THE First part of the Dial of Days, Containing 320. Roman triumphs,
besides the triumphant Obelisks and Pyramydes of the Egyptians, the Pillars,
Arches, and Trophies triumphant, of the Graecians, and the Persians, with their
Pomp and Magnificence: Of feasts and Sacrifices both of the Jews and of the
Gentiles, with the stately games and plays belonging to these Feasts and
Sacrifices, with the birthes and funeral Pomps of Kings and Emperors, as you
shall find more at large in the 2. part, wherein all kind of triumphs are
enlarged.

By Lodowick Lloid Esquire.

Prou. 20. Lucerna Domini spiraculum hominis. London Printed for Roger Ward
dwelling at the sign of the Purse in the little old Bailie. 1590.

To the Right Honorable Sir Christopher Hatton, Knight of the most Honorable
order of the Garter, Lord Chauncellor of England, and of her Majesty's most
Honorable privy Council.
CAesar (right Honorable) wrote but three words of his victory from Pontus
to his friends at Rome, Veni, vidi, and vici: though not like Caesar a
Conqueror, and victorum victor: yet like Solon not conquered and agestatis
victor, presuming but with the like words to dedicate this little Book unto
your Lordship, Veni ad te, vixi per te, and spero de te, and so I rest, as one
that has registered himself your old servant, and so has decreed cum unto,
to continue in good will and service.

Your Lordships old servant, Lodowick Lloyde (...)
How and when all Nations begin their years and days, etc.
AMong the most nations of the world after the confusion of tongues at the
building of Babel for many hundred years, they had no certain time for their
years, every country then used time without any sound reason or any true
period of the Sun or of the Moon, Plin. lib. 1 Cap. 48.
almost the whole world then used annos Lunares, as the Egiptians in the
beginning though after most expert, from whence the Grecians and the Romans
were instructed for their years, yet the Egyptians year in the time that
Abraham was in Egypt, was sometime of two months, sometime three, sometime
four, sometime less, Joseph. lib. cap. 1. 8.
and sometime more until Abraham being taught with the Chaldeans, instructed
the Egyptians in the course of the Sun as Josephus affirms.

The Romans before Numa Pompilius time used ten months for their year, the
Grecians used Lunares annos, y^ Arcanenses 6. months, the Arcadians 4.
months, and so confusedly all nations of the earth used their years in the
first beginning until the Egyptians first found the true period of the Sun,
and appointed their year to be 365. days. Of this year Julius Caesar after
his wars in Egypt brought with him the Egiptian year to the Romans, and by
the industry of Sosigenis a great Mathematician which Caesar brought with him
to Rome from Egypt, Sosigenis
Annus Iulianus was made which we now use.

In like manner in their months so diverse and so erroneous and especially the
Grecians, even Plutarch himself so much deceived in the Athenian months,
referring the month Hecatombeon which is June to April, even so he did refer
Metagitnion Metagitnion.
which is Iulie to May: others in like sort refer Memacterion, Mematerion.
which is September (...) August, October to January, and so Thargelion which
is April by Lu, Florentinus is set down in Plutarch for February, Errors
both in years and in months.
but the Grecians excel all in their errors, thus the Grecans and others
erred in their time and in their histories, for that they were ignorant of the
Hebrew months. And therefore I will set down in what month of the year all
countries and kingdoms of the world begin their year, and first I will
begin with the Hebrews, for they are chiefly herein to be followed for
being ignorant of their months and years, made many profane writers to err.

The old ancient Hebrews began first their year in the later The Hebrews
began their year in Sept.
end of the month of September containing part of September and of October
for that they supposed the world to be created at that time, for trees,
herbs, corn, and all good things, the earth was full, yet after they were
commanded to begin their year in Nisan which is April, and the first
month of the year, for that the year of Iubilei began that month the
Hebrews were commanded to begin their year then, so that Nisan which is
April was in dignity before Tisri, Nisan in dignity before Tisri.
which was October with the Hebrews in respect of the year of the Iubiley,
and of the feasts which God commanded Moses to be kept, yet Tisri was before
in time and in nature until Moses time when the commandment was given
otherways but now since y^ Hebrews began their year about the 25. of March and
so forward to the month April. So the Hebrews began their year in March and
ended in April.

The Egiptians began their year in September The Egiptians began their year
in September. Censor cap. 15. de not. deoru^. All good deuines agree that the
year began in September.
which the Egyptians called Thod, which is their first month, and they have
this reason for it, that Nilus begins to flow in that month Thod, which
Cicero does call Mercurius Egypti, besides the Egyptians have another mark for
the beginning of the year per ortum caniculae by the rising of the star
called Canis, which are the dogdaies, at what time the river Nilus begins to
flow which as Pliny says was in June, and not in September, but it is agreed
of all the best writers that the Egyptians begin their year in September, in
the which month the Persians do also begin together with the Egiptians their
year beginning at the month Phordimech, which is rhod with the Egyptians, and
with us called Sptember.

The Grecians begin their year in the month of June, which they call
Hecatombaeon, of the which for that I would be brief, I will set down at what
time every nation do begin their year as follows.

The Hebrews in March. The Egyptians in Sept^m^er. The Graecians in June, I
mean the Athenians. The Persians with the Egiptians in the month of
September. The Arabians and the Sarazens began their year in May. The
Cyprians in March. The Macedonians and the rest of the Grecians in June. The
Romans and we of Europe, Christians, began our year in January, and thus
shortly I have showed how and when every nation began their year.
In like manner when these begin their days, here also I set them down, how
some from midnight to midnight, as we Christians, Spain, France, Germany,
England and others, do begin our day, for that the Sun does from his
hemysphere begin after midnight to ascend toward the East, and also for that
the Son of God Christ Jesus was borne about midnight of the Uirgin Marie.

The Egiptians, the Umbrians, and the Arabians, begin their day from noone to
noone, which is twelve of the clock the next day, the old Astrollogers
followed the Egiptians in their days, for that then the sun enters into the
highest part of the heavens.

The Babilonians began their day from sun rising to sun rising, which is
the common day of the most vulgar people, referring the night following to the
day before.

The Jews began their day from Sun setting to Sun setting, Pantaleon
says, that the Bohemians, Polonians, and the S^lesians, imitate the Jews, for
the beginning of their days.

The old Athenians began their day in like manner as the Jews did, and so
Sensorimus and Beroaldus do both affirm.

FINIS.
OF THE MONTH January, with the Latins the first, with the Hebrews called
Thebet, their tenth Month, with the Athenians called Gamelion, their eight
Month, and with the Egyptians called T^bi, their fifth Month.
The first Day.
THis Month January was made by Numa Pompilius, the 2. king of Rome, the first
Month of the year. For Romulus his predecessor the first king of Rome, began
his year in March consecrating this Month unto his supposed Father Mars: for
at this time the Romans had but ten months in their year, called Annus Romuli
after Romulus time. January and February were added to Romulus years by Numa
Pompilius to make the year twelve months. January he dedicated to God Ianus,
and caused it to be the first month in the year amongst the Romans, making
March to be the third month. For Numa preferred peace before war, and civil
things before Martial, and therefore Ianus was set before Mars, for were this
Ianus either king or demy-God, he was in former age very civil and politic,
of whom the Romans brag most: for he had temples, altars, sacrifices, and
ceremonies done to him this month. In the Temple of Ianus the Consuls, the
Senators, all the Magistrates of Rome should solemnly meet to determine and to
consult about wars or dangers of the City when occasion so served. By the
temple of Ianus it was known whether the Romans were in wars or in peace:
if it were open as always it was, it signified wars, if it were shut, which
was never but three times, once in Numa Pomp. time, the second time in Augustus
Caesar, and the third after Titus Vespasian triumphed over Jerusalem, then it
signified peace, if there the Senators and Magistrates of Rome had agreed upon
wars, one of the Consuls should go presently to the temple of Bellona, and
take a spear in his hand, and flourish with the spear before the Altar of
Bellona, and thereby pronounced wars in the Romans behalf. Genial. lib. 1.
cap. 14.

All Calendes which is the first day of every month, was consecrated to Juno,
and the Ides to Jupiter by the Romans. For in the Calendes of January, the
king called Rex sacrorum, and the priests called Flamines, used to offer up in
sacrifice to Juno a lamb or a young dooue for good success of that month:
for every first day of every month they use the like sacrifice with all
ceremonies thereunto belonging, to Juno, for that the old Romans supposed
Juno and the Moon all one. Macrob. lib. 1. cap. 15.

This day in Rome they were wont to elect new Magistrates, and to present them
with laurel branches and gifts, with great mirth through the City.

They celebrated the feast of Juno in Rome called Gamelia, as the Greeks were
wont to do to Bacchus the feast of Lenaea the same day, with all due solemn
ceremonies belonging unto the Goddess Juno. In this feast of Gamelia, Juno had
these ceremonies in her sacrifice: of all married women and of young women,
which were to be married, they should come unto the temple of Juno to make
their supplication to their Goddess, to remove all bitterness and choler from
that present sacrifice, and to bury all displeasure and offenses which might
move Juno to anger, openly before all the people under her sacred Altar, upon
the which they offered their sacrifice, that it might be signified, that all
marriages ought to be without strife, bitterness or anger. Genial. lib. 6. cap.
4.

In like manner in Athens the feast of Lenaea is celebrated withal too much
licentious and uncomely speeches with foolish and wanton gestures, where also
the Poets did use to make slanderous and biting verses one against another, in
such sort as he that could excel in scurrilitie, scoffs, and floutes, either
in prose or in verse, he was crowned with a garland made of Iuy, and Thyrsus
given to his hand, as one of the victors in Bacchus feast. The Grecians were
nothing inferior to the Romans for their ceremonies in feasts and sacrifice.
Plut.

Marius Censorinus likewise this day triumphed in Rome with a victory gotten
in Macedonia. 713.

Temples were dedicated to Jupiter and Aesculapius, in the I Will of Tiberina,
where either of them had their yearly sacricrifice and feasts of the
countrymen with all devotion.

Albertus the second being married to Sigismundus the Emperors daughter, was
crowned king of Hungaria, and was this day also elected Emperor of Rome: for
they used to elect the Emperor either being king of Germany or of Rome,
sometime also they elected the king of Hungaria or Bohemia.

Lewis the twelfth king of France, in the 18 year of his reign, 1515. died
at Paris. Pantal. lib. 1.

Magdalen the daughter of Frauncis king of France, was espoused to James king
of Scotland. Sleid. lib. 10.

Fredericus the third was elected king of the Romans at Franckford 1440. whose
election was with great solemnity and pomp, as I have said in the crowning
and inauguration of the Emperors.

Titus Liuius a great historian, died this year at Padua, at the age of 70
years, and the Poet Ovid was borne the self same day, in the year of Christ
18. Voleteramus.

Christ Jesus the Son of God was circumcised this day to fulfill the law of
Moses.

This day the Image of Ianus was set up in Rome, with a keie in his righthand,
and a rod in his left hand, and upon the keie was written the figures of 365.
to show the numbers of all the days in the year. He had 12 Altars, with the
just number of the months of the year, dedicated and consecrated unto Ianus,
he had three statues, which were pictured with two faces in the market place,
and had diverse names: as Geminus pater, Quiri^us, Visuuius, etc.

In the Calends of January, the feast and plays called Hillaria in the honor
of Berecynthia the mother of the Gods, were celebrated.

Lucius Antonius that year when he was elected Cons^ul in Rome, had a gallant
triumph granted him by the consent of the Senators for his victory over the
people of the Alps 712. and the year after upon the self same day M.
Censorinus tryumphed over the Macedonians, whose solemnity and pomp were
such, that I omit to set down the manner and order of every several triumph,
for that I have set some down at large, you may suppose the like ceremonies
and solemnities in all other triumphs more or less, according to the victory.
Goltz.

The second Day.
THis was a dismal day to the Romans and a most unfortunate, and therefore
their Bishops and Southsayers appointed the next day after any Calend, None, or
I Would, to be recorded an unlucky day, in remembrance of the unfortunate victories
had over the Romans at the river Allia, in the taking of the City of Rome by
the Gauls, for the great overthrow of the Romans at the battle of Canes by
Hannibal. The Bishops and the Southsayers made a decree that n^ exploit, nor
battle should be taken that day, and these days to be recorded. Atros dies.
Macrob. lib. 1. cap. 16.

It was also an unfortunate day amongst the Egyptians, for the Prophet
Ezechiel did foreshew the calamity and ruin of the kingdom of Egypt upon
this day. Ezech. 29.

This day the statue of Commodus Antoninus was thrown down from the place
where it stood, within three days after his death. So wicked an Emperor was
this Commodus, and so far from the virtues of his father, that all Rome
honored the father, and hated the son, and the month of September which he
commanded to be called Commodus, was after his death presently restored to
his former name.

Charles the second was crowned king of Hungary with much solemnity and pomp
upon this day. 1310.

Philippus surnamed Longus, king of France, died 1320. Pantal. lib. 1.

John the fourth king of Lusitania, and father in law to Charles the second,
died, leaving his wife with child, which within twenty days after his death
brought a son and a Prince named Sebastianus. 1542.

Galeatius Duke of Millaine was slain in the Church at service, by a Citezin
of Millaine named Andreus Lemponianus, 1477.

Charles the fifth caused a meeting of many learned Catholics and Protestants
at Vnormatia a Town in Germany, for conference sake about the religion, 1541.
Sleid. lib. 13.

Pius the fourth was elected Bishop of Rome upon this day, of whose solemnity
I have laid down in his inauguration of his papacy.

Upon this day John Baptist bare witness of the true Messiah before his coming.
Math. 3.

Machareus priest of Alexandria was martired, 314. This day shows the nature
and state of September.

The third Day.
THe third day of every month was in Greece consecrated unto Minerua among the
ancient Greeks, of whose feasts, sacrifices, and ceremonies, you shall read in
their several places: for Minerua had her festival days, and all solemn
sacrifice in Athens, as Juno had in Rome.

Marcus Tullius Cicero was borne at what time Quintus Scipio, and Quintus
Serrano were Consuls, before our Savior Christ 110. years. This very year
the Cymbres invaded Italy. Gellius lib. 15. cap. 28.

Vitellius was proclaimed Caesar by the soldiers in Germany after the
foundation of Rome 821. years.

Nicholaus Bishop of Florentia was elected to be Bishop of Rome 157.

Antherus Bishop of Rome and many other Christians suffered martyrdom under
the Emperor Maximinianus, 239.

There was in Rome upon this day a meeting of the Citizens to see the
performaunce of vows, which they made to the Gods for their victories, and to
find out the effect and purpose why these were made, but being made they would
also know the cause of the breach thereof, if any were such. The order and
manner of vows in what sort they were made and solemnized, are set down.

Upon this day happened such an earthquake, so violent and so strange, that
all the parts of the world were shaken therewith, and much loss thereby in
every place sustained, in the year of Christ 1117.

The fourth Day.
IN the month of January when the days began to lengthen they held a great
solemn feast at Rome with public games and plays, in which the women went
before they sacrificed unto Venus, to wash and to bath themselves in sweet
water, the next morning they were crowned with garlands of myrtle, and so
passing most solemnly through the streets of Rome into the Temple of Venus,
they offered to the Goddess in sacrifice certain young white pigeons. In
Athens this feast was so celebrated with great mirth and triumph in joy, that
the spring came on: the young men had a public feast wherein they used many
ceremonies to the moon.

In India the king with his train (according to the manner of the country) was
wont to wash himself at a certain river, and after offered to the Gods in
sacrifice black horses and black bulls, for that color is of greater
estimation than white, and more holy and acceptable to their Gods, and after
used much mirth. He thought himself a most happy and fortunate prince to see
the son to come to visit him. Genial. lib. 4 cap. 20.

Calis a haven town in France, for the space of 211. years in the possession
of English kings, was again recovered and woonne upon this day: but Aemilius
Paulus refers it to the sixth of January. Pantaleon lib. 1.

Sigismundus king of Poland, and son to Cazimerus, was borne this day: some
say the first of January.

Charles the fourth of that name the Emperor, entered into Paris in France
with great pomp and bravery, to make peace between the king of England, and
Charles the first of that name king of France. 1378.

Julius Caesar with a great army passed into Greece after Pompey the great,
whom Caesar the next year after overcame in the battle of Pharsalia.

This day does forshew the nature and state of November.

The fifth Day.
ALL Nones, Calends, and Ides marriages were prohibited with the Romans.
Macrob. lib. 1. cap 15.

The None of every month was made a solemn day, and kept holy in Rome, for
that Seruius Tullius the sixth king of the Romans was borne upon the self same
day, upon the which day the servants and bondmen of Rome had as much liberty
as their masters in some things, like to the feast Saturnalia.

Caius Iunius Brutus at his being Consul in Rome the 2. time, triumphed over
them of Lucania, and after over the Brutians, after the building of Rome 470.
years, solemnly with such pomp and solemnity as was then in Rome used. Rome
was not yet come to her great pomp and dignity: for none of their seven Kings
rode in any triumphant Chariot, but either on foot like the triumph of
Ouation, or else on horseback from the Temple of Bellona where the Senators
met them, and brought them through the City into the Capitol, where after
sacrifice done, they celebrated the feast called Epulum Iouis, which feast was
also called Epulum triumphale.

In the I Will of Andria a Well was consecrated to Liber Pater, and two other
fountains, the one in Caria, the other in Arabia, which being drunken this
day, tasted like wine. Calend. Romans

Rodulphus surnamed Haspurgensis was crowned king of the Romans this day,
1274. Benth.

The pomp of Caius Marius in his triumph which he had in Rome over Iugurth
king of Numidia, at what time Metellus deprived him of much of his honor in
the conquering of Iugurth, which spited Marius sore, that the glory of his
triumph should be thus hindered by Metellus; but the greatest glory of his
triumph had Silla, by the means of Bocchus king of Numidia father in law to
Iugurth, who through treachery delivered Iugurth into the hands of Lu. Silla.
This was the original cause of the cruel and bloody civil wars after in
Rome, between Marius and Silla, to the overthrow almost of the whole Empire.
Silla was then but Quaestor under Marius, in the latter end of the wars.
Metellus which deserved best the triumph was also cut by Silla, howbeit Marius
had a solemn triumph granted in spite of Silla and his adherents, and that
with great solemnity and pomp. Plut. in Mario.

Charles Duke of Burgundy was slain, and his army overthrown upon this day
in a great battle at Nausen by the Heluetians, whose only daughter and heir
Maximilian the Emperor married, and thereby got the Dukedom of Burgundy to
him and to his heirs for ever: as Philip Cominaenus affirms, 1477.

Ferdinandus Archduke of Austria, was with great solemnity and pomp crowned
king of the Romans in Colonia, 1509. Sleid.

A great slaughter of Frenchmen at Gent began by factions and civil discord,
and ended by shedding of much blood in a battle between party and party,
1568.

Frederike one of the Electors of Saxony died upon this day, 1429.

The old ancient Romans had upon the fifth day of January in the first time of
their kings elections certain ceremonies of white beans, which among the
Grecians were signs of good euentes to come, as the black beans
prognosticate things unfortunate to come. Beside in y^ time of Romulus they
sacrificed in Rome with milk and not with wine: and so the Athenians did
appease the fury of the Gods in sacrifices with water and honey clarified, and
not with wine of a long time after: the first was unto Dionisius, in the which
they sacrificed wine, honey, and milk.

The sixth Day.
THis day among the Romans was counted unlucky, called Ater dies, though
otherwise among all Christendom great mirth and feasting for the appearing of
the star this day: for the three Kings called Magi of the East offered then
gold, mirrhe and frankincense unto Christ at Bethlem. Math. 2.

Julius Caesar entered into Rome upon this day with three several triumphs, at
what time he was first named Perpetuus dictator. He had five several triumphs
at Rome: the first time over the Frenchmen, the second time over the
Egyptians, thirdly over the Affricans, fourthly over the king of Pontus, and
fifthly over the Spaniards, at what time he vanquished Sextus Pompeius son to
Pompei, the great, Cato, and others of Pompeis friends and confederates. It is
written that in his first triumph he entered Rome with such a pomp, that he
passed through the City in the night time with forty Elephants, which
carried lamps and light before Caesar, twenty on the one side, and twenty on
the other into the Capitol, being set with such devise as made a solemn
sight, at what time his Chariot was so laden with rich spoils, treasures, and
sumptuous tents, that it was like to break. Of the region of Pontus he wrote
of his triumph to his friends before he came to Rome in three words, Veni,
vidi, vici, he got the victory with such celeritie: after the building of
Rome 225. Pantal. lib. 1.

Upon the self same day, 26. years after, Augustus Caesar made his great and
last triumph in Rome, having brought all the kingdoms of the world subject
unto Rome: he caused Ianus Temple to be shut, and was never opened during the
whole time of Augustus, which was never shut but once by Numa Pompilius, once
by Augustus Caesar, and once in Titus Vespasians reign, which was in all but
thrice during the whole government of the Empire of Rome, which was a thousand
years and more.

Philip surnamed Pulcher, was solemnly at Rhemes crowned king of France, 1286.

This day Henry the fifth was crowned king of the Romans at Aquisgraue, 1099.
200. years after Henry the seventh was crowned king in Rome upon this day,
1299.

Charolus the brother of Lewis the ninth, was crowned king of Rome and of
Cicilia upon this day, by Pope Clement the 4. of that name.

Gethes king of Herulans, with all his Peers and Nobles came to
Constantinople, and was baptized in the time of the Emperor Justinian, 530.
upon this day.

Katherine the first wife of Henry the eight died upon this day, 1535. at
Kimbalt^n, and was buried at Peterborow.

Adulphus County of Nassouia was elected Caesar, and 18. years after upon the
same day Lodowicke Duke of Bauaria was also chosen to be Caesar. Naucler. 1315.

Epiphanius says, that Christ wrought his first miracle at a marriage in
Canaan, a City of Galilie, where he turned water into wine upon, this day.
Idan 2.

Pius the fourth was with great ceremonies in Rome upon this day consecrated
Pope. Onoph. 1560.

Alexander Medices Duke of Florence was slain in Millaine at service time, by
the treachery of one Laurentius an Italian, 1536. Iouius.

Stephanus the sixth, Clement the third, and Pius the fourth, three Popes, were
upon this day elected, yet in time distant 700 years and more, one after
another.

The seventh Day.
Upon the seventh day of the month Thebi, which is January, a festival great
day is solemnized unto Mars in the City of Papremus in Egypt, after sun
setting, where the priests standing in the very porches of Mars his chapel
with great wooden keys in their hands, having no leisure to look unto the
sacrifice within the chapel for the great multitude which would violently
enter in, to see the secrets of the ceremonies: with these Priests were
certain pers^ns which vowed to do their best with the Priests, and to stand
with them against these violent persons: for in that chapel was the Image of
the mother of God Mars honored and worshipped, with such secret ceremonies as
none might know but such as the Priests had appointed. No man might enter into
this temple, unless he were clean washed over, Post venerem, which in other
countries was lawful, supposing multiplication to be acceptable unto their
Gods, saving in Egypt and in Greece, which abstained to defile their Temple.

In diverse Cities of Egypt, as Heliopolis, Butis, and others, they have this
custom for their sacrificed beasts, they are kept with such care from the
father unto the son, being vowed to be sacrificed to the Gods in this manner.
When any Egyptian does consecrate any beast or foul to any of their Gods, as
in Egypt every several God has his several beast or foul for sacrifice:
they shave their childrens heads, or half the hairs of their heads, they
lay that in the one part of the balance, and in the other end a piece of
silver that shall weigh down the hairs: this money they gave to those that
keep this sacred beast for sacrifice, and by the law of Egypt if any man kill
any of these beasts willingly, he shall die for it, if against his will, he
shall be so punished, or he shall pay as much money as the Priests of Vulcan
shall set down, but whosoever kills the bird Ibis shall die the death without
any excuse. The like law is read of the Thessalonians of their storkes, and
among the old Britains of their kites and rau^ns. But of the Egyptians
feasts and sacrifices, you shall read as they happen upon their days in their
months, which I have laid down as I found them.

Valentinus Cletus and Isidorus, Bishops of Hispalensis, were martyred under
Domitianus the Emperor, 630.

Upon this day in Rome there was great solemn sacrifices and feasts celebrated
unto Ianus, and likewise in Greece was the like unto Isis, which is called
Ceres. Pantal. lib. 1.

This day in Rome by decree of the Senators, were orders prescribed in this
sort, that the Consuls, Pretors, Proconsuls, and Tribunes of the people should
examine and view the state of the City, least the like should happen to Rome
as did in the time of Cateline, Lentulus, Pompey the great, and Julius Caesar,
Marius and Silla, and such others. This was appointed beside their inquisition,
which was every five year by two Censors of Rome elected for that purpose:
that inquisition was called Lustrum. Appian. lib. 2.

Carolus king of Cicilia died upon this day, and Laurentius the Patriarch of
Constantinople died at Uenice.

A great turnement and triumph at Madenburge, of all the nobility of Germany,
was caused by Henry the first Emperor of that name upon this day, 938. This was
the first tilting in Germany of 32. lib. Torn.

Christ began upon this day to fast forty days, as Martianus Scotus lib. 1.

John the sixth Pope of that name, a Greek borne, was martyred. Upon this day
began the Tridentine Council, 1546. Sleid. lib 17.

A great disputation in Berna a town in Heluetia about religion on this day,
after which in many places religion was altered, 1528. Sleid.

As upon this day Tiridates king of Armenia entered into Rome in Chariots sent
by the Emperor Nero, for him and the queen his wife, and his children, and
for other states which Tiridates had in his company into Naples, where the
Emperor Nero was. Tiridates golden helmet was carried before him, as the
manner of the kings of Armenia be, he was commanded to lay his sword from him
while he talked with Nero, in obeisance of the Empire of Rome, to whom the
Armenians paid tribute: the king took his keie and locked his sword in his
scabard, and therewithal made some reverent obeisance unto Nero, In Naples he
was feasted with great pomp and solemnity, he was brought to see the
Gladiatory plays, and other triumphs by sundry men done, and by sundry women,
and beside strange ^^ghts and inventions by Ethiopian young men, with all kind
of hunting within the Amphytheater of wild beasts, with tame beasts fighting
one against another. After this Nero brought the king with all his pomp into
Rome, where all the City in most sumptuous manner was adorned and set forth
with garlands of flowers and crowns of laurel, and there in presence of all
the people, the king of Armenia said: I am Tiridates king of Armenia, nephew
unto the great Arsaces king of Parthia, and brother to king Pacorus, and king
Vologaesius, and thy servant Nero, whom I honor as the Sun, and I am even
he whose fortune lies in Neroes hand, to whom I came from Euphrates with the
Queen my wife and these young princes, to yield my service and due honor,
whereat the people showted out, and Nero rising from his chair, laid a
diadem of gold upon Tyridates head, saying: For that thou came from
Euphrates to Rome, and show thy obedience unto the Empire, behold, I will
bestow that kingdom upon thee, which neither thy Father left thee, neither thy
brother could give thee, after which solemn speech being done, many triumphs,
plays, and feasts were showed unto the king of Armenia. The charges of
Tiridates journey from Euphrates to Rome, which was nine months, stood the
City of Rome in 8000. crowns every day one with another. Sigon. lib. 3.

The eight Day.
THe eight day of every month in old time amongst the Greeks was
consecrated to their God Vulcan, as the third of every month was dedicated
unto Minerua.

This day before noone declared the nature of June, and after noone the nature
of May.

Ferdinandus king of Castile entered with great triumph into the City of
Granata, which was under the Saracens for eight hundred years, he subdued the
Saracens, and won the Town. Pantal. lib. 1.

Sp. Caruilius, at what time he was Consul at Rome, tryumphed as upon this day
over the Samnites, the pomp and solemnity whereof, and of all other great
triumphs, you may read in the general triumph here following.

The order and general form of the most greatest and renowned triumphs of
the Romans, appointed for the worthiest conquerors, by consent of the Senators
and Consuls, were in this order: the triumph should begin to be set out, even
from that place where they tarried for the Senate and Magistrates of Rome, with
all the Citizens, called Territorium triumphale Vaticani, out of the walls of
the Citte in old time hard by the Temple of Bellona, tipstaues were
commanded with silver trunches and staves to go before and rid the way, and to
keep the people in order. From thence the state of the City go in order,
their Censors, Tribunes, Aediles the Praetor, the Consuls and the Dictator, in
most solemn order kept Viam trumphalem before them, from Bellonas temple
through the fields of Flora until they came to the gate of the City, called
Triumphalis porta: from thence they went with the greatest solemnity and the
most imperial pomp that might be devised, through the street called Platea
Iudaeorum, from thence to the temple of Juno, from Iunos temple to the temple
of Ianus, and so until they came to the Capitol, going before as you heard,
the Senators and the Magistrates of Rome: after followed the religious men, the
high Bishop, called Pontifex Maximus, the Priests Flamines, and their Augures,
Southsayers, singing edes and psalms unto their Gods in verses: after came
Sal^, which carried the golden targets, called Ancylia, dancing and leaping as
their manner is, when they carry Ancylia: before whom went all kind of sweet
harmony and music, clothed and crowned in most sumptuous manner: after these
followed the Uestal Uirgins, with their ceremonies sacred, in carrying the
eternal ^^re of the Goddess Vesta: then the Priests of Bacchus men and women,
with their hairs loose, and naked, with Thirsus in their hands, and crowned
with Iuie crowns, Haud secus qua^ in orgyis, beside tumblers and stage-plaiers,
and such like iesters, as others before mentioned, did set forth the dignity
of the triumph: these triumphs were nine hours going from Territorium
triumphale where they began, until they came to the Capitol. After the
conqueror was carried in a triumphant Chariot by four brave white horses,
(...).
and sometime carried in most solemn sort and pomp with huge and stately
Elephants, as Pompey the great was carried in his Affrican triumph: and Julius
Caesar in his triumph over the Gauls, and Gordianus in his triumph over the
Persians: sometime carried by great tamed Hearts, Flauius Vopiscus lib. 1.
as Aurelianus was: other with Tigers, and others with monstrous Dogs. To
such exceeding pomp and glory grew the Romans after their Affrican
victories, that within the triumphant Chariots were carried with the
conqueror* the simulacher of Jupiter with his scepter in his hand, Neptune
with his three picked forke, Mercury winged about his shoulders and his
legs, and Juno carrying in her hand Quirinus spear: thus the triumpher
marched into the Capitol, the soldiers crowned with laurel, round about the
Chariot singing songs in praise of the conqueror, where after sacrificing an
Ox unto Jupiter, with public thanks unto the Gods for the victory, the feast
was prepared, called Epulum triumphale, which was the common banquet appointed
after any triumph.

Ferdinandus the Emperor returning from Frankford, and coming unto Basil,
was received and welcomed with great honor, 1563. Pantal. lib. 1.

Albertus Marquis of Brandenburge, after many sharp battles and long wars in
diverse places of Germany, died at Fortzhemi, 1557. being 35. years of age.

Celestinus the third Bishop of Rome died, and on the same day Innocentius the
third was elected into his place: this made the Decretals and other books:
this caused the Council, called Laterense to come together, 1^98. Volat.

Likewise Constantinus Sirus, a Pope whom Iustinianus the Emperor, and second
of that name, reverenced so much, that he went from Constantinople to Nicomedia
to meet him, and there to submit himself unto the Pope to have his absolution
for sin.

Seuerinus a godly learned man that preached Christ, about the River of Danuby
died, 483.

The ninth Day.
Upon this day the feast, called Compitalia, was celebrated in Rome, at what
time the Praetor should speak these words in presence of the people: Die nono
post Calendas Ianuarii, Quiritibus compitalia erunt. Li^. 7. de. 3.
Also Compitalia festa were those feasts at Rome, when the plays, called
Compitales ludi were celebrated: in the streets in every town of the country.
To these games were there Images and Idols brought with all solemn ceremonies
of the people, they were set upon the table where Epulae Iouis were celebrated
they were also laid on Altars, crowned with all kind of garlands, and set
forth with sweet flowers, decked and trimmed with chains and Jewels, etc. Also
it was commanded by Seruius Tullius, that once every year in the temples of
the Gods upon this feast, solemn sacrifice should be consecrated unto the
Goddess Mania, and the Gods called Lares, unto whom the people offered onyons
heads in steed of men's heads. Augustus Caesar used this play in his days, to
bring his country Gods to be carried from the place where these Compitalia were
celebrated, at what time they began to be called Augustales ludi, the sacrifice
whereof was solemnized unto Lares. Lares, household gods.
This was invented first by Tarquinius the proud: these plays had sundry names
among the Romans, as Compitales plebei, Curales, and Augustales, For
understand, that among the old Romans there was no games or plays
instituted, but had their proper feast, with all the pomp that might be, and
their sacrifice to one God or other more or less, either before victories
vowed in the Temples to the Gods, or after victories invented, and he that was
conqueror, had a Ram for reward of his victory given him. Macrob. lib. 1.

Likewise the feast Agonalia, was solemnly kept to Ianus among the Romans, at
what time the best Magistrate of the City should command a Ram to be killed,
being the chiefest of the flock, he himself being the chiefest man in the
City, whosoever he were, should solemnly offer up the Ram in the Temple of
Ianus, for sacrifice and dutiful service to God Ianus: these days of sacrifice
were called Agonales.

The wife of Charles the eight, and after married to Lewis the twelfth, both
kings of France, died 1514. she was an English woman, as the Chronicles ^f the
kings of France do record.

Hadrianus the sixth schoolmaster of the Emperor Charles the fifth, was elected
Bishop of Rome upon this day, Praeter opinionem, 1522. Onoph.

John the twelfth of that name, was the 133. Pope elected, 938. an infamous and
vicious Pope, and therefore driven to exile by Otto the Emperor, at what time
he died in a ca^e for fear of Otto. Vol^.


Johannes Aduentinus, a learned German, died upon this day at Ratisbone,
1534. Pantal.


Under Valentinianus the Emperor was martyred upon this day 358. Iuuencus a
religious man of Antiochia, Eusebius. hist. trib 8.
and one Marcella, as I ^inde in Eusebius.

Stephanus surnamed Porcarius a Roman, moved sedition, and thereby fell to
arms in Rome, where he was taken and hanged upon Had^ianus the Emperors
Pillar or arche 1433. Pantal.


This day opens the nature of August before noone, and after noone does
show the state of July, as in Practica rusticorum is laid down.

The tenth Day.
THis was woonte to be a dismal day to the Romans, for every fourth day
before any I Would, Nones, or Calends, which the Romans forbad any sacrifice to
be used, Gell. lib. 5. cap. 17.
or any ceremonies to be done, for upon such days they sustained great
overthrows, and much loss, and therefore called Atridies.

Some write that Jerusalem was by Nabuchodonosar besieged this day, being the
tenth day of the tenth month, but they err much, as it shall be said in
another place, in mistaking the days and the months.

Charles the fifth, married with Isabell the sister of the king of Portingale
with great pomp and solemnity. Monst. lib. 3. Cuspi.


Honorus was by his father Theodosius elected and made Caesar and Emperor 393.
This vanquished many cruel tyrants for 32. years that he reigned Emperor, as
Eusbeius Eusebius. hist. trip. lib. 9. cap. 45.
affirms.

Frederike Lord Elector of Palantine, upon this day changed the state of
religion, Sleid.
at Heidelberge in Germany 1546.

Gregory the tenth, who made peace between the Venetians and they of Genua in
Italy died, who also called a general council at Lugduum, where Michael
Paleologus Emperor of Constantinople, S^bel.
was reconciled to the Latin Church, 1278.

Fabianus which was consecrated Bishop of Rome 237, suffered martyrdom under
Decius the Emperor, upon this day this Bishop made a law, that no marriage
should he between kindered within five degrees, V^lat.
he also commanded that all Christians should receive the communion thrice in
a year, and that every year a new Chrisme should be made, and the old
burned.

This day shows the nature of October before noone and after noone, Reg. rust.
the state of September.

The Sun enters into Aquarius.

The eleventh Day.
THe feast called Carmentalia, was as upon this day celebrated which continued
five days by the matrons of Rome in the honor of Carmenta: some suppose her to
be the Goddess of Destiny, and has rule and power over the natiuities of
men, Call. Romans
and therefore the women of Rome reverenced this Carmenta very much: others
say, that she was the Wife of Euander the Arcadian, which was so inspired by
God Phoebus, that she was accoumpted and taken for a demie Prophetess, and
took upon her to give oracles in verse in that sacrifice which should be done
unto her feast Carmentalia. other opinions there be of this Carmenta which I
hear omit.

The temple of Iuturna was dedicated in Martius field as upon this day.

Ferdinandus was elected Caesar after the manner of the Electors, Sleid.
and was crowned with great solemnity at Aquisgraue 1531.

Stauratius the Emperor of the Aest kingdoms died upon Diac. lib. 24.
this day, 804.

Higinus a Greek borne, Bishop of Rome, was martyred upon this day under
Antonius Pius the Emperor, and was buried in Vaticano in the first year of
his consecration 144. This Bishop commanded that one Godfather should be
present at Baptism, Pantal. lib. 1.
and also that matters belonging to the Church, should not be used profanely
by lay men.

Likewise M. ltiades an Affrican borne, suffered to be martyred under
Maximianus the Emperor 309. some do refer this to the tenth of December,
Marianus Scotus says, that upon this day, Christ by the commandment of the
Angel, in the seventh of his age, was brought again from Egypt, when Herod
was dead in Galilie, and Archelaus reigned in Herod's place.

Before noone, this day declares the nature of December, Reg. rust.
and after noone the nature of November.

Laurentius Surius says, that upon this day great sedition and insurrection
fell in Colleine, at what time two of their chief Counselors were beheaded.

The twelft Day.
CArolus the third surnamed Crassus the Emperor was driven o^t of his empire
in the tenth year of his reign, and died a very poor man, Io. Cuspi.
and was buried at the lake Podimi^us in Augia. 888.

At Colonia a great meeting with triumph at tilting and barriers of all the
nobility of Germany both on horse and foot with great pomp and solemnity
appointed by Florentinus county Io. Cuspi.
of Holland and Sealand, 1179.

Also at Bamberga in Germany the like turnement, where many of the nobles and
of the peers met upon this day 1486.

Upon this day 1514. were seen at Whittenberge three Suns in the firmament,
as Licosth de Prodig^js affirms.

Maximilian the Emperor in 33. year of his reign died at Velsa a town in
Austra whose death an eclips of the Sun the eight day of June, before he died
foreshewed the same.

Upon this day ended the feast called Compi^alia, which endured three days in
Rome.

John Castellanus a Doctor of Divinity, Call. Romans Pantaleon liber 1. Petrus de
Natalitijs.
was burned for his religion in Lotharingia 1524.

Satyrus, Ciriacus, and Nicanor, became martyrs under Claudius the Emperor, 45.

This day being the twelfe, does foreshowe the nature and condition of the
whole year, Reg. rust.
and does confirm the eleven days going before.

The thirteenth Day.
THe I Would of every month is consecrated upon Jupiter Satori, at what day all
kind of Minstrels and all Trumpetors do celebrate a great feast with much
mirth, dancing and leaping in women's apparel through the whole City of
Rome: for the Ides of every month is with great care solemnlye celebrated with
the sacrifice of a white Ox by the priest of Jupiter called Flamen Dialis.
This day of any day in the month is most in reverence and honor, not only
among the Romans, but also the Graecians: as in the Ides of October, Macrob.
lib. 1.
the Mysteries and solemnities are such, as they sent the Idol of Dionsyus out
of Athens to ^leusina, during the mysteries of the feast, of the which Ides you
have in every month the feast and several ceremonies of the Ides, this I Would of
January they had beside the Ox which was sacrificed unto Jupiter, a Weather
to be brought into the Temple of Jupiter, crowned with a Garland of Oken
leaves, in memory of the victory that Augustus had over Marcus Antonius at
the battle of Actium.

Quintus Publius the Consul of Rome, triumphed over the Latins upon this day,
after the city of Rome was builded, 414.

Caius Marius a Roman was borne as upon this day, and was afterward the first
Consul that was elected out of the common people: for before Marius time the
Consuls were chosen out of the company and society of the Patritians, this
Marius grew so great in Rome that he became seven times Consul of his
victories, triumphs, and exploits done, you shall in their place and time
find them, but in the honor and memory of this his birth they solemnized
feasts and plays called natalitij ludi, and Plutarch says, Plut.
that Marius died upon that day of the year that he was borne upon, as Pompei
the great did, and diverse others. Appian. liber 1.
Marius died the same year that he was made the seventh time Consul, being
seauentie years of age.

You must understand that nether these last conquerours, or any other were he
Dictator, Consul or Praetor might enter into Rome with any triumph unless he
had quieted the country subdued his enemies and slain 5000 in the field, and
the deliverance of his charge to his successor by the appointment of the Senate,
then had he his triumph granted him, and the Senators, Bishops, and the
priests called Flamines in their purple robes, and several sumptuous
garments, then the nobility, the magistrates, and the Roman tribes with all
the state and solemnity of music came to meet the conqueror at the temple
of Bellona out of the city, and so to march before the triumphant chariot with
great pomp and state through the city into the capitol, singing hymns, in
the praise of the victor in verses, the temples decked with crowns and
garlands, the streets with sweet flowers trimmed and decked. There certain
bulls were sacrifized unto Jupiter, with solemn ceremonies: after sacrifice
the feast called Epulum triumphale was celebrated, this feast was often
solemnised as occasions of triumphs forced: of the greatness of these feasts
and of the sundry several pomp of some triumph more than others I have in
their time and place spoken of them.

Octauius was upon this day first named Augustus, at what day a weather was
brought into the temple of Jupiter, as I wrote in the Ides, Sueton.
and there was offered by Jupiters. priest of the order of Flamines 711.

Fridericus archduke of Austria being elected Caesar died of Onoph*
a consumption upon this day 130.

Ioannes king of France sailed over into England to redeem his sons being
pledges to Edward king of England, as in the French chronicles is set down
1364,

Such a terrible tempest fell over all Germany, Lycosth. de Prodig.
that they thought doomes day was at hand 1551.

Upon this day our savior Christ fed five thousand men with five loves and
two fishes as Beda affirms. Beda.


Carolus a king of France concluded a peace with Pope Alexander 1495. Pau.
Ioui.


Philip duke of Burgundy gave an overthrow to the English men in Ba^auia 1425.
Auent.


The fourteenth day.
AS upon this day the feast Chytra was celebrated to Neptune among the
Grecians with due and solemn sacrifice: in this feast the chief dish was
broth or rather poddage made of all kind of herbs, which was so dainty in
those days in Athens, as ius nigrum Lacedemoniorum, called the black broth of
Sparta they had yet not common to their sumptuous cheer in Greece, very much
like to y^ feast of Iu. Brutus, who after he had vanquished Tarquine the
proud, the last king of the Romans, he held a feast in mount Caelia, at what
time the daintiest dish in that feast was poddage made of beans, and of the
fat lard of bacon, Macrob. lib. 2. ca. 12
at what time sacrifice was done to the Goddess Caruia: these were the old
ancient feasts of both Romans and Grecians in the beginning.

This day of the Romans was called Ater dies, unlucky, for as Numa the second
king of Rome divided the year into months, so he divided the month into
days, Mac. ^. 1. cap. 11. and A^l. Gel. li. 5. ca. 17.
the days again were divided some into feastiuall days, called festi dies
consecrated into the gods. Other named profesti dies dedicated into men, some
other called intersici comman both to the gods and to men. Of these read
Macrobius.

Henricus King of the Vandoles, being of the sect of the Arrians, slew 4963
Christians in one day, amongst whom some godly Bishops died, Vict, lib. 2
in the year of Christ 500.

Upon this day appeared a terrible Comet, which endured for the space of two
months, 1313.

Pius surnamed Aquiliegensis Bishop of Rome, was martired under the Emperor
Antonius Pius 142. Upon this day this Bishop made it a sacrilege to do
violence to any religious man: forbidding also, that no woman should make any
vow, Plat. 2.
or enter into order of religion before they were of 25 years.

In Suenia the Fair called Nordlingenses, was kept upon this day.

I found no more done upon this day worth the writing.

The fifteen Day.
THe feast Carmentalia, was only by the old matrons of Rome upon this day
observed and celebrated: for you must understand, that these great solemn
feasts which were dedicated to the Gods, Manob. li. 1. ca. 16.
were diverse times of the year solemnized, as Agonalia Lupercalia, and this
feast Carmentalia with others.

Sergius Galba an ancient Senator, after he was chosen Emperor by the
Spaniards, being 37. years of age, having been often Proconsul, and also
Consul: in sundry perilous battles chief Captain was slain as upon this
day, Tacitus lib. 7. and Etrop. lib. 7. Suet.
by the means of Otho who succeeded him in the Empire. This Emperor Galba in
the seventh month of his reign, had his throat cut in the market place at
Rome, and was buried in his own Garden by the way Aureli, 10. years after our
Savior Christ,

Marcellus Bishop of Rome, dyed a martyr under Dioclesian the Emperor upon
this day, 310. This Bishop divided the City of Rome into 25. several dioces,
Onoph. and Platina.
ad baptismi commoditatem.

Under Iustinianus the Emperor, dyed Maurus an Abbat Pantal. lib. 1.
and a martyr 536. years after Christ.

In Germany upon this day was a meeting of the people called Fustelenses
nundinae Germanorum, Cherubinus stella de nundinis.
and this continues for the space of ten days.

Also in Bridges a town in Flanders, is a fair which endures for three
days: this is all that I can find of this day.

The 16. Day.
Upon this day, the old and ancient Romans were wont to do great
sacrifice unto the Goddess Porrima, and to the Goddess Postuenta two great
Idols at Rome, which would tell the people things to come, Pant. lib. 1
and therefore called Deae pranuntiae futurorum.

Theodosius Hispanus, who was made Emperor by Gratianus which then was
Augustus, died upon this day, 402. This Emperor oftentimes vanquished the
Goths, Blond.
and subdued Eugenius and Arbogastus two mighty tyrants.

Theodosius the son of Arcadius, and Nephew to the first Theodosius, was upon
this day created and called Augustus, who after he had taken the Empire into
his hand, he sent Valentianus his Father in law against the Vandoles and
Hunnes to defend the West countries, and he for 32. years governed the East
kingdoms.

Marcellus Bishop of Rome, Plat.
died a martyr under Maxentius the Emperor, 310.

Johannes Schonerus, a great learned man, and a singular Mathematician, was
borne upon this day in Germany, in the year of Christ, 1477.

I read no more of this day worth the laying down.

The 17. Day.
AFter the murdering of Julius Caesar the first Emperor of Rome, Augustus
Caesar his sisters son, and his successor in the Empire, instituted in the
honor and memory of his Uncle, certain plays called Ludi Palatini, which
should be celebrated upon the Calende of January, in a round temple within
the Palace of the Emperor, these plays endured eight days. Sigon. lib. 3.
cap. 22.
At these plays afterward was Caligula slain by Chaerca and others that
conspired his death.

Furius Camillus called of the Romans the second Romulus, reedified the
Temple of Concord in Rome, which the Frenchmen threw down at their inuation
and subduing of the city, Pantal. lib. 1.
but by Camillus they were forced to fly to their loss.

Octauius Caesar, was upon this day confirmed Augustus 24. years before the
birth of Christ, Oros. lib. 6. cap. 20. Sueto.
some write that upon this day he changed the months name before called
Sextilis, according to his own name to be August.

Theodosius the Elder died at Milane in the twelft of his Empire, Hist. trib.
lib. 9.
and threescore year of his age, and in the year of Christ 395. But
Melancthon refers it to the seventeenth of September, others to the
sixteenth of November, so that in this as in others, by va^^tie of opinions
errors rise.

Georgius Castriotus, otherwise called Scanderbecke, Prince of the Epyrotes,
died upon this day in his climatericall year 63: a valiant Soldier, a
fortunate Captain, who for 24. years, gave diverse overthrows to the Turks,
and defended both Epyrus and Vngaria, to the great loss of the Turk, 1466.
Volat.


Fredericus, that founded the University of Whittenberge, and that first
received the doctrine of M. Luther of all the Princes of Germany, Pantal. lib.
1.
being one of the Electors for the Empire, died as upon this day, 1525.

John Chrysostomes body was brought to Constantinople, and was solemnlie
buried, 440. Hist. trip.


Upon this day the River of Rhein did freese over, and almost the frost endured
a whole Winter, 1514.

P^^s the fifth, was elected Pope of Rome upon this day, Onoph.
1566.

Stephanus Palatine of Vualachie gave to the Turk a great overthrow upon this
day at the River Barludus, 1467.

The eighteenth Day.
ATilius Calatinus a noble Roman, entered upon this day into the City of
Rome with a great triumph over the Affricans vanquished in Sicilia, for the
which, the Senators and chief Citizens of Rome should present him with
several rewards and presents on the day of the triumph: besides they granted
the dignity of his seat among the Consuls, and chief magistrates crowned
with Laurel, to behold the games and plays in Circo Maximo, in his triumphant
garments, according to the use and manners of the Romans. To some Conquerors
whose triumph excelled others, they had their statues set up in the market
place at Rome, or in the Capitol, or in the Palace, or in the pleading place,
or in Jupiters high chancell, of Marble or of Iuorie, both on Horseback and on
(...), for victories in all countries were in diverse sorts rewarded. Among the
Indians, if any Soldier had brought the head of any enemy to the king, he^
should have a black Horse and a black Bull for his reward. If in Scythia
any victory had been gotten, the Conqueror should drink of the kings cup,
which was carried for that purpose with the army, Pantal. lib. 1.
and that every year during his life, he might after that victory drink of
the kings cup, as a reward for his service. In the games of Isthmia, the
victors were crowned with the Garlands made of Pine, appointed by Solon that
they should have one hundredth drachmes: In the games of Olympia the Uictor
should be crowned with Laurel, and have five hundredth drachmes, and he that
won the masterie thrice, should have his statue erected, being 496. years
after the building of R^me.

Martinus the second of that name, a French pope of Rome died 884. Volat.
It is written that this Pope got his office by enchantment or such other evil
means.

Upon this day appeared a great Comet, after the which Lodowicke King that
time of Germany died within three days after, 882. Melanc. lib. 4. Chron.


Petrus Benbus a Uenetian, cardinal of Rome died, 1547.

I reed in Pandolphus Chronicles, that Peter the Apostle came into Rome first
upon this day, 44.

In the city of Caesaria in Palestina, Priscus, Malchus, and one Alexander,
three countr^emen, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 12.
were crowned martyrs under the Emperor Valerius upon this day, 259.

Likewise Prisca a Virgin of that name, a martyr under Claudius the Emperor,
45. Falc. tem.


John Philpot an Englishman, a great divine, was b^rned at Smithfield, 1556.
Fox in Mart.


Lispia was besieged by Johannes Frederick a Saxon, being one of the Electors
in the Empire, Sleid. lib. 18.
but his siege was in vain, 1547.

The 19. Day.
MArcus Aemilius Paulus, proconsull of Rome triumphed over the Affricans by
Sea. In this triumph of M* Aemilius Paul* as it did in fight differ from
others, so in victory and triumph he was contrary to others triumphs: for
their Banners, Flagges, and Ensigns, were set up in most brave manner, their
ships hanged over with cloth of Tishue, Gold and Silver, decked and trimmed
with Garlandes of several flowers, and the Soldiers crowned with all manner
of crowns Nauales coronae, Images and statues, and all the rich ^po^les set in
public places to be seen, their Captives and Prisoners bound fast to the
Mastes of the Ships, Pant. lib. 1
thus with all kind of Music and pomp of triumph, they sail with victory
toward Rome.

M. Amilius Pau. Procon^ul of Rome, Plutar. and Pantal. lib. 1.
triumphed over the Affricans by sea 499. years after the building of Rome.

Theodosius Hispanus was by Gratianus appointed Emperor in the East country
upon this day, in the room of Valens the Emperor, 389.

And after that, this Emperor Theodosius appointed his Son Arcadius to be
with him a Caesar in the Empire* Diac. lib. 12.
died upon this day at Constantinople, 413.

Henry the eight, King of England, after he had reigned almost 38. years,
dyed upon this day, as Sleidon affirms, lib. 18.
others say and affirm it to the eight and twentieth of this month, at what
day Edward the sixte his son succeeded him, 1541.

As upon this day in France were many martyred under the Emperor Antonius
Verus, specially three notable martyrs, Eusebius. 5. cap. 1.
Maturus, Attalus, and Blaudina a Maid of such wonderful constancy, that
when she was martyred, she much astonished the tormentors and the beholders on.

Likewise Potentiana and Pontianus, and many others, upon this day was made
martyrs, under Commodus the Emperor.

In Portingale upon this day, a great Fair or meeting of men, for the space
of 15. days is appointed.

The tvveentith Day.
Upon this day, Gordianus the Emperor was borne, Herod. lib. 7.
259. of whom games and plays were celebrated with much mirth at Rome, in
remembrance of Gordianus birth.

Theophilus Emperor of Canstantinople, being overthrown twice by the
Sarizens, of very shame and grief dyed in the twelfth of his Empire, 842.
Onoph.


Carolus the eight, king of France, was created Emperor of Constantinople upon
this day, Pantal. lib. 1.
by pope Alexander the sixte of that name.

Seruius Fuluius Proconsul at Rome triumphed by sea over the Affricans, Pantal.
lib. 1.
upon this day 499. years after the building of Rome.

Fra^ciscus Valesius king of France with great regal pomp Beuth.
and solemnity was crowned upon this day at Remes 1515. some refer it to the
25. of January.

Vladislaus duke of Lithuania was made a Christian by the Popes legate and was
crowned king of Poland, the self same day with great solemnity in the city
of Cracouia 1320. Martinus Chrom.
whose posterity continues to this day, as Mart. Chromerus a Polonian writer
does affirm.

Sebastianus a citizen of Millaine a captain under Dioclesian the Emperor in
his wars suffered every torment, and was martired with diverse others in
France for the profession of Christ as upon this day, 304.

Likewise Fabianus bishop of Rome was under the emperor Decius tormented with
martyrdom as upon this day.

It is written in Martinus Cromerus that Margareta the county Verboslay had
alive 36. sons, Si credi potest.

Upon this day at Basil the river of Rhine was frosen over Pantal. lib. 1.
which was seen in no man's age before.

The 21 Day.
UPON this day the Jews began their month Schebat their eleventh month, on
the which they held a feast, as they do upon the first and the last day of
every month celebrate solemnity in memory of their government under Moses in
the wilderness, and also in remembrance of their deliverance out of Egypt from
Pharaos bondage and cruelty.

The 21 day of every month the Calcedonians hold it as an unlucky and evil
day, for as the Romans the Grecians, and other countries recorded their altros
dies, black days upon the which days they would take no war in hand, nor
enter into any battle, nor take in hand any great action so this day the
Calcidonians much lamented for that Darius lieftenant and general of his
wars after he had vanquished subdued and had spoiled and ransacked all the
country, to add more cruelty he caused all the male children within Calcedon
Volum. lib. 2.
to be gelded, and to be sent as Eunuchs unto Persea.

Lodowick king of Germany died, and was buried with his father as Melancthon
affirms, but Scotus refers it to the 20. of August of the next year
following.

Lodouicus the third and the last emperor of the house and Melanch. lib. 4.
stock of Charles the great, and first of that name died for very grief on
this day, for that he was by the Vngarians overthrown 911.

Hadrianus the third was elected the eight pope of Rome, who decreed that in
the election of the pope the consent of the emperors should not be sought nor
looked for 884. Volat.


Likewise as upon this day Innocentius the fifth a Burgandin^ Onoph.
was elected pope of Rome, who reigned six months.

Carolus the eight king of France departed from Rome with a great army,
Stumph. lib. 3. de Gallia.
upon this day invaded Naples, Pantal. lib. 1.
and help the whole kingdom for a time, 1495.

Georgius Sigismundus Chauncelor to the great Emperor Charles the fifth.
Ferdinandus and Maximilian the second was upon this day borne in Augusta 1516.

The 22 Day.
PErtinax the ninth emperor of Rome, which succeeded Co^modus in the Empire
being a very aged man of seauentie years old, after he had reigned eighty
days, was slain as upon this day in an uproar which fell among his guard
through Scot. lib. 2 Eutrop. 18
the treason of Iulianus, Sabel.
who succeeded Pertinax in the Empire, 194.

Selymus Emperor of the Turks vanquished the Sou^dan, lib. 8.
and the Mameluchos in a great battle, of this history read Sabel. and
Iouius.

Carolus prince of Lotharingia was solemly married to Claudia the daughter of
Franciscus the second of that name king of France at Paris. 1559. Aemulus de
Galli^.


Edward Seimer an English man duke of Somerset, and uncle to Edward the sixth
king of England was beheaded upon, this day in the tower of London, 1552.
Baleus.


Ioan^es the second of that name was elected bishop of Rome Onoph.
upon this day, and died after within ^ year and 4. months, 332.

Anastasius surnamed Iconomachus was created patriarch of Constantinople upon
this day, 710.

Vincentius was martired under the Emperor Maximianus, upon this day which day
amongst the ancient Romans was holded a fortunate day for marriage, and as
Casparus Goldworne affirms, being a fair day shows much good luck to the
Romans. I can read no more for this day.

The 23 day.
MArcus Attilius Regulus being then Consul at Rome, after he had given diverse
overthrows to the Beut.
Carthaginia^s having discomfited Hamilcar with Hannibals father, and after
joined battle with 3. Carthaginian Captains, overthrew them and wan 73.
cities in Affricke, over whom he solemly tryu^phed upon this day 485.

Antonius surnamed Caracalla the 22. emperor of Rome Mar. scot. lib. 2. Chron.
of the age of 43. years s^cceeded his father Seuerus in the Empire, and was
like to his father in condition, he was out of measure given to sensuality,
and unto carnal concupiscence, that he espoused his mother in law called ^uba,
he founded the bathes in Rome which were called Antonianae, he dyed at Edissa
as Eutropius affirms: but Mar. Scotus says that he was slain in his viage
against the Parthians, lib. 8.
as upon this day after he had reigned six years and two months he wanted
the solemnity of imperial funeral, for he was buried very poor and simply.

Otto the 3. Emperor of Constantinople was poisoned in Italy, on this day
1000. his bowels were buried in Augusta, and his body at Aquisgraine two
years after that he had named the seven electors of the empire called
Septem^er^.

Many houses and many other buildings fell down in Thuringia Fabritius lib. 1.
by wind and tempest 1410. as is affirmed in the Chronicles.

Ioannes Leydenses king of the Anabaptists, after he had laid siege to the
city Monasteria, Sleid.
killing and murdering for 6. months without mercy, was justly punished and
plagued for his tirannie upon this day 1536.

Emerentia a Roman virgin became a martyr under the Pet. de natal.
emperor Valentinianus 360.

The 24 Day.
Caius Caligula the some of Germanicus the fourth emperor of Rome with his
wife Caesena and his Daughter were slain in his own palace, after he had
three years reigned a vicious, wicked, and cruel emperor, who had carnal
copulation with all his sisters and upon his daughter g^tten by one of his
sisters, he was cruel and horrible toward all men altogether addicted to
avarice and to fleshly lust, Suet. Eutrop. lib. 7. an. 50.
and as he lived dishonourably so he was slain miserably as Sueton, affirms
and Eutrop.

Philip king of Macedonia and father unto Alexander the great ob non punitam
libidinem was slain by Pausanias in the marriage of his daughter with Alexander
king of Epire in the midst of his regal pomp going most solemnlie with a
train of Princes into the theaters to see games and public plays having
before him twelve statues and Images of the Gods, and hi^ own statue besides
decked with chains, Iuels most rich and sumptuous, Plutarch.
before Christ's birth 334.

Anna the daughter of Ladislaus king of Vngaria the wife of Ferdinandus Caesar
and mother to Maximilian the Emperor, and sister to Lodowick king of Germany
died upon this day, 1547. Beuth.


Aelius Adrianus the fifteen emperor of Rome, was borne upon this day in
Italicia a City in Spain, for whom the Romans kept a yearly feast upon
this day, and granted public plays (to celebrate the memory of Adrianus
birthe) called Natilitij ludi, for he was one of the number of the best
Emperrours, 119. Aeli. Spa.


Lu. Iul. Libo, Consul of Rome, upon this day triumphed over the Salentines,
486 years after the building of Rome.

John the tenth, was elected pope of Rome, 914. This Volat.
Pope gave an overthrow to the Sarazens in Campania, and after was taken by
some Romans, in the 14. years of his papacy, and was smoothered by thrusting
the boulster where he lay into his throat.

Timotheus the disciple of Paul, and Bishop of Ephesus, suffered martyrdom
upon this day under Nero the Emperor, 50. Niceph.


Upon this day the ancient Romans used to sacrifice to Ceres and to Tellus,
and with all they celebrated the feast called Sementina.

The 25 Day.
Upon this day the Apostle Paul was converted from his cruel persecution of
the Christians, who lived when the Emperor Caligula lived, 34. Of this day the
Husbandmen prognosticat the whole year: if it be a fair day it will be a
plentiful year, if it be windy, it will be wars, if it be cloudie, it
does foreshowe the plague that year, Clara dies Pauli, etc. Reg. rust.


M. Ati. Regulus, triumphed upon this day our the Salentines, 486 Pant. lib. 1.
years after the building of Rome.

Martianus the 64 Emperor of Rome, dyed upon this day, Cuspi.
after he had reigned six years. And Leo the fourth of that name, was upon
this day borne 751, who left behind him his wife Irenes and his son
Constantinus.

Fardinandus king of Sicilia, died also this day, Maucler.
leaving his kingdom to his Son Alphonsus, 1494.

Selymus the Turk, upon this day gave an overthrow to Pau. Ioui.
the Solthan of Aegipt, and took Aelcairum which was sometime called Memphis,
the strongest City in all Aegipt, 1517.

Gregory the 4. Pope of Rome, died on this day, he instituted the feasts of
all Saints, 844.

Gelasius the second, was elected Pope, 1118.

An Earthquake in Germany happened upon this day, that 26. Castles fell, and
many towns beside 1349. The like happened Lycosth.
in Uenice.

Adolphus Duke of Holsatiae was borne as upon this day, Paul. E^e.
1527.

The Greeks were wont to sacrifice a feast in memory of Theseus, for the
delivery of Greece from Minotaurus: beside diverse other feasts and sacrifices
which they had in remembrance of Theseus the tenth king in Athens, and the
first that brought Athens to any perfection of good government.

The 26 Day.
AS upon this day Maximinus the 26 Emperor was slain at Aquileia by Pupeinus
his fellow in the Empire, for after Maximinus time Albinus, Pupienus and
Gordianus, Eutrop. lib. 9.
were all three Emperors of Rome at one time, and named Augusti. This Maximinus
was first a Shepherd in Thracia, after became a Soldier, and from a
Soldier became an Emperor, who reigned three years, and then was slain,
he, and his son being a very child, 240.

C. Julius Caesar entered into Rome from mount Albanus Pantal. lib. 1.
with great pomp and triumph upon this day 727 years after the building of
Rome, in the which year he also was slain.

Leo the son of Martianus the Empepor, was chosen emperor of the East after
his father upon this day, 457.

Editta, Wife to Otto the Emperor died upon this day, and was buried at
Magdenburge, 948. Melanc. Chron.


Henry the eight, king of England, died upon this day, leaving a son behind
him his successor, Edward the sixth, 1547. Lilius.


Lusitania a country of Spain, was so shaken with an Earthquake, that much
harm and great loss of it ensued, Beuth.
at what day the City of Ulisbone fell prostrate to the ground, 1531.

Upon this day in Rome was builded a temple, and dedicated unto Castor and
Pollux, 270 years after the building of Rome.

Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, Pionicus, and diverse others, after much
constancy and boldness, were martired under Antoninus Verus, 150. Of
Polycarpus death, Eusebius. writes very strange things, read 3. book and 15.
chap. of his Eusebius. 3. cap. 15.
martyrdom in Smyrna.

Sextus Apuleus, proconsul of Rome, had his triumph granted him out of Spain,
under Octauianus the Emperor, 727 years after the building of Rome.

The 27. Day.
COcceus Nerua, the thirteenth emperor of Rome, who succeeded that deadly
tyrant Domitianus, after that he had reigned almost two years, died upon this
day at Rome, 66. This Emperor advanced the public weal, behaved himself
very soberlie, upright and courteous, and yet stout and manfull, he adopted
after him a good man to govern, named Traianus, for it was hard to find a
good Emperor then in Rome, and harder for a good Emperor to live in Rome,
Onoph.
such treachery and tirannie reigned the^, that one Caesar kiled an other, and
one Emperor destroyed another, that the empire continued not above 400 years,
but was carried, from Rome to Constantinople.

Henricus, the s^nne of Fredericus Barbarossa, king of the Romans, Pantal.
lib. 1.
was married to Constantia, daughter to Rogerus king of Sicilia, of whom
Fredericus the second was borne.

Seffanus and Constantinus both then Emperors, were apprehended and taken by
Constantinus the some of Leo, Paul. lib. 1.
and put into a Monastery, being shaven like Friars, both head and beard.

Upon this day by the commandment of Charles the fifth, a speech was had
concerning religion, five years after the first controversy at Ratis^one in
Germany, but because of the business and war ensuing it took no effect,
Sleid.
1546.

Stumpf. affirms, that upon this day a great battle was fought between the
Tigurines and Heluetians, at V^ila a town in Germany.

Vitilianus Bishop of Rome, died as upon this day, 670. after he had been
elected 14. years: Volat.
this bishop brought into the Roman Church the Organes and music.

Licosth. in his books of woonders says, that upon this day appeared two
golden pillars, the one on the right hand of the sun, and the other on the
left, 1704.

Ignatius bishop of Antioche, suffered martyrdom under Arcadius the Emperor:
this Ignatus committed his Church to Policarpus bishop of Smyrna.

The 28 Day.
Upon this day Charles the Great, King of France, and the first of that name
of a Frenchman, was made Emperor of Rome by Pope Leo: this brought the Empire
from Rome into Germany, Pantal. lib. 1.
and having done many great exploits, after he had erected Colleges and
Schools in Bononia, Papia, and Lutetia, died at Aquisgrane, in the 46. year
of his reign. Of this Charles the great, the Frenchmen have their chief
antiquity in matters touching the roialtie and dignity of their inaugurations
of their kings, and of the burial of their princes, the solemnity of either
began by this king, and from his time whose Eusignes and relics, are left as
monuments to be used at the coronation of the Kings of France at this day, as
I have written in the general inauguration and crowning of their kings.

Alexius the 4. emperor of Constantinople was slain upon this day. 124.

Lu. Cornelius Dolabella triumphed over the Lusitanians, Plutar.
and Spaniads 6^5. years after the building of Rome.

Mari. Scotus says, that upon this day 1079. a terrible battle was fought
in Germany by a place called Fladechies where county Manfridus with many
others died.

A terrible earthquake was heard over all Siria upon this day, at what time
many towns, and many thousands of people perished. Cedrenus in his chronicles
of the Greeks, 746.

Pascalis was elected pope of Rome without the consent of Jews surnamed Pius
king of France, Volat.
and also Emperor of Rome.

Upon this day at Darmset by the river of Rhine a great solemnity of the
nobles and peers of Germany with running at tilt and at barriers, Pantal. lib.
1.
and other games was celebrated, 1496.

Amongst the old and ancient Romans the feast called Equitia was solemnly
wont to be celebrated and kept in Mars his field at Rome, sometime in Circo
Maximo. For this feast Equitia they had certain plays and games where horses
and Mules, some lose and some bound together, and shoult so run in Circo
Maximo: Some used one race, some used another. These mules and horses made such
a sport at Rome, that while this play was celebrated Romulus caused the Sabine
virgins to be ravished, for the which cause great wars grew between the
Romans and the Sabines, and in memory of this Romulus appointed the feast
called Consualia.

The 29 day.
AS upon this day the ancient Romans were wont to create their kings, and
every year they celebrated a solemn feast in memory of their Kings. The
solemnity of inauguration and crowning of the Kings of Rome I did write in my
other Book.

Aurelianus Emperor of Rome borne in Ponnonia, after he had subdued the
Goths, vanquished the French men, tamed Egypt, and recovered both the East and
West countries under his dominion and empire of Rome, Eutrop. lib. 9
and triumphed over Zenobia Queen of Palmeria after he slew Odenatius the king
her husband. And after many other famous exploits done, he used Solons law
called Amnistian, Amnistia^.
which Thrasybulus revived in Athens after the banishment of the thirty
tyrants and was as upon this day slain by his own servants between
Constantinople and Heraclia, some refer it to the fourth of February, ^76.

Likewise Dagobertus Magnus king of France died at Spinetum of the f^ixe on
this day, 645.

Philippus the 28. emperor of Rome and the first of that name, with his son
named also Philippus were slain in one day, Mar. Sco. lib. 2.
the elder at Verona the younger at Rome after they had reigned seven years,
as Mar. Scot. affirms, but Eutrop. says 5. years.

Batildis the wife of Clodoueus the second of that name, Volat. lib. 3.
king of France died at Paris, 670.

Isabella the wife of Edward the second king of England, after many broiles
threw her husband the king into prison, Lil.
and caused her son named also Edward, being of fourteen years of age to be
crowned king of England, 1326.

Gelasius the second, Onoph.
Pope of Rome died in exile in the second year of his papacy, 1119.

Upon this day great disputation began at Tigurum in Germany for religion,
Sleid.
after which a great change began upon the same to be in Helue^ia, 1523.

This was accounted an unfortunate day amongst the Romans, called aterdies.

The 30 Day.
GOrdianus the 27. Emperor was slain as upon this day through the treason of
Philip, who succeeded him in the empire after good service and maine victories
over the Parthians, in his return from Parthia toward Rome, Eutrop. lib. 9.
over whose grave one of his captains erected a monument for a memorial of
him, Mar. Sco. l^b. 2.
yet his funeral was solemnized by a decree of the Senate.

Ludouicus the last Earl of Flanders of his family and stock dyed, and the
self same day Philip duke of Burgundy and son to Ioannes king of France
succeeded him, 1384.

As upon this day Lu. Cornelius Silla then Dictator at Rome triumphed most
solemnlie over Asia, Grecia, and over Mithridates king of Pontus. The pomp of
this triumph endured two days so set forth, and solemnized to the great glory
of Silla: for this triumph of Silla and the royal magnificence thereof was
compted among the Romans one of their hundred great triumphs, though from
Romulus time the first king of Rome until Probus the Emperors time were
registered 320. triumphs.

Anthimus bishop of Nicomedia a with many more Christians, Casp.
even three hundred were tormented and martired under Galerius the Emperor,
after whom succeeded Constantinus the great.

Iulianus bishop of Cenomanenses, and Adelgundis did suffer upon this day
torments under the Emperor Vespasianus. 665.

In old time at Rome the Romans were wont to celebrat in the temple of
concord in memory of peace and quietness, and this Ovid says was appointed
upon this day.

H^c erit a mensis fine secunda dies.

The inhabitants of Berna in Germany with the aid of the Heluetians, Stumf.
lib. 8.
afflicted and troubled sore the people of Germany, wasted, took and occupied
much of their territories. 1536.

The 31 Day.
Upon this day being the last day of January, the Romans used in ancient
time to do sacrifice to their household gods, Gal. Romans
called di^penates.

Husbandmen say that trees hewn, or wood out down upon this day, Reg. rust.
will endure longer then other in any building.

Clodius a noble Roman but yet malicious and envious of other men's good
fortune, one that much troubled Rome by his greatness, App^.
and caused many good men to be banished, as Cicero and others: but as he
returned from Aricia to Rome, he was with all his company by Milo slain, of
whose death few seemed to be sorry, but Cicero had good cause to rejoice: and
therefore Cicero defended Milo Cicero pro Milon.
before the Judges at Rome for the killing of Clodius, as it is in his oration
pro milone proved 701. years after the building of Rome.

Noah upon this day did let out a raven, and after a raven a do^e, Genes. 8.
which returned both in one day without finding of any land, after the creation
of the world. 1657.

Stephanus the third, Bishop of Rome a Cilician borne di^d, 772. this bishop
called together Consilium Lateranense under Pipinus king of France. In this
council Images were restored again into the Roman church against a decree
past before in the council of Constantinople. S^bel.


Within the month of January died 29. Roman Emperors, and in the said
month the Romans had 20. triumphs with great pomp and solemnity, and 7.
public solemn feasts, with so many sacrifices.

The names of the triumphers.
1. C. Marius. 2. L. Antonius. 3. M. Censorius. 4. C. Iun. Brutus. 5. I^.
Caesar. 6. August. Caesar. 7. Q. Publius. 8. Sp^. Car^ilius 9. M. Aemil. Paulus
10. Ser. Full. Petinus 11. M. Atil. Regulus 12. L. Julius Libo. 13. C. Julius
Caesar 14. Sex. Apuleus 15. Cor. Dolabella. 16. L. Corn. Silla.
The names of Feasts.
Gamelia, Compitalia, Epiphania, Carmentalia, Agonalia Chytra. Equitia.
Of the month of February, with the Hebrews called Schebat: with the
Athenians called Elaphobelion, and with the Agiptians called Mecher. Also of
triumphs, feasts, plays, funerals and natiuities within the sam^ month.
The first Day.
THis month in the old Romans time, was dedicated unto Neptune, for upon the
first day of this month, they were wont to sacrifice a sheep to Jupiter in
the Capitol, and withal a great feast they celebrated in the honor of
Hercules, for that Hercules was borne upon this day. Call. Romans


Elaphobelia, is a feast solemnized in Athens to Diana, at what time the
Athenians used to sacrifice a Heart upon the f^rst day of February, to honor
Diana, and therefore the month of February was so named according to the name
of the feast Elaphobelia, Plutarch.
for in this month yearly the Athenians held this feast with great
solemnity, with sacrifices and ceremonies of Hearts upon the altars of Diana.

M. Valerius surnamed Cor^us, then Consul at Rome, triumphed over the
Vulscanes, Satricians, and the Antiates, Pantal. lib. 2.
407 after the building of Rome.

Q. Fab. Maxims, Consul of Rome, triumphed over the Ligurians upon this day,
Pantal. lib. 2.
after the building of Rome 520. And before him Fab. Pictor had a triumph
granted him over the Salentines and Mesapians, 487.

Tit. Coruncanus, likewise Consul at Rome, triumphed over the Vulscans, Liui.
473.

And Lu. Aemil. Regulus having subdued the lieutenant of Antiochus the great by
sea, Liui. l^b. 7
had a triumph granted him by the Senators at Rome, 487.

Lu. Cornelius Dolabella, proconsul then in Spain under Constantine then
emperor, E^trop.
had a triumph at Rome over the Lusitantans, so that as upon this day, six
several solemn triumphs were in Rome by the aforesaid Consuls, as you heard,
655.

Lu. Sergius Catilina conspired upon this day the destruction of Rome, Salust.
but his conspiracy was prevented by M. Cicero, 691.

Jews the twelfth king of France, Ioa. Stu^.
entered in league of peace with the Heluetians for ten years, called
Decennale faedus, 1499.

Car. Pulcher the 48 king of France, Cron. Fra.
died without children upon this day, 1327. After whom succeeded Phil.
Vales^us Hic seminarium belli Anglicifuit.

Ladislaus, the thirteenth king of Vngaria, died on this day, 1172.

Upon this day Damiata a city in Egypt was taken by the Christians from the
Sarazens, Pantal. lib. 2.
but with great effusion of blaud, 1220.

Tritemius an histographer was borne on this day, 1462. And Con. Celtes a
German poet, was also upon this day borne, 1454. Pros. Pan.


The second Day.
Upon the second of February Christ Jesus the son of God borne of the
Uirgine Marie 40. days, was presented in the temple of Solomon in Jerusalem,
according to the law of Moses, where just Simeon and Anna confessed him in the
presence of the people, to be the savior of mankind, Luck. 2.
saying with exceeding great joy, Nunc dimittus.

This was amongst the Romans accounted one of their dismal days, Mar. scot.
for in those days that some victory was lost, or some unfortunate expl^its
done, or any other harm by fire, by water, or by any other mischance, they
called those days Atros dies, on which days they ceased from any enterprises,
calling this day into mind. Gell. lib. 5.
Also, as upon this day, the Romans hallowe^ and consecrated their firebrands,
for that the city of Rome was twice taken by the Gauls, and four times by
the Goths, and had been in diverse dangers by fire, therefore the priests
called Flamines by the council of Southsaires, sacrificed firebrands unto
Vesta, Goltz.
for among the Romans the Uestall Uirgins were charged to keep the immortal
fire, always burning in the temple of Vesta, as among the Grecians the old
women had care of the holy Lamp in the Temple of Phoebus.

Andronicus surnamed Palaeologus, Ger. Mer.
was upon this day crowned Emperor of Constantinople, 1314. in whose time
Ottomanus the Turk began now his kingdom.

Guntherus an Earl of Germany, as Cusp. says, was elected upon this day
Caesar, by the most number of the Electors of the empire at Frankfort, for
hatred and privy malice the bare unto Carolus the fourth of that name, and at
that time Emperor, 1349.

The feast Hipapante with the Jews, commonly called with us the feast of the
Purification, was by Sergius Bishop of Rome instituted: Func. in Chron.
in the which feast our Savior Christ was presented in the temple at
Jerusalem, according to the law of Moises, 40 days after his nativity,
there was another kind of purification in ancient time with the Romans, which
Picus and Faunus two Satyricall gods revealed to Numa Pompilius with many other
things, among which they taught him the purification of lightning and
thundering, by secret ceremonies revealed to Numa. Plut. in Numa.


At Darmstat by the river of Rhein, a great meeting of the Nobles of Germany,
where much mirth and marshall exploits were done.

The third Day.
Upon this day at Rome the fields were visited, and the fruits were solemnly
hallowed, and the Olive trees were sanctified with processions of the priests,
and with sacrifice and mysteries, like to Amberuale sacrum, at what time the
people went together to visit their Corn, Call. Romans
how their fruits in the fields prospered. In procession they go very
devout, thrice round about the field, one going before them bedeckt with Oken
boughs, with a comely solemn dance, singing verses in praise of Ceres whom
all follow in like sort, Call. Rom
singing and da^^cing until they had gone round about the field three times:
then they sit upon the green grass, which with solemn sacrifice of Milk,
Wine, and Honnie comb, which they offer unto Ceres the Goddess of Corn: then
they kill a Porke, which they called Praecidanea, and offer it unto Ceres whom
they call upon in their hymns and odes to prosper their corn.

Upon this day in Rome in the Senate house were had a just view, and an
inquisition made, with a certain care of the Censores to amend things amiss
among them, and to punish offenders, to direct them and to correct their faults
every fifth year, which time was called Lustrum, at what time they might put
out and in, by the consents of the rest of the Senators, such as had against
the City of Rome offended.

The Frenchmen which had invaded Rome, where by the noble Roman Camillus,
Plat. in Camillo.
after they had possessed the City seven months, driven out of Rome and
slain, to their loss and great harm, 363 years after the building of Rome.

Au. Probus the 36 emperor of Rome, a man of singular experience in warfare,
and able to match that noble emperor Aurelianus in all good parts, Eutr. lib. 9
was upon this day created Emperor next after Tacitus, 278.

Henry Duke of Bauaria, and Uncle to Jews the fourth then emperor, Io.
Auent.
died on this day, 1290.

Clodomanus king of Vngaria died on this day, after whom succeeded Steffanus
the second, Pant. lib. 2
11^14.

Basilius the great Bishop of Caesaria in Cappadocia died upon this day, Eusebius.
390.

Gal. Picus entered secretly by night into the city Mirandula, and then slew
his Uncle Fran. Picus and his son, and took the town, 1533.

Upon the third day of the month Mechir, Sesostris a most famous King of the
Egiptians, who after he had conquered diverse countries, and made his kingdom
far more by his conquest, specially by subduing of the Scythians whom neither
Cirus, Allexa. nor Darius could do, for the which cause the priests of Vulcan
suff^ed not the statue of Darius long after Sesostris time to be set up before
Sesostris: though Egypt at that time was subject to the Persians. In memory of
his victories he erected in many regions pillars and arches of brass of
marble, and of Iuorie called Arcus triumphalis among the Romans, but proper to
the Egyptians, and his Image set thereon, in token and monument of his
triumphs, for that was the order of the kings of Egypt to put their pictures
and statues in stones and brass in lue of triumph. This Sesostris in Siria had
his image set upon a high pillar of brass with this sentence written between
both his shoulders on his back in Egyptian characters

Hanc ego regionem meis sustinui humeris.

The 4 Day.
THe Romans celebrated for 6. Call. Romans
days certain games called Ludi Gotici in memory of their last overthrow, or
as some say, they were appointed by the Goths, at what time they had taken
Rome, and then used enterludes as a triumph of their victories and conquests.
Therefore the Romans far excelled all nations in feasts and triumphs in
plays, in sacrifices and ceremonies, as I have written of them in the places
and days appointed, the Romans would omit nothing that might be recorded, for
neither the Goths, the Perseans, the Almanes, the Sarmatians, the Frenchmen,
and many other nations are forgotten among the Romans, but they are men^ioned
upon the Theators of Rome, and in Circo Maximo once a year, so the Goths are
remembered upon the 4. day of February by their games and plays called Gothici
ludi which endure 6. days upon the theators in Rome.

Lu. Septimius Seuerus the 27. emperor of Rome the only emperor elected forth
of Afric, Mar. Sco.
which for his worthiness and rare exploits over the Arabians and Parthians
demerited to have the names of Parthicus, and Arabicus. This Emperor at York
in England disseased on this day when he had reigned eighteen years and
four months, some say he died the twenty ninth day of November, these
controversies of days cannot be well decided, 212.

Conradus the third of that name a Sueuian borne, Pant. lib. 2
upon this day made a voyage against the Saracens with a great company of the
princes of Germany into Asia, where the Saracens with much blood on either
side were discomfited 1147.

The Jews upon this day being the 15. of their month Shebat do celebrat a
feast of great mirth and joy, Eber.
for that the spring begins, and that trees and all things do begin to have
sa^ and to flourish: at what time the Egyptians worshipped their bird Ibis for
that in the spring time a number of serpents ^leeing from Arabia into Egypt,
are by the birds Ibides fought withal and vanquished, and thereby Ibis does
often save Egypt from the harm and danger of these serpents, and therefore
recorded in the books Memphis as one of the gods of Egypt by the priests of
Vulcan.

In Germany great triumphs with tilting and barriers and other plays at
Ratisbone by the nobles and peers of ^auaria were as upon this day solemnized:
This was the 35. turnement had in Germany, 1487.

Under the Emperor Maximinus many were on this day martired, as Veronica and
Philea with others of these martirs I have in an other place entreated, Eusebius.
where you may have infinite number that stoutly stood to the profession of
Christ Jesus.

The 5. day
IN Rome as on this day two solemn feasts were celebrated, the one amongst
the Roman Uirgins called puellarum fer^ae, the other amongst the nurses and
mothers that gave suck called nutricum lactantium feriae, on the which day
among the Romans the women sacrificed to Nundina the goddess of infancy, and
consulted touching the bringing up of these infants, with their nourses,
prescribing laws and orders of diet to the nurses that gave suck, lest by
liberty of feeding the infant might miscarie, at what time they appointed
upon what day the infant should be named, which was among the old Romans upon
the ninth day, Alex. lib. 2. cap. 25.
and among the Grecians the fifth day, the ceremonies and the sacrifices that
are used by the nurses for the health of the infant to the goddess Nundina are
many in diverse countries according to their superstitious customs.

As upon this day a feast and solemn sacrifice in old time was appointed in
Quirinus valley against the fury of fire dedicated to the goddess Agatha with
torches done in the night time.

Octauius Caesar was now the third tiwe by consent of the Senators, Consuls,
Magistrates ^and people saluted by the name of Augustus, Sueto^.
and also called Pater patriae, as the most fortunate and best beloved Emperor
of any that reigned after him in Rome.

As upon this day Iunius Pera at his being Consul of Rome with great pomp by
the license of the senators triumphed over the Salentines, and also the
Mesapians in such solemn sort as you read in the general triumph. The year
that this triumph was solemnised fell upon the time of Lustrum, which was
appointed every fifth year, the state of the city should be examined per
Censores, Liui. lib. ^
at what time a general mustering was had at Rome, in the which were 360 and
od thousands found of able men within the city of Rome, 487.

Clemens the fourth a frenchman was on this day chosen pope of Rome 1265. this
pope called Carolus the French king his cosyn germane and went into Italy and
fought against Manfredus and Conradinus two noble captains of Germany,
Platina.
whom Carolus that time vanquished, and was by pope Clemens therefore crowned
king of Sicilia, paying yearly to the Pope 40000. crowns as a tribute to the
church of Rome.

The city of Millaine in Italy was taken by duke Franciscus surnamed Sfortia
after long besieging of it, 1444. Pan. Iouius.


The 6 Day.
THis was a dismal day to the Romans fore those causes before reheased, so the
priests of Memphis recorded this day unfortunate, for as the Romans observed
their unlucky days, by the name of Atridies, so the Grecians, the Egyptians
and all nations have recorded good and bad days according to the first cause
given, whether it were good or bad, though in truth none were more
superstitious than the Romans, neither had such cause offered to note these
days because their overthrows were great, and their victories far greater.

Manfredus the Son of Fredericus the second, and tutor to Conradinus his
brothers son, was slain in a battle at Beneuentum on this day by Carolus
the French king, 1126.

Iohanna Borbania Queen of France, and the wife of Charles the fifth died on
this day, 1378. and afeer within three days her daughter called Isabella died
also, Pantal. lib. 2.
which doubled the grief of the king.

Beorgor king of Alania was on this day slain and found dead at the foot of
Bergome a mountain so called, 473.

As upon this day Pelagius the second of that name bishop of Rome died of the
plague at Rome, after whom succeeded Gregorius surnamed the great, this was the
last of 92 bishops that reigned in Rome, then followed the race of Popes from
Bonifacius the third, which was the 63. bishop and the first pope of Rome
until Gregorius which was the 13 Pope, 166.

Eusebius a Greek borne, bishop of Rome, was upon this day, Volat.
310. made martire for Christ Jesus under Maxentius the Emperor.

The 7 Day.
(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

The eight Day.
(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

The 9 Day.
(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

The tenth Day.
(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...) (...)

The 11 Day..
(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...) a part of Africa in consideration of this peace, for (...) Rome with all
her pomp and dignity became to decline, and the kingdoms in Germany began to
flourish, and within a short time after to challenge the Empire.

Elizabeth wife to Henry the seventh king of England died as on this day in
London by childbirth, 1503. Lal^.


Gregorius the second, pope of Rome died on this day, 731. he defended Images,
Platina.
and extolled them to the highest honor in spite of Leo the Emperor, for then
Popes made Emperors sometime without the leave of the electors.

The 12 Day.
ANdronichus Palaeologus the Emperor died on this day, Pant. lib. 2
1330.

Leo the ninth was elected pope in Rome being before the (...), Sabel.
and now sent to Rome by Henricus the third, then Emperor, 1049. to be chosen
pope.

Iageslo duke of Li^uania, Chroni. lib. 14.
afterward called Vladislaus was crowned king of Poland on this day in Craconia
the chiefest city in Polonia, 1386.

Jane the daughter of the duke of Suffolk was married to Gilford Dudley the
duke of Northumberlands some. Sleid. 14. Io. Fox.
and was named and pronounced Queen of England, and therefore on this day was
beheaded in the tower at London, 1554.

Religion was changed in Basil in Germany by the persuasion of Io.
Occolampadius learned and a Godly divine, 1529. Sled.


(...)

In Italy on this day ^he ^ayres called Nundine nucerienses are kept which
endure for 15. days Stella de Nun^*


Dionisia a maid of Alexandria was persecuted and beheaded for the Gospel,
Pant. lib. 2
as Eusebius says. Also Sosanna and Eulalia two other (...) of Alexandria died
mart^rs on this day, Lib. 6.
262.

The 13 Day.
THe Romans in times past upon this day with great solemnities very devoutly
sacrificed unto their god Faunus, to whom they dedicated their plays
Lupercalia, and also on this day they builded a temple unto Jupiter hard by the
river Tiber.

Noe the third time did let a dove from the arc, Genesis 8.
which returned not to the arc again.

Upon this day the city of Rome was by Camillus delivered from the French men
who took her and possessed her for 7. months as Plutarch in Camillus life
reports, though some attribute it to the third of (...).

300. Roman gentlemen of one name, and of one house, called Fabij, in the
wars between the Romans and the Ueintes by the river Allia, were slain
every one saving one Fabius, from whom Fabius Maximus a most noble valiant
Roman issued* Pantal. lib. 2.
this battle was, 276. years after the building of Rome: the (...) Camillus
the^ Dictator appointed to grant them ^^^ence to fight this batta^l* Some
referr this overthrow of 300 Fabians to the 16. of Iulie, as Plutarch affirms
the like is read between 300. L^cedempnians and 300 Arguis.

Lu. Papyr. Cursor then Consul at Rome, triumphed over the (...), and as this
Consul gave diverse overthrows to the (...) gave as many to the Romans during
the time of 50. years. in the which time the Romans got 24. victories, and
every victory a triumph, 460.

Carolus the third, king of V^garia was on this day murdered, with many other
in the castle of Budensis, 1388,

Bela, Bonf. dec. 2. lib. 6.
the 2* king of U^garia who was blind and much given to drunkenness, died as
on this day.

Balduinus king of Jerusalem died also as upon this day, Guil. Tyr. 19. Cap.
34.
having reigned 24. years.

The Heluetians with an army on this day marched to Hegouia and overthrew ^0.
strong castles and holds and burned them 1499. Munst.


The 14 Day.
AMong the Romans this day was counted a dismal day, Gel. lib. 3.
for they believed that diverse kind of sprites walked abroad that night, and
therefore they used as the papists were wont to do, to sprinkle holy water
about their houses. Much like to Lecanomantia a solemnity of divination among
the old A^^irians by water put in a basen where after many superstitious words
spoken certain spirits entered into the basen, and thereby a whispering noise
signified things to come.

Henricus the 2. K. of France being delivered from (...) concluded peace with
Charles the fifth emperor 1526. Frond. lib. 3.


Henricus the 2. surnamed Claudius was created (...) of Rome, as A^entinus
says, but Onophrius (...) the, 26* of April 1014.

Gisela the empress and wife to Conradus the Emperor, Cusp.
and mother to Henricus the 3* Emperor lineally discending from Charles the
great and first of that name died at Spire, 1043.

In S^euia by a^towne called (...) a great battle where both Arnolphus and
Hermannus prince of (...) were ^la^e by Albertus their uncle, Beuth.
and Theobaldus his brother. 953.

Peace was concluded between the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians Thucid. ^*
upon this day for 30. years, called ^ricenal^^ inducias, in the 8. year of
the (...).

The 15. day
THE Romans were woonte to celebrate the feast (...) (...)

The 16 Day.
IOuianus the 43 emperor of Rome, being in the East country in the wars,
Eutrop. 10 hist. trib.
as he took his voyage toward Illyria, he died suddenly in the borders of
Galacia, as upon this day: he was a very good prince, and a great favorer of
the Christians, and did much good, while he reigned Emperor in the Empire.

Fredericus the Emperor, with the consent of all the Electors of Germany,
made his son Maximilianus his fellow in the Empire at Frankeford.

Phil. Melancthon a famous learned man, Pantal. lib. 2.
and the very ornament of all Germany, was upon this day borne, in a town
called Bretta, 1497.

Upon this day fell such a terrible tempest in Frisland, that many towns and
villages were overthrown and drowned, Munst.
1230.

The 17 Day.
AS upon this day, the feast called Parentalia in Rome was celebrated with
great solemnity. In this feast they used to bring beans, pulses, wafers, and
dry figs, and to lay them upon a bare flint stone, at the grave of their
dead parents, and upon the grave to ^ffer sacrifice to the infernal gods with
beans: Call. Romans
and after many ceremonies done, they sit round about the grave of the dead,
their banquet being laid upon a flint stone, as I said, at what time they make
their feast, much like to the sacrifice done at the feast, which is solemnized
in May called Lemuralia.

Also they used on this day, to seal up the court house, and seats of
judgment.

Charles the fifth, emperor, after he had ten months besieged Rome, departed
toward Naples, at what time the most part of his army were lost, Frontsp.
lib. 8.
1528.

Charles duke of Burbone, a prince of haughty courage, was borne on this day,
Eberus.
1489. who after many victories woon^ was at the besieging of the city of Rome
slain, 1527.

The sixth synod universal of 150 bishops, was had at Constantinople against
those that affirmed that our Savior Mar. scot.
Christ had but vnam voluntate^ and operationem, 676.

The 18 Day.
THe feast called Quirinalia on this day was solemnly celebrated in Rome, in
this feast it was lawful for tumblers and gesters, to use any game, play, or
other pastime, and lawful for any person to invent and to use scoffs or any
other mir^he, and therefore it was called Festum stultorum, where the Poets
might use on the Theators, any flou^ing rimes, or any kind of scur^litie in
their verses.

The Romans also on this day celebrated a feast called For^acalia, appointed by
Numa Pomp. in the which feast the people were taught to do sacrifice to
Fornax, with new cakes made only of dried meal, salt, and water, like unto
the Grecians sacrifice, which was of Barlie flower and honey, their cakes were
called Liba, for during the whole time of Numa, which was 43 years, Call. Romans
the Temple of Ianus was not once opened, they lived so in peace and quietness
in Rome, that they studied nothing but far feasts, plays, banquets, and
sacrifices to their gods. The number of these feasts and sacrifices by Numa
instituted, are in Macrob. Plut. and others mentioned, for these 3 feasts,
Fornacalia, Palilia and Laralia, were popular feasts.

On this day in Rome triumphed many Romans over foreign enemies for victories
achieved: Li^.
first Marcus Pompilius Consul of Rome, triumphed solemnly over the Frenchmen,
after the building of Rome* 403.

Lucius Fuluius surnamed Coruus, triumphed with great honor over the Samnits
431, Pantal. and Plut.
and in the same self day triumped Q. Fab. Maximus over the Samnites and the
Apulians.

And in the year 477. Q. Fabius, surnamed Gurges, being the 2. time Consul in
Rome, triumphed with pomp and solemnity over the Samnits, Lucanians, and the
Britains. These triumphs, you must understand that the pomp and solemnity
of their triumphs were such, as it were large to describe them particularly:
how some had carried before them in their Ensigns painted, and set forth in
tables the names of the towns and cities which they subdued, with their
proportion and form. Some had the likeness of those mountains and of those
rivers which were in the countries that they conquered, painted and set forth
in like order, and carried before them in the triumph: so that all things
which were subdued by the Conqueror, were carried most solemnelye before their
triumphant chariot, for the setting forth of the dignity of the triumph: and
those things which could not be removed, as mountains, hills, rivers,
towns, Cities, woods, and such like, they were painted as I said, and set
forth with all bravery in the Ensigns of the Conqueror, in like form and
shape as they were builded and situated in those Countries where they stood.

C. Claudius, surnamed Caninus, 2. Pantal. lib. 2.
Consul of Rome, triumphed over the Samnits and the Lucanes, 480.

Lu. Aniti. Gallus, on this day subdued Gentius king of Illyria, Eutrop.
and with great glory triumphed over him and over the Illyrians, 586.

Jerusalem was delivered up to Fredericus the second, emperor, Auent.
by letters received of the Solda^ of Egypt, 1219.

Martin Luther dyed at Islebia a town where he was borne, Vuil. Tyr.
being 63 years of age, 1546.

The 19 Day.
AMong the Romans was a feast which they called Charistia festa, which was
celebrated only between families and kindred of an house or stock, Eber.
one saluting another with rewards and presents, no stranger might be in this
feast.

Clodius Albinus, which made himself to be proclaimed emperor of Rome in
France, Eutrop. 8.
was by Septimius-Seuerus subdued and taken, his army overthrown, and
himself with all his family slain, as on this day, at Lugdunum which is Lions,
203.

On this day were three kings bodies which had been buried before most
solemnly, Io. Naucl.
brought to Colonia, and there buried again, 1178.

Franciscus Duke of Guise, was slain on this day by John Poltrotto at the
siege of Aurelia, and therefore was drawn in pieces by Horses at Paris: some
say this fact was done on the 18 of February, 1563.

Upon this day died Sabinianus the 62. and last Bishop of Rome, for after him
next Bonifacius the third was made the first pope after 62. Bishops: at what
time papacy began in Rome, Volat. Funct.
together with the kingdom of the Sarazens, of popes hereafter I will make no
mention, with this farewell, that from Gregory the great, the last pope of
Rome, being in number 62* until Gregory the 13. reigned 166. popes.

The 20 Day.
ON this day begins the month Adar, which with the Jews is the twelfth
month: on which month the Prophet Ezechiel cried out upon the Jews, Ezech.
32.
and prophesied unto them the calamity and misery following.

Lu. Aemilius Regillus triumphed over Antiochus the Plutar.
great king of Siria by sea, after the building of Rome, 564.

Marcus Fuluius the nobler, proconsul of Rome, triumphed over the Aetolians,
Ambrocians and the Cephalenians with great pomp, 566.

C. Sulpitius Gallus consul at Rome, triumphed on this day over the Ligurians,
G^ltz.
though not solemnized as one of the greatest triumphs, yet with the company
and meeting of the Senators and the Patricians, and the chief magistrates of
the City of Rome at Bellonas Temple, from thense they brought him to the
Capitol being carried in a Chariot, and his Soldiers crowned with laurel:
this kind of triumph as by the law appointed to any conqueror, that reserved
the decree of the Senators, in their edictes made de triumphis.

Charles the 5. was crowned as on this day king of Lumbardie in Bononia, Iou^.
1530.

Edward the 2. son to the first Edward borne at Carnar^^on married Isabel the
French kings daughter at Bulleine and were both crowned at Westminster as
upon this day, 1308.

Aurelius Quintilius the 32. Emperor of Rome was slain as on this day, within
17. days after he was by consent of the Senate created Augustus after his
brother Flauius Claudius who reigned before him Emperor for two^yeares almost.
Of these Emperors few or none have their imperial funeral, Eutrop.
which among the Romans excelled in solemnity and state of funeral pomp,
such was the slaughter and murdering of emperors after they had first allowed
2. Caesar's and one Augustus, then 3. Caesar's, and at last 4. Caesar's. These
many Caesar's could not agree in one Empire, for Nulla regni fides socio, every
Caesar would be Augustus, and some Augustus would be Antoninus, until their
empire was taken from Rome into Co^stantinaple, for of 89. Emperors that
reigned in Rome from Julius Caesar to Constantine the sixth, you shall not read
of ten that died in their beds.

Elizabeth the wife of Philip king of France died on this day, 1189. Pantal.
lib. 2.


James Steward king of Scotland was slain through treason by his own
subjects as on this day, Bal.
8436.

The Heluetians vanquished in a great battaill an army of Austria at Hardt,
Stumph. lib. 10.
1400.

The 21 Day.
IN Rome with the ancient Romans a feast was solemnized in this day called
Vinalia, at what time they used by old customs to ^ast their new wines,
vinalia.
and to drink their first drink unto Jupiter as the first founder and
benefactor of their doings.

There was another feast called Uinalia celebrated by the priests called
Flamines, at what time they gathered their grapes and hallowed the vines, then
they caused a lamb to be sacrificed unto Jupiter, vinalia ruflica.
and at what time the new wine was carried by the priests flamines into the
temple of Venus after large feastings and drinking of servants, and also of
strangers, and clownes of the country, and therefore called Rustica vinalia.
The sacrifice which they used at this feast was called Meditrinalia unto the
goddess Meditrina, these superstitious ceremonies grew in Rome from Numas
time, for Romulus used no wine in sacrifice but milk mingled with honey, so
the old Grecians when Pythagoras and Ulysses used to do sacrifice to Urania
with water and honey mingled.

Another feast called Terminalia was celebrated in like sort at Rome, but of
some referred to the seventh Calendes of March.

On this day Bonifacius the third was elected the first pope 606. years after
that 63. bishops had used the seat by the names of bishops since the time of
the Apostles. Platina.


Guido king of Italy a marshall man was by pope Steeuen the 5. Onoph.
of that name, crowned emperor of Rome upon this day, 890.

On this day the Christians overthrew an innumerable company of the Saracens
at the river Pharsura 1097. Pant. lib. 2 lib. 2.


Carolus Pulcher the 48. king of France, and the last before the house of
Valloys came to the crown of France, was as on this day crowned king of
France, 1321.

The 22 day
THe feast Terminalia was in Rome celebrated unto Terminus the god of Confines.
The Romans had a temple jointly consecrated and dedicated to Faith, and to
term, unto whom they do sacrifice both publicly and privately upon the
limits of inheritance, and upon the Confines of borders. In old time they did
sacrifice unto Terminus with out any blood by the law of Numa, as Lycurgus in
like sort commanded the Spartans to do no sacrifice to the Gods with blood but
with herbs, Plut. in Numa.
fruits, corn, honey, milk, wine, which continued in Greece for a time,
therefore Numa instituted that in this feast Terminalia such sacrifice and
oblations should be done to Terminus, with synceritie and uprightness, without
blood, or murdering of any thing that had life, as to him that was witness of
their limits, confines and bonds, and as a keeper of peace, and a Judge of
Justice.

On this day being with the Jews the third day of their month Adar, the city
of Jerusalem being hitherto let and hindered by the Samaritans, was with
great joy of the people after their captivity in Babylon for seauentie years,
Joseph. lib. 2. cap. 4
now again by Zorobabell, Nehemias, and Esdras licenced with full authority
of Darius king of Persea to be builded.

Martin Luther as on this day as Melancthon says, was carried from Islebis to
Whittenberge to be buried.

Petrus Toletanus Uiceroy of Naples laying siege to Sena, died as on this day
at Florentia a city of Italy.

The 23 Day.
TArquinius Superbus, the seventh and last king of the Romans, was driven out
of Rome by Iu Brutus, 220. years after the building of Rome, after which time,
this day was named Regifugium. Plut. Bruto in Ovid pleasantly notes this day
in these verses.

Nunc mihi dicenda Regis fuga, etc.

Iustinianus in the second year of his reign began to reedifye the great
Temple of Constantinople being thrown flat to the ground by an earthquake,
Cedreun.
531.

Ladislaus surnamed Posthumus, the son of Albertus the second, emperor, was
borne as upon this day, 1440. and after was crowned king of Hungaria, and
Bohemia.

In the month Mechir, which is February, in Egypt they used to celebrate the
ceremonies of Isis, whose Image among the Egyptians is set forth with a
goulden cup in her right hand, and in her left a key: her sacrifice sometime is
pefourmed by young virgins in the night time, at what time Isis priests were
clothed in white linen very sad and mournful, The ceremonies of Isis.
wandering up and down the city before they solemnized the sacrifice of Isis,
but all her priests after this mourning in the streets were very io^full and
glad to celebrate the sacrifice with pure devotions, and such ceremonies, as
one does come like a hunter with a hunting staff in his hand, an other like a
soldier cum balteo, another in a long gown like a woman cum stola, others
with white long rods like officers going before the Idols, others of her
priests with strange visers on their faces, Genial. lib. 6. cap. 8.
and withdiuers kinds of strange garments were going solemnizing her
sacrifice. About the Idol were women apparrelled all white, some with glasses
going before, and some with combs coming after the Idol, some with lamps and
lights carried in most ceremonial sort, with songs and music according to
the Egyptians manners.

The Grec^ans in like sort had in this month many ceremonies in every city
of theirs, for there was no meeting of states, no consultation of wars, nor
no council taken, but where sacrifice were appointed first to be solemnized as
in Ionia they meet in the temple of Pallas where all Boetia assembled, and
after feasting and sacrifice celebrated, which was called Pamboetia sacra, they
consulted of the state of their country. In Tro^zene every year the Judges
called Amphictions, which were the general judges of all Greece meet in the
temple of Nep^une where 7. cittes assembled, Athens, Aegina, Nauplia,
Epidaurus, and the rest, to consult and to confer in council and matter of
states, but after solemn sacrifice to their gods, not omitting on jot of their
ceremonies, in so much that in some sacrifice they thought the blood of beasts
could not please the gods, and therefore they would often go into a wood
called silua sacra, where a quick man was solemnly slain and sacrificed. This
kind of cruel sacrifice was done to Saturn, to Mars and to Bacchus, so
often as they were by oracles warned, so superstitious to their gods were the
Heathens, that they spared not their own lives to please their Idols.

The 24 Day.
THis day is Dies intercalaris, for the year which con^ameth 365 days and
six hours, besides some odd (...): of these six hours, every fourth year
one natural day is here intercalenderd: for in old time with the Romans,
ten months were counted for a whole year, until Numa Pompilius the second
king of Rome added these months, January and February, of these months I
write more at large in other places.

Lu. Cornelius Lentulus, surnamed Caudinus, Consul of Rome, as on this day
triumphed solemnlie over the Ligurians, 516 years after Rome was builded, and
was by Senators accompanied to the Capitol, and was by the Magistrates
presented with presents, Of the Athenia^s.
according to the custom and manner of some triumphs which was observed in
Greece among the Athenians, when any General or great Magistrate of Athens had
vanquished the enemies, and had gotten victory, at his return all the chief
states of Athens in their several degrees, being clothed in their most
sumptuous and rich garments, should meet the Conqueror out of the City of
Athens, carrying before them, Of the Grecians
all their Idols and Images of their gods, with all other relikes and monuments
of Athens, to set forth the dignity of the triumph: for among the Gretians,
the dignity of their triumphs were most in the (...) of Garlandes and
Crowns, wherewith the Captains and the Orators were most solemnlye crowned
with all manner of solemnity, upon any great victory gotten, Genia. lib. 4
cap. 8.
they had their slatues and trophes erected up in Ceramicus a place hard by
Athens, where the Images of their gods, and the statues of their chief
Captains and magistrates were put up.

C. Dulcius Nepos Consul of Rome, first triumphed by sea over the Sicilians,
Liuius.
and after he had a solemn triumph granted him over the Carthagin^ans, 493.

M. Claudius Marcellus, triumphed in the City of Rome with great pomp over
the Frenchmen, and over the Ligurians, of whose diverse triumphs mention is
made often of the order and manner thereof.

These days being called Intercalares dies, when Marcellus triumphed, might be
by the authors of these histories taken for the whole month, for that before
that Julius Caesar had reduced unto this order of intercalation the year, the
Romans followed the Greeks in their intercalation. This triumph is with the
greatest pomp solemnized, and the greatest glory finished, that it was
counted one of the roialest and greatest triumphs, which if I should set
forth the dignity, with the solemnity and pomp thereof, I should be
tedious, howbeit I have set diverse triumphs down in order and manner as they
were solemnized, by the which you may proportion these last triumphs, by the
dignity of the other triumphs so set forth, and yet some triumphs far
exceeded others, according to the greatness of the victory, as the victories
of Claud. Marcellus excelled much L. Cornelius and Nepos triumphs.

Carolus the fourth, emperor, dyed on this day at Praga, in the 33. year of
his reign, 1379. Auent. Auent.
refers it to the 26. of November.

Carolus the sixth, was on this day borne at Gandanum in Flaunders, at three of
the clock in the morning, 1500: which day the Germans for a long time
celebrated as a fortunate day, following the Romans use, who in the memory of
their Emperors natiuities, solemnized games and plays, as is mentioned upon
their days.

Frances the second king of France, was by Charles the fifth taken, and his
army overthrown, to the number of 20000 slain, F^nct.
and the king himself taken, at Ticinum, as Pau. Iouius affirms, yet
Functius says in his table, that he was at Pauia taken, 1525.

Ferdinandus archduke of Austria, Must. 3.
was crowned king of Bohemia, as upon this day at Praga, 1527.

Charles the fifth was on the same day that he was borne created Emperor of
Germany in Bohemia, Paul. Ioui.
by Clement the seventh of that name, Pope of Rome, 1530.

Charles the fifth, after he had resigned the Empire to his brother
Ferdinandus, who by the consent of the Electors was most solemnly crowned
Emperor at Frankeford, Lu. Sur.
and received into the Empire with great pomp and roialty, by all the states of
Germany while yet Charles the fifth lived, who shortly after dyed, and was
with great funeral pomp buried at Angusta, by his brother Ferdinandus, 1559.

The 25 Day.
THe feasts called Bachanalia and Dionisia were sol^mnly on this day at Rome
celebrated, banqueting and feasting in houses of neighbors, dancing and
leaping in streets, mirth and plays every where, the one in the honor of
Bacchus, the other in the honor of Appollo. Nouid. 2. Fast.
The feast Bacchanalia is mentioned and set forth at large in diverse other
places, for that this feast was every where solemnized.

This day was amongst the Egyptians, in the Book of the Priests at Memphis
recorded and named Aegiptiacus dies.

Aurelius Antonius, was adopted by Adrianus the Emperor, heir to the Empire,
Pantal. lib. 2.
and took presently on him the office of Tribunus militaris.

Annius Verus, and Aelius Adrianus, both Emperors of Rome, were adopted by
Antonius Pius, as heirs to the Empire.

Geta being Caesar, was by his own brother Antonius (after Emperor) on his
mothers lap slain: Principatus nos admittit socios, H^rodian. 213.

(...)

The 26 Day.
_(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

The 27 Day.
(...) (...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

The 28. day
(...) stow it upon the Romans, I will here promise and vow before your divine
majesty's to erect you up altars, to build up temples, to make you public
games and plays, with all worship honor and reverence, which shall be
celebrated with feasts and sacrifices, with all solemn pomp and glory in
Circomaximo at Rome after victory had, So likewise they vowed for the
country, for the health and sauegard of the people, and for taking away any
plague, (...), or any other extreme peril or danger, Macrob. lib. 3. cap. 4.
they vowed and promised with all faith to perform these plays called Votiur
Iudi, and therefore great examinations and search was made of the bishops, by
whom the license and aucthority of these plays were first granted, least
things extra vota should be found unperformed, which the Romans took to be
a sacrilige, for of all other things they performed their vows to their
gods, whether it were in feasts plays, or sacrifice.

Also in Rome as on this day were much unseemly mirth with plays and games
most riotously feasting and banque^ting called their Carnifex, Nond. 2.
days used in Uenice and in many other cities of Italy.

On this day Iunius Brutus the first Consul of Rome after the kings were
exiled fighting hand to hand in arms with Aruntius Torquinius Superbus son,
killed one another, at what time the Citisens and matrons of Rome mourned and
lamented his death, Liui.
at what time Torquine the proud with all his friends and aid of Hetruria had
the last overthrow 246

Lu Scipio surnamed Asiaticus for his great victory over Antiochus the great
triumphed most solemnlie with great pomp in the city of Rome out of Asia,
and therefore was named Scipio Asiaticus, Orosius 4. cap. 20.
as his brother was by subduing of Haniball called Africanus, 564.

Carolus the 7. of that name, king of France was borne on this day, 142.

Heraclius the 75. Prosop. Pantal.
Emperor of Rome (from Julius Caesar) died at Constantinople as upon this day,
638.

Hildegardus the wife of Charles the great, and first of that name king of
France, and also the first Emperor of Germany died on this day 783. but
Melanc. says the last of April.

Franci^cus the second of that name king of France was as on this day borne in
Ambrosia, 1517. this was son to Henry the first who was father to the king of
France.

Fridericus the seacond had a great overthrow at Parma 1248. at what time the
town was also burned.

The names of the noble Romans which triumphed within this month of February.
M. Valor. Coruus, Tit. Coruncanus, Fab. Pictor, Q. Fab. maximus, L. Aemil
Regulus, L. Cor. Dolabella Iunius Pera, L. Papyrius, M. Popil. Lenas, L. Full.
Coruus, Q. Fab. ^ax. Rullianus. Q. Fa. Max. Gurges. C. Claud. Caninus, L.
Anicius Gallus. L. Aemyl. Regillus. M. Ful^^^s nobilior, Ca. Sulp. Gallus, C.
Du^c. Nepos, L. Cornel. Lentulus, M. Claudius Marlus, Scipio Asiaticus.
The names of the feasts and sacrifices done at Rome during this month
February called Scebat with the Jews, with the Athenians Elaphoboleon,
Elaphebelea, Lupercalia, Parentalla, Quirinalia, Fornacalia, Charistia,
Terminalia, Vinalia, Bachanalia, Taurilia, Equiria.
The names of the games and plays which were at Rome, together with their
triumphs and feasts solemnized.
Ludi Gothici, Ludi Geniales, Ludi Apollinares, Ludi Votini.
Mensis Februaij ^inis.
Of the month of March, which with the Jews is called Adar the tenth month,
with the Athenians called Munichion the 8. month, and with the Aegiptians
Pharm^noth their 7. month.
The 1. Day
Upon this day the Romans began their year, even from Romulus his time by
the name of Annus Romuli, on which day the Senate had made a decree, that the
altars in the temple of Vesta should be consecrated, new fire should be
solemnlie set up by Vestals virgins with green Laurel branches, likewise in
the howses of Flamines the priests of Vesta, and in the house of the king
called rex facroum, in the market place, and in the senate house great
solemnities of (...) ceremonies of fire, Macrob. 1 cap. 12.
and of laurel draunches with feasts and mirth, and especially the sacrifices
of the priests.

Besides the Romans kept a solemn feast called Consualia in memory of the
600. Sa^^ne virgins, who after they were violently ravished, by the council of
Romulus, war ensued, and they with one consent entered ^aked into the field
between the two armies, the one side being their fathers the other their
husbands, and with tears entreated both parties and reconciled their husbands
unto their fathers, and their fathers unto their husbands, this feast was
called matrona^a festa, Pantal. lib. 3.
this day the women used to serve their servants at supper, and the husbands
presented their wives with gifts, and therefore it is called of some (...)
festa.

This month in old time was first dedicated unto Minerua, and therefore they
keep a great feast called Quinquatria, at what time the Romans kept the feast
of Ancylia, when Salij should dance up and down the streets of Rome, (...)
in their hands small round Targats which fell from the air in the time of Numa
Pompilius, Plut. in Numa.
singing and calling out upon the end of every verse, on the name of Mammuris,
for it was he that had made that target Ancylia.

This very day also, they used in Rome in the hill Exquilinus a solemn
sacrifice unto Juno in he own Temple: upon the which day, Josephus says that
the (...) dedication of the temple at Jerusalem after the captivity of
Babylon, was licenced and permitted by Da^ius.

The Greeks held a solemn feast unto Diana with great ceremonies and
sacrifices called Munichia, on the which day it is supposed by some writers,
that the third flood was in Acha^a in Greece, which continued two months, and
drowned all Helespont the next regions into Asia, when Ogyges governed Athens,
and Bellochus in A^^yria.

On this day diverse noble Romans had their triumphs with great honor in
Rome, as Pub. Valerius Publi^ola, the first Consul after the kings, who
triumphed over Torquinius and his army, and over the Vients, after the
building of Rome 264.

Also Lu. Cornelius Lentu^us triumphed over the Samuits and Lucans with much
solemnity, after the building of Rome 476. So did Quintus Luctatius (being
Consul) triumph over the Phaliscans, 512.

Lu. Silla, after he had subdued the most part of the Cities of Greece, he
laid siege to Athens, took it, Plut. in Silla.
and slew most cruelly the citizens on this day.

Mar. Claudius Marcellus, Pantal. lib. 3.
Consul of Rome, triumphed with great glory on this day over the Germans and
Frenchmen, after Rome was builded, 537.

Cai. Plautius Decianus, and Lu. Aemilius Mamertinus both Consuls of Rome, who
had a solemn triumph granted them by the Senators over the Prinernates,
after the building of Rome, 424.

Lodowick the ninth of that name king of France, with his three sons, and
with a great army sa^led from Massilia into Africa, against the Sarazens,
over whom he had a great victory, in the year of Christ* 1270.

On this day Valerius Maximianus, was by Dioclesian the Emperor made Caesar,
who for a time governed the empire jointly, 290.

Basilius Emperor of Constantinople died on this day, he was a poor man in
the beginning, and after he came to be a Chamberlain to the emperor Michael,
Onoph.
whom this Basilius slew and after governed the Empire, 889.

As on this day Fran^iscus Guisius s^ue in Vasseio a town of France 200
Frenchmen for religion, Pant. lib. 3
in the church as they served God, 1562.

The 2 Day.
AMongst the Romans the second day of March was counted a dismal day, which
they called Ater dies, for the Romans as you heard, recorded their fortunate
days, according to the events of fortune, and the actions of time.

On this day a great battle was fought in Saxonia, at what time Albertus the
Marquess of B^and^nburge was taken, and his army vanquished by John Fridercus
one of the empire, Sleid.
1547.

The 3 Day.
AS on this day, the old Romans examined the numbers of the S^nators, placing
and displacing by the consent of the two Consuls, and the two (...) of the
Soldiers, and of the people, where by they might have Se^atus legittimus.

Carolus duke of B^rgundie with all his army, was overthrown in a great
battle at Gra^sen by the Heluetians, on this day, ^^umof. 8.
1476.

Johannes Fridericus Elector of Saxone, died 1554, and Leo the tenth of that
name, a Florentine borne, was elected pope of R^me 1513, against this Pope
Martin Luther began to write and to set open the Church R^me to all men.

Ly^cost. writes, that on this day, little children came in to our Sa^iour
Christ to be touched, at what time he rebuked the Desciples for the keeping
back of them.

The 4 Day.
THis day among the Jews was heavy and unfortunate, for Hamon had gotten from
the King Assuerus license, 13. of the month Adar.
to kill all the Jews within his dominions and provinces, at what time Hester
fasted for the Jews, and great sorrow was made by Hester and her nephue
Mardocheus, this (...) ^^ste Iudeorum festum, but this sad day was turned into
a ^^yfull day, as you shall read in another place.

Judas Machabeus also made this day among the Jews to be recorded most
fortunate, for he slew the great army of Antiochus, and the great blasph^mer
Nicanor Ant^ochus general, and hanged up both his wicked hands which he held
up against the Temple, and also his blasphemous (...) on the walls of
Jerusalem before the Temple of Solomon: read this history in the second
book and last Chapter of the Machabes.

Au Manlius Torquatus surnamed A^ticus, at what time he was Consul at Rome,
triumphed with great honor over the Phalisses after the building of Rome. 512.
Plutar.


As on this day Iehoakin King of Judah, after he had been carried capt^^e with
diverse of his nobles, among whom Daniel and his fellows were also brought to
Ba^ilon he was delivered out of prison by Euilmedorach king of Babylon after
Nabuchodonosors death, Stumpf.
and was princely entertained with royal garments, and sitting at the Kings
table all the days of his life. Some think that upon this day was the
resurrection of our Savior Christ Jesus.

The 5 Day.
AS on this day the Jews held a joyful feast called Festum sortium, appointed
by Mardocheus in memory of the sudde^ alteration of their sadness and sorrow,
being all then appointed for the sword by the means of Hamon, and now
converted into joy and solace, for the escaping of their present danger, at
what time the Jews slew 75000 Pagans and Heathens, which were appointed in
arms to destroy the Jews, were wont to feast upon this day in their church,
and when they heard of Hamons name, Scamna pugnis and malleis pulsant Read the
history of Hester. 9.

Likewise upon this day in the City of Rome, the old Romans celebrated with
great solemnity sacrifice to the Goddess Isis, Call. Romans
in memory of their often prosperous sailing, called Nauigium (...)

Lu. Papyrius, at what time he was dictator of Rome, triumphed over the Samnits
with great pomp and glory into Rome, 429. Pantal. lib. 3.
And after him Caius Papyrius maso Consul of Rome, most solemnlye triumphed
from mount Albanus into Rome, over the people called Corses, 522.

C. Fabricius Luscinius being Consul at Rome, had a triumph granted him by
the Senators, with much pomp and honor over the Lucanes, Brutianes, and also
over the Samnits, at one time, 471 years after the building of Rome. Of this
great triumph Liui speaks of.

Likewise on this day triumphed Lucius Aemilius Papus (then Consul of Rome)
over the Frenchmen, 528 years after the building of the City of Rome. And
C^^manlius being then P^oconsul of Rome, triumphed over the Frenchmen in Asia,
so that upon this day, at sundry several times, five solemn great triumphs
were kept and solemnized in the City of Rome.

A great over throw was given upon this day to the Saraz^ns, Pantal. lib. 3.
at the ^o^ne called Nicea by the Christians, 1097.

Odoacer who made himself king of Italy, after the Empire fell from Rome,
Pantal. lib. 3.
was vanquished and slain in his own house, by Theodoricus King of the Gotes,
at Rauena, 492.

Fredericus the first of that name, was as upon this day elected Emperor of
Germany, and crowned at Frankeforde, 1152.

Heleonora sister to Charles the fifth, Pant. l^b. 3
left window after the death of the king of Lusitania, was mar^ed to Francis of
Valoyes the 57. king of F^aunce, and was crowned Queen of France in the
church of Saint Denis at Paris 1531.

Georgius the third of that name was made Pope of Rome upon this day, 731. This
Pope entised the Frenchmen to war upon the Greeks and Longobardes for
abolishing of Idols. Onoph.


The 6. Day
THe old ancient Greeks do celebrate a great solemn feast in memory of
Theseus, who embarked on this day from Athens into Creet with the tribute of 7.
young men and seven young virgins, according to the law of king Minoes allotted
to the tribute money, Eutrop. lib. 7.
he offered up a sacrifice called Hiceteria in the temple called Delphinion
upon the 6. of March which was an olive bough hallowed and wreathed about with
white wool, at what day the Greeks were wont to send their young girls to
the same temple where Theseus offered Hicetaria, to make their prayers and
petitions to the goddess Venus to be their guide, to whom they sacrificed a
goat.

Antonius surnamed Pius for his lenity and curtisie being Emperor of Rome
died of a fever upon this day at a Manor place of his own called Lorium 12,
miles distant from Rome when he had lived 73. years, yet Mar. Scotus refers
it to the 31. of October, but he erreth often both in the days and years.

The Jews do celebrate on this day a great solemn feast called Purim in
memory of their victory had against the heathens, Hester 9.
and for joy of their deliverance from the conspiracy of Hamon.

Augustus Caesar upon this day in the fifteenth year of his reign took upon
him the office of the high bishop called Pontifex Maximus.

The 7 Day.
THe star called Corona falls in the west in the morning, and the star
Pegasus rises.

In Rome with the ancient Romans great solemnicie of ceremoni^s and
sacrifices were had upon this day, and celebrated in the honor of Juno,
Pantal. lib. 3.
whose stately feast was called of the Matrons of Rome Iunonalia festa, at
what time they used to do sacrifice in the temple of Jupiter.

Sordisci a people in Thracia were went in the month of March^^o^ill those
soldiers whom they took in the wars, and to make sacrifice of their flesh
to god Mars, and to make a drinking cup of the sculles of their heads,
whereinto the Ti^acians powered the blood of the soldiers, Sexi. Ruf. Ep^t.
and made thereof an oblation of sacrifice unto their gods with the one half,
the other they dranch^ it mingled with water.

Upon this day in the 28 of his reign died that noble emperor Traiane at
Seleucia a town of Isauria of the flix, as he returned from Persides, whose
bones were set under a sumptuous pillar which was of a 144. Eutrop. 8.
foot high.

All the Deuines, and all the Physicians of Rome did use as upon this day to
meet together in the Temple of Minerua where a solemn oration was made in
memory of Thomas Aquinas, this is called in Nouidius the fourth book Doctorum
feriae.

Phocas Liuetenant over the armies of Constantinus the 9. of that name did upon
this day wine the strongest city of Creete named Caudax. Cedr.
This Phocas was elected after Emperor of Greece, 950.

The 8 day
THis was also a dismal day compted among the Romans. The Sea birds bigin on
this day to appear, according to the Rules of Ptolom.

Fridericus the 3. of that name entered into the city of Rome with pomp and
great honor as upon this day to be crowned Emperor, Cusp.
and to be married with Heleonora daughter to the king of Lusi^ania, 1452.

Philippus Barbarossa was elected king of the Romans against Otto, who was
before preferred by his friends, and now against his friends and against his
own force this Philip was chosen king, 1199.

Upon this day Gualtherus Sensaueir a noble captain passed with a great army
of Christians and entered into Constantinople, Tyr. lib. 1. cap. 21.
and from thence took his army toward Jerusalem, to deliver the city from
the tirannie of the Saracens, which then were strong in all Asia and Africa,
1696.

The 9 Day.
Upon this day they were wont in Rome in old time to bring in Uiolets and all
sweet flowers, at what time the Senators gave to every one are ward, and then
a great feast was made called Pub. e^ulum in the temples of S. Franciscus,
where a solemn Nouid. 4.
oration was made in the praise of this Saint, and the custom of that time,
much like to the rewards which the old Grecians were wont to give to their
General or Lieutenant, who having obtained the battle, and put the enemy to
flight, was rewarded with a monument either in brass or in marble, with the
title of his prowess and marshall feats called Tropheu^.

Likewise the feast called Ancylia in memory of Mamurius a most cunning
wo^rke^an, which wrought the like targets in Rome as the target of the Nymph
Aegeria, which was given to Numa. This ^east was dedicated unto Mam^rius, to
whom songs and odes were made, Pl^t. in Numa.
and with great melody and mi^th they were by Numas laws to be song in this
feast, often rehearsing the name of Mamurius.

Forty gallant knights stoutly professed christianity upon this day, who left
both kings, and emperors, wives and children, and stood with the church of
Christ, and were willingly (...) under Zicinyus, 320, at what time Cyrillus the
bishop bare the^ company at Sebasta.

Celestinus the second of that name, pope of Rome died as upon this day, 1144.
under this emperor flourished Baliardus a philosopher, who much withstood the
christians with his subtle arguments, and did much harm in the Church of God.

The 10. day
THe Carthaginians were discomfited by sea at Lilibeum a city of Sicilia by
Caius Luctatius then Consul at Rome, at which time fourteen thousand Africans
were slain, and 32. thousand taken prisoners, 518. year after the building of
Rome, and as both Eutropius Eutrop. 2.
and Liuie affirm, the suncke 125. ships, and took 73. ships, to the
great praise of Caius Lucta^ius and Aulius Posthumous both then Consuls at Rome.

Titus Manlius Torquatus a noble Roman triumphed upon this day with great
honor over the Sardes, for by this time the magnificence and dignity of
triumphs grew to be such that it excelled in pomp and bravery, for a long
time after the building of Rome during the time of their kings, when the
Romans force were not such as it grew shortly after in the Consuls time, for
in the first triumphs of kings they used to go on foot into the City, the
second time to ride on horseback, the third time carried in a chariot with two
horses and after with four. After Camillus time the dignity of a triumph
became such as it was not granted to any, though the victory deserved
triumph, unless he had bin either Questor, Consul or Dictator, and also
unless he had vanquished the enemy in the field and slain 5000. of the
enemies, unless he had delivered his office into the hands of the Senators,
and quieted the province of the enemies, for as the victories of the Romans
grew great, so the triumphs grew famous.

On this day also Caius Flamineus Nepos with leave and license of the Senators
had his triumph with pomp and solemnity to enter into the City of Rome, and
to pass with his great spoil and treasures of the enemies carried in triumph
before him through the city into the Capitol, where he solemnized Triumphale
Epulum.

Antoninus Heliogabulus, a wicked and a most cruel emperor of Rome, for his
overmuch tyranny and bea^^linesse used in Rome toward all men, was slain
upon this day with great reproach and shame, as both Plut. Pantal* and others
affirm, 123.

Ferdinandus the last Emperor of that name, was borne upon this day in Medina,
Pantal. lib. 3.
a town in the kingdom of Castilia, whose nativity was solemnized yearly
with those games and plays called Ludi natility.

Vladislaus King of Polonia, Chron. 11.
dyed as on this day, 1333. Brixia a famous town, was upon this day yielded to
the state of Uenice, 1428,

The 11 Day.
THis day the Sun entering into Aries, is taken to be the equinoctial of the
spring.

The old Greeks were woonte upon this day after Sun setting, to use
certain sacrifice to their gods for the preseruations of their cities, which
after the Romans used to do the like: so both Greece and Rome were so
superstitious to their gods, that none might contrary the^ without death, as
Socrates and diverse other Philosophers did, as you may read in Plutarch. That
to profane the holy mysteries of the gods, was a sacrilege among all the
Grecians, for so Alcibiades was accused that he had offended against the
goddess Ceres and Proserpina, for that he counterfetted in mockery their
holy mysteries, Alcidiades accused.
apparrelling himself in vestiments and copes as the Priests of Ceres were
wont to do, with his torche bearer and verger before him, his fellow scorners
with him, all in long robes like religious priests, and sacred ministers, in
manifest contempt and derision of the holy ceremonies and mysteries of
Emolpides, Alcibiades was for his contempt herein condemned, and his goods
confiscated, beside a decree made, that all the religious priests and (...)
should in their temple before Proserpina banne and curse Alcibiades.

Heraclius the Emperor, in the 31. year of his government died of the
dropsy: this succeeded Phocas being the^ Praetor in Affrike for the Romans,
for when Phocas was slain, the Soldiers made Heraclius Emperor: this restored
Siria, Egypt, and Jerusalem to his Empire, 643. Scot. refers this to the
28. Mar. scot.
of February.

Lotharius the Saxon Emperor, waged battle upon the Bohemians, Pant. lib. 3
at what time great slaughter was without victory to neither of them.

Lu. Cornelius Scipio, then Consul at Rome, triumphed over the Sardinians and
the Corsicanes, Plutar.
at what time he brought an exceeding rich spoil to Rome, 494.

Albertus which was surnamed for his valiant acts of arms and great strength
Achilles Germanicus, a singular Soldier, being Marquess of Brandenburge, died
as upon this day at Frankford. Pros. lib. 2.


The 12 Day.
AS upon this day, in Rome they celebrated the mysteries of Christ and his
passion, No^id.
with much devotion and great ceremonies, and withal they remember the holy
land in their feast.

C. Flaminius, and Pub. Furius, both then Consuls at Rome, after much good
service and victories woone, they triumphed most solemnly over the Frenchmen
and the Lugurians in Rome with great honor, Liuius. Plutar.
after the building of Rome 530 years.

Gregorius the last of that name, a little before the coming of the Pope yet
in, was elected Bishop of Rome, a man of rare virtues, and of great learning,
in so much that our Elders began to send their Children to school as upon this
day wherein he was consecrated Bishop of Rome, he suffered death for Christ
Jesus under Phocas, 604.

The 13 Day.
THe Romans used great sacrifice and ceremonies unto Jupiter the founder and
patron of their Capitol, for they used diverse kinds of service at sundry
times to Jupiter, yielding also to him diverse surnames, as Sta^ore, and
Jupiter Olimpian, Jupiter Ammonius, etc. according to the place where he is
most honored.

Also in Rome by the river Tiber, is the feast Equiria kept as before in Mars
his field, for the Romans celebrate this feast in two places, in Mars his
field, and at Tiber: but if the river Tiber be up and overflowed, Nouid. i^
fast.
then is Equiria kept in mount Caelio.

Mahomet the great Prophet of the Sarazens, died upon this day, after he had
for ten years poisoned with false doctrine all Arabia, and many places of
Asia, who is to this time honored amongst the Arabians and Sarazens as a great
prophet, with solemn obsequies and sacrifice certain days of the year upon
his grave: whose principal feast was upon every good friday, in contempt of
the passion and death of our Savior Christ, he uses all the pomp and glory
that he can devise upon that day, Cael. lib. 1. de Sarace.
though upon every friday, though the year he holds a solemn feast in
memory of his nativity, which was upon a Friday, yet nothing in comparison of
his other upon good Friday, the charges of that one feast surmounted all the
other 52. feasts, 637.

Alexander the sixth of that name Pope of Rome drank of that cup which he
had provided for an other, by the negligence of his cup bearer, and so by this
means drank his own poison, and died of it, after that he had been pope for
eleauen years.

Rodolphus Duke of Sueuia, Gerard. Me^^.
was nominated Emperor by diverse princes and Bishops of Germany, against
Henry the fifth of that name, who after reigned Emperor for twenty years,
1076.

The 14. Day.
AS upon this day appears the Star^e called Aquarius.

On this day likewise Henricus surnamed Heintz, Son to Frederick the
Emperor, being King of Sardinia, and appointed Lieutenant over all Italy,
dyed at Bononia, 1271.

The 15 Day.
THis was called Mercatorum festum, the Merchants feasts, at what time in Rome
all the Merchants did use to meet in one place, every man with some devise of
mirth, using often the name of Bacchus, and crying out of this world,
Quinquatrus minuscula, which was the name that they gave unto this feast. Call.
Romans


Again upon this day another feast was celebrated at Rome which was called
Geniale festum. This day the parents and their children carried their wine with
their delicacies into the fields and therewith all kind of mirthe and music,
they banqueted and kept a solemn feast in the honor of Hymaenaeus the God of
Marriage. Nouid. 3.


C. Julius Caesar the first Emperor and perpetual Dictator of Rome, upon this
day, at their session houlden in their council house, was slain by Brutus
and Cassius before the Senators, and also by some of them, where he 23 had
deadly wounds, as Suetonius says, there were 60 that conspired his death, and
therefore this day was in Rome called after Parricidium: for after Julius
Caesar and Augustus time, such ambition grew daily in Rome, that from ambition
it grew unto tyranny, that the emperor which was made to day should be
marthred the ne^t day, for so ye Romans used to ch^ose their emperors, sometime
at Rome by the Senators, sometime in the field by the soldiers, but generally
by the sword both in Rome and in the field. It was not so among the old
Persians, for before Cyrus time none should be K. in Persea but one of the
stock of Achiminides, which name was common to all the kings of Persea, for
the kings of Persea were all named Acheminides, as the Emperors of Rome were
called Caesar's.

Marcus Valerius Cor^us did solemnlie triumph in Rome over the Calenes, and
after that he was created Consul for 24. years, for that he slew a French
man that challenged any of the Roman army to a combat, whereby the Romans
got then the victory, when Lu. Furius was general of the Roman army. Of this
you shall read more in Eutrop.

Manlius surnamed Valso a valiant Roman, entered into the city of Rome, Liui.
with great triumph over the Ueients after the building of Rome 279. Rome at
this time had no wars far from the city, for that the Sabines, the Latens,
the Fedenates, Thuscanes, Ueients, with many other nations of their neighbors
held the Romans tacke.

Upon this day Valentinianus the Emperor was strangled to death at Uienna
through the treason of Arbogastus, Beuth.
391.

Mi^zaus the second of that name king of Polande died upon this day, as
Functius affirms after he had reigned 10. years 1304.

Calendaria festa which the old Late^s used as on this day long after they were
subdued by Tul. Hostilius, and made subject unto the Romans, yet they reserved
the laws and customs of their countries and their old religion to their
country gods, for in mount Alba they met in the temple of Jupiter to the
number of 67. so many at one time might celebrate the feast and offer
sacrifice, for it was among the old Late^s once every month, and therefore
called Calendaria festa^ to this temple some brought cheese, some brought
milk, some lambs, some brought honey, and the most part brought cakes, called
Mola made of meal and salt, in this feast they sacrificed a bull unto Jupiter,
with the ceremonies thereunto belonging: after sacrifice and the feast done,
they divided this sacrificed bull between them and sent a pee^^ of the fleash
to every city and town about them.

The 10. day
AS on this day was celebrated the great and famous victory of the Greeks over
the Persians navy by sea at Salamina, at what time armed men were seen which
did reach out their hands from the I Will of Egina toward the Grecian galleys
also songs were hard in the air in the praise of Iacchus, and flames of fire
were seen in the element, with many ^^oe wonders which appeared toward the
city Eleusin, of which Plutarch men^ioneth, Plut. in L^sandro.
this was one of the most glorious victories that ever the Greeks had chiefly
gotten by the policy and cunning of Themistocles the Athenian.

Upon the self same day, 77 years after this victory, at Salamina by that
noble Greek* Themistocles the City of Pant. lib. 3 and Plut.
Athens was overthrown and taken by Lisander the Spartan after he had
scattered their Nauies at the river of Go^es called Aegos Potamos.

Tiberius Caesar the third, emperor of Rome, in the 23 year of his reign,
disceased in Campania with great rejoicing of the Romans upon this day, yet
some say that he died about Naples, Suet.
in a village called Lucullana, in the 39. years of Christ.

Lotarius Caesar, son to Lodowicke surnamed Pius, and emperor of Germany,
Funct.
after his fathers death was made emperor, against whom Pipinus and Lodowike
his brethren conspired, and gave him upon this day such a terrible battle*
that on both parties such slaughter was made, that all Fraunc^ was long
weakened thereby.

Upon this day 1185, Hist. ^el. ^ac.
dyed Bald^inus the fourth of tha^ name King of Jerusalem, for very grief of
the civil sedition of that time within the city.

Mar. Pomponius Mato, Consul then at Rome, triumphe^ over the Sardeis, and was
solemnlie with great joy receive into Rome, 520 years after the building of
the city, as (...) and others affirm upon this day.

The city of Rome was taken now the fourth time by the Goths, Pantal. lib. 3.
at what time Iustinianus was emperor of Rome after the building thereof 1300.

Pope Joan the 14. of that name died, and Bonifacius the seventh succeeded him
Pope of Rome upon the same day, Volat.
this Bonifacius was a cruel sacrilegious priest, for he robbed all the
churches of Rome of all their gold and silver, and fled with great abundance of
treasure to Constantinople, 985.

Upon this day was Euripides the Greek poet borne, and Vatablus and Tussanus
2, Beut.
famous learned men, the one a reader of the Hebrew tongue, the other of the
greek tongue, died at Paris, 1547.

This day was amongst the Romans accounted a dismal day, wonder not that the
Romans had so many unfortunate and unhappy days, for they recorded all those
days to be unhappy, wherein they sustained great losses, by wars, or any
harm, shame, or otherwise, and accounted those days festiuals when any
victory was gotten, or any Country overthrown, at what time they used to
triumph.

The 17 Day.
AN unhappy day this was accounted among the Romans, Alex, li. 4
for they came to the temple of Berecynthia, the mother of the Gods, and there
with ^eares, wa^^ing and weeping they sought to please their goddess, and for
to have aid in their enterprises.

Likewise in Rome upon this day the youths of the city, when they were 14.
years of age kept solemnly their feast called Liberala, at what time those
youngmen that were most wise and discreet should wear upon them this day a
gown as a government of gravity in token they should in time become grave and
discreet Consuls to govern the City, this feast Varro called Agonia.

Upon this day M. Valerius Messala being then Consult at Rome brought his
triumph most honorable from Afric to Rome, and with great pomp and honor
triumphed over the Africans and over Hiero king of Sicile, who in respect to
be pardoned, Entrop. 2.
he with the rest of his nobility gave to the Romans 200. talents of silver,
and yielding himself to Valerius, and concluded peace with the Romans 490.

Mar. Aurelius Antonius the 24. Emperor of Rome after he had reigned two
years and 8. Eutrop. 8.
months was slain with his mother Semiamira in an uproar which the soldiers
made. This was Antoninus Carocalla his son, as some supposed, 224.

Even so upon this day Valentinianus Junior the Emperor 3 of that name was
slain by secret treason of his friends he was the sooner killed, Pantal. lib. 3.
as Iustine says by one Maximus for his wife who is a passing fair woman 455.

Solymanus Emperor of the Turk was horn upon this day, 150, and died in
Ungaria when he had reigned 48. years.

Ferdinandus had the Empire resigned to him from his brother Charles the 5. who
departed into Spain with both his systers, Marie and Leonara, where he died in
a monas^rie, leaving the empire unto his brother Ferdinandus, who upon this
day was crowned at Frankford^ as both Sabel and Fun^. do affirm 1558.

Frederick the third of that name, with great solemnity and pomp was crowned
Emperor of Rome. 1451.

The 18. Day
THe s^arre called Miluus appears upon this day in the morning.

Upon the 18. of this month Munichyon, which is March, is the feast Adonia
celebrated, in the which feast the women and young Uirgins of Greece did set up
in diueers places of their cities, in every street, in every temple, images
like dead corses, which they were wont to carry at burials, there they
presented their mournings and lamentations made at the funerals of the dead,
with shriking and crying, and beating themselves with blubbering eyes, The
^east Adonia.
and haling their heirs in token of the sorrow and grief that the goddess
Venus made for the death of her friend Adonis.

Great sacrifice with ceremonies and solemnities were upon this day in Rome to
Gabriell the Archangell, as Nouidius says, at which day the temple of Iunpiter
Palatinus was burned with the books of Sibilla, which were by the commandment
of Numa Pompilius the second king of Rome, kept with great care in the temple
aforesaid of Jupiter.

Euilmedorach king of Babylon, and son to Nabuchodonozar, advanced Ioachim
king of Jude, for that he by the (...) Jeremy yielded himself with all his
court to him, and now in the 37. Mass.
year of the ^aptiuitle of Babylon, he was set at liberty out of prison, and
sat at ^he kings table with great favor and honor all the days of ^oachims
life: some appileth this day to be the 27. of the twelfth month (...)

Opilius Macrinus emperor of Rome, was slame with his some named D^adimenus by
the same self Soldiers, Mar* Sco. and Justin.
that created them both emper^urs, after they reigned both one year and two
months.

Alexander Seu^rus whom the Romans named Caesar, and the whole Senate created
Augustus, being but twelve years (...) prince that fououred all good men, and
(...) emperor that favored the Christians, was slain in France in a tumult
that grew among the Soldiers upon this day, yet Melancthon refers it to the
28 of June, and Scotus to the 17 of December.

Upon this day appeared a horible Comet with a long tail, which endured as
Lycosthenes says 8. weeks, Lycosth.
after the which infinite were the number that died in every part of Europe, by
sickness which fell at that time. 1400.

The 19 Day.
IN ^^ld ancient time by the Romans, a temple was builded on mount Coelio, and
upon this day dedicated unto Minerua, where they were wont once every year,
to celebrate a solemn feast called Quinquatria which continued five days in
memory of the birth or Minerua, The feast Quinquatria.
in this feast it was not lawful for any man to draw his sweard out of the
sheath, in so much the Fencers called Gladiatores might by no means play on
the stage upon this day. Again the children at Rome upon this day kept their
feast called Minerualia, not unlike* to the feast Panathenea, which the
Athenians were wont to celebrate to Menerua.

In Rome likewise upon this day was kept a great solemnetie among the Smithes
and Carpenters, Nouid. 4.
and other artificers, called Fabrorum ^erie.

In Athens the feasts of Knights, at what time the young Knights of all Achia,
should meet upon this day at Athens, and with great pomp and glory they
marched from the castl^ of Minerua into the temple of Jupiter, most sole^^lie
through the streets, Call. Vet.
and there in the temple used sacrifice and returned to keep their feast in
the castle of Minerua.

Upon this day Joseph the son of Jacob after he was sold of his brethren into
Egypt, where after much imprisonment he^ opend the dream of king Pharao,
Genes. 41.
of the seven fat (...) and of the seven lean kine that did devour the fat
kine, (...) therefore advanced to be head governor and ruler once all Egypt.

Phocion a noble Greek, captain of Athens, the son of Miltiades the worthy
and glorious conquero^ of the famous battle at Marathon, this Phocion no less
famous for diverse victories then his father, after great service done to his
country, was by his countrymen condemned to die, to gratifi^ Cassander king of
Macedonia, who saught by all mea^es the destruction of Phocion, he to avoid
the unjust sentence of his ^^untriemen, and the fury and rage of Cassander,
poisoned himself: but some say that he was by others poisoned, Plutar. in
Phon.
but it was in Athens a reward appointed to any that resisted the religion of
their gods.

Gaudentius and Io^ius friends and companions of Ho^orius the emperor, Aug.
lib. 18 De ciuitate Dei.
overthrew all the supersticious temples at Charthage in Africa, and burned
their idols as upon this day, 398.

The great council called Lateranense, Pantal. proso^^.
where three hundred Bishops gathered together, began upon this day, 1182.

The 20 Day.
THe most glorious triumph of our savior Christ Jesus into Jerusalem, was as
upon this day, which triumph though it seemed contemptious to the Jews, for
that he was borne poor, and supposed to be a Carpenters son, and that he
rode upon an Ass, The glorious triumph of Chapter Jesus into Jerusalem.
a simple silie beast, without any pomp or triumph which the Jews expected
to have in their king that should be, but these vain people were much
deceived, for this triumph only excelled far all the vain solemnities and
regal pomp, either of Xerxes triumph into Greece, or of Alexander the great
into Babylon, for as the victory of this triumphant king did much exceed all
their victories being made one, so his triumph surmounted all the triumphs of
the world were they all in one triumph: in this triumph they spread their
raiment upon the way, and cut branches of Palms, and sang Hosanna in excelsis,
which song contained in it self more majesty and glory, then all the
triumphant pomp of the world could devise.

Some of the Jews Rabbis affirm this day to be the first day that was
created, for the latter Jews refers the creation of the world to the time
of Autumn, for then the Iubilers began, and the year was plentiful of all
kind of things.

This was the second festival day in mount Coelio in memory of Mineruas
birth, Call, Romans
called Qu^hquaria, for this feast as you heard endured for five days, on the
which day Ovid the poet was borne, and Cicero in that yea^e was slain, when
Pausa was Consul at Rome 40. years before Christ's birthe.

The dedication of the cross was in Rome upon this day, Nouidi. 4.
where women only used great ceremonies and solemnities, at what time it was
not lawful for any man to sacrifice amongst women, or to enter once into their
church upon this day.

Carolus Martellus a famous prince of France, among many worthy renowned and
great victories, as well over the Heathens and Sarazens, as over diverse parts
of France, and specially the great victory which he had upon this day over
Chilpericus the second of that name, and 19 king of France at a place called
Camericus in the 718. year of Christ's birth.

Henry the fourth king of England, Lili.
upon this day, after he had been delivered from many hard chances, and had
diverse good haps in civil wars, languished in sickness, and died upon the
20 of March, and was buried at Canterbury.

One sacrifice the Scythians have in this manner, in the month Nisan which is
March, when one dies in Scythia of any great state his friends and his
neighbors carry all his beasts, and kill them for a feast to solemnize the
funeral of the dead, as the Romans and the Gretians do celebrate a feast for
the honor of Emperors and Princes birthe. The son of this Scythian dead
man, causes his fathers head being filled with all sweet odors, Herod^t. lib.
4.
to be guilted over, and to be set as a monument of his father, where once
every year upon the very day that his father died, he keeps a solemn
feast, where his friends and his neighbors do yearly at this feast offer
sacrifice with ceremonies thereunto belonging unto this gilded head, abhorring
the rites and sacrifices of any countries beside their own as you heard, what
they did to Anachares, and Siales, for the ministering of the sacrifice and
ceremonies of the Gretians.

The 21 Day.
MAximus the Emperor, or rather tirant, after he had reigned in the empire
77. days, and had in that short time slain Gratianus, at Lugdunum after he
came from Britain, and had driven Valentinianus from his empire in the west,
was upon this day, as Mar. Scotus affirms cut in pieces by the soldiers of
the Emperor Valentinianus, yet Functius says that he was beheaded not far
from Aquilea, 430.

Also on this day, Eutrop. 9.
269. Galienus the emper^ur who reigned 15. years, 7. with his father, and
eight years he governed the empire after his fathers death, as Eutrop* says,
but he was slain with his brother Valerianus both Emperors at Millaine, and
that upon this day some vary in his saying, that Valerianus was brother to
Galienus, but I let such controversies pass.

After that Carolomaunus the son of Lodowicke the second of that name, and
brother to Lodowick the third, who reigned both kings of France, had recovered
Italy and settled himself quiet he died upon this day of a sickness called
Apoplexia 880. Melanct. chrou. 4.


Maximilian the Emperor son to Frederick the third was borne upon this day in
the new city of Austria, 1459.

Rodolphus Sueuus was crowned king of the Romans by Stumpf. lib. 4.
the bishop Sigisfridus against Henry of Mag^ntia who stood against him in the
election to be king, 1077.

The 22. Day
THe Jews whose five days of intercalation do now begin after the month
Adar, which is the twelft month with the Jews and the Egyptians, do use this
kind of intercalation, as the Romans do with Julius Caesar who brought from
Egypt to Rome a cunning Mathematician, and made the Roman year to agree with
Egyptians by adding every four year a day.

Henry the fourth being before elected Caesar, returned upon this day from
Campania^o Rome in triumphant sort with Auent.
great honor over the Normans 1084.

The English men had an overthrow by the French men and the Scots in the
territory of Anioy, as upon this day, 1421.

Hennibal the scourge of Rome being called from Italy into Africa to resist
Scipio, being made a new Consul, Hannibal
and sent from Rome as general over the Romans Hannibal before he returned
from Italy caused a triumphant arch to be set up by the temple of ^uno Lucina,
in the which he caused to be engraven his exploits and noble victories, and
the name of all the Consuls, Dictators, and gallant Roman captains, which he
vanquished and slew at three great battles T^ebeia, Trasymene, and Cannes,
which were set in Greek and Punicke letters for a memorial of his being in
Italy as a Trophie and a monument of his feats and victories against the
Romans.

The 17 Day.
POlomie counted this day to be the equinoctial of the spring being the fourth
day of the creation of the world, on the which day the Sun, the Moon, Genesis 1.
and the stars were created. This was the fifth and the last day of
Quinquatria festa, which was consecrated to Minerua in mount Caelio, upon the
which day all the Trompeters should come to the said mount, and there begin to
sound, and from thence through all the streets of Rome sounding the Trompets
until they came to the Capitol, which was warning to the Senators, the Cousuls
and magistrates of Rome to come to the Capitol to finish the sacrifice of
Qui^quatria into Minerua, and to make an end of the feast, which is called
Tubilusthium. Of this day Ovid says,

Summa dies ^ quinque tuba lustrare canora, etc.

Cornel. Scipio then Proconsuld in Africa in most solemn sort within a
triumphant chariot came victor into Rome over the Africanes. The same Scipio
might be well compared unto Sesostris, who for his victories and conquestes was
called the Hercules of Egypt. This Sesostris exceeded for his pro^nesse and
valor. These lef^ more trophes, and monuments of his triumphs behind him in
Egypt, in Ethiopia, in Asia, and in S^ithia then either Alexander, or Cirus,
such (...) Archers, (...) pillars of brass, copp^^, and of Iuorie, according
to the custom of Egypt. This Sesostris carried kings captives bound to his
chariot from place in place, whose monumentes after his death were by the
priests of Egypt, so kept and defended, that they would not permit Darius to
have his statue exected, before Sesostris though Egypt was at that time, (...)
The courage of this Scipio in Carthage, (...) Sardima, and in all Africa seemed
no less, but that among a number of Roman Hercules, which in Scipios days
flourished in Rome, he might challenge (...) over them all.

Selymus the Turk, Cael. de bell, Milet.
and second of that name satled from his (...) of Constantinople toward the
I Will of Melitea with a great and huge number of ships, and he bestowed there a
whole Winters war without any conquest done at all.

In the wars which chanced between the Romans and the (...), after much
slaughter on both sides, they agreed that there should be three men upon the
Romans side, Dion. lib. 3
and three also upon the (...) ^ide which should end this strife, and finish
this war between them. Three Romans came into the ^ielde which were both
horn at one birth being Brethren, and called Horatij, and the other three
Sabines called Curiatij, these were likewise brethren in like sort borne (...)
one (...) called ^rigemini fratres and cousin germans to the Romans, they
fought it so valiantly that two of the Romans (...) other Romans which lived
who perceiving their eagernes, the Roman made as though he would flee, and the
Sabine that was not hurt followed him hard at the heels, the other being sore
wounded came halting behind, the Roman turned ^ppon the soden and fought with
the Sabine, and in fight slew him and then he easily slew the other two, being
maimed before and not able to follow in fight, over these Sabines M. Horatius
was so received with such a triumph into Rome with all pomp and mirth, his
triumph was such that the Romans long after used upon this day a great feast
in memory of Horatius victory.

The 24 day
THis was named amongst the Romans Aegyptiacus dies either in memory of some
great victory had over them* by the Egyptians orels an overthrow.

The 5. day of the creation of the world wherein were fowls* fishes, and other
dumb b^astes made by the Almighty, upon the which day our Savior Christ was
taken by the Jews, Math. 20.
and held his last supper.

As upon this day Aurelius Quintilius was by the whole consent of the
soldiers nominated Empero^r, and by the assent of the Senate he was made
Augustus a man of singular sobriety of great patience and gentleness, he
succeeded his good brother Au. Claudius a worthy man, and a noble emperor who
for the worthy service he did to his country had by the Senate appointed him
a goulden sheeld to hang in the council house and a goulden Image in the
Capitol, for a perpetual memory of his worthiness, this good Quintilius
reigned but 17. days emperor after his brother and was slain as upon this day.

The 25 day*
CHrist Jesus the son of God took flesh of the virgin Marie upon this day,
on the which day the Angel Gabriel ^^luted the Uirgine.

The feast of the mother of the gods called Hylaria festa, was solemnly
celebrated in Rome upon this day, for that the day began to be longer, for in
the time of Julius Caesar and Octauius Augustus, Macrob. ^
this day was counted the equinoctial of the spring, at what time the women
of Rome sacrificed unto Venus with great obsequies.

Theodosius the third of that name Emperor, who was compelled by his Soldiers
to take the name of an Emperor, and within two years after was constrained
upon this day to forsake the empire, and to live a private life in a
monastery, he was so persecuted by ^eo the third surnamed Iconomachus, so
called for that he defended Images, who succeeded Theodosius, 717.

Frederike the second, Auent.
being Emperor was crowned king of Jerusalem, and within 23. years after,
Conradinus the son of Conradus the Emperor, was borne upon this day, who
died afterward at Naples, 1252.

Nicephorus surnamed Botoniates, was elected Emperor of Constantinople upon
this day, who by Alexus was driven out of his Empire into a monastery, where
he died, three years after he was chosen Emperor, 1077.

James the first Bishop of Jerusalem after Christ, Mar. scot. lib. 2.
and brother to him according to the manner of the Jews which called them
brethren that were cosins, was stoned to death, in witness of his faith, as
some writers suppose, 64.

Clemens the third Pope of Rome dyed, 1191, by whose persuasion the Emperor
Frederick the first took a voyage into Italy, besieged Mellaine, Cremona,
Dertona, and many other Towns and Cities which revolted from him, he brought
even to the ground. This Frederike was surnamed Aenobardus a Bononian borne,
and son to that Frederike, which was Son to Conradus the Emperor.

The 26 Day.
THis was the seventh day after the creation called the sabbath day.

The Rabbis of the Jews, more curious then wise in their fabulous books of
Talmudists or Drash, presume to know all things and let nothing pass, Pant.
lib. 3
they say that upon this day Lazarus was raised from his grave, (being dead for
four days) by Christ Jesus.

Conradus the second of that name, a Frenchman, after he had laid long siege
to Melaine, returned to Rome, and was crowned Emperor of Rome by Pope John the
twentieth of that name, Onoph. Justin.
he revenged upon those that dwelt in Pannonia, for that they aided the
Italians, he made his some Caesar during his abode at Rome, 1017.

Romanus Argyropilus Emperor of Constantinople, by the means of his wife a
lewd vicious woman named Zoes was strangled by Mychael Paphlago who succeeded
him in the Empire, G^dr.
and married his wife whom she also used as an instrument of her wicked life
for a long time, but she died of a miserable disease, fit for such a beast,
1033.

Two Uirgines of Hypborea venturing as far as Delos to perform certain
sacrifice vowed to the goddess Lucina, Hyperboreans virgins.
for safe deliverance at child birthe, they dying at Delos in this journey,
are so honored of the young maids at Delos, that they do offer upon the
grave of these Hyperborean Uirgins the long hairs of their heads, and after
three days they hang their hair upon a long pole over their tomb: and the
young men in like sort binding their hairs with certain sweet herbs in a
kind of sacrifice unto Argis and Vpis grave. Again in the Country of Iouia,
Herod.
other ceremonies were used by a number of yongewomen, singing hymns of
Lycaeus work, to further the celebration of the ceremonies, naming often in
their Songs the two Hyperborean Uirgins by the name of Argis and Opis, with
solemn music upon their grave: in the mean while the Priests sprinkeled
their As^es which were kept in a pot over the grave of these Uirgins upon a
company of sick persons, who sat upon the grave of the Hiporean Uirgins: this
became a Scythian sacrifice, and from Scythia, as Herodot, does report into
Thracia, called Sa^ra triticea.

The 27 Day.
NIsan or Abib the first month of the Jews, for on this day their year
began, Rab. Elea.
imitating the Egiptians for the first day of the new moon after the
equinoctial of the spring, according to the oulde Jews order and custom:
but the latter Jews begin their year after the moon in the equinoctial
autumn, having respect to the best season of the year, at what time the
Iubileis of Moses began, upon the which day Noah uncovered the Arc, and saw
the waters decreased and earth appeared, yet stayed in the Arc 56 days
expecting the word of the Lord.

The 2. year after the Isralits departed out of Egypt, Exodus vult
in the first day of ye first month Nisan, Moses reared the tabernacle whom
the Majesty of the Lord in the sight of all men, covered all day with thick
clouds, and all night with shining flames of fire.

Likewise Ezechias king of Judah, 2. Chro. 29.
began as upon this day to repair the Temple of Solomon at Jerusalem, and
caused the Priests and the Levites to sanctify the house of the Lord with
sacrifices and thanks giving, The sacrifice of Ezechias.
at what time were dedicated 600 Oxen, and 3000 sheep.

The Rabbis affirm that upon this day Abraham the Patriarch was about to
sacrifice up to GOD his son Genes. 22.
Isaac.

Upon this day the old ancient Romans sacrificed with great solemnity to
the mother of the gods Berecynthia, which yearly the Romans used with great
pomp, carrieng most sumptuously the image of Berecynthia to be washed in the
river of Almono, Call. Romans
the sacred ceremonies were called Megalesia sacra. This Berecynthia was called
Pessinuntia, to whom M. Iunius Brutus builded a temple, and dedicated those
games and plays called Megalenses ludi, which should be plaide in the spring
time before the Idol of Pessinuntia, by the finest and gallentest yongmen
within Rome, Alex. li 6. cap. 19.
piched and chosen out by the Alcidebes, the matrons of the city were chief
in those plays, in their most sumptuous apparel, for in these plays were
moddest, shamefast, chaste and honest actions used gesture.

Phocas the Emperor, by the conspiracy of certain that sought the Empire,
Gerard. Merc.
was slain, and upon the same day Heraclius was elected in his room Emperor,
yet Scotus refers this murder unto the nineteenth of April, in the year
611.

John Valesius the 50 king of France, and father to Charles the fifth, Pantal.
lib. 3.
surnamed the wise, dyed as upon this day at London in England, 1364.

Lu. Posthumous Megellus, the second time that he was Consul at Rome, with
great pomp and glory triumphed over the Samnits and over the Hetruscans by
the appointment of the Senators, Liuius.
459 years after the building of Rome: upon the which self same day 734.
triumphed Lu. Cornelius Balbus over the Affricans, in the beginning of the
reign of Augustus Caesar, for the triumph of those Consuls in those days
were much obscured, for the dignity of the Consuls was defaced through the
glory of the Emperors, who took from the Consuls all pomp and glory, to set
forth their own triumphs.

Upon this day 169. Lu. Septimius Seuerus was borne in a Town called Lepus,
which was in Tripolinata a Province of Affricke: This Emperor willed all men
to call him Pertinax for the great zeal and goodwill which he bare unto him,
which Pertinax was slain by Iulianus. This Seuerus the Emperor by his
victories over the Parthians and Arabians, was surnamed both Parthicus and
Arabicus.

Gregory the eleventh Pope of Rome died as upon this day, Sabel.
under this Pope all the Towns of Italy which were in subjection to the Pope
revolted, and therefore this bishop removed his seat from France into Rome
again.

The 8. day
FOr the space of thirty days the Israelites lamented much the death of Moses
in the plain of Noab upon this day, for after that God showed all the land of
Canaan, Deuteronomy. of the last chapter.
he went to the plain of Moab to the top of mount Nebo where he died, and no
man knows his grave to this day.

In Rome as upon this day great solemnities of ceremonies and sacrifices were
had and celebrated unto Ianus in the temple of Concord, in the temple of
Health, in the temple of Peace and in the temple of Ceres, by all the women and
matrons of the City of Rome.

Aelius Pertinax the 26. Emperor of Rome when he had reigned but 80, days,
being a very aged man, was slain in an uproar which fell among the guard
through the reason of Iulianus who succeeded him in the Empire: notwithstanding
some say otherwise, 194.

Mar. Atil. Regulus triumphed over the Samnites, and over the Uolscanes, I do
not mean the great triumph which Regulus got over the Africanes when he s^ue
18 thousand enemies, and took prisoners 5000. men when he had received under
his obeisance 73. Plutar.
cities and took 8. elephantes, and sent them to Rome, this was upon an other
day of which I shall speak of in an other place, 459.

Albertus marquis of Brabenburge, the scourge of Germany with long wars
many years, was borne upon this day, 1520, at which time died Henry
Glareanus and poet Laure^tus in Friburge a town in Germany, 1563.

Aron and his two sons Madan and Abiliu remained at the door of the
taber^acle seven days and seven nights, and performed that which Moses
commanded him from the spirit of God, Leuit. 8
2455. years after the creation of the world.

The 29 Day.
Upon this day Joshua the second Judge of Israel that succeeded Moses sent out
of Sichim two men to view Jericho, and to spy the land, Iosua^^.
at what time Rahab the harlot acknowledged the God of Israel and lodged the
two Israelites and hid them from the king of Jericho, who sought to kill them.

C. Claudius the 5. E^^rop. 7.
Emperor of Rome son to Drusus which was brother to Tiberius and uncle by
the fathers side to Caligula after he had reigned 13. years and 9. months,
he was poisoned by his own wife in the year of our Lord* 41.

Lectisternium a feast among the Pa^nims in the honor of Jupiter, Juno, The
feast lectisternium.
and Minerua, at what time sumptuous and rich beds were spread in the
Temples, in the which their Images and Idols dect with all kinds of chains of
gould, crowns and garlands beset with Jewels and pearls were first laid in
most magnificent and royal manner with all ceremonies and solemnities in these
gorgeous beds, and a great feast celebrated with music and mirth before them.
And after in the residue of the beds which were made within the temple, as many
as mightlie and eat and bare company with their gods, thinking themselves
happy that they in this feast in their temples accompaniing their Idols had
the fruition of so sacred a feast.

The Rabbis do affirm that as at this time our Savior Jesus Christ came to
raise up Lazarus from death, at what time he came to Jericho, and by the way
gave sight to the blind man, and lodged in Zachaeus the publicans house.

The 30. Day
THe French chronicles affirm that upon this day the great and bloody
victory of Edward duke of York fell, which afterward was called Edward the
fourth king of England.

Frederick the third being arch^uke of Austria was crowned emperor and reigned
almost 54. years, he was also upon this day elected and crowned king of the
Romans as Nauclerus says, but Cuspinianus who best knew ye state of Austria
refers this to the first day of January. It is not much to be marvelled
that writers contend for days sith they in greatest causes vary much in
years, vetustas erroris plena, and therefor I repeat sometime histories that
I wrote before.

The 31 Day.
THe old Romans upon these day used solemn sacrifice and oblation to the moon
upon mount Auenti^e with such rites and ceremonies as the Augurers and high
bishops had observed, for all ceremonies and sacrifice were by Numa Pomp. from
the nymph Aegiria, and also after Numa in the time of Torquine the proud, the
book of Sibill, which were kept by the 3. magistrates called triumveri were
full of these supersticious vain ceremonies and sacrifices which the Romans
much honowred.

Ti. Pomp. Atticus died upon this day 12. years after his friend M. Cicero was
slain by Hierenius, and Popilius by y^ procurement of M. Antonius, Volat.
who likewise was overthrown with his friend Cleopatra queen of Egypt by Oct.
Augustus in this year that Pomp. Atticus died, at what time ended the wars in
Rome, after the building of the city of Rome, 722.

Henry the first of that name King of France, died of a wound that he got
with running at Tilt on this day, Sleid.
after he had reigned 12 years, after whom succeeded his son Franciscus the
second of that name. Pantaleon affirms that Franciscus the first reigned 32.
years, 1557.

Alphonsus king of Spain, 1259, was by the Princess of G^rmanie elected to
the empire, which he refused, for then the empire had bin void of an emperor
17. years which was the time of interegnum, at what time Richard the Duke of
Cornwall son to the king of England was crowned king of Rome, Onoph.
of this time, and of the certeintie thereof as Functius says, writers do
much vary.

Henricus the fourth of that name Emperor of Germany was upon this day, being
then the feast of Aester by Pope Clement the third, Pantal. lib. 3.
as Functius says by Pope Steeuen the ninth crowned emperor who ranged 50.
years whose wife named Bertha used the government at her pleasure, for she was
the empress, and emperor.

Melancthon says in his chronicles that saint Ierom died on this day 420, at
Betheme, yet Volateranus affirms it 30. of September in the year of our
Lord, 442.

Nehemias came upon this day with letters from Artaxerxes to Jerusalem for
the repairing of the Temple, 2 Esd. 2.
and also for the building up of the walls of Jerusalem again.

In the month Munychion among the Egiptians called Pharme, Menede^ K. of Egypt
ended his great and wondrous, tomb, which for the rareness thereof was
called a Labyrinth, the pattern whereof Dedalus brought with him from Egypt
unto Creet, where he builded the like to king Minos. It was hard for any that
entered into this Labyrinth to come out thence without a guide. This Labyrinth
Labyrinth
was made a place of burial for the kings of Egyptlineallie descending from
the body of Menedes and not for others, in so much that the kings of Egypt
afterward contended who should excel in these works, Herodot. lib. 2.
some in Labyrinthes, some in building of Piramides, and some in building of
monsterous great Temples for their burials, as the priestrs of Vulcan affirm
in their sacred books at Memphis, that 43. of the most a^ncient kings of Egypt
were buried in these Pyramides, of the which number 17. remained until the
time of Ptolomi the son of ^agi, one of the soldiers of the great Alexander.
This was the first king of the Ptolomeis after the name of Pharaos, for the
first kings of Egypt from Menas time until the time of 52. kings, we have as
little to write of, as we have of the first ancient kings of Assiria.

The names of the Triumphs solemnized in Rome within the month of March, and
by whom.

1 P. Valor. Publicola, 2 L. Aemil. Mamertimus, 3 L. Cornel. Lentulus, 4 Q.
Luctatius Cerco, 5 M. Claud. Marcellus, 6 A. Manl. Torqua. Atticus 7 L.
Papyrius, 8 C. Fabricius Luscinius, 9 C. Papyr. Maso, 10 L. Aemil. Papus. 11
Cn. Manl. Volso. 12 T. Manl. Torquatus. 13 L. Aemil. Papus, 14 C. Flamineus
Nepos, 15 L. Conel. Scipio, 16 C. Flamineus, 17 Pub. Furius. 18 Manlius Volso,
19 M. Valerius Coruus, 20 M. Pomp. Matho. 21 M. Valor. Maximus. 22 C. Conelius
Scipio. 23 L. Posthumi. Megell^s 24 L. Conel. Balbus. 25 M. Atil. Regulus.
The names of the solemn feasts and sacrifices within the month of March.

Munichia, Matronalia, Quinquatria, Bachanalia, Iunonalia, Equiria, Liberalia,
Quinquaria, Minerualia, Hylaria, Megalesia.
These games and plays called triumphant plays and vowed games, must of
neces^itie be celebrated and solemnized after any great triumph, together
with the feast Tri^mphale Epulum, which is also a feast appointed in the
Capitol belonging always unto any great triumph.

Ludi Votiui, Ludi Triumphales, Ludi Natalitij.
Finis mensis Martij.
Of the month of April, which with the Jews is called Nisan their first
month, with the Athenians called Thargelion their eleauenth month, and With
the Aegiptians Pharmute their eight month.
The first Day.
THis month of April is called of the Jews* Nisan, which is the first month
with the Hebrews, Vernalia.
for the Jews begins their year in this month: in the old time this
month was of the Romans consecrated unto Venus, at what time they celebrated a
feast called Vernalia, where the Romans used sacrifice and solemine ceremonies
unto Venus, bedeckt with garlands made of diverse flowers on their heads, Call.
Romans
and myrtle branches in their hands. Likewise the women and matrones of Rome,
washed and bathed themselves in sweet water, and with garlands of myrtle
crowned, came upon this day to the temple of Fortune, and offered oblations and
sacrifice with Frankencense and other sweet odors, for their husbands good
success and events in wars.

In like order the ancient Greeks had upon this day two great solemn feasts,
the one called Thargelia festa, celebrated with many ceremonies unto Apollo and
unto Diana, Suidas.
according to the manner of the Gretians, the other feast called Apaturia,
solemnized with diverse kind of sacrifices unto the goddess Venus.

In Rome upon this day, Sempronius Blesus when he was Consul at Rome triumphed
over the Affricans, at what time woone many cities, ^utrop. 2.
and though he suffered shipwreck in his return from Affrike to Rome with
great riches and spoil, yet the Senators granted him to come with a triumph
into the City of Rome, 500 years after the bulding of the City.

Q. Martius Philippus Consul of Rome, made a brave entry into Rome with great
pomp and honor, triumphing over the Hetruscans a people of Italy, before the
first wars of the Romans against the Carthaginians eight years, Eutrop. 2.
for at this time the Romans had enough to do at home, by means of the
wars, of the Tarentines, Samnits, Latens, and of other nations about them.

Also on this day Ser. Caruilius Max. being Consul then at Rome, Pant. lib. 4.
triumphed most solemnly over the Sardintans, 519.

Tacitus the 34. Empero^r of Rome, after he had reigned but six months, dyed
by an uproar among the Soldiers, the most common death that then happened to
the Emperors of Rome, one preventing an other by treason, that in 277 years
34 Emperors reigned in Rome, as Onoph. affirms, but Iustine says, that
Tacitus died of a fever at Tarsus, but I leave contention.

Valens was by his brother Valentinianus made Emperor of Constantinople, to
govern jointly the Empire upon this day, 367. This was a cruel persecutor
of the Christians, for he commanded that 80. Christians should be drowned,
that were sent to him from the other Christians, Read the 30. book of Amianus.
to entreat for mercy and favor, but Valeus being most worthyly afterward
wounby the Goths, and flyeng from the battle so wounded to a little cottage
in a podre village, was burned most miserably by the Goths in his cottage
where he hid himself. His brother Valentinianus had no better end, for both
were cruel Emperors.

Justinius Thrax a base man borne, who was first a Swineheard, and then a
heardman, and afterward became to be a Soldier, who after by many events of
wars, Suet. in vita Caesarum.
was made by the Soldiers (after he had ran through all kind of preferment
in the field) Emperor, 517, who as upon this day did adopt to the Empire his
sisters son named Iustinianus, in the ninth year of his raig^e, and dyed
within four month after, he was a good Christian, and rooted out the heresy
or the Arians and Ne^torians.

Conradus the third of that name, king of Bonaria, borne in Sue^ia, nephew to
Henry the fourth, being his daughters son, was by the consent of all Princes
of Germany, elected E^perour upon this day 1139. he made a voyage into Asia
against the Saraze^s, Onoph. and Instin.
but returned without any thing done, by means of treason at home, by a
wicked man named Manuell, who succeeded after him by treason in the Empire, as
Onoph. and Iustine affirms.

As upon this day 1081. Alectius surnamed Comnenus, was elected to succeed
Nicephorus the Emperor, Pantal. lib. 4.
who after he had ended many battles, he erected an Hospital for p^^re
fatherless children, and also a free school to be there instructed and
brought up after they were able to come from the H^spitall,

Clephis king of the Longobardes was slain in Papia by the Italians, Gerard.
Merc.
568. ^or before this time they had determined with Albonius there to invade
Italy four years before this king Clephis was slain.

Maunt Ae^na in Sicilia, was so shaken with an earthquake, that the fire that
flamed therewith out of this hill, Lycosth. de prodig.
destroyed and burned many places, at what time the monastery of S. Leo was
utterly spoiled and consumed, as upon this day, 1536.

Rome was taken upon this day by Alaricus king of the Gotes, Sabel. 7. Enned.
6.
after he had continued his siege two years, 414 after Christ as Pau. Aemilius
in his first book sets down at large.

Sigismundus king of Polonia, Mart. Chrom. in orati ^ineb.
died when he had reigned 42. years, 1548. after whom succeeded also his
son Sigismundus.

Some also hold opinion that our Savior Christ came upon this day to Bethania,
and called Lazarus from his grave, where he had been four days dead and
buried, and he lived after as Mar. Scotus affirms 24 years, but he borrows
of the Rabbis all this uncertain conjecture of the time, for the Jews will
be ignorant in nothing.

The 2 day
Upon this day the old Romans celebrated a solemn feast with great ceremonies
in memory of Quirinus, who was borne upon this day, at what time the Romans
kept the feast Lupercalia with great solemnity.

Christ after he raised Lazarus from the grave would not enter to Jerusalem,
which was 15 furlonges distant from Bethania, for the Jews hearing of these
miracles took council how they might kill him, and therefore Jesus went to
Ephraim a City five miles distant from Bethanie.

Jane the wife of Philip surnamed pulcher king of France the 45 king in number
died upon this day, 1304. This queen was the only daughter of Henry King of
Navarre.

Honorius the fourth of that name was elected Pope of Rome as upon this day at
Perusium, this pope builded many houses upon the mount Auentine, and assigned
to many poor men certain Gowns and clothes called Album amictum:

It is written that a Jew being baptized upon this day against his will
presently put fire in his own house, Stumpf. 5*
took his wife and his children out, and ran up and down in the streets
saying alowd and crying out, I am a Jew, I am a Jew, and no christian, his
house being burned and 40 houses more in Constantia by the means of this his
fury, 1349.

The 3 day
Upon fridaie before the feast of Aester Christ Jesus our savior suffered his
passion as upon this day, by whose death death was swallowed up, and the
power of Satan overthrown.

Henricus the second king of France and Philip which is now king of Spain
after many years of war, at length concluded peace upon this day, 1559. Aemil.


Eulalius in a schism against Bonifacius then Bishop of Rome was elected
bishop, and Bonifacius rebelled as on this day. Volat.
This Bonifacius while yet he was ^ishop, which was 3. years and four
months ordained that none should be allowed a priest before he were 30
years of age.

Pub. Posthumous Tubertus Consul then at Rome triumphed over the Sabines, 250.
after the building of Rome. This was one of the first triumphs in Rome after
the kings were banished, Pan^al. 4.
at what time in their triumphs they used no such solemnity and pomp as they
did after as to be drawn in chariots so sumptuously with four elephantes, or
with four white Steedes, or with such pomp and royal solemnity or in wearing
purple robes and triumphant garments neither yet crowned with garlands, nor
with any great magnificence, which was after among them practiced.

The godly Ezechias king of Judah as some write, repaired the temple as upon
this day, and therein prepared oblations and sacrifices to please the Lord, 2
Paral. 29
at what time he continued therein 8. days instructing the people* and
sanctifying of the temple.

The 4. Day
AGrippa Menenius surnamed Lanatns, fellow Consul to Posthumous Tubertus in
the self same year, 250. after the building of Rome, triumphed over the
Sabines, and made also his triumph the next day after Tubertus his fellow, Liui.
over the Sabines Liuie said that they both had their triumphs granted by the
senators in one day over the Sabines, they rode not in chariots, but were
brought with serieants and officers before them, and with such pomp as was
used in those days, for then they triumphed but within Italy. The greatness of
the Romans triumph grew by the wars of Africa, which was the first after
they had conquered Italy.

The 5 Day.
Plays and games called Megalesia, Megalesia.
were celebrated as upon this day in the honor of Cibeles the mother of the
gods, the sacrifices and solemnities done to this goddess in the the temple
at Rome were used in the 27. of March, as you before have read, yet some
refer these plays to the last of March but plays are vsedmanie times as
occasion serves.

The Israelits upon this day with their captain Joshua passed through the flood
Iordane at what time the water dried before them as the red sea did in the time
of Moses and Aaron and Iordane stood still until the priests had brought the
Arc through the river unto the other side, Ios. 3. and 4.
at which time the waters came again together.

The Iues as on this day yearly provided a male lamb of a year old without
any spot or blemish on him, for the feast of Easter, which they kept on y^ 14.
day of their month, Nisan, and then they kill him, and take part of his blood
and strike it on the two side poastes, and upon the upper door post of the
house where this lamb should be eaten. Exodus 12.
God ordained this sacrifice as a token and a pledge of their deliverance.

Lotarius son to Lodowick surnamed Pius the 24. king of France and the
second emperor of Rome of a French man being then king of Italy by his father
thither sent, Onoph.
was upon this day elected and created emperor of Rome after his fathers
death, where he reigned 15. years: he made his son Lodowick the second of
that name his fellow to govern with him in the empire.

Lodowick the 9. Hist. Saracen. lib. cap. 7.
king of France sailed as upon this day from thence into Asia with a very
great army to ease the christians being much vexed and afflicted by the
Saracens, and afterward returned safe and sound into France again, as
Functius says, but others said, that he was taken by the Saracens in Damiata,
1250*

Charles the fourth of that name and son to John king of Bohemia was as on
this day crowned emperor of Germany which Lodowick Bauarus being alive and had
reigned Emperor 32. years took it so greeuouslie that Charles should be
emperor during his life, Pantal. lib. 4.
that falling down from his house on hunting died more for sorrow of the
empire, then for the fall, 13^5.

Upon this day Charles the 5. entered into the city of Rome, accompanied with
pope Iulie the 3. who with great triumph was received of the citizens where
for a time he remained to consult with the Pope of all estates of
Christendom, in matters of state and religion. Nouid. lib 4.


Philip king of Spain that now is proclaimed peace upon this day at Bridges
between Henry the second of that name king of France and himself, Pant lib.
4
1559.

The 6. day
AS upon this day the magistrates of Athens did examine and visit the whole
city in that sort that the Romans afterward used in their Lustrum every fifth
year, with the Greeks called penrerides.

In Greece they celebrated a feast in memory of Dianas birth which fell upon
this day, in which feast no sacrifice might be offered of blood, but the feast
was solemnized with wafers fine cakes and wine, and they sacrificed
fra^kinsence, sweet odors and spices, besides they should honor this feast with
all kind of delicate sweet flowers, Alex. lib. 2. cap. 22.
and adorn their Idols with all garlands, for in this feast all joys and
mirth was solemnized with music, dancing and feasting, but no killing of
any living beast upon this day, and therefore it is called Hylaria festa.

Some also hold opinion that the birth day of Alexander the great, Alex. lib.
4. cap. 20.
and his death was upon this day, but better referred unto the 8. of June.

Likewise that learned Philosopher Socrates the Athenian died upon this day as
Plutarch supposes.

The second circumcision was by Joshua performed by the commandment of God in
Gilgar, for now they had left off 40 years after the first circumcision, and
Joshua made him sharp knives as the Lord commanded him, and circumcised all
those which were borne in the wilderness, after they came out of Egypt, for
all their old Captains, and the Isralits that came out of Egypt were
circumcised in the wilderness, and for their disobedience to God they died
every one saving Caleb and Joshua they rebelled against God, and contemned
Moses, Joshua.
for they remained 40. years in the wilderness.

Our Savior Christ returning into Jerusalem, curssed the Fig tree for his
barrenness, at what time he entered into the temple and taught there, and stope
the mouth of the Saduces and Phariseis, and returning to mount Oliver, took
occasion by beholding of the Temple, Math. 21.
to prophecy the destruction both of the city and of the world.

M. Aurelius Antonius Bassianius, which is also named Caracalla, died on this
day at Edessa, when he had reigned six years and two months, Pantaleon says
that he was both borne and dead as upon one day, Eutrop. 8.
218.

The 7 Day.
THe Athenians used upon this day to celebrate the feast of Thargelia, in the
honor and memory of Apollo* also the feast called Carnia was also solemnized
in Cirena to Phoebus which is called Apollo, and taken for the Sun, for the
Sun was worshipped by so many names, that almost in no country the Sun
escapes without feasts and sacrifices, with all kind of solemn worship done
unto him, for he is worshipped with the Greeks by the name of Phoebus, with
the Latins by the name of Apollo, with the Egiptians by the name of Serapis:
with the Persians by the name of Onamasdris, etc.

Christ our Savior being in Bethania in the house of Simon the lepor, Math. 26
at what time the woman powered upon his head a box full of precious ointment,
where Judas ^he (...) was angry for the waste thereof.

Zeno surnamed Isauricus a deformed man and base borne was by Leo Junior his
own father made Emperor, 120000 books burned.
490. who used the Empire more liker a tyrant then a Emperor, in whose time
Constantinople was set on fire, and the most part thereof burned, at what time
120 thousands books were quite burned to ashes, Justin in Isaurico.
amongst which books Homers poems were, being written with goulden letters, In
testino draconis of 120 foot long, he died very poor, as Iustine and others
affirm.

Charles the eight of that name, king of France, died suddenly upon this day
at Ambrose, 1497. leaving no lawful heirs behind him to succeed, and
therefore Jews the 12. of that name succeeded the 59 king of France, this
king was called Pater populi, and the last king before the stock of Valoyes
became to be king of France. Justin.


Anastasius the 40 Bishop of Rome, after the Apostles was elected upon this
day, who instituted, that no lame, impotent or maimed person, should be
admitted to minister in the Church, and this Bishop also commanded, that men
should stand up at the reading of the Gospel, Volat.
398.

The 8 Day.
Upon this day the Romans used a great triumph with pomp and solemnity,
^uet.
and with plays, in memory of Iuba king of Numidia by Augustus Caesar then
conquered and brought to triumph 45.

A dis^^all day and unfortunate among the Jews, for that upon this day the K.
Assuerus otherwise called Darius Hisdaspis king of Persea made a law and a
decree by his chief counceller Haman that all the Jews being every where
scattered in these his kingdoms, which were a 127 provinces should be
destroyed and slain both man, Ester. 13.
woman, and child, and therefore this day was among the Jews named Luctuosus
Iudeor^m dies.

In the temple at Jerusalem, about nine of the clock at night shined such a
light so bright about the chief altar, E^eb. 3.
that it seemed to be day: the brazen gates of the temple of their own accord
opened, and many woonders seen.

The 9 Day.
THe charge and manner of eating the Passover, which was to be kept in the 14
day of the first month which is Nisan at even, the first day of the feast of
unleavened bread, for this feast continued with the Jews seven days, this
was celebrated in memory of their deliverance, at that night when all the
first borne of Egypt man and beast were slain by the Angel of the Lord, Exodus
12.
and in the remembrance of the blood of the lamb which the Jews sprinkled
upon the doors, as a warning to the Angel to spare the Jews of this feast of
Passover, the first was in Egypt under Pharao, the second in Jerusalem, under
king Ezechias the 3. and last under our Savior Christ at his death.

Again in the second year after the Israelits came out of Egypt, Number. 9.
Leuit. 23.
upon the self same day in the wilderness of Sinay, the people of Israel
celebrated the feast of the Passover, by the commandment of the Lord unto
Moses, at even of the 14. day of the month.

In Rome upon this day Cerelia festa were most solemnlye with great ceremonies
after their ancient custom, celebrated in the honor of their goddess Ceres,
Cerealia festa.
upon that day also the old Romans appointed with pomp and state, great plays
called Circenses ludi, to the same self goddess. In this feast the most
stately and magnificent shows of all other solemn games were played in the
great room called Circus Maximus, this was se^ forth cheefely by the
triumphant emperors dedicated to Jupiter for their victories, and before the
Emperors by the C^^suls and Dictators, for before they went into the battle
they would go into the Capitol, and after sacrifice and due ceremonies done
unto Jupiter, they vowed if the gods would grant them victory, to celebrate
public plays in this place Circo Maximo, which contained in length three
furlongs, and of breadth one furlong, mad^ and enlarged by Caesar the Dictator,
the buildings and seats which were made for the people to sit and to behold
the games, amounted to the number of 200060. seats.

The 10 Day.
THe Isralits departed from Rameses a city in the land of Gosan the 15. day
of the first month, which the Jews call Nisan, on the morrow after the
passover, under the conducting of Moses and Aaron, after that God had plagued
the Egiptians, and had smitten the first borne within all Egypt, Exodus 13.
and God spared not the chief rulers, and in remembrance of this their
deliverance and going out of Egypt, and from the tyramite of Pharao, God
commanded to sanctify the first borne unto him as well of men as of beasts,
the number that came out of Egypt were 600000, beside women and children: this
was done 2. Die Azinorum.

God gave the city of Jericho unto Joshua, and Jericho was taken after Joshua
had gone about the city six days, as the Lord had commanded him, and the
seventh day Joshua compassed Jericho seuentimes, Joshua. 6.
and the seven priests that bare the Arc should sound their seventh trumpet
of Rams horns a long blast, and all the people shall shoute, and then the
walls of Jericho shall fall, 2494.

Christ Jesus our Savior, by all probable reason of some of the best
Astronomers, did offer up himself upon the cross to God his father upon this
day, for our sins and transgression. Some also of the Fathers hold opinion
that Adam was created upon this day, Cedr. August.
and that our Savior Christ took flesh of the Uirgin Marie, upon the same
day that he dyed.

Upon this day Septin^ius Seuerus the 21 Emperor of Rome, was borne in a
Town called Lepos in a Province of Affricke, 195. Herod. 2.


Also Theodosius Junior, the son of Arcadius the Emperor, was borne upon
this day, Sex. Aur. Victor. de Caes. epit.
401, in the declining state of the empire there were three: Theodosij the
first of them was a noble Emperor, out of the house and progeny of Traiane,
to whom he was most like in manners and conditions, and all his life was
resembled to Traianas life, his victories were such that he merited to be
called Theodosius the great.

Lewis surnamed Balbus the 26. king of France after he had reigned 2 years
died as on this day, Beuth.
879.

Rossana a city of Assiria with all the villages and towns within thirty
miles about were by a great earthquake shaken down to the ground, also the
great temple called Sophia at Constantinople with many towns and buildinges
of the city were overthrown upon this day by that earthquake, 1556.

Lodowick Duke of Millaine was taken by the French men and brought to France
captive unto Lewis the 12. king of France, Volat.
1500. Eight years before this died Laurentius Medices duke of Florence as
upon the same day, 1492.

The 11. day
THis was the third day of the feast of the unleavened bread and the second day
after the Israelites had departed out of Egypt, at what day the Israelites
removed from Sucoth to the desert of Ethan in the edge of the wilderness not far
from the red sea.

In the 16. of Nisan, which is the eleventh of April Ezechia king of Judah
sanctified the house of the Lord in the eight day and made an end in the
sixteenth, in the which day Ezechias the king brought seven Oxen* seven ^ams,
seven sheep, 2. Paral. 29.
and seven goats to be a sin offering for the kingdom, for the sanctuary,
and for Judah, and their blood were sprinkled upon the Altar, and the Levites
with Cymbals, Psalteries, and harps, and all instruments of David: and the
Priests held the trompets, and the sons of Aaron were commanded to offer
these on the Altar of the Lord.

As upon this day the noble Roman Milo was condemned to (...) at Rome for the
killing of Claudius, Appia^. lib. 2.
at what time Cicero pronounced an eloquent orationin the behalf of Milo,
fifteen years before the birth of Christ.

Selymus the ninth Emperor of the Turks began his empire upon this day, at
what time his father Baiazeth was poisoned by a Jewish physician, 1512. five
years after he had subdued Siria, and conquered Egypt, look Alcairon which
is called Meniphis the chiefest city of Egypt, and took also their king
Soldanus and haled him through the streets of Alcairon by a rope, and after he
commanded him that he should Pan. Iou.
be hanged in the chiefest gate of the city.

Julius the second pope of Rome was vanquished by Lewis the eleventh king of
France at Rauenna, where the pope lost 16. thousand soldiers, and at that
battle Leo the tenth which was elected Pope, would upon that day be crowned
pope to change the unfortunate day to be fortunate, some refer this day to
be the 27. of March.

As on this day Lewis of Burbonie prince of Condie con^erred with the peers of
France at Aurelia about religion which was in question 30. years before at
Ratisbone by Charles the fifth, Pantal. 4.
at what time they consulted to take a voyage against the Turk, and this
continued the space of a whole year, and ended as upon this day, 1542.

As upon this day three sons and two Rainbowes were seen in the skies at
Uenice. Sleid.


The 13 day
THis was the fourth day of the unleavened bread, and the third day after the
Israelites had gone out of Egypt, and the 4. day Pharo made ready to march
after them, for Moses had brought the bones of Ieseph out of Egypt, for so
Joseph willed and made the children to swear that they should take his bones
away with them, and the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud,
and by night in a pillar of fire.

The Jews held another feast called festum manipuli spicarum, Fest. spicarum.
they should bring unto the Priest a shea^e of the first fruits of their
harvest, and he should wave the sheafe before the Lord to be accepted for
their sins, and this should be done the morrow after the Sabbath day, for the
Jews had these many feasts by the Lord commanded to be kept.

1 The feast of the Passover. 2 The feast of unleavened bread. 3 The feast of
the first fruits. 4 The feast of blowing of trompets. 5 The feas^es of
Tabernacles.
Of these in their places orderly as they fall* I shall hereafter plain^ie
declare.

In Rome were certain plays and games called Ludi cereales which endured
eight days, and were celebrated with the most solemn cheer that might be
with the most pomp and sumptuous s^ghtes in the honor of Ceres, these were
often placed by the names of Cereales, Circenses, also Ludi magni, and
sometimes by the names of Ludi votiui, which were placed in Circo Maximo after
any great triumph or victory had.

Ludi Cereales were diversely in diverse countries solemnised. Among the
Grecians they used this sacrifice with torchlight, in the which they imitated
the Siracusa^s in the sacrifice to Proserpina, at what time they offered up the
best wheat and chiefest corn being winnowed and through picked and cleansed the
women, came to the altar of Ceres crowned with garlands made of wheat straw,
being decked and set forth with all sweet flowers in Rome. Their priests held
torches to this sacrifice, and none might come but Priests and women, Alex.
li. 6. cap. 19.
and then it should be solem^ized a little after Son setting. Among the
Romans, they used these sacrifices and the plays like unto the plays called
Circenses, which of all the regal shows is with most pomp and magnificence
played in Circo maximo, at what time the Dictators, Consuls and magistrates of
Rome, with all the Idols of their Gods bedeck^ with ^ewels and chains are
set iniuorie and golden chairs above the triumphant states of the Consuls and
Emperors to behold these games and plays.

The Christians seperating themselves from the Jews do keep still a solemn
feast the eight day after the resurrection. of Christ in memory of his glorious
resurrection instituted upon Pant lib. 4
this day by Higinus bishop of Rome, 146. after Christ.

Upon this day by D^oclesian the Emperor were great persecutions done upon
the Christians, and spoiled their churches to the number of 305. upon the which
day the head of Andrew Nouid. 4.
the apostle was at Rome presented.

Henry the fifth of that name after he had keep war^es in Flanders and
against the Hungarians, went to Rome to be crowded, and was resisted by the
Pope, but peace being concluded, he was with great solemnity crowned Emperor
of Germany, and returning home from Rome, and buried his father Henry the
fourth at Spire, Exodus 14.
which had bin unburied ^ine years, such was the desire of men for an Empire,
and the contempt of an Emperor.

The 29* Day.
THis is the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, and the fourth day
after the Israelites going out of Egypt, at what time Pharo pursued after them
with all the peers of Egypt, and at that time the Lord commanded Moses to
pitch their pauilions between Migdol and the red sea in hard and dangerous
places, for that God might have the more glory: their care was such of Pharo,
and of his force following, that they cried unto the Lord and he heard them and
delivered them from the tirannie of Pharo.

As upon this day Romulus the first king and founder of Dionis.
Rome took the City of Fidena, and brought it under obeisance of the city
of Rome in the year, 14.

Caius Aurelius Cotta then Consul at Rome (...) with great pomp and
solemnity over the Africans and over the Sicilians, 50^. I need not to set
forth every triumph with the pomp and solemnity thereof, for that I have set
some out by the which you may think so of the other.

Mecenas a great man in honor with Augustus Caesar, (...) and defender of all
learned men was borne as ^pen this day, whose memory was in Rome solemnlie
kept, with a feast solemnized by the learned patrons and favors of students,
he lived together with Horace in the time of Augustus 2. Emperor of Rome, Plut.
with whom he was greatly exteemed: this Macenas name is much honored among
learned men, for his favor to learning.

The goddess Pessinu^tia was by Cornelius Scipio brought to Rome called Matter
magna or Dea magna, the great mother or the great goddess, unto whom in
Phrigia the feast Orgia was celebrated in the honor of this goddess, Call. Ro^.
to whom at the river Gallus her priests were gelded and called Galli,
according to the river, this image was found in the field of Herod. lib. 1.
Phrigia called Pessinuntinam, and the Phrigians therefore called her
Pessinuntia.

The 14 Day.
THe 6. feast of the unleavened bread, being as on this day the Israelits
pitched their tents before Baal, Sephon, Pharo, and the Egiptians followed
after, and the Israelits cried unto the Lord, and the Angel of God came
between the tents of Israel and the tents of Pharao in a pillar Phar^o.
of cloud by day, and in a pillar of fire by night, and Moses stretched out his
hand over the sea as God had commanded him, and the sea went back and gave
place for the Israelits to pass dry through the midst of the sea, and Pharao
followed after them, and was with his power, and all the Princes of Egypt with
all his peers and all his pomp, drowned in the red Sea, and Moses and the
Israelits gave thanks unto God Exodus 14.
with a song of triumph, the victory was so great, and the triumph was such,
that neither Salmanas^er, Senaherib, Nabuchadonazar, Cirus, nor Alexander the
great, had the like in any triumph or great victory of theirs, as Moses had
over Pharao.

Pompeius the great upon this day took Jerusalem, and entered into Sanctum
sanctorum, spoiled the Temple, and wasted the city 15. years before he was
slain in Egypt by Septimius and Photinus, at what time he fled from Caesar at
Pharsalia for succor to young Pharao, whose father Pompei restored to his
kingdom, but his head was sent to Caesar for his good will, Mel^nch. 2. chron.
that was the welcome that Pompey had in Egypt with Ptholomey.

Octauius Caesar vanquished M. Antonius in the great battle at Mutina upon
this day, where two noble Consuls at Rome named Hircius and Pansa, at that time
were slain in the field, for it was for an empire, and therefore they fought
Iustilie, for Cleopatra Queen of Egypt would feign be empress of Rome, Flor.
lib. 4
also Antonius seeking to please her, little exteemed his wife Octauia which
was Augustus sister, hence proceeded the cause of these civil wars, until
Antonius was with his lover Cleopatra vanquished.

The city of Jerusalem was upon this day besieged by Titus emperor of Rome,
at what time great multitudes of people came from every coast to the feast of
the unleavened bread, which at that time with great solemnity was according to
the commandment kept at Jerusalem: of the often inuation, spoil and
destruction of Jerusalem, you shall many times here, Joseph. 6.
for it was destroyed five times, first by the Egiptians, they by the
Chaldeans, and after by the Romans. etc.

The Frenchmen after many hard conflicts by the Germans, and the Germans by
the Frenchmen, as upon this day through the aid of the H^luetians vanquished
and overthrew the imperial army of Charles the fifth in Pedemontana at what
time the Frenchmen got such a victory yet to their smart, insomuch that Charles
the Emperor and Frances Valoys the French king, Pau. Iou.
were both contented to conclude a peace, 1544.

Leo the fourth Emperor of Rome, in the fifth and last year of his reign, at
the earnest suit and request of his Nobles, and also of the people, elected and
made his son Constantine the seventh of that name his fellow Emperor,
Onoph. and Funct.
to govern with him in the empite, which was the only sure way to stay
himself in the empire, being matched with his son, as it was the costome and
manner of the Roman Emperors to do. 776.

Philip a very y^ong man, in the 20. year of Lodowike ^urnamed Cra^sus was
crowned king of France upon the sixteen kalend of May, Funct.
which is the fourteen day of April, 1128.

The 15 Day.
THis was the seventh day and last of the feast called unleavened after the
Israelits passed through the red sea, and had given thanks to God for their
deliverance, they came to the wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and
Sinai, Exodus 15.
where they wandered three days, murmering against God and Moises, who took
them from the flesh pots of Egypt, at what time Quales covered their tents, and
Manna covered the ground, so GOD pleased then their humors, and yet were these
people not pleased.

Numa Pompilius the second king of Rome, instituted a feast to appease the
gods, at what time the plague fell upon their cattle, this feast was called
Fordicidia, in which feast it was not lawful for the priests to offer no
sacrifice but pregnantem bouem, Fordicidi^
at what time the Idols of their household gods which were called Lares, had
upon them a long robe made of Dogs skins, and crowned with a Garland made of
sweet flowers, to whom sacrifice was offered with corn and Frankencense, for
their Idols were kept in their houses and in their gardens, to drive sprites
away, and to watch their houses from any harm or danger that might happen in
the night time.

Pipinus son to Charles the great king of France, and Emperor of Rome, was
crowned king of Italy by his father, Onoph.
and Lodouicus surnamed Pius his other son, who succeeded him both in the
Empire and in the kingdom of France, was made king of Aquitania, 781.

Romanus Argyropylus Emperor of Constantinople, Cedr.
when he had reigned five years and six months, died upon this day, Iustine
says, that he was through treason drowned, where he hathed himself, 1033.

Henry the sixth of that name, was crowned Emperor of Rome by Pope Celestinus
with great pomp and solemnity, this was son to Frederick surnamed
Barbarossa, who reigned 38 years Emperor, O^oph.
during which time this Henry was crowned king of Rome. 1191.

Balduinus first Earl of Flaunders, Funct.
and after was elected Emperor of Constantinople, after he had reigned scant
one year, Justin.
leaving the Empire to his brother Henry, who succeeded him and reigned after
him six years, 1205.

I find in some Chronicle, that Charles the seventh king of France, as upon
this day gave a great overthrow to the Englishmen in Normandy, but it was
well requited, for Henry the sixte king of England, o^n. Til.
in the tenth of this Charles his reign, was crowned king of France in their
chief Church at Paris, Functius could say no less with wounds and calamities
enough to requite the first overthrow, so that Victor became Victus, 1450.

The 16 Day.
I Find not much that were done upon this day worth the writing, Functius.
saving of the death and election of some Bishops of Rome, amongst whom
Anicetus the tenth bishop of Rome suffered death under the emperor Seuerus,
this Bishop instituted that no priest should have a beard, nor let his hatre to
grow long, 160.

Lodowicke County of Helsfenstein was most cruellye murdered and slain in an
uproar of the Country men in Sueuia, Sleid.
but after they were like sheep slain in many places of Germany for the
same, 1525.

I read that in Scythia they were wont to celebrate a feast once a year, in
the month Thargelion, to worship and to honor Mars his sword, in the which
beside the sacrificing of a horse, they used this ceremony, to lay the sword
of Mars called Acinax, as Mercuries sword was called Harpen, upon a pile of
wood, unto the which the Scithians did more reverence then to any of their
other gods, and did sacrifice unto this sword of every 100, prisoner one, as
the beasts were saficed, but in this manner, first they powered wine upon the
heads of the prisoners that should be slain in sacrifice after they took them
into a certain great vessel, where they were slain, and from thence carried
to the place where Mars his sword was put up, and taking the blood of the
sacrificed men, they powered it upon the sword of Mars for among the Scythians
the chief service is to drink of the blood of the first man that they kill of
their enemies, and to bring his head to the king, of whose scull if he be a
great man the king does drink of.

The 17 Day.
Upon this day the Jews were wont to celebrate a feast in memory of their
Passover which they used for a long time after the departing of the Israelites
out of Egypt: this was called Festum vincite in remembrance of the noble
victory and glorious triumph they had over Pharo with all his peers, nobles,
and all the force and power of Egypt, at what time the read sea was appointed by
God to make an end of Pharos tyranny, and to give his people victory.

Felicianus with his naked sword in his hand most cruelly wounded Carolus king
of Hungary being at meat, at one table with him, and had then slain him had
he not bin saved by the company which were with him conversant at the Table.
1330.

Martin Luther being as on this day before Charles the 5. and all the states of
Germany, Munst. lib 3.
showed and opened the falshod the abominations and wickendes of the Roman
religion, of their indulgences, and defended most syncerely this religion.

It is written that as upon this day the sea brake into Flanders, and drowned
an hundred thousand people beside the loss of Cattels infinite number, the like
has not bin seen before, as Munster affirms.

he 18 Day.
THe feast Equiria was celebrated with great solemnity at Rome as upon this
day in Circo maximo with other pastimes and plays called Circenses ludi, which
were always appointed to perform some vows made for victory obtained. Call.
Romans
In this feast Equiria the Romans used after the race and running of horses or
mules, to tie flax to Foxes tails, and then to fire it, and to let them run
and play their parts among the people with much mirth and sport, which they
call Vulpium combustio, the burning of the Fox.

Gregory the fifth of that name pope of Rome, who jointly with Otto the second
of that name Emperor, appointed and ordained first the electors of Germany
that should make choice of their Emperor so that by Otto the second and
Gregory the fifth this order of election was made, 1001.

Mar. Scotus affirms that at the feast of Easter Jerusalem was taken and
destroyed by Titus the emperor, at what time two hundred thousand Jews
perished by sword and famine an hundred thousand sold, Mar. scot.
and nintie thousand dispersed into all parts of the world.

Upon the 14. Calend of May the old Druydes used their sacrifice which was
under an oak whereon grew Messelden, there they caused diverse and sundry
kinds of meat for their feast and two white bulls to be brought forth bound,
the priest being the sacrificer all clad in white should clime up to the tree
The sacrifice of the Druides.
with a bill, or an axe in his hand to cut off the Messelden from the tree,
then offered they their sacrifice to the Gods upon an altar which they made,
and laying their hands upon the altar according to their custom offered
Messelden, supposing it to be a sure remedy for all kind of poison, and also
a present cause in their beasts being barre^ to become, fruitful. After
sacrifice done they sat under the oak, and held their feast with their
ceremon^es according to the custom and Laws of the old Druydes, which were
of all people most superstitious, for in all Countries their chief and
greattest men of honor in old time were religious men as among the Persians
Magi, among the Ethiopians Gymnosophistae, among the Scythians Agrippei, these
were honored as gods in their country, for without the council and advise
of these men no man in their countreies would presume to take any thing in
hand, these were of such great credit and of such honor as you have heard
before of the aucthorities of the Priests in Egypt, of Augurers in Rome, and
of the old Philosophers in Greece, they appointed their feasts, and they
instituted their Sacrifice, and all other Ceremonies belonging unto their
Gods.

The 19 day
ONe of the three days in which the Israelites were in the wilderness of Sur,
and found no water that they might drink for it was so bitter, Exodus 15
until the Lord showed unto Moses a tree which he commanded to be cast into
the water, and so the waters were made sweet.

Upon the 24. day of the month called Nisan, which is the ninteenth of
April, at the great Hidekill which is Tigris in profane histories appeared to
Daniel at even, a man clothed in linen, whose loins were girded up with fine
gold of Uphaz, his body like unto the Turkis stoane, his face was like
lightning, his eyes were like unto flames of fire, his arms and his feet were
like in color to pollished brass, and his voice was like unto the voice of a
great multitude, he instructed Daniel concerning the kings of Persea, of
Greece, of Egypt and of Syria, their continuance and end, their wars and
government, etc. read Daniel who is the very ground and center of all true
chronicles concerning the three last monarchies of the world.

Otto the eight Emperor of Rome after he had slain Galba, and invaded the
Empire, was by Vitellius at that very instant made Emperor, who by the armies
of the Germans, was discomfited in a light skirmish at Hebriacus for very
sorrow and grief smote himself into the heart with his own dagger as upon
this day when he had reigned but 86. Eutrop. 7.
years and 15. days,

Phocas who s^ue and succeeded Mauritius the good Emperor, between these two
Emperors was great difference, the one governed the empire discreetlie and
most happy, the other brought the empire by his slouthfulnes and lechery into
such weakness and infamy that nothing remained sound, but the naked name of
an Emperor, and therefore was burned by Heraclius in a village not far from
Constantinople, but Gerardus mercator refers it to the 27. of March, whereof
also I remember to make mention.

Philip surnamed Pulcher the 45. king of France en^ised Guide the Earl of
Flaunders to send his daughter to Paris and willed 30 Noble men and 30
gentlewomen to accompany her thither, promising to marry her, whom he
welcomed in this sort, he drowned the Earls daughter with her thirty
gentlewomen and hanged 30. noble men, Cron. reg. Franc.
and within a while after the Earl of Flaunders him self was taken by
deceipte of Carolus phillips brother, and had the like entertanment, hereby
grew great and terrible wars, in so much that philip was justly deprived out
of his kingdom.

This day among the Egyptians was recorded in the books of their pries^es at
Memph^s called of the Romans Egyptiacus dies.

The 20 day
THe Senators were wont to meet altogether as upon this day in the Capitol,
Romulus
and there both dined and supped that night, feasting and banqueting in the
honor of Romulus their first founder and first King. Upon this day it was not
lawful to kill any beast for sacrifice, they kept it so solemn and so
religious, for Romulus was so favored among the old Romans, that long after
his death they named him Quirinus and sacrificed unto him under that name.

Constantinus the fifth surnamed Capronimus so called ^or that he defiled his
crisme at the font when he was baptized signum impietatis futurae, as Iustine
says, this was the son of Leo Isaurius, Pant lib. 4 Justin.
who abolished Idols and Images, this Capronimus as upon this day, was by his
father created Emperor with him to govern, 720.

Mauritius Emperor of Constantinople a Cappadocian borne, of a poor Notarie
became Emperor, vanquished the Persians, and the Armenians, he repressed the
Longobards in Italy, Justin. and Scotus.
and with many more victories governed the empire with both courage and wisdom,
but for his extreme avarice, not paying unto the soldiers their wages, he
with his two sons Theodosius and Tiberius were slain by Phocas that
succeeded him, as upon this day, of this he was admonished in sleep by a
dream, as Iustine and Scotus affirms, 603.

Heraclius the son of Heracleona, Emperor of Constantinople, upon this day
got a triumphant victory over the Persians, with fire and sword both in
Persia and in Medea, he let lose Roman captives and prisoners 50 thousand, he
persecuted their king Cosroes into Media, burning and killing: this Heracli^s
was the only scourge of Persea, Diac. lib. 2 Functius.
during whose time Cosroes could never govern his kingdom, neither stay in
Persea, but from place to place persecuted by Heraclius, until Cosroes was
slain by his own son Hormisda, to get his kingdom.

The 21 Day.
PLutarche in the life of Romulus affirms, that the building of Rome began
upon this day, Plut. Solin. cap. 2.
and that Romulus proportioned and measured the compass of the walls, and
settled down the plot of the city, which was in the beginning but a little
thing, and upon that very day that Romulus began to build Rome, Numa Pomp. the
second king that suceeded him, was borne in Cures a town of the Sabines.

Palilia festa in the honor of the goddess Pales was celebrated of the
Shepherds before the building of Rome by Romulus* The Shepherds used in the
dawning of this day, to deck and to adorn the sheepefolde with green bows
and branches, and with green turffes, with diverse kind of flowers. Likewise
they cast squibbes and such other pretty de^ises, with fire, with much sport
and pastime, which feast of Shepheardes according to their custom was kept,
and solemnly celebrated upon the same day that Rome was builded, in the which
feast it was not by the law of Numa Pomp. lawful to offer any sacrifice of
blo^d unto Pales the goddess of Shepherds that day, for in those feasts that
either a great city was builded or a great prince borne, no beast might be
kilde, no blood might be sacrificed, Plin. lib. 18. cap. 26.
neither lawful once to name the peculiar god of that place, altogether like
to the feast of Natalitia, which is the feast of Natiuities, and also like to
the feast Terminalia, which is celebrated to the God of Confines. The sacrifice
in this feast among the Shepherds, were wafers, garlike, and new wine boiled.
This was first instituted by Romulus, by the name of Natalitia, and Pallilia
was celebrated by the Shepherds before Rome was builded.

In the 1000. year after the building of Rome, Philippus the first Christian
Emperor of Rome, together with his son Philip began their reign, in the
second of their Empire some say they made great preparations and great
solemnities of games and shows at Rome, with such pomp and magnificence, as
the like had not been seen since the Consuls time, he celebrated the games
called Seculares ludi, Eutrop. lib. 9.
which were the only plays of pomp and magnificence, and were with great
solem^itie plaide, and it was the last time that Ludi seculares were plaide in
Rome, for those plays were but sildome plaide.

Probus the 36. Emperor of Rome, after he had reigned six years and three
months, a stout and a just Emperor, expert in warfare and courteous in
behavior, he was the last Emperor that triumphed in Rome, afterward he was
slain at Syrmiu^ in an uproar which grew among the Soldiers in an Iron tower,
as Scotus affirms: Just. de vit. C^s.
but Onophrius refers it to the 2. of December.

The renowned prince king Henry the seventh, after long sickness deceased
at Richmond, as upon this day, but of some referred to the 22. of April after
he had reigned 23. years and eight months, and on the ninth of May he was
brought to Paul's with many Nobles, Knights, and Gentlemen, and a thousand
torches burning before him: and on the morrow was buried at Westminster on the
eleventh of May, in the new chapel which he had caused to be builded, 1508.

The 22 Day.
HOnorius the son of Theodosius reigned Emperor of Rome, in the same self
year that Arcadius reigned Emperor in Constantinople, and dyed as upon this
day, after he had reigned with Arcadius thirteen years, and with Theodosius
lunior which was Arcadius son sixteen years, Plat. Scot. Onoph.
in this Emperors time the book which the Jews call Talmud, was made by two
Rabbines of the Jews, as Platina and Scotus affirms, but Onophrius refers
it to the fifteen of August, 414.

As upon this day in the City of Florence in Italy, being upon the Sabbath
day, a company of factious Citizens called Pactiana, entered into the Church at
mass time, ran upon the house and family of Medeces, (...) Iulianus, and
wounded a Nobleman called Laurentius and many others, among whom Laurentius
escaped and made away with his weapon, and having some aid by his good
friends, presently fought with them, Volat. lib. 5.
took them and hanged a number of them to the very window of the town
court. As Volat in his fi^t book afmeth, 1478.

The 23 Day.
THe feast called Vinalia priora, was celebrated and solemnized in Rome upon
this day to Jupiter and to Venus, in this feast the Romans used to take the
first taste of their wine, and to consecrate certain vessels in sacrifice for
Jupiter against the feast day of Vinalia: Plin. lib. cap. 29.
of this feast I shall speak more in an other place.

Mahomet the false prophet of the Saracens, was borne upon this day being then
upon Friday, 593. and therefore the Arabians and the Sarazens observe fridaye
for their chiefest feast, Herod. 3.
and they honor that day as the Christians honor the Sabbath which is
Sunday, and they begin to acount their years from that day, as we do from the
year of our Lord and Savior, which they call Hegyra which is to them
peculiar, as to the Spaniards Era, or as indictions were now last the account
of the Romans, after their Lustrum or Consulatus.

Michael the fourth of that name, Emperor of Constantinople, son to
Andronicus Senior surnamed Palaeologus, was slain upon this day, 867.

The 24 Day.
AS upon this day, Plutar. in Camillo.
Troy a most famous city in Asia, was taken, after ten years terrible
wars between the Greeks and the Trojans, in this war died the most part
of the famous men that then flourished in all Greece and Asia, Volat. 4 lib. ^.
and that for one lewd woman named Helena. The history is so well known, that
I need not much to speak of it, yet others refer it to another day, which I
in an other place have laid down more at large, Anno mundi. ^783.

The Romans used as upon this day to celebrate an ancient feast called
Lustria festa, this feast had diverse kinds of uses, and was celebrated of all
kind of persons, the captains and the soldiers solem^ized this feast in this
sort. Lustria festa.
They sounded their trompets most pleasantly at every chief place in the
city, at what time they did view their armories, munitions, engines, and other
preparations for wars, and then came to the Temple of Mars, Call. Romans
and with great joy feasted and after they used sacrifice unto Mars. Another
kind of this viewing called Lustrum was used at the funeral of the dead
emperors great generalles that died in the wars, they would with great
funeral pomp three times compass the pile of wood being armed, and with
spears in their hands and shaking them with frowning looks at the pile of
wood, as it were upon an enemy of the country, for it was appointed to bury
the body of those Emperors, kings, and princes, they going procession like
about the hearse, wailing and lamenting the death of the Emperor, do sing most
tragical verses in mournful manners, shaking still their swords and spears,
and stamping the ground with their feet until the body be laid upon the pile,
then they threw all sweet flowers, spices and odors upon the body, and after
the burying, they take his ashes into several pottes and keep it, diverse
kinds of feasts be called Lustrum, of which I shall more at large show as
occasion serves.

The Carthaginians were vanquished in Sicilia by Timoleon the Corinthian in a
great battle, Plnt.
over whom he triumphed at Rome as upon this day.

The first king of France called Pharamundus was elected as upon this day,
419. at what time the Frenchmen were called Sicambri from the 86. of Olympiad
until Francus time, which was in the, 104. Olympiad, of this Francus they were
named Frenchmen. Triteui^s.


The 25 Day.
PLynt^ria festa which properly in Athens is solemnised unto Minerua upon the
25. of September, but sometime in Apr^^ and sometime in Iulie but the ceremony
is a like at all times, for the priests of Minerua called Praxiergides do take
from the image of this goddess al her raiment and jewels, and keep the image
close covered over, at what time certain secret sacrifice with hidden
ceremonies thereunto belonging were celebrated unto Minerua, in bathing and in
washing y^ image with sweet rose water, with decking of it again with diverse
kind of flowers, Plut.
with spices and delicate odors, for so it is named among the Athenians the
weshing feast, and compted unfortunate to do any thing, for that Minerua as
upon that day is not to be seen.

Also by Numa Pompilius the second king of Rome Rubigalia festa was instituted
in Rome, and upon this day celebrated in the second year of Numas reign, for
that time the corn should be weeded, which feast is celebrated out of the
city of Rome in the fields by Jupiters priests called Flamen Quirinalis,
Plin. 18.
the sacrifice that should be offered in this feast to Pales for Corn and for
cattle, was wine and frankensence powered upon the entraels of a dog, with
verses song unto the goddess Pales to prosper the corn and the cattle, and
to prefer the fruits of the fields.

Alcibiades after he had bin banished from Athens, for his careless and
negligent service at Siracasa, he went to Sparta, Plut. anno mundi 3549.
and conferred with the Lacedaemonians against his countrymen the Athenians,
yet by means of Thrasybulus, Alcybiades was received again into Athens with
great joy.

The famous city of Tripolis was by the Souldane, Pantal. 4.
and the Saracens upon this day subdued and overthrown, at what time all the
Christians were slain that dwell there or were at that war.

The 26 Day.
MOses and Aaron were commanded to number the Isra^lites in the wilderness the
number whereof came to 603550. that were about twenty years of age, and beside
the Levites which were 22000. died all in the wilderness for their
disobedience and their unthankfulness toward God only, Joshua and Caleb
excepted

The Temple at Jerusalem was begone as upon this day to be built by Zorobabel.
Nehemias and other infinite number of the Jews that returned from the
captivity of Fabilon, at what time they laid the foundation of the house of
God in the new moon of the second month and in the second year they Chap. 1.
were come to Jury and to Jerusalem of their vows and sacrifices read the
third of Esdras.

Marius Antonius surnamed the Philosopher was borne as Eutrop. 8.
upon this day in his time only the Romans were governed by two emperors at
one time, who with indifferent authority governed the empire, in whose time on
part of England received the faith.

Conradus the second of that name, a French man borne, was by Pope John the
second of that name, 1027. with great solemnity and pomp at Rome crowned
Emperor, and his brother Gebardus for that he rebelled against the Emperor
his brother, was compelled to be a Muncke. Conradus created then his own
son king of Rome in the second year of his reign.

The 27 day
OT to the fourth of that name was crowned Emperor by y^ consent of all the
princes of Germany by pope Innocentius the fourth in contempt of Philip the
son of Frederick Barbarossa brother to Henry the sixte, who then governed
the Empire. Onoph.
This Otto married Philip daughter, and reigned four years, invaded Sicilia,
and did much injury unto the church, wherefore Pope Honorius excommunicated
him.

I can find no great thing written upon this day.

The 28 day
THe feast called Floralia was at Rome upon this day celebrated, this feast was
commanded by the books of Sibilla, with great honor and solemnity to be
kept, at what time the Romans were wont to sacrifice unto their goddess Flora
all kind of flowers and fruits that the earth yielded most devoutly and
religiously craving Flora to prosper and to increase all things in their
fields and elsewhere abroad, Pantal. lib. 4.
516* after the building of Rome.

Likewise the old Romans celebrated great games and solemn shows called Ludi
celebres, these plays endured until the fourteeuth of May, for these plays
which the Ediles used upon the Theaters when it pleased them, for all other
plays saving the plays of Ludi celebres, and Ludi Liberales had their days
and times appointed by the law of the high bishop, and by the Priests flamines.

Syuius Otto was borne as upon this day in the 34. year after Christ as
Functius noted in his tables of the Emperor of Rome, at what time Aruntius
Camillus and Domitius Aenobardus were Consuls at Rome, this after invaded by
killing of Galba the seventh Emperor of Rome, Eutrop. 7.
when that Galba had reigned but seven months, and even so Otto was by
Vitellius in like sort vanquished within 95. days of his reign, at what time
Otto as you heard of his death, in another place, thrust himself into the heart
with his own dagger,

As upon this day, 518. Fla. Valerius Emperor of Constantinople, surnamed by
the Grecians Dicoros, for that he had one black eye, and the other graie, was
stricken by a thunderbolt and died after he had reigned 27* years, this
Emperor was by the persuasion of his wife much addicted to the monstrous
heresy of Eutichianus, Mar. scot.
some say this emperor died the tenth of Iulie.

The 29 day
A Great ceremony according to the custom of the Romans were celebrated as
upon this day to the goddess Vesta in mount Palatine, where sometime Romulus
the founder and first king of Rome dwelt. No^id. in fast.


Decius the 29 emperor of Rome borne at Bubalia in Hungaria, in whose time the
8. persecution began, he persecuted the christians so extremely, that he made
an act that all that worshipped Christ should be slain, but he and his son
called also Decius in the wars against the Goths were slain, some wrote
that he was drowned in Thracia in the river Abricium, some wrote that he was
swallowed into the earth by an earthquake, Eutrop. 6. Funct.
and some say that he suncke in bogs and marish ground, his body could never
be found, he reigned two years.

The 30 Day.
ARcadius Emperor of Constantinople dividing the Empire between Honorius, who
then was made Emperor and himself: this Arcadius following his wife Eudoxias
council, fell into such hatred that his own Tutor Rufinus conspired his death
with Alaricus king of the Goths, but Rufinus treason was found, and therefore
he was slain, Caianus attempted the like treason, and was likewise slain:
this Arcadius banished that godly and learned man John Chrysostom Bishop of
Constantinople, and after he had reigned thirteen years died upon this day,
leaving behind him Theodosius Junior his son to succeed him.

A great terrible earthquake was in Italy upon this day, at what time Charles
the great the first Emperor and king of that name, Lycosth. de prodij^.
was at Spoletum, this earthquake did much harm not only in Italy, but also
in France and Germany. 802.

The names of those Consuls and Captains that had their triumphs granted
them by the Senators at Rome, within the month of April, are these that
follow.

1 Q. Martius Phillippus. 2 M. Valerius Max. 3 C. Sempronius Blesus. 4 S.
Caruilius Max. 5 P. Posthumi^s Tubertus. 6 Agrippa Menenius Lanatus. 7 C.
Aurelius Cotta.
The names of the feasts and sacrifices celebrated with great solemnity in
Rome within this month of Apri^l.

Thargelia. Vernalia. Carnia. Fordicidia. Vincite. Equiria. Quirinalia. Agonia.
Palilia. Vinalia. Lustria. Plyntiria. Robigalia. Floralia.
The solemn games and plays in Rome within April are thus named.

Megalenses Ludi. Ludus Magnus. Ludi Cereales. Ludi Hastiles. Ludi Celebres.
Finis Aprilis mensis.
Of the month of May with the Hebrews called lair, their second month: with
the Atheniaus called Scyrophorion their last month: and with the Aegiptians
called Pachon their ninth month.
The first Day.
THis month of May is called with the Jews Iair, and the first day of May
is the 6 of Iair, and with the Athenians named Scyrophorion, Nouid. lib. 5.
this month in old time was consecrated unto Maia the mother of Mercurius, for
as upon this day in old Rome a temple was both consecrated and dedicated unto
Maia under the name of Bona dea: Mar. scot* lib. 12.
in this temple one of Vulcans priests called Flamen Vulcanalis, should offer a
Sow farrowing to Mercury and to this mother Maia.

The Romans used to sacrifice on this day, and with much solemnity they were
wont to offer upon the altars of their goddesses every goddess in her own
temple, and upon her own altar, diverse kinds of oblations and sundry orders
of sacrifices to their chief Idol, which they called Bona dea, another to
Fauna, another to Saturnus wife called Ops, and another to the goddess Fatua,
of these Macrobius in his first book, Macrob. lib. 1.
and Nouidius in his fifth book makes mention. Likewise they sacrificed to
their household gods called Lares, the order and description of their
ceremonies in these sacrifices I have expounded them in their places, the
Athenians also held a feast called Scyreum festum, in this feast none might be
but the Senators and chief men of the city of Athens, resembling much the
Jews feast called Palmarum festum, Vmbracula.
at what time they used to make them boothes of green branches, of palms, and
of Oken boughs: in like sort as the Romans kept the feast called Vmbracula, so
the Athenians kept their feast called Scyrea.

Put. Valerius Publicola (the first Consul of Rome after their kings,) upon
this day triumphed over the Sabines, and over the Uients, he was the first that
entered into Rome, triumphing upon a chariot drawn with four horses, the
victories of this noble Roman were many, Li^i^s. Plutarch.
for he had been four times Consul, a very discreet wiseman, he did in his
time set up some solemn games and feasts, and appointed sacrifices unto Pluto,
for he found in some of Sibils books that the oracles of Apollo were not fully
kept, who ever commanded feasts and sacrifices to be done to the gods, as
Liuius and Plutarch affirms, 278.

In like order triumphed Quintus Publius Philo being then P^oconsul of Rome
over the Samnits, and over the Palepolitans with great honor and solemnity at
Rome, and by the full consent of the Senators, for none might enter with a
triumph into Rome without the Senators had licenced the same, The triumph of Q.
pub.
so great was the authority of the Senate: this triumph was in the 427 year
after the building of Rome.

Leo, the son of Constantinus the fifth, surnamed Capronimus, Emperor of
Constantinople, after he had reigned five years, and had made his son
Constantinus the fixed of that name with the consent of the people emperor, to
govern jointly with him in the Empire, dyed as upon this day, 790.

Pipinus surnamed the short, was created king of France upon this day, 751:
This was son to Charles the great, and brother to Jews called Pius. This
Charles in his life time had made Lotarius his eldest son king of Italy, and
made this Pipinus his second Son king of Aquitania, Functius.
and made his third son called Jews king of the Noricans, as Functius
affirms, yet others varrie in this.

Bela the third, and 14 king of Hungary, died upon this day, after he had
reigned 23 years 1199.

The second Day.
THis day was taken for an unfortunate day among the old Romans, and so
recorded, that no man might marry upon this day, for among the Romans
certain days were prohibited to marry, called dies non n^p^iales, as
Macrobius makes mention.

M. Claudius Marcellus consul at Rome, in the which office he had been seven
several times, Plut.
and for his courage and prowes, the Romans called him ensem Romanum the
sweard of Rome, of whom Hanniball was wont to say, nec victorem nec victum
quietum habeo Marcellum, ^and also named him the Roman Hanniball as upon this
day triumphed over the Insubrians and over the people of Comenses, 557.

This day was the birthday of Frederick marquis of Brandenburge the son of
Albertus surnamed the Achilles Germanicus, upon the which day the Saracens were
overthrown Nouidi. 5.
by the Greeks in Thracia by sea.

The 3 Day.
THe Romans recorded this day diem Egyptiacum in their calenders, on the which
day the women of Rome might not lawfully go into the Chapel of the holy
cross, for the Egyptians had two unfortunate days, in the which the priests
of Egypt had commanded, that nothing should be attempted on those days, the
Romans being as superstitious as they, observed these two days with like
reverence as the Egyptians did, as Nouidius affirms.

Mahomet the second of that name, and the sixth Emperor of the Turks as upon
this day sent three several armies, Paul. Io^.
the first to Italy, the second to Rhodes, and the third to Egypt, in which
army he was present himself, this Emperor affected the whole world, and
therefore began in Greece with the empire of Constantinople, which he besieged
and subdued, and after died at Bythinia of the Colicke, 1481.

The city of Constantia was most lamentably burned as upon this day, 1314.
upon the which time also happened such an earthquake in Polonia that many
towns fell, Chron. 7.
and much cattle lost not without the destruction of many people, 1200.

The 4 day
Upon this day in the city of Rome were great games and solemn shows which
continued 6. days, either in remembrance of any great victory had over the
enemy, or in memory of some kingdom gotten to the Empire of Rome, or for some
great fortune past. Call. Romans
The Romans were wont upon those days to celebrate with great pomp and
solemnity games or plays called Ludi magni, as these games Circences,
Cereales, Seculares, and yet counted one of the unfortunate days among the
Romans.

Aulus Manlius being then consul of Rome, when he had waged battle against
Phalisa a wealthy city in Italy, Liui.
he wan it within 9. days siege, where he slew 15. thousand, the residue he
granted life unto, over whom he had a triumph granted by the Senate, 512.

Anacletus the third bishop of Rome, the successor of Linus who succeeded Peter
the Apostle (if at any time Peter was bishop of Rome) this Anacletus reigned
Bishop 12. years Onoph.
and two months, he ordained that a Bishop should be consecrated by the three
Bishops, and a priest should be made by one Bishop.

Carolus the second of that name king of Neaples after he had reigned 25. years
died, after whom succeeded Robertus, 1308.

The 5 day
Upon this day Noah had warning to make the arc as God commanded him saying,
make thee an arc of Pine tree, pitch it within and without, the length thereof
shall be 300. Cubits, the breadth 50. and the height of the arcke shall be
thirty, etc. a window of a cubite length, and two doors in the side of the
arc, Genes. 6
and three loftes one above another.

Carolus the great, and first of that name king of Frannce, and after emperor
of Germany, was entreated by Pope Hadrian the first of that name, and the 29.
pope to come unto Italy against the Longobards, who much molested the Roman
state, at what time Charles overthrew their army and banished Desiderius their
king, who after yielded himself to Charles, and so finished the kingdom of
the Longobards, which continued in Italy 204 years, Pantal. 6.
and brought them subject to the crown of France.

Cazimirus king of Polonia in the 25. year of his reign was by treason
poisoned, and on this day died, 1194. This Cazimirus had four provinces within
Russia he vanquished the Prussians and brought the Russians subject to
Polonia, Funct.
as Functius says.

Augustinus first a great philosopher and then a great heretic being the
reader of the rhetoric lector in Millaine, by often hearing of Ambros his
sermons then Bishop of Millaine, and by often conferring was converted upon
this day as Vincentius affirms unto Gods church, and became the only doctor
of the Latin church, at what time reigned in Rome Gratianus and Valentianus
emperors, 373. Vincentius says that he was after disciple to Ambrose, and
was made bishop of Hipponia in Africa.

The 6 Day.
Upon this day Pau. Iouius affirms that the city of Rome together with pope
Clement the 7. of that name was taken Pau. Iou.
and spoiled by the imperial army of Germany by the Spaniards aid, at what
time Charles duke of Burbonie, was shot through and ^laine at that assault.

The 7 day
(...) Ides of May are consecrated laride^. to the household Gods, at what time
they used solemn (...) with such (...) and ceremonies as upon this day the
bakers of Rome did use, to crown their Asses with bread made of dough, and
made garlandes likewise of Oken boughs about their Asses necks, and in the
which feast the bakers of Rome were wont to sacrifice unto their domestical
Idols called Lares, new bread and fine flower, this was a great festiual day
among the bakers and with great solemnity in Rome observed.

Cai^s Sulpitius Petitus having bin three several times consul at Rome and
after made dictator who in his office of Dictatorship did triumph over the
Gauls being afterward called Frenchmen.

Likewise Q. Fabius Vibulanus an excellent Roman of that time before ten
Commissioners called Decemuiri were created seven years, and within 50 years
of the last overthrow Plutar.
of Torquinus Superbus the seventh and last king of Rome triumphed over the
people called Aqui, 294. years after the building of Rome.

Titus the son of Vespasian the emperor a man worthy of admiration, and full
of good virtues called homini delici^ being with his father at the assaulting
of Jerusalem, shot 12. arrows and ^lue with every arrow one of the Jews, he
was wont to say that day was lost in the which he gave nothing, for he would
say that no man ought to depart from an emperor sad or sorrowful, upon this
day through his great agillit^e and courage, Josephus.
first won the walls, for Jerusalem was strongly walled by reason of so long
wars, for it was five times conquered.

Otto the second son to Otto the first Emperor of Germany was elected king
at Vuormatia, and was crowned Emperor at Rome, and reigned with his father 6,
years and after his fathers death 10. years he married Theophania daughter to
Io. Zimisces Emperor of the Grecians for the emperor of Constantinople was so
called, he subdued Henry duke of Bauaria, and had good success against the
Greeks and also against the Saracens, he wasted and spoiled the most part of
Bohemia he brought his arm^e against Lotarius the 33. king of France, he
burned and destroyed unto the very city of Paris, and also burned the
suburbs of Paris, he died at Rome, poisoned by the Italians for his too much
severity (...) government as is thought, 984.

Likewise Ladislaus the third, and son to Emericus the 16. king of Hungaria,
after he had reigned scant one year, died as Functius says the seventh
Calend of September, Bonfinus affirms that he reigned 16. years, who in this
is before Functius to be believed, Bonf. lib. ^
for his decades do entreat only of Germany.

The 8 Day.
THis day was an unfortunate day among the Romans, for the first day of every
month after the Nones, Gel. lib. 5.
is recorded unlucky, for some great overthrow which the Romans upon this day
sustained.

The Uirgins of Rome as upon this day, in the temple of S. Michael, used in
old time to be married, for that the Romans suppose that Michaell the
Archangell appeared in that Nouid. 5.
place where they then builded and dedicated a temple in memory thereof in the
suburbs of Rome, and therefore all the maids of Rome made choice of this day
to marry.

Henry son to Frederike the second of that name, Emperor of Germany, being
yet but a boy in Colonia, was by his father the emperor caused to be crowned
king of Rome, Ger. Mer.
and after sent him to Calabria to see good order and peace kept, 1222.

As upon this day Letters came from Artaxerxes king of Persia, unto
Themistocles at Magnesia, to leauie soldiers, to assemble Captains, and
charging him straightly to have an eye to the Grecians army, according to his
promise made unto Artaxerxes when he was banished from Athens, at what time he
was taken into such favor with the king of Persia, as he granted unto
Themistocles the revenues of three great cities of Asia, for his allowance of
bread, wine, and vittels, these three cities were Myontia, Lampsacus and
Magnesia, where Themistocles was when these letters came from the king, but
after Themistocles had wayed the charge of Artaxerxes, he resolved with
himself in this sort. After secret sacrifice unto the gods, and solemn feast
made unto his friends, first to keep promise with the king of Persia, to whom
he promised his service during his life against the Gretians, Themistocles
dies.
and therefore he resolved to die like a true Grecian, for his promise was but
during life, for he manfully drank Bu^^ blood mingled with poiso^, and dyed
least he might seem to s^aine the glory of the Athenians, or hinder Cimon of
his victories and triumphs which he was like to have over the Persians at that
time.

The 9 Day.
AS upon this day at night the Romans used great sacrifices and ceremonies for
three several nights one after another, Nouid. lib. 5.
to purge and to cleanse their houses from sprites that walked in the night
time called Lemures, and therefore they solemnized and dedicated feasts to
those sprits called Lemuria ^octurna, to drive those sprites from their houses,
supposing by their sacrifices to appeace them.

As on this day being the 14. of the second month ^air, they which were
defiled by a dead man or any other way vnclean^ should keep the passover unto
the Lord, for they were deferred for their uncleanness from the 14. day of the
first month, until the 14 of the second month, and they should eat it with
unleavened bread and sower herbs as the Lord had commanded, Deuteronomy. 9.
also they should leave none of it until the morning, nor break any bone of
it. After that Ezechias had proclaimed throughout all Israel from Beerseba to
Dan, that they should come and ^ould the feast of the passover at Jerusalem
the 14. day of the second month, 2. Chro. 30
the Leuits slew the passover the same day, and brought in the burnt offerings
unto the house of the Lord, in this feast E^echias king of Judah gave 1000 young
Oxen, and seven thousand sheep to the congregation, and his Lords gave also
1000 Oxen and 1000 sheep, and so in this feast a great number of the Priests
and of the Le^^ts were sanctified, (...) there was great gladness and joy in
Jerusalem.

The 10 Day.
AS upon this day, Clau. Tiberius Nero the third Emperor of Rome, son to
Liuia Augustus wife by her first husband, triumphed over the Germans the
Illyrians, the Dalmatians and over the Pannonians, and after this great
triumph fell to all kind of lasciviousness, Funct. Eutrop. 7.
in so much that he became in such contempt with the people that instead of
Tiberius Nero they called him Biberius Mero, and he commanded that the chief
city of Cappadocia called Mazaca should be called Caesarea after him.

Tiberius Claudius son to Drusus and uncle to Caligula the fifth Emperor of
Rome, was borne upon this day, Funct. chron.
on the which day Camillus a Roman was proclaimed emperor in Dalmatia by the
Soudliors, and upon the fifth day after he was slain by the same self
Soldiers.

The 11 Day
COnstantinople before time called Byzantium, a noble city in Thracia, was as
upon this day after her second building, finished in the 20 year of the reign
of Constantine the great, and in all points made equal to Rome, and by some
called Noua Roma, Cedr. Funct.
but he named it Constantinople after his own name, he rebuilded a new the
city Drepana in Bethanya, and named it Helenopolis after his mothers name
which was named Helena.

Lotarius son to Lewis surnamed Pius the 24 king of France, and the second
Emperor of Rome of a Frenchman, after that his father Lewis the godly dyed,
Lotarius succeeded him in the Empire, but his two brethren rebelled against him
Lewis and Charles surnamed Caluus, a battle was fought between them at
Fon^oniacus, where after the shedding of much blood they concluded a peace,
Pant. lib. 3
Lotarius should hold Italy, and the empire, Charles should be king of
France, and Jews should govern Germany and Hungeria, 824.

The 12 Day.
IN the 600 years of Noach life, and in the 17. day of the second month,
entered Noah with his three sons, Sem, Cham, and Iaphet, and their three wives
into the arc: Come thou and all thy house (said the Lord to Noah) to the arc,
for thee have I seen righteous in this generation, and take of every clean
beasts seven and seven, the male and his female, but of the unclean cattle
take two, the male and the female, of fowls of the air seven, and seven the
male and the female, to keep seed a live on earth, ^enes. 7.
and they came two and two, male and female, into the arc as God had
commanded them.

In Athens as upon this day, a great feast was solemnlie kept and celebrated
in the memory of the most famous and glorious victory at Mantinaea the chief
city of Arcadia, the glory thereof fell to the Thebans, Plut.
through the prowisse and courage of Epam^ondas their general.

Lu. Cornelius Maluginenses, then Consul at Rome, triumphed over the Voli^cans
and the Antiates, Call. Romans
after which triumph the triumphant banquet was celebrated with great pomp
and solemnity from Bellonas temple unto the Capitol, in the 294. year after
the building of Rome.

Charles king of France, having subdued the Neopolitans, entered into the
City of Naples with a most solemn triumph, Functius.
with great pomp and honor most sumptuous and rich in his imperial robes,
but he was troubled by the Venetians and by the power of Millaine in his
return from Neapoles to France, this Charles had married a Duches of England,
espoused before to Maxilian the Emperor.

The 13 day.
THis was the third and last day of the feast Lemuria, at what time the men
and the women celebrated a feast with great pomp and solemnity, according to
the old and ancient rites and ceremonies of the Romans for feasts and
sacrifices were the only means they used to appease their gods, for every
victory or triumph they had they celebrated a feast in memory of that day, and
for every overthrow they received they recorded that to be a most unfortunate
day.

The Romans began their games and plays as upon this day, which were called
Persici ^udi, which continued for the space of five days in memory of the
victories which the Romans obtained against the Persians, Call. Pet.
over whom triumphed T. Flaminius with great pomp, and after him again
triumphed P. Aemilius with wonderful great regal solemnity.

The temple of Pantheon was as on this day consecrated at Rome with great
solemnity, Nouid^. 5.
upon whose alter cherries and beans were offered in sacrifice, etc.

Also the Jews do celebrate a solemn feast in memory of the great plague, in
the which died 3000. learned Jews: as upon this day ended this feast which was
kept by the Jews 30. days after their feast called Manupulorum festum.

The 14. Day
LEwis the eleventh king of France overthrew the Pantal. 5.
Uenetians as upon this day in a great and terrible battle at Bondinum, where
8000. Italians were slain.

Cleomenes king of Sparta being taken of Ptolomi king of Egypt in the wars was
put in prison, but Cleomenes brake the prison in Alexandria, but when he saw he
could not escape the hands of the king (after much slaughter within the town)
exhorted his company which were but thirty in number to die like men by their
own hands and not by the enemy saying, let not Fortune triumph over
fortitude, which being performed, and the news brought to Ptolomie, he
caused the body of king Cleomenes to be hanged up upon a Cross and commanded
also his body their to be kept and watched, the watch at length espied a
serpent wreathed about his head, and coueres all his face, in so much that no
ra^^ning foul durst come near him, the king fell to so super^^icious a fear
that he had offended the Gods, that hereup^on he with his nobles and all the
Ladies of the court began to make many sacrifices of purification, Plutar.
making also their prayers and supplications unto Cleomenes as unto ademie God,
calling him the son of the Gods, with sacrifising of diverse oblations in the
very place, of execution so supersticious and blind, were those Egyptians in
religion toward their gods.

The 15. day
FRom the deserts of Sinay the children of Israel departed upon the twenteeth
day of the second month, and rested in the wilderness of Pharan, at what time
the Lord commanded Moses to make two trompets of silver to call the
congregation together when y^ camp should journey: these trompets should be
sounded also on their feast days in the beginning of their months, Number 10.
they were likewise commanded by the Lord to sound these trompets over their
burnt sacrifices and peace offeringes.

The Romans used sacrifice after their heathenish custom upon this day to
Jupiter feretrum, and upon the which day they were wont to make Images of
rushes, called scyrpea simulacra to offer upon the Altar of their Idols, when
none might celebrate sacrifice, or approach nigh to any of the sacred altars
before he had sprinkled his body with clean water, and had upon his head a
crown of laurel consecrated by Jupiters Priest called Flamen dialis, Flamen.
to whom the sacrifice was solemnised: besides he should be instructed in the
secret mysteries of the hidden ceremonies belonging to the sacrifice.

Upon this day God Mercury was born, to whom the Romans builded a Temple in
a place called Circus maximus there they celebrated a great solemn feast,
Liuius.
and used sacrifice, and appointed sundry games and plays, and all kind of
exercise both on horseback and on foot, and at that very feast they kept
mercatorum ferias, the Merchants feasts, where they offered oblations and
sacrifices in the honor of God Mercury.

The ten magistrates of Rome called Decemuiti upon this day after they were
first created and the laws of the twelve tables brought from Ath^ns to Rome,
came with great pomp and glory to the market place of Rome having an 120.
sariants bearing maces, and (...) before them as though they were ten kings,
thereby grew sedition in the city for their pride, Liui. dec. 1. lib. 3.
^ust, rape, and other wicked dealings which were intolerable, they were put
down after they had by force governed 3. years more like to ten tirants or ten
Torquins then to ten civil magistrates.

C. Plautius proculus Consul at Rome, triumphed over the Hernices, with whom
Marcus Fabius Ambustus was made Consul, at which time the Torquinians (so
called for that they held with Torquinius the proud) offered 307. Roman
soldiers being taken prisoners, Liui.
in the way of sacrifice, I mean killed them most cruelly and offered their
blood up insacrifice to the furies called Eumenides, but they were well
requited, for so many Torquinians were at an other time slain and sacrifised
in the maket place at Rome.

Valentinianus Junior the third of that name as Iustine affirms, which was by
the soldiers proclaimed emperor being but a boie, after his fathers death was
by Maximus, that then was made emperor of Britain by the soldiers driven
out of the empire to Theodosius, Functius
and after a while through the treason of Eugenius was slain, but herein
writers do much vary.

On this day Rodulphus surnamed Burgundus died being the 31. king of France
after he had reigned two years by himself, then Lodowick with his mother
returning from England whither before they fled for succor, is restored to his
kingdom again. Funct. affirms that he died the first callends of June.

Also the Christians besieged Nicea a cit^ie of Stria for this time the
Saracens had scattered themselves not only in Asia and Afric* but also unto
Europe but they were met withal in all places by the Christian Princess and
fought with all with many overthrows given unto them, ^uil. Tyr.
1097.

The 16 Day.
THis is one of the days that Titus the Emperor besieged and wan the inner
part of the wall called of the Jews Acran, where the Romans set up their
ensigns and advanced themselves upon the walls, at what time a great
slaughter was made in Jerusalem by Titus.

Vratislaus The first king of Bohemia was crowned as upon this day being the
17. kalend of June by the bishop of Treuira called Eugelbertus in the chief
church of Praga, who died by a fall from his horse within few days after the
coronation, after whom succeeded his brother Conradus, Chron. pol. 3.
who reigned king of Bohemia for the space of seven months.

Conradus the second of that name and son to Henry the fourth emperor of
Germany, was upon this day being then the feast of Pentecost crowned king of
the Romans at Aquisgraue by Hermanus archbishop of Collen.

The 17 Day.
Again the Israelites offended the Lord and the fire of the Lord burnt
amongst them and consumed them that were uttermost of the host, and Moses
prayed for the people and the fire stayed, they loathed Manna, which the Lord
reigned unto them from heaven, they desired the flesh of Egypt, the Cucumbers,
Melons, Leekes, Onions, and Garlike, and Moses was weary with the cry of the
people, (...). 11.
and he prayed unto the Lord for them and for himself, and the Lord eased
Moses of his chardge and caused him to bring 70. of the elders of Israel to
the tabernacle that they might have the spirit of Moses to govern the
congregation with Moses.

The 18. Day.
THe Romans record in their old Cale^ders that Jupiter Ammon their god, as
borne upon this day, Call. Romans
and therefore in memory of his birth they held a feast and used solemn
sacrifice. Alexander the great was made to believe by the priests of Ammon that
he was this Iupirers son, and therefore he commanded that he should be so
called.

Upon the 23 day of the second month, Simon the brother of Judas Machabeus
succeeded after his brother Jonathan, won the castle of Jerusalem, and entered
into it with thanks giving, with branches of palm trees in their hands, with
harps, Clouds, Cymbals, and Flutes, with Psalms and songs unto the Lord, 1.
Mac. 13
that they thus vanquished the power of Antiochus and Simon commanded that
this day for ever should be celebrated and kept with feasts and sacrifices in
memory of this success.

The noble Roman Titus surnamed Torquatus, for that he in a combat between a
Frenchman (who challenged any of the Roman army) and himself slew the
Frenchmen hand to hand in the sight of both the armies, and took his chain
all bloody from the Frenchmans neck, and put it about his own: he triumphed
after (being Consul of Rome) over the Latens, over the Campanians, over the
Arrunces, Liuius.
and over the Sidotians, with great pomp and glory at Rome, 413 years after
Rome was builded.

Solimane the tenth king of the Turks, sent 250 sails, and with them 40000
Soldiers, under the conduction of two great Captains, Bassa Mustapha and
Bassa Pyalis into the I Will Melita, Pau. Iou.
where the army of Rhodians horsemen defended it most valiantly, and gave at
that time a great repulse to the Turks, 1565.

Franciscus the first of that name, surnamed Valesius, was after many battles
had with Charles the fifth, sometimes Uictor and sometimes vanquished, Sabe^.
Plat.
and at last taken at Papia by the Emperor Charles, and after this peace
concluded, and Elenora the Emperors daughter married to Frauncis Valoys King of
France, others say that he married Claudia, Lewis the 11 his daughter, the
most writers affirm that the king of France was taken upon the 24 of
February, by the army of Charles the fifth, 1523.

Clemens the sixth of that name, and the 198 pope, was elected on this day, and
reigned pope ten years, this pope reduced the Iubiley into 50 years according
to the account of years, Sab. Plat.
for every seven year was the sabbath year with the Jews, and every seven
sabbath year was the year of the Iubiley according to Moses law, this
Clemens was a iollie pope he crowned Charles the fourth Emperor of Germany,
1342.

The 19 Day.
AT Athens upon this day the feast called Bendidia, was most solemnly kept and
celebrated in the ha^en of Pyraea in the memory of many great prises brought
into that haven, by Orators and noble great captains, as Themistocles,
Phocion, Pericles and others, for in sea victories Athens excelled all the
Cities in Greece: on the which day the Romans also celebrated a festival
No^id. lib. 5.
day for their advocates and pleaders in law called ^eri^ aduocatorum.

The Jews this time do offer unto the Lord two new loves, for harvest in Judea
is sooner then with us, for we are further from the Pole, almost twenty
degrees then Jerusalem is, but they being rebellious people, still forsook the
Lord though they received all blessings at his hand, yet were their minds of
the flesh of Egip^, crying for their belly, but while the flesh was yet
between their teeth, the wrath of God was kindled, and smote them with an
exceeding great plague, and the place was called where they were buried the
Grave of lust, Number. 11.
for they so murmured for meat, that God sent them Quails till they all
lothed it as they did Manna.

Mahomet the 2. of that name, and the s^xt emperor of the Turks, took
Calcides a great town of the i will of Nigropontus through treason, and most
cruelly slew and killed the inhabitants thereof, he invaded Siria took Eubaea
and banished Stephanus king of Mysia out of his kingdom, and used him before
he banished him as Cambises used the judge in Persea, left his skin behind,
Pant. lib. 5 Functius
this was a most cruel Turk, but he was requited with like measure by
Scanderberge, who then reigned king in Epirus, who curbed this T^rke, and
subdued him with many great victories.

The 20 day.
AFter the Israelits had departed from the graves of Lust unto Hazeroth, where
also Aaron and his sister Miria grudged against Moises their brother, Number. 12.
for the which M^ria was stricken with leprosy, and was at the prayer of
Moises healed, after she was shut out of the host for seven days, and then
removed the Israelits, and pitched in the wilderness of Pharan.

The feastiuall days called Agonalia were on this day celebrated at Rome,
Agonalia.
in this feast the Roman youths contended about masterie, at what time they
used al kinds of exercise for trial of agilitie, courage and strength, having
thereunto many kinds of Garlandes appointed for rewards unto the victors,
imitating the order and manners of wars, in scaling of walls, and assaulting
of Fortes, in fighting of battles, and such other military discipline, that
some were crowned with Laurel, some with Pine, some with Oken boughs, Call.
Romans
every Uictor bearing in his hand a branche of Palm in token of victory.

Frederick the second of that name Emperor of Germany, after that pope
Gregory the ninth had excommunicated Frederike for no cause, many conflicts
and great wars grew between the Pope and the emperor, the Archbishops of
Collen and Maguntia, drove this Frederick from his empire, and upon this day
elected Hen^ie Prince of Thuringia in his place as Emperor, but Frederike came
in by the sword, and took both the Cardinals and imprisoned them, and agreed
with the pope.

The 21 Day.
THe old Romans kept a festival day called Tubi^ustria, in the which feasts
the Magistrates met at the Capitol, and celebrated a solemn sacrifice unto
Vulcane, and after went about the city with sounding of trumpets at every
sacrifice they did, for then they offered in three several places, in the
first a sheep, in the second a sow, Nouid.
and in the third a Bull, to purge the City of Rome of their grievous
offenses, and thus they went about these sacrifices to please their gods,
Iosep. lib. 7
upon the which day also the Jews in Jerusalem were by Titus the Emperor, so
straightly shut in, that they looked but for the sword and fire.

Upon this day Lewis surnamed Pius king of France, and some to Charles the
great, after he had reigned 26 years, died, Prosob.
and was buried at Metis, 840. on the which day Phillip king of ^ispaine that
now is, and son to Charles the fifth was borne, 1527.

A fiery Dragon was seen at Lucerna a town in Helu^tia 1471, Lycosth. de
p^odigijs.
flyeng up and down in the air about the river Russus, after the which sight
ensued great wars called Bellum Sueuicum.

Christ Jesus our Savior ascended up to heaven upon this day, Merc.
being the 40. day after his glorious resurrection, being at that time the
last of May.

The fifth wonder that was seen before the destruction of Jerusalem was upon
this day, which seemed to be an host of men armed, running on horseback and
in chariots above the city of Jerusalem in the skies, a little before sun
setting.

The 22 day.
THe 27 day of the second month Noach came out of the arc, and his three
sons, Gen 9.
Sem, Cham, and Iaphet, and God blessed Noach and made a covenant with Noach
never to destroy the world again with water, in token hereof he sets his
bow in the clouds in memory of his promise.

A great solemn day among the Romans, at what time they with processions and
sacrifices went to visit their corn, this feast was called ^ustratio segetum on
the which day they builded up a temple, Call. Romans
and dedicated the same to the goddess Fortune that she might vouchsafe to
accept their processions and sacrifice and to prosper their corn.

Constantinus the great that good Emperor that favored the Christians and the
church of Christ after many great good things by him done, Pantal. 5.
died as upon this da^e at Nicomedia a city in Bithinia after he had reigned
31 years and had lived 66.

Lodowick the fourth of that name surnamed B^uarus, was most solemnly crowned
Emperor of Germany by all the Cardinals of Rome, in spite of pope John the
22. of that name in saint Peter's Chuch at Rome, for the Pope had elected
Friderick duke of Austria, Lodowick the 4.
and would have crowned him, and stood against the state of Germany, for the
space of 8. years wars did grow, in so much that Frederick was taken and
killed by Lodowick the fourth, 1327.

Henry the third surnamed Niger, son to Gerardus the second, who was by his
fathers means crowned king of the Romans as upon this day, and afterward by
consent of all the Princes of Germany was elected emperor who straight
invaded Bohemia and subdued them, Functius.
he plagued Hungaria, spoiled their country and subdued two of their chief
cities, and restored their king whom they had driven out of his kingdom
again, 1054.

The 23 Day.
CRunnus the Prince of Bulgaria gave a great overthrow to the Christians as
upon this day at Adrinopohs a town which Adrian the Emperor builded, and
called it after his own name, about which time Mahomet the 2. went, to Rode
upon this day with an infinite number of soldiers, and there played the
cruel tirant for three months both on sea and upon land besieged Rhode, and
seeing that he could do no good he returned his siege and marched with his
army toward Apulia, Naucl.
1474.

After the Philistines had the great victory over the Israelites, when they
had found the body of Saul being slain and his three sons dead in the field
with him, they stripped Saul out of al his armor, Sam. lib. 1 cap. 31.
they cut of his head and sent it to the land of the Philistines to publish the
victory, and they hanged the armor of king Saul in the temple of Astaroth
their Assirian idol, they commanded also that his body should be hanged on
the wall of Bethshan, and his head to be set on a pole, they sent also the
heads and the quarters of Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malchisha being the three
sons of king Saul unto diverse cities of the Philistines to hang them upon
poles in the temples before their Gods in token of victory and triumph.

An overthrow was given to Charles the fifth his army, at Uisurgine and upon
the same day Wittenberge was yielded up unto the Emperor, for this Charles the
fil^ never quieted himself before he had subdued all Flanders and the most
part of Germany under his empire, 1547.

The 24 day
A Great day among the Syracusans, and commanded to be solemnly celebrated in
memory of their famous victory had over the Athenians by the river called
Asinara, Plutarch.
at what time Niccas general for Athens with all his whole army were over
thrown, slain and scattered. This Syracusa the chief city in Sicilia, was by
the persuasions and council of Alcibiades taken in hand to the great hurt and
loss to Athens.

Otto the third was crowned Emperor of Germany by Gregory the 5. pope of
Rome after he returned to Saxonia, and hearing that Gregory the 5. Otto the
3. crowned emperor.
whom he had caused to be made Pope was deposed by Crescentius and by the
citizens, and had put in his room a Grecian borne named John the 17 of that
name, the Emperor returned in all have besieged the city and took it, took
Crescentius, plucked out both his eyes, cropped his ears off, and put him upon
an ass to ride through Rome as a spectacle, and after slew him, he restored
Gregory to his papacy, Justin.
and made John's eyes to be had out* and after to be banished, 1000.

Edward the 5. with his brother Richard sons to Edward the fourth king of
England were slain, some say smothered, some say drowned in the tower at
London by that cruel monster Richard the third their own uncle Edward the 4.
his brother, 1483. Lili.


The 25. Day
SEruius Tullius the sixth king of Rome triumphed on this day over the
Hetruscans and over the Sabines this annexed to the city three hills or
little mounts called mount Q^irinall, mount Uiminall, and mount Erquiline, he
entrenched round the walls of the city, and he did first invent the
mustering of men, at what time their was not found in Rome past 84. thowfand
citizens.

M. Marcellus being again reconciled to the Emperor Eutrop. 1.
Caius Caligula was slain by his familiar friend Magius Chilo as he returned
to Rome by the way, and after Magius slew himself, Sulpit.
the 43. year of our savior Christ.

Sethon one of Vulcans priests afterward made king of Egypt being so hated of
his people, and in such contempt with his subjects, that* at what time
Senacherib king of the Assirians came with a great army of Arabians to invade
Egypt, at what time in the month Pachon the people forsook Sethon and
revolted from him, how be it he was warned by a vision in sleep to geeue
battle to the Arabians which he performed, he pitched his tents at Pelusium
having few soldiers in his band, the night before the battle should be
fought, a great and huge swarm of rats and mise came and devoured their
bowstringes and their quiuers, spoiled their targets, and bucklers, and did eat
up al their matches for their shot, in fine, they disordered all things in the
Arabian camp, that in the morning they were sorced to fly, in which flight
many were slain and taken, Sethon the king having this victory, in this the
priest of Vulcan caused an arch to be made, on which y^ statue of Setho^ was
set in Spayrs holding a rat in his hand with this inscription, In me quis
intuens pius est, in this order did the Egyptians triumph in their monstrous
huge works and buildings, setting up their pictures and Images to stand in
Spairs, to manifest their triumphs, Scehons triumph.
but in their sacrifices and superstitious ceremonies, they far exceeded the
Romans which I have for example set down, for that they began long before the
Romans, who had most of their sacrifice and ceremonies from the Grecians, and
the Grecians from the Egyptians.

The 26 Day.
Upon this day begins the third month, which the Jews call Siban or Syuan
the seventh of this month answeareth the first of June.

In the third month in the which the Israelites went out of Egypt, they came
unto the wilderness of Sinay, where the Israelites pitched their Tents, and
camped before the Lord, there the Lord commanded Moses to sanctify the
people, Exodus 19.
and that they should be ready upon the third day to hear the Lord, saying,
you shall be unto me a kingdom of priests and an holy people.

In the first day of the third month the word of the Lord came to the prophet
Ezechiel, Ezech. 3.
who spoke unto Pharao king of Egypt, Assure is a Cedar in Libanon with fair
branches and thick bows of a high stature all the fowls of the air made
their nestes, in his branches all the beasts of the field brought forth their
young, under his bows and under his shadow dwelt all mighty nations, thus the
Prophet sets forth the prosperity of the Assirians, and prophesies a like
destruction unto them both.

Germanicus the son of Drusus, and father to Caius Caligula, Germanicus
triumph.
which was the fourth emperor of Rome had a solemn triumph granted him at
Rome over the Cheruscians, Angriuarians, the Catteians, and over the nations
that dwelt as far as Albis. This Germanicus changed the name of the month
September to be Germanicus, as Julius Caesar and his nephew Augustus changed
the two months before called Quintilis and Sextilis to Iuli and August,
Tacit. lib. 2.
after their names which still continued, but Germanicus after his death y^
month called Germanicus recovered his first name which was September.

Malancthon in his fourth book says that upon this day Lotarius King of
France and also emperor of Germany was fought withal by his brethren: in this
great battle all the whole Plut. F^^ct.
stock af Charles the great were slain for it is set down that above 100000
were on both parties slain: of this day writers vary, some referring it to
the 11 of May, and some to other days, 841.

Ladi^laus son to Charles third King of Sicilia entered Rome in arms, threw
down Adrian the emperors pillars, Cedr. Funct.
raised many ancient monuments and got the possession of the Cappitoll but by
the means of Paulus Visinus a noble Roman who aided pope Gregory the 7, Rome
was recovered and Ladislaus put to flight, 1410.

Upon this day Basilius Macedo of a poor boy became one in Michaell the
emperors chamber, and whom the emperor often times commanded to be slain for
he had some diffidence in Basilius, yet he was slain by this Basilius and
after was crowned Emperor of Constantinople such was the state of emperors in
those days* 870.

Alphonsus king of Arragon besieged Iohanna queen of Naples in the castle at
Capua, Functius.
but he was thence removed and put to flight at that time, but with in a while
after he took Neapoles and subdued Apulia, and drove their king Reuatus to
forsake his kingdom, and after comenced wars against the Florentines, 1443.

The 27 Day
GReat solemnities, sacrifices, rites, and cerimones were in Rome on this day
in the temples of welthe, honor and virtue, three goddesses among the Romans of
great authority, whom they celebrated with seu^rall seruises according to
their custom.

The people of Israel being sanctified, and their clothes washed, and also
having abstained from their wines, Exodus 19.
being commanded the second day to be ready for the next morning, at what time
God appeared in thunder and lightning, commanding the priests and the people
not to touch the hill, least they should perish.

The birth day of Antonnius surnamed Geta, son to Septimius Seuerus the 21.
Emperor of Rome, Herod. 4.
who was slain by his brother Antoninus Caracalla in his mothers lap 213.
Spartianus refers this to the first of June.

Lewis the 12. was as on this day with great joy and gladness of all the
kingdom of France elected king after his Father Charles the eights death, as
Aemilius affirms, 1497. Some say that he was crowned upon the very same day
in the year following.

The 28 day.
THis was the third day, wherein Moises and Aaron were commanded by the Lord
to come to mount Sinai, and the people to stand at the foot, Exodus 20.
where they saw the thunder and lightning, and the noise of the trumpet, and
the mountain smoking, and the Lord delivered unto Moises the second table of
the commandments.

As upon this day the games and plays called Fabrici lud^ the feastiuall day
of Smithes, Fabrici ludi.
who met upon the Theators, and made a common feast together with great pomp,
which they sacrificed unto Vulcan with all solemn ceremonies* according to
their supersticious customs.

Titus the son of Vespasian the 11 Emperor of Rome, after he had lived 42.
years, died in the third year and eight month of his reign, at the same
manner place where his father the good Emperor Vespasian died: Eutrop. 7.
this emperor builded the Theator at Rome, yet Sueto. and others refer his
death with more reason to the 13. of September, 83.

The Cathedral Church at Misena, when they sang Te de^m for joy and gladness
of the taking of the Elector, the author of a great commotion, where many were
slain, Lycosth.
and the church burnt unto the very ground by lightning, 1547.

The 29 Day.
AS upon this day, Octauius Augustus, M. Antonius and M. Lepidus, three me^
called Triumuiri, after some bibering between Octauius and Antonius, Liui. and
Eutrop. 7.
were made by the means of Lepidus friends, after which all three joined their
forces together, against the City of Rome, at what time diverse of the Senate
were banished, and many that had been Consuls were slain, as Cicero and
diverse other noble men.

The famous City of Constantinople, after long wars, and often repulses
given, was upon this day being on the feast of Penticoast by Mahomet the second
of that name, and the sixth Emperor of the Turks taken, and the head of
Constantius then Emperor (being slain at that assault as he fled) set upon a
long pole, Pantal. 5.
and carried through the City of Constantinople.

Philippus Valesius the 49. king of France, and the first king of the house of
Valoyes, was with great pomp and solemnity crowned as upon this day king of
France, Anual. Aquit.
during this kings reign France had most terrible wars with England, and
since France never had the like since the Roman war, this is called with
writers Atrox cruentum and funestum bellum, 1328.

The 30 Day.
BErna a town of Heluetia was besieged as upon this day by Rodulphus county
of Haspurge, who (after 12 years of interregnum which was with out y^ Empire)
was elected emperor of Germany not by the Pope of Rome crowned but by the
Bishop of Lusitania, for said he, many emperors went into Italy with an huge
army few or none return, resiting the fable of the fox, Justin.
being desired by other beasts to come to visit the Lion being sick, I wish
him well said the fox but I pass not for the sight of him: I saw the steps of
many going in, but I saw the steps of none coming out, 1287.

The 31 Day.
THe Jews kept the feast called Pentecost on the 6. day of the third month
called Syuan, which was 50. days after the feast of the first fruits. In this
feast they offered unto the Lord two waines laden with fine flower, The feast
of Penticoast.
also they offered 7. lambs without deformity of one year of age, and one
young Bullock, and two Rams, to be a sacrifice of sweet savor unto the
Lord. Leuit. 23.


Damiata a great city of Egypt being once overthrown by the Saracens to the
great loss of the Christians, Bell. sac. 4. cap. 3.
is now again besieged and taken by the Christians and by them inhabited.

Rolandus sisters son to Charles the great the first French Emperor, a man of
great courage, a skillful soldier, after a terrible battle fought about the
mountains Pyrenei, died for mere penury and want of water to cool his
thurst. Pantal. 5.


The Romans celebrated as upon this day a feast, wherein were used many
sacrifices upon many altars in Rome, much like to the feast of Hecatombea, at
what time in Athens they sacrifice^ upon an hundredth Altars, and therefore the
Scythians could not abide the superstitious ceremonies of the Grecians,
Hecato^bea.
for they had no Altars, no Temples, no images, nor no such ceremonies as y^
Egyptians had: but in this sort the Scythians do use their feast or sacrifice,
the beast that is to be sacrificed is made to kneel upon his legs, the
sacrificer stands behind the beast to strike him down, then making his
prayers to that God to whom he sacrifices this beast* not with fire, not with
vows, nor upon altars in temples, for the Scythians have none, but simply
after their Scythian manner he takes the skin off, and puts the flesh into
a great cauldron of brass, or else in the skin of the beast, and so he
lays all the boans of the beast under the ch^ldron, and puts fire into it and
seethes it, and after he sacrifices the bowels of the beast either to Vesta
which is chiefly worshipped in Scythia, or to Mars, and of the rest they make
this feast. This is the order of al Scithian sacrifices.

The names of those Consuls, and Captains that had their triumphs granted
them by the Senators at Rome within this month of May, are these that follow.

1 Pub. Valerius Publicola, 2 Qu. Pub. Philo, 3 M. Claudius Marcellus, 4 Q.
Fab. Vibulanus. 5 A. Manl. Torquat. Atticus 6 C. Sulpitius Peticus, 7 Tibe rius
Caesar, 8 L. Cornel. Maluginensis, 9 C. Plautius Proculus, 10 T. Manlius
Torquatus,
The names of the feasts and sacrifices celebrated with great solemnity in
Rome within this month of May.

Lenuria 1, Lemuria 2, Lemuria postrema, Scyrpea simulacra. Bendidia, Agonalia,
The solemn games and plays in Rome within May are thus named.

Ludi Maximi, Ludi celebris, Fabrici ludi.
Finis mensis Maij.
Of the Month of June, which the Hebrews called Siua^ their third month:
with the Athen^ans Hecatombeon their first month, and with the Egyptians
called Pauni: their tenth month.
The first day.
ON this month the Athenians began their year which they called Hecato^beon,
a month dedicated and also consecrated by the old ancient Romans to Mercurius.
Nouid.
The Athenians as upon this day being the first day of their year celebrated
a solemn feast in the honor of Apollo at Athens, Hecatombea.
which they call Hecatombea after the name of their first month using the
ceremonies and rites of such sacrifices according to the custom of Athens.

In Rome they held a feast to the gods Carna called Fabaria in the which they
were wont to use sacrifice with great solemnity, and to offer up new fresh
beans mingled with fine flower to this Carna, and after their sacrifices and
religious ceremonies were ended they kept this feast with much devotion and
great holiness, making cakes as the old Romans in ancient time used of these
beans mingled with flower, Macrob.
every man kept a piece of a cake, or a whole cake in his house, until that
time in the next year following.

To this goddess Carna Iuu^us brutus the first Consul at Rome after the king
when he had banished Torquinius the proud the 7 and last king of Rome,
solemnised a great sacrifice without the gate called Capena in mount Caelio,
and after celebrated a feast in memory of this victory according to a vow
which he had made to the gods Carna before the battle on this day. Macrob. 1
Likewise the Romans builded a temple consecrated the same and dedicated it to
Tempest.

In the 690 year after the building of Rome when Lucius Murena and Cecus
Iuuius were Consuls at Rome, Q. Metellus triumphed over Creet, at the same
very day that Pompei the great eriumphed over the Pirates on sea. Eutrop. 6.


Upon this day a famous combat was appointed between Carolus king of Cicilia
and Petrus king of Aragon about the kingdom of Sicilia, this was committed to
an hundred chosen men of either side and they should fight it out, the king of
Aragon with an hundredth men, and the king of Cicilia should come with another
hundredth men, Pant. lib. 6
and on whether side the victory should go, thither also the kingdom should
go.

Lodowick the fourth son to John king of Bohemia was crowned king of
Lumbardie at Millaine by his father who the^ subdued Luca, Parma, Rhegium,
Mutina and other cities in Italy before he was elected Emperor of Germany
1337.. Pan. Io^.


Iulianus Didius borne at Millaine in Italy a nobleman by birth, and learned
in the civil laws, yet factious and very ambitious, after he had reigned
seven months Emperor of Rome, Functius says he reigned but 65. days, was
slain by Sep. Seuerus, and beheaded, and his head put upon a pole in the
market place at Rome.

Nicolaus the second Pope of Rome died as upon this day 1061. This Pope
crowned Henry the third Emperor of Germany, Volat.
and he caused that the Popes should be chosen by the election of the twelve
Cardinals only.

Robertus, or as some say Rupertus Emperor of Germany made a great
preparation at Augusta with his army to pass to Rome, but the princes of
Germany at that time were against him, he returned without any great thing
done, Functius
and took money of the Florentines to commence war against Galeatius, but
before he came to Germany from Rome he died in Achaia after he had reigned
ten years.

The 2 day
BY Henry the fourth and his army the city of Rome was assaulted, who after
three sharp terrible battails fought with Rodolphus duke of Suenia, at y^ time
elected K. of y^ Romans came and revenged his malice upon pope Gegorie the 7.
otherways named Hildebrandus drove him out of Rome and possessed all the
city of Rome, but when Gregory was restored by Rodulphus as Pantaleon
af^irmeth to his papacy, Pantal. 6.
again, Hildebrandus the Pope sent a crown with this inscription to
Rodulphus, written rownd about the sam^ after this manner.

Petra dedit Petro, petrus diadema Rodulpho. Upon this day Valterius duke of
Aquitania with a great army of the Saracens entered into France, wasted, and
spoiled the country until king Pipinus son to Charles the great came and
gave battle, in the which Valterus was slain, and the army of the Saracens
was overthrown and killed at Petragoricon. 968.

The 3. day
M Fab. Ambustus at his third time being Consul of Rome triumphed with great
solemnity over the Tiburtines, under whom the Torquinians which were subdued
and taken to the number of 307. soldiers in his first Consulship were slain
and sacrificed in Rome for that they rebelled with Torquinius their last king
against their country, and now again by this Fabius in his third Consulship,
348. of the best noble men were brought prisoners unto Rome where they were
whipped and scourged, Liuius.
and after put to the sword in the maket place at Rome, 397. years after the
building of Rome.

Charles the third king of Neapolis leaving his son Ladislaus behind, who
after his father succeeded in Apulia, went unto Hungaria, and their was created
king, 1386. but shortly he was slain through the conspiracy of these noble
men in Bonf. lib. 8
Hungaria, but Boof. refers this day to the 5. of December, and also
affirms that this king was bidden to Buda to a feast and was slain sitting
at the table.

Antioche a famous city in Siria was besieged by Godfredus and his army
which were Christians, and was taken in that voyage they went to Ierusam into
the holy land to fight against the Saracens and Infidels which were scattered
into al parts of Asia and then dwelt in Jerusalem, against whom many
Christian princes went to commence war, Tir. lib 9.
and to seek to vanqtish out of the holy land 1090.

The 4. Day
Upon this day a temple was builded and dedicated to Hercules in Circo Maximo,
Call. Romans
a place where the Romans used all kind of exercises and agilitie both on
horseback and on foot, at which time they also celebrated a feast in memory
of Hercules with solemn games and shows in Numitia*

Also an other temple was dedicated to Bellona with great solemn sacrifice, in
the which Ap. Claudius a noble Roman caused this day to be celebrated in
memory of the victories of Liuius. and Ovid.
Pub. Sulpitius, and also Fabritius against king Pyrrhus when he was wounded,
his Elephantes slain, and his army vanquished to the number of 20000. men.

The 5 day
AS upon this day the Romans builded a temple unto Faith, and yearly on this
day they did use solemn sacrifices to Jupiter Sponsar their patron, for the
Romans had Jupiter in most honor, to whom chiefly they did sacrifice, the 2.
was to Mars the 3. was to Quirinus which they named Romulus during his life:
and putting him in the number of the Gods they called him by the name of
Quirinus.

The Boetians had a great overthrow by the Thessalians upon this day at
Gerestion two Countries in Greece long before the Peloponesian war, which war
was the destruction of Greece.

As upon this day the Thebans had that famous victory over the Lacedenionians,
at which battle Cleo^brotus the king with all the peers, and chiefest of the
Lacedemomans were slain, and that noble Greek Cleomines was slain at the
kings foot with a thousand of the most valiant Spartans about him, at that
time there was a great feast at Sparta. When this news came to the Ephories of
the victory of the Thebanes. This battle was 30. years after the overthrow
of Athens by Lisander the Lacedemonian, Plut.
and now the overthrow of Sparta by Epaminondas the Theban: these two cities
were named the two eyes and the two legs of al Greece, and yet Sparta could not
abide Athens, neither could Athens abide Sparta.

Gauerus county of Egmond, and Philip county of Hornia, were upon this day
at the commandment of Duke Dalbe at Brussels in Brabant beheaded.

The 6. Day.
Upon this day Moses was called up to mount Sinai by the Lord with his minister
Iosuah, where he was six days covered with a cloud, and in the seventh the
Lord appeared unto Moses, Exodus 24.
whose glory seemed to be like unto consuming fire, and Moses was in the
mount forty days and also forty nights.

The huge and monstrous Temple of Diana at Ephesus which for the greatness
thereof was deemed to be one of the seven wonders, was burnt as upon this
day, Plutarch.
at what time the priests of Diana cried out running up and down and saying,
that this day is borne the tormentor and plage of all Asia, for at that very
day Alexander the great was borne when the Temple was on fire: which afterward
verified the priests sayings, yet some hold opinion that he was borne the 6.
day of April, 3610.

Philip king of Mac^donia gave a great overthrow as on this day to the
Illiricans by Parmenios courage, then being lieuetenant unto him: he took the
city of Potidea and there wan the garland of price, in the games which were
used in the mount Olimpus, Pl^t.
for running tilting, and also iusting, with other exercises on horseback,
which were usual and had in great estimation among them.

Iulianus Apostataan exceeding great persecutor among the Christians, and of
the Christian religion, resembled by Eutropius to M. Antonius, whom this
Iulianus endeavored in all points to imitate, he was well seen in the
liberal sciences, he excelled in the Greek tongue, who in his wars against
the Parthians, E^trop. 10
after he had conquered Assiria, and returned thence was slain by his enemies
after he had reigned ninteen months as Eutrop* says, who was present in these
wars that he was slain in the 7. year of his reign, and the sixth calend
of Iulie, when he had lived 31 years.

Alexander son to Ba^ilius and brother to Constantius reigned two years a
most vicious and wicked Emperor, nether like father nor brother, given to lust
and slothfulness calling those to honor and to be chief with him which were
most like to him in vice, and therefore he died by such a filthy surphet as
is most strange, with bleeding at his nostrels and also at his priuities,
Functius.
when he had reigned two years, not so long as Justin writes.

The 7 day
ON this day the Romans builded a Temple called Templum mentis, for that they
had bowed going to the African wars if they returned with victory to build
up a Temple in memory of the same, and to dedicate it unto Mind, for they
supposed Faith, Mind, Peace, Concord, and Fortune, to be canonised goddesses,
Nouid.
and therefore builded to these Temples, feasts and sacrifices.

The temple of Vesta was opened in Rome as upon this day to renew the lamps
where the Uestals Nuns kept the holy and immortal fire, this ceremony of
keeping the holy fire was also in the Temple of Apollo in Delphos and likewise
at Athens, but they differ in the ceremonies, for in Greece old women which
were past marriage, and in Rome young maids who might not marie with great
devotion and religion. These lights were never put out, but once in Athens in
the time of Aristion, and once in Delphos, when the temple of Apollo was ^^rnt
by the Medes, and once in Rome in the time of the civil ^^rres betwee^e Pompei
the great and Caesar, when altar, fire and al were consumed, and the vestall
virgins forced to (...) with the Idol of Vesta with them.

The play and games called Piscatorij, which were celebrated in the fields of
Mars as on this day by the fishmongers at Rome with their devised mirth and
sportes according to their custom.

The 8. day
AFter that Theseus had killed Scyron the Arcadian wrestling with him and a
little after slew Demastes in the city of Herionia a great tirant imitating in all points Hercules who sacrificed Busirus and Aper cruel tyrants: Plutarch.
enen so Antheus the 8. day of Hecatombeon, at what time he saw his father
Aegeus, but of this Theseus and his exploits hereafter you shall read more.

In Vienna a town in Austria a great meeting of the peers of Germany with all
the imperial state, at what time the chief noble men of Austria ordained great
games and plays with great pomp and solemn shows both on horseback and on
foot, which continued, as Pantaleon says, the whole month of June, at the
which play Ferdinandus the Emperor brother to Charles the 5. was present,
1559.

Upon this day Isacius Commenus was crowned Emperor of Greece by the
Patriarch then of Constantinople, and became afterward vngracefull to the
Patriarch. Justin.
This Emperor after he had reigned two years and three months, took the
habit of a Munck upon him, and gave up the empire unto Constantine Ducas, and
so afterward he lived a monastical life, 1059.

The 9. Day.
A Great feast in Rome was as upon this day celebrated, in the which they were
wont to deck their Asses with garlandes about their necks, and Crowns upon
their heads* and so to lead the^ solemnly through the city of Rome into all
streets only by the Milners and Bakers, leaving their Mils and Ba^khouses
fully dressed with all kind of flowers and green boughs, these asses being
thus gorgeously and bravely set out, were laden with bread: of the which at
their return they kept a great solemn feast, to the which they invited their
neighbors to celebrate the same, N^uid. 6.
after they had done sacrifice to God Pan.

Seruius Tullius the sixth king of Rome, was upon this day slain through the
wickedness of his son in law Lu. Torquinius, who was son to the last king
before him, whom Seruius succeeded, also his own daughter Tullia, whom he had
espoused to Torquinius was of the conspiracy, and the only means of her
Fathers death, in the 219. year after the building of Rome.

Pub. Rutilius Lupus, then Consul at Rome, after he had fought most valiantly
with Marses, Didius Viuius.
was slain in the battle at the river Thebonium, the same very day Nola was
taken by the Samnits, and the year next following they gave an overthrow to
Didius, 664,

M. Crassus a noble Roman, equal in force and power to Caesar or to Pompey,
after many great victories, was as upon this day among the Barbarians and
Parthians overthrown: at what time many noble captains ^lew themselves for
shame and sorrow of their overthrow by Surena: the Leiutenant of Parthia,
Censorimus, Octauius Petromus, and diverse other Roman Gentlemen slew
themselves, they struck off Pub. Crassus head, Flor. lib. 3 cap. 11. Plutar. in
Crasso.
and sent him to his father yet a live, but on that day slain also. In this
battle 10000 Romans were slain, and 1000 taken prisoners, and after that
Surena had bathed Crassus head in blood, and had melted gould into his mouth to
the great reproach of the Romans he sent both the heads of Crassus and of his
son to Hyrodes king of Pa^^hia, 50 years before Christ was borne.

Now Charles duke of Bugundie, son to Philip, brought 100000 armed men to
Marten a town in He^uetia assaulted it but in vain, after took Lotoringia,
upon the which offense war grew between Jews king of France, and this
Charles: this war Paulus the second of that name pope of Rome pacified: after
this he came to the Emperor Frederike the third, which lay then at Treueris
with a brave company of Horsemen, expecting to be created king of the
Emperor, Functius Monst.
but missing of that hope, he entered again into arms, and was slain with
20000 of his men with him in a great battle given him by Jews the eleauenth
king of France. 1478.

Alphonsus king of Arragon assaulted Naples as on this day, took it and dwelt
there, then he warred in Apulia, drove Renatus out of Apul^a, Pant. lib. 6
and possessed the kingdom: this king Iohana Queen of Sicilia deprived of his
interest and title which he had through her into Sicilia, for she had adopted
him after her days to be king of Sicilia, and now she adopted into his place
Lewis the third.

The long broiles of Henry the fourth his fury and rage of civil wars, was
upon this day ended, at what time Rodulphus duke of Sueuia, Mar. scot.
who also had married Henry's sister and his great secret enemy was slain at
the river of Vuseredom in Saxonia, as Marian Scotus affirms, 1079.

The 10 Day
TItus Didius, Proconsull for the Romans against the Celtiberians in Spain,
whom he most valiantly overthrew in a great battle, Liuius.
over whom he had his triumph granted him by the Senators with great honor
into Rome as upon this day, in the 660 year after the building of Rome.

Cruel Nero the sixth Emperor of Rome, son in law to Claudius, who adopted
him his successor in the Empire, not unlike unto his Uncle Caligula given to
all riot and strange lust, a tyrant that committed diverse murders upon his
own kins^olkes, slew his own brother, his mother, and his wife, he murdered
a great number of the Senators, and chief men of the City of Rome, and at
last he set the City on fire, that he might see how and after what manner and
fashion the City of Troy burned, when it was set on ^^re vy the Gretians,
and hearing that he was adjudged by the Senators that he should be drawn naked
through the City, Tacit. lib. 16.
with a forcke thrust into his head, and so whipped until he were dead, fled
fourth of his palace, Eutrop. 6.
and slew himself three miles off from Rome. 69.

Frederike the first, surnamed Barbarossa, Emperor of Germany, in the voyage
that he made to the holy land, waged wacres against the Turk, Cuspina.
and overthrew him, and subdued him, and in Armenia died, some say that he was
drowned after he had reigned 37 years, 1190.

The 11 Day.
THe solemn feast called Quinquatria, was in Rome most solemnlie celebrated
with great mirth, this feast endured five days, Quinquatria.
in the honor of Minerua: of this feast I have spoken before.

Constanti^us surnamed Monomachus, Emperor of Greece, was married upon this day
to Zoes, and was crowned Emperor by Alexius Patriarch of Constantinople, this
Zoes whom he married had been before married to the Emperor Romanus
Argyropylus, whose death she conspired with Michael Paphlago whom after she
married, who dyed within seven years after, then she adopted to the Empire
Michael Calaphates who likewise abused her, Volat. lib. 23. Cedr. and Just. in
epit. Cesorum.
saying that Zoes went about to poison him, and so he banished her, for the
which he had his eyes pulled out by the people, in the fourth year of his
reign, and Zoes restored to the Empire, and at last married to this
Constant^ne, with whom she lived 12. years and eight months.

The 12 Day.
AS upon this day a feast was celebrated at Athens called Cronia, in honor
and memory of Saturn which continued 5 days, wherein the Athenians used to
feast one another with great mirth, and to send mutual presents and gifts,
this feast is also called Saturnalia among the Romans, and is assigned to
Saturn as some write in the month of December, in the which the Romans being
more religious the^ the Greeks were wont to sacrifice with great solemnity,
Saturnalia.
and to celebrate a feast according to their custom and rites.

Likewise the Romans held a feast with prompe and ceremonies after their manner
upon this day called Messorum pompa, which unto this day is used at Rome.

Pub. Lucinius Crassus Proconsul for the Romans in in Hispaine, after his good
service in many battles, he vanquished the Lusitans, and triumphed over them
at Rome with the favor and consent of both the Senators and people 600. years
after Rome was builded.

Now this time Maximius was emperor, who then was in Britain by the Soldiers
proclaimed Caesar, and after called Augustus, Trip. 9. cap. 12. Justin.
came to France, slew Gratianus at Lugduum and drove Valentianus from the west
empire to fly to Theodosius, this Theodosius commenced war upon Maximus and
vanquished him at Aquilea, where he was by Theodosius slain, as upon this day,
392.

Carolus the third, surnamed Crassus, was by pope John the eight of that name,
and 42 in number, crowned Emperor of Rome for that he defended Italy from
the Sarazens, which then were ready with an huge army to invade Italy. This
Emperor was son to Lewis king of Germany of Almania, and of Lotharingia, he
was called from Italy into France against the Normanes and the Danes, who
then sore afflicted France, Aemil. lib. 4.
at what time he concluded a peace between him and the Goths, and married the
daughter of Gotfredus king of the Goths named Gisla, and after he had reigned
12 years he died in Sue^ia, and was buried upon this day in Augia, 889.

The 13 Day.
THe Romans held this day most solemn, for that they record this day in
their Calenders, as the birthe day of the Muses, celebrating a sumptuous
feast, where they used many several ceremonies in religious sort, Nouid. ^.
with sundry vows to be performed to every one of the Muses, according to
the quality and nature of the Muse.

Likewise they celebrated the feast of Merchants called Feriae mercatorum, where
they gathered in one place to make solem^e vows to Neptune and to Mercury for
goods lost, and for further good speed in their Navigations. Nouid.


Quinquatria a feast unto Pallas which endured five days, celebrated at Rome
with much solemn state, and great mirth by the musicians, and songmakers,
called Poets. The Musicians should with their trumpets, shalmes, and all other
instruments, play through all the City of Rome, Quinquatria.
and their Poets should sing all kind of verses through the streets, until
they came to the Temple of Minerua, and there solemnized a great feast, singing
Odes to Pallas with many ceremonies thereunto belonging.

Charles the fifth road unto Augusta with great states, where many of the peers
of Germany came to meet him, where certain learned protestants exhibited
their supplictions unto the Emperor in defense of religion, as they did before
at Maspurge, Vuormatia, Spire, and at Bernia, and in other places, where both
papists and protestants by the appointment of Charles the Emperor met, Sleid.
at what time disputations were had, and the same in writing published, 1530.

Among the Egiptians upon the 18. of the month Pauni, in the City of Sais,
when the day of their solemnity approached to be celebrated, the feast of
Minerua which is called Ellychinum, that is the feast of lights, Minerua*
for that is solemnized in the night time, at what time candles, torches,
lamps, with all other kind of lights, hang at every man's door, in their
temples, in the obeliskes, and in their pyramides, feasting and sacrificing
unto Minerua all that night long, to this feast infinite number of Egyptians
came: this feast is not only in the city of Sais solemized, but also in
every city of Egypt, though chiefly in Sais, the secret ceremonies of their
sacrifice were such, as it might not be solemnized in the day time, which was
y^ cause y^ it was done in the night time, for they are by their oracles
warned, and by their priests taught and instructed, the time and the manner of
their sacrifice, as were the Persians by their magi, and the Romans by their
Soothsaires called Augures.

The 14 day.
XErxes the great king of Persia leauied a huge army, and took his voyage
into Greece, at what time the games of Olympia were celebrated, Herod. 7*
Dionys. 9.
thinking thereby all Greece were busy in setting forth their Olympicall
feast, came to Thermopila, where he was met by Leonidas a noble Greek, and was
put to ^light with the loss of 20000 Persians.

Attila king of the Hunnes a mighty Captain, the only king that reigned
among the Germans, that played his part in the weast kingdoms, no otherwise
then Cyrus or Alexander did in the East: he on this day assaulted Auerlia a
city in France, and wanne it, but at that time he was by Aetius the Roman
Leiutenant through the aid of the Frenchmen and Burgundians kept from the
spoil thereof: this Attila kept Germany under his wings, Tritem and Pant.
lib. 6
and subdued many of France as you shall read. 451.

The 15 Day.
GReat solemn sacrifices were used at Rome to the wine, to Oil, and to bread,
for the Romans omitted nothing by the which they had any gain, but they would
use vows, sacrifices and other religious ceremonies, this sacrifice was used
for those that were bitten by mad Dogs. Sacrifice.
Also upon this day the Romans cleansed and purged the Temple of Vesta, and
brought the filthe of the Temple into the river of Tiber, and after they kept
shut the temple as Ovid.

H^c est illa dies, qua tu purgamina Vestae,
Tybri per Hetruscas in marimittis aquas.
The Hungarians invaded Austria, at what time the most part of the nobles of
Hungaria dyed in that voyage, not without great loss of the people of Austria,
for though they had the victory yet Frederike the Archduke of Austria was
slain in that war, and that made some writers attribute the victory to the
Hungarians, as Functius does, saying that all the Nobility, and also the
Archduke Frederick were overthrown and slain, 1235.

All countries solemnized this feast called Bacchanalia, by diverse and sundry
manners, in Egypt they held this feast unto Bacchus without S^ines flesh, the
ceremonies whereof seem strange, for the women had hanging about their necks
like small strings of a Lute, Bacchanalia.
upon the which hanged small pictures like little puppets, instarphalli, for
that was the only pomp of the feast which these women did carry about them,
with such mad frisking, skipping, and strange gamalds of daunsing, having
minstrles before them playing, and they following after singing songs in the
honor of Bacchus, these little pictures were made by some fleights to move of
themselves as though their chinnes moved and sang with them for company,
mentula mutante, as though they honored the feast of Phallum with songs and
dancing to honor God Bacchus, the like ceremonies the Pelasgans taught the
Athenians, lib. 2.
who first erected the Image of Mercury, and used the like ceremonies in their
sacrifices, of the which Herodot does write at large.

The 16 Day
MEtoichia a feast solemnlie kept at Athens, Me^oichia.
in memory of Theseus for diverse great good benefits done to the Athenians,
this feast only was for strangers, which came to dwell at Athens which Theseus
had brought from diverse places, Plut. in Theseo.
at what time Theseus cained money, which he marked with the stamp of an Ox,
in the memory of the Bull of Marathon which he slew: that feast is celebrated
to this day by the strangers at Athens, upon the 16* of the month Hecatombeon
which month also in Gree^e is generally called Cronius.

The most renowned victory of the Greeks over the Persians by sea at
Artemesium, where Xerxes with all his whole Navy was overthrown, as upon this
day: this victory made Themistocles to be so honored of the Gretians, y^ the
captains after sacrifice done, gave him an olive branche in token of the
victory, and they sent 300 of their lusty youths to accompany Themistocles,
his renown grew such by this victory, that when Themistocles came to the next
feast of the Olimpicall games, all the people cast their eyes on him, clapping
their hands, and showing him unto strangers that knew him not, of this day
diverse varye, for that the months of the Gretians differ, and are mistaken
by writers.

Hugo County of Paris, father to that Hugo Capetus, Beuth. Funct.
which was the first king of France, of the nations of the inhabitants called
Galli, (whose stock is famous among the Frenchmen) dyed upon this day, and is
buried at S. Denis in Paris, 957.

The 17 Day.
THe Jews celebrated a joyful feast in memory of their deliverance from
Hamons malice, at what time he had procured king Asue^us to direct his decree
for the killing and murdering of so many Jews as could be found within all
the dominions of the king of Persea, which were 127 regions, and now by the
means of Mardocheus, and the prayer of Ester, they were delivered, Hester. 16
and Hamon and his ten sons hanged, with an infinite number of their enemies
slain, but this feast was kept on the thirteenth of* the month* Adar, which
is March.

Sp. Posthumous an ancient Roman, as on this day gave battle to the
Volscans and to the Aequeis, and vanquished them: Liuius.
the victory was the greater and far more famous, for that the Romans then
were not strong, nor their territories great, for it extended not past 18.
miles from Rome, 266.

Io. Albertus king of Polonia dyed upon this day at Turone in Prusia, after
whom succeeded his brother Alexander duke of Lituania, 1502. Upon the very
self same day 48. years after Charles the ninth king of France was borne,
1550.

The 18 Day
Unto Anna were certain ceremonies and sacrifices used as on this day, at
which time Alexander the great fell in a Fever after much surfeiting and
drinking, Mel. lib. 2
and within 21 days after died at Babylon, 324 years before Christ our
Savior his birth.

Charles the 5. was elected Caesar, and made emperor of Germany as upon this
day, though he was absent at Franckford about other business of his own, some
refer it to the 28. of this month, Sab. lib. 29.
but he was crowned at Aquisgraue the 12. day of October, as Func. in his
Chronicles most plainly affirms.

A League of peace was concluded between Henry the first king of France, and
Philip king of Spain that now is as upon this day at Paris with great
roialtie.

Pontianus the 19. Bishop of Rome, was in the time of the Emperor Alexander
Seuerus persecuted for the profession of the Gospel, and died for the same in
Sardinia, Onophrius does vary much from Functius and others as well in the
numbers as in the time, 231.

The 19 day
ON mount Auentine great and solemn sacrifices with religious ceremonies were
celebrated as on this day in the honor of Pallas. Nouid.


In the great wars between the Polonians and the Russians in a battle at
Sauichostum, as on this day, in the which the Russians were vanquished and
o^erthrowen.

After some terrible battails and between Philip prince of the Catteians and
Charles the fifth, the Catteians yielded, at Hala in Saxonia, at what time the
river of Rheine did much harm to men and beasts, 1205.

The 20. Day
THis day was the 40. day after y^ Noah entered into the ar^^ during which time
the fountains of the deep were broken up, and the windows of Heaven were
opened that it rained for the space of forty days, in so much that the water
increased and rose 15 cubits above the height of any mountain for an 150.
days, Genesis 7.
that all flesh perished.

As on this day the Tarentines desired Pyrrhus king of Epyrus to assist them
against the Romans, which was the first battle that the Romans had with any
foreign enemy, they builded a Temple in Circo Maximo to the God Summanus, for
the Romans much feared Pyrrhus being the greatest warrior of the world, Call.
Romans
and therefore they as on this day used solemn sacrifice within this new
erected Temple unto Summanus.

At Antiochia a great city in Siria by Godfredus and Balduinus two captains
and conductors of a great army of christians was given a famous battle unto
the Persians, Aemil.
in the which battle, 5000. were slain after they took Jerusalem where they
reigned kings one after another, 1^98.

Philippicus surnamed Barnamus being but a Soldier at Chersona became by
service to be Emperor of Greece, and after he had reigned two years he was
forced to forsake the Empire upon this day and by Artemius, Onoph.
which is called Austasius was taken, and his eyes plucked out, and after put in
prison where he died, 715.

Terouana a town in France was assaulted and taken by the imperial army,
spoiled and afterward was lamentably burnt with fire. Aemil. Cont.


Io. Chrisostom a singular, godly and a learned man, was banished by the
general council then assembled at Cyprus, Onoph.
for that he would not subscribe to the burning of Origens books, which were by
Epiphanius and Theophilus condemned, but he was afterward called back with
great honor.

The 21 Day.
AT the city of Rome this day is kept a festival day in the honor of
Hercules, to whom they do great sacrifice, with all religious ceremonies
thereunto belonging*

C. Centumalus proconsul for the Romans over I^yrica, whom he vanquished and
overthrew by a battle given on the Sea, Pantal. 6.
over whom he with great comme^dation triumphed cum nauali triumpho.

Mahomet the second of that name and the 6 emperor of the Turks the only
scourge that plagued the Christians, Caelius de Saracenis
and also the only t^rant that afflicted Asia, who did much augment his empire
as upon this day, again the third time he laid siege to Rhodes, and yet
failed of his purpose, and was forced to pass with his army to Apulia.

The Heluetians being in war with their next neighbors, Stumf. 6.
gave them battle at Lauppen a city in the Confines of Heluetia, overthrew
them and slew them to the number of three hundredth, 1338.

The 22 day
PHilip the sun of Frederick surnamed Barbarossa and the first Frederick of
that name, Functius.
after his great wars against Alsatia, Argentina, and Thuringia taking some
repose in the castle of Bamberga, was there traiterouslie slain by Otto the
County of U^ietelspatch to the great grief of al Germany after he had reigned
9. years, 1208.

The marriage of Philip king of Spain was solemnly celebrated as upon this day
at Paris in France unto Elizabeth daughter to Henry the second, but Functius
says the first of that name king of France, with great pomp, roialtie and
magnificence, in the which feast 8. days after the marriage Henry king of
France was slain by apeece of a staff which brake and ran through his eye
into the brain pan as he was running at T^^t, 1559.

The 23. day
AS upon this day the Romans used to send mutual presents one to another,
and to salute their neighbors with diverse kind of sweet savors, as ginger,
peper, sugar, and such like, and likewise they gathered all kind of herbs in
the honor of Vulcan, Nouid.
and after this, they met together with many ceremonies, and did great
sacrifice unto fire, for the sauegard and t^ition of their young children.

The famous victory of Hanniball over the Romans at Thrasimenum in Perusia
was such, that Flaminius the consul was killed, and fifteen thousand more
slain in the field, and almost so many taken, this battle was so fiercly
fought on both sides, that a great earthquake which was at that instant,
overthrew some cities, and turned mighty streams of rivers against their
course: and did many terrible things besides: yet they were so earnest in
fight that nether parties felt it, Plutarch.
but the moan and lamentation was such in Rome for so great an overthrow, that
they record this day as one of their chief unfortunate days and this
happened by the ouer^ight and rashness of Flaminius the Consul.

Otto the first of that name Emperor of Germany, and son to Henry the
first duke of Saxony and after crowned king of Germany, married y^ daughter of
one Edmundus King of England: this Otto overthrew the Bauarians, and gave the
Hungarians such a terribl battle at the river of Licum that 3. kings were
taken by Otto and hanges at that overthrow, F^nct.
he after made wars upon the Bohmians, wasted and spoiled B^hemia, an^ took
their cities, thence he entered into Italy, and lated siege to Rome, and the
gates were opened to him, at what time he took the pope Benedictus the 5. from
his papacy, and restored Leo the 7 to his form^r estate.

The Turks again invaded the I Will of Melitia, and in the time of Solomon the
tenth emperor laid hard siege to the castle of Mercury, where Caelius affirm
that many thousands on either side were at that Turkish army slain, 1565.

A^ulphus ^ount^e of Nassau was elected Emperor of Germany, this Adulphus for
his ambitious dealing against Albertus duke of Austria, son to Rodolphus the
Emperor which was well esteemed and beloved with all the ^lates of Germany,
whom this Adulphus by all ambitious means sought to banishe, and to drive him
from Austria, Cuspina.
but he was therefore deposed from his Empire after he had reigned ^ixe years,
and with all the consents of the Princes of Germany, Albertus Duke of Austria
was as upon this day placed in his room, 1298. This day of Onoph^^us and
others is set down to be the 27 of Iu^e.

As upon this day died that noble and valiant Gretian Pericles, chief
governor of Athens after Themillocles, whose victories and triumphs were such
that he had nine ^euerall monuments, equal in number to the nine victories
which he got in nine great battles, set up in diverse places, some in Athens,
some in other places of Greece, Ceramicus.
but especially in Ceramicus, which was a place appointed by the Athenians to
honor Conquerours with triumphant arches and pillars, Alex. lib. 3
with their names thereupon engraven with letters of gould, whereby he merited
by his victories lenity, justice, and diverse other virtues, to be surnamed
Olymphus.

The 24 Day.
A Great solemn feast at Rome, at the which they used much devotion, wit^
sacrifice and many religious ceremonies to the goddess Fortune, Pantal. 6.
Plutarch.
as upon this day they trimmed their ships upon the river Tyber with sundry
garlands, and crowned their tops with laurel, myrtle and Oken boughs, in
token of Triumphs and victories, and there they banqueted and feasted with all
pleasant mirthe and melody.

Asdrubal brother unto Hanniball, Asdrubal.
being sent for to come from Spain into Italy by his brother Hanniball, fell
into the hands of Appius Claudius Nero, by an ambushment laid for him, where
he was slain manfully fighting for himself, his head was brought and thrown
before Hannibals tents, his army slain and taken, and a great quantity of
treasure was brought to Rome: Liuius. lib. 18.
this Asdruball has plagued the Romans in Spain, and slew both the Scipios
which had been long conquerours for the Romans in Spain, Eutrop. 3. Funct.
of whom I shall speak when I came to the time of their dealings.

Wars being proclaimed against the Carthaginians by Scipio Affricanus and by
Masinissa king of Numidia, who had joined friendship with the Romans, this
Masinissa being 92 years old gave an overthrow to king Syphax on this day
this Masinissa left behind him 44 sons, and appointed Scipio Affricanus whom
he dearly loved, to be ouerseer, and to distribute his kingdom as it pleased
him amongst them, Eutrop. 3.
609 years after Rome was builded.

Vespasian the ten emperor of Rome, a good and a virtuous man, after he had
reigned nine years, and lived 69. years died in a manor of his own, Suet.
lib. 10.
among the Sabines of the Flixe as upon this day, Eutrop. 7.
81 years after Christ.

The Sarazens as upon this day 1083, had a great battle giuien them by the
Spaniards in the territories of Granata in Spain, at what time by chance not
looked for, an army of Englishmen entered fresh into the battle, whereby the
Sarazens were overthrown, this the French Chronicles allow, and Pantal in his
fifth book affirms.

Cazimirus Duke of Massonia, was crowned king of Polande with solemn pomp and
great magnificence, as upon this day, being then upon the feast of S. John
Baptist, 1448. So also was Henry the eight king of England, and his wife
Katherine Dowger crowned at Westminster, in the year of Lord, 1532. Lu. Sur.


John Baptist was borne as upon this day, but I find great contrauersie
herein amongst writers.

The 25 day.
THe 25 day of June begins the fourth month of the Jews called Tamutz,
and the first day of the month Tamutz.

Henry the fourth, emperor of Germany, gave a great overthrown on this day
to Rodulphus duke of Sueuia, and king of Italy, whom Pope Gregory the
seventh called also Hildebrandus, who reuoulting against Henry the 4. crowned
Emperor, and against all the states of Germany, that between them both began
great wars, and diverse terrible battles, the first at Fladenhen, Cuspician.
Functius Chrom.
the second at the flood Ellestra, the third at Merseburge a town in Saxonia,
where Rodulphus was overthrown, and his army scattered and slain, with no
less loss to Henry, the victory only excepted, 1080.

Ludouicus Gallorum Delphinus, duke of Aquitania and son to Charles the sixth
surnamed Beneamatus, was made king of Apulia by pope John the 24 of that name,
and the lawful king Ladislaus was by the Pope rejected: This Dolphin of
France married Margaret the daughter of James king of Scotland, and within a
while after died, after whom succeeded John his brother, Io. Til.
and in Apulia Iohanna the sister of Ladislaus succeeded, 1436.

The most of the princes of Germany being protestants, professed the Gospel,
and confessed the same before Charles the fifth emperor at Augusta, as upon
this day, in the assembly of the Peers of Germany, for Martin Luther had
disputed and opened the treachery of Papacy in diverse towns of Germany,
Sleid. lib. 7.
and had wrote in the defense of the Gospel, 1^^0.

The 17 Day.
AS (...) this day, Ancharsis the philosopher, after he had traue^^ Egypt,
Greece, and other places, returning into the country of Scithia again, being
excellently well learned, he liking the religion of Greece better then Scythia,
vowed to the mother of the gods that if he sailed safe to Scythia that h^ would
celebrate her feast day, and offer sacrifice after the manner of the
Cyzecenians which he performed in Scythia, in a wo^die place called Hyllaea,
Anacharsis,
not far from Achilles race, there Anacharses was spyed in his Grecian robe,
with his Thyrsis in his hand, with such mad ceremonies as are in the
sacrifice of Orgies, after the manner of the Grecians, Saulus the king of
Scythia being his own uncle, as Herodot says, was brought to the place, who
finding Anacharsis occupied in the Grecians ceremonies, shot him through with
an arrow and slew him, so that the Scythians cannot abide to hear of the name
of Anacharsis, for that he followed the Grecians supersticious ceremonies.

Iulianus Apostata the Emperor, a great persecutor of the Christians, Anmian.
lib. 22. 23. and 24.
a man excellentlye well seen in the Greek tongue, and learned in the
liberal sciences, he was likened by Eutrop. to Marcus Antonius in many things,
after he spoiled Ass^ria, and had vanquished the Parthians, and returning from
thence a conquerou^, was slain in the sixth of the calende of July, after he
had reigned seven years, 366, it is of others otherways written, as I said
before read Ammianus.

In the month of Pauni, Sesostris king in Aethiopia, which kingdom he
subdued, erected up many pillars within Egypt, as triumphs of his victories,
according to the Egiptians custom and manner of triumphs, clean contrary to
the Lacedaemonians, H^^od. lib. ^.
who by the law of Li^urgus were forbidden to make any monument of their
victories within G^^ece, in marble, brass, or Iu^rie, for that it would move
civil wars, and stir more envy and discord between City and Ci^^ie,
or between tribe and tribe: it was also among the Romans, that no triumph
might be had for any victory gotten by civil wars, No triumph granted in
civil wars.
for they refused therein to triumph both Marius and Silla, and after Caesar
and Pompey, and at last Augustus and Antonie, for the best and the greatest
conqueror has no cause of triumph in c^^ill wars.

The 27. Day.
Caius Marius a noble Roman was borne as upon this day, this Marius was
Consul at Rome 7. times, of whose triumphs and victories during that time you
shall read them in their places and in their time. Likewise C^. Carbo, Pantal.
6.
who was Con^ull at that time in Rome with Marius, when civil wars were
between Silla and Marius and slain in that year of his Consulship by Pompei
the great, being then but a young man, was also borne with Marius as upon this
day.

Romulus b^^lded a Temple at Rome to Jupiter S^ator in that place where he
sta^ed when he fled from the Sabines, who had then secretly entered into Rome
through the treachery of Tarpe^a to revenge the rauishment of their daughters,
and young Sabine virgins, who were entised and deceived by Romulus, Plutar.
then Romulus being forced with shame to fly, lifted up his hand to heaven,
and praised Jupiter to stay the flight of his people, and they stayed upon a
sudden, and in that place Romulus builded a temple as upon this day to
Jupiter, the staier back of Romulus and of his people.

Iouinianus after the death of Julian the Apostata, Iouinianus
was by the consent of the army in Persea chosen as upon this day to have the
administration and rule of the Empire, a very good Prince and a religious
Emperor, for he instituted that the tithes should be paid to the Churches,
how be it he had little good success, for he fell sick and died within eight
months, Justin.
after, 365.

As upon this day died Martianus at Constantinople in the seventh year of
his reign, He from a mean soldier first in Lidia became emperor of all
Greece, he recovered the Em^^e being much tro^led and also weakened, at that
time he as^^aged the fury of the Par^^ians, and subdued the Uandoles, and
vanquished Attila king of the Gotes, Mar. ^oot.
and concluded peace with all countries, for he loved peace, and would often
say, Arma non induamus, dum pace potiri possumus, 458.

The 28. day
AFter that Theseus had reduced all things in order, and had reformed Athens,
and removed Judges and Magistrates to a greatter state, to whom he builded a
council hall, long before Areopagyts who were before the A^ph^ctions, and
after that Theseus had brought all into one corporation, he instituted a great
feast and common sacrifice for all the country of Attica called Panathenaea,
This was the only greatest feast among the Athenians, Call. Romans
to this feast no stranger might come and therefore he appointed another
feast in Athens for strangers the 16. of June called Metoichia.

In the month Pauni in the City of Bubasti in Egypt a great feast is
celebrated in the honor of Diana to this feast they came from all parts of
Aegipt men and women, some by sea, and some on foot, the men cum tibijs
dancing and reioicing through every town as they travel through the
country, the the women crepitacula tenentes, in like manner sing and dance,
some clapping their hands together, some with one noise and some with another,
with such antic to^es and tricks, and with such strange gestures as I pass
with silence to speak of their impudency, they do come to this feast as
Herodot, does mention 70000. men and women besides children, and in this sort
they feast that day, and drink more wine then they do all the year after,
offering in sacrifice to the gods Diana diverse oblations of beasts and
fowls.

Alexander the great after some opinions died as upon this day, yet Plutarch
and others refer it to the 28. of March, many were suspected of his death,
and therefore many were put to death by Olympias his mother, as Iola,
Antipater, yea Aristole was thought to be one of the conspiracy, and the only
inuentor of the poison: some again wrote that his drin^^king and feasting
brought him to an ague, drincking out of Hercules, cup, for Alexander was so
much addicted to that cup making both garlands and crowns, and appointing
great rewards to the best carowser, but howsoever it was, he died after he had
reigned twelve years, and left at Babylon unburied many days, for his
Princes and Captains contended for kingdoms. All the kingdoms of the East
countries were the^ in Alexanders hands, but at length he was buried in
Alexandria a town of his own.

As upon this day Diogenes the Philosopher being bitten with a dog dyed
neglecting his sore like a cynicke dogged fellow, and therefore a pillar was set
on his grave, and a picture of a dog upon it. This Philosopher disdained
Alexander and all his pomp, in such sort that Alexander wished to be Diogenes
if he were not Alexander, Laertius in vita dingenis.
for that Diogenes contemned the world, the glory, and the pomp thereof as
much as Alexander did, who wept for that he could not be king of one world,
since he heard by Democritus and other philosophers that there were diverse and
sundry worlds, so that Alexander and Diogenes died both in one day.

The 29 day
Jerusalem was as on this day besieged of Nabuchodonosor in the 1691. year
after the flud, and in the 9. year of Nabuchodonosor, and continued until the
11. year of his reign, during which time the city was taken, 4 Reg. cap. 25.
Zedechias sons slain before his face, and Zedechias own eyes put out, and al
Judah brought captive to Babylon, but this is laid down in the last of the
Kings to be the tenth day of the tenth month Tebeth, which is January, for
the tenth of ^ebeth is the 21. of January. By mistaking of the months in
diverse countries diverse errors do escape.

In the fifth day of the fourth monet^ Ezechiel the priest and after a prophet,
being by the river Cheba^, and in the fifth ^ear of Ioachius captivity, saw a
stormy wind coming from ^he North, with a great clow^e and fire enfoulding
it self in the cloud, and out of the midst thereof the likeness of four
beasts appeared, and their form was like to the form of man, and every beast
had 4 faces and 4. wings, cap. 1.
these 4. had the face of a man, and the face of a lion on the right si^e, and
the face of an Ox and of an Eagle on the left side. You may read more of this
in Ezechiel.

Upon this day was builded a Temple on mount Quirinall in Rome to Quirinus in
memory of Romulus, which is also named Qui^inus their first king and founder,
in this Temple they used sacrifice and devout ceremonies to honor Romulus whom
they canon^sed after his death: Plut.
this sacrifice was called Quiri^ia after his name.

Peter the Apostle of Jesus Christ our savior, after he had preached the
ghospel in Pontus, in Galatia, Cappa^ocia, Bithynia, and last at Rome where he
suffered death, hanged with his head downward under the cruel emperor Nero, so
he suffered death on the third calend of Iulie after whom upon the same day
Paul the godly and most learned Apostle was beheaded as some think
after that he had preached in Judea* I^^irica, Greece, Italy, Spain, and in
diverse other countries, of whom his epistles make mention of, 68.

Scylus king of Scithia affecting the sacrifice and rites of the Grecians was
found as upon this day, as Anacharsis was for using the feast and ceremony
of Orgia, which was a feast used with solemn sacrifices to Bacchus, was driven
out of his kingdom, and his brother Octomasides elected King in his place, so
straight the Scithians observe their own religion, yet Budini a people that
imitate the Scithians, whose speech is mingled partly with the Greek tongue
and partly with the Scithian v^e their Trieterica sacrifi^la every third year
after the manner of the Grecians having their Temples, altars, and their ^^ols
as the Grecians have,

The 30 day
IN Rome as upon this day they celebrated a solemn feast to Hercules and to
the Muses, in the which feast the Romans used their several ceremonies with
so many kind of sacrifices wherein they excelled all nations, for most comely
they played in their g^mes and public shows the whole life of tha^ God with
such reverence and religions customs in observing a decorum in all things as
they are full of feasts and sacrifices: in the which month the great solemn
feast of Is^s in the city of Bus^ris which is in all Egypt most honored, they
take for y^ Moon, as they do take Osiris for the Sun, in the which feast
after their sacrifices and ceremonies are done in honoring of Isis they beat
and strike themselves about the face with their own hands, Isis.
yea they wound and prick themselves with Knives and Bodkins, and also with
other kind of sharp instruments, afflicting and persecuting themselves with
diverse tortures in such a most strange sort, that they think Isis not
appeased before they use these ceremonies according unto their ancient custom.

Q. Mar. Tremulus being Consul at Rome triumphed over the Hernices and
Anaguins in the 447. year after the building of Rome, this was y^ 2. age of
Rome, called adolescentia Romana which continued from the Kings until Appius
Claudius, at what time the triumphs began to be of great pomp Q. Mar.
Tremulus triumph.
according to the victory of the conqueror for the Athenians crowned the
victor with a crown of Oken leaves called ciuitas corona appointed for them,
that the states of Cities, as Pericles and Demosthenes do affirm, that they
might not in Greece make a mo^^ment of their victory in brass, or in any
durable stoane to maintain or to move dissension between their posterities,
but with garlands and crowns made of flowers, leaves, and such like.

In the latter years of Charles the fi^t, a decree was made at Augusta by the
Emperor and all the states of Germanye, that the new form of religion so
often consulted, disputed, and de^ended by Martin Luther and others, should
continue until the next general council, this decree of Inreri^ was
published in all the cities of Germany, and allowed by the Emperor and the
peers, this decree says Functius was published the 18. of May, but Sleid and
Pantal affi^meth this day, 1548.

T. Statilius Taurus then Proconsull in Aff^ick under Octauius Caesar,
triumphed with great pomp and solemnity over the Affricans, 719. you must
proportion the state of the triumph to the greatness of the victory, for
great victories made great triumphs, specially among the Romans, for the
Persians and the Egiptians used not such stately glori^us triumphs as the
Romans did, nor with any great pomp and magnificence, but they used for to set
up their statues and images in brass or in copper, or st^ne, upon arches or
pillars made for that purpose in memory of their victories, with certain
Persian caracters, or Egiptian letters, in token of their triumphs, and that
they erected up in every great city, as Memphis, Sais, Pelusium, to signify
unto* their posterities their victories, which the priests of Vulcan had in
charge to keep, contrary to the Grecians, who were not permitted to set up
any monument of triumphs or victories by the Judges of all Greece called
Amphictions, because it should not stir or provoke envy between Tribes or
Cities, but they should were garlands, and be crowned with diverse kind of
crowns made of laurel, myrtle, pine, oken leaves, for triumphs were not
permitted, neither among the Gretians nor among the Romans for any victory
obtained in civil wars.

FINIS.
The names of those Consuls and Captains that had their triumphs granted
them by the Senators at Rome within this month of June, are these that follow.

1 C. Marius Rutilius, 2 Q. Cecilius Metellus, 3 M. Fab. Ambustus, 4 T. Didius,
5 Lucinius Crassus, 6 ^n. Fuluius Centumalus, 7 Q. Marius Tremulus, 7 Statilius
Taurus.
The names of the feasts and sacrifices celebrated with great solemnity in
Rome within this month of June.

1 Hecatombaea, 2 Vestalia, 3 Quinquatria, 4 Chronia, 5 Saturnalia, 9
Metoichla, 7 Panathenaea,
The solemn game and plays in Rome within this month of June are thus named.

Ludi Piscatorij. Ludi Gladiatoria. Ludi Circeuses.
Thus ends the first part of the Dial of Days* 1590.

