CERTAIN ENGLISH Verses, presented unto the Queens most excellent Majesty,
by a Courtier: In joy of the most happy disclosing, of the most dangerous
conspiracies pretended by the late executed Traitors, against her royal
person, and the whole Estate.

AT LONDON Printed by Henry Haslop, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard
at the sign of the Bible. 1586.

THE TRIVMPHS OF TROPHES, In Saphie verse of Iubiles.
IF DAVID daunst for joy before Exul^^tes cantate Domino, and inbilate Deo
Jacob. Psalm. 80.
the Arc being a king
If Barac sang when Isreal's foes were foild,
Then victors we that Deboras song may sing
Our Judith stout Holosernes Mates has spoild.
If Rome of Roman Triumphs erst was often so glad Psallite Domino in Cithara
in^ unda and voce carminis. Psalm. 98.

and likewise Greece of Grecians Trophes ioyed:
If Jews of Jubilees their only mirth have had
then England leap, and laugh aloud for Queen enjoyed.
Now Baal and Bell, now Titanes sons are slain, Clangite iubam, sumite
psalmii, and dat^ tympa^^m cum nablo. Psalm. 80.

their Prophets false their wicked Priests are killed
Their Pluto howles that Babels brood are taen,
their Tower did fall that Nimrods Imps did build.
Since Nessus brood and Cassius crew are known Tu deus dissipa(...) and
cos^egisli capita, draconu^ in aquie ps.

like Siluane Centaures conspirde your Realm to quail,
Take courage Queen, for Sinon sleights abroad are blown,
the Traitors found, and yet the treasons fail.
These Cicloppes seed which at your crown do kick Demersae sunt gentes in
foue^^ quam fecerunt.

and frame a form to make your kingdom bleed,
Like Giants seek with stones the stars to strike
but mist the mark and wound themselves in deed:
They vowed Zopirus vows, to please Darius beck Sepul^rum patens guttur little.
Psalm. 5

they sought a new devise which Sphinx of Rome the^ taught,
They feign would find, that England had one neck,
that by a stroke the head might off they sought-
Gladiu^ strinxerunt* and arcu^ tete^derunt impij, vt iugulent cor qui recto
sunt cord.
Their match was made, their wager was not won,
their snares were laid, but yet their purpose mist,
Their day decreed, and yet the deed not done,
a will they had you see, that wanted what they wist.
Vt ^arent cada^era ^uoru^ in cibum a^abu^ coeli. Psalm* 93.
What thought Pyragmons sprats to do, we know,
their Romish Iesabell Naboths vineyard sought,
Who like Medusa bends her cursed Bow
the only Circes, which has this mischief wrought.
Deus vltionom est Dominus. Psalm. 94.
These vipers tend with Briareus hundred hands,
with hundred Argus eyes these Scorpions wait,
These busy Basilisks and brood of Cocatrice stands
like Nilus Crocodiles hungry for their bait.
Callidu^ excogitarunt consiliu^ contra dominii. Psalm 93.
These sucking serpents, these monstrous snakish crewe,
these blooddie Dragons like spiteful Asps are set,
With Hidras heads which erst Alcides slew
are now of late with our Bellona meet.
Vt Jerusalem poncre^t in acernos ruinar^m. Psalm. 79.
Of Canaan feign* they would a Chaos make,
and bring Palladium in, our Ilion to deface,
A spoil for Hispaine, a feat for France in hand they take
and quite to make an end of Brutus race.
Via impiorum tenebrosa, nesciunt vbi corruant. Prou. 4.
Thus these climing mates Euceladus like attempt,
in arms seek Jove from skies by force to take,
They seek the Sun, the Moon, the Stars in great contempt
to obscure their light a deadly Eclips to make.
Sepe expugnaueru^t me a iuue^ tute mea nunc dicat Israel. Psalm. 129.
They seek with Phaaeton Phoebus charge to rest,
Vulcans net, Gordions knot they would unknit
And break their blooddie blades on Pallas breast,
thus they covet much in Moses chair to sit.
To wrest from Hercules hand his Club, who can?
who may from Jove, his lightning take by force?
Homers verse, who can disgrace? I say no man,
who then can touch a sacred Princes coarse.
Though Ca^sar was in Senate slain by Brute his friend,
Though Cirus head was bathd in blood luke warm, Sanguis ^anguinis merces Deuteronomy

No marvel though, for blood requires blood at thend
but mercy too much thine, I fear does harm,
For if Laban was for Jacob sake so blessed,
and Putiphars hap, Genes. 30 39.
by Joseph's mean no less
Our hap, our bliss, our joys wherein we rest*
For whom it is, we must of force confess.
Who with Jonas gurth has sau'de us from the Sun, Tegmen a turbine and
vmbraculum ab aestu dominus. Deuteronomy. 33.

Who with Aser shoes, has kept us from the mire?
Who has with David's sling Golias mates undone.
our Cynthia, she who has appeased Iehouas ire.
These on Bellerophons horse do ride in sky, Quaerunt anima^ mea^ and
moditati sunt tota di^ dolos Ps. 38.

with Icarus wings to clime in clouds is their drift,
These would make Architas wooden Dove to fly,
What blind Teresias does not see their shift.
In Phaetonissa school, Pone cos domine vt clibanum ignis, in tempore irae
tuae. Psalm. 21
at Endor they were taught,
with Dracos ink to write, with Creons seal to sign,
With Judas kiss to kill, with Hamons have they sought,
both Iudaes spoil, and Sions fall in fine.
These seceet Satires, these cruel Catelins wait,
these dogs of Moabs house greadie of their pray.
Like Eumenides whelps tending on their bait,
Vultures for Prometheus guts ready set in ray.
They ventured Acherontas depth to wade, Apericulis persequentium and a
conuentu malignant^^on tu salus mea.

they striued through Stigtas stream to sail,
Mauger of Megeras head away they made,
by Carons help, Elisius field to assail.
To make spotted Ewes with Jacobs stick they sought, Eijce fulmen and dissipe
eos^mitta sagittas tuas and disturba illos. Psalm.

to walk unseen, with Giges ring feign they would
Of Simon Magus these men would feign be taught,
like Curres by Circes charmed to be with Liones bold.
Leuate sign^^ (...) est (...).
Circes cup is fallen, Calipsos sauce is shed
Balims brood is b^^d, their Harpies are descried,
Cerberus soppes are found, Cirens songs are red
thus is Accaron known, and Roman Idol tried.
Car (...) Psalm. 25
Their drink is blood, their bread is humane flesh,
Consuls heads with Preachers tongues their food, and what
Is their daintiest dish* Princes hearts I guess,
Thus like Basan Bulls, they feed their Pope with fat.
Conati sunt pri(...) an^na mea. Psalm. 25.
But time decreed, how long should Assure live,
and God foretold, when Pharaoes life should end,
To take thy life the man of sin does strive,
in vain O Queen, when Angels thee defend.
Non ob^eniet ti by malii, nec appropinquabit plaga tabernaculo tuo. Psa. 62*
Could Jonas in the raging Seas be drowned?
could Lions Daniel in their Dens devour?
Might Misael burn in fi^ie furnace bound?
durst Traitors blade attempt our sacred Princes bower?
Non est consiliu^ nec prudentia contra Dominu^.
A blast of wind made Th'assirians host to fly,
Earthen pots made Madianites to take their flight,
Horns threw Ierichoes wall flat on ground to be,
God, makes Flies, Frogs, Rats and Lice, for him to fight.
Pone co^s^cut rotam, and sicut stipulamanto ve^^tum.
Cains curse, Herod's death, I wish on them to fall,
that seek a sacred Prince with secret sword to kill,
Judas death to good for Judas mates I call,
who bathes in blood, and drink of blood their fill.
Ia^vet gladius cor^^n in cor cor^^. Psalm. 37.
But Serpents never build in Box, nor breed
in Cipres tree, no Canker can the Emerald touch,
Even so these hellish Heliottes cannot feed,
on her whose virtues rare amaseth such.
Profer lancea^, apprehe^de clyp^ and singe in auxil^^^ (...). Psalm. 36.
These Minotaurus brood from Rome, from Creete,
with sword and fire, in Albion swarm like Bees
Like Sampsons Foxes with fi^ed tails and feet,
they dread no death to win a Popish fees.
In Rhodes was never seen, they say, an Eagles nest
some hold it so, tha Creete can breed no Owl,
And Crows in Athens were never seen at least
that England breeds no wolves, an error foul.
Cymerians blind, that haunts Troponius Cave,
could never bide the shining Sun in sight, Qui ambula^ in tenebais odi^
lucem.

Who still in darkness dwell, the light do never crave,
but like Cacus Captives shrouded a^e with night.
A simple Goat could assuage god Faunus ire,
a grunting hog could Neptunes rage appease, Dij Gentu^ vani sunt. Deus noster
coelos fecit.

A seely Cock could cool Asculapius fi^e,
but Lions ^round, the bull of Rome must please.
His Dan and Bethell, sacred Pantheon called,
his sinagoge esteems no Ox, no Calfe, miserunt in Ignem sancta tua and
pollueru^t tabernaculum nominis tui. Ps. 74
no Bull,
But blood of kings in Royal seats enstald,
wherein Perillus part he plays at full.
No fire in Rome could Romulus staff consume,
no means might make king Pyrrhus toes to burn
But Pope with Naeuius knife ever durst presume,
with Briers and Brambles make Caedar trees to mourn.
But might these mates have had but Aarons rod in hand
or could have borrowed Elias cloak no doubt, Anima nostrasicut passer ereptae
est ex laqueo venantium. Psalm.

They had made the Seas, on both sides for to stand,
that France and Spain might make the slaughter out.
Their Dagon fell, Quis deus praeter Dominum? quis ^ortis? sicut Deus noster
Sam: 22
our sacred Arc stood up,
their Pharao mist, our Moses did prevail,
Their cross was down, our crown did never stoop,
Their Barge did sink, our Ship top gallant sail,
Noughtie Nabals curse on David never fell? Cadant a consilij^ suis quonia^
r^belles sunt tibi. Psalm.

Achitophels cruel counsai^e did no good
to Absalon, when Absalon did rebel?
Semei could do no harm, when Semei God withstood.
Elizeus bones could raise the Dead from grave,
Peter's shadow passing by, (...) Act^ ^ap 5 Act. cap. ^9.
made sick men hole.
Paul's handkercher from death, did many save,
thus virtue deals to virtuous men her dole
But Balls of Rome and Bears of Hispaine did more,
they murder whom they will, and pardon whom they list,
Kings from crowns deprive, Spiritus procellarum e^it pa^s callicis little.
Psalr
and kings to crowns restore,
thus to shadow Caesar states, the Pope has ever wished.
If Dathan and Abiron sanke for treason wrought,
if Assure, Pluet super impios laqueos, ignem and sulphur.
Pharo so envied David's seat,
If Greeks Jews and Gentiles Jacobs star have sought,
these Gorgons would Eliza feign from Crown defeat.
When Perseus sword shall snatch of Medusas head,
when Mercuries whistle lulls Argos eyes to sleep,
When Phoebus faulchon kills monstrous Python dead. Inueniet manus tua ini^^ico^
tuos. Psalm. ^

then shall Eliza make Roman Cerberus creep:
Though still you bear, the Olive branch in breast.
yet some wish you Hermes Harpen in your hand,
Though you the Lamb embrace, the Lion is your beast,
for mercy must with justice join to rule a land.
Cleanse Angeus hall, destroy Stymphalides seed,
your soldiers ready preast, Dispelle eos sicu^ pale a a facie venti. Psalm. 1.
do stand in array,
Thunders, hailstones, brimstone, fire, your foes shall speed
Angels armd, hosts from hie, God himself will say.
S^ent and salue^^ (...) augures coeli qui contempla^^ur sydera: Esa 47.
To Curria trudge, of Sibill know your fates,
to Ammons priests, at Ammons temple scrape.
To Delphos post, call and knock at Phoebus gates,
to know of Phoebus how traitors best may escape.
Dux foemina factum.
No Jewel, Gemme, no goulde to give I had,
no Indian stones, no Persean gaze in hand
No pearls from Pactolus to a Prince, yet glad,
these happy Halcions days to see in Britain land.
FINIS. L. L.

