A BRIEF CONFERENCE OF DIVERSE LAWS: Divided into certain Regiments.

By Lodowick LLoyd Esquier, one of her Majesty's Serieants at Arms.

Eccle. 21. Vidi in loco iudicij impietatem, and in loco institiae iniquitatem.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, 1602.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, Elizabeth, by the grace of God, Queen of
England, France and Ireland, etc.
I Knew not how most gracious Queen, to make my most bounden and dutiful
service known unto your Majesty; But as David's servant ventured their lives
through the midst of their enemies to fetch water from the well of Bethelem,
to please their Lord and Master; So my self thought it my duty to travel
into some far countries in no danger, but of your Majesty's displeasure, by
presenting some strange Jewels among so many, as might dislike your Highness,
which should scorch me more then the Sun did Jonas when his gourd was off;
and terrify me more, then the countenance of Moses terrified the Jews without
his veil on. But your Majesty, which forget nothing but injuries, will the
sooner forgive me my overmuch boldness, the rather for that I present your
highness, but with Jewels, and such as far excel the Jewels on Aarons
garment, the only pearls which ought to be bought with all the wealth we have,
the Jewels which we ought to seek with all the study and travel we can; the
only Vrim and Thummim, which should shine bright on a Princes breast, which
the ancient Kings of Israel ware as tablets about their necks, as frontlets on
their foreheads, and gardes on their garments, which Jewels many other kings
sought and mist. Licurgus sought these Jewels for the Lacedaemonians at Delphos,
Mena sought them of Mercurius for Egypt, Numa of the Nymph Egeria for the
Romans, and Zaleucus of Minerua for the Locrea^s. Of these Jewels also I
brought the best Pearls I could find among them unto your Majesty, in hope
of your wonted gracious favor to accept these Jewels for their own sake, as
Artaxerxes accepted water of the river Cyrus, for Cyrus sake.

Your Majesty's most bounden and obedient servant, Lodowick LLoyd.

A BRIEF CONFErence of diverse Laws, divided into certain regiments.
In the first Regiment is expressed the antiquity and force of the Law, the
states of Commonwealths under diverse kinds of governments.
ALl creatures of God, as well in heaven as in earth, had laws given them
after they were created, to be governed and ruled by, the Sun, the Moon, and
the Stars to keep their perpetual motions and course in their places and
regiments, so the seas have their limits and bounds, how far they should rule
and reign, and though one star differs from an other in Job. 38.
glory, in greatness, and in brightness, yet are they governed by one
perpetual law; so the seas, though the waves thereof be so lofty and proud,
yet are they shut up within doors, and commanded to keep in, and not to go
further then the place to them by law appointed.

By law also the elements are commanded to stay within their own regiments,
without trespassing one of another, as Manilius faith; Certa stant omnia lege,
For the stanes by law have their leaders before them, they have their watch
given them, they have their motions and marching appointed them, and as all
rivers and waters have their course and recourse, to the seas, and from the
seas, as from their chief commander, so all stars have their brightness
and light from the Sun, as from their chief general.

Neither were the Angels in heaven, being the first and the chiefest creatures
of God, nor man in Paradise being the last creature, Tanquam Epilogus operum
dei, without law, the breach whereof made such a general confusion, that it so
obscured the first integrity of the law of nature, that the Angels that
offended in heaven, lost heaven, and were judged to perpetual darkness, and
man for his disobedience in Paradise, cast Job. 25.
out of Paradise to everlasting punishment, so that the Angels were not pure,
nor the heavens clear before God.

The earth likewise and the seas, and all the creatures in them, by breaking of
the first law which Tertullian calls Primordialem l^gem and legum omnium
matricem, lost the benefits of the first creation, for in Adams fall all
creatures were cursed, which made Augustine to wonder, Vtrum mirabilius homines
iustos creare, quam iniustos instificare, whether the mercy of God were more in
creating just men, or in justifying wicked men, though with God it was of
equal and like power; yet said Augustine, it was of greater mercy to justify
unjust men, for that Iustificatio er at secunda hominis creatio.

Yet the old Patriarchs lived under the law of nature, The old Patriarchs
lived under the law of nature. 2. Cor 3. Iere. 31.
so Paul testifies that the law was first written, not in tables of stones,
but in fleshly tables of the heart, for I will put my law says the Lord in
their inward parts, and in their hearts will I write it; so Augustine says,
Audi linguam non in lapide sed in cord scribentem; for from the eternal law,
which is Creatrix and gubernatrix vniuersitatis, was revived and lightened the
law of nature, under the which the Patriarchs lived, for the law of nature
which the Patriarchs had, being not corrupted, differs nothing from the
written law given to Moses, which is the whole sum of the moral law.

What else is the law written given to Moses, but a short repetition, and
compendious catalogue, expounding The law of nature is a short repetition of
the law written.
unto us the law of nature, being obscured and corrupted by the fall of Adam,
but by the second Adam renewed, written, and given to Moses in tables of stones,
Tanquam norma rectitudinis in Deo.

So Paul says, that if the Gentiles which have not the law, do by nature
those things contained in the law, they hauiug not the law, are a law to
themselves, and therefore the Heathens are not excuseable, for conscience which
is that Flammeus gladius, is a witness of their fault, and a sign of the
anger and judgment against them for their sin.

Agnitio Peccatilex, and therefore the law was given to show us our
infirmities, and that by the law grace might be sought for, Fides enim
impetrat, quod lex The law written and given to Moses.
imperat: for when the law was first given in Mount Sinai to Moses, it was
with such fear, lightning and thundering, with such clouds, smoke, and fire,
that every part of Sinai trembled and quaked, when the law was given, for the
law is full of terror and ministers unto death.

The law said Plato, punishes wicked me^, and rewards good me^, so Cicero
says; Lex vitioru^ eme^datrix and virtutu^ est commendatrix. By the law we
know our selves, without the which we wander in darkness without light, Cic de
leg. lib. 1.
in ignorance without knowledge, in sin without fear, whose force and
authority is from God and not from man: so could Cicero say, Tantalegis vis
est, vt ea non homini sed deo Delphico tribueretur.

And therefore the first and ancient kings and lawmakers of the world, Quibus
omnes antiquae gentes quonda^ paruerunt, both for the more credit of themselves
and better authority of their laws, made their subjects and people Cic. de
leg. lib. 3.
believe, when their first laws were made, that the gods were so careful,
that they gave them several laws to govern the people.

So Mena one of the first kings of Egypt, affirmed that he had instructions for
making of his laws and decrees to the Egiptians, from god Mercurius.

In like sort Licurgus made the Lacedaemonians believe, Cic. de diuini. lib 1.
that the laws which he gave unto them were delivered unto him from Appollo in
Delphos.

The people of Creete were persuaded fully by Minoes their first lawe-maker,
that the laws which he gave Diod. sic. lib. 2. cap. 5.
unto them, were delivered unto him from Jupiter, that thereby the law might
the more be feared, and the lawmakers better obeyed.

So did Numa Pomp. warrant his laws which he established among the Romans
concerning religion, from the Nymph Egeria, for the government which was under
kings, is by Aristotle called Primus and diuinissimus principatus.

When the first government and state of Commonwealths fell by too much
severity of kings, as among the Romans who were weary of kings, and had no
law but Ius regis, the judgment and sentence of the king, called in Romulus
time, Lex curiata, whose severity grew to be such, that the second government
in Rome, Lex curiata.
which was by Consuls and Senators, took place by fall of the first, which
law was called Senatus Consultus, which grew so great by authority of the
Consuls, that a third kind of popular government under the Tribune of the
people, was authorized to suppress the misgouernment both of the Consuls and
Senators, as the Ephori were among the Lacedaemonians made by Theopompus, to
bridle the insolency of the kings.

So were the wise men called Magi in Persia, without whom the kings of Persia
could make no laws.

And so the Magistrates called Megistenes, had the like authority with the
kings of Armenia, as the Ephori had in Sparta. Chief magistrates and governors
in diverse countries


Among the Carthagineans also were two chief Magistrates named Suffetes, the
one with the other to look to the government of the kings, that they should
justly and rightly minister justice to the people.

The Hebrews likewise, where God placed Judges to govern the people, of the
which they were weary, and would have a king, so that the Romans being weary
of kings, would have Consuls, and the Hebrews being weary of Judges, would
have kings, for all nations at the beginning began with the government of
kings, saving the Hebrews, which were as strangers and bondmen in Egypt,
without either king, law, or liberty, four hundred and thirty years, even
from the coming of Abraham into Egypt, until Moses and Aaron were commanded
to bring Israel out of Egypt, at what time a law was given in Mount Sinai to
Moses, within fifty days after the Israelites came out of Egypt, that they
should be governed thereby before they possessed the land of Canaan.

After they had received the law, the Lord commanded them that they should
not make gods of silver, nor gods of gold: he also commanded that they The
Lord commanded an altar to be made.
should make him an Altar, and thereon to offer burnt offerings and peace
offerings, with a straight charge that they should not make him an Altar of
hewed stones like the altar at Damascus, which Achab Exodus 20.
brought to Israel, for that they should do nothing of themselves after the
manner of the Gentiles, but by the Lords prescript rules, which are his
eternal laws.

Yet before this law was given to Moses, there were Aultars builded and
sacrifices offered, by Noah after he Diverse aultars before the law written.
landed out of the Arc at Baterion, by Abraham after he came to the land of
Canaan at Sychem, by Isaac in Bersabe, by Jacob in Bethel, where he fled from
his brother Esau, they were instructed by the law of nature, written in the
tables of their hearts, to worship the Lord, and to fear him even from the
creation.

Under the law of nature the people of God lived, and were assisted by the
spirit of the Lord, ministered unto them by Angels, and instructed by the
Patriarchs, and lively tradition of the fathers to the sons, two thousand
five hundred years before the law written.

Who doubts but what Methusalem (being in the company of Adam above two
hundred and fifty years, and with the rest of the Patriarchs unto the very
flood, Septe longaeui
living under the law of nature) heard of Adam, but Methusalem delivered it to
Sem? what Sem heard of Methusalem, but he instructed Abraham therewith? what
Abraham heard of Sem, he showed it to Jacob? and what Jacob heard of Abraham,
he taught it to Amri, who was father to Moses, to whom the law written was
given, so that the one was instructed by the other, from the father to the
son, to serve and fear the Lord by the law of nature. So that Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, Jacob, Job, and all the old Patriarchs and godly fathers, lived in
the fear of God by the law of nature.

No doubt many things were written of the old fathers before the flood, and
left to their posterities, and after the flood generally over the whole world
before the use of paper, laws and learning were given by traditions from the
parents, to the children and their posterities, as the Indians which had no
laws written no more then the Lacedaemonians, but by observations, until the
Indian Philosophers called Brachmaines, found means to write in Sindone, fine
linen, or lawne, as the old Egiptians used to write on the inward side of the
bark of the tree Biblus, or as Vlpian says, the Grecians used to write on the
bark of the tree Tilia; for in ancient time from the Tylia otherwise called
Phyllida.
beginning, laws were written on the inward side of barks of trees, as on the
bark of Beech trees, Elm, Ash, Palm trees, and such; for the great library
in Alexandria, by Philadelphis compiled, and the library in Asia by A^talus
Vlpian. F. de leg. 3.
and Eumenes gathered together, were written in Haedonis Chartis in goat
skins.

During all which time, there was no mention made neither of gods nor of Idols,
though Satan played the first Idolater in practicing to Adam and Eve, saying;
Eritis vt dij; Ye shall be like gods on earth, and your eyes shall be opened.

Satan by degrees deceived Ada^, first asking him questions, then doubting,
then denying, saying, you shall not die, which was the first lie in the world;
so Satan proceeds with his stratagems, as Gregorius Magnus says in Vnoquoque
lapsu a minimis semper incipitur.

Yet after the law written was given, Idolatry was presently committed before
Moses came down from the Mount; so that there was no Idols mentioned nor
Rachel stole her father Labans Image.
spoken of, before Rachel, Jacobs wife, stole her father Labans Image, and
brought it from Mesopotamia in her husbands company toward Canaan, where Laban
accused Genesis 31.
his daughter, that she stole his gods away.

But Jacob within a while after he came to Canaan, commanded his household and
all that were with him, to put away the strange gods that were among them,
Genesis 35.
to cleanse themselves, and change their garments, and Jacob buried and hid
their Images under an oak by Sichem, and went to Bethel, and made an altar
there to his God, as the Lord had commanded him.

So Ninus a little before that time set up the first Image that is read of to
be among the Gentiles, to Belus The Image of Belus made by his son Ninus.
his father, from which time the name of Baal, his prophets, and his priests,
began to multiply so many in Niniuie and in Babylon, yea in Judah it self
among the Israelites, to whom the law was given from the Lord to Moses,
forbidding them to serve strange gods.

Jeroboam Salomons servant, and king of Israel, which Jeroboam made two golden
calves.
made Israel first to sin, by making two golden calves their gods, the one in
Dan, the other in Bethel, saying to the people, These be thy gods (o Israel)
which brought thee out of the land of Egypt.

Within a while after, wicked Achab being not satisfied with the gods of
Samaria, the golden calves which Jeroboam made, brought Baal from Assyria to
Judah, where he kept and maintained 450. false Prophets, to instruct and teach
Israel in the religion of Baal, contrary to the law which the Lord gave unto
Moses; for the law was, Thou shall have no other gods but me: so that the gods
of the Moabites and Ammonites, yea the gods of the Gentiles, came to be
worshipped in the midst of Jerusalem: and Mount Oliuet was so full of
Idolatry under every green tree, and in every grove, that thereby it was
called the Mount of corruption, so that Jerusalem had as many strange aultars
in the time of Solomon, as Athens had in the time of Paul.

The Jews therefore were as Idolatrous, and had as many gods as the Gentiles
had, and rather served the dumb Idols of the Gentiles, then the living God of
Israel.

So vain and wicked were the Israelites, that while Moses was in the Mount
with the Lord for the law, before he came down from the Mount, they had
forced Israel made a god of metal while Moses was with the Lord for the law.
Deuteronomy. 9.
Aaron to make them a calfe of metal, as a god to go before them, for so the
Lord said unto Moses, up and get thee down quickly, for the people have made
them a god of metal, at what time the Lord was so angry, that he determined
to destroy all the Hebrews for their Idolatry, had not Moses earnestly prayed,
and made intercession for them.

For the Hebrews before they came out of Egypt, saw the Idolatry of the
Egiptians, in worshipping oxen, calves, serpents, crocodiles, and other beasts
as gods, the law was not so soon given to Moses, but it was as soon broken
by the people, who forsook the Lord and his law, and followed other gods,
Baalim and Ashtaroth, Number. 25.
after Ioshuahs death, for during the whole time of Ioshuah, he kept Israel
from Idolatry, and they served the Lord, but after his death they committed
fornication with the daughters of Moab, who brought Israel to worship and serve
their gods, that the Lord was angry with Israel, and bad Moses take up the
chief men among the people, and hang them up to the Lord against the Sun,
that the Lords wrath might be taken away.

So after Gedeons death Israel fell to their Idolatry, as they were wont to
do, that Manasses a most wicked 4. Reg^.
Idolatrous king builded aultars to all the host of heaven in the house of the
Lord, and he put up an Image in the Temple of the Lord, where the Lord himself
said, In Jerusalem will I put my name, he worshipped and served them, he
reared up aultars and made groves, he built high aultars, which Ezechiah his
father destroyed, and following Achab king of Israel, offered his son in
fire, so that in Jerusalem the Israelites worshipped more gods, and had more
aultars to their gods, then the Athenians had in Athens, which Paul testified,
who saw so many gods and so many aultars in Athens, one to lust, one to shame,
and one among so many, Ignotodeo, to an unknown god.

The second Regiment of Laws, containing the contempt of religion severely
punished among diverse nations: of the sundry sacrifices and vows of the
Heathens, and of the multitude of Idols and Aultars in Israel.
SOcrates deriding and scoffing at the multitude of the gods and aultars of
Athens, was by the Athenians put to death, not for breaking their aultars,
destroying their temples, nor betraying Socreates poisoned in Athens for
religion.
the City, but because he swear by a strange god, thinking thereby he had
despised the gods of Athens, and more esteemed strange gods.

Plato his scholar, though he was of the like opinion as his master Socrates
was, yet durst he not openly confess it, for fear of the people, though king
Dyonisius knew Platos mind by his Letters, therein signified, that when Plato
wrote to king Dyonisius of one god, then he wrote seriously and earnestly, but
when he wrote of many gods, he ieasted with scoffs as Socrates did.

Plato was of oipnion that Poets and Painters filled Greece with all kind of
Idols, for what the Poets feigned Platoes opinion of Poets and Painters.
in Greece in fables, the same the Painters painted in Greece in tables, and
therefore Plato thought good to remove Homer crowned and anointed with all
reverence Joseph. lib. 2. contra. Apion.
out of Greece, for that he (through the opinion of the Greeks had of him)
filled Greece with too many gods and aultars.

But the Lord commanded Israel to overthrow the ^ltars of the Gentiles, to
break their pillars, cut down their groves, and burn the Images of their
gods with fire, saying; Covet not the gold nor the silver (...)
that is about the Heathens Images, as Achan did, least thou be sna^ed thereby,
for it is an abomination to the Lord.

Among the Romans they thought it a great sacrilege to contemn and profane
the religion of their gods, for so Alcibiades was accused of sacrilege for
that he offended the law of the Athenians, despising the holy Alcibiades (...)
ed from Athens.
mysteries of the goddess Ceres, entered with his torchbearer and v^rger before
him, against the law of Eumolpides, into the secret sacrifice and mysteries of
Ceres, for the which his goods were confiscated, and himself banished out of
Athens for his contempt.

So for the like Clodius was accused in Rome, for that he entered secretly into
the mysteries of Flora, where none should be but women, and the Priests of
Flora, but as Alcibiades was banished out of Athens, so Clo^ius Clo^ius slain
in Rome.
after was slain in Rome, for that Clodius offended the law, being rather
suspected for Pompeia Caesar's wife, then for the zeal he had to Floraes
sacrifice.

So zealous were the Heathens, that even among the Scythians, rude and savage
people, for that Anacharsis Anacharsis slain.
the Philosopher brought the ceremonies of the Grecians and their religion into
Scythia, and used the same in Joseph. lib. 2. contra Apion.
Scythia, he was slain by his own countrymen the Scythians.

In like manner the Athenians used certain of the Acarnanites, who being not
Priests, profaned the gods of Athens in their religion, which was taken of the
Athenians for a sacrilege against their gods, and therefore were the
Acarnanites slain in Athens. If the Gentiles do this for dumb Idols and
wooden gods, and allow no strange gods to be worshipped nor served within
their territories, neither suffered their religion to be altered, how much
more should Israel observe the law of their Lord and God? for of him, through
him, and for Paul. (...). ad Romans
him, are all things; and as Hilarious says, Quicquid in deo est Deus est, and
totum quod in Deo est, vnum est: Hermes Hermes in Poemand.
though a Heathen man among the Egiptians, could say: Deus est quae sunt and ea
quae non sunt. And Plato among Plato in Phaed.
the Greeks, could say: Deum esse aequalem totum and ipsum singulum.

Such was the blind zeal of the Gentiles toward their gods, that they
exceeded the Jews, for as their gods were innumerable, so were their
ceremonies, their sacrifices, feasts and vows infinite, they were so religious
to their gods, that they sought neither health, wealth, nor any thing else,
without vows made, The Romans vow.
either to dedicate Temples and Aultars, to sacrifice and make Plays, as the
Romans did for the health of their Consuls, Dictators, and Emperors, or for
any thing else, the Priests of Jupiter called Flamines should offer the
sacrifice of Haecatombae unto their gods.

The Grecians also when their gods were offended with them, vowed for their
assistance and help, to stand Grecians.
with them to dedicate statues and Images, with crowns, chains, and Jewels.

The Egiptians when they had offended their gods, Vows of the Gentiles to
their gods.
they should shave their heads and their beards, and dedicate the hairs
thereof at Memphis, with vows made that they would build temples of marble and
of Iuorie to their gods.

The Persians which have neither Temples nor Images, Pers^
but the Sun only whom they worship, whose Temple said they, is the whole
world, to whom the Persians made a pile of wood, offered sacrifice, and powered
wine, milk and honey, which with supplication and vows Xerxes burnt the
Temples in Greece.
they made to the Sun, for the Persians had neither Temples nor Idols, which
made Xerxes when he came to Greece with his Persian army, and saw their
Gods Cic. de legib. lib. 2.
and Idols so full painted and pictured on the walls of their Temples, that
he left neither Gods nor Temples that he could come unto, unburned.

In so much that the Lord complained by his Prophets, and brings these
Heathens, the Romans, Egiptians, Persians, and others in, for a proof against
his people, saying; how these Gentiles observe and keep the laws of their
Gods, and suffer no strange God to be worshipped among them, but my people
will not obey me says the Lord.

The Prophet Jeremy cried so to Israel, saying; Look how many cities are in
thee (oh Judah) so many strange ^em 1^.
Gods do you worship within Judah.

And so the Lord complained how the Rechabites kept the laws and ordinances of
their father Ionadab, that commanded them, they should never drink wine,
build no house, sow no seed, plant no vines, and The Rechabites laws.
have no vineyards, they have kept their fathers laws, but my people will not
obey my laws, nor keep my commandments says the Lord.

So did the sons of Mattathias, as the sons of Ionadab did, obeyed their
fathers commandment in observing the laws of the Lord.

The examples are verified in all the kings of Israel, even from Solomon, for
he forsook the Lord, and served strange gods, and builded Aultars to
Chemosh, god of the Moabites, and to Moloch, god of the Ammonites.

But David burnt the Images and Idols of the Philistines in the valley of
Giants, so in like sort were the Idols of the Iamnites burned.

The Lord therefore sent Ahiah the Sylonite, to Jeroboam, Ahiahs speech to
Jeroboam.
Salomons servant, which took his mantle, and rent it into twelve pieces; thus
says the Lord, so will I rent the kingdom out of Salomons hand, and will give
ten Tribes to thee, although they read in the law of the Lord, that the
sword of the Lord is sent against them that worship Images, as the Lord said,
I will whet my sword which shall eat the flesh of Ido^ators, and will make my
arrows drunken with Deuteronomy. 32:
^heyr blood, I will destroy your Aultars, overthrow your Images, and cast
your bodies upon the ^arkasses of your Idols, yet would not Israel be
in^tructed.

And therefore it was prophesied and said of Jerusalem, Thou shall serve thy
enemy in hunger, in thirst, ^n nakedness, and in need, and he shall put a
yoke Deuteronomy. 38.
of Iron upon thy neck, until he have destroyed thee; thou shall eat the
fruit of thy body, even the flesh of ^hy sons and daughters, during the
siege and straight^esse wherein thy enemies shall enclose thee, because thou
obeyedst not the voice of the Lord, so that thorn Hose. 10.
and thistle shall grow on their altar, and they shall say to the mountains,
cover us, and to the hills fall upon us.

And therefore Zaleucus Pythagoras Scholar, the first law that he made among
the Locreans, was first to Zeleueus first laws to the Locreans. Diod. sic. li.
12.
establish religion, and to honor and worship the gods, acknowledging all
things that are good, to come from divine powers; the second law was against
contention and discord among the people, exhorting one to love an other,
agreeable to the law of nature, which law was given unto us that we should
love others, and do for others, as much as for our selves. Hence grew that
Paradoxe of Pythagoras, that all things should be common amongst friends, and
friendship most common; and Cic. de leg 1.
therefore Socrates was wont to curse that man, Qui primus vtilitatem a natura
seiunxisset, for what nation is in the world, but by the law of nature, loves
lenity, humanity, gratitude and goodness, and by the self same law hates
cruelty, pride, ungratefulness and wickedness.

It seemed that Zeleucus read Moses law, for that his first law was
concerning religion in the first table, and his second law touching love and
charity between neighbors in the second table.

Licurgus among the Lacedaemonians made a law that no stranger might come and
dwell in Sparta, not Licurgus law that no stranger should dwell in Sparta.
in any part of Lacedemonia, lest they should defile and profane their laws
and religion, neither should that Lacedemonian, that went out of his country,
return to his country, lest he should corrupt their religion.

So it was among the Israelites by the law of Moses, that no stranger might
match with the Israelites, neither by marriage, nor by any society, unless they
would become obedient to the law of Moses.

It was not lawful in Athens to think, much less to speak any thing against
their gods, and for that Auaxagoras the Philosopher said, the Sun was but a
fiery stone, he was by the Athenians put to death, for that the Athenians
judged the same to be a God. Anaxagoras put to death. Joseph. lib. 2. contra
Apion.


So careful were the Gentiles to serve their Gods, that Gedeons death was
sought, for the breaking of the altar of Baal, Ieptha was threatened to be
slain in his own house, whereby he was forced to fly to the land Iudic. 6.
of Tob.

Protagoras, because the Athenians found that he Protagoras
doubted in his opinion of the gods of Athens, they so sought him, that had he
not fled betimes he had died for it.

The like happened to a Roman captain in Egypt for killing of a Catte one of
the Gods of Egypt, which was against his will, he hardly escaped with his life,
whom Diod. sic. lib. 2.
the people so followed and pursued to Alexandria, that Ptolomeu the king and
all his princes had their hands full to save him and others from death.

The Athenians also were so zealous and religious toward Diagoras.
their gods, that they decreed 600. crowns to any man that would kill
Diagoras, for that he was charged, Talentu^. Atticum. Cic. de natura deor.
lib. 1.
that he scoft and laughed at their gods, and doubted whether any gods were,
and if there were, what manner of gods they were. Too many examples might be
brought for the proof of this in all ages, and in all countries.

The laws of Moses by the Lord set down, was to serve him in the Temple of
Solomon: and that only in Jerusalem, yet Solomon in his old age forsook the
Temple, which he made to serve the Lord, and was the first himself that served
strange gods in groves, and under every green tree, that from Salomons time
Idolatry grew so in Judah, that the Israelites had as many laws, as they had
gods, and as many gods as they had cities, and although they had not so many
Temples builded to their gods as the Gentiles had, yet they had as many aultars
in groves and under every green tree, for among the Israelites in every grove
was a temple, and under every green tree an altar; and yet they spared not to
defile the temple of the Lord in Jerusalem; among the Gentiles they were so
careful of their gods, that every god had his temple, for among them two gods
might not be in one temple.

So the Romans could endure nothing worse then to suffer strange gods to be
among them, for Lu. Aemilius the Consul, was by the Senators commanded to pull
down the temples of Isis and Serapis (...) ^at they were Egiptian gods: for
there was a law among the Senators Val. Max. de peregrin. religione, cap. 3.
of Rome, that Dij Peregrini e ciuitate ^ijciantur.

And therefore the Romans so esteemed their gods, that when Pilate wrote unto
his Lord and mais^r Tiberius Caesar, to have one Jesus allowed to be one of the
gods in Rome, who did many miracles and great wonders in Judah and Jerusalem;
and yet of malice by the Jews was put to death: though Caesar would allow it,
and would have the Senate also to allow (...), yet the Senators thought it not
fit that a strange god should be accepted in Rome, among the Roman gods, so
that the Romans and the Grecians could serve many gods, but Israel could not
allow nor accept their Lord and God, for the Samaritans drove him out of their
cities, the Gergesites banished him out of their country, and in Jerusalem his
own city, the Jews crucified him, preferring Barabas the murderer, before
Jesus their Savior.

Yet Cyrus king of Persia, caused it to be proclaimed Cyrus confessed the god
which the jews worshipped. 1. Eldr. (...).
by writing throughout all his Empire, that the Lord God of heaven, had
commanded him to build him a house at Jerusalem in Judah, confessing that he
only is the god that is at Jerusalem; and therefore Cyrus commanded the
Israelites to build their Temple again.

Artaxerxes, surnamed long hand, made the like law for repairing of the Temple
of Jerusalem. Artax.


Nabuchodonozer published a law that he should be Nabuchodonozer.
torn in pieces, and his house made a Iakes that blasphemed the God of Israel,
but before he said, what God can take you out of my hand, at what time
Holofernes said, there was no other God but Nabuchodonozer.

Darius Medus made a straight law, that all dominions Darius made a law that
all dominions should fear the god of Daniel.
and people should fear the God of Daniel, but before he proclaimed an edict,
that whosoever desired any petition, either of any god or man, within 30. days
but of himself, should be cast into a Lions den, so that Daniel was found
against the statute praying to his god, and was cast into the Lions den.

King Agrippa all in cloth of silver, glistring garments, Agrippa.
making an Oration to the people upon the Theaters at Caesaria, because he
suffered the people to flatter him, Joseph. de antiq. li. 19. ca. 7.
and to say it is the voice of God and not of man, which as Thucidides says,
is one of the three most dangerous enemies to overthrow a commonwealth: this
king in the very face of these his flatterers, was presently so tormented with
such pangues of death, that dying he spoke to the people, See whom you called
a god a little before, dies now like a most wretched man, like Bell the god of
Nabuchodonozer, who after that Daniel took pitch, fat, and hair, and did
seethe them together, and put it in Bells mouth, god Bell burst in sunder, of
who^ Daniel said, Behold your god Bell whom you worship, for the greatest king
is like an earthen vessel soon broken, a spider is able to poison him, a gnat
is able to choke him, and a little pin able to kill him, this is the
greatest glory that man can brag of himself.

In the third regiment is set down the Idolatry and superstitiousnesse of the
Israelites, compared by application with the customs and laws of the Gentiles,
IN Egypt the mother of all Idolatry, from whence the Grecians, the Romans,
and all the world were instructed Egypt the mother of all Idolatry. Dio^ic.
lib. 2.
to serve strange gods, they had most sumptuous Temples of Marble and of
Iuory, bedect with gold and silver most richly; but such ridiculous gods were
in Egypt, as apes, dogs, crocodiles, calves, oxen, serpents, and cattes, that
every several city in Egypt, had a several beast for their god, in Memphis a
bull, in Heliopilis an ox, in Medeta a bucke goat, in the city of
Elephantina a crocodile, and so of the rest.

And therefore the greeks scoffed the Egiptians, for that there was no beast
so vile but they would make Joseph lib 2. con^ Apion.
him a god in Egypt, and none but beasts were gods in Egypt, the Grecians gods
were carved and made like men.

The Romans made themselves gods, as Domitianus, after he decreed to be called
son unto Pallas, was not contented therewith, but would be called Dominus Deus
Domitianus.

So Caius and other some of the later Caesar's, would be called son unto
Jupiter, others brothers to the Sun and Moon, which both Augustus Caesar and
Tiberius Good. c. ^n li. 2. Viget. cap. 1.
refused to be honored with those names though they were offered; others would
have their Image set up in the Temple at Jerusalem; but woe be unto him that
says unto a piece of wood, arise, and to a dumb stone, stand up.

And therefore the Prophet says, Confundantur omnes qui adorant sculptilia,
and gloriantur in simulachris suis.

We are forbidden to bring rubbers and napkins, and to hold a looking glass
to Juno, for it is not Paul's napkin, Peter's shadow, Elizeus staff, Moses
rod, nor Elias mantle, but the Lord God of Elias, as Elizeus said.

When Pilate the Roman President was commanded by Tiberius the Emperor, to
set up his Image in the Temple of Jerusalem, some of the best of the Jews went
to Caesaria to Pilate, requesting with tears, that he The Jews observed
straightly their laws.
would not violate the Temple with Images, Pilate answered, Caesar's Image must
be set up, or else you die for it, they presently offered their necks bare to
be cut off, before their law should be broken, or the Temple violated with
Images.

The like commandment had Petronius from his master Cai. Caesar, to set up
his Image in the Temple, but in like manner as before to Pilate, the Jews came
with their wives and children to entreat Petronius, who told them as Pilate
did, that the Image of Caesar must be set up in their Temple, as other Nations
suffered the Roman Emperors Images to be set in their Temples among their
gods, as fellows to their gods, or else they must dye for it, the Jews
answered Petronius, that all the Jews in Judah, men, women, and children,
shall and will dye before the law shall be broken. Thus were they so slain
and killed between the Roman Emperors and the kings of Assyria, that their
blood was shed out like water on every side of Jerusalem, and yet would they
not allow Images, nor have their laws broken.

The Romans had no Images for 170. years, though afterward they had in
their closets diverse Images which they worshipped as gods, they had also
household and peculiar gods at their gates, and in their Alex. Neapolit. genial.
lib. 5 cap. 24.
entries, besides the Images and statues of themselves and of their friends, so
that the Romans so esteemed Images, that in the time of the late Caesar's,
Theodosius the Emperor thought to destroy Antiochia, for the pulling down of
the Image of his friend Placilla, had not Macedonius persuaded him to the
contrary.

So Agrippa for his woman Drusilla despised Paul.

Among the Jews one Theudas a Magitian took upon him to be the Messiah,
persuaded the people that he was that Prophet which they looked for, and that
he Diverse took upon the^ to be the Mesias.
was able with a word to divide the River Jorden into two, and to give him and
his company place to pass through, but he was slain and his company, and
Theudas head brought to Jerusalem by Cuspius the Roman President.

An other after Theudas, called Attonges a shepherd, affecting the kingdom,
made himself the Messiah. Joseph. de Antiquit. lib. 20. cap 5.


And after Attonges one Barcosma, who took upon him to be the Messiah, whom
the Jews so affected and followed thirty years, and when they perceived he
could not keep promise with them in vanquishing the Romans, the Jews slew
him.

But as the Israelites offered the blood of beasts, and sprinkled their
Aultars, according to the law of Moses, so the Gentiles imitated the Hebrews,
offered also blood, but the blood of their servants and children.

The Heathens thought no blood too dear to please their gods.

For the Romans were admonished out of the books of the Sibils, which they
more honored and esteemed in Rome, then the books of the Prophets were in
Judah, as it may seem by Torquinius Priscus, who bought them Torquinius.
so dear, and after were more carefully kept, then Zedechiah king of Judah
kept the laws of God, for he did burn and tear the book which Jeremiah
sent to him from the Lord, without any dread or care had of the Three hundred
aureos.
Prophet, so that the books of the Sibils were more reverently kept, and their
laws observed in Rome, then the books of the Prophets in Jerusalem.

So Zedechiah the false Prophet was preferred by Achab before Michaeah the true
Prophet of the Lord, and Baals priests before the Lords Prophets.

The Romans had their warrants from the books of the Sibils, to sacrifice
unto Juno a quick man buried, Idolatrous sacrifice of the Gentiles.
as the Grecians were wont to sacrifice to Bacchus.

The Phaenizians and the Carthagineans sacrificed to Saturnus with Infants
blood, the Laodicians sacrificed a young virgin unto Pallas; so the
Lacedaemonians sacrificed to Mars with blood; the old Germans to Mercury with
blood.

These sacrifices of blood were contrary to the law of Licurgus, taught among
the Lacedaemonians, and after by Numa Pomp. imitated in Rome in all his laws,
No blood offered in sacrifice by Licurgus law.
taught to him by the Nimphe Egeria, as Licurgus laws were taught to him by
Apollo in Delphos. Yet Pythagoras brought this law of Licurgus, after Numas
time, from Greece to other parts of Italy, for it was Pythagoras law according
to Licurgus, that nihil animatum dijs litetur, that no blood should be
sacrificed, but fruits, herbs, flowers, meal, milk, honey, and wine, which
was the law of Licurgus among the Lacedaemonians.

The Romans as Cicero said, had their Temples made to piety, faith, virtue,
and to the mind, as degrees and steps to ascend up to heaven, but by the
same Cic. de leg. lib 2.
law of Cicero, they were forbidden to build any Temples to any profane vice,
contrary to the Greeks, and to the Egiptians, who allowed all kind of their
country gods, but yet would allow no strange gods.

It was the chiefest point among all Heathen Princes, Arist lib. 5. polit. cap.
11.
to be careful of their religion. Oportet principem says Aristotle, ante
omnia, res diuinas videre curari.

For in Paul's time when he came to Athens and saw so many gods, and so many
aultars, Paul waxed angrle to see one altar to lust, an other to shame, and
another Paul called Spermologos in Athens.
to an unknown god, after he had disputed with certain Philosophers of the
Stoiks and Epicures against their gods and their aultars, he had no other
commendations of the Philosophers in Athens, but to be called Spermolagos, a
teacher of strange doctrine.

Among the Jews the punishment of Idolators was, to bring them to be stoned
with stones to death, being lawfully convicted with two or three witnesses,
Deuteronomy. 17.
and the hands of the witnesses shall be first upon them to kill them, and the
hands of all the people.

I need not go out of Judah for examples to the Gentiles in following
strange gods, in committing Idolatry, and in forsaking the laws of the Lord.

Manasses built aultars in the house of the Lord for all the hosts of heaven,
gave himself to witchery and forcerie, used them that were soothsayers, and
had familiar 2. Reg. 21.
spirits, and caused his sons to pass through fire in the valley of Hinnon.

Wicked Ahaz king of Judah, made an Idolatrous altar, sacrificed and offered
the blood of his son through fire to Moloch.

So wicked Achab offered the blood of his son likewise in Tophet, to Moloch,
following the king of Moab, who sacrificed his son that should have reigned
next after him king, to please his Idol Chemosh.

Thus the kings of Judah and Israel profaned the Lords altar with the blood
of their own children to please their dumb Idols.

Yet Pythagoras and Vlixes, two Heathens, sacrificed to Urania, but with water
and honey mingled, according to Numa Pomp. law, which commanded that no blood
should be offered in sacrifice, but milk and honey.

No doubt the Gentiles imitated these wicked kings of Judah in their
sacrifices, in their vows, and in the dedicatio^ of their temples and aultars,
taking Abraham for their warrant in sacrificing his son Isaac, and Ieptha in
sacrificing of his daughter, for their Idolatrous sacrifice, in murdering their
children, as is said before of Achab, Manasses, and others.

The Ammonites had a great Image called Moloch, which had seven chambers within
the hollownesse of it, one to receive meal, the second to receive Turtle
Moloches 7. chambers.
Doves, the third a sheep, the fourth a ram, the fifth a calfe, the sixth an
ox, and the seventh a man. This Idol Hose. 10.
had the face of a calfe, with stretched out hands to receive gifts, certain
Samaritan Priests called Chemarims, attended upon this Idol Moloch, and though
I know well that grave and godly Judges are not acquainted with Molochs
reaching hand, nor with his chambers, yet I doubt some like Chemarims, that
live in the world and serve Moloch, attend more upon the reaching hand of
Moloch, and his hollow chambers, then their masters beck in true service, to
whom may be said, as Christ spoke to Nicodemus, Art thou a master in Israel,
and know not how to be borne again?

Even among the Persians Cambises though a tyrant and a wicked king, yet would
he have the Persian laws observed, for the breach whereof he caused one of
his Judges named Sinetes, corrupted with money, to have his skin fleyed from
his back, and to be made a carpet for his son that succeeded after him to
lean upon to put him in remembrance of his fathers corruption, and punishment
by the law, that his son thereby might better observe the law, Remota
iustitia regna magna latrocinia Punishment of corrupt Judges in Persia.
sunt.

Darius king of Persia caused Sandoces one of his Judges, for that he was
corrupted with money to judge unjustly against the law, to be hanged and
condemned by the law, in that very place where he was appointed to be a Judge.
Of these corrupt Judges, and of the like, the Psalm. 25.
Prophet says, Dextra eorum repleta est muneribus.

These and such Lawiers and Judges that oppress poor Widows and Orphants,
rob the poor and are corrupted with rewards, cannot be hold the brightness
Law turned to wormwood. etc.
of Moses face, without a veil to cover their face. These are the lawiers of
which the Prophet speaks, that turn the law to wormwood, righteousness, to
bitterness, Amos. 4.
and cast down justice to the ground, for Nihil tam ven^ quam aduocat^m
praesid^, says Aristotle. Arist. Rhet. 1. cap. 3.


And therefore the Prophet Esaias reprehended the Judges of Israel, and called
them companions of The law of the Lord set down by Esaias the Prophet.
thieves, following after gifts and rewards as Samuels sons did, he called
them tyrants of Zodome, and people of Gomorah, Learn to do right says the
Lord, apply your selves to equity, let the Widows complaint Esai. (...).
come before you, and help the fatherless to his right. This is the law
only of the Lord, these be the precepts and sum of all laws, to live
honestly, to hurt none, and to give to every man his own, for where good kings
rule and reign, there laws are obeyed.

Judges ought to do righteous judgment, they ought to accept no persons, but
judge according to the law of the people, they should hear the small and the
Deuteronomy. 7.
great alike, neither accept the face of the poor, nor fear the face of the
mighty, for that judgment is the Lords, therefore Judges are called gods,
for the law commands that thou shall not rail upon Exodus 22.
the Magistrates, neither curse the ruler of the people.

So Homer said, Ex Jove sunt reges. To that effect does Plato likewise say,
Deus quispiam humanus Rex Plato polit.
est.

What law had then Nabuchodonozer to say, what GOD is he that is able to take
Judah out of my hand?

Or Holofernes to say, there was no God but only his master Nabuchodonozer,
such laws made Domitianus, that he would be called Dominus Deus Domitianus.

What law had king Zedechiah to answer his nobles that sought the Prophet
Ieremies death, take Jeremy Wicked answers of kings^
and do with him what you list, it is not lawful for me to deny you any thing.

The like law and the like words used king Ashuerus to Ammon, who sought the
destruction of the Jews Ashuerus.
throughout all the kingdom of Persia (age quod placet) do what thou list with
the Jews.

The like laws used Darius at the request of his Persian Princes, to throw
Daniel the Prophet of the Lord to be devoured of Lions; these are the laws of
tyrants Darius.
and not of kings, to kill the Prophets of the Lord without law, they forget
the law of the Lord written by Esaias the Prophet, Woe be unto you that make
unrighteous laws, and devise laws which are hard to keep, and are not to be
kept, that thereby the innocents are robbed of judgment, such a law made
Iezabel for Naboths Iezabels law for Naboths vineyard.
vineyard with false witness.

These kings like tyrants, use the sword for blood, and not the scepter for
justice, like Pharao, to whom when Moses alleged all the laws of the Lord,
he said, Who is the Lord? Nescio dominum, I know not the Lord, Lysander and
Pompeys speech to a Lawier.
like Lysander of Sparta, who said to a Lawier that pleaded laws and customs
on their sides, he pleads best in law which pleads with this, said
Lysander, laying his hand on his sword, for this pen does write with blood.
Sileant leges inter arma.

So also Pompey the great said, what prattle you to us of your laws, when we
have our swords in our hands.

Who does warrant the sword but the law? who defends the law but the sword?
he that commanded Peter to put up his sword in his sheath in mount Oliuet, was
even he that commanded Joshua to pull his sword out of his sheath to destroy
the Canaanites: the first commandment that was given to man after the
creation, was the law, and upon breach of the law, was the ^ammius glad^us.
sword given to revenge justice, for the Lord is just, for as laws are made by
God, and ministered by Angels unto men, so must laws be obeyed with reverence,
and defended with the sword, Prudentem dicemus sibi and Reipub* consulere,
potentem, and validum. So Plato says, that he is valiant Plato in Alcibiad.
and wise that can both with the sword and the law defend a commonwealth.

In Egypt it was not lawful for any heard-man to come within their Temples,
neither among the Hebrews Leuit. 13.
was it lawful for men or women that had any white or black spots, somewhat
reddish, or pale, to come among the congregation to the Temple, for the priests
should pronounce them unclean.

So among the Persians by the law of their Magi, none that had any pimples or
red speckes on their face, might touch the altar, or offer any sacrifice to
their Alex. Neapo. lit. gnial lib. 4. ^a 7.
gods, for in Persia they had neither Temples nor Images, but among the
Persians and the Arabians laid fire upon the altar in a vessel called Arula,
and offered frankincense in sacrifice only to the sun, for the Gentiles
trimmed their aultars diversely, the altar of Jupiter with Ceremonial laws of
the Gentiles.
Oaken branches, the altar of Appollo with Laurel, the altar of Bacchus with
Iuye, the altar of Hercules with Popley, and of Pluto with Cypress, so were
the aultars of Minerua with Olive, and of Venus with Myrtle, so that there was
no service omitted, no duty forgotten, no law broken in the superstitious and
profane religion of the Heathens.

So fond and superstitious were both the Athenians and the Romans, that the
Athenians builded temples out of Athens, to Poverty and old age, because they
would feign expel these aged and poor gods out of Athens, or else to put the
Athenians in remembrance that they should pray unto them, least they should
come to poverty and to want. The Gentiles builded diverse temples to their gods.


The Romans and Egiptians builded temples to those gods that might annoy their
cities, out of their cities, as the Romans builded the Temples of Bellona and
Mars four miles out of the gate Capaena in Rome, to re^ist and withstand the
treachery and violence of their enemies.

The Egiptians builded the Temples of Saturnus and Serapis out of the cities,
as gods to watch, ward, and to defend their cities from the enemies, and least
their gods by invocation or supplication of the enemies should forsake their
cities, the Romans bound fast the Image of Mars, and the Carthaginians
Hercules.

See how blind men in religion, are ignorant in gods service, and yet
ignorance with some late learned men, was termed the mother of devotion.

The Lord commanded Israel to serve no strange gods, but him only, and to
come at three appointed feasts in the year to one place in the city of
Jerusalem, to serve him, and to sacrifice in one Temple, the Temple of Solomon;
for as the Lord made choice of one nation to be his peculiar people, so he
made also choice of one place Jerusalem, where his name should be worshipped
and called upon.

After that the Tabernacle was set up, and the arc of testimony set therein,
the Lord commanded Moses to bring Exodus 40.
Aaron and his sons unto the door of the Tabernacle, and there to wash them
with water, and after to put upon Aaron the holy garments, to anoint him and
(...) him, that he might minister in the Priests office.

The Gentiles used the like ceremonies at the first co^crating of any temple,
which they dedicated to their gods, The manner of the Gentiles in dedicating
their temples, etc.
that they should lay their hands upon the porch post, calling upon the name
of that god, to who^ they consecrated the temple, for whatsoever the Gentiles
dedicated to their gods (though profane before) yet after they were Alex.
Neapo. lit. li. 6. cap 14.
consecrated, they were, Sacra diuino cu^ ma^cipata; ci^er temples, aultars,
money, religious places, or otherwise.

For among the Romans and the Grecians, the dumb, deaf, blind, lame, or
maimed otherwise by nature, were rejected from any office in the temples of
their gods.

So was it among the Persians in like sort, that no blind or maimed man should
minister unto their gods. Whence had they all these originals, but (as it
seems) from the law of Moses?

And as Moses was commanded that Aaron and his sons should be first washed with
water, before they should Alex. Neapo. lit. genial. lib. 4 cap. 17.
put on their holy garments and minister unto the Lord; so the priests of Egypt
should often wash and anoint themselves, before they should serve and
sacrifice in the temple of Isis.

So the Priests of Greece washed and anointed themselves before they would
sacrifice unto Ceres.

And so among the Romans and in other places, they seemed (though they erred
much) to imitate the ceremonies of the Jews, who had their warrant from the
Lord, and they from the devil.

Moses put on Aaron the coat, and girded him with a girdle, clothed him with
the robe, and put the Ephod on him, after he put the breast plate thereon, and
put in the breast plate the Vrim and Thummim; he also put the The consecration
of Aaron. Leuit. 8.
golden plate and the Miter upon his head, and upon the Miter the holy crown,
as the Lord had commanded Moses, and he powered of the anointed oil upon
Aarons head and anointed him, that the excellency of his calling might be
known, and the dignity of his office present the majesty of the highest.

Hence the Heathens and the Gentiles took their platform, as an example to be
followed in the anointing and crowning of their kings, by the Lord warranted
and particularly set down to Moses, whereby you shall find by comparison, that
the profane ceremonies of the Gentiles took their original from Moses law,
in the anointing of their kings.

In the fourth Regiment is showed, how the Gentiles confirmed their laws by
diverse authorities, faining that their la^s were given to them of their gods,
with the straight keeping of the same.
THere was no law among the Gentiles made nor established, unless they were
authorized and confirmed by some divine power to satisfy ignorant people, for
the Heathens most preferred that law, and esteemed that government, which was
commanded and allowed as it were, from the gods, as by Mercurius in By what
authorities all nations confirmed their laws.
Egypt, by Jupiter in Greece, and by Appollo in Sparta, as you heard before.

So among the Locreans, their laws were authorized by Minerua, among the Getes
by the Goddess Vesta, and so the law which Sergius compiled to the Turks, to
this day the Turks hold it authorized and confirmed from the very mouth of
their great Prophet Mahomet.

And for that a sperhawke brought in her claws a book written with red
letters to the Priests at Heliop^lis in Egypt, containing the laws and
religion of their Diod. sic. lib 2. cap. 4.
gods, the Priests therefore ever after ware red Scar^ caps, like the color of
the letters, and the feather of a sperhawke in their caps, in memory thereof.

So no war was commenced, nor battle taken in hand without such policies to
entice and allure the soldiers to fight, as Sertorius had his white hind,
which he taught to follow him in his Affrican wars, by whom he made his
soldiers believe he was instructed to d^ any thing he did.

So Lu. Sylla would take upon him in the sight of his Plut. in Sylla.
soldiers, to consult with the picture of Appollo, to make his soldiers more
obedient and valorous.

So did Marius with his Scythian woman Martha, and so of others, which I spoke
of in my book of stratagems, and now to the Sabbath.

The observation of the Sabbath, was severely by the law of the Jews kept,
for the Lord blessed the seventh The straight observation of the Sabbath by the
Jews.
day and hallowed it, to rest from our works, and to serve the Lord,
signifying unto us our eternal rest to come: and therefore the Jews gathered
upon the sixth Exodus 16.
day in the wilderness, so much Manna as served them upon the Sabbath, because
they should not break the Sabbath.

As the Lord Jesus was crucified on the Sabbath eve, and rested in his grave
the Sabbath day, so careful were Luke 23.
the Jews to observe the Sabbath, that the holy women that followed Christ,
with their odors, ointments, and John. 19.
spices, stayed from the anointing of his body upon the Sabbath, for the
Sabbath was made especially, that they should cease from labor, and come to
hear the laws of the Lord, and the voices of the Prophets, which are read
every Sabbath day in the Temple.

After the destruction of the Temple first builded by The second building of
the temple by Cyrus.
Solomon, the Lord stirred up Cyrus for the second building of the Temple, and
to deliver all the vessels of gold and silver, which Nabuchodonozer had
taken out of the Temple of Jerusalem, to be placed again in the 1. Esdr. 1.
house of the Lord at Jerusalem, according to the prop^ sie of Esaias, two
hundred years before Cyrus time.

After Cyrus, Darius and Artaxerxes, kings of Pers^, commanded in like manner
that the Temple which was hindered for a time by means of the Samaritans to
Darius and Artaxerxes.
Cambises and others, should be with great diligence b^ded, and all the vessels
which king Nabuchodonozer too^ away, should be according to Cyrus, Darius, and
A^ erxes, three mighty kings of Persia, again restored to Jerusalem.

Among the Grecians the first day of every month was their Sabbath, called
among them (as among the Jews) Neomenia, which they kept most solemnly and
served Neomenia.
most religiously their gods.

Among the Romans the Nones and Ides of eu^ month were their Sabboths, and
observed as religious days, on which days they would commence no bat^, The
Romans, Sabboths.
but as a Sabbath to serve their gods; for on the Ides of every month
throughout the year, the Romans (...) great solemnities, with diverse
sacrifices and religious ceremonies.

Among the Parthians they observed the very day that Arsaces overthrew Zaleucus
to be their Sabbath, Parthians.
for that they were restored on that day to their liberty by Arsaces, which
day they keep as a religious day, and use great solemnity in memory of
their liberty.

The day that Cyrus overcame the Scythians, was The diverse kinds of Sabboths
among the Heathens.
one of the Sabboths of the Persians, which they call Sacas.

And an other Sabbath day of the Persians, had on the very day that their
rebellious Magi were slain that would have usurped the kingdom, in memory
whereof they consecrated a feast called Magoph^niah, the which day was so
solemn a Sabbath among the Persians, that it was not lawful for any of the
Magi, that day to go out of his house.

The victories at Marathon and at Micala over the Persians, was the Sabbath of
the Athenians, for among Heredot. lib. 6
the Heathens the days of their victories and triumphs, the days of their
liberties restored, and of their feasts; were their Sabboths; for as it was not
lawful among the Jews to fight upon the Sabbath day, so among the Heathens
they straightly observed their religious days as their Sabbath.

Phillip king of Macedonia, upon the very day that his son Alexander was
borne got two victories, Phillip.
the one was with his Mares in the games of Olympia, and the other with his men
of arms in Thracia, for memory whereof, he decreed an annual feast to be
made, which was observed for a Sabbath among the Macedonians.

The Jews so obeyed and reverenced their laws, that they would not break
their Sabbath day, in so much that they suffered their enemins to kill and
overthrow them, because they would not fight upon the Sabbath day, so did they
when they began to build the temple, before they would build houses to dwell
in, or walls to defend them, but every man ready with weapon in one hand for
their enemies, and working with the other hand.

Nicanor going to strike a field with Iud. Machabaeus upon the Sabbath day,
was willed to hallowe The blasphemy of Nicanor.
the Sabbath, who said, is there a God mighty in heaven that commands to keep
the Sabbath day* and I am mighty on earth that command the con^ry, but
Nicanor lost the battle, and his life in the battle, and his head, his hands,
and his blasphemous tongue were cut off, and hanged on the Pinnacles of the
Temple at Jerusalem.

Nehemias finding some Israelites profaning the Sabbath day, in carrying
burdens, he took them and rebuked them sharply for profaning of the Sabbath
day.

So straightly the Jews observed their laws, that he that gathered but a few
sticks upon the Sabbath day, was taken and brought to Moses, and Moses brought
him before the Lord, and sentence of death was given upon him by the Lord, for
breaking of the Sabboath, saying; Let him be stoned to death by the people.

Such reverence and obedience the Jews had to Moses law, that when Alexander
the great commanded the high Priest to ask him whatsoever he would have him
to do, whereas he might have had Territories and Joseph lib. 11. cap. 8.
Countries given him, he requested but the liberties and laws of his Country
to the poor Jews that did inhabit within Asia, and all the dominions of
Alexander.

So did the Jews that dwelt in Greece, in Asia, and in Antioch, requested of
Zaleucus and Antiochus the great nothing but that they might live, and enjoy
the benefits of the laws of their country, which is the law of Joseph. lib.
12. cap 3.
Moses.

Neither could the Jews endure any that would despise their laws, for a
soldier under Cumanus the Roman President, for tearing of Moses books in
contempt, moved such sedition, that they came armed to Cumanus, and claimed
to have justice executed upon the soldiers that so despised their law, for the
Certain Romans slain by the Jews. Joseph. lib. 20. cap. 4.
tearing of one leaf.

The like sedition moved an other Roman soldier upon the feast day of the
Jews by showing his genitall parts, scoffiing and flowting their laws and
religion, so that Cumanus to satisfy the Jews, put both the Romans to
death, to the loss of twenty thousand Jews by the Roman Armies afterward.

The Jews suffered many overthrows most willingly 1. Machab. 2.
upon the Sabbath day, saying: Moriamur omnes, because they would resist
neither Pompey the great, nor Antiochus King of Syria upon the Sabbath, a^ the
Romans and the Syrians ever found mea^ Plut. in Pomp.
to fight with the Jews upon the Sabbath day, on the which day Pompey the
great took Jerusalem.

Therefore Iud. Machabaeus made a law, that to fight upon the Sabbath day, in
defense of their laws, of their countries, and of their lives, was no servile
work, but thought it lawful to fight The law of Iud. Macha^.
upon the Sabbath day with Nicanor a blasphemer, and an enemy of the Lord
and his Army, and so overthrew Nicanor, and slew nine thousand of his host, so
that upon the Sabbath day any man may do good.

So Christ answered the Israelites for his Disciples, being accused that they
brake the law in eating the ears of corn, have you not read what Math. 12.
David did when he was a hungrye, to eat the show bread, which was not
lawful but only for the Priests:

So he also answered for himself, being accused of the Israelites that he
brake the law in healing the (...) upon the Sabbath day: Which of you said
Christ will not loose his Ox or his Ass from his cribbe upon the Sabbath day
to water them?

The Sabbath day is the school of the Lord, in the which he would have his
people taught and instructed, not only to hear the laws read unto them, but
to learn the laws, and to live according as the law commands them, to
that end was man created that he should be the Temple of God, where the Lord
might dwell and reign within him, and that the Lord should be our altar, upon
the which we should offer our selves unto him in sacrifice, both in body and
^ule.

Among the Heathens the Sabbath of the Lord was not known, for that they knew
not the Lord of Among the Heathens the Sabbath of the Lord was not known.
the Sabbath: this commandment pertained only to the children of the Lord the
Israelites, to whom the law was given in hope of eternal rest.

The restoring to their liberty, their victories, their triumphs, their
feasts, and the days of their birth, these were the Sabboths of the Gentiles,
to serve, to give thanks, and to sacrifice to their gods, as before (...)
written, but the Lord spoke to Israel, you shall not observe time to make some
days luckie, and others unlucky, as the Gentiles did, but only observe your
Sabboths* and to come to the Temple to hear the laws of the Lord read.

When Hanibal departed out of Italy, the Temples were set open according to the
custom of the Roman^ Liui (...).
that they might go and give thanks to the gods for the vanquishing of such an
enemy.

Archidamus began first with service and sacrifice to the gods, before he would
attempt any great battle with Thueyd. 1.
the enemy.

Xenophon before he had gotten his whole Army reconciled, and willing to
crave the favor of the Xenoph. de expedit. Cyri. 3.
gods in any distress, he would take no journey in hand.

The Gentiles observed times, days, and months, as the kings of Macedonia
commenced nowarre during Plut. in Alex.
the whole month of June.

The Romans likewise observed the Nones of every month as unlucky and
religious days, and refrained that time to take any great thing in hand.

The Germans also had a law not to fight any battle in the wane of the
Moon, much like the Lacedaemonians, who were forbidden by Licurgus law, that
they should take no war or battle in hand before the Licurgus law for time
of battle.
full of the Moon, they were therein so religious, that they absented from the
battle at Marathon four days.

The Romans also would enter into no field, neither wage any battle upon their
religious days.

Cai. Caesar in his wars against Ariouistus, King of the Germans, knowing
that the Germans had a law set down, that it was not lawful for them to
commence any battle in the wane of the Front. lib. 2. cap. 1.
Moon, Caesar observing the Germans to be so religious, gave them a battle
unexpected, and overthrew them.

So Titus Vespasian upon a satterday, the Sabbath of the Jews, subdued the
Jews, destroyed the Temple, and took Jerusalem, as Pompey the great did
before.

Before the Temple was builded in Jerusalem by Solomon, the Israelites came to
Siloh, where the Taber^cle Before y temple was made in Jerusalem, the
Israelites came to Siloh.
rested, to offer to the Lord, as after they did to Ie^salem. In this Temple at
Jerusalem, the Lord promised to Solomon, that he would present himself, and
appear at the prayer of Solomon, as he promised to Moses in the wilderness
to appear at the door of the Tabernacle, Esaias. 45.
to comfort them, and to further them in all their laws.

The Angels that brake the laws of the Lord in heaven, were condemned, and had
judgment given to be prisoners in perpetual darkness, and man that brake
the law in Paradise, had sentence of death pronounced against him by the Lord
himself in Paradise.

And therefore Licurgus to have his laws continue among the Lacedaemonians, to
perform the Oracle of The continuance of Licurgus laws.
Appollo, which was, so long should the Lacedaemonians keep Licurgus laws
undefiled, as long as Licurgus should keep himself absent from the
Lacedaemonians, and therefore most willingly banished himself out of his
country to dye in Delos, that by his absence the laws which he established
among the Lacedaemonians should continue, his laws therefore continued 500.
years and more after his death.

The contempt and breach of laws in all countries were severely punished, in
so much that Charondas made a law to the Carthaginians, Archadians, and others,
that they Charondas laws against those that disobeyed and contemned laws.
that found fault with paenall laws, should be crowned with Tamarisk, and be
carried round about the town, and so thence to be banished, according to the
law of the 12. tables, Violati iuris paena este.

And therefore Antalcidas accused Agesilaus for the breach of Licurgus law,
for that he taught the Persians Licurgus law. Rhe^ra. Plut. in Licurgo.
by often wars to become men from women; Non diu in hos bellaadum ne ipsi
bellicosi euaderint.

Charondas made an other law, that if any that were co^uicted, thought his
law to be too severe, they might upon condition make means to the people for
abrogating of the law, the condition was, they should come with halters about
their necks, before all the people in one place assembled, which if they by
complaining of the seuerities of the law, should go free, the former law
should be abrogated, or mitigated, but if they falsely The law of the 12.
tables.
accused and slaundered the integrity of the law, they should be strangled
with the same halters which they ware about their necks, to accuse the law, for
the words of the laws of the twelve tables which agree with Charondas law are
these; Legum iusta imperia sunto, hisque ciues modeste and sine recusatione
Parento.

And yet it is necessary upon occasions that laws should be altered, for says
Hypocrates, Tempus est in quo occasio, and occasio in qua tempus, though he
applied this to Hipocrates in praecep^.
Physic, yet in the self same reason it serves for the law.

Cicero thinks the life and manners of good men often changed, to be the
cause of changing of the laws and states of cities; and Plato, whom Cicero
calls Deum Cicero de leg. 2.
Philosophorum, said, that the least law made, may not be changed nor
abrogated, without doing hurt or harm to the public state of a
commonwealth; and therefore in Aegina he was ever accounted accursed, that went
about to make new laws, by abrogating the former. For when Lysander went about
to alter and change Licurgus laws among the Lacedaemonians, he was resisted
Cic. de divine. lib. 1.
by the Senators and the people, though Lysander was the only chief man in
Sparta.

Likewise the whole sum of Aristotle's Aeconomicall and Political laws, are
but instructions teaching the rule and government of a Common wealth, iubendo
Cic. de leg. lib. 3.
and parendo, how men should know to do good, and avoid to do evil, to govern
and to be governed, that the people should be defended from wrong, so is the
law of the twelve Tables, Vis in populo abesto, causas populi tencto.

And therefore positive laws in all countries were and are made from the
beginning to maintain civil orders, and to determine of such orders and
circumstances as are necessary and requisite for the keeping of the people in
obedience of the same.

Of these and such laws Plato wrote his book de Repub. tending to the
administration and government of the people, according to the law.

The moral law commands a just and upright ordering of judgments,
contracts, and punishments in a commonwealth.

Alexander Seuerus the Emperor, therefore would make no laws without the
judgment of 20. of the best learned Ciuilians, with the advice and consent of
50. of the grauest and wifest counselors that were within his Empire, to
examine whether the laws were just and profitable Alex. Neapolit. genial. lib.
6 cap. 23.
for the people, before they should be published, but being once published as a
law, extreme punishment was appointed for the breach thereof, as is before
spoken, without any appeal from the law, without some great extraordinary
cause of appeal.

As among the Hebrews in any city of Judah, that if they could not rightly
judge, nor discern thoroughly Joseph. lib. 4. cap. 8.
the cause, according to justice, by the Magistrates of the city, they might
appeal to the Judges named Sinadrion in Jerusalem, from whence no appeal
could be had.

So among the Grecians, they might appeal from the Areopagites in Athens, from
the Ephories in Sparta, and all other cities of Greece to the Amphictions at
Trozaena, which were appointed general Judges for the universal state of
Greece, in martial and military causes, and The diverse orders of appeals
among the Heathens.
there to sit and determine twice a year of the whole state of Greece, and
further to hear and to judge of some other great causes and capital crimes,
from whose sentence no other appeal was to be had; for out of every city in
Greece in the Spring and in the Autumn, to the Amphictions at Trozaena they
sent Ambassadors, whom the Greeks called Pytagorae.

So among the Romans a lawful appeal might be had from the Consuls to the
Senators, from the Senators to the Tribune of the people, and from the people
to the Dictator, which continued until the time of the Judges called Centum
viri; for Sententia Dictatoris, and iudicia Alex. Neapolit. genial. lib. 3 cap.
16.
centum viralia, were both laws of life and death, from whose judgment and
sentences, there were no greater Judges to appeal unto: of the like authority
were the December viri, from whom also there was no appeal during their
government.

So in divine causes we may appeal to mount Sion from Mount Sinai, from the
law to the Gospel, from Moses to Christ our perpetual Dictator, from whom we
have no place to appeal unto for our eternal salvation.

In the fifth Regiment is declared the choice of wise Governors to govern the
people, and to execute the laws among all Nations, and also the education and
obedience of their children to their Parents and Magistrates.
ALl Nations made their choice of the wisest and chiefest men to rule and
govern their country, imitating Moses, who was by the Lord commanded to
choose seventy wise grave men to be Judges among the Israelites, called
Synadrion, which continued from Moses time who first appointed these
Magistrates, until Herod's time who last destroyed them, for in every city of
Judah seven Magistrates were appointed to govern, Joseph. lib. 4. cap. 8.
and to judge according to the law of Moses, and for their further instructions
in the law, they had of the Tribes The wise and grave Judges in diverse
countries.
of the Levites two in every city; to instruct and assist the Magistrates in
all actions according to the law.

The Egiptians being next neighbors to the Hebrews, though they mortally
hated the Hebrews, yet their government of Dinastia under thirty Governors
elected and chosen out of Eliopolis, Memphis, Pellusium, Diod. sic. lib. 2.
cap. 3.
Thaebes, and other chief cities of Egypt, seemed to imitate Moses law under
Aristocratia.

So Solon appointed in Athens certain wise men called Areopagitae, as Judges
to determine of life and death, and of other criminal causes.

Among the old Gauls, the Druydes sage and wise religious men, had authority
both in war and peace to make laws, and to determine of the state of their
country.

The laws of all Nations against disobedient children to their parents are
manifest, not only the law of nature among all Nations unwritten, but also
the divine law of the Lord written, commaundes children to be obedient to
their parents, as the law says, Whosoever curses his father Exodus 20.
or mother shall dye, and his blood be on his own head, for that he curses
his father or mother. Laws of all nations against disobedient children.


If a man has a son that is stubborn or disobedient, let his parents bring
him unto the Elders Deuteronomy. 21.
of the City, and there accuse him of his faults, saying, my son is a
Ryotour, a Drunkarde, and disobedient unto his parents, the law is, that all
the men of that City shall stone him with stones to death.

This commandment was esteemed among all Nations, even among wicked men, as
Esau being a Esau.
reprobate, so the Lord said, Esau have I hated, and Jacob have I loved, yet
Esau hating his brother Genesis 27.
Jacob in heart, saying that the days of his fathers sorrows were at hand,
for I will kill my brother, and most like it is that he would have done so had
not the Lord (which appeared to Laban the Syrian in a dream by night, for
that he followed Jacob from Mesopotamia) Gen 31.
said to Laban, Take heed to thy self, that thou do or speak to Jacob
nothing but good: as the Lord kept Jacob from Laban, so he kept him from his
brother Esau.

Notwithstanding Esau came to his father, and said, have thou any blessing for
me? see that obedience and fear was in Esau toward his father Isaac, though
he was a wicked man, he determined not to kill his brother before his father
died, least Isaac his father should curse him.

The sons of Samuel the Prophet, Joel, and Abiath, which were made Judges in
Bersabe by rheyr father Samuel, being old, they turned from their fathers
ways, took rewards, and perverted the right, the people complained to Samuel
that his sons followed The corruption of Judges.
not his steps, and therefore they would have a King to govern them, as
other nations had. See the end of Judges in Israel, by the wicked Judges Joel
and Abiath, two wicked sons of a good and godly father, and the cause of the
overthrow of the Judges in Israel.

The two sons of Eli, their offenses were such, that their father being an
old man, was rebuked of the Ophnes and Phinees.
Lord for suffering their unthriftiness and wickedness, which was the cause
that the Priesthood was taken from the house of Eli for ever, so that the
government of Judges in Judah, and also of the Priesthood, were taken away by
the corruption and disobedience of wicked and ungodly children. Good parents
have ill children.


Observe likewise the end of kings and kingdoms by wicked kings, by Ahaz who
offered his sons in fire to Moloch, by Ioachim and his son, wicked fathers,
1. Reg. 16.
which brought up wicked sons.

The kings which were 21. in number, continued five hundred and odd years. 1.
Reg. 24.


Who would have judged that three such good Kings of Judah, should have three
such wicked children?

As David had Absolon, who sought most trecherously to dispossess his father
of his kingdom.

As Ezechias had Manasses, who offered his son in fire to Moloch, and filled
Jerusalem with blood.

Or as Josias had Ioachim, whose wickedness together with Zedechiah, was so
disobedient to the Lord and his Prophets that he lost the kingdom of Judah.

Who would have judged that Solomon the only wise king of the world, having
700. Queens, and 300. concubines, and having but one son which is read of,
and that so wicked, that through his wicked and cruel dealing to his people,
the Lord took 10. of the 12. Tribes of Israel away from Salomons son, and
gave them to Jeroboam, Salomons servant.

It was a commandment given from Moses to the people, that they should not
forget the laws of the Lord but teach them to their sons, and their sons
sons, and therefore the laws were commanded to be set as frontlets between
their eyes, to be written upon the The care of the Hebrews to keep Moses law.
posts of their houses, upon their gates, and to bind them for a sign upon
their hands, that their children should not forget, but be instructed by the
sight thereof in the Deuteronomy. 6.
laws of the Lord.

For the old Pharisees were wont to wear Philacteria, which were scrolles of
parchment about their heads and arms, having the ten commandments written
on them, and therefore Christ pronounced so many woes against the Scribes and
Pharisees for their hypocrisy.

Hence grew the beginning of setting up of pictures in porches, the Images of
Philosophers in Schools and Universities, and the Images of the gods in the
Temples and secret closets of Princes, as Alex. Seuerus had the Image of
Christ, Abraham, Orpheus, and Appollonius in his closet worshipped as gods, so
the Heathens Godese. lib. 2. cap. 6.
and Pagans had the Images of their country gods set up at their gates,
galleries, and closets.

Among the old Romans in ancient times they were buried in their gardens,
and in their houses, and therefore they had their household godeds to do
sacrifice unto them, and to use funeral ceremonies Alex. Neapolit. lib. 6.
cap. 14
unto these Idols, for it was not lawful by the law of the 12. tables to
bury any within the city, for the law was Ne in vrbem sepelito; and it was
also Platos law, that the Platoes law.
dead should be buried in the fields or some barren ground, out of the
cities, least the dead bodies should infect the quick. These laws were called
Leges funerales.

But the Lord spoke to Ioshuah, Let not the book of this law depart out of
thy mouth, see that thou do and observe all the laws which Moses commanded
thee, so Ioshuah did, and made a covenant with the people at his death, set
ordinances and laws before them in Sychem, and took a great stone, and
pitched it under an Marks of monuments and covenants by Joshua, Jacob, and
Samuel.
oak that stood in the Sanctuary, and said, behold this stone shall be a
witness unto us, and a memorial of the covenant between us.

So Jacob set up a stone, and said to his brethren, gather stones and make a
heap, which he called Gilead, Gent. 31.
and said to Laban, this heap of stones be a witness between thee and me.

It was a custom among the old Hebrews, as marks of witness, and memorial
of things past, to put up stones, as Samuel did in his victory against the
Philistines, pitched up a stone, and named it the stone of help.

So careful were the kings of Persia, that they made choice of four
principal men in all knowledge to instruct the kings children after fourteen
years of age, and therefore the Persian laws for education of their youth,
were not only commended of many, but of many imitated, they should learn
three principal lessons, to take heed of lies, and only to speak the truth;
secondly to deal justly, and wrong no man; and thirdly The care of the Kings
of Persia to bring up their children.
to know what was wrong and what was justice.

The children in Persia were brought up with such reverence to their parents,
that it was not lawful for them in the presence of their parents, either to
sit, to spit, or to blow their noses: their children might not so much as
taste wine, though it were upon their feast day, which among the Persians, is
the most solemn feast: also the children might not come to their parents sight
before they were seven years old, there is nothing so requisite in parents as
the education of children.

And therefore Charondas made a law, that the citizens which were governed by
his laws, should bring Charondas law sxr education of children.
up their children in schools, to be taught to know good from evil, and to be
accustomed with virtuous education, that thereby they might stand in stead to
their country, with wisdom, judgment, and counsel. The like law is set
down by Plato, who says, Si Rempub. vere institues, virrtus cum ciuibus
comunicanda est. For as every Plato in Alcibiad.
city has her Physicians, to provide for health, and to care for the body,
So I think it rather better said Chaerondas, to have schoolemaisters and
teachers to bring up youth in virtue and knowledge, and to be taught in the
laws of God and man to serve their country.

Diverse Nations, as the Carthagineans, Arcadians, Baeotians, and Mazacens, sent
for Charondas laws to govern their country, and as the Romans sent to
Greece Alex. Neapol. lib. 6. cap. 25.
for Hermadorus to interpret the 12. Tables, so the Mazacens sent for one to
Thuria to interpret Charondas laws.

So the Jews after their return from Babylon, appointed Nehemiae. cap. 8. and
10.
Esdras to read and interpret the law of Moses unto the^, before whom they
swear that they would turn away their strange women the Ammonites and
Moabites, and that they would keep the laws of the Lord.

The Lacedaemonians would make their hindes and husbandmen drunken, having
rods in their hands, to whip and beat them for their drunkenness, and would
Plato and Anacharsis order for the youth in Greece.
bring them out before their children and other youths of Sparta, which was
both Plato and Anacharsis order to the Grecians, because their children might
see the faults and beastliness of the servants, to terrify the children, that
thereby they might loath vice, and love virtue, and learn to be obedient to
their parents, for the greatest care the Lacedaemonians had, was to bring up
their children in music and military discipline, esteeming the education of
their chidren in any thing else indifferent.

Nabuchodonozer king of Babylon, caused four of the kings stock Zedechiah,
Daniel, and his fellows, to be Joseph. lib. 10. cap. 11.
brought up in the Chaldaean discipline, that they might serve the king in his
chamber and at his table.

In ancient time the old Romans were not only studious and careful to
bring up their children to observe The Romans care for their children.
the laws of their gods at Rome, but also used yearly to make choice often of
the best men's children in Rome, and to send the^ to Etruria, a religious
nation, there to be taught in the Etrurian discipline, concerning religion to
their gods, and to learn duty and service to their country, being in the
Latin tongue instructed first, then Cic. de divine. 1.
in the Greek tongue, and after to learn wise and pithy sentences, as
Paradoxes and Aphorisms.

Charondas judged those parents not fit to be of counsel, nor worthy to be
Magistrates to rule in their country, Charondas law.
that having many children by the first wife, would marry a second, for he
supposed that they would never be careful over their country, that would not
be careful over their children.

And therefore the laws of diverse of the Gentiles were not to be allowed in
selling their children to strange Nations, as the Phrygians and others did for
to relieve their parents for necessity sake, and yet far better then to
burn, kill, and sacrifice their children to Images and Idols, as Ahaz,
Manasses, and others did.

Bocchoris made a law against idleness, for all idle men in Egypt were
compelled to write their names and to give account how they lived. This law
was brought Bocchoris laws.
by Solon from Egypt unto Athens, where they gave the like account in Athens as
they did in Egypt before the Areopagites; for we read that the fig tree
because it was barren and bare no fruit was spoiled of his leaves, and
therefore the well exercised man is compared to the Be that gathers honye of
every weed, and the evil sloathful man to the Spider, which gathers poison
of every flower.

Bocchoris made an other law against those that clipped any coin, diminished
the weight, changed the form, or altered the letters about the coin, that both
their hands should be cut off, for Bocchoris law was, that those members
should be punished that committed the offense.

So careful were the Hebrew women for their children, that their fathers
should not name them, but the mothers should give them such names, as should
signify The care of the Hebrew women in naming and in nursing their children.
some goodness or holiness to come, as a memorial to the parents to think
upon their children, besides giving them their names, their natural mothers
should be Nurses to their children, as Sarah was a Nurse to Isaac her son,
Zephorah a Nurse to her son Moses, and the blessed Virgin Mary a Nurse to her
son Christ Jesus our Savior, so the two wives of Jacob, Leah, and Rachel,
gave names to all their children, the twelve Patriarchs, the sons of Jacob.

So Jacob corrected his children, kept them under, and blessed them at his
death, so Job prayed for his children, Jacob.
and offered for his children unto the Lord every Job.
day a burnt offering, and so was David for his son Solomon so careful, that
he committed him to the Prophet David.
Nathan to be brought up in wisdom, and in the law of the Lord, this care had
the Hebrews to bring up their children in the law and fear of the Lord.

The very Heathens, even Phillip king of Macedonia, was glad to have his son
Alexander borne in Aristotle's Phillip.
days, because he might be brought up in his house with him, and instructed
with so great a Philosopher.

Agamemnon was in his youth brought up with wise Nestor, of whom Agamemnon was
wont to say, that if he Agamemnon.
had but ten such wise Consuls as Nestor was, he doubted not, but soon to
subdue Troy.

And so was Antigonus brought up with Zeno, chief of the Stoik Philosophers,
where he could hear and see Antigonus.
nothing, but what he saw and heard from his master Zeno.

There be many parents in the world that weigh not how they live themselves,
neither esteem how to bring up their children, like the Troglodites, whose
children were named after the names of the beasts of Troglodites called
Antinomi.
their country, as horse, ram, ox, sheep, lamb, and such, alleging that
the beasts were their best parents, in feeding, in clothing, and in all other
necessary helps, and therefore they would rather be named after these beasts
that maintained them in life and living, then after their parents, who gave
them but bare birth, against the law of nature, and therefore they and such are
to be called Antinomi.

I doubt too many of these in many places may be called Antinomi, which
degenerate from their parents both in name and in nature, yea from all laws,
rather to be beasts, then to have the name of beasts, like people The careless
nature of the Troglodites and Atlantes for their children
in Africa called Atlantes, whose children have no names at all, but as the
Troglodites were named after their beasts, and therefore well called Antinomi,
so these people leave their children like themselves without names, not like
beasts, but beasts indeed, and therefore well and truly to be called Anomi; for
many have the names of beasts, that be neither beasts, nor like beasts; for as
the Atlantes called Anomi.
Troglodites that before their parents prefer beasts against the law of
nature, are called Antinomi, so these Atlantes in Africa, worse then beasts,
are called Anomi, which is without any name. It is much therefore in parents to
show good examples before their children, for what children see in the
parents, or hear from their parents, that lightly will they imitate, for the
tree is bended when it is tender, the horse is broken when he is a colte, and
the dog taught when he is a whelpe, so children must be instructed and
brought up when they are young, for that seed which is sowed in youth,
appears in age, for Virtue must have a time to grow to ripeness.

Therefore Marc: Cato the Censor, made means to remove Manlius from the Senate
house, because he wantonly embraced and kissed his wife before his daughter,
Manlius removed from the Senate house.
saying, that his wife durst neither embrace nor kiss him before his children,
but for very fear when it lightened and thundered.

Hieron King of Cicilia, sharply punished Epicarmus the Poet, for that he made
and read certain light verses Epicarmus punished.
before his daughter.

So was Ovid for the like offense bannished from Rome, and so was Archiloccus
from Sparta, for saying it was better for a soldier to loose his shield then
to loose his life.

The children of Bethel had they been well brought up, they would not have
mocked and flouted Elizeus the Prophet, they might as well have said Ozanna in
excelsis, with the children of Jerusalem, as to say, Ascend calue; up balde
fellow. But true it is as Isocrates faieth, that rude and barbarous men, not
brought up in Virtue from their youths, should never or seldom prove just or
honest.

And so it is written that Equus indomitus euadet durus, Eccle. 30.
and filius remissus euadet praeceps.

And therefore both the Romans and the Grecians were careful to have grave,
wise, virtuous, and learned men to bring up their children in the fear of God.

Among the Lacedaemonians, Licurgus law was, Licurgus appointed school
masters in Spart^, called Paedonomi.
that expert and judicial men should be found out, which were named
Paedonomi, to instruct and teach the youth of Laced^mon, for in three things
especially the Grecians brought their children up, in Learning, in Painting,
and in Music, and especially great men's children, in dancing and in singing,
as Epaminondas and Cimon, and for that Themistocles and Alcibiades found great
fault for that great Captains should become dancers, they were therefore
reprehended, and answered that Epaminondas and Cimon were as great Captains as
they.

The Egiptians were wont to bring up their children in Arithmeticke and
Geometry, and the Kings children in Magic.

People of Creete brought their children up in three things, first to learn
the laws of their country; secondly to learn Hymns and Psalms to praise
their gods; and thirdly to learn to sing the praise and fame of their great
Captains.

Among the Indians their wise men called Brachmanes, made a Law that their
Children should be The law of the Br^chmanes for their children in India.
brought after two months old before the Magistrates, and there to judge by
the sight of the children, that if they were fit for wars, they should be
brought up in military discipline, if otherwise, they should be appointed to
Mechanical occupations.

The Ethiopian Philosophers made a law that all Magistrates and Parents
should examine their children and the youths of their Countries, what labor
and exercise they had done every day before they should take meat, and if it
were found that they had not exercised either Mechanical or Military
exercise, they should go away vndined for that day.

Among the Grecians all the Orators and Poets came from all parts of Greece,
sometimes to Thesius grave, sometimes to Helicon, and there the Poets to
contend in verses and the Orators in Oratory, with diverse kinds of crowns and
garlands, which exercise was used to draw Orators and Poets contended in Greece
and entice the youths of Greece to virtue and learning, and as the Roman
youths had a garment like the Dictators garment, called Toga praetexta, in
honor of arms to exercise military discipline in Martius field, so the
Grecians had for those youths that excelled in learning, the garment called
Palladium.

The sixth Regiment entreats of murder and revenge of blood amongst all
Nations, against the which the Gentiles had diverse lawe-makers which made laws
to punish the same.
AS the Gentiles in all Countries had their laws made to rule and govern
them, as among the Egiptians by Bocchoris, among the Persians and Baetrians The
names of law makers and magistrates in diverse countries.
by Zoroastes, among the Carthagineans by Charondas, among the Magnesians and
Cicilians by Plato, among the Athenians by Solon, and among the Lacedaemonians
by Licurgus, so had they certain Magistrates to execute the same law after
them, as the thirty Senators in Egypt, the Areopagites in Athens, the Ephori
in Sparta, and so of the rest.

This is the law of nature, written first in tables of flesh, and after in
tables of stone. Cain the first-man born; and the first murderer, he slew his
brother Abel, and had Gene. 4.
sentence of the Lord with a perpetual mark of torture, that no man should
kill Cain, but to live as a vagabound and a rogue, cursed upon the earth; the
witness that accused him was his brother Abels blood, so the Lord spoke, Vox
sanguinis fratris tui edit clamorem ad caelum, Blood the first witness against
murder.
blood therefore was the first witness on earth against murder, and called in
scripture the Judge of blood.

Cain for disobedience to his father, and murdering of his brother, became a
cursed vagabound upon the earth, and all his wicked posterity were drowned in
the deludge.

So scoffing Cham was cursed of his father Noah, and in him all his posterity
likewise accursed, for the Canaanites which were of the stock of Cham, were
slain Cham was accursed.
by the Israelites, and the Gibionites which came from the Canaanites, were
made slaves to the Israelites, and so the Egiptians and Aethiopians the
offspring of Cham, were taken captive by the Assyrians, so that Cham was cursed
in himself, and cursed in his posterity, for the scorning of the nakedness
of his father; so the parents Deuteronomy. 1^.
of the Idolaters and blasphemers, brought the first stone to press their own
sons.

The second murderer in Scripture was Lamech, which killed Cain, against whom
the Lord made a The second murderer in scripture.
law, that whosoever should slay Cain should be punished seven fold, for so
Lamech confessed himself, that Cain should be avenged seuen-folde, but Lamech
Gene. 27.
seventy times seven fold, there shall want no witnesses against murderers,
and oppressers of Orphants, and widows.

The witness against the filthy lust of the Sodomites, was the very cry of
Sodom before the Lord, for so is the law, that the Justice of blood shall
slay the murderer.

Jacobs children consented all saving Ruben and Judah, to kill Joseph their
younger brother which made Joseph threatened to be killed.
Ruben speak to his brethren in Egypt, that the blood of Joseph was the cause
that they were thus imprisoned and charged with theft and robberies.

There are four witnesses which the Lord stirs up against murderers,
oppressors of Orphants, Infants and Widows; first the Lord himself is a
witness, Four witnesses against murderers.
the second the witness of blood, the third the witness of stones in the
streets, and the fourth, the witness of fowls in the air.

The like murder was in Esaus heart against Jacob his brother, for Esau said
that the days of his fathers sorrows Jacob fled from Esau.
were at hand, for I will slay my brother Jacob, but Jacob fled to Aran to his
uncle Laban, by his mothers counsel Rebecca, for fear of his brother.

Naboth was stoned to death by false and wicked witness, for his Vineard, of
Achab, by his wife Iezabels counsel.

The like murder was in Saul's heart against David, practicing by all means
possible to kill David, The envy of Saul toward David.
first by himself, then by his son Jonathan, by his daughter Michol, David's
wife, and by his servants, for there is three kinds of murder, the first in
the Three kinds of murder.
heart against the Lord, as in Cains heart against Abel, in Esaus heart
against Jacob, and in Saul's heart against David; the second by the tongue,
either by false witness, as Iezabel with false witness against Naboth for his
Vineard; or else by slander, as the two Elders in Babylon slaundered Susanna;
the third performed by the hand, of the which there are two many examples, but
all murders by the hand and by the tongue proceed from the heart: the envy
of Cain in his heart toward his brother Abel, was the cause that he slew his
brother. The murder of Naboth was the covetousness of Achab in his heart, to
have his vineyard. 3. Reg 21.


The murdering of Vriah came from David's heart by lust to Berseba, Vriahs wife.

There be other kind of murderers, that rise early in the morning to kill in
the day and rob in the night. So Job says, Mane surgit homicida, interficit
egenum and Pauperem. Job. 20.


Again there be other kind of murderers, as the Prophet says, Qui viduam
and Aduenam interficiunt. Psalm. 93.


So may it be said of ambition in the heart, for by ambition Herod caused all
the children in Bethelem and about Math. 2.
Bethelem to be slain, seeking to destroy him which could not be destroyed,
which was Christ.

Against such kings and tyrants, the more wicked cruelty they use, the more
just punishment they shall receive, Sap. 6.
Iudicium enim durissimum ijs qui presunt, fiet, and the more wrong and injury
they do to honest and just men, the greater torments they shall suffer,
Fortioribus fortior instat cruciatio.

By ambition in the heart Abimelech slew three score 2. Reg. 11.
and eight of Gedeons sons his brethren.

And so by the selfsame ambition Thalia caused all that were of the kings
blood to be put to death, so is he that enuieth, hates, and wishes ill to
his brother, a manslaughterer.

The punishment of murder in Cain and in Lamech, Punishment upon Cain and
others by the law of nature.
was given by the law of nature of the Lord before the written law was given
to Moses, as Thamar the daughter in law of Judah for whoredom, and as murder
and whoredom were punished first by the law of nature before the law
written, so all other offenses contained in the Decalogue, were by the same
law punished, long before the law was written and given to Moses in mount
Tabor.

The murdering of the Prophets, of the Apostles, and of the martirs of God,
even from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias the Priest,
cry and call for justice and judgment, saying: How long Lord will it be
before vengeance be taken upon wicked murderers and tyrants?

Of these the Prophet says, Dederunt cadauera seru^rum tuorum in cibum anibus
caeli, and carnes piorum bestijs terrae.

But when the Lord is ready to be revenged upon these cruel murderers, and
ambitious murmurers, who can quench the fire in the stubble when it begins
to Esd. li. 4. ca. 16.
burn? who can turn again the arrow shot of a strong archer? or drive away a
hungry Lion in the wood? who can resist the Lord in his purpose and decree?

Murderers have their marks, as Cain had such a mark, that he could not
dye, though he wished to dye.

Esau had such a mark, that though he sought with tears to repent, yet he
could not repent. Murderers have their marks.


Pharao had such a mark that he could not confess the Lord to be God, though
he sought Moses to pray for him, but no doubt marks of murder, for Cain killed
his brother Abel, Esau sought, and said he would kill his brother Jacob, and
Pharao in his heart threatened death to Moses and Aaron, and to all the Hebrews.

These signs and marks which these reprobates had, were not outward marks
seen, but inward, burned with hot Irons in their consciences, but the
Hebrews in the land of Gosen, were marked with the letter Tau in their
foreheads, as signs to be saved from the plagues in Egypt, they that lamented
and wept for Jerusalem, were marked in their foreheads with the letter Tau of
the Angel: so all Christians are saved by this letter Tau, made like a cross,
which we must bear in our hearts, and not in our foreheads.

The punishment of Paracides among the old Romans was such, that the
murderer should be put in a sack alive, bound hand and foot, together with
an ape, a cock, and a viper, which should so byte and torment him, until he
were almost dead, and then to be How Paracides were punished in Rome.
thrown into Tiber, with his three companions with him; so was Marc. Malleolus
for killing of his mother, judged so to die by the Senators.

The second Paracide in Rome was Histius, after the second Roman wars with
the Affricans, with the like judgment given as before: this kind of punishment
for Alex. Neapol. Genial. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Paracides continued a long time among the Romans; for in former time while
yet the Romans were poor, not acquainted with money, long before they knew
Affrike or Asia, their punishment for murder was but a ram, which the
Romans slew and sacrificed to their gods.

The Grecians like the Romans in ancient time, punished a murderer with a
certain set number of cattle; yet in other countries they punished murder
most severely and cruelly.

As in Egypt they would thrust long needles made sharp of steel, under the
nails of their hands and of their Bocchoris laws in Egypt for murder.
toes, and after cut the flesh of the murderer in small pieces, and throw it
by gobbets into the fire, and burn it in his sight while yet he had life in
him. Diod. sic. lib. 2.


A law was made among the said Egiptians, that if any man had killed his
son, the father should be locked together with the son slain by him in one
chamber, without meat or drink for three days, beholding still before his
face the dead body of his son, by himself slain, (with a watch that none
should come to him) thinking that by looking thereon, there could be no greater
torture or punishment to the father, then to see his son so slain by
himself which was his father.

Among the Persians a law was made, that he that killed his father was thought
that he never had a father, for they thought it against the law of nature, a
thing unnatural, yea and impossible that the son should kill his father, and
therefore he should be ever after called a bastard (a greater reproach among
the Persians could not be) and therefore Romulus in Rome, and Solon in Athens,
being demanded why they made no laws No law made against Paracides, neither
by Romulus nor Solon.
against Paracides, answered that they thought none so wicked or so cruel as
to think on such wickedness, and therefore they thought it fit, that no law
should be mentioned for so wicked a fact, though by Dracoes law, Solons
predecessor, the least fault in Athens was punished with death, and therefore
called in jest, Lex Draconis.

In Lusitania a Paracide should be stoned to death, not within their country,
least the murderers blood should defile their country, but they should be
banished to the next confines, and there to die.

David was forbidden to build the Temple in Jerusalem, for that he was a man of
blood, so the Lord said, Thou art a man of blood, and therefore thy son
Solomon shall build me a Temple.

In the city Elephantina in Aethiopia, a murderer should be forced by the
law to eat the herb called Ophiusa, which being eaten, the murderer should
be so tormented with such terrible visions and dreams, that he could never
take rest or sleep before he had killed himself.

The Macedonians in like sort stoned them not only to death that committed any
murder or treason against their Prince and their country, but also such as
were consenting thereunto; and therefore Plato in Athens made Platoeslaw for the
man that killed himself.
a law that the hand that slew himself should not be buried with the body, but
should either be thrown away to be eaten of dogs, or else to be nailed in
some public place, to be eaten of fowls of the air, as actor of the murder.

In many places murder was less esteemed of men, then of birds or of beasts,
as in Egypt to kill an Egiptian cat, was more dangerous then to kill a Roman
captain. The history is written in Diod. sic. at large.

So to kill the bird called Ibis in Egypt, there was by the law capital
punishment for it. In Thessalia none might kill a stoike; neither in Athens by
the law of Solon, none might sacrifice an ox.

Cai. Caligula after he had murdered so many, much complained because he could
not murder more, and oftentimes Caligula.
wished that all Rome had but one neck, that he Oros. li. 7. ca 5
might with one stroke cut it off. There was found in this Emperors study,
after he was murdered, like a sword and a dagger, the one written on and named
Gladius, the other Pugio, in the which were written the most part of the names
of the chief Senators, appointed by Caligula to be slain, and in the same
study was found a chest full of cups, filled up with diverse kinds of poisons,
which likewise he appointed to poison the most part of the Roman knights, as
well of the Senate as of the City, which poisons being thrown into the seas
by Claudius the Emperor his successor, so infected the seas, that it killed an
infinite number of fish, which fish being dead, the seas cast off to the next
shores: so by the death of one murderer, most part of the Senators and Knights
of Rome escaped from murder and poison.

In the time that Clau. Marcellus was Consul in Rome, there were found 370.
old ancient women, supposed matrons, accused and condemned for poisoning
Oros. lib. 3. cap. 10.
so many in Rome, that it was thought by the citizens and Senators of Rome,
that it was a common plague either by corruption of the air, or otherwise,
that so destroyed the people, such rewards have tyrants.

For he that killed Saul in Mount Gilboa, and brought his crown to David,
supposing to have some great reward, had the reward of a murderer, commanded
by David to be slain. Diverse horrible murderers punished.


The like reward had Rechab and Banah, which brought Isbosheths head to David,
their reward was, to have their heads and their hands cut off, and to be hanged
up over the poole in Haebron: murder never wants his due deserts, nor just
rewards.

Charondas law was, that he that pulled a man's eye out, should loose an other
of his own for it, but if a man had but one eye, and that were plucked out,
Charondas Charondas law.
thought the law were satisfied, if one eye of the offender were lost for it,
yet the one eyed man by loosing of his eye, was deprived of all his sight, and
therefore sought by the law to have the offender as blind as he, for though
he lost but one eye, yet lost he all his sight, and thereby would have the
penalty of the law for his sight, and not for the eye, and claimed therefore
justice of the law against the offender.

But the law of Moses is otherwise, that if a man strike his servant in the
eye, that his eye perish, he shall let his servant go free, for that he lost
his eye, also if a man smite out his servants tooth, the law is that he shall
likewise Exodus 21.
let his servant go free.

Yet in matters of death, Moses law is, eye for eye, member for member, life
for life, blood for blood, so is The law of the 12. Tables like Moses law.
the law of the twelve Tables, Siquis membrum rupit in eum Talio esto.

So Samuel spoke to king Agag the Amalekite, as thy sword made many women
without children, so without children shall be thy mother, and cut him in pieces,
according to Talions law.

Was not Andronicus stripped out of his purple clothing by King Antiochus
commandment for his Andronicus killed.
murder, and caused to be killed in the same very place where he caused the
high priest Onias to be slain? the Lords just judgment ever reuengeth
innocent blood.

Zimri through ambition, which is the root of all Zimri. 3. Reg. 15.
mischief, conspired against his master Elam, and killed him as he was
drinking in Samaria. How long reigned he? seven days after he was besieged in
his own palace, where he was forced to burn himself and his house.

Zellum through ambition conspired against his master Zachariah, flew him, and
reigned in his stead but a Zellum. 4. Reg. 15.
month in Samaria.

If men look to the end of kings, governors, and generals, Curtis. 9.
more are found betrayed and slain by friends and servants in their chambers,
the^ by the enemies in the field.

For these be called Cubiculares consiliarij, a quibus b^nus and cautus
imperator venditur. Vopisc. in Aurel.


Thus is murder ever committed, either by covetousness, pride, malice, envy,
or ambition, which is chief, the very ringleader of murder and treason.

Was not Saul ambitious when Samuel told him Saul.
that the Lord had reicted him for his disobedience, to say to Samuel, yet
honor me before the people.

The Idol Appollo in Delphos could say no more to Augustus Caesar, when he
came to know what should become of the Empire of Rome, but that an Hebrew
child was borne that commanded us to silence, yet as Saul spoke to Samuel, so
the Idollspake to Augustus, yet depart thou with reverence from our altar
before the people.

These wicked men's lives are compared in the book of Wisdom, to a shadow,
or to a post riding in haste on the way, or to a ship in the sea, whose path
cannot be seen, or to a foul flying in the air, whose steps cannot be
found, whose wicked hope is compared to an arrow that is shot, and falls
quickly to the ground.

Was not Absolon ambitious to say, I wish that there were some by the king
appointed to hear the just complaint Absolon.
of the people. Thus by ambitious means he practiced secret treachery against
the king his father for the kingdom.

In the seventh Regiment is manifested the great zeal of good men, where
whoredom is punished in many countries, and lest unpunished in other
countries, with the praise and commendation of chastity.
AS you read before in the first and fourth regime^ts, how the Egiptians, the
Lacedaemonians, the Locreans and the Getes, affirmed to have their laws from
Oracles and Divine powers.

So Numa Pomp. made the old Romans Plut. in Numa
believe, that all the laws and Religion which he gave to thepeople, were
delivered The Gentiles confirm their laws by authority of Oracles from their
gods.
unto him by the Nymph Egeria, yea even the very barbarous Scythians, brag
that they have their laws from their god Zamolxis.

And as the Turks at this day confess, that they have their laws from
Mahomet, so many other lawmakers in diverse countries, made their people
believe, that they consulted with some divine powers, and were instructed to
make their laws.

Such therefore is the strength and authority of the law, that Paul calls
the law the minister unto death, and yet a school master to know Christ.
Plato called laws the sinews of a commonwealth. Demosthenes a divine gift.
Cicero the bands of cities. Plutarch the very life of a commonwealth. The
laws are as keys to open unto us the way unto obedience, and to know sin;
for if the law had not commanded me, Thou shall not defile thy neighbors
wife, I had not known adultery to be a sin.

There is no offense so grievously punished by Gods law, neither by man's law,
as adultery was even from the creation, in so much that all men defiled
themselves with that sin, all flesh corrupted his way. Hence grew the Lords
anger so great, that he punished the whole world with an universal Deluge,
saving eight persons: after the Deluge, for the self The five cities called
Pentapolis destroyed.
same sin, the Lord destroyed the five Cities of Palestine with fire and
brimstone, the Lord would not have so filthy a sin to reign among his
people.

How was Israel plagued for their adultery with the Moabites, with whom the
Lord commanded that The Israelites plagued for their sin with the Moabites.
they should not join in marriage, and therefore the Lord commanded Moses to
hang their Princes up against the Sun for their filthy lust with the
Moabites, and the women that had lien with men, were Nomb. 13.
commanded by Moses to be slain, and the Virgins to be reserved in the
wars against the Madianites, and Moses was angry with the Captains for that
they had not slain the Madianite women.

And therefore Phineas the son of Eleazer, for his zeal against adultery,
slew Coshi the Madianite harlot, and Zimri the Israelite, thrust them through
both their bellies in the act, for the which the Lord was so pleased, that the
plague ceased in the camp, and the Priesthood was given for ever to Phineas
and his stock, for the Lord would not have a whore to live in Israel.

The zeal of Iehu was such, that he caused seventy sons of Achab to be
slain, and caused Iezabal his 4. Reg. 10.
wife to be cast headlong down out of a window to be eaten of dogs, he
slew 42. of Achabs brethren, and destroyed all the Priests of Baal, and left
not one of Achabs house alive. The zeal of Iehu so pleased the Lord, that his
children reigned four generations after him.

The zeal and faith of Abraham was such, that he was ready to offer and
sacrifice his only son Isaac to obey The commendation and reward of godly
zeal.
the Lords commandment.

The zeal and love of Joseph in Egypt was such, that he preferred the laws
and love of the Lord before the love of his mistress, Putiphars wife.

Such also was the love and zeal of Moses to Israel, that he requested to be
put out of the book of life, before Israel should be destroyed of the Lord in
his anger.

Solomon was so zealous in the laws of the Lord, that he sought nothing but
wisdom to rule his people, and to know his laws.

So Job loved the Lord and his laws, that for all the loss of his goods and
children, and for diverse plagues and punishments of body, yet he still stood
constant in the laws of the Lord.

Adulterers are cried out upon in the scripture, and often mentioned in the
old and new Testament, compared by the Prophet to stoned horses, neying upon
other men's wives. Women so corrupted Solomon, that he forsook the Lord, and
worshipped strange gods, and lost thereby ten of the twelve Tribes of
Israel.

David his father was so punished for his offenses with one woman against the
Lord, that he welnigh lost his kingdom by it.

If David, if Moses and Paul were buffeted by Satan, who can think himself
free from Satan? we must therefore watch if we will not be deceived, we must
fight if we think to have victory, not against flesh and blood only, but
against armies of spirits, infernal powers, against spiritual enemies, and
against Satan the prince and ruler of darkness. For many are the stratagems
of Satan, with whom we must wrestle as Jacob did with Ephesians. cap. 6.
the Angel, with such weapons as is taught in Paul, or as David did with
Goliath, or as Job did with Satan himself.

The evil counsel of Achitophel to Absolon, to lie Example of adultery in
diverse countries punished.
with his fathers concubines, brought both Absolon and Achitophel to hanging.

Pharao for lusting on Sarah Abraham's wife, both he and all his house were
scourged and plagued with Angels Genesis 1^.
and visions.

The Beniamites for their abominable abuse of the Iudic. 19.
Levites wife, was the cause that three score and five thousand died in Israel.

Sychem and all the Sychemites for the rauishment of Dina, Jacobs daughter,
were slain, and the town ouerthrown Genesis 34.
by Simeon and Leui, Jacobs sons.

The laws of all countries and nations appointed such due severe punishments
for adultery, as in Rome Lex Iulia was as sharply executed against
adulterers, as against traitors, and still renewed by many of the Emperors
(after Julius Caesar, who made this law) as Tiberius, Seuerus, and others, who
with great severity punished adultery.

Laws were made in many Countries to suppress adultery, for concupiscence
and evil affections were Laws in diverse countries against adultery.
condemned by the laws among the Gentiles, to be the root of all mischief;
for evil thoughts breed delectation, delectation bredeth consent, consent
action, action custom, and custom necessity, for custom is as another
nature.

Adultery was punished in Egypt by the law of Bocchoris, in this sort; the man
should be beaten with rods to a thousand stripes, and the woman's nose should be
Bocchoris law against adultery.
cut off to deforme her face, as a perpetual mark of her adultery: but if she
were a free woman, the man should have his privy members cut off, for that
member which offended the law, should be punished by the law, which law
sometime was executed among the Romans, for so was Carbo gelded by Bibienus
the Consul for his adultery; the Romans had rather make laws, then keep the
laws which they made.

Therefore Charondas made a law to keep the good from the bad, for to fly
from vice is virtue; that by taking away the cause the effect might also be
removed; for virtue is soon corrupted with vice, and a little leaven Charondas
law against adultery.
infecteth the whole doughe; and therefore an action might be had by the law
of Charondas, not only against honest women that used the company of leaude
men, but also against men that should be often found in the society of wicked
men; for Charondas said, good men become better by obedience of the law, and
become wicked, by wicked company which obey no laws; for that law said
Charondas is ever best, by the which men become more honest then rich. Par est
eos Arist. 5. polit:
esse meliores qui ex melioribus.

Lysander being demanded what manner of government Demosthenes aduersus Leptin.
he best liked, said; where good men are rewarded for their weldoing, and evil
men punished for their wickedness: as Plato said, Omnis Respub: paena and
Praemio continetur. Plato de leg.
So Demosthenes ever thought that law best, which provided for good men
advancement, and for evil men punishment.

To the like effect Zaleucus made a law that no honest or modest woman should
go in the street but with one maid with her; and if she had two, the law
was, Zaleucus laws against adultery.
she should be noted for a drunkarde: Neither might known honest women go out
of the Town in the night time, unless they would be noted to go in the
company of adulterers.

Neither might any modest woman or sober matron be attired with brave apparel,
imbrodered or wrought with gold, silver, bugles, and such, unless she would
be noted by the law of Zaleucus, that she went abroad to play the strumpet,
for among the Locreans an adulterous nation, people much given to lust and
lechery, Zaleucus made a law, that by their comely and modest apparel they
should be known from harlots, and light women, which used to wear light,
garrish, and all kind of glistering garments to be looked at.

Aurelianus the Emperor punished a soldier found in the camp in adultery in
this sort, to tie both his legs to two tops of trees, bended to the earth,
and so his Fla. vobise. in Aureliano.
body by the swinge of the trees to cleave in the midst through, that the one
half hanged on the one tree, and the other half upon the other tree.
Punishment of adultery by Aurelianus and Macrinus both Emperors of Rome.


The like or rather more horrible punishment used Macrinus the Emperor against
two soldiers in the camp that deflowred a maid in their lodging, he caused
two oxen to be opened, and sowed alive one of the soldiers in the one ox, and
the other soldier in the other ox, and left their heads out of the oxen, that
thereby they might speak one to an other as long as they Capitolin. in vita
Macrini.
lived.

Was not Abraham called from the Chaldeans; because they were wicked Idolaters?
Did not Jacob long in Mesopotamia for the land of Canaan? Did not David wish to
be in Judah from among the Amalekites, wicked Infidels? Were not the captive
Israelites most desirous Time has ever been appointed for godly men to effect
their purpose.
from Babylon to come to Jerusalem? yet not before the time that God had
appointed and determined; for Elizeus could not prophecy before Elias threw
his mantle upon him, neither could David appeal the fury of Saul before he
played on his harp; neither could Aaron become a high Priest before his rod
blossomd in the Arc.

The very Heathens forsook the company and country of wicked people, as
Hermadorus forsook his country Ephesus for the iniquity of the people.
Anacharsis left Scythia his barbarous country, and came to Greece to learn
wisdom and Philosophy in Athens. Plato left Athens, and went from Greece to
Egypt to be taught in the religion, ceremonies, and laws of the Egiptians.
Paul left Tharsis to go to Jerusalem to learn the laws of the Jews at
Gamaliel. Queen Saba came from Aethiope to hear Salomons wisdom in
Jerusalem.

It was lawful by the law of Solon in Athens, to The law Paratilmus against
adultry.
kill an adulterer being taken in the act, as among the old Romans, the
husband might kill his wife, if he found her an adulteress: but this law of
Solon in Athens, was after mitigated by Solon with a less punishment.

The Parthians supposed no offense greater then adultery, neither thought they
any punishment to be equal with so great a crime.

Among the Arabians the law was, that the adulterer should die such a death as
the party grieved should appoint.

Diverse Philosophers ever thought adultery worse then perjury, and without
doubt greater harms grow by adultery then perjury, though the one be in the
first The opinion of diverse Philosophers concerning adultery.
Table against the majesty of God, to take his name in vain; and the other in
the second Table against thy neighbor, whom thou ought to love as thy
self; and yet some of the best Philosophers as Plato, Crisippus, and Zeno,
judged that commonwealth best governed, where adultery was freely permitted
without punishment, that liberty they brought from Egypt unto Greece, where
the Egiptians might marry as many wives as they would, like the Persians.

Among diverse other nations, adultery was left unpunished, for that they had
no law against adultery.

Histories make mention that the virgins of Cypria and of Phaenizia, get their
dowry with the hire of their bodies, until they gave so much for their
dowries, that they might make choice of their husbands, and be married. Alex.
Neapol. lib. 1. cap. 24.


The Troglodites the nights before they be married unto their husbands, must
lie and keep company with the next of their kin, and after their marriage they
were with most severe laws punished if they had offended.

It should seem by the laws of Licurgus in Sparta, 300. years before the law
of Solon in Athens, which was 200. years before the law of Plato among the
Cicilians, which made no laws against adultery, that the Grecians took their
instructions by imitation from the Egiptians.

For one after an other, Solon after Licurgus, and Plato after Solon, traveled
to Egypt and to other far countries, and brought the law of Bocchoris out of
Egypt, the law Diod. sic. lib. 2. cap. 6.
of Mynoes out of Creete, and the laws of the Gymnosophists out of India into
Greece.

As among the Lesbians, Garamites, Indians, Massagets, Scythians, and such,
that were more like to savage beasts, then to temperate people, for by the law
we know sin, for I had not known what adultery was, unless the law had
commanded thou shall not lust.

And therefore it was not lawful by Moses law, that a bastard, or the son
of a commonwoman, should Moses law against bastard^
come unto the congregation of the Lord, or serve in any place of the
Tabernacle, or enter into the ministry until the tenth generation, so
hateful unto the Lord was fornication, adultery, and uncleanness of life.

When Jacob had blessed all his children, yet for that Ruben lay with his
fathers concubine Bilha, his father Jacob prophesied, that he should not be the
chiefest of his brethren, though he was the eldest son of Jacob, and the
eldest of his brethren, for that he was as unstable as water for defiling his
fathers bed; for among the Israelites it was a great shame and reproach for
women to be barren, and therefore the wives brought their maids to their
husbands for childrens sake, as Sarah brought Genesis 49.
her maid Agar unto Abraham, and Leah and Rachel brought to Jacob their two
maids, Bilha and Zilpha; so Rachel gave leave to Jacob to lie with Bilha her
maid, who bare to Jacob two sons, whom Rachel though not Genesis 30.
their mother, named them as her own sons, Dan and Nepthali. So Leah brought
her maid Zilpha to Jacob, who conceived and brought him two sons, of whom
Leah was so glad, that she named them as her own sons, the one Gad, and the
other Asar, so that four of Jacobs sons were borne by his maids and not by
his wives. This was tolerated, but not lawful.

Though the Hebrews were tolerated by the law of Moses to have many wives
and concubines, and Libels of diuorcement, for the hardness of the jews
hearts, as Christ said, yet said our Savior, Non fuit sic ab initio, it was
not so from the beginning.

Even from the creation men lived under the law of nature, for in man's heart
(yet not corrupted before the Law of nature.
fall) there was perfect knowledge in the law of nature, as in the first man
Adam was seen before his fall, under the which the old Patriarchs lived, and
sins were corrected and punished by the same law, for it was a positive law
by nature set forth and written in the hearts of men, thus was the written
law yet by Moses tolerated.

When it was told Judah that his daughter in law Thamar was with child, he
commanded that she Genesis 3^.
should be brought forth, and be burnt. Here the law of nature before the law
written, commanded whoredom to be punished with death; here Judah though he
detested whoredom in Thamar, yet being found that the incest was committed by
him, found his fault greater then hers.

If a man be found with a woman that has a wedded husband, let them both die
the death, so shall thou put Leuit. 19.
evil away from Israel, for the law is, you shall maintain no harlots in
Israel, as the Cyprians and Locreans do.

It was not lawful among the old Romans to call a bastard by the name of his
father, because he was the son of a common woman, and no man knew who should
Laws of nations against bastards.
be his father; but they used for his name to write these two letters, S. P.
quasi sine patre, as though he had never a father.

In Athens by the law of Solon, a bastard might choose whether he would be
acquainted with his father or no, or give him a meals meat in his house, or a
cup of drink at his door, for that he was the cause of his ignominious and
infamous birth.

Among the Israelites if a man marry a young virgin, and after prove her not to
be a virgin when he married Deuteronomy. 22.
her, the law is, that she should be brought to the door of her fathers
house, and the men of that city should stone her with stones to death, but if
her husband falsely accused her, then the Elders of that city should chastise
him, and mearce him in an hundred sickles of silver, and give them to the
father of the damzell, and she to continue with him as his wife.

But in Israel there was an other law, that if a man be taken committing
fornication with a virgin, and after the Deuteronomy. 22.
matter come before a Judge, he shall be caused to marry the woman, and to
live with her during his life, and to pay 50. sickles of silver to the maids
father for his offense.

A woman with child condemned to death, might challenge the time of her
childbirth by the law of Bocchoris, Bocchoris law for a woman with child.
which law was brought by Solon from Egypt unto Greece, for the law thought it
not fit, that the guiltless should die for the fault of the guilty.

An other law was made, that if a man hurt a woman with child so that her
child depart from her, and Exodus 21.
she die not, he shall be punished according as the woman's husband shall
appoint, or pay as arbiters will determine.

Again in Israel there was an other law, that the wife of the dead shall not
be given unto a stranger, but her brother in law shall take her to wife, and
marry her, and the eldest son which she bears, shall be the child of the
brother that was dead, and not of him that begat him, but if the brother
refuses to marry his brothers The law of the unshod house.
wife, the Elders of the city shall call unto him, and commune with him,
before whom if he deny to take her to wife, then the sister in law should go
in presence Deuteronomy. 25.
of the Elders, and loose his shoe of his foot, spit in his face, and say, so
shall his name be called in Israel of the unshod house.

The law of Moses was, that an adulteress should be brought by her husband
unto the Priest, and the Priest The law of Moses against an adulteress
to bring her and set her before the Lord, and shall uncover her head, and have
bitter and cursed water in his hand, and say, if thou be not an adulteress,
and defiled not thy self unknown to thy husband, then have thou no harm of
this bitter and cursed water, but if thou be defiled by an other man besides
thy husband, the Lord make thee accursed, and make thy thigh rot and thy belly
swell, and this cursed water go into thy bowels, and the woman his wife so
accused, shall say, Amen.

The law which the Lord punished his people for committing adultery, was
with such severity, that they should die the death, either by stoning or
burning, which was the law among the Israelites.

The people called Cortini, had a law in their country, that an adulterer
should be crowned with wool, and Cortini.
should sit in the market place in open sight of the people to be laughed at,
and to be noted as an infamous adulterer all his life long in his country.

The people called Pisidae had a law made, that the adulterer should be bound
upon an ass, and be carried Pisidae.
from town to town, for the space of three days, with his face backwards,
holding the tail of the ass in his hand for a bridle.

They had in Athens by the law of Solon a place called Casaluion, and the women
were called Casaluides, to whom Casaluion.
any Athenian might resort to avoid adultery with the Matrons and Virgins of
Athens.

The like place they had in Rome called Summaenium, for the like purpose; and
the like are tolerated in many Summaenium.
countries to avoid great offenses, but rather a nurserie of whoredom then a
prohibition. These used the like words as Iulia did in Rome, Licet, si libet,
like Anaxarchus, being demanded by Cambises, Is it lawful for the kings of
Persia to marry their sisters? we find not such laws, said Anaxarchus, Non
fas potentes posse, fieri quod nefas, but we find an other law that the
kings of Persia may do what they list.

What vice can be greater in man then incontinencie? for it does sin against
the body it self, and does weary and languish all the parts thereof; for as
fish says Plato, are taken with hooks, so men are taken and deceived with
pleasures; in so much that Xerxes, the great king of Persia, Xerxes offered
rewards to invent pleasures
decreed by law, a reward to any man that could invent andfind out new kinds
of pleasures, but he was slain, and lost the kingdom of Persia by his
pleasures. And therefore Laert. in Solone.
well said Solon, Co^sule non quae suauissima, sed quae optima.

Hanibal having welnigh subdued the Roman Empire, yet being taken with the
baits and pleasures of Haniball.
Campania, in company of wine and women, and all delicacies and pleasures that
could be invented, of which Seneca says; Conuiuiorum luxuria and vestium,
aegrae ciuitatis indicia sunt, that by means of his incontinency in Campania,
he was driven out of Italy, and after out of his own country of Affrike, by him
that was one of the chiefest and chastest Captains of all the Romans, Scypio
Affrican, who made a law to bannish all women out of his camp, to whom in his
Affrican wars was brought a passing fair young Gentlewoman of singular beauty
and of a noble house, whom Scypio used so honorably, with great care and
diligence for her good name and credit, Scypio.
until Allucius a young Gentleman that should be married to the virgin,
brought a great ransom from her parents, to redeem her, to whom Scypio
delivered both the young virgin into his hands, and bestowed the gold which her
father sent unto him for her ransom, upon Allucius for her dowry; by this
honorable dealing of Scypio, the whole Province which stood out in arms
against Scypio, yielded unto him, and sought peace at Scypios hand, for his
courteous modestitie and temperancie; Commendation of chastity.
where Hanibal lost all Italy and Campania, by his incontinencie and unchaste
life.

If Darius king of Persia, had escaped from his last overthrow at Arbela by
Alexander, no doubt in respect of the honorable usage which Alexander showed
to Darius Alexander.
wife and his daughters, he would have yielded all the whole Empire of Persia
unto Alexander.

Narseus king of Persia, being overthrown, and his army slain, by Dioclesian
the Emperor of Rome, and the Dioclesian.
King himself constrained to flight, his wife and his daughters were taken by
the Romans, and were used so honorably, that the Persians confessed, that the
Romans did not only exceed all Nations in arms and valor, but in modesty
and temperancie; the honorable usage of his wife and daughters, made Narseus
to yield unto the Komanes, and to deliver to the Romais hands Sext. Ruffinus.
Armenia, with five other Provinces, and to conclude a peace; See the force of
virtue and power of chastity in Heathens, that Alexander, Scypio, and
Dioclesian, wanne by temperance and chastity, that which they could not
conquer by arms.

Antigonus understanding that his son lodged in a house where three sisters
were, of passing beauty, wrote that he was most straightly besieged of three
great enemies, Front. lib. 4. cap. 1.
and therefore wished him to remove his camp, and afterward made a decree,
that his son should lodge in no place, but where the woman should be 50. years
of age.

The law was among the Grecians, that women should not sit among men, unless
it were with their husbands, and among their next neighbors. L. Consensu C. de
repud. lib. 1. cap. 2.


The like law was among the Romans, the woman that might be found with
strangers in banquets, her husband might put her away, and be divorced from
her, and therefore it is written in the law, that conuiuia, veneris Praeludia
sunt.

Licurgus law was among the Lacedaemonians, that none should fare better then
an other in banquets, but all by law should be equally feasted; the number was
appointed in banquets from three unto seven among the Greeks, so that it grew
to be a proverb among the Grecians, Septem conuiuium, nouem conuitium facere.

So among the ancient Romans, not above four or five should be allowed or
admittted to a feast or banquet: Leges conuiuales.
for the chief feast by Platoes law called Bellaria Platonis, was figs,
berries, olives, pease, beans, masts of beech trees tosted, and prunes, for
the temperate fare and thin diet both of the old Greeks and of the Romans,
were Magis iucunda quam Profusa.

But after in time it grew to such excess among the Romans, that they came to
their feasts and banquets with garlands crowned, and there to drink the first
draught to Jupiter, as the Grecians drank the last draught to Mercurius. Unto
these kind of feasts the Romans might not come in black or sad colored
garments, but all in white.

Wisdom exclaimes against those that say, Coronemus nos vosis ante qua^
marcescant and vino precioso nos impleamus. Sapien. 2.


So likewise among the Grecians it grew to such excess, that they forgot
Anacharsis law, which was but three draughts of wine; or Democritus law,
which was but four at the most, though afterward it came to a popular law,
Aut biberent aut abirent. This the Greeks had from the Persians, who with
their wives and concubines, consulted of state matters at their feasts.

Licurgus also decreed an other law, that in any public feast or banquet,
when neighbors and friends were disposed to be merry, that the best and
auntientest man of the company should speak to the rest, that nothing spoken
or done in this feast, should pass yonder door, showing to the company with
his finger, the chamber door which they came in at.

These feasts were not Bellaria Platonis, but rather Praeludia veneris.

In the eight Regiment is contained the commendation of chastity in virtuous
and godly women, with the sinister means of the Gentiles to become chaste.
AFter laws were made in every country, confirmed by divine authority, and
executed by grave and wise Virtuous and good laws were so honored that they
were sent for from one country to an other.
magistrates, these laws for necessity sake were sent for from one kingdom
to an other, to govern and to rule their countries.

Philadelphus king of Egypt, sent three from Alexandria to Eleazarus the high
Priest at Jerusalem, for the laws of Moses to be translated from Hebrew into
Greek.

So the Senators of Rome sent three for the law of the 12. Tables, to be
brought from Athens to Rome.

So the Mazacens sent for the law of Charondas to Thuria, and so the Grecians
sent for the laws of king Minoes into Creete.

Philadelphus much wondered after the reading of the Hebrew laws, being so wise
and godly a law, that welnigh Philadelphus.
for a thousand and two hundred years, no nation among the Gentiles made any
mention of this law, Joseph. lib. 12, cap. 2.
though before that time they must needs hear and read of it, by reason of the
greatness and authority of the Jews commonwealth. Demetrius and Menedemus
two great Philosophers, at that time answered the King, that none durst attempt
to mingle the divine laws of the Hebrews with the profane laws of the
Gentiles, for both Theodectus and Theopompus were punished, the one with
madness, the other with blindness, for making no difference between the
laws of the Lord, and the laws of the Gentiles, for as Dagon their god fell,
and could not stand before the arc, where the presence of God, and the figure
of Christ was, so the laws of the Lord suffered no profane laws to be joined
with them.

Seeing we are commanded by the law to forsake adultery, we must learn by
the self same law how Alex. Neapol. genial lib. 4. cap. 7.
to become chaste, not as the Priests of Athens did, called Hierophantae,
before they should come to do sacrifice to their goddess Pallas, they would
drink a very cold drink made of Cicuta hemblocke to make themselves chaste,
sometimes used in Athens to poison condemned men, which was the last drink and
draught of Socrates.

Neither like the Roman Priests who used to drink and to wash themselves
often, with the cold water Cicalda, to become chaste to sacrifice to the
Goddess Ceres.

Neither as the Priests of Egypt did by shauing their beards, and the hairs of
their heads, by abstaining from wine, women, and flesh, or by ofren washing or
Sinister means of the Gentiles to become chaste.
anointing of their bodies, to become the more continent to serve their
goddess Ifis. These Heathens all, for that they knew not Christ, missed in the
means to become temperate. So the Priests of Cybeles did amputare virilia,
because they might continue chaste and religious to sacrifice, and serve their
goddess Cybeles.

But it was commanded by the Lord, to Aaron and his sons, that they should
make no baldness on their heads, nor shave off the locks of their beards, nor
make any mark in their flesh as the Gentiles did. It was not lawful for them
to marry with a widow, or woman divorced from her husband, or any polluted
woman, but only with a maid, for the Lord would have his Priests holy which
kindle fire on his altar, and offer bread in his sacrifice.

If the Priests daughter play the harlot, she should be burnt by the law,
though others by the law should be stoned to death.

To become chaste is to serve God, and to say as Sarah, Tobiahs wife said in
her prayers, thou know (o Toby. 3.
Lord) how I have kept my soul clean without any desire or company of man.
Examples of chastity in good women.


Likewise to become temperate, is to imitate Judith the widdowe, that sat all
day long in her house in sackcloath, and kept her self close within doors
with her maids, fasting all the days of her life, excepting only Iedith. 10.
and 1^.
the Sabbath and the feast of the new Moon, not like Dina gadding to Sichem to
see the manners and fashions Neom^nia.
of the Sichemites; neiiher like the Sabine virgins going Prou 7.
to the feast Consualia to see plays in Rome; neither like the maids in
Siloh, to go abroad to play, to dance, and to sing. What was the end of this
liberty? first the overthrow of Sichem and the Sichemites, for violating Dina
The harm that happens by too much liberty.
Jacobs daughter; secondly the rauishment of the Sabine virgins, which moved
public wars between the Sabines and the Romans; and so of the virgins of
Siloh.

Neither like that light woman which is spoken of in the Proverbs of Solomon,
saying: I have decked my bed with ornaments, with carpets, and carved works,
and laces of Egypt, I have perfumed it with mirrhe, Aloes and Synamom, come and
let us take our fill of love until the morning, and take our pleasure in
dalliance, and he followed her as an ox that goes to the slaughter, as a
fool to the stocks, or as a bird hastneth to the snare, not knowing Prou. 6.
what danger he runs into, for can a man take fire in his bosom and not be
burnt? can a man go barefoote upon coals, and his feet not be burnt? so he
that goes to his neighbors wife shall not be innocent says Solomon.

It was a custom among the Hebrews, that the spowse was brought to her her
husband, her head being covered; so Rebecca took avail and covered her head,
when she saw Isaac, in token of shamefastness and chastity, for the way to
become chaste, is first to be shamefaste.

Men must have chaste eyes, Holosernes offended and desired to sin with
Judith, at the sight of her slippers.

So the two Elders offended at the sight of Sufan^ bathing her self in the
well.

This made Abraham to speak to his wife Sarah, I know thou art a fair woman,
that when the Egiptians Gene. 12. The offense of the eye.
see thee, they will kill me to obtain thee.

The eye of Herod was delighted so much at the dancing Math. 14.
of Herodias daughter, that he foolishly promised whatsoever she would ask,
which he cruelly performed with the head of John Baptist.

To become chaste is the gift of the Lord, not by unlawful means as Origin
did, though learned and religious, yet missed in the means to be temperate, so
that he made himself to be made an Euenuke, and his stones to be taken away,
thinking thereby to become continent, for you shall not tear, nor cut your
flesh, nor make any print of a mark by whipping of your bodies, or burning
marks any where upon the flesh, as the Heathens and Pagans did.

So the Prophet Elizeus commanded Naman the Syrian to go to wash him in
Jordan, to elense him of his leprosy.

So Christ commanded a poor cripple to go to the water of Syloh to wash him,
the water whereof being stirred by the Angel, many were healed; I do not speak
of the waters which in old time the Roman merchants used to sprinkle
themselves withal, called Aqua Mercurij, whereby they supposed that their God
Mercurius, Aqua Mercurij.
would give them good success and great gains.

Mary Magdalene trusting too much the false reports of some Rabines, was
deceived in the seeking of the Mary Magdalene.
Messiah, but having found (whom she sought) the Messiah, her love was such,
that she washed his feet with the tears of repentance, and dried them with
the hairs of her head, and therefore many sins were forgiven her, because
she loved the Lord much.

Among the Gentiles also, there were so many that made means to become chaste,
as they which were called Animphi, and another sort called Abij, which in no
People called Animphi and Abij.
sort could abide women, but led a single life; especially the heathen priests
in all countries, they should not come and offer sacrifice unto their gods,
until they had shaued their hairs, and washed their bodies over from top to to
toe, and abstained from wine and women.

The Gymnosophists in Aethiopia, grave and wise Judges, they made means
likewise to become chaste, by thin fare, feeding on Gurgins and course bread,
made of the Gymnosophists.
husks of corn, with Apples and Rice, this was their means to become
temperate in their profane religion.

So in India, Sacedotes solis, the Priests of the Sun, thought the means to
make themselves continent, not only by abstaining from flesh, wine and women,
as the Priests of Athens, of Rome, and of Egypt did, but also by refraining
their own beds in their own houses, and to live sub dio, to lie in their
clothes upon the earth.

Among the Romans and the Grecians the laws of the 12. tables commanded and
commended to them chastity, in such sort that they might neither serve,
sacrifice, The law of 12. tables for chastity.
nor offer unto their gods, unless for a certain time they had abstained from
wine and women, the words of the law were these, Ad diuos adeunto cast,
Pietatem adhibento, opes admouento. How straightly the Gentiles observed this,
you read before, yet seek they their warrant from Moses, for the high Priest
Abimelech would know of David whether he and his company were pure and clean
froo^ women before they should eat of the show bread, which was lawful for no
man to eat but the Priest.

The law of Moses was, that money gotten by common women might not be
accepted, neither in offering, nor in sacrifice upon the Lords Altar, for the
law says, thou shall neither bring the hire of a whore, nor the price of a
dog into the house of the Lord, for even both these are abominations unto
the Lord, for there Deuteronomy. 23.
shall be no whore, nor whore keeper in Israel.

So Numa Pomp, made a law in Rome, that a strumpet or a leaud woman should not
so much as touch the altar of Juno, for it was his law that Pellex non
tanger^ Innonis aram, so all the Pagans and Heathens would Val. Max. li. 6.
cap. 1.
have clean and pure things offered and sacrificed unto their gods upon their
profane aultars: so it is written by Cicero, Impij donis non audeant Placare
deos. Cic. de leg. 3.


In the ninth Regiment is signified the continuance of laws in diverse
countries, and the care in keeping of their laws.
AFter laws were made and executed in all countries, reverenced with
obedience, and so kept with care, that Licurgus laws were kept in Sparta among
the Lacedaemonians, five hundred and odd years, the laws of the Sybils in
Rome, continued welnigh five hundred years; the laws of Bocchoris in Egypt,
endured seven hundred years, the laws of Solon in Athens, continued
Continuance of laws in all countries.
one hundred years from Solons time to Xerxes, at what time Athens was burnt
by the Persians.

The laws of the Rechabites were observed and kept three hundred years by the
children of Ionadab, but the laws of the Jews from the coming of Moses out
of Egypt to the last destruction of Jerusalem under Titus, continued 1500.
years.

So careful were the first age, that the children of Seth (hearing Adam
prophesying of two destructions which should come upon the whole world, the one
by fire, the other by water) builded up two arches or pillars, the one of
brick, the other of stone, in the which Joseph. lib. 1. ca. 3. de Antiq.
were written many things concerning the law of nature, and the influence and
motions of the stars, that if the brick pillar were destroyed by water, the
stone pillar should reserve and keep safe their laws, their service, and
sacrifice to God; which the Patriarchs used as instructions to their posterity
after the flood, which continued until Josephus time; which as Josephus
himself writes, he saw in Syria.

Moses at his death delivered to the Hebrews the book of the law, and he
commanded them to lay up those laws in the Arc within the Tabernacle, where
The Tabernacle hidden by Jeremy.
it was lawful for none to come to them, but the high Priest, which continued
from Moses time until Jerusalem was destroyed by Nabuchodonozer, at what time
Jeremy 2. Macab. 2.
took the Tabernacle, the Arc, and the Altar of Incense, and brought them to
Mount Nebo, where Moses dyed, where he found a hollow cave, wherein he laid
the Tabernacle, the Arc, and the Altar of Incense, and so closed and stopped
the cave.

Among the Egiptians their laws were so reverenced and honored, that none but
only the Priests of Egiptians.
Memphis had the keeping thereof in the Temple of Vulcan.

The Lacedaemonians in like sort so reverenced and kept their laws, that their
kings and the magistrates called Lacedaemonians.
Ephori, came once a month to the Temple which they dedicated to the goddess
Fear, and there in the porch of the temple, the Senators of Lacedemonia, which
were 28. in number, did minister an oath both to the King and the Ephori before
the people, to serve and keep Licurgus laws, in the which Temple their laws
were locked up, and kept with great care.

The Romans made so much of the laws of their Sybils, that they were so kept
and so strongly locked with The care and diligence of all nations in keeping
their laws.
such care and diligence in a stony Arc in the Capitol under the ground,
where none might come to them, see nor read them, but the officers called
Duumuiri, who had the charge over them, neither they until the Consuls, and
the Senate had occasions to confer with the laws, which continued from
Torquinius Priscus time, until Lu. Syllas time, at what time the Alex. Neapol.
genial lib. 3. cap. 16.
Capitol was burnt, and withal the laws of the Sybils, and if any of these
officers would reveal any secrets out of the laws of the Sybils, he was
punished like a murderer, sowed alive in a sheet, and thrown into Tiber.

So the Athenians very careful of their laws, written first by Draco, and
after by Solon in Tables of wood, Athenians.
called Syrbes, that they were set up to be kept in their chief court place,
which the Athenians named Prytanion, where Magistrates should sit and judge
causes of laws.

The law of the Turks is, that the Priests after some ceremonies done, should
have a sword and a spear, which is set by him in the Pulpit, and to show the
same to the people, saying; see that you have these weapons in a readiness to
defend the laws and religion of Mahomet, the penalty of the Turks law is,
that if any man speak against their law, his tongue should be cut out; in so
much that the book called Muzaph, wherein their law is written, is so
reverenced Chron. Turcor.
and honored among the Turks, that no man may touch it with bare hands. Thus
were laws in all countries reverenced, and with great care and diligence
observed.

After laws, decrees and statutes were made in every Country, with such
circumstances as agreed with the time, with the place, and with the people, for
without law no Commonwealth nor Kingdom Arist. Rhet. 1. cap. 3.
can be governed, as Aristotle says, In legibus salus ciuitatis si ta est.

Judges were appointed to execute the same in all countries, and magistrates in
every city, as among the Hebrews the Elders called Synadrion Judges, and yet
in every city of Judah was a several Judge.

Among the Egiptians they had 30. Judges which they elected, from Eliopolis,
Memphis, Thaebes, Alexandria, Judges appointed in all countries to execute laws
and other cities of Egypt, of the which 30. they elected one to be chief.

Among the Aethiopians the sage Philosophers, the Gymnosophists, executed their
laws, among the Indians likewise the Brachmaines, called also Sacerdotes solis.

Among the Grecians, the general Judges called Amphictions, which sat twice
in the year, once at Trozaena in the spring time, and in the Autumn, in the
Temple of Neptune in Isthmos.

In many countries women for their wisdom and knowledge, were admitted to sit
in counsel, as among the Persians with King Xerxes, who in any great cause of
counsel, would send for Artemisia, Queen of Caria, whose counsel he found
so wise, that chiefly among all the Princes of Persia in many causes he allowed
and followed her counsel.

So the Queens in Egypt, altogether ruled and governed the whole estate of the
kingdom, to whom greater honor and homage was given, rather then to the kings
of Egypt, for that the whole state of their kingdom Of counsel and government
of women.
was rather governed by the Queens then by the Kings.

Women among the Lacedaemonians were not only admitted in public counsel, to
sit and determine in courts, but also sent for to co^sult in secret matters of
state with the Senators.

The old Gauls in the time of Haniball, in any contention between them and
the Carthagineans, if the breach of the laws, or any league broken were
committed by the Gauls, the women should determine a satisfaction to the
Carthagineans; if any offense grew by the Carthagineans, the Senators of
Carthage should satisfy the Gauls.

It is as well says Aristotle, if men govern like women, that women should
govern. Quid inter est vtrum faeminae, an qui gubernant, gubernentur a
faeminis. Aristot. (...). polit. ^ap. 7.


The Romans though they had a law that no woman nor young man should be
admitted to counsel, yet suffered they such grave and wise women, as
Agrippina, Meza, Cornelia, and others, to sit in some secret place where they
might see, and not be seen.

Solon therefore forbad by law that young men should neither give counsel, nor
be magistrates in a commonwealth. Plato in Alcib.
So Plato says, Concilium eius est, qui rei cunisque peritus est.

Yet Deberah and Hebrew woman, was a Judge in Israel, governed and ruled the
Hebrews for forty years. To this woman came all the children of Israel for
judgment, and she governed them wisely, and discreetly ministered unto them in
all points the laws of Moses, and delivered them out of the hand of Iabin King
of Canaan, who had sore oppressed Israel for the space of twenty years.

But among the Athenians, it was not lawful that women should sit and
determine in matters of state in Alex. Neapol. lib. cap. 3.
Athens, as the women in Sparta did; or as the women of Persia.

The Athenians sent to Delphos to know what law Cic. de leg. lib. 2. The
Athenians sent to Delphos.
and religion were best to be observed among the people; It was answered, the
ancient laws and religion of their Elders. The second time they sent again,
saying, that the laws of the Elders were often changed; It was by the Oracle
answered, that they should take the best laws of diverse laws, for it was the
manner as well among the Grecians, as among the Romans, ever to make laws,
and never to keep them.

And though the authority of the kings were taken away, and derogated in many
countries, yet the force and power of the law stood in effect, though the
change thereof were dangerous.

For the law says, Thou shall not steal, nor deal falsely, herein is
included under the name of stealing, Leuit. 19.
all kind of sacrilege, falsehood, fraud, lying one to an other, and all other
crimes pertaining to stealing.

Achan for his cunning stealing of a cursed Babylonian garment, two hundred
sickles of silver, and a tongue of gold against the law at the spoil of
Jericho, was delivered by the Lord to Ioshuahs hand, who brought him with his
sons, his daughters, all his cattells, his Tent, Achan stoned to death for
theft.
and all that he had unto the valley of Achor, and there stoned Achan to
death, and burned them with fire, the Lord ever prefers obedience before
sacrifice, for the Joshua 7.
disobedience in Achan for breaking the law, was the cause of his stoning.

The disobedience of Saul against the commandment of the Lord was such, that
he lost both his kingdom and his life.

A Prophet that went from Judah with the word of 3. Reg. 13.
the Lord to Bethel, for that he did eat bread in that place being forbidden,
he was killed of a Lion as he returned.

The man that gathered sticks upon the Sabbath day against the commandment,
the Lord commanded Number. 15.
he should be stoned to death.

We might think that the gathering of sticks, and the eating of a piece of
bread were but small faults, that thereby the one should be stoned, and the
other killed of a Lion, had it not been forbidden by the law.

So such men suppose Adams fault to be but little, that for earing of an Apple
in Paradise, not only he, but his posterity after him should loose Paradise,
but as the Angels in heaven, by their disobedience lost heaven, so Adam by his
disobedience lost Paradise.

The Lord spared not Kings for breach of the law, as Oza, and Ozias both
kings, the one for vnreuerent handling of the Arc, usurping the Levites Office
against The law of the Lord for breach of his laws.
the law, was strooken with sudden death; and the other for burning incense
against the law, which was the Priests Office, was strooken with leprosy.

The Lord spared not his own Priest Aaron, that for his incredulity before
the people, he died for it in mount Hor.

Neither spared the Lord his own servant Moses for his disobedience, so that
he also died in mount Nebo, Malac. 1.
that neither of them both came to the land of Canaan, for their disobedience
and diffidence in the Lord.

So severe the law of the Lord was, that 50000. Bethsamites died for looking
into the Arc.

Aarons sons Nadab and Abihu, for offering strange Nadab and Abihu.
fire before the Lord against the law, were destroyed by fire from heaven.

Hence grew the ceremonial laws of the Gentiles, touching their religion and
sacrifices to their Gods. So the women that attended the fire on the altar of
Apollo in Delphos, were severely punished, if by any negligence it happened to
be extinguished, neither might that fire being so extinguished, be kindled
again by any other then by the said women, and by no other fire the^ by the
beams of the sun.

The Vestall virgins in Rome, if the sacred fire of Vesta wear out by any
negligence, that Vestall virgin that then attended, should be brought Per
Regem sacrorum to the Bishop to be whipped, neither might any fire be kindeled
again to the goddess Vesta, but by the heat of the Sun, neither might they
swear by any other then by the name of Vesta: the like ceremonies they used to
Minerua in Athens.

So among the Persians, Assyrians and Chaldeans, they worship their sacred
fire, Vt Deorum maximum on their aultars, seeming to follow Moses law.

Zaleucus an ancient Lawe-maker among the Locreans, The law of Zaleucus for
breach of the law.
brought up with Pythagoras the Philosopher, made a law against adulterers,
that both the eyes of the adulterer should be pulled out, which being broken by
his eldest son, though all the Locreans jointly en treated for Zaleucus
son, yet said he the law must nobe broken; and to satisfy the law,
Zaleucus pulled one of his sons eyes out, and an other of his own, showing
himself a natural father to his son, and a just Judge, to perform the laws
which he made to the Locreans; so severely were they punished that brake the
laws, or sought to break the laws among the Gentiles.

Those people said Alcibiades, do better which keep the laws they have
(though they be worse) then often changed for better, Obseruatio legum and
morum tutissima, Thueyd. lib. 6.
that plant cannot take root which is often removed.

So Augustus Caesar wrote to the Senators, that what laws soever they had
decreed and set down, should not be changed nor altered; for better were it
not to make laws, then to make so many laws, and not to keep them. Positas
semel leges constanter seruate, nec vllam August. apud. Dyon. 3.
earum immutate, and si deteriores sint, tamem vtiliores sunt Reipub.

Lu. Papirius Cursor the Dictator, for that Fabius Rutilius brake the decree of
the Dictator, though he had good success, and won a great victory, yet the
law was, that Fabius should dye, neither could the captains The severity of
L. Papirius, for breach of the law.
entreat him for his pardon, that Fabius was constrained secretly to fly to
Rome, and to appeal to the Tribune of the people, and to the Senators; the
Dictator followed Fabius to Rome, saying, that there was no law that Front.
li. 4. ca. 1
any appeal should be made from the Dictator, until Fabius and his father
fell upon their knees, with the Senators and Tribune of the people, to entreat
for him, and that for breach of the law, though he was Magister equitum, the
greatest and next in authority to the Dictator, for the lawe-makers themselves
that brake their own laws were punished, as Zaleucus spared not his own eye,
nor Diocles his own life for breach of the law.

The like we find in Plato, comparing the law to medicines mingled with
poison, to that end the patient might recover his health by the medicine, so
that (says Plato de Rep. 5.
Plato) the law is profitable to correct and amend the offender, Vt
medicamentis venena miscemus salutarifine, instar pharmaci haec talia vtilia
esse.

Diocles, among other of his laws in Syracusa, made a law, that if any should
come armed with weapons into any Senate, Court of Council, or before any
Magistrate Diocles law.
or assembly of people, sitting in law causes, he should die for it by the
law of Diocles.

This law of Diocles was the cause of his own death, for as he was riding into
the Town, being met and sent for to mitigate some contention, and debates
among the people, he making have, forgetting his sword on his side, came to the
Court, and opened to them the law Diocles killed himself to satisfy his own
law.
made to the people, to be governed by, and willed them to obey the same, but
he was told by some seditious men, that he made laws and brake them
himself, to come with his sword on his side against his own law to the
Court, Diocles forgetting that he had his sword on his side, answered, I will
straight satisfy the law, drew his sword out and slew himself in presence of
all the multitude. I am not ignorant that some say that Charondas was he that
made this law and not Diocles.

So Licurgus willingly banished himself to die out Licurgus banished himself.
of his country, that the laws which he made in his country might continue
according to the Oracle.

Pythagoras disciples thought whatsoever their master said was sound and sure,
they would have no other proof but what Pythagoras said, Ipse dixit. The
credit of Pythagoras and Aristotle, with their scholars.


Likewise Aristoles scholars, they would seek no other proof, whether it
were right or wrong, but what they found in Aristotle's book, est Aristotelis.
Vilescit princeps qui quae iusserat, vetat, and quae vetuerat, iubet. For the
which fault Cato reprehended Pompey, for that he Plato de Rep. 5.
brake the law which he made before when he was Consul.

The Israelites had not such trust and confidence in their Lord and God, as
either the scholars of Pythygoras, or of Aristotle, had in their masters, but
said, we The Israelites sacrificed their children to Moloch.
will obey the Queen of heaven, we will sacrifice to the calfe in Bethel, and
offer our children to Moloch, in the valley of Hinnon. See the diffidence which
the Israelites had of their Lord and God, of whom the Prophet said, Ipse dixit,
and facta sunt, ipse mandauit and creata sunt: for by his word heaven and earth
were made, and by his commandment all things created, and yet not so much
obeyed as Pythagoras was of his disciples, or Aristotle of his scholars, nor
so much worshipped of his people Israel, as the two calves made by Jeroboam in
Dan and Bethel.

Old customs once rooted and in long time confirmed, are taken for laws; also
whatsoever is done by example, it is supposed that it may be done by law, so
Cicero says, Quod exemplo fit, id etiam iure fieri putant, when in truth
wicked customs are named Vetustas erroris, and non veritas legis, though
corrupt and leaud manners of men were first the cause that laws were made, yet
evil examples may not be allowed as laws.

The ancient fathers and Patriarchs were Poliga^, but not thereby to make good
laws by ill examples; for it is said, Praua consetudo magnus tyr annus.

In the tenth Regiment is showed the disobedience of man against the Lord, with
the severe punishments of all nations against theft.
THe Lord commanded ravens to feed Elias, and they did obey him; he commanded
3. Reg. 1^.
the Sun to stay over Gibeon, and the Moon over Aialo^ a whole Luke 8.
day, and they obeyed him; the Lord commanded the winds, the seas, fire, The
disobedience of man against God.
hail, snow, Ise, and tempests, and they obeyed his commandment; all
creatures obey the Lord, but man the chief creature, which the Lord created
Psalm. 141.
according to his own Image.

And therefore said Cicero, Legi obediunt maria, terraeque, and hominum
vitaiussis supraemaelegis obtemperat, the heavens, the earth, the sea, and all
men living, obey the Cic. de leg. 3.
supreme law, which is the law of God, which Cicero calls the law of
nature, Lex est illa circaea virga, qua taetaeferae, hominesque, mitescunt.
Law is the rod appointed to tame man and beast. Liui. lib. 6.


The fraud of Giezi, Elizeus servant, because he went secretly like a these,
after Naman the Syrian, and made a large lie that Elizeus his master sent for
a Tallent of silver, and two garments, the Prophet being his The fraud of
Giezi plain^ theft.
master, gave sentence on him, that the leprosy of Naman should cleave and
stick to him for ever: Giezi here stole nothing, but only for his falsehood
and lies, which with sacrilege and robberies, stealing of cattle, fraud,
deceit, and the like, are included within the precept of stealing, for the law
is, Thou shall Leuit. 19.
not steal, nor deal falsely, neither lie one to another, thou shall not do
thy neighbor wrong, neither rob him.

The vision of the flying book, signified the curse of thieves, and such as
abuse the name of the Lord with The vision of the flying book.
oaths, for all thieves and swearers shall be judged by this book, for this
book shall remain in thieves houses, and in the houses of them that swear
falsely by my Za^h. 5.
name says the Lord, and shall consume them with the timber and stones thereof.

Many poor thieves are fettered and chained in prisons, but great and public
thieves are clothed in gold Cato Censorius de re militari.
and purple.

Such was Heliodorus that came to rob the Temple of Jerusalem from king
Zaleucus, who was so scourged and whipped, that for gold and silver, he had
stripes and strokes, that scarce thence he escaped alive.

So should Shesac king of Egypt, Antiochus king of Syria, Pompey the great, and
Mar. Crassus the Romain Consul, these four great mighty thieves, had been as
well plagued Four that robbed the temple.
and punished, as Heliodorus was, when they robbed the Temple, had it not been
for the great sins of Judah and Jerusalem.

Many like Dyonisius, after he spoiled the temple of Proserpina in Locris, and
sailing with a good gale of wind Cic. de natura deor. lib 3.
from Locris to Syracusa, see (said he) to his mates and fellows, how
prosperously we sail after this our sacrilege.

Many again rob in scoffing sort, like the same Dyonisius the tyrant, who
took the golden garment Dyonisius.
from Jupiter Olimpian in Peloponesus, saying, that it was too heavy for
summer, and too cold for winter, and therefore he commanded that Jupiter
should be clothed with a woollen garment, light for summer, and warm for
winter; many such like sacriledges are scoffingly committed in Christian
Churches.

Many make but a jest of their theeuerye and falsehood with Dyonisius, who when
he had taken the golden beard of Aesculapius away, said, it was no reason the
son should wear a beard, seeing his father Appollo had none.

If any man be found stealing any of his brethren the A law called Plagium.
children of Israel, and sells him, the thief shall die for the same; the
like is spoken to him that takes the nether or upper millstone to pledge.

The severe laws that they had in Phrygia against theft, were such, that he
that stole but a ploughe share The severe laws of the Phrygians against theft.
from the field, or a forke, or a rake from a meadowe, should by the law in
Phrygia die.

In Athens the laws of Draco were so hard and straight against theft, that for
the least filching or stealing, the thief should die for it.

If any man in Athens should steal herbs to make pottage, or to take some
dung of beasts for to dung his own ground, from another man's ground, it was by
Dracoes law a capital crime.

He that borrowed a Horse of his neighbor, and The laws of Draco in Athens
against theft.
would ride further then the place appointed, by the law of Draco he might
have an action; and therefore Demades said, that Dracoes laws were Leges
sanguine scriptae, laws written with blood: the least fault in Athens, by the
law of Draco was punished with death, which laws by Solon his successor were
mittigated.

Among the Indians though adultery was left unpunished, as it was among the
Scythians, yet theft was most odious to both these Nations, and most sharply to
be punished by the laws of India and Scythia.

In all countries among all nations, thieves were diversely punished.

In Egypt the law of Bocchoris was such against theft, that if the Thief
after he had stolen any thing had brought his stealth willingly of himself
unto the chief Priest called Princeps Sacerdotum, before he was accused of it,
he that lost the goods, should write the time, the day and the hour when it
was lost, unto the Priest, and The law of Bocchoris in Egypt against theft.
should have again three parts of his goods, and the thief should have the
fourth part that stole it, for that he confessed it before he was accused, which
is according to Moses law, that if the theft be found in the thieves hands,
Diod. sic. lib. 2. cap. 3.
he shall restore double; but if a thief steal an ox or a sheep and kill
it, or sell it, he shall restore five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a
sheep, for in the civil law it is written, Propter manifestum furtum
restituatur Exodus 22.
quadruplum.

The Romans therefore very careful hereof, kept in their Capitol dogs
quick for smelling and sent, and fed geese for sacrifice to Juno, quick of
hearing, lest thieves should rob the Capitol, and so Manliu^ by geese, saved
not only the Capitol, but Rome it self from the Gauls.

Another law of Bocchoris, that if any were accused falsely of theft in Egypt,
before a Judge, the law was, that he which wrongfully accused the party,
should Bocchoris law against theft. Deuteronomy. 19.
suffer that punishment which was due to him that was accused, if he had
committed the fault; so is Moses law, that if a false witness accuse a man of
trespass, before^ Judge, and be not able to prove it, then shall the Judge do
unto the false witness as he had thought to have done unto his brother.

Charondas made a law in favor and education of Orphants, that the wealth and
legacies which were left unto them by their parents, should be answered to the
Orphants by the next of their fathers kindred, when Charondas law in favor of
Orphants.
they came to age, and the Orphants to be brought up with the next of their
mothers kindred, and therefore Charondas made this law, least the fathers
kindred or mothers kindred should deceive the Orphants either by any fraud,
deceit, or guile, which is plain theft.

The like law made Solon in Athens, as Charondas made among the Thurians and
Carthagineans, least, any Solons law for Orphants and Infants.
fraud or deceit should be practiced against Infants or Orphants, and
therefore the Indians used none of the kindred or of the blood of the Orphants,
but two strangers as tutors and gardens to answer to the pupuls their goods
and legacies according to the law of India.

Among the Persians as among the Indians, the law was, that the patrons that
deceived their clients should Alex. Neapol. lib. 6. cap. 10.
die for it; so was the law of the 12. Tables, as well among the Romans as
among the Grecians, Patronus si clienti fraudem fecerit sacer esto.

The daughters of Zalphod were restored to their fathers heritage, for the Lord
commanded Moses that The daughters of Zalphod restored to their fathers
inheritance.
he should turn the inheritance of their father unto them, and gave them a
possession to inherit among their fathers brethren; this is the law of the
Lord, if a man die and have no son, his inheritance shall turn to Nomb, 27.
his daughter, if he have no daughter, to his brethren, if he have no
brethren, to his fathers brethren.

Among the Arabians the law was, that the eldest brother was allowed to the
inheritance before the eldest son.

In Aethiopia in like manner not the kings children, but his brothers children
should succeed him in the kingdom.

Among the Lycians also, the daughters and not the sons should be their
fathers heirs, neither were they named after their fathers name, but after
their mothers name.

This is against Voconius law in Rome called Plaebiscita, for that he was
Tribune of the people, by the which law it was lawful that no woman should have
(though she were the only daughter of her father) but the fourth part; and
because women grew so rich by patrimony and by legacies, Domitianus the
Emperor confirmed Voconius law.
Voconius law, and made a decree that no defamed woman Alex. Neapol. lib. 6.
cap. 15.
should possess the heritage of her father, neither should she be carried in a
coach, were she ever so great or so rich; for the law was, Nequis etiam
census vnicam relinqueret filiam haeredem, contrary to the law of the 12.
Tables, which was, that the Testator might dispose of his goods as pleased
himself, according to the law, Vti legasset suae reiquisque, ita ius esto.

Therefore the law commands just and true dealings to be exercised and
embraced as well in words as in deeds, for negative commandments include in
themselves affirmatiues, as, Thou shall do no murder, therefore thou must
aid and help thy neighbor, wherefore we must love our neighbors in heart,
and wish them no more harm then to our selves, and show the same in word and
deed.

Such love was in Moses and in Paul, that the one wished to be put out of the
book of life to save the people from destruction, the other of mere love
wished to Exodus 32.
be accursed for their brethren to do them good.

Such is the nature of perfect love, that Abraham prayed Effect of love and
prayers.
for the Zodomites, and Moses for Pharao and the Egiptians, though they were
wicked people; for that is the law, love your enemies, and do good to them
that Genesis 18.
hate you.

So Stephen the first martyr, following the example of his master Christ,
prayed for them that stoned him, for all virtues have their force and power
from prayers, faith Genesis 22.
is strengthened by prayers, love confirmed by prayers, and repentance
continued by prayers.

In the eleventh Regiment is described the diverse kinds of thefts, of usury,
and slander, and of laws provided for the punishment of the same.
THe law commands, Thou shall not steal, which contains not only all
kind of falsehood, fraud and deceit, as before is spoken, but also justice,
equity, charity, and conscience.

Such was the justice of Abraham to Genesis 13.
his nephew Lot, that though their servants contended and fell out, yet they
both agreed, for Abraham used great justice, divided their portions equally
into two parts, and gave the choosing thereof to Lot.

The like justice was between Jacob, and his father Genesis 3.
in law Laban, separate thou or I said Jacob, all the sheep which have great
spots, and little spots, and all black lambs among the sheep shall be my
portion and wages, and every one that is not black, nor (...) ted among the
sheep and the lambs, shall be the (...) to me, for my righteousness shall
answer for me.

Thus were they in ancient time instructed by the law of nature to love one
another, and to use justice and charity.

A Heathen man could say almost so much, Prudentia non vult falli nec fallere
potest; that a wise man neither Cic. de finibus. 5.
can, nor will be deceived.

In like sort, Thou shall not commit adultery; and therefore the law
commands men to be chaste, sober, and temperate, both in body and mind; for
the law requires inward and outward obedience, as well in Angels as in men,
for outward evil springs from inward corruption; Murder proceeds from hatred
and malice of the heart; Adultery comes from wicked and filthy lust of the
heart; Theft is falsehood and fraud in the heart; to steal other men's goods,
therefore to do, or to wish any thing against the law is sin: for the law
is spiritual, The effects of laws in inward and outward obedience.
and he that is not subject to the law, says Paul is subject to the wrath of
the Lord, for by the law we know our sins, and in the law, consists the
knowledge of our life; for the Lord has decreed a necessiti^ of obedience to
the laws of civil Magistrates; for it is said, Inuictae leges necessitatis,
and though the law does accuse all men, yet the law does freely promise with a
condition of obedience, as the Gospel promises with a condition of faith, for
as by the law we see as in a glass the corruption of nature, and deformity
of sin, so by the law we are taught what is to be done, and by the Gospel,
how things ought to be done.

Among the Romans for the space of 300. yearer, welnigh after the building of
Rome, they had no laws written, but Ius regis, before they sent for the law
of the 12. Tables, from Athens, which law was so obscure, that Edictum
principis.
they brought Hermadorus from Greece to Rome, to interpret the laws of the 12.
Tables, which law against theft was so severely executed, that it was lawful
to kill a The law of the 12. Tables against theft.
thief, that would not yield, especially in the night time; for the law was,
Sifurtum sit factum nocte, si eum aliquis occidit, iure caesus esto, if a
thief be found breaking any man's house in the night time, and be smitten to
death, no blood must be shead for him, which is also Moses law, except the
sun be up when he is found; but if a thief were taken in the day time with
his theft with him, he was by the law of the 12. Tables, to become his slave
and bondsman, of whom he stole it, and to be used as pleased the party all his
life time after.

An other law of the twelve Tables against other An other law^ of the twelve
Tables.
injuries was, that if any man's servant had stolen any thing, or his beast had
done harm, or endamaged his neighbor, or a stranger, he was to yield his
servant, or his beast that so offended, to the party grieved, and so by the
law of the 12. Tables, the master of the servant was Exodus 22.
free; for a thief that cannot make restitution for his theft, must be sold,
according to Moses law.

The seuerest law among the Romans, was Lex Iulia, which appointed just
punishment for treason, adultery, and theft: by Lex Iulia in Rome, theft was
as severely Julius law against theft.
punished as adultery, and adultery punished as treason, for the law says,
a man must not rob, for thieves are accursed, men must have no conversation
with thieves.

Also there was a law in Lycia, that if a free man should steal any thing, he
should loose his freedom, and become a bond-seruant to him of whom he stole
it, and by the law of Lycia never after to recover his liberty, but to live
as a bondsman all his life time.

Bocchoris law in Egypt was, that if any wayfaring man find a man in danger
of his life, and so to be slain by thieves and robbers, and not help him,
either by his sloathfulnesse or negligence, if he could, he was by the law of
Bocchoris guilty of death, because he did not aid and help him with all
means possible he Bocchoris laws.
could.

Again if a man were robbed by thieves on the way, though he were not killed,
and not rescued of any that could, and neglecting to follow after the thieves,
he or they (by the law of Bocchoris) were punished and beaten with a certain
number of stripes, and kept without victuals three days.

Licurgus made no laws in Sparta against theft, for it was lawful by Licurgus
law, among the Lacedaemonians to use theft, unless the party were taken with
the Theft left unpunished by Licurgus law
theft; which if he were, he should be severely punished, following the manner
and custom of the Egiptians, and the old Germans, which had no law written
against theft, but left unpunished, and therefore there is no transgression,
where there is no law.

There was then, and is now a greater kind of theft then stealing among diverse
nations, which is usury, forbidden by the laws of God, as well as theft, for
before Bocchoris law, which banished usury, the law was Bocchoris law
against usury.
in Egypt, that the creditors might arrest the bodies of the dead for debts,
and that they should be unburied till the Illiad. 1.
depts were paid, Pecunia est enim anima and sanguis mortalibus, which law was
abrogated by Bocchoris, that debts only should be paid of the goods of the
debtors, and not their bodies to be imprisoned, for that they should be always
ready for defense of their country, and not imprisoned either for debt, or
usury.

Solon brought this law from Egypt unto Athens, and called it Sysacthia,
against usurers. This law was after executed in the market place of Athens by
Agis, who extremely Solons law against usury called Sysacthia.
hated usury, where he burnt all the usurers writing tables, of which fire
Agesilaus was wont to say, that he never law a better fire in Egypt, Persia,
nor in Greece, then when Agis burnt all the writing tables of Diod. sic. lib. 2
cap. 3.
the usurers in the market place at Athens, for before Solon brought this law
from Egypt unto Athens, dead men's bodies might be arrested, and an actio^ might
be had before the magistrate called Zeteta, for satisfaction of debts Zeteta.
in Athens.

Therefore Solons law was, that no man should credit the son while the
father lived, and to avoid further Solons law.
dangers, least the son should practice against the father (which children
do use against their parents) the law was, that he which would c^dit the son,
during the life of the father, should have no action against the son, after the
fathers death.

So hateful was usury among (welnigh) all nations, that where punishment of
theft was but double, punishment of usury was quadruple, and therefore Lu.
Genutius, Tribune of the people in Rome, abrogated former laws of usury in
Rome. Lucullus in his victory over Asia, Lucullus and Caro bannished usury.
among other Romanie laws which he gave them, set all Asia free, and at
liberty from usury. So Cato made a law, that no usurer should dwell within
the province Alex. Neapol. lib. 1. cap. 7.
of Cicilia.

So also Licurgus made a law to bannish usury so far from Sparta, that it
should never be named, Licurgus.
nor spoken of within Sparta.

The law of Moses among the Hebrews was, Thou shall not give to usury to thy
brother, as usury of Moses law against usury.
money, usury of meat, or usury of any thing that is put to usury, thou
shall take no usury or advantage of him, but thou shall fear thy God, that
thy brother may live with thee; if thou take thy neighbors raiment to pledge,
thou shall restore it unto him before the Deuteronomy. 23.
sun go down, ye shall not oppress the poor with usury.

An example thereof in the Gospel, a servant ought to his master ten thousand
talents, and upon entreaty his master loosed him, and forgave him the debt,
but that Math. 18.
servant went out, and found one of his fellows that ought him an hundred
pence, laid hands on him, took him by the throat, and cast him into prison
without compassion, until the debts were paid.

There is an other kind of theft which is not the least, to steal the good
name and fame of any man by scandalous tongues, and therefore it was not
lawful in Solons law against nicknames.
Athens, not so much as to reach the longest finger toward any man, for it was
a note of infamy, as though he should call him Catapygos, a dog or a beast.
Catapygos.


Likewise if any would call a man Hodidocos, or Sycophant Obscessor via^um.
in Athens, he might have an action by the law of Solon, before the Judges
called Areopagitae.

So to call a man in Egypt an ass, an action might be had by the law of
Bocchoris against the party. Bocchoris law


The like law was in Persia against those that would call a man a coward.

The law of Christ set down in the Gospel, is, that whosoever calls his
brother Racha, or a fool, is in danger of judgment: so it is commanded by
the law of Moses, that none shall go up and down with slanderous tongues,
to tell tales among the people, for the Leuit. 19.
punishment of this fault is stripes, or amerciaments by the same law.

And therefore he that will see good days, must refrain his tongue from evil,
and his lips that they speak Psalm. 33.
no guile, says the Prophet, Liber a anima^ meam a labijs iniquis and lingua
dolosae.

The tongue is fire, yea a world of wickedness, it defiles the whole body, it
sets on fire the curse of nature, we put bittes into the horses mouths,
that they should obey us, and we turn them about as we list.

And therefore says Xenophon, Omnibus animalibus facilius Xenoph. 1. Paed.
est quam hominibus imperitare, all creatures are more obedient to the law
then man.

Ships which though they be so great, yet are they turned about with a very
small rudder; our of one mouth proceeds blessings and cursings, with the
which James cap. 3.
we bless God, and curse men, which are made after the similitude of God; all
things are tamed by man, but the tongue can no man tame, for it is an unruly
evil, full of deadly poison.

Thou shall not slander thy neighbor, neither shall thou hate thy brother in
thy heart. These and many such judicial laws are set down in the law of
Moses.

Therefore said Solomon, he that keeps his mouth, Pro. 13.
keeps his life, but the wicked man's tongue is full of slander and shame;
Futiles in vtiles, and therefore it is great wisdom not to believe any thing
rashly, for it was ever good counsel, Cave cui credas neruus sapientiae est,
and therefore the punishment of the tongue, was in diverse countries diversely
punished.

And therefore Alexander the great reading certain secret Letters, suffered
his only friend Ephestion to read the same Letters, and after Ephestion had
read them, Alexander took his signet and laid it on Ephestions mouth, as a
seal to keep silence, and said, Anima consilij secretum. And therefore the
punishment of the tongue, was in diverse countries, diversely punished.

In Persia the tongue should be cut off, and nailed to a post, or to a pillar,
in the market place.

In Egypt the tongue should be cut off, and sowed upon the soldiers helmet; in
offending the law of arms, or for offending the state, hanged upon their hats
or caps. In other places for their blasphemy, itshould be hanged upon pinnacles
of temples, or on walls of cities to be eaten of fowls of the air. The like
law made Plato for the Platoes law.
hand that killed it self, that it should not be buried.

Yet Augustus Caesar, being persuaded by his friends, that one Aelianus that
spoke hard of the Emperor should be punished for his ill tongue, answered, No
more but Suet. in Augusto.
Aelianus shall know that Caesar Augustus has also a tongue.

The like answer gave Phillip of Macedon to an ill tongued man, whom when his
Council would have him banished out of Macedonia, God forbid said Philip, he
will speak worse of me in a strange country, then in his own.

But Ramyrus king of Spain, being so soft and so gentle of nature, that many
of his Nobles had him in contempt for his softness, but he at length in the
midst of their contempt and of his softness, caused eleven of them to be
beheaded in the city of Osca; saying, Nescit vulpecula ca^ quo ludat; for it
is an old saying, It is dangerous to play with Lions; Leone^ vellicare
periculosum est.

Yet many slanderous tongues with wicked counsel, ever practiced mischief,
as Doigs counsel to Saul against Abimelich, Achitophels counselto Abs^on,
against Achisophel.
David his father.

But the counsel of Daniel to Nabuchodonozer, was to hate sin by
righteousness, and his iniquity by mercy toward the poor, such was the
counsel of Joseph to Pharao in Egypt, in providing against the famine to come.

Many with the false prophet Balaam, have their Slanderous tongues practiced
mischief. Tacit. 1. annal.
tongues with Israel, but their hearts with Balaac. Multi malum sub lingua, non
in lingua habent.

Many there be like Laban, that deceived Jacob for his wife, and gave Leah for
Rachel; too many there be like the Samaritans, that seemed in public show to
help the Israelites to build the Temple, and yet secretly in what they could
hindered them.

Many such say with Sigismundus the Emperor, that he which cannot dissemble
cannot live, like Tiberius, who only preferred and commended his
dissimulation, before all other his virtues; for it was ever Tiberius saying,
Nullam ex suis virtutibus magis quam dissimulationem diligebat.

Vlixes dissembling to be beside himself, least he should go out of Greece
with Agamemnon to the wars, Palamides tried him with this stratagem, laid
Vlixes child before the plough share, whereby Vlixes dissimulation was found
out by Palamides.

So Gedeon found out the Ephraimites not to be true Giliadites, by pronouncing
the letter Schiboleth, who slaundered the Gileadites to be runnagates of
Ephraim, and therefore Gedeon commanded that none should pass over Jorden,
unless he could pronounce Schiboleth. The Gibionites very cunningly dissembled
how far they came, what pain and travel they took, to feeke the favor of
Joshua and the Israelites.

Yet Plato allowed dissimulations in Princes and Governors to effect some
purpose, for said he, Mendatie and fraud vti imperantes debere, ad comodum
subditorum. Pleto de Repub. 5.


There is nothing so necessary in a Commonwealth says Cicero in some respect,
as dissimulation, Nunqua^ Cic. pro Milone.
regent, qui non tegent.

That made Seneca to say, that in Courts with Kings and Princes, dissimulation
must have chief place. Fra^ enim sublimi regnat in aula.

For if love be not perfect nor esteemed and embraced for it self, where shall
we find true friendship? If all men be addicted to their private gain without
doing good to any man, or speaking well ofany man, where shall we find a
beneficial man to his country or to his friend? for he that thinks to do
good to another to gain profit to himself, that man said Cicero is not to be
Cic. de leg. lib. 1.
thought beneficial to his friend nor to his country, but an Usurer to
himself.

The natural society among men, and mutual love ought to be such, that as
Cicero said, If any would ascend up to the heavens to view the beauty and
ornament thereof, unsweet were the admirations he saw, unless it might be
imparted to friends.

So may we speak of ungrateful and slanderous men, who are not thankful
for any benefits done, and therefore an action might be had against ungrateful
men among the Macedonians, and be brought before a Judge, as if they were in
debt, as debtors, not requi^ing one good turn with another, according to the
law of nature, much like to Charondas law, which forbad civil citizens to
associate themselves with evil ungrateful men, which are as Cicero says,
Tanqua^ glabra ad libidinem via, which infect good men for being familiar with
them, and therefore an action might be had by law against honest men for
coming often to the company of these wicked evil men.

And so it was among the Athenians, which had the like law against unthankful
men; for as Demosthenes Alex. Neapolit. 5. cap. 1.
said, He that receives a benefit, ought ever to be mindful to requite it,
and he that benefits his friend ought to forget it, as a man bound to do any
good he can by the law of nature, for so just men are bound to do; Non solum
iuxta leges sed legibus ipsis imperare. Plato in (...).


The wicked and ungrateful Gergesites hunted Christ out of their country,
because he healed a man possessed of a devil, they had rather have their devil
dwell with them then Christ; they more esteemed their swine then the doctrine
of Christ, like the Jews who had made choice of Barrabas the murderer, before
Christ their Savior.

In the twelfth Regiment is mentioned the seuerepunishment of false witness,
together with the lawful oaths of diverse godly men.
THe law is, that if any be found that has given false witness against his
brother, let him stand before the Lord Deuteronomy. 19.
and before the Judges, and you shall do to him, as he thought to do to his
brother, that life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, and
foot for foot, should go; A false witness shall no remain unpunished, and
he that speaks lies shallperish. Prou. 19. and 24.
Again, be no false witness against thy neighbor, Psalm. 101.
hurt him not with thy lips. This is the sentence of the law pronounced by
the Lord. Deuteronomy. 27.


He that privily slaundereth his neighbor, him will I destroy (says the Lord)
for he that tells lies shall not dwell in my house, nor tarry in my sight,
cursed is he that strikes his neighbor secretly, and cursed is he that
takes reward to shead innocent blood, and all the people shall say, Amen.

And for that lies and perjury are knit together with false witness, we will
examine the laws of other Nations with the laws of God, and what punishment
they have for the same.

Four hundred false witnesses did the Prophet Michaeas reprove of Baals
Prophets, which counseled king Diverse false Prophets of Baal reproved by
Michaeas and Elias.
Achab to war against the king of Syria. Did not one true Prophet Micheas,
prove these 400. false Prophets to be false witnesses against the Lord? but
Achab by the king of Syria was slain, as Michaeas prophesied.

So did Elias kill four hundred and fifty false Prophets of Baal at the
brook Kyson, for bearing false witness against the Lord; for they affirmed
that Baal was God.

And the Prophet Daniel caused 80. of Baals Priests to be slain at Babylon,
for their lies and false witness 80. of Baals Priests reproved.
to the people against the Lord. These Idolaters were the worst kind of
witnesses, because they bare false witness against the Lord, to please
Nabuchodonozer and king Achab.

The two Elders made themselves false witnesses against Suzanna in Babylon,
they were found by Daniel to Suzanna.
be false witnesses and adulterous Judges, and were stoned to death according
to the law.

Iezabel brought two false witnesses against Naboth for his vineyard, to her
husband king Achab, and they said that they heard Naboth curse God and the
king, and Naboth was carried out of the city, and there they stoned him with
stones to death; but sentence was pronounced Naboth stoned to death by false
witness
against him by Elias the Prophet, saying: In the same place where the dogs
licked the blood of Naboth, shall the dogs lick the blood of Achab also. Non
magis potest mactari opima Ioui, quam Rexiniquus.

Thales being demanded, what was the strongest thing that he saw, answered,
Tyrannum senem.

Stephen was accused that he spoke against the Lord and Moses, and the Jews
brought two false witnesses against Stephen the first martyr
S. Stephen, saying: This man never cease to speak evil words against this
place, the laws, and the holy Temple.

How often fought the Jews means through false witness to condemn Paul,
crying out upon him, This Paul.
Paul speaks against this holy place, against the law, Act. 24.
and against the people, and brought Tertullus the Orator, as a false witness
to accuse and to plead against Paul before Faelix the Roman deputy.

These forget the saying of the Prophet Michaeas, who cried out and said, you
Judges, you give sentence for gifts; ye Priests, you teach for lucre; ye
Prophets, you prophecy for money, you build up Syon with blood, and Jerusalem
with doing wrong.

What dare not false witness do, when they accused Christ to be a glutto^, a
bibber of wine, a blasphemer, denying False witness against Christ our savior.
tribute to Caesar, for being a seducer of the people, a Samaritan, a coniurer,
and one that had the devil, a breaker of the Sabbath day, they wanted no false
witness to prove all these things against Christ, and yet against Mar. Cato,
being accused by his enemies in Rome Mar. Cato.
fifty several times before the Senators, they could not bring any one
witness to prove any thing against Cato.

Aristophantes in Athens, being accused before the Judges Areopagitae, 95.
times, he pleaded his cause, and Aristophantes
shifted out himself from the maliee of his enemies, not able to bring one
witness against him, that both Cato in Rome, and Aristophantes in Athens, were
set at liberty, and yet the Martyr Stephen, the Apostle Paul, and the son of
God himself, wanted no witnesses, but had all Jerusalem to bear witness
against them.

Zaleueus made many laws, but especially religious and ceremonial laws,
imitating his master Pythagoras, who was a very ceremonial Philosopher, he
made a law Zaleucus law against false witness.
that no man should go about to corrupt justice or judgment, either by
perjury, false witness, or otherwise, and the punishment for those that brake
Zaleucus law, was not redeemed with money, but performed with shame and
infamy, pains and tortures.

And therefore Bocchoris made the like law in Egypt against periurers and
false witnesses, as against those Bocchoris law
that brake their professed faith and religion toward Diod. fic. lib. 2. cap.
3.
God, and violated their faith and bond of society toward man, with no less
punishment then with death.

Artaxerxes so hated lies, that he made a decree among the Persians, that
whosoever were found and proved a liar, should have his tongue set unto a
post, or a pillar in the market place, fastened with three nails thereunto.

The laws of Moses to the Israelites against any great offense, was to stone
them, to burn them, or to run upon them.

The laws of the Indians against false witness was, to cut off the ends of
all his fingers from his hands, and Alex Neapol. lib. cap. 10.
the ends of all his toes from his feet.

The laws of the Persians as you heard by Cambises and Darius, was fleying and
hanging against false witnesses and corrupt Judges, as you read of Sandoces and
Sinetes.

The punishment of false witness by the Turks, was and is executed in this
sort, that he shall be set on The Turks punishment of false witness.
a Mule with his face backwards, holding the tail of the Mule for a bridle in
his hand, and so to be carried round about through every street of the town,
and after burned in the forehead with two letters, as a mark of false witness.

By the law of the 12. Tables among the Romans, he that was convicted for a
false witness, should be The law of the 12. Tables.
thrown headlong down from the rock Tarpeia, which law was first exercised
and executed in Egypt, and a long time after brought from Athens to Rome.

For the law among the Egiptians was, that false wie nesses should pe punished
with the like death.

The Indians had the like law as the Persians had, that if any man were found
three times a liar, what state Indians.
soever he were of, he should be neither magistrate nor officer, during his
life, but should be deprived of all honor and credit, and lead his life
private in silence; and yet among the Egiptians lies were left without laws
unpunished.

The laws of all countries were sharp and severe, against rebellious servants
and false witnesses, which like Laws against rebellious servants.
seditious serpents seek secretly to forsake and defraude their master both
in word and deed.

And therefore the testimony of the servant against Alex Neapol. lib. 3. cap.
20.
their master, by the law of Romulus among the ancient Romans, was not
admitted; so that many of the late Emperors of Rome made a decree, that those
servants that would accuse their masters, should be slain as ungrateful and
treacherous servants.

So did Sylla use Sulpitius servant for betraying of his master, though
Sulpitius was Syllas enemy.

This continued until punishments were set down, Paucicapa a kind of
punishment.
and appointed by law, for crimes and offenses by servants, as carrying a
forke made like a gallows on his shoulders, or with Paucicapa, or burning
marks in the foreheads, as the Syracusans used to burn their bondseruants in
the forehead with the print of a horse, to note them as their own bond-slaues.
Melius enim est Cic. ad Attic. Epist. 1.
vitiosas parts sancare quam execare. For the law does respect no person
otherwise then by justice; laws then were made, how much, and how far the
authorities of masters extended over their servants.

Among the Lacedaemonians, the law of Licurgus was so austere, that it was
lawful for their masters to kill those wicked wilful servants, that would
practice Licurgus law^
either by word or deed any falsehood against their masters.

Alexander in his great fury, against all laws, slew Calistenes his servant
and Philosopher, for some sharp and quick words, yet Calistenes spoke but what
he ought Plut. in Alex.
to speak, but not how he ought to speak. Quae debebat, dicebat, sed non
quomodo debebat.

Calistenes though a Philosopher, yet he forgot this lesson, Facile prsse
loqui cum Rege, sed non de Rege. Herein that which was spoken of Hanibal, may
be spoken of Alexander: Armis vicit, vitijs victus.

But better could Anaxarchus flatter Alexander then Calistenes, lamenting the
dearh of Clitus, whom he slew in his fury. Art thou ignorant king Alexander
(said Anaxarchus) how ancient wise men caused the Image of Justice to stand by
Jupiter, that whatsoever Jupiter had decreed, it was taken for a law, for that
Justice was on his side.

The like speech may be spoken of Iulia, procuring her son in law to offend
with her. Do thou not know thou art an Emperor, which make law to others,
and make it not to thy self?

A law was made in Athens, not only against servants, but against any
treacherous man whatsoever, were he never so great, that though he died in his
country, yet should he not be buried in his country, but be carried Alex.
Neapol. lib. 6. cap. 14.
out of the confines of Athens; so was Phocion and others that were suspected
of any treason.

An other law among the Grecians was, that he which prodigally and wilfully
consumed his fathers patrimony, should not be buried within his own country
of Greece, so those kings of Egypt, that neither obeyed, nor lived under the
law while they lived, should not be buried in their Pyramides: so were some of
the kings of Judah and of Israel, unburied for breaking of the law.

There was a law made by king Agis in Sparta, that the servants called
Hilotae, for their rebellious sedition against their masters, were condemned
to be in perpetual Hilotae.
servitude; neither might their masters make them free in Sparta, neither
might the servant go out of Sparta, but live there like bondslaues, and
their posterity after them, which should be called Hilotae. Oportes Arist lib.
5. Polit, cap. 11.
enim supplicia more patrio sumi, offenders most be punished, as Aristotle
says, after the laws and custom of the country.

The like law made Solomon against Semeia, for that he took part with Absalon
against the King, railed and slaundered David, and threw stones at him, that if
he should but once go out of Jerusalem, he should die for it, by the sentence
of Solomon.

And so in Athens the like law was made, that those that the Athenians
overcame at the river Hister, they and their posterity should be as captives
and bondslaues in perpetual bondage, with one name given to them and their
posterity called Getae, as Hilotae were in Sparta. (...).


Among the Persians, their law was, that the servant being bought with money,
that fled afterward from his master, being taken, he should be fettered and
bound in chains, and so bound to serve his master.

False witnesses are liars, periurers, and blasphemers, either with perjured
tongues for a man's life, or with slanderous tongues for his name and good
fame, calling God to be witness of untruth; so the false prophets and priests
of Baal did, whom Elias therefore destroyed at the brook Kyson, false witness
is a murderer of his neighbors, false witness sells blood for money, Deuteronomy.
19.
a thief that sells men's lands, livings and lives secretly; for it is
written in the law of Moses, that thou shall not remove thy neighbors mark
which they of old time have set in thine inheritance.

So Numa Pomp. made the self same law in Rome, that whosoever would plough
up, any of his neighbors marks or meeres, both he and his oxen should be
slain and sacrificed to god Terminus, upon the very mere where the offense
was done.

False witness is a defamer and slaunderer of men's credit, and therefore the
law of the twelve tables The law of the 12. tables against slaunderers.
says, Siquis occentauisset, aut carmen condidisset quod infamiam faceret
flagitiumque alteri capitale sit, If any would write slanderous libelles, or
infamous verses, touching a man's credit, good name and fame, he should die for
it.

The self same law was by Solon made in Athens, that upon any slanders or
nicknames an action might Alex Neapolit. 6. cap. 10.
be had before the Judges Areopagites.

How much more false witnesses and periurers, that seek men's lives by false
oaths are to be punished, whose conscience are burned with hot irons, of
Leuit. 9.
whom is said, Conscientia, pietatis lacinia, for you shall not swear by my
name falsely says the Lord, neither shall you defile the name of your God.

The Lord though he commanded his people that they should not swear at all,
neither by heaven, for Oaths.
it is the Lords throane, neither by the earth, for it is his footestoole, for
the scripture used the speech of the Lord for an oath, Dixit Dominus, it was an
oath, and the Of oaths.
Lord swear by the excellency of Jacob, he swear by himself, Amos. 8.
Per me ipsum iuraui.

Oaths may be well and justly required in lawful causes, for Abraham made
his servant to swear by the God of heaven and earth, not to take a wife to his
son Genesis 24.
Isaac, of the daughters of the Canaanites, but of his own stock and kindred,
and therefore he caused his Of the manner of oaths among the Hebrews.
servant to lay his hand under his thigh, which ceremony declares the duty
and obedience the servant should have to his master.

Jacob swear the like oath, as his grandfather Abraham did, and caused Joseph
his son to put his hand under his thigh, as an oath that he should not suffer
him to be Genesis 27.
buried in Egypt, but to be brought from Egypt to Haebron, to the field
Machpela^, and there to be buried with his fathers.

Abimelech requested Abraham to swear, Iura per deum, ne noceas mihi, nec
stirpimeae, and Abraham swear unto Abimelech, Genesis 22.
and named the place where they both swear Berseba.

Jacob swear unto Laban his father in law, Pertimorem in Patrissui, by the
fear of his father.

David swear against Nabal, and said, Hocfaciat mihi dominus, Thus God do unto
me, if I leave Nabal a head, for that he denied me and my company a little
victuals, 1. Reg. 25.
being a hungry.

Solomon swear unto his mother, by the Lord, Thus God do unto me, if Adoniah
live, for that by seeking Abizaig he seeks also the kingdom. 3. Reg. 17.


Elias the Prophet swear unto Achab king of Israel, Viuit Dominus, as sure as
the Lord lives. So Elize^s swear unto Elias the like oath, Viuit Dominus, I
will not forsake thee: this kind of oath is often used in scripture, as the
Lord lives, or as thy soul lives.

Paul the Apostle used this oath, God is my witness, whom I fear: in an other
place, Testem Deum inuoco in animam Galath. 1.
meam, I call God to witness to my soul: and again, Coloss. 1.
God knows that I lie not.

In the thirteenth Regiment is set down the danger and inconveniences that
happened by ambition, and what laws diverse countries made to banish the same.
THe states of Princes and countries are ever in most danger, where ambitious
men be, who fearing nothing at all secretly to speak against Princes and
Magistrates ambitiously, whose ambitious nature seeks not only to rule and
reign, but also to practice (without fear) through policy, to undermine
states, and to overthrow their country through ambition. Pacem Plato de leg.
lib. 12.
contemnentes and gloriam appetentes pacem and gloriam perdunt.

Of these men Plato says: Siquis priuatim sine publico scitu, pacem bellumue
fecerit, capitale esto.

Ambitious men are not so glad and proud to see many follow them and obey them,
as they are spiteful and disdainful against any one man that esteems them
not; so ambitious and proud was Ammon, that he could The pride of Ammon.
not endure the sight of Mardochaeus.

The ambition of Abimelech was such, that he slew Abimelech.
three score and eight lawful sons of Gedeon, his brethren, upon one stone,
to become a Judge in Israel, himself, being but a bastard.

Absolon the natural son of David, went most ambitiously about to win the
hearts of Israel from his father, Absolon.
embracing and kissing every one that came unto him, saying; I wish there were
some that would minister Many great me^ ambitious.
justice to the people.

Such is the nature of ambitious men, Qui honores quieta Repub: desperant,
perturbata, se consequi posse arbitrantur. Can a man go barefooted on thorns,
and not be The nature of ambition.
pricked? can a man put coals in his bosom, and not be burnt? can a man be
ambitious, and not be treacherous? for ambition claspeth envy, as the Iuye
claspeth the Oak, and as the Iuye sucketh all the moisture of the Oak, so
envy sucketh all the moisture of the ambitious man.

What was the end of Ammon for his ambition? to be hanged upon the selfsame
gallows which he prepared for Mardocheus.

What got Abimelech by his ambition and murdering of his brethren, but to
have his brain pan broken Iudic. 9.
and slain, and that by a woman in the City of Argos.

The end of Absolon was no better, but to be brought by his own mule, and to
be hanged by the hair of his own head in the wood of Ephraim, where his mule
left The end of ambitious me^.
him. Impia proditio celeri paena uindicanda.

Had these ambitious men observed the three precepts which Brasidas taught his
country men the Athenians, Velle, vereri, and obedire, they might have died a
more honorable death, then to be hanged and killed by those whom they sought
ambitiously to destroy by their next kindred, and chief friends.

These be such men, Qui suam sibi fortunam fingunt. Plato de leg 9.


The like law was appointed by Plato for treason, as for sacrilege, Iudices
istis proditoribus dantur, qui sacrilegis solent: for as Philip of Maecedon was
wont to say, Amare se prodituros non proditores, so Augustus Caesar after him
used the like words; Proditionem non proditores Stobaeus Sermo.
amo.

And therefore Corah, Dathan, and Abiron, and all their accomplices, to the
number of two hundred and Numb. 16.
fifty, were swallowed up of the earth alive, for their Numb. 12.
ambitious murmuring against Moses. The Lord spared neither Aaron, Moses
brother, nor Myria his sister for the like offense; so severe was the Lord in
his laws, that he spared not Moses himself.

And therefore Zaleucus made a law among the Zaleucus law against ambitious
men.
Locreans, to suppress the pride and insolency of great men, who did more
harm their Country through pride and ambition, then they did profit their
country by just and true dealing.

The like law against ambitious men, was made in Syracusa, which secretly
sought through ambition to excel others in singularity, both in wisdom and
in wealth, and therefore were they banished for five years out of Syracusa,
according to the law which was The law Petalismus against ambitious men.
made against ambition called Petalismus, least their greatness through
ambition should do more harm to their country, then good.

In Rome for a time ambition was not known; until the Romans grew great out
of Italy, then Cai. Petilius Tribune of the people, made a law, that no man
through ambition, which then grew in Rome, together with the greatness of the
Empire, should make means by money or reward to bear office in Rome.

After Petilius, Cincius decreed an other straight law against ambitious
means to become Magistrates, that none of the Patricians, or any other that
were ambitious Cai. Petilius and Cincius laws against ambition in Rome.
to become magistrates or officers in Rome, should come in a gown or any long
garment into the Senate, least they should carry money secretly in their
bosom, to corrupt the people, for the choosing of Censors, Praetors, Consuls,
and other officers, were in the election of the people both in Rome and in
Athens alike; for there was nothing in Rome but Forum and Senatus, laws
decreed in the Senate by the Senators, and weapons in the market place by the
Tribune ansd the people, to resist the same.

The law of Cass. Longinus, Tribune of the people was, that every Tribe by it
self of the 35. should bring Alex. Neapol. lib. 4. cap. 3.
their several Tables, where the voices of the people were secretly pricked to
avoid ambition and quarrels, which law was called Lex Tabellaria.

An other law among the Romans was, to avoid ambition among the people, that
the Senators with the consent of the people, should elect one Consul, and that
Consul so chosen, should choose one of his own friends to be his fellow Consul;
for it was not lawful for both Cie. de leg. li. 3
the Consuls at one time to have Serieants to bear Maces before them, but one
after an other monthly; neither might a Consul be chosen again within ten
years after his Consulship, which laws were made only to avoid ambition.

The like law was among the Thaebans against Merchants that were called
Mercurij proles, which hunted for private profits, and gaped for gain, which
forbad them that had been officers within ten years after, not to be chosen
governors again in that office, for that Merchants be not fit men to be
Magistrates: and as Aristotle Arist lib. 3. polit. cap. (...).
says, Parum generosa haec ratio, vitae and vertuti aduersa.

Against which Demosthenes exclaimed in his bannishment, the three monsters of
Athens, Populus, Noctua, and Draco, but two of these monsters ruled always in
Rome and in Athens, Noctua and Populus, men and money.

And therefore the law Ostracismus was made in A thens The law Ostracismus in
Athens against ambitious
against such ambitious men, as would secretly seek to grow into greatness
to win the favor of the people, that they should be banished out of Athens for
ten years, as Themistocles, Alcibades, Demosthenes, and others. This law of
Ostracismus, was ever ready in A thens, so long against the greatness of
ambitious men, that at length it grew against base men that would practice any
sinister means among the people.

For it was a practice among the Athenian, least one should grow greater then
an other, to make this law Ostracismus, according to Aristotle's rule, Neminem
vnum Arist. 5 poli^. cap. 11.
magnum facere, communis custodia principatas.

The kings of Egypt that did not minister justice rightly, nor observe the law
justly while they lived, might not be buried after they dyed, for it was
lawful for any Amzitious kings of Egypt might not be buried.
man to accuse the kings of Egypt, before they were buried, of any ambition,
injustice, or crime, before committed against the law, for nothing was more
ignominious to the kings of Egypt, then to be deprived of their burialls,
Diod. sic. lib. (...) cap. 3.
which made them live more circumspectly, using justice and observing the law.

But what were the Kings of Egypt better to be buried in sweet odours in their
Pyramides, or the Heathen Princes of the world to be buried in Suis Mausoleis?
was not poor Lazarus better in Abraham's bosom, then the rich man tormented in
hell? for he cannot be ill buried wheresoever he is buried that dies well;
neither can he dye ill, wheresoever, or howsoever he dies, that lives well;
and therefore, Non potest male mori, qui been vixcrit, says Augustine.

A people in India called Pedalij, among other their The law of the people
Pedalij to justice.
vows and prayers, they wished nothing to be granted unto them of the Gods,
but to be just, and to use justice. Alex. Neapol. lib. 6. cap. 17.


Appollonius Thianeus the Philosophers wish was, Pa^a habere and Nullius in
digere, and to know good and just Appollonius and Socrates wishes.
men, and to avoid the company of wicked and unjust men. Socrates wish was, to
have a sound mind in a sound body.

In Eliopolis, a city of Egypt, the Image of Justice was set up in the market
place without a head, and on the right side of Justice, the Image of a king was
painted The Image of Justice, etc.
blind, without eyes, because he should not see his friends nor foes, but
govern without affections; and on the left side of Justice, the Image of a
Judge was painted without hands, because he should not receive bribes, and be
corrupted in his judgment, Iuditij venenum sua cuique vtilitas, and therefore
the Judges called Areopagitae in Athens, might not sit on life and death in the
day time, while the sun were up; but in the night, because they might not see
the prisoner in the face, to move affections, but to hear their causes to do
justice; so is the law of the Lord; Accept not the face of the poor, fear
not the face of the mighty. So the Philosopher could say, Deus enim nusquam
and nunquam iniurius, semper iustissimus.

A Philosopher after he had seen these pictures at Eliopolis, he caused the
picture of an ambitious magistrate The picture of ambition without legs.
to be painted without legs, because he should not climb too high, saying,
Agesilaus climbes in Sparta, to overthrow Thaebes, and Epaminondas climbes in
Thaebes to overcome Sparta.

This is that ambition every where, Quae frontem aperit Cic. proplan^.
and mentem tegit.

But these ambitious men remember not Lots wife, who seeking to save her life
by looking back on Sodom, Luk 17.
she lost both her self, Sodom and Zegor.

So that among all nations in all countries, ambitious men are such, that some
with Absolon, seek to plant and set their names on earth by some monuments of
fame, but die ignominiously without monuments or fame, like Absolon.

Some with Sebna build them sumptuous Tombs in their own country, but are
buried in an other Sebna.
country.

Some with Achab build them Iuorie houses, who most ambitiously sought Naboths
vineyard, but he Achab.
did not long enjoy it; and some seek with Nimrod to Nimrod.
build towers in the air, like to the King of Mexico, when he is sworn at
the first coming to the kingdom, who among other oaths must swear, that the
sun must keep his course, shyning always in sight; that the clouds must
let rain fall down; that the rivers must run their course, and that the
earth must bring forth all kind of fruits.

These kind of men search those things that be under the earth, and those
things that be above the heavens, Plato in Apol.
Satagunt inquirentes (says Plato) quae subter terram and quae super caelum
sunt.

We read of Antiochus, after he had taken Jerusalem, after such slaughter of
men, women, virgins, children, and Infants, that within three days there was
slain four The pride and ambition of Antiochus.
score thousand, and as many sold as were slain, and 4000. taken prisoners,
after he had taken a thousand and eight hundred talents out of the Temple, he
went with such a haughty proud mind from Jerusalem to Antioch, as Xerxes
went from Persia into Greece, thinking in his pride to make men sail upon dry
land, and to walk upon the seas, but as they lived both, so they dyed, the
one miserably murdered in his own country, the other most miserably dyed out
of his country.

These and such ambitious men, in seeking to build their great name and fame on
earth, as Xerxes and Antiochus, they become so odious and contemptible in their
own country, as Ammon was in Persia among the Jews, whose name when the Jews
heard of, they beat Ammon.
and stamped on the ground with their feet, because they would not hear his
name: for the like ambition the name of Hercules might not be mentioned among
the Dardanians, nor the name of Achilles among the Hercules.
Taenedians, for that they destroyed both these countries. Achilles.


To forget these great injuries, Thrasibulus made a law in Athens called
Amnestia, because the cruelty of the thirty tyrants, which caused the
children to The law of Thrasibulus in Athens called Amnestia.
dance in their fathers blood in Athens, might no further be remembered, least
by revenging of the same, more blood should be lost, much like the Dictators in
Rome, who might put to death any free Citizen at their pleasure. So did
Opimius, usurping the office of a Dictator, being but Consul, caused Gracchus,
Fuluius, and diverse other Citizens to be slain.

But after Julius Caesar became the first Emperor, and Perpetuus Dictator, the
other Emperors that succeeded him, claiming the like authority, made such
laws in Rome as pleased themselves, Sit fortitudo nostra lex iniusticiae, for
when the honor of the Senators were abrogated, and past by Hortensius law
under the Emperor Caesar and his successors, that they only made such laws
as were called Placita Principum, without authority of the Senators, or
counsel of the people, which were accepted as laws among the Romans, during
the time of the Emperors, as Iusregis was in Rome during the reign of the
Kings.

The law called Plebiscita, made by the Tribune of the people, could not be
allowed unless it were confirmed by the Senators, neither could the law made
by Senators Alex Neapol. lib. 6. cap. 23.
called Senatus Consultus, be allowed without the voice of the people. In like
sort Responsa Prude^tu^, for that they had authority to enterpret the law in
matters of controversies, their sentence and judgment was accepted as laws,
so that the body and whole sum (welnigh) of the civil law, consisted in
these laws before named.

None might in ancient time among the Romans, be elected Dictator, Consul,
Praetor, or Censor, unless he were one of the Patritians, but in time it grew,
that the Patricians and the Plebeians were joined together, that one Consul
should be chosen by the Patritians, the other by the people.

This law called Amnestia, was afterward brought to Rome from Athens, and
renewed by Cicero, that they should forget the murdering of Caesar, least a
greater harm should come by revenging of Caesar's death by civil wars, Omni
enim populo inest malignum quiddam and querulum in imperautes.

This law was put in practice by the Jews in Mazphah, for the treacherous
murdering of Godoliah by ambitious Ismael, for they thought it best to put up
injuries by forgetting of injuries.

But the law of Draco in Athens was, not to forget injuries, as Thrasibulus
law was, neither to please the people, as the law of Gracchus was in Rome,
but severely to punish the people, and that with such severity, that it was
called according to his name, Lex Draconis, the law of a Dragon; for the least
fault in Athens, by the law of Draco, during the time of his reign, was
punished with death, who for his laws was Draco strangled in Egina.
strangled in Aegina upon the Theaters, by the people.

So that in Rome, for the laws which Gracchus made to please the people, he
himself, and diverse others were slain. So in Athens and in diverse other
places, by offending the people too much by cruel laws, they were strangled,
killed, and slain of the people for their laws, as Draco was in Aegina, and
Perillus in Agregutum, who Perillus died by those torments which he invented.
found out the brazen bull to please the tyrant Phalaris, who decreed by law a
reward to those that would find out new kinds of torments and tortures to
punish offenders.

So Xerxes promised great gifts and rewards to any that would find out diverse
strange kinds of pleasures to feed his humor, as an Epicure.

Of these kind of fellows Aristotle says, Subtilia illa Arist. polit. lib.
3. cap. 3.
and ignea ingenia in assiduo motu, nouandis, quam rebus gerendis aptiora, and
therefore rash young men must not be magistrates, or officers, by Aristotle's
rule.

In the fourteenth Regiment is set down the change and alteration of diverse
laws; of the liberty and tyranny of some laws: of the authority of
soothsayers, both among the Romans and the Grecians.
HEliogabalus, a monster and not an Emperor, maintained rather women as
Senators to sit with him in council in Mount Quirinal, to make laws to feed
his filthy humors, then the Senators, which have been Judges, equal with
Kings in council, after Kings with Consuls, after Consuls with good Emperors,
for Heliogabalus called the Senators Togatos seruos, to whom Augustus Caesar
gave great reverence, in any public assembly or meeting, and with whom in the
Senate house he sat in council. Facilius est errare naturam quam sui
dissimilem possit princeps formare Rempub.

So Tiberius Caesar and Traiane, that whatsoever was done in Rome, was then
done by the Senators with the Tib. Caesar.
consent of good Emperors, which with the Senators made laws, and obeyed
those laws which they made, for Vnum imperij corpus and vnius animoregendum:
in so Tacit. 1. Annal.
much that Adrian the Emperor, when he saw a proud citizen of Rome walking
in the market place between Lamp. in Alex.
two Senators, he commanded an officer to give him first a buffet, and after
to bring him to prison, for that he made himsefe a fellow and companion of
Senators, to whom he was scarce worthy to be a servant.

For the wise and prudent Emperors of Rome, were wont Lamp. in Alex.
to have learned and grave men with the^, as well in wars in their camp, as
also for counsel at home; For Augustus would not allow in Rome that liberty,
which the Indian Philosophers allowed to the Indians, for they thought The law
of the Indian Philosophers.
it fond and foolish, since the laws were equal to all, but that every man
should be equally governed by the law, since the law made all men free, that
there should be no servants in that part of India.

Far from the Athenians, who made so much of Diod. sic. lib. 3.
their freedom, for Pericles law was, that none might be free in Athens,
unless they were borne and their parents before them in the city of Athens.

And it was the law of Solon, that no stranger borne should have Ius
ciuitatis, unless he with his house and household goods were for ever banished
out of his country, or had comen to Athens alicuius artis causa.

But among the Lacedaemonians the manner was, that they that should be made free,
should be crowned, with green branches made of boughs of trees, and should
Alex. Neapolit. lib. 4. ca. 10.
go round about the Temples of that city where they were made free.

The ceremonies and manners of making free men among the ancient Romans was,
that the servants or bondmen should come with their heads shaued before the
Roman Praetor, and there the Serieant at the commandment of the Praetor,
should strike them on the head three times, with a little rod or wande,
called Virgula vindictae, and they that were so made free, were called
Manumissi vindicta. But if they were soldiers taken by the enemy, and had
lost the liberty of their freedom, if afterward they returned to Rome, they
should again receive their freedom, Iure Postliminij. But both those which
were made free, Cum virga vindictae, the rod of revenge, and they which were
taken by the enemies, should go unto the Temple of Feronea, and there they
should receive Libertorum munia. After that the Romans became Lords of Italy,
they granted Ius latij unto the Italians, which was the law then used within
the city of Rome, and after they had conquered the most part of Asia and
Affrike, both Affrike and Asia had Ius latinitatis, which was the ancient law
among the old Italians to be ruled and governed by, for the Romans would have
their Roman laws and Roman magistrates to govern those provinces which
they got with the sword.

Among the Romans, during the time of their kings, they had no law but the
sentence and judgment of the king, in any great cause, and this law was
called Lex curiata The first law of Romulus called Lex Curiata.
by Romulus, and by the rest of his successors continued during the time of
kings: this law was without the consent of the people, but with the counsel
and consent of the king and of the Senators, and for that Papirianus a learned
Roman, gathered these laws together and recorded them into one volume, they
were called Ius Papirianum.

But when the name of Kings was banished out of Rome, and Consuls created to be
chief governors in The second law in Rome called Senatus Consultus.
Rome, then the law was between the Consuls and the Senators called Senatus
Consultus, then came in the authority of the people, and no law was allowed
and ratified, but by consent of the people; but when the people had voices to
make laws, so many laws were made in Rome, as one law confounded an other,
against Platoes rule, who ever preferred few laws before many laws, for said
Plato, Corruptissima Respub. vbi plurimae leges. Plato.
That law which was made by the Senators and Consuls in Rome, was not
accepted, unless it were allowed by the people; for whatsoever the Consuls and
Senators had determined, the people should be Judge thereof.

So Plyni with Plato said, that multiude of laws were hurtful, Videat
princeps ne ciuitas legibus fundata, legibus Plyni. Paneg.
euertatur.

So it was among the Lacedaemonians by Licurgus law, Alex. Neapol. lib 4. cap.
11.
that the people had authority and power to judge of that which the Kings and
Senators did determine.

Of these thus says Homer, Popliuorus princeps populoiudice, cuipecuniam
eripere, idem quod vitam. Illiad. 1.


There was a law decreed in Aegina, that he that went about to invent and
bring in new laws by abrogating the former, should die for it, for oftentimes,
Specie Alex. Neapol. lib. 6. cap. 14.
aliqua legum, leges euertunt.

It is not so among the Achaians, as it was among the Romans and the
Grecians, for in Achaia there was no other law but what Aratus set down, and
in Syracusa no other law, but what Timoleon said.

Yet the Senators of Rome might without the consent of the people call a
Senate, and make election of Senators, they might also govern and rule the
Roman provinces What the Senators might do without the people.
abroad; they might dispense and distribute the money of the common treasury;
but for making of laws, creating of magistrates, to make wars, or to
conclude peace, the Senators had no authority to do it, without the consent of
the people.

So that in time laws were rather authorized in Rome by force and weapons in
the market place, then in the Senate house by the Senators, for Populus
Comitiorom Princeps bare sway ever in Rome.

So Pompey by force of arms authorized Caesar's law to please the people, with
division of lands, and distribution of corn, though Cato spoke bitterly
against it, yet could he not be heard, but was by Caesar being then Consul,
commanded to prison.

They pleaded Ius in armis, as Pompey and Lysander said, Non cessabitis nobis
gladio accinctis, leges praedicare. Plut. in Pomp.


Lex agraria was the most dangerous law among the Romans, for that the
Tribune of the people sought ever to please the people, by lands, by corn, or
by any Gracchus law called Lex agraria.
means to become strong by the people, which had the chiefest voice in Rome,
that the Tribune would often co^troll the Consuls, and resist the Senators, as
Tiberius and Cai. Gracchus, Marius, and Fuluius, with others, preferred always
this law to please the people, but Gracchus and Fuluius lost their heads for
it, and were carried upon a pole to Opimius the Consul, who was then commanded
by the Senators to resist the Tribunes, and people-pleasers, for at that
commandment were slain three thousand at Rome, whose bodies were thrown
into Tiber.

No Commonwealth can be without arms, no arms without stipend, no stipend
without tribute, and therefore says Plato, Quemque opes suas in censum defer
Platos laws.
ad multa vtillia.

Neither were the magistrates called Ephori, opposed against the kings in
Sparta without cause, by Theopompus; neither were they removed afterward
without cause by king Cleomenes, Plena enim periculi aula.

Neither were the Tribunes of the people in Rome without cause, appointed to
resist the Consuls and Senators, though sometimes they were rejected and
suppressed, and sometimes slain, for so was the old law of the twelve tables.
Salus populi suprema lex esto.

The Lacedaemonians had also their Senate of eight and twenty grave and
ancient wise men, which by Licurgus 28. Senators in Sparta.
law should be 60. years old before they should be chosen and accepted to be
of council.

The Carthagineans in like manner made choice of 30. of their principal and
chief men of Carthage, called 30. Senators of Carthage called Conipodes.
Conipodes, to sit and determine in secret council of the state of their
city, for the Carthagineans though they followed Charondas law, yet they
imitated the Lacedaemonians in all other government, as well in warreas in peace.

So weary were many nations of kings, that when the Hebrews sought to alter
the government of Judges to have Kings, the Lord commanded Samuel to set down
to the Hebrews the laws of Kings, that they Aristocratia changed to Menarchia.
will take their sons, their daughters, the best of their fields, of their
vineards, and of their Olive trees, and give them to their servant, and they
shall take the best of (...). Sam. cap. 8.
their men-seruants, and their maid-seruants, their young men and their asses,
to do their work withal.

So the Vine, the Fig tree and the Olive, answered the trees which would have
a king; Shall we loose our fatness and sweetness to become a king?
Notwithstanding the bramble would be a king over the trees.

The Storke also would accept to be king over the the Frogs, though all
nations desire generally rather to be ruled by one then by many, yet many that
were elected kings would feign have forsaken it.

Q. Cincinnatus being taken from the plough to be a Dictator in Rome, and to
wear Togam praetextam, as soon as six months were expired (so long the
office of the Dictatorship endured) he returned again to his plough, according
to Salomons speech, better is a morsel of bread in a poor man's house
peaceably, then to be a Consul or a Dictator in Rome among unruly people.

And therefore the Ephori of Sparta grew so ambitious, that they began to envy
their kings, and therefore devised this law to expel their kings, to observe
the stars every ninth year in a clear bright night, which if they saw any
star either shooting, sliding, or any way removing from their place, they
with the consent Kings deposed in Sparta by the Ephori.
of the whole college of soothsayers, accused their kings that they had
offended their gods, and therefore deposed their kings; so were king Agis, and
king Pausanias deposed from their kingdom by Lysander.

This was against the law of the Lord, who said unto Job, Where wast thou when
I placed Hyades in their places, and Plyades in their course? can thou know
the course and orders of Septentriones, and of other stars, and of the reason
thereof, Nunquid Nosti rationem caeli, says the Lord?

Against these starre-gazers Plato writes, men should Platos law.
not be too curious to seek causes supernatural, and says, Neque inquiri
oportere, nec fas esse curiose, satagere causas scrutantes. That was the cause
why Andronicus the Emperor, hearing two learned men reasoning of the like, to
say, if they would not leave their curious and frivolous disputations, the
river Rindacus should be Judge between them, and end the controversy, for,
Non sapit, qui nimis sapit.

So were the Priests called Mantes in Athens, of such authority, that nothing
could be done in any public council concerning religion and matters of state,
unless they were in place present.

The like law the Romans used every fiftyeare, being taught and commanded
to be observed out of the books of the Sybils, that upon any appearances Cic
de divine. lib. 1.
or sights of two Suns together, or of three Moons, or any other great
causes, the soothsayers might remove Consuls removed in Rome from their office.
either Consul or Praetor from their place.

The like ambition began in Persia after Cambises dyed, that it was not lawful
for the kings of Persia to make any laws otherwise then they were instructed
by their Magi; neither was there any law made among the ancient Romans,
without the counsel of their soothsayers, who were called interpretes Iouis
and Nuntijdeorum; for these laws were called among the Romans and the
Persians, Leges Augurales, but of these Augural laws, I have touched them in my
book of Stratagems, which Lex Auguralis
were as much esteemed and feared of captains and soldiers, as their military
laws, for both the Persians, Alex. Neapol. lib. 5. cap. 19.
Grecians, and Romans, followed the counsel of soothsayers in their wars,
contrary to Moses law, which forbad dreams and soothsaying to be used as the
Gentiles did, for says the law, Non declinetis ad magos. Leuit. 19.


The superstitious error of the Gentiles in their soothsayers grew to be so
great, that if the soothsaiers said that Esculapius being dead, could sooner
restore health and minister medicine to the sick by dreams, then Galen Cic.
de divine. lib. 2.
could do by his art alive, some would believe it, and therefore the
Pythagorians abstained from beans when they went to sleep, because it fills
rather the mind with vain dreams, then the belley with good meat.

If any soothsayers would say that Serapis and Minerua through divination could
minister medicine and restore the sick unto health without the help of
Physicians, sooner then the Physicians themselves, these flatterers would be
(as they are) accepted in court and country; Tanqua^ Syrenes aulae, the
Gentiles would believe it, which as Thucydides says, are two most noisome
things in a commonwealth, for nothing could be spoken so absurd, but some
Philosopher or other will maintain it and defend it.

The Philosophers among the Indians, which would either prognosticate or defend
falsehood, or seem to Diod. sic. lib. 3. cap. 10.
affirm that to be true which was false, they were by law for ever after
commanded to perpetual silence.

The law of divination was such in all kingdoms and countries, either by
fleeting of stars, flying of Cic de divine. lib. 1.
fowls, by intrailes of beasts, or by dreams, that whatsoever the soothsayers
spoke among the Persians, Grecians, and the Romans, it was taken for Maximum
and praestantissimum ius Reipub; for the words of the law were Auspicia
seruanto: for example thereof, Cicero recites many histories, and Crisippus
gathered many Oracles together. But if the law of the Gospel were so kept
among Christians, as the law of Augurers was among the Gentiles, and the words
of the Preacher were so observed as the words of the Soothsayers among Pagans;
if men's affections were set on a heauenlycommon-wealth, Vbi Rex est veritas,
lex charitas, and modus aeternitas, as worldlings are set on an earthly
habitation, Vbi Rex est vanitas, lex infidelitas, and modus breuitas; As it
has been seen in the Greeks, which first flourished before the Affricans; in
the Affricans, which flourished before the Romans; and in the Romans, which
flourished before the Scythians; and therefore In rebus cunctis, est morum, and
temporum, and Tacit. annal. 3
imperiorum vices; So that all common wealths, all kingdoms, and all
countries, were ruled, are, and shall be governed, by divine providence, from
the beginning to the worlds end.

FINIS.
A Table containing a brief sum of the whole book.
THe old Patriarchs lived under the law of nature. page. 2 The law of nature
is a short repetition of the law written. pa. 3 The law writtten given to
Moses pa. ead. The credit and confirmation of laws pa. 4 Chief magistrates
and governors in diverse countries pa. 5 The Lord commanded an altar to be
made pa. 6 Diverse aultars before the law written pa. ead. How they used to
write in auntitient time. pa. 7 The first Image brought by Rachel, Jacobs wife
pa. 8 The Image of Belus in Niniuie. pa. ead. Jeroboam made two golden calves
pa. ead. Israel committed Idolatry while Moses was in the Mount. pa. 9 Socrates
poisoned in Athens for religion pa. 11 Platoes opinion of Poets and painters
pa. ead. Alcibiades banished from Athens pa. 12 Clodius slain in Rome pa. ead.
Anacharsis slain in Scythia. pa. ead. The vows and supplications of the
Gentiles pa. 13 Xerxes burnt the Temples in Greece pa. 14 The Rechabites laws
pa. ead. The Prophet Ahiahs speech to Jeroboam pa. 15 Zaleucus laws of
religion to the Locreans pa. 16 Licurgus law against strangers in Sparta. pa.
ead Anaxagoras put to death. pa. 17 The zeal of the Gentiles in their religion
pa. ead. Cyrus confessed the God of Israel pa. 18 Darius made a law that all
dominions should fear the God of Daniel pa. 19 Egypt the mother of all
Idolatry. pa. 20 The Jews observed straightly the laws of Moses pa. 21
Diverse took upon them to be the Messiah pa. 22 Idolatrous sacrifice of the
Gentiles pa. 23. No blood offered in sacrifice by Licurgus law pa. ead. Paul
called in Athens Spermologos of the Philosophers. pa. 24 Molochs reaching hand
and seven chambers pa. 25 Punishment of corrupt Judges in Persia pa. 26 The
law of the Lord set down by Esaias the Prophet. pa. ead. Of diverse kings
blaspheming the name of the Lord pa. 27. Lysander and Pompeys taunt to a Lawyer
pa. 28 Ceremonial laws of the Gentiles pa. 29 The Gentiles builded diverse
temples to their Gods pa. ead. The manner of the dedication of the Temples of
the Heathens. pa. 30 The consecration of Aaron by Moses pa. 31 By what
authority all Nations confirm their laws. pa. 32 The straight observation of
the Sabbath by the Jews. pa. 33 The second building of the Temple by the
appointment of Cyrus pa. ead Diverse kinds of Sabboths among the Heathens pa.
34 The blasphemy of Nicanor. pa. 35 How dearly the Jews esteemed their laws
pa. 36 Certain Romans slain by the Jews pa. 37 The law of Iud.
Machabaeus. pa. ead. Among the Heathens the Sabbath of the Lord was not known.
pa. 38 Licurgus law for time to go to battle pa. 39 Before the Temple was
made, the Israelites came to Sitoh. pa. 40 The continuance of Licurgus laws
pa. ead. Charondas laws against contemners of laws pa. ead. Licurgus law
called Rhetra. pa. 41 The law of the 12. Tables touching obedience pa. ead.
The sum of laws set down by Plato pa. 42 The form and manner of diverse
appeals among the Heathens. pa. 43 The wise and grave Judges in diverse
countries pa. 44 Laws of all nations against disobedient children pa. 45
Corruption of Judges pa. 46 Good parents had ill children. pa. ead. Marks of
monuments and covenants pa. 48. The laws and care of the kings of Persia to
bring up their children pa. 49 Charondas law for education of children pa.
ead. Plato and Anacharsis law for the education of the youth in Greece pa. 50
The Romans care for their children pa. ead. Bocchoris laws against idleness,
and clippers of coin. pa. 51 The care of the Hebrew women in naming and
nursing their children pa. 52 The careless nature of the people called
Troglodites and Atlantes for their children. pa. 53 Manlius removed from the
Senate house pa. 54 Licurgus appointed schoolemaisters in Sparta, called
Paedonomi pa. ead. The law of the Brachmaines in India pa. 55 Orators and
Poets contended in Greece 56 Of lawe-makers and magistrates in diverse countries
pa. ead. Blood the first witness against murder pa. 57 Four witnesses
against murder. pa. 58 The envy of Saul toward David pa. ead. Punishment of
murder by the law of nature, before the law written pa. 59 Murderers have
their marks. pa 60 How Paracides were punished in Rome pa. 61 Bocchoris law
in Egypt against murder pa. ead. No law against Paracides, neither by Romulus
nor Solo^. pa. 62 Platos law against him that killed himself pa. 63 The
punishment of murder in diverse countries pa. 64 Charondas law for pulling out
ones eyes pa. ead. The law of the 12. Tables imitated Moses law pa. 65 The
Gentiles both allow and confirm their laws by Oracles. pa. 67 Pentapolis
destroyed for Sodomiticall sin pa. 68 The Israelites punished for their sin
with the Moabite. pa. ead. Commendation of godly zeal. pa. 69 Adultery
punished in diverse countries pa. 70 Bocchoris law against adultery. pa. 71
Charondas law against adultery. pa. ead. Zaleucus laws against adultery. pa.
72 Punishment of adultery by Aurelianus and Macrinus both Emperors of Rome pa.
ead. The law of Solon called Paratilmus, against adultery pa. 73 The opinion
of diverse Philosophers concerning adultery. pa. 74 Moses law against bastards.
pa. 75 Laws of diverse nations against bastards pa 76 Bocchoris law in Egypt
for a woman with child pa. 77 The law of the Unshod house. pa. 78 Moses law
against an adulteress pa. ead. Xerxes reward to invent pleasures pa. 79
Commendation of chastity. pa 80 Leges conuiuales pa. 81 Platos law called
Bellaris Platonis pa. ead. Good laws sent for from one country to an other
pa. 82. and 83 Means made by the Gentiles to become chaste pa. 84 Examples of
chastity in good women pa. ead. The harm that happens by too much liberty
pa. 85 The offense of the eye. pa. 86 The chastity of the people named Animphi
and Abij pa. 87 The law of the twelve Tables for chastity pa. ead.
Continuance of laws in all countries pa. 88 The Tabernacle hidden by leremie
pa. 89 The care and diligence of a^ nations in keeping their laws. pa. 90
Judges appointed in all countries to execute laws pa. 91 Of counsel and
government of women pa. 92 The Athenians sent to Delphos. pa. 93 Achan stoned
to death for theft. pa. 94 The punishment of the Lord for breach of his laws,
pa. ead. The law of Zaleucus for breach of his law pa. 95 The severity of
Lu. Papirius for breach of the law. page. 96 Diocles slew himself, to
satisfy the offenee he did to his own law pa. 97 Licurgus banished himself
for continuance of his laws. pa. ead. The credit of Aristotle and Pythagoras,
with their scholars. pa. 98 The Israelites sacrificed their children to Moloch
pa. ead. All creatures obey the Lord more then man, the chief creature pa. 99
The fraud of Giezi plain theft. pa. ead. The vision of the flying book. pa.
100 Four great men that robbed the Temple in Jerusalem. pa. ead. The law
Plagium pa. 101 The law of the Phrigians against theft pa. ead. The laws of
Draco in Athens against theft pa. ead. Bocchoris laws in Egypt against theft
pa. 102 Charondas law in favor of Orphants pa. 103 Solons law in Athens for
Orphants and Infants pa. ead. The daughters of Zalphod restorea by Moses law
to their fathers inheritance pa ead. The effect of love and prayers pa. 105 The
effects of laws in inward and outward obedience. pa. 106 The laws of the 12.
Tables against theft pa. 107 Julius law against theft. pa. ead. Bocchoris law
against theft. pa. 108 Theft left unpunished by Licurgus law pa. ead.
Bocchoris law against usury. pa. ead. Solons law against usury, called
Sysacthia pa. 109 Lucullus and Cato banished usury pa. ead. Moses law against
usury. pa. 110 Solons law against slaunderers. pa. ead. Description of ill
tongues. page. 111 The diverse punishment of tongues. pa. 112 Slanderous
tongues practiced mischief pa. 113 A law in Athens against ungrateful men
pa. 115 Diverse false Prophets reproved. pa. 116 Naboth and Stephen stoned to
death pa. 117 False witness against Christ himself pa. 118 Zaleucus law
against false witness pa. ead. The law of Bocchoris in Egypt against
periurers pa. 119 Punishment of false witness among the Turks pa. ead. The law
of the twelve Tables against false witness. page. ead. Diverse laws against
rebellious and treacherous servants. pa. 120. 121. 122 The law of the 12. Tables
against staunderers pa. 123 Of the manner of swearing among the Hebrews pa. 124
Of diverse ambitious men. pa. 125. 126 The evil end of ambition. pa. ead.
Zaleucus law against ambitious men pa. 127 Cincius law in Rome against
ambition pa. 128 The law Ostracismus in Athens against ambition pa. 129
Ambitious kings in Egypt might not be buried pa. ead. The Image of Justice in
Eliopolis. pa. 130 Of the oaths of the kings of Mexico, at their consecration.
pa. 131 The pride and insolency of Xerxes and Antiochus pa, 132 The law of
Thrasibulus in Athens called Amnestia. pa. ead. The law Plebiscita pa. 133 The
law of the Indian Philosophers pa. 136 Of liberties and freedoms in diverse
countries pa. ead. The first law of Romulus in Rome called Lex Curiata pa. 137
The second law in Rome called Senatus Consultus pa. ead. What the Senators of
Rome might do without the consent of the people pa. 138 Gracchus law in Rome
called Lex Agraria pa. 139 Thirty Senators in Carthage called Conipodes pa.
140 Aristocratia changed to Monarchia among the Hebrews. pa. ead. Kings
deposed in Sparta by the Ephori pa. 141 Platos law against curious men. pa.
ead. Consuls removed in Rome from their office by soothsayers. pa, 142 The law
called Lex Auguralis. pa. 143
FINIS.

