A fig for Momus: Containing Pleasant variety, included in Satyrs, Eclogues,
and Epistles, by T. L. of Lincolnes Inn Gent.

Che pecora si fa, il lupo selo mangia.



AT LONDON Printed for Clement Knight, and are to be sold at his shop at the
little North-doore of Paul's Church. 1595.

To the Right Honorable and thrice renowned Lord, William Earl of Darbie:
T. L. his most humble and devoted servant, wishes all health and happiness.
MY honored good Lord, having resolved with my self to publish certain my
poems, and knowing them subject to much prejudice, except they were graced with
some noble and worthy patron: I have followed the example of Metabo, king of
the Uolschi, who desirous to deliver his only daughter from all peril and
danger, consecrated and dedicated her to the sister of the sun. So I no less
careful of my labors, then the king of his Camilla, with deliberate and
advised judgment, wholly deuote, and offer up my poems to your favor and
protection: who being the true Maecenas of the Muses, and judicial in their
exercises, are of power to relieve my weakness, by your worthiness, and to
privilege me from envy, though she were pressed to devour me: If midst your
general favor to all desert, your honor vouchsafe this particular benefit
to my industry, no day, or time, (as Tully counsaileth) shall define the
memory of your benefits, but as your noble father in mine infancy, with his
own hands incorporated me into your house, so in this my retired age and
study, my labor, lines, and whole life, shall be employed to do you honor
and service.

Your Lordships most bounden in all humility, Thomas Lodge.

To the Gentlemen Readers whatsoever.
GEntlemen, I know you wonder, that having so long time kept silence, I salute
the world with so peremptory a title: But if thou consider the reasons before
you enter into mislike; you shall be satisfied, and I excused.

I entitle my book (A fig for Momus,) not in contempt of the learned, for I
honor them: not in disdain of the well mindded, because they cherish science;
but in despite of the detractor, who having no learning to judge, wants no
liberty to reprove.

Who worthily deserving the name of Momus, shall rather at my hands have a
fig to choke him, then he, and his lewd tongue shall have a frumpe to check
me: Sheep are soonest wooried by curdogs, because they are mild: but he that
nips him soundly, that bites him cowardly, purchases his own peace, and
escapes much peril.

Heraclitus intituling one of his books with Ponou Encomion, the praise of
labor, King Ptolemey (causing all the copies to be bought,) commanded the
first letter of Ponou to be put out, and called the book Onou Encomion, the
praise of the ass: But had Heraclitus begun with Ptolemey, and touched him with
cowardly flight from Demetrius, with effeminate vanity in apparel, with
exceeding gluttony, and drunkenness; with his letcherie with Agathoclea, and
bawdry with Oenante, the King would rather have given a talent to stop his
mouth, then devised (by taking away of a letter) to abuse his title. UUhere
detraction is given to challenge, it is good striking first, for whelps that
are whipped for brauling, are quickly quiet.

This cause (gentlemen) has drawn me to use this title, and under this title
I have thought good to include Satyrs, Eclogues, and Epistles: first by reason
that I study to delight with variety, next because I would write in that
form, wherein no man might challenge me with servile imitation, (wherewith
heretofore I have been unjustly taxed.) My Satyrs (to speak truth) are by
pleasures, rather placed here to prepare, and try the ear, then to feed it:
because if they pass well, the whole Centon of them, already in my hands
shall suddenly be published.

In them (under the names of certain Romans) where I reprehend vice, I
purposely wrong no man, but observe the laws of that kind of poem: If any
repine thereat, I am sure he is guilty, because he bewrays himself. For my
Eclogues, I commend them to men of approved judgment, whose margents though I
fill not with quotations, yet their matter, and handling, will show my
diligence: For my Epistles, they are in that kind, wherein no Englishman of our
time has publicly written, which if they please, may draw on more; if
displease, have their privilege by authority. Briefly, I have so written, as
I have read: so read, as I can judge: In which respect, if any man doubt, let
him ask and I will resolve him: if any man reprove, let him look to it, I
will nip him: for as I am ready to satisfy the reasonable, so I have a gird
in store for a Railer. Finally, gentlemen as Prometheus, after he had formed
his image of earth, presented it to the sun; and Ops when she had brought
forth Jupiter, (for fear lest he should be devoured by time, figured in
Saturn) gave him in keeping to the Cureti; So I present this frail image of
my art, to take life, and light, from the sun of your approved judgments,
and desirous to commend, this infant of my wit to immortality, and defend it
from the assaults of time, and envy: commit, and submit it to your protection,
the true Cureti of all cunning: who accepting these fragments in good worth,
shall shortly receive from me, matters both worthy regard and reading. Vale 6.
Maij. 1595.

Yours as you use him,

T. L.

Gentle Reader, faults escapte correct thus:
Satyr 1. page. 2. line. 17. reproou'd, read reproved. page. 4. line. 5.
will, read. ill. line. 8. dele (). Epost. 1. ad Momum. p. 2. lin. 22. manners,
read moouers. pa. 3. l. 19. humors, r. humor. Eclog. 2. p. 1. l. 14. were, r.
now. page 2. l. 25. awe, r. policy. p. 3. l. 28. thrift, r. thirst. Eclog. 3.
p. 2. l. 10. nor r. or. Ecl. 4. l. 8. virtues, r. virtue. Epist. 2. lin. 15.
contaging, r. containing. p. 3. l. 13. of, r. if. p. 5. l. 1. mortal, r.
moral. p. ead. l. 15. tongue, r. longes. p. 6. l 1. cheer, r. cheered. Sat.
4. page 2. li. 20. leare, r. tear. p. 3. l. 23. rest, r. roast. p. 4. l. 13.
is, r. was. Sat. 5. p. 2. l. 19. dread, r. dreades. Epist. 3. p. 2. l. 16. are,
r. do. p. 3. l. 6. harkt in mine, r. lay lip to. page 6. lin. 2. Gredoes, r.
Predoes. ead. lin. 9. sure, r. since. Epist. 4. p. 1. l. 6. no, r. may. p. 2. l
8. peace, r. pence ead. lin. 25. retain, r. reclaim. Epist. 5. p 4. lin. 5.
Pierias, r. Pierius. Epist. 6. p. 1. l. 7. worth, r. North. p. 2. lin. 1.
accursed, r. incenst. ead. pa. lin. 19. distraundged, r. distourning.

To Master E. Dig.
Satyr. 1.
DIgbie whence comes it that the world begins.
To wink at follies, and to sooth up sins?
Can other reason be alleadgd then this,
The world sooths sin, because it sinful is?
The man that lives by bribes, and usury,
Winkes (like a fox) at loathsome letcherie;
Craft gives ambition leave to lay his plot,
And cross his friend, because he soundes him not:
All men are willing with the world to haulte,
But no man takes delight to know his fault.
He is a gallant fit to serve my Lord
Which claws, and sooths him up, at every word;
That cries, when his lame poesy he hears,
It Is rare (my Lord) it will pass the nicest ears:
This makes Anphidius welcome to good cheer;
And spend his Master forty pounds a year,
And keep his plaise-mouth'd wife in welts and guardes:
For flattery can never want rewards.
And therefore Humfrey holds this Paradox;
It Is better be a fool then be a fox;
For folly is rewarded and respected,
Where subtlety, is hated and rejected:
Self-will does srowne, when honest zeal reproues,
To hear good counsel error never loves.
Tell pursie Rollus, (lusking in his bed)
That humors, by excessive ease are bred,
That sloth corrupts, and choakes the vital sprights,
And kills the memory, and hurts the lights:
He will not stick (after a cup of sack)
To flout his counselor behind his back.
For with a world of mischiefs, and offense
Unbridled will, rebels against the sense,
And thinks it no little prejudice,
To be reproou'd though by good advice:
For wicked men repine their sins to hear,
And folly flings, if counsel tuch him near.
Tell Sextus wife (whose shoes are vnder-layd)
Her gate is girlish, and her foot is splayd;
She Will rail with open mouth as Martial does:
But if you praise her (though you speak not sooth)
You shall be welcome both to bed, and board;
And use her self, her husband and his sword.
Tell blear-eid Linus that his sight is clear,
Heel pawn himself, to buy thee bread, and beer:
But tuch me Quintus with his stinking breath,
The dastard will defy thee to the death:
Thus, though men's great deformities be known,
They grieve to hear, and take them for their own:
Find me a niggard that does want the shift,
To call his cursed avarice good thrift?
A rakehell, (sworn to prodigality)
That dares not term it liberality?
A letcher, that has lost both flesh and fame,
That holds not letcherie a pleasant game?
And why? because they cloak their shame by this,
And will not see the horror what it is.
And cunning sin being olad in Virtues shape
Flies much reproof, and many scorns does escape.
Last day I chaunst (in crossing of the street)
With Diffilus the Inkeeper to meet,
He wore a silken nightcap on his head,
And looked as if he had been lately dead:
I asked him how he fared, not well (quoth he)
An ague this two months has troubled me;
I let him pass: and laughed to hear his skuce:
For I knew well, he had the pox by Luce:
And wore his night-cappe ribbind at the ears,
Because of late he swet away his hears:
But had a stranger, chanst to spy him than
He might have deemd him for a civil man.
Thus with the world, the world dissembles still,
And to their own confusions follow will;
Houlding it true felicity to fly,
Not from the sin, but from the seeing eye.
Then in this world (who winks at each estate)
Has found the means to make him fortunate:
To color hate with kindness, to defraud
In private, those in public we applaud:
To keep this rule, kaw me and I kaw thee;
To play the Saints, whereas we devils be.
What ere men do, let them not reprehend:
For cunning knaves, will cunning knaves desend.
Truth is pursew'd by hate, then is he wise
That to the world, his worldly wit applies:
What is he wise? I as Amphestus strong,
That burnt his face, because his beard was long.
Ad Momum. Epistle. 1.
SIr, laugh no more at Pliny, and the rest,
Who in their public writings do protest
That birds, and beasts, (by natural respects
And motions) judge of subsequent effects:
For I will prove, that creatures being dombe,
Have some foreknowledge of events to come.
How prove you that I hear some Momus cry?
Thus (gentle sir) by good Philosophy.
First brutish beasts, who are possessed of naught
But fantasy, to ordinate their thought.
And wanting reasons light, (which men alone
Partake to help imagination)
It follows that their fantasies do move,
And imitate Impressions from above:
And therefore often by the motion
Of birds and beasts, some certain things are known:
Hereon the Stragerite (with Judgment deep)
Discourses in his book of watch and sleep;
That some imprudent, are most provident,
He means beasts, in reason indigent,
Where naitheles their intellectiue parts
(Nothing affected with care-killing hearts,
But desert as it were and void of all)
Seem with their manners half conaturall.
For proof, the bitter stinges of fleas, and flies,
The slime-bred frogs, their harsh reports and cries
Foresignifie and prove a following rain:
How prove you that cries Momus once again?
Why thus dull dunce: The moist and stormy time
Fitting the frogs that dwell in wette and slime,
Makes them by natural instinct to croke,
Because (...)suing (...) the spleen provoke:
And so the fleas, and flies in their degree,
By their attracted moist humiditie,
Drawn from a certain virtue elatiue,
Whence rain his generation does derive:
Seek more than their accustomed nutriment.
So cocks in season inconvenient
That often crow, and asses that do rub
And chafe their hanging ears against a shrub;
A following rain do truly prophecy,
And this the reason in Philosophy:
The cock whose dri^nes by the heat was fed,
By moisture feels the same extinguished:
The ass with vapors caused by the rain,
The humors then abounding in his brain:
Ingendereth an it thing in his head:
What need I more, he that has Virgil read,
(Were he as ^to, crooked and precise)
Would graut that birds, and beasts were wether wise:
But if some misbeleeuing lad there be
That scorns here into judge, and join with me:
This pain I do inioyne him for his sins:
When porpose, beat the sea with eger sins,
And beasts, more greedily do chaw their cud,
And cormotants, seek shore, and fly the flood;
And birds do bowse them in the pleasant springs,
And crows do ceaseless cry, and beat their wings:
That cloakles, in a champion he were set
Till to the skin he thorowlie be wet.
To reverend Colin. Eclogue. 1.
Ergasto. Damian.
Ergasto. SIng us that carroll (Damian)
Amyntas soung when he began,
To follow Ringdes minstralsie,
And made us merry melody.

Damian. Young lad, my strings are broke and spent,
My harp, records no merriment,
The modern and new fangled lays,
From auncestrie bear hence the praise;
Such strange Terpanders now profess.
To move both mirth, and heaviness,
By every motion of the fingers,
That old men seem but sorry singers.

Ergasto. Let young men boast what art they list,
Mine ears chief pleasure does consist,
In hearing what concentfull lays
Our Fathers chaunted in their days;
For often have I found this true,
The sense is old, the words be new:
What ere the younger boast and brave,
Their worth, and wit, from eld they have:
Old sense by vpstarts newly suited
In words ill warpt, is not reputed
The deed of him that formd the style,
But his that did the sense compile.

Damian. Since thou can argue so for age,
My voice with harp some war shall wage:
And I will sing thee such a lay
As erst I heard my Ringde play.
At Galateas wedding feast,
(Where sea to hear, his music ceast.)
Cantus.
THere was a time (or writers have missung)
UUherein our partial mothers balance hung
UUith equal poise: and fish, wild beasts, and birds,
Had use of reason, and of needful words:
Wherein foure-footed beasts of sauadge field,
(UUho sought the state of winged fowls to wield)
Conspired, (the better to defense their states)
To choose the fish, to be their mutual mates:
UUho vainly trusting to their frail defense,
Consented quickly to the beasts pretense,
Supposing nature, equally had lent
Like force in earth, as liquid element:
Hereon (ambition egging on the flocks
Of proud foure-footed beasts) the shoares, and rocks
UUere filled with fish; and heaven, with shoutes and cries,
And gastlie breathings, almost lost his eyes:
UUhen all the fowls, embatail'd in the air
(Seeing their fortunes almost in despair)
Besought the Gods, (who all injustice hate)
To be assistant in this dire debate:
Jove, by a thunderclap a signal gave
Upon their prayers, they should good fortune have,
And speedily sent out the Southern wind
To drive the waters from their bounds assind;
A murren on the beasts he thrilled down:
UUhilst thus the reverend judge does threat and frown,
The fowls they stoop, and offering urgent blows,
Find hartles beasts, and each where liueles foes:
The fish, on waueles shore dispersed, and left,
Of pride, and life, were all at once bereft:
The fowls preuaild, and fed them fat with pray,
And after victors like did fly away;
And beating off the air with open wings
They tuned this carroll to the woods and springs,
To beasts, to fish, (reserved from brunt of war)
To all, that (with both factions mortal are)
Beware (o what soever race you be)
(Too much ambitious in felicity)
To strive to raise your fortunes through oppression,
Or count your neighbors purchase your possession,
For Gods revenge each impious attempt
Before the plague, or punishment be drempt:
Be sure the square whereby you build your states,
Must break and fail, in dangers and debates;
For Nemesis has every hour reserved
A plague for pride, that has from justice sweru'd:
Oh you, whose calm, makes neighbors storms seem sore
Try you your tides, before you trust your ore,
The surge may rise on sudden ere you think,
And force you, (whilst you swim, secure) to sink.
UUho trustes to choice of proud confederate,
And fails in choice of faithful friends estate;
Let him disclaim his arms, and claim foresight;
Lest he with beasts, manage a beastly fight.

Engasto. In sooth this is a witty lay
More pleasant then the verrelay,
The shepherd sings unto his sheep
As soon as day begins to peep.

Damian. Weigh not the words, but mark the worth,
Great floods do often issue forth
From humble waters, and deep skill,
May flow from an impolisht quill.
Who waits for words, may get him hence,
For shepherds only sing for sense.

To happy Menalcus. Eglogue. 2.
Philides. Eglon.
Philides. WHat wrong, or discontent, old Eglon has withheld
Thine honorable age from governing the state?
Why live thou thus apart, whose wisdom wont to shield
Our kingdom from the storms of foes, and homebred hate.

Eglon. Ah Philides, the taste of trouble I have felt,
Mine actions misconceau'd, my zeal esteemed impure,
My policy deceit, (where faithfully I dealt)
These wrongs, (all undeserved) have made meliue obscure:
Besides, my youthful years were canceled by mine age,
(The very Inn of griefs, of sickness, and of cares,)
Time bids me now prepare, with death some war to wage
And think upon mine end, and shun these worldly snares:
And time it is (God worcester) when age has got the start,
To fly from public noise, and brawles of judgment seat,
For now my wits wax weak, and scarce yield use of art,
My limbs are stiff and stark, my pulses faintly beat.
And this late-purchas'd age, (besides all other pains)
Is subject to contempts, accused of avarice,
And youth, with self conceit, has so bewitched his brains,
As he esteems years, wits chiefest prejudice.

Philides. Can men so far forget the reverence and awe,
They should in justice, yield to siluer-suted hairs?
Is duty so despised, (enioyn'd by natures law)
That youth impugneth age, in mannaging affairs?
Then worse then Ethnicks far, may Christians be esteemed,
For both among the Greeks and Romans, I have red,
Such honors given to eld, that nothing happy seemed
Wherein their counsel mist, and wisdom had not led:
In Solons happy laws, in old Licurgus schools,
In Numas sage decrees, and grave Prometheus books,
Amercements were set down for such misgouern'd fools,
As did malign at eld, and loath their reverent looks:
For where they first ordained, the Gods should be adored,
Next, that the silly poor, should want no due relief,
They lastly, did command the younger to afford
All honor unto age, and still to hold them chief:
The Roman Senate wont, in giving dignities
To take respect of years, of judgment, and discretion,
The Lacedemon state, in all their souerainties,
Did yield their public charge, to aged men's possession:
Taught by these flouring states, by men so fortunate,
(As reading what they did, our minds are stirred to follow)
I wonder that our world, should so degenerate,
From perfect awe, and carry hearts so hollow?

Eglon. Ah Philides, forbear to wonder at the time,
There must be some contempt, before a plague succeed:
I see great storms at hand, and sigh to see them clime,
Whose fall I might bewail, before it come indeed.
But let all reasons pass, of envy, and disgrace,
Sufficient to withdraw, a man from common weal,
Not these alone procure, me leave mine honored place
But this, because it is time with state no more to deal:
The hour prefixed is come, the revolution fixed,
Wherein I must, and will, give over government;
Taught by those happy men, whose weal, with sorrow mixed,
Did make them leave the world, which danger does present:
Oh when I sadly think of old Lucullus wit,
Who having fortune thrall, and fame attending him,
Thought good to leave the world, when he had conquered it,
And rather cease in time, then sincke, in hope to swim:
I cannot choose but smile, because by like advise
I fly from froward hate, (as old Metellus did)
And leave ungrateful men, (as erst did Scipio wise)
Deeming it happiness in private to be hid:
Had Cicero forethought, how sweet this course had been
When he had mastered fame, and conquered Cateline,
His Tusculanum then, he had more often seen,
And left ungrateful Rome, before he did decline:
But hope of further fame, so fondly him besotted,
That wrestling with lewd chance, at last he caught the fall,
And where he presupposed, true fame was him allotted,
There lost he his desire, his fortunes, life, and all:
His lessons make me wise; these warnings are mine arms;
Wherewith I conquer chance, and false Rhamnusias trains,
And now dear Philides, my mind no trouble farms,
And great content is bought, with little thrift of gains.

Philides. Thy reasons have their weight, and so have won my heart,
As I will leave the world, and come and live with thee:

Eglon. So doing thou art wise, who from the world does part,
Begins to travel on to true felicity.

To Rowland. Eclogue. 3.
VVagrin. Gold.
VVagrin. Why sings not Gold as he whilome did
In sacred numbers, and diuiner vain,
Such hymns, as from bace-humor'd brains are hid?
For shame revive thy mated Muse again,
Let not ambitious ignorance forbid
Thy worthfull style immortal praise to gain,
Live thou to after age, and let thy fame,
Eternise thy deserts, and tell their shame.

Gold. Why should I make mine industry a slave,
To day, and night? why should I dwell on thought
When as some scoffing idiot shall deprave
That which with travail learning forth has brought:
Proud Aristarchus will the credit have,
And bear that palm, the happier muse has bought,
And though in furnace of true art I try
My labored lives, yet escape not obloquie.
In such a world where worth, has no reward,
Where all the gods, want shrines, but greedy gain,
Where science sleeps; and ignorance is hard,
Why should I loose my sleep, or break my brain?
Can virtue spring that wants true regard?
No VVagrin no: it is wisdom to refrain
In such an age, where learning has no laud,
Nor needy Homer welcome, or applaude.
Sweet Muses, my companions, and repose,
Tired with contempts in silence now record
Your pleasures past; disdaining to disclose
Your worth to them, who wisdom have abhord:
Make me the Judge, and writer of your woes:
Whilst senceles walls, (where I your treasures hord)
Do hear such grief, as were they ought but stone,
Hewd in this age, they might consume with moan.

VVagrin. Fie Gold, blame not all men for a few,
The Muses have some friends, who will esteem
A man of worth, and give desert his dew:
Did Mercury (as many wisemen deem)
Surcease the wavering Cynthia to pursue,
His cross aspects to arts, more sweet would seem:
There are some few, (alas that they were more)
That honor poesy, and wit adore.
To these firm oaks (who boldly can resist
The tempest of lewd tongues,) thy self apply,
Like Iuie, round about their bodies twist,
And live to them, whose fame should never die:
Sweeten their ears, and glut them when they list
With such nice numbers of sweet poetry:
That reading, they may think, that every line
Refines their wits, and makes them more divine.

Gold. On these strong pillars (UUagrin) have I built,
And lived a while in sunshine of their grace,
But time (sweet friend) believe me if thou will,
Has made them worldly, covetous, and base,
Their niggard minds, with golden words they gilt,
They are not as they seem, in outward face,
To live in hope of that they mean to give,
Is to deceive our selves, and not to live.
Arts perish, wanting honor, and applause,
And where imperious need does tyrannise,
The holy heat, through worldly cares does pause,
The mind, (with-drawne to study for supplies)
Is soyld with earthly thoughts, and downward draws;
Hence come those dull conceits amongst the wise,
Which coy-eard readers censure to proceed,
From ignorance, whereas they grow by need.
Oh were the world so forward to affect
The high conceits of artists as of yore,
When least deserts, were held in high respect;
Did wise Maecenas flourish still to adore
The heavenly lines his Virgil did erect,
Or he whom Rome admired for wisdoms store;
Want, should not wring good wits, and this our age
For science, should with theirs, the battle wage.
But now, these frugall patrons, who begin
To skantle learning with a servile pay,
Make Poets count their negligence, no sin:
The cold conceit of recompense does lay
Their fiery fury when they should begin,
The priest unpaid, can neither sing, nor say:
Nor Poets sweetly write, except they meet
With sound rewards, for sermoning so sweet.
Which sound rewards, since this neglectful time
Repines to yield to men of high desert,
I Will cease to revel out my wits in rhyme,
For such who make so base account of art:
And since by wit there is no means to clime,
I Will hold the plough a while, and plie the cart,
And if my muse to wonted course return,
I Will write, and judge, peruse, commend and burn.

VVagrin. A better mind God send thee, or more means,
Oh woudst thou but converse with Charles the kind,
Or follow harvest, where thy Donroy gleanes,
These thoughts would cease: with the^ thy muse should
A sweet converse: then this conceit which weanes (find
Thy pen from writing, should be soon resignd.

Gold. I rest resolved, if bounty will, I wright,
If not, why then my muse shall fly the light.

To Master Samuel Daniel. Eclogue. 4.
Deliuorus. Felicius.
Deliuorus. FElicius, nourish not these sullen veins,
Live not, as if thou lothedst to impart
Unto the world thy wisdom and thine art:
Virtues obscured, yields small, and sorry gains
But actiuely imployd, true worth retains:
Now clattering arms sound terror in our coast,
Like aged Nestor guirt thee in thy steel,
Win fame by valor, let impugners feel,
That though sweet Mercury delights thee most,
Thy courage, with thy years, thou have not lost:

Felicius. Eld is ordained to counsel, youth to fight;
Age to foresee, young courage to enact,
High courage with true wisdom ever backed,
Winnes perfect fame: youth does deserve by might,
But old age, by good counsel, and foresight.
Deliuorus, when as thou do behold
Felicius sit apart, be thou assured
His mind still works: and what thou have endured
In bloody brunts, the same though being old
He does endure, and more a hundredth fold.
I travail in my soul, when thou do sleep
I for my country combat by forecast,
And how by day, the danger shall be past
By night I study: Thus by care I keep,
What hed-strong youth might loose, and loosing weep.
I live not then obscurely, as I seem,
But as the master of the ship performs
Far more then common yonkers in great storms,
So guiding of our states well may I deem,
I do, and merit more, then most esteem:

Deliuorus. As if a life devoted unto ease,
And mannaging affairs by policy,
Might be compared for worth, and dignity
With honorable arms, by land and seas?

Felicius. Why not (sweet friend) yield reason if you please?

Deliuorus. Whom ever did the rising sun behold
More royalliz'd, and dignified then him,
Whose glory, (though fell fortune sought to dim)
His courage raised, his conquests manifold,
Commanding all, himself still vncontrol'd?
By arms, Realms, Empires, monarchies are won,
To arms, laws, justice, magistrates submit,
Arts, sciences, before their triumphs sit,
And beg their grace, and sing what they have done,
Amas'd to see the race, which they have run.

Felicius. Deliuorus, war, honor does deserve,
Yet counsel in all kingdoms policied
Is far more worthy, and more dignified:
For arms, but in extremes do never serve
To reconcile, and punish such as swerue.
First have an eye to Grecian gouernements,
And even in them, the truth will be explained:
In Athens, where Themistocles remained,
Though much he conquered by his regiments,
Yet Solon, was more praised for his intents:
Themistocles, by arms; he by good laws:
One, conquered foes, the other planted friends;
One got the wealth, the which the other spends,
Both fame: though not like measure, nor like cause:
For counsel to it self more honor draws.
Pausanias, and Lysander by their swords,
And warlike virtues, made Laocena rich,
Fame followed them where they their tents did pitch,
But grave Licurgus, by his laws and words,
Did merit more, then these renowned Lords,
Though these attempted, he prefixed the way,
Though they commanded, and arraung'd the bands,
Licurgus put the fortune in their hands:
Though Marius could begin, and make the fray,
Yet Scaurus policy deserves the bay:
Let Catulus, with Pompey be compared,
Or witty Cicero, with Cateline:
And to prevent with policy divine
That which the other over rashly dared,
Deserves such fame as may not be impar'd.
Say military virtue does require
A valiant heart, great strength, and constancy:
The selfe-like guiftes in civil policy
Are requisite for such as do aspire,
To gain renown by counsel for their hire:
In brief, for what is war ordained but peace?
And perfect peace is end of bloody war:
And since the ends, fore-meanes, is prised far;
Let war, his boast of dignity surcease
And yield to wisdom, which does peace increase.
Peace, does depend on Reason, war on force,
The one is humane, honest, and upright,
The other brutish, fostered by despite:
The one extreme, concluded with remorse,
The other all injustice does deuorce.

Deliuorus. Felicius thy reasons are approved
(If measured by the square of statemens skill,
Who on their books hang their opinions still)
But I, who from my youth the wars have loved,
From mine opinion may not be removed.
For by that method which my self have tried
I find such word-bold warriors as you be
As fit for war, as apes for minstralsie:
For what can you prescribe, or else provide,
To order those, whom you could never guide?
Think you Vigetius serves to make you fit
To give directions to a general?
No book-men no, time now has changed all,
Both men, and means: war craves a greater wit
And courage, then when Rome directed it:
Should we exspect, (as erst the Romans did)
Instructions to dislodge, encampe, assail,
Before we did endeavor to prevail,
The means to conquer would be lost, and hid:
Basely fights he who wars as others bid.
All things are changed, the means, the men and arms,
Our stratagems now differ from the old,
Expert in book, was never truly bold,
Demosthenes, whose tongue the soldier charms,
Fled coward-like away in hot alarmes.
This said, he ceast, and would no more proceed,
Felicius left him settled in this thought,
I, hearing both the reasons they had brought,
Resolved that both deserve true fame indeed,
And pray that wit may thrive, and war may speed.

To F. M.
Satyr. 3.
IT is as common as unkind a fault
In youth, (too subject to this worlds assault)
To imitate, admit, and daily choose,
Those errors, which their lawles parents use.
For what by vain example youth conceaues,
The same for lawful, daily he receaues,
If damned dice the father does affect,
The selfe-like folly does his heir infect,
If lust; to lust the son is too procliue,
If fraud, by fraud his wanton race will thrive:
If surfeit, surfeit is esteemd no sin,
For youth perseuers, as he does begin.
And where to natures, (forward to retain)
Lewd objects are annexed and customs vain,
The wounds grow desperate, and death does end,
Before good counsel can the fault amend;
Lucillas daughter, she that keeps the swan,
That saw her mother dally with her man;
Steal privy sports, for sweet meats hazard fame,
Scarce twelve years old begins to do the same:
For nature, joined with custom, never fails
But by her self, and in her helps preuailes:
And why? because what children apprehend
The same they like, they follow and commend:
And where the mind is willing and addict,
The Examples are more forcible and strict:
And though some natures, by especial grace
Correct themselves, and give not folly place,
Yet lean the most part, to example so,
That what they like, they hardly can forgo:
Then (gentle friend) from damned deeds abstain,
From lawles ryots, and from pleasures vain,
If not regarding of thine own degree,
"Yet in behalf of thy posterity:
"For we are docible to imitate,
Depraved pleasures tho degenerate.
Be careful therefore lest thy son admit
By ear, or eye, things filthy or unfit,
Exclude the bawd, the parasite, the whore,
The dicer, drunkard, swearer from thy door,
For such contemptible consorts as these,
Leave ranckest poyso^ where they sweetly please
And as thy child resembles thee in face,
In foot, in feature, and in outward grace,
So study thou (thine actions being good)
He may wax like in manners, as in blood:
If thou epsy within thy curious knot,
Some tangling twitch, that does thy flowers rot,
Or in the picture hanging in thy hall,
That represents Caesar maiesticall,
Thou see some spots that spoil and do disgrace
The matchles modle of thy monarcks face,
Will thou not quickly root away the one,
And wipe the other from the piece anon?
So in thy son demean thy self likewise,
If thou perceive a sin, that does disguise
And choke the beauties of his toward mind,
If in this image of thy self thou find,
Corruption, choking virtue, error grace,
And will, usurping reasons rightful place:
Dissuade by fatherly admonishment,
School, and correct, advertise, and prevent:
Make him by government, and perfect zeal,
A happy member of his common weal,
And not by negligence, and liberty,
A scouge unto thy private family:
The eaned lamb does loose that color seld,
The which at first, thingendring ewe beheld:
The stained cloth, retains his grayned die,
The Iuory his first Imagerie,
The bird but scarcely broken from his shell,
Feeds on that food which first he liked well;
The tun retains long, the taste, and sent,
Of that pure licour which at first it hent:
And what impressions we in youth retain
In age, our reason hardly will restrain:
The idle More, the Turk, the Saracen,
The Chinois, and the wealthy Abissine:
Observe that custom, and idolatry
Which was ingrafted in their infancy;
Then in the presence of thy toward heir
Beware to frisse, currle, and kembe thy hair,
To spend three hours, in gazing in a glass,
Before thy wife and daughter go to mass:
Take heed thy gagtooth'd hosts in his sight
Tell not how often she tyres thee every night,
Beware thy son do never hear thee brag,
That thou have paid twelve angels for a nagge,
And pawned it to the rich and broking bawd,
For whores, and capons, little to thy lawd:
Take heed the toward had do never hear,
That thou have spent a thousand pound a year,
Take heed thou never swear whilst he is by
That thou by oaths dare prove an open lie,
Lest seeing thee make light of loathsome sin,
To practice like misdeeds he do begin;
And thou at last to thy excessive grief,
Behold thy self a beggar, him a thief:
For by a fatal law it comes to pass
That lewdnes is defamed and ever was.
And life corrupt by unexpected shame
And timeles death is buried with defame:
Enough, if grace be gone, then words be vain:
I Will tell thee more if so I write again.
To Master W. Bolton. Epistle. 2.
Bolton, amidst thy many other theames
Thou do desire me to discourse of dreams:
Of which, what I could gather, read, or find,
I here set down to satisfy thy mind:
Dreams then (in sleep our spirits true retreat)
Do challenge their predominance, and seat:
And in their natures, are but fantasies
Made by the motion of Imageries,
According to the sleepers habitude
Of every sensible similitude.
So then, all dreams from diverse causes grow,
And from th'interior, or th'exterior flow:
Thinterior likewise has a double right,
The one is mental, clayming by the spright,
Where through in sleep (the fantasy and thought
Encountering) strange and rare effects are wrought;
Resembling those, which our affections kept,
And thoughts did travel on before we slept:
The other cause takes his fruition,
And being from the bodies disposition:
For by th'interior habitude and state
The body houlds, (corrupt or ordinate)
Some motion in the fancy is maintained,
According to the disposition gained:
For where as chilly humors do abound,
Men seem in snow, or water, to be drowned:
This makes the sage Physician to coniect
By dreams, what griefs the inward parts infect;
Th'exterior cause likewise, we double call,
The first divine, pure, and spiritual,
Whereby things hidden, sacred, and concealed,
By God, or by his Angels, ere revealed:
The next is merely corporal; whereby
Not only mind and working fantasy
Is changed, (according as the sleepers thought
Or fancy, by contaging air is wrought)
But by the impression of celestial rays,
Which do conform affection to their ways.
For so the staid star-gazers do areede,
That from celestial bodies do proceed,
The cause, and workings of our dreams in sleep:
And in this point a mighty coil they keep.
Note me the hour (says one) and bring it me,
I will express the effect and dream to thee:
For as when choler swarms in breast or head,
Men dream of things inflamed, and fiery red,
And whereas fleugme preuailes, abounds and springs.
We dream of watrie, cold, and frostie things:
So heaven may by his influence bestow
The knowledge of the effects which he does owe,
And what in strength, and virtue it contains,
Infuse in man, in whom his work remains:
But by their leaves; it is not material
The heavens can do only but casual:
But now me thinks Apollo pulls mine ear
And claims mine industry an other wheare:
Speaking in thee, (because in thee he reigns)
And bids me busily employ my brains,
And prove of spirits either good or bad,
In forms, and certain apparitions clad,
Can further force, or else infuse by right,
Unfeigned dreams, to those that sleep by night.
To which mine answer is affirmative,
Because the fathers make it positive:
For dreams both true, and certain, now and then,
By blessed sprites, are powered in living men
Either as pertinent to their relief,
Or to repress their friends impendent grief,
Such was the dream Albertus Magnus had,
Who whilst the world in nights-dark-cloake was clad,
Supposed he saw, (near to a water-mill
By which a brook, did flow with murmr shril)
A pretty lad, hard by the river side,
That from the bancke fell headlong in the tide,
Whilst wrestling there he lay, and he in dream
In pity seemd to save him from the stream,
The morn arose, he walked, and scarce araid
Beheld a woeful mother quite dismayed;
That piteously perplexed, and (...) with teene,
Complained no less the^ he in dream had seen.
The selfe-like hap to Nicons son befell,
Who knowing neither purge, not hidden spell,
To cure his patient trauel'd with the spleen,
Fell fast asleep within a meadow green:
Wherein he thought, some spright, or genius good,
Enioyn'd him presently to let him blood
Betwixt the wedding finger and the small,
Which wakned he performed, and therewithal
The sick man got his health, he won the same,
And thus by dream his doubt he over came:
If then the heavenly bounty by good sprights,
Direct men's actions to their best delights,
To bodily contents, to perfect health,
To safety, to security, and wealth:
Far and more working is his heavenly power,
In sending holy spirits every hour;
Who in our mortal, and spiritual weal,
Are pressed sincere instinctions to reveal:
So in a dream King Solomon the sage,
(Both wealths, and wisdoms, wonder in his age)
Had special counsel how to bear a hand
In governing his people, and his land:
So even the most corrupt and vnretir'd,
Have to good ends, been faithfully inspired:
So Pharao, and Nabuchadonsor;
The caitife Caiphas, and many more,
To their confusion have fore-knowne their fall,
And miseries God threatened them withal:
From evil messengers the sons of pride,
To evil men, true things are told beside,
Not for the devils tongue they should believe,
But that in right he labors to deceive,
Not for desire to manifest misdeede,
But to himself more faith and trust to breed*
So Socrates, the night before he saw
Diuiner Plato, skild in natures law,
After digestions hours were ouerpast,
And vapors in the brain digested fast,
Bethought him in his dream that he beheld
A milk-white swan, whose pleasant note excelled,
That from the earth to heaven did singing fly,
And cheer all other birds with melody:
Which when he waked, he knew fore-tould the truth
Of Platos worth; for seeing of the youth:
Here is (quoth he) that swan that sung so sweet,
Whose eloquence, all Greece shall grace and greet:
Thus much for dreams, though more remains to say:
My Muse commands me now make holiday:
And end abruptly, vowing faithfully,
To prosecute this subject seuiously.
To a dear friend lately given over to covetousness.
Satyr. 4.
I Hear of late (but hold it very strange)
(That such vain news is common in the change)
How being old, and drawing to the grave,
Thou waxest greedy, and desir'st to save:
As if thy life of sorrows had no store,
But thou in policy should purchase more?
Alas for thee, that at thy iournies end
Art grown so near and careful what to spend.
Look on thy self, age has thee by the back,
Thy hairs are white, which erst were frisseld black:
Thine eyes are suncke, thy cheeks are lean and pale,
Thy lips are blew, thy breath is stinking stale,
Thy grinders gone, thy ghastly gout, and murre;
Do break thy sleeps, and scarcely let thee stir:
Thy memory is dull, and well nie dead,
Thy tongue already faulters in thy head:
Where al these torments make thee loath thy self,
Why art thou now enamored with thy pelf?
Think thou the purchase of a niggards name
Is not a prejudice unto thy fame?
Mark me a miserable mysing wretch,
That lives by others loss, and subtle fetch,
He is not only plagued with heaviness,
For that which other happy men possess,
But takes no taste of that himself partakes,
And sooner life, then misery forsakes:
And what in most abundance, he retains
In seeming little, does augment his pains:
His travails, are suspicions backed by fear,
His thoughts distraught incessant troubles leare,
He doubts the rain, for fear it raise a flood
And bear away his houses, and his good,
He dreads his neighbors cattle as they pass,
For fear they stay and feed upon his grass,
He hides his treasures under lock and kay,
Lest thieves break in, and bear his bags away:
Only unto himself, for whom he spares,
He gathers nothing but continual cares:
His eye disdaines his hungry belly meat,
Himself repines, at that himself does eat,
Though rents increase, he lets his body lack,
And neither spares his belly nor his back:
What on him self he lays, he houlds it lost,
What on his wife, he deemes unthrifty cost,
What on his heirs, his misery and miss;
What on his servants, ryotting it is.
Thus from himself, his covetous desire
Does draw himself, and on his heart does tire:
So lives he to the wretched world alone,
Loathsome to all that long to see him gone:
If such he be, (as such he is indeed)
And far more worse, (if wealth more worse may breed)
For shame from such a sin thy life exempt,
That makes thee rich in nothing but contempt,
They say the many packs before thy door,
Are but the pawnes, and wages of the poor,
They say the buildings which thou do begin,
Are rich without, but yield no rest within;
They say thy dearest friends are sure to pay
Great forfeitures, and if they miss their day:
They say the interest of ten a year
Is held too little to maintain thy cheer,
And yet thy self, thy wife, thy maid, thy knave,
Scarce buttered turnips upon days have,
They say at New-yeares-tide men give thee cakes,
And thou the next day sels them for their sakes,
They say thou sel'st the chipping of thy bred
For fear thy servants should be over fed,
They say one horse may bear thy household stuff,
Where for thy coin three carts are not enough;
They say thy welted gown, and ruffes of lawne,
When thou were warden last was but a pawn:
They say thy plate is forfeited and lost
For half the money that at first it cost,
They say thy wives cast kertle is become
A pair of breeches to enskonce thy bum.
Briefly, they say that for the world thou art
Too wretched, and for God too false in heart.
All these reports thou know as well as I
Spring from some grounds, things sold by common cr^
Are quickly sold, men hardly stop the noice
Of slanders published by common voice:
If these be true, reform them; if untrue,
Take them for warnings what thou should eschew:
What ere they be, now think upon thy grave,
And leave thy worldly drudging to thy knave,
And let him carry fire unto thy stils,
And tend thy brewhouse, watch, and ward thy mils,
Look to thine apples, lest they rotte away,
Set up thy hop-powles, and thy champions lay.
And thou thy self safe wrapped in cloth and furre,
Fall to thy prayers, desire no more to stir,
Give to the poor, what thou have got by wrong,
For be assured thy days cannot be long:
Follow this friendly counsel which I give,
Or else in shame, and hatred thou shall live,
Or dead, those passengers that spy thy grave,
Shall say here lies a broking bribing knave.
Satyr. 5.
IN every land from Gades to Ganges flood
Too few they be that think upon their good:
Too few that by discretion can discern
What profit rightly does themselves concern.
Behold ambitions true begotten son,
Spent in desire before his hope be won,
Striving for kingdoms which are sooner lost,
Then kept, desired, then had, with mighty cost.
Ending like him that senceles in his harms
Does strive to stem a sea with two weak arms,
Behold a mind pressing beyond his might,
Catching at stars censured by oversight.
Like him tha eger scales a mountain steep,
And headlong falls into the valley deep:
There lives no man so settled in content
That has not daily whereof to repent,
Nor can reformed wit so justly deem,
But that it leaves true goods, for such as seem;
Briefly, the greatest gifts whereof we boast
Are those which do attempt and tire us most.
Peace brings in pleasure, pleasure breeds excess,
Excess procures want, want works distress:
Distress contempt, contempt is not repaired
Till timeles death determine, hope dispair'd.
War eggs the victor to desire debate,
The conquered to submit and serve with hate;
Leaves nothing sure though he presume to choose,
But what he keeps with hate and dread to loose:
How often has watching policy devised
A cunning clause which has himself surprised?
How often has lewd fraud been set afloate?
Of purpose that his goods might cut his throat?
Who builds on strength by policy is stripped:
Who trusts his wit, by wit is soonest tript.
Example be thou Hepar, who professed
A home-borne infant of our English west
Have in that shameful schene of treasons play
Betrayed thy self to death, who would betray:
Uolcatius that subborn'd, devised, and wrought
To work out Themis, from the place he sought:
Was laughed in court, and though he were not seen,
Yet wept his follies to a wooden skreene,
Was never since this wretched world began
To entertain, receive, and nourish man.
A judgment by itself that never erred
Or wit vnwrong'd by that he most preferred
Travel the world, and trauerse every clime,
And win one hour in every year of time:
Compass what ere the sea receives round,
And seek to Southward men of underground:
What have thou got if following Candies fate,
That keepst no certain compass in thy state:
O naught of ours, our wealth, our wit, enjoyed,
If not as ours, for us, it be employed,
Thy fame declining, Tellus, not thy farm,
Thy zeal presumptuous, Dacus not thine arm:
Thy bounty Varis, not thy many bribes,
Thy silence Shanus, not thy many Iibes.
These are those goods whereto you ought to cleave:
The rest are good in semblance and deceive.
What then in right for good may we elect?
Such things as challenge not by lewd respect?
Seek not in age with Crassus such a place
As both thy life and fortune may deface:
Nor fill the sea with sails, the earth with men
In shameful sort, to be repulst again.
Nor leave the northren lands, and fruitful Gaul,
In royal Rome, thine empire to enstall:
For seldom can presumption be enthrown'd
To live esteemed, or die to be bemown'd.
An humble cote entapissed with moss,
A lowly life that fears no sudden loss:
A mind that dreads no fall, nor craves no crown,
But makes his true-content, his best renown.
These are the choice conte^ts, the goods, the gain
Which rightly can be ours: the rest are vain.
If thou then see a troop of guarded knaves
Wait at Argastos heels like servile slaves:
Be not aghast, admire not at his state,
For now the world is bent to serve and hate:
It Is true: that slave whom Pompey did promoate,
Was he that first assayed to cut his throat.
To his Mistres A. L. Epistle. 6.
IN that same month wherein the spring begins,
And on that day when Phoebe left the twins
(Which was on Saturday, the twelft of March)
Your servant brought a letter sealed with starch,
Which by my soul (sweet mistres) when I op'te
And read your motion far from that I hop'te,
Believe me (had not troubles tired me quite)
Might be enough, to make me laugh outright:
You pray me to advise, and tell you what
Will take away your pursines and fat,
You pray me without any let, or pause,
To write of both the remedy, and cause,
And in a short discourse to let you know
The Antidote of that mislikes you so.
Well, since your beauty may, and must command
Thus briefly will I answer your demand:
Fatnes (connaturall to sick, and hole,
Which nearest vnder-dwell the Northren pole)
In those by nature who enjoy the same
Is passible, not preiudiz'd by blame:
That other grown by surfeit, and excess,
That choaks the vital powers with heaviness,
Is that (fair mistres) which you ought to fly
And that which Phisiques art may remedy:
Fatnes by nature (not immoderate)
Kills not the wit, quels not the minds estate:
But fatnes, by intemperance increast,
(When living man resembles loath some beast,
And belly cheer with greedy gluttony
Is held the fulness of felicity:
This makes men addicted to the same,
Dull in conceit, gross minded, worthy blame,
Of such do Basile, Galen, Plato, write,
That fattest belly has the weakest sprite:
For reason, (only made for man's behoof)
Affords hereof this true, and certain proof:
Therefore are lawles belly-gods by kind
Defect in understanding, and in mind,
Because gross blood by their disordred feed,
And swift concoction, plenteouslie does breed:
And by this blood, gross spirits from their hearts
Ascend, and seize upon their vpperparts,
And from these spirits, spirits of the brain
A dead and loath some dulnes do retain,
Through which it comes, that they wax stark, and slow,
Because their spirits animal be so.
That fatnes then engendered, and engrost,
By riot, surfeit, belly cheer and cost,
Is hateful: and that fatnes nature breeds
From good complexion, orderly proceeds:
Which praised, because approved, me thinks I hear
A saint, sweet like your self, harkt in mine ear,
And with a maiden blush entreat me tell
Why fatnes most does in the belly dwell.
Whereas the head (the master part of all)
Is fleshles, slender, pretty, round, and small?
To this, this answer mistres do I make:
The belly therefore fatnes does partake,
Because it keeps the matter of our meat,
And still contains our fatnes-breeding heat,
But for the head, it therefore is not charged,
With fat, or flesh, or by such like enlarged,
Because the heavenly workman did provide,
That such a part, which is the bodies guide,
And is the seat, where souerainlike remains
That reasonable power the soul contains,
Should not by flesh, be soyld, or ouerset,
For fear the works of reason should be let;
This problem plainly opened to the eye,
It follows thus of fatnes orderly,
It vitiats beauty, makes a barraine womb,
Because the blood which Sperma should become
Is wholely turned to fat, it hastneth age,
And houlds our appetites in vassellage:
It hinders blood, and shortneth breathing to,
And makes all things tedious that we do:
It causes sownings, passions of the heart,
It makes the pulses in their places start.
Briefly, (if Auicen speak not amiss)
Grossenes the bodies loathsome fetter is,
The self opinion old Pythagoras
Maintaind: who seeing once a fat man pass,
Said thus to them that did attend him then,
A loath some prison dothyond spirit pen:
This Plato knowing well, and waxing gross,
Chose out a shadie wood, and fruitful close;
Where walking, he his scholars taught and trained,
Which all his followers afterward maintained:
A world it were to reckon up, and wright,
How all those old Philosophers do fight,
Contend, debate, decide, dispute, entreat,
Whether this fatnes come from cold or heat:
But to be short, the Synod and the sect
Of those who rightly natures works respect:
Conclude that by a double sort of heat,
Our fat is made, and moult, and so concreate.
Excessive heat dissolues, the mean makes hard;
Heat in excess, as deeper read, award
Is that same heat, which does engender fat,
Heat moderate, is rightly counted that
Which Galen terms cold: By this decree
Two mighty factions thus accorded be:
Well since these proofs the causes do assure
Let us debate a little on the cure:
Much sitting, and long abstinence from care,
Drinking of oily wines, our fat prepare,
Eggs, whitemeat, pottage, do increase the same,
And bring the waxing body out of frame:
Let therefore fat men grown by gluttony,
(For to the rest no medcine I apply:)
Open a vain; or if that seem too sore,
Use cuppings, and often rubbings evermore,
Live in that air, which is both hot, and dry,
Watch much, and sleeping little, hardly lie:
Walk much, and toss, and tumble in the sun,
Delight to ride, to hawk, to hunt, to run,
Drink little, gargarize, fly grosser food,
Or if some deem a hare, or partridge good
Feed modestly thereon, and if he has
Some crowns to spend, go often to the bath:
Not Esculapius, were he now alive
Could better helps, or remedies contriue,
Except behoulding mighty Graedoes port,
He cut off both his legs to make him short:
Whether am I transported in discourse,
My Muse me thinks has run too long a course.
The question is resolved, why fail I then
To seal this letter up, and leave my pen?
Faith, naught but this in kindness to desire
(My Genius of good wit) sure I require,
To count her fatnes no deformity,
But as it is the guise in Italy,
To nourish that: for fat, slicke, fair, and full,
Is better liked, then lean, lancke, spare, and dull.
To his dear friend H. L. Epistle. 4.
THat very day wherein the sun began
To visit Aries, by the Scot thy man
I did receive thy letters: and with thease
Thy gifts which in this world no better please,
Thy letters, I with letters do reward;
But for the rest, (because the world goes hard)
Think not amiss, if for thy presents kind
My presents, be the riches of my mind;
For they often read, will yield thee much content,
Whereas thy gifts will serve me but this lent.
But Tom say thou what presents shall I have?
Faith Harry counsel, how to spend, and save,
Which counsel if thou keep, and follow to;
None better then thy self shall live, or do:
First for instructions how thou shall dispend:
Spend prayers on God, and peace upon thy friend,
Which doing, God will bless thy crop, and plant,
And friend will help, if so thou hap to want:
Spend still on that may yield thee good, and gain,
Spend on thy house, to tyle it from the rain:
Spend on thy horse, in travel every night,
For such expense, will make him fresh, and light,
Spend on thy teame, their labor gets thee bred,
Spend on thy neat, that breed, and erst have bred:
Spend on thy sheep, and see them worm'd and shorn:
Spend compost on thy land, that brings thee corn,
Spend on thy wife, and see her seemly clad,
For such expense in duty must be had:
Spend on thy son, to get instruction,
That he may live by art, when wealth is gone.
Spend on thy servants, paying them their wage,
And they will serve thee truly in thine age:
Spend stripes on him, whom words may not retain,
Yet spend to mend by strokes, but not to maime;
Thus spent, well spent: now learn again to save,
Save from the Sycophant, what he would have;
Save from thy neighbor, that does press and pray,
To buy thy goods, and never means to pay:
Save from the insatiate husbandma^ thy beef,
Save by fast locks, thy money from a thief:
Save by receiving strangers, and estates,
Be not at home to all, keep fast thy gates:
Save by forbearing company, and dice,
Save by well husbanding, thy grain from mice:
Save by thy market, and thy sale again,
Buy cheap, sell dear, thy profit quites thy pain:
Save in thy diet, spend as thou may get,
And lay up some for age, the rest for debt.
Briefly, so spend, as thou may save to buy,
So spare, as thou may spend, and get thereby.
Thus in requital of thy kind good will,
My heart as kind, (though power be weakened still:)
Presents great thanks, these counsels grave, and true,
And till my next, occasion bids adue.
To Master Michael Drayton. Epistle, 5.
MIchael, as much good hap unto thy state,
As Orators have figures to dilate:
As many crowns, as Alchymists have shifts,
Briefly, so many goods, as thou have gifts:
I hear some vpstart Rymer set a gog
By writing poems on the Lician frog,
Or Tithons Grasshopper grows envious,
And will be famous with Archilochus:
Alas for them that by scurrilitie,
Would purchase fame and immortality:
But know this friend, true excellence depends,
On numbers aimed to good, and happy ends:
What else has wanton poetry enjoyed
But this? Alas thy wit was ill employed.
What reason moved the golden Augustine,
To name our poetry, vain errors wine?
Or Hierome, (deeply sighted in these evils)
To term it nothing, but the food of devils?
Naught but the misimployment of our gifts,
Ordained for arts, but spent in shameless shifts.
Look as the sunne-beame in a burning glass
Does kindle fire, where ever it does pass,
But freely spread upon th'ingendring earth,
Eggs on the spring, and kills the cause of dearth:
So poetry restraind in errors bounds,
With poisoned words, and sinful sweetness wounds,
But clothing virtue, and adorning it,
Wit shines in virtue, virtue shines in wit:
True science suited in well couched rimes,
Is nourished for fame in after times.
Thou then sweet friend, grieve not though folly thrive,
Fame got by it, dies ere it is alive:
Be thou a prentize to a blessed Muse,
Which grace with thy good words will still infuse:
Oh let that holy flame, that heavenly light,
That led old Abraham's race in dark some night:
Oh let that star, which shining never ceast
To guide the Sages of balme-breathing East,
Conduct thy Muse unto that lofty pitch,
Which may thy style with praises more enritch.
They wash a More, they strive to dry the seas,
And plain proud Atlas that intend to please,
By filthy words, by railing and detraction,
Proper to Momus, and his hateful faction:
For when they think they have deserved most,
Alas says wisdom, all this toil is lost:
But all this while I have forgot my text,
I must remember now, what follows next:
I have perused, thy learned nines and threes,
And scanned them in their natures and degrees:
And to thy choice, Apology apply,
This sudden tribute of my memory.
And first for three, which Bartas wisely names
The first of ods, which multiplied, frames
The sacred number nine: Three does include
The name beloved by beatitude:
Three does express the lincke and union
That knitteth one to two, and two in one:
Three does include his infinite in three,
And is the step to immortality:
Three has his center of the second one,
His true beginning, and his end alone:
The true Pythagorists, (as I have red)
Do term the triangle, Mineruas head:
And in their purifying bathing used,
By threes, to sprinckle water once infused:
These threes so famous, are the steps to nine
Sacred unto the Muses most divine,
This number in proportions musical
Is dissonant: and Astrologians call
The same Sinister for some secret work;
Or hidden fate, that in the same does lurk:
Hesiodus in his Theogonie,
Under Styx, nine fould stream does signify,
The discords, and complexions of man's body:
Pierias Michael, if thou list to see,
Will tell thee more, this shall suffice for me.
Here must I needs abruptly make an end,
Called to discourse with old Amyntas friend,
When he is gone, and I get time to wright:
Thou shall have more, til then sweet friend goodnight.
In praise of his Mistress dog. Epistle. 6.
MAdam, my Muse winged by your kind request,
To praise a dog has solemnly professed,
And for reward, desires no further grace,
Then for a night to grant me Pretties place:
Oh you hie eyes the worth of my discourse,
Succor my Muse to end her vowed course:
Diuiner Plato, first (under pretense
To teach the soldier faith, and diligence)
Compares him to a dog, that ceasles keeps
His masters tent, and chamber, when he sleeps:
That howles when he is sick, that barks, and bites,
When as accursed by wrongs, he eger fights:
The Greeks, and Latins, loved these creatures so,
That in their public sessions to and fro,
They let them pass, where men of better sort,
Were not permitted freely to resort:
The ancient household Gods for ornament,
Wore dogskins on their backs: to this intent,
To signify that as the spaniell baies,
When as the thief his masters door assaies:
So they, when dangers should the house attempt,
Propitious, should pursuing plagues prevent.
Them Cicero admired, them Egypt loved,
And by their Hirogliphique sign approved.
The dignity of perfect confidence,
And courage scorning inconvenience:
The Bactrians, and the Caspians, by their dombes,
In life made them their mates: in death their tombs.
The Egyptians, in their sacred letters place,
A dog distraunged of his head, and face,
Fore-tokning by the same obedience due,
To loving masters, by their servants true:
Nor can that fained folly win regard,
Wherein the former poets did award:
Life-taming Aconite to Cerberus:
Nor can the story of Heraclitus,
Be held for true, whereby in spaniels skorne,
It Is published, that he by them was torn.
But of their faith, what stories cannot boast?
Lisimachus, when as his life was lost;
And funeral prepared, and hearse arrai'd,
And fair addressed, and friends with grief dismayed;
Began to burn his corse with many tears,
His faithful dog that served him many years,
In self same fire, that burnt his kingly corse,
Consumed to dust, freely without enforce:
Zantippus sailing from the Athenian strand,
Was followed by his faithful hound to land:
And Philips son (as Theopompe does wright)
In faithful Pertha took so great delight,
That being dead, who gave him so much game,
He built a town in honor of his name:
The Ptamphuonians on the Afrique coast
Do reverence the faithful spaniell most,
And setting light by other living things,
Midst them, elect and choose their crowned Kings.
The stout Uenetians being in disgrace,
With Clement Pope of Rome a certain space,
By no submission, could remission gain,
Till their Ambassadors tied in a chain
Crept dog-like under table, where he sat,
And by this means their public pardon gat:
Nor is it womanish to aid, or help,
To comb, to currle, to feed a pretty whelpe,
Since all the kings of Persia, where they eat,
Play with their dogs, and kindly give them meat:
Thus for your dog, my doggrell rhyme has runnne
no common course, wherein if I have done
Ought pleasant to your ears, thank both your eyes,
Which are the Load-stars of my poesies.
The Anatomy of Alchymie. Epistle. 7.
THou do desire, (and have deserved far more,)
To gather my opinion in my Rimes,
In what regard I hold that hidden lore,
Ycleped Alchymie these latter times:
To satisfy this expectation,
Sweet friend conceive much matter, in few lines,
This fruit of foolish innovation
Is first condemned by deepest-red divines,
Not as an art, but as the seal of shift,
The persecution of natures power,
Divine in show, in proof, a subtle drift,
To cosen slight-beleeuers every hour:
For if with jealous eyes we justly pry
Into the scope, and issue of the same
Nature, (the mistres of Philosophy)
Is lost herein, and wants power, and name:
The artists, and the practizers hereof
Resemble Cacus creeping from his den,
The common subjects of each public scof,
The refuse race, of labour-tyred men.
Their purpose is to drag out by the ears
A quint-essence to fix and fashion gold.
To cloth decrepit age with youthly years,
To quicken plants by nature fruitles old,
But al these promised mountains prove a mouse,
These silly idiots plie the fire so fast;
That suddenly they blow up man and house,
And both their wealths, and wits, and fortunes wast:
Yet these quark-saluers for a color sake
Pretend some physical experiments,
And mighty cures with boldness undertake,
But all their science is but complements:
They by their words enritch believing sots,
Whereas in deed they empty all their chists,
And where they promise gold, by glutting pots,
They beg for groats, and part with empty fists:
And as along the shores of Cicely,
The Sirens charm by their enchanting noates
The passengers to seek their ieopardie,
So these by bootles hopes, do cut men's throats:
So that this study, (as some writers deem)
Is but a pleasing madness at the best,
Drawn on by dreams, and thoughts of things which seem,
Till richly left, be poorly dispossessed:
The favorites of this too fond conceit,
At last through loss of substance, and of time,
Robbed, and bereft of rent, and old receite,
Are like a crased clock, that cannot chime:
Old, clothles, meatles, smelling brimstone still,
Besmeer'd with cole-dust, from their furnace brought,
Plagued with the palsy, (letchers common ill)
By tempring of quicksilver quickly cought:
Their riches are the droppings of their nose,
Where else beside, the slaves are brought so low;
That for three farthings they will beg, and gloss,
And sell their souls, and teach what ere they know.
In brief, when other subtle shifts do fail,
They fall to coining, and from thence by course
Through hempen windows learn to shake their tail,
And love to die so, lest they live far worse.
But soft sir swift (cries one) and puffes with ire,
And calls me prating knave, that speak so large
Of such a sacred thing, which (but the fire)
Is compact quickly with a little charge:
Yea, when the Grecian Calends come (quoth I)
For why? Philosophy nere knew this are,
But some vain vpstarts, (sons of subtletie,
As Giberis, and witles Salesart,
Bacam, and Hermes father of this fraud,
Began the same in terms, and words obscure,
(To studious of deceit and foolish laud,)
Hoping by toys to make their craft endure:
But let us mark their mysteries and spells
Their vain Aenigmata and Problemes dark.
First ask they where the flying Eagle dwells,
Next of the dancing fools, craft coining clarke,
Then of the Lion green, and flying heart.
Next of the Dragon, swallowing his tail,
Then of the swelling toade, they prattle art,
Next of more black, then black, they chose to rail,
Then of the crows head, tell they weighty things,
And straight of Hermes seal, they sighing speak,
Some of their Lutum sapientiae sings,
Thus on these toies, their bitter jests they break.
Alas, alas, how vanity has power
To draw men's minds from virtue, under hope
Of fading treasures? Danaas golden shower
Does ravish wits, and leads them from their scope:
Yet unto Artists will I sing a saw,
Perhaps may smell of art, though I have none,
Wherein by reasons light, and natures law,
I Will dream of being, which they build upon,
There is a thing in substance full complete,
Not wholely earthly, nor inflamed too much,
Not simply watrie, though it water eat,
Not sharpest, nor yet dullest in the touch,
A quality light felt, and apt in curing,
And somewhat soft, at least wise not too hard,
Not bitter, but in taste some sweet procuring:
Sweet smelling, much delighting man's regard.
It seeds the ear, it amplifies the thought,
Except to those that know it, it is naught,
Briefly, sweet friend, I think of Alchymie,
As erst Thucidides the learned clarke,
Defynd a woman full of honesty:
(In plain discourse, but not in riddles dark:)
That woman (said the sage) is best of all,
In whose dispraise, or praise, less speech is had,
That Alchymie say I is best of all,
Which few men's reasons can approve for bad:
Thus much of Alchymie, and thus an end,
Though thou commend not, friendly I commend.
FINIS.

