THE CONSENT OF TIME, DISCIPHERING the errors of the Grecians in their
Olympiads, the uncertain computation of the Romans in their Penteterydes and
building of Rome, of the Persians in their account of Cyrus, and of the
vanities of the Gentiles in fables of antiquities, disagreeing with the
Hebrews, and with the Sacred Histories in consent of time.

Wherein is also set down the beginning, continuance, succession, and
overthrows of kings, kingdoms, States, and governments.

BY LODOVVIK LLOID Esquire.

PROVERB. 24. Vir sapiens est fortis, and vir doctus robustus. Imprinted at
London by GEORGE BISHOP, and RALPH NEVVBERIE. Anno 1590.

TO THE MOST REVErend, JOHN Archbishop of CANTERBVRIE, Primate and
Metropliotane of all England, and of her Majesty's most honorable privy
Counsel.
I Am bold (most reverend) to dedicate the fruits of this my travail, such as
they be, unto your Grace, who can and will defend my rash attempt in so great a
cause, and yet not so great an enterprise of me to accuse errors, as is
necessary to your Grace to defend al writers in the proving thereof. I have
presumed to write of the Consent of time, a charge wherein I confess my self
far inferior to those that have herein much erred. Howbeit, I am the bolder
encouraged by the assurance of my warrant which I take from the Sacred
Histories the Center and ground of all beginnings, and the only proof of all
antiquities, without which (says Eusebius) no History can be true: For
(...) 10. Praep.
(...).

The errors are infinite in the computation of Rome, of the time of Cyrus, of
the destruction of Troy, and specially in the accounts of the Olympiads, which
made all Greek and Latin writers to go far amiss, and to fail in consent
of time very much, sometime twenty or thirty Olympiads, sometime more,
sometime less: the deceiptfulnes thereof, not only holy Histories have
confounded, but whole successions of lives have disproued: for the Greeks
(says Josephus) No^ tam studio and notitiaveritatis quam suis opinionibus,
multa prodidere falsa: And therefore Thucydides used rather to account the time
by the Peloponesian war, per aestates and hyemes, then by the Olympiads.
Seeing then (right reverend) that profane writers are thus wrapped in errors
by missing the true warrant of time, I took this my best course to prove
consent of histories by succession of Patriarchs, by continuance of Judges, and
by the government of kings, even from the creation of man unto the deluge: from
the deluge to the promise made to Abraham: from the promise, to the Law given
to Moses: from the Law given, to the building of the Temple: from the Temple to
the captivity: and from the captivity to the MESSIAH, truly proved by
Moses, and by the Chronicles of the kings, and last by Daniel, who made a
perfect abstract for all Chronographers: Wherein he does instruct all
writers, how to find the order and time of histories, for the three last
Monarchies, whose Method I follow, as much as my simple capacity suffered
me: alleging such authorities as wrote best of every Country, endeavoring to
avoid the name of the Olympiads as the enemy of truth and time.

Thus I yield your Grace mine account of my proceeding for Consent of time,
most humbly beseeching your L. to accept herein my good will, as one, that is
to my small ability desirous to amend things amiss.

Your Graces most humbly to use,

LODOVV. LLOYD.

TO THE READER.
I Think my labor well bestowed, my reward sufficient, if my travail and
good will be herein of the reader accepted: I accuse my self of some rashness
to wade into those strong streams that have carried the best learned to a
labirinth of errors, who in seeking consent of time by uncertain computations
of the Gentiles, have missed the square and perfect frame of the Prophets, the
straight and perfect line from Adam unto Christ, without the which all profane
writers most grossly err: for can any true account of time be made by the
Romans computation, either from the building of their City which was from
year to year, or by the censure of Lustrum, which the Grecians call
Penteterides, which was from five year to five (...).
year, or by the computation of their Indictions, which was from fifteen
year to fifteen year, when neither the time of the building of Rome, or of
appointing of Lustrum, or of the instituting of the indictions, are not yet
known or agreed upon? In like manner the old Grecians from the time of Ninus,
from the destruction of Troy, and last from the Olympiads so erred and became
so fabulous in histories, and since from their Olympiads, that Greece it self
is called Grecia mendax: for the Olympiads is the general cause of all errors,
even in the best learned: for Xenophon, who flourished in the chief time of the
Olympiads, yet fallax in his accusatur.

The like gross error is in the computation of the Persians of the time of
Cyrus. To speak of the Egyptians account from the one flowing of Nilus unto
another, from one Dynastia unto another: during which time they say, 340. kings
reigned from the first Pharao called Amasis, unto the last Amasis named also
Pharao, far from any true consent of time, it were superfluous: by this
means Hellanicus accused Acusilaus, Acusilaus Ephorus, Ephorus Timaeus,
Timaeus Herodot, and Herodot accused Hesiodus. In brief one so accused
another, that all erred in consent of time, and that by reason of their false
co^putation, without looking to the succession of the Patriarchs, continuances
of Judges, reigns of kings, and without respect of the Jubilees which the
Hebrews so observed, that they could not err: which if Pliny,
Halicarnassaeus, Polybius, Diodorus, and the rest had observed, they had not so
disagreed, in a hundred, two hundred, three hundred, four hundred years, more
or less from the sacred histories.

Had they looked to the histories of the Hebrews, they had found how to
avoid many inconveniences: for profane writers of the Assyrian, Chaldean,
Egyptian, and Persian histories can not but err, for that they wrote long
after the time of these kingdoms. I have therefore for the more assurance of
sound warrant answered the time with the history of the Church, and have
withal followed the best authorities both in sacred and in profane histories,
as far as my simple judgment can reach.

Lodowik Lloid.

A brief Table containing the Arguments of the histories of this Book, with
the authorities of every History thereunto annexed.
THE HEBREWS.
OF the creation of the world, and of the continuance of the first age therein
from Adam unto Noah. Fol. 1. CHAP. 1.
Of the most ancient and true history of the Hebrews, after called Israel:
of their laws and original government called Oligarchia 2
from Abraham to whom the promise was made, unto Moses to whom the law was
given. 17. Of the birth of Moses: of his favor with God: of his government
over Israel for 40. years in the wilderness, and deliverance of them from
Pharaoh, 3
by the direction and instruction of God: of Joshua his successor, and of his
wars and victories, and of his good government over Israel for 32. years, and
of the common wealth of the Hebrews, during the time of Moses and Joshua,
which was 72. years. 26. Of the third change of common wealth of the Hebrews,
first from Oligarchia under the Patriarchs: secondly from Aristocratia under
the 4
Judges, now to a Monarchy under kings, which Israel cried out and never
ceased until they had a king. 41. Of the taking away of the ten tribes from
Judah to Samaria by Jeroboam, in the fourth year of Rehoboam, Salomons son:
of the first division of 5
Israel: of their wars and last destructions of the kings of Israel by
Salmanasser. 54. Of the continuance of the kings of Judah, after the kingdom of
Israel was 6
destroyed, Samaria taken, and the ten tribes of Israel carried capitue by
Salmanasser into Assyria. 68. Of the return of the Jews into Jerusalem after
the captivity first by the decree of Cyrus, after by Darius, and last by
Artaxerxes: of the second 7
building of the temple by Esdras, Nehemias, and Zorobabcl, and of the
government under the high Priest. 76. Of the Machabees, and of the last kings
of Judah, and of their government 8
under the Romans, and of their last destruction of Jerusalem by Titus the
Emperor. 85. I have used in the history of the Hebrews for my authorities
these many writers, whose names are under written. Moses. Berosus. Josephus.
Eusebius. P. Eberus dereb. Iud. Sigonius. Glareanus. Melancthon. Io. Freigius
de vitis patrum. M. Beroaldus. Io. Functius.

THE CHALDEANS.
OF the first original of the Chaldeans, first called Arphaxades after the
CAP. 1.
name of Arphaxad the third son of Sem, which was the first kingdom of the
world: of their continuance, government and last destruction by Darius Medus,
and Cyrus. Fol. 102. Of the rest of the kings of Assyria, from Ascatades the
18. king unto Sardanapalus 2
the 36. and last king of the Assyrians, which is since the Israelits left
Egypt until the first Olympiad, at what time Iotham reigned in Judea. 117. Of
the kings of Babylon again called new Assyria, from Sardanapalus which 3
the Greeks call Tonoscon Coleros, until Balsaar the last king of Babylon.
128. Moses. Eusebius. Berosus. Josephus. Manethon. Tro. Pomp. Orosius.
Xenophon. Zonaras. Bucholcerus. Ruffinus. Justinius.

THE EGYPTIANS.
OF the original beginning of the Egyptians, and of their continuance: 1
of their kings and governments: Why Egypt was called Oceana, or Nilea. 141. Of
the kings of Egypt after Ramesses time, firnamed Egyptus, at what 2
time Oceana was called Egypt after the name of Egyptus before called Mizreia.
153. Of the last kings of Egypt by the name of Pharaos, which continued 1200.
years: and of the first conquering of Egypt by Cambyses the second king 3
of Persia. 165. Of the second conquest of Egypt by Alexander: of their kings
afterward called 4
Ptolomeis, until the time of Caesar Augustus, by whom al Egypt was last
conquered and made a province subject to the Roman Empire. 177. Manethon.
Herodotus. Cheremon. Diod. Sicul. Io. Annius. Blondus. Appion. Justinius.
Ruffinus. Josephus. Melancthon.

THE SCYTHIANS.
OF the antiquity of the Scythians, of their laws, government and life, 1
of their hardines in wars, and of their victories over the Persians and
Egyptians, and their often invasions into Asia. Fol. 191. Herodotus. Dio.
Siculus. Plini. Melancton. Justinius. Berosus. Strabo.

THE PARTHIANS.
OF the original of the Parthians, and of the beginning of their kingdom CAP.
1.
and how long it continued: of their kings, government and last destruction by
the Romans in the time of Augustus Caesar. Fol. 199. Strabo. Justinius.
Solinus. Plutarchus. Liuius. Val. Max. Linus. Diodorus. Melancthon.

THE MEDES.
OF the antiquity of Media, of the original of their kings, and of their 1
common wealth, government and continuance. Fol. 209. Of the first kings of
Media: of their government, laws and continuance from Deiocis until Astyages
the last king of the Medes. 214. Strabo. Zonaras. Diodorus. Orosius. Josephus.
Pomp. Mela. Trog. Pomp. Ruffinus.

OF LYDIA.
OF the antiquity of Lydia: of the original of their kings, and of their 1
common wealth and government. Fol. 223. Of the rest of the kings of Lydia,
from Ardis the sixth king, until Croesus the last king of Lydia, and of their
destruction by Cyrus, and the kingdom brought subject to Persia. 229.
Eusebius. Ruffinus. Herodot. Diodor. and Functius. Trogus Pompeius. Strabo.
Pomp. Mela. Melancthon. Appianus.

OF PERSIA.
OF the first original of Persians: of the antiquity of their kings, of their
1
common wealth and government: of their continuance, and how they have been
called the great kings by the means and dignity of Cyrus. 238. Of the two
Magi that usurped Persia after Cambyses time: of Darius Histaspis, 2
and his good government of Xerxes the great, and his wars in Greece: of his
ignominious flight from Greece, and of his death in Persia after his flight.
249. Of the successors of Xerxes in Persia: of their wars, victories and
government: of the state of Greece, and of the prosperities, victories and fame
3
they had in Xerxes time. 258. Of the tyranny of Darius Ochus: of his son
Arsames, and of the utter 4
confusion and last ruin of the Persians in the time of their last king
Darius, surnamed Codomanus, by Alexander the great. 267. Of the state of the
Persians under the Romans after the time that they were conquered by Alexander
the great, until the time of Alex. Seuerus Emperor 5
of Rome 550. years after, at what time began the new kingdom of Persia, by
one Artaxerxes, and of his successors, until the Persians the fourth time
were utterly destroyed by the Saracens. 278. Xenophon. Josephus. Io. Functius.
Dion. Zonaras. Strabo. Herodotus. L. Florus. Q. Curtius. Justinius. Io.
Monachus. Dio. Halicarnas.

OF MAHOMET.
OF the original of Mahomet in Arabia: of his greatness and credit not CAP.
1.
only among the Saracens and Arabians, but also in the East kingdoms: of the
invasions of the Saracens: of their scattering wars in Asia, Europe, and in
Affrike, and of their continuance. Fol. 289. Pau. Aemilius. Blondus. Maspeus.
Iornandus de Get. Chron. Pol. Bonfinus de Hung. Functius.

OF THE TVRKES.
OF the great Turk, and of his kindome from Othoman the first, until 1
Selimus the 11. of the two Empires of Constantinople and Trapezuntium, which
now the Turks do govern: of their beginning, and of their first service
under Basilius Macedo Emperor of Constantinople. 302. Egnatius. Paul. Iouius.
Chromerus Pol. Blondus. Bonfinus. Functius.

OF GREECE.
OF the antiquity of Greece: of the beginning of their cities and Common
wealth, of their laws and governments by degrees, during yet the 1
infancy of Greece. 311. Of the building of Athens: of their beginning, and of
their first laws under 17. kings, being the third kingdom of Greece in
antiquity after the 2
Sicionians and the Argiues. 320. Of the original beginning of the kings of
the Lacedaemonians, and of the kings of Corinth, who at one time began their
government under the 3
state of Monarchy, and also ended about one time: of their government and
continuance. 327. Of the general government in all the cities of Greece from
Lycurgus time the king and the lawmaker in Sparta, until the coming of Xerxes
the 4
great, the 4. king of Persia into Greece: of Lycurgus laws among the
Lacedaemonians, and of Solons laws among the Athenians. 333. Of the huge army
of Xerxes, of his preparations both by land and by sea, of 5
the pomp and pride of Xerxes in his journey to Greece, of his shameful great
overthrow and ignominious flight from Greece again into Persia, and of the
flourishing state of Greece at that time. 339. Of the civil discention in
Greece after Xerxes time: how every city was 6
in arms one against another: of their Peloponesian war which continued 27.
yeeeres, to the overthrow of Greece by Philip, and after by his son Alexander
the great. 347. Of the last destruction of Greece by the Macedonians, by means
of civil discord and the Peloponesian wars, the only cause of their ruin
and 7
confusion: at what time king Philippe brake their backs, and his son
Alexander their necks. And after them last of all the Romans kept them in
perpetual servitude. 362. Eusebius. Josephus. Zonaras. Theo. Bibliander.
Strabo, and Xenoph. Thucydides. Herodotus. Plutarchus. Archilogus. Diod.
Siculus. Functius. Orosius.

OF THE MACEDONIANS.
OF the kingdom of Macedonia: of their continuance, laws, and government, of
their kings, and of their wars, until the time of Alexander. CAP. 1.
Fol. 372. Of the renown and fame of Macedonia, during the reign of Alexander
2
the great, of his conquests and victories over all the East: of his dangerous
wars in India, Egypt, and in Scythia, and of the subduing of Darius, and the
taking away of the Monarchy from Persia into Macedonia. 382. Of the division
of Asia and Syria after the death of Alexander the great, between his
captains: for he left no king to succeed after him but the 3
sword. So many kingdoms were void by his death, that his captains that
fought then under Alexander for wages and spoils, fought now for kingdoms and
Empires. Of their wars, and of their continuance. 393. Of the Roman wars
with king Philip, and his son Perseus, the two last 4
kings of Macedonia: of their overthrow by Paul. Aemilius, and of the overthrow
of false Philip and counterfaite Andriscus, by Q. Metellus in his last conquest
of Macedonia. 404. Glareanus. Theo. Bibliand. Plutarchus. Q. Curt. and Liui.
Plinius. M. Scotus. Orosius. Florus.

ASIA AND SYRIA.
OF the wars of the kings of Asia and Syria with the Romans: of their
succession in the wars, and of the continuance of their kingdom after CAP. 1.
Alexanders death. Fol. 413. Of that wicked and most blasphemous king Antiochus
Epiphanes, son to Antiochus the great, and the type of Antichrist: of his
usurpation and tyranny 2
of the kingdom: of his sacking and cruelty in Jerusalem: of his bloody
wars, and persecutions of the Christians. 420. Of the last destruction of
Asia and Syria through their civil dissension and long wars one against
another, the only cause of their bondage afterward 3
to the Romans, under whom they lived as subjects, and all Asia and Syria made
provinces unto Rome. 429. Eusebius. Appianus. Eutropius. Valerius Max. L.
Florus. Liuius. Functius. and the Machabees.

AFFRIKE AND LIBYA.
OF the first Affricane wars between the Carthagineans and the Romans, 1
which continued 24. years, and of the victories of the Romans over them.
Fol. 436. Of the second Affricane wars between the Carthagineans and the
Romans, 2
which endured 17. years: during which time Hanibal held terrible wars with
the Romans, which brought the Empire of Rome well nigh to Carthage, but at
last by Scipio Affricanus the wars were ended, Carthage overthrown, Africa
won, and Hanibal forced to flee. 443. Of the third and last Affricane wars
between the Romans and the Carthagineans, which endured four years: of the
overthrow of Carthage 3
and Numantia: of the ruin and last conquest of Africa by the Romans. 453.
Liuius. Appianus. Plinius. Polybius. Orosius. Eutropius. Dionys. Halic. Val.
Maximus. L. Florus. Frontinus. And all the Romans.

OF ITALY.
OF the antiquity of old Italy first called Ianicula, and then Saturnia: 1
of the beginning of the kings of the Latins, the first kingdom of Italy: of
their laws, and government from Faunus unto Aeneas, and from Aeneas until
Romulus. Fol. 459.
OF THE ROMANS.
OF the first building of Rome by Romulus: of his government, laws, and CHAP.
1.
appointing of Magistrates after he had founded the City: of his wars with
the Sabines: of his conquestes and victories over these Sabines, Fidenates, and
of his triumph over king Acron. 467. Of the government, laws, and orders of
Rome after Numa Pomp. time, 2
until the end of Tarquinius the proud, the last king of Rome: of their
wars and victories during this time over their neighbors about them: of the
enlargement of the City of Rome, and of their territories, and last of the
banishment of their king. 480. Of the first change of government in Rome from a
monarchy unto Aristocratia, at what time one Dictator and two Consuls were
appointed to govern 3
the people in the room of kings: of their good government, laws, wars, and
victories, until the Tarentine wars where Pyrrhus began to aid the
Tarentines against the Romans. 493. Of the wars and victories of the Romans
over king Pyrrhus called the 4
Tarentine wars, until the Carthaginean wars: of their victories and
triumphs had over Italy, with diverse other foreign nations and kingdoms.
507. Of the Roman wars, and of their conquest over Carthage, Numantia, 5
and all Asia, and of their diverse victories and triumphs over other nations,
during the time of this Affricane wars. 514. Of the conspiracy of Lucius
Catilina, and of the two civil wars, the first 6
between Marius and Silla: and the second between Pompei the great, and Iu.
Caesar, during which time Carthage and Numantia were subdued in Hispaine, and
the last conquest of Africa by Scipio the younger, and also surnamed
Affricanus the younger. 524. Of the alteration and change of the common wealth
of Rome from Aristocratia to Monarchia again: as before from kings to Consuls,
so now from 7
Consuls to Emperors, the state was altered by Iu. Caesar the first Emperor
and last Dictator of Rome, and so from Iu. Caesar unto the end of Nero, which
was the last of the progeny of Augustus. 536. From Nero the tyrant the sixth
Emperor of Rome, until the time of Lu. 8
Antoninus Commodus the cruel the 18. Emperor, a match meet for Nero, in the
one the stock of Caesar was extinguished, in the other the blood of Antoninus
ended and quite failed, two Emperors of like condition and manners: of the
government of them over Rome from Nero to Commodus, during which time reigned
12. Emperors. 550. Of the good Emperor M. Antoninus, surnamed the
Philosopher, and of his 9
son Co^modus: of the difference in their government: of the love which the
father had in Rome, and of the hatred and contempt which the son had: of the
murders and slaughter of diverse Emperors from M. Antoninus the 17. Emperor,
until the time of Dioclesian the 38. emperor. 562. Of the rest of the
Emperors of Rome after Dioclesians time, at what time 10
their Empire at Rome began to decay: for that the dignity of the old
Emperors were diminished by reason that Constantinople whom Constantine the
great had so enriched and beautifiedwith their ancient monuments of Rome, that
old Rome was hereby defaced, and new Rome thereby flourished, so that the
Empire was divided between two Emperors, the one to be at Constantinople, the
other at Rome. 576. Liuius. Trogus Pomp. Florus. Valerius Max. Eutropius.
Suetonius. Egnatius. Tacitus. Voriscus. Cassiodorus. Blondus. Josephus.
Plinius. Appianus. Sabellicus. Orosius. Beroaldus. Polybius. Dionys. Halicar.
Herodianus. Fu^ctius with others.

THE TRIAL OF MARTYRS.
OF the try all of the Martyrs of God in the primitive Church, from the first
CAP. 1.
persecution under Tiberius the third Emperor, in the which Stephen was
stoned, James beheaded, Philip hanged, with infinite more tormented and
persecuted, until the third persecution which began under Domitian the twelfth
Emperor of Rome. Fol. 587. From the third persecution under Domitian the 12.
Emperor, unto the sixth 2
persecution under Sept. Seuerus the 22. Emperor: of the constancy of
faithful Martyrs every where in the Church of God: of their godly lives, their
deaths, and their glorious victory over Satan. 593. Of the tyranny of time
from the sixth persecution under Seuerus, until the ninth persecution under
Dioclesian the Emperor: of the zeal and constancy 3
of the godly in their martyrdom, and of the tyranny and wickedness of the
kings of Persia, and of the Emperors of Rome at that time in the persecution
of the Church. 600. From Dioclesian under whom the vehementest persecution of
any reigned, 4
until the reign of Alexander Seuerus: by whose good means and great
traueile persecution somewhat sla^kt, at what time diverse heresies began fresh
in many places of Asia and Europe. 608. Eusebius. Euagrius. Ireneus and
Functius table.

OF SPAIN.
OF the antiquity of Spain, and of the original of their kings, and of their
continuance from Tubal until Hispanus: during which time they were CHAP. 1.
called by diverse several names, as Caetubales, Hiberi, Celtiberi, and
Hispani. Fol. 617. From the time of Hispanus, by whom they were called
Hispaniards, until the 2
monarchy and the names of kings ended, after what time Spain was divided
into peculiar provinces and several dominions, after the reign and government
of 24. kings from Caetubal the first, unto Mellicola the last. 626. From the
dissolution and change of the kingdom of Hispaine into provinces and
dominions, until they were subdued by the Carthagineans and Affricanes, 3
under whom they were subjects, until Scipio Affricanus time, at what time
both Africa, Carthage, and Hispaine were made tributaries unto Rome. 633. From
the time that the Romans conquered Hispaine, unto the time of the Vandales the
third conquest of Hispaine, and from the Vandales unto 4
the Goths victory over Hispaine, the fourth conquest from the Goths unto
the Saracens the fifth conquest of Hispaine. 641. From the time that the
Saracens possessed Hispaine, until the time of Ferdinandus the great, and
Alphonsus king of Aragon, which were the only 5
first two kings that possessed all Hispaine, from the first monarchy of their
kings, which was 2400. and odd years: so base a country was Spain, and
conquered so many times, until Ferdinandus time. 647. For the histories of old
Hispaine few have written of it, as Annius, Manethon: but since they were
conquered by the Romans, all Roman writers speak of them by the reason of
the Affricane wars, as Liui. Trogus Pomp. Lu. Florus. Blondus. Beroaldus.
Functius and many more of late But of old Hispaine Io. Annius. Manethon.
Diodorus Siculus. Ritius. Iornandus. Boufinus.

OF GALLOGRAECIA.
OF the beginning and original of the nation which was called Galgreekes, 1
or Gallograecians: of their invasions, spoil, and slaughter in many countries
in Asia: and of their overthrow by Cn. Manlius, who with great pomp triumphed
over them at Rome. 655. From Francus the 16. king of France, then called
Sicambri, until the time 2
of Farabertus the 12. in number after Francus: of the wars, invasions, and
victories: of the enlargement of their kingdom from one king to another,
until Farabertus government, during which time they were called Franci, after
the name of Francus. 669. Of the continual wars which the Frenchmen had
still in seeking for the quiet possession and the whole government of all
France, from the time of 3
Farabertus, until the time of Pharamundus, during which time they were called
Franci: for as they were before called Sicambri from Marcomirus unto Francus
four hundred and odd years: so now from Francus unto Pharamundus they were
called Franci four hundred and odd years, that wellnigh nine hundred years
they were before they could possess the kingdom of France. 675. From
Faramundus the first king that had all France in his hand, and from 4
whom al Historians and Chronographers begin the history of France, who
began his reign in France in the year of our Lord and Savior 420. of the
laws, government, and wars from that time unto Clodouaeus the first
Christian king of France, and so unto Clodouaeus the second of that name, and
the 12. king after Pharamundus. 684. From Clodouaeus the second who began his
reign 645. until the reign and government of Charles the great, the patron
and only mirror of France, 5
by whom chiefly the Frenchmen flourished in famous renown, and in who^ all
the laws, relikes, and monuments are established. 697. From Charles the great,
the only king of France in fame, of whom all the states of France hold
their laws, monuments, and other ceremonies belonging 6
to their inaugurations, crowning, and their several pomp: of his wars and
victories against the Saracens: of his diverse conquests every where, and of the
taking of the Empire into Germany. 703. Tritemius. Pau. Aemilius. Arnol.
Ferronus. Io. Tilius. Ritius. Blondus. Beroaldus. Plutarch. Functius. T.
Liuius. Diodor. Siculus.
The briese for Britain I gathered out of these Authors.

Dionysius Halicarnassaeus. Diodorus Siculus. Strabo. Gildas. Giraldus.
Guidonius. Ponticus Verrunnius. Iu. Caesar.

OF THE CREATION OF the world, and of the continuance of the first age therein
from Adam unto Noah.
IN the beginning of all beginnings, The creation of the world.
when GOD had made the universal frame of the whole world of nothing, the earth
being without form or shape, covered with water, and the water covered with
darkness: The first creature that was made, was light, of some learned Isido.
lib. 5.
men supposed to be the creation of Angels: for the Sun, the Moon, and the
Stars were created the fourth day, the rest of the six days works is set
forth by Moses in Genesis, all living creatures, all creeping worms, all
things in heaven above, and all things in earth below were created to set
forth the glory of God, and to magnify his name, and God saw that all which
he did was good, and therefore blessed them, and by virtue of his eternal word
commanded them to multiply and to engender. He commanded both fish and
foul, the one to fly above in the air, the other to swim below in the
water, for fish and foul had one beginning. He commanded all the rest of his
creatures to obey man, because man should serve and obey God: all creatures
were created for the use of man, and for the glory of God, such was the love of
God toward man. When God had made this great tabernacle of the world in such
perfect frame, in such wonderful perfection, that the very perfection thereof
(as the Philosopher says) might see and say, Ex effectis, There is a God, the
workmanship hereof is above far the reach of man, Quia ipse dixit, and facta
sunt, and therefore Paul to the Hebrews says, that we must understand
through faith, that the world was ordained by the word of GOD, and the things
which we see were not made of things that did appear: for God made all things
of nothing, against the rules of Philosophy, Ex nihilo nihil fit, though Plato
did his best to make some comparison (as far as his sense could see) of this
great work with Art, applying to the earth, to the water, to the air, and to
the fire, the most perfect kinds of squares, and most exquisite frames and
forms of Geometry, which the learned may read to satisfy himself: and the
whole universal frame by the ^saedri. Tetraedri. Octoedri.
names and qualities of sensible Elements, the earth her form, the water, the
air, and the fire to have theirs, compared to Dodecaedri. Cicero likewise, to
whom I refer the Reader that is desirous to hear a full praise at large in
particulars, Dodecaedri. Read Plato, and Io. Phrig.
the variety, beauty, perfection, harmony, and the divine excellency of
this work, devised and made by God to man: but let sense sleep in so great a
matter, let Plato and Cicero lib. denat. deorum.
Cicero keep silence of that they know not, let Moses the man of God, not with
sense but with faith, certify you in this, and hear what God said to Job
concerning his works: Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the
earth? Job 38.
who has laid the measures thereof? or who has stretched the line over it?
whereupon is the foundation of the earth set? or who laid the corner stone
thereof? or who has shut up the sea with doors and set bars on it? who said
to the sea, Hitherto shall thou come, and no further? where is the way where
light dwells? or where is the place of darkness? have thou perceived the
breadth of the earth? or have the gates of death opened unto thee? Read the
whole chapter, and there you shall read of the weakness of man to find out
the works of God, and of the power of God in his works: which work being
finished with all creatures therein saving MAN, of whose creation he takes
council of his Wisdom and Virtue, purposing to make a more excellent
creature of man then the rest: and to the intent that man should not glory in
the excellency of his own nature, he shows whereof man's body was created,
of the slime and dust of the earth. God says, Let us make man to our own
likeness, in The creation of man.
righteousness and holiness, in all innocence and perfection. So Manilius
says, Exemplumque Dei quisque est in imagine parua, and for that man should
not be alone without help or comfort, God made a woman to live in society of
man for ever. And God said, Let man rule over the fish of the sea, and over the
fowls of heaven, and over the beasts of the earth, and over every thing that
creeps or moves upon the earth: and this great liberality of God toward
man, takes away all excuse of man's ingratitude, since God left all things to
man, and created man to his own image, and named him Adam the last creature
made: and as he was the last, so was he the best creature made: for in man God
rested Tanquam in suo templo and domicilio, in man God so delighted, that he
endued him with Wisdom, Justice, felicity on earth, that God might be served
and glorified by man, for all creatures were made to serve man, that man might
serve God in his creatures. God laid before man good and bad, life and death,
God made man lord over all the earth, and to have sovereignty over the whole
world, God placed man in a sweet, pleasant, and a delicate garden, in the Man
placed in Eden.
garden of Eden, named so of the Hebrews for the delicacie thereof, of the
Graecians named (...), for the aboundancie of pleasure therein, and in the
Persian tongue called Paradise, for so the kings of Persia do name their
delicate gardens and pleasant orchardes, there might Adam live for ever without
feeling of sin or tasting of death, had he not ^oph. i^ (...).
disobeied God. This Paradise was set in the East part of the earth, a place by
report of the best learned most temperate and fertile. So Aristotle and
Hippocrates affirm, saying, Omnia pulchriora in Asia nasci and meliora. This
place is of the Prophet Ezechiel thus commended, Quod facie ad orientem
conuersa adorarent: and Esaias says, Iustitiam ab orient proficisci, that is,
Righteousness should come from the East, meaning the Messiah to come. In the
East the star appeared to the wisemen, in this place the pleasant rivers
which commonly are called the four fluds of Paradise, do spring in this
garden. Hence does Euphrates take her course and runs through Babylon and
Mesopotamia: hence does Ganges spring to India: and compasses all Aethiopia,
from this garden does Nilus ouerflow all Egypt, and from this place does
Tigris, so called for her swiftness, pass through Assyria. Moses names them
in the Hebrew tongue otherways, which I laid down in the margent. This
garden did much excel the garden Pis^hon. Gi^on. Childekel. Phrat.
of Alcinois, or the Orchard of Hesperides, or the delicate valeys of
Thessalie, Tempe Thessalicum, or the Isles Fortunate. This pleasant place and
the fame of Paradise, and the report of the pleasure of that place, was heard
of amongst the Heathens: for it is written of John Freigius, that the figure of
Pythagoras letter was put up in Samo to signify the state of man Pytl^go.
letter.
as a figure of the tree of knowledge. In this happy place God commanded Adam
and Eve to dwell, and there all creatures were brought before Adam, and he
named them upon the sight: a true argument to prove the wisdom and perfection
of Adam by his creation, a thing more proper to God then to man. So Plato could
say, (...), That Plato in Cra^.
God gave to every creature his own name in the beginning. In truth God gave
him that great wisdom, that he could and did name all living creatures, and
God gave him sovereignty and dominion over all the earth, and all the
creatures therein, saying, Subijcite vobis terram and dominamini. The
possession of Adam was much, to be an Emperor of the whole world, a commander
of all the whole earth, but in the midst of this great bliss, the contempt of
God and unthankfulness to God overthrew Adam: for Satan taking upon him the
form of a serpent, a murderer from his original, John 7.
and a lier from the beginning, the ancient enemy of Man, envying the happy
estate and the great felicity of Adam, fell in friendship with Eve, entising
her to eat of the forbidden fruit, saying: If thou eat of the tree of
knowledge, your eyes shall be open, you shall know both good and bad, and you
shall be as GOD himself. Eua straight conceived by the words of the serpent
the destruction of man, and was entised to say with the Poet, Vt vidi, vt
perij, vt me malus abstulit error? took the fruit, ate it, and gave it to
Adam to eat. Here sin entered into man, here death entered into the world.
This disobedience Ingens malorum Chaos, brought Adam and all his posterities
into bondage: by this transgression man lost the favor of God and the
possession of Paradise for not keeping Gods commandment. The image of God was
obscured in man, and for sin sake the whole earth was cursed, that Hinc
infoelix lolium and steriles dominantur auenae. thus by one man sin entered
unto the world, and death by Romans 5.
sin.

This contempt of God through unthankfulness, lost all the benefits of God
which he gave to man in his creation. The commandment broken by Adam, the
church divided by Cain, marriage corrupted by Lamech, that which should be a
testimony of man's obedience toward God in man, was broken by man, all the
blessings of God which God created for man, in six days Adam lost, in six
hours: and for that I wrote six hours, some of the best learned affirm The
opinion of the learned concerning Adams continuance in Paradise before his fall.
that Adam fell within six hours after his creation, some nine, some twelve:
but all conclude that Adam fell the same day wherein he was created, and was
the same day put out of Paradise: for as the first man sinned and disobeyed
God, and became equal to the beast, Calvin. Pliny says that Adam and Eve
fell the same day that they were created, 27. I think that out of Moses it may
be gathered, that Adam and Eve did Clemens fol. 128
not long retain the dignity they had received: for as soon as Moses said
they were created, without any mention made of any other thing, he passes to
the fall, which was before that Ada^ knew his wife, which is to be in Genesis
read, for had he dwelled with his wife any long time, surely the blessings of
God should not have been in vain, and therefore Moses Genesis 4.
signifies they were deprived of Gods benefits before propagation of issue:
whereby it seems straight after the creation before they had accompanied,
their transgression fell, by which they were commanded to depart from the
place of happiness, for the devil who has been a murderer, a lier and a
sinner from the beginning, even in the first man played his part to hasten the
fall immediately after the creation of Adam, and from thence never ceased to
spread abroad his poison amongst men.

Diverse of the Jews Rabbis were of opinion that Adam in Paradise continued
not a night: and first Abba a great doctor Loar fol. 109.
of the Jews says, when Adam and Eve were planted, they were as it is
written, a spring of my planting, the work of my hands to be delighted in.
Again it is written, what day thou wast planted, thou did wander from me:
for in that day they were planted in the world, they were united, and the same
day they rebelled. Again, in the Sabboths eve Adam was created, in the which
day all these things fell out in order as the Rabbie Midras sets down, that
the Sabbath Midras (...) Psalm. 92.
coming on, hastened Adam out of Paradise. First, God purposed the making of
man: Secondly, that he should reign with Angels: Thirdly, God gathered his
clay, God formed it, framed and breathed life unto it. God set man in Paradise,
charged him with a commandment, but Adam transgressed the same day, he was
condemned the same day, and driven out of Paradise the same day, for God came
in the cool of the day to give sentence against Adam, and the Sabbath coming
on, did rid him thence: for the Angels cried concerning him, Adam in honor and
dignity will not continue a night, but he became like the beast that
perishes, Rabbi Menahem, fol. 9. upon Moses.
for the same day in the which the first man was created, it was committed to
the extremity. The same words or the like does doctor Bochay rehearse. The
first hour Adams mould was gathered, and so with those terms as Midras before
rehearsed, the eleventh he was judged a transgresser, the twelfth he was driven
out of Paradise, and so concluded as is said before, Adam in honor did not
lodge a night, he became like the beasts that perish. So the Jews Rabbis
handle this in their book called Drash, at large, agreeing in one opinion. But
some of them were more curious then need required in seeking out the very
hours of Adams continuance in Paradise. Some would have it the fixed hour as
Augustine Theoph. and August. six hours.
writes and holds it so, and of this opinion is Theophilactus who says, As
man was formed the sixth day, so he did eat of the tree the sixth hour. Some
would have it the ninth hour, as Thomas Aquinas, and some would have it the
twelfth Thom. Aquinas nine hours. Bochay twelve hours.
hour as doctor Bochay, but the day is agreed upon, and their opinion has
been every where received. I will bring two or three more testimonies to
confirm the words before. Rabbi Nathan writes thus: the same day that Adam
was formed: Rabbi Nathan.
the same day that his members were knit, and his veins opened: the same day
that life was put in him: the same day that he stood first on his feet: the
same day that Euah was married unto him: the same day that he gave names to all
the creatures: the same day that he entered into Paradise: the same day that
God gave him the commandment: the same day Adam disobeyed: and the same day
he was driven out of Paradise. No doubt as soon as man was created, Satan
sought man's destruction, and had a wicked desire to hate him, he went with all
his might to destroy man, and working error and rebellion in our first parents
Adam and Eve, he slew all mankind. The same murderer within a while after
armed Caine to destroy his brother Abel. Because Adam trusted too much in his
own aboundancie, and thought never Cedrenus.
to be moved, the Lord turned away his face from him, and therefore the same
day wherein Adam was made, he transgressed Mariaenus Scotus.
Gods commandment. And Beda our own countriman said, that Adam was formed
the sixth day in which he sinned, and therefore died: for it was meet in
reason, that the same day the second Adam for the salvation of mankind should
sanctify unto himself his spouse the Church, in which he had created the
first Adam the father of mankind, and taking a ribbe out of his side, made a
woman: for as man was formed the sixth day, and did eat of the tree the sixth
hour, so the Lord Jesus reforming man, is fastened to the tree the sixth day,
and sixth hour: and that day wherein Christ was killed and slain in the flesh,
and in the which day he was made a redeemer and a Savior to man that had
perished, It is so evident that that day the Lord obeying his father, suffered
death, wherein Adam being disobedient unto God died: for as Adam by eating of
the forbidden fruit of the tree of knowledge, brought death to the world, so
Christ our Savior dying upon the tree of the cross, gave life unto man. And
again, as Christ was crucified in Golgotha for the sin of man, so Adam was
dead and buried in that place before, by Adam was buried in Golgatha.
transgressing the commandments of God. Look in what day Adam transgressed,
in the cool of the day was he condemned and put out of Paradise, so faith
Rabbi Isaac, that the Rabbi Isaac.
creating of Adam, and the commandment, and the fall, and the driaing out of
Paradise, all befell the self same day. Many of these Analogies seem probable
for the confirming of these opinions before spoken. For as it was kept in the
tree which was the instrument of life and death, so is it also kept in time and
place. But thanks be unto God who delivered us from the fall, from the curse,
from death, hell, and damnation, and from going out of Paradise which was our
portion held Our portion held by the first Adam.
by the first Adam: but now all things are made manifest by the second Adam, by
the appearing of Messiah, who has abolished sin and death, and has brought
life and immortality Paul.
unto light through the Gospel: for as Eve being a virgin and incorrupted, when
she had conceived the words of the serpent, brought forth by disobedience
death: so the virgin Mary full of faith and gladness, embracing the salutation
of the Angel Gabriel, restored life through Christ, who redeemed man from
thraldom. So was the promise of God before Adam was brought out of Paradise,
that the seed of the woman (the Messiah and Savior in whom and by whom we have
eternal life) should tread the Serpents head. This comfort was very great unto
Adam, and continued from Adam the first man unto Abraham, 1949. years, the
first Patriarch, Genesis 3.
wherein the children of God were instructed by this promise, and saw through
faith the redemption of man.

Now by the sentence of God Adam was sent from the garden of Eden to till the
earth whence he was taken, and being cast out at the East side of the garden of
Eden, the Lord God set Cherubins and the blade of a sword shaken, to keep the
way of the tree of life. Afterward Adam knew his wife which conceived and bare
Caine, an argument to prove of no long continuance of Adam in Paradise. And
again, Eve conceived and had another son and called him Abel, for yet the
blessings of God, the state of marriage, and man's nature were not utterly
abolished through sin, but the quality and the conditions thereof was
changed. Caine was a tiller of the ground, and Abel was a shepeheard: they
offered both to the Lord sacrifice, and it is plain by their oblation, that how
Adam The first sacrifice unto God.
instructed his children in the knowledge of God, and how God gave them
sacrifices to signify their salvation: for so Adam confessed the Lord to be
God, saying, I have obtained a man by the Lord, when Caine was borne. God took
not his spirit from his elect, neither did absent himself from the church. For
the first godly Fathers had the law written in their hearts by the spirit of
God. The first table where the co^ma^deme^ts were graue^, was flesh, which was
in Adam, the second was give in tables of stones to Moses. But as concerning
their oblations, Caine offered unto God of the first fruit of the ground, and
Abel likewise offered the first fruit of his sheep. Genesis 4.
Abel with his sacrifice was accepted of the Lord, and Caine with his oblations
was rejected. For so Paul says, that Abel Heb. ^1.
offered unto God a greater sacrifice then Caine, by the which he obtained
witness that he was righteous, because GOD received him to mercy, and
therefore imputed righteous, God testifying of his gifts, by the which being
dead, yet lives, wherefore Caine was angry and exceeding wroth, and his
countenance fell down, because he was an hypocrite, and offered only for
outward show without sincerity of heart, yet God gave unto Caine the dignity
of the first borne over Abel.

But Cain contemning and despising God, when he was reproved of God for the
murdering of his brother Abel, whom he entised to walk to the fields to be
killed, whose blood even from earth cried up unto heaven for revenge at Gods
hand, at that time the curse of God was pronounced against Caine, and he went
from the presence of the Lord, wandering from place to place with tortures of a
guilty conscience, according to Gods sentence, as domestical furies night and
day, seeking means to hide himself with the like guilty conscience, as Adam
had when he fled from the face of God, when he was called of Iehoua in
Paradise, Where art thou Adam? Caine went to the land of Node, thinking by
being far from God, he should have less occasion to fear him. Caine had
some visible mark to be known of all men: for God said he should not be
slain, not that he loved him, but for that God abhors murder, and would
have a murderer known. Caine knew his wife which conceived and bare Henoch,
and Henoch was borne.
builded a city and called it after his sons name Henoch: this was the first
city of the world, there he dwelt with his wife. To Henoch was borne Irad,
and Irad begat Mehimal, and he begat Methushael, and Methushael begat
Lamech: these children grew ungodly and wicked, as most natural and like
children to Caine, the last worse then the first: for this contemptuous Lamech
took to him two wives, the one named Adah, the other Zillah: thereby he first
corrupted the lawful institution of marriage, which was that two should be one
flesh. Afterward he mocked and scoft at Gods suffera^ce in Cain, saying: If
Cain shall be avenged seven fold, truly Lamech shall be avenged seventy times
seven fold, as though God would suffer none to punish him, albeit he was most
contemptuous of good living, most ungodly and wickedly having 76. children in
adultery, as Josephus writes, but by Adah Gen 4.
he had a son named Iubal, who was the first that taught to make tents and to
dwell therein, and he was the first father of such as had cattle. Lamech had a
son named Iubal, who was the first inuenter of Music, as the harp and the
organes, and other instruments. Zillah bare him a son named Tubal Caine, he
found first the use of iron and brass, he was the first author of cunning
craft in grauing. Here is Pliny much deceived to name Amphion the first
Musition: here was Diodorus Diodorus lib. 5.
ouerseene to prefer Apollo: and the most part of profane histories do
greatly err, attributing to Mercury, to Orpheus, to Linus and to others which
are read in Genesis in the first age found, for Prophetical histories are
far more ancient then profane, by 2000. years, beside the first age, and
first Fathers lived so long a time therein, they must of necessity be first
acquainted with all things: for the chiefest cause of long life in the first
age, was that all men universally might praise the Lord God in magnifying his
name, acknowledging his works in his creatures. Thus did Adam, Seth, Enos,
Henoch, Methusalem, Lamech and Noah see, yea and foresee the works of God in
his creation, in his Church, in his redemption, in his promise, and in his
election: for Josephus writes that the creation of man, the commandment, the
state, the Church institution of marriages, all other governments fit for the
children of God, were by Adam in two tables of stones: and some old ancient
writers affirm, as Melancthon, that the first age was called (...), for that
they excel in wisdom, justice, government and authority, full of
inventions, full of of arts and sciences, and therefore a long life was by God
granted unto them: for no doubt Adam before his fall had that full and perfect
knowledge of God in his works, that he and his posterities taught afterward in
the Josephus.
word. The second age was called (...) wherein began the magnanimity and
fortitude in wars, force, and violence. In vvarres Empires and kingdoms
took beginning in the world, and this second age began in Nimrode, and
continued until Julius Caesar's time. The third age (...), endures the whole
time of the fourth monarche, given to delicacie and pleasure: for though the
world be full of secret contention and hidden envy, full of open vvarres, one
kingdom against another, yet not accomplished as in the fore ages. But to
return to Caine and his posterities, how they grevv from the beginning in
idolatry, in superstition, and in outvvard pomp of vain ceremonies, framing
to themselves a new kind of religion, not in sincerity and truth, but in
external form and fashion, being ignorant of God and of his word, Christ the
Messiah that was to come. This idolatry began in the house of Caine, from
Caine himself unto the time of Belus 150. year after the flood. This Belus
being dead, his son Ninus erected up his fathers image or statue with such
honor and with such privilege, and with such solemn pomp, as he that was
guilty of any great crime, might flee Adstatua^ Beli, to the image of Belus,
as to a sure sanctuary of Belus Image a sanctuary to all wickedness.
his safety what fault soever he committed. Here began the second cause of
idolatry, here images were made idols, set up, and all kind of graven work
in stones or trees, were honored as gods amongst the Gentiles, derived from
the name of Belus, some calling them Baal, some Bell, some Belcebuc, according
to the variety of tongues as Eusebius vvriteth. And this idolatry continued
from Belus until Alexander the great, to whom at the siege of Babylon
certain Astrologers called lib. 10. cap. 3. de prae.
Magi signified unto Alexander, unless he would restore the tomb of Belus,
being spoiled and defaced by the Persians, he should have no good success at
Babylon: but Alexander little esteeming their Chaldaicall divination, as
Diodorus at large does report, marches forward with his siege. At what time
Diodorus lib. 11.
was Lucius Cornelius and Quintus Pompeius Consuls at Rome, so the first
idolatry of Cain and his posterity, were well and justly revvarded by the
flud. The second age when idolatry began in Belus, ended in Sardanapalus 12.
hundred and odd years, being the 36. king and last king of Assyria, as
Eusebius affirms. All this while God had his Church for his elect, the Lord
had appointed another seed unto Adam for Abel, which was Seth, in whose
time men began to call upon the name of the Lord, and the Lord did moon the
hearts of the godly to restore religion. The posterity of Seth which was by
Caine and his family, suppressed and continued seven generations, until such
time that Naema the daughter of Lamech Genes. 4.
and sister of Tubal Caine, taught men the use of fine flax to be soft
clothed, and to be trim attired with cloth and linen, where before men
were clothed with leather and skins.

Now the posterity of Caine became right worldlings in follovving their
fancies and pleasures from vice to vice, The sons of God married with the
daughters of men.
nothing acquainted with the afflictions and crosses of the true Church: so
when men began to be multiplied upon earth, and had daughters borne unto
them, then the sons of God, as Moses calls them, which Josephus calls
the angels of God, meaning the seed of Seth which began to forsake the
godliness and simplicity of their forefathers, and savv the daughters of men
which issued out from Caines house, that they were fair, took them to their
vviues of all that liked them: of this unlawful and wicked mixture of the
good with the bad, of this holy seed with profane blood, of godly men with
wicked women sprang up an huge people, much like unto the giants, or as Homer
says in his sixth Odysse, speaking of the Cyclope Poliphemus, to whom Moses
Melancthon.
compares them, alluding the course of their life ad Cyclopicam vitam, men
more to be feared then to be follovved: Fregius in histo. Adami.
yet Seth a man singularly beloved of God, endevved much with Gods blessings,
studious to please God, desirous to plant true religion, and given to all kind
of virtuous practicing all godly exercises, and living in all felicity, left
behind him godly children, as Enos, godly and virtuous like Seth his father,
whom Moses prefers to be the first that Fregius in histo. Adami.
earnestly called upon the Lord Jehovah, detesting the house of Caine as dead.

Then Henoch a godly sincere man, led an upright life before God, the seventh
from Adam, prophesied of such wicked men, saying: Behold the Lord comes with
thousands of his Saints to give judgment against all, and to rebuke all Iud. 1.
the ungodly of their wickedness, and of their cruel speaking against him:
for even that Henoch says Paul, was taken Heb 11.
away, to show that there was a better life prepared, and to be a
testimony of the immortality of souls and bodies, and that he should not
see death for his faith toward God: for before he was taken away, he was
reported that he had pleased God, and he was seen no more, for God took him
away. Henoch vvalked with Lamech the father of Noah, Henoch walked with God.
having respect to the promise, desired to see the Messiah which should be
sent, and yet he savve but a figure thereof, he said by the spirit of
prophecy, that when his son Noah was borne, this should comfort us
concerning our work and sorrow of our hands as concerning the earth, which
the Lord has cursed. The last man of the first age was Noah a just and
upright man in his time before God, he likewise vvalked with and obeyed GOD
in all things, and therefore found favor with God, with whom God made his
covenant, and established the same with a sign, for thee only have Genes. 9.
I found just and righteous in this age upon the earth, for Noah Noah the
righteous preacher.
was called the righteous preacher, preaching unto the wicked for amendment
of life, and because they were luld in all kind of securities and feared not
God, Noah departed from them and went to another land: for he was warned of
God of things that were not seen as yet concerning the Arc, God was so much
offended with the wickedness of the world, that his wrath was kindled to
see such iniquity upon earth, for the whole world was corrupt before God, and
was filled with cruelty, all flesh had corrupted his way, and all
imaginations of man's thoughts were so evil and wicked, that it repented the
Lord to have made man, and as it were disauowing man to be his creature: they
were so addicted to intemperancie, lust, gluttony, and security, the four
principal causes of the flood, which for sin destroyed man and beast, and
yet in mercy God spared man 120. years to repent, before he would destroy
the world. No dout many things have been written of the old Patriarchs in
the first age, and thought of many writers that Adam and his son Seth, had
made two tables of stone, wherein they wrote many goodly things to their
posterity. The best warrant is read in Josephus, for that he travailed much in
the history of the (...) lib. 1.
Jews, and their other histories called Drash: for their Rabbis Zonaras lib.
1.
heap many fables beside the history of Moses, in their Chronicles called
Drash: so Philo Iudaeus, Herodot, and Melancton, from them affirm. It is
written again, that Adam and Seth foreseeing the deluge of the world, caused
two pillars to be set up, the one of brickes, the other of brass, one to
resist the violence of the water, the other to endure the rage of the fire: but
I see no reason that Adam should prophecy the same to be from God, and yet he
being man, sought means by natural reason, and ways by art, to prevent the
everlasting decree of the Almighty. Josephus might well err in that. I think
that many things are written of the Jews, which do not agree with the purpose
of Gods providence, nor his counsel: for the Jews recorded in their books of
histories, called Drash, any thing that might be coniectured true, and which
they themselves supposed in opinion to be true, as the manners of their
Talmudists were. Talmudists.


Josephus a great writer of the Jews antiquities, the best Historiographer of
Chaldean histories, who wrote more, and is more to be commended then any other,
and because he thinks much amiss for any man to seek records of
antiquities amongst the Graecians, men of late knowledge, having their
beginning and first original from Egypt, and Chaldea, specially Assyria and
Chaldea, the first seat of man after the flood: for the Greeks began to
flourish in the declining age of the world, when that Assyria, Chaldea, Egypt,
and other places of the East, were wasted and consumed with sword and fire: for
so it seems by the Philosopher Calisthenes report, then being with Alexander
the Great at the siege of Babylon, writing unto his cousin Aristotle, who had
been his preferrer unto Alexander, to that purpose he might search out the
Libraries of Babylon, and to certify Aristotle of those antiquities, specially
of Astrology, wherein the Chaldeans past, and of their monuments, wherein the
Greeks were ignorant: for Calisthenes sent unto Aristotle, how that Babylon
was far more famous for all kind of learning and knowledge twelve hundred
years past, then it was when Alexander the Great did besiege it, certifying
him with records of 19. hundred years before Alexanders time.

Berosus an ancient writer, and a man of great authority amongst the
Chaldeans, says, that Arphaxad one of the sons Joseph lib. 1. cap. 14.
of Sem, whose birth was 2. years after the flood, christened Ko^rus lib. 1.
cap. 4.
the first name of this Country after his own name: afterward it was
called Cephem, and now last named Chaldea, of the situation of this Country,
and the seat of Babylon. I will let the reader read of it in Ptolom^us, and
in Pomponius Tabula 4. Asiae lib. 3.
Mela. I will go on with my history.

When Cham the second son of Noah, had begotten a Genes. cap. 10.
son named Chus, and Chus had begotten a son, named Nemrad, this began to
take arms, and to become great in his doings: he became mighty in earth,
using violence and force against all people, framing himself to be first
Emperor of the world, so full of cruelty and tyranny, that it grevve unto
a proverb, as it is in the Genesis, as Nemrod the mighty hunter before the
Lord: his oppression was such, that he passed not to commit cruelty even in
Gods presence. This Nemrad began to rule in Babel, in the land of Shinear,
afterward called Chaldea, where he and his company returning from Armenia,
where they after the flood began to build up an high tower, whose top should
reach unto heaven to get them a name upon earth, least they should be scattered
Genes. 1.
over the whole earth, thinking through pride and ambition to prefer their
own glory before Gods honor: but vain is the help of man, their wicked
enterprise was overthrown, for God saw their folly, and so confounded them
in their devises, and in their speech, that one could not understand another.
Then were they divided and scattered, then confusion of tongues began, which
was then in the house of The confusion of tongues in the time of Peleg.
Heber only the Hebrew tongue, then began people to seek out countries and to
inhabit the earth: The posterity of Sem to great Asia, Persia, Assyria and
Chaldea, and all the regions about Euphrates toward the East part of the
world: The posterity of Cham went to Egypt, Aethiope, Libya, and possessed all
places about Nilus, and reached toward the South unto the furthest part of
Africa: and the posterity of Iaphet possessed all the Westcountrey, the
lesser Asia and all Europa, of whom all the Gentiles sprang out. Thus much for
the first age from Adam unto Noah, 1656. Now I mean particularly to follow my
history, as the reason is offered unto me by following the sons of Noah,
their children and posterities from the land of Senaah, unto every part of the
earth.

CHAP. I.
Of the most ancient and true history of the Hebrews, after called Israel, of
their laws and original government called Oligarchia, from Abraham unto Moses.

THE history of the Hebrews, for that it is most ancient from Hebers time the
fourth from Noah, and most true, for that it is written by Moses and confirmed
by the Prophets, but most of all in dignity and honor, for that lineally from
Sem which first builded Jerusalem, the Messiah and Savior of the world
according to the flesh descended, though the history takes no beginning but
from the calling of Abraham out of Chaldea into the land of Canaan, so called
first, after, the land of Israel, thirdly, of Judea, fourthly and last, called
after Christ our Saviors death, The holy land, or the land of Palestina: the
inhabitants thereof were called accordingly, Cananites, Hebrews, Israelites,
Jews, of whom either to speak or to write, of their laws, their Judges,
their Kings, or of their ceremonies, or of their common wealth, it was not
lawful neither for the Graecians nor for the Romans, and so affirmed by
Josephus, that Demetrius Phalerius did auere before Philodelphus king of
Alexandria, that the Greeks nor the Sabellicu^ lib. 3.
Latinists might translate, handle, or so much as to presume to write of any
Hebrew history being but profane men, as Theopompus, Theodecta, with others,
which were made blind by their arrogancy, and became mad. An other cause does
Eusebius allege, that neither Greeks nor Latins were in time The antiquity
of Greece.
to write of the Hebrews histories: for the greatest brag of the Greeks, as
Josephus says, and the most ancient history of the Graecians, is Homers
work: they began to flourish in the time of Cyrus, after that the Assyrians,
the Chaldeans and the Egyptians, and many other kingdoms of the East were
decayed, and their empires lost, at which time the temple in Jerusalem was by
Cyrus permitted to be reedified 80. years before the last permission by
Artaxerxes surnamed Longimanus: for Plato of The praise of Plato.
whom Numenius the Pithagorean does report, and is called of him Moses Attica
lingua loquens, even that learned Philosopher does confess, that the Graecians
had their knowledge from the Chaldeans and from the Egyptians, and began to be
famous and great after these great kingdoms were destroyed. The seven Sages
were the first wise men known or commended in Greece, which was in Cyrus time,
at what time Solon lived 200. years before Plato, which was the infancy of
Greece, and The infancy of Greece.
the first school of their Philosophy.

Now the Hebrews being the most auncientest people, even from Hebers birth
until Christ's death, which was after Christ's death 2000. years and odd,
they inhabited the land called Syria, called likewise Phoenicia, and now in
latter years called Judea: of this country does Josephus write at large both
of the nature of the people and of the goodness of the Joseph. lib. contra.
soil. Hecateus the Abederit, a good Philosopher and a great writer,
flourishing in the time of Alexander the great, made a book in describing and
commending of Iudaea. I will them to read the 16. book of Strabo that would
know the situation of Reed Stabo 16. book.
Judea, where the Reader shall be satisfied with the full description of Judea.

Josephus a Jew borne, being taken prisoner by Vespasian the Emperor at the
last destruction of Jerusalem, at the which time he wrote a great volume
containing 20. books of the antiquities of the Jews, and he wrote other 7.
books of the wars of the Jews, a man of great industry, learned in the
Hebrew and Greek tongue, and very expert in the Jewish histories, says, that
Egyptians were envious to the children of Israel, for so were they called after
Jacobs time, which by long wrestling with the Angel of the Lord, was named
Israel: for first First Hebrews. 478
they were called Hebrews from Hebers time until Jacob, which was 478. years
and odd: secondarily, Israel from Jacob, until the destruction of Samaria, at
what time ten tribes of Israel were by Salmanassar king of Assyria Senacheribs
father, brought captive Then Israel. 1026
unto Assyria in the time of Osea the last king of Israel 1026. years, as
Bucholcerus affirms, and from the destruction of Samaria Thirdly Jewish. 786
until the last destruction of Jerusalem by Titus Vespasian they were called
Jews 786. years.

Now the malice of Egypt toward Israel was such, that A egyptians most envious
to the Jewish.
they kept them in bondage 430. years, and ever after they were by God
delivered, they still wrought evil against them, and persecuted them with
continual hatred, disliking their The mercy of God toward his people.
religion, abhorring their ceremonies, disdaining and much envying the
felicity of the Jews, with the which the God of Israel by power and great
miracles, did advance them to the abolishing of idolatry, and contemning of
their false gods, which the Egyptians, the Chaldeans and the Assyrians did
adore, and therefore the blessing of God was according to the promise upon the
Hebrews first, afterward called Israel and Jews, and continued from Abraham,
to whom the promise was made until the time of the Messiah, the full
accomplishment of the promise. So these people bathed in bliss, and being but
a little country, few people, from Dan to Berseba, and of no estimation, became
by Gods favor strong, mighty, and conquerors The goodness of God to his people.
of the greatest kings of the world. So, he said (the Lord of all) out of Sion
shall my Law proceed, and from Jerusalem my word. This little city of
Jerusalem, chosen of God to be his seat, though often for sin destroyed, and
the people plagued, yet still comforted to the stay of Gods Church.

It is written that David the second king of Israel, gave these words to
Solomon his son before he died. Behold, Praeparaui impensas domus Domini
auritalenta centum millia, and argenti mill 3. Regum cap. 10
millia talentum. And again it is written in the Chronicles, that gold and
silver were as plenty in Jerusalem, as stones in the street in the time of
Salomo^: for there was in the temple of Solomon, as Budaeus notes 27.
millions, in ready coin. This De Ass 4.
made other kingdoms to envy the prosperity of the Hebrews: for by just
account of Budaeus, there was left before unto Solomon by David his father, ten
times more treasures and substance in Jerusalem, then Darius the great king of
Persia left Joseph. 8.
unto Alexander the great in Babylon when he conquered it: this was the promise
which God performed to Abraham, and to his seed for ever.

This godly Patriarch to whom the promise was made, was 50. years of age when
Noah died, 40. years before Sodom Abraham's age when Noah died.
and Gomorrha were destroyed. At 75. years was Abraham called from Vr a town
of Chaldea, in the last years of Ninus the first king of the Assyrians. Now
while Abraham obeyed Gene. 18. 20. 47.
God from time to time, from place to place, exercising himself in the
obedience of GOD, famine grew in the land of Canaan, so that he with few
Hebrews were forced to flee into Egypt, where he continued three years, at
what time he taught them knowledge of the stars, read Abraham's going to Egypt
Astronomy, and taught in Egypt Arts and Sciences, as Josephus says: for
Abraham was brought up in Astrology with the Chaldeans, where he dwelt with
his father Their in Vr, and from whence the Egyptians had their learning and
knowledge: for Egypt was as yet scant in the world known, where some of the
Hebrews stayed after Abraham's departure and multiplied, in so much that the
kings of Egypt troubled, molested, and brought them in such bondage, as they
were The bondage of Israel in Egypt, 430. years. Moses the fifth from Abraham.
made slaves and bondmen of the Egyptians until the time of Moses which was
430. years after Abraham, even then God delivered them from their bondage by
the hands of Moses, which was the fifth man in descent from Abraham, for Moses
was the son of Amri, the son of Cath, the son of Leui, the son of
Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham.

But to return to Abraham, who attending the voice of the almighty, was most
diligent with care and fear of God to perform his duty to his God: for God
had blessed Abraham and promised also to bless them that would bless Abraham,
saying, Benedica^ te benedicentibus, etc. I will bless the^ that bless thee,
and I will curse them that curse thee, for in thee all the kinreds of the earth
shall be blessed. For God had promised Abraham three great blessings, that is,
First, the land of Canaan flowing with milk and honey: Secondly, the
incarnation of Messiah tobe out of the tribe of Judah: Thirdly, that his seed
should be as the stars in the skies, or the sands in the sea. After God had
blessed Abraham by the mouth of Melchisedech the high priest of God, saying:
Blessed art thou Abraham of God most high possessor of heaven and earth: to
Gene. cap. 14.
this high priest Melchisedech, Abraham paid tithe of all that he had, for God
was with Abraham, he defended him, and he rewarded him. About this time were
the kings of Sodom The kings of Sodom and Gomorrha ouerthrown by the king of
Shinar.
and Gomorrha overthrown by Amraphael king of Shinar, and Lot taken prisoner,
but rescued by Abraham: this was not the last destruction of Sodom.

Now reigned in Sicionia a king called Apis, of whom the country was afterward
named Apia, and since called Peloponesus, and now Morea. In Assyria reigned
Ninus the husband of Semiramis. In Egypt this time was a form of government
called Dinastia, fifteen principal magistrates to govern the Egyptians.
About this time Ismael was borne of Agar the bondwoman, when Abraham was of the
age of 86. Ismael borne by Agar the the bondwoman.
of whom many nations do come. After this time Abraham's name was changed to
confirm him in the promise. Circumcision then was instituted, and Isaac was
likewise promised by the Angels that lodged with Abraham, as they went to
destroy Sodom and Gomorrha, who opened to Abraham, how sin cried up unto
heaven for vengeance upon the Sodomites, which Abraham with his eyes saw: he
saw Sodom, Gomorrha, Seboim, Adamah and Segor, five great cities of Canaan
burned with fire and brimstone from heaven, and all men, women and children
destroyed, Lot only with his wife and Lot with his two daughters escaped.
two daughters saved. In that soil where these 5. cities were burned, there
was left a lake of such terrible sight, being one and twenty miles long, that
Strabo in his book, and Josephus at large describes, which in another place
shall be spoken of.

But much deceived for that they attributed unto the effects of nature, which
was the work of God whom they knew not at that time. Lots wife by
disobedience, looking Josephus lib. 1. cap. 12.
back against the commandment, became a pillar of salt, a terrible monument
of Gods vengeance to all passers by: but mark how by drunkenness Lot sinned
with his daughters, a horrible example of dru^kennes whom the wickedness of
Sodom could not overcome, yet wine caused him to commit most abominable incest
with his two daghters, who making their Lots incest with his two daughters.
Genes. 19.
father of purpose drunk, became both with child by their father, the elder
bare a son and she called his name Moab, the first father of all the
Moabites, the younger bare a son, and she called his name Ammon, from whom
sprang the Ammonites a people of great nations, who as they were born in most
horrible incest, so were they and their posterity vile and wicked enemies to
God and his church. About this very time Isaac was The birth of Isaac. Isaac
the child of promise borne 14. years after Ismael. Joseph. lib. 1. cap. 15.
Sara died, and is buried in Hebron. A ficide does co^tune 4. D^achmes. Lib. cap
16.
borne when Agar and her son Ismael was cast off. For God said unto Abraham,
In Isaac thy seed shall be called, and not in Ismael, for Isaac was a figure of
Christ. Not long after Sara the wife of Abraham when she had lived 127. years,
even just the double years of the virgin Marie. Sara was buried in Hebron,
where Abraham bought a field of an Ephronit^ for 400. sickles of silver, where
Abraham and all his posterities were after buried. Abraham after Sara married a
woman named Kaetura, by whom he had six sons prudent and very discreet
men, their names you find in Josephus, and the several nations that issued from
them.

Now Abraham waxed old, for he was an 100. year old when Isaac was borne,
and he lived after the birth of Isaac 75. years, and then died, and was buried
by his wife Sara in Hebron. Abraham dies.
In the time of Abraham and of the first Patriarch, the Church of God was
governed by a state called Oligarchia, until Moses time, to whom the law was
given on mount Sinai by God, for before the law was written in the Patriarchs
hearts. But first he saw his son married with Rebecca, he was the 10. from
Noah, as Noah was the 10. from Adam, and lived fifty years with Noah: he
lived with Sem, Arphaxad, Sela, Heber, Peleg, Regu, Serug, Nahor and Thara
which was his father. He was virtuous and godly, he was blessed of God, and in
his seed the whole earth was blessed after him.

Isaac had two twins borne together, Esau which is also Esau and Iacob^ birth.
called Edom, of whom the Idumeans came, and Jacob called likewise Israel, of
whom the Israelites came. Jacob was the true tipe Jacob was the true tipe of
the Church
of the church of God, Christ being the head thereof. Esau likewise the figure
of the synagogue of Satan, over whom Antichrist is the head. Isaac loved better
Esau the^ Jacob, but Rebecca loved Jacob, as by her counsel, though needless,
to Jacob to defeat Esau of his fathers blessing appeared, being therein faulty
to prevent the Almighty. But as Caine never loved Abel, so Esau never loved
Jacob: for Jacob ever feared his brother Esau, but God from his eternal
purpose never changes, but stands to his people, and comfort his church.
The history of these two brethren you shall read in Josephus at large, Lib. 1.
cap. 18. 19.
and in Genesis 27. and 28. In the time of Jacob reigned in Niniuie Amatrites
the 9. king of the Assyrians, a voluptuous wicked prince. Atlas the great
Astronomer, and thereby fained of the Poets to sustain the skies upon his
shoulders, flouriin these days. Osiris who is thought to be called Mirzaim,
Diodo. de fab. (...). lib. 2.
and of Berosus is named Oceanus, and Diodorus names him Menam the first king
of the Egyptians, he governed Egypt, taught the people to worship their gods,
instructed them in many faculties and sciences, which then few of the Egyptians
knew: the daughter of Jacob named Dina, was ravished of Sichem, the son of
Hemor, afterward she is supposed by Philo Iudaeus to Functius in tabula patrum.
be the wife of Job, by whom he gate fourteen sons and fourteen
daughters, but some think it an error, saying: Job was two discents after
Jacobs children, but as I said before, hard it is to correct an error of such
antiquity, for where true records want, then conjectures of men do grow.

About this time Isaac died and was buried in Hebron hard Isaac dies and is
buried in Hebron.
by Rebecca his wife, he was accepted of God and walked in his ways virtuous
and godly, he lived one hundred eighty years, three years longer then his
father Abraham lived. Which Isaac lived

With Sem 110. years. With Sara his mother 37. Arphaxat 48. Sarug one year.
Salah 78. Jacob his brother 120. Heber 139. Ismaeel his half brother by
Abraham lived with Isaac 75 Agar 123. Their his grandfather 35. Joseph 29.

Isaac saw the prosperity of his son Esau, which governed all the land of
Seir, for the appointment of GOD was, Isaac saw the prosperity of Esau and the
affliction of Jacob.
Mayor seruiet Minori, when Jacob had no certain place in the world, but
tossed from one affliction to an other. Isaac before he died saw the travel
and trial of Jacob. About this time was Joseph sold by his brethren, and laid
in prison in Egypt, even then Tiphon the Egyptian conspired the death of his
brother Osiris, with the help of certain tyrants Busiris of Phoenicia, Antens
of Lybia, Melinus of Creete, with others, he killed the king, usurped the
kingdom, and was called thereby, as Berosus affirms, Tiphon tyrannus, but he
was well requited, Diodo. lib. 1.
and all his confederats: for they all were slain by Orus Magnus, Osiris
son, in a town of Arabia named Anteos. Justin. lib. 36. B^sius lib. 1. cap 8.
Rhodes was builded about this time, which was named before Opheinissa: the
great famine of the 7. dear years in Egypt, and in all the world, began
likewise about the time of Isaacs death. In Assyria reigned Baleus the 11.
king, a man of the Iustine lib 36. Orosius lib. 1. cap. 8.
greatest fame: after Semiramis in the 41. year of this Kings reign, Hercules
surnamed Lybius, drove all cruel tyrants and giants out of Italy, for he with
continual wars for 10. years space wearied them, and subdued them, and
afterward reigned peaceably 20. years, as both Berosus and Functius do
affirm.

In the 18. Dinasteia of Egypt, began the Kings of Egypt to The 18. Denas^na of
Egypt
be called Pharaones, a name of great dignity, not proper names, but as the
Romans, Alexandrians, the Latins, with other kingdoms used to name their
kings Caesar's, Siluij, Ptolomeis, Arsaces, so like wise the Egyptians named
their kings Pharaones, which began about the latter end of Isaac. Sparta a
famous Sparta builded.
town amongst the Lacedaemonians, was builded of Pharoneus son, whose name
was Sparta, and therefore after his own name named it Sparta. Alitle after
this time, the going The going of Jacob unto Egypt.
of Jacob unto Egypt, was in the 130. years of his age, where he continued with
his son Joseph 17. years in great favor with Pharaoh, and then died, after
Abraham's being in Egypt, 215. years, and before Moses went to Egypt to deliver
the children of Israel out of bondage 215. years. Now while Jacob and his
family were in Egypt with his son Joseph, who was sold by his brethren, and
by his father thought to be slain, then dwelled in Judea Hethits, Iebusites,
Amorites, Chananites, Amalakites, and Pheresites, this land flowed with milk
and honey, fertile, and full of all plentifulnes: for after Joseph died in
Egypt, Moses was borne within 65. years: and in the Joseph died 65. years
before Moses was borne.
fourscore year of Moses age, the 145. after Joseph died, and were in the
wilderness forty years, and after had the possession of the land of
Chanaan, as it shall be hereafter said. But for that the histories of the
Patriarchs are written in the Genesis at large, and in Josephus, and specially
Frigius Mosaicus, in his book De historijs patrum, leaves nothing untouched,
I will forward to the birth of Moses.

CHAP. II.
Of the birth of Moses: of his favor with God: of his government over Israel
for 40. years in the wilderness, and deliverance of them from Pharaoh, by the
direction and inctruction of God of Joshua his successor, and of his wars and
victories, and of his good government over Israel for 32. years, and of the
Commonwealth of the Hebrews during the time of Moses and Joshua, which were
72. years.

MOses the son of Amri, being borne in Egypt, in the time of Isreal's bondage,
and thrown according to the commandment of Pharaoh unto Nilus: but by the The
manner of Moses birth.
providence of God, Pharaohs daughter named Thermutis, walking for her pleasure
with her maids about the banks of Nilus, beheld a thing houering upon the
water, commanded her maid to see what it was: there Miria Moses sister tended
to see what should become of the child: when Pharaohs daughter saw that it
was a goodly child, she much delited in him, and caused an Egyptian woman to
give him dugge, which the child refused: his sister Miria said, Ifan Hebrew
woman were there, he would suck. Thermutis willed her straight to bring one,
and she brought Thermutis Pharaohs daughter.
the mother of Moses: to whom the Kings daughter said, Take this child, and
bring him up for me. and she adopted him her son.

This child grew both goodly and godly, of whom many things are written of:
while yet he was in Egypt, being but a child in Thermutis arms, she put the
Kings diadem upon the childs head, and he threw it to the dirt, not
esteeming Moses threw the diadem of Egypt to the dirt.
pomp and regal show. But after he grew to be a man, he was made a Captain
over the Egyptians against the Moses made captain over the Egyptians against
the Aethiopians.
Aethiopians, and he ouerthrewe the Aethiopians: where the kings daughter of
Aethiope, called Tharbis, beholding his magnanimity, with admiration of his
great actions, fell in love with Moses, offered him marriage and to be a kings
son, Read Fregius of Moses life.
and a king himself afterward of Aethiope: the condition he accepted, upon
yielding up of the town to spare blood, which was done.

But envy of the Egyptians against Moses, disgrasing and disdaining his
fortune, and threatening him to the death, after the killing of the Egyptians,
fearing it should come to light, fled unto the Madianits, where he married
Iethroes daughter, and continued forty years, until the Angel appearing in
a flaming bush, commanded him to go to Pharaoh, to deliver Israel from
captivity, with whom Aaron his brother which was the first Priest after the
law given, was joined Moses and Aaron sent by God to Egypt.
with Moses in commission to execute the commandments of God: for to Moses
was granted wisdom, counsel, and power to do miracles: to Aaron eloquence,
learning, and power to speak what he would. Now by Gods mercy which to the
Israelites was always great, and by the which they were now delivered from
the hands of Pharaoh, after many miracles done which Nazianzenus sets forth
in few Greek verses, and in Latin by Frigius Mosaicus briefly written in two
lines the ten plagues of Egypt, in these words: The ten plagues of Egypt.
Sanguis, Rana, Culex, Muscae, Pecus, Vlcera, Grando,
Vermes and Tenebrae, Pestis primogenitorum.
Even then Moses carried the bones of Joseph to be buried in Joseph's bones
brought by Moses out of Egypt.
Hebron, by his progenitors, as Joseph had commanded, when he prophesied of an
other Pharaoh which should entreat Israel evil. This singular man of God
Moses, to whom the law in Mount Sinai was given, and by whom the law had
full execution, with whom GOD talked so familiarly, that he alone continued
with GOD forty days in Mount Sinai: the most ancient Chronographer of the
world, the very light of profane Histories, and the only teacher of time,
as by his 5. books appear: but for that Moses must be spoken of almost in
every place, for the recourse and trial of time, I will now go forward with
the history.

Now reigned over the Assyrians Ascatades the 18. king in Niniue, and in the
8. year of this Ascatades, Cancres Pharaoh the king of Egypt, with all his
great army were drowned in Cancres king of Egypt drowned in the red sea.
the red sea. In Moses time happened two great floods, the one called Deucalion
flood, 784. years after Noah's flood, the other in Thessalia, after which
followed such earthquakes in Deucalion flood.
Thessalie, that many thousands of beasts, men, women and children, towns and
cities, were destroyed, as both Berosus and Xenophon do agree. After which
earthquake fire wasted many towns and cities in Greece, called incendium
Phaetontis. In Moses time the kingdom of Athens began, wherein The kingdom
of Athens.
Cecrops was the first king of Athens 350. years before the destruction of
Troy. From Abraham to Moses 450. from Moses to the first building of the Temple
480. years. Thus far Berosus writes, even from the beginning of Noah out of
the arc, Berosus ends his hystory.
until the going of the Israelites out of Egypt, yet a little farther until the
falling of Dathan, with 250. more which held with Abiran and Chore, for their
murmuring against Moses. After this went Moses up from the plain of Moab to
mount Nebo, where the Lord showed unto Moses all the land of Canaan,
according to his promise, saying: thou shall see the land of Moses death.
Canaan with thine eyes, but thou shall not go over thither, and there Moses
the servant of the Lord died, for whom Israel wept 30. days, and after whom
Joshua succeeded. Moses was 120. years of age when he died.

Now you must understand that when Joseph was dead, and the Hebrews began to
be multiplied, the Egyptians both feared and hated them, oppressed them as you
heard with all toil and slavery, and not yet contented, but a law was made
Israelites toil and slavery.
among the Egyptians, that every male child of the Hebrews should be thrown
to Nilus. This law continued from Moses birth, and before, until their God
delivered them by Moses. God had appointed with Moses, and after with Joshua,
wise and grave men, as Elders, Judges, Magistrates, to govern the
Commonwealth of the Hebrews under Moses, (as Iethro his father in law had
councelled him,) the head of any tribe or of any city, Conuocauit populos
Israel, and Senatum eorum, and principes eorum, and iudices eorum, Ios. 23. He
had also the Levites, the Priest, and the high Bishop: a state of Commonwealth
changed from Oligarchia, which was in Abraham's time, into Aristocratia, by the
express commandments of God, in all the laws of the Hebrews Moral and
Judicial. And after God gave the Ceremonial Laws to Moses at mount Sinai:
for the Commonwealth of the Hebrews were of all others most principally to be
allowed, for that God ordained all their laws, ordered their Judges, al their
Kings, and their high Priests: for these three states governed the Hebrews
from Moses the first Judge, until the last high Priest, though by Moses other
officers were appointed, as Tribunes, Centurions and Captains, some over a
1000. some over a 100. some over 50. by the Greeks named Chiliarchi,
Hecatontarchi, Chiliarchi. Hecatontarchi. Pentecontarchi. Decatarchi.
Pentecontarchi, Decatarchi. The offerings which were gold, silver, and brass,
blewe silk, purple and scarlet, fine linen, Goats hair, and Rams skins
colored red, oil, spices, perfumes of sweet savor, the Tabernacle, the
Arc, the stone table, and the rod of Aaron, and Manna which were testimonies
of Gods presence. Read of these Ceremonial laws in Exodus 25.

About this time reigned in Egypt Ramesses: afterward having vanquished his
brother Danaus from Egypt, Egyptus Ramesses was surnamed Egyptus.
usurped the kingdom of Egypt, and named it Egyptus after his own name.
Amongst the Argiues, Stelenus their 9. King, and after him succeeded Danaus,
being driven out of Egypt by the Cornelius Tacitus lib. 2.
foresaid Egyptus, his brother giving that name to the Country of Egypt, being
before named Mizraim. Now in Creete governed Axit, and in Athens the 4. king
Ericthonius in these days.

Now Memphis in Egypt, of one Epaphus, as Eusebius does name, was builded.
Dardanus builded Dardania, in the sixth year of this king Egyptus: this
afterward was called Troy-Cyrene at this time was likewise builded in Libya,
and Nisa a great city in India, by Dionysius. In Niniue Amintes the 19. king
of the Assyrians governed. It is written by Orosius, that Crosius lib. 1. cap.
11.
Danaus king at this time of the Argiues, having fifty daughters, who being
married to fifty brethren, sons to his own brother Egyptus, wrought means
by these his daughters, to requite the injury of his brother: they agreeing
with their father, conspired the deaths of their husbands, and slew them all
in one night. This history is diversely written, which I leave to every man's
judgment.

After that Moses had governed the people of God 40. years in the wilderness,
he made choice of Joshua (as you heard) to be their Governor and Judge: for
there was no succession of Governors, no election of states, no Prince, no
Judge to claim right amongst the people of Israel, but the law of God was
the Judge that governed Israel. So Gedeon said: Non dominabor vestri, nec
dominabitur vestri filius meus, sed Dominus, he was the only ruler, so they
prospered all the time of good Judges. This Joshua the second Judge of Israel,
whom God raised after Moses, was adorned with excellent gifts, as with
counsel to govern Israel, and with strength to defend Israel: this brings
them after all difficulties unto the land of Canaan: which Joshua divided among
the people, he appointed their borders, he established laws and ordinances,
Joshua deuideth the land of Chanaan. Joshua made orders and laws.
assuring them of Gods favor, if they would obey God, and contrariwise of his
plague and vengeance by disobedience. To this good Joshua God said, my servant
Moses is dead, now therefore arise, go over Jordan, thou, and all this
people, unto the land which I gave them: for every place where you shall tread
upon, have I given you, there shall be no man able to withstand thee all the
days of thy life: be thou strong, and be of good courage, I will not leave
thee, nor forsake thee. This was great comfort to Joshua, to have God to be with
him, to assist him, to strengthen him, and to defend him.

Then Joshua commanded his host, with their Captains Joshua commands his host
to pass Jorden.
and officers to pass over Jordan, he exhorts the Rubenites, the Gadites;
and the half tribe of Manasses, to execute their charge, saying, the Lord your
God has given you this land, which was sometime in the possession of Sihon king
of the Amorites, and in the hands of Og, king of Bashan, go you forward, God
shall go before you, and cast out the Cananites, the Hittites, the Iebusites,
Girgashites, Perisites, and the Amorites: so Jordan gave place to Joshua and to
the Arc.
they passed over Jordan dry, the water stayed, and gave them place in like
sort as the red sea did. The walls of Jericho fell down, and gave them place,
to enter unto the city without The walls of Jericho fell.
strokes. Now Jericho being burned, diverse kings, countreies and cities,
hearing how Jericho and Ai were destroyed, gathered their forces together, one
to help an other, but in vain, for the Lord fought for Israel: for five
kings rose against Joshua, which were destroyed and discomfited: and as it is
written in the 12. of Joshua, thirty kings were vanquished, overthrown, and
slain, whose names you may read in Joshua. Joshua cap. 12.
This godly Joshua was an other Moses, ruled Israel in all obedience of the
Lord, conquered and possessed the land of promise, and kept Gods people all
his time in peace, lived 110. years, and governed Israel two and thirty
years. Eusebius Melanthon.
says thirty, and he died two hundred years after Joseph's death.

CHAP. III.
Of the Judges of Israel after Iosuas death, until Saul the first king of
Israel: of their government, wars, and continuance.

THe Hebrews had none to govern them 8. years after, (so long inter regnum
continued,) whereby the Israelites ever rebelling against God, contemned the
laws, despised religion, quiteforgat Moses and Joshua, and the benefits of God
toward the^: a thing almost incredible, that so soonefro^ God they would fall,
having tasted of his goodness and mercy so (...) de Hebre^ru^ admin.
long: for after they had entered into the land of Canaan, and had seen the
promise of God performed, (instead of thanks for the same) they rebelled and
provoked God to anger: for The mutabiliue of the Israelites.
he suffered them to be vexed and tormented by tyrants, he took their liberty
away from them, and left them destitute of all comfort and help: yet God
raised from time to time such as should defend them, if they would be obedient
and thankful unto God: and although the Israelites fell to idolatry after
Iosuas death, and thereby were given unto their enemies hands, as the tribe of
Benjamin 1005. in one day slain, and so the tribe of Dan, with others: yet God
left them not for all their ingratitude, but stirred good and godly Judges, as
Othoniel, Ehud, Gedeon, and others, to deliver them in extremities.

The Lord pitied them, and raised Othoniel of the tribe of Judah, the younger
brother of Caleb, which governed the Israelites 8. years, animated them again
to go to war against the king of Syria, whom God delivered to the hands of
Othoniel, and brought them to the favor of God, that Israel had rest 40.
years, 32. under Joshua, and 8. under Othoniel: yet still Israel offended God,
and committed wickedness before the Lord so long, until that Eglon king of
Moab, was by God appointed Eglon king of Moab afflicts Israel.
to be their scourge. He smote them and afflicted them, and kept them under
him 18. years, until Ehud of the tribe of Benjamin, a man whom God appointed
to defend and to deliver his people, even he ouerthrewe the Moabites, slew
10000. at one time, and killed Eglon the king of Moab, Ehud kills Eglon.
and caused Israel to have rest 80. years, the whole time of his government.
But when this good Judge died, the children of Israel again fell from the
Lord. Then Iabin the king Iabin against Israel.
of Canaan had them in his power, troubled and persecuted them extremely: for
God had sold them for their wickedness unto the hands of Iabin and Sisera his
General, yet still his mercy continued with them: for Debora and Barach of
the Debora and Barac overthrew him.
tribe of Nephthali, were of God appointed to defend the Hebrews: for Israel
prevailed against Iabin king of Canaan, and prospered under Debora and Barach,
while Debora and Barach governed, which was forty years. Some writers do
interpose Shamgar to be the third Judge of Israel, compting Othoniel to be
first Judge that delivered Israel after Joshua, Ehud Functius and R^fin.
the second Judge that killed Eglon, and then Shamgar, which slew of the
Philistims six hundred with an Ox goade.

Now while these things were done amongst the Israelites, reigned in Niniue
Pannias, in Athens reigned Pandion the 8. king of the Athenians. About this
time Bithinia was builded. Gedeon the first Judge, one of the tribe of
Manasses, after Gedeon.
that Israel committed wickedness, was sent by God to deliver them from the
Madianites, who at that time oppressed Israel miserably: but they always in
great extremities, at the Josephus lib. 5. cap. 7.
last pinch, when necessity forced them, and misery oppressed them, according
to their wonted manner, cried unto the Lord, and he heard them, and helped them
by Moses in Egypt, and in the wilderness by Joshua, to come to the land of
Canaan, and in the land by Othoniel, in often delivering Israel from the king
of Syria, by Ehud, in saving them from Eglon Othoniel.
the king of Moab, whom Ehud most boldly and zealously killed in his privy
chamber, by Shamgar, in defending them Shamgar.
from the Philistims, of whom he slew six hundred with an Ox goade, by
Barach and Debora from Iabin king of Canaan, Barac and Debora.
and Sisera, and now by Gedeon, whom God raised to defend them, and to deliver
them from the Madianites, who prevailed much against Israel: for both the
Madianites, and the Amalekites, brought Israel into so great misery, that they
made The great misery of Israel.
them dens in the mountains, and caves to hide themselves from the
Madianites. After seven years oppression and affliction, then they cried unto
God, when they were most afflicted and persecuted, and not before.

But the mercy of God was with them for all their vileness and stubbornes.
Gedeon was called by God to be their aid, who ouerthrewe the Madianites, and
overcame the Amalekites, Judge 7.
not by strength or force of Israel, but by the works and wonders of God, as
you may read in the Judges at large: for with three hundred, Gedeon slew one
hundred and twenty thousand of the Amalekites, Madianites, and Arabians. And
though Ephraim murmured against Gedeon, yet he appeased them, and revenged him
self on them of Succoth and Penuel. Read the 8. of the Judges, you shall be
satisfied. By Gedeon now again Israel was restored to the former liberty and
dignity, having vanquished the Madianites, and slain Oreb and Zeeb, two of
their princes, and their heads brought Oreb and Zeeb 2. princes of Madianites
slain.
to Gedeon beyond Jordan.

Now reigned Panninas in Niniue, the five and twentieth king of the Assyrians.
Pandayon of that name the second king after Cecrops, reigned in Athens.
Euristheus the first king of Euristheus.
Mycena: this was that king, whose fame was great in Greece: he brought the
Argiues and their kingdom subject unto Mycena, which kingdom continued from
Jacobs birth, until Gedeons time, five hundred and fifty years, during which
time reigned fourteen kings over the Argiues.

About this time reigned in Troy, Ilus the fourth king: of Diverse names of
Troy. Dardania.
this kings name Troy was called Ilion, being first called Dardania by
Dardanus, who first builded it, in the last year of Ascatades the eighteenth
king of Assyria, at which time Moses died in the plain of Moab. Then Tros
altered the name of Dardania after his own name, being the third king of Troy,
and called it Troia, and now last of all by Ilus the fourth king, called
Troiae.
Ilion. Dedalus, of whom the Poets fained much, flourished likewise about this
time, and fled with his son Icharus Ilion.
from Greece unto Creete, unto king Minoes.

Mydas governed now in Phrygia. This was he, of whom the proverb is made,
Midas ears, etc. And in Sicyonia reigned Polybus their second king in Gedeons
time. Cadmus, who for jealousy of his wife Armonia the sister of Iasius,
brought letters first into Greece from Phenicia, as Xenophon says, 17. Zeneph.
de equiuecis.
letters.

Now after Gedeon had governed Israel forty years, he likewise died, having
left behind him three score and ten sons, lawfully gotten by wedlock, and
one bastard by his concubine Druma, a woman of Sichem. This bastard was named
Abimelek, a wicked and a cruel tyrant, full of all mischief, The tyranny of
Abimalec.
and bent to all wickedness: he slew by his treachery, conferring with his
mothers kinsfolks, all his brethren, only Iotham by fleeing escaped, who a
little afterward Iotham escapes.
told the people of Sichem the parable of the trees, of the fig tree, and of
the vine tree, and of the bramble. This Abimelek, when he had usurped the
kingdom, and put all his brethren to death, using all kind of tyranny in
such sort of wickedness, that after he had slain all the Sichemites, and taken
the City, and burned a thousand of men in the Tower, he then destroyed the
City, and sowed salt therein, that it might be unfruitful, and never serve
to any use.

Thus was Sichem destroyed for their ingratitude to Gedeons sons. Then Theber
and Abimelech besieged it, where a woman threw a piece of a millstone upon
Abimelechs head, and slew him, after he had usurped three years the
government.

Thus God takes vengeance on tyrants, by such miserable death: for mark the
calamity that fell upon the posterity of Gedeon, a man of singular favor
with God, and yet three score and ten of his sons by wedlock slain, and
his bastard the tyrant that slew them, to succeed him. The sin of Israel
was the cause thereof, and of many more plagues.

Miletum, a town in Miletia the Country of Thales, one Miletum builded.
of the seven wise men of Greece, was about this time builded, and Tire an
other famous town was builded in Phenicia: Tire is builed.
this was builded 240. years before the Temple of Solomon was builded.

Thola of the tribe of Isachar, now judged Israel three and Thola Judge in
Israel.
twenty years, during which time, the people lived in tranquillity and peace
in the beginning of the fourth Iubile, at which time flourished Orpheus the
Thracian, and the great Musician. Sosarinus the 26. king of the Assyrians,
reigned in Niniue at this time. Hercules the son of Amphitrion, Hercules
borne.
was likewise in this age borne.

After Thola, succeeded not by succession (as I wrote before) but by the
election of God, (for the will of the Lord should be a law to his people)
Iair the Gileadite, of the tribe Iair the 8. Judge of Israel.
of Manasses, the 8. Judge of Israel, under whom likewise the Israelites lived
quietly all the time of his government, which was 22. years: who ruled Israel
in prosperity, having 30. Iairs 30. sons.
sons that rode on 30. assecoltes, men of great authority: and they had 30.
cities in the land of Gilead. As soon as Iair Iairs 30. sons possessed 30.
Cities.
died, Israel wrought wickedness in the sight of the Lord: they served Baalim
and Astaroth, the gods of Syria and Sidon: and God was angry, and gave them to
the hands of the Philistims, and the children of Ammon, who vexed and
oppressed Judah, Israel oppressed.
Benjamin, and the house of Ephraim, against whom the children of Ammon went
over Jordan to fight with them: so that all Israel, specially they that dwelt
in the lands of the Amorites beyond Jordan, were sore tormented. 1. Reg. cap.
10.


Then they cried, then they prayed, then they confessed their sins, and
said, they had served Baalim. God most mercifully heard their cry, and
appointed them Ieptha a valiant Ieptha is appointed their captain.
Captain, the son of a stranger, and therefore was chased away by his
brethren, and now by God appointed their Captain: whom they rejected before
as no body, now God has chosen to do these enterprises. Men often desire
help, even of those, whom before they have refused. This poor abject, exiled
and banished by his brethren, slew and destroyed the Ammonites, and took
twenty of their cities, for the which fact, Ieptha was much envied by the men
of Ephraim, in the like sort as they of Sichem did envy Gedeon:
notwithstanding, he killed 42. thousand Ephramites.

Thus Ieptha ruled Israel 6. years, and ended his government Ieptha ruled 6.
years and died.
most happily. Tantanes reigned and governed the Assyrians about this time: and
Theseus the 10. king of Athens overcame the monster Minotaurus. The history
you Minotaurus.
shall read in Plutarch, in the life of Theseus: for the Athenians paid
tribute to Minoes king of Creete, for the death of Androgius Androgeus son to
Minoes king of Creete slain.
his eldest son, who was by treason slain in the Country of Attica: for the
which cause Minoes pursuing the revenge of his death, the Athenians by
entreatie of peace, to appease Minoes wrath, sent to Minoes, which peace being
granted upon condition, that the Athenians should be bound to send him yearly
unto Creete 7. young boys, and as many young girls, some say, to feed
Minotaurus the huge monster; others say they were shut within the Labyrinth,
wandering up and down, and could get no place to come to, until such Theseus
sailed to Creete.
time as they died: some others say, that king Minoes kept these youths of
Athens as prisoners within the Labyrinth, in memory of his son Androgeus.
Howsoever it was, Theseus, after he had fortified Athens with people, to whom
he gave laws, and coined money, with more things, sailed from Athens unto
Creete, and wanne the city of Gnosus, slew Deucalion with all his Guard and
Officers, and killed Minotaurus. Minotaurus slain.


About this time, Hercules instituted certain games or masteries, called
afterward Olympiades, in respect of Mount Olympus, The games of Olympia.
the place where these exercises were appointed. This was 430. years before
any Olympiade began. Likewise in the time of this Judge Iephthe, Theseus
ravished Helene Menelaus Theseus ravished Helen.
wife, and was by Aedoneus king of the Molossians, taken and imprisoned: but by
his companion Hercules he was rescued and delivered. Hercules took Ilion,
killed Laomedon the king, and gave the kingdom to Priamus his son.

At what time, the Amazones, a people of Scythia, moved wars against the
Thebans: here is the first mention made of them in histories, of whose
original you may read Iustine, Justin. lib. 2.
where you shall see more. Now after Ieptha had governed Israel 6. years,
obeying God in all things, save in his rash vow, in sacrificing his
daughter, he died, and was buried in one of the cities of Gilead.

Abesan the Bethlemite, of the tribe of Judah, governed the Israelites Abesan
supposed to be Boaz the husband of Ruth.
7. years. Certain writers suppose this Abesan to be the Prophet David's
Grandfather: for Ishai David's father, was borne in the time of Iair, in the
which time happened inter regnum for 18. years, whereby the Hebrews were
compelled to serve the children of Ammon, and the Philistims. They were in
great misery this time, until Israel repented, Iudic. 10.
which was the only repentance and acknowledging of sins we can read of
Israel, described in the Judges at large. This Abesan had 30. sons, and 30.
daughters, and he sent his 30. daughters to bring other 30. more for his
sons, and when he had governed 7. years, he died, and was buried at
Bethlehem. Then Elon came in steed of Ieptha: he was of the tribe Elon.
of Zabulon, and he judged Israel 10. years, and died, and was buried in the
Country of Zabulon. After him Abdon of the Abdon.
tribe of Ephraim, judged Israel 8. years. Of these three last Judges there is
nothing left in memory worth the writing.

During this time, in Niniue governed Tanteus, the 29. king of the Assyrians
Mezentius governed the Tuscans: but being driven by the people, called
Vitulones, out of his chief Herodot. lib. 2.
city, he fled unto an other city of his, called Carites, and from thence
gathered a great army, and went in arms against Aeneas with Turnus. Protheus
the Egyptian, a Priest of great Ianus, flourished this time. Likewise happened
this season, a great deluge in Egypt, called diluuium Pharaonicum, in Diodo.
lib. 2.
so much that the Isle of Pharaoh was drowned with water. Agamemnon reigned
now in Mycena, of whom Thucidides does make mention in the preface of his
first book.

About this time, Helene again was taken away by Paris: hereby the Grecians
did gather a great army for rescuing of The second rauishment of Helen.
Helene: after, Messengers being sent unto Priamus, and being denied of
restoring of Helene, the Greeks prepared for wars 1210. nauies, as Dares
Frigius writes. After this greatwarre, the Latins began their kingdom,
over whom Aeneas after Latinus time was the first king, having married
Lauinia, Latinus daughter. All these things were done in the beginning of the
sixth Iubile, at which time reigned in Athens, Demophon the 12. king of the
Athenians, and one Mopsus reigned in Cilicia, of whom they were named
afterward Mopsecrenae.

Then after Abdons death, Israel had no Judge for forty Eusebius.
years, but continued in their wickedness, and offended the Lord, whereby they
were oppressed by the Philistims, until the birth of Samson, of the tribe of
Dan, whom God had blessed with many virtues, as strength, courage, godliness,
and zeal to revenge the people of god upon the Philistims. This was the last
Judge of Israel: but for that the history is written in the 13. 14. 15. and
16. of the Judges, I will omit other things: for during the time of Samson,
which was twenty years, Israel Samson 20. years.
was by the Philistims much molested, and forty years after Samson, when the
Israelites were governed under Ely the Elie 40. years.
high Priest. Now the Judges of Israel ended that government, which God
delivered them even from Moses death, until the birth of Samuel, 357. years,
adding thereunto 40. years of Moses government, does make the continuance of
the Judges of Israel to be 380. and 17.

About this time, Orestes the sixth king of Mycena, slew Pyrrhus Orestes slew
Pirrhus.
the son of Achilles, in the Temple of Apollo: for after Orestes time, there
reigned no more kings in Mycena, but Orestes son, named Tisamenus, after
whom succeeded Penthilus, and after him Cometes, the last king of Mycena.
After this Cometes, descended the stock of Heraclides, which afterward
Heraclides.
came from Peloponesus, and took Mycena.

Thus ended the kingdom of Mycena, who began their government in the time of
Gedeon, at what time the kingdom of the Argiues was translated unto Mycena,
where reigned 10. kings, whose names are these.

Perseus. Stelenus. Euristheus, who was accounted a second Hercules for his
worthiness. After him Atreus. Theistes. Agamemnon. Orestes. Tisamenus.
Penthilus. And Cometes the last king.
The continuance of these kings was from the beginning of Gedeon, until the
beginning of Elie the high Priest, which was 157. years: so long continued the
kingdom of Mycena. Mycena.


Now after Samsons days, the house of Israel began according to their use, not
to thank God for his benefits, but still discontented, murmuring against God,
seeking new Magistrates, new laws, weary of their government and of their
The vileness of the Jews.
Judges, most desirous of change, stubborn people, and a wilful nation,
idolaters, rebellious and factious, always by disobedience offending their
God. God followed their humors, they had what they would, and they did what
they listed: Their cry for a prophet and for a king.
they had Elie the high Priest for their Judge 40. years, in his time the Arc
was taken by the Philistims, his sons slain, and himself fell from his
stool, and died. After Elie the high Priest died, they had Samuel for their
Prophet, but they still cried out for a king: for neither Judge, Priest, nor
Prophet might please them, but a King: and therefore God commanded Samuel to
anoint Saul to be their king. But first I Samuel anointed Saul.
will lay down the names of all the Judges that judged Israel, from the first
unto the last.

After Moses and Joshua succeeded

1. Othoniel of the tribe of Judah. 2. Ehud of the tribe of Ephraim. 3. Debora
of the tribe of Ephraim. 4. Barach of the tribe of Nephthal. 5. Gedeon of the
tribe of Manasses. 6. Abimelech the bastard of Gedeon, the tyrant that slew his
70. brethren. 7. Thola of the tribe of Issachar. 8. Iair of the tribe of
Manasses. 9. Iephthe of the tribe of Manasses. 10. Elon of the tribe of
Zabulon. 11. Abdon of the tribe of Ephraim. 12. Samson the last Judge of the
tribe of Dan. After these, Ely the Priest, and Samuel the Prophet.
Now God had commanded Samuel to anoint Saul their king, saying unto Samuel,
They have not cast thee away, but they have cast me away ever since I brought
them out of Egypt to this day, because they were not content with the order
that God had appointed, but would be governed as the Gentiles were.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the third change of the common wealth of the Hebrews, first from
Oligarchia under the Patriarchs: secondly from Aristocratia under the Judges,
now to a Monarchy under Kings, which Israel cried out and never ceased until
they had a king.

NOw Saul was king of Israel in the beginning Saul was chosen king of Israel.
of the 7. Iubile, at what time Tineus governed the Assyrians, and Melanthus
governed Athens: for though Saul and Samuel governed together 40. years, yet
Saul governed as a king (as both Josephus and Ruffinus affirmed) not ten
years. He had good success in the beginning of his wars, for God gave him
the spirit of strength and courage against the Moabites, Edomites, Ammonites,
and against the Philistines, till Saul disobeied God in sparing of Agag, for
the Saul spared Agag, and was reproved by Samuel.
which Samuel reproved Saul, and the lord rejected Saul, and his kingdom was
gluen to David. For after the great victories of Saul of those before rehearsed
nations, he was commanded by Samuel to take arms against the Amalekites, and
to spare neither man, woman, or child, cattle or beasts: but for saving of
Agag the king, and few of the fattest beasts for sacrifice, Saul lost his
kingdom: disobedience was the cause thereof.

Some may think the cause to be small that Saul did, to be rejected from his
kingdom, the sparing of a kings life: So 50000. Bethshemites slain forlooking
into the Ark of the Lord.
likewise may they judge of the men of Bethshemesh, who because they had looked
into the Ark of the Lord, he slew 50. thousand, three score and ten men: for
it was not lawful for any either to touch the Arc, or to look within it,
save only to Aaron the high priest: and to difobey GOD, and to break Gods
commandment, is a thing most terrible. Now though Saul spared Agag,
disobeying God, yet Samuel Samuel hewed Agag.
most zealously without any further delay hewed him in pieces.

After this, Samuel returned to his house to Bethleem, where he was commanded
to anoint one of the sons of Ishai king of Israel: and having all the seven
sons of Ishai before him, save the youngest which was David, who kept his
fathers sheep in the fields, Samuel commanded David to be sent for: at whose
coming the Lord said to Samuel, Arise, anoint him: for this is he. And
Samuel took the horn of The first anointing of David king of Israel.
oil, and anointed him king in the midst of his brethren, and the spirit
of the Lord came upon David from that time forward, and the spirit of the Lord
departed from Saul. And now though David was anointed king by Samuel the
Prophet, yet GOD would have David to be exercised in many things before he
should have the use of the kingdom.

After this Samuel went to Ramah to his house, and came no more to see Saul
until Saul died. Samuel loved Saul much, and mourned much for him, and God
therefore reproved Samuel. Samuel was a godly Judge over Israel, who with
great care and diligence served God, and governed his people, keeping his
circuit once every year, from Bethel to Galgala, and from Galgala to Masphat,
and from Masphat to all towns upon his ways to Ramah, where Samuel dwelt, and
there he set up an altar unto the Lord and judged Israel. Even so did Debora
sit under a Palm tree between Deb^ra.
Ramah and Bethel, judging and determining causes of the people.

This Prophet governed Israel forty years. Saul being deposed and thrown
from his kingdom, he fell unto great melancholy, imagining how he might
compass and bring things to pass with troubled mind: for the evil spirit
of the Lord came upon him, that he oftentimes was molested and vexed with
troublesome thoughts. And to ease the king of these agonies, instruments of
Music, with all kind of harmony were thought very necessary of his counsel.
David was called and sent for by Saul David sent for by Saul.
to play upon the harp before Saul: for he was skillful in Music: so Saul
loved David and made him his armor bearer.

While Saul was in this melancholy mood, the Philistines were again in arms
against Israel, wasted their country, destroyed their Cities, and provoked the
Hebrews to war. Saul made ready his host: but while yet they were
preparing for the battle, Goliath a mighty huge man, a great Giaunt, vaunted
forward from the host of the Philistines Goliath.
by himself, cried and called for a combat, if any one man of the Hebrews
durst, defying Israel, and blaspheming their God.

But GOD prepared David's heart mighty and valiant, David slew the great Giant
Goliath.
and with a sling to be able to overthrow this Giant: for David by the
experience which he had in time past by Gods help, nothing doubts the
danger of Goliath, sithence he killed a Lion and a Bear before this time,
being but a shepeheard in the field. He was fully persuaded by Gods spirit
to have the victory over Goliath, being moved with a fervent zeal to be
revenged upon this blasphemer.

But true it is, Comes virtuti inuidia. Here Saul began to Saul's envy to David.
envy David, and to lay snares to kill him: for great actions are full of
dangers. But there is no danger where God defends and saves: the virtues of
David purchased much envy, much danger, which David escaped by the providence
of God. But Saul still devised his destruction, using all policies, and
inuenting many stratagemes to overthrow David, promising David his daughter
Michol to wife, seeking at David's hands nothing but valiant courage and
service against the Philistines. But the more victories David wanne, the more
danger ensued him: the greater service he did, the more he was envied and
hated: for Saul feared David seeing the Lord was with him, and Jonathan the
son of Saul told David the wicked purpose of his father, so that David was
driven to flee from Saul, and to hide himself in a Cave.

Samuel the Prophet about this time died, and was buried Samuel died at Rama in
his own City.
in Ramah his own city. David being still persecuted of Saul, wandered and
fled from Saul to Achis king of Gath, where he should have a charge under the
king to fight against Israel, which troubled him not a little: yet such was the
infirmity of David, that he durst not deny the king. Now Saul all this 1.
Sam. 2. 8.
while following his wicked purpose, consulted with a witch to know of Samuels
spirit the success of his kingdom, by whom, I mean not Samuels spirit, but
the spirit of Satan, he was fully certified of his ruin and of the end of his
kingdom which happened to Saul and to his children: for it fell out that Saul
killed himself, and his children were slain in the Saul killed himself iu
Gilboa. 1. Sam. 31. 2890 The triumph of the Philistines over Saul.
battle, a cruel life has a desperate end.

After, the Philistines found Saul, Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malchishua his
three sons lying dead in mount Gilboa after the victory, and the Philistines
cut off Saul's head, and stripped him out of his armor, and they laid up his
armor in the house of Ashtaroth their idol, and hanged his body on the wall
of Bethshan in token of victory and triumph. Saul died after the deliverance
of Israel from Egypt 473. years, after the calling of Joseph into dignity in
Egypt 660. years, and after the flud 1234. years.

Thus the wicked in their pomp and pleasure consider not the judgment of God.
During this time reigned Dircillus over the Assyrians, the 31. king, and Aeneas
Siluius the 4. king of the Latins. In Athens this time reigned Codrus the last
king of the Athenians, between whom and the Peloponesians grew great wars,
and continued unto the last destruction of all Greece. In the time of Saul
certain people were driven out of Thessalia called Boeotij: they found a land
to inhabit, which at this day is called Boeotia, before named Cadmeia. The The
kings of Sicyonum, called otherwise Peloponesus, ended in Saul's days, even
when Israel began their kingdom.

About this time the kingdom of Lacedemonia began, where first reigned
Euristhenes, of whom descended Leonidas and Cleomenes, two valiant captains,
which overthrew the Persians in the great battle at Thermophila. About this
time descended the stock of Heraclides into Peloponesus. Read of this further
in Herodotus. Homerus surnamed Chius, a great Magitia^, flourished in Saul's
time, the kingdom of Corinth together with the Lacedaemonians began a little
before the eight Iubilee, in the year of the world 2865.

But to go forward in the history, Saul being dead, and David the last time
after Saul's death anointed king over all Israel. 2. Sam. cap. 5.
David the last time anointed, the kingdom of Israel not yet came to David's
hands: for some of Saul's sons lived and withstood David, as heirs to Saul,
and held all the tribes of Israel save the tribe of Judah, over whom David was
the second time anointed king, and David dwelt in Hebron 7. years: Ishboseth
the son of Saul was likewise anointed king over the house of Israel: hence
grew great wars between the house of Saul and the house of David: for Abner
the chief captain of Saul, and the master of Saul's horses, thought it not fit
that any should govern Israel but Saul's son, who was right heir to the
kingdom, persuading the people thereunto, and gathering force together, and
would by the sword make Ishboseth king of Israel, who kept then his court at
Manahim, under whom all the Hebrews saving the tribe of Judah were ruled.

David this time lying in Hebron, and hearing of Abners preparation to wars,
consulted with the Lord, and solicited A battle between Abner the chief
captain of Saul, and Ioab the chief captain of David.
his own cause carefully: he appointed Ioab to be his Lieutenant. These two
great captains Abner and Ioab, full of indignation, and willing to try the
kingdom by battle, they met by the poole of Gibeon where Abner and Ioab fell
to the sword, and the battle was exceeding sore that same day. But Abner and
the men of Israel fell before Ioab, so that 360. men were slain. Thus God
would confirm David in his kingdom by overthrowing of his adversaries. These
wars continued long, for Abner made all his power for the house of Saul.

But God wrought otherwise to bring his purpose to pass: while Saul lived, he
had a concubine named Rizpha, with whom Abner kept company, and consumed more
time with Rizpha then he did in the service of Ishboseth. The king being moved
with some choler, charged Abner with his fault concerning his fathers
concubine: this check could not be well disgested of Abner, and therefore he
communed with the elders of Israel, and persuaded them to take David for their
king: and after that, Abner went to Hebron to David, and promised him that he
would bring all Israel under his government: and all this Abner did rather for
malice and hatred that he bare to Ishboseth, then for any good will he bare to
David. Notwithstanding, David accepted in good part his coming to him, though
Ioab would have had the king to slay Abner for his private grudge, which was
the killing of Asahel Ioabs brother, which within a while after Ioab revenged,
for he killed Abner unknowing to David, whose death David lamented much. Ioab
kills Abner.


When these news came to Saul's son that Abner was dead in Hebron, he was
discouraged, and all Israel was afraid 2. Sam. cap. 3.
with him, and so within a while after he was slain by Banah and Rechab, two
men that were captains of bands: this they both did in hope of lucre and
favor with David, and they were rewarded, as he that slew Saul: for in as much
as neither the example of him, nor duty to their master, nor innocence of the
person, nor the reverence of the place did fear them, they died for it. Now
David was made king over all Israel, after he had reigned seven years over
Judah in Hebron: he went with all his army to Jerusalem unto the Iebusites the
inhabitants of the land at that time, and took the forte of Zion, and dwelt
there, and builded round about it. Hiram king The Moabites and the Philistines
are ouerthrown by David, and are tributaries to Israel.
of Tyrus sent Cedar trees, and carpenters and masons, they builded a house for
David. Again, the Philistines came up against David, and he smote them from
Geba to Gazer. The arc was not yet come from the house of Abinadab in Gibeah,
whither David with 3000. chosen men of Israel went, to bring 2. Sam. cap. 8.
the arc to the city of David.

When David had subdued the Iebusites, Philistines, and other diverse nations,
as the Syrians, Phoenicians, Edomites, Ammonites, Moabites, and Mesopotamia,
until the river of Euphrates, so that David's fame spread far, his kingdom
prospered, his people grew strong, and himself in all his enterprises most
happy: Then David ruled and reigned over all Israel, and executed judgment and
justice to his people. And being at rest from his enemies with great quietness
in Jerusalem, behold, both his 2 Samuel 11. 12.
fortune and his great fame forsook him: for he committed adultery with
Bethsabe Vrias wife, and wrote his letters to Ioab Ioab was sisters son to
David.
his lieutenant, with Vrias in this sort. Put Vrias in the forefront of the
battle, and cause the soldiers to recule back from Vrias, that he may be
smitten and die. Which being done, the king was glad, and took Vrias wife to
his house, and married her: but the Lord was angry with David, and sent Nathan
to Nathan the Prophet sent to accuse David of adultery and murder.
accuse him of adultery and murder. What grew of this? cruel dissension
between David and his children. God gave over David to be afflicted and
tormented on both sides, inward and outward. For Amnon defiled his sister
Tamar, and Absalon killed Amnon: such was the wrath of God upon the house of
David, that one wickedness fell on the neck of another: Absalon fled upon the
killing of his brother, and went to Geshur, and then Absalon practiced to
aspire to the kingdom, and laid snares to entrap his father the king. Absalon
gathered force to dispossess David, for Achitophels council is always ready
A^hitophels council.
in matters of treason.

Now David felt the anger of God for sin, he confessed that he had deserved
this plague: for David was faithful and obedient to God, and showed himself
contented with these afflictions. Absalon goes forward with his army, and
David fled over Jordan to Mahanaim: Absalon passes likewise over Jordan and
followed fast, as Achitophel had councelled him: so Israel and Absalon pitched
in the land of Gilead. God raised favorers unto David in every place where he
came: for certain of the Reubenites and Gadites could not bear the insolency
of the son against the father, and therefore with all the power they had,
they joined with David, and the battle began, so there was a great slaughter
of Absalons side, to the number of 2000. Israel fled before Ioab, and Absalon
was caught by the hair of his head under a bough of an oak, where he hanged
till Ioab came and killed him, and so David again was restored Absalon killed.
to his kingdom, being persecuted of Achitophel for his counsel, of Semei for
his threatening and cursing, and of Absalon for his treason.

Now this war being ended, new wars again began between Judah and the
ten tribes of Israel, more cruel then the wars of Absalon: for Sheba a man
of Ephraim, he now again raised Israel against David, and made the Israelites
to forsake David, and to follow Sheba: but his head was carried by Ioab to
David. After this, David had four great battles with Four battles with the
Philistines.
the Philistines, slew them, and subdued them unto the last.

Thus was David delivered by God from all dangers, tyranny and treason, and
saved from Saul, Absalon and many others. When David had gotten by the sword
peace and quietness, and brought all nations subject unto him, he took his
rest and thanked God in Psalms, Hymns, Odes and Verses, which David sang unto
God in praise of victories which God gave him. But yet more troubles came on
David: The Lord so suffered Satan to tempt him, that David commanded Ioab
nombred all Israel by the commandment of David. 2. Sam. 24. Troubles in Israel
again.
Ioab to number all Israel and Judah, from Dan to Beersheba, which Ioab did: the
people were in number of able fighting men, 1100000. Gods wrath was kindled
against Israel, so that much it offended God that David should trust in me^,
sithence only God had oftentimes delivered him: and the Lord sent Gad, David's
seer, with three things to take his choice: Pestilence, Gad the prophet sent to
David.
Famine, or War. David chose rather to fall to Gods mercy, then to trust to
man. Then fell pestilence in Israel from the one side of the country to the
other, and there died 70000. men.

Now after this, David waxed old, and he caused Solomon his son to be
anointed king before he died, whom he charged to walk before God uprightly,
exhorting him to serve God, to use justice and judgment in Israel. David
commanded David's counsel to Solomon.
Solomon his son to kill Ioab for his murdering of Abner and Amasa, and to
take the like punishment of Semei which railed and cursed me, when (says he) I
was at the worst. David left to his son more wealth in Israel to build a
temple to the Lord, then Alexander the great had in Babylon by the conquest of
Darius: for Josephus does write, that Hircanus the high priest a 1000. and odd
years after David's death, opened the grave of David, and brought 3000. talents
to satisfy the rage of Antiochus Demetrius son, who laying siege to
Jerusalem, was contented to return with some of these talents without any
harm done. And David died being 70. years of age, David dies.
after he had been 40. years king of Israel: seven in Hebron, and 33. in
Jerusalem. David died 803. years after the death of Abraham, after the death of
Adam 2000. after the birth of Christ 1070.

During this time of David, reigned in Assyria Eupales the 32 king, in
Lacedemonia Argis the second king of the Lacedaemonians. Now failed the state of
kings in Athens, and there began a new form of common wealth governed by
Judges, which The kings of Athens ended.
now began by Codrus son named Medon, after whose name they were named
afterward, Medontidae for a while. Latinus Sylaius reigned the 6. king over the
Latins, and in Corinth reigned Ixeon the second king of Corinth. About David's
time there was builded in Asia a city called Magnesia, and another in Italy
called Misene, now called Cuma.

Solomon the son of David, and the third king of Israel, of the Salomons
reign.
tribe of Judah, a man endued with singular wisdom, and in great favor with
God, as soon as he had sit on his fathers throne, he remembered the words of
David, and with care and zeal he followed his fathers steps in seeking to
please the Lord Notwithstanding, the Israelites being froward and stubborn,
ever reuolting from their GOD, were always forgetful of Gods benefits, as
after the death of David fell out: for in David's time, Israel flourished, and
all things prospered in Judah. But scant had Solomon been anointed king, but
Adoniah Salomons Adoniah Salomons elder brother aspired to the kingdom.
brother aspired to the kingdom secretly and subtillie, seeking the good will
of Bethsheba Salomons mother, and by her means to have Abishag, which David
his father loved tenderly, to wife. But his craft was found out, and his
pretensed treason spied by Nathan the prophet, and by Solomon himself: who
perceiving that Adoniah was the elder brother, and Salomons sentence upon
Adoniah.
had Abiathar the priest on his side, and Ioab who took Adoniahs part when he
would have usurped the kingdom: Solomon hereby was moved to make sure ways,
and remembering his fathers charge before he died concerning Ioab and Semei, he
executed justice first upon Adoniah, afterward commanded Adoniah slain
Benaiah to fall upon Ioab for the murdering of Abner Saul's Ioab slain.
chief captain, and Amasah a nigh kinseman of David, who envying their favor
and credit with the king, slew them, and was now justly punished for sheading
of blood.

Now Adoniah and Ioab two great enemies of the king, being Abiathar the priest
banished.
dead, Solomon banished Abiathar the priest, and called to be a priest Sadock
in the room of Abiathar: and so the office of the high priest was taken away
from the house of Eli, and restored to the house of Phineas. After that,
Solomon called Shemei, The office of the high Priest was taken from Elies house.
and charged him with the breaking of his oath in passing over the river of
Cedron being forbidden by the king, and charged him further with wickedness
against his father David, in reuiling and cursing of him, and he was likewise
slain by the son of Iehoida called Benaia. By this means the kingdom of
Israel was established in Salomons hands, and Solomon obeyed Solomon married the
daughter of Pharaoh.
God in all things, and then he takes Pharaoes king of Egypts daughter to wife.

Josephus in his eight book and 2. chapter, says: that the kings of Egypt
were al called Pharaones from Minaeus time that builded Memphis, until the time
of Solomon, which was 1300. years: for Minaeus reigned in Egypt many years
before Abraham came to Egypt, and this is the cause why Herodotus does omit the
names of the kings of Egypt, even 330. kings. Solomon repaired the walls of
Jerusalem, and went to Gibeon, to sacrifice: for there their tabernacle was at
that time, there was no temple yet builded to the Lord in Jerusalem. In Gibeon
the Lord appeared by dream to Solomon, and gave him wisdom more Solomon
flourished.
then any prince of the world had, as by his sentence upon the two harlots
appeared.

Solomon flourished and prospered, and far excelled all the kings of the
world: for his wisdom was so abundant, as the sand that is on the sea shore:
No Philosopher, no Astrologer, no Chaldean magi, no Egyptian priest might
apprehend Salomons judgment, for God was his schoolmaster. Solomon was famous
throughout the whole world: he wrote 3000. Solomon wrote 3000. proverbs and
parables.
Proverbs, and books of Odes and Verses 1000. and made five and twenty songs
which perished in Jerusalem when Israel was taken captive unto Babylon, the
temple then being burned, and the city destroyed. He wrote of all kind of
trees, He wrote of trees from the highest to the lowest, Joseph. lib. 8. cap. 2.
from the Cedar tree that is in Libanon, unto the Hysope that grows on the
wall. He spoke of beasts, fowls and fishes: He wrote of incantations and of
other secret arts, which Josephus affirms at large. And there came of all
countries to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and all the kings about him sent
unto him and sought his favor.

Now coucerning the princes, rulers and officers which were under Solomon, the
purueiance for victuals, the number of his horses, and the order of his house,
they were almost incredible, were it not written in sacred histories. Solomon
reigned over all kingdoms from the river of Euphrates unto the 1. Reg. cap. 4.
land of the Philistines, and unto the border of Egypt. And to speak of the
hospitality of Solomon, and to set it down as it is in the Bible read, it
exceeded: for every day he had 30. measures of fine flower, and 60. measures of
meal for bread: he had ten fat oxen, and 20. oxen of the pastures, and one
hundred sheep, besides Hearts, Buckes, and other diverse fat fowls. Solomon
had 4000. stalles of horses and chariots, in every 40000. horses.
stall ten horses, which in all amount to 40000. and he had 12000. horsemen.
This blessing had Solomon at Gods 2. Cron. 9.
hand: for the which benefits he was much bound to set forth The hospitalitic
of Solomon.
Gods glory, which had given him such wisdom to govern, such rest and peace in
his government, that he sent to Hiram king of Tyrus an old friend of David his
father for Cedar trees and Fur trees to build a temple to the Lord his God,
and Hiram The building of the Temple. 1. Reg. cap. 7.
satisfied Salamon to his full desire. Solomon had 7000. men that bare burdens,
and 80000. masons in the mountain, and he had three thousand and sixty, whom
Solomon appointed officers and under officers of the work. As for the form
and frame of the Temple, the height, the breadth, the length, and the deep
foundation thereof, with all things belonging thereunto, as Cherubins, caldrons,
bases, cups, pillars, candlesticks, pots, vessels, altars, tables, bowls and
basins, it is in order written in the kings. The Temple being finished, the
Arc was brought to the Temple, where the ten Commandments were written
where Solomon made his prayers to God, to accept their sacrifice, to sanctify
the temple, and to continue with Israel for ever. Solomon all this while The
Lord appeared to Solomon the second time.
followed the Lord, and therefore God appeared unto him the second time, as he
appeared unto him first at Gibeon, promised him that he would establish the
throne of Israel, and defend his people for ever, if they would walk in his
ways: in token whereof the glory of God filled the temple, fire came down
from heaven and consumed their sacrifice, and Gods presence was with Solomon.
Saba.


Now the renown of Solomon went far, so that Saba Queen of Aethiope came to
Jerusalem to hear Solomon, and to see his port: but after, Solomon fell from
God, he loved many outlandish women which were idolaters, he followed the
women of Moab, of Edom, and of Ammon, and of Sydon, that he had 3. hundred
Queens and Princes that were Solomon had 300. wives, 700. concubines.
his wives, and 700. concubines: these women turned Salomons heart from GOD
after the gods of the Gentiles, so that he worshipped Ashtaroth and Milcom,
the gods of the Ammonites, his God forsook him therefore, and raised up
Solomon an Idolater.
adversaries, even Jeroboam a servant of Solomon, but an ouerseer of his
work, whom Solomon sought by diverse means to kill. But Jeroboam fled to
Egypt, where he kept himself till Solomon died. Thus Solomon, whom God with so
many blessings had exalted above all the kings of the world, left to his son
Rehoboam whom he loved best, the kingdom of Israel to govern: after he had
reigned in Israel 40. years, he died before the nativity of Christ 1000.
years, before the Solomon died.
birth of Romulus the first king of Rome, 231. before Alexander reigned king in
Macedonia, 666. and before the last destruction of Jerusalem by Titus
Vespasian, 1070.

While Solomon governed Israel, Laostanes the 33. king of the Assyrians reigned
in Niniuie, Labotes reigned in Lacedemonia, What kings reigned in other
countries.
and Agesilaus in Corinth. This time governed the Athenians, Agastus the second
Judge of Athens, and Alba Syluius reigned over the Latins the 7. king. In
Salomons time was Ephesus builded by Andronicus, as Eusebius affirms, and in
Egypt governed Simendes called in the scripture Sisac, to whom Jeroboam (as you
heard) fled from Solomon for fear in the 21. Dinasteia of the Egyptians. The
son of Hiram called Baleastartus succeeded in Tyrus, and lived but 7. years.
Sadock and Ahiah Solomon began his kingdom in the year of the world, 2930.
were now prophets in Israel. Solomon began his kingdom in the year of the
world, 2930. After the going of Israel out of Egypt 480. years, 12. years
before the beginning of the 9. Jubilee, Solomon began to build the temple in
the 4. year of his reign, before the building of Rome, 300. years, after the
calling of Abraham from Chaldea, 910. years. Solomon builded to himself in
Libanon a house for his pleasure, and this was in making 13. years, and was
finished 20. years after the building of the Temple, before the monarchy of
Macedonia gotten by Alexander the great, 700. years, and before Augustus
Caesar's empire 1000. years. Solomon died before Romulus birth, 231. years
before Christ, 1000. years, and before the last destruction of Jerusalem under
Titus Vespasian. 1070.

CHAP. V.
Of the taking away of the ten tribes from Judah to Samaria, by Jeroboam: of the
first division of Israel, of their wars and last destructions of the kings of
Israel by Salmanasser.

NOw after Solomon, reigned Roboham his son borne of an Ammonitish woman
named Noma. Jeroboam now being in Egypt when Solomon died, he was sent for by
some of the elders of Israel: God brought it to pass, that when Jeroboam came
from Egypt unto Sichem, the people followed Jeroboam, and fled from Roboham:
for he despised the counsel of the ancient wise men which followed Roboham
despised counsel.
Solomon his father, and he only esteemed rash and young counsel, whereby
Jeroboam being strong and stout, and subtle amongst the people, perceiving
the nature of the people to be drawn from the son of Solomon, God suffering
Jeroboam sent for into Egypt
these things to go forward for the sins of Israel, Ieroboham builded him an
house in Sichem, and not long contented Joseph. lib. 8. cap. 3.
with that, he builded another house for his dwelling in a town called Penuel.

Now about this time in Jerusalem, approached the feast of the Tabernacle, which
Jeroboam considered of, and saw it was dangerous to let the people to go to
Jerusalem, least the people should take pleasure with the rites and ceremonies
of the Temple, with their solemn pomp and dignity in religion, with their
sacrifices and feasts, and therefore he erected two altars, the one in Bethel,
the other in Dan, and caused two golden calves there to be worshipped. Here the
ten tribes of Israel committed idolatry, forsook their God, and they
followed Jeroboam in all wickedness. Thus Dan and Bethel with all the
idolatry of Israel, continued till Idolatry in Dan and Bethel.
Josias time.

Roboham this while having but the tribe of Judah and Benjamin under his
government, repaired his Cities, fortified his country, and gathered an army
of an hundredth and four score thousand to fight against Jeroboam, and to bring
Israel again to Roboham. But they were warned by the Prophet Shemaiah not to
fight, saying, This is done by GOD, who of his just judgment will punish
offenders: all this happened for Salomons sins. Now the kingdom was divided
The people of Israel divided
to two names: Israel which continued two hundred sixty two years, and Judah
which continued three hundred ninety three years, but both Judah and Israel
forsook God, and followed idolatry, until GOD at length by his just
judgment destroyed them utterly: for the rigor of Roboham in following of
lewd counsel, made the people to rebel, the house of David against the house
of Israel: he followed women, and had eighteen wives and threescore
concubines, Roboham had 18. wives, 60. concubines.
he had eight and twenty sons, and three score daughters.

Roboham forsook the Lord, and therefore Susack king of Susack came up against
Jerusalem.
Egypt came up against Jerusalem, ransackt the City, spoiled the Temple, and
took the treasures of the City, and of Robohams house: this was the first
destruction and affliction of Jerusalem: for Roboham had transgressed the
commandments of God: for no calamities could come to Israel, no country might
annoy them, no king could hurt them. But when the Lord gave them over for
sin, this Susack king of Egypt Susacks army.
came in the fifth year of Roboham, with twelve hundred chariots, with three
score thousand horsemen, and the people were innumerable that were with him, as
Josephus says, four hundredth thousand footmen came from Egypt with him,
Lubins, Sukimes, people of Africa, called also Troglodites, The first time
that Jerusalem was taken by Susack.
he had Aethiopians, Egyptians, with diverse other more nations, and he took
the strong cities of Judah, and carried their treasure to Egypt.

After the time of Roboham, who reigned 17. years, succeeded Roboham died.
him in Jerusalem his son Abia: against whom Jeroboam straight after Robohams
death, came in arms with great expedition: they both prepared for the battle,
the greatest army that ever was in Israel. Abia had four hundred Abia moned
wars against Jeroboam.
thousand chosen men: Jeroboam had eight hundred thousand men, and the battle
met and fought: and for that Abia trusted in the Lord, who is the stay of all
kingdoms, and the giver The greatest battle that ever was in field, and the
greatest slaughter.
of all victories, he had such a victory over Jeroboam, that Israel fled
before Judah, and God delivered them unto the hands of Abia being young of
years, and too tender to execute such a charge, and to govern such an army,
so that the slaughter was great, eue^ five hundred thousand chosen men slain,
so that Judea prevailed against Israel at that time, because they depended upon
the Lord of their fathers: so Jeroboam was brought under at that time. He was
so pursued by Abia, his strong Cities taken, his men slain, himself hardly
escaped, the Lord plagued him that he could not recover (...). Cron. cap. 13.
strength in Israel again all the days of his life. For because God made him
a king of a servant, and he neglected the service of God and forgot his
benefits, therefore he was justly punished, for Dan and Bethel was the first
and the greatest cause of his fall. I never read in profane histories of such
a number, neither in the history of the Church four hundred thousand
soldiers in one army, and eight hundred thousand in the other. Ieroboa^ after
he had reigned in Israel 22. years, died. See you the anger of God for
idolatry in serving and worshipping the calves of Dan and Bethel: for God gave
Israel over unto their last destruction, which was in the time of Salmanasser
Senacheribs father: for Judah devoured Israel, and Israel devoured Judah, that
both at length were destroyed and overthrown: Judah by Nabuchadonosor, and
Israel by Salmanasser: both Jerusalem and Samaria made even to the ground in
the time of Zedechias the last king of Judah, and Osea the last king of Israel.

Then succeeded Ieroboham in Israel Nadab their second Jeroboam died. Nadab the
2. king of Israel.
king, the natural son of Ieroboha^, wicked, malicious, cruel, following his
fathers steps in idolatry and all wickedness. But God stirred up one tyrant to
punish an other: for Nadab did offend in provoking the people to commit
idolatry with his golden calves, and as he was most busy in besieging a
town belonging to the Philistims, named Gibbethon: he was slain of Baasha,
according to the Oracle of God before spoken. The sin of Jeroboam was great,
and therefore Baasha was appointed by God to destroy all the house of Jeroboam:
he slew Nadab, and reigned in his steed.

In Judah now reigned Asa, a wise, godly, and discreet man, Asa the sixth king
of Judah.
an obseruer of the laws of God, a walker in his ways: and in Israel, Baasha
the 3. king reigned, and war grew between Baasha king of Israel, and Asa
king of Judah. Ramah was builded by Baasha to that purpose, that none might go
in or out to Asa king of Judah, who followed the example of Jeroboam. But Asa
assembled all Judah, and took the stones of Ramah, and the timber thereof, and
builded Mizpah and Geba, two great towns in Judah: and the wars continued
between the house Wars between Israel and Judah. 2. Cron. cap. 15.
of Israel, and the house of Judah. But still the Lord had respect to David,
and to his stock: for Baasha and all his posterity had the like end, as
Jeroboam had, and his house. But Asa walked right before God, he destroyed
idolatry, took away the altars of the strange gods, and brake down the
images, and cut in pieces the groves: he deposed his mother Maacha from her
regencie, and threw down her idols which she had made in a grove. Asa brake
it, stamped it, and buried it at the brook of Cedron, and commanded Judah to
seek the Lord, and to serve him: for he knew like a godly king, that in
abolishing The praise of a good king.
of idolatry, and aduauncing true religion, the rest and quietness of kingdoms
stood. For when Zareus king of Aethiopia came against him with an huge army
of ten hundredth Zareus king of the Aethiopians great army.
thousand to Maresa a town of Judah, Asa prayed unto God when he should go to
fight, and acknowledged all victories Asa his victory.
to come from God, and therefore obtained the victory over the Aethiopians,
slew them, and pursued them to Gerar, and there was no war in Judah unto the
35. year of Asa. Yet he was reproved by the Prophet for his covenant with
Benhadad king of Syria, and likewise offended God to trust in Physicions to
help his disease, and not to seek help at Gods hands.

About this time, Elias and Elizeus were borne in the middle age of the world.
Capetus Siluius now reigned, the 9. king over the Latins: Eutropius calls
this king Epidus. In Assyria Eutrop. l^b. 1.
governed Ophrateus, and in Lacedemonia the fifth king Doristus, at what time
Smyrna was builded in Samos, in king Asas time, Nepher Cherres reigned in Egypt
king, for 4. years, and after him succeeded a king in Egypt, called Amenophis,
who reigned Nepher king of Egypt.
9. years. In Athens governed Phorbas the 5. Judge, and in Corinth ruled Basis
the 5. king, after whom their kings were called Bacidae, as the Roman
Emperors were named Caesares. In these days, Hiel the Bethelite did build
Jericho, which fell before Jericho reedified.
in the days of Joshua, at the sounding of the trumpets, and shouting of the
Israelites. But the judgment of God followed Ieroboams house, according to the
Prophet, saying to Nadab, and to Baasha that slew Nadab, That dogs should
eat Nadab slain by Baasha.
him that died in the city, and the fowls should eat him that should die in
the field.

After Baasha succeeded Ela his son, and reigned in Tirza 2. years, and
Zimri his servant conspired against him: and Ela slain by Zimri.
when the people heard that Zimri had killed the king, they rose against Zimri,
and made Omri their king. At that time Israel was in camp against Gibethon,
and besieged Tirza, which siege continued from the time of Nadab, Ieroboams
son, where Zimri kept him self in hold: and perceauing the city should be
taken by Omri, he burned him self, and Zimri burned himself.
the kings house with fire.

After this, reigned Omri twelve years, six in Tirza, and Joseph. li^. 8.
cap. 9.
six in Samaria, a town which he builded, and was the first king that was
buried there, after the building of Samaria, and Omri builded Samaria.
after the burning of Tirza. After this, the seat and palace of the kings of
Israel were in Samaria, and they are often called the kings of Samaria, and the
kingdom of Samaria, being so called of Samarus the lord of that soil, or
rather of that mountain, where Samaria was builded. This was the judgment of
God, to bring his purpose to pass, that one king should destroy an other king,
unto the last confusion of Israel: for such is the nature of idolatry, that
the elder it is, the more abominable it is, superstition does increase, and
danger does ensue.

After that Omri was dead and buried in Samaria his own Omri dyed. Achab his
son succeeded him.
town, Achab his son succeeded, one far worse, and more wicked then the
rest: for he mended no evil thing in Israel, but added evil to evil, and
augmented the sins of Israel: he married that ungodly and wicked wretch
Iezabel, by whose means (being wicked before) he fell to all strange and
horrible idolatry, and cruel persecution: he reared up Melancthon. Chron. 2.
groves and altars to Baal, and provoked the God of Israel more then all the
kings before him. Yet the mercy of God never failed the faithful: he stirred
up good and godly men in wicked and superstitious countries, as Abraham and
Lot, among the Chaldeans, Tobi in Niniue, Raguel and Gabel in Media, and here
amongst these idolatrous and wicked Israelites, he raised Elias and Elizeus,
Amos and Osea, faithful Prophets to instruct his Church.

Now in Judah king Afa waxed old and died, in the time Asa king of Judah dyed.
Iosaphat a good king.
of this evil and cruel king Achab, after whom succeeded his son Iosaphat,
who gave him self wholly to serve the Lord, and therefore prevailed against
Israel. God gave him a pure heart to seek Gods glory, that his enemies could
not execute their rage against him: for Iosaphat trusted in the Lord, and
abolished idolatry, and he prospered. Iosaphat builded in Judah palaces and
cities, and he taught the people in Judah, and all Judah brought presents to
Iosaphat. The Philistims and Arabians gave him gifts, and brought him tribute.

But let us leave Iosaphat a while, and return to Achab in Samaria, where
Elias was warned of famine that should come to Samaria: of which famine,
Menander in his Chronicles of Menander in his Chronicles of the kings of Tire.
the kings of Tire, does make mention: for Elias was commanded to depart
Eastward, and to hide him self in some place about the river of Cherith
against Jordan, which for want of rain became dry, and the hunger grew great
in Israel.

This famine was 800. years after the famine of Egypt, in the time of Joseph:
yet the Ravens every day fed Elias, and The Ravens fed Elias.
brought him bread and flesh every morning and every evening, and he drank of
the brook Cherith; thence went Elias to Sarepta, and there met with a poor
widow gathering sticks, of whom he asked a morsel of bread, and a little
water, and the woman said, I have but one handful of meal in a barrel, and a
little oil in a cruse, which I am about to make ready for me and for my
son, that we may eat before we die: for there was no hope of any more
sustenance: yet of The famine of Samaria.
that little she had, she gave unto the Prophet of God some part thereof, for
the which afterward the barrel was full always of meal, and the cruse full
of oil, until plenty of food came, as Elias said: he restored the widows
son being dead, to life again.

He was sent to Achab to show Gods mercy to him, and to his people in
Samaria: for the famine was great, and God pitied the wicked for the godlies
sake, and strengthened Elias with his spirit, to do great miracles, by sending
down fire from heaven to burn the sacrifice, which he had prepared to his
God, to reprove Baals prophets, therefore 400. of Baals 400. false prophets
slain.
prophets were slain by Elias, at the brook Kishon, whom their god Baal
could not help.

But Elias was sought therefore of Iezebel Achabs wife: she thought to revenge
the deaths of her Prophets, yet her rage and fury failed, and her purpose
missed of Elias. Achab by Iezebels counsel, exercised all cruelty and
tyranny: Naboth was killed for his vineyarde by Iezabels counsel: and by the
Wicked Iezebel.
wickedness of his wife, Achab became a vile Idolater, a cruel murderer, and
as one that wholly gave him self to serve sin.

Now while Achab was in committing one evil upon an other in Samaria, the
peace ended which was made for three 1. Reg. cap. 22. Joseph. lib. 8. cap. 8.
years, between Achab king of Israel, and Benhadad king of Syria: for after
that Achab had victory over Benhadad king of Syria, (for when Samaria was
besieged by the king of Syria, and the hosts of the Aramites filled the
country, yet God gave the victory to Achab. God before went about with signs
and miracles to draw Achab from his impiety, and now he gives him
victories, whereby he should acknowledge the Lord to be his God) yet still
trusting to his false prophets, he joined the second time with Iosaphat king of
Judah, and went to Ramoth Gilead, to fight again with the king of Syria, where
Achab was slain, and he was brought to Samaria to be buried, Achab slain and
is buried in Samaria
according to the Oracle of Elias.

When the king was thus slain, the battle was ended: Iosaphat returned to
Jerusalem, for Iosaphat had made affinity with Achab: for Ioram Iosaphats
son, had married the daughter of Achab, named Athalia, a wicked woman, such
as her mother Iezabel was.

Thus Iosaphat walked in David's ways, and sought not Baalim: he was virtuous
and godly, and followed the commandments of God, and forsook the trade of
Israel: he abolished idolatry from Judah, and prospered in riches and honor,
yet he was reproved and rebuked by the Prophet, for that he would help the
wicked, and love them that hated the Lord: for the wrath and judgment of God
is over all those that support the wicked. But in respect of his care and zeal
The peace and quietness in Iosaphats days.
which he had over Judah, he had happy success in all his regiment.

In the 25. year of his reign, he called all the Elders and chief officers
of Judah before him, commanded them severely to walk uprightly before God, and
to read the laws of God to the people, and to acquaint them with the true
religion: his reward was therefore peace and quietness within Judah: praemium
piorum pax. For the Philistims paid their ordinary tribute every year, and
the Arabians (as Josephus says) paid yearly to Iosaphat 630. Lambs, and so
many young kids. The Lord gave to Iosaphat victories over the Ammonits,
Ammonites, Moabites, Idumeans, by Iosaphat overthrown.
Moabites, and Idumeans: for the children of Ammon and Moab rose against the
inhabitants of Mount Seir, and one slew an other.

Thus God gave unto him marvelous victories over his enemies, and Judah
flourished 25. years, the whole time of Iosaphats government, the time of his
father Asa, and the time of his Grandfather Abia, three good kings of Judah,
during the time of 69. years, Judah prevailed against Israel.

After Iosaphats days, his son Ioram succeeded, who offended Ioram succeeded
Iosaphat his father.
the Lord, and walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and followed the
steps of his father in law Achab. Ioram made him self strong, began in
his first entering unto the kingdom, to play the tyrant: for he slew all his
brethren with the sword, and therefore Edom rebelled against Edom rebelled
against Judah.
Judah, because he had forsaken the God of his fathers.

The Philistims were stirred up against Ioram, and the Arabians: The
Philistines were stirred up against Ioram.
he was cruel, and became a tyrant even unto those, whom by nature he ought
to have most chiefly defended. But Elias prophesied to him the reward and
justice of God that would ensue thereof, as Ioram afterward felt: for as he
spared no blood, but made havoc of his brethren, and of his country, with
the sword: so it happened to him, to his wives, and to his children, by the
Arabians, and other barbarous people of the Ethiopians, who invaded his
country, dispossessed him of his life and living, and such calamities which
with his eyes he saw: he died most miserably, his guts gushing out, being in
the displeasure of God and man.

Thus is idolatry rewarded: one only son named Ochosias, Idolatry rewarded.
and that the youngest, escaped the sword, and he succeeded his father, as
wicked as he, a very Idolater, for he could not be good, being the son of
Ioram, borne of Athalia, the daughter of Achab: he followed his mothers
counsel, and walked in the way of Achab, and went with Ioram Achabs son, to
fight against Hazael, king of Syria, and he Ioram fought against Hazael king of
Siria. Iehu slew Hazael.
was in that war wounded, and after taken by Iehu king of Israel, who hiding
him self in Samaria, Iehu slew him and Ioram king of Israel, for so he was of
God commanded, and after a while he brake the neck of Iezabel Achabs wife,
and Iehu brake Iezabels neck.
reigned him self king in Israel, who was by God appointed to execute
judgment upon the house of Achab.

This king Iehu was anointed king for that purpose: Ochosias lived Ochosias
lived but one year. Athalia a cruel Queen. Athalia destroyed all the kings
seed only I^as saved. 2 Cron. 23. 2. The stock of Solomon perished.
but one year: which when his mother Athalia heard of, she rose and destroyed
all the kings seed, to the intent that there should be none to make title to
the crown, that thereby she might usurp the government: only Josias was
saved by Iorams daughter, who had married Iehoiada the high Priest, and his own
sister. This time by the tyranny of this wicked Queen, the stock of Solomon
the son of David perished, and the kingdom of Judah fell to the posterity of
Nathan, an other son of David, of whose house it pleased God that Messiah
should be borne, so that the posterity of Solomon was altogether extinguished.
This Queen restored the temple of Baal, and raised up altars, and nourished
false prophets and priests to False Prophets nouri shed and priests to
maintain Idolatry in Judah.
maintain idolatry in Judah. This Queen reigned 7. years, then was she
slain at the commandment of Iehoiada the hie Priest, the house of Baal
destroyed, and his altars broken, and Mattan the Priest of Baal slain. Ioas
now began to root out all idolatry, and to set in order all things in
Judah: he Ioas began to root out Idolatry.
pleased God, and walked in his ways, while Iehoiada the high Priest lived,
who was a faithful Counselor unto him.

But after his death, Ioas wanted good council: he followed Ioas wanted good
counsel, and therefore followed flatterers.
flatterers, and by them he was brought to idolatry, and after to tyranny,
which always join together: for Ioas killed Zachary the son of Iehoiada
the high Priest, and a Prophet of the Lord, who had saved him from the
tyranny of Athalia. Ioas killed Zachary the son of Iehoiada.
This is that Zachary of whom Christ makes mention in Luke, saying, that from
the blood of Abel the just, unto the blood of Zachary the Prophet, etc. But
what came of this? The king of Aram, he came with a small company against Ioas,
against Judah, The king of Aram came with a small company against Ioas, Judah and
Jerusalem.
and Jerusalem, and destroyed all the princes of the people, and sent all the
spoil of them unto the king of Damascus, and Ioas him self was of his own
servants slain.

In Ioas time, Elizeus the Prophet died, and Homer lived, the first and most
ancient learned amongst the Grecians. While Elizeus the Prophet died.
Ioram the son of Achab reigned king in Israel, and Ioram the son of
Iosaphat reigned king in Judah, being joined in affinity by marriage. In other
countreies reigned Persusennis Persusennis and Cheopes, kings in Egypt.
king in Egypt: from this king, and from Cheopes his predecessor in Egypt,
does Herodotus make mention, not of the number, but of the names of the kings
of Egypt. In Athens governed Mezades 30. years, the 6. Judge, and in Corinth
likewise Mezades.
Agelas the 6. king. In the days of Ioram king of Judah, reigned over the
Latins the 10. king Tiberinus Siluius 8. years.

This king being drowned in the river called then Albula, Tiber first call.
Albula.
afterward named Tiber, after his own name, Agrippa Siluius succeeded him the
11. king, and he reigned 40. years over the Latins. In Lacedemonia, Archelaus
the 7. king, who reigned 60. years over the Lacedaemonians. The people of
Rhodes at this time were lords of the seas. Pigmalion reigned king in Tire 40.
years: and in the 7. year of his reign, his sister Dido (as Josephus says)
builded Carthage, 143. years after the Carthage builded.
building of Salomons Temple, and before the building of Rome, 135. Error is in
Functius, and in other, in the time of the building of Carthage.

There was about this time of Ioas, a king that reigned over the Tuscans, named
Felcinus: he builded the chief city of the Tuscans, and named it after his
own name Felcina. The Romans long after that, called that town, and the
country it self was called Gallia Aurelia.

Now to the kings of Israel and Judah. After that Ioas had been slain by his
own servants, for the stoning to death of Zacharias: Amazias Ioas his son
succeeded him: who in the Amazias king of Judah.
beginning of his reign showed him self godly, and did execute things
uprightly, but not with a perfect heart, in respect of his predecessors: he was
called a good king: he revenged the death of Ioas his father, and puts them
to death that He revenged his fathers death.
slew him: he made provision for wars, and nombred all the men, and hired a
hundredth thousand valiant men out of Israel, for an hundredth talents of silver,
though he was forbidden by God so to do. He over comes the Edomites.


But Amazias went forwards, and slew the Edomites, and Amalekites, even 20000.
But the men of Israel requited that slaughter: they fell upon the cities of
Judah, from Samaria unto Bethoron, as they returned from Amazias to Samaria
back: and Amazias after the victory he had over the Idumeans, He commits
Idolatry.
brought their gods and their idols of Seir, and set them up to be his gods,
and worshipped them.

But the gods of Edom brought Amazias to the hands of Ioas king of Israel, and
he was afterward slain by conspiracy, Amazias slain by conspiracy.
fleeing from Jerusalem to Lachis. While Amazias reigned in Judah, Ioram lived
in Samaria, and governed Israel, and Ioram also governed Judah of that name, and
at that time: so two Iorams reigned together, one in Judah, the other in
Samaria: after whom succeeded Jeroboam his son in Israel.

In the time of Amazias king of Judah, Sardanapalus reigned Sardanapalus.
in Assyria their last king, after whom the Assyrians lost their Monarchy: for
Belochus had Babylon and Niniue, the two chief seats of the kings of Chaldea
and Assyria. Arbaces held Media and Persia under his government. Hitherto
neither the Assyrians nor Chaldeans molested Israel: but afterward God stirred
them up for his scourges, to punish Judah and Samaria for their idolatry, and
after them, the Medes and Persians were as though they were the hammers of God,
to destroy offenders.

After Amazias succeeded his son Vzias, named also Azaria: Vzias.
him did all the people of Judah make king in steed of his father: he was but
sixteen years of age when he began to reign in Israel. While he obeyed God,
he prospered in 2. Cron. cap. 26.
all his enterprises. He ouerthrewe the Philistims, brake down the walls of
Gath and Ashdod, God helped him, and prospered him against the Arabians, and
the Ammonites: he builded towers in Jerusalem, and towers in the wilderness:
his fame spread to Egypt, and all the nations about Jerusalem were under his
wings: but he waxed proud, usurped the Priests office, and he was punished
and driven out of the Temple, and the leprosy rose in his forehead: for he
transgressed Vzias leprosy.
against God, to presume to burn incense, which was the Priests office in the
Temple, being forbidden and resisted by Azaria, and four score other Priests.
Therefore he lived afterward as a leper unto the day of his death, in a Esai
prophesied.
house by himself.

Under this king Esai began to prophecy, and he prophesied 80. years the fall
of these great kingdoms, Egypt, Syria, Assyria, Chaldea, and Tire. He
likewise prophesied of Kittim, and of the Macedonians. This Prophet was by
Manasses Kittims the Romans.
king of Judah martyred, and cut in his middle with a saw.

Now during the time of this king Vzias, ruled in Israel Zachariah, the son
of Jeroboam, being the last king of Israel that had the kingdom by succession
of Iehu: for he was the fourth in descent from Iehu: for so the Lord said to
Iehu, Thy sons shall sit on the throne of Israel, unto the fourth generation
after thee.

Shallum reigned a month king in Samaria, and Manahem slew him, and reigned in
his stead. In the 39. year of Vzia, began Manahem to reign in Samaria: he
likewise sought not God, but with money sought the favor of Phulasser king of
Manahem.
Ashur, the father of Salmanassar, and graundfather of Saneherib infidels, and
enemies of God, and therefore God was wroth, so that Manahem prospered not, and
his son Pekahia Pekahiah.
succeeded him in Israel, and reigned two years and died.

Now after Vzias days, his son Ioatham succeeded him in the kingdgme of
Judah, a man of great virtue, godly, and just, and seeking to please God. He
builded many ruinous things, by reason still of wars, and he was careful to
mend things amiss, so that Ioatham became mighty, because he directed Ioatham
king of Judah.
his ways before the Highest: he fought with the Ammonites and prevailed, and
they paid him tribute. The Olympiads of Greece began in the second year of
Ioatham. The Olympiads began.


About which time, Romulus the first king and builder of Rome was borne: In
Ioathams days began first the kingdom of Lydia. Ezechias also was borne
this time: some suppose Ezechias and Romulus borne
that in Greece Lycurgus the law maker of the Lacedaemonians flourished in these
days, after whom, the kings in Lacedemonia failed, and the government was
altered.

Now when Ioatham had reigned sixteen years, Achas succeeded in Judah,
wicked, ungodly, cruel, and a great Idolater, like his predecessors: he made
moulten Images for Baalim, he burned his son, and sacrificed him unto Idols,
and devils, and therefore the Aramites smote him, and Pekah 2. Reg. 16.
king of Israel slew in Judah six score thousand in one day, and took
prisoners two hundredth thousands, and brought all the spoils and treasures
unto Samaria.

Thus Judah was destroyed, and utterly almost overthrown at that time. Achas
after this great slaughter, did send to Salmanasser king of Ashur, gave him
gold and silver, and promised him more money, but it helped him not: for Achas
sacrificed to the gods of Damascus, and to the gods of Aram, or of Syria, which
was the only cause of his destruction, which Esai the Prophet had warned him
of.

After he had reigned in Judah sixteen years, he dyed, 3215
in whose days Romulus and Remus began to build Rome. Dionysius writes,
that the walls of Rome were begun in the one and twentieth day of April,
and in the first year of the seventh Olympiad.

After this spoil and great slaughter of Judah, Salmanasser king of Ashur came
up against Samaria, after that Hosea had Hosea the last king of Israel.
reigned nine years, of the which he paid tribute for eight years, and in
the ninth of his reign he was taken prisoner, and the City of Samaria given
to the Babylonians, and to the Samaria taken 212. after it was builded by Omri.
men of Hamath, and to the men of Succoth, and to the other strangers, which
the king of Ashur brought to dwell in Samaria in stead of the people of
Israel: and the ten tribes of Israel were carried away captive unto the Cities
of the Medes.

Thus was Israel dispossessed from glory and liberty, and carried captive by
Nabonasser, unto Assyria, after they had Israel carried to Babylon.
continued two hundred fifty and three years after Salomons days, and after
the going of Israel out of Egypt seven 262.
hundred seventy and nine years, in the tenth Olympiad.

This last thraldom fell upon them for idolatry and blassphemie, which Israel
against their God committed, having so often tasted of his mercy, and seen
his works in defending them always, even from their going out of Egypt, where
they were in slavery and bondage 430. years, until now again they are
carried captives and bondmen from Samaria Sin the cause of Gods wrath.
their native country unto Babylon, 779. years after their going out of
Egypt: for they so provoked the Lord to wrath, even from Ieroboams time, who
builded Dan and Bethel, and erected golden calves therein to be worshipped, unto
the time of Osea the last king: during which time, 19. kings reigned in Israel,
of the which not one walked before God sincerely, but with horrible blasphemy
and most wicked idolatry, they worshipped idols and images, wherefore God gave
them over one to kill an other, and one to destroy an other, until Nabonasser,
which is Salmanassers time, who carried them prisoners unto other strange
countreies, and set strangers to dwell in Samaria.

CHAP. VI.
Of the continuance of the kings of Judah after the kingdom of Israel was
destroyed, Samaria taken, and the 10. tribes of Israel carried captive by
Salmanassar into Assyria.

THis time reigned in Jerusalem Ezechias, a Ezechias.
godly zealous king, who destroyed idols, and brake in pieces the brazen
serpent, he took away the high places, and cut down the groves, the altars,
their images and idols, and walked before God uprightly, and in the 14. year
of his reign came Senaherib with an huge host to Judah, spoiling and destroying
Senaherib laid siege to Jerusalem.
Libna, Lachis, and other cities, laid siege to Jerusalem, threatened the king,
and blasphemed God most horribly, challenging the gods of the nations, and
defying the God of Israel, preferring the armies of flesh, and the strength of
his host.

But his bragging and boasting was sharply punished by the Angel of God, who
slew at that time of the Assyrians an hundredth four score and five thousand,
and Senacherib him self 185. thousand slain of the Assyrians by the Angel.
Sanacharib slain by his sons before his Idol in the temple.
before his idol Niseroch, whom he worshipped and preferred before the living
God, was slain of his own sons Adramelech and Sarezer, the just judgment
of God for blasphemy.

After this, Ezechias fell sick, and was restored to health, in sign whereof
God brought the Sun 10. degrees back in Achas dial: this good king repaired
the Temple, instructed the Levites in the religion: he and all his princes of
Judah frequented the Temple, sacrificed daily to their God oblations of thanks
giving, and he commanded all the Nobles of Israel and Judah, from Dan to
Bersheba, to repair to Jerusalem to keep the Passover to the Lord, which
Passover was so great, that the like was not in Israel.

This Passover under Ezechias, was 775. years after the 2. Cron. cap. 30.
Ezechias Passover.
Passover of Moses, and 775. years before the Passover of Christ our Savior
in the New Testament. Now after that Ezechias had destroyed idolatry, and had
appointed Priests and Levites according to the commandment of God, prayed for
his people, and provided for the Levites livings, and ordained overseers to
distribute to every Leuite his portion: Israel prospered all the days of
Ezechias, and all things went well with Judah.

But Ezechias being dead, Manasses his son succeeded Ezechias died Manasses
succeeded him. Manasses Idolatry.
him, not in religion, nor in godliness: (for he followed not his father
Ezechias in virtue, but his Grandfather Achas in all kind of vices:) for this
most wicked king restored idolatry in Israel, used great cruelty, and he
erected altars to Baal, and set up images in groves: he practiced witchcraft
and sorcerie, and frequented the company of them that had familiar spirits,
and those that were soothsayers.

This king did much evil in the sight of God, he martyred the Prophet of God
Esaias, and consecrated his son in fire to his idol: he shed innocent blood,
and filled Jerusalem with iniquity. Behold, such a good father to have such a
wicked son. But the Lord God stretched over Jerusalem the line of Samaria,
and the plummet of the house of Achab, and promised to destroy Judah, as he had
destroyed Israel: so he did with Manasses, and gave him to Assure, and to his
Captains, who brought him in fetters, and bound in chains to Babylon.

But when he was in tribulation in Babylon, he called then Manasses again
restored to his kingdom.
upon God, and God heard him, and delivered him, and restored him to his
kingdom: so merciful is God when he is called upon: for by this God instructed
him to know him self, and to humble him self before God, whom he much
abused. You may read in the books of the Kings, and in the Chroniches, the
histories of the kings of Israel at large.

Manasses died, and left behind him Amon his son, who Amon king of Judah.
reigned 2. years in Jerusalem: he forsook God also, and walked in the ways
of Achas, and he was slain by his own servants which conspired against him in
his own house, and the people made Josias his son king over Judah, who
began to Josias king of Judah.
reign in Jerusalem in the 8. year of his age, and in that age he was
instructed by God to have care over the people of Israel: he sent messengers
unto all the towns, cities, and countries, and territories, to call the
Priests, the Leuits, the Nobles, and all men of what degree soever, to come to
Jerusalem, where he him self read the books of Moses unto the people, with
oblations and sacrifices unto God for the sins of Israel: and those Priests
that were not of Aarons stock, that served idols and images, he commanded them
to be slain: and whatsoever he found in Israel of the relics of Jeroboam, he
destroyed, and burned the bones of the false prophets upon the altars that
Jeroboam erected: his zeal was prophesied of by Iaddo, 300. years before
Josias was borne. Iaddo the Prophet.


Josias having repaired the Temple, and having found the book of the Law, he
makes a covenant with the Lord, that he and his people should walk before God
uprightly and justly. After that, he killed their Priests, he brought down
their idols, he slew the coniurers, sorcerers, and soothsayers, and he burned
the Priests of Baal called Chemarims, whom Chemarims Baals priests.
the kings of Judah had founded to burn incense in high places; and every place
of Judah to the Sun, to the Moon, to the planets, and to all the hosts of
heaven. His zeal increased more and more, he threw down the altars of Achas,
and the altars of Manasses: he had put also down the horses, the charets
which the idolatrous kings had dedicated to the Sun: he ouerthrewe the
abominable idolatry of Solomon 2. Reg. 23.
in the mount of Olives, called also in the Chronicles the mount of corruption,
where Solomon builded up altars and groves to Ashtaroth the idol of the
Sidonians, for Chemosh the Ashtaroth, Chemosh and Milcom.
idol of the Moabites, and for Milchom the idol of the Ammonits.

In Josias time all Judea flourished with the service of God, and the laws of
the Countreies were put in practice: for there was in every city among the
Hebrews a chief Magistrate, as a Prince or Judge, to determine causes in
equity and justice among the people. But in the Metropolitan City, which was
Jerusalem, were 70. wise and grave men, whose court or consistory was kept in
Gazith. The Jewish Talmudists named these Sanhedrin: these passed both in
number and in dignity other Magistrates: these first governed in Silo, and
after in Sanhe^rin.
Jerusalem elected by Moses, by the express word of God: these Silo.
were Judges for life and death, and according to the custom and laws of the
Hebrews, they were to condemn offenders 4. kind of ways: by running upon a
man to death, by stoning, by burning, and by strangling. That day that these
judged any offender to death, they obstained from meat. These Councellers
continued until Herod's time, and kept their Court at Gazith. Beside these
Sanhedrioth, which were 71. were also twelve Princes over the people, of every
tribe of Israel one, which governed the whole twelve tribes of the people. Some
write, that in every City were seven of every tribe.

But this good king was slain in Mageddo, by Necho king of Egypt, who went up
at that time against the king of As^hur, wherein Josias did offend God, because
he consulted not with the Lord, before he sought with Necho.

In Josias time, in the 13. year of his reign, Jeremy began to Jeremy began
to prophecy the 13. of Josias.
prophecy the destruction of Jerusalem, and he foreshewed of the captivity of
Babylon, of the misery of the Jews, of the famine, and of the last ruin by
Nabuchadonosor: and how afterward that king could not be quiet, but was
troubled with one dream and other, seeking soothsayers, wise men of Babel,
coniurers, sorcerers, to interpret his visions and dreams: his vision of the
4. beasts, of the 10. horns, of the battle between the Ram and the Goat,
of the great image whose head was gold, etc.

In Josias time reigned in Media Phaortes the 6. king of the Medes, and in
Lidia reigned Ardis the 6. king of the Lidians: Media, Lidia, and Rome, welnigh
o^ one continuance.
for (as I wrote before) Lidia, Media, and Rome, began welnigh together. In
Babylon reigned Nabuchodonosor the first of that name, and the father of
Nabuchodonosor the Great: yet some take exception against the first
Nabuchodonosor, saying that there was none such, as Beroaldus affirms. He was
the 3. king Beroald. lib 3.
of the Chaldeans, after Merodachs time. In Rome governed Tullius Hostilius,
their 3. king, who was now in war with the Sabines, and in Macedonia, Philip
the 6. king: about which time the Grecians used first the Oracle called
Dodonium oraculum.

Now in Locretia reigned Zaleuchus, a famous Law maker, and more famous for
the keeping of his laws being made, even against his own son that should
succeed after him king, as in an other place you may read more. Sibylla which
is called Herophila, was of great fame in Samos at this time. Herodotus
writes, that Batius the first king of Cyrena builded Zoan, Herodot. lib. 4.
and after builded Cyrenes, and furnished the same with people of Tire, and of
Greece. In the beginning of Josias government, flourished the great
Historiographer Archilochus, whose authority for time is with the best
approved: for he wrote a book entitled De temporibus, with whom at one time
lived Simonides, and Aristoxenes the Musition. Josias began to reign in the
30. Olympiad, and died in the 37. Olympiad, and 16. Iubile of the Jews.

After Josias, Ioachim his son succeeded: for Necho king Josias slain.
of Egypt, after he had killed Josias in Mageddo, he gave the kingdom to
this Ioachim, called also Eliachim, paying 100. talents of silver, and one
talent of gold, for yearly tribute Ioachim brought captive to Babylon.
unto Egypt. But Necho within a while was overthrown in battle by
Nabuchodonosor the great, and the tribute which the Jews paid unto Necho now
being slain in the field by Necho slain by the king of Chaldea.
the king of Chaldea, was paid to Nabuchodonosor. But I have written of this
Ioachim and of his son that succeeded him, called also Ioachin, or Iechonia,
and of Nabuchodonosor, in the histories of the Chaldeans, how they were subdued
by Nabuchodonosor, Iere. 36. Joseph. lib. 10. c. 8. 9.
whom God raised to destroy the rest of Israel the tribe of Judah and the tribe
of Benjamin. With this Iechonia was Daniel, Ananias, Azaria and Misael, carried
captive to Babylon: of whom Nabuchodonosor had care to instruct them in the
Chaldean tongue, whereby they might serve the king and be in favor. It was the
kings will that they should be of Zedechias blood, of the best favor, and of
the best complexion. Some write that this captivity began from the 3. year
of Ioachim, unto the 20. year of Cyrus. Some other write that it began Some
vary about the time of the captivity.
from the preaching of Jeremy, which was the 13. year of Josias, unto the
first year of Cyrus: and others, in the eleventh year of Zedechias.

They would not hear Jeremy the Prophet, who did foreshew the calamity and
misery that should come upon Jerusalem: but they despised him, imprisoned him,
and burned his books, until an huge infinite army of the Chaldeans laid
siege to Jerusalem 18. months, and that it was at length taken and destroyed,
after much famine and plague during the time of these 18. months, after that
21. kings of David's tribe reigned in Jerusalem for the space of 500. years and
odd, counting 21. Kings of Israel.
as Josephus says, beginning from Saul's reign, which was of another tribe.

The wonders which were seen, before Jerusalem was destroyed, Joseph. lib. 7.
cap. 12.
besides the threatening of the Prophets, were such, as might well persuade the
Jews of their calamities and miseries not then believed, but afterward felt.
The first time they The first wonder.
saw right over the city of Jerusalem a fiery burning Comete, most like a
bloody naked sword flourishing to and fro over the city, which continued for
the space of one whole year.

The 2. wonder was a sudden clear shining light, as bright as day light being
in the night time. This light only shined The 2. wonder.
about Salomons Temple, and about the sacrificing altars, the which the Jews
construed to be their better fortune, wherein they were deceived.

The 3. wonder was, that an Ox being brought to the The 3. wonder.
Temple to be slain and sacrificed upon a festival day, according to the
Jewish manner, that it brought forth against the course of nature a Lamb in
the midst of the temple, which was terrible and monstrous.

The 4. wonder was, that the East brazen gate of Salomons Temple being so great
and so heavy with iron bars and The 4. wonder.
great brazen bolts, that Vix a viginti viris clauderetur, the very words of
Josephus, that 20. strong men could scant shut that gate, opened of it self
most willingly. The bars loosed, the bolts yielded, that some of the ignorant
Jews prognosticated the opening of the Temple should be some great good thing
to come.

The fifth wonder was seen upon the 21. day of May, which seemed to be an host
of men armed running on horseback, The 5. wonder.
and in charets, above the City in the skies, a little before Sun setting.

The sixth wonder, when the priests went unto the temple in the feast of
Pentecost, as they were wont to do by night, to The 6. wonder.
celebrate divine service, they upon a sudden felt the ground quiver under
their feet, and the temple shook, and a voice speaking, Migremus hinc, let us
depart hence.

Yet a more horrible wonder there was, the daily crying The 7. wonder.
and exclaiming of a country man Jesus the son of Ananus, who for 7. years
and 5. months before the destruction, ceased not in every corner of the City,
in every street, and specially in the temple upon the Sabbath day, saying, Vox
ab orient, vox ab occidente, vox a quatuor ventis, vox in Ierosolymam and
templum, and vox in omne^ hunc populum, continuing still this cry, though he
was punished by the magistrates, and brought before Albinus the Roman, which
was then Caesar's deputy in Jerusalem, in so much as he was thought to be some
furious fool, that he was left after whipping alone, who cried, Vae, vae
ciuitati, vae phano, vae populo, and last of all he said, vae mihi. This
Josephus saw with his eyes, and heard with his ears, who wrote this history.
A greater wonder then all these, The true Messiah The 8. wonder.
Christ, 40. years before told of this, and yet was not believed. Jerusalem
(as it was oftentimes) was never destroyed, but they were warned before by the
prophets of God: but they would not know the time of their visitation, and
therefore came these evils upon the Jews: the town sacked and made even to the
ground, their temple burned, and themselves slain, destroyed and scattered
from the face of the whole earth.

Now Jerusalem being thus destroyed, the temple burned, the people slain, and
the king Zedechia taken prisoner and brought to Babylon where he died:
Nabuchodonosor like a fierce Lion proceeds forward, invaded Syria, subdued
the Ammonites and the Moabites, brought his army to Egypt, slew the king,
subdued the country, and brought those Jews back to Babylon that had fled
from Jerusalem to Egypt.

This was the misery of the Jews, and the last confusion of The misery of the
Jews.
Judah. The history of this king concerning the last end of the Jews, no where
may be better read then with the Prophets. Nabuchodonosor had a son called
Euilmerodach, who after the Euilmerodach.
death of his father enlarged Iechonia from prison, and used him princely: for
Iechonia in respect of Jerusalem, and the people therein being by Jeremy the
prophet persuaded thereto, yielded himself, his wife, his children, his nobles,
and all the two tribes, unto the hands of Nabuchodonosor.

Jeremy, Ezechiel and Daniel, have laid down the full history The captivity
of Babylon.
of Nabuchodonosor and of Euilmerodach, and of Balthazar, the three last kings
of the Chaldeans, in whose time the empire of Babylon was had away from the
Chaldeans unto the Persians by Cyrus. This was the stock of David, being 21.
kings after David, lineally from his body descending, ended, whose names are
these,

1 Solomon. 2 Rehoboam. 3 Abia. 4 Asa. 5 Iosaphat. 6 Ioram. 7 Ochosias and his
mother. 8 Athalia. 9 Ioas. 10 Amazias. 11 Azaria. 12 Iotham. 13 Achas. 14
Ezechias. 15 Manasses. 16 Ammon. 17 Josias. 18 Ioachas. 19 Eliacim. 20 Ioachim.
21 Zedechias.
The kingdom of Judah carried cap^ue by Nabuchodonosor into Babylon after it had
continued

After the death of Solomon 395. years. After the flud 1709. years. After the
nativity of Abraham, 1416. After the burning of Sodom and Gomorrha, and the
other three Cities, 1317. After the departure of the Israelites out of Egypt,
912. After the destruction of Troy, 577. From the nativity of David, 505. From
the dedicating of Salomons temple, 412. And after the taking of Samaria, and
the destruction of the ten tribes of Israel, 133. years.
CHAP. VII.
Of the return of the Jews into Jerusalem after the captivity, first by the
decree of Cyrus, after by Darius, and last by Artaxerxes: of the second
building of the Temple by Esdras, Nehemia, and Zorobabel, and of the government
under the high priests.

AFter the captivity of the Jews, Daniel grew in great favor with
Nabuchodonosor, being by God instructed to expound the dreams of the king, and
to vanquish Bell and all his priests, and to convert Nabuchodonosor to
acknowledge God after he saw a dream of four beasts which came up from the
sea one differing from another. The first was a Lion which had Eagles wings,
and the wings thereof were plucked off, and a man's heart was given him, meaning
the Chaldeans and the Assyrians which were strong and fierce, The Chaldeans and
the Assyrians.
and yet their power overthrown by the Persians power. The second beast like a
Bear, which had three ribs in his mouth between his teeth, meaning the
Persians which were barbarous The Medes and Persians.
and cruel. The third was like a Leopard, which had upon his back four wings
of a foul: this beast also had four heads, signifying, Alexander the great
with his four captains, which after Alexanders death had the empire among
them: for Cassander was king of Macedone, and Antipater after The Macedonians
and Grecians.
him. Saleucus had Babylon and Asia the great, and Antigonus had Asia the
less, and Ptolomeus had Egypt.

The fourth beast which Daniel saw, was fearful and terrible: The fourth
beast the Romans.
it had iron teeth, it devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue
under his feet. This was meant by their Roman empire, a monster exceeding all
kind of beasts: for the tyranny and greedines of the Romans excelled the
rest: for that which the Romans could not quietly enjoy in other countries,
they would give it to other kings, upon condition to take them again when it
pleased the Romans. To this Daniel was the vision of the 70. weeks opened by
the angel Gabriel, (...). weeks.
who informed him and instructed him of the time of the Messiah coming,
saying: 70. weeks are determined upon the people, and upon the holy City, to
finish the wickedness, to seal up sins, to bring everlasting righteousness,
and to anoint the most holy.

Now at what time the 70. weeks began, some controversy there is: some from
the first edict of Cyrus: some from Darius: and some from the time that Daniel
spoke it: and others from the 7. year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, which was 80.
years after the first commandment of Cyrus.

The captivity of Babylon fell at that time when Tarquinius Priscus reigned in
Rome, after whom the Romans had no more The kings of Judah, and the kings of
Rome, ended almost about one time.
kings after but two, so that the Jews and the Romans were governed by a
state called Aristocratia of the Jews. The 70. weeks, and the very last year
of the captivity, was likewise the last year of the Assyrians and Chaldeans:
for even they which saw the destruction of Jerusalem, saw also the destruction
of Babylon: and what spoil soever Nabuchodonosor brought from Jerusalem unto
Babylon, the same did Cyrus in the last year of The first return of the Jews
in Cyrus time.
his reign restore, with a commandment given to all the princes that ruled
under Cyrus, to suffer the Jews again from all places where they were
scattered, to return to Judea, to build up Jerusalem again, and to repair
the temple: and if any were not able through poverty to return, king Cyrus
commanded that they should be furnished with necessaries: for God raised up
Cyrus to be a friend to his people, and he called Zorobabel, who was the
chief governor of the Jews.

The number of them that returned from the captivity of Judah, with the
bountifulnes of Cyrus toward them, you may in the book of Esdras read at
large: For after that Cyrus was slain by Tomiris in the wars of the
Massegits, his son Cambyses succeeded him: who by the Samaritans complaint,
commanded the Jews to stay from the building, Joseph. lib. 7. cap. 3.
and from their repairing of Jerusalem, which continued 9. years after.
Cambyses returning from Egypt died at Damascus, after he had subdued Egypt:
succeeded Darius the son of Histaspis. He again in the 2. year of his
reign authorized the Jews to do as Cyrus had commanded them: for so Darius
found in a coffer of Cyrus in Ecbatana, a book wherein Ecbatana the chief
city of the Medes.
the acts of the kings of Medes and Persians were written, and the decree of
Cyrus which he also established, by the means of Zorobabel in pleasing the
king for his probleame, as it is written in Esdras. Esdras cap. 6.


But God still exercised his people with some crosses, because of their
stubbernes: for from the time they came home under Zorobabel, they had married
with the Gentiles, and offended God until the coming of Esdras from Darius
with authority to build, to repair, and to inhabit Jerusalem: for so does
Bucholcerus in his Chronicles write, saying, that Daniel does comprehend in
two words, Jerusalem inhabitabitur and aedificabitur, the whole sum of Esdras
books. Now in the time of Darius, of Cambyses before him, and of Cyrus before
Cambyses, God stirred up diverse excellent men to help his people, to restore
his Church, and to build his city again, as Zorobabel, Esdras, Nehemias with
others, whose care, delight, and zeal are extant in their own books which
they Zorobabel.
wrote.

For after their return from Babylon, there was peace and tranquillity in
Judea until Ochus time, for Nehemias lived 130. years, and saw (being very old)
a new broile, and a greater calamity of his country: for though the
posterity of David continued until the time of the Machabees as governors and
Judges of the people, not naming themselves kings, for the reverence and fear
which they bare unto the kings of Persia. Salathiels son first governor of
the Jews after the captivity of Babylon: Zorobabel of whom mention is made in
Zachary, ruled Israel wisely and discreetly 50. years. Resa Mesulla the 2.
governor, in whose time Nehemias and Esdras came from Babylon to Jerusalem.
After him succeeded Iohanna Benresa, the third Judge who governed Israel 53.
years. The 4. was Judas Hircanus the first of that name, and thought of
Melancthon to be so Melancthon lib. 2. Chron.
called, for that Ochus king of Persia brought with him a number of the Jews
to Hircania, and therefore Judas was surnamed Hircanus. This judged Israel when
Alexander conquered Darius, and reigned 14. years. Then Joseph the first, ruled
the Jews 7. years. The 5. ruler after Joseph came Abner to govern the Jews,
in whose time Ptolomeus the son of Lagi the first king of Egypt after
Alexander the great, under pretense to do sacrifice upon the Sabbath day, took
the town, spoiled the temple, slew and imprisoned the Jews, and brought to
Egypt infinite treasure. Now after this Abner, the 6. Judge since the time of
Alexander, succeeded of David's stock, from Abner to Ianna Hircanus the 2. who
was the last of 15. governors over the Israelites Hircanus 2. the last of 15.
governors.
after the captivity: for they continued even unto the time of the Machabees.
After this, Haman played his part, and thought to have all the Jews slain, and
commanded a gallows to be made for Mardocheus: the history hereof is found in
the book of Esther: for about the time of Cyrus death, the government was then
altered in Rome: Consuls were made after the building of Rome 244. years, and
in the 67. Olympiad, in the beginning of the 9. Jubilee, at what time Cambises
had subdued Egypt and brought them subjects to the laws of Persia. After
Cambises Darius went against the Getes, and overthrew Herodot. lib. 4.
them, and his chief captain Zopirus son Megabisus vanquished the
Thracians, and subdued the Peonians and Cambyses went against the Getes.
took Perinthus. During this time the Lacedaemonians had wars against
Policrates, the tyrant of Samos.

The Philosopher Pythagoras and Hippocrates the Physician lived this time.
While the Jews (as you heard) were in planting themselves in Jerusalem again,
the Graecians were busy one with another: Tyrants ruled Greece, and governed
by the bloody law of Draco: for Hipparchus and Hippias used tyranny in
Athens, and were slain both by Hermodius and Aristogiton. Aristagoras a
tyrant, revolted and rebelled against Darius, which moved Darius in arms
against the Ionians, and overthrew them, and took their chief city called
Miletum. A little after Miltiades the chief captain of Athens, by the council
of Callimachus the famous Grecian, ouerthrewe Darius king of Persias
lieutenant called Hippias, in the battle of Marathon, where he slew 6300.
Persians, as both Thucidides Herodot. 6. Thucidides 1.
and Iustine do report.

This overthrow of the Persians was at that very time when Tarquinius superbus
made his last battle with the Roman Dictator Justin. lib. 2.
Posthumous, where he was put to flight, and after died in exile. Aristides
surnamed the Just, was banished this time from Greece, and Alcibiades called
back to Athens from his banishment. Now Nehemia causing the law of Moses to
be read, as an ordinance to serve God, and reproouing them for their
disobedience in ioining themselves with strangers, they were in some quietness
for a time: though sometime murder and slaughter were between themselves
committed: for the which cause Bagoses the general of Artaxerxes Joseph. lib.
11. cap. 7.
army, understanding that the high Priest slew his brother in the Temple,
being a dear friend to Bagoses, he plagued the Jews again for the space of
seven years, and revenged his death with slaughter and tribute: he placed
Iaddus in the office of the priesthood in his fathers place. This high priest
had to his brother one named Manasses, which was sent to Samaria by Darius the
last king of Persia.

A little while after this, Alexander the great, after that his Alexander the
great.
father Philip died, having brought his army over the Grecians sea called
Helespont, unto the river of Granicus, having subdued the Lydians, Tire
besieged and taken, Thebes wasted and spoiled al Asia, he overthrew Darius the
king of Persia, carrying his soldiers through Caria, invaded Pamphilia, came
over Euphrates unto Syria, took Damascus, besieged Tire and Sidon, and he
wrote to Jerusalem to the hie Priest Iaddus, that his soldiers might have
passage without interruption, and also requiring the tribute that was paid to
Darius to be paid Tribute to Alexander.
to him, and to the crown of Macedonia, for that Alexander had vanquished
Darius, and had carried the Empire of Persia unto Greece: they of Jerusalem
were frighted and much amassed what to do.

But co^cluding among themselves, they opened the gates, and the hie Priest
came out with all the Priests, the Elders, The solemn receiving of Alexander
the great unto Jerusalem.
and Nobles of the City in most solemn sort to meet Alexander out of
Jerusalem, unto a place named Sapha, and saluted Alexander most humbly, being
in precious garments and pontifical robes, with his sacred mitre, whereupon was
written the name of the God Iehoua.

The solemnity and state whereof made Alexander to light The reverence of
Alexander to the high Priest.
from his horse, and to yield to the hie Priest more honor and reverence,
then his countrymen the Macedonians thought well of, so great a king, so
mighty a co^querour, even Alexander the great, to humble himself to a silie
priest. Parmenio demanding the cause of Alexander why he honored the priest
so much, he answered, that he reverenced God, whom the hie Priestrepresented at
that time: for I dreamed of these men, even as I behold them now when I was
yet in Macedonia: This Priest exhorted me then to be of good courage, and bade
me go forward with my army to Persia.

Thus with great honor and solemn sacrifice was Alexander The benefits and
good turns of Alexander.
received unto Jerusalem, where Daniels prophecies were brought unto him, and
where also it was read unto him, that a king of Greece should bring the
Monarchy of Persia unto Greece, which was himself. After all these things
were done, Alexander showed great courtesy, enlarged their common wealth,
quieted the Samaritans their enemies, and brought all the Provinces about under
the Jews. Again he granted them what they would ask of him, permitted
them to use Alexanders benefits.
their religion, to observe their own laws, and also promised that those
Jews which were scattered amongst the Caldeans, Assyrians, and Medes, should
have such liberty to use their religion and laws, as they had in Jerusalem:
and this continued during the time of Alexander, which was but short. For when
he died, the Empire was divided between his Nobles: The succession of
Alexander.
Antigonus had Asia: Seleucus had Babylon: Lysimachus had Hellespont: Cassander
had Macedonia, and Ptolomeus Lagi had Egypt. These successors of Alexander,
having continual wars one with an other, which continued long, Ptolomeus
king of Egypt came upon the Sabbath day to Jerusalem, under pretense Ptolome
the son of Lagi.
to offer sacrifice to the God of Israel, took the town, used the Citizens
hardly, handled the Jews most severely and sharply, (they mistrusting him
not) imprisoned them, and brought them with him in heaps to Egypt.

Thus still was Jerusalem exercised with tribulations and crosses: but God
stirred up this kings son Ptolome philadelphus to them a friend, loving and
beneficial, wise, learned, Ptolome Phila.
and most desirous not only to do them good, but also most willing to admit
their laws, their Religion to come to Egypt, and made a decree, that all the
Jews wheresoever they were by his father imprisoned and captiuated, should be
enlarged, and be set at liberty, which were above 100000. Jews, as Ptolome in
his Epistle written to the high Priest Eleazar does testify: where lie
entreats Eleazar to send to Egypt, six of every tribe of the best, wisest,
and skilfullest men, to translate the Bible then being only in the Hebrewe
tongue, into the Greek tongue: for that Ptolome was most desirous to have the
Bible in Greek to be in his study, where The Bible first translated from
Hebrew to Greek.
he had a hundred and twenty thousand books in his Library.

In the days of this Ptoleme Lagi, flourished Theophrastus the Philosopher, and
Theodorus Athenaeus: he sent messengers for this purpose to Jerusalem
Aristaeus, and one Andreas captain of the Kings guard, with whom he sent 100.
talents of silver, to honor the Temple, and to do sacrifice therein, besides
viginti phialas aureas, triginta argenteas, quinque crateras, and Joseph. lib.
12. cap. 12.
mensam auream, which in Josephus all at large are described, and set forth
worth the reading: which things being most grateful unto the high Priest, he
received them most lovingly, and used them with all humanity and favor, and
sent with them 70. wise and discreet men which should translate the Bible, as
Philadelphus request was.

These seventy men came to Alexandria, where after much welcome, long
feasting, great conference, and disputations, so much he ioyed of their
coming, and delighted in their company, that the king Philadelphus continued
his feast 12. Polot. Philadel.
days: where wisdom and learning were exercised, disputations practiced,
arguments propounded, the questions whereof you may read in a book which
Aristeus wrote only Aristeus.
concerning the meeting and coming together of these learned men. These
seventy interpreters so named, translated 70. interpreters.
the Bible from Hebrew into Greek, in the year of the world 3695. in the 24.
Iubile, and in the 127 Olympiad, in the 12. year of Philadelphus reign. About
this time Megasthenes Megasthenes. Aratus.
the Persian writes his histories, and Aratus the great Astrologer wrote his
book entitled Pheonomenon. Now when Philadelphus had this sacred book thus
in Greek translated, he rejoiced much, and thought himself happy to have such
a book in his Library: and so conferring with Demetrius, mused greatly that
neither Historiographers, Philosophers or Poets, had not translated this book
before.

But Demetrius told the cause to the king, saying, that the Demetrius.
Heathens durst not attempt it: for diverse were punished for their rash
enterprises to meddle therein, as Theopompus, who Theopompus.
for writing of some sentences of the Scriptures amongst his own profane
writings, was xxx. days deprived of his memory, distracted of his mind,
until by a vision in his sleep, he was warned to know his faults, and to
reconcile himself for the same. Even so Theodecta the Poet, for putting
Theodecta.
a sentence of Gods book presumptuously with his own in a tragedy which he
made, was mad for a time, and blind.

This learned king Philadelphus rewarded these 70. interpreters The great
liberality of Philadelphus.
at their departure in this sort: every one of them had two talents of gold, 3.
suits of costly and rich apparel, and a standing golden cup, which wayed a
whole talent, which by Budeus computation is 600. crowns, if it be gold: and
A talent of gold 600. crowns.
every of them had of him a precious, costly and delicate bed, wrought with all
silk. Moreover, he sent by them to Eleazar the hie Priest 10. rich tables
with silver feet, with all things belonging thereunto, a Chalice of 30.
talents, a diadem or a crown full of precious stones, two golden cups to be
dedicated to the altar, 10. suits of purple, with 100. basens and censers of
gold for sacrifice.

Thus much does Josephus report of this Ptolomeus Philadelphus: but within a
short time after this came Antiochus magnus, Antiochus Magnus.
who had al Asia and Syria under his sword: he vexed the Jews, spoiled the
country, slew the Citizens, takes the kingdom of Judea, subdued Egypt: he
full of all wickedness, sets up Idols, altars, groves, and Chapels of Idols:
he polluted the Sanctuary, defiled the Sabbath and the feast, he offered up
swines flesh and unclean beasts. Antiochus thus played the part of a tyrant,
that Jerusalem was desolate, the Citizens fled, the women and their children
taken captives, and Antiochus forced Israel to forsake their God, and to do
sacrifice to his The difference between the great Alex. and Antiochus the
great.
Idols, sending commissioners to all Judea to see the execution of them: so
great difference was between two heathen kings, Alexander the great, and
Antiochus the great, the one honoring the hie Priest, sacrificed in the Temple,
brought all things under the Jews again, used great courtesy: the other,
Antiochus the great, stealed, wasted, robbed the Temple, the City, and all the
Cities of Judah, until Mattathias a godly zealous man, borne in the city of
Madis, saw how Antiochus blasphemed God, committed idolatry in all Judea,
somed in blood, and practiced al mischief and wickedness.

He consulted with his five sons, John, Judas afterward The 5. sons of
Mattathias.
called Machabeus, Simon, Eleazar, and Ionathas, to whom he opened the
calamities of his country, the defacing of Moses laws, the blasphemy and
idolatry that were used by Antiochus Antiochus tyranny.
in all Syria and Judea: and where that their predecessors even from Abraham's
time defended the Church with their own blood, so now it was as necessary to
stop the rage of this tirant, as Moses, Joshua, and David did to the enemies of
God.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Machabees, and of the last kings of Judah, and of their government
under the Romans, and of the last destruction of Jerusalem by Titus the
Emperor.

THey took courage in God: they provided Judas Machab.
to resist the violence of tyranny, and when Mattathias died after one years
government, he appointed Judas Machabeus whom he knew bestable in body, and
most willing in mind, to be in arms with their God against this Antiochus and
his idols.

And though these brethren were not of the stock of David, nor of the tribe of
Judah, as you may read in the Macchabees, and in Josephus: yet they joined
their force and power together, and appointed Judas Macchabeus chief captain
and ruler over them: for in his acts he was liks a lion, for the Apolonius and
Seron 2. princes of Syria slain.
wicked fled for fear of him, he killed Apollonius and Seron, two princes of
Syria, and the most part of Antiochus army, who gathered the Gentiles, and a
great host of Samaria to fight against Israel, who were slain and scattered
like sheep before Judas sword: and Judas goes forward against Gorgias, does
the like, he slew their soldiers, and puts Gorgias and the rest of his
army to flight. Lysias lieftenant general of Antiochus hearing of this, waxed
Lisias lieuetenant to Antiochus the great.
wroth, disdained his camp, gathered 60000. chosen footmen, and 5000.
horsemen to fight against Jerusalem, came to Judea, and pitched his tents in
Bethsura, where Judas came with ten thousand soldiers against him: who with
confidence in God, and prayers made, slew five thousand, and put the rest to
flight, and Lysias himself escaped to Antiochus. Judas having these victories
over Antiochus the great, went up to Jerusalem to repair the Sanctuary which
lay wasted, and made a new altar (for Antiochus had erected and altar, and the
Image upon it) where they sacrificed according to the law, and praised God for
their good success.

Now while Judas had vanquished the Heathens that went about to destroy Israel,
for they of Tire and Sidon, of Ptolemais, Machab. lib. 1. cap. 5.
of all Galile, of the Heathens and of the Gentiles were set in force against
Israel: after that Judas had fought with the Edumeans and Ammonites, and
hearing of these news, Judas gave to his brother Simon 3000. soldiers to go
unto Galile, and he took his brother Jonathan with him to Galaad with 8000.
and they had good success and victory in all their wars. Antiochus in the
mean season traueiling through the country of Persia, hearing of the riches
and treasures of Ptolemais, besieged it, but was by the Citizens forced to
flee, who died within a while after. Lysias having knowledge of the kings
death, he caused Antiochus Epiphanes, the 2. son of Antiochus the great, to
be crowned king after his father: who used much Melancthon. 2. Chron.
more extremity in Jerusalem then his father did, killing, destroying the
Citizens, robbing the Temple, and putting Idols and images upon the altar.
Being slain in Persia, his brothers eldest son Demetrius being at Rome, came
with all haste possible to Tripolis, a Town in Syria: and having possessed the
most part of Syria, being their lawful king by descent, the people brought
Antiochus Eupator and Lysias before Demetrius, who commanded them to be
killed before they came to his sight. Now when that Demetrius was set on his
fathers throne, a great enemy of Judah waxed hot to revenge the slaughter
which Judas Machabeus made of his friends and favorers, while yet Demetrius
saved himself in Rome. Judas perceiving the cruel meaning of Demetrius, Judas
Machabeus sends to conclude peace with the Romans.
and knowing well the power and force of the Romans, made them his friends
through peace of mutual friendship, sending messengers unto them Eupolemus and
Jason, brethrens children to Judas Machabeus, which of the Romans were most
lovingly accepted: and they sent to Jerusalem a letter written in tables of
brass, wherein they had a memorial or monument of their friendship and peace.
In the mean time Demetrius having heard of the death of Nichanor, sends his
army against Judas: in the which battle, after many joyful victories which
Judas had over his enemies, he is now slain Judas Machabeus slain.
by his enemies: for he that was wont to pray and to overcome, and now omitted
to pray, trusting to his strength, and to the Romans force, was left of God to
himself.

Judas now being dead, his brother Jonathan succeeded him, and had present
battle with Bacchides, one of Demetrius Machab. lib. 1. cap. 9. 10.
captains, and with Alcimus, and put them to flight. During these broiles in
Judea, Demetrius perceiving he could gain nothing by Jonathan, desires peace
with the Jews: which being done, Jonathan governed Israel quietly. When
Alexander the son of Antiochus had heard the promises which Demetrius made to
Jonathan, and also hearing of the courage, virtue, and manhood of Judas,
Jonathan, Simon, and of the two other brethren, he sought the favor of
Jonathan, and friendship of the Jews. Then Alexander makes wars against
Demetrius, Alexanders army against Demetrius. Demetrius slain.
gathered a great host, and joined in battle with the army of Demetrius, and
the two kings fought it out, until Demetrius was slain. Then Alexander sent
his Ambassadors to Ptolomeus king of Egypt, signifying unto him how he wanne
his fathers kingdom, and sat on his throne, requesting the kings daughter in
marriage, and so to be in league of amity, and to continue perpetual friends:
wherein Ptolomeus gladly consented, and married his daughter Cleopatra unto
Alexander at Alexander married Cleopatra.
Ptolomais, and they continued friends, until discention fell between Ptolomeus
and his son in law Alexander: for Ptolomeus took his daughter Cleopatra, and
gave her to Demetrius the Cleopatra given to Demetrius.
son of king Demetrius, which Alexander slew a little before.

When Alexander heard how that his wife was given to his enemy Demetrius in
marriage, he came with an host against Ptolomeus his father in law: for
Ptolomeus had put two crowns upon his own head, the crown of Asia, and the
crown of Egypt, and had driven Demetrius after the overthrowing of his army,
unto Arabia, where he had his head cut off by Zabelus, and sent to Ptolomeus to
Egypt, who likewise died shortly after, and Demetrius reigned after him. All
these kings sought friendship at Ionathans hands: for as Judas Machabeus Judas
victor^.
slew Nicanor, Apollonius and Seron, princes of Syria, ouerthrewe Lysius
Antiochus general, and his nigh cousin, and puts Gorgias and his host to
flight, as he vanquished the heathens, and overthrew the City of Ephron, and
wanne Bosorra, with many more victories which he had of Countries, cities and
towns: so Jonathan prospered against Bacchides Ionathans victory.
Alcimus, against the children of Ambrie, against the princes of Demetrius, so
that Demetrius the king sought the favor of Jonathan, and Alexander entreated
for friendship with Jonathan.

Thus God blessed the sons of Mattathias, because they were zealous in the
laws of God: for after king Demetrius Ieseph. lib. 13. cap. 3.
was slain by Alexander, and Alexander slain again by Demetrius son, named
Demetrius, the Jews all this while were quiet, and so peace in Israel
continued under Jonathan and Simon, as in the Machabees you may read, until
contention grew between the Samaritanes and the Jews in Alexandria, Strife
between the Jews and the Samaritans.
concerning the religion and holiness of their temples: which was with great
malice followed, standing one with an other in defiance, until the matter was
to be judged before Ptolomeus Philometor king of Egypt, the Jews having one
Andronicus a learned Jew to open the privilege and authority of the Temple
of Jerusalem, and the Samaritans had also one Sabbeus, a wise discreet man to
plead for the Temple of Samaria.

For there dwelled amongst the Jews at that time 3. sects of religion: 3.
sects of the Jews.
the first were called Pharisees, the 2. Saduces, the 3. Esseni. The Pharisees
acknowledged the judgment of God to come, with the reward of good and evil,
confessing the immortality of the soul. The Saduces clean contrary, holding
an opinion stout against the Pharisees in all points. The Esseni supposed al
things to be governed by fate, and that nothing could happen to man but by
destiny. After this Jonathan Lacedaemonians came from Abraham stock.
sent to Sparta, and to Rome, to renew the covenant between the Jews and the
people of Sparta: for it was found and known in their Chronicles, that the
Spartians came of the generation of Abraham. In the mean time one Triphon that
Triphon young Antiochus tutor.
was tutor to Alexanders son named Antiochus, a very young man, expected to be
king in Syria in the room of his father, considering how falsely and
traitorously he was slain by the means of Ptolomeus his father in law, and
Demetrius, to whom Cleopatra his wife was wrongfully given in marriage.

This Triphon by the color of this title to young Antiochus The falsehood of
Triphon.
Sedetes son to Antiochus Epiphanes, became very ambicious of the kingdom
himself, laid wait to kill Jonathan and take him by deceit: and having also
heard how Demetrius calamities increased by the Parthians, saw an easy way
to obtain the kingdom by killing of the young king Antiochus, to whom he
promised faith and service to restore him to his kingdom, for that his father
Alexander was wrongfully deposed and slain. For as soon as Triphon had slain
Jonathan and his two sons, and also king Antiochus, he Joseph. lib. 13. cap.
8. 9.
straight ways makes wars upon Simon the brother of Jonathan, who succeeded
in his room to defend the Jews, promising to follow the steps of his father
and of his brethren: for Simon was well beloved of the Jews, and therefore in
great authority proceeded with the like courage as his brethren did to war
upon the enemies, and came in arms against Gazara, Iamnia, and Ioppa, wasted
them, and spoiled them, laid siege to Jerusalem, and wanne the castle, pursued
Triphon (which then usurped the kingdom of Syria,) to the castle of Dora, from
whence he secretly fled unto Apania, a city in Phenicia, where he was slain
by Antiochus friends, within 3. years after he had falsely usurped Syria.

After this, grew strife between Antiochus and Simon, and therefore Cendebaeus
was appointed Captain by Antiochus against Simon: but Simon prevailed in all
his actions, prospered Joseph. lib. 13. cap. 14.
in all his wars, and conquered his enemies for the space of 8. years, until
Ptolome who married Simons daughter conspired against him, slew him and his 2.
sons at a banquet, and sent secretly to kill John named likewise Hircanus the
son of Simon. But he having intelligence that his father and Simon and his
two sons slain.
his 2. brethren were slain, and that Ptolome had sent to slay him also, he
prevented that, and slew them, and fled to a castle called Dagon.

Now Hircanus possessing the office of his father, not forgetting the villenie
and cruel murder of this Ptolomeus, thought Hircanus Simons son.
to revenge it when time would serve. In the mean season, Antiochus surnamed
Pius, being mindeful of injuries received of Hircanus father Simon, came with a
great host to Judea in the 162. Olympiad, compassed the City Jerusalem with
his army, kept Hircanus close within the city, not daring to look out: but
after that Hircanus had promised 500. talents to Antiochus Joseph. lib. 13.
cap. 16. 17. 3838
to depart in peace, he opened the grave of David, where he found 3000.
talents of silver, of the which he satisfied Antiochus, which within a short
time after was slain amongst the Parthians, in whose place succeeded his
brother Demetrius Hircanus. When he had heard that Antiochus was dead, he came
presently with an army to Syria, destroyed the temple in Samaria which
Alexander the great permitted to be builded, took Samega before called
Samaria, with the city Sicima and many towns beside, where the nations of the
Cutheans dwelt, which Salmanassar brought with him to inhabit Samaria, in
stead of the 10. tribes which he carried captive away to Babylon: for after that
Samaria was destroyed, first by Salmanasser, the Samaritans were called
Chutheans, a people of Babylon and of Caldea. Now it was plagued by Hircanus
and besieged by Aristobulus and Antigonus, the sons of Hircanus, that
Aristobulus and Antigonus.
after one years siege, they brought Samaria even to the ground, and caused
rivers and lakes to ouerflow the place where Samaria Samaria the second time
destroyed.
was, that no man knew where Samaria stood, so wicked a seat, and so ungodly
a town, full of all horrible idolatry and blasphemy: For Samaria had been
twice builded, first by Omri which was destroyed by Salmanasser king of Syria,
after builded by Manasses the brother of Iaddus the hie Priest, by the means
of his father in law Sanabalat chief governor under Darius, builded a Church
to encounter with Jerusalem in mount Garizin at Samaria, where from Babylon
and from Assyria men and women came to dwell, willing to receive the laws of
Moses, but not to forsake their Idols. At what time Onias builded the 3.
temples in Egypt: this was the son of that Onias which was the hie Priest at
Jerusalem, whom Antiochus Epiphanes king of Syria slew at his ransaking
Joseph. lib 7.
of Jerusalem, at what time he destroyed the city, spoiled the temple, and
put up the Image of Jupiter Olympus upon the altar of the Lord: this 3. temple
continued at Heliopolis in Egypt 330. years. Read more of this in the
Machabees. Beside al 2. Macca. cap. 1.
this (I mean the tabernacle, the hie hills called excelsa, the 3. temples)
they had certain other meetings and serving of God, though not in temples, yet
in places that resembled the temple. Of this no mention is made, neither in the
history of the Judges, nor of the Kings, and therefore it seems that after
the Jews were captiuated into Babylon, and their kingdom destroyed, many of
them being dispersed, some to Egypt, some to Asia, and some to Europa, met
together as many as were in one city or country, having no temples The first
use of the Synagogues after the captivity.
but places by themselves, made like temples which were called after
Synagogues, and so continued: for after the 70. years of captivity, the Jews
being permitted by Cyrus to return and to rear their temple for strangers
that dwelt in other Provinces, as at Alexandria, Silicia, Asia, and in diverse
other places and yet Jews borne, when they came to Jerusalem, either to the
feast which was thrice a year, or upon any other business of their own, they
went into the Synagogues appointed and made for them, and not into the temple
which was only for the citizens of Jerusalem, for both were frequented in our
Saviors time, proved by himself, saying, I have taught in the temple, and in
so many Synagogues in Galilee and Asia mentioned: so that one temple was in
Jerusalem, and many Synagogues, and so many, that I find in an Hebrew
co^mentary 480. Synagogues were within the city of Jerusalem, and diverse other
Synagogues dispersed through all Judea: but God commanded that he should be but
in one place worshipped, which was first in Silo in the tribe and mount of
Ephraim, after in Jerusalem in mount Sion in the tribe of Judah. Of the use of
the Tabernacle after the temple was by Solomon builded, the Talmudists write
many fables which I omit to recite.

Samaria being thus the second time destroyed by Aristobulus Samaria the
second time destroyed.
and Antigonus, the Pharisees, corrupt, evil, and seditious men, much envied
the prosperity of Hircanus and his sons, persuading the people to hate him:
but Hircanus after that he had done great service for the Jews, and brought
all things in quietness, he foresawe things to come: and after he had governed
Israel 31. years, leaving behind him 5. sons Hircanus died.
he died. All this while there was no king in Judea since the captivity of
Babylon 481. years: but now after Hircanus time Aristobulus his eldest son
succeeded him in government, who by report of slaunderers and backbiters,
caused his brother Aristobulus slew his brother Antigonus, the first king of
the Jews after the captivity.
Antigonus whom he loved very dearly to be killed, being most falsely accused
of his enemies: he left his own mother to perish for famine, and put the rest
of his brethren in close prison.

But after a while his conscience did accuse him, and tortured him in such
sort, that Aristobulus commanded to be brought to the place where Antigonus
his brother was slain: and being carried to the place, he vomited blood in
such abundance that he cried and said, O corpus impudens quousque Aristobulus
death.
retinebis animam, quam materni ac fraterni manes flagitant? and so with
torment he died, leaving behind him his wife Solome whom the Greeks call
Alexandra: she enlarged the sons of Hircanus which Aristobulus laid in
prison, one of them named Iannaeus, which was also called Alexander, not
Alexander the third brother.
well thought of by his father, but now made king after his brothers death by
the means of Alexandra Aristobulus wife: he as soon as he had obtained the
government, used the like trick as his brother did before him: he caused one
of his two brethren to be slain, and the other he esteemed with honor.

This being done, he went with an army against the city of Ptolomais, at what
time Ptolome surnamed Lathurus was driven by his mother Cleopatra out of Egypt,
and being at Cyprus she forced him thence, so that Ptolome the son and
Cleopatra the mother, used their policy and exercised their tyranny The
unquiet state of the Jews.
one against another. When Cleopatra had gotten the city Ptolomais after a
long siege, her son again being driven out of Egypt, Alexander king of the
Jews renewed friendship with Cleopatra, for that her son Ptolome had plagued
Judea. Now being aided by Cleopatra he took Gadara, and a strong fort called
Amathuta, to whom Demetrius Euserus gave battle and discomfited his army,
and fled himself to the mountains: he straight gathered some strength, and
having gotten 6000. soldiers again in a readiness, pursued after Demetrius,
who for fear fled at that time. After this the Jews being sundry times thus
afflicted by their own The tyranny of Alexander.
cruelty and tyranny, they conspired against Alexander, and were in arms often
times, but still overthrown.

Such was Alexanders hard hap, that six years he was molested, afflicted
and persecuted of his own nations and subjects, that he slew of them from
time to time about 50000. and yet still moved he them to hate him, so that
being demanded by him of the people what they would have him to do, they with
one consent said, Hang thy self. Alexander having taken the city Betoma,
after much slaughter and blood, he brought the wealthiest and chiefest men of
the city, in bands and fetters prisoners to Jerusalem, where he commanded
before his face where he sat in a high rome of his palace, 800. of the
greatest and chiefest men to be hanged: and before they were hanged, he
likewise commanded that 800 of the Jews hanged.
their wives and children should be flaine before their eyes.

While this tragedy was played at Jerusalem by Alexander, Antiochus Griphus was
slain by the falshod of Heracleon, after Antiochus Griphus slain.
whom succeeded his son Seleucus, and made wars with his uncle Antiochus
surnamed Cizicenus, whom Seleucus took in Seleucus his son.
battle and slew. Alexander was at that time called of the Jews for his
tyranny for his surname Thracida: for while Alexander lived, 8000. Jews lived
out of their country banished and came not to Iewry during the time of
Alexander which was 27. years. The Jews were miserably handled under this
king: for Ptolome Lamyrus slew 30000. Jews at one time: he made the captives
Ptolomeus Lamyrus slew 30000. Jews.
and prisoners to eat the flesh of their own countrymen, being slain in the
wars of Alexander. Himself slew 600. of his subjects being moved and allured
to sedition against their king by the Pharisees a sect of the Jews, that
extremely hated Alexander. Now his wife Alexandra called Salomine the time of
her Alexandra.
first husband Aristobulus, she reigned quietly after her husband 9. years.
Alexander had 2. sons, Hircanus and Aristobulus: and though that Hircanus was
the elder brother and heir to the crown, yet did Aristobulus gather an army
and invaded Judea, while yet Alexandra his mother lived. Antipater the Idumean,
and Aretas king of Arabia, took part to aid the elder Aretas king of Arabia
ay^ed Hir^us.
brother Hircanus. Alexander had given council to his wife before he died, to
speak fair to the Pharisees, who could much persuade the people, and also to
conceal his death until she had gotten the castle of Jerusalem, considering
his life to be offensive to the people, and to make no account of his burial,
but let the people use their discretion. She using this her husbands advice,
became in great favor with the people: in the mean season Aristobulus
fortified himself, (being by nature very quick and industrious) made himself
strong, and having corrupted the Roman Scaurus, then Pompeius the great
Ambassador, to be his friend to the Senators.

Hircanus again sent to Rome, opening his injuries, accusing and declaring the
infidelity and corruption of his Ambassador, craving their aid and help
being the elder brother to have his right. Upon this complaint, Pompey being
then in Armenia against Tigranes, and coming to Damascus (being newly by
Metellus and Lolius taken) he repared to Jerusalem with an host of soldiers,
at what time Caius Anthonius restored to Hircanus the government and the office
of the high Priest: he carried captive with him to Rome, Aristobulus with his
2. sons Alexander and Antigonus. This fury of domestical A^istobulus with
his two sons carried to Rome.
sedition, this tyranny and bloodshedding of brethren brought all Judea from a
kingdom to a province: again by this means, strange magistrates governed
them, and foreign strength feared them, that since the time that Aristobulus
Hircanus son became the first king after the captivity, nothing prospered
with him, as by the family and stock of Hircanus may appear, one brother
killing another, as before you have read. Now Alexander and Antigonus prisoners
at Rome with Aristobulus their father, their fortune was thus, that Alexander
having escaped from Rome to Cilicia, came to Judea, and took a part of
Galilee, where he thought to have more force, he spoiled that which Pompey
spared, he took not only the 2000. talents which was left of Pompeius, but
also spoiled, robbed and ransackt the temple of treasures to the value of 8000.
pounds. But he was taken with Gabinius, sent to Rome, and after slain of
Scipio Pompeius son in law in Antiochia. This was Alexander taken and brought
to Rome by Gabinius.
the end of Alexrnder one of Aristobulus sons. Antigonus the other son, was
let loose by Julius Caesar, after the civil wars between Pompey and him, he
gathered an army of the Parthians and thought to recover Judea, the rather that
Antipater was dead, and that the Jews had rather have Antigonus to be their
king, then any of the sons of Antipater, he took the old man Hircanus his
uncle, to whom Antipater stood a friend while he lived, stirring the Jews
against this Antigonus father. So likewise Hircanus had both his ears cut off
by his brothers son Antigonus.
the king of Arabia, Areta to who^ Hircanus fled for aid, Antigonus after he
had taken his uncle, being high Priest, and had cut off both his ears, and had
carried him prisoner to Parthia, even he was slain by Marcus Antonius within
3. years after Herod was made king, that was Antigonus end. And Herod after
that called Hircanus from Parthia, and caused him to be slain being 80.
years of age.

This was the tragical end of the Machabees, whom God The end of the
Machabees race.
endued with great haps and singular favor to rule his people: for the Jews
never prospered under kings, neither before the captivity, at what time
reigned 22. kings in Judah, of the which number there were but seven under whom
Judah flourished.

David, Solomon, Abia, Asa, Iosaphat, Ezechias, and Josias.
Neither prospered they under kings after the captivity, during the time
ofseuen kings, as

Aristobulus, Alex. Iamnaeus, Hircanus, Aristobulus, 2. Antigonus the son of
the last Aristobulus, and last of the line of the Machabees. Herod the great
whom the Romans created king. And Archelaus Herod's son.
After the Machabees race Antipater the Idumean and his Antipater the first
governor under the Romans.
posterity became great in Judea, by the favor of Julius Caesar, who at that
time was in Egypt with an army of soldiers, to whom Antipater stood in
stead by good service at that time done unto Caesar: for he brought Memphis
the great city, with all the country about to obey Caesar, and therefore
Caesar gave him the regiment of Judea, not yet as a king, but as chief
governor. The Jews could not well digest the government of strangers, which
knew by Moses and by the Prophets, that the tribe of Judah should rule Israel
until the Messiah were borne: therefore they were mutinous and full ofsedition.

Antipater perceiving the envy and malice to strangers, Antipater poisoned.
ruled discreetely, and behaved himself wisely, and yet he was poisoned by a
Jew named Malchus, whom afterward Herod the son of Antipater slew at
Tirus: this Herod surnamed Astalomites, grew great in his fathers days, for
the Jews thought after Antipaters death, to shake off his children, and not to
admit any of them to govern. Now they had called Antigonus Aristobulus son,
from the Parthians to Jerusalem, but Herod ouerthrewe their purpose, and forced
Antigonus to flee from Jerusalem. Marcus Anthonius returning Marcus Anthonius.
from the city Philippos, where he and Augustus ouerthrewe Brutus and Cassius
the murderers of Julius Caesar, came to Bythinia, where Herod and Phasaelus
his brother were accused Herod and Phasaelus accused. Hircanus the high Priest.
by the Ambassadors of Judea, that Hircanus the high Priest governed as a
sipher, and they as kings: yet notwithstanding Herod's fortune and his brothers
so increased, that he and his brother were named by Marcus Anthonius, the
Tetrarches of all Judea, and within a while after Herod came to Rome in 185.
Olympiad, where he was created king of all Judea; and he was Herod made king
of Jury.
solemnly brought to the Capitol in the midst between Octauius and Marcus
Anthonius, with all the magistrates and Consuls of Rome accompanying him.

In the 30. year of Herod's reign, was our Savior Christ borne. Herod had
three sons, Archelaus whom he left king Her^ds 3. sons Archelaus, Herod
Antipas, and Philip.
by will to govern Judea: Herodes Antipas which he appointed Tetrarche to
govern Galilee by whom John Baptist was beheaded: and Philippe which governed
Ituria or Trachenitida. Herod after he had reigned 37. years, and had sent
infinite treasure to Caesar and to his wife Iulia, died, and was with great
pomp buried in a town of his own name called Herodium. Joseph. lib. 17. cap.
9. 10. 12.
But though Herod's testament was by Caesar first confirmed and pronounced,
Archelaus king of Judea afterward altered: he appointed to Archelaus, half
Judea for his regiment, and the other half between Herod Antipas and his
brother Philip.

Now while Archelaus was a governor of this people, they were much offended
with him, and sent to Caesar great complaints, with letters from Sabinus, that
he was seditious, cruel, and vnobedient to Caesar* which being thoroughly wayed
and Archelaus was banished Judea.
found true by Caesar, Archelaus was banished, and his part of Judea was made a
province for Roman magistrates, the other two brethren Herod and Philippe
governed their Tetrarchies with some care and fear of Caesar, and therefore to
get the more favor at the Emperors hand, either of them builded a town.
Philip to flatter Caesar builded a town and named it Caesarea, and Herod
Antipas builded another and named it Tiberias, for that the Emperors name was
Tiberius Caesar, two towns for one name.

The Romans again brought Judea in subjection of the Empire, and sent these
deputies following:

1 C. Coponius, the first lieutenant. one year. These 3. were sent by Octauius
Augustus. 2 Marcus Ambinius. 1. year. 3 Annius Rufus. 1. year. 4 Valerius
Gratus. 2. year. 5 Pontius Pilatus, 10. year. Under whom our redeemer and
Savior suffered his last passion upon the Cross, he was sent by Tiberius
Caesar. 6 Marcellus. 3. year. Herodes was made king of the Jews, by C.
Claudius the Emperor which reigned 10. years. After Agrippas time reigned
over the Jews Romans deputies again, as after Marcellus, Caspius Fadus was
7. deputy, and governed Judah, 3. years. 8 Tiberius Alexander. 2. years. 9
Cumanus. 3. years. 10 Antonius Felix. 10. years. 11 Portius Festus. 11.
years. 12 Albinus. 3. years. 13 Gersius Florus, being the last deputy over
Judah, at what time Jerusalem was destroyed by Titus.

When Vespatian laid siege to Jerusalem, even the last overthrow and conquest
of the Jews, at what time Caius Anthonius and Marcus Cicero were consuls at
Rome, Jerusalem was three months besieged by Pompey the great, but taken at
last by the Romans, Cornelius Festus, Sillas son, and Furus Centurio entered
first the City, and after the whole Roman army rushed in and slew 22.
thousand Jews, spared the temple and the sacred treasures therein, defiled not
the Sanctuary: neither touched Pompey the golden table, neither took away
with him one penie of the 2000. talents which was the treasure of the temple.
But Crassus in short time after going against the Parthians, in his voyage
spared neither treasure nor the temple.

Jerusalem was builded in Judea by Sem the son of Noah, and was by him first
named Solima or Salem, a city most famous, and the soil it self most
fertile, and so by God blessed and preserved from the first building in the
time of Sem, unto the last overthrow of the same by Titus the Roman Emperor
being 2177. years. Josephus does describe the situation The continuance of
Jerusalem.
and building of this town, that it was builded upon two hills, the one hill
higher then the other: David the first king of the tribe of Judah, in whose time
for that he fortified the higher hill, after his days it was called Castellum
David, the lower hill was called Acra: over against this hill Acra they began
afterward to draw another hill to enlarge this city, and to join the temple
within the same, for the temple was builded on a hard high rock, for that it
might the better be seen, that the state and magnificence thereof might be
beholden and seen above the town, and above the high towers of the walls:
for Jerusalem was compassed with Joseph. lib. 6. cap. 6. de bello Iudaico.
three several walls, fronted one against another, with such high strong
towers, that some of them were 70. cubits higher then the walls, as the tower
called Psephina, likewise the tower of Hippicos was fourscore and five cubits
Hippicos the third tower.
high. The second tower called Phasaelis after Herod's brothers name, was
fourscore and ten cubits high: the third named after his wives name
Mariannes, which far excelled the rest, whose large descriptions you shall
read in Josephus, a Jew borne and brought up in Jerusalem I^sephus a Jew
borne.
until the destruction thereof, where he was taken prisoner by Titus: there it
is set forth to the full, the situation of the city, the beauty of the temple,
the strength of the walls, the height and largeness of the towers, the port
and state of the gates, the full description of the four hills which
Jerusalem was builded on, and other things which now I omit, for the circuit
of Hierusalems walls, was no more but thirty and nine furlongs.

This town was nothing like in bigness to Babylon, or to Niniue, but far
greater in fame and in victories: for Jerusalem had triumphed and saw the
end and last destruction The long continuance of Jerusalem.
of the Caldeans, Assyrians, Egyptians, Arabians and Persians: for little Judea
endured the force and power of the three first Monarchies, which was the
Assyrians, the Persians, and the Grecians, though it was before conquered five
several times by the just judgment of God for their transgression and sin,
yet by the mercy of God saved and preserved, as is before mentioned, until
thirty and eight years after Christ's death. All that while that they served
God and followed the steps of their forefathers, I mean Abraham, Isaac,
Iaacob, Daniel, Iosaphat, Ezechias and Josias, they prevailed against all
nations, they conquered all Countries, and brought all the kingdoms of the
world to admire their virtues to fear their force, and to seek favor and
friendship at their hands, though they were sometime touched for their
stiffenecked stubbernes and too much iniquities, as in Egypt, in the wilderness,
and after they had possessed the land of Promise: for still they offended the
Lord, for the which these several five conquests were had over them.

The first was by Nabuchodonosor, the great king of Babylon: Five times
Jerusalem taken and destroyed.
the second by Asocheus king of Egypt: the third time by Antiochus the great
king of Syria: the fourth by Pompeius the great: and the fifth and last was by
Titus Vespatian. In the which last subversion and overthrow of Jerusalem, we
read in Josephus being then a present soldier in the wars, the calamities
and great miseries that then fell on the city of Jerusalem, and on the
inhabitants thereof. Their hunger and The misery of Hi^rusalem.
famine was so great, that one did eat an others vomit: the fathers did eat
their children, and the mothers fed on their own babes in the cradle, in so
much that stinking carions and dead bodies which died for hunger in the
street, was meat of great daintines in Jerusalem. They were constrained to
eat beasts dung, dried leather, girdles, shoes, and skins which covered
their shields, yea they sought their food in Iakeses, many slew and butchered
one another in the city. Besides this, the plague was so hot amongst them,
that lodgings, houses, temples, and all the streets in Jerusalem were filled
with dead bodies.

The slaughter was such, as within 18. months siege Joseph. lib. 7. cap. 7.
110000. were slain within the city, and most of them strangers and Gentiles
which came up to the feast, according to the custom of the Jews, where
suddenly they were taken and besieged, you must think by famine and by the
sword. During which time 97000. were taken prisoners and captives: there were
found of the Jews in priuies and Iakeses, and hiding themselves in caves,
sinkes, and holes of the earth, above 2000. Some sent of these to the number of
70. thousand to Egypt as bond slaves, there to moile like beasts in
intolerable toil: some sold more cheap then dogs: for Egesippus witnesses,
that 30. Jews were sold for a penie, and those were young boys under sixteen
years.

OF THE FIRST Original of the CHALDEANS, first called Arphaxades after the
name of Arphaxad the third son of SEM, which was the first kingdom of the
world: of their continuance, government and last destruction by Darius Medius,
and Cyrus.
NOw having ended the history of the Hebrews, the posterity of Arphaxad the
third son of Sem, I will follow Assure the second son of Sem, who builded
Niniue, from whom and after whose name the Assyrians are called: whose history
I have now in hand.

In the hundredth thirty and one year after the flood, when people had
multiplied in the land of Shinear, old Noah taught the people to seek new
seats and dwellings, instructed the new world (the first age after the
flood,) in the course of the Sun, the Moon, and the stars, and in all
other things wherein Noah was most perfect: he declared to his people what he
knew and saw in the first age, and divided the world into three parts, Asia,
Afric, and Europe, and sent his sons to seek adventures. Cham to Egypt.
Sem to Asia. Iaphet to Europe.
Cham he sent to Egypt and to Afric with his company, Sem to Asia, and Iaphet
with his people to Europe: of whom I will speak where their history is
handled.

Now I will begin the history of the Chaldeans, who after that the people were
dispersed at the building of Babel, and had scattered into every parts of the
world, were the first that erected up a kingdom, and was the first place that
was inhabited, as both Zenophon and Berosus affirm: for the Caldeans knew that
before the flood that men lived, and that the continuance of them were before
the flood, one thousand six hundredth and fifty years and more, for that
then Noah and his sons taught the second age, of things done in the former
age, and how for sin God had destroyed the world: for the Egyptians and the
Phoenicians long after the flood, were taught by the Chaldeans of the flood,
and of the former time, and after more perfectly instructed by Abraham, Abraham
read in Egypt.
which in the time of famine travailed from Canaan into Egypt, where for a time
he read Arithmeticke to the Egyptians, then rude and ignorant of any great
knowledge, that hearing of these things, they began very obscurely and
darkely to set down many things which they then not perfectly knew, and yet
are imperfect, for that they were ignorant of the Genesis. The goodness of God
spared Noah for 350. years and more, to instruct the second age, and to preach
unto them the wonderful works and mercies of God before the flood, and to
warn the world after the flood from sin, the only cause of Gods wrath
toward man, and to bring them up in the true religion of God: not as profane
writers affirm, that he wandered all the countries of the world by diverse and
sundry names, as by the name of Ogyges, Of Noah* (...) after the flood.
Ianus, Coelus, Oenotrius, Geminus pater, and many such fabulous names, of his
laws in every country, of his religion and ceremonies in every kingdom, of
his being in Italy, in Spain, and in other countries, clean contrary to the
nature and truth of the history, which came after the flood unto the place
where he yet lived, with his forefathers, Lamech, Methusalem, Enoch, and so
forth before the flood, the land of Shinear where by the consent and opinion
of the best learned he lived until he died. I will not therefore follow Caldean
fables, in the antiquities of their Caldean and Assyrian kings, for that they
have no sound warrant for their history, but that which Berosus sets down,
which Manethon an Egyptian priest much commends, and makes many supplies of
Berosus lies, and so does Io. Annius a priest in Whitenberge, in his
Commentaries upon Berosus, and so does Diodorus in his books of Fabulous
antiquity. But leaving Berosus, Menathon, and Annius to forge their fables, I
will as briefly as I can, run through this history, for that I can find
nothing true of them, but that which I read in the Bible, from the time of
Phul assure, until Balsaars time, which were but 10. kings, Thul assure. Tiglat
Phul^ssar.
whose names I set here down.

1 Phul assure, named in the Scripture, Tiglat Phulassur. 2 Salmanassar, which
destroyed Samaria, and took the 10. tribes of Israel unto Niniue captive. 3
Saneherib, who came against Ezechias to Jerusalem, with an huge army,
following his fathers tyranny Saneherib. 4 Merodach, the first king of Babylon,
again brought Niniue under Babylon. 5 Berodach, his son. 6 Nabuchodonosor,
which destroyed Jerusalem, and took the tribe of Judah captive into Babylon. 7
Euilmerodach, Nabuchodonosors son, this restored Iehoakim king of Judah unto
his liberty again, after that Nebuchodonosor his father died. 8 The last of
these Kings was Balsaar: of these many kings, in this the history of the
Prophets make mention, and so much of the history is true.
I will therefore set down the continuance, the nombers of their kings, the
change and variety of this Kingdom: for after that Nimrod had drawn people
together, he first laid the foundation of the Empire, made laws, began to
build a great City, and named it Babylon, the first City after the flood:
which City though Nimrod began it, his son Belus Melancthon lib. 1.
amplified it, and last of al Semiramis finished it in such form and stately
show, as he that is desirous to know the length, the breadth, the compass,
situation, the strength and beauty of Babylon, let him read Herodotus Solinus,
where it is largely Herodot. lib. 1.
described. Though it is thought that Herodotus and others in this do err: for
Josephus lib. 1. contr App. and Beroaldus 3. Chr. affirm, that the old
writers erred much about the building of Babylon, and of Niniue: for that which
Nabuchodonosor claimed to be his own, saying, Nonne haec est Babylon quam ego
aedificaui in robore fortitudinis meae? Is not this Babylon which I have
builded? the Grecians and all old writers attribute to Nimrod, to Belus, and
to Semiramis. The like fable is of Niniue, which was builded first by Assure,
the son of Semi, by writers is attributed to Nynus. Herein both Greek and
Lataine Historians are over seen as well in the time, as in the persons, in
that they were ignorant of the Prophets histories: howbeit Babylon was begun
by Nimrod and Belus, and somewhat enlarged and beautified by Semiramis: but the
dignity and chief sovereignty of Babylon must be granted to Nabuchodonosor,
under whom the Caldeans only flourished over all Kingdoms, and enjoyed aureum
seculum.

So this Country flourished first before all other Countries. Herodotus lib. 1.
Babylon the first town and the first seat of the Empire of the world, being
the chiefest palace of the king: for so were they called kings of Babylon, and
the first kings in the world after the flood, and so continued almost two
hundred years, until the time of Ninus, who after he had builded Niniue, in
Josephus.
the plain of Aturia, a far greater Town then Babylon, though before it was
begun by Assure, one of the sons of Strab. lib. 16.
Sem, yet fully by Nynus finished.

This Nynus waxed great and strong, laid siege to Babylon, subdued it, and
brought the Empire of Caldea subject unto Assyria: then both Caldea and Assyria
became one Monarchy, Herodot. lib. 1
and then the kings of Babylon were called kings of Assyria, and then Assyria
having conquered Babylon, began to be chief, and continued from Belus time the
first king of Assyria, until Sardanapalus time the last king of Assyria, which
as Eusebius writes, was 12. hundred and forty years from the first reign
of Nynus, until the last of Sardanapalus: so long the seed of Sem continued
kings, and held the Monarchy of Melancth. lib. 1.
Assyria. As the kingdom of Babylon was translated then from the posterity of
Cham, after the first 200. years, unto the posterity of Sem: so now again
Niniue is made subject to Babylon, as it shall be hereafter showed, when the
history of the kings of Assyria is handled. Thus Assyria sometime subject to
Chaldea, and Chaldea to Assyria: Niniue to Babylon, and Babylon to Niniue,
until both were subdued by the Medes, and after by the Persians: so God does
appoint, and God does disappoint states and common wealths, according to the
decree of his eternal will, sin being the only cause of Gods anger and
wrath, his wrath the cause of all calamities, destruction, and subversion of
kingdoms, as Sirach says, Regnum a gente in gentem transferetur propter
iniustitiam.

Therefore Pompei the great, being a heathen man, and driven to flight in the
the battle at Pharsalia by Julius Caesar, Chap. 10.
desirous to know of Cratippus the Philosopher, the events of the wars
between Julius Caesar and himself, demanded of him, an sit prouidentia?
whether the decree and purpose of God is unchangeable? Cratippus answered him,
though a heathen Melancth. lib. 2.
Philosopher, yet like a true Christian, saying, Fatales esse imperiorum
periodos, the providence of God is most sure and Chron.
certain: for then the Roman Monarchy began by Julius Caesar, the first
Emperor of Rome, which Pompei found true within a while after: and so Chaldea
first, and Assyria after, so the Medes, so the Persians, so the Grecians; and
last of all the Romans came to destruction by not confessing God, neither
acknowledging his providence, as you shall read in their several histories.
But now to speak of the rest of the kings of Assyria, for that they were at
one time, and governed together, Belus the son of Nimrod, after he had (as
you have heard) laid the fundations of Babylon by his father Nimrod before
appointed, a peaceable prince, quiet, gentle, and courteous unto his subjects,
until about the latter end of his reign he became to be ambitious, most
cruelly given to enlarge the Empire of Babylon, and (as Berosus says) to bring
all Nations (...). 5. in Belo.
under the Chaldeans: he went about first to destroy a mighty great king in
those days, which much hindered Belus purposes, named Sabatius king of Saga.
This Sabatius perceiving that Belus laid secret snares every way for him, and
seeing that he could by no means escape the hads of Belus, he hid himself in a
secret place with the Caspiis. Annius says in the 5. book (...).
upon Berosus, that this Sabatius was Saturnus. Now Belus being old, having
reigned 62. years, grew so great and so mighty, that all the nations about
honored him as a god: he commanded Nynus his son a little before he died, by all means possible to destroy Sabatius Saga; and by the sword to compel all
nations and countries, and al people to be under the Empire of Babylon, for
that it was the first kingdom after the flood. When he had reigned king 62.
years, he died, to whom the Belus the 2. king was the first cause of idolatry.
Assyrians after his death erected his statue or image, and they made so many
momuments to Belus after his death, that thereby they began to commit idolatry,
to put up images, naming them Baal, and Bell, after the name of Belus. Nynus
succeeded his father Belus, the third king of the Assyrians, imitating his
father both by nature and by commandment, lost no time, but straight in arms,
and where his father subdued the most part of Assyria and Asia, this king went
further, having conquered every where until the coasts of Libya, finding the
people yet not able to resist him, not acquainted with wars, but seeking means
to fortify their kingdoms, being as yet weak and tender, without any great
force, not so strong as to resist Nynus being at that time the greatest king in
the world, which overcame Aricus king of Arabia, but some say king of Ellasar,
2. Gene. 15.
and after conquered Barzanes king of Armenia, as Berosus affirms. After he
returned to Media, where Pharnus king Berosus lib. 5 in Nyno. Pharnus king of
the Medes slain. Iustine lib. 1.
of the Medes, and his seven sons were slain with their army, thence
proceeded forward to Bactria, where Zoroastres remained as king, to whom
Iustine ascribes the first observations of the stars, naming him the first
Astrologer of the world after the flood: this gave Nynus a great overthrow in
the first battle, putting the enemies to flight after he had slain 100000. of
the Assyrians.

Nynus having this foil returned with greater force, joined again in battle,
overcame the Bactrians, slew their king, and possessed the kingdom by the
policy of Semiramis, who^ Zoroastres king of Bactria slain by Nynus.
afterward he married: which history you shall find in Diodorus Siculus at
large. This Nynus excelled his father, augmenting the Empire of Assyria, by the
conquestes he did of all Asia, and of all the East kingdoms unto the Indians:
he amplified the City of Niniue, which Assure the son of Sem began Lib. 3.
de Fabu. antiquo. gestis.
to build, as Josephus and Philo Iudaeus do affirm: but Melancthon says,
that Nynus two hundred years after builded Niniue: after Assure began it that
Nynus enlarged it, beautified and made it so great, that it contained four
hundred furlongs of ground, which is fifty miles after our account: it had a
thousand and five hundred wonderful great towers upon the walls, it had the
only soueraignetie of the world, and there Nynus, and all the kings of
Assyria kept their Courts: this was called by Nynus after his own name
Niniue: it was builded in the valley of Aturia, not far from the river
Tygris: this Niniue was far greater then Babylon, as you may read in
Herodotus at large, and was the chief seat The kingdoms of the Assyrians
continued 1240.
of the kings of Assyria a thousand and two hundred years: some write one
thousand, three hundred and more.

How true Berosus writes of the pilgrimage and iourneys of Noah, I refer it
to the reader: but he says, that in the tenth year of Nynus the third king
of Babylon, after that Noah had travailed many Countries, and had given them
laws, he came to Africa, from Africa after that heehad taught the people for a
time he came into Italy, in the nineteenth year of Nynus, at what time Noah
was eight hundred and three score years old, and lived after in Italy and in
Hetruria 92. years: for so long lived Noah, which was in all 950. Many
Monuments and Towns builded by Noah in diverse Countries, are set written by
Berosus lib. 5. and by Annius in his Comentarie: Abraham was 57. when Noah died.

After this Nynus had reigned 52. years, he died, and was buried in his own
City of Nynus, where his wife Semiramis Nynus 3 king died.
buried him so honorably, with such a sumptuous Toumbe, that it was the only
pattern which Artimesia the queen of Caria made for her husband Mausolus, and
counted for the rarenes thereof one of the seven woonders of the world. We
read in Zenophon, that Semiramis caused an Epitaph to be set upon one of the
pillars of this grave with these words, Mihipater Belus Jupiter, Auus Saturnus
Babylonicus, Functius. Nynus Epitaph.
proauus Chus Saturnus Ethiops, Abauus Saturnus Aegyptus, atauus Caelus Phoenix
Ogiges, repeating the petigree of Nynus to be the son of Belus the son of
Nimrod, the son of Chus, the son of Cham, the son of Noah. Archilogus
writes, that he began to reign a king over the Assyrians 250. years after
the flood.

In this Nynus time Abraham was borne: Semiramis after her husband was dead,
began to fortify the walls of Babylon, Semiramis.
ruled and governed most stoutly the Assyrians and the Caldeans 42. years,
adding to the Empire more Regions and Countries after her husbands days,
subdued the Ethiopians, overcame the Indians and their king Staurobates, which
never was done, or by any enterprised beside Semiramis, but only by Alexander
the great. Of this queen, and of her doings, her wars and her great works,
you shall read in Diodorus Diodo. lib. 2.
and Annius, how she became so great, so terrible, and so luckie in any war
she took in hand, that she excelled far all the Assyrian and Caldean kings
in victories and triumphs, until Nabuchodonosors time, but slain at last by
her son called Nynus, or Nynias, as Melancthon, and Annius, and Ruffinus
writes the 5. king of the Assyrians, who lived with his mother, and had no
government, for that he was a simple man, and who succeeded his mother, being
neither like to his father Beros. Lib. 3.
nor to his mother, a king given to slothfulness, full of idleness, of whom
we read nothing worth the writing, saving that he repaired and beautified the
temples of their idols, Ani^us in Beroso de Semira mide.
and made much of the Chaldean magi which were accounted wise men, observing
the turn of Astrologers who began then in those days to use divination: he
reigned 38. years, who a little before he died, Camesenus being forced to flee
from all the parts of the world, came to Bactria, and there strengthened
himself with the Bactrians, that he prepared a great army to invade the
Assyrians: but he was slain, and his army overthrown even of this king
Ninias, as Berosus affirms: Berosus lib. 5.
yet Diodorus, Justinius, and Orosius say, that this was done by Nynus the
father of Ninias. Let the reader believe who^ he list: Many of the best
writers use Berosus, though he is had in contempt.
I had rather follow Berosus, (though he is supposed not to be Berosus, yet the
best writer uses him in this history) for he is best to be believed, for that
he knows better the Chaldean histories, being a Chaldean borne, then others.
This Ninias, or Ramisninias is taken to be that king, which is called Amraphel
in Genesis, king of Shinar, which is Babylon: for in the days of Amraphel came
Arioch king of Ellasar, who came with the king of Shinar, against the kings of
Sodom and Gomorrha, together with two other kings, Chedor king of Elam, and
Tidal king of the nations gathered of diverse countries. These four kings made
Genesis 14.
war with Bera king of Sodom, with Byrsha king of Gomorrha, with Shemeber
king of Seboim, and with the king of Bela, in the Bela is Zoar.
vale of Siddim. At this very war Lot the nephew of Abraham (for he dwelt
then at Sodom) was taken with the king of Abraham rescued his nephewe Lot.
Sodom and the rest, was rescued by Abraham his uncle, he and all his goods, al
his substance, men and women, Abraham recovered from Amraphel king of Shinar,
and his company. By this time Egypt began to flourish, and the kings of Egypt
began to be strong: they were all named Pharaohs, as the Romans called their
Emperors Caesar's, names of great dignity. While this conflict and these great
armies of five kings against four were in the field, you must understand they
were but governors The overthrow of the 5. kings of Sodom, Gomorrha, and
Seboim. The first kind of common weal. Melchisedec blesses Abraham.
of cities: for in these days skant the names of kingdoms were known, but a
kind of government called Oligarchia, by reason it was within 350. years of the
flood. At that time Abraham coming back with Lot, Melchisedec king of Shalem
came to meet him, and blessed him, to whom Abraham gave tithe of all that he
had. This Melchisedec is taken to be Sem the son of Noah king of Shalem,
afterward called Jerusalem. After this Ninias, succeeded his son Arius, the
sixth king of the Assyrians, as Functius writes: but Ruffinus the fourth, and
yet they vary not, but in this that Functius begins from Nimrod, which
Ruffinus says began in Babylon, and not in Niniue. Again, Functius numbreth
Semiramis reign, for that she reigned 40. years after her husband Nynus, which
Ruffinus omitteth, coumpting Nynus reign for both: for both the government of
Semiramis and Ninus, and forward still of the rest of the kings of Assyria,
Ruffinus, omitting these two, Nimrod and Semiramis, makes Functius to say
six, and Ruffinus to accoumpt four, but in this I will follow Functius. This
Arius after that Arius the sixth king of the Assyrians.
his father Ninias was dead, he gathered a great host of soldiers against the
Bactrians and the Caspians, with whom his father and his forefathers were
enemies always: he invaded them again, spoiled their country, slew their
king, and brought Bactria and Caspia subject to the Assyrians: in Caspians and
Bactria^s made subject to the Assyrians.
this kings time died Noah, about twelve years after Abraham was called from Vr
in Chaldea, and came to Haran, where he stayed four years. Thus flourished the
kingdom of the Assyrians, being still augmented with more Provinces, Cities,
and Countries, by Arius and his predecessors: and when he had reigned 30.
years, he died, and after him succeeded Aralius the seventh king of the
Assyrians a warlike prince, a man of Aralius the 7. king of Assyria.
great prowess, skillful in military discipline, full of martial exploites,
of whom Berosus affirms, that it was he that first used triumphs and pompes
with great honor, dignity, and rewards to soldiers that deserved praise, and
began to be delicious in bankets and feasts, and invented many engines of
wars that then were not known.

In this kings fathers time, there dwelt in Celtiberia a great wise man, expert
in many things, whose name was Druyas: of Lib. 16. cap. 44.
whom (as Berosus writes) the ancient priests and wise men were called
Druyades: so does Pliny write, and Caius Julius Caesar in his book de bello
Gallico.

This Aralius ruled Assyria forty years, and died. Then began in Niniue
the reign of Baleus, surnamed Xerxes, the eight king of the Assyrians: this
surmounted far his predecessor Baleus the 8. king of Assyria.
Aralius: for he brought under the scepter of Assyria twice as much people,
Nations and Countries, as his predecessor did, and therefore he was called
Xerxes, that is, the conqueror, the triumpher, which long after were names of
great dignity among the Persians. This king was both fierce and fortunate, and
enlarged the confines of his kingdom with many Nations: he conquered al
Countries unto India, Functi^s in fabula Assyrio^u^.
he made the kings to be feared so much of all kingdoms, that he was named of
the Assyrians, Xerxes victor and triumphator: this reigned (as Berosus does
write) thirty years. In this Baleus days, Inachus the first king of the
Argiues, and their The kingdom of Argos began in these days. Armatrites 9.
king of the Assyrians.
first kingdom began.

After Baleus reigned in Assyria, a king named Armatrites the ninth: of him
there is no great thing to be read to his commendation: he was given much to
wicked lust and slothfulness, consuming his time in feasting and banqueting,
from one pleasure unto another, more co^uersant with women then with men, and
more delicious in apparel then hardy in wars, and more given (as Berosus
says) to a lewd life then to virtuous exercise: he reigned 38. years. In
these days Sem the son of Noah died, and the king of Salem being six
hundred years old, for Sem was a hundred year old when the flood began, and
he lived before the flood with three of his old fathers, with Noah,
Methusalem, and Lamech: and after the flood he lived in the second age, until
Jacobs time, and died in the fifty year of Jacobs age, seven hundred Sem dies.
years just before David's birth: he lived thirty five years after Abraham's
days.

The tenth king of the Assyrians was Belochus Priscus, and he Belochus Priscus
10. king of Assyria.
reigned 35. years, a righteous king, of who^ writers make no great mention:
for most of the kings of Assyria be so ancient, and their histories by Berosus
set forth so doubtful, that authorities sufficient cannot be found to write
much, saving those ten kings which are mentioned in Scripture, in whose time
the Assyrians and the Chaldeans flourished most: their histories and their
tyrannies done in the Church, is set down in the Prophets by the Spirit of
God, the touchstone of all truth, and reserved by the holy Ghost to the use of
his Church and the members thereof, the keys of all knowledge, of whom al
profane histories have their beginning. Baleus Junior succeeded to be the
eleventh king of Assyria: he reigned two and fifty years, and was amongst
the Assyrians of great fame: he excelled the rest in all his wars: for his
predecessors, euenthe best kings, as Baleus Xerxes, Aralius, Ninus or Belus
himself entered not so far, conquered not so much as this king did, whom all
writers so commended, and specially after Semiramis next in fame and greatness:
for she conquered unto India, this conquered India, and brought the Indians
under the government of the Assyrians, paying yearly tribute unto the kings of
Assyria, committing themselves and their countries under the tuition of this
king Baleus Junior.

In this Baleus Iuniors time, Osiris being very aged, returning Baleus 11. king
of Assyria.
from all the Countries where he had traueiled, into Egypt, erected up a
triumphant pillar, with this inscription set upon it, I am King Osiris, the
son of Saturnus, that taught in all parts of the world the use of those
things which I Osiris first found out. This Trophe was kept a long time by the
Priests of Egypt Diodo. lib. 1.
in memory of Osiris.

About this time Jacob and his children went to Egypt, 215. Jacob and his
children removed to Egypt.
years after Abraham's being in Egypt: and they continued so long after
Abraham, 215. years, which was the whole time of the children of Isreal's
bondage in Egypt: for from Abraham's being first in Egypt, where he left to
dwell in Egypt some The misery of the Israelites in Egypt 430. years.
Hebrews after his departing, until the coming of Moses, is 430. years.

After this reigned Altad^s the 12. king of the Assyrians: this above the rest
became epicureall, applying his whole Altades 12. king of Assyria.
study to seek out vain men that could well instruct him to degenerate from
his predecessors: for he saw so much wealth in Niniue, where the treasures
of the kings of Assyria were, that he could by no means know how to spend
them: he gave himself to all kind of vices, and to follow young council: and
moreover he thought it a most miserable thing to toil, to traueile himself
with continual wars, having so much substance that he could not foresee
how to consume them: but by a decree of his young councelours so it was
devised, that the huge treasure and great substance which his predecessors by
their conquestes had obtained, should be with most ease and less danger
consumed: for this was Altades opinion, he thought it most fit to live in
pleasure, and to enjoy the benefits of his predecessors, noting the misery
to be such of his elders, as could not spend them selves, but spare them to
others: and therefore suum institutum Functius. Beros. lib. 5.
fuit (says the history) to feed delicately, to use insolent attires, to
follow riotous company, to frequent all kind of pleasures, and to live
viciously while he lived. In this time lived Prometheus, of whom the Poets make
mention much, as Eusebius in Chron.
Ruffinus in his comentarie does note.

This Altades reigned 32. years: Berosus writes, that one Hercules king of
Celtiberia, in the 19. of Altades, brought his son named Thuscus unto Italy,
where he was created king. After this, Hercules returned back from Italy
unto Celtiberia, where he died being very old: he was honored with statues
and images after his death as a demie god: this was before Hercules Amphitrion
500. years: this reigned in the year of the world 2275. When Altades had ended
his riotous life, Functius. Mamitus the 13. king of Assyria.
one succeeded him named Mamitus the 13. king of Assyria, a man of a clean
contrary disposition to Altades.

This king again, as soon as he came to his kingdom, exercised himself with
care and diligence to foresee the state of his kingdom, lothing and detesting
idleness, bent himself to wars, kept garrisons, had diverse armies abroad, and
himself ready to perform in person that, which Altades his predecessor Sabel.
lib 4. E^eadum. Pliny lib. 5. cap. 12. Strab. lib. 16.
had neglected. This king grew so great and so strong, that Egypt and al Syria
stood in awe of him, which Syria (as Sabellicus affirms) was once the largest
kingdom of the world, having within it self Palestina, Arabia, Judea,
Phoenicia, and Coelosyria: for the Syrians are people very ancient: for so
Pliny says, that they were before the Assyrians. Strabo would have Syria to
be al one as Assyria is: for so the Grecians called them. This king Mamitus
reigned 30. years, and was the first king of the Assyrians that began this
war in Syria and Egypt: for in his days Syria and Egypt flourished. There is
mention made of the Syrians in Genesis, where Moses says, that the Syrians
descended from Charmel the son of Nahor Abraha^s brother, called also by the
kings of Aram. Now after Mamitus succeeded Mancaleus, the 14. Genes. 22.
Mancaleus 14. king of Assyria.
king of the Assyrians: this king did nothing worth the memory, for we read
of no war in his time: for the kings of Assyria being the first nations which
had kings in the world, grew from time to time so great and so mighty, that
they held the Monarchy of Assyria from Nimrod to Sardanapalus 1240. years and
more: during which time, few kings or none could hurt them or stand in field
against them: for in the East part no king of any puissance was able to
encounter with the Assyrian kings: for then the Assyrians only ruled: other
countries Nothing worth the writing of the old kings of Assyria.
were not as yet populous, saving Egypt, who began to be likewise strong: in
process of time, none could resist the strength of the Assyrians but the
Egyptians. When Egypt grew strong, these two kingdoms began to war one with
another, and therefore until the time of Phul, Belochus, Salmanasser,
Senaherib and Nabuchodonosor, mentioned in the Ecclesiastical history, no
great histories are written of the Assyrian kings, and then it was called new
Assyria, therefore nothing may be read of the first kings of Assyria, for they
held their kingdom all this while without any great dangers, for yet the
engines of war^es were ^ot known: for as Berosus began to The beginning of
Berosus history, and the end of the same.
write his histories from the going of Noah out of the arc: so he continues
his histor^ vn^ the children of Israel going out of Egypt: few could writ^
^erteinly of this time being of such antiquity: for from Ninus the third king
of the Assyrians until Spherus, the fifteenth king which now I have in hand,
as Archilochus does gather, there is 451. years. This Spherus after 20. years
government died: the 16. king called of Berosus Mameius, reigned 30. years,
and he likewise died without any great mention made of his name. Then followed
in Sparetus 17. king of Assyria. Eusebius in
the kingdom of Assyria one named Sparetus, under whom the Chaldeans warred
upon the Phoenicians, as Eusebius and Berosus says, and brought the Syrians
and the Phoenicians subject to Sparetus. At this time happened such a terrible
earthquake (as Berosus does write) throughout al Assyria and Chaldea, that
Babylon and Niniue were much thereby frighted: this Sparetus reigned 40.
years. Next followed Ascatades, the 18. king of Assyria, of whom Berosus
writes, that in the eight year of this Ascatades 18. king of Assyria.
kings reign, reigned Centres king of Egypt, who with all his host were
drowned in the red sea. This is that Pharao that resisted Moses and plagued
Israel, of whom I have written in the stories of the Jews. In his time he and
all his peers and nobles of Egypt were drowned in the red sea, at what time
the Hebrews had such a triumph over their long enemies, as neither the
Persians had over the Assyrians, nor the Macedonians over the Persians, neither
yet the proud Romans over the Macedonians, as the Hebrews had over the
Egyptians, and therefore I will set down the names of the kings of Assyria in
this sort from the first king until Moses.

Nimrod. 56. years. Belus. 62. Nynus. 52. Semiramis. 42. Zamhisninias. 38.
Arius. 30. Aralius. 40. Baleus Xerxes. 30. Armatrites. 38. Bellochus Priscus.
35. Baleus Junior. 52. Altades. 32. Mamitus. 30. Mancaleus. 30. Spherus. 20.
Macaleus. 2. called of Berosus Mameius. 30. years. Sparetus. 40. Ascatades.
40.
Of the rest of the Kings of Assyria from Ascatades the eighteenth King unto
Sardanapalus the six and thirtith, and the last King of the Assyrians, which
is since the Israelites left Egypt, until the first Olympiad, at what time
Iotham reigned in Judea.

CHAP. II.
IN the last year of Ascatades, began Dardanus to govern the Troianes,
himself being the first king and first builder of Dardania, then Ilion, and
the third time called Troy, after the flood eight hundred and thirty years:
for Berosus in the last years of Ascatades the eighteenth king of the
Assyrians, ended his history, and went into Athens, and read the Grecians
Astronomy, instructed them in the Chaldeans knowledge, concerning the first age
before the flood: secondly, the genealogy of Adam, and the rest unto the
flood: thirdly, of the flood and of Noah, by the name of Ianus, of his long
continuance, of his traueile, laws, and monuments in all Countries: fourthly,
^ee taught the antiquity to the Athenians, of all Kingdoms and Nations, for
the which the Athenians caused his statue to be made with a tongue gilded in
his head, and to be put up in the open school at Athens: thus was Berosus in
Athens honored with a statue. I think it best therefore after that Berosus
ended his history of the kings of Assyria, briefly to pass them over, only
setting their names, the time of their government, and the continuance of the
same, until their kingdom and Empire was taken away by the Chaldeans. I have
already from Nimrod the first king, until Ascatades the eighteenth king, set
down their names: and now from Ascatades unto Sardanapalus the last king, I
will likewise pass them over briefly.

18 Ascatades the eighteenth king of Assyria, reigned forty years: in his
time Dardanus builded Dardania, afterward called Troy, whose building was
after the flood eight hundred and thirty years.

19 Amintes succeeded Ascatades, and reigned king of Assyria 45. years: in
this kings time Moses died in the land of Moab on mount Nebo, after he had
brought the Israelites out of Egypt 40. years.

20 After Amintes followed Belochus Junior, which reigned 25. years in Assyria:
he had a daughter named Actosa, otherwise called Semiramis, who governed with
her father 7. years. The first Iubilee began in the fourth year of this king
Bellochus after Moses: for from Moses death unto the birth of Christ are 29.
Jubilees.

21 Bellopares reigned 30. years, in whose time the Israelites served Eglon
king of Moab 18. years, until Ehud the son of Gera slew Eglon, by whose
death Israel had rest 18. years.

22 Lamprides the 22. king of Assyria, reigned 32. years, in whose time Shamgar
^dged Israel, who slew 600. Philistims with an Ox goade, so God still raised
either Priest, Prophet, Judge, or a king to defend his people.

About this time was the Levites wife abused at Gibeah to death: for the which
cause the Leuite cutteth her in 12. pieces, and sends her to the 12. tribes
of Israel: for the which Lamprides 22. king of Assyria. Judge. 19.
villainy all the tribe of Benjamin were well nigh destroyed.

After Lamprides had reigned 32. years, he had after him a king called
Sosares, in whose time (as Cassiod. does write) the flying horse Pegasus was
invented, and so called for his swiftness. Debora and Barac ruled Israel four
years, at what Sosares the 23. king of Assyria. Judge. 4.
time they fought with Iabin. Iael slew Sisera the chief captain of Iabin
king of Chanaan, and his whole army were overthrown by Barac and Debora. The
history of Ruth was likewise about this time: some suppose that Obed the son
of Boas was borne when Sosares had reigned twenty years. Lampares succeeded
him, and he continued thirty years. In the fifth year of Lampares sell the
third Iubilee after Moses Lampares 14. king of Assyria. 3. Iubilee.
amongst the Jews.

Many of the Assyrian kings might have been omitted for any memory they left
behind, saving that by the time of their government, we know how every
kingdom and when every nation began to flourish: for truly they were more
ancient then the rest, and were the first kings of the world, and were idle
without any great war, therefore is little written of them until Phul
Belochus time: for Herodotus, Ctesias, and Diodorus Siculus, wrote more
liberally of the Assyrians, then either More written of the kings of Assyria
then can be proved.
authority or reason warranted them therein. The greatest brag that
Saneherib, called Sargon in some histories, could make of his predecessors the
kings of Assyria, at what time he laid siege to Jerusalem, he boasted to
Ezechia king of Judah, the victories and conquestes of the kings of Assyria in
these words, Tu audisti O Ezechia, omnia quae fecerunt reges Assyriorum? etc.
Have thou not heard (O Ezechias) what my predecessors the kings of Assyria
have done? have they not 2. Reg. cap. 19.
conquered Gozan, Haran, and Reseph? have they not subdued the sons of Eden,
which dwelt in Thalassar? what is become of king Emath, and of king Arphad?
where be the kings Sepharuaim, Hena and Iuah? are not these subdued and
conquered Beroaldus lib. 4. cap. 6.
by the kings of Assyria? all these kings dwelt in Syria. All this brag of
Saneherib, who was in the most flourishing time of the Assyrians Empire, their
kingdom, their victories, their glory, and all these repetitions of
Saneherib, extended not yet as far as Mount Taurus: and therefore Dionysius
Halicar nassaeus, is in this to be both believed and preferred before either
Herodotus, or Ctesias, or Diodorus and others, who wrote more largely then
truly of the Assyrian kings: for he says, that the old Assyrian Empire
possessed Dionys. Halic. lib. 1.
but a little part of Assyria, Modicam quandam Assyriae partem obtinuit, as
Dionysius affirms: for during the time and government of the first kings of
Assyria, even from Nynus the first king, until Sardanapalus their last king,
was fabulosum tempus: the truth of their history and the glory of their
Empire appeared from the time of Phul Belochus, which was father to Phul Assure,
and in the sacred Scripture named Tiglat Assure.

This Phul Assure was father to Salmanasser, and Salmanasser was father to
Senaherib. At this time it was called new Assyria, whose Empire was again
after the death of Saneherib by Merodach brought into Babylon: for in Babylon
the first Empire began, after translated from Babylon to Niniue, and now from
Niniue to Babylon again, where it ended in Balsaar, as it shall be showed when
the history comes to it.

In this kings time the Midianites prevailed much against the children of
Israel for seven years, and they were sore oppressed, until Gedeon was sent to
be their deliverer, and to be their judge. Then Pannias, or otherwise Pannas,
was the 25. Judge. 6. 7. Pannias 25. king of Assyria.
king of Assyria, in whose time the kings of Argiues ended their kingdom, and
their Empire was translated into Mycena, after they had governed as kings 540.
years. In this time reigned Here ends the kingdom of Assyria.
in Athens Pandion, and Mydas governed in Phrygia.

About which time Abimelech the tyrant usurps the kingdom of Israel, and
puts seventy of his brethren to death: Habuit mercedem: for at Thebes as
Abimelech was besieging a Judge. 9.
high strong Tower, a woman did cast a piece of a millstone upon his head, and
brake his brain pan, after he had been a judge in Israel three years. In
the 24. of Pannias happened the fourth Iubilee after Moses. In this kings time
likewise ruled The fourth Iubilee.
in Israel Thola, a judge of the tribe of Isachar, and governed the people of
Israel 23. years. After this reigned Sosarmus 19. years in Assyria. It is
written that Orpheus the Thracian, the Sosarmus 26. king of Assyria.
most famous and most ancient musician lived at this time. Iair the Gileadite
governed Israel 22. years: this judge had thirty sons that rode on 30. ass
coltes, men of great authority: for they had thirty Cities in the land of
Gilead, and they kept the land in peace 22. years. Now Faunius Junior governed
Italy, to whom Euander came from Arcadia, and had given him certain lands in
Italy, which Euander called afterward Palatinum. Manethon writes, that
Hercules, Amphitrions son was borne about this time, of whom the Poets feign,
that he was the son of Jupiter: of this man more shall be spoken amongst the
Grecians, when I speak of their histories.

But again to the Assyrians, who had after Sosarmus a king called Mytreus the
27. king, and reigned 27. years: in the latter end of this kings reign
Hercules killed Cacus the great Hercules kills Cacus.
giant, in mount Auentine, after Hercules overthrew Troy, and killed the king
called Laomedon, and made Priamus his son king of the Troyans: who again
repaired and builded up Troy to be one of the strongest towns of the world.
This Hercules came to Italy fifty and five years before AEneas coming, and
gave to the Italians laws. Read of this more in Halicarn. lib. 1.

In Israel after Judge Iair died, it was 18. years interregnum, without a
Judge, and they wrought wickedness in the sight of The Lord punishes Israel for
sin.
the Lord again, and served Baalim and Ashtaroth, the gods of Syria, and the
gods of Sidon, the gods of Moab, the gods of Ammon, and the gods of the
Philistines, and God was angry with them, and delivered them to the hands of
their enemies, who vexed and oppressed them 18. years, until the time they
put away the strange gods, and served the true God with great repentance. Ishai
the father of the Prophet Ishai borne.
David was borne about this time, three hundredth year after the Israelites
going out of Egypt.

Now with the Assyrians, Tautanes the 28. king begins to rule, about which
time Hercules appointed the games of Tautanes the 28. king of Assyria.
Olympia, where all the Grecians came to exercise feats of arms, running and
wrestling, with all other kind of exercise, 430. years before the Olympiads
began. This time happened Hercules gamesat Olympia.
in Egypt in the Isle of Pharao a great deluge called Diluuium Pharaonicum,
which did ouerflowe the whole country, which was seldom seen in Egypt, for
that they have no rain but only the ouerflowing of Nilus which once a year
happens unto them.

By this time Iephtah was made Judge in Israel, a valiant man: but for that he
was a bastard, sedition grew in Israel Judge. 12
against Iephtha by the Ephraimites, his brethren thrusted him out, and Iephtha
fled to the land of Tob: but he was made afterward captain over Israel, and
he subdued the Ammonites from Aroer to Abel, 20. cities, and slew 42. thousand
of the Ephraimites, and for the victory here of he sacrificed his daughter
unto the Lord according to his vow, though it was rash and unlawful. In this
Tautanes time reigned 4. Judges, Iephtha 6. years, Ibzan governed 7. years:
some thought this to be Abesan the 10. Judge.
Boas the husband of Ruth, the grandfather of David: this had 30. sons and
30. daughters. After him Elon of the tribe of Zabulon, judged Israel 10.
years: and after Elon ruled Abdon: this Judge had 40. sons, and thirty
sons sons that rode on 70. assecolts, and he governed Israel 10. years and
died.

About this time Theseus ravished Helen the wife of Menelaus, The first
rauishment of Helen by Theseus.
which being by Adoneus king of the Molosseans taken, was rescued by his fellow
and always his companion Hercules. In the kingdom of Assyria succeeded
Tautanes, who reigned 40. years: of which we read nothing worth the writing.
At this Tautanes the 29. king of Assyria.
time Samson the son of Manoah of the tribe of Dan, governed Israel 20.
years: he plagued the Philistims who had kept Israel under hand for their
sins and wickedness: for God was angry with them: for notwithstanding all his
goodness, his mercy toward them, and his miracles amongst them, yet they still
rebelled, and moved the Lord to wrath: this Samson was the last Judge of
Israel. Then the state of the Israelites government Sams^ the last Judge of
Israel.
was altered, and they were under Ely the priest.

At this time reigned a king that governed the Thuscanes named Ocnus Beanor,
this builded Mantua the country where Virgil was borne, which the Romans
called after Hethruscanes. Ocn^ Bianor builded Mantua.
Now that the race of the Judges of Israel is ended which continued from Moses
death, until Samuel 357. years, God suffered kings to govern his people, and
appointed his Prophets to direct his kings: this came to pass in Samuels time,
who anointed Saul king over Israel, and they both together reigned 40. years.
By this time Tyneus the 30. king of the Assyrians reigned in Niniue 30. years,
and in the 13. of his reign the 7. Iubilee of the Jews began. The kingdom of
Hispane before The 7. Iubilee. Hispane divided into provinces.
called Iberia, and before that time Celtiberia, is in this time divided into
provinces, into several gouernme^ts of cities and countries, having 24. kings
by succession, which continued until 75. years after the destruction of Troy,
and continued so until the Carthaginians began to flourish, whom the Romans
afterward conquered. At this time one Pypinus governed the Thuscanes, and
reigned, as Manethon writes, 56. years. In the last years of this king Tyneus,
the Prophet David was borne, The birth of David.
407. years after the children of Isreal's going out of Egypt, and in the 7.
Iubile after Moses: then began to reign in Assyria Dercillus, Dercillus the
31. king of Assyria.
he reigned 40. years. In his days began the kingdom of Lacedemonia, 83.
years after Troys destruction: the first king of Lacedemonia was called
Euristenes, who reigned 42. years: The kingdom of Lacedemonia at this time
begins.
of him came lineally 2. noble and valiant captains, Cleomenes and Leonidas,
who in their time were most famous, for they invaded the Persians, and
overthrew them at Thermophila.

About the same year the Corinthians began likewise to establish The beginning
of the kingdom of Corinth.
a kingdom: for the Lacedaemonians and the Corinthians began at one time to
reign: the first king of Corinth was Alethes, and he reigned 35. years. In the
10. year of king Dercillus the Ark of the Lord was taken by the Philistines,
and carried unto Ashdod, one of their five principal cities, and they kept the
The Arc is taken away from Israel by the Philistines.
Arc 7. months. For when the Israelites were overcome by the Philistines, and
the arc taken away, Ely the priest hearing that the Israelites were
overthrown, the arc taken, and his two sons slain, fell down from his
stool and brake his neck: for so the Lord told Samuel before what should
become upon Ely and his house. Israel still offended God, and now not contented
with the government which God appointed them, but cried Saul the first king of
Israel:
out for a king, God commanded Samuel to anoint Saul their king. About this
time great wars grew between the Peloponesians and the Athenians. Codrus at
that time lived, and was the last king of Athens: for after Codrus there was no
king there, but governors called Metontidae. Codrus son called Medon was the
first Judge in Athens after the kings. Codrus according to the Oracle given,
that the Athenians should have no victories Codrus the last king of Athens.
unless their king were slain in the battle, he disguised himself like a
common soldier, rushed into the midst of the battle purposely to be slain,
that his country might have victory, being the last of the 17. kings, having
ruled Athens 21. years, ended his life and his kingdom.

About this time Samuel was commanded to anoint David king over Israel, and
many learned men would have Homer about Ruffin, in Com.
this time to be borne: some controversy is of Homers time: Eratosthenes
thought it within 100. years after the destruction of Troy, and so says
Aristarchus, and Cornelius Nepos, both affirm that Homer flourished 100.
years before the first Olympiad. Budaeus says, that Homer lived in the latter
years Euphoreus lib. 4. de ass.
of king David, so they square about 80. years of Homers birth. During this
time reigned over the Latins, AEneas Siluius their fourth king.

After this reigned in Assyria Eupales 38. years, in whose time the
Peloponesians again moved wars against the Athenians. Now about this time
the promise is made to David that the continuance of his kingdom should for
ever endure, but with crosses and afflictions: for Absalon killed his brother
Amnon a little after, and fled unto the king of Gessur, 2. Sam. cap. 7.
and tarried there three year. By this time Solomon was borne of Bethsaba the
wife of Vrias: Nathan and Gad were in those days Prophets of the Lord.

Now reigned in Athens Medon the first Judge, the son of Codrus the last king
of Athens: in Lacedemonia Argis the second Ruff. in Com. Medon the first judge
of Athens. Arcestratus the third king of Lacedemonia.
king reigned one year, Arcestratus succeeded the third king of Lacedemonia,
and governed the Lacedaemonians 35. years: in Corinth likewise Ixon the second
king reigned 37. years: for both these kingdoms had one beginning, and
therefore their kingdom is accordingly to be handled: for in the last years of
the kings of Assyrians histories, the Grecians began: for this understand, that
the Caldeans, Assyrians, Egyptians, and all the East part of the world, which
were first inhabited after The antiquity of the Chaldeans and Assyrians.
the flood, were even consumed with sword and fire, before the Grecians or the
Romans were acquainted with the world, and therefore the less to be spoken of
these old ancient people for want of authorities: and had not the holy Ghost
lightened profane histories with true records of the Scripture, all
antiquities had almost been put to oblivion: Moses the first Historiographer of
the world.
for all that are in truth learned in histories, take their light from Moses:
he is the grand scholemaster of all writers.

About this time Nicius Fesulanus governed the Thuscanes Di^lor. lib. 6.
47. years: he expelled the people called Phocenses out of Corsica, and Nicius
builded a town, and named it Nicea after his own name. By this time Solomon
grew great in Gods favor, 3. King. cap. 6.
began to make the temple in Jerusalem, excelled all the princes of the world
in wisdom and government. Hiram king of Tyrus at that time sends to Solomon,
and Solomon to him, purposing to build the house of God: which temple began to
be builded the fourth year of Salomons reign, and the 12. of Hiram king of
Tire Salomons friend, who procured workmen to work in Libanon, and after the
going of Israel out of Egypt 480. years.

Some think that Carthage was builded by Charcedon at Carthage builded.
that time: some think of Dido: others say otherwise, both of the building of
Carthage, and of the time of building, as in the building of Troy, and in the
building of Rome the like controversy Joseph. contra Appionem lib. 1.
is, that sub iudice lis est. Laosthenes the 33. king of the Assyrians is the
next king after Eupales, and is now in hand to Laosthenes the 33. king of
Assyria.
be spoken of, in whose time Alba Siluius governed the Latins the sixth king:
for the sirnames of the Latin kings were called Siluij, as the kings of
Alexandria were called Ptolomei, as before The 9. Iubilee.
I told you of the Caesar's of Rome and Pharaos of Egypt.

About this time the kingdom of Israel for the idolatry of Solomon was
divided, and the ten tribes carried from Rehoboam The kingdom of Israel divided.
the son of Solomon king of Judah, unto Jeroboam king of Israel, who invented
many wicked things in Israel, idolatry, new religion, contempt of the true
God, putting up for their god the golden calfe: thus he and his posterities
continued Here the kings of Iudae begin.
from the fourth year of Rehoboam, until the 19. year of Nabuchodonosor,
which was 390. years, at what time the last destruction of Jerusalem, and the
captivity of Judah was Archippus the third Judge atthis time ruled Athens,
where he governed 19. years: under whom flourished Sextus Homerus a citizen of
Athens: this man gave new laws to the Athenians. The Thracians were strong by
this time, and became great on land and seas, and Smendes king of Egypt to whom
Jeroboam fled, and with whom he stayed until Solomon died: this Smendes is
named 1. King. 11. 14.
in Scripture Sesac: this came up against Jerusalem the fifth Functius.
year of Rehoboam, destroyed the city, spoiled the temple; and took all the
treasures of the kings house away. Thus was The first destruction of Jerusalem.
Judah punished for sin by Sesac king of Egypt a heathen man.

At Corinth governed Pryminas the fourth king: he reigned thirty and five
years at Corinth. In Assyria after Laosthenes reigned Pyrithides 30. years,
in the 10. year of the tenth Iubilee, Pyrithides the 34. king of Assyria.
which Iubilee was in the year of the world, two thousand nine hundredth
ninety and three. Abia the son of Rehoboam reigned three years king of Judah:
after whom succeeded Asa. In Tyrus reigned now a king called Ascartus, who
after he had reigned 12. years in Tyrus, his brother Astarimus succeeded him,
and governed Tyrus 9. years, and he was slain by his brother called
Phelletes: he reigned 8. months, and was likewise slain by Ichobalus a priest
of the goddess Astarthes, of whom mention is made in the third book of 3.
King. 11.
the kings and the 11. chapter. This goddess Solomon honored much: and in
Egypt ruled Pseusenses. There rose against Asa king of Judah, Sera king of
AEthiopia about this time, and Se^a king of AEthiopia.
thought to invade Iewrie: but he was not by Asa, but by God put to flight, and
his army scattered and slain.

Elias and Elizeus were borne this time, men singularly beloved Elias and
Elizeus borne.
of God in the middle age of the world: for so it is set down (as Melancthon
says) by Elias himself, accompting The middle age of the world.
the age of the world, 2000. without the Law, 2000. by the Law, and 2000. by
grace, which are the days of Messiah, but for sin shortened, and by that
rule to be looked for before 6000. year. Nadab at this time was the second
king of Israel, Nadab the second king of Israel. Baasha the third king of
Israel.
and began to reign after Jeroboam, whom Baasha slew in the third year of Asa
king of Judah. Baasha the third king of Israel builded Rama, that it might be a
cause that they of the kingdom of Judah might not come within the territory of
Israel, neither they of Israel might trouble Judah, for the which Asa king of
Judah for fear of Baasha king of Israel, makes Asa the fifth king of Judah.
covenant with Benhadad king of Aram, and therefore is reproved by the Prophet,
for that he trusted in the king of Aram, and not in God who had given him
victory before over the AEthiopians and Lubins. At this time Achia and Sameas
prophesied in Israel: and Septimus Siluius was king over the Latins, after
whom succeeded Capis Siluius the eight king of the Latins, and reigned 28.
years: by this Capis was Capua Capua builded.
builded. In Lacedemonia governed the sixth king named Agesilaus, and over the
Corinthians Bacis the fifth king, of whom Eutropius lib. 1. The kings of
Corinth after Bacis, were called Bacidae.
the kings of Corinth were afterward named Bacidae: the names of these kings
for the most part are seldom found amongst writers, for they did nothing worth
the memory.

Now in Assyria reigned Ophrateus 20. years, he was the 35. king in whose days
Zambri or Zimbri the servant of Ela conspired Zambri killed Ela king of Israel.
against the king, killed him, and destroyed all the house of Baasha, according
to the word of the Lord to Iehu, and afterward Zambri went to the kings house
and burned the palace of the kings, and himself with fire: then the people of
Israel Zambri burned himself.
were divided, some followed Tobni to make him king, others followed Omri, and so
Omri became the sixth king of Israel. He Omri the sixth king of Israel builded
Samaria. Nepher king of Egypt.
builded first Samaria, 200. years before Romulus builded Rome. At this time
reigned Nepher king in Egypt four years: and after him succeeded Amenophis,
he reigned 9. years king in Egypt, of whom I will speak among the kings of
Egypt.

Now died Asa king of Judah after he had reigned 41. years: then followed in
Israel after Omri, Achab the 7. king worse then Achab the seventh king of
Israel.
all the other kings before him, a great idolater, and a tyrant: in the fourth
year of this king Achabs reign, began Iosaphat to reign in Judah. In Achabs
time Elias began to prophecy, whose history begins from the 17. of the
first of the kings, until the 3. of the 2. of the kings, where he prophesied
of the famine that was at hand to come, 800. years after the famine Famine.
in Iaacobs time. In these days Hiel the Bethelite builded Jericho.

Amongst the Latins reigned a king called Tiberinus Siluius of whom the river
Tiber is now named after Tiberinus name, for Tiber was called before Albula.
Then was in Corinth T^ber before called Albula.
Agelas, and Archelaus governed the Lacedaemonians: Eusebius in his histories
affirms, that in this time flourished Licurgus a lawmaker, and a great wise
man amongst the Lacedaemonians. ^iuius lib. 1.
After this reigned Ophraganeus Ascrasapes, and Sardanapalus, in whom ended the
history of the Assyrians.

And now having ended the whole time of 36. kings reigning in Assyria, from
Belus time unto Sardanapalus, and after him from Bellochus unto Merodach, the
reign of six kings, during The first kingdom of Assyria ended under
Sardanapalus, which continued 1350. years.
which time it was called the new kingdom of Assyria, and from Merodach unto
Balsasar, five kings government, which was translated from the Assyrians unto
the Chaldeans, as you shall read more: being of two gouernements, and yet one
Monarchy, sometime under the Chaldeans in Babylon, sometime in Niniue under
the Assyrians, until both Chaldea and Assyria became subject, first unto the
Medes and after to the Persians.

Of the Kings of Babylon again called new Assyria, from Sardanapalus, which
the Greeks call Tonoscon coleros, until Balsaar the last king of Babylon.

CHAP. III.
SArdanapalus being given to all filthy pleasures, feasting, banqueting, a
most riotous glutton, a great drunkard, disguising him self amongst women in
women's apparel, wading from one vice unto another, so much subject to beastly
abuse, that his slothful life gave great opportunity to Arbaces a valiant
captain of the Medes, a man of such magnanimity, being general of all Media,
consulting with Belochus the lieutenant of Babylon, a man of great experience,
that both Arbaces and Belochus agreed, seeing such occasions offered, to join
both their forces together against Sardanapalus: which being done, after two
great overthrows given to The last overthrow of the Assyrians by Arbaces.
them, and Arbaces almost slain, and his people scattered and fled,
Sardanapalus was yet too strong for them both: but the third time he was
found with his Assyrians so full of wine, and his army so sleepie after
drunkenness, (according to their wonted manners) that Arbaces again by night
with all his force entered unto their tents, found them in their beds full of
surphets, slew them in such heaps, that Sardanapalus fled to his city of
Niniue, and his lieutenant was slain: he was then besieged in Niniue, his
people forsook him, and went to his enemies. Then he perceiving his great
danger, sent his three sons and his two daughters to Paphlagonia to his
friend Cottus with great treasures, to avoid the present peril he was in:
being full of all desperations, he made his own grave so gorgeous and so
sumptuous, of such high The manner of Sardapalus death.
building, that he brought 150. beds made of pure gold, so many tables
likewise of gold, and after much feasting and banqueting with his Queens and
concubines, and with many of his dear friends, being in the midest of their
pleasures, he commanded fire to be put to his palace (I mean that pile of
wood which he made for his grave) and so ended his life and the Empire together
in fire, to escape his enemies: thus ended the monarchy of Assyria, after one
thousand two hundredth and forty years continuance.

Behold the events of the kingdoms of the world* how God gave them always up
to the enemies, when they flourished most in glory, and were most in force and
power. Even so was Chaldea and Assyria the only empires of the world, which
far excelled all other kingdoms, when it was overthrown by Cyrus, insomuch
that the great and mighty king Nabuchodonosor the only Hercules (by
Megasthenes so named) of the East Nabuchodonosor named Hercules.
kingdoms, who advanced himself up unto the heavens, who was compared for his
great magnificence and glorious pomp of his huge empire, for the pride of his
mind, and insolency of his state, to the star Lucifer, and for the
brightness, beauty and glory of his Empire: his greatness was such, that he
had divine honors done unto him: but his pride and pomp was laid in the
pit. For in the time of Nabuchodonosor, Isai. 14.
the Chaldeans and Assyrians flourished: for they were kings of the Arabians,
of the Egyptians, of all Syria: and for the glory and greatness of their
kingdom, it passed all others far: and being the first kingdom of the
world, was called the golden kingdom, aureum seculum: the other three
Monarchies were called Argenteum seculum: the silver age, began in Cyrus time
in Persia: the brazen age in Macedonia in the time of Alexander: and last, the
Iron age among the Romans began in Julius Caesar's time, described in Daniel
by the four beasts. For all Nabuchodonosors power, strength, states and
kingdoms, lost all within threescore and ten years of this his great
possession and power. Even so the kings of Egypt which flourished in like
strength, and claimed the like majesty, lost their kingdom in the midest of
their glory, and were overthrown by Cambyses.

To be short, because God would be known unto his people, whom the wicked
never confessed to be the God of victory, he delivered Pharao and all Egypt
into the hands of Nabuchodonosor: and for his pomp and pride herein, thinking
that it was his own strength, his own force and power, he delivered
Nabuchodonosor and his posterities, with all the Empire of Assyria and Chaldea,
into the hands of Cyrus, whose kingdom flourished much above the rest, until
Darius surnamed Codomanus, whose wealth, force and kingdoms were such, that he
made nothing of all the world beside, God gave him over into the hands of
Alexander the great, whose greatness continued not long, for the like
unthankfulness to God, for his kingdom passed to the Romans.

Thus God appointed the weakest sometime to vanquish the strongest, and raised
up the meanest to overcome the mightiest. Thus was Egypt subdued by the
Chaldeans, the Chaldeans by the Persians, the Persians by the Macedonians, the
Macedonians by the Romans, and the long empire of the Romans, their pomp and
their glory taken away by the Germans, and the Germans rather provinces to
be called then an Empire: so wickedness prevailed, that Turks, Canes,
Sophies, with such infidels of long time flourished.

Then Arbaces and Phul Belochus divided these Empires: Arbaces king of the
Medes and Persians.
Phul Belochus held Babylon and Niniue, Arbaces possessed Media and Persia for
his part. But to write of Chaldea: first this Phul Belochus though he dwelt in
Babylon, and reigned asking there eight and forty years, yet the name of the
Monarchy continued still in Assyria, for that the most part of the other Kings
had their mansion in Niniue, and therefore after Sardanapalus time, called the
new kingdom of Assyria.

Now Belochus being settled king in Babylon, called also Belochus king of
Babylon.
the king of Assure, he came against the land of Israel, and moved wars
against Manahem then king: but being pacified with a thousand talents of
silver, he returned to Babylon without any harm done, and there died, when he
had reigned eight and forty years.

After him succeeded his son Phul Assure, named in Scripture Tyglat Phul
Assure: this infidel God stirred up against 4 Reg. cap. 15.
Israel for their sins: he took all these Cities and coasts, Aron, Abel,
Bethmecha, Asor, Gilead, and Galilee, and all 4. Reg. cap. 13.
the land of Nepthali, and carried them unto Assyria: this king reigned three
and twenty years, as both Functius and Melancthon write, yet Metasthenes
would have him to reign twenty and five years.

After this succeeded Salmanasser the third king of new Salmanasser the third
king of Assyria.
Assyria: he likewise was by God appointed a scourge for the sin^s of Israel,
and the idolatry of Samaria: he came from Niniue unto Samaria, besieged it
three years and took it, and carried all Israel captive unto Assyria, and put
them in Halah, and in Habor, cities of the Medes: for at that time the Medes
and the Persians, were subject unto the Assyrians.

Thus were the 10. tribes carried captive away from Samaria 4. king. cap. 17.
unto Assyria, in the ninth year of Hosea king of Israel, after the building
of Samaria 210. years: the whole kingdom of Israel was destroyed, when it had
continued from the first year of The kingdom of Israel destroyed by
Salmanasser.
Roboam the son of Solomon, to the last year of king Hosea, two hundredth
fifty and three years, as Functius affirms. Then Salmanassar filled all the
cities of Samaria with men from Babylon, and from Hamath, in stead of the
children of Israel: 262. by Bucholcerus.
for the kings of Samaria envied so much the kings of Judah, the state of
Jerusalem, the pomp of the high priest, and the magnificence of Salomons
temple, that the kings of Samaria builded temples, erected two idolatrous
altars in Dan and Bethel, where they sacrificed unto the golden calfe, and
honored idols of Baal: yet God raised good men, as Elias and Elizeus, Amos and
Osea, by whom the Church of God in this wicked kingdom was still preserved.

This king Salmanasser brought the Medes and Persians subject unto Assyria, and
destroyed the Moabites, as the Prophet Esaias before told: there is mention made
of this king Chap. 16.
in the tenth chapter of Osea, where the Prophet says, As Salmanasser
destroyed Betharbell in the day of battle, the mother with the children was
dashed in pieces: so shall Bethel do unto Osea cap. 10.
you. Under this king Salmanasser was Israel scattered like sheep, for the
Lions dispersed them: first the king of Ashur that was Salmanasser, has
devoured him, and last Nabuchodonosor has taken his bones: the one carried the
ten tribes of Israel, the other carried the two tribes of Judah prisoners unto
Babylon. This Salmanasser is named of Ptolome Nabonasser: Iere. cap. 50.
he reigned in the eight Olympiad, when Romulus was king Melancthon lib. 2.
in Rome. Ezechias was king in Judah, and Osea king in Israel, before the
captivity of Judah, one hundredth thirty and three years: so long was between
the destruction of Jerusalem and Samaria: for Salmanasser did reign seven
years king in Assyria before he had besieged Samaria, which is to be noted,
to avoid errors in account. From the first year of Salmanasser, until the
first year of Nabuchodonosors reign, is 115. years: he reigned but ten
year in the whole, and then he died.

And after him succeeded Saneherib who dwelt in Niniue, Saneherib.
who following his fathers steps in all tyranny, and seeking means to
destroy the rest of Gods people, came with 2. King. 18.
a mighty huge army to besiege Jerusalem against king Ezechias, with most
horrible blasphemies against God, preferring his own force and power (being
the arm of flesh,) before the Lord of heaven: but the prayer of Ezechias the
king, and of the Prophet Esaias was heard of God, and God sent his Angels to
defend his saints, and to destroy the enemies of his Church. All the bragges
of Sanneherib, and all his horrible blasphemies, the Lord at a moment with one
blast blewe away: his force, his strength, and his huge armies, 2. King. cap.
19.
being one hundredth fourscore and five thousand, were slain by the Angel of
the Lord, and Sanneherib fled to Niniue, where his own sons Adramelech and
Sharazer, slew him in the temple worshipping his god Nisroch, even before
Sannaherib slain by his sons.
that Idol whom he preferred before the living God: the just judgment of
God for blasphemy, to be slain of his own sons before the face of his
god. For this perjured king Sanneherib swear unto the Ambassadors of Ezechias,
if he might have three hundredth talents of silver, and thirty talents of
gold, he would peaceably depart without offering of any injury to the Jews:
this Ezechias by persuasions satisfied his demand, but Sanneherib performed
not his promise, but contrary to his oath, returning from Egypt, where he
laid siege to Pelusium in vain, fearing Tharsicos king of AEthiopia, that
with great power came to aid the Joseph. lib. 10. cap. 1.
king of Egypt, he came (as you heard) and laid siege to Jerusalem: but he
had his reward. Herodotus says, that in Egypt in one of the temples, there was
a statue made for Sanneherib, with this sentence written in Greek, (...).
Herodot. lib. 2.
This sentence is of some referred to Sethon king of Egypt. And thus this
wicked king, after much mischief and harm done to the Church of God, in the
seventh year of his reign, and in the 12. Olympiad died: he and his father
Salmanasser reigned in Assyria, when Romulus and Rhemus reigned in Rome: he had
the end you heard of: you shall read more of him in the second book of
Herodotus. The Chaldeans.


All this while Chaldea had their governors, their laws, and all things
free, fit for the common wealth: yet they paid tribute to the kings of
Assyria. Hitherto new Assyria reigned as the chief seat of the Empire, and
held Babylon as subject to their Scepter. Now while this Sannehorib had in hand
to conquer Judea, and thought thence to pass unto Egypt as he did, imagining
fully to subdue all those regions which his father Salmanasser thought to have
done: when news came to Babylon that all his army was slain at Jerusalem,
Functius lib. 1. Comment.
and himself killed at Niniue by his sons, the Chaldeans being hereof
advertised, took present occasions to set in for the Empire of Assyria,
Merodach being then governor of Babylon, considering that both his two sons
fled to Armenia, after the murder of their father, (as Functius says) for
fear of their elder brother Asserhaddon, but Josephus says, Lib. 10. cap. 2.
the younger brother.

Now Asserhaddon one of the three sons of Sanneherib, in whose time Manasses
king of Judah was borne, Asserhaddon succeeded his father Sanneherib.
when his father was slain and his brethren fled, he entered to his fathers
seat, and governed the Assyrians ten years: But Merodach the son of
Baladan the governor of Babylon, a discreet man, looking unto the government
of Asserhaddon, being full of contention between the brethren: the other two
which fled before after they killed their father, return with a great army
against the king Asserhaddon their brother, and held civil wars within
themselves so long, that the Monarchy of Assyria became so weak, that
Merodach translated the kingdom of Assyria unto Chaldea, and brought Niniue
again subject unto Babylon.

Now when Merodach had reigned twelve years in Babylon, Merodach.
and after having the full dignity and supremacy over the Assyrians and
Chaldeans, he was named the first king of Babylon again, and reigned forty
years in Babylon. Of this Merodach there is mention made in Jeremy Capta est
Babel, Jeremy cap. 50.
confusus est Bell, victus est Merodach, which shall be more spoken of, when the
kingdom of Judea is in hand. Ptolomey does call this Merodach, Mardocempadus:
for in the Egyptian histories Herodotus differs from Eusebius and others in
the names of kings: men must read with great diligence and with much care, and
Eusebius from Herodotus does differ.
weigh the computation of time, as here between Metasthenes and Functius some
controversy rises from the time of Belochus unto Merodach. But Functius
following the best authority, is best to be believed: for he reproves by
prophetical histories, the error of Metasthenes, which goes about without
warrant of Scripture to prove histories of the Bible, as these partly be for
the most part, both of Assyrian and Chaldean histories: for after Sardanapalus
time, they do co^curre with the time of the Prophets. Esaias does make mention
of Isai 39.
Merodach the son of Baladan, who sent Ambassadors with Merodach sends
unto Ezech^as Ambassadors.
letters unto Ezechias, with great presents to entreat of friendship, and to be
in league one with another, where they were with all solemnity received,
showing unto them all the treasures and pleasures of Jerusalem, and returning
to Babylon I^seph. lib. 10. cap. 3.
with rewards.

After Merodach died, when he had reigned forty years in Babylon, leaving
behind him his son Bemerodach, who reigned one and twenty years, of whom
little or nothing we read of: After whom succeeded Nabuchodonosor the first,
father of the great Nabuchodonosor: this king took war in hand against Necho
king of Egypt, and went from Niniue to 2. Chron. 35.
the river Perath, which is likewise Euphrates, where Necho came in person to
fight against a city of the Assyrians named Carchemish. Josias fearing Necho,
lest he passing through Judea Melancton lib. 2.
would have taken his kingdom, he not consulting with the Lord, fighting with
Necho was slain in the valley of Megiddo, or Magiddo, as Herodotus and
Functius affirm.

But to come to Nabuchodonosor. To avoid tediousnes, I will join him with his
father, letting the reader to the second of Herodotus, where he shall read of
this first Nabuchodonosor and his wars: and for that he jointly reigned two
years with his son, as Functius does write, the son being of greater fame
and better known far, then the rest of the kings of Chaldea or of Assyria:
In the Ecclesiastical history, I will set down his actions, his wars, his
greatness, and his victories. After his father had reigned 25. years, this his
son Nabuchodonosor the great, who in the eight year of his reign subdued
all Syria, Judea only excepted, conquered from Euphrates unto Pelusium, and
brought in subjection, even from the river of Egypt unto the river Perath, and
all that pertained to the king of Egypt, so that the king of Egypt came no more
out of his land (as it is written) against the 2. King. 24.
king of Babylon: he laid siege to Tire, and wasted all the regions Functius.
there about: he brought under the king of Babylon, all Libya, the most part of
Asia, unto the land of Armenia. This Ruffinus.
king grew so great, that Philostratus does so set him in his histories, that
he passed Hercules in force and power. Strabo Strabo lib. 15. Nabuchodonosor
greater then Hercules.
says, that the Chaldeans esteemed more of Nabuchodonosor, then the Grecians
did of Hercules. Nabuchodonosor made kingdoms to shake, the earth to tremble,
and the whole world a forest, and left almost no where unconquered but Judea:
where after all his other wars and conquests, he sends his deputy
Nabuzaradan general of his army: he comes with a huge army of the
Chaldeans, a great band of Aramites, of Moabites, of Ammonites: for
Nabuchodonosor had heard that Iehoiakim had rebelled after he had paid
tribute for The greatness of Nabuchodonosor.
three years. This was the cause of the destruction of Iehoiakim, after he had
reigned three years: he was deceived much, trusting to have aid by Necho king
of Egypt, and so lost both the kingdom and himself.

This was the judgment of God for the sins of Manasses, and the idolatry of
Judah, not weighing the crying out of Jeremy, though night and day he persuaded
them to yield up the City, and to followethe Lord: for Jerusalem was full of
innocent blood, and therefore God used these wicked tyrants to execute his
commandment. After this Iehoiakin the son of Iehoiakim, when he had reigned
three months, being 18. years of age, Nabuchodonosor fearing least he should
become false, and so revenge his fathers death, came against him: he and his
mother, his princes, and his servants yielded to Nabuchodonosor by the council
of Jeremy. And the king of Babylon made Mattaniah king in stead of his nephewe
Iehoiakin, and changed his name to Zedechia, who likewise offended 2. Chron. 36.
the Lord, and would not be councelled by Jeremy, but he and his people
mocked the messengers of God, despised his word, and misused his Prophets so
long, that Nabuchodonosor came and slew their young men with the sword, killed
all, and spared none. But for the rest of Nabuchodonosors tyranny, his cruelty
and slaughter, specially of Jews, they are read in the fourth book of Kings
Chap. 24. and 25. in in Esai, in Jeremy: This king is every where mentioned
with The first coming of Nabu. unto Jerusalem. Jeremy 22.
the Prophets and in Ecclesiastical histories. Likewise Josephus orderly
sets down his several wars against Jerusalem, first in the eleventh year
of Iechonias, he came with great force and slew the most part in Jerusalem,
killed the king, and buried him in sepulchro asini, threw him dead unburied out
of the City, according to the prophecy of Jeremy saying, Iehoiakim shall be
buried as an ass is buried, even drawn and cast forth without the gates of
Jerusalem like a carrion, neither shall any lament him, neither mourn for him:
he took also the chief men of the City, even 3000. and carried them unto
Babylon, amongst whom Ezechiel being yet a very young man was lead likewise
captive. This was before told of by Jeremy the Prophet, but not believed. The
second time he came against Iehoiakin, whom Nabuchodonosor advanced unto his
fathers seat: but fearing he would reuoult by being mindful of his fathers
death, he took him, his mother, his family, his nobles, and others to the
number of ten thousand The 2. coming of Nabuchod. unto Jerusalem. Joseph.
lib. 10, cap. 9.
eight hundred thirty and two, and carried them unto Chaldea: yet
Nabuchodonosor swear to the king and to his counsel, that he would spare them
upon their submission, to the which the king by the persuasions of the Prophet
Jeremy yielded: but the tyrant kept no promise. With this king, Daniel, Ios^ph.
lib. 10. cap. 9.
Anania, Azaria, and Misael, being of the kings stock, were taken prisoners,
and commanded by the king that they should be brought up in the Chaldean
tongue, to serve the king afterward. The third and last coming of
Nabuchodonosor was against Zedechia the last king of Judah: he laid The third
and last coming of Nabuchodo.
siege to Jerusalem eighteen months: during which time, great famine and
plague, with manifold miseries more befell them, and at last the destruction
of the City: men, women, and children slain before the King, his Princes and
Nobles put to the sword, the wealth and treasure of the City carried to
Babylon, the Temple burned, the King himself Joseph lib. 10. cap 10. 11.
taken, his children killed before the kings face, and then his eyes put out,
and carried in chains to Babylon, where he died most miserably in prison.

Thus God did put his sword in Nabuchodonosors hand as an instrument of his
wrath, to punish sin. Of this matter more is spoken of in the history of the
Jews, otherwise called the Hebrews. When Nabuchodonosor had reigned forty
three years, (Metasthenes says forty five years:) the Chaldean history
reports, that he prophesied the destruction of Babylon, being by Daniel
taught, and by God called to be one of his chief instruments in his Church.
In a little before he died, he confessed the glory and majesty of God,
saying, I give thanks unto the most High, I praise and honor him that lives
for ever, who restored unto me my kingdom, my honor, and my understanding,
whose works Daniel 4.
are all truth, and his ways judgments: for now I confess Bucholcerus.
that he is able to abase those that walk in pride: he lived in Tarquinius
Priscus time, the fifth king of Rome, and in the eighteen Ruffinus.
Iubilee of the Jews, and in the forty nine Olympiads. In the time of
Nabuchodonosors father, Dracos laws was written in Athens. Solon, Thales
Milesius flourished, and the seven Sages of Greece lived this time: the Prophet
Ezechiel began to prophecy in Babylon, the fifth year of the captivity.

For as you shall read of the Medes and Persians, and of the Jeremy 51.
Romans, that they were made by God executours, instruments and hammers: for
so the Lord spoke of them, saying, Thou art my hammer and weapons of war: for
with thee will I break the nations, and with thee will I destroy kingdoms,
All creatures obey God.
by thee will I break man and woman, and by thee will I break young and old:
you shall find this phrase often rehearsed by God in the mouths of the
Prophets: so God calls Nabuchodonosor his servant and says, I will put my
sword in Nabuchodonosors hand: so Senaherib, so Salmanasser, and so Satan
himself is Gods servant to work his will, to obey his commandment, and to
execute his judgments. After this Melancthon lib. 2. Chron.
Nabuchodonosor succeeded his son Euilmerodach, he reigned 30. years, he
reigned one year together with his father: it seems that this Euilmerodach
was instructed by Daniel to fear God: for after that Nabuchodonosor had turned
to the Lord, and began to be a benefactor to the Church, and to the members
thereof, this his son likewise when he became king of Babylon after his
father, in the first year of his reign brought Iehoiakin king of Judah out of
prison, he restored him to liberty, and advanced him to honor, he gave him
princely apparel, Jeremy cap. 52.
and did set his throne above the throne of the kings that were then in Babel,
he had allowance in the Court for his diet, he had rest and quietness, and
continued in favor with the king all the days of his life. Thus by Gods great
providence the seed 2. Reg. cap. 25.
of David, which in king Zedechias was extinguished, yet in Iehoiakin was
reserved even unto Christ: for after 37. years imprisonment (so long was
Iehoiakin, his wife and his children in Babylon) by the council of the Prophet
Jeremy he was of king Euilmerodach so esteemed, that having a son named
Funct. Lib. (...). comment.
Mesezabel surnamed Salathiel, who likewise had a son borne in Babylon, his
name (as Philo Iudaeus says) was Mesezebel: this Salathiel had a son called
afterward Barachias or Zorobabel Barachias. surnamed Zorababel.
a great man of authority amongst the Jews, beloved of God, and by whom God
brought his people again to reedifie his temple.

This Euilmerodach is called in Herodot, Labynitus, where you Euilmerodach.
shall read that his wife Nitochris, being a discreet wise woman, and of such
commendations for her diligence, policy and wonderful great works and
buildings in Babylon, that she was counted another Semiramis, and did much
advance her husbands fame for her great actions that she did in Babylon, far
Herod^t. lib. (...).
otherwise then Zenophon, Zonaras, or Josephus writes: read the first of
Herodot. There reigned after this Euilmerodach the last king of Assyria, a
great Idolater named Balthazar: this contemned God, despised his commandments,
disdained the instructions of Daniel, though he saw the works of God Daniel
lived this time and saw the destruction of Babylon.
daily, and heard by Daniel, of the wonders he showed upon Nabuchodonosor: yet
he feasted, he banqueted, and commanded to bring him the golden and silver
vessels, which his graundfather Nabuchodonosor had brought from the Temple in
Jerusalem, that he, his wives and his concubines might drink therein. This
Balthazar did in great contempt of God, Daniel 5.
commit all evil and all idolatry, which for his ingratitude and
forgetfulness, Daniel told him what should become of his kingdom, repeating
the great goodness of God unto Nabuchodonosor, the majesty, honor, glory,
and many kingdoms which God gave him: yea all people, nations, and languages
trembled and feared Nabuchodonosor, until he puffed up himself in pride, and
hardened his heart against God: then his glory fell, his honor forsook him,
his kingdoms lost, himself made like a beast, and his dwelling was with wild
asses. All this did Balthazar know, and yet he humbled not himself to God,
for the which Gods judgment Balthazar the last king of Babylon.
fell upon him, and upon his kingdom: for he was slain, and his kingdom had
Cyrus king of Persia, for that was the full effect of this sentence, Mean,
Thekel, Phares, written upon the plaster of the wall of the kings palace by
the finger of God, the last destruction of the Chaldeans, and the end of the
seventy years captivity before told of Daniel, and prophesied by the rest of
the Prophets: here Nabuchodonosor and his posterity ended, and the kingdom of
Chaldea translated first unto the Medes, and afterward to the Persians.

OF THE ORIGINAL beginning of the Egyptians, and of their continuance: of
their Kings and governments: why Egypt was called Oceana, or Nilea.
Now I will go from Assure the son of Sem, and follow Mizraim the son of
Cham into Egypt: for from Chus and Mizraim came the Ethiopians and the
Egyptians. After that Chus and Mizraim, and their children, at the building of
Babel in the land of Shinear had come into Afrike, Chus went to Ethiopia with
his company, Mizraim possessed Egypt with all his family: this Mizraim is
called in histories Oceanus, after whose name Egypt was first named Oceana,
though in the Scripture and in the Hebrewe histories it was named Mizreia,
after the name of Mizraim the son of Cham. I read in Manethon and in others,
that from the first coming of Mizraim into Egypt unto Osiris time, which was
280. years, Egypt had three several names: first Oceana, after the name of
Oceanus in Berosus, in Scripture Mizraim: the second name was Aeria, after the
name of the river Nilus: the third Aeria which continued until Osiris time,
and after Osiris time named Osiriana, according to his name, at what time
Abraham was in Egypt, until Ramesses time surnamed Egyptus, about the time
that the Israelites left Egypt, after Abraham's being in Egypt, four hundred
and thirty years. During which time of these four Herodot. lib. 2.
several names, Egypt was governed by states and potentates of Dynasteia, a
form of a common wealth like unto the state of the Hebrews government by the
council of Sanhedrin, or like the Grecians ruled by their Amphictions. But
first to speak of the fertility of the soil, the manners of the people, the
antiquity of the country, the greatness of their government, and specially of
many rare wonders which are in Egypt, more then in any kingdom of the world:
for the description of Egypt I refer you (as you have read before of other
countries) to Strabo, Pomponius Mela, and Solinus. Egypt was divided i^to
Stra^o. lib. 17. Pompo. Mel^. lib. 1. Cap. 44.
six several kinds of people: the first three which were kings, priests, and
soldiers, governed the state and common wealth of Egypt: the other three
served in the country, to use things necessary for the kingdom and for the
state, which were husbandmen, craftesmen, and shepherds. Concerning the
antiquity Diod. lib. 1. (...). 3.
of the Egyptians, they contended therein with the Scithians, and with the
people of Phrygia: for this opinion the Egyptians hold of their antiquity, and
that registered in ancient chronicles, that during their continuance in Egypt,
the stars have four times altered their courses, and the sun twice:
likewise they have recorded 330. kings to have reigned in Egypt before king
Amasis time, which was king of Egypt, when Pompo. Mela. lib. 1.
Cyrus was king of Persia. The vain assertion that the Egyptia^s held of their
antiquity, was of continuance above 13 thousand years (you must understand
Lunares annos) Of their superstitious The old Egyptians counted a month for a
year, sometime 2 sometime 3. and some time four mo neths.
religion to their gods, it is set forth by Herodot in all points, how two
black pigeons, the one flying to Libya commanded them to build a temple unto
Jupiter surnamed Hamon, to receive oracles, and to be instructed thereby,
as well by ceremonies in the religion of their gods, as also in manners and
living of their country: the other pigeon in Thebes a City of Egypt in like
sort commanded an other temple to be builded where the like oracles also should
be delivered to them of Thebes. The old priests of Egypt having these
warnings Herod. lib. 2.
(as they supposed by some power divine) being of greater authority in the
beginning then the kings of Egypt were, they began to worship as many gods as
they thought good, and yet not to erect images and idols in their temples: for
in the greatest and ancientest cities of Egypt, the princes and nobles of the
country contended sundry times in the year to offer sacrifice, and to
celebrate feasts to these gods, with such solemn rites and ceremonies, as
were by the oracles commanded: these great feasts were once every year in
these cities.

The first was in the city of Bubastis in honor of Diana, with such service
and ceremonies due unto her: the second in the city of Busiris in the honor of
Isis: the third in the city of Sai in the honor of Minerua: the fourth in
Heliopolis in the honor of the sun: the fifth in the city of Butis in the
honor of Latona: the sixth in the city of Papremi in the honor of Mars. Herod.
lib. 2.
The manner and order of their sacrifices were very strange: some wounding
themselves, some beating and whipping themselves some with torches and lights
al night, with processions about the cities, and some with such ceremonies, as
I may not well name them, so horrible and so beastly, as they were, and yet fit
sacrifices for their gods. The greatest god that the Egyptians universally
worshipped, was an Ox marked with white spots, which they called Apis. This
Ox is Pompo. Mela. lib. 1.
accompanied with a hundred priests in the city of Memphis, where he is
hallowed by these priests, and stauled as a god with yearly feasts and daily
sacrifice. The people of Egypt solemnize the birth day of Apis, and that day is
holden most holy and festival throughout all Egypt, and that feast continues
seven days. Also in the city of Heliopolis they worship another Strabo. 17.
Ox, which they name Mneum, as Apis is in Memphis. In the city of Aphodito
Politana, they worship a white Ox, as Strabo says likewise.

Concerning others of their gods, they are too many for me to write: as of
Cattes, to whom they attribute much honor, Read Diodo. lib. 1. cap. 4.
for that they are under Vulcan, their chief god to defend them from fire, and
therefore Cattes in Egypt are much esteemed and worshipped as gods: for when
any Catte is dead in Egypt, specially in Heliopolis, they wear mourning
weeds, and shave their brows, and with great solemnity they are buried. And
then next to Cattes, Rams, for that The sundry gods of Egypt.
Jupiter would not be seen unto Hercules in the likeness of a god, unless
Hercules would put on a Rams skin, therefore in diverse parts of Egypt none
might kill a Ram, but the Ram was likewise honored as a god. So also of
the Crocodile, and of the bird Ibis, and of many other beasts which the
Egyptians worship as gods, the which is not lawful by the law of Egypt to
hurt, much less to kill them.

In mourning for their dead, they besmeare themselves Their burials.
with doung and dirte, specially the kinswomen of the dead, they be all
bedaubed and bedirted, raunging the streets howling and crying for the space
of seventy days: and then with great care and diligence they bury the corpse
with great solemnity, in stately and huge buildings, with sharp spires of
wonderful great height, named Piramides: but of the manner of their burial I
have set down in my dial of days.

The strange wonders of Egypt, of their fishes, beasts, and fowls, of their
trees, fruits, and of their rivers, they are such The wonders of Egypt.
and so many, that if I should begin, I should not know when to end: as to
write of bridges builded of stones thirty foot square a piece, of lakes
called Chimmis and Meris, bearing woods and forests of 20. miles compass
about: to speak of many rivers, I should weary my self. What should I
speak but of one which is Nilus, the only river of the world? of which the
Egyptians have as great cause to brag, as India had of Ganges, or Mesopotamia
of Euphrates. This Nilus makes Egypt always either to laugh or to weep: for
it is strange in Egypt to see rain.

In Egypt women plead matters in Courts, and they look to foreign causes,
and the men spin and card, and take charge of the house at home: the women
bear burdens on their shoulders, and men upon their heads: women standing,
and men sitting, do make water in Egypt: also they eat and drink openly
without the doors, and do their natural needs within the house.

These with infinite more strange things shall you Herod. lib. 2.
find in Herodotus, but Chronicles do contrary Herodot in many things, and
therefore I pass over diverse of his fables, and take as much of him as shall
agree with Eusebius B^roaldus lib. 4.
and others of the soundest writers: for certainly the Greek histories are
far more doubtful then the Latin: for Hellanicus Josephus lib. (...). in
Appionem.
differs from Acusilaus, Acusilaus from Hesiodus, Hesiodus from Hephorus, and
Hephorus from Herodot, and Herodot accused of al as most erroneous and
fabulous: for how can Greek histories be true, when the Greeks (says
Josephus) do rather seek fables to maintain their opinions, then to traueile
in antiquity to verify their histories? or how is it possible for profane
writers, who were borne two thousand years after the beginning of some
kingdoms, to write truly of them, specially of the Chaldeans, Assyrians,
Scithians, Egyptians, and others, whose kingdoms were long before scattered and
destroyed, if they be not by Moses instructed, or have their light or warrant
from the prophetical histories? such confusion Errors in all antiquities of
profane writers.
is grown by their discord, that their error is great, as well for the number
and names of kings, as also for the time of their continuance and government. I
said before, they that are desirous to be acquainted with fables rather then
histories, let them read Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, and vain Berosus. But I
will and must use them sometimes, and especially in this history of Egypt I
must allege Herodot, for he confesses that he wrote nothing but what he
himself had either seen or heard in Egypt of the priests of M^mphis, whose
books were full of old fables, where it was written that 330. kings reigned
in Egypt successively. Of these 330. kings, 18. were Ethiopian 330. kings in
Egypt.
kings, the rest Egyptians, and one woman named Nitocris, not Nitocris Queen
of Babylon, but an other as famous for her tyranny in Egypt, as she was in
Babylon.

But when Abraham the Patriarch was in Egypt, then Egypt did not so flourish,
at what time Pharao was punished by God for Sara Abraham's wife. This is the
first king that we read of in truth with warrant of the sacred histories of
the Bible, ^nesis cap. 12.
which is taken to be Osiris by Functius, Melancthon, and others. Of this
Osiris many things are written in profane histories, as by his surnames does
appear: for Osiris is called Dionysius, Olympicus, Jupiter, and Iustus: to
follow further his genealogy it is vain. This Osiris taught in Egypt first,
and after in sundry Osiris.
places of the world where he did traueile, to plow, to sow, The sundry names
of Osiris.
to plant vines, and to do many things, which yet the world knew not. The
Egyptians honored this Osiris so much, that they caused his statue or image to
be made at large in a table or pillar of Iuory, and his picture was made like a
scepter with two eyes, with all fowls, fishes, and beasts that were
consecrated unto the gods of Egypt, as momuments of triumphs unto Osiris, with
this sentence written: Ego sum Osiris Jupiter iustus, qui vniuerso imperaui
orbi: diverse of these scepters were made and put in tables of Alabaster,
Iuorie, and Ebony, in diverse countries where he traueiled, leaving behind him
his sister and his wife Isis to govern Egypt. This time began the 16.
Dynasteia of Egypt, which were pote^tates and states, who governed Egypt in
many places: some endured 100. some 200. years, and some Diod^r. lib. 2. Isis.
300. years, some more some less: they were in Egypt as the Chiliarchi were
with the Hebrews, as the Amphictions with the Grecians, and as the Senators
with the Romans: but when the kings of Egypt began to be mighty and strong,
the state of the potentates began to be diminished, but it still continued under
Polimarchi chief officers with the king in wars.
the kings of Egypt as chief governors, which the Grecians called Polemarchi.
I will begin of Osiris the first king of Egypt: yet Diodorus names Mena the
first king of Egypt, which Berosus call Oceanus, which is Mizraim with the
Hebrews. This Osiris was married to Isis called Juno Egyptia: for profane
writers name the first kings and queens of every country by the name of
Satur. Jupiter, Juno, Ceres, etc. This Isis is supposed to be called Ceres, for
that she affirms of her self this sentence written under diverse pictures of
Isis in tables and pillars set up in Egypt, Ego sum Isis Egypti Regina, a
Mercurio erudita, vxor Osiridis, matter regis Ori: gaude Bubastia, gaude Egypt,
quae me nutristi: these words were graued in a pillar of brass called Columna
Isidis: read of this more in Dio. Sic. Orus the 2. king of Egypt succeeded
Diodo. Siculus. lib. 1. cap. 1. Orus the 2. king.
his father Osiris: this taught the Egyptia^s many things, read lectures of
Astronomy, and the first that instructed the rude people to observe the orders
and course of the stars: likewise he made many good laws amongst the
Egyptians, and made them acquainted with the true God, who^ Abraham being then
in Egypt confessed and preached, with who^ king Orus seemed to have conference,
and was taught by Abraham to acknowledge Melancth. lib. 2. Chron.
the power of God, having had sensible trial thereof, of his fathers punishment,
and the plague thereby that happened by his injurious dealing with Sara: this
made this king to honor Abraham much, yet in his fathers days Abraham Of
Abraham being in Egypt.
made no long stay in Egypt. It seemed that Abraham had some liking to this
Orus before he was king, to who^ he revealed instructions both to know God and
his creatures, whereby after he was made king: and he taught in Egypt those
good things which Abraham instructed him, whereby he was called in Egypt Orus
the great. Melanthon says, he had a son called Bocchoris: Orus surnamed the
great.
after Bocchoris, Busiris, who builded Thebes in Egypt, setting forth the kings
of Egypt, Herodotus does not observe lineally their succession, nor Functius in
his table, nor Manethon an Egyptian priest, and only chronographer for the
kings of Egypt, wherein no true lineall success may be set down of the old
kings of Egypt, until Amasis, where Herodotus omitteth many things of Egypt,
and begins to make relation of the kings of Egypt from Chiopes the first
year of Persusennes, which was in the beginning of the 11. Iubilee after Moses,
Menathon the history is mentioned by Josephus, and the names of the Egyptia^
kings laid down to Ramases, which with him is Sethosis, begins from
Ramesses surnamed Egyptus, who usurped the kingdom, having banished thence his
brother Danaus.

He sets down that the land of Egypt was then the Lib. 2.
fourth time called Mizraim, at what time as Cornelius Tacitus and others say,
the names of Pharoes first began: so Manethon affirms.

But it does appeate by Josephus against Appian, a schoolmaster of Alexandria,
that the history of Egypt is patched and forged by Manethon and Cheremon, two
chief ancient Chronographers, Ios^ph lib. 1. in A^pion.
that for true histories generally remain but fables: he lays down the
errors of Manethon written by himself in these words: At what time Timaus
reigned king in Manet^n lib. 3. Egyptia^oru^.
Egypt (says Appian) came certain people a base nation from the East, and
began to inhabit and to build, and to grow strong in Egypt, so that they made
them a king to govern them, the which was called Saltis: this came to Memphis,
and to Sais, two great towns in Egypt, seated himself in those towns, and
brought the princes about to pay to them tribute, used great cruelty, slew and
made havoc of much people in Egypt. After that Saltis reigned nineteen
years in Egypt he died, after Manethon lib. 2. Egyptian.
whom succeeded five other kings, which in all were six, whose names I set
down to your view.

1 Saltis which reigned 19. years. 2 Baeon which reigned 44. years. 3
Apachnas which reigned 36. years. 4 Iamas reigned 50. years. 5 Apochis reigned
61. years. 6 Assis reigned 49. years.
These six kings reigned first over these base people (as Manethon writes)
which were called in Egypt Hicsos shepherds: they and their posterity after
them reigned in Egypt five hundredth and eleven years, until the time of
Alisfragmutosis, Alisfragmuto.
by whom they wererepulsed and constrained to dwell within a place called
Auaris, the proportion of ten thousand acres: this compass they held, and
fortified many strong walls and fortes: these shepherds (as Manethon says)
stood upon their defense, until Temosine the kings son to Alisfragmutosis
laid siege to their fortes with four hundred and eight 480000.
score thousand ready in arms against these Hicsos, with whom the king of
Egypt concluded peace, upon condition to depart whither they would without
harm or hurt, so that they would depart out of Egypt.

These people forced in this sort to the number of two hundred and forty
thousand, to pass through Egypt with all their possession with them, took
their journey through the deserts of Syria, and fearing the power of the
Assyrians which at that time governed al Asia, they builded a Town for them to
dwell in in Judea, called Jerusalem: this nation was called in Manethon, Hicsos
Pastores reges: this squareth far from the Manethon call^th the Hebrewe,
Hicsos.
history of Moses concerning their dwellings being of the Hebrews in Egypt.
After the departure of these Hebrews out of Egypt, these many kings reigned
successively, as Manethon orderly sets them down.

1 Alisfragumtosis. 2 Temusi. 25. years. 3 Chebron. 13. years. 4 Amenophis.
20. years 7. months. 5 Amesses the sister of Amenophis, governed Egypt after
her brother 21. years. 6 Mephres 12. years and 9. months. 7 Mephramutosis
reigned 25. years. 8 Thmosis 9. years and 8. months. 9 Amenophis the 2. of
that name, reigned 30. years 10. months. 10 Orus 3. years and 5. months. 11
Acencheres Orus, daughter after her father, reigned 12. years. 12 Rathotis
reigned 9. years. 13 Acencheres. 12. years. 14 Acencheres the 2. reigned 12.
years and 3. months. 15 Armais reigned 4. years. 16 Armesis reigned one
year. 17 Armesesmiamus reig ned 66. years. 18 Amenophis the 3. of that name.
19. years. 19 Sethosis was the 19. king of Egypt after the going out of these
Shepherds out of Egypt, which was 393. years from Tomusis, until Sethosis.
This Sethofis was mighty and strong on sea, and upon land: he prepared an
huge army against the Cyprians, Phoenicians, and after against the Assyrians
and the Medes, committing the government of Egypt to his brother named Armais,
which is also called Danaus: he delivered all Egypt under his brother, charging
him to abstain from his concubines, and not in any wise to abuse himself in
any thing belonging to the crown of Egypt: but as^oone as Sethosis took his
voyage, so soon Armais rebelled, took the Diadem, imprisoned the Queen
Sethosis wife, and did what he pleased in Egypt. Maneth^n lib. 3. Egyptian.


The king being of this certified, returned in haste, drove his brother Armais
out of his kingdom, and at that time named the Country after his own name
Egypt: (for so was Sethosis surnamed Egyptus.)

Thus sarre Manethon in his own book of the history of Egypt does write,
wherein he seems to be fabulous in the histories of the Hebrews, and in the
setting down the names of the kings of Egypt, after the departure of the
shepheardes (as he terms them) to vary much from others: but in truth it
is hard to set down in order either the kings of Egypt or of Scythia, for the
antiquity of time, beside their close government in their Dynasties, which the
Egyptians had in number twenty and one, and therefore their three hundred and
thirty kings are written in Herodot not named, but past over in silence under
the government of so many Dynasteias: neither does Manethon name them.

The like is written of Cheremon another old writer of the Egyptian histories,
to whom the goddess Isis appeared in a Cherem^.
vision, finding fault that her temple was not rebuilded: and opening secrets
and oracles to Cheremon. Concerning their kings of Egypt, of their fables and
mere ignorance in their own histories, I need not much to stand upon, but
refer you to Josephus, where he at large unfolds their folly, opening
Josephus lib. 12. contra Appion^.
their own Chronicles against themselves, and therefore I will let Manethon,
and Cheremon, and others, as Herodot, and Diodorus Siculus, that write of the
kings of Egypt, to stand to their fables.

We read in Genesis of Pharao in Abraham's time, which Dynasteia p^siorum.
is sufficient to discharge them both. The kingdom of Egypt was (as I said
before) governed by a state called Dynasteia: for after Osiris which governed
Egypt in the sixteen Dynasteia, which continued a hundred and ninety years,
after Osiris government the seventeenth Dynastia began, as Eusebius No mention
of kings in their Dynast.
sets it down, and continued a hundred and three years: during that time
of government, potentates and magistrates reigned and governed in Egypt,
without any mention made of kings as yet to any purpose.

But as the priests of Egypt have written in their Chronicles as I said before
from Menes time the first king of Egypt, as Herodot says, the priests have
recorded three hundred and thirty kings, of the which many of them have past
obscurely without any speech made of them in that kind of government called
Dynastia: for I find in Functius table twenty one Dynastias of the names of
those that governed, and of their government during that time: Eusebius and
Manethon with others, omitted not to write the number of these Dynasties, and
yet past with silence the names of their kings, until the eighteen Dynastia,
the names of Pharaos were not known, then began the kings of Egypt to be
surnamed Pharaos.

About the time of the going of Jacob into Egypt two hundred The first names of
Phar^es.
and fifteen years after that Abraham his graundfather had been there, at
what time reigned Baleus the younger, the eleventh king of the Assyrians, then
reigned in Egypt Amasis Amasis.
the first that was called Pharao 25. years, after him succeeded Chebron.
Amenophis.
Chebron, and Amenophis, the one reigned 13. years, and the other 21. after
these three kings reigned in Egypt Mephres Mephres.
12. years, in whose time Joseph died after he had lived a hundred and ten
years, and of that age he ruled and governed all Egypt 80. years. Then
reigned in Assyria Mamitus the 13. king: after this succeeded in Egypt two
other kings, the one named Mispharmutosis, who reigned 26. years, the
Mispharmutosis. Thutemosis*
other named Thutemosis, who governed Egypt 9. years.

About this time Kittim having driven his brother Hesperus, who reigned then
king in Celtiberia into Italy, usurped his kingdom, and reigned thirteen
years after him over the Celtiberians: and after that Kittim left his son
Sicorus in Celtiberia, and passed into Italy, where he reigned and was
surnamed Italus, whom the Greeks named Atlas, of whom I wrote in the history
of Italy more at large with sufficient warrant of the Bible: for he is in
diverse places of the Scripture spoken of by the name of Kittim. By this time
reigned king in Egypt Amenophis the second king of that name, a cruel king and
most tyranicall: for he made a decree in Egypt, that Amenophis.
all the male children of the Hebrews should be drowned in Nilus by a straight
commandment given to the midwiues, who notwithstanding in all points obeyed
not the king, for they were by God directed otherwise, as it is read of the
birth of Moses, and of the providence of God in saving of Moses was borne 350
years after the calling of Abraham from Vr.
him. This Moses now borne within eighty years after, was by God appointed
to deliver his countrymen from thraldom, slavery, and tyranny, and to plague
Egypt with most extreme punishment worthily.

There is a history written of this king Amenophis, called Functius.
of some Memnon, that his image graven in stone continued until the coming of
Christ, which continually at sun rising Diod. lib. 1. Herod. lib. 2.
seemed to sound a voice like a man. This tyranny continued in Egypt almost
one hundred years: for when this cruel king Amenophis died, succeeded him a
more cruel king then he named Busiris, as Melancthon and Diodorus say,
Busiris.
who plagued the poor Hebrews with death in like sort as Amenophis did, and
kept them in slavery and misery, with toil and task to make brick to work
monstrous huge Piramides, whipping and scourging them, using them with all
bondage and slavery: some say that Mercurius Trismegistus, Mercurius.
Trismegistus.
a grave Philosopher of Egypt this time flourished, though by Suidas affirmed
that this Mercurius lived before Abraham's time in Egypt.

After Busiris reigned king in Egypt Acengeres twelve years, and after him
Achorus reigned nine years, using the like tyranny Acengeres.
to the Hebrews as before, until the time of king Chencres, Achorus.
who far excelled his predecessors in tyranny and Chencres.
blasphemy: this was that Pharao that resisted God and his servant Moses, and
therefore was drowned in the red sea, and all the peers of Egypt with him.
Read of this king more in Exodus: the most part of Egypt was at this time with
Chencres Pharo Exodus cap. 14.
drowned, and Egypt was left very skant of any great states, and therefore
began to rise diverse seditions for a time in Egypt, after the departure of the
Hebrews until Rameses time, which is surnamed Aegyptus.

This time began Dardanus his kingdom in Dardania afterward called Troy, at
what time reigned in Assyria Ascatides Rameses.
the eightenth king: in Athens Cranaus the second king. And over the Argiues
Crotopas their eight king.

CHAP. II.
Of the kings of Egypt after Ramesses time surnamed Aegyptus' at what time
Oceana was called Egypt, after the name of Aegyptus, before Mizreia.

NOw after the great overthrow of the Egyptians in the red sea, after a while
began to reign in Egypt Ramesses, surnamed Aegyptus, after whose name Egypt
was then called, as Manethon writes: for at the first, Egypt was named Oceana,
or Mizreia, The names of Egypt.
and the second time it was named Aerea, and now the third time called Egypt,
as you read before. This Aegyptus after he had vanquished his brother Danaus,
he usurped upon the Egyptians, and reigned king of Egypt 68. years: for Egypt
had not recovered her former state as yet, since the overthrow of Chencres and
all the states of Egypt, who perished in the red Sea pursuing the Israelites.

Of this, Manethon seems most ignorant, saying that the Manethon.
shepherds were driven out of Egypt, for some natural foul filthy disease as
leprosy, which the Israelites had, affirming Mos^ called Onarsyphus.
that Moses was an Egyptian, borne in the city of Heliopolis, and that he was
named Onarsiphus, and became leprous and Mane^hon lib. 3. Aegyptiorum.
then went to the Israelites, which every where Manethon names Hicsos,
shepherds or captives, and became conversant with them, and was driven out of
Egypt with them.

In the beginning of this Aegyptus reign, Moses died, after whom succeeded
Joshua the second Judge of Israel. This time reigned in Assyria Amintes their
19. king. Also Dionysius otherwise Bacchus, whom the Greeks call (...),
subdued India, and builded a town after his own name called Nisa, in
remembrance of his great victories that he had over the Indians.

Now succeeded in Egypt Myris or Moeris, as Herodotus does Myris.
call him: this king restored Egypt again, and recovered strength and great
power, and builded many notable and famous monuments worthy to be remembered: he
brought the river Nilus, being out of hope to be repaired, in course again: he
made the lake Miris of such wonderful bigness, that he far excelled the rest
of the kings before him. This Myris made the Labirinths of Egypt, which after
Dedalus taking an example of those Labirinths, made the like in Creete,
imitating Myris in all points: he builded such monuments for Vulcan in Egypt,
as Herodotus calls them, Digna Vulcano vestibula, H^rodot. lib. 2.
where you may read more.

This king reigned forty years in Egypt, and had a son Melanc^hon lib. 2.
succeeded him, of no less fame then himself, named Sesostris, of whom the
priests of Egypt spoke much: he began to augment the kingdom of Egyyt with
diverse victories over S^sostris.
the Syrians, Phoenicians, Thracians, Scithians, and the most part of Asia.
This king only conquered Aethiopia, and was king proclaimed both of Egypt and
Aethiopia: this king waxed strong on land and sea: he made more monuments of
his victories in diverse strange kingdoms, leaving behind him his statues and
Images erected up in foreign countries: some of them Herodotus does affirm
to have seen in his days, Herod. lib. 2.
which lived about Xerxes time: one he saw in Palestina cut in a large stone
with letters written round about his picture. And about Ionia he saw two
statues or pictures of this king Sesostris, the one between Ionia and the
city of Eph^sus, the other as men go from Sardinia into Smirna: he was cut in
two great high stones of five cubits length, holding in his right hand a
spear, and in the left hand a bow, being in all Melanc^n lib. 2 Chronicles.
points of his apparel armed like an Egyptian, with this sentence written
between his two shoulders in the Egyptian tongue, I have carried this Country
upon my shoulders. Some take S^rabo 17.
these statues to be Memnon, but the priests of Egypt affirmed that it was
Sesostris in his return from his victories into Egypt, even he that carried
kings captives bound to his chariot from town to town, from country to
country. In Aethopia and Egypt he had many of these pictures, and many statues
set upon pillars and arches, according to the manner of Egyptian triumphs.

This king was so honored in Egypt, and his statues after Sesos^ris the only
Hercules of Eg^pt.
his death so esteemed, that when Darius Histaspis long after that time came
into Egypt, being by his predecessor Cambyses conquered and brought into
subjection under the Persians, yet he was not suffered by the priests of Vulcan
to put his statue above the picture of Sesostris in Memphis, affirming that
Sesostris had conquered as many countries, and gotten as many victories as
Darius had: and beside, Sesostris had overthrown the strong and invincible
Scithians, which Darius never could: which speeches Darius took in good part,
and would not revenge, though well he might.

This Sesostris is named in Functius table, Amenophis, imitating Manethon the
Egyptian writer, where he is set down to be the third in that government
Dynastia. Larthes is a name likewise of dignity, as were Pharaos, before the
governors and potentats: for in the first government of Larthes which endured
194. years, Zetus was the first (as Manethon affirms) 4. Larth^.
and reigned 55. years. After Zetus succeeded in this kind of government
Ranses Larthes, which governed 66. years: after Dynastia Larthes 194.
whom succeeded this king Sesostris the third Larthes, which reigned 40.
years.

The fourth Larthes was named Phero, the son of this Sesostris Larthes were
governors and principali^ie in Egypt.
of which I spoke last. Herodotus recites a history of this Phero, that it
happened to him to become blind, and so continued 11. years: at what time he
was instructed by the oracle of Butis, to find out a temperat chaste woman
which had never known carnalitie, but only one man, and that he should wash
his eyes with this woman's urine, and he should receive again his sight. This
Phero Larthes making great speech and search for such a woman, after many vain
trials, he found one woman whose urine healed him, whom (after he had his
sight) he married, and caused all those women whose water could not help him,
to be brought into the city called Rubragleba red clay, where both they and
the city were commanded by the king to be burned.

After this Phero Larthes succeeded Thuoris, the fifth and last Larthes of those
Potentates: this king is named in Diodorus, Cetes, which the Greeks (as
Melancthon says) called Proteus, Proteus named Cetes.
for diverse illusions which he used in magic, whose temple was long seen
after his death in Memphis. To this king came Paris Priamus son, at what time
he ravished Helen Menelaus wife, from Sparta to Greece, and was driven of
force into Egypt, of his hard welcome there, and of the kings-commandement to
Alexander to depart from Egypt, with threatening of death unless he would be
gone within three days with all Grecians with him, saving that the king stayed
Helen in Egypt, where Menelaus came after the siege of Troy, and Joseph. lib.
1. contra. Appio.
was honorably received by Proteus the king, and welco^med of his wife Helen.
Others write that Menelaus and Helen went both together after Troy was
destroyed, by force of tempest Herodot. lib. 2.
into Egypt: it is not much material.

Now while these five potentats called Larthes reigned in Egypt, which
continued for the space of one hundredth ninety and four years, it began in
the second Iubilee, at what time Lamprides the two and twentieth king reigned
in Egypt, and Tros the third king reigned in Troy, Proteus the thirteenth king
reigned over the Argiues, and Shamgar judged Israel.

This government of Larthes ended when Tautanes the 28. king of the Assyrians
reigned, and when Abdon the twelfth (...). (...).
Judge judged Israel. After this government of Larthes, Manethon writes of
another kind of Potentats, which continued 177. years, whom Functius
follows, and recites not one king that reigned in Egypt during that time,
but he rehearses who flourished most, and who governed chiefly in Chaldea,
Assyria, and in other kingdoms, and makes no mention of any king in Egypt
during 177. years, and therefore I will return to Herodotus, whom Melancthon
does follow in this, and write of those kings orderly as I find them: this
kind of Potentats began three hundredth and thirty years after Israel
departed out of Egypt.

About which time, Troy was destroyed by the Grecians, about Ann^ Mundi 1783.
ten years before the sixth Iubilee, and in the seventh year of Thuoris king
of Egypt, otherwise called Proteus. The kingdom of the Latins began this
time, when that Aeneas with his son Ascanius after Troy was destroyed came to
king Latinus, where reigned five kings before Aeneas came, by the name of kings
of the Latins, of whom I wrote in that history.

But now to the kings of Egypt: for after that Proteus died, Ram^sinitus.
the kingdom happened to Rampsinitus a king of the greatest wealth that ever
reigned in Egypt, whose treasures were such, that he invented to build some
strong place for his treasure: and having cunning and subtle workmen to
build this work: one of them perceiving the infinite treasure that the king
should put there, made a stone of that bigness that two men might remove it,
and likewise of that length and breadth, that a man might creep well through
the place of that stone being thence removed. Before this fellow died, he
Good instructions of the father to his sons.
opened to his two sons how they might have treasure enough in removing such
a stone, which he for that purpose had made. When he had taught them in all
points to know this stone, and how to bring their purpose to pass, he died,
and they practiced the fathers counsel, and found as their father told them
twice or thrice. In continuance of time the king also found that much of his
treasure was taken away: he invented by some policy the next time to prevent
them: engines and snares were laid for them, in the which one of the two
brothers being taken fast, called for his other brother and willed him to cut
off his head, lest he should be known thereby, and so likewise lose his life.

This being done, the king came the next time into his treasury, and found a
dead man without a head, and musing much who it should be, devised in this
sort, that this body Herodotus lib. 2.
should be hanged upon some gibbet with men to watch and to see who would
weep, and who should take him away. The mother of this dead man within a while
after threatened her son, that unless he would bury his brother, she would
reueile unto the king the whole matter: he also (to please his mother) devised
to save himself, and invented means to make the watchmen drunken, and took
his brother from the tree Wine must be used, and not abused.
the watchmen being asleep, and after returned to the watchmen, fained
himself drunken, and to have slept with them.

The king perceiving that he was deceived, punished the watchmen, and mused how
he might know how these things came to pass, or who should take him away: then
he invented this policy, having only one daughter, he promised she should lie
with any man in the kings house that could tell any likeness of this matter, or
any else within Egypt, and should be his wife afterward. Every man was willing
to have the kings daughter to wife, but none could advertise her how these
things were done. The thief at length that robbed the king of his treasure,
that did cut his brothers head in the treasury, and after deceived the kings
watch and stole him from the gibbet, he thought once again to try his skill
for Rewards do try skils.
a kings daughter: he went to his brother late dead, and cut off his hand, and
carried it under his cloak, and went into a dark chamber into the kings
daughter as the custom was, and told her the whole matter how it was, that he
did all things, robbed the king, killed his brother, made the watchmen drunken, and
buried his brother. She hearing this, laid A pretty devise.
hand upon him in the chamber: and seeking his hand in the dark to lead him to
her father, he secretly conveyed the dead man's hand into her hand, and
conveyed himself away: and she thought that she had him by the hand all the
way as she went to her father, until she came to the light and saw she was
deceived.

The king being deceived three times before, made a general decree throughout
all Egypt, making good his promise by an oath, that he should marry his
daughter whosoever he was, if he would come unto the king and confess his
faults, for the king was amazed at these great enterprises: for (says Theft
rewarded with the marriage of a kings daughter.
the king Rampsinitus) the Egyptians in truth excel all other nations in
policy and wit, but this passes all the Egyptians: and therefore the king
married his daughter unto this cunning thief, as to a man of great knowledge
and wisdom.

After this king Rampsinitus died, succeeded Cheops, a king Cheops.
of great wickedness: during this kings time, Egypt so mourned, that their
temples were shut, their sacrifices stayed, Herodotus lib. 2.
and all Egypt by this king put to toil and slavery, almost in the like state
as the poor Hebrews were in Moses time, carrying great huge stones, to build
monstrous and vain works: he had a hundredth thousand men, to make up one
Piramides, who continued in this work twenty years: the charges thereof (as
Herodotus affirms) for roots, garlic and onions only, beside all other
meat, came to one thousand six hundredth talents of silver, so that the work
being great, and the people many, Cheops thereby fell to want, and Cheops
daughter.
having not to perform his work, forced his daughter by her body to gain as
much as she could, to finish the work begun: but she for a memorial of her
self, sought of every man a stone, and she had thereby so many stones, as she
her self caused an other Piramides to be made equal to the highest.

This foolish king as it is thought to avoid idleness amongst the people,
occupied them in these vain and monstrous works, as places and sepulchers for
kings burials: for until the time of Rampsinitus, all things prospered in
Egypt. This Cheops after he had reigned 50. years died, after whom succeeded
his brother named Cephrim, a king no less hateful (...).
to the people of Egypt then his brother was, who in like sort used them with
toil, and with all kind of bondage as Cheops did, and therefore the like
praise they had. For after they had reigned both an hundred six years, during
which time Egypt suffered great calamity, they disdained after their death to
call them by the names of kings, but suffered shepherds to lodge in their
stately Piramides, loathing once to think upon these two kings.

By this time ended the government of 177. under the Potentats, during which
time many things happened in other kingdoms, as erection of the kingdom of
Israel after Samsons time their last Judge, by appointing Saul their first
king, Saul.
about the 60. years of these last Potentats of Egypt. At what time the kings
of Peloponesus in Greece, and their government of Monarchia ended, and priests
which were called Carni were appointed magistrates. After 26. kings had reigned
in Scicionum, about the 80. of this government, the kingdom of Lacedemonia
Egypt often governed by Potentates and p^incipalitie called Dynasteia.
and the kingdom of Corinth began both at one time: at what time reigned in
Athens Codrus their last king: after whom the state altered into the government
of Judges, in the 114. year of this Dynastia, during which time reigned in
Assyria four kings, and over the Albanes, otherwise called Herodlot. lib. 2.
the Latins reigned six kings: this was the twenty Dynastie of the Egyptians:
this began ten years before the sixth Iubilee, and ended 19. years after the
beginning of the ninth Iubilee.

In Egypt governed by this time Mycerinus or Cerinus (in Mycerinus.
Diodorus) the son of Cheops, a just king and gentle, using the people with
much more clemency then either his father or his uncle did before him: he
opened the temples, which of an hundredth and six years were shut up, he
restored all Egypt into her former liberty, which had been long in calamity
and misery under his father: he commanded the people to be free from their
taxes and toiles, and used them with greatlenitie: he judged justly, and
showed himself such a king, that all the Egyptians thought themselves happy
of his government: for he loathed tyranny and cruelty, and was much ashamed
of his fathers reproach amongst the people.

This Mycerinus in the midst of his good government Mycerinus.
had only one daughter, that died, of whom her father (to show the great love
which he bare unto her) made such a monument for her burial, that it past all
the burials of the kings of Egypt: he caused a coffine of the likeness of an
ox to be made, set over all with gold, wherein he laid his daughter, and
hanged the same up from the ground in his palace at the city of Sai, where
every day the priests came with frankincense and other sweet odours, to do
sacrifice: the ox of Apis, which was the God of Memphis, and the Apis.
ox Mneum which was the God of Heliopolis, were not so set forth as this ox
of Sai, where Mycerinus daughter Mneum.
was buried.

An other misfortune was denounced by an Oracle unto Mycerinus, that he
likewise should be buried within six years after his daughter, for that he
altered the state of Egypt, Egypt ruled by Oracles.
and eased the Egyptians from such bondage as they were to abide for an
hundredth and fifty years, of the which Cheops and Cephrim two brethren
performed an hundredth and six, remaining yet behind forty and four years
of the calamity, which by an Oracle was appointed for Egypt: and to seek to
please the Oracle, Mycerinus became a little better then his father Cheops, or
his uncle Cephrim, two tyrants that plagued Egypt.

After this king, the priests of Egypt do set down a king named Asichis, of
whom I find in Herodotus, that he past the Asichis.
rest of the kings of Egypt in building and vexing of his subjects, in so much
that he made one Piramides to excel the rest, with this inscription, This
Piramides does pass the rest as far as Jupiter does excel the rest of the
gods. This king is named also Anisis in Melancthon and in Functius, but in
Herodotus, Anisis, Anisis.
or Asichis, a king who came not to be king of Egypt by succession of blood,
but by election of the priests, who after he had reigned six years, was
driven out of Egypt by Sabacus an Ethiopian, which reigned after Anisis 50.
years Sabacus.
king of Egypt: this king is called Sesac in the book of the Kings, of whom
you may read more: for in the fifth year of Roboam 3. Reg. cap. 14.
king of Judah this Sesac king of Egypt is spoken of.

After Sabacus, succeeded Sethon a priest of Vulcan: this king Sethon.
after many overthrows, being left and forsaken of his own people, made his
complaint to Vulcan, of whom he was certified in a dream, that he should have
aid and help, if he would meet the king of Arabia and his army, and give
him battle. Being thus encouraged, with a small company of Egyptia^s Melancthon
lib. 2. Chron.
that followed him, he camped before the city of Pelusiu^, where the army of
the Arabians pitched their tents: while the first night they lay in their
tents, rats, vermin, and myse, of all the country about, devoured their
arrows, their bowstrings, their quiuers, their targets, and their instruments
which they prepared for the wars, so that the Arabians in the next morning
fled. In memory of this victory, Sethon when he died, caused Herod. lib. 2.
himself to be buried in the temple of Vulcan, and commanded that his statue
should be made in a stone, with a rat in his hand, with this sentence written
about it, In me quis intue^s pius Herodotus fabulous.
esto. In that place where Herodotus does entreat of this Sethon, he seemed
very fabulous, and says, that the Isle of Foemis swimmeth on a lake, and that
the priests of Egypt affirm, that from the first king of Egypt until this
kings time, 341. kings are past, which are 11. more kings then Manethon before
affirmed: during which time the sun four times altered his course; rising in
the West, and going down in the East, with such other vain and frivolous
fables concerning their antiquities.

This Sethon is named of Eusebius, Spethon, with whom Manethon Josephus lib.
10. cap. 1.
supposes in his chronicles, that it was he that Sannaherib had wars with,
and after overthrew him: for I read in Eusebius and Josephus, who make mention
of one Tarachus king of Aethiopia, which came to aid Sethon king of Egypt
against Sanneherib, at what time God had raised many enemies to plague Israel
and Judah for their transgressions against their God, which so mercifully had
saved them oftentimes, as Assar, Salmanasser, which in the histories of the
Prophets is called Tiglat Assar, to whose hands God gave over Samaria, and
ten tribes of Israel, and afterward Jerusalem to the hands of Nabuchodonosor,
with the other two tribes of Judah and Benjamin: for both the kings, of Assyria
and of Egypt, made a pray of Judah, as in the history of the Assyrians is more
at large declared.

In Egypt after Sethon the priest of Vulcan died, the government Diodorus lib.
1.
changed between 12. Princes which should equally govern the whole kingdom
of Egypt, and so did for 15. years, as Diodorus affirms. After this, one of
the 12. princes obtained into his own hand the whole kingdom, and governed
54. years after, augmenting the confines of Egypt by the aid of certain
Grecians, which against their wills were driven into Egypt by a tempest, with
whom Psammiticus entered into friendship, and came thereby to be king of Egypt.

To these Grecians did the king give a country to dwell in, far from Nilus:
with these Greeks Psammiticus commanded Psammiticus.
that certain young gentlemen of Egypt should be brought up in the Greek
tongue, which afterward made Egypt acquainted therewith. While yet Psammiticus
was one of the 12. magistrates, before he became king, these 12. consented to
make some monument in memory of their government, and therefore they erected
many huge and strange works, as pillars, porches, labirinths, Piramides,
temples, and other sumptuous buildings: they also studying how to pass these
monuments, invented to make a Labirinth upon the lake of Meris, not far from A
Labirinth.
the city of Crocodiles: for so the Egyptians had cities according to the names
of those fowls, fishes, and beasts, which they had honored for their gods,
and had erected temples for sacrifices in these cities: and though the temple
of Diana in Ephesus, and the temple of Juno in Samos were huge and monstrous
P^ramides and Labirinthes were made for kings burials.
for their bigness, yet the Piramides of Egypt were far more greater. But the
Labirinth far excelled this greatest Piramides: for within this Labirinth were
chambers, parlers, halles and A Labirinth described.
other rooms, to the number of three thousand, whereof an hundredth and fifty
were made under the ground, and the other above ground, with such artificial
work, with the pictures and likeness of all kind of creatures, that it far
excelled all the monuments of Egypt: and the place whereupon it was made and
builded, was a lake of three thousand six hundredth furlongs, which are three
hundredth seventy and five miles, which is more wonderful then the Labirinth
it self. Herodoti fabula. Herodotus lib. 2.


But now to the king Psammiticus again, who having long laid siege to Azotum a
city of Syria, and after many years overthrown (for it was the longest siege
that ever endured which may be read of;) Psammiticus died: after whom succeeded
his son Necho, of whom the Prophets make true mention, and therefore
Herodotus, Diodorus, and others, may be the better spared being profane
writers, because he and his doings is mentioned in the sacred histories: of
whom the Prophets write, that the wrath of God was ripe to give judgment
against Egypt at this time: for Egypt had so long offended the Lord with their
vain superstition and idolatry.

Now Necho was cried out upon by the Prophet Ezechiel, Ezechiel 30.
which was by the river Perath, and gave sentence against all Egypt in this
sort: Howl and cry, woe be unto Egypt, the sword shall come upon Egypt, and
fear shall come upon Aethiopia. Pathros shall be desolate, and fire shall be
in Zoan, (which is Taphnis.) Thus the Prophet cried out again, I will power
out my wrath upon Shin, (which is named in histories, Pelusium) and I will
destroy the multitude of No, the young men of Auen, (which The city of No, is
now called Alexandria.
is otherwise called Heliopolis) and of Phibeseth (which is also named of old,
Pubastum) shall fall by the sword.

CHAP. III.
Of the last kings of Egypt by the name of Pharaos, which continued a thousand
two hundredth years: and of the first conquering of Egypt by Cambyses the second
king of Persia.

THis time great wars grew between the Assyrians and the Egyptians: the
greatness of both these kingdoms, which then were the only kingdoms of the
world, were destroyed by the sword: for so the Prophet said, that Egypt should
be the reward of the king of Babylon, for his labor which he took against
Tyrus, and so it was performed in Necho: after much mischief that Necho.
he had done to Israel, he was delivered into the hands of Nabuchodonosor, for
so the Lord said, I will strengthen the arms of Nabuchodonosor, and the arms
of Pharao shall be weakened. Of this, Necho and Aprie the last Pharaos mentioned
in Scripture had full trial: for Necho reigned seventeen years, and left
behind him a son named Psammis which reigned 6. years, Psammis.
and making war with the Aethiopians died. About this time Phaortes king of
the Medes with all his army was overthrown by the Assyrians, at what time the
Scithians entered into Asia, spoiled and wasted almost to the country of
Palestina. Tullus Hostilius the third king of Rome died in the beginning of the
reign of Necho. Herodotus does place Apries the son of this Apries.
Psammis. This king for a time prospered like his grandfather Psammiticus: but
I will admit Herodotus to speak of this king Apries for the like cause as
before: for I find that he is called in Jeremy, Hophra. To this king many of
Jerusalem fled Jeremy 44. cap.
from the hand of Nabuchodonosor, where they were as well entertained as with
Nabuchodonosor, for so the Prophet said, that the sword should follow them into
Egypt, and Pharao should destroy all that fled from Nabuchodonosor, who at that
very time took the city, and brought all Judah captive into Babylon, though
Jeremy persuaded the contrary: yet they of Judah vowed to burn incense unto
the Queen of heaven, and unto the gods of Egypt: but the God of Abraham and
Isaac gave them over to the sword, and destroyed them with famine. And after
that Apries had fed his tyranny against the Jews, and had slain the
Prophet Jeremy: afterward he overthrew Sidon, besieged Tire, and had done
great harm in Judea, and Melancthon lib. 2. Chron.
the word of the Lord came unto him, saying, I will give Pharao Hophra king of
Egypt into the hands of his enemies, and into the hands of them that seek his
life, even into the hands of Nabuchodonosor. Though Herodotus affirms (as
other profane Herodotus lib. 2.
histories do,) that Apries was after the overthrow of Sydon, forsaken of his
people, and vanquished by Amasis at Memphis, and carried captive from Memphis
into Sais, into his own palace before.

But now Amasis reigned king in Egypt, and ruler of Apries throne: thus Apries
after he had reigned thirty five years, died by the hands of his enemies.
During the reigns of these two last kings Necho and Apries, which was fifty
three years, many destructions of countries and cities happened, as the
destruction of Niniue, and also Assyria by Ciaxeres king of the Medes, the
destruction of Jerusalem, and all Judea by Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and
the wars between the Chaldeans and the Egyptians, which continued seven and
twenty years, the victory whereof fell to the king of Babylon, as the
Prophet before had said, I will give the land Ezechiel cap. 29.
of Egypt into the hand of Nabuchodonosor, for wages to his Army.

This time reigned in Rome, Ancus Martius the fourth king, Ancus Martius.
and Tarquinius Priscus the fifth king. Europus reigned now the seventh king of
Macedonia, and in Lydia Haliates their eight king. Hitherunto the lives of
Pharaos kings of Egypt, which continued from the first Amasis in the beginning
of the eighteenth Dynastia, which was about the time of the going of the
Patriarch Jacob into Egypt unto his son Joseph, until the time of this Amasis
the last king of that name, about twelve Amasis.
hundredth years, so long continued the names of Pharaos.

This Amasias, as the rest of the kings before him, was so idolatrous, and so
addicted to obey Oracles, that he also imitated his predecessors in such
fond buildings, to carry huge stones from Memphis and from Elephantina to
build a temple up unto Minerua in the city of Sai, that he much mused how he
might pass the rest with the monstrousness of the great huge stones to build
temples, images, colossus: wherein he in one monument excelled the rest.

He caused a house to be made of one stone to be brought The kings of Egypt
contented one to excel another in building.
from the city of Elephantina to the city of Sais, which is (as Herodotus
writes) twenty days sailing: two thousand chosen men were three years in
bringing this house to Sai, of all other works most to be wondered: for this
stone was one and twenty cubits in length, and fourteen in breadth: and also
he made a colossus or an image in Memphis, before the temple of Vulcan, of
seventy and five foot long: he builded likewise a large temple for Isis in
Memphis. Thus the kings of Egypt strove one after another, to excel in their
works and vain monuments.

In the time of this king, a law was made in Egypt, that in every Province of
Egypt the President thereof should take Idleness in Egypt punished.
account, and examine the youths of their provinces, how and after what sort
they lived: for to see an idle man in Egypt that could not answer for himself
how he lived, it was death: and therefore to avoid idleness, they were thus
compelled by the Kings of Egypt, to carry stones to the building of Piramides,
temples, Colossus, Labirinthes, and such like.

This law afterward was by Solon brought to Greece, for Solon was in Egypt in
the time of the last Amasis. Pomponius Mela says, that in the reign of Amasis
were twenty thousand cities, Herodotus says, one thousand and twenty cities:
for old 20000. Cities in Egypt.
Egypt in times past was very great and large, for hard by the marches of
Affricke in the shore stands Alexandria: on the borders of Arabia is the
city of Pelusium: other fair cities are far from the sea, as Memphis, Sai,
Bubastis, Elephantina and and Thebes, which is reported to have an 100. brazen
gates, and so many princes palaces. Many good laws are written among the
Egyptians by Sasiches and by Sesostris, but specially by Bocchoris, of whose
laws I will set dowme some few as Diodorus wrote them, to the number of 17.

1. The first law was, that none might violate their gods with oaths: the
offenders herein were punished as false to God and man.

2. If any aided not a man iniuried or beaten, or robbed by any man, either
upon the way as he travailed, or in the place where he dwelt, he was to die for
it, if he might have helped it: else to publish, and to call for help.

3. False witness was so punished, by a decree made for that purpose: the
punishment that he that was accused should have, being proved, should be for
the false accuser not being proved.

4. Against idleness, all the names of the city, parish, or country, are
brought and recorded with the magistrates of the provinces, and are examined,
how they are occupied, how they live, of what trade or trafique he or they be
of: if he be found idle, he shall die by the law in Egypt: this law Solon
carried with him from Egypt to Athens.

5. If any man killed a freeman, or a servant, death was his punishment.

6. If the father killed the son, he was free from death, but he should for
three days be punished as the decree was made in that behalf: for the
Egyptians thought not the father worthy of death for killing of his son, quia
auctor fuit.

7. For the son that killed his father, the greatest torments that might be
devised was by law appointed for him, for to take the life of him away, which
gave him life.

8. If a woman with child, by law be condemned to die, she is reserved until
the child be borne: for the Egyptians think it not fit that two should be
punished, when one had offended, and that the giltlesse with the guilty should
be condemned: Iniquum enim iustum cum iniusto poenam pati. This law was carried
from Egypt into Greece, and from Greece into other countries.

9 The soldier that offended his captain in the field, or had transgressed
the commandment of the officers, he should not die, but with all infamy and
shame he should have two letters printed in his forehead, as common marks of
infamy: but if he had revealed any secrets to the enemies, the law had
commanded his tongue to be plucked out of his head.

10 If any had clipped any lawful coin, or counterfaited the like, or
diminished the weight, by law he should die.

11 If any man had counterfaited the hand of any man, or had taken away any
letters, or had put in any letters in any writings, or found faulty in forging
any deed or letters, he should have both his hands cut off.

12 If any had violated by force any maid or free woman, he should have that
member punished that had offended, his privy members cut off: if by consent
the man and woman sinned, it was by law appointed that the man should be
beaten with rods to the number of a thousand stripes, and the woman should
have her nose cut off, for a mark of a whore.

13 For satisfiyng of creditors in borowing of money, it was by an oath
confirmed, and not with obligations made, that the money should be paid upon
the day appointed: for a sacred oath sincerely inuiolated, was more esteemed in
Egypt, then any writing or bond made: for it was a wonder to see in Egypt a man
forsworn.

14 For it was not lawful to arrest any man in Egypt for debtes by the law of
Bochoris, but to seize upon the goods or substance: for whatsoever passed in
secret writings between the party and creditour, no arrest was admitted: for
all the people of Egypt were divided into four Bochoris laws.
parts, which were husbandmen, craftesmen, shepherds, and soldiers: payment
was made to the creditors by the goods of the debtors, and not by arrest: for
they thought that a man free borne, should for no money be imprisoned,
specially the soldiers, which with danger of life defends his country.

15 The like law was in Egypt for usury by Bochoris, which A law for usury.
was brought to Athens by Solon, which law was called (...): by this law
Solon commanded that no Citizen in Athens should be put in prison for usury:
for the Egyptians condemned much the Grecians that had by the law forbidden to
arrest any plough, harneis, and such necessaries for the use of man, and yet a
man that used these, and could make these, suffered to be arrested and to be
imprisoned.

16 The law against theft in Egypt was, that he that would A law against theft.
steal, should write his name, and record it in a book which the chief
captain, or the great prince appointed: for those should receive the theft,
and the party that had lost his goods, should come to his captain, and
should set down the day and the hour wherein his goods were lost, and the
captain should record it in his book, and appoint him a day to come again:
against the which day the theft being found out, he should have all his loss
saving the fourth part, which by law the thief had: for they so judged it
better, sithence it were impossible to forbid theft, or to hang as many as
would steal.

17 As for the law for marriage, it was thus: that the priests of Egypt might
mary but one wife a piece: others as many A law for marriage.
as pleased them: for that they would have their country populous, and their
cities strong with people: no bastardes might be named in Egypt, though diverse
were borne of bondwomen, esteeming only their fathers for credit, and the
mothers for their nources. Now for their Judges and Magistrates that executed
these laws in Egypt, they were elected by 30. of the best and wisest men in
every great city, as Memphis, Heliopolis, Thebes, and the rest, in every city
one chief Judge with his sociates with him, as were the Areopagites in Athens,
or the Ephories in Sparta. Of other laws concerning the religions of their
gods, and their burials, and of their discipline and order in wars, I have
written of it in the Dial of days.

There was also a law in Egypt before these laws, that the Diodo. lib. 2.
cap. 3.
pictures and images of their gods painted in tables and set in brass in their
Temples, should be carried in their ensigns to the field in the time of wars.

But as Egypt flourished in the time of king Amasis, so Egypt was brought
subject unto the Persians within six days after Amasis the last name of
Pharaoes.
Amasis days: for after that Amasis had reigned forty four years, his
son succeeded him called Psammenitus, who after he had reigned six years,
was overthrown by Cambyses Psammenitus.
king of Persia, which came from Persia into Egypt, to revenge the wrong which
he received at Amasis hand, who refused to give his own daughter in marriage
to the king of of Persia, but deceived him with a daughter of Apries called
Nytetis, which was only left alive of all the stock of Apries: whom Cambyses
married, supposing her to be king Amasis Herodot. lib. 3.
daughter, until Apries daughter opened the whole matter, affirming unto the
king, how Amasis had betrayed her father the king being his master, and by
that reason had obtained the kingdom of Egypt: and also she revealed, how he
disdained to give his own daughter, but took me up being left desolate and
comfortless, and willed me to Cambyses.
feign my self to be his daughter. These floutes and scoffs of Amasis,
kindled wrath in Cambyses to come in arms into Egypt, but before he came,
Amasis died.

Notwithstanding after he had conquered his son Psammenitus, and had
possessed the kingdom of Egypt, he went from Memphis unto Sai, to satisfy
his wrath upon Amasis: and though he was before buried, yet he caused his
carcas to be brought before him, and commanded it first to be whipped and The
cruelty of Cambyses.
scourged, then thrust him through with daggers and bodkins, after this he
haled and lugged it through the City of Sai, with all contempts that might be
invented, and last he caused it to be burned, which was against the manner of
the Egyptians: for they suppose the fire to be a living creature, because the
fire deuoureth all things, and at last deuoureth it self.

Thus the old ancient kings of Egypt continued a thousand Melancth. li^. 2.
Chron.
two hundred years, before they were conquered by any nation: and though they
were by the kings of Assyria and of Chaldea, which then flourished chiefly,
often assaulted, yet they never lost the proper names of their kings which were
called Pharaos, until Cambyses time, which continued under the Persians a
hundred thirty five years, and after they reuoulted Diodo. lib. 2.
under Darius Nothus, and kept of, until by many sharp battles they were
again by Ochus vanquished, who used in Egypt great cruelty.

About this time Tomiris Queen of the Massegets, and Tarquinius superbus, the
last king of the Romans reigned in Rome: for the Romans lost their kings, and
the Egyptians lost their kingdom about one time. Cambyses this time hindered
the building of the Temple by the means of the Samaritanes, who ever envied
Jerusalem.

Thus briefly I have written of the state and government of the old kings of
Egypt, Pharaos by name, until the time of Alexander the great: and now
something after Alexanders days. Egypt and their kings afterward altered and
changed The names of Pharaos changed to Ptilomeis.
from the names of Pharaos to the names of Ptolomeies, as you shall read
hereafter, from Alexander the great, until the time of Julius Caesar, during
which time the kings of Egypt were called Ptolomei.

Therefore I have gathered together all the names of these ancient kings of
Egypt, from Osiris time the first potentate in Egypt, which was in the time of
Abraham, until Amasis time, the last Pharao which was in Cambyses time the
second king of Persia: that is, from the going of Abraham into Egypt, until the
Prophet Daniels time, which was a thousand four hundred 1425.
twenty five years: for before Osiris time, and long after, we read of no
certain king by the name of Pharao, but of some government called Dynastia, at
what time in every province of Egypt, before Egypt had the name of Egypt,
certain potentates governed for the space of fiftene Dynasties. Hence grew
that vain opinion of the priests of Egypt, that they were the ancie^test
nation in the world, and that the stars altered their The Egyptians then
compted their years sometime by 2. months, sometime by 3. and sometime by 4.
months. Diodo. lib. 1. cap. 1.
courses four times, and the sun twice since they first inhabited Egypt,
recording in their chronicles the names of three hundred and thirty kings, and
before their kings the government of those whom they called Heroas, or Deos,
which reigned eighteen thousand years.

But leaving them to their fabulous antiquity, I have set down all the names
of Pharaos that I could read in Manethon, Eusebius, Diodorus, Herodot, and
Melancthon, beginning at Osiris, which was that Pharao to whom Abraham came
unto, in the sixteen Dynastia of Egypt, from the first Pharao called Amasis,
unto the last Pharao called likewise Amasis, as they are set down in Functius
table, who followed Herodot from Cheopes, unto the last Pharao of Egypt called
Amasis. For the placing orderly of the kings of Egypt, Manethon differs from
Eusebius, Eusebius from Diodorus, Diodorus from Functius: and therefore as I
wrote the names of the old kings of Egypt as Manethon laid them down, so
will I now also write them as I found them in Functius table from Osiris,
which was that first Pharao, unto the last Pharao named Amasis.

1 The first king of Egypt, Amasis, named Pharao 25. years. 2 The second king
was Chebron, which reigned 13. years. 3 After whom reigned Amenophis 21.
years. 4 Then Mephres reigned 12. years. 5 Mispharmutosis 26. years. 6
Thutemosis reigned 9. years. 7 Amenophis the 2. of that name reigned 31. this
king made a law, that as soon as any Hebrewe should be borne, he should be
drowned in the river of Nilus. 8 Orus surnamed the great, reigned 38. 9
Acengeres reigned 12. years. in this kings time the kingdom of Athens began by
Cecrops. 10 Achorus reigned 9. years. 11 Cenchres reigned 16. years. this was
that Pharao that resisted God, and contraried Moses sent from God for the
deliverance of his people, at what time the ten great plagues happened in
Egypt, and after, the overthrow of the king and the whole kingdom in the red
Sea.
After that Israel had left Egypt, and the King, and all his Nobles, and
peers, and forces, were drowned in the red sea, these many kings reigned
that held still the names of Pharoes, as

12 Acheres reigned king 8. The first king after Israel left Egypt.
years. 13 Cheres reigned fifteen years. 14 Armeus which is also Danaus 5.
years. 15 Ramesses surnamed Egyptus reigned 68. years, after whose name the
land before called Oceana Mizreia, or Oseriana, was called Egypt. 16 Menophis,
of some named Miris, reigned 40. years. this made the first Labirinth for his
burial in Egypt, whose pattern was by Dedalus carried into Creete. 17 Zetus
reigned fifty five years. 18 Ranses reigned sixty six years. 19 Amenophis
the third of that name reigned forty years. 20 Amenophis the fourth of that
name reigned twenty years. 21 Thuoris reigned seven years. the five last
kings governed by the names of five Larthes, during whose time endured that
kind of government called Dynasteia Larthum for a hundred ninety four
years.
After succeeded another Dynastie, which endured a hundred seventy seven
years, during which time Functius named no king in his table, but were ruled
with Governors in every principality of Egypt, as Sanhedrin with the Jews,
or Amphictions with the Grecians.

22 Then succeeded Smendes, to whom Jeroboam fled, which in the Scripture is
called Sesach, he reigned 26. years. 23 Pseusenses reigned forty one
years. 24 Nepher Cheres 4 years. 25 Amenophis the 5. reigned 9. years. 26
Osochorus reigned 6. years. 27 Spinaces 9. years. 28 Pseusennes. 35. years.
29 Cheopes reigned 50. years. 30 Cephenes reigned 56. Eusebius says, that
after Cephenes, Seustoris reigned. in this Cephenes time began the kingdom of
Macedonia. 31 Micerinus Chcopes son reigned six years. 32 Asichis reigned
6. years. 33 Sabachus reigned 50. 34 Spethon reigned 33.
After these thirty four kings, the kingdom of Egypt was governed by twelve
Magistrates of equal authority, which ruled the realm of Egypt for fifteen
years.

After these twelve Magistrates had ended their time of fifteen years, one of
the twelve named Psameticus, reigned fifty four years. Then Necho reigned
seventeen years: Necho.
this king slew Josias in Mageddo, and was himself slain by Nabuchodonosor.
After Necho, reigned Spamnus six years. After Spamnus Apries, and after
Apries reigned Amasis the last of the name of the Pharaos. Eusebius sets
these kings down in another sort, and adds some other names, which I omit to
avoid tediousness.

Many things I omit willingly, which the old Egyptians used: for as we hang at
our doors signs of beasts, fowls, and fishes, that strangers might know our
houses: the Egyptians used those signs at their ears, that by the marks and
figures of such beasts, fowls, and fish, as they had at their ears, The
manners of Egypt.
they might know of what quality or condition they were.

For if an Egyptian did excel in running, he should have the figure of an hare
hanged at his ear: if he were slothful and The manners in Egypt.
heavy, he should be marked with a Crocodile: if he were liberal and frank,
he should have the picture of an open hand at his ear: if he were covetous, he
had hanged at his ear a close hand and shut: if he were quick of hearing,
the picture ofa Serpent: if he were just and honest, he had the likeness of an
eye at his ear: if he were crafty and subtle, the figure of a fox: if
envious, of an eele, and so of the rest.

The chief Cities and great Towns of old Egypt were thus named.

1 Memphis. 2 Sais. 3 Bubastis. 4 Thebes. 5 Papremos. 6 Butis. 7 Leontina. 8
Elephantina. 9 Alexandria. 10 Heliopolis with many others.
These are the names of all the ancient kings of Egypt that I could find: and
for that I neither found them in Manethon, Eusebius, Diodorus, nor in Herodot
orderly set down, I have co^ferred the state and government of the pote^tates
called Dynastia Egyptiorum, and have as nigh as I could placed them: for it
cannot be in such antiquities but many errors happen, as I have sundry times
said of the Chaldeans Assyrians, Scithians, Egyptians, and other ancient
nations, whereof no mention is made in the sacred histories, neither can be
made truly in profane histories, for that nothing was known to profane
writers before Cirus time, or rather after Alexander the great, at what time
profane Historiographers began to Diodo. lib. 2.
record antiquities: and thus much until Cambyses, who was the first
conqueror of Egypt, by whom the Persians had government The whole time of the
kings of Persia was but 130. Diodo. erred.
over Egypt a hundred thirty five years, until the reign of Darius Ochus:
for in the sixth year of this king, the Egyptians reuoulted, and these many
kings afrer reigned in Egypt.

1 Amirtes Saites reigned 6. years. 2 Nepherites reigned six years. 3
Achoris reigned twelve years. 4 Nectanabus reigned 18. 5 Nepherites one year.
6 Mectanabus again reigned 18. years. this was the last before the coming of
Alexander the great.
CHAP. IIII.
Of the second conquest of Egypt by Alexander the great: of their kings
afterward called Ptolomeis, until the time of Caesar Augustus, by whom all
Egypt was last conquered, and made a Province subject to the Roman Empire.

THe Egyptians (as you heard) having great wars, first with the Assyrians,
and after by the Persians, until Cambyses time, Cambyses.
by whom they were made to pay tribute unto the Kings of Persia, until they
waxed strong again that they reuoulted from the Persians in the time of Darius
Nothus, until by many sharp battles they were again by Ochus the eight
king of Persia vanquished, who used in Egypt great cruelty, so that the later
kings of Egypt Melancth. lib. 4
were for eight and thirty years under the Persians: but after that the
Persians were vanquished, and their Monarchy taken from Persia into Macedonia,
by Alexander the great, the Egyptians willingly yielded themselves to
Alexander, as to a second conqueror: he used them with great clemency,
permitting them to have their former liberties and laws, appointed over them
certain Magistrates of the Grecians called Nomarchas, and over them two
Superuisors called Episcopi, to see that none of the aforesaid Magistrates
should claim more dignity then was set down by Alexander in a table: which
the Romans afterward kept, using the same order for a time as Alexander did.

It is written that the great Alexander had yearly tribute paid unto him
during his life, the sum of six thousand Melancth. lib. 2. Chron.
talents: for Plutarch in the life of Agesilaus speaks of a king named Tachus
in Egypt, to whom Agesilaus came from Sparta: for Nectanabus was a nephew of
king Tachus, and one of his chief captains, who rebelled against the king:
and being chosen by the Egyptians their king, he desired the aid of Agesilaus,
who joined with him being an old soldier, having had in hand greater battles
in Greece against Pelopidas and Epaminondas, then at that time with Nectanabus
against Tachus.

Therefore Nectanabus committed all into the hands of Nectanabus.
Agesilaus, by whom the victory fell to Nectanabus, and Tachus the king forced
to flee. After this the affairs of this Nectanabus had good success, and he
was quietly stablished in his kingdom by the means of Agesilaus king of
Sparta, to who^ Agesilaus.
Nectanabus gave two hundred thirty talents of silver in ready money, to
defray the charges of his soldiers.

Thus Nectanabus reigned quietly in Egypt, though under Darius the last king of
Persia Mezabes governed Egypt, who yielded into the hands of Alexander the
kingdom of Egypt, as soon as he had heard that his master king Darius was
slain, and al Persia subdued by Alexander, who (as you heard before) possessed
Egypt without wars, being yielded of the state of Egypt. From the time of
Alexander the great, unto Julius Diodo. lib. 18.
Caesar, that is, from the Monarchy of the Grecians unto the Romans, is two
hundred eighty two years.

After the death of Alexander, his kingdoms were divided chiefly between
four of his graund captains, specially The kingdoms of Alexander divided.
those kingdoms which were of the greatest fame and renown, as Macedonia to
Cassander: Asia the lesser, to Antigonus: Babylon and all Asia the great, to
Saleuchus furnamed Nicanor: Egypt with the most part of Syria, to Ptolomei the
son of Lagi. This was the first king of Egypt after Alexanders death, after
whose names all the kings of Egypt, until Julius Caesar's time were called
Ptolomei.

This king grew great and mighty in Egypt, and began strongly upon the next
nations unto him to make war, and brought diverse subjects under the Empire of
Egypt, whose good success in the beginning Perdiccas began to envy. This
Functius lib. 3.
Perdiccas was the chief governor of Macedonia, and as it were left a tutour
over Arideus the base brother of Alexander the great, to whom by common consent
the kingdom of Macedonia was appointed. Perdiccas supposing to keep Egypt
subject Diodo. lib. 18.
to Macedonia, and to bridle the insolency which he saw in Ptolomei, he
leauied a great army of soldiers, made a voyage into Egypt: against whose
coming, Ptolomie with all celeritie gathered his army, and gave him battle,
wherein Perdiccas was slain, and his whole company overthrown.

Upon this overthrow of Perdiccas, Ptolomei king of Egypt Josephus lib. 12.
cap. 1.
waxed insolent of the victory, entered into Syria, and by strong hand brought
Syria under Egypt: after he went to Jerusalem, he plagued the citizens,
wasted, spoiled, and brought diverse out of Judea captives into Egypt. Of this
king the Prophet Daniel spoke in this sort, The king of the South shall be
mighty, and his dominion Daniel cap. 11.
shall be great: read more in Daniel of this. Antigonus being Ptolomeis
victories over Demetrius.
advertised of Ptolomeis great victories, how he had vanquished Perdiccas and
subdued Syria, sent his son Demetrius, a young man of 22. years, and the
first time that he took the charge of a General in hand, and that against an
old soldier of the great Alexander, trained up in discipline of wars
always. Demetrius was put to flight, 5000. of his men slain, and almost eight
thousand taken by the City of Gaza.

Antigonus hearing how his son was overthrown said, that this Ptolomei
overthrew beardles men, and said further, he should fight with bearded men. And
it came to pass that Demetrius being before put to flight, was not quiet
before he requited the last foil by the king of Egypt received, with the
Ptolomei overthrown by Demetrius.
like overthrow: wherein Demetrius had the victory of Ptolomei and of his
army, which victory did put Ptolomei out of al Syria, and brought Antigonus in
again. By this time, Seleucus who^ Antigonus had driven out of Babylon before,
came again and entered into Babylon.

Cassander likewise fearing that young Hercules the son Iustine lib. 15.
of Alexander the great, being now of fourteen years of age, should be by
the Macedonians so favored for his fathers sake, that he should be king in
Macedonia: therefore he secretly commanded, that both Hercules, and his
mother Arsine should be murdered: yet Cassander was not The tyranny of
Cassander.
quiet, until he practiced the like murder against Olympias Alexanders
mother, and against Roxana Alexanders wife.

Antigonus and his son Demetrius, were much envied for their victories this
time, in so much that all these kings after Alexanders death destroyed one
another with continual wars, Lysimacus was slain by Seleucus, Seleucus was
slain by Ptolomei, whose sister was married to Lysimachus. Polibeus writes,
that in the hundred twenty fourth Olympiad, Polibeus lib. 2.
Ptolomie Lagi king of Egypt, Seleuchus Nicanor king of Syria, Lysimachus king
of Thracia, and Ptolomei Cerannon brother to Philadelphus, chief soldiers
under Alexander the great, were slain one of another.

Thus Ptolomei the son of Lagi, after he had conquered Perdiccas, ouerthrewe
Demetrius, subdued Syria, and the most part of Judea, when he reigned fourttie
years, died: during which time Demetrius Phalerius ruled Athens under
Cassander: and Demetrius surnamed Poliorcetes, destroyed a City in Samaria,
which Perdiccas builded.

This time the people of Alexandria sent to entreat for the Romans
friendship to aid them, if need required: This was the first request made
to the Romans, by The Romans were of all nations feared.
the Citizens of Alexandria in Egypt: for the Romans began to be strong,
and they of Alexandria perceiving the great wars and tyranny that was in all
parts of the world at that time: And also having seen within Egypt more
blood in the time of one Ptolomei, then in twenty Pharaos: for then Egypt had
nothing to do but to build Piramides, and to make Labirinths, monstrous and
needelesse monuments, but now sword and fire came into Egypt.

In the time of this king flourished Theophrastus, a famous Philosopher, one of
Aristotle's scholars, and Menedemus another Philosopher: in the same time lived
Menander the Tragedian, Atheneus the Historian, and Demetrius Phalerius. In
Egypt succeeded after Ptolome Lagi his son Philadelphus, a learned prince,
and a great favorer of learned men: this The praise of Ptolomei Philadel.
king was just, discreet, and gentle, bent more to maintain peace, then to
procure wars, and therefore so beloved of his people, and he to them again
so loving, that during his whole government, which was thirty eight years,
the Egyptians lived quietly without trouble or wars, where before, Functius
lib. 3. Coment.
Egypt for a thousand four hundred years was brought up under blind priests,
idolatrous superstition, given to all errors, only acquainted with the
Egyptian tongue.

Now Philadelphus with greater care and zeal of his country, then any of his
predecessors had before, kept with him diverse and sundry learned men, as
Aratus, Callimachus, Apollonius, Melancth. lib. 2.
Theocritus, Hipparchus the Mathematician, and Demetrius Phalerius the
Philosopher, which at that time was banished from Athens, and received in
Egypt. Philadelphus a prudent Diodo. lib. 1.
and a learned prince, and co^uersant with learned men, Philadelphus the only
king of all the Ptolomeis.
knew well that the Jews religion, their laws, their manners, and their
service of God, did far excel all the nations of the world: he sent great
presents and gifts to Eleazr the hie Priest then being at Jerusalem,
entreating him to send learned men of the Hebrews that could translate the
books of Moses and the Prophets into the Greek tongue, that Egypt might be
acquainted with the word of God as well as Judah: to whom Eleazar sent seventy
two learned men to interpret, and to translate the Bible.

After this, he provided in Alexandria such a famous Josephus lib. 12. Cap. 2.
Library to the common use of learned men, as far excelled all other
Libraries: And (as Melancthon says) he caused many other things to be
translated into the Greek tongue: he restored the poor Jews that dwelt
captives in Egypt into liberty: he sent for learned men into all Regions, he
honorably maintained them and lovingly used them, that Egypt flourished with
sound doctrine and virtuous men: for even then Jesus the son of Sirach,
gathered in Egypt Sirach and his son.
together many wise sentences and godly speeches, many learned and virtuous
lessons, which his graundfather before had written in Jerusalem, which he now
augmented with care and diligence; and compiled in a book which is reserved in
the Church to great use.

This king excelled all the Pharaos before him, and all the Ptolomeis after
him, and during his reign he studied to maintain peace, and to avoid war,
and therefore bestowed his daughter Berenices to Antiochus surnamed Theos, who
offered diverse injuries to move wars against Egypt: but while Philadelphus
lived, Egypt prospered and flourished with all good success, but after that
Philadelphus died, his son Ptolomei Ptolomei Euergetes 3. king of Egypt.
Euergetes reigned twenty six years, of whom Daniel said, that the kings
daughter of the South which was Berenices, Philadelphus daughter, and this king
Euergetes sister should come to the king of the North to make agreement: but
Daniel said it should not continue, for she should be Daniel cap. 11.
delivered to death, and out of the budde of her roots shall one stand up
named Euergetes, and shall enter with an army into the fortress of the king
of the North, which is called Antiochus Theos, and do what he list, and shall
prevail.

He plagued the Syrians and revenged Berenices his sister with diverse
victories: for he carried captives into Egypt their gods, with their moulten
images, and their precious vessels of silver and gold: for after Seleucus had
lost his Nauies by a tempest on the sea, he geathered an army by land, and
gave battle to Ptolomei, but the like misfortune fell then unto him, and the
victory happened to Ptolomei: for he was driven to flee to Antiochia, and
from thence to crave his brother Antiochus help, which then governed Cicilia.
Ptolomei hearing of these news, concluded a peace with Seleucus, and returned
into Egypt, after he had fully requited his sisters death upon the Syrians.

During Euergetes reign, the Parthians began their kingdom, who were all
named Arsaces, as now the kings of Egypt were called Ptolomei: this time the
wars of Afric began between the Carthagineans and the Numidians: at that
time Amilcar was sent captain general into Spain for Carthage: in this
Euergetes time certain enterludes were appointed by the oracle of Sibilla, in
Rome named Floralia the Floralia. Rubigalia. These feasts are set forth in my
dyall of days.
fourth kalends of May, in the honor of the goddess Flora for fair weather,
and fruits of the earth, like unto the feast named Rubigalia, which Numa
Pompilius instituted the seventh kalends of May in Rome,

After this Ptolomei Euergetes had reigned twenty six years Plini lib. 18.
cap. 29. Plutarch (...) Numa. Ptolomei Thilopator 4. king of Egypt.
he died, whom succeeded his son Ptolomei surnamed Philopater a cruel beast
and not a king, but a monstrous tyrant, a murderer, both of his wife and his
sister Euridices, whose filthy and lewd life is better to pass with silence,
then to express in writing, of whom Iustine said, Noctes in stupris, dies in
conuiuijs consumsit, letting his strumpet Agathocles and her mother Euanthea to
rule and govern Egypt as pleased them: for none might less command in Egypt
then Iustine lib. 29.
the king, nor none might do more in Egypt then women: for nothing delighted
Philopator, but women and dancing, and whatsoever Agathocles would, that also
Philopator would.

Against this king, Antiochus the great king of Asia and Syria, came toward
Egypt, and began to take and spoil those Cities of Syria, which held with
Philopator the king Functius lib. 3.
of Egypt. Antiochus coming forward toward Egypt, Ptolomei Philopator met
him, and gave him battle at Raphia, a Town in the Confines of Palestina,
where Antiochus the great was overthrown and put to flight, and Antiochus the
great.
forced to entreat for peace at Philopators hand, and so Philopator king of
Egypt got the victory over Antiochus, and recovered those Towns of Syria
which Antiochus had woonne before.

This victory was well gotten, but not well used, for Philopator was so puffed
up with pride and insolency, that Iustine lib. 3.
he thought having overthrown Antiochus the great, he might well also
overthrow JEHOVAH the great, entered Jerusalem, spoiled the Temple, slew the
Citizens, and made havoc of Gods people, some to be devoured of beasts, and
some to be quartered by men. Read the Machabees further of this, but
specially read the eleventh Machabees. Daniel cap. 4.
of Daniel, where the whole history of the kings of Syria and Asia, of Egypt,
of Persia, of Greece, and of the Romans are before spoken by the Prophet.

There it said was by Daniel, that Antiochus and all his army should be
delivered into the hands of Philopator, and after that victory, it was by the
Prophet said, that Tyrants were ever warned.
Philopator should wax arrogant and proud, and that he should contemn and
blaspheme the Lord of Israel, and the God of Jacob, that he should profane
the Temple, destroy the people, and in his fury excel in tyranny, but at
length he should not prevail: for he was poisoned, and so died after his
most wicked and incestuous life, leaving behind him a son by his sister
Euridices, of five years old, when he had reigned seventeen years.

I pass briefly these Histories of Egypt, for that in the Polibeus lib. 5.
history of the kings of Syria and Asia, the kings of Egypt are likewise
spoken of, and in the Machabees also you may read further of this Antiochus:
for since the death of Alexander the great, the kings of Syria and Asia could
not agree with the kings of Egypt, until the last destruction of both the
kingdoms by the Romans, and therefore as soon as ever Philopator died,
Antiochus straight again sought to invade Egypt, understanding this Ptolomei
Epiphanes, the son and heir of Philopator was young, and not able to resist
Ptolo. Epiphanes 5. king of Egypt.
so great a King, he entered into Phoenicia, and into other parts of Syria,
which yet lived subject under the king of Egypt.

They of Alexandria sent to Rome to the Senators for aid against Antiochus,
and against Philippe king of Macedonia: for both these two kings affected the
kingdom. Ambassadors were sent from the Senators unto Antiochus, willing him
to avoid out of Egypt, and not to do injury to the young king. This messenger
was little esteemed of Antiochus, and therefore Functius lib. 3. Comment.
the Senators pronounced him an enemy of the Romans. Antiochus being
advertised of this, agreed with Ptolomey Epiphanes, and gave him Cleopatra his
daughter in marriage, supposing thereby the easier to get the kingdom of Egypt:
he gave Coelosyria, Judea, Samaria, and Phoenicia with his Melancthon lib. 2.
Chron.
daughter to Epiphanes, but he was deceived and mist his purpose. For he was
prevented by the Romans, and kept off from Egypt: he was overthrown and
vanquished at Thermopila by Attilius and Glabrio, Roman Consuls, and the next
year after, he was quite driven out of Syria and Asia, by Lucius Cornelius
Scipio, at the city of Magnesia.

Of this Antiochus the great, and of his son Antiochus Epiphanes another
monster, Daniel before showed their tyranny: for during the time of these two
kings, Antiochus Epiphanes I^sephus lib. 12. cap. 13.
king of Syria, and Ptolomey Epiphanes king of Egypt, the Jews were most
miserably afflicted. Read Josephus, how also the Samaritanes molested them,
and sore vexed them. And for that I spoke of these kings before in the history
of Assyria, I will briefly run over the rest of these kings. Now after that
Ptolomey Epiphanes had reigned 24. years, he died, leaving two sons behind
him, the elder called Philometor, Philometor the sixth king of Egypt.
the younger called Phiscon: the elder brother reigned king in Egypt 35. years,
of whom his uncle Antiochus Epiphanes, a subtle king, under the pretense of
love and care of his nephew, became his ouerseer and tutour, rather aspiring
the kingdom then respecting the king, for he furnished Egypt with men of
arms, having the strongest towns of Egypt in his own hand, as Pelusium and
others.

The king being yet young, idle, slow, and of no courage, addicted to all
filthy vices, without respect of himself or of his kingdom, fled to his
brother Phiscon to Alexandria, where both were besieged by Antiochus, until
Popilius the Roman was sent from the Senators of Rome to command Antiochus
out of Egypt, without further delay, which he was constrained to obey, though
he did much harm before his departure out of Egypt.

Philometor having recovered his kingdom into his hand, and the Romans to be
his friends, to avoid further braules, and to stablish himself strong in
Egypt, he married his daughter Cleopatra to Alexander, who had then obtained the
kingdom of Syria: but this friendship continued not long: for Demetrius
Nicanor, the son of that Demetrius vanquished by Alexander, came to Syria,
got certain towns into his hands, appointed Apollonius captain of
Coelosyria, who trusting Functius lib. 3. Comment.
too much to himself, was quickly vanquished by Ionathas. Philometor
understanding of these wars in Syria, between his son in law Alexander and
Demetrius, he also hasted with an army to Syria, thought to prevent both, and
to have Syria with Egypt: he took his daughter Cleopatra away from Alexander,
and gave her to Demetrius, and both wickedly and falsely dealt with his son in
law.

But Demetrius had Syria, and Alexander was slain by Zabdiel the king of
Arabia, and his head sent to Ptolomey Philometor to Egypt, who then was king
both of Egypt and Syria but for three days: for within three days after
Alexander was Melancton lib. 2.
slain in Arabia, Philometor died in Egypt, and Demetrius Nicanor was received
king into Syria. This time governed in Jerusalem prince Iannaeus the last
governor of Judea of the house of David: he with many battles discomfited the
Arabians.

In Parthia reigned now Mithridates the fifth king, and in Macedonia reigned
Perseus the last king. In Philometors days, Ariarathes king of Thracia sought
the Romans favor, and made a league of peace with them. Aristobulus a Jew
borne a great Aristobulus a Philosopher.
Philosopher of the sect of the Peripatetiks, expounded the books of Moses to
Ptolomey Philopator. In the beginning of this kings reign, died two of the
most famous warriors of the world, Scipio Affricanus the Roman, and Hannibal
the Carthaginian. It is supposed that they both died in one year, and both
banished from their countries.

But to Egypt again. After Philometor, reigned Ptolomey Euergetes Ptolomey
Euergetes the 7. king.
the second of that name, and (as Functius says) surnamed Phiscon, for the
deformity of his body: but others, as Manethon and Iustine, say, that this
Euergetes was the seventh king of Egypt, and that Phiscon was the eight king.
It is not Ptolomey Phiscon the 8. king.
much material, and therefore I will follow Functius, who sets down in his
table this Phiscon by the name of Euergetes; whom Epiphanius called Philologon:
he reigned 29 years king of Egypt, a monstrous and incestuous beast, far
passing all other his predecessors in filthy wickedness: he was not so foul
in the shape of his body, as he was filthy in his mind: for he kept his own
sister, of whom he got a daughter, and Functius lib. 3. Comment.
after with that daughter borne of his sister, committed abominable incest. He
muthered his own children, and cut Iustine lib. 38.
them in small pieces, and made his wife their own natural mother to eat
them: but he had the reward due for such offenses: he was thrust out of his
kingdom, and died a banished slave, hated and abhorred of all men.

After Phiscon was banished, reigned his brother Ptolomey surnamed Alexander,
as Melancthon says: but Alexander reigned not long, but was likewise banished
as his brother was. Then succeeded in Egypt Ptolomey Lathurus, who in the 3.
year of Alexander king of Judah, was expelled out of his own kingdom by his
mother Cleopatra, who favoring more her younger Cleopatra Queen of Egypt.
son named Alexander, intended to make him king of Egypt: she taking Lathurus
wife, married her unto Alexander, yet he mistrusting the great cruelty which he
saw in his mother, fled secretly, letting the government to his mother and to
his wife. This Cleopatra after that both her sons were thus banished, reigned
10. years. Ptolomey Lathurus being now in Cyprus and sent for by the citizens
of Ptolomais to defend them from Alexander king of Judah, which hearing of
Lathurus coming, left his purpose, raised his siege, and returned to
Jerusalem, fearing the great army of Ptolomey, who had thirty thousand in
the field. The citizens of Ptolomais when Alexander departed, changed their
purpose, and kept Lathurus out of the Josephus lib. 13.
town, whereby he was thus moved to send some of his army to oppress Judea,
some to lay new siege again to Ptolomais. Alexander being advertised that
Lathurus with all his army spoiled and wasted his kingdom, he returned and met
at the flood of Jordan, where Lathurus gave a very great overthrow to the king
of Judah, and (as Josephus writes) thirty 30000. Jews slain by Lathurus.
thousand Jews were slain.

The calamities of the Jews were such, that they were compelled by the king of
Egypt to feed upon the dead carcases, and bodies of their friends and
countrymen, at what time many godly men of the Jews were present, beholding
this myserie, as Simeon, Zacarias and others. Beside this calamity, Simeon.
Zacharias.
at what time the contention grew hot in Judah between Aristobulus, Antigonus,
and Alexander Ianneus: the Jews at that time were so plagued, that Alexander
sent for aid unto Egypt to Cleopatra: for Iustine writes, that Cleopatra used
Alexander her son too familiarly, and that her great abomination was known
in Egypt.

And therefore Ptolomey Lathurus was sent for by his own subjects to come into
Egypt, for that the Queen Cleopatra Ptolomey Lathurus the 10. king.
his mother who had banished him from Egypt, practiced tyranny and all kind
of cruelty in Egypt, where he reigned 8. years. After Lathurus, reigned in
Egypt Ptolomey Auletes, father to the last Cleopatra, some say her brother,
which was Ptolomey Auletes the 11. king.
Marcus Antonius friend: this king lived at Rome until such time as he was
restored by Gabinius into his kingdom of Egypt, at the commandment of the
Senators. This Auletes is named by Eusebius and Epiphanius, Dionysius.

This king for some certain offenses and discords done to his subjects,
departed from Alexandria, and sailed toward Rome, hoping that Caesar or Pompey
would restore him to his kingdom: and being desirous to see Cato, travailed
unto him where he was occupied: and opening the cause of his coming to Rome,
sought therein Catoes counsel, who told Catos saying of Rome.
him how he should find Rome insatiable, and that if Egypt were converted into
silver, it would not suffice the Magistrates of Rome: which saying of Cato
Ptolomey found to be true: for after long being at Rome, having fully
satisfied the Senators and other magistrates, he was sent by the Senators, and
specially by Pompey, with one Gabinius to be restored to his kingdom again,
where he reigned thirty years. After Ptolomey Dionysius the 12. king of Egypt.
whom succeeded his son Ptolomey Dionysius, unto whom Pompey the great fled
from the battle at Pharsalia, hoping to have some help for the friendship
showed to his father, as you heard before.

But there Pompey was slain by the kings commandment, Strabo lib. 17.
and his head sent to Caesar, and also when Julius Caesar came after, the like
sauce was prepared for him: but Caesar prevented it, ouerthrewe him, and put
him to flight, in the which flight the king thinking to escape Caesar's hand,
entered Melancthon lib. 2.
into a cock boat, and was drowned amongst the rest for company. The kingdom
of Egypt was given by Caesar unto Cleopatra, Dionysius sister, who reigned
until the twelfth year of Augustus Caesar, at what time she willingly died to
accompany her loving friend Marcus Antonius: she was the last of the line of
Ptolomeis, and the last Queen of Egypt: for after Cleopatra.
Cleopatra, Egypt was made a province under the Romans by Augustus Caesar, at
what time Augustus Caesar commanded his laws and decrees, which himself
caused to be engraued on a pillar of brass, and to be set up in Alexandria for
the Egyptians Augustus laws in Alexandria.
now made subject to the Romans, to be governed by, in like sort, as Alexander
the great, the second conqueror before Caesar had done the like, appointing
officers and magistrates, chief rulers, named Nomarchas, and two overseers
Episcopi.

Of this Manethon took no notice, and therefore Josephus taunted him in his
second book Contra Appionem, that he had the heart of an ass, and the
impudency of a dog, to make Egypt, which was three several times conquered,
first by Cambyses, secondly by the great Alexander, and last by Caesar, equal
to the Hebrews which endured the force, and saw the last destruction of Assure,
and Pharao. Thus Egypt was the third time conquered by Julius Caesar, and by
his nephewe Augustus Caesar, and these many kings of the names of Ptolomeis
reigned in Egypt from Alexander the great until the 12. year of Augustus
Caesar.

1 Ptolomey Lagi reigned 40. years. 2 Ptolomey Philadelphus, reigned 38. 3
Ptolomey Euergetes, reigned 26. 4 Ptolomey Philopator, reigned 17. 5 Ptolomey
Epiphanes, reigned 24. 6 Ptolomey Philometor, reigned 35. 7 Ptolomey Euergetes,
the second of that name, reigned 8 Ptolomey Phiscon, reigned 29. 9 Ptolomey
Lathurus reigned 17. 10 Ptolomey Alexander, cum Matre Cleopatra, reigned 10. 11
Ptolomey Auletes, reigned 30. 12 Ptolomey Dionysius reigned 13 Cleopatra
Auletes daughter, some say his sister, reigned 14.

OF THE ANTIQVITIE of the Scythians: of their laws, governments and life: of
their hardiness in wars, and of their victories over the Persians and
Egyptians, and their often invasions into Asia.
SCythia is a country large and wide, co^teyning within it self diverse and
sundry nations, as Sages, Nomades, Massagetes, Amazones, Caspians and
Hircanians, with Solinus cap. 60. 61.
many other nations bordering upon Scythia, and dwelling within Scythia: of the
which particularly to write, I think it needless, the rather, for that
Pomponius Pomponius Mela lib. 3.
Mela, Solinus and also Strabo in his 11. book does describe Scythia and
other nations which dwelt in Scythia, exquisite and painful men in describing
countries, their towns, their rivers, their hills, their manners, and natures.

And therefore lest I should seem fabulous (as diverse writers herein offend,
the Grecians specially, who never thought their histories worth the reading,
unless they were mingled with vain fables) I will write of their wars, and
of their antiquity, and therein I shall hardly escape fables of some Talmudist
or other, so difficult a thing it is to find out a true beginning of
antiquities in profane histories, as Liuie says, vt rerum vetustas sine
errore esse nequit.

The Scithians are thought to be one of the ancientest nations in the world,
from whom diverse great kingdoms took Beroaldus lib. 4. cap. 5.
their first original, as Celte or the old Gauls, which now are called
Frenchmen. Berosus affirms, that Noah by the name Berosus lib. 2.
of Ianus, and all his family dwelt first in Scithia Saga, and thence came to
Chaldea, and dwelt in Senar: for during the time of Ianus, Cameses, and
Saturnus, and all the time from Ianus until Ninus, the profane writers called
the golden world: for then men lived without laws, and had all things in
common. This Pliny in his natural histories affirms, that the Persians
called the Scithians, Sagas. There is great contention between Pliny cap. 17.
the Scithians and the Egyptians, concerning there antiquities, Iustine lib. 2.
the history whereof is written in Trogus Pompeius: there, after much
disputation it is concluded, Scitharum gens semper antiquissima, that the
Scithians had the soueraingtie over the Egpytians in antiquity.

As the Egyptians excelled in great and monstrous buildings, so these Scithians
exceeded for sweet and famous rivers, as

1 Ister. Herodotus lib. 2.
2 Tyres. 3 Hypanis. 4 Borysthenes. 5 Panticapes. 6 Hypacaris. 7 Gerrhus. 8
Tanais. 9 Moetin.
These Scithians who were rude and slavish people, without manners or nourture,
excelled far the Greeks which with great care and diligence, studied to
attain knowledge and virtue: for by how much the more the Scithians were more
ignorant then the Greeks, so much the more the Scithians Scithians.
excelled the Greeks in virtue: their hardiness and courage in wars was
such, that they were accounted amongst all other nations the most invincible
people of the world, that it is doubtful (as Iustine says) whether the men
or the women of Scithia be more famous: they attempted no less Signiories then
the whole Empire of Asia, which Empire they so tamed with often invasions, that
the Scithians were lords of Asia eight and twenty years.

For at what time Ciaxares, otherwise called by the Prophet Daniel, Darius
Medus, laid siege to Niniue the chiefest Ruffi^us de (...) origin.
city of Assyria, and being even then ready to take Niniue, the king of
Scithia whose name was Madies, came with a great army of Scithians and set
upon the Medes, overthrew them, spoiled and wasted at that time in their
return to Scithia, all Asia, and kept Asia under the kingdom of Scithia for
the space of eight and twenty years.

And again before this time, the Scithians brought Asia to Functius.
pay them tribute, at what time Tanais king of the Goths was their general:
and again before that time, the Egyptians who with an army set forward toward
Scithia, at what time Vexores reigned king in Egypt, the Scithians having
intelligence of their ambassadors coming, answered in this sort, that they
marueiled much that so famous a prince as the king of Egypt, should come to
fish with golden hooks to Scithia so barren a country: saying further, that
the Scithians had rather come to offer wars into Egypt, then to welcome them
into Scithia, but such rude welcome as rude people can yield, the king of
Egypt shall have: and therewithal gave to Vexores such Vexores. Iustine lib. 2.
a battle, that he was overthrown, and constrained to take his flight to
Egypt again, and was so followed at the hard heels, that if bogs and marish
ground had not stayed the Scithians, they would have given him battle in Egypt,
as they did coming home through Asia, spoiling, wasting, and destroying it the
third time. Iustine writes this history at large.

That time the Scithians absented themselves from their country in Asia so
long, until their wives sent unto them, threatening them, that unless they
would out of hand return home, they would take their next neighbors for
their husbands, and further they should not come when they would: for after
they did marry their servants that were The women of Scithia married their
servants.
left, as shepherds and swineheards at home, which resisted their own
masters, to have their wives, their houses and their own countries. The like
history is written of the Amazones, women of Scythia, who govern and rule
their country without men with such fame, as Hercules, Cyrus, and Alexander
the great can witness of them.

The custom of these Amazones, lest their stock should perish, was once a
year to accompany with people of their next Justinius lib. 2.
confines for multiplication sake. And thereby being with child, if it should
be a male child, they presently kill him or send him to his father: if it should
be female, she was exercised from her cradle in all martial exploits, both on
horseback and on foot, and she had the right dug or breast cut off, whereby
they might exercise their bows. Two Queens reigned of the Amazones of passing
great reports, named Marpesia and Lampedo, of whom both Asia and Europe have
tasted of their darts: these two Queens, after they had won diverse towns in
Asia, and also had builded other towns in Asia, they died vnco^quered in their
country. After them succeeded Otrera the daughter of Marpesia, who reigned
together with her sister Antiopa. Otrera the third Queen of Scythia.
Otrera or Oreithia having an army out of Scythia, leaving her sister Antiopa
to defend Scythia, the fame and renown of these Antiop the Queens sister.
two Ladies kindled Hercules and his fellow Theseus with diverse young gallants of
Greece to sail to Hircania, a part of Scythia, who upon the sudden, unlooked
for of Antiopa, with some slaughter of the Amazones, Hercules took Menalippe,
and Theseus took Hippolite, both the Queens sisters. Otrera hearing of these
news, returned home with all have, asked aid of Sagillus king of Scythia, to
revenge the wrong done by Hercules and Theseus against both her sisters, saying
also that the Amazones were Scythians as well as he, and therefore not to deny
aid, promising the king that women should be as well in the foreward of the
battle as men: but Hercules restored Menalippe to the Queen her sister again,
and Theseus married the other, Justinius lib. 2.
by whom he got Hippolitus.

After Otrera succeeded Penthesileia, whose valiant acts and deeds in the
Troyans wars against the Greeks, who knew Penthesileia the 4. Queen of
Scythia.
them not? After Penthesileia they succeeded orderly until the time of
Alexander the great, at what time Thalestris reigned Thalestris.
Queen of the Amazones.

I will leave this part of Scythia thus much commended by the Amazones, and
will briefly speak of other nations in Scythia, as the Massegits, a people of
wonderful courage, as by their wars against Cyrus might appear: for after
that Cyrus had brought the Medes, Chaldeans, Assyrians, Lydians, and all Asia
under the Empire of Persia, hearing of the great harm and the invasions that
the Scythians had often done in Asia and Europe, he levied a huge army, and
passed toward Scythia, at what time Tomiris reigned Queen over the
Massegites: who hearing of Cyrus coming, though he was then the only monarch
and conqueror that brought all the East kings under Persia, yet she permitted
him with all his army to pass the river of Oraxis, and to come and to make
choice to set his camp as pleased him best. Cyrus at that time used a
stratagem, Cyrus.
left his tents full of all delicate and dainty banquets, with all manner of
wine, and fained to take his flight for fear of the enemies.

The Queen hearing of Cyrus flight, commanded her son Spargapises Tomyris
son.
named Spargapises out of hand to follow Cyrus with an army of Massegetes. The
young Scythian being not acquainted with such galant banquets in Scythia, began
to assail Cyrus wine, but he and all his army were overthrown without any
sword drawn, or a blow given.

When Cyrus had returned, and found the Scythians some drinking, some sleeping,
some dancing, and all drunken, he slew them with the sword, and thought
thereby that God favored much his cause to have such a victory over the
Scythians Strabo lib. 11.
without blood of the Persians, and therefore he erected a temple to the
goddess of that country, and appointed that day a solemn feast called
Sacaea, which Cyrus consecrated in Sacaea.
remembrance of his happy victory.

When Queen Tomyris heard that her son Spargapises was slain by Cyrus, and
al his army, she leauied a great number Herodot. lib. 1,
of the Massegetes together, and went in person her self to the battle, and
that to the only battle that ever was in Scythia, the greatest and the
terriblest: for two hundredth thousand Justinius lib. 1.
Persians were slain, and Cyrus himself killed in that battle. Of Cyrus
burial, his grave and his epitaph, and also the cruelty of Thomiris to Cyrus
being dead, I will write in the history of Persia. After this great victory
of Tomyris, the Scithians had L^thinus king of Scithia.
peace until Lanthinus time king of Scithia.

After Cyrus time, Darius Histaspis came to Scithia, who being Darius Hist^spis
overthrown.
denied of king Lanthinus daughter in marriage, he returned his love to hatred:
he waged battle against Lathinus, and brought to Scithia seven hundred thousand
Persians, of whom he left behind him slain in Scithia, fourscore and ten
thousand, and Darius himself constrained to take his flight, with no less
fear then danger into Persia again.

In like sort the Scithians used Zopirona a general of Alexanders Zopirona
overthrown.
the great, in a battle given by the Macedonians to the Scithians, with such
slaughter, that the whole army of Zopirona was overthrown, and himself
hardly by flight escaped, as Vexores king of Egypt, and Darius king of Persia
had done before: of such invincible courage the Scithians were, being from
their birth acquainted and brought up in hardines, that life and death were
esteemed alike: they made no account of victory for wealth and treasure, but
for honor. Alexander the great, who had better success in Scithia then any of
his predecessors, liked the people so well for their hardy and valiant
enterprises, that he builded a city and named it Alexandria, which was the
first city that he builded in Scithia, which name was after raced by the
Barbarians, and repaired again by Antiochus the son of Seleucus, who
according to his progenitors name, called it Seleucia. Into this city (says
Solinus) Orodes king of Parthia conveyed the Romans that were taken at the
slaughter of Crassus. Strabo writes, that Alexander the great builded 8. great
Eight towns builded by Alexander.
towns amongst the Bactrians, and amongst the Sogdians, two large countries of
Scithia: also he says, that Alexander destroyed certain cities in Bactria, a
city called Cariata, where Callisthenes the Philosopher was imprisoned by
Alexander: in Sogdiana he destroyed a city which Cyrus builded after his own
name called Cira, hard by the river Iaxartes.

I read of none saving of Alexader, which ventured so much in Scithia, as the
Scithians have done in other countries: you shall read that the Scithians have
thrice invaded Asia, have driven the Cimerians out of Europe, have given to the
Medes diverse overthrows, specially in a great battle at Mount Caucasus,
Diverse countries overthrown by the Scithians.
and after came into Media their own country, wasted it, spoiled it, and did
possess it, as lords and rulers thereof, until by a stratagem of the Medes,
the Scithians were slain being drunken. After the Medes, the Egyptians were
overthrown with their king Vexores, and put to flight. After the Egyptians,
Phrahartes king of Parthia with all his Parthian army, and almost all the
country of Parthia, were at that time wellnigh conquered by the Scithians.

The Persians were twice by the Scithians overcome, under The praise of Scithia.
Darius Histaspis, who was discomfited with all his army, and himself glad to
take his heels: and under Cyrus the great king, who also after two or three
battles, was slain amongst the Scithians. It was thought a thing most renowned
to make an army, and to enter Scithia. Liber Pater was the first that
travailed into Scithia, as far as Panda a city of the Sogdians, where the
first altar was erected in testimony of so famous an enterprise. The second
altar was made even in that Trophes set up in Scithia.
place by Hercules. The third by Semiramis Queen of Assyria. The fourth and
last altar was erected by Cyrus, and therefore it was compted one of the
greatest commendations of Alexander the great to make his voyage so far,
whereby he had the name of the fifth that also erected his monument: so
invincible were the nations of the Scithians, that they would take no injury
at home, neither offer justice abroad.

The antiquity of the Scithians is such, that there is no great certainty of
their time, nor no sound histories have declared any thing formally, neither
of their kings, nor of themselves, and therefore I will briefly end their
history in this place, only setting down the names of such kings as I found
scattered in diverse histories of other kingdoms.

1 Scytha the first king of Scythia, of whose birth and beginning the Scythians
do much brag. Read Diodorus. Diodorus lib. 2. cap. 11.
2 Napis. 3 Pluto. 4 Sagillus. 5 Targitaus. 6 Plinos. 7 Scolopithus. 8
Penaxagora filius Sagilli. 9 Tanais. 10 Indathirsus. 11 Saulius. This king
killed the Philosopher Anacharsis, for that he found him in Grecian robes
executing the rites and ceremonies of the Greeks, in a sacrifice to
Berecynthia, against the customs and laws of Scythia. 12 Spargapithus. 13
Aripethes. 14 Sciles. This king was in like manner driven out of his kingdom for
imitating the Grecians in their sacrifice to Bacchus: for the Scythians did
mock and floute the Greeks to alter themselves like faunes or Satires, some
like men, some like women, and some like beasts with darts in their hands, and
Yuie crowns on their heads, after the manner of the Grecians, which the
Scythians could not abide. 15 Octomasades. 16 Lanthinus, which reigned in
Scythia when Darius king of Persia came with an army of seven hundredth
thousand, and was overthrown of the Amazones, Sogdians, Hircanians, and of
diverse other nations, which dwell in Scythia: which to write itwere but labor
in vain. But a few of the Amazones Queens I will set down, as Pe^thisileia
which came to the Troyan wars against the Grecians. Menalippe that gave
battle to Hercules. Hippolite that gave battle to Theseus. Tomiris that gave
battle to Cyrus and overthrew him. Antiopia: and Marpesia. Otrera and other
warlik Queens. But of Tamberlanes greatness of his army, and victories against
the Turk, how he toooke him, carried him in a cage with him to all his wars,
and how he used to tread upon his neck as a block to mount on horseback,
lute histories every where are written.

OF THE ORIGINAL OF the Parthians, and of the beginning of their kingdom, and
how long it continued: of their kings, government, and last destruction by the
Romans, in the time of Augustus Caesar.
THe Parthians were (sometime) people of Scythia, and driven from thence as
banished men, weried and overthrown: and after, by long wars they came to
the deserts of Hircania, and possessed the co^fines of those nations called
Daces, and Maiani: for in the Scythian tongue, the Parthians does signify
banished men, so that the Parthians were first obscure Pa^thia.
and base people, banished out of their country of Scythia in the time that
the Asyrians and the Medes flourished, and long after that the Persians had
gotten the monarchy from the Medes. The Parthians were very rude, without
lords or laws to rule them, until the empire of Macedonia had gotten the
masterie over the Persians: for at what time Alexander the great died, no
Maccdonian would vouch safe to be king in Parthia, the successors of Alexander
made no account of the Parthians, Parthians not esteemed.
but as rude people, and mercenarie soldiers, neither esteeming them nor their
country: so simple a beginning the Parthians had, until they scattered
themselves to serve as mercenarie soldiers: then began the Parthians to have
some fame by their service, which were (as I said before) scant known.

It is written by Solinus, that Parthia grew into so large an Solinus cap. 68.
Empire, that it contained 18. kingdoms: these kingdoms are divided into two
parts, eleven of the eighteen called the upper kingdoms, beginning from the
borders of Armenia, passing along the Caspian sea coast to Scithia: the other
seven kingdoms have on the West the Medes, on the South Carmania, and on the
North Hircania the language of the Parthians Justinius lib. 41.
is mingled partly with the Medes, and partly with the Scithians: their apparel
after the custom of Scithia, their soldiers in fight were their servants, of
whom the Parthians had as great care, as of their children, teaching them in
their youth to ride, to shoot, and to do all other martial exploits: for of
fifty thousand soldiers which they had against M. Antonius, were none free
men but 450. all the rest were servants. The Parthians began to erect a
kingdom, at what time reigned in Egypt Euergetes the third king, and in
Macedonia reigned king Demetrius, likewise in Asia and Syria reigned Seleucus
Gabinius the forth king. About this time the Carthagineans had great wars
with the Numidians, which Polibeus lib. 2.
endured four years: of these wars Polibeus writes. In the time of the
first king of Parthia which was named Arsaces, Eumenes Arsaces the first king
of P^rthia.
king of Bithynia invaded Asia.

This king Arsaces deserved no less fame by his great prowess and valiant
deeds, by his fortun at wars and good success amongst the Parthians, then
Cyrus did amongst the Persians, or Alexander the great amongst the Macedonians.
The Parthians so loved this Arsaces alive, and so honored him dead, that all
the kings of Parthia after him were called Arsaces, with no less dignity then
the Caesar's of Rome, or Pharao^s of Egypt, and yet a mean man in the
beginning, who might more brag of virtue, and knowledge, then of dignity or
parentage: for before these Parthians, followed Eumenes in the wars of Asia,
after Eumenes they followed Antigonus, after Antigonus they followed Seleucus
Nicanor, after him Antiochus. At what time the Parthians reuoulted and made a
choice of this king named Arsaces, who brought such Parthia by Arsices renowned.
renown to the Parthians, such credit to the country, as enlarged their
confines, and augmented their Empire.

This time one Theodotus being but then President over 1000. Towns and Cities
in Bactriana, proclaimed himself king of the Bactrians: with this king
Theodotus, Arsaces entered Iustine lib. 41.
in society, and with his son after him: now when Arsaces had settled
himself quietly in Parthia, he gave them laws to live by, he did set and
frame all things in order, he builded Towns and Cities, and one chief
Metropolitan City, and named it Daram.

This king had a son named Mithridates, who after his Mithridates 2. king of
Parthia.
father reigned in Parthia with no less fame then his father, he leauied an
army of a hundred thousand footmen, and twenty thousand horsemen, fought
with Antiochus the son of Seleucus king of Syria, with such invincible
courage, that Antiochus thought it his best way to have peace with him.

When this king died, succeeded him Pampatius the third Pampatius 3. king of
Parthia. Pharnaces 4. king of Parthia.
king in Parthia, who when he had reigned twelve years, left behind him two
sons, the one named Pharnaces, the other Mithridates: the elder brother after
the Parthian manner enjoyed his fathers seat, and his father surnamed Arsaces
as the other kings were: This king overthrew a very stout Nation called Mardi,
and did as his predecessors had done, add some people, or wanne some country
to Parthia, who having many children when he died, and having more care of his
country then of his children, appointed his brother Mithridates 5. king of
Parthia.
Mithridates to be king of Parthia, a man of great courage and singular virtues.

The same very time when Mithridates entered into Parthia as king, did
Encratides likewise enter to the kingdom of the Bactrians, but these two kings
prospered not alike: for Encratides after diverse and sundry battles given to
him by the Sogdians, Dranganites, and Indians, wherein he gave diverse repulses
Iustine lib. 4.
unto his enemies, but at length so wearied with continual wars, he was
overthrown and vanquished. In Parthia with better success fought Mithridates
with the Medes, whom after many doubtful battles, Mithridates subdued the
Medes, and brought them subject under the Parthians, and appointed in Medea
Bachasus to be lieutenant, and went himself into Hircania, and then waged
wars with the king of Elymees, which he vanquished and all his country, and
joined them to the Parthians: so that Parthia was so strengthened by the Medes,
the Elimees, and other nations, that they governed from mount Caueasus, to the
river Euphrates: so that poor Parthia before a base people, and a rude
country, are now become lords over the stout Medes, so by Gods appointment
kingdoms and Empires do both flow and ebb: during this time Masinissa was
by sundry battles driven out of his kingdom Masinissa.
by Syphax king of Numidia.

At that time reigned in Syria, Seleucus Philopator their seventh king, and in
Egypt reigned Ptolomei Philometor the sixth king, Cornelius Scipio about this
time triumphed over Asia. After this Mithridates death succeeded his son
Phrahartes: Phrahartes 6. king of Parthia.
who had not the fortune which his father had, for Phrahartes was sore vexed by
the Scythians, who at the first came to aid the king of Parthia against
Antiochus king of Syria* the soldiers fell to mutiny for want of pay, and
therefore wasted and spoiled the Confines of Parthia, burned towns, and robbed
I^stine lib. 42.
countries, that Phrahartes was constrained to leauy an army, and to make
wars upon the Scythians, whose luck had been better if he had tarried in
Parthia, where he left behind him Himerus, too young a man to govern a
kingdom, who lost at home in Parthia, as much as Phrahartes lost in Scythia.

After Phrahartes was overthrown by the Scythians, Artabanus Artabanus 7. king
of Parthia.
succeeded, who likewise shortly was slain in the wars at Colchata, after
whom succeeded his son Mithridates the second of that name, who for his noble
deeds and Mithridates 8. king of Pathia.
valiant acts, was named Mithridates the great, and yet not so great as
unfortunate: for when he had revenged the death of his father upon the
Scythians, plagued the Armenians, and had gotten diverse Nations subject unto
Parthia, yet he was banished from Parthia, and his kingdom given to Horodes
his brother. Horodes having the kingdom of Parthia in his hand, hearing that
his brother Mithridates had fled into Babylon to avoid further fear, he
besieged Babylon, until by famine they were compelled to yield the City:
Mithridates hoping for pardon, yielded himself to his brother: H^rodes 9. king
of Parthia.
but Horodes* supposing that he would prove rather an enemy then a brother,
commanded him to be slain before his face.

By this time the Parthians grew so great, and waxed so strong, that their
fame extended into Rome, a City that could never abide no kingdom nor no
country to flourish Crassus sent to Parthia.
beside themselves: and therefore the Romans sent Marcus Crassus, one of the
greatest men of Rome to Parthia, who had such conceiptes in his head, that the
victory of Lucullus against Tigranes king of Armenia, and all that Pompei did
against Mithridates king of Pontus, were but trifles to that which he
intended: for he thought to conquer the Bactrians, the Indians, and the great
Ocean sea.

For in his decree and commission to him given by the Senate, there was no
mention made of the Parthians, which the Parthians knew, and therefore sent
Ambassadors unto Crassus, opening unto him that he offered wars unto the
Parthians, against his decree by the Senate: but Crassus more bold then wise
said, that Horodes king of Parthia should answer The answer of a Parthian
unto Crassus.
him in Seleucia. One of the Parthian Ambassadors fell a laughing, showing to
Crassus the palm of his hand, saying, Hairs shall sooner grow in the palm
of my hand, before you come to Seleucia: and so with defiance of Crassus; the
Ambassadors returned to their king, telling him that he was to prepare for
wars.

By this time Artabazes king of Armenia came to the camp of Crassus with six
thousand horsemen, promising Crassus ten thousand more horsemen, and thirty
thousand footmen, but that promise was not kept, for he was assaulted by the
Parthians in his country: beside, Crassus had in his army fifty thousand.
Horodes king of Parthia made ready for Crassus, Surena captain general of the
Parthians.
and appointed one named Surena his lieutenant, the second man in all Parthia
next to the king, in experience, value, reputation, and riches: for Plutarch
says, that when Surena removed with his own household only, he had a
thousand Camels to carry his sumpters, and two hundred Coches of Curtizans, and
a thousand men of arms armed from top to toe, beside another thousand more
lightly armed: his whole train and Court made above ten thousand horse.

Crassus thought long to give battle unto the Parthians, but the miserable
sight of the overthrown Romans which were so martyred with such torments,
showing unto their captains their hands fast nailed to their targettes with
arrows, and their feet likewise shot through and nailed to the ground, the
forked arrows fast in their bodies, and so wounded with spears and pikes,
that the most part of the Roman gentlemen slew themselves, for so did
Censorinus, and Publius Crassus himself commanded one of his gentlemen to
kill him, whose head was cut off after by the enemy, Crassus slain, and his
head sent to the king of Parthia.
and brought to his father for a present, whose sight killed the Romans hearts.

Yet the old Crassus showed greater courage at that time then ever he had
done before: he made an oration to his soldiers, when his heart was full of
sorrow, brought them examples how Lucullus overcame not Tigranes, neither
Scipio, Antiochus the great without blood. Thus he comforted his people, and
persuaded them to turn their sorrows into fury, and to show themselves
worthy Romans for the revenge of his sons death: but the inconstancy of
Crassus fortune was no better then his son, after many vnlucki^ battles to
be slain, and his head to be cut off as his sons was, and twenty thousand
Romans slain: beside Surena did send Crassus unto Herodes the king his master
into Armenia. After Crassus and his son were thus shamefully Envy at Rome.
slain in Parthia, the Parthians so triumphed of this in feasts and plays,
making rimes and iestes (as Plutarch says) of both Crassus heads.

About this envy began a quarrel in Rome, first between Plutarch in the
life of Crassus.
Lucullus, and Pompei, and after between Pompei and Caesar: now the Romans
having sustained such foil in Parthia, and the Parthians such victory over
the Romans, that Horodes king of Parthia, and his son Pacorus conceived
great pride therein, but pride will have a fall, and so it fell to the
Parthians.

After diverse great victories of many Countries, Ventidius Ventidius victory
ouerthe Parthians.
a Roman lieutenant of Marcus Antonius, who fully revenged the death of
Crassus, with such a slaughter of the Parthians, that in the first battle that
he had with Horodes, he slew Pharnabates, and Labienus, which two increased
much the Parthians fame, while Labienus was in Syria, two of the chief
captains he had: in the second battle he far excelled the first, and slew
many more of the Parthians: in this battle Pacorus Pacorus slain.
the kings own son was slain.

This made the victory of Ventidius more notable: this exploit was a full
requital of Crassus death, so that Ventidius a mean man borne, was the only
man that ever triumphed Ventidius victory over the Parthians.
over the Parthians unto the very last day of them: when news of these
victories came to Horodes, that his son Pacorus was slain with all his
army, of whom he heard before so well of in vanquishing and overthrowing
diverse armies both in Asia and Syria, he suddenly fell to such a fury, that
he became beside himself, that for many days he was dumb Horodes dumb.
without speech: and when he spoke any word, he spoke nothing but Pacorus,
he thought that he saw him, that he heard him, and that he spoke with him.

But in time after he had recovered his former state, he imagined of thirty
sons he had, who should be king after him: at length he bequeathed his
kingdom unto his son Phrahartes: this was the last king of Parthia. About
this time Phrahartes the 10. king of Parthia.
much trouble was in Rome between Caesar and Pompei the great, the civil
wars whereof had almost overthrown the state of the Romans, the which I
will write of in the Roman history: now when Phrahartes had slain his
father Horodes, and had possessed the kingdom of Parthia, he doubting lest
the like murder might happen to him, he made sure work.

After he had slain the king his father, he also slew his thirty brethren:
this tyranny in the beginning of his government, Many reuoulted from
Phrahartes.
made diverse gentlemen of Parthia to forsake him, and to flee unto Antonius, to
who^ (as Plutarch says) Antonius gave diverse cities, as Larissa, Arethusa, and
others. After this he took a general muster of all his army, and of his
confederates that were come by commandment to aid him from Armenia, and
other places, so that Antonius had threescore thousand footmen, and ten
thousand horsemen, beside The great army of Antonius.
thirty thousand of other Nations. This puissant army made all Asia to
tremble, and yet no worthy exploite done, but besieging the City of Phrata in
Media: the love he bare to Cleopatra was thought to be the cause of his ill
luck. Cleopatra.


In the mean time Phrahartes king of Parthia being advertised where Antonius
left his engines of battle, he sent a number of horsemen to fight with
Tatianus, who was in that conflict slain with ten thousand more at that
time: this troubled all Antonius army: notwithstanding Antonius hasted to
battle with them, at what time he put the Parthians to flight, without any
great slaughter of the Parthians.

Antonius lingering still, and doing no great act in Parthia, determined to
give over such crafty people: and though Antonius had overcome the Parthians
in eighteen several battles, yet they gave him diverse repulses and such
Antonius depa^ture from Parthia.
overthrows, as Antonius was most willing to let them alone and to depart from
them, whom they followed in his return at the hard heels to his great loss
and shame.

This made Phrahartes king of Parthia so proud, that Antonius the great Roman
took his flight from Parthia, that he used such murder and tyranny in his
Country, that his own subjects threw him out of his country and kingdom,
and placed in his seat Tiridates to be king, until Phrahartes after he had
been thus banished was aided by the king of Scythia to be restored unto his
kingdom again.

Then Tiridates hearing that the Scythians came with a great Tiridates.
army to restore Phrahartes, he fled into Spain unto Octauius Caesar:
thither likewise did Phrahartes send Ambassadors: Caesar's clemency andiustice
when Caesar had heard both the parties, the complaints of the banished king
Phrahartes, and the request of Tiridates saying, that Parthia was fit to be
subject to the Roman Empire, affirming also that if it should please Caesar to
substitute him lieutenant under the Romans in Parthia, that he would with all
Parthia hold with Rome.

Notwithstanding Caesar used in this great clemency both wisdom and justice,
he commanded that Phrahartes son should be king in Parthia, and that
Tiridates (if it pleased him) should continue in Rome upon Caesar's charges,
until his return from Spain, at which time Caesar having occasion after he
came home to Rome from Spain, to go to Syria, and to dispose of those
kingdoms which his predecessors had conquered in the East countries, and to
set all things in order, he charged then that Phrahartes should make no wars
Diodo. lib. 42.
against the Parthians, promising that he and his posterity should govern
Parthia under the Romans, willing and commanding him and the king his son to
send those ensigns to Rome, which Marcus Crassus lost at Parthia, and
commanded them to be true friends to the Romans. The fortune of this Caesar
was such, that he could then command with a word, more then Antonius* who
sought it with blows, or Crassus that sought it with his death. This Caesar
afterward called Augustus, brought parthia to be a province unto the Romans,
and ended without wars, which other could not do with wars.

Thus the kingdom of Parthia which began in the hundred thirty three
Olympiad, and ended in the beginning of the Monarchy of Augustus Caesar, in
the hundred eighty eight Olympiad, after he had conquered his friend Marcus
Antonius: There reigned in Parthia eleven kings, whose names are here under
written.

1 Arsaces the first king, by whom the kings of Parthia were all called
Arsaces. 2 Mithridates the second king of Parthia. 3 Pampatius the third king
of Parthia. 4 Pharnaces the fourth king of Parthia. 5 Mithridates the fifth king
of Parthia. 6 Phrahartes the sixth king of Parthia. 7 Artabanus the seventh king
of Parthia. 8 Mithridates the great, the eight king of Parthia, and son to
Artabanus. 9 Horodes the ninth king of Parthia. 10 Phrahartes the tenth king of
Parthia. 11 The eleventh and last king of Parthia, son to Phrahartes, and
supposed to be called Phrahartes, after his fathers name.
OF THE ANTIQITIE OF Media: of the original of their Kings, and of their
common wealth, government, and continuance.
THough the Assyrians, the Chaldeans, and the Egyptians were conquered by the
Persians: yet I will touch the history of Media, before I handle Persia, for
that the Medes likewise were made subject unto the Persia^s: for all these
kingdoms came at length to Cyrus hand. For as the kingdom of Media began atone
time with the new kingdom of Assyria, after Sardanapalus time: so they ended
about one time, and both these kingdoms by Cyrus taken unto Persia: and even
so of Lydia the next history to this, was also by the Persians subdued: of the
which also I mean briefly to speak, before I handle Persia: for so the
course of time, and the order of the histories do require: but now of the
Medes.

For Strabo in the description of the kingdom of Media Strabo. lib. 11.
says, that Parthia is bordered upon the East side of Media, and on the South
it is inhabited with people called Cadusij: and (as Strabo writes) it has
other nations dwelling about the Sea of Hircania: the river Halis (as Herodote
does write) is the Confines of both Media and Lydia. And he says further,
that the Medes were called Arij before, and then long after that Medea came
from Cholchos unto Athens, and from Athens unto this people then called Arij,
and changed the name of the country after her own name Media, who^ the
Greeks called after that Medi, by the name of Medea: but otherwise confirmed
by Josephus, and by Zonaras in his first book, who Josephus lib. 1. cap. 6.
say that Medi had their original from Madai, the son of Iaphet, and of him
(as Melancthon says) named Madei first, and after of the Greeks called Medi.

There were many Towns in Media first builded by the Macedonians, inhabited by
the Grccians, as Laodicea, Apannia, Rhaga, which Nicanor builded. The Medes in
times past flourished The Medes first by Cyrus vanquished.
(a kingdom that governed many Countries, and had under their Empire the most
part of Asia, until the Persians vanquished the Assyrians by king Cyrus, which
Cyrus afterward subdued the Medes, and brought both Assyria and Media unto the
Empire of Persia.

The chief Palace of the kings of Media is called Eobatana, where the kings
of Media kept their Court every winter. Herodote, which wrote his history in
the time of Xerxes says, that after the Medes had conquered the Assyrians, the
Medes had no kings of long time after, but every City by popular state was
then governed, until Deiocis time, Deiocis the (...). king of the Medes.
who being wise, and withal very ambitious, plausible in his speech, and
gentle in his dealings, wanne the peoples hearts to affect him much: who by
secret means aspiring to the kingdom, having many great friends by council
to further him, and with power to aid him, until by common consent of the
whole Estate he was chosen King, in the forty five year after the building
of Rome, and in the seventh year of Numa Pompilius reign, the second king of
Rome, in the eighteen Olympiad. Arbase* subdued the Assyrians, and made them
subject to the Medes.


For after that Arbaces then chief Governor of the Medes had joined in
friendship with Bellochus lieutenant of Babylon, and both conspired (as you
heard before in the history of the Assyrians) against Sardanapalus, whom after
they had with three or four battles conquered, the Assyrians with their Empire
was translated unto the Medes by Arbaces: Arbaces
which Medes yet had no king created, but were ruled and governed by Arbaces,
as Babylon was by Bellochus. Bellochus.


Now after that Arbaces had governed the Medes twenty eight years, at what
time Procas Siluius reigned king over the Latins, and at Athens Thespeius
lived their tenth Judge after their kings: It is written that one Phidon of
Argiue, found about this time the use of measures and weights.

This Arbaces began to reign over the Medes forty two years before the
Olympiads, at the which time the kingdom of Macedonia began: so that the Medes
and Macedonians began forty two years before the Lydians, and the Lydians
twenty four years before the Romans. Ctesias a great antiquarie of the
Persians, who wrote in Artaxerxes time presently after Herodot, says, that
after Arbaces time, a son of his succeeded him named Madanes, who reigned 50.
years: and then followed Sosarmus, which reigned 30. years: after him
succeeded Sosarmus 3. king of the Medes.
Aristeus, who held long wars with the Cadusians, by whom he was at length
slain: but before he died, he commanded by Aristeus 4. king.
will that the Medes should never be in league with the Cadusians, but with
sword and fire to persecute them, until they were brought subject unto the
Medes.

After the death of this Aristeus, reigned in Media Artines, 22. years: after
him Artelanus governed the Medes, forty years, in whose time the Parthians
were subdued and The Parthians were vanquished by the Medes.
brought under the Empire of the Medes, after they had yielded them selves and
the Country unto the king of Saca, which king, both he and his Country after
two years great wars had between them and the Medes, were vanquished both
they and the Parthians, when the Medes had brought the king of Parthia and the
king of Saca under the yoke of Media, at what time Artabanus reigned king over
the Medes, after whom succeeded Astiages, which with some writers is named
Astiages the last king of Media.
Apanda. This was the last king of Media, which was conquered both he and his
country by Cyrus king of Persia, whose history is at large set forth in the
Empire of Persia: Diodorus with others which write of these kings, as Herodot
and Ctesias. Great controversy there is between writers about the kings of
Media, of their succession, of their reign, and of their governments: though
Strabo and Pomponius Mela do fully describe the situation of Media, yet the
best Chronographers vary much of their government. Justinius affirms, that
the Justinius lib. 1.
Medes reigned 350. years: others say 304. making their computations from
Sardanapalus time, whom the Medes conquered, until the time of Cyrus, by whom
the Medes were vanquished: Diodor. lib. 2. cap. 7.
so long the Empire stood.

Again they vary much in the names of their kings: for as I named from Arbases
the first king, until Astiages the last king Arbases the first governor of
Media. Controversy of the government of the Medes. Sosaramus 2. king of Media.
and the ninth king of the Medes, so some again after this sort do set down
the lines of the kings of Media. After Arbases reigned Sosarmus the second king
of Media: he reigned thirty years, at what time reigned in Egypt a king of
singular wisdom, very courteous and gentle, much commended of Herodot for
many rare virtues, named of Functius, Osorus, and of Eusebius Nicerinus.

About this time was Achas king of Judah borne, and Coenus the second king of
Macedonia began with Sosarmus the second king of Media to reign. Mark the
order of time: for both the Macedonians and the Medes at one time began their
kingdoms, and even then the Lacedaemonians ended their kingdoms: for so God
works by order of nature and time. The Peloponesians and the Athenians were
so plagued one of another Orosius lib. 1. cap. 24.
by continual civil wars, the slaughter so great on both sides, and the
wars so long, as men conquered on neither parties yielded at last unto
necessity, and were forced to forsake the fields, and to withdraw themseles
from destroying of both their countries: for the wars that was between the
Athenians Great wars between the Pelopon, and the Athenians.
and the Lacedaemonians from time to time was the overthrow of all Greece: the
cause arysing from so little a quarrel, as hereafter shall be mentioned in the
history of Greece.

While these wars endured in Greece, Romulus and Rhemus were borne, and the
third king of Media began to govern Romulus borne
the Medes: his name was Medidus, in the first Olympiad, at which time the king
of Tire which was named Elulaeus (as King of Tire,
Menander testifies a writer of their own Chronicles) was besieged by
Salmanassar king of Assyria, who after he he had spoiled Phoenicia, and
Samaria, he turned his force against Tire. After great slaughter he took
Sidon, Arce, and Paletire, with many other Cities from the king of Tire, and
brought the spoil thereof unto Niniue: And yet says Menander, for all
Menander de bello Salmanasser.
his victory, he was the second time discomfited, his Nauies so scattered,
that five hundred of his best soldiers were taken by the Cananites, and by the
king of Tire: whereat Salmanassar waxed full of wrath, and commanded his
soldiers to stop all conduites, and all passages of waters, that for five
years they were forced to dig out water, and to make wells and springes to
sustain themselves withal: and this history is written in the Chronicles of
Tire.

About this time lived that good and learned Poet Archimus, that wrote of the
wars of Troy. Coelius king of the Thuscans aided Romulus the first king of
Rome with men and money against the people called Cennienses, and the
Antenates: Dyonisius Hal. lib. 1.
of this kings name mount Coelius, one of the seven hills of Rome was called.
Plutarch says, that Numa Pompilius, the second king of Rome was borne about
this time: and in the twenty eight year of the third king of the Medes, was
that wicked king Sancherib, with his horrible blasphemies, with a Sancherib
over thrown.
hundred four score and five thousand of his soldiers slain by the Angel of
the Lord.

After this Medidus the third king of Media had reigned forty years,
succeeded him Cardiceas the fourth king, who Cardiceas 4.
reigned thirteen years. During this kings government, King of Media.
the Empire of Assyria was brought by Merodach the son of Baladan unto
Babylon, where Merodach reigned forty years Merodach 4. king.
the first king of Babylon. Now in Judea governed a wicked king, a great
idolater, a murderer of the Prophets, and a most contemptuous despiser of
God. This Manasses filled all Manasses a tyrant.
Jerusalem with blood, he martyred Esai the Prophet, commanding him to be
cut in two pieces with a saw: for the which tyranny God gave him over to
the hands of the Babylonians.

In Ethiop reigned about this time a king named Tarachus, of whom Josephus
makes mention, that he came Lib. 10. ap. 1.
to aid Spethon king of Egypt, against Senaherib, in the sixteenth Olympiad.
About this time Nicomedia was builded: Dionis. lib. 2.
Gela a Town of Sicilia, and Phaselis a Town in Pamphilia were likewise
builded. All this while the Medes had no king crowned nor allowed, but as a
supreme Governor of all Media, but were (as you heard) from Arbaces time
until Sosarmus.
this time, governed by a Magistrate or chief Government, even until Deiocis,
which was the chief governor Deiocis the 1. king of the Medes.
and the first king: for Arbaces, Sosarmus, Medidus, Cardiceas, these four
were but governors, though for order sake they were named kings.

CHAP. II.
Of the first King of Media: of their government, laws, and continuance from
Deiocis, until Astyages the last King of the Medes.

But Deiocis now after he had governed wisely and discreetely the Medes, he
through his own policy and his friends council became the first King by
consent and by election. When he was sure of the kingdom, and had settled
himself as a King, he straight commanded Towns and Cities to be builded,
and erected many strong Fortes, made good laws, and governed the Medes with
equity and justice for the space of fifty three years, as both Herodot and
Diodorus Siculus affirm. Diodorus Siculus lib. 3.


This Deiocis likewise appointed a certain guard for his person, for change of
state is dangerous: for now Deiocis from a Magistrate was made a king, and
therefore with greater care and fear he foresawe things belonging to his
person: he had his garrison and his guard to attend his person, and provided
that the Medes, who both loved him and honored him so much, should be in all
service at his beck: he commanded then to build one great Town, a chief
Strab. lib. 11.
City, and to be the only seat of the king, as in all kingdoms the Palace
of the king is the chiefest.

Now the Medes having this commandment, began with one consent to build
one great Town above the rest fortified with walls, and strengthened with
garrisons. This Russ^ de Medor. origin.
city was great and large, and was called Ecbatana, where this king Deiocis
lived, using such justice and severity, as hereby no man might have access
unto him but by means: he grew so severe, that no man might have sight of
him, no man might laugh, cough, or spit before him. This was the only Deioces
praised
king that brideled the Medes, and as much commended for his severe punishment
of injuries, as for his sound judgment of justice and equity praised.

There were many nations subject unto the Medes, as Buse, Paretaceni,
Arezantij, Budi, and others. In his time reigned in Macedonia, Perdiccas: in
Judea Ezechias and his son Manasses: in Rome reigned Romulus in the later
end of his reign, and in Lydia Candaules the fourth king of Lydia.

This time reigned in Egypt 12. governors of equal authority: Diodo. lib. 1.
these ruled Egypt as supreme magistrates 15. years, until Psammeticus: one
of these 12. Judges had gotten the kingdom unto his own hands, who reigned
54. years king in Egypt. You shall read in Herodot, and in Diodorus Siculus,
the Herodot. lib. 2.
whole history, even from this king Psammeticus, until the time of Cambyses.

As Kingdoms and Countries flourished and became mighty and strong in arms,
so they invented military discipline to defend themselves and their
Countries: every Kingdom had their proper and several order of fighting, with
variety and change of their marching into battle, with sundry and diverse
kinds of Trumpets and ensigns. The Egyptians had Crocodiles and cattes in
their ensigns: for those The Egyptians.
which they honored as gods in the City, they used them in their wars in
their ensigns, and a Trumpet made of a horn. The Indians had in their
ensigns the picture of Hercules The Indians.
carried before them into battle, with many little Belles and Timbrels for
their Trumpets. The Persians preferred in their ensigns the image of the
sun, and burning lamps, which should be carried in the midst of the army.
The old The Persian.
Athenians caused an owl to be set in their ensigns: and the Thebans the
image of Sphinx with shaulmes and flates for trumpets. The Macedonians had a
wolf carried in their ensigns. The Macedonians.
The ancient Romans before they grew to their greatness, used a handful of hay
tied to the end of their spears, which should be carried before them as
ensigns, and thereby called manipulares miliets: they had not yet used in
their ensigns the picture of a horse, which they used after the hay, or of a
The Romans.
bore or of Minotaurus, or of the eagle which now they use for their ensigns.
The Cimbrians had in their ensigns a brazen bull. The old ancient Germans
used to paint in The old Germans.
their ensigns the likeness of shining light. The Parthians tied little
brazen belles to their spears, and infinite number of horns, having before
them carried in their ensign a flagge of red leather painted over full of keys.
And so I might speak of more that used their country orders and manners in
wars: but mighty Emperors and Kings had in their several ensigns what
pleased them, as

Hanibal had a red flagge with The several ensigns of kings and great
captains.
a naked sword for his ensign. Old Osiris had the dog Anubis in his ensign.
Great Porus king of India had the image of Hercules carried before him in his
ensign. Cyrus king of Persia, a cock. Julius Caesar an Elephant. Eumenes king
of Asia had in his ensign the image of Ceres, and the statue of Alexander the
great. Neoptolemus the image of Minerua. Ca. Marius in the Cymbrian wars used
to carry in his ensign a silver eagle, and so upon their tents they used the
like.
And so of their secret watchword which the Emperors, and great kings used in
their wars, I thought good to set down some brief examples of mighty great
conquerours and captains, which they used in the field in the time of war
to their officers and soldiers.

Cyrus king of Persia would use this for his watchword: Jupiter belli Dux.
Antiochus, surnamed Soter, used this watchworde: Been valere. Augustus Caesar
Emperor of Rome used this word: Faelicitas, sometime, Victoria. M. Antonius in
his wars used this word: Lar Deus. Pompey the great used, Invictus Hercules.
Caius Caligula the Emperor used, Priapus and Venus for his watcheword.
Watchwords at se^raln (...) or ^eat (...).
Demetrius king of Macedonia, had for his watchworde, Jupiter and Victoria. The
Emperor Septimus Seuerus used this word, Laboremus. As Pertinx the emperor
used Militemus for their watchwords in their camp. Claudius Caesar never
missed this watchworde, Virum vlcisci decet. The watchworde of Silla was but
Apollo.
The sixth king of the Medes was named Phaortes, a man of great promise and of
great fortune, who much increased the state of Media with winning of many
countries, and adding of many nations to the kingdom of Media: he moved wars
first against the Persians, and brought them at length under his hand, and
vanquished them, who became subjects under Phaortes to the Empire of Media.
After that, he passed further unto Asia, destroying and vanquishing many stout
nations, in so much that he brought all Asia under the Medes. Again he went
with great force against the Assyrians, laid siege to Niniue, where he was
slain and all his army vanquished: Phaortes slain at Niniue.
he reigned in Media 22. years, about the 33. Olympiad, 105. years after the
building of Rome.

At this time reigned in Judea, the good king Josias, who destroyed idolatry,
and restored religion, commanding the groves, the altars, and other
superstitious places, to be had in pieces: he caused all the wickedness which
reigned among the Jews in his fathers days king Amon, to be quite taken away.
Now in Lydia governed Ardeis the 6. king of the Lydians. In Rome governed
Tullus Hostilius the 3. king of the Romans, and in Agrigentu^ at this time the
great tyrant Phalaris exercised his tyranny. Phaortes.


After Phaortes had brought all Asia under the Empire, and had vanquished the
Persians, and now the monarchy was in Strabo lib. 11.
Media, the Medes grew so strong that they subdued all countries, and became
the only kingdom of force and power, whose fame and renown was spread over the
whole world. After him succeeded Ciaxares the 7. king of the Medes: this passed
Ciaxares the son of Phaortes, and the 7. king of Media.
all the kings of Media before him, and obscured the fame of his predecessors:
this king is named in Daniel Darius Medus, as Melancthon does note. This was
he that subdued Asia, and divided Asia into nations, countries, provinces, and
kingdoms, and the first among the Medes that devised spearemen, bowmen, and
horsemen, and taught the Medes many warlicke feats: he vanquished all the
regions about Media, and gathered all the force he could against the Lydians,
and after brought all his armies over the river Halis, and went to revenge his
fathers death Phaortes upon the Assyrians, besieged Niniue, and (as Eusebius
testifies) he took the city of Niniue, and conquered the most part of
Assyria, except Babylon and few provinces about Babylon. It is written in
Ruffinus, that while Ciaxares laid siege to Niniue, Madies king of Scythia
came with great power against this Ciaxares, with Ruffinus de Medorum origin.
whom he encountered and put him to the worst, scattered his army, and wan the
field, and removed their siege from Niniue, in so much that the Scythians ruled
and governed al Asia for 28. years, but afterward slain and overthrown by the
Medes.

About this time Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon laid siege to Jerusalem, took
Zedekias the king, burned the city, and destroyed The besieging of Jerusalem
by Nabuchodonosor.
the temple, and the most part of the best Jews were carried captive into
Babylon, where Ezechiel began to prophecy both against Egypt and Babylon,
where likewise he prophesied the rebuilding of Jerusalem, and the restoring of
the Jews after 70. years captivity. There followed in Media Astiages Astiages
the 8. and last king of Media.
the 8. and last king of the Medes, who reigned over the Medes 35. years,
having only one daughter named Mandanes: of this her father thought so well,
that he judged no man among the Medes worthy of his daughter, but gave her in
marriage to Cambyses king of Persia, which then paid tribute unto the Medes,
and were brought under their monarchy by conquest.

Now Astiages the king being in his town Ecbatana, dreamed of his daughter
Ma^danes in this sort: he thought in his dream that his daughter made so much
water at one time as filled all the streets of the city Ecbatana, and that it
did ouerflow all Asia: who when he awaked, mused much at this dream, and
fearing Astiages dream of his daughter.
the success thereof, took order with one Harpagus a friend of his, that when
his daughter Ma^danes should be brought to bed, the child should presently be
killed. This commandment of the king troubled Harpagus, insomuch that he
himself detested Harpagus.
so foul an act, caused one named Mitridates a heardman of Astiages to come to
his house, to who^ he imparted the kings Mitridates.
commandment, charging him to take the child, and to bring him to some place
where the child might die, to avoid the displeasure of the king. This poor
man obeying Harpagus, took the child, delighted much in his favor, thinking
in his heart that he was of some great parentage, took it with him, and having
that time by his wife a child borne dead, he took it, and made as though it
were Cambyses son, and buried Cyrus brought up with a poor heardman as his
own child.
him in a desert place, and commanded his wife to bring up Cyrus as her own
child. Now when Harpagus was thoroughly certified that Cyrus was killed and
buried by this his trusty friend, who saw the place where the dead child was
buried, supposing it to be Cyrus, Harpagus thereof was very glad, told the king
that in all things his commandment was executed. The king was merry, and al
things very quiet, and he doubted nothing.

While this Astiages was lusty and frolike, Cyrus grew in the mean while to
some stature, being about ten years of age, having some cause to be brought
before Astyages, he had some impression in his head, and conceived by
imagination, considering the time that Cyrus should have been killed, and
astyages has knowledge that Cyrus was not slain by Harpagus.
the age of Cyrus then present: he began to examine the matter with
Harpagus, and Harpagus with Midridates, until the truth was found. Astiages
being much disquieted with this Harpagus, was troubled in mind, fearing some
mischance should happen unto him by the means of this Cyrus, of whom he
dreamed (as you heard) commanded him Cyrus is banished from Media unto Persia.
out of his sight, and to go unto Persia to his father Cambyses, and to his
mother Mandanes, and there, upon his allegiance to stay. Cyrus is father to
Cambyses, and not his soane, in all writers but in Herodotus.


Cyrus began to feel his stomach being very young, to be very great: yet for
that time he obeyed the king, and went to Persia, where he consulted with
Harpagus about the recovery of the kingdom of Media. For when Cyrus had heard
how that Astiages had commanded Harpagus to kill him, and to Cyrus makes this
force in a readiness.
have him out of the way, he thought now being in years, fully to revenge the
said wrong: he gathered his power together, and had his soldiers in arms, and
was ready with his force to march against Astiages.

The brute and great report of Cyrus preparation came to Messengers sent unto
Cyrus.
the ears of king Astiages, who not being therewith a little frighted, sent
messengers unto Cyrus, commanding him upon his allegiance to repair to king
Astiages. To whom answer was made by Cyrus, that Astiages should see Cyrus
before he Cyrus answer.
wished to see him, and that Cyrus would come before Astiages would have him to
come. This answer of Cyrus being given to the king, he straight commanded all
Media to be in arms, and with great have and with no less fear made his
soldiers ready. Now Harpagus having determined to flee from his charge,
being general of the Medes, unto Cyrus: When both the armies came to join in
battle, Harpagus performed promise with Cyrus, forsook the Medes, and came
to the The first battle of Astyages with Cyrus.
Persians. This first battle by reason of Harpagus and diverse noble men more
of Media which revolted, was overthrown by Cyrus.

Astiages again gathered his force, renewed his army, and came in field
himself being general in person against Cyrus, The second overthrow of
Astiages, and the last.
where he was with all his soldiers overthrown, and his kingdom taken from
him, and the Empire of Media which before governed Persia, is now again
brought by Cyrus unto Persia.

This was the uncertain state of the world then, sometime conquerours, and
sometime straight conquered, as before you have read of Assyria and Chaldea
sometimes the Assyrians mastered the Chaldeans, and again the Chaldeans
overcame the Assyrians, and so of the Medes and of the Persians: The last end
of the Medes.
for now the Persians are become lords of Media, Lydia, Chaldea, Assyria, all
Asia, and the most part of the East, which the Medes hitherto for the space of
an hundredth and thirty years governed Asia about the river Halis. Thus Media
after it had The river Halis.
in all continued three hundredth and fifty years, from Sardanapalus until
Cyrus time, by Cyrus was overthrown, in the The 56. Olympiad.
thirty and fifte year of the reign of Astiages, two hundredth years after
the building of Rome, at what time Tarquinius Priscus was the first king of
Rome.

This time ruled in Lydia, Cressus, which within fourteen year after was
likewise vanquished by Cyrus, and his kingdom translated unto Persia. It is in
Zonaras and in Josephus Zonar. lib. 1. cap. 19.
otherwise written about Cyrus and Astiages: they affirm that Cyaxeres was the
son of Astiages: this was of Daniel called Darius Medus, and of Josephus,
Zonaras, Zenophon, and others. This Josephus lib. 10. cap. 13.
was uncle unto Cyrus, and heir unto Astiages: he together with Cyrus
governed for a time, afterward having but one daughter, he bequethed his
daughter and the kingdom unto Cyrus his nephew his sisters son, who was
married unto Cambyses.

While this Cyaxeres lived, he honored much Daniel, and had him in great
reverence. Herodotus writes in the history Herod. lib. 3.
of Cyrus, and says, that Cyrus married Cassandanes the daughter of
Pharnaspis: so does Zenophon, and so does Zonaras zenophon lib. 8. Padago.
write.

The Egyptians affirm, that Cyrus married a wife in Egypt, and by her got
Cambyses ^but how foeuer Chronographers agree, it is certain that he began
a monarchy upon the conquering of Lydia and Media, as shall be more at large
written in the history of Persia.

The Medes fed on fruits, Ex amigdalis tostis panes, ex malis How the Medes
fed. Strabo lib. 11.
siccis ac tritis massas conficiunt, They make their drink of certain roots,
and they use wild beasts, and wild fowls for their food: for they nourish
no tame beast. And this is the property of the Medes and of their king, to
have as many wiue's as they would, they might not have under Of their husbands.
seven. And so their women thought it a great praise and fame to have many
husbands, but they might not live without five husbands, as Strabo does write
in his eleventh Book.

OF THE ANTIQVITIE OF Lydia: of the original of their Kings, and of their
common wealth, and government.
THE kingdom of Lydia, being before called (as Herodotus writes Herodot. lib.
1. cap. 7.
) Maeonia, began to take name of one Lydus the son of Artis: but that
seems to be fabulous, as Herodotus is in many of his histories. Lydia is
named of Lud the fourth son of Sem, as Josephus, Zonaras, and Philo Iudaeus
Josephus. lib. 1. 14. antiq. Zonaras lib. 7.
affirm. This country is situate in this sort: it has Eastward Phrigia: on
the Southside Caria, and on the Northside Misia, as both Strabo and Pliny
affirm. The river Meander runs through Lydia, and compasses the most part
of Lydia. Strabo lib. 13. Plini lib. 5. na^. histor.
Eusebius in his histories faith, that the kingdom of Lydia began in the
first Olympiad, and in the beginning of the 14. Dionysius lib 2. Pl^t, in
Romule.
Iubilee, about which time Romulus the first king and builder of Rome was
borne: of whose birth as Dionysius and Plutarch write, many strange things are
read.

Lydia was before Rome 24. years, and after the destruction of Troy 405 years.
When I speak of the Romans and of their kingdom, you shall have it fully*
set down. The kings of Lydia, the kings of Rome, and the kings of Media, are
almost of The Lydians, the Romans, and the Medes began to reign together.
one time: for as soon as the Medes began to set up their kingdom, the
Assyrians which governed so long all the East part of the world decayed.
Likewise the Lacedaemonians ended their government, and their kings failed in
Alcanes time the ninth king of the Lacedaemonians: at which time the
Macedemonians The Lacedaemonians ended their kingdom now.
elected their first king called Cranaus: so some countries, nations, and
kingdoms begin, others end: some rise, and some fall, as time gives them
license by Gods appointment.

But now of the kings of Lydia: where I find in Eusebius Arsidius the first
king of Lydia.
their first king to be named Arsidius: this Functius does call Ardisus, at
what time judged the Athenians Aesculus the twelft Judge of Athens, after the
kings who had governed from Cecrops their first king, which began in Moses
time, until Codrus the last king of Athens, which ended his kingdom in the
time of David, where reigned that while 17. kings. When Arsidius reigned in
Lydia, Ioathan was king in Judea, and in Samaria Pecah the 17. king of Israel.

These people of Lydia were first very warlike, stout, and a courageous
nation, but Cyrus brake their backs, and compelled Lydians became idle and
slothful.
them to be caupones and institores (as Iustine says) and to leave off arms
(for that oftentimes they rebelled against Cyrus) and to use such trafiques as
were of the meanest credit: hereby, these stout and strong nations before,
came now by Cyrus policy to be very idle and slothful, whereby they
invented many unthrifty games, diverse plays at dice, tenise, and such like,
and having nothing to do, neither durst they do any thing for fear of Cyrus:
they fell (as Pliny says) to exercise Arts ludicras and lenocinia, and so
became from a strong and stout people, the most slothful and idle people of
the world.

Budaeus thinks, that this region Lydia is now called Anatolia: Budaeus de
ass. lib. 3.
after Arsidius had reigned in Lydia 36. years, succeeded him Aliagtes the
second king of the Lydians, at the which time Aliagtes the second king of lydia.
grew great wars of twenty years continuance between the Lacedaemonians and
the Messanians: the cause thereof you Wars between the Lacedaemonians and the
Messanians.
shall read in Orosius. Catina a city in Sicilia at this time was builded,
and Messana one of the chiefest cities of the Messanians was taken then by the
Lacedaemonians. Now reigned in Rome Romulus the first king, in Phrygia Mydas, in
Egypt Sacalion, Orosius lib. 1. cap. 21. Herodot. lib. 8. in fine.
and in Macedonia Perdicas the fourth king of that country, of whom Herodotus
does set forth how he from a mean state became king of the Macedonians.

Titus Liuius writes, and so does Dionysius, that Romulus about Liuius lib.
1. Dionysius 2.
this time did triumph over the Sabines, whose wars continued two years,
with whom after he had furnished Rome with the spoils of the Sabines, and had
taken their The first triumph of Romulus.
daughters and virgins by force to the number of 683. he suffered Tacius Sabinus
at that time king of the Sabines, to govern with him in Rome five years, at
which time the city of Rome Dionysius lib. 1.
was much increased, and more amplified by adding thereunto Mount Coelius, and
Mount Quirinal. Now ruled in Judea Ezechias about the 12. Olympiad and the 15.
Iubilee.

There fell about this time in Athens a third alteration of The third
alteration in the government of Athens.
their government after this sort: After their 17. kings government, then
governed in Athens Judges, to the number of 13. After the Judges there was
another state agreed upon, that every 10. years there should be a new
magistrate in Athens, and they were called Decennales principes: and this
government Decennales principes.
endured 70. years, which was the whole time of 7. princes, and then again
changed unto a popular state. But let us return to the kings of Lydia, the
history that I have in hand.

After that this Aliagtes had reigned 14. years he died, and Meles the third
king of Lydia.
Meles succeeded him the third king of the Lydians: of whom Herodotus does
make mention, that he was the first that triumphed over the people called
Sardei. This Meles had a bastard borne unto him, a stout man, a great
soldier, and so great, that he with his posterity ruled the Sardeans until
Cyrus time. In this Meles time were the Camerines subdued, having once or twice
before revolted against the Romans, over whom Romulus the second time
triumphed, their cities taken, The second triumph of Romulus.
and their country made a province to the Romans.

By this time the people of Vienna moved wars against Romulus: but being
overthrown, Romulus made his third and last triumph of these three triumphs:
read Dionysius. Romulus The third tri umph of Romulus. Dionysius lib. 2.
died, to whom many towns, cities and provinces, yielded themselves unto
Romulus, for the fame and report they heard of him: for he was both religious
and virtuous. Hippomenes the fourth prince or magistrate then governed Athens.
After that Meles had governed the Lydians 12. years, there followed the fourth
king named Ca^daules, a foolish and a vain king, of whom this history is of
Herodotus written. This Candaules, Candaules the fourth king of Lydia.
who^ the Grecia^s called Mirsilus, had a passing fair woman to his wife, of
whom he ioyed much, esteeming her to be the only woman of the world for
beauty: and having a dear friend, and one of his own servants named Giges
from whom he could conceal nothing, he persuaded this Giges to be an eye
witness of his wife, whose perfection in all points he could not with tongue
express unto Giges: but willed him to be in some secret place, where and when
he had appointed To brag of beauty is dangerous.
him to behold the rareness of her beauty.

Giges after three or four denials, being urged thereunto by the king his
master, consented to the kings request, and secretly came to the place where
the king had appointed him, where he saw the queen naked as shewent to bed, to
whom Candaules when he knew that Giges suffficiently had viewed his wife, he
said, Esto fidelis Giges: at the which words the Queen The foolishnes of
Candaules.
looked back being amazed of his speech, and saw the back of Giges by chance
as he went away, and requesting the king to tell who he was, after much
entreatie he said it was his servant Giges.

The Queen dissembling the matter that night, said nothing, but in the morning
she did send for certain of her chief friends, and told the cause, and
willed them to be in a place appointed ready against Giges came, whom she sent
Two offers unto Giges.
for, to whom she said these words: Giges thou have to choose of two offers,
either to kill the king my husband and to marry me and become king thy self
in Lydia, or else to be killed and lose thy life presently: for in that place
where he showed me naked, thou shall destroy him, there shall thou have a
dagger ready: which being performed by Giges, he married the Queen, and
became the fifth king of the Lydians, according to the oracle of Delphos, who
had before told that Ca^daules should be the last king of the stock of
Heraclides, and Giges the son of Dascilus of the house of Memnades, the fifth
king of Lydia, Giges the fifth king of Lydia.
which governed not long without due revenge, which fell in the time of Cyrus.
Thus the ancient stock and the long succession of Heraclides, even from
Hercules until Candaules Heraclides stock ended in Candaules the 4. king, and
continued 502. years. he^odot. lib. 1. Justinius lib. 3.
the son of Mirsus was of five hundredth and two years continuance: during
which time reigned 22. kings one after another of the line of Hercules: read
Herodotus. Taurentum was builded by Philautus in the time of this Candaules by
the Parthians: read Justinius the third book.

After that Giges had by wicked means obtained the kingdom of Lydia, and had
sent to Delphos great presents, and rich rewards to Apollo for the oracles
given: he went in arms against Miletum and Smyrna two cities in Greece,
besieged Colophonem, and subdued it. No other action of any importance has
been written of him: he died when he had reigned 36. years. In Giges time,
Bizantium otherwise called Constantinople Constantinople builded.
was builded. About this time the tyrant Phalaris governed the Agrigentines.
Tullus Hostilius reigned third king of Rome, in the last years of Giges. In
Judah reigned Amon. And amongst the Egyptians Psammeticus: this Psammeticus when
he had obtained Egypt into his own hands, being before but Herodot. lib. 2.
one of the twelve that governed Egypt, he joined with the people of Caria and
Ionia, and thereby he much augmented the state of Egypt. From this king unto
Cambyses time, the history is set forth very plain in Herodotus.

The Grecians about this time first frequented the oracle of Dodoneum oraculum
at this time.
Jupiter called Dodonaeu^ oraculum. Archilocus the historian, Aristoxenes the
musition, and Simonides flourished in these days. In the seventh year of
Giges, the state of Decennales principes ended, The state of Athens again.
and the common wealth of Athens was governed afterterward by a popular state
called Democratia. Now Ardis the Ardis the sixth king of Lydia.
sixth king of Lydia and son to Giges succeeded in the kingdom, of whom there
is little or nothing mentioned.

In the beginning of this kings reign, in the 29. Olympiad, and in the 16.
Iubilee, Zaleucus king of the Locresians decreed a Zaleucus law for adultery.
law to his subjects concerning adultery, that whosoever should be found
faulty in this offense, should lose both his eyes. His son violating this
law, was of his own father the king judged to loose both his eyes: his nobles
and his great men entreated for the young man's fault, but the king not
neglecting to do justice according to the law by him made, and according to his
sentence given upon his son by the law, he caused his son to be brought
before him, where in presence A just king.
of his subjects the king showed both mercy and justice: for he commanded
first that one of his own eyes should be put out, and the other eye to be
taken from his A rare example of justice.
son. A rare example of Justice and mercy, and the like not to be found in
our days.

At this time in Rome triumphed Tullus Hostilius over the Fidenans Tullus
Hostilius triumphed over the Fidenans and the vients.
and the Vients, and entered Rome triumphantly the ninth year of his reign. Now
reigned in Judea Josias a godly king, who purged Jerusalem and all Iewrie from
abominations and idolatry, and brought them to know the Lord again: in
whose time the Prophet Jeremy began to prophecy the destruction of Jerusalem
and other kingdoms. In Corinth reigned at this time Cipselus, and amongst the
Medes governed Phaortes their sixth king, whom the Assyrians overthrew, as
Herodotus does affirm. In the realm of Pontus there was this Herodotus lib.
1.
time builded a town called Hystris, and in Asia two other Terpander a famous
musition. Thales a great Philosopher lived long.
towns called Chautus and Stagera. Terpander an excellent mufition at this
time lived, and Thales Milesius a great Philosopher, whom Eusebius affirms to
have lived from the 30. Olympiad, until the 58. Olympiad.

About this time the Sabines after much slaughter were again vanquished by
Tullus Hostilius: then the Latins made war against the Romans, which
continued five years: about which Dionysus Halica. lib. 3.
time Tullus Hostilius the third king of the Romans, with all his family was
burned in his own house. Solinus says, that Solinus cap. 2.
he died in the 35, Olympiad. Numa Pompilius a Sabine borne in the city of
Cures the second king of Rome, was consecrated by the soothsayers called
Augures: in his time bishops, called Pontifices, were created in Rome, holy
fire, vestall virgins, and religious men, and priests of diverse orders, as
Salij, Faeciales, and Flamines, which he instituted to serve his gods, for he
was virtuous and good: for when Rome was builded by Romulus, Numa was borne.

The Cimmerians were now at this time overthrown by the The Cimmerians subdued
by the Scythians.
Scythians, the Scythians entered unto Asia and took Sardis the chiefest city
of the Medes, and came conquering countries and regions as far as Palestina.
About this time Necho king of Egypt, who a little before ouerthrewe the good
and godly king Josias, is now by Nabuchodonosor king of the Assyrians,
vanquished by the river of Euphrates.

CHAP. II.
Of the rest of the kings of Lydia, from Ardis the sixth king, until Craesus
the last king of Lydia, and of their destruction by Cyrus, and the kingdom
brought subject to Persia.

NOw succeeded Ardis his son named Sadaites the 7. king of Lydia.
Sadaites, the 7. king of the Lydians, who (as Herodot. says) reigned 12.
years: but Functius says, 15. years. Of this king nothing is mentioned with
Historiographers, Herodotus lib. 1.
but that in his time Ancus Martius Ancus Martius the 4. king of Rome.
the fourth king of Rome brought a huge army against the Veientines, which
being by Martius overthrown, had his triumph granted unto him by the
Senators. This Martius made upon Tiber a haven called Hostia, four or five
leagues from Rome, and a passage from thence to the sea. The Sabines were
overthrown by this king, as before oftentimes by his predecessors.

This time was Dirachium builded, and Perosina. Aulus Gelius Dirachium builded.
an ancient writer, reports an history of one Arion a Lesbian borne, a man
of great skill in music, a dear friend of Periander The history of Arion the
musition.
king of Corinth, travailing Sicilia and Italy: he grew in great favor with
all men in all countries, and having in time heaped great wealth by his art,
longed again to be with Periander Aulus Gell^us lib. 16. cap. 19.
in Corinth. Now being shipped and well forward toward Greece, the mariners
understanding that he had much money, spoiled and robbed him of his money, and
after being ready to kill him, he befought them with tears to spare him so
much time, until he had attired himself in his best apparel, and to license
him to play upon his lute, and to sing Orthium carme^ (...) Arion.
two or three songs before he died to the Muses: which being granted, he
prepared to play and sing very loud, and in the midst of his song he leapt as
far as he could into the sea, where the great Dolphine, a fish (as histories
record) very Herod. lib. 1.
much entised with music, and greatly delighted with man's voice, carried him
clean upon his back from the water, and Arion carried by a Dolphine in the sea.
brought him unto an haven of Lacedemonia called Tenarum, from whence he
travailed to Corinth, and opened to Periander the king, the whole course of his
fortune.

About this time Tarquinius Priscus the fifth king of Rome began his government
in the 41. Olympiad, as Dionysius writes: Cleonidas Theb^s in Olympi^ rict^s.
in the which Olympiad, Cleonides a captain of Thebes got the victory in the
games of Olympia. After Sadaites followed Haliates the 8: king of Lydia: he
reigned 49. years, in whose time though he himself did nothing worth the
writing, yet the most part of the kings of the world were busy: the king of
Assyria was in wary with the king of Egypt.

This time reigned in Babylon Nabuchodonosor, to whose government not only
Assyria, but all the East kings were brought under his beck. Likewise about this
time a great band of the Scythians were driven to flee to the Medes, where they
The Scythians caused war between the Medes and the Lydians.
were kindly harbored, much made of, and well entertained, until such time as
by some co^spiracie they were found rebellious unto the king of the Medes: then
they fled from thence unto Lydia to this king Haliates, and being by him there
succored, great wars grew thereof between the king of Media and the king of
Lydia, and continued until Astiages married Astiages married Haliates daughter.
the daughter of Haliates, upon the which, peace and great affinity began to
be between the Medes and the Lydians. Herodotus who writes this history, is
thought of Functius and others to err in the time.

In Egypt there reigned Apries, whom Jeremy calls Hophra, Heredot. lib. 1.
whose name he ought to know for by this king Jeremy was put to death in
Egypt. In the 7. year of this king Haliates, this Apries king of Egypt in the
midst of his tyranny, God gave him into the hands of his enemies: so the
Lord said, I will give Jeremy cap. 44.
Pharao Hophra king of Egypt into the hands of his enemies, as I gave Zedechias
king of Judah. And in another place the Lord says, I will give the land of
Egypt unto Nabuchodonosort king of Babylon, and Egypt shall be the wages for his
army to spoil her spoil, and Ez^chiel cap. 19.
to take her pray. For to Egypt flead Judah for succor, where they were put to
the sword, and not one escaped.

Now again in Rome began Tarquinius Priscus the fifth king of the Romans: he
on the other side began to lay on about him with the Latins, and with the
Sabines, that after he had brought the Latins with long war to seek favor
at The Latins vanquished by the Romans.
his hand, and being driven out of the country by Tarquinius, were forced to
entreat for peace, and to crave the Romans friendship, who by this time waxed
so strong, that all the West part of the world began to hear of the Romans.

Now after that the Latins were vanquished, the Sabines again, being old
ancient enemies of Rome, a very warlicke The Sabines overthrown.
nation, with all force came against Tarquinius: at what time their bridge was
burned, their tents taken, and themselves slain, and forced to entreat for
truce for six years. After the Sabines, the Hetruscanes armed them against
Tarquinius, whose Hetruscans.
war continued 9. years. About this time the seven sages of Greece flourished,
whose names I thought good to put down The 7. Sages.
together, for that they lived at one time: Solon of Athens, Thales of Milesia,
Pitacus of Mitilena, Periander of Corinth, Bias of Prienna, Chilo of Sparta,
and Cleobulus of Lindia. These singular wise men were in those days esteemed
the rarest men of the world. In this time the kingdom of Corinth failed in
Periander Alteration in the government of Corinth.
the last king, or rather the last tyrant, and the government was altered to a
popular estate.

About that time Polymnestor a very young man, and (as the history has termed
him) a boy, being a feeding his fathers Polimnestor Millesimus as swift as a
hare.
goats, a hare by chance running by, the boy followed, and ran so swiftly,
that he ouertooke the hare, and brought her home to his father, declaring the
race and the running between him and the hare to his father. The matter being
spread abroad, the young man was brought to the games Olympical, where he
Solinus cap. 6.
wanne the victory in running, and had a garland on his head, Zenophon lib. 8.
pediae. Joseph. lib. 10. cap. 12.
as Solinus does write. Ciaxeres son unto Astiages, some say his father as
Zonoras in his first book, but Zenophon likewise affirms with Josephus, that
this Ciaxeres, was Astiages son called by the name of Darius Medus of Daniel,
and of Josephus: but the Some controversy of Ciaxeres.
Grecians named him Ciaxares Cyrus uncle: for when Astiages died, he left
behind him as his heir Ciaxares, and a daughter named Ma^danes which was
married to Cambyses. I will not molest An error in Herodotus.
the reader with variety of auctorities, sometime disagreeing in computation of
time, or varying of the place, or of the person: but howsoever it is, this
Ciaxares became a great and a strong king: for after he had conquered many
countries, he went in arms against the Assyrians, besieged Niniue, and took
the spoil thereof by aid of Cyrus, who afterward shortly Niniue taken by
Ciaxares.
sub dued it, and became co^querour of al Assyria, and brought them subject to
the Medes.

About this time Solon made laws to the Athenians, and Milo Crotoniensis a
Roman of a wonderful strength, is reported by Solinus, that he could carry upon
his back an ox, and that with Solinus t p. 4.
a stroke of his bare hand he killed that ox. This Ciaxares, at what time
Harpagus laid siege to a town in Phocea called Ionia, the extremity of his
war being such that they were forced to flee forsaking their town and
country toward the West part, where they builded a town which they named
Massilia, of whom Eusebius in his chronicles makes mention, Massilia builded.
Iustine lib 43. Budae, de ass. lib. 1. Strabo de mo^ibus Gallorum.
and in Iustine you shall read the whole history. Diverse write of this Town,
as Melancthon, Strabo, and Budeus, that in Massilia Frenchmen, in whose border
this Town was builded, by frequenting the Town, and by exercising of the
Grecians society in the Town, grew in time to understand the Greek tongue,
the traffic, their order, their laws and government, which in these days
excelled in virtue and manners, where of a long time the Greeks tongue
flourished, the ancient customs and manners of Ionia were kept.

Now Tarquinius Priscus after he had triumphed over the Tarquinius Priscus
slain.
Latins or Albans, over the Sabins, and over the Hetruscans, three several
triumphs, he was conspired and laid in wait for by Ancus Martius children
his predecessors in Rome three years before he was slain, after he had
reigned thirty eight years, and in the forty one Olympiad he died. Then
followed by succession after Aliactes Croesus, the ninth and Cressus the 9.
king of Lydia.
last king of Lydia, being thirty five years of age, and being before hand
grown unto great force and power, and having heaped a great abundance of
treasure, began to war upon these Grecians which dwelt in Asia, upon the
Ionians and Aeolia^s, and the people called Doreans: he receives the
Lacedaemonians, because they were stout and a warlike nation, into his society.

Croesus thus following in pomp and pride of fortune, hearing Babylon besieged
by Cyrus.
that Cyrus king of Persia had laid siege to Babylon, and that Balthazar then
king of Babylon had endured two or three overthrows, and most like to lose his
kingdom, unless with some speed he were aided: Croesus hasted to Babylon
with more haste then good speed. After his best done, Balthazar Babylon taken
by Cyrus. Balthazar slain.
was slain, Babylon taken, and the Monarchy thereof carried unto Persia by
Cyrus. Croesus being overthrown and narowly escaping, fled from whence he came
to Lydia again, where after that Cyrus had laid all things in order, and had
disposed the victory to his mind, he returned after Croesus unto Cressus
fled.
Lydia, laid siege unto Sardis the chief City and palace of the king, where
Croesus after his flight hearing of Cyrus coming, Heredot. lib. 1. Sardis
taken, and Cr. the second time conu^cted.
and having felt his force before at Babylon, he was not a little troubled, but
abiding the brunt thereof, until Cyrus took the town, vanquished his power,
and brought the kingdom of Lydia subject unto the Persians: thus was Croesus
twice overcome by Cyrus.

When Cyrus had brought these great kingdoms under the scepter of Persia, he
took an order with Croesus, that he being deprived of his crown, and spoiled
of his substance, should yet have a town in his possession, where he might
live not Errors in the Olympiads.
(as before) a rich king, but as a poor man. In Croesus time reigned in Rome
Seruius Tullus, the sixth king of Rome, in the 51. Olympiad, and four years
before the 18. Iubilee. This king did adorn Rome and the common wealth thereof
much, and (as Dyonisius Halicar reports of him) he brought within 20. Dyonis.
lib. 4.
years space the Hetruscans to his beck, he tamed all the countries about Rome,
and excelled in government.

By this time Cyrus had subdued the Medes, after Astyages Media at this time
was made subject to Persia by Cyrus.
was convicted, and the Medes made subject to the Persians: Ciaxerxes, whose
son (as you heard before) was called of some Darius Medus, who reigned
jointly with Cyrus 2. years as Astyages here for a time. The temple of Apollo
at Delphus, was now the second time set on fire: the Lacedaemonians with
Lacedaemonians and the Argiues.
the Argiues were in arms about this time, who were settled on either side,
with all the power they could make, to make of one party a conquest: but
before they joined in battle, being better advised by some council, they
agreed to avoid the destruction of so many men, that 300. chosen men of the
Lacedaemonians, and likewise 300. chosen men of the Argiues, should make an end
of the battle, and they which should A brave combat.
have the victory of these chosen men, should be co^querors, and the others to
yield where the victory happened: which being fought out, the victory fell to
the Lacedaemonians, having but three of their 300. left alive, all the rest on
both sides stood to it unto the last man, as Herodot does write.

In Croesus time happened in Athens a great sedition between Herodot. lib. 1.
the Citizens about usury, the cruelty whereof grew to be such, as the
usurers claimed free men's sons and daughters to be sold, or otherwise as
captives or slaves to serve them, until payment were made. This was one of
Dracos Dracos laws mitigated by Solon.
laws, which (as Demades says) was written with blood. To mitigate this
cruelty, Solon by consent of the whole City was chosen an vmpire, whose Edict
was, that free men's children should not be sold or brought unto any bondage
for usury: and further he decreed, that all creditours should forgive Solons
laws of usury.
their debt until that time. And Solon himself which made the law, first
performed the law therein: for he forgave five talents himself, which
amounted to 2400. crowns: for every talent is six hundred crowns. He added
to the twelfth month called Lunaris annus, the Epact, Melancthon 2. Chron.
which is eleven days, to make an equal number of days with the year of the
sun. He gathered all the writings of Homer being 300. years before unto one
volume: he made many good laws in Athens. So likewise at that time did Thales
in Miletum, a great Philosopher, who did to many Cities Thales in Miletum.
in Greece, as Solon did in Athens: for they were in Croesus time.

In this time flourished Pythagoras, borne in Samos, brought up in Egypt, and
taught philosophy in Tarentum: he was the first among the Italians that read
philosophy, whose sect after him were called Pythagoreans, who far differed
from others Pithagoras taught in Italy.
in his doctrine. It is written that Croesus bragging much of his substance,
and so preferring thereby himself to be the most fortunate and happy king of
the world, sitting on his regal throne in his princely attire, beset with
precious stones of several names and colors in most gorgeous and sumptuous
sight, seemed to himself to be the goodliest creature of the world: he asked
of Solon whether he had ever seen so fair a Croesus to Solo^.
sight, or so goodly colors in a creature: Solon answered, the Pecock, and the
Popiniay do far excel Croesus in natural colors and beauty: whereat Croesus
being angry said, Solon was a fool: but afterward Croesus being vanquished by
Cyrus, remembered Lydia did rebel against Cyrus.
Solons words: but now again to Lydia, which had revolted against Cyrus and
fell to rebellion.

By this time Cyrus was busy in other wars, and hearing of these news,
returned and made of them the last conquest, in the thirty four year of
Seruius Tullus reign the sixth king of Rome, and in the two hundred and ninth
year after the building of Rome. Thus Lydia being brought by Cyrus a servile
Province to Persia, afterward the relics of the Lydians The first conquest of
Lydia.
became from stout soldiers to slothful slaves, and from men became women,
accompanying themselves with an idle life, given to invent many unthrifty
exercises, as before is written. And the maids of Lydia went a whoring for
their dowry, offering themselves a pray for money, and the wicked gains of
their bodily use was the dowry of their marriage, who before Cyrus time, during
the time of nine kings, esteemed neither Chaldeans, nor Assyrians: their
fortune so flowed, that it became a common proverb, As rich as Croesus.
Croesus favor with Cyrus.


But now Croesus having experience of Solons speech, became now as wise as he
was before rich: for the which cause The good opinion of Cyrus toward Croesus.
Cyrus esteemed him so, that he would take nothing in hand without Croesus
council: for Cyrus in all his wars, which at that time Cyrus had with so
many Nations, having already conquered the Assyrians, the Chaldeans, the
Lydians, and other kingdoms, having like mind to conquer all the world as
Alexander the great had, insomuch that Croesus wondered at his fortunate
success in all his actions, his singular wisdom, his great policy, and his
princely liberality to be such, as Croesus did often say, It was no shame for
Croesus to be conquered by Cyrus.

After that Croesus was long enterteined with Cyrus, having good experience of
his fidelity and service, he commended Croesus unto his son Cambyses,
charging him so to esteem of Croesus, as he would be directed in all great
causes by him.

Now Cambyses far unlike unto his father, both in nature and in fortune much
inferior, a cruel king, yea a tyrant: for in his voyage to Egypt, with whom
Croesus was in company according to his fathers commandment, Cambyses
killing Cambyses tyran nie to his soldiers.
and murdering his own soldiers being Persians, like a hungry lion foming
in blood without any respect of person, Croesus began reverently to warn
Cambyses of his fathers council, and of the trust that his father Cyrus had in
him to admonish Cambyses to lenity, persuading him to use more clemency,
Croesus council to Cambyses.
and to show good countenance to his soldiers, saying, that the strength of a
king was his people, and that mercy in a king was the anchor of his scepter.
Cambyses moved with these words, thought to stabbe him: but Croesus by flight
escaped, and Cambyses for anger that he had so escaped, commansded them to the
sword that aided Croesus to flee from Cambyes sight at that time: of this at
large does Herodot write. Herodo. lib. 3.


Thus ends the kingdom of Lydia in the 14. year of Croesus, which continued
from the beginning, until the last overthrow of Croesus 230. years: but
Functius says, 205: others say not 200. and some 130. years, beginning in the
first Olympiad, and ending in the 51. Olympiad: for as the kings of Lydia Lydia
is made a province of Persia by conquest.
began but 24. years before Rome, so it ended in the eight year of Tarquinius
Superbus the last king of Rome, and after the first building of Rome 180.
years, and was translated to be a province of the Persians.

Ardisus the 1. king of Lydia, reigned 36. years. Aliagtes the 2. king of
Lydia, reigned 14. years. Meles the 3. king of Lydia, reigned 14. years.
Candaules 4. king of Lydia, reigned 17. years. Giges the 5. king of Lydia,
reigned 36. years. Ardis the 6. king of Lydia, reigned 37. years. Sadaites
the 7. king of Lydia, reigned 15. years. Haliactes the 8. king of Lydia,
reigned 49. years. Croesus the 9, and last king, reigned 14. years.
OF THE FIRST ORIGINAL of the Persians: of the antiquity of their Kings, of
their common wealth and government, and of their continuance, and how they have
been called the great Kings, by the means and dignity of Cyrus.
NOw having left Assure the second son of Sem in Assyria, and Arphaxad the
third son of Sem in Chaldea, and Lud the fourth son of Sem, in Lydia: I am
come with Elam the eldest son of Sem unto Persia. Of these four sons of
Sem, the Assyrians, Chaldeans, Hebrews, and Lydians proceed. Having also left
Chus in Ethiopia, and Mizraim in Egypt, I come (as I said before) to Persia,
then caled Elam: so Daniel names it, when he saw the vision in the Palace in
Susa in the province of Elam, by the river of Vlai: in this place Elam dwelt:
and the nation were long named Elamites, whose history I have now in hand.
Persia therefore is large and wide, reaching unto the North as far as Caspia
8000. Strabo lib. 15.
furlongs, as Erastones sets it down, which is in accoumpt yielding eight
furlongs unto a mile, a thousand miles: and from the City of Susa unto
Persipolis, 4200. furlo^gs, which is 530. miles, and from thence unto the
confines of Carmenia, Pomponius. Mela lib. 3. The description of Persia.
are 1600. furlongs. The Region of Persia is co^fined with Media on the North:
Persia has eastward Carmenia, and has westward Susia: for Susia is (as Strabo
writes) a part of Persia, and lies between Babylon and Persia, and has Susa
that famous city, where most often the kings of Persia used to be, with it.
The nations of the inhabitants of this Country are called Palischores, another
nation called Achemenides: from these the old kings of Persia were called
Achemenides: for among the old Persians they had a law, that none should be
king in Persia, but he should be of the stock of Acheminides, which of long
time continued before Cyrus, while yet the Persians were called Elamites, among
the Hebrews, and of the ancient Greeks called Cephenes, all kings of Persia
were called Achemenides: the like law was in Sparta, Corinth, Egypt, and with
other nations for their kings, for that diverse kingdoms had by law confirmed,
that no election of kings should be, but of those families which by law in
records were allowed, as

The kings of the Parthians were all called Arsaces, out of Arsaces stock. The
kings of Alba called Siluij from Siluius Posthumus, the third king of the
Albanes. The first kings of Egypt were all called Pharaones. The kings of
Corinth Bacidae, of the house of Bacis. The latter kings of Egypt called
Ptolomei, after the death of Alexander. The kings of Sparta. Heraclides.
And so the Emperors of Rome named first Caesares, then were Alex. lib. 3. cap.
16.
they called Augusti, and the third time they were named Antonini. Thus in
these countries none might be king elected, but of these houses and families,
yet in other kingdoms they were otherwise elected, as

The Ethiopians made choice of the most likeliest man in sight. The Medes in
like manner used to make choice of no king, but such as excelled in talenesse of
person, and strength of body. In Libya none should be king, but he that could
win it with running: for he that was most swift, should be king in Libya: and
so according to custom, and to the manners of every Country or kingdom, any
prince or king was elected and chosen.
Again there be in Persia two other nations called Cirtij, and Marai, beside a
sect of people named Magi. The chief Cities of Persia, before Babylon was by
Cyrus won to be a Persian City, were Susa, Parsagardia, Persepolis, and
Gaza: for The kings of Persia all called Acheminides. The Persians called first
Cephenes.
there the Persian kings had their monuments: in Gaza, there lay there treasure
and wealth. Beroaldus in his Chronicles, Suetonius, and Tranquillus in August
say, that the Persians were called of the Greeks in ancient time Cephenes, but
they bragged and boasted of a more ancient name, and called them selves
Artaei. Artaei.


But after that, Perseus the son of Jupiter and Danaes had married Andromada
the daughter and heir of Cepheus, and had by his wife a son named Perses,
after whose name then Perse.
they being called Cephenes, are now called Persis, after the name of their
king Persis.

This region of Persia was divided unto a hundredth twenty Provinces, in the
time of Darius Hystaspis, the third king of The Persians before called Elamites.
Persia, appointing to every Province a governor, that should pay certain
tribute unto the king. Josephus says, Elam the eldest son of Sem, was the
first original of the Elamites, now called Persians, a country most fertile
and most flourishing, which had sovereignty ouerall Asia. After that, Cyrus
from Diodo. lib. 13.
a private man brought up by a heardman in an obscure place in Media, became
lord of all Asia, king of the greatest part of the Eastkingdomes, and the
conqueror of Astyages, king of the Medes, and of Croesus, king of the Lydians,
and last of Balthazar the last king of Babylon, and the last successor of
Nabuchodonosor the great: he fortified himself with strength of munitions,
commanded garrisons ready in every great city of Persia, appointed races of
horses to be had in all the Josephus lib. 11. cap. 6.
Empire of Persia, and every governor of every Province to furnish the king
with horses and men necessary to defend the country: for the Medes,
Assyrians, Chaldeans, Lydians and Egyptia^s, were by this time brought subjects
under the Persia^s.

And therefore their wealth must be infinite: for in Artaxerxes time there was
an hundredth and twenty Provinces under the Monarchy of Persia, as Josephus
writes. Ctesias and Dionisius, two great writers of Persian histories
affirmed, that the king of Persia was wont to have in his Palace, fifteen
thousand every day to dinner and supper: for they received out of Asia every
year forty thousand and fifty talents.

For when Alexander the great had conquered Persia, and Curtius lib. 5.
had taken Babylon, he found a hundred fifty and seven thousand talents, and
yet not so much as Cyrus left behind him (as The wealth of Persia in the time
of Cyrus.
Strabo says) and no marvel: for Cyrus had all the wealth of Judea, and the
treasure had in the Temple at Jerusalem which was infinite, of Assyria,
Chaldea, Lydia, and Media, and therefore Herodot called him Cyrus the great
king, and after Cyrus time all the kings of Persia would be called (...), the
great kings.

For in all the histories you shall not read, that the Romans who afterward
likewise mastered the whole world, had so much treasure at one time, as either
Cyrus had left in Persia, or as Alexander had found in Persia: yet Persia
before Cyrus time was obscure and of no fame, subject unto the Medes: for Cyrus
had long wars and many battles with Euilmerodach in Assyria, with Croesus in
Lydia, with Astyages in Media, and with Zenophon. Paeda lib. 8.
many kings before he had rest, and before he had brought the Monarchy unto
Persia, and to be called the great king.

Cyrus began his Empire at Babylon, at what time Seruius Cyrus began his Empire.
Tullius, the sixth king of the Romans reigned in Rome, and Amasis governed
Egypt: In Cyrus time the temple of Apollo was burned in Delphos the second
time. Cyrus obtained the kingdom of Persia in the beginning of the eighteen
Iubilee, and in the third year of the eighty Olympiad, which much differ from
Diod. Siculus, who affirms that Xerxes the fourth king after Cyrus, took his
voyage into Greece, in the seventy five Olympiad, from Polybius, that
affirms Xerxes went into Greece in the 74. Olympiad: in the like error is
Halicarnasseus, Herodot, and others: some affirming Cyrus to begin his Empire
in the 50. Olympiad, some in the 54. some in the 57. some in the 60. Olympiad,
and thus they err some 30. Olympiads, some 20. some more, and some less of
the true time of Cyrus: for in the sacred history by sound testimony it was
laid down by Daniel and in Nehemias, the very time of Cyrus.

Now after that Cyrus had brought all these kingdoms under the monarchy of
Persia, he took Armenia in hand, and having conquered the king and the
country of Armenia, Tigranes the kings son of Armenia, a familier old friend
of Cyrus, hearing of Cyrus victory over his father, he then being far from
Armenia, returned home with all haste, and besought Cyrus not to think of the
wars between his father and him, but to remember the amity and familiarity
which was between them both: and therefore Tigranes entreated Cyrus to have
the crown after his father, paying unto Cyrus such tribute as he would
appoint: to which request Cyrus consented, appointing Fifty talents are three
thou sand crowns.
fifty talents yearly to be paid to the kings of Persia, which is three
thousand crowns. After the conquest of Armenia, Xenophon lib. 2. and 3. Paedag.
Cyrus passed with his army unto Phrygia, Cappadocia, and Arabia, who could
not long hold out, but partly yielded, and partly conquered, were brought
subject and to pay tribute unto Cyrus. Cyrus was wont before he entered into
battle, to sing a song to Castor and Pollux, and to march as the old
Spartanes, with hymns and odes to the muses to solace their hearts, and to
avoid fear that might occupy their heads otherwise. Cyrus his guard or
chief soldiers about him were called Homotimi, as the best soldiers under
Alexander Homotimi. Argyraspides.
the great were call Argyraspides, under Achilles named Myrmidones, under
Pyrrhus called Dolopes, and so of other Myrmidones. Dolopes.
great conquerors which had a peculiar name of their chief soldiers. Now the
last and the greatest victory was over the Babylonians, which he attempted not
before he grew great and strong by other victories: for truly before Babylon
was won, the monarchy was in Assyria.

We read of no king that conquered so many kingdoms as Cyrus did, neither of
such favor with God: for no doubt he was instructed of Daniel to know and to
confess the God of Cyrus by David instructed.
Israel, as appeared by his care and diligence in ayding the Jews after the
captivity unto Jerusalem, in suffering them quietly to return with wealth and
treasure, in commanding all his princes of Syria and subjects, to favor and to
help them, with a decree made for the building up of their temple unto God,
which had raised Cyrus to punish the blasphemy of that Chaldean king
Balthazar, and to make an end of his kingdom, and by Cyrus to restore the
kingdom again of Israel, which Cyrus.
was overthrown by the Chaldeans. Cyrus being then the only conqueror ofthe
world, and having under the Persian scepter all the East kingdoms, he had in
mind the woonted manners of the Scythians, how they came often times from
Scythia, and rushed in arms unto Asia, spoiled, wasted, and destroyed the
regions and countries about Asia. Cyrus made war upon the Massagites, which
were of the stock of the Goths: of these Messagites came the Getes and the
Sueuians. While Cyrus was occupied in these wars, Cambyses reigned in Persia
six years, so that the government of Cyrus and of his son Cambyses were
compted all one for two years, because Cyrus took his wars in hand
needelesse to Scythia.

And beside, he was warned by Soothsayers, by the divination of Swalowes which
were seen in the tents of Cyrus, being unlucky birds, not to go to Scythia:
for Swalowes Swallowesvnlucky birds.
flying about the tents of Pyrrhus, in the wars of Italy, and also lighting
upon the sails of Mar. Antonius nauies in his wars against Augustus,
prognosticated to them both calamity and destruction: nay God, with whom Cyrus
should have consulted, who brought him from Harpagus claws, saved him from
Astyages sword, defended him from Croesus snares, and gave him so many
victories.

God used the like example upon Josias, Solomon, Osias, and David, as he did
now upon Cyrus, for that Gods servant Melancthon lib. Chron 2.
should know their infirmities, and confess that God gives victory: for as
Josias was slain in Mageddo, by Necho king of Egypt, so Cyrus trusting in his
own strength, was overthrown with all his army of the Massagites. Cyrus head
was cut off by Tomyris Queen of Scythia a woman, and thrown into a great
vessel full of blood, with spiteful words saying, Diodor. lib. 2. cap. 11.
Satia te sanguine quem sitijsti: yet Dyodorus says, his body was hanged upon
a gibbet, and his head thrown into a barrel full of blood: for Cyrus before
that time had taken Spargapises, general Herodot lib. 1.
of the Massegites, overthrown the whole host of the Massegites, and had
slain Queen Tomiris son Spargapises. Of the histories of Cyrus, read
Zenophon and Herodot, where you may be satisfied of the whole life of Cyrus,
and also of his death. In Cyrus time when the Hebrew prophets in Israel ended,
The first infancy of Greece.
then the Philosophers in Greece began: Thales with his successors after him
in Ionia, a man of great antiquity amongst the Grecians, who taught them first
the observations of the stars, the eclipses of the Sun and Moon, the
divisions of the year, and the number of the days. The other taught in the
Confines of Italy: they were called Pythagorici, the one in Miletum, the other
in Tarentum. There were in Greece before this time certain wise and learned
Poets, as Homer, Hesiodus, and Orpheus, and Linus, that were had in great
honor in Greece.

It is written by Aristobulus, that Cyrus had upon his tomb diverse Epitaphes,
as this, O homo, ego Cyrus Asiae Rex, ne mihi sepulturam inuideas. O man, I am
Cyrus king of Asia, suffer Cyrus without envy, this seven foot ofgrou^d to
cover his bones. Onesicritus rehearses in Strabo many Epigrames upon Cyrus
tomb, and Cyrus himself in these words cries out in Zenophon: Non auro non
argento condi, sed corpus terraereddi: though Zenophon reports other ways of
Cyrus death, reciting an The death of Cyrus. Zenophon. lib. 8. Paedago. Zonar.
lib 1. cap. 29.
oration that Cyrus before he died, called before him all his Nobles, to whom
he made long speech concerning the immortality of the soul, exhorting his two
sons Cambyses the elder, and Smerdis the younger, who^ Zonaras named
Tamaraxes, to use justice in their government, bequeathing to Cambyses the
Empire of Persia, withal the kingdoms thereunto belonging, Assyria, Chaldea,
Lydia, with all the rest of his kingdoms, Provinces, and Territories, saving
Media, Armenia, and Cadusia, which Cyrus bequeathed to his youngest son
Smerdis.

Of this Cyrus read Zenophon, and see how Ulysses is set forth by Homer, Aeneas
by Maro: so is Cyrus magnified by Zenophon. Cambyses the 2. king of Persia.
Cambyses succeeded Cyrus his father, not in virtue and justice, not toperforme
his fathers will, but to break the decree which Cyrus made after the
captivity to the Jews for their return to further the temple: the tyranny
of who^ if you list to be acquainted withal, read Herodot the 3. book, and
you shall know the whole life of Cambyses, who after Cyrus death used al kind
of murders, fomed in blood, raged in tyranny, gathered an army of Persia,
and of Greece, moved wars against Amasis king of Egypt.

The cause of this war does Herodot in this sort set down: Herod. lib. 3.
Cambyses had council to ask Amasis daughter in marriage of some back friend
of his: Amasis saw the full intention of Cambyses, could not tell well how
to answer Cambyses: he thought this way to deceive him: there was one only
daughter of Aprie king of Egypt left alive of that stock, a wise and a Nitetis
sent to Cambyses.
very fair woman named Nitetis: this Amasis the king with all sumptuous tire,
with gold and substance plentifully, did send to Persia to king Cambyses, with
whom she was in great favor and love by the name of Amasis daughter, saluting
her daily by that name, until Nitetis spoke these words.

O Cambyses, thou art much deceived to take me for Amasis daughter: I am king
Apries daughter and the last of that house, whom Amasis the king sent unto you:
he killed my father, and he now thus used you. Upon this, Cambyses sent unto
the king of Arabia, to license him with his army to have passage to Egypt:
which being then granted, Cambyses spoiled, wasted, and burned, until he
came to Memphis, where he thought to find Amasis alive, but he found his
son Psammeticus. Memphis being taken by Cambyses, another battle was Memphis
taken by Cambyses.
fought by Nilus, where likewise Cambyses got the victory after a great
slaughter: of this Herodot does write, that when trial was made of the dead
soldiers, whether the Persians or the Egyptians had the harder scull, it was
found that the Persians heads were so soft, as any small thing would break it,
and the Egyptians head so hard, that nothing skant might break Difference
between the Persians and the Egyptians.
it: the reason was, that the Egyptians were wont even from their youth to
shave their heads, and so hardened them by the heat of the sun, that it is a
wonder in Egypt to see a balde man. And the Persians were wont to bear upon
their heads such great mighty hats called Tiaras, rolled in such sort, that
Strabo. lib. 15.
their heads were mighty and monstrous, that by the warmenes thereof they were
so soft as wool.

Now Cambyses waxed so cruel by this victory, wasted where he came,
committing sacrilege, adding one evil to another, fearing his own
conscience, suspecting his brother Smerdis, sent his trusty and secret friend
Phraxaspes to kill him, married his own sister, who hearing of her brothers
death, mourned and wept, wherefore Cambyses slew her. After this, when his
dear friend Praxaspes had entreated him secretly to spare wine, the cause of
his disquietnes, certifying him what hard opinions the Persians had of him, and
how they would be glad to have Cambyses to be Cyrus son, sober, and
temperate: Cambyses answered in this sort: thou shall see whether I be sober
The tyranny of Cambyses.
or no: go thy ways, bring thy son unto me, and set him to stand against
the door. This being done, Cambyses commanded the young man to put his left
hand upon his head: he took his bow, and shot him into his heart, and smiling
upon Praxaspes he said, behold how sober I am, and what a steady hand I have
amongst the cups: yet as not contented to rage, to murder, and to use tyranny
against those that were alive, but he would satisfy himself upon dead men, he
caused Amasis king of Egypt his body being dead and buried in his grave to be
taken The Persians worship the fire.
up, to be beaten, whipped, and to be wounded with swords and daggers, and last
to be burned to ashes against the laws of Persia: for that the Persia^s honor
the fire as a god, and therefore not lawful to feed upon dead bodies: against
the laws of Egypt, for the Egyptians take their fire to be a living creature,
and to devour any thing that is put into it, and therefore the Egyptians were
wont to salt their dead bodies, lest they should be devoured of vermins.
Neither were the old Romans* wont Herodot. lib. 3.
to bury the bodies of the dead for a long time: for I read of none buried
with the Romans before Sillas time the Dictator: Silla.
for this was the custom of those days, that wheresoever any Roman should
die, he should be brought dead to his own house, and there be kept seven
days, the eight day he should be buried, and the ninth day the ashes buried,
and that in his own house, at what time they sacrificed to Proserpina
nouendiale sacrificium: for so also it was among the Grecians, as Nouen. liales
pulu^res.
you may read in Plutarch, after the funeral of Philopoemen: his ashes were
covered with garlands, and flowers, and nosegaies, all the soldiers crowned
with garlandes of laurel in token of diverse victories: but this funeral was
appointed for a captain or a Prince that died as a conqueror in the field:
yet the funeral pot, where the ashes of the dead were laid, should be carried
with great solemnity, and be kept as a monument among his friends and
kinsemen in great honor, before their gods Penates or Lares.

And here a little to speak of burial, we read in Genesis, Genesis 2. 3.
that Abraham bought a field of Ephron the Hittite, to bury his wife Sara,
and to bury the rest of Abraham's stock: this was a possession of burial unto
Abraham, and he paid 400. shekels. Jacob dying in Egypt with wis son Joseph,
comanded his bones to be brought to Hebron. Joseph after that charged also his
brethren Abraham's field for burial.
that his bones should be carried to his fathers grave in Hebron: but of the
manners and orders of funerals in every kingdom it is set down in my other
book. But let us return to Cambyses, where having subdued Egypt, and ready
further to war upon the Ethiopians, which was a kingdom joined to Egypt, at
what iime news came from Persia by a messenger, that his brother Smerdis had
usurped the kingdom, letters were sent from the two Magi, which Cambyses left
over seers of Persia in his absence, to all parts of Egypt, to signify the
same.

For Patizitis (so one of the Magi was named) had found a kinseman of Smerdis
most like in all points unto him: this being instructed, was crowned king in
Persia by the name of A counterfeit Smerdis.
Smerdis Cyrus son, and being proclaimed king by heralds, and by post letters
sent to signify the same to all Countries, that all countries should obey
Smerdis and not Cambyses: and so that herald certified Cambyses.

By this terror and fear Cambyses called Praxaspes, consulted with him, and
demanded whether he had performed his charge concerning Smerdis: to whom he
said, I have buried Smerdis with my own hand. Cambyses being thereby
enbouldened, demanded the truth of the herald: he charged him to speak
truth, whether Smerdis my brother gave thee this charge, or any else in Smerdis
name: to whom he answered, In truth I never saw Smerdis Cyrus son, sithence
the time that Cambyses took his journey from Persia unto Egypt: but even he
whom Cambyses made his deputy in Persia, gave me this in commandment to do.

Cambyses making him ready with all haste possible to go Cambyses by his own
sword slain.
with his army to Susa, and leaping on horse back, his sword fell out of his
sheath, and pierced him through his thighs, of the which wound within twenty
days after Cambyses died, when he had reigned seven years and five months.

Cambyses before his death, saw the like dream as Iu. Caesar did the night
before he was slain in the Senate, who seemed in his sleep to flee above the
clouds, and to sit upon the Alex. lib. 3. cap. 26.
throne of Jupiter, and that upon the sudden he was thrown down to the
earth. The like Cambyses dreamed of his brother Oracles are doubtful.
Smerdis, when he thought that sitting upon Cambyses seat, his head reached
vpto the heavens, so that almost the like effect happened to them both: for
Cambyses had knowledge by the oracle at Butis, that he should die in Ecbatana,
but he knew not that another Ecbatana was in Syria, beside that in Media,
Herodot. lib. 3.
and therefore was deceived. Yet Cambyses left this example of justice behind
him: he used one of the Judges named Sisamnis in this sort, that being
corrupted with money to give sentence against justice, he caused him to be
slain, and to flay him, Sisamnis skin.
and to lay his skin for a cover upon the seat of judgment for the next Judge
that came afterto lean upon. And he appointed Otanes Sisamnis son tosucceed
his father, brought him to the Melancthon. 2. Chron. His son Otanes.
judgment seat, and showed him his fathers skin, commanding him to behold
the same, before he would give sentence in any thing.

CHAP. II.
Of the two Magi that usurped Persia after Cambyses time: of Darius Histaspis
and his good government, of Xerxes the great, and his wars in Greece: of his
ignominious flight from Greece, and of his death in Persia after his flight.

NOw while Cambyses was thus in Egypt, these two Magi governed Persia seven Two
Magi governed Persia 7. months.
months in bountiful sort, forgiving tributs and taxes, and granting
liberties and freedom for the Persians to live as they listed. Writers do
vary about the name of these two. Iustine called these two Magi, Comaris and
Oropastis: Herodotus does call the one Patizites, and the other Smerdis.
Zonaras Herodot. lib. 3.
names the elder Tanoaxeres, but it is not material: for Eusebius does not
number these two amongst the kings of Persia.

But in the eight month one of the seven princes or governors of Persia
overthrew these Magi: then these seven princes being virtuous and well-beloved of
the people, agreed in love and faith one with another, one preferring another
to What state should govern Persia.
the kingdom, that it was hard for the people to make choice of any of them:
yet to them the election was referred. Otanes one of the seven princes, thought
that it was not necessary to have a king, to make a free common wealth bound to
a Monarchia: he persuaded the country to live under the law of popular state
called Democratia, every city to have their magistrate, Otanes for Democratia.
and every province to have such governors as might defend the country with
laws and arms: affirming the greatness of a king to approach the nature of a
tyrant, and therefore most dangerous: for when they give over to be kings in
doing justice, then they begin to be tyrants in committing rage and fury.
Megabisus held a contrary opinion, allowing Megabisus the second for Oligarchia.
not a popular state, who are never quiet, never constant, drawn one day of
this side, to morrow of another, affirming the fury and rage of the people to
be intolerable, and like the stream of a violent flood, without wisdom in
government, without reason in judgment, and even like Hidra that monstrous
beast of Lerna, never satisfied, never contented, never quiet: and compared it
to the saying of Demosthenes, that populus was one of the three monsters at
Athens, which reigned at one time, Noctua, draco, and populus, the owl, the
dragon, The three monsters of Athens.
and the people.

Megabisus therefore disliked a Democraticall common wealth, persuaded that
some of the wisest and best learned should be chosen for a state: for to good
men belong good counsel (said he) and they will in conscience and truth
refourme things amiss: his reason tended to have a common wealth called
Oligarchia, or Aristocratia, and not a popular state. The third Darius spoke,
disanulling both Otanes and Megabisus opinion, declaring by examples of diverse
kingdoms, the Darius persuasion for a Monarchy. Lib. Paedag.
defect of kings, as Zenophon and Herodotus most largely discourse, and amongst
Philosophers approved the best state of a common wealth to be a Monarchy:
alleging also by Cyrus Herodotus 3.
last will and Cambyses, that while any of Cyrus stock lived, Cyrus last will.
that they by succession should enjoy the Scepter of Persia, and if the house
of Cyrus should fail, then to make an election of a king by the seven princes
of Persia and the people. And therefore both in reason a king is to be elected,
and by them commanded of Cyrus to be confirmed.

The other four, which yet had spoken nothing, but diligently hearing these
three before, they all consented with Darius, and supposed that common wealth
to be best, where a Monarchy is, the sovereignty whereof is in a king: and
therefore they agreed all to elect a king: and to avoid contentions and
quarrels, they committed to Fortune their election in this sort, That all the
seven princes should be a A devise for the ection of a king in Persia.
horseback the next morning in the suburbs of the city to talk of this
matter, and that whose horse should neigh first after Sun rising he should be
king in Persia. They all to this consented, and every prince rode sumptuously
to the place. These were the names of the seven princes.

Otanes. Intaphernes. Gobrias. Megabisus. Astphatines. Hidarnes, The names of
the 7. princes of Persia.
And Darius.
The night before they should ride to the place, in the morning Darius
consulted with the master of his horse, opened the whole cause, and asked his
devise by art. Oebarus Oebarus policy.
(so his name was) assured Darius of some secret help: he brought Darius
horse that night to a mare, to that place where they should meet in the
morning. Darius riding upon that horse by the counsel of Oebarus, the next
morning met according to their agreement altogether. Darius horse having been
with the mare in that place, began lustily to praunce, and to neigh lowdly:
whereat the other six princes lighted immediately from their horses, and
saluted him as their king.

This Darius now king of Persia had married a daughter of Cyrus named Atossa, of
whom he had Xerxes. Within some Darius king of Persia.
space after Darius came to the kingdom, the Assyrians began to revolt from
him: he laid siege to Babylon twenty Babylon besieged.
months, and could not prevail, until one Zopirus a subtle Persian, who
yielded Babylon to Darius hand, by this policy: he himself did cut off his
own ears, his nostrels, and Zopirus subtlety.
came all bloody to Babylon, accusing Darius cruelty, who for persuading him
to raise his siege and to spare blood, he used me as you see.

The Babylonians light of belief, thought it truth, made him captain over a
band of soldiers, who for his more credit with the Babylonians, gave two or
three light overthrows to Darius men, and by this means brought Babylon to
Darius hand. Of this Zopirus was Darius wont to say when he held a pomegranate
in his hand, that he wished nothing more in Darius saying of Zopirus.
the world, then to have so many Zopirus as the pomegranate had kernels. Now is
Babylon the second time taken by the Persians. When Darius was quietly settled
in Babylon, he made wars upon the barbarous Scythians: for even as Cyrus was
wont to drive the barbarous nations from Asia which came from the region of
Arctoa: so Darius took that course by his chief captain Megabisus, to cleanse
Persia from strangers: the Getes, the Cimmerians, Cimerians.
and the Sauromats inhabited in Asia and about Thracia. Getes.
For of the Cimerians came those Germans called Cimbri, and from the Getes came
likewise the Goths. These Getes yielded to Megabisus: the Scythians he could
not vanquish. Scythians.


But after some war he returned unto Greece, sent ambassadors unto Amyntas
king of Macedonia to have free passage Persian ambassadors sent to Macedonia.
through his country: which being granted more for fear then for love,
Amyntas entertained the ambassadors of Persia very liberally, brought them to
a banquet, where after much rioting of wine, they handled rudely the
Macedonians ladies that bear them company.

Alexander the son of Amyntas, and the great grandfather of Alexander the
great, being discontented with their beastlines, desired the king his father to
take his rest that night, taking upon him the entertainment of these Persians:
who after his father was gone, he consulted with certain noble men of
Macedonia, that they should come in most gorgious and sumptuous attire like
women in the apparel of women, with A worthy history of Alexander Amyntas
son.
their naked weapons close under their garments, commanding them when they
should so beastly handle them next, to stabbe them unto the heart.

In the mean season Alexander desired them that the ladies might withdraw
themselves for a time, promising them they Justinius lib. 7. and Herodot. 5.
should presently return to bear them company: in the mean time while these
ladies were absent, came the Macedonian lords in form and show of ladies, and
performed the will of Alexander in all points, when they saw occasion offered.

At this time Pisistratus that governed Athens, had a son Pisistratus.
named Hippias, which was banished his country for his cruelty toward the
citizens, and was with Darius, who hearing that his brother Hipparchus was
slain, made means to Darius that he would vouchsafe to aid him to his
country: which was the rather granted, for that Darius was offended with the
Athenians, for that they aided the Ionians against him in that war called
bellum Ionicum, when they took Sardis and burned it.

He caused presently a hundredth thousand footmen, and Hippias by Darius aided.
ten thousand horsemen to accompany Hippias to Athens, who when they came
within two mile of Athens, the Athenians with these news were sore afrighted,
and stood in great doubt whether to yield or to resist them, until Miltiades
a famous captain comforted them by the counsel of Callimachus took in hand
to fight with the Persians. He had ten thousand of Athens, and ten thousand
Platenses, here was his whole force: but in that battle that noble fellow
Miltiades, and Callimachus Melanct. lib. 2 Chronicles.
with his Greeks, gave the overthrow to the Persians in the fields called
Marathon, to the number of six thousand three hundredth, by the counsel of
Callimachus. Thus much Melancthon affirms: but Justinius says, that there
were six hundredth thousand Persians, of the which (says he) two hundredth
Herodotus 7.
thousand were slain, and the rest put to flight: but this warrewas after
that which was at Marathon, when Darius upon the hearing of these news, was
three years in preparing for it.

With this Miltiades flourished in this war Themistocles, a gallant young
gentleman of Athens: this Themistocles was wont to say (after that field
fought in Marathon, and the Persians vanquished) that the victories and
triumphs of Miltiades could not suffer him to sleep: but his son Xerxes
performed Iustine erred.
it, as it shall be spoken hereafter. In Esdras it is referred to Artaxerxes
surnamed Mnemon, whom the Hebrews took to be Asuerus. Hitherunto Eusebius
does agree.

In this war Pisistratus two sons died, Hipparchus and Hippias: Hipparchus
Plato so commended him, that he was co^uersant Hipparchus a wise man.
with learned men, he loved Simonides, he brought Homers Iliads first to
Athens, and caused the Grecians in any solemn meeting to sing Homers verses:
his delight was to prefer learned men, and to reverence wise men, and for
that only A^an lib. 8. Lib. 1. cap. 16.
cause he was esteemed the wisest man of Athens. But to Darius again, whom
Zonaras said that he was the husband of Esther, which in the Scripture is
called Asuerus. Melancthon writes, that Darius Histaspis was that Assuerus
that married Esther: and here the history of Esther might be well brought in,
saving it is in the Bible: for Herodotus says, that Darius married Herodot.
lib. 7.
two women, the one named Aristona which may be the name of Esther, as well as
the name of Vasthi to be Atossa which was Cyrus daughter, on whom he got Xerxes
who succeeded after him, though Artabazanes the eldest son by Aristona or
Melancton lib. 2. chron.
Esther made claim to the kingdom, and opposed himself against Xerxes: yet
when Darius made wars with the Grecians, and afterward with the Egyptia^s, in
the which journey Darius died, he appointed Xerxes to govern Persia in his
absence, and to be king after him if he should die in wars, for that his
Herodot. lib. 7.
mother was Cyrus daughter, and for that Cyrus was called by the Persians Pater
patriae.

The goodness of this king was fully proved, at what time the Church was
miserably afflicted by that wicked Haman and hindered by that cruel Cambyses
against the decree of Cyrus: he confirmed the decree, and gave license and full
liberty for the Jews to build their temple according to Cyrus decree: for God
raised Cyrus, Darius, Artaxerxes, Nabuchodonosor, Euilmerodach Good kings by
God raised.
to be pillars and defenders of his Church. When Darius had reigned 36. years,
he died, in whose days the kings of Rome ended their kingdom, and their
monarchy fell to a new form of state called Aristocratia. In the time of
Darius reigned Aristodemus in Cuma a town of Italy, not as king, but as a
Dionysius lib. 7.
tyrant, with whom the barbarous nations had open wars. This contention
between Artabazanes and Xerxes was ended by Instaphernes: but Herodianus says,
by Demaratus Ariston, to both their liking, judging the crown to be Xerxes
according to Darius will and the request of Persia, and Artabazenes so
satisfied that one loved another. In Darius Histaspis time reigned in Madonia
Alexander Amyntas son their 10. king. Herodotus also this age wrote his
history, which after it was read in Athens he was of more credit amongst the
Grecians, though Strabo called Lib. de esse.
his book Mythistoriam, fabulous histories, as Budeus writes. Sophocles and
Euripides lived in Darius time, and Socrates was borne.

Darius Histaspis a little before he died, after he had heard the news of the
Grecians victory at Marathon, being before offended with the Athenians for
that they invaded Sardis, now ten times more kindled to revenge these injuries,
posting all Asia, and sending to all his provinces, prepared such force, that
he was three years in providing men and munitions against the Grecians, at
which the Egyptians revolted from Darius, which were by Cambyses before
subdued, he then Melancton lib. 2.
had thought to make his voyage to Egypt, and appointed Xerxes his son by
Cyrus daughter Atossa, to govern in his absence Persia: between whom and his
brother Artabazanes, some strife (as you heard before) grew about the
government.

But Xerxes after his fathers death, was the fourth king of Persia, who taking
that war in hand against the Egyptians, Xerxes a king of Persia.
which his father Darius thought to have taken, had he not been by death
prevented, not yet thinking to revenge the Greeks, until Mardonius his aunts
son had persuaded him. He gathered such an army, as the like is not read,
saving of Tamberlane the Scythian king, of whom the history is public: this
great preparation of Xerxes was consulted and thoroughly waighed before it was
taken in hand, for Artabanus Xerxes own brother thought it not a necessary
war. Mardonius his near kinseman persuaded the contrary saying, that Xerxes
with that force might bring all Europe subject to the Empire of Asia. Mardonius
sentence prevailed. Mardonius.


Xerxes made ready his armies: the number were so many, as scant could be
accounted, for he had twelve hundredth and seven Nauies: the Scythians, and the
Persians, the Phaenicians; which dwelt in the land of Palestine, brought three
hundredth nauies, the Egyptians two hundredth, the Cyprians The huge army of
Xerxes.
one hundrerh, the Silicians one hundredth, and the Licians brought fifty
nauies, Doors which dwell in Asia brought thirty, they of Caria brought
seventy, the Ionians an hundredth nauies, the Aeolians threescore, and the
inhabitants of Helespont, brought an hundredth nauies, so that Herodotus
Herodotus 7.
accounts the whole number of the nauies to be three thousand: but Iustine
writes, that Xerxes had in his company toward Justinius lib. 2.
Greece, ten hundredth thousand nauies, insomuch that the Persians bragged,
that the Ocean seas had scant sufficient The vain brags of Xerxes.
room for their nauies, that all Greece was not able to give them ground
enough, and scant place for their shotts in the air: with this insolency the
Persian army marched. Diodor. lib. 11.


While Xerxes this time was in preparing such a huge host, the Grecians
bestirred themselves with all care and diligence to call their force together,
and to gather their strength together from all parts of Greece. The Athenians
made forty nauies: the Magarenses made twenty nauies: the Chalsidenses The
Grecians preparation for Xerxes.
so many, as they of Athens made, which was forty: the Peloponesians twelve
nauies: the Lacedaemonians ten: the Epidaureans eight, and the inhabitants of
Agineta two and twenty: the Traezeneans made five nauies: so that the whole
number of the Grecians navy was but two hundredth seventy and ons.

The Athenians appointed to be their general, Themistocles: and the
Lacedaemonians made Euribiades: but the Persians could not find a fit general
for so great an army: for (as Herodotus does record it) there was in the camp
of Xerxes an hundredth Myriad is 10000.
and seventy Myriads of soldiers. You must understand, that every Myriad is
compted for ten thousand, so that a hundredth and seventy Myriads are to be
taken for seventy hundred thousand men, which Xerxes had in his voyage to
Greece, Seven hundredth thousand men.
which was in the seventh year of his reign, when he sailed on the sea of
Helespont, and marched with more boldness then wisdom, drinking a bowl of
wine to the Sun, and throwing the cup after his draught into the sea,
making a vow that he would not return from this journey, before he had
brought all Greece and Europe joined with Asia, subject to Persia. But he was
soon deceived: for the Persians fought for money to augment their treasure,
and the Grecians fought for virtue to defend the liberty of their Country:
for this war of Xerxes was more taken in hand for Xerxes need^lesse war.
ostentation then for necessity, to do injury and not to defend justice.

The authors whereof God has from time to time punished: as Josias that good
king, yet for such a fault he was given to the hand of Necho king of Egypt an
infidel. Cyrus, this Xerxes grandfather, for taking unnecessary wars in hand
against the Scythians, was slain by Tomyris a woman: and now this king
needless without cause offered, thought to have eaten up all Greece, he was
made a runnagate, and to flee from Greece, his soldiers slain, his captains
drowned, and himself hardly escaping: for within two years the Persians had
four overthrows.

The first overthrow was at Thermopila, where he lost Xerxes lost four great
battles. First at Thermopila. 2. At Artimesium. 3. At Salamines.
twenty thousand Persians by three thousand Grecians. After, they were
vanquished in two sundry great battles upon the sea, the one hard by
Artimesium in Thessalia, the other by the Isle Salamines, from whence Xerxes
himself was secretly forced to flee in a little boat, after he had lost the
last battle, to his great ignominy and shame, which he never recovered during
his life.

Afterward, leaving Mardonius behind him with three hundredth thousand
Persians, the fourth battle was given him at Platea, where the Persians
likewise were overthrown, 4. At Platea.
Mardonius slain by a soldier of Sparta, and all Greece triumphed of that
victory.

CHAP. III.
Of the successors of Xerxes in Persia: of their wars, victories, and
government: of the state of Greece, and of the prosperities, victories, and
fame they had in Xerxes time.

THis time flourished Greece, for it had many Themistocles, which was wo^t to
say, I overcome my friends with patience, and my foes with celeritie: after
this victory it began to be strong, and to flourish in same before al nations,
until civil wars: for Caesar was demanded by a Roman a friend of his, how
he conquered so many nations in so short a time? he answered by celeritie: for
(said Caesar) it was a fault found in Hanibal, that Caesar's saying of Hannibal.
after he had taken Capua, that he had not laid siege to Rome.

This great and mighty voyage of Xerxes being thus with loss and shame
finished, even he who was a terror to the whole world, and so called terror
ge^tium before this time, was Read Herod. his sixth book to the end of this
Xerxes.
now had in contempt, and despised of all Persia. Artabanus who then persuaded
this journey, had 7. sons well esteemed of the Persians: and perceiving the
contempt of Xerxes with the people, and how he slew his brother, after this
great infamy of the war, when he returned home, he took his brothers wife,
and his brothers daughter, and committed incest with them both, but his own
uncle Artabanus his fathers brother slew him, after that Xerxes had reigned in
Persia 21. years. Herodot. lib. 7.


But Mardonius could not persuade Xerxes before his going to Egypt: for he went
to Egypt in the second year after Darius death: and after he had subdued them,
and brought them into a straighter servitude then they were under Darius, he
made his return toward Greece, leaving behind him in Egypt his brother
Archemenes to govern the country. After he had been four years in subduing
Egypt, the fifth year he took this voyage with great expedition to Greece.
Greece then flourished: Functius lib. 2.
for even at that time, and specially after Xerxes time, their fame grew
greater by their great victories had over Xerxes: for in Greece every city
seemed a kingdom, and so continued until the Peloponesian wars: such
magistrates, such captains, as Themistocles, who by Thucydides was thus
commended Themistocles.
that he excelled for his wit, that he wanted neither foresight of things to
come, neither memory of things past, neither unprovided of things present, and
what he knew not, he would learn: and what he was taught he could perform:
ready of wit, quick of actions, and circumspect in all his doings, the honor
and glory of all Greece. After whom Pericles was had in great estimation in
Athens. So of Agesilaus and Cleomenes in Sparta: of Epaminondas and Pelopidas
in Thebes: and so the rest at that time in Greece, of whom I have written in
the history of Greece.

After him succeeded his son Artaxerxes the long handed, Artaxerxes the fifth
king of Persia.
for that the right hand was longer then the left, a noble and a courteous
prince, and the first of this name of all the kings of Persia: he began to
govern Persia after Xerxes his father, at what time Perdicas the second of
that name, and the 11. king of Macedonia reigned. To this Artaxerxes fled that
worthy man Thucyd. lib. 1.
Themistocles, being banished from Athens, whom often from destruction he
saved, and by whom the great overthrow was given to Xerxes and to his navy, to
the glory of Greece, and shame of Xerxes. In this Artaxerxes time flourished two
great Philosophers, Empedocles and Parmenides. Many learned men of great fame
lived in Artaxerxes time, as Democritus and Heraclitus, two philosophers, the
one laughing always at the folly of the world, the other always weeping at
the misery of the world. Hipocrates that famous physician served this
Artaxerxes Many learned men flourish.
in Court, Gorgias and Pherecides, Policlitus and Herodotus. Greece began to
flourish in philosophy, and in all knowledge about this time. In this kings
time the Romans sent to Athens for the laws of the twelve tables, at what
time the Romans created ten men named Decemuiri, to interpret the Leges
duodecim tabularum.
laws. About this time Titus Liuius writes that the Frenchmen came out of
Scythia, first with one Marcomirus, to the number of 489. thousand to the
confines of Germany, where they were called first Nemmagi by the Saxons: the
second name they had of Cambra the Queen, and were called Sicambri, and the
third name of Francus a king, they were named Franci, as you may read more in
the history of France.

But to return to Artaxerxes, whose zeal to the Church was such, that he
commanded the Edict of Cyrus to be performed, which was hindered by Cambyses,
and by Darius Histaspis his own grandfather, who after once he had permitted
the Jews to have Cyrus decree performed, a good king, yet he was let to do
that which now his son does, by reason of the wars which he had in Egypt
and Greece: for then wars were put to silence in Asia and in the East part.

At this time Artaxerxes did send Esdras with great treasures Artaxerxes good
benefits to the Jews.
and substance to Jerusalem, in the seventh year of his reign, to build up
again Jerusalem, to repair the temple, and to restore to the Jews their
common wealth. This Artaxerxes is named in Esdras to be Darius by the prophet
Aggeus and Zachary, at what time a great multitude of the Jews came from
Babylon Esdras comes from Babylon.
with Esdras to Jerusalem, though Sisines the governor of Syria and Phoenicia
would had hindered them, had not Artaxerxes commanded to help them.

All this time Artabanus mused how he might destroy Artaxerxes to have the
kingdom: for to that end before he slew Xerxes this kings father, and that
imagination was strong with Artabanus, laying the like snares to murder
Artaxerxes: but Artabanus snares.
Artaxerxes having intelligence of the same, and fearing Artabanus sons,
seven stout and gallant gentlemen, he gathered an army of soldiers, as though
he had some secret voyage in hand, amongst whom Artabanus was soonest and
readiest armed: and as Artaxerxes vewed his army, he spied Artabanus
Melancthon lib. 2. Chr^n.
in arms, of whom still he stood in fear, until he prevented the danger with
Artabanus death to save his own life. The Jews took this Artaxerxes to be
Darius Histaspis son, whom they called Assuerus by queen Esther. By this
good king Nehemias was sent after Esdras to Jerusalem, with the like rewards as
before. From the seventh year of this Artaxerxes, surnamed the long hand, some
do begin the seventy weeks of Daniel, concerning the coming of Messiah.
About this time Pericles died, a noble Captain of Athens that succeeded
Pericles.
Themistocles: and Plato was borne, whose master Socrates flourished at that
time. Thucydides which lived in the time of Artaxerxes says, Themistocles was
driven from Athens, and banished unto Persia, yea and to come to serve this
king, whose father he anoyed so much, and whose people he vanquished in four
great battles: so ungrateful Athens was toward Themistocles, Aristides,
Alcibiades and others, of whom I do speak in the history of Greece.

The Jews had some quietness from Artaxerxes time the fifth king of Persia,
until the time of Ochus the eight king of Persia. Likewise the Grecians were
in rest, and had the cities and countries to use with free liberty by means
of this king Artaxerxes: for the Athenians and the Peloponesians were made
friends for fourteen years, of whose war afterward Thucydides continues
his history, and writes the calamity of Greece, which ensued the civil
wars of the Grecians. After followed the Peloponesian wars, which continued
27. years, to the Artaxerxes Mnemon lived about 400. years before Augustus
Caesar.
overthrow of all Greece. In the seventh year of this war died Artaxerxes,
after he had reigned forty and four years: this war began before Augustus
Caesar four hundredth years.

About this time Capua was taken of the Samnits, and Macedonia was in many
places wasted and burned by a Thracian Thucidid lib. 2.
captain called Sitalices. Agis was king in Lacedemonia this time, and
Archidamus reigned in Sparta. There lived more learned men in Artaxerxes time
then in any one kings time, and that in every part and coast of the world, and
therefore it is not amiss to put them in one place, for that they were at one
time, I mean one age: especially of Romans and Grecians.

Esdras and Nehemias, two noble Jews. Aggeus and Zacharias, two godly
Prophets. Empedocles and Parmenides, two great Philosophers. Phericides, an
Historiographer of Syria. Cratinus, a great writer of Tragedies and Comedies.
Sophocles and Euripides the Tragaedians. And Proclitus a Philosopher.
Democritus and Heraclitus, two Philosophers. Hippocrates, a famous Physician,
attendant upon king Artaxarexes. Ctesias, a Persian Chronographer, and one of
Artaxerxes household. Socrates flourished this time, and Plato his scholar was
yet but young. Herodotus and Thucydides, two great writers. Aristophanes and
Protagoras, whose books were burned in Athens by a public Edict. And a little
after, Pindarus and Diogoras the Philosopher. Zeuxes and Phidias, two renowned
cunning men in cutting or grauing Images, statues, in painting most excellent,
which skill amongst the Grecians was much esteemed. In Artaxerxes time lived
Miltiades, Themistocles, Cimon, and Pericles, four famous Athenians. In Rome
Lucius Sicinius dentatus, a very strong man, Tribune of the people: of whose
strength Pliny in his seventh book, Cap. 28. and Solinus, Cap. 6. In
Artaxerxes time the Romans sent to Athens for the twelve Tables which Solon
had made, to be had in great reverence amongst the Grecians.
In Persia after Artaxerxes succeeded Darius Nothus: this married Darius Nothus.
Artaxerxes sister. Bibliander thought him to be Xerxes son: others named
him Xerxes the second: others affirming him to be Artaxerxes son: but it is
not much material, for Chronographers omit to put him amongst the kings of
Persia: so Ctesias himself a Persian writer, who lived in his days, and
served his predecessor Artaxerxes. While this Darius reigned in Persia, the
Egyptians again began to revolt: at what time Amartheus governed Egypt, and
Orestes reigned king in Macedonia.

The Athenians made this time a league with the Lacedaemonians: likewise they
concluded a peace with the Argiues, and with the people of Mantinea, by the
counsel of Alcibiades. This time gave the Lacedaemonians a great overthrow to
the Thucidides lib. 5.
Argiues, whereupon peace was concluded, Agis being then king in Lacedemonia,
and himself general in the field at Tegaea. The state of Greece was to be
lamented from time to time: for as they did think all the world to be
barbarous beside themselves: so of themselves they could not agree, until all
Greece was through civil wars destroyed and wasted, one country bickering at
another, and one city envying an other, that they who triumphed often over the
strong Persians, are now trodden under foot of their next neighbors.

For in this Darius Nothus time, when the Athenians had given an overthrow to
the Syracusans, the Lacedaemonians envied The Syracusans.
so much Athens, that they sent a great company of soldiers with Gilippus
their captain, to bring down the victories of the Athenians, at what time the
Athenians were overthrown, and the Syracusans triumphed. In this war died
that noble fellow Nicias the general of the Athenian army, with many mo
famous Athenians, which shall be more at large in another place, when we speak
of Greece, be declared. The Rhodians this time did revolt from the
Lacedaemonians, whereupon the Lacedaemonians sent ambassadors to Persia to this
Darius to have his friendship, and to join with the Lacedaemonians in a league
of peace: for the Medes likewise (as the Egyptians did before them) revolted
from Darius: for at that time Egypt and Media began to rebel against Darius.

About this time Alcibiades, who succeeded Nicias in Athens, Alcibiades
victory at Chalcedon.
had gotten a great victory at Chalcedon, overthrew the captain Pharnabazus
taken by Zantium, and was thereby made chief captain of the Athenians, being
absent from Athens.

Now when Darius had reigned nineteen years in Persia, Darius Nothus died.
Artaxerxes Mnemon.
he left behind him two sons, Artaxerxes surnamed Mnemon, to whom he
bequethed the kingdom of Persia being his eldest son, and Cyrus his second
son, to whom likewise he gave certain cities and provinces under his
government. Cyrus not well contented with his fathers will, he secretly rose
in arms against his brother his father yet living: who commanding Cyrus to be
brought unto him, laid him for a time in prison, and kept him in fetters of
gold.

But after Darius time, it grew to further malice and to open wars: for Cyrus
bearing the name of the former ancient The name of Cyrus.
Cyrus, (which was a dear name among the Persians) was the bolder to fall out
with his brother, supposing that the Persians would the more favor him for the
names sake, which in truth among the Persians was much honored. Cyrus was
from his cradle of a hot stirring mind, Artaxerxes mild and gentle in all his
actions: he was named first Arsicas, and is with many writers so called.

Now when Artaxerxes was consecrated king at Pasargardes in the temple of
Minerua by the priests of Persia, reports were made unto him, that Cyrus his
brother had conspired his death, and had laid wait to kill him: of the which
Artaxerxes Plutarch. in Artax.
was by his counsel persuaded to try out the treason of Cyrus: which being
found out, yet by the means of his mother Parysatis who loved Cyrus dearly,
he was of that fault pardoned.

Notwithstanding the great courtesy of Artaxerxes toward Cyrus, he after this
thirsted more for the kingdom of Cyrus wars against Artaxerxes.
Persia then before: for this king Artaxerxes Mnemon, following his
grandfathers steps Artaxerxes the long handed in all goodness and virtue, he
was much beloved of his subjects, honored of his country, and of all
countries much esteemed: he gave himself to hear suitors causes, and to let
his poor subjects to have access unto him to open their causes. Now such as
desired innouations and change, gave out Diodorus lib. 14.
that the greatness of the Empire of Persia stood in need of a king that should
be always in arms, such a prince as Cyrus was: these people stirred up Cyrus
to open war against his brother, who leaving the government of Lydia, being
also general lieutenant of all Asia given unto him by his father Darius, sent
messengers unto Lacedemonia for help, gathered of Greece and of barbarous
nations, to the number of thirteen thousand, beside his own force, and
marched Cyrus army ^3. thousand.
boldly forward, until he heard that Artaxerxes had an Artaxerxes
army of nine hundred thousand fighting men: yet Cyrus went forward, and gave
him battle and diverse sore assaults, 9 hundred thousand.
but prevailed not: this war is of Xenophon excellently described and set
forth in all points. In this battle was Artaxerxes hurt, by Cyrus his own
hand, but afterward the misery and the extremity of Cyrus was such, as by
Plutarch is set in the life of Mnemon. The cause of this war was ambition,
and the desire of Cyrus to the kingdom: but (as Melancthon says) the rather
moved hereunto by his mother Parysatis, Mela^cthon 2. Chron. Pary s^is Artax.
mother
who hated Statira Artaxeres wife, to the death.

The great magnanimity, justice, modesty, liberality, and other singular
virtues which shined in this Cyrus, is of Xenophon not forgotten in his book
de Cyriminoris expeditione: for Lib. 8.
after Cyrus death, all those that boasted to have slain him, were by
Parysatis means Cyrus mother so persecuted, that they died most miserably, as
Artasyras and Mithridates. To be short, this Parysatis the kings mother found
no rest, until she S^atyra Artaxerxes wife. Agesilaus.
had poisoned the Queen Statyra her daughter in law. In the mean season,
Agesilaus king of Lacedemon makes wars with the Persians: Artaxerxes wisely
looking to the war, sends Hermocrates to the most part of the cities of
Greece, with great treasures of gold and silver, to raise the rest of the
Grecians against the Lacedaemonians. During this garboile between Artaxerxes
and Agesilaus, Parysatis was sent to Babylon to Parysatis sent for to Babylon.
come to the Court: for the king kept not his anger long against his mother.
After this, Artaxerxes took a journey against the Caduceans, sent an army to
Egypt, who had reuoulted from his father, and thought to recover both Media and
Diodor. lib. 15.
Egypt.

Now the King entering into some years, hearing of some stir and contention
between his two sons, Darius and Ochus, either of them aspiring into the
kingdom, the younger being Ochus a valiant man, but of a hot nature, and had
some in the Court that wrought both with the king, and with his sister Atossa,
who loved him dearly, and (as Plutarch says) too dearly, by a crime between
them both suspected.

Notwithstanding Artaxerxes proclaimed Darius his eldest son to be king, to
see whether the like contention and rebellion would grow between his children,
as fell between him and his brother Cyrus, and to put Ochus his younger son
Ochus.
out of all hope to succeed in Persia a king after his father: he commanded
according to the law of Persia, that his son Darius should wear the point
of his hatte right up in token of his succession: for it was not lawful to
any, saving to the king or to his successor, to wear his hatte with the point
upward.

There was likewise a custom in Persia, that when any A custom among the
Persians.
should be proclaimed successor or heir apparent to the crown, he should
request any one thing at the kings hand, and have it: there was a very fair
gentlewoman taken after Melancthon 2. Chron.
Cyrus death in the camp by Artaxerxes, who had been in great favor with
Cyrus a Grecian, borne in Ionia named Aspasia, called for wit and beauty
(...).

This woman did Artaxerxes so esteem, as when his son Darius craved this
woman for his gift, he was much offended thereby, and yet must of force depart
from her, according to the law of Persia, but it cost Darius his life: for
after Aspasia was taken again from Darius by his father, he began to be
Plutarch in Artax.
moved herein, and to conspire the kings death, being well set forward by
Tiribazus: for ill council easily takes place, as Sophocles says. But
Artaxerxes had intelligence of this treason, and laid wait to take them in
that place where they had appointed to murder the king: and thus they being
prevented, were adjudged to die according to the law, both Darius and
Tiribazus.

Now Darius being dead, Ochus Darius brother stood in good hope to be next
heir to the crown, and the rather, by the means of his sister Atossa, of
whom some suspicion was Atossa married to her father Artaxerxes.
spread abroad of incontinencie between Artaxerxes her own father, and Atossa
whom he married afterward, yet he feared the succession of his brother
Ariaspes, for the Persians honored him mst.

Artaxerxes had another son named Arsames, a very wise and a valiant man,
whom his father loved dearly, which Ochus well understood, and therefore he
determined to entrappe them both: his malice and cruelty was such, for that he
knew his brother Ariaspes to be simple and plain, he sent Ariaspes.
some secret messengers with threatening words from the king, forging terrible
news to terrify his brother, telling him how the king was determined to
execute extreme justice upon him for diverse pretended treasons proved against
him: poor Ariaspes was put in such despair of his life, that he ended all
with a cup of drink.

King Artaxerxes understanding of his sons death in such Artaxerxes M^n had
60. children by concubines.
sort, took it very heavily, and began to suspect Ochus the more: he then
laid his love altogether upon Arsames one of his bastard sons (for he had
six score children by co^cubines, and he had but three only legitimate) Ochus
having brought to pass al his purpose, saving Arsames, who being in the
greatest favor with the king, could no longer abide to defer his intent,
entised Harpaces, Tiribazus son, to make an end of this tragedy to kill his
brother, which he performed: which Arsames killed by Tiribazus son.
whe^it was told the king, being very weak and almost gone for age, he took
it to his heart, and consumed the few days which were behind of his life, in
great anguish and sorrow, after he had lived four score and fourteen years,
and had reigned in Persia 62. years: Thus the house and stock of noble Cyrus
ended. Artax. reigned 62. years.


CHAP. IIII.
Of the tyranny of Darius Ochus: of his son Arsames, and of the utter
confusion and last ruin of the Persians, in the time of the last king Darius
surnamed Codomanus, by Alexander the great.

IT was found that this Artaxerxes Mnemon, surnamed with the Grecians the
great, was a noble, wise, and discreet prince, in respect of the succession
that reigned after him. Eusebius took this to be Assuerus, which married Esher,
as the Hebrews did: but Zonaras, Bibliander, Melancthon, with others affirm
Darius Hystaspis, as before is spoken.

During the long reign of this king, reigned in Macedonia four kings one
after another, Pausanias, Amyntas, Argeus, and the fourth Amyntas again: in
Egypt governed Nectanebus, and in Sparta, after the death of Agis governed
Agesilaus, a wise valiant prince, who invaded Phrygia, scattered the army of
Tisaphernes the Persian, and put him to flight at the river Pactolus.

In this kings time was Lysander, that so much plagued the Athenians, slain by
the Thebans, a man of great fame amongst the Lacedaemonians: diverse are of
opinion, that he reigned not so long as Plutarch says: some attributing
forty, as Ruffinus: Ruffinus de origin Persar.
others 36. as Functius does: but it is not material: he was a just, modest,
and a wise king: Persia, Asia, and all Greece, and specially Judea might so
say, when they saw the tyranny of Ochus, who succeeded him.

About this time in Rome Camillus triumphed over the people Camillus triumphed.
called Veyans, when M. Manlius and Lu. Valerius were Consuls. In this
Artaxerxes time lived Mausolus king in Caria, Mausolus tomb.
of whose wife named Artimesia it is thus reported, that when the king her
husband died, she made him such a sumptuous tomb, so worthy a monument, so
brave a building, that it was compted for the rareness thereof, one of the
seven wonders of the world: for Artemesia had the most skilfullest cunning men
of that age, as Timotheus, Scopas, Brixias, and Leocharas. Likewise reigned in
this time in Thessalia a great P^nij. lib. 36. Alex. Pheraeus a tyrant.
tyrant Alexander Pheraeus, who was wont to bury men alive, and to put others
in the skins of bears and wild bores, and then to set hounds upon them to
tear them in pieces: others he would bind to a post naked, and would
himself both shoot and throw darts to kill them. In a battle against this
tyrant Pelopidas that valiant Theban captain was slain, and afterward the
tyrant was killed by his own wife.

In this Artaxerxes time Rome was laid siege unto, and taken Eutropius lib. 2.
T. Lini. lib. 6.
by the Frenchmen: but by Camillus the Roman dictator manfully rescued, to the
overthrowing of the Volcos, and the Hetruscans: he subdued their people,
wasted their towns, and afterward builded up Rome again, repaired the
Capitol after that he had repulsed the Frenchmen, and made them Eutrop. lib. 1.
most willing to flee from Rome. About this time two great Towns in the
Country of Poloponesus in Greece, were swallowed up by an earthquake, called
Helice and Burae.

Plato the Philosopher, about this time flourished. Aristotle was yet a young
man, Platoes scholar, forty and four years younger then his master.
Diogenes lived this time: so far does Xenophons history of the Grecians
reach: for he began where Thucydides left. Socrates Platoes master, was now
in Athens poisoned. Demosthenes borne in the one year with Aristotle, a famous
Orator afterward. Ctesias a Persian Historiographer, served this king
Artaxerxes in his house.
Artaxerxes Ochus after he had killed his two brethren Ariaspes Ochus 8. king
of Persia.
and Arsames, succeeded his father, not in justice, but in tyranny: not in
governing of his subjects, but in murdering of princes: of all the kings of
Persia most cruel: yea Cambyses could not match him: for after he had played
the bear at home with his own people, he played like the lion abroad amongst
other nations, specially with the Jews, who lived all this time in
tranquillity, enjoying Halciones days in building Darius Ochus compared to
Cambyses.
up Jerusalem, in repayring the Temple, in rearing up the walls, in planting
again religion, and inhabiting Judea, and so possessing the liberty of the
Country granted first by Cyrus, confirmed by Darius, but fully permitted by
Artaxerxes, surnamed Longhanded, Esdras, Nehemias, Zorobabel, being instruments
thereunto appointed, and authorized by these good kings. But this cruel Ochus
after he had destroyed the stock of Cyrus in the beginning of his government,
he laid siege to Sidon, kept them most miserably without any hearing of peace
or offering of mercy, though it was by the best and grauest citizens humbly
entreated for, whom he most cruelly slew without respect to the law of arms:
whereat the citizens being desperate to see his tyranny, they burned the town
Read this miserable historic in Diod.
and themselves, to the number of forty thousand.

After this, Ochus took his voyage to Ciprus, where reigned at that time a
familiar friend of his named Euagoras, who^ he, after he had taken Ciprus, and
made slaughter most cruelly of the citizens, killed without respect of old
amity and acquaintance. Of this Euagoras there is extant an eloquent oration
Oros. lib. 3. cap. 7
of Isocrates: he proceeded forward in arms to Egypt, where he exercised the
like tyranny with sword and fire without mercy, until he had subdued Egypt:
thence he went, fomed in blood unto Phoenicia, with all tyranny he could
devise. Now after he had subdued Sidon, Ciprus, Egypt, Phoenicia, he would
not spare Judea the next province unto Phoenicia, which had been in great rest
from Artaxerxes the long handed until this time: at what time contention grew
between two brethren about the office of the high Priest at Jerusalem, Iohanna
who was then the high Priest, and Jesus who sought aid at Vagoses hand the
Persian: to avoid this help Iohanna slew his brother in the temple of Solomon.

Thus they did provoke God to anger, and God raised Vagoses, Ochus lieutenant
to be their enemy, brought him to Jerusalem, went to the temple which was
profaned and polluted Melancthon 2. Chron.
with blood. Vagoses spoiled it, carried the treasures with him: to whom the
high Priest had told him that he did most wickedly so to defile the temple:
he answered, Not so wickedly as thou in killing thy brother. When he had both
spoiled Jerusalem and the temple, and brought the Jews under Ochus foot to
pay tribute unto the Persians for the space of seven Vagoses Ochus lieutenant.
years: after this he brought diverse families of the Jews captives with him
unto Hircania: this great calamity endured The Jews plagued by Ochus.
unto Alexander the great, which when he came to Jerusalem, made all things
well again. Of this Ochus there is no good thing to be written, though Herodot
does not altogether omit him. Ctesias does make likewise mention of him,
Ochus a cruel king.
and does write of his birth, of his life, and of his government, and does much
vary from others: for Ctesias ever flattered the Persia kings, forwhich
Plutarch in many places reproves him. In this time reigned king in Macedonia
Perdiccas, who was taken by the Illyrians in battle: after him succeeded
Philippus Amyntas son, and father to Alexander the great, who began to move
war against the Athenians, and continued after against other cities of Greece
for three years.

In the eleventh year of Ochus was Alexander the great borne: the same self
day was the temple of Diana in Ephesus burned, at the which time Philomelus a
captain of Phocea in Justinius lib. 8.
Greece, spoiled the temple of Apollo at Delphos: thereby grew great wars
called sacrum bellum, which continued ten years in Greece. About this time
Clearchus the tyrant reigned Functius lib. 3.
in Heraclia, and Spartacus the son of Leuconis reigned as king in Pontus.

In the eleventh year that Phillip reigned king in Macedonia, Philip of
Macedon.
Greece was sore troubled and vexed: for Philip with an army of Macedonia
took Myciberna, Tiro, and Olynthus, three great towns of Helespont: he
pursued the Phoceans unto the temple of Apollo at Delphos, who thinking to have
sanctuary, were burned: the rest of Phocea yielded to Philip. Timoleon a noble
captain of Corinth sailed to Sicilia, ouerthrewe the castle of Syracusa, and
made a popular state of Syracusa: he delivered the Greeks that were in bondage
in Sicilia under the Carthagineans, unto their country, and banished the
thousand traitorous soldiers that had forsaken Timoleon in Sicilia. This
Plutarch in Timoleon.
time Philip subdued the Illyrians, vanquished the Thracians, and delivered
Thessalie from tyrants, that long governed in Thessalia: he made free all the
cities of Greece from all the incursions of barbarous nations, and concluded a
peace with the Greeks.

The old Persians had this custom when they went to wars, to go in red
cassockes according to the Persians manners: so did Artaxerxes enter to battle
with his brother Cyrus, If you will know of Cyrus fully, read Xen^phon de
(...) l. and also de exp^dt. Cyri.
at what time every soldier should put an arrowe with his name written on it,
into a large great coffer that stood in the kings Court: which arrowe if he
returned alive from the wars, he should at his coming to Persia take his
arrowe out of the coffer: for by arrows left in the coffer, they knew who
they were, and how many that died in their wars.

This time died Plato, and Speusippus succeeded him in his school, after whom
succeeded Xenocrates. Aristotle the Philosopher flourished in this time.
Demosthenes and Aeschines, two famous Orators, bore most swaynowe in Athens.
After Ochus had reigned in tyranny twenty six years, he was used even as
he had used others, slain of Bagoas, and Ochus slain of Bagoas.
his son called Arsames being very young succeeded him: who when he had been
four years king, and had grown into some stature of body, Bagoas feeling a
gilitie conscience, for that he had killed Ochus the kings father, fearefullest
some revenge would fall unto him, he to prevent the danger thereof, practiced
the like conspiracy against the son, as he did before against his father,
and slew the young king: this was the end of Ochus, and his son Arsames: no
marvel to see tyrants Arsames, Ochus son slain by Bagoas.
die by tyranny.

This Bagoas would have had translated the kingdom of Persia, after this
murder of the father and the son, and his great tyranny unto one Darius,
governor at that time of Armenia: for he had murdered al them that issued out
of Cyrus: for when Artaxerxes Mnemon had made wars with the Caduceans, one of
those nations challenged Monomachian, which is Darius the last king of Persia.
a combat, with any one Persian that durst take him in hand: Darius one of
Artaxerxes captains fought with this Caducean and slew him, to whom the
government of Armenia was given for that service by Artaxerxes.

Now Bagoas when he had brought Darius to be king in Persia, still his
conscience tormented him, and doubted much Darius, and fearing lest he should
have the reward of a traitor, he devised to poison Darius: but of the
conspiracy Darius had such intelligence, as Bagoas was forced to drink that
Bagoas drank of his own poison.
draught which he had prepared for Darius, and so Bagoas drank his own
poison, and dyed.

Now the great kings of Persia (for so were they called in Diodod. 17.
respect of their force and power) continued no longer, their race ended, their
kingdom cameto an Aliens hand, a foreign prince, who in short time waxed
strong and stout withal, not inferior to any of his predecessors: who having
intelligence of a great army of Macedonians and Grecians by Philip king of
Macedon sent to Asia, he gathered his force, and having Alex. the great
already a huge host of Persians, he appointed a general over them called
Memnon, a Rhodian, a singular skillful soldier. In the mean season Philip
died, and his son Alexander the great succeeded him, a young gallant king, of
twenty years of age: this stepped in into his fathers room, he enterteined his
fathers soldiers, and took the wars of Asia in hand. Darius hearing of
Alexanders setting forward, made him ready, stirred the cities of Greece
against him, so that diverse of Greece understanding the force, power, and
flourishing state of Persia, dehorted their country men from Alexander,
Melancthon 2. Chron.
and to stick and to stay with Darius.

The Thebanes began to forsake the Macedonians, saying they would fight with
the Persians, which had often defended the liberty of Greece. Demosthenes
traueiled as much as lay in him, to bring the Athenians to join with the
Thebanes, and so to stand with the Persians: for Demosthenes so hated
Alexander, Thebes destroyed.
that he called him (...), as Aeschines says. This moved Alexander to some
anger: he returned to Greece, began with the Thebans, destroyed and brought the
city of Thebes even to the ground, after he had slain six thousand Thebans,
and taken captives thirty thousand.

Then Alexander sent to Athens, required those men which persuaded this war,
to be sent unto him, which was Demosthenes, Lycurgus, and others. Here
Demosthenes persuaded the Athenians with a fable of the wolf, who offered peace
to the shepherds upon condition to banish their dogs, opened the meaning of
Alexander, and the danger ensuing: Demades sent to Alex.
and therefore Demades an eloquent Orator, and one that loved peace was sent
unto Alexander to entreat for peace: which was granted by Alexander in such
gentle sort, that he wan great favor in all Greece: such was the clemency and
liberality of this prince, that all Greece with one consent made him the
general and defender of their liberties.

Now having laid al things quiet in Greece, he came in the second year of his
reign toward Asia. In the mean season Darius king of Persia having leauied a
great army, sent his captains The first battle between Alex. and Dari. at
the river of Granicus.
and lieutenants to tarry Alexander at the river Granicus, and there to give
battle, where Alexander must fight of necessity, that river being the only
bar to stop his entry unto Asia. Darius had two captains, named Rosases,
and Spithridates, who being valiant men, began the battle, and did set upon
Alexander both together. Alexander was in great danger, had not Clitus his
foster brother saved him at that time: for many Melanct. lib. 2. Chron.
came at once upon him: yet Darius in the endhad the worst: for the Persians
stood not to it, but turned their backs and fled, and Darius army was put to
flight. This was the first battle fought between Darius and Alexander, at the
river of Granicus. In the second battle Darius himself comes in person against
600. thousand n the 2. battle of Darius in Cicilia.
the great Alexander, having leauied in Susa a great power of six hundred
thousand fighting men, trusting much in the multitude of his soldiers, the
rather further emboldened by a dream which Darius saw. Beside all this, he
waxed more bold, for that Alexander stayed so long in Cicilia, supposing him
to be afraid: so partly by his great army, and partly by his dream (which was,
that he saw all the Macedonian army on a fire) and partly for that he thought
Alexander durst not come, he waxed proud, and used contemptuous words against
Alexander, Darius contemptuous words of Alex.
saying he feared nothing so much, as that Alexander would flee, before he
would come at him: but he was satisfied by one Amyntas a banished man of
Macedonia, who knew well the disposition of Alexander. This second battle
happened in Cicilia, where Darius was put to flight: howbeit, Alexander was
hurt in one of his thighs with a blow of a sword. Alexand. hurt.
Chares writes, that Darius himself hurt him, and says also, that Darius and
Alexander fought hand to hand in this battle. Darius lost a hundred ten
thousand of his men, yet escaped Darius and fled, but his wife Statira, and his
mother Sisigambis, and Darius, his wife his mother, and his daughter taken.
two of his daughters were taken by Alexander.

Darius having two ouerthrows already, and seeing the great nes of Alexanders
invincible courage, having but 30000. Grecians in his army, with which small
number he conquered all Asia, and all the East countries, Darius sent
Ambassadors to Alexander Darius sent Ambassadors.
with letters to diverse of his friends about him, to entreat of peace,
offering Alexander 10000. talents, with Mesopotamia, and all the countries,
signories, and lands on the one side of Euphrates, with one of his two
daughters in marriage, that they might be kinsemen and friends: but it would
take no Read Curtius of Alexander.
place with Alexand. except Darius submitted himself in person unto the
courtesy of Alexand. Now Statira Darius wife died in travel of child being
captive with Alexander after the second battle, which increased much the
misfortune of Darius. When Darius Ambassadors took no effect for peace, then
he gathered a greater army then the second, and had gottenne An other army of
Darius of 10. hundred thousand.
hundred thousand fighting men against Alexander at the river of Euphrates,
making his prayer unto his gods, that if the kingdom of Persia must needs
have an end either through divine revenge, or by natural change, that none but
Alexander might sit in Cyrus throne after him. Alexander with his army went to
meet with Darius: the battle was fought at Arbelles by report of most
writers, though Plutarch and others named it Gausameles: the victory happened
unto Alexander, unto the overthrow of Darius, and last destruction of Persia.
Diod. lib. 17.


Thus the great Empire of Persia, the glory and renown whereof all the world
spoke of, is brought to an end by Alexander in three battles, with 30. thousand
men. The treasure which Alexander carried away from Persia unto Macedonia, loded
ten thousand Moyles, and five thousand Camels.

The kingdom of Persia continued from Cyrus unto Alexander the great: for as
Cyrus gate Chaldea and Assyria unto Persia from Balthazar the last successor
of Nabuchodonosor: so Alexander got Persia from this Darius, which was none of
Cyrus posterity unto Macedonia, though in truth Arsames the son of Ochus
Darius predecessor was the last of Cyrus house: and yet Melancthon says, that
Darius was Arsames son, and so does Eusebius. Thus ended the great kingdom
of Persia: in like sort as they had by Cyrus woone it, so now by Darius they
lost it: therefore I thought it necessary to set down the names of the kings
of Persia, how many they were, and how long they reigned, from Cyrus the
first, until Darius the last king of Persia.

1 Cyrus the first king of Persia reigned twenty and nine years. 2 Cambyses
his son the second king of Persia, reigned seven years and more. 3 Darius
the son of Hystaspis the third king of Persia, reigned 36. years, married to
Atossa Cyrus daughter. 4 Xerxes Darius son reigned twenty one years. 5
Artaxerxes long handed reigned 44. years. 6 Darius Nothus reigned nineteen
years. 7 Artaxerxes Mnemon reigned forty years. Functius says thirty six
years. Plutarch does write that he reigned sixty two years. 8 Ochus his
son after he had killed both his brethren, Ariaspes and Arsames, reigned
twenty six years. 9 Arsames the son slain by Bagoas, reigned 4. years. 10
Darius the last king of Persia, overthrown by Alexander the great, reigned
six years.
Thus the Greeks lay them down in their Cataloge, though Eusebius otherwaise
sets them down. Darius Medus, Functius.
of whom mention is made in Daniel, is here of the Grecians omitted. Josephus
thinks him to be Ciaxeres Astyages son: and so Xenophon agreeing with
Josephus, places Darius Medus before Cyrus. Metasthenes does not much dissent
from the Greeks in his Cataloge, saving that he speaks not of Cambyses,
because he reigned in his fathers time: for he was appointed to be king in
Persia in the absence of Cyrus, who in his own person went against the
Scythians at that time.

Likewise Metasthenes omitteth to speak of Xerxes, who Xerxes omitted by
Metasthenes.
for the like reason being in great wars at that time from home in Greece,
leaving behind him to govern Persia his son Artaxerxes: so that Metasthenes
writes, that Darius Medus and Cyrus, reigned together two years, and then
passes to Darius Hystaspis, which is also called Assuerus, making no mention
of Cambyses name: and then he goes to Artaxerxes Melancthon 2. Chron.
the long handed, passing over the name of Xerxes his father: the cause is laid
down by Melancthon: in the rest Metasthenes does agree with the Greeks.

After that the Persians the strongest and the greatest nations of the world
had gotten the Monarchy of the Assyrians and Chaldeans, not by the sword of
Cyrus, but by the idolatry of Balthazar, whom God gave over unto Cyrus hand,
making an end of one, and beginning with the other: for the finger of God does
appoint Monarchies according to Sirach, saying: No kingdom shall be translated,
if wickedness of the king and kingdom be not the cause thereof.
Nabuchodonosor was converted and confessed Gods power: Euilmerodach his son
acknowledged the Highest: but Balthazar through blasphemy and idolatry lost
the Empire of Assyria: Even so in Persia, while Cyrus, Darius Medus, Darius
Hystaspis, Artaxerxes governed Persia, the Persians flourished, they were lords
of the whole world. Now when Alexander had abated their pride and diminished
11^. Olympiad.
their force, and had taken their Empire from them unto Macedonia, and had
substituted lieutenants and governors under him in all kingdoms and
countries, where the Persians had before sovereignty: for as the Persians were
obscure and of no fame before Cyrus time, so after Alexander the great, their
renown was lost, their pomp and their pride decayed, and their kings
afterward of small account: for now Macedonia and the Grecians triumphed, and
the Persians being destroyed and scattered without any king or any prince of
Alex. Seuerus anno Christ. 225.
fame to govern them, until the time of Alexander Seuerus Emperor of Rome,
five hundred and fifty years after Alexander the great, at what time lived in
Rome Vrbanus Bishop there at that time: this Emperor had a mother named
Mammea, a wise and a discreet woman, who having knowledge that Origin, a great
man in the Church of God was then at Antioche, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 18.
sent for him, and so enterteined him as a rare jewel in those days. At that
time reigned in Persia one Artaxerxes, who being of the name of the ancient
kings of Persia, was Olymp. 251.
likewise wise and valiant, and in process of time grew so strong, that he
overthrew Artabanus king of the Parthians, and thereby restored to the Persians
a beginning of a new kingdom.

CHAP. V.
Of the estate of the Persians under the Romans after the time that they were
conquered by Alexander the great, until the time of Alexander Seuerus Emperor
of Rome 550. years after, at what time began the new kingdom of Persia by
one Artaxerxes, and of his successors, until the Persians the fourth time were
utterly destroyed by the Saracens.

THe Persians again began to take strength, and to draw together in the
fourth year Agath. lib. 2. and 4. de bello Gothoru^.
of Alexander Seuerus reign, in the which time flourished many great and famous
learned men, which were for their singularity elected Counselors to the
Emperor, as Fabius Sabinus. Domitius Vlpianus. Aelius Gordianus. Julius
Paulus. Pomponius Alphenus. Florentius and Martianus. Calistratus and
Hermogenes. Venulcius and Triphonius. Metianus and Celsus. Porculus and
Modestius,
professors of all the civil law, and to Papinianus a singular rare man in
those days: but of this matter Lampridius does write at large. But let us now
return to Persia, and to the new The Persians without king from the 112.
Olymp. to 251. Olymp.
kingdom which had been so long without king or kingdom, but kept under of
every nation not daring to name a king from Darius until this Artaxerxes.

This first king of the new kingdom of Persia, after he had slain Artabanus
king of Parthia, and had reigned fifteen years: he was overthrown and
subdued by the Roman Emperor Alexander Seuerus, of whom he triumphed
Herodimus.
in the ninth year of his Empire, though some hold the contrary, that
Alexander in that battle was discomfited by Artabanus.

In this time the Romans had gotten three great victories, one in Mauritania
by Furius Celsus: the second in Illirico by Varus Macrinus: and the third in
Armenia by Iunius Palinatus, three famous Romans: of these victories
Lampridius makes mention: Herodianus says, that in France reigned
Hildegastus, a king much honored of the Frenchmen, by whose Hildegastus.
diligence and policy France, which was then rude and barbarous both in
living and in manners, became civil and pollitike: for unto this time their
building was very base and simple in France. About this time Origene was
called from Herodian lib. 6. Orig^ne.
Alexandria unto Caesarea, where he made his book entitled De Martyrio.

And now was Julius Affricanus of great estimation after Iu. Affrican.
Artaxerxes succeeded Sapores, the second king of Persia: this reigned thirty
one years, he had sore wars with Gordianus Gordianus.
king of Africa: this Gordianus pronounced open wars, and commanded their
temple of Ianus to be opened as the Romans did use when war was proclaimed:
he destroyed many Cities and Towns, and continued his wars against Eutrop.
lib. 8.
the Persians, made great havoc in all places, and gave the repulse to
Sapores: how be it Gordianus was by conspirators deceived, and of him whom
he deserved well of, by treachery slain of one Philip, surnamed Arabs.

This Philip governed the Romans five years, and builded a town of his own
named Thracia, called Philippus Caesar, at what time the plays Ludi
saeculares, were set forth with such 257. Olymp.
pomp in Rome, as the like to that time were not seen. The Parthians invaded
Armenia, drove the king called Tyridas Eusebius.
out of the country, took his children, and possessed his country: certain
sects of heresy began in Arabia, which Origin did overthrow: in Affrike
likewise questions grew, whether Hist. eccle. lib. 6. cap. 2.
heretics being converted from their errors might be rebaptized: of this
Ciprian, and the ecclesiastical histories write, Ciprian lib. 1. epist. 2.
and of a council called concerning the same: for Berilhis about this time
bishop of Bostherna, fell to a monstrous error, denying the eternity of
Christ. In the twelfth year of Sapores reign happened such a sickness in the
most part of the world, specially in Egypt and Alexandria, that Ciprian thereby
took an occasion to write a book entitled De mortalitate. Trebellius.


About this very time the Goths rushed into Asia, spoiled towns and cities,
wasted many countries, burned the great temple of Diana at Ephesus, and did
great harm: the Germans Oros. (...), cap. 22.
joined with the Frenchmen, gathered a huge army very strong against the
Romans, ented into Italy, made havoc in all places, until they came to
Rauenna. Trebellius sets down the spoil that the Goths have done in
Greece, in Pontus, and in Macedonia. But to return to Sapores king of Persia,
who in the seventeenth year of his reign got a great army of soldiers,
entered into Syria, Cilicia, and Capadocia, committed great cruelty and
slaughter, until Valerian the Emperor met him in Mesopotamia, and gave him
battle, where the king of Persia was overthrown and taken by the Emperor, by
Sapores taken.
whom he was kept captive in miserable servitude all his life afterward in
Persis. Odenatus held then the whole Empire of the East in his hand at this
time, which being slain by his coosin Maeonis, Zenobia Odenatus wife, a famous
woman revenged her husbands death, after the king her husband had Zenobia
Odenatus wife.
vanquished the Persians, and had put the king Sapores to flight, and pursued
him unto the city of Ctesiphon, where he besieged him, and brought him to
great extremity. This Zenobia ruled the Palmyrians with her two young sons
Herreminianus and Timolaus, and as Trebellius writes of her, she sent an army
of soldiers against Egypt, under two valiant captains Sarba and Timogenes:
she was wise, learned and stout, and compted for her courage and magnanimity
a second Semyramis. In the last years of Sapores king of Persia, was Paulus
Samosatenus in the last council had at Antioche, condemned Paulus Samosatenus.
as heretic, and put from his bishopric, by Aurelian the Emperor. The third
king of Persia was called Ormisdates: this Ormisdates the third king of Persia.
reigned but one year, and did nothing worth the writing. But Aurelianus
having assuaged the fury and sedition which then was at Rome, sent his army
to Thracia and to Illyria, where Aurelianus great victories.
he vanquished the Barbarous nations, slew the grand captaiue of the Goths by
the river Danubius, overthrew the Sue^ians, Sarmates and Germans, and slew of
the Almanes fifteen thousand: thence he returned his force unto the East,
vanquished the Palmireans, and their famous Queen zenobia, and after he
invaded Egypt, and triumphed over these nations in Rome.

After this, he began to persecute the Christians, and to send His persecutions
against the Christians.
his commissions abroad unto all places, with great cruelty to vex and to
molest the Church: but in the midst of his tyranny he was slain by
conspiracy of his own servant, Ecclesiast. 7. cap. 26. Orosius lib. 7. cap.
23.
between Bizantium and Heraclea: the heresies of Manichees began in Aurelianus
time.

Now in Persia began Vararanes their fourth king, and another Vararanes the
fourth king of Persia.
of that name succeeded him the fifth king of Persia, of whom there was nothing
done during nine years which they reigned, worth the reciting. After these
succeeded in Persia Narses the sixth king of the Persians: this began to
flourish Narses the sixth king of Persia.
and to wax strong, gathered force about him, and began to war in
Mesopotamia, and in Armenia, wasted, subdued and vanquished all the provinces
thereabout, took Galerius. in hand, and gave him in battle the overthrow.
This Maximinus Constantius Maximinus.
Galerius being elected together with Constantius Chlorus, both Emperors for
two years, the Romans had then their handful to do: diverse nations revolted
from them, and many countries were in arms against them, and they much
weakened from the force and power of the old Romans, by reason of the treason
and murder, one Emperor finding means to kill another: therefore Constantius
was made a governor of a great army of Romans to resist the force of
France, Hispaine, Affricke and Italy. Galerius appointed general against
Greece, Illyrica, Persia, and the East countries: either of these two had the
name of Caesar given them, and well worthy.

For Constantius discomfited the Germans, made free the Frenchmen, subdued and
slew threescore thousand of the Eutrop. lib. 10.
Almanes: Maximinus he on the other side vanquished the whole army of the
Assyrians, gave the overthrow to Narses king of Persia after the first
battle, and at that time brought under the Roman Empire five provinces.

Misdates the eight king of the Persians reigned seven years Misdates the eight
king of Persia.
and nine months, in whose reign happened in Tire and Sydon such an
earthquake, that innumerable people were slain thereby: that houses and whose
streets fell down to the ground, in the year of CHRIST, three hundredth and
six.

In the which time Dioclesian the Emperor, in the ninetenth year of his
reign, began extremely to persecute the Dioclesians persecution.
Christians, which continued most cruelly for thirteen years. Of such
persecution shall you scant read in all the Ecclesiastical histories: this
Emperor was so proud, that after he had done his triumph in Rome with such
pomp and magnificence, Pomponius Laetus.
he commanded his subjects to adore him, and to worship him with some divine
service, Fratrem solis and lune se nuncupans, putting golden shoes on his
feet, wrought with pearls and precious stones, with an edict given, that his
nobles and great men should kiss his feet. By this time Sapor the ninth king
of the Persians had reigned seventy years: he was crowned (as Functius says)
in his mothers womb, Ruffinus de orig. Perfi.
he plagued those Christians that dwelt then in his territories, with taxes,
tribute, and with all cruelty, at length persecuted them with open murder and
slaughter: for he slew Simeon Archbishop of Seleucia, with a hundredth more in
one day of Christians: he laid siege to Nisibis, and got Singara, Bizabda,
and Amyda, three great towns from Constantius Eutrop. lib. 10.
that were under the Romans, took them, scattered and destroyed the Roman
army, that peace was offered to Sapor at that time by the Romans.

Of this king Sapor, and of his great wars called Persicum Ammia. lib. 19.
and 20.
bellum, of his long government, and of his often persecution against the
Christians, read Eutropius and Pomponius Laetus. During his reign Constantine
the great, was Const^ntine the great.
made Emperor of the Romans, the son of Constantius the last before him
surnamed Chlorus, a good Emperor, he sought peace, and restored peace,
specially to the Christians, which were before so persecuted by Dioclesian, by
Valerian, by Sapor, and by the Emperor Licinius, which presently succeeded his
uncle Constantine.

Eusebius says, that Helena the wife of Constantius Chlorus, Helena.
and mother to Constantine the great, found the Cross upon the which our
Savior CHRIST died, in Jerusalem. Of Eusebius trip. lib. 2. cap. 18.
this the Roman Papists make much more ado then of the Son of GOD who died
thereon: for the Messiah our Savior they rob of his glory and honor, and
the Cross of wood they worship and adore.

This Constantine builded two famous great cities, the one Helenopolis and
Constantinopolis builded by Constantine the great.
named Helenopolis after his mothers name, being before called Drepana an
ancient city in Bythinia, the other he builded, and named it after his own
name Constantinopolis, before called Bizantium, a very ancient city in
Thracia. At this time died in Syria and Cilicia, a great multitude of people of
famine and hunger.

This time was Athanasius called from exilement by the Emperor Constantine,
and was sent unto Alexandria, where he was sore vexed by the Arrians, a sect
of heresies sprung up in those days by one Arrius of whom the rest were named
Arrians. Donatius, an arch heritike, a beginner of other heresies, of whom many
heritikes flowed in Affricke. Diverse sects of heresies.
Constantine though he could keep the Church from tyrannical persecution by
restoring of peace, yet he could not stop the rage of heretics which in his
days were many: as the Sabellies, the Manichees, the Donatists, the Arrians,
and the Nouatians: yet God raised singular learned men to defend his Church, as
Origene, who suppressed them, and disputed against them, in Arabia, and in
Africa. After him Cyprian bishop of Carthage, Lactantius a very eloquent man,
and Ambrose bishop of Millaine: but of this you shall read more; where I
entreat of Councils and Synods in the March of Martyrs.

But now to the kings of Persia. Artaxerxes succeeded Sapores, Artaxerxes the
tenth king of Persia.
in Persia the tenth king, and reigned 11. yerees: of whom as of the rest,
little or nothing is to be written: for then the kings of Persia were not of
such fame, or of such force, as before while they ruled as lords over the
world, for two hundredth and thirty years. Now they had much to do to defend
themselves from invasions, the monarchy had passed away to Macedonia, their
wealth, power and country were brought to nothing by Alexander the great: the
kingdom of the Goths and the Vandales began first their government together
The kingdom of the Goths, the Vandales, and of Lombards at this time began.
with this Artaxerxes: the first kingdom of Hunni and of Lombardie, began also
now to take footing in the year of our Lord three hundredth seventy and five.

This time a number of Christians were again restored to their country, which
had been banished before: likewise more then fourscore thousand of
Burgundines, which inhabited about the river Rhene, became Christians at once,
at what time Theodosius the Emperor gave two or three battles to the Goths,
overthrew them, and constrained them to go out of Thracia, with their king
Athanaricus.

This time lived Ambrose bishop of Millaine, and Gregory Ambrose bishop of
Millaine.
Nazianzenus died, two famous learned men, in whose time two Councils were
called, the one in Rome, and the other in Constantinople. Theodosius the
Emperor hearing that Maximus was proclaimed Emperor by his own soldiers in
Armorica, which is called now little Britain, made an army against Maximus,
who now had taken Gratianus, and slew him at Lugdunum, and had driven
Valentianus from his government in Lugdunu^ is Lions in France.
the West part to flee to Theodosius.

By this time stepped to be king in Persia Sapores the second of that name, and
the eleventh king of the Persians: he reigned Sapores the 11. king of Persia.
five years, who without any wars lived his time in rest. In his days were
signs seen in heaven in the likeness of a dove, which burned and appeared for
thirty days, as Eusebius reports, which I omit. Little is to be mentioned of
the last kings of Persia, for that the Romans kept them still down.

About this time Theodosius went with his son Honorius to Constantinople,
leaving behind him in Rome Valentianus to govern, who within a short time by
false conspiracy of Eugenius was destroyed, whereby Eugenius usurped the
Empire: of this you shall read more in the Roman Empire. Augustine Augustinus.
a great clearke and one of Ambrose disciples, was now bishop of Hippo in
Africa.

I thought good once for that I find little or nothing worth the writing of
the kings in Persia in those days (for that the Macedonians, and after them
the Romans, had brought Persia and all other kingdoms to subjection for a long
time) to set the sects and sundry sorts of heretics that began like monsters
to trouble the Church, to write of councils had Of heresies, and of Councils.
herein by general consent, of the opinions sprung of that time, and of their
consultation: yet for that we hasten to end the history of these later kings
of Persia, of whom (as I have said) little is to be written, saving of some few
kings, as Artaxerxes the first that restored to the Persians their kingdom,
after he had slain Artabanus king of the Parthians. Again Sapores the second
king of Persia, Narses the seventh king, and Sapor the ninth king of Persia:
these kept tacke with the Romans, vexed Mesopotamia, Armenia, and other
countries, (as you heard before) persecuted the Christians, and did some
actions that they seemed to show a shadow of the old PerPersiaus, but to small
effect: for the Saracens (as before you The Persians four times subdued.
heard) have fully mastered them, and quite destroyed them, and so they came to
their decay, first by Cyrus, then by Alexander and by the Macedonians, and the
third time by the Romans, and last by the Saracens.

After Sapores the eleventh king of Persia, entered Varanes the twelft king, who
reigned twelve years: in whose days were many signs in heaven, much
earthquake in sundry places of the world, herefies, contentions, and many
strange questions demanded, as An Deus habeat corpus, and membra, and such
other absurd and blasphemous quarrels grew. Even this time Auricular confession
was abrogated by Nectarius then bishop Auricular confession abrogated. Tripar.
9. cap. 35.
of Constantinople, for filthy and many fornications committed in those days
by priests and deacons. The Frenchmen denied tribute unto the Romans also this
very time: upon which occasion, war grew again new between the Romans and
the Frenchmen in the time of Valentianus the Emperor. Hunni were most busy in
diverse parts of the East, spoiling Armenia, and Pannonia, and passing over the
river Ister, entered Thracia, wasting and destroying al places that they came
unto.

About this time Nectarius (of whom you read a little before) Trip. 10. cap. 24.
being bishop of Constantinople died, in whose place succeeded Chrysostom a
famous learned man, of no less learning then virtue, who in the Council
gathered at Cyprus, where Origens books were condemned by the authority of
Epiphanius and Theophilus two great learned men, and for that Chrysostom would
not subscribe thereunto, he was put out of Council, Joan. Chrysostom.
and banished from his bishopric: howbeit, he was with great honor received
again unto Constantinople within a short space after.

But to hasten out of the history of Persia. Isdigertes the thirteenth
Isdigertes the 13. king of Persia.
king reigned 21. years in Persia, of whom we read nothing, but that he
vexed and molested the Christians, and especially those he persecuted whom he
found in any territory of his, and yet within a while the Christians had good
success in Persia, and the king much contented with them, Trip. 8.
pleasured and advanced them, using them courteously and gently. Honorius now
Emperor of the Romans, associating Honorius.
himself with Constantius whom he sent to France, and by whom Constantine
then was slain, who governed at that time in Britannie, to whom Placidia
Theodotius daughter was committed, and again from Honorius given to his friend
Constantine died in Britain.
Constantius in marriage, by whom Constantius got Valentinus the third of that
name: Constantius grew in such favor with Honorius the Emperor by his great
service in France and in Hispaine, that he was taken and chosen by Honorius
himself to be his associat in the Empire.

About this time all the Jews that were co^morant in Alexandria, Tripar. cap.
12.
were thence expulsed with much blood and great slaughter, and this was done by
Cyrillus then bishop of Alexandria. This time also was there a Council at
Carthage, where the heresies of the Pelagians were quite overthrown: then died
that great learned man S. Hierome. S. Hierom died.


Now in Constantinople the Arrians fell in great discord between themselves,
which continued twenty and five years, and after that again united and were
made friends. In these days Paulus Orosius wrote his history, and Nestorius
was removed Paulus Orosius.
from Antioch to be bishop at Constantinople. The Jews again as they were by
the justice of God scattered unto all places of the world, so had they no rest
in any place of the world, as you heard erst of the Jews in Alexandria: so now
likewise in Creete they had a false Moses fained, whom then they so honored,
and whose laws they observed: and yet Eusebius says, that a number of them at
that time were converted Tripar. cap. 9.
and became Christians.

At this time in France, Faramundus was by common Faramundus.
consent of the people elected and named king of France, who died seven years
after he came to the kingdom. Marcomirus succeeded him being his own brother,
and he reigned eighteen years: of whose actions and lives, you shall in the
histories of France read more. The Frenchmen began here to record and to
number the kings of the whole country of Gallia, which until that time were
called Reges The Frenchmen began to be kings of all Gallia.
Francorum, kings of France, being a parcel of Gallia. This happened in the
year of the world four thousand three hundredth eighty and seven, and in the
300. Olympiad. By this time reigned in Persia Varanes the fourth of that name,
and after him reigned his son Varanes the fifth of that name, and they When
the Olympiads ended, the Indictions of Constantine began.
both reigned 37. years, and they had wars with the Romans also. In the
time of this last king Varanes, began the Indictions of Constantine the great.

Now again the third time the Persians begin to quail: for in the time of
Corsoes and his son Hormisda the last king of Persia, the Saracens became
lords and governors over the Persians, in the year of Christ our Savior 634.
These are the names of these latter kings that reigned in new Persia.

1 Artaxerxes the first king that restored the new kingdom of Persia, reigned
15. years. 2 Sapores reigned after him being the 2. king. 31. years. 3
Ormisdates. 1. year. 4 Varanes. 3. years. 5 Varanes the second of that name.
16. years. 6 Varanes the third of that name. 4. months. 7 After him Narses.
7. years 8 Misdates. 7. years. 9 Sapor reigned 70. years: this king was
crowned in his mothers womb. 10 Artaxerxes the second of that name. 11. years.
11 Sapores the second of that name. 5. years. 12 Varares the 4. 12. years. 13
Varanes the 5. of that name. 12. years. 14 Isdigertes. 21. years. 15 Varanes
the fifth of that name. 20. years. 16 Varanes the sixth of that name. 17. years.
17 Perozes. 20. years. 18 Canades. 12. years. Lambases Procopius does call
this Blasen, reigned 4. years. 19 Cosroes. 48. years. 20 Hormisda Cosroes his
son, and last king of the Persians, reigned 8. years.
OF THE ORIGINAL OF Mahomet in Arabia: of his greatness and credit, not only
among the Saracens and Arabians, but also in the East kingdoms: of the
invasions of the Saracens: of their scattering wars in Asia, Europe, and in
Affricke: and of their continuance.
THus the kingdom of Persia, the only monarchy of the world for 130. years
(I mean from Cyrus unto Darius) is utterly now destroyed by the Saracens the
fourth time, a sort of infidels, which had their first original from Agar the
bond woman of Abraham, by whom Abraham begat a base son called Ismael, whose
progenies were called Ismaelites after the name of Ismael among the Hebrews:
so were they in other places called Agareni after Agars name: and in
continuance Agareni then, are called now Saraceni.
of time from Agareni called Saraceni, which name they hold to this day. For
even as from Ammon and Moab, two incestuous sons of Lot gotten by his two
daughters in his drunkenness, an infinite stock of wicked and idolatrous people
grew, which were named after their fathers name, Ammonites and Moabits, enemies
to God and to his people: so of this bond woman Agar and her son Ismael, all
the Ismaelites, Ismaelites and Saracens alone
and all the Saracens do spring: which people as they were in the beginning
most in number, and most able of force and power to persecute then that little
flock of Jacob at that time: so now are they in the latter days of the world
most in number by the names of Saracens, Turks, Canes, infidels, and such like
other names.

I will therefore but touch the history of Saracens, for that they were
always people scattered into all Asia, and from thence to all parts of the
world, much like to the Scythians, who in like manner russhed into all parts,
and invaded all countries, being rude and barbarous nations, praying upon every
place they came into. I refer them that will read of the Saracens, to
Augustinus Caelius, who at large wrote their histories. I will briefly pass
the names of some few of those which began to reign from Mahomet, where he
is named Muhamet which began his kingdom after Christ, six hundredth twenty
and four, at what time Bonifacius the fifth was the fourth Pope of Rome: for
the great prophet Mahomet in The first Pope of Rome began in the time of
Mahomet.
Arabia, and the great Pope of Rome began at one times as two tyrants to
persecute the Christians. These two grew so great, that they ruled all
Christian Emperors, kings, princes and states: one, making them to hold his
stirope, and to kiss his foot, the other with sword and fire, tyrannized
over kingdoms and nations, increased his fame by blood and tyranny. When
Bonifacius the third, and the first Pope of Rome altered the title of a bishop
to the dignity of a Pope, Phocas then was Emperor of Constantinople: for
while the Emperors flourished at Rome, no Pope was heard of.

I will return to speak of the Saracens, who at that very time that they
overcame the Persians, entered into Syria, slew Bahanes with all his army,
took Damascus, brought Egypt to pay tribute, laid siege to Jerusalem,
brought Antioche subject to the Saracens, wasted and spoiled all Syria, and
brought Jerusalem.
the kingdom of Persia (which so long flourished) under Mahomet, who governed
the Persians 800. years and odd.

This poisoned scorpion and the only plague of Christians (I mean Mahomet) was
borne in Arabia, a large country and wide every way: here they live after
diverse manners, and with diverse kinds of religion: some with powled heads and
hoods like miters, some with beards shaven to their skin: they abstain from
swines flesh: for Solinus says, that no swine can live in that Arabia, which
the Greeks call (...). Of the division of Arabia into Harmenios and Erembos,
and the third into Scenetem, which is that country called the region of the
Saracens, S^nets people in Arabia dwelling in tents.
people that have no houses, but dwell in tents covered over with things made
and wouen with goats hair like the manner of the Scythians, who likewise had
no houses but their wagons, in the which they carry their wives, their
children, and themselves into any country where they take war in hand.

Now of the Arabians trafique and merchandise, and of their frankincense,
myrrh, and many other kind of spices, of their birds, Phoenix and
Cynomolgies, of their precious Solinus 45.
stones, of their hills, sweet rivers, and other rare things in Arabia, I
refer you to Strabo: he leaves nothing untouched Strabo lib. 16.
within Arabia.

But I will return to Mahomet, a poor man of a base and mean parentage,
brought up a servant to feed and to attend Mahomets education.
camels, a young man of a wonderful crafty subtle wit: having married his
mistress, and thereby grown wealthy, he used the company of one Sergius a
Monk, with whom he was taught to accuse the Jews as wicked cruel tyrants, to
kill Sergius a Monk.
a great Prophet, and to accuse the Christians of ignorancie, and of much
simplicity, scoffing them for their superstitious ceremonies and mere
fantasies in their religion (as he said) of their God Christ.

This Mahomet vomited his malice in such sort, that not only Asia, but
Affricke and Europe were by him infected: he settled himself in the richest
regions of all Arabia named Scenites, where in short time through the craft and
subtlety of his fained religion, and by the daily access of a white pigeon in
the ear to eat grains of wheat, which he used to deceive the simple,
supposing the pigeon to be some spirit from God that instructed Mahomet in all
good discipline and religion, that whatsoever Mahomet did, it was taken as done
by a prophet. He grew of such credit within Arabia, that he made laws and
decrees, he altered the whole course of the Arabians government, and brought
the Saracens to begin their years and their account, from the beginning of
Mahomets reign.

For as the Grecians were wont to number years by their Olympiads, the Romans
by their Lustrum: so the Arabians and the Saracens used their account by
Hegira, begun in the Hegira.
time of Mahomet, at what time he escaped hardly the hands of the chief men in
Arabia called Philarchi: who thought to kill Mahomet for his new doctrine
against the religion of the Arabians. But after he had escaped, he gathered a
great army, by means of many that took him and honored him as a divine
prophet, and entered with force and maine strength again upon his enemies, and
had the victory over them. From the which time the Arabians began to account
their years in memory of the escape of Mahomet by flight, which the Arabians
call Hegira, and after by Mahomet Beroaldus lib. 4. cap. 5.
commanded in the time of Heraclius the Emperor and Pope Honorius, in the
year of our Savior six hundredth twenty and one, to be kept of the Saracens
and of the Arabians in great honor and account, and to begin all their
accounts, trafiques and merchandise, by Hegira. And as we use the year of our
Lord at the very day that he was conceived in the womb of the Virgin by the
holy Ghost: so the Arabians from the time of this Hegira by Mahomet commanded,
used their years.

MAhomet the great prophet, and the only Prince of Arabia 1 Mahomet.
began his government in the year of our salvation 624. At what time Heraclius
governed as Emperor in Constantinople: he reigned nine years, died, and was
honored as a God to this day among the Saracens.

After this Mahomet, reigned in Arabia Ebubezer three 2 Ebuzer.
years: during which time, he subdued the city of Gaza, and brought that
province altogether under the Arabians, who at this began to be surnamed
Amiras, a name of dignity, as Caesar's among the Romans, or Pharaos among the
Egyptians: this reigned the first Amiras.

The second Amiras was called Haumar, which reigned 12. 3 Haumar.
years: this enlarged the country of Arabia, from Egypt unto the river
Euphrates: this brought Persia subject to Arabia, and forced Hormisda their
last king to take his flight, and to leave behind him all his treasures, and
all the wealth of Persia. This Amiras took Caesarea a city in Palestina,
after he had besieged it seven years by his lieutenant Muhanias, who was his
General from the confines of Egypt unto Euphrates. This Haumar after he had
destroyed the temple of Jerusalem, caused the Cross which he found in the
temple, to be set up in Mount Oliuet to scoff there the Christians, who
began at that very time to worship every where the Cross: that was the first
Cross, and the first time that the use of Crosses began, from that in Mount
Oliuet. But after much harm done by this Haumar, he was slain by a Persian
woman named Margaret, as he was praying, kneeling before the new erected
idol of Mahomet.

After this Haumar succeeded Hotaman the fourth Amiras: 4 Hotaman.
this invaded Africa, possessed diverse places, and filled many towns with
Saracens: at what time Muhanias the chief General of all the Arabians
territories, sailed with a great navy into Cyprus, invaded the whole Isle, and
took the city Constantia, and the city Aradus, and at his return came to
Rhodes, destroyed the huge and monstrous image of Phoebus called Colossus
Solis, accounted one of the seven wonders of the world.

While Muhanias was in wars with the Cyprians and the Rhodians, the very same
time another Prince of Arabia named in the Chronicles Busor, invaded Isauria,
destroyed Busor.
the country, made a great slaughter of the people, and brought five thousand
captives prisoners into Arabia: but within few days Hoaman was slain through
the treasonof his own housholdes and chief friends. This time reigned king in
France Clodoueus the second of that name, which Clodoueus was called Jews the
first: and in Constantinople reigned Emperor Constans which was son to
Constantius the third, who had a great overthrow in battle by sea by Muhamias
with his army of Saracens. Eugenius then was elected the tenth Pope of Rome.

Hali who governed the Saracens after Hoaman with Muhamias Muhamias the fifth
Amiras.
for 3. years, at what time he was slain by a conspiracy of soldiers: after
whose death Muhanias became the fifth Amiras over the Arabians, who governed
four and twenty years, and kept his court all that time at Damascus. This
Muhanias grew mighty and strong, invaded Africa, slew fourscore thousand
Africanes, spoiled the territories of the Romans, entered into their confines:
but the Romans forced him to flee, pursued him, and compelled him to seek the
Romans favor, paying three thousand pound in gold, and fifty Saracens for
yearly tribute. Constantine the fifth surnamed Pogonatus, held then the Empire
at Constantinople.

Gizid the son of Muhanias succeeded his father, and reigned 6
after him 3. years: this had not such success as Muhamias his father had:
but after Gizid succeeded Habdella the 7
seventh Amiras, against whom Marnan was elected the eight Amiras, who died
within nine months after, and left his 8
son Habdimelech to be the ninth Amiras: this reigned two and twenty years.
Habdimelech the ninth Amiras.


The Saracens about this time invaded so many countries out of Asia, as in
Spain with such armies by long wars with the Goths, who at that time
mastred all Spain. After the Romans time, and now after the Goths, the
Saracens possessed the West part of Spain, and from Spain such an infinite
number entered into France in the time of Martellus and Charles the great, that
made all Europe to be in fear of these monstrous infidels: these spoiled and
destroyed countrels and kingdoms, and used great tyranny in every place of
Europe, in like sort as they did before to the Hebrews and to the Church of
God, at what time they were Agareni or Ismaelites after the name of Ismael and
his mother Agar, and now from Agareni are called Saraceni, continuing their
tyranny (even from Abraham's The Saracens called Agareni, and before Ismaelites.
time unto this day) the name of Turks, which in the year of our Savior
1299. took the Empire of Constantinople, and began to set his Empire there.
And for that the Saracens, and the Turks after them, have their histories in
the chronicles at large set forth in Aug. Caelius, Egnatius, Blo^dus and
others, I will set down as in a table some few of these Saracens Amiras, for
that they followed the Persian history, whom they the fourth time have
conquered, as before is written, first by Cyrus, the second time by Alexander
the great, the third by Alexander Seuerus being long before by the Romans
kept under, and now the fourth time by Haumar the third Amiras of the Saracens:
and so the Persians endured the bondage, until the time of Sophi came, who gave
diverse repulses to the Turks, and to the late Egyptians called Soldani,
recovered Persia, that now again Persia is very populous, and inhabited, and
strongly defended by the Sophie, which is now the general name of all their
kings.

But to return to Habdimelech the ninth Amiras, who had Habdimelech the 9.
Amiras.
now concluded a league with Justinian the Emperor, and had also subdued
Armenia and Mesopotamia, and ended the civil wars which this time grew
between the Princes of Arabia: this having done great exploits, ended his life
after he had reigned two and twenty years. This time reigned in France
Clodoueus the third, four years, and after him Clodoueus the third, and
Hildebertus 78.
his brother Hildebertus reigned king in France 18. years. During the reign
of Habdimelech, a huge number of Egyptians invaded Africa, and destroyed
Carthage.

After this succeeded the tenth Amiras of the Saracens: this 10. Amiras.
turned many of the Christians Churches to be temples for Mahomet, as the
Church of Damascus and others: this time Masalmas a Barbarian captain, gave a
great overthrow to the Romans at the assaulting of Tyrannia, and after spoiled
the country of Galici in his return, and died in the ninth year of his
reign.

Zulzimin the eleventh Amiras followed: he reigned three years: during which
time Haumar the second of that name, 11 Zulzimin.
and the 12. Amiras that succeeded after Zulzimin, subdued Cilicia, and
Masalmas another prince of the Saracens, invaded Asia, took the city of
Pergamum, laid siege to Constantinople, which siege endured three years, at
what time Zulzimin died, and Haumar the second that succeeded him, reigned two
12
years after him, who was glad to have escaped the great famine, cold and
plague, which then reigned among his army during the siege of Constantinople:
beside his whole navy upon the sea were burnt up with wild fire, and
monstrous great hailestones: this Haumar persecuted the Christians most
extremely.

Gizid the second of that name and the 13. Amiras, succeeded Haumar and reigned
4. years: this was by a Jew persuaded to 13 Gizid.
destroy images. About this time Muza a Saracen captain invaded Spain, and
conquered diverse provinces and cities, settled himself, and inhabited as a king
over the Saracens in Spain: after whom succeeded 15. kings of the Saracens
within Vincentius lib. 24.
20. years after Muza, at what time Rodericus the last king of the Vestgothes
which reigned in Spain, and the Christians, were forced to flee, and to keep
Asturum and Legio for their principal strength: after which time they were
called the kings of Legion. This time the cities of Italy began to elect in
every city a chief Magistrate, which they now call by the names of the Duke,
as the Duke of Millaine, the Duke of Florence, and so of the rest, all Italy
being before governed by Hexarchies, from the which the cities revolted into
this new order and election of Dukes in every city, after the time of
fourteen Hexarchies, which governed Italy before it was divided into
dukedomes.

Euelid the 10. Amiras, and the son of Gizid, reigned after 14 Euelid.
his father 18. years: during which time, Masalmas a prince of the Saracens
took Caesarea a city in Cappadocia. This time the Saracens strength and force
were great: for they inhabited every coast of the world: they were strong in
many and in diverse The Saracens.
parts of Asia: they ruled as kings in Afric and in Spain: they possessed
many places in France, and of the Roman territories: 14
for now the glory of the Romans and their power decayed, after whom the
Saracens and the Turks began to be mighty. After this, Euelid died, in the
18. year of his reign.

After him succeeded Gizid the 3. of that name, and the fifteenth Gizid.
Amiras: this was slain by his own people the same year that he became
Amiras: after whom, Eyces his son 15
reigned one year after his father, the 16. Amiras: this time 16
reigned in France Carolus Martellus, with his brother Pipinus: this Martellus
made a great slaughter of the Saracens, at what time Eudo their general brought
to the number of four hundred thousand Saracens of men women and children
from Spain to France, and was subdued by Martellus, with the most of his
people overthrown, and their king Abdimarus slain.

In the time of this valiant Martellus, the Saracens invaded France sundry
times, and took Narbon and Anemon, two of the chiefest cities of that part of
France: but they were assaulted by Martellus, so that they fled from place to
place, and were vanquished and slain in heaps: for Martellus slew three
Saracen kings, Abdimarus, Athinus, and Armoreus: but they wanted no kings, the
best captains took upon them the names Three kings of the Saracens slain.
of kings, when any king died or was slain in the field: for in Spain
fifteen kings of the Saracens were slain within twenty years, and yet the
Saracens continued and prevailed from 200. years before Martellus time, until
the time of Ferdinandus the great, 800. years well nigh after: During which
time the Saracens (as I write in the history of Spain) much prevailed.

This time Maruan the second of that name, and the seventeenth Maruan the 17
Amiras.
Amiras, invaded Cyprus with an army of Saracens: but such civil wars began
between the princes of Arabia, that Maruan was constrained to forsake Arabia,
and to flee to Egypt, after he had reigned Amiras 4. years, and from thence
forced to take the like flight toward Spain, to rest among his Countriemen,
but he was prevented and slain by Salim The Hunes now in Germany.
prince of Chorasimia.

About this time the Hunnes, people from Scythia, made seven several iournies
from Scythia to Pannonia, and at last seated themselves, whose chief captain
was named Arpat: of this read more in Ritius, and in Bonfinus. Now in Arabia
reigned Muhamat the 18. Amiras, at what time governed in Muhamat 18. Amiras.
Constantinople, Constantine surnamed Copronimos as Emperor, and Aistulphus
reigned king of Lumbardie, and was at that time the thirty one king in number,
the which had reigned kings in Lumbardie.

This Lumbardie is a pleasant fertile country, called of some the Paradise of
all Eorope, which reaches from the Alps to the river of Rubicon. But to
Arabia again, where now reigned Habdallias the ninetenth Amiras of the
Saracens: this reigned twenty one years, and gathered an army of eighty
Habdallias 19. Amiras.
thousand, invaded Cappadocia, under captain Salimie, who was appointed
General over the Saracens.

This Amiras vexed the Christians sore: the Arabians waxed so mighty at home
and abroad, that almost no place was free from the Arabians* they had wars
this time with the Armenians, and with the Turks, who yet had not erected
their Empire up, but were such scattering infidels, and like in all manner of
life and living to these Saracens, and to the Scythians, which dispearsed them
selves over all the whole world, as Caterpillars, to destroy and spoil all
Nations and Countries, one succeeding the other. The Saracens and the Turks
alike.


Mady succeeded Habdallias: this was the twenty Amiras, who reigned nine
years, in the which time he prepared an army for wars against Asia: but
he was then intercepted and returned into Arabia without any thing done: how
be it Aaron his son invaded Armenia, and Ithuma entered Asia, and was slain
with all his army by the Romans.

Again, Aaron the son of Mady entered into Asia, and got diverse victories,
and constreined Eirene with her son Constantine the Emperor to seek peace,
and to pay tribute The Romans paid tribute to the Arabians.
unto the Arabians.

After Mady succeeded his son Moses, and reigned Amiras one year, after whom
followed Aaron the brother of Moses, he reigned twenty three years: during
which time the Arabians invaded Cyprus, subdued Cappadocia, took two notable
Fortes and strong Castles, Amachan in Armenia, and Sebasan: this time flourished
in France Charles the great, to whom this Amiras sent many rich presents, and
withal a mighty huge Amy. lib. 3.
Elephant. This Arabian prince had such great victories, that Nicephorus the
Emperor had much adooe to escape from his hand in Crason, which is a Town in
Phrygia: besides the Arabians had spoiled Sardinia, and destroyed Corsica, and
also the Saracens that were now dispersed into al Countries specially into
Spain, where they governed as kings, and in France, where likewise they bare
such great sway and sovereignty, that Charles the great was well contented for
the time to conclude a peace with Abumalach king of the Saracens. Well, to
finish shortly his great exploites of long histories, I pass to the 23. Amiras.

Muhamad the son of this Aaron the twenty three Amiras Muhamad 23. Amiras.
of the Arabians, in whose time great civil wars began in many Countries,
that he had much a do to keep his own Country from civil invasion for
five years.

After him succeeded in Arabia Habdallias the third of that name, and the
twenty four Amiras: this reigned 17. years. Habdallias 24. Amiras.
During this time, the Saracens gave two great overthrows to the Grecia^s, at
what time they took the Isle of Creete, spoiled Blondus lib. 12.
Palestina, and possessed many Regions and diverse countries, wasted much the
country between Vtica and Carthage, so that the Arabians waxed the only
nation in strength and force, in all the East kingdoms: for by this time
Africa which was full of the Saracens, was forced to yield to them as well as
Spain: for still came from Arabia supplies to every Country and place where
the Saracens had planted them selves, as well in Europe and Afric, as they did
in Asia: for now Abderana king over the Saracens in Africa, was not contented
to live quietly over his people in Africa, neither Abumalach, nor yet Abumalach.
Aigolandus, with whom Charles the great had long and terrible Aigolandus.
wars, could be satisfied with any one kingdom of the world, until at
length God so strengthened the Christians, that they were sore afrighted and
amazed by the means of these infidels, that they joined together their power
and force, and were by Gods providence after 800. years delivered from the
tyranny of these cruel Saracens.

Now reigned king in France Jews, surnamed, The holy, son to Charles the
great, who succeeded his father both in the kingdom of France, and in the
Empire of Rome, which was taken away into Constantinople, until the time of
Charles the great, at what time Leo the 3. of that name, and the 30. Pope of
Rome renewed the Empire, and was called Imperium Romanorum nouum. Now in Arabia
reigned Muhamat the twenty Muhamat 25. Amiras.
five Amiras for forty years: during which time the Saracens rushed into
Italy, spoiled and destroyed the country with sword and fire, at what time
they came to the suburbs of Rome and did great harm, spared no place, but as
Blondus Blond lib. 12.
affirms, Ferro and flamma totam deuastarunt Italiam: this time the Danes
invaded England in the time of Edelbertus, who valiantly resisted the Danes,
and constreined them with great loss and slaughter to retire: read more in
Polidore of this. Polid. lib. 5.


After this time the Saracens began in many places to be slack, and specially
in the most part of Europe, though in Spain they continued until the great
Ferdinandus time: but for that the Saracens are sufficiently spoken of in the
history of Spain, I will therefore here no further proceed therein, only
laying down so many as reigned kings in Arabia, called by the name of Amiras,
from Mahumet the first prophet and prince, until Muhamat the twenty five
Amiras, which continued 253. years: these names follow in this sort as you
see set here down.

Mahomet reigned nine years, the first Amiras of the Saracens. Ebubezer 2.
Amiras, three years. Haumar 3. Amiras, twelve years. Hoaman 4. Amiras ten
years. Muhamias 5. Amiras 24. years. Gizud 6. Amiras, three years. Habdalla
7. Amiras, one year. Maruan 8. Amiras, one year. Habemelech his son,
twentietwo years. Vliud nine years. Zulzimim three years. Haumar the 2. of
that name, two years. Gizud the 2. four years. Euelid his son, eighteen
years. Gizud the 3. one year. And his son Eices after him, reigned one
year. Maruan the second, six years. Abubalas five years. Haldalla twenty
one years. Mady nine years. Moses the son of Mady, reigned after his father
one year. Aaron the younger son of Mady, reigned after his brother Moses
twenty three years. Muhamad the son of Aaron, reigned five years. Habdalla
the 3. reigned 17. years. Muhamat the 25. Amiras, reigned forty years.
Thus far I thought good to write the beginning of Mahomets kingdom, and his
successors in Arabia, and of the Saracens spread from Arabia unto Afric, and
unto Europe, and now a little of the Turks history, and that briefly.

OF THE GREAT TURCKE, and of his kingdom from Othoman the first, until Selimus
the eleventh: of the two Empires of Constantinople and Trapezumtium, which now
the Turckes do govern: of their beginning, and of their first service under
Basilius Macedo Emperor of Constantinople.
THe Turckes history is like the Saracens, or like the Scythians, people
without guide or governors, until of late time they inhabited first about
mount Caucasus, and from thence to the Caspia sea: a nation mingled of the
Scythians and of the Hunnes, which now are called Hungarians, obscure and base
people, without any mention made of them any where, but of their bare names in
Pliny: a people scattered in Scythia, and after into other Countries, rather
called Latrocinantes quam belligerantes, as Egnatius names them: of whom (as I
said) Pomponius Mela makes but little more mention then Pliny did.

The first service which they did, was under Basilius surnanamed Egnat. lib. 2.
Macedo then Emperor at Constantinople, in the year of our Savior eight
hundred forty, at what time they invaded The first service of the Turks.
Armenia, and within a while after, gave a battle to the Arabians under their
first captain called Mucaletius.

After twice or thrice good success had against the Arabians and the Saracens,
they gathered together under a head at Tangrolipix, where diverse more heaped
and flocked to them from the straight of Caspia, and from Caucasus: there they
waxed strong, and began to invade Asia, until the time of Ottoman the first, a
man base and obscure borne, cuius parents Ottoman the first of the Turks.
agrarij, but very valiant, wise, and fortunate: he first began to advance
the name of the Turckes, and to set forth his force and power being much
inflamed with desire of sovereignty, and very ambitious of honor and dignity.

After he had subdued a part of the kingdom of Bythinia, and had taken
certain Cities and strong Towns toward Egnat. lib. 2.
the Sea Euxinus, at what time reigned in Constantinople Michael, surnamed
Paleologus Emperor, in the year of our Savior Christ a thousand three
hundred: this Ottomanus within twenty eight years which he reigned, had
strengthened his Cities and Towns, and had builded many strong Fortes, and
specially one invincible Castle, which he named after his own name Ottomanni
Castrum.

This Othoman left behind him a son named Orchanes, Orchanes 2.
in whose time contencion grew between Paleologus, and Cantachuzenus, about
the Empire of Greece, whereby Orchanes power and force so increased, that while
these two contended about the Empire, he took Prusia out of their Prusia
taken by Orchanes.
hands, a large strong City: and finding his father in law Caramanus false
and deceitful, he ouerthrewe him, and killed his son, a young gallant
youth: but after that Orchanes had reigned twenty two years, he was slain
in Bythinia.

After him succeeded his son Amurathes, a man of Amurathes 3.
singular courage and fortune, who forgetting not his father nor graundfather
Othoman, imitated them in all manly exploites, and presently armed him self
against his own graundfather Caramanus, whose daughter was his natural
mother. This Amurathes was solicited by the Emperor Palealogus.
Paleologus, being now a very old man, to aid him against the Bulgarians,
hard old soldiers, brought up always in wars: to this he quickly
consented, and prepared an army of twelve thousand Turks, and brought them
into Europe, and did great service to the Emperor, ouerthrewe the Bulgarians,
and revenged the Emperor upon the enemy: but being after these victories
tickled with the wealth and pleasures of Europe, having given the repulse to
Cantachuzenus which affected the Empire, while he fained this service, he
passed over the sea Helespont, took Callipolis with other cities, as
Adrianopolis, Bydus, and Philippolis, ouerthrewe Egnat. lib. 2.
and conquered every province as he traueiled: he entered Bulgaria, invaded
Seruia, and slew the princes of the country named Lazarus, with a great
slaughter of his people: but Amurathes escaped not long, for he was slain by
a servant of Lazarus prince of Seruia, who revenged his masters death stoutly.

Thus Amurathes died, after he had reigned twenty three years: after whom
lived two sons of his, the one named Paizates, the other Soliman. These two
brethren could not agree: they fell at such variance, that Paizates slew his
brother Pazaites 4.
Soliman, and presently after took in hand to revenge his fathers death upon
Marcus Craienicius prince of the Bulgarians, Soliman.
whom he subdued, and after slew him in the field: by which conquest he
obtained the most part of Bulgaria. And yet not therewith contented, he
invaded Bossina, Croatia, and other parts of Illyria, wasted and spoiled all
places into Thracia: yet he could not quiet himself, but laid siege to
Constantinople, and continued the same for eight years, and had at that time
taken the City, if he had not been prevented by two great armies of
Frenchmen and Vngarians, to whom this Pazaites gave such a terrible battle,
that he ouerthrewe both Pazaites victory over the Frenchmen and the Hu^garian.
the armies, and took the most part of the French captains with their
General the Duke of Burgundy, with an infinite slaughter of the soldiers,
and had also at that time taken Sigismundus king of Hungaria, unless he had
been saved by the Venetian navy.

From this great victory he again returned to Constantinople, endured his
siege, and laid hard at it. When news came, that Tamberlanes the Scythian
invaded his Country, he removed his siege at these news, and made more haste
then good speed: for in that battle between Tamberlanes and Pazaites, two
hundred thousand Turks were slain Pazaites the Turk kept in a cage by
Tamberlanes.
at mount Stellum, in the confines of Bythinia, the Turk taken and set in
fetters of gold, and bound in chains of gold, and so kept all the days of his
life in a Cage, which Tamberlanes carried into every foreign war out of his
Country, and used (as some write) as a block to mount on horseback.

This time reigned in Constantinople Andronicus, as Blondus Functius.
affirms: this great victory of Tamberlanes fell in the year of our Savior
Christ 1397. at what time Charles the sixth, surnamed Beneamatus was king in
France, and Vladislaus had taken the Empire of Germany into his hand. In Rome
Pope Bonifacius the ninth of that name reigned.

This Pazaites had two sons, the elder named Orchanes, of some called
Calepinus: the younger named Mahomet, which Mahomet 5.
was also named Moses: this by conspiracy and treachery slew his brother
Orchanes within two years after his fathers Egnatius lib. 2.
death, and reigned alone, recovered, and possessed all that Tamberlanes had
gotten of his father.

This Mahomet had spite to the Bulgarians, and to the Valaches, and began with
no less good success to advance the name of the Turks, then his father did:
he waxed mighty, and after he had brought all these Provinces and Regions
about to be vassalles of the Turks, and had quieted himself, after many
victories, he made Adrianopolis to be his chief Adrianopolis.
City, where he all his life kept his Court: where after he had reigned
seventeen years, he dyed: at what time Emanuel governed as Emperor in
Constantinople, and Sigismundus king of Hungaria reigned Emperor of Germany:
in England Henry the fourth flourished.

This Mahomet left to succeed him a son named Amurates, the second of that
name, and the sixth king over the Turks: this Amurates far excelled all his
predecessors in Amurates 6.
his wars: he began to war with the people called Mysores, and their
prince, which now are named Seruij: he took their Cities Scopia and
Nouemontum, and took the Scopia and now Nouemontum.
Kings two sons, and his daughter: he caused the Kings sons eyes to be
plucked out, and yet married their sister, and thereby restored the City
Nouemontum to the king again. Egnat. lib. (...).


After this, he commenced wars against the Germans, Hungarians, and
Valaches, spoiled their territories, and wasted their Countries, and used great
extremity: he passed thence to Epire, laid siege to Croia, took it, and
possessed it.

After truice made, and peace concluded between the Turk and the Hungarians,
Amurates against his promise and oath, by persuasion of Pope Eugenius the
fourth, entered in arms, and gave two terrible battles to the Christians, in
the which many Nobles dyed and were taken. In these two A great overthrow by
the Turk to Polonians, Hunnes, Hungar, etc.
great victories, the one at Varna, the other at Basila, he slew an infinite
company of Hungarians, Polonians, Hunnes, and others of Germany: for in this
war at Varna, Ladislaus, king of Polonia was slain, and Cardinal Julian,
with all their captains and men of arms: in the other at Basila, all the
Princes of Hungary, and many of the Nobles and Peers of Germany.

Thence he returned into Asia, after he had subdued and conquered all places
as he traueiled: and having had sufficient trial of his good fortune, with
some diffidence of further success by some change of fortune, he committed
the kingdom unto his sons charge, while yet he lived, being willing to take
his rest, and to see the euentes of the succession in the kingdom by his
son, over whom he appointed Tutour and Governor (for that Mahomet his
Calibassa.
son was yet young) a Turk named Calibassa: but this during the time of
thirty four years did no great exploite, but made one voyage to Epirus, and
besiged the City of Croia, but in vain: for that valiant and noble captain
Scanderbeg drove him quickly with loss and shame from Epyrus, and for very
grief he dyed after his return. Of this Scanderbeg This Scanderbeg is called
Castriotus.
Prince of Epirus, the history is set forth according to his deserts, in
Barletius. In the time of this Mahomet, Constantine the last of that name, and
the last Emperor of Barletius lib. 13.
Constantinople reigned. Sultan Zeledim, Emperor of the Functius.
Tartarians dyed in this time.

Now reigned Emperor of Germany Albertus the second of that name, which was
both king of Hungaria and Bohemia: he reigned Emperor but two years, after
whom succeeded Frederick the third, Archduke of Austria to be Emperor of
Germany, which reigned Emperor fifty four years.

But to come to Mahomet, the second of that name, and the seventh king of the
Turks. This, for his greatness and good success in his wars, was named
Nouus Othomanus, an other new Othoman: for as in the first Othoman, the
kingdom of the Turks began: so now by this Mahomet, the Empire of Mahomet
2.
the Turks began, and therefore he was called Othoman the great. He subdued
two Empires, twelve kingdoms, two hundred Cities and great Towns: he took
from the Venetians the Isles of Chalcidis and Scodra: he took diverse Cities
in The great victory of the Turks.
Greece, as Corinthus and Mitilena. The Turks invaded Syria, wasted and
destroyed Hungaria, and took al Euboca: he took Capha a City in Pontus, and
Hydrantes in Italy: he took in battle by treachery (says Functius)
Stephanus king of Mysia, whom he used as Cambyses used Sisamnis: he flayed him,
and banished him from his kingdom: he destroyed all the province of Carinthia.
Quae and quantae huius victoriae, totus vix dies explicet: the very words of
Egnatius.

This Turk so plagued the Christians, that yet to this day they could not
recover the loss: how be it he was overthrown Egnat. lib. 2.
by Scanderbeg in a great battle, where he lost an infinite number of his
Turks: by Hussa Cassanus king both of Armenia and of Persia, who also gave a
great overthrow to Mahomet: by Stephanus Prince of Valachia, who got over the
Turks a great victory: by Pope Sixtus the fourth The Turks overthrow.
who gave battle by sea under the Cardinal of Aquileia: by the Rhodians, and
by the Christians at a place called Alba Graeca, he was discomfited, and
diverse times overthrown: but still he prevailed with more gain then loss,
and with fame and renown, that he is now Emperor of Constantinople, and of
Trapezuntium, and king of many kingdoms, lord and governor of so many
Provinces and Regions, that he thereby is now named the great Turk.

Now after this Turk had reigned thirty one years, he Pazaites 8.
dyed in the year of our Lord God 1481. on the fifth nones of May. After whose
death, great civil wars grew among the Turks, and continued for a time:
which being done, Pazaites the second of that name, and the eldest son of the
last Mahomet, having vanquished his younger brother, obtained Egnatius lib. 2.
the Empire, armed his men and himself out of hand, assaulted the Castle of
Valachia, and took it: after he marched The Sultan of Egypt.
against the Sultan of Egypt, by whom he had sundry overthrows, that the
Turk and the Sultan entered into a league, and concluded a peace.

After, he returned and went against the Germans, whom he by continual wars
brought under the Turks servitude, and at that very time he so plagued the
Venetians, that he subdued Methon, Dyrrhachium, and Naupactum, three strong
great cities. The Turks under this Pazaites conquered and subdued many places:
for this Emperor vanquished the Polonians, which people were called before,
Gelas, and subdued Chrom. Polo. lib. 3. cap. 31.
many people inhabiting about Meotida: he destroyed the City of Craocia, but
constrained by the army of Maximilian Croacia.
the Emperor to forsake their Fortes, he was also put to flight. Read
Chromerus Chronicle of this Pazaites wars against the Venecians: at what time
he returning from the overthrow and subduing of Modon, the Sophi king of
Persia, (for so now all the kings of Persia are called Sophi) gave the Turks
a great overthrow.

Thus far does Egnatius prosecute the Turks history, until Selimus time
the ninth Emperor of the Turks: Egnat. lib. 2.
at what time reigned Emperor in Germany Maximilian, son to Frederike the
third, and in France Jews the twelfth of that name.

This Pazaites, after he had reigned thirty one years, died: after whom
succeeded Selimus, the ninth Emperor of the Selimus the 9. Emperor of the
Turks.
Turks, who lived seven years in the Empire: this had a great overthrow in
Armenia the great, by the Sophy of Persia: how be it, afterward he recovered
his strength, and gathered an army, passed into Egypt, gave battle to the
Sultan, whom he took as prisoner, and at that time subdued all Egypt and
Syria: for now the kings of Egypt are called Soldani, as the kings of Persia
are Sophy.

But to come to Soliman the tenth Emperor of the Turks, Soliman 10. Emperor.
who reigned forty eight years, and had diverse times many victories, and as
many overthrows: for first he lay de siege to Rhodes, took Alba Graeca by
treachery and deceipte: but Virtus an Dolus quis in host requirit? he
subdued Corsica, and ouerthrewe a great army of the Germans, by the City
Functius.
of Buda in Vngarie, being betrayed and sold into the Turks by Catzianerus:
and by the like treachery of a Spaniard, the Turks got a very strong fort in
Vngarie called Granensis Arx.

After this, Soliman laid siege to Vienna in Austrich, and to diverse Towns in
Sicilia, but they were manfully resisted and repulsed from both Austrich and
Sicilia. His armies in the East Countries were so slain and scattered by the
Sophy of Persia, that Soliman lost in two battles an infinite number of Egnat.
lib. 2.
hia Turks.

After these two great victories had over the Turks by the Persians, he was by
the Germans resisted at the haven of Hercules: he was by the Rhodians driven
out of the Isle of Militea: he entered into a league with the Persians, and
concluded peace with diverse princes of Asia, and came into Vngaria, laid siege
to Segethum, where he died in his tents before he could win Segethum. After his
death, his sons fought for the Empire. Baiazetes was compelled to flee into
Persia, being by this civil war overthrown by his brother Selimus, who of
all the sons of Soliman was left alive, and succeeded his father in the
Empire. Under this Selimus the Turks took wars in hand against the
Saracens, and prepared a navy into Cyprus, which had reuoulted from the
Turks. After he made a voyage against the Moscouians at the river of Tanais,
where Selimus lost more then he wanne: then he laid siege to Nicosia, and to
Famagusta, two noble cities in Cyprus: for Famagusta is Nicosia.
the chief City of Cyprus. Two years after this, the Persians Famagusta.
gave two great overthrows to the Turks in Mesopotamia: at what time the
Tartarians (which in old time were called Scythians) wasted and spoiled Russia
and Moscouia: but I leave the Soldane of Egypt, the Sophi of Persia, the
Saracens, the Turks, and those infidels, and end their history in this
Selimus, laying their names down as they reigned, from Othoman the first, unto
Selimus the eleventh.

1 Othoman reigned 28. years. 2 Orchanes 22. 3 Amurathes 23. 4 Pazaites having
slain his brother Solimanus. 26. 5 Mahomet 17. 6 Amurates the 2. of that name,
Mahomets son 34. 7 Mahomet the 2. which took the Empire from the Greeks 32.
years. 8 Pazaites the 2. 31. 9 Selimus 7. 10 Soliman 48. 11 And after Soliman,
his son Selimus.
OF THE ANTIQVITIE OF Greece: of the beginning of their Cities and Common
wealth: of their laws and governments by degrees, during yet the infancy of
Greece.
Now I leave Asia, and come to Europe, to that noble and famous Country of
Greece, though by order of history I should pass from Persia, with Alexander
the great into Macedonia, whither the Empire Greece.
from Persia was brought now by Alexander: yet for that Greece is upon the
way, and that Alexander Alexander.
the great subdued all the Provinces of Greece, and was by consent of all the
Country made Emperor of Greece, where his father Philip was made but a Duke
or a Governor of Greece: I will therefore first speak of Greece, for that
Macedonia and Greece were but one Empire, and under the great Alexander: for so
he was called in the sacred history, the King of Greece, and so after
Alexanders death they compted their years after the reigns of the Kings of
Greece: and therefore I will pass first over Greece, before I come to
Macedonia.

To this Country came the third son of Iaphet, named Iauan, or Iaon, of whom
this Country now called Greece, was then named Ionia: for all Countries had
their names by the first inhabitants therein, as in the 10. of Genesis is
mentioned, the first ground and original, from whence the nations Genesis 10.
of the world had their beginning, by the description of the sons of Sem, the
sons of Cham, and the sons of Iaphet. After that Iaon the third son of
Iaphet, possessed Greece, a Country for the situation thereof most delectable
and fertile, wherein many things of great account are most worthy to be
remembered.

This Country of Greece is divided unto twelve regions:

The first and principal part of Greece is the region of Morea. The 2. the
Country of Athens. The 3. of Corinth. The 4. of Lacedemon. The 5. of Messenia.
The 6. of Achaia. The 7. of Boetia. The 8. of Thessalia. The 9. of Arcadia. The
10. of Ionia. The 11. and 12. of Dorica, and Aeolica.
Although Strabo says, that these two last are Countries within Peloponesus,
which is now called Morea, which was the greatest and chiefest Country of
Greece, inhabited first by the Barbarous: for so all Greece was inhabited
first, the Country of Athens only excepted.

The platte form of Peloponesus is like the leaf of a Plane tree, with
creekes and nookes, and contains in length from the West unto the East, a
thousand four hundred furlongs, and almost so much in breadth. The coast of
Peloponesus is on the north side, with the Ionian sea: on the West Solinus cap.
11.
with the Sicilian sea: on the South with the Candian sea: Strabo. lib. 8.
all these Shires or Countries are situated within Morea, Achaia, Elis,
Messenia, Laconia, which is also named Lacedemonia and Arcadia, which is
environed round about with Peloponesus.

In every country of these are very famous towns and cities, named at large
in Pomponius Mela, and in Strabo. Next Peloponesus begins the country of
Hellas, which is called and taken for true Greece. In this Hellas is the region
of Phocis, where the temple and Oracle of Apollo in Delphos, and the Hellas.
famous mount Parnassus: here is also in that part of Greece Boetia where
Thebes a most famous city is, and mount Cytheron much spoken of in Poetry:
then is the country of Locris, Megaris, and of Athens, more famous of it self
then it need The praise of Athens.
to be commended, as well for chivalry and magnanimity, as also for learning
and knowledge, being the fountain and nourse of Philosophy.

This country of Athens does Strabo describe in his ninth book, that he
bestows all that book in the setting forth only of Athens, with
commendations of Boetia and Thessalia, as the chiefest and rarest countries of
Greece: for Thessalia co^tayning within it the renowned mount Olympus, which by
The praise of Thessalia.
means of the wooddie bottoms of the hill, with a very pleasant river running
through the same, makes a most delectable and pleasant soil, called Tempe
Thessalica: unto Thessalia belong the plains of Pharsalia, where Pompey was
overthrown Solinus cap. 11.
in the last battle between Caesar and him.

In Thessalia are many notable rivers and cities, many Isles lie over against
the maine land of Athens, as Salamis, Sunim, Cos and Ceos: not far from
Athens is the plain Marathon, where was a bloody battle between the
Persians and the Athenians. Greece was so full of renowned cities, famous
rivers, notable mountains, a country of singular rareness in althings, that
it were to much labor to write the due praise of Greece. But I refer him
that would read the setting forth of Greece to the eight and ninth book of
Strabo, to the second Strabo lib. 8. 9.
book of Pomponius Mela, where all Greece is particularly described at large:
and I will proceed to the several government of Greece in several countries,
and will set down the continuance of every Region, with the names of the kings
where and how long they reigned: and for that the country of Morea is the
first inhabited country of Greece, and the largest region of the same, called
in Strabo, Arxtotius Greciae, I wi^ begin with their common wealth.

This region was first named Aegialia by the name of Aegialeus their first
king, and continued so until the time of Apis Five several names of
Peloponesus.
the 4. king: after whom this region was named Apia, which name continued unto
the time of Sicyon the 19. king of Morea. After this king Sicyons time, the
country was called Sicyonium, and continued until Pelops time, by whom again
the country was called Peloponesus, and now at this time is called Morea: so
that Peloponesus had five several change of names from the first government
under Aegialeus the first king, until Xeuxippus reign, the last king of the
Peloponesians.

And although the kings of that region did nothing worth the memory, having
been twenty and six kings successively: yet they are the very way to come
further unto Greece: for all this while the whole country of Greece was
inhabited with barbarous people, and was far from the fame which they gained
afterward: therefore I will briefly pass over the history of their kings and
their reign, because I might speak of other countries in Greece, which
flourished together with Morea. For the first king of this region was named
Aegialeus, he governed that part of Greece, at what time Ninus Marianus Scotus.
reigned in Assyria, and (as Eusebius writes) Thebaei ruled Egypt, in the
year of the world two thousand one hundredth and seven, yet Bibliander would
not allow so many years by two hundredth and odd, which is rather to be
followed, for that it does with the Genesis agree. For in the five and
twentieth year of this king Ninus was Abraham borne, which was within two
hundredth and ninety years after the flood, and therefore better agrees with
Ninus time.

The second king after Aegialeus, was named Europs: he reigned five and
forty years: this time flourished Zoroastes the great king of the Bactrians:
he was thought to be the Zoroastes.
first that read Astrology, and taught to others Astronomy: in whose time
Tribeta the son of Ninus by Semiramis was expulsed out of the kingdom of
Assyria, and he builded a town in the coast of Gallia, and called it Treueris.

The third king of Sicyonium was named Stelchium: he reigned twenty years:
at what time the kingdom of Creete Marianus Scotus.
began, and had for the first king one named Cres: after whose name the
country of Creete was called. This Cres builded a city in Creete and named it
Nosus: in the which he also builded a temple to the goddess Cybeles. After him
succeeded Apis the fourth king of that region, after whom (as Apis a king of
Apia.
I have written before) it was called Apia: he reigned then, when Ninus the
son of Ninus and Semiramis governed the Assyrians.

After him followed the fifth king named Telasion, in whose Telasion the 5. king.
time died Noah the righteous preacher and patriarch, and at which time Abraham
begat Ismael upon Agar the bond woman: of this Ismael came all the Ismaelites,
a wicked nation that offended the Lord: In time afterward they were called
Agareni, after the name of Agar, and now are called Saraceni, which are
infidels and heathens.

Now succeeded Telasion the sixth king of Peloponesus named Aegidius: at what
time reigned in Assyria, Analius. About Aegidius the sixth king.
this season Isaac the son of Abraham begat two twins upon Rebecca his
wife: Esau which was also called Edom, of whom the Idumeans came: and Jacob
afterward called Israel, of whom issued the twelve tribes of Israel. In this
kings time Sodom, Gomorrha, Zeboim, Adama and Zoar, five principal great
Pentapolis burnt.
cities in the land of Palestine, were destroyed and burned with fire and
brimstone from heaven: the just judgment of God for sin.

Thurimachus the eight king reigned 45. years: in this kings government
Eusebius notes the seventeenth Dynastia of the Egyptians to begin, where
Shepherds governed as chief rulers for the space of 103. years sovereignty.
About which time the kingdom of the Argiues first sprang up, where Inachus
Argiue begun.
reigned the first king within the kingdom of Argiue, and afterward continued
from Inachus unto the time of Tenelanthus the last king of the Argiues, as
Marianus Scotus writes, four hundredth years.

After this Leucippus succeeded Messapius in Peloponesus: at what time
Bellochus reigned King in Assyria, and Thelassus governed the country of
Thessalia. Among the Argiues Ruffi. de orig. Graeco.
reigned now Phoroneus the son of Inachus and Niobes the second king after
his father: this made laws first to the Argiues, and instituted orders in
government, and wrote decrees for his subjects, and ruled the Argiues to his
great fame, as Eusebius in his histories sets forth.

In Licippus time Sem the son of Noah died, after he had lived six hundredth
years, and had seen much misery and great calamity, but not so much as his
father before him had seen: he lived after Abraham's days thirty and five
years. Osiris, whom the Egyptians call Apis, and sometime Serapis, for that
they adored this as their God, lived about this time, and destroyed that
monster in Thracia called Licurgus. Read more of this in Herodotus. Ismael
Abraham's base son by Agar Herodot. 2. 3.
the bondwoman died now, and left behind him twelve sons, great princes over
many tribes and nations, which began in time to grow enemies to the Church of
God, and to persecute the people of God, and were named Ismaelites.

In this time reigned in Assyria Bellochus surnamed Priscus Diodor. de sub.
au^. lib. 2.
their twelft king, and in Egypt governed Menam the first king that taught the
Egyptians many ceremonies, as new sacrifices to their gods, religions and
service, and instructed them in many things: for this time Egypt was raw and
rude in skill and knowledge. This Menam was thought (of Functius) to be that
which is read in Scripture to be Mizraim, and of Berosus called Oceanus. There
is nothing to be written of these kings worth the memory of man: for all this
while Greece was inhabited with barbarous people, nay the most of Greece was
not yet inhabited. Athens was not builded, neither Sparta, nor Corinth: for the
kingdom of Lacedemonia and the kingdom Corinth.
of Corinth began about David's birth. Lacedemonia.


The Argiues were the most ancient people in Greece, next after the
Peloponesians: for they began to reign in Argos in the time of Jacob the
Patriarch, at what time Baleus surnamed Xerxes governed in Assyria being the
eight king of the Assyrians, Functius.
before the Athenians, as long as Jacob was before Moses: for in Athens reigned
Cecrops the first king, which king was of one time with Moses.

But let us proceed. The ninth king in Peloponesus was named Mesapius, who
reigned forty and seven years. Philo Iudeus affirms, that Job about this
time lived, and that after his punishment and afflictions, he married Dina the
daughter of Jacob: but this is thought to be false, and found otherwise, that
Job and Dina were not of one time not by four discents: for that Iobab which
is written in Genesis, was of Jacobs time: this Iobab was the second king that
reigned in the land of Genes. 36.
Edom, as one of the stock of Esau, and therefore some writers erred herein.

Now follows in Peloponesus Heratus the 10. king, in whose Heratus the tenth
king of Poloponesus.
time one Hispalus the son of Heroules surnamed Libius, reigned in
Celtiberia, who at that time builded a city after his own name, and called it
Hispalis. You must understand, where you read Celtiberia or Iberia, that then
that country was so called Celtiberia
which is now named Spain, as it is in the treatise of Spain more at large
written, when and how long Celtiberia or Iberia continued by that name, and
when the name of Spain began.

The kings of Egypt began now to be called Pharaones, a general name of
dignity always unto their kings afterward: Pharaones.
for their proper names were not so. The eighteenth Dynasteia of the Egyptians
likewise began this time, which continued three hundredth forty and eight
years: in the which government Amasis was the first king. Sparta a very famous
city amongst Sparta builded.
the Lacedaemonians was now builded by one Spartus the son of Phoroneus, the
second king of the Argiues, whom a little before you read of. Mar. Scot.
says, that Greece was not tilled before this time, and that corn being
brought then from Corn first sown in Gree^
Phoenicia to Greece, was first at that time sown: but I will be brief in
passing over the names of the kings of Poloponesus; because I might come to the
ripeness of Greece, which was many hundredth years after this time.

The eleventh king was named Plemneus, and their twelft king named Orthopolis:
of these two we have nothing to write more then of the rest, but in respect of
the time and of the government to open the naked state and weak Empires The
naked Empires of the world.
of the world, at that time wherein there was no action done worthy of writing
for scant arms were then known: this only we find, what kings reigned
then, and in what parts of the world they governed, having their those names
which they have not now: for then the Frenchmen were called Celtae, the
Spaniards Celtiberi or Iberi, and so of other nations. But now reigned in
Assyria Mammitus the thirteenth king, and Crassus reigned over the Argiues the
fifth king.

This time Cath begat Amram Moses father, and about this time Joseph. died in
Egypt. after which time the children of Israel were sore afflicted by the
Egyptians under another Pharao, Ruffin. de orig. Grecor.
surnamed Amenophis, a cruel tyrant over the Hebrews then being under his
subjection in Egypt. This king made an Edict, and charged the midwiues that all
children of the Hebrews should be slain, or else cast into Nilus as soon as
they were borne. Of some this king is called Memnon. Tacitus lib. 3.


About this time governed in certain parts of Celtes one Lugdus, after whom
the place and the people were called Lugdunenses: and likewise one named
Narbon, by whose name the country is to this day called Narbonensis, which are
two provinces within Gallia now called France. About this time flourished the
great Astrologer Atlas, which is of Poets Atlas.
fained to sustain the skies upon his shoulders, for his skill and knowledge
therein.

In the two and twentieth year of this king Orthopolis, Amram married
Iochabed, and begat Aaron, and three years after begat Moses. In Moses time
began the kingdom of 2373.
Thessalia, where Emon the first king reigned: and together Thessalia.
with Thessalia sprang up the kingdom of Athens, three hundredth Athens.
seventy and five years before the destruction of Troy, and about seventy
years before Israel was delivered from the bondage of Pharao: for from Cecrops
the first king of Athens unto the first Olympiad, reigned in Athens seventeen
kings, and twenty princes or Judges, first called Metondidae, after called
Decennales principes after the kings. Of this king it Metondidae.
is written that he first named Jupiter a god, and honored Decennales
him: he erected the first altar in Greece, found images, and offered principes.
up sacrifices which were not before Cecrops time seen in Greece: for Castor
and Pollux, Liber and Mercurius, with diverse ancient gods of the Gentiles, were
after the time of Cecrops. Justinius lib. 2.
But I will leave Athens for a while, and I will speak of the Sicyonians and
Argiues: for these two regions of Greece were the first regions that were
governed by kings, but such kings as then that time yielded called Reguli: but
the state and regiment of the Argiues after the succession of fourteen kings,
was carried by Perseus into Mycena, which kingdom of Mycena was established in
Euristheus, after whom reigned six kings, and ended together at one time,
with the kingdom of Sicyonum, as you shall read after in the next chapter.
But now I will set down the names of the kings of the Sicyonians in order, as I
find them in Ruffinus, and in Functius tables.

1 Egialeus, after whose name the country was called Egialea, reigned. 52
years. 2 Europs. 45. 3 Stelchin. 20. 4 Apis, after whose name the country was
named Apia. 25. 5 Thelassion. 52. 6 Aegidius. 34. 7 Thurimachus 14. In this
kings time began the kingdom of the Argiues. 8 Leucippus. 53. 9 Messapius. 47.
10 Heratus. 46. 11 Plemneus. 12. 12 Orthopolis. 63. 13 Merathius 30. In whose
time the kingdom of Athens began. 14 Maretus. 20.
CHAP. II.
Of the building of Athens* of their beginning, and of their first laws under
17 kings, being the third kingdom of Greece in antiquity after the
Sicionians and the Argiues.

CEcrops of whom mention is made before, builded Athens in Achaia, and hereof
it was named first Cecropia: after that it was called of one Ati, Attica: and
last of all it was named of Minerua, Athens: for in the Greek tongue Athenae
is called Minerua, though in ancient time it had other names, as Mopsopia, or
Strabo lib. 8.
Ionia, Diadas, and Orchomenon, and now at this time of no great Ruffinus de
origin Grecorum.
fame, but a poor fisher town, which Mahomet the eight Emperor of the Turks
has brought under.

In the days of Cecrops, reigned that Pharao which was with Thucyd. lib. 2.
all his nobility and chivalry of Egypt drowned in the read sea for his
wickedness and tyranny against God and his people: he was by his proper name
called Chencres. There happened in Cecrops time, two great wonders in Greece:
the one a great deluge in Thessalia called Deucaleons flood: the other that
great harm of fire called Ince^dium Phaetontis: at what time the Deucal. flood.
Grecians were named Helenes after the name of Hellenes the son of Deucaleon
and Pyrrha.

After this Cecrops followed Cranaus the second king of Athens, which reigned
nine years. Hermes Trismegistus a great Philosopher, Hermes Trismegistus.
and a priest of Egypt, flourished, though Suydas says, that he lived before
Abraham's time: yea some of the best learned that are best acquainted with
histories, think it a name fained, and a book framed of late under the name
of Trismegistus. Now followed Marathus the foureteenth king of Peloponesus,
Erictherus the 15. king, and Choar the 16. king of Peloponesus Erictherus.
(as Functius says:) Ruffinus names this king Astades. I pass Functius.
over the names without any matter to be written of them, for Greece was yet as
the Chaldeans and the Assyrians in the beginning, building and beginning to
frame kingdoms: for all this time no part of Greece was known but Sicyonum,
which is the country of the Peloponesians, after them the Argiues, and now the
Thessalians and the Athenians start up and begin a kingdom as the third and
fourth governors of Greece in antiquity. About this time the city of Corinth
was builded: this was first called Epira, and grew afterward to be one of the
strongest cities and holds in all Greece.

Now was the city Epidaurus, and the city Bythinia builded: now Memphis was
builded in Egypt, for the world was Called first Mariandina.
then busy only in building: at what time in Athens reigned Ruf. de orig.
Graecor.
Amphitrion the third king, and after him succeeded Ericthonius the fourth
king of Athens. About which time came Phaenix and Cadmus from Thebes to Egypt,
and from Egypt unto Syria, and governed Tire and Sidon: at what time reigned in
Creete Asterius, and over the Argiues the ninth king called Stelenus.

I thought for observation of time very necessary to set down the time and
beginning of every kingdom as they began in one place after another, though I
find nothing yet in Greece worth the writing, concerning either wars or
government. Now began in Phrigia a new kingdom called Dardania, after one
Dardanius name, who both builded this Dardania.
town and reigned there the first king 31. years: though Manethon sets
down 64. I will follow Archilochus in this history, whose assertion is more
probable concerning time then Manethon is. It was called before Meonia: this
kingdom began 830. years after the flood, when Amyntas the 19. king of the
Assyrians kept his Court at Niniue. About which time Moses died, after whom
succeeded Joshua. In Egypt then governed Aegyptius, after he had driven his
brother Danaus then king out of Egypt, usurped the kingdom, after whose name
Egypt was named (before called Mizraim) and had to his surname Ramesses.

About this time in Egypt the first Labyrinth was builded Labyrinth.
by Menophis, by some called Miris: after which example Dedalus imitated the
like work, and made the second Labyrinth Diod. lib. 1. cap. 2.
in Creete, at what time Minoes reigned king in Creete. This Minoes Creete.
was the first lawmaker in Creete, when likewise Radamanthus ordained laws in
Licya. Bellopares now king in Assyria governed, and Epopeus the 17. king of the
Peloponesians. For that I see not much matters in following the course and
order of these kings of Greece, and for that I find (as I said before) nothing
historical, because yet time seemed raw in Greece, and far from the civil
dissentions which long after happened in Greece, and from the foreign wars
which the Grecians had with the kings of Persia and Macedonia (for now all the
wars that were, was in Assyria and Chaldea:) I will hasten therefore to come
to the histories of Greece, and will pass over these fragments of places and
persons, until I shall find matters to write of: only I will set down the
names of the kings of the Argiues as they reigned orderly.

1 Inachus the first king, reigned 50. years. 2 Phoroneus. 60. The names of the
kings of the Argiues.
3 Apis. 35. 4 Argos. 70. 5 Crassus. 54. 6 Abas Phorbas. 35. 7 Troiphas 46. In
this kings time the kingdom of Athens began. 8 Crotopus. 21. 9 Stelenus. 11.
10 Danaus which was driven by his brother Rameses out of Egypt, came to Argos
and reigned 50. 11 Lynceus. 41. 12 Abas. 23. 13 Protheus. 17. 14 Agrisius. 13.
Now the kingdom of the Argiues ended, and their foueraigntie was taken away
into Mycena by Perseus, a noble valiant captain, which had diverse victories
over diverse countries, as over the Persians, and now over the Argiues in the
time of Agrisius, after they had governed Argos 544. years: where Eristheus
Euristheus accounted another Hercules.
a man most famous, and named another Hercules, for his great courage and
enterprises, he was of the stock of Atrides: for Atreus, which was Agamemnon
and Menelaus father, was his own uncle, and therefore he governed the most part
of Greece. In his time (which yet had grown to no strength) he established the
kingdom of Mycena, and brought many subjects under it, that Mycena became
populous and strong, and the Mycenians became Mycena.
to be conquerors of many provinces, and therefore writers omit the name of
Perseus and of Stelenus, and they begin the kingdom from the time of Eristheus:
after whom succeeded 6. kings, who waxed strong, and mighty, that then Mycena
ruled al Greece. These had the 10. years wars with the Troyans, and at last
conquered them, which war was the cause of their own destruction, and for
that they began together at one time, and both had equal number of kings: for
6. kings reigned in Mycena, and 6. in Troy, whose names I have here laid down.

The kings of MYCENA. The kings of TROY. Eristheus reigned 45. years. Dardanus
the first king. 31. Atreus, and Thiestes. 65. Ericthonius. 2. 57. Tros. 3. 60.
The kings of Mycena, and of Dardania.
Agamemnon Atreussonne 18. Ilus the 4. king. 54. This came from Mycena unto
Troy with 1202. ships. Laomedon the 5. reigned 36. In whose time Troy was
destroyed by Hercules with his company going to Colchos. Aegistus after
Agamemnon. 2. Priamus the 6. and last king, was by Agamemno^ subdued, and his
city conquered. Orestes 15. years. In whose time Mycena was subdued by the
stock of Heraclides under the Peloponesians.

Thus ended the kings of Mycena and of Troy, the one being destroyed by the
other: yet after Orestes was slain by Pirrhus in the temple of Apollo,
Tisamenus Orestes son reigned 15. Ruf. de orig. Graecor.
years after his fathers death: and after Tisamenus reigned but two more, which
were called Penthillus and Cometes. But there is scant any mention made of
these after Orestes time.

Now after that these two kingdoms were destroyed, and overthrown, presently
the kingdom of the Latins begins in the person of Aeneas, who travailing
from Troy unto Italy after the destruction thereof, married king Latinus daughter
and heir, which is spoken of in the original antiquity of the Latins, by
Halcarnassaeus, Ruffinus, Eusebius, and others.

The Peloponesians reigned 860. years, and ended in the time of Samson the
last Judge of Israel, which ended the government The kings of Peloponesus.
of the Judges in Israel, which continued from Moses until Samsons time 400.
years, and after Samsons death 40. years, kings began to reign in Israel.
After that the kings ended in Sicyonum, priests reigned in that country of
Peloponesus called Carnij, which governed until the coming of that Carnij.
strong and ancient people called Heraclides: who afterward grew of great
force, that the long civil wars which continued Heraclides.
27. years, to the last destruction of all Greece, as more at large in
Thucydides is mentioned, and shall be spoken of me when the time of these civil
wars shall come to be handled in this history.

I in the mean season will return to the state of Athens, which by this time
grew to some fame, though before (as Theseus the 10. king of Athens and first
advanced the fame and state of Athens.
other parts of Greece) obscured by reason of no action done worth the writing
until Theseus time, which reigned (as you heard before) in Poliphedes time the
24. king of Pelopones. he brought unto Athens all the whole province of Attica,
and dispersed people from other parts of Greece, and made them all one
corporation, which were before dispersed unto diverse villages: he erected a
council hall, and made a town house, which the Athenians called Asti: he
instituted great feasts and sacrifices unto Minerua called Panathaenea: this
was for all the Plutarch in vita Thes^i.
country of Attica, and he ordained another feast which they called Metaecia,
for strangers and forreners that should come (...).
to dwell at Athens. That done, he began to set up an estate of a common wealth:
he made distinctions of degrees, and difference of states: moreover Theseus
coined money, and marked the coin thereof with the stamp of an ox, in
memory of the bull of Marathon, or of Taurus, chief captain of king Minos,
which Theseus subdued by combat appointed. The The fame of Theseus.
stamp of the ox continued in Athens until Pericles time, at what season the
owl was stamped in the coin of Athens.

The renown of this Theseus was marueilously blown through all Greece, after
diverse victories gotten against the Amazones, the slaughter of king Deucaleon
king Minos son, of the vanquishing of the huge monster Minotaurus, of the
wars of Lapithes, of the overthrow of Captain Taurus, and of infinite more
victories, so that all Greece rang of Thesius The fame of Theseus.
fame, that his acts came to certain proverbs in all parts of Greece, Hic
alter Theseus, this is another Theseus: Hoc sine Theseo no^fit, This was not
done without Theseus. He discharged Athens of their tribute unto king Minos,
and appointed certain games called Isthmia after the imitation and order of
Thucyd. lib. 2.
Hercules, that even as the Grecians did celebrate the games of Olympia in the
honor of Jupiter by Hercules ordinance, so they should likewise celebrat the
feast of Isthmia games which Theseus made in the honor of Neptune: for he
imitated Hercules in all his actions.

The great admiration which Theseus had of Hercules courage, Theseus emulated
Hercules.
made him in like sort with Themistocles to say, that as the victories and
triumphs of Miltiades would not suffer Themistocles to sleep, so the renown
and fame of Hercules could not keep Theseus back from the imitation thereof:
for they both were near kinsmen. He was so great a benefactor unto Athens,
that on the 8. of October the Athenians do most solemn sacrifice in
remembrance of his return from Creete with the children of Athens, after the
killing of king Deucaleon and Minotaurus, and in the honor of Neptune (as
Plutarch says.) The Ruffinus de orig. Graecor.
Athenians honor the name of Theseus, which of some is supposed to be the
son of Neptune, every 8. day of every month, so much Greece was beholden
unto Theseus. Plutarch in the life of Theseus says, that Aegeus his father
descended of the lineage of the great Erictheus, and of the first inhabitants
which occupied the country of Attica: for there is no mention made that they
came out of any other country, but they were called Autochthones, borne of
themselves in the land of Attica, (for so the Athenians would have it.)

This was the first that erected Athens: and having joined the city of Megara
and all the territories thereabout unto Attica, The division between the
Peloponesians and the Athenians.
he caused (as Plutarch affirms) four square pillars to be set up for the
confines within the straight of Isthmis in Peloponesus, with this sentence
written on the pillars: All from these pillars Eastwarde, is in Ionia which is
Attica: and all Strabo lib. 9.
from thence Westward was in Peloponesus, to separate the country of Attica
from Peloponesus: for in Ionia Attica lay.

After this Theseus, succeeded in Athens Mnestheus the eleventh king, which
reigned four and twenty years. This Mnestheus.
time governed Agamemnon in Mycena, when Helen Menelaus his brothers wife was
ravished and taken away by Paris, who likewise being very young was before
ravished by Theseus. I will briefly rehearse the rest of the kings of Athens:
for after Mnestheus, Demophon succeeded in Athens the twelfth king over the
Athenians, and reigned 33. years. In whose time Aeneas married Lauinia king
Latinus daughter, who governed them three years and died, and left to Ascanius
his son the kingdom after him: he reigned after his father thirty eight
years. This time reigned in Assyria Tauteus the twenty and Eli the hie Priest
judged Israel 70. years before this time.
ninth king of the Assyrians. Eli the priest now judged Israel, and Samuel the
Prophet was borne. Oxintes the thirteenth king of Athens reigned twelve years:
about which time Ascanius began to build a town, and named it Alba longa,
where he with Alba longa.
all his Court removed, leaving Lauinium to his fathers wife Lauinia, thirty
years after his father Aeneas had builded the city of Lauinium. In this kings
reign the Amazones burned the temple of Diana in Ephesus.

Now followed in Athens the foureteenth king over the Athenians, who reigned
but one year: after him reigned Thimoetes the 15. king he reigned eight
years. This was the last king of the stock of Erictheus: after this time
reigned Siluius the third king of the Latins: here of all the kings of Alba Of
Erictheus stock the kings of Athens descended.
were afterward called Syluij. In the 70. years after the destruction of Troy,
and fourteen years after the kings failed in Peloponesus, came certain
people from Greece unto Peloponesus, and possessed a great part of the
country, which were called Doors: of this Thucydides only can best report,
for it is his proper history. Thucyd. lib. 2. 3.


Now was Melanthus the sixteenth king over the Athenians which reigned 37.
years: in this kings time reigned in Assyria Dercillus the 31. king. About
this time Samuel the Prophet judged Israel, with whom governed afterward king
Saul: during which government, the prophet David was borne, when Aeneas came to
Italy about David's birth.
Aeneas reigned the sixth king of the Latins: at what time the stock and
family called Heraclides entered Peloponesus, who waxed so strong and fierce,
that they waged wars against the Athenians, with whom they had diverse battles.

CHAP. III.
Of the original beginning of the kings of the Lacedaemonians, and of the kings
of Corinth, who at one time began their government under the state of
Monarchy, and also ended about one time: of their government, and continuance.

THis very time began the kingdom of Corinth to start up, where first
reigned Alethes their first king, which reigned five and thirty years in
Corinth. Together with the Corinthians begin the Lacedaemonians to set up a
kingdom, where reigned first as king one Euristhenes, of whom issued after
those two valiant and noble Captains, Cleomenes and Leonidas so much Leonydas.
for their courage and prowess set forth in Thucydides, whose greatness and
courage shall (when time serves) be declared, Thucyd. lib. 1.
to their great fame. Understand how by degrees one after another, kings and
kingdoms in Greece begin:

1 The first government began in Peloponesus, and continued during the time of
26. kings, which was 860. years. 2 The second kingdom which sprang up in Greece
were the Argiues, where reigned 14. kings, which continued 544. years.
After these two, the Athenians and the Thessalians began to flourish about
one time. Athens waxed more famous then any other region of Greece: seventeen
kings successively reigned in Athens, and continued from the going out of the
Athens continued 463. years.
children of Israel out of Egypt, yea forty years before that time, until
the 423. year after their departure out of Egypt, even from Moses time until
David's reign: for in Moses time Cecrops the first king of Athens reigned, and
in David's time Codrus the last king of Athens. This is a sure computation of
time, wherein can be no error.

The ancient and first people of the world after the flood, began to account
the time from the going of Noah out of How the Chaldeans and Assyrians
accounted their time.
the Arc, as the Chaldeans and Assyrians did, as Berosus (their own country
Chronographer) does affirm, whose history endured from Noah to Moses. Then
the Hebrews made their account from the delivery of Israel out of Egypt, as
Josephus How the Hebrews and Jews accounted their time.
(their country man likewise) affirms by their Jubilees which they used
every fiftieth year. All other kind of Chronicles which account by the
Olympiads, or from the reign of Alexander which the Greeks used, from the
destruction of Troy, or from the building of Rome which the Romans Errors in
Chronicles.
and diverse other nations did, do much err, and must of necessity err: for
they neither agree of the time of the Olympiads, neither of the time when Troy
was destroyed, nor when Rome was builded. But I will return to my matter.

Now that Peloponesus, Argos, Thessalia, and Athens, have altered their
government from kings unto princes and magistrates, and that now Lacedemonia
and Corinth begin together to erect up their kingdoms, and to enjoy a
Monarchy by the government of kings, who began to reign in Lacedemon and in
Corinth, four hundredth and thirteen years after the Israelits went out of
Egypt, at what time in Athens reigned Codrus the last king of 17. and over the
Latins Aeneas Siluius the fourth king: This time began wars between the
Peloponesians and Iustine lib. 2.
the Athenians while yet Codrus lived, in the which wars to save his
country, and to satisfy the Oracle given thereby, he Thucyd lib. 1. and 2.
entered boldly and valiantly to the midst of the enemies like De^ius or
Curtius, and died, after whom succeeded Medon Codrus son, after whose names
the magistrates of Athens were called Metondidae. About this time began David
to reign king in Hebron, Saul being slain and his sons in the 8. Iubilee of
the Jews. Latinus Siluius reigned over the Latins, the 5. king. In Tire
reigned Hiram, one that loved and favored king David all the days of his
life: this time governed in Assyria Eupales, the thirty two king of the
Assyrians. In Corinth governed Ixion Ixion 2. king of Corinth.
the second king, who reigned thirty seven years, in the hundred eighteen
years of the taking of Troy by the Grecians. In Lacedemon likewise the second
king called Argis succeeded, who lived but one year: after him succeeded the
third king Argis and Arcestratus the 2. and 3. king of Lacedemon.
named Arcestratus, who reigned thirty five years. A little after this,
Absalom slew his brother Amnon, and fled to the king of Gessur, about which
time Solomon was borne of Bethseba: for that I find no great matter to write
of the kings of Lacedemonia, where reigned nine kings, saving Agesilaus only,
and of the kings of Corinth, where reigned twelve kings: I mean to avoid
tediousness to set down the names of these kings as well of Lacedemon, as of
Corinth, in a table with their reignement and government as here you see: for
that these two kingdoms began both at one, and also ended about one time.

1 Alethes the 1. king of Corinth, he reigned 35. Look Herod. lib. 7. for
these kings of Lacedemon. 2 Ixion. 37. 1 Euristhenes the first king of
Lacedomon. 42. 3 Agelaus. 37. 2 Argis the 2. king one year 4 Pryminas. 35. 3
Arcestratus 35. years. 5 Bacis the 5. king 35. 4 Labotes 37. years. 6 Agelas.
30. 5 Doristus 29. years. 7 Eudemus. 25. 6 Agesilaus 44. years. 8
Aristemedes. 35. 7 Archelaus 60. years. 9 Egemnon. 16. 8 Thalecus 8. reigned
40. 10 Philestenus. 12. 9 Alcanes the last, 37. 11 Autones the last 1. year.

This Agesilaus being very wise and valiant, learned to obey before he came to
command, well instructed in military discipline, just and virtuous in all
his actions, which the Ephori being chief of authorities within Sparta, and
were to control kings insolency and injustice, if any were by them used: he
first after he was elected king, armed himself against the king of Persia, for
the defense of the Crecians his Country Agesilaus against the Persians.
men that dwelled in Asia, and after he had set the Cities of Greece which
were in Asia at liberty, he entered unto Phrygia, where he took many cities,
wanne great spoils: these exploites being done, he returned unto the City of
Ephesus, where within few days he had levied a great number of men of arms,
imitating herein king Agamemnons example in choosing the best soldiers to
wars with him, and leaving behind at home the worst: he from Ephesus entered
into Caria, and from thence to Lydia, and took Sardis the head City of Lydia,
slew Tisaphernes, the king of Persias General. Agesilaus became so great by
diverse victories gotten against the Persians and barbarous kings, that he was
made general of all Lacedemonia^ nauies: for as then Theopompus says, he was
Melanctohn 2. Chron.
the worthiest man of fame in his time: for he rather gloried in the praise of
virtue, then in the greatness of his authority. Now Pharnabazus was come
from Persia as general after Tisaphernes, who at his first coming had a
sharp welcome: Agesilaus so prospered, that being but two years in Asia, he
was for his honesty, continency, courtesy, and plain dealing, through all
Asia much commended: he was Thucyd. lib. 8.
wont often to say that sentence of Timotheus: as Mars uses no mercy, so
Greece contemns gold: but Agesilaus being called from Asia home to Greece,
he was much against his Agesilaus saying.
will enforced to fight in Greece, and against Greeks his own country men,
even against that worthy and renowned captain Epaminondas, whose magnanimity
Agesilaus often woondred at.

I need not much to praise the life of Agesilaus: for it is set forth in
Plutarch even from his youth, his manners, his wars, his victories in such
sort, that Epaminondas though then his enemy at the battle at Leuctres,
before and Plut. in Agesil.
after wondered much at his magnanimity, and commended much his agilitie,
courage, and wisdom: read Plutarch of this and Zenophon, where he wrote an
noble oration in Zenoph. lib. 1.
the praise of Agesilaus: yet I will leave the wars between them both,
concerning the liberty of the Boetians, until some other place where more
shall be spoken.

Zenophon was great with Agesilaus, and in person present Zenophon great ly
honored of Agesilaus.
in all the wars whom he much loved and honored: to be short, Sparta thought
themselves happy to have such a king: but I omit until better occasion be
offered to speak further of Agesilaus. Now to the Lacedaemonians again, whose
kings ended in Alcanes the ninth king, being the last after that the
Lacedaemonians had a Monarchy under kings for three hundred and odd years:
and now at the fall of the kings of Lacedemonia in the time of this king
Egemnon, which was the Ruffi. de Greco. Orig.
ninth king of Corinth, diverse kingdoms sprang up together, as the kingdom of
Assyria, at what time Sardanapalus the last king there reigned of thirty eight
kings, now translated unto the Chaldeans by Phul Belochus.

The Medes this time begin a kingdom under Arbaces, and the Macedonians
their new kingdom under Caranus their first king: and within forty years
after began the kingdom of Lydia, and within thirty years after began
Romulus his Empire in Rome, so that within one hundred years one after
another, sprang these five kingdoms: The kingdom of new Assyria. The kingdom
of Media. The kingdom of Macedonia. The kingdom of Lydia. And the Romans
began to have footing, and kings began to flourish: about which time the
kingdom of Corinth decayed, after the raignement of twelve kings, which
governed well nigh three Twelve kings reigned in all Corinth.
hundred years.

Now that the Lacedaemonians and the Corinthians had a fall in their kings, and
that the state of their government was altered to an other form, as before the
Argiues, and the Peloponesians, the Athenians, the Thessalians, whereof that
government, I mean of kings, translated to another form: so likewise now the
Lacedaemonians and the Corinthians together were changed from Kings to Judges,
and other popular Magistrates.

And as in Greece one country began with the other: so one fell with the
other, and so I hasten to the history of Greece, whereof nothing yet is spoken
but the accompting of time, saving the wars that the Grecians had with the
kings of Persia, and with the kings of the Medes: for the first tribute that
ever was paid out of Greece unto any barbarous king, was unto Croesus the last
king Lydia: so long Greece flourished, as long as they had not civil wars
between them selves, which The first tribute of Greece paid unto Croesus.
was the only cause of the whole destruction of Greece: otherwise Asia,
Persia, Media, Lydia, and Scythia, felt the value of Greece, envied their fame,
and sought to overthrow their glory, and could not.

For Plutarch in the life of Solon says, that Licurgus was the eleventh person
that descended from the right line of Hercules: great controversy there is
amongst Historiographers concerning Licurgus time, of his parentage, and of his
travel out of his country: they have written diversely of his government, of
his laws, and of his death: but specially they vary of the time he lived in:
some will have him in Iphitus time: Aristotle Licurgus.
is of that opinion: others say, that he was long before any of the Olympiads,
as Eratosthenes: but Zenophon affirms that he Zenoph. lib. (...). Laced.
was of great antiquity, he was in the time of Heraclides, which were nearest
of blood unto Hercules: but how so ever it is agreed, it seems it should not
be long from Homers time, for that he was the first that brought the unknown
poemes of Homer to light in Greece. Chronographers vary much about the time of
these men under written: for in antiquity of time they seem more fabulous
then historical.

Hermes. Tris. Homer. Pythagoras. Linus. Orpheus. Lycurgus. Cyrus. Romulus.
With infinite more which I omit here to name.
CHAP. IIII.
Of the general government in all the Cities of Greece, from Lycurgus time the
king, and the lawmaker in Sparta, until the coming of Xerxes the great, the
fourth king of Persia into Greece: of Lycurgus laws among the Lacedaemonians:
and of Solons laws among the Athenians.

THus Lycurgus being singular, rare and wise in his doings, first consulted
with the oracles of Apollo at Delphus, changes the estate of the common
wealth, instituteth a Senate of the Lacedaemonians, to the number of twenty
eight, who should pull down the fury of the people, if need so required, by
any innouations against the kings: and again to bridle the tyrannical Laws
and institutions made by Licurgus.
government of the kings against the people: and a little after that, a supreme
authority was instituted and given to certain Magistrates called Ephori, who
should likewise control the Senate and the kings in their faults.

Lycurgus made laws for the women of Lacedemonia, and instituted disciplines
for the maids to exercise therein, as to run, to wrestle, to cast the dart,
to throw the bar: he made laws touching marriage, and appointed order for
education Plut in Lycur.
of children: they were taught after seven years of age how to obey, to
sustain pain, to endure labor, and to continue in fight: they were compelled
to shave their heads, to go bare legged, to use all kind of exercise: naked
they lay together on a bed of straw, which they them selves made of the
tops of reeds or canes that grow in the river Eurotas.

Licurgus also appointed them straight diet, and taught them Zenophon de repub.
Laced.
short speech, little meat, and few words: hereby grew the Lacedaemonians to
be the only famous people of the world, the most endured soldiers, and the
most able men of body. Diod. lib. 2. cap. 3
The like law Bochoris made in Egypt for the education of their children: they
might not exceed in expenses upon any male child borne, above twenty
drachmes: then either straight he should be exercised a soldier in the
field, or with the priests in Astronomy and Arithmetike, or else if he were
not a likely child of limme and body fit for a soldier, he should be put
with shepherds, husbandmen, or with some craftesmen: for he might not be idle
in Egypt. It seemed that both Lycurgus and Solon brought from Egypt their laws
into Greece: for all confess that Egypt was matter artium.

Lycurgus appointed an order for burial amongst the Lacedaemonians: Lycurgus.
he did cut off all superstition of places, but only to lap the corpse
within a red cloth, and spread it over with olive leaves, commanding by his
law, that they should not mourn for the dead past eleven days, and on the
twelfth day to do sacrifice to Proserpina, and to give over mourning.

This straight kind of government bred due obedience in Sacrifice to Proserpina
for the dead the 12. day.
Sparta, and that of Sparta none should traueile without license. And amongst
the Lacedaemonians he made laws, that none should dwell in Sparta. This
Lycurgus framed his life according to the laws he made: and for that he would
know of Apollo, whether his form and manner of government were good, he went to
Delphos to consult with the oracle: and before he went, he swear the Senators,
the Ephories, and the king of Sparta, to keep his institutions and laws
until he would come again from Delphos, where he willingly died, lest he
should return to Sparta, whereby they might have occasion by his return to
break their oath. In ancient time this town Sparta Strabo lib. 8.
had the sovereignty and rule of a 100. towns, and every year an ox in every
of these 100. towns was sacrificed unto Mars: and this sacrifice was of long
time used in Sparta, and named Hecato^ba, as Strabo says. This was a kind of
sacrifice afterward used in diverse countries. Al which time Judges governed in
Athens Hecatombo^a.
from Medon the first Judge the son of Codrus, until Eurixias time being the
last Judge: for after 17. kings had reigned in Athens succeeded after judges,
to the number of twenty, who ruled the state of Athens, from the time of
Codrus the last king of Athens, until the time of Tullius Hostilius the third
king of the Romans, who reigned in the 22. Olympiad: so long Judges reigned as
chief magistrates in Athens. After these 20. judges the form of government was
again altered in Athens, that nine magistrates yearly should be chosen of the
chief men, of the noblest stock within Athens, which should govern the
state of Attica: but (as Eusebius says) then ruled lust for laws, and the
liberty of Athens grew to be much offensive, until Eusebius lib. 10. cap. 3.
de prepar.
the time of Draco, who made severe laws and sharp punishments for offenders,
in the time of the 36. Olympiad. Dracos 36. Olympiad.
laws were called for their severity, lex sanguine scripta, laws written
with blood: he was the first that made laws in Athens. After him succeeded in
the 47. Olympiad Solon, a singular man of rare virtue, and of great justice: he
did mitigate the fury of Dracos laws, and made found and perfect laws for
the Dracos laws 47. Olympiad.
Athenians. In this Solo^s time, Athens was well governed, and flourished before
all other towns of Greece: he instituted his laws Strabo lib. 15.
in Athens, when Cyrus reigned king in Persia welnigh 200. years before
Alexander the great: at what time the Grecia^s, knew not the Persians, neither
did the Persians know the Grecians, which seemed strange in so late a time: yet
Strabo writes this, an ancient writer: that whereas the Romans had at that
time diverse wars with the Sabines, Samnites, Fidenats, Thuscans, and other
nations about them, the Greek Historiographers took no notice of them,
neither Herodot, Thucydides, nor Zenophon: so strange were the Romans to the
Grecians. Less marvel it is that the Chaldeans and the Assyrians thought
Spain to be but a city, called (as Josephus says) Iberia: even so did they
esteem Joseph. contr. Appio. lib. 1.
France and Italy being far countries from the East, where the most wars
were in those first years after the flood.

But to return to Solon, who studied by all possible means to furnish with
good laws and to be careful of the state and government of Athens: for he
chiefly delighted in moral Philosophy, which treated of government and commonweals, which was most necessary for those days: for the seven wise Solon.
men which then flourished in Greece, sought no further knowledge then of things
common for the use of man: for in those days he was called most wise, that
could handle great causes in matters of State, and endeavor to have a good
wit in judgment of government, which in Solons time was found rare in men,
and therefore Greece had but seven wise men of great account for knowledge and
judgment, which were named the seven Sages, whose names are these under written

Solon of Athens. Thales of Miletum. Bias of Prienna. Chilo of Sparta.
Cleobulus of Lindia. Periander of Corinth. Pittacus of Mytilena.
But in Athens wars grew between the Magarians Justin. lib. 2.
and the Athenians for the Isle of Salamina, which was in the possession of the
Magarians. Solon herewith being moved, fained this Stratageme, to send a
trusty man of his own to Solon Stratageme.
Megara, fayning himself a reuoulted traitor, and that of purpose he came to
tell them how they might take all the chief Ladies and Gentlewomen of Athens
together, if they would follow him. The Magarians easily believing this man,
followed him: which when Solon understood, he appointed certain young men in
women's apparel that should dance on the shore side, with short daggers under
their clothes, until their enemies were landed: which being done, the enemies
having sight of these young Ladies dancing and playing without any man with
them, they so greedily leapt one upon the neck of the other to take such a
fair booty, that not one escaped, but were all slain, and by this means
Salamina was gotten to the Athenians.

Nevertheless the Magarians were sharply bent to recover The Magarians
overthrown.
Salamina again, if by any means they could: but Athens had still some great
wits, who were ever most busy in bickering and quarreling with their
neighbors: for the Athenians could better persuade with their tongues, then
fight Thucyd. lib. 1.
with their swords. Solon wanne great honor and glory, for one oration he
made in the defense of the temple of Apollo.

Solon by subtlety and wit set order betwixt the poor and the rich: for by
this time fell again the Athenians to the Attica divided.
old troubles and dissencions, about the government of the city, so that all
Atica was in it self divided: some taking part with the best and chiefest
Citizens, others with the common people.

Solon pacified this sedition: for he was neither partaker with the rich in
the oppression of the poor, nor with the Solon.
poor in the necessity of offense: his equity and upright dealing was well
known in Athens, therefore he was chosen governor by common consent of all
the Country of Attica, to reform the rigor of the laws, and to temper the
state of the commonweals. And first he began to take away al Dracos bloody
laws, saving for murder and manslaughter: for by Dracos laws by Solon
mitigated.
the laws of Dracos all kind of offense was punished with death, as well the
least fault, as the greatest offense, and therefore called lex sanguine scripta
Then Solon erected the Council of the Areopagites: out of this Council, the
city of Athens did yearly choose their governor: for in Dracos time
Areopagites.
were certain Judges upon life and death called Ephetes, before the time of
the Areopagites.

After this, Solon established diverse laws within the City Plutarch in Solon.
of Athens, and appointed three kinds of Councels to govern the City, one
above the other: and then he instituted some laws, which I will briefly here
recite: he made a law The laws of Solon.
for the maintenance of wills and testaments: he made an act for planting
and setting of trees: an other act he made, 1 law.
that they should not transport out of the Realm neither 2
corn, nor any other fruit to strangers, saving oil: he ordained 3
a law, that no stranger should be free Denizen within Athens: he appointed a
law for wells, for that Attica is a 4
dry soil, wanting springs and rivers, using only wells: 5
therefore he ordained, that all within four furlongs (which 6
is half a mile) should come to one well: he made a law to forbid ioynters
and dowries, not to use merchandise for marriage, neither should they buy
their husband to gain thereby, but that man and woman should marry for
issue, for pleasure, and for love: he made a law for women's going abroad,
what time they should go to walk, appointing The laws of Solon concerning
the women of Athe^s.
to them the time of their feasting, of their sacrificing, and also appointed a
time of mourning, to pluck from women all disorder and wilful liberty, which
by nature they seek: he made laws against idle persons, those that did not
Solons care for his country.
labor, charging the Council of the Areopagites to enquire how every man
lived within Athens, and to punish them to their deserts: likewise he made a
law for clearing of debts, called (...), and afterward that no man should
lend money upon usury, and a law against the same made: in Plut. in Solon.
this law he raised the value of money of 73. drachmes which was then a pound,
to a hundred drachmes. Solon made a law to forbid evil speech of the dead.

Now after that Solon had made these laws and many more, he cause'd them to
be written in tables by Plutarch called Axones, by Aristotle called Cyrbes: but
the Athenians being Axones. Cyrbes.
still very seditious and quarelling within themselves, Solon to avoid the
braules, secretly took his voyage (but with license given) to Egypt: there a
while he studied and conferred Solon went to Egypt.
with Psenophis and Souchis two of the wisest priests at that time in Egypt,
from Egypt he went to Cyprus.

After this, Solon went to Sardis the chief City of Lydia, where Croesus kept
then his Court: with whom he questioned touching happiness, Croesus
supposing himself most Croesus.
happy for his great honor, wealth, fame and dignity, and his great
triumphs which he had over great nations: but Solon preferred poor virtuous
and quiet men before Croesus, as Tellus in Athens, and Biton in Argos, so that
this good man did much good in Athens: for yet the glory and liberty of
Greece was not subject to strangers, though they had sundry bickeringes and
contencions between themselves.

All this while Themistocles was not known in Athens, neither Lysander in
Sparta, neither Leonides in Thebes, neither (as I said a little before) was
Persia known to Greece, Persia not known to Greece before Xerxes time.
nor Greece to Persia: for before Cyrus time, the Persians were of no great
fame, neither before the war of Xerxes were the Grecians of any great glory.

CHAP. V.
Of the huge army of Xerxes: of his preparation both by land and by sea: of
the pomp and pride of Xerxes in his journey to Greece: of his shameful great
overthrow, and ignominious flight from Greece again into Persia: and of the
flourishing state of Greece at that time.

TThis Xerxes was the fourth king after Cyrus, over whom Greece had the
greatest victory that ever Greece 72. Olympiad.
had. For Cambyses the son of Cyrus, and the second king of Persia was skant
known in Greece, but Darius surnamed Hydaspis, to whom Cyrus daughter named
Atossa was married: this Darius was the third king of Persia, and the first that
made preparation against Athens: and now having a great army he appointed
Hippias the son of Pisistratus, who being banished from Athens fled from
Greece unto Persia, to be lieutenant over Darius army.

The Athenians hearing of Darius coming, sent to have some aid of the
Lacedaemonians: but being deceived of their long expectation, having Miltiades
their captain, The battle of Marathon.
stayed not, but with fury proceeded and gave him the overthrow in the
battle of Marathon, and in the seventy two Olympiad.

Now Darius having some intelligence of troubles in Egypt, Darius.
altered his purpose from Greece, and turned his army to Egypt: in the which
wars after he had pacified and had set in order all things, he returned to
Persia, where shortly after he died: whose place of government his son Xerxes
had, who bestowed five years in gathering his huge force Diod. lib. 11.
and armies together, thinking rather to eat Greece then to fight with Greece:
his power was so great, and his force so Xerxes great army.
much, (for so Iustine says, Herodot, and Thucydides, with others) that when
Xerxes had demanded of some of his captains, Thucyd. lib. 1.
what they thought of his army: some answered, that all Greece was not able to
receive them to land: others say, that the Ocean sea had not room sufficient
for his nauies: and thus Xerxes was flattered by his captains, that he went
forward toward Greece with a far greater force then his father Darius had.
Some write that Xerxes had seventy hundred thousand footmen, as both Iustine
and Ruffinus affirm, and three thousand nauies: Iustine writes Iustine lib.
2. Ruffinus de Greco. orig.
ten thousand, and forty hundred thousand horsemen.

But as his coming to Greece was most terrible unto Greece, so his flight from
Greece was most shameful to the Persians: for at his first entering unto
Creece, Leonidas king of Sparta passed the streightes of Thermopyla with four
thousand soldiers, kept him play there, to the loss of twenty Thermopyla.
thousand Persians: they of Sparta being animated by their king to stand like
stout Lacedaemonians against such rude and barbarous people, a thing easily
persuaded to them that already were persuaded to die, they entered to the
number of six Herodot. lib. 6.
hundred into the tents of the Persians, thought it more value to die before
Xerxes face, wasted and spoiled every tent, and making diligent search for
Xerxes through all the tents of the Persians, killing them and destroying from
the beginning of the night until the next morning: Xerxes herewith being
frighted, escaped.

Now Themistocles being appointed general of the Athenians Themistocles
general of Athens.
against Xerxes in this war, having been before in the battle of Marathon,
being then very young, but very much enflamed with desire of glory, to see the
worthiness, and to Herodot. lib. 6.
hear the report and great fame of Miltiades, which was then general over
Athens, it tickled Themistocles to study to devise Miltiades.
to take some new matter in hand to gain glory: for Themistocles was of that
opinion, that the last overthrow of the Persians at Marathon, was but a
beginning of further troubles, though others thought the contrary: he was ever
most careful to persuade the Athenians to the seas, and to make galleys for
the wars of Greece. All the Athenians were most cruel, because the Athenians
were lords of the seas.

Themistocles mused every way, and studied daily to prevent dangers before they
were offered: he could not be quiet, he would take no rest for the safety of
his countire of Greece: and being asked of his familiar friends why he took
such pains, he answered, that Miltiades victory would not let him
Themistocles saying of Miltiades.
sleep: Themistocles was the most ambitious man in the world.

Now when he had won the Citizens to bend their force to the sea, while
this preparation was in Greece, news came how that king Leonidas was killed
in the country of Thermopilis (of whose courage and exploites you heard a
little Thucyd. lib. 1.
before) and that Xerxes had now that entry into Greece by land, and had
Ambassadors to demand the Empire of Greece both by sea and by land, and that
all Greece should acknowledge obedience to king Xerxes: but Themistocles
hanged up the interpretour that came with Xerxes Ambassador, for that he
being a Grecian, would use the Greek tongue in the service and commandment
of the barbarous king.

This stoutnesse of Themistocles pleased more the Athenians, Eurybiades
general of the Sea.
then the suffering of Eurybiades the Lacedemonian to be Admiral of all
Greece: for the Athenians would not set sail under any other Admiral then
their own, as well because they had the greatest number of ships in their
army, as also they thought them far more worthy then any other Country of
Greece: but Themistocles foreseeing the danger that was likely to fall out
between themselves, did willingly yield the whole authority unto Eurybiades,
and got the Athenians to agree thereunto.

This time, Aristides after he had been banished five year by means of
Themistocles, was now by a decree of Themistocles Aristides surnamed the just.
called home again: for Aristides was a good just man, and well beloved in
Athens. By this time the fleet of Xerxes showed on the coasts of Attica, and
covered all the seas, and Xerxes in person came with an army by land to camp
by the sea side. The Grecians having the sight of so monstrous an army both by
sea and by land, forgate all Themistocles persuasions, and began to retire
to the Peloponesians, and there to recover the gulf of Peloponesus.

Themistocles perceiving their determination, was in his mind angry, that the
Grecians would thus disperse themselves asunder, leaving the advantage which
both land and seas offered them: he suddenly used this stratageme, to send to
Themistocles stratageme.
king Xerxes a trusty friend of his own named Sicinus, a Persian borne,
taken in the wars before by Themistocles, and Thucyd. lib. 1.
kept by him as a scholemaster in his house for his children: this he sent
secretly to Xerxes, to advertise him, that Themistocles general of the
Athenians was very desirous to become Xerxes servant: and for that the
Grecians were determined to fly, he wished the king not to let them escape,
but to set upon them while they were far from their army by land.

Xerxes being glad of Themistocles message, the next morning by break of day,
placed himself on a huge hill where he might behold his whole fleet, and
discern the ordering of his army by sea: there did Xerxes set up a throne of
Ruffinus de Gr. (...). orig.
gold, and had about him many secretaries to write all that was done in the
battle.

Themistocles with no less skill had chosen his time and place: the galleys
drew near to the other armies. Xerxes Admiral, a man of great valor,
bestowed arrows and darts, charging the Grecians galleys hotely: they joined
and grappled together: the battle began so fiercely, that the dead bodies
being thrust over boorde into the sea, altered the color of the water into
blood. The Grecians by reason of the straightness of the sea wherein they
fought, The great slaughter of the Persians.
preassed sore upon the Persians, who with over great a multitude hindered them
selves much, being so many laid one an other a boorde in such disorderly sort,
that they were constrained to fly by night, in which flight many, of their
Thucyd. lib. 1.
galleys were drowned, and many taken, and more running secretly into Persia,
for fear of Xerxes being a cruel man.

This famous victory gotten by the Grecians, made Xerxes stark mad, his
loss was so great, and his shame was more. Iustine 2.
Being thus amazed what to do, Mardonius his lieutenant did persuade him to
return to Persia, and to leave him with three hundred thousand soldiers
behind. Xerxes resolved to follow Mardonius council, and was forced to escape
in a poor fisher man's bote most cowardly and shamefully, who before thought,
that land and seas had not room sufficient for his army.

The victory which the Greeks had over Xerxes at Salamina, Plutarch in
Themistocle.
was the greatest that ever Greeks had: for in truth the Greeks this time
flourished, being after this great victory much enriched with the gold of
Persia: for Mardonius Xerxes lieutenant, had the like success as his master
had: for he was overthrown in a battle in Boetia, leaving behind him all the
kings treasures, which was infinite, and did more hurt to Greece then good:
This Mardonius was driven Mardonius.
with like shame to follow his master into Persia.

Among the Greeks which ever contended more for vain glory then for profit
(as by this victory appears) grew great envy, the Lacedaemonians affirming
that they and their Admiral Euribiades deserved the glory and honor of this
victory, Themistocles much honored of all Greece.
the Athenia^s chalenging the praise and fame to themselves and to their
general Themistocles, of who^ all Greece spoke much honor, and who by common
judgment deserved most praise. Skant was Xerxes in Persia, but civil
discentio^ began in Greece, and Themistocles, by whose service principally the
glory of Greece shined at the victory of Salamina, was banished from Athens,
and went from place to place, until he came to Persia Diod lib. 11.
to this king Xerxes, whom he made to flee from Greece, as both Heraclides and
Clitarchus affirm: yet Thucydides says, Xerxes was dead before Themistocles
coming: but he meant Thucyd. lib. 1.
to his son Artaxerxes, surnamed the long handed. Herodot ended his history
in Xerxes time, where Thucydides begins, and therefore is best herein to be
believed.

Now Themistocles in Persia by drinking bulls blood, did poison himself, to
avoid the service which Artaxerxes appointed Themystocles poisoned him self.
him against Greece: he knowing the valor of Cimon, and fearing his courage,
who lay with an army there at Cyprus, to have given battle to Themistocles,
but Themistocles prevented that with death: for after this great victory of
the Grecians over the Persians at Salamina, Greece flourished, until civil
discord began within Greece, and so continued, one City contending with
another, until it brake out into public wars, which began fifty years
after the overthrow of Xerxes. After him succeeded in Athens Pericles, a man of
great valor, but he had an associate joined with him, a singular rare man: he
was the son of that valiant captain Miltiades, who overcame Darius Xerxes
father in the battle at Marathon. Miltiades Phocion father.
Of his service and courage you shall hear more: for as Themistocles had
Aristides, surnamed the just his colleague as a touchstone to reprehend
Themistocles for his ambition: so now Pericles had Phocion surnamed the good
called home being banished from Athens fortenne years to join in government
with Pericles: for when Aristides died, and Themistocles was banished, Cimon
had been of long time in service as general in foreign countries out of
Greece. Then Pericles began to deal in the common weal of Athens, and for
that Cimon was inclined to take part with the best men, and with The justice of
Cimon.
the honestest causes, he was the more esteemed, not only in Athens, but in
all Greece, and specially of the Lacedaemonians, who could not brook so well
Pericles, who took a contrary course every way to Cimon: of whose service
abroad Cimons praise.
far from Greece somewhat I will recite: for neither Themistocles, Read
Thucyd. lib. 1.
nor his successor Pericles bridled more the cruelty of that mighty Persian
king, then Cimon did, not only in chasing him out of Greece, but following him
hard at the heels to Persia, and brought him against his will to conditions of
peace.

After this he entered Thracia, subdued them, and forced those Herodot. lib. 7.
Persians that dwelt in Coronesus an Isle in Thracia to flight. Cimon was made
general of Athens, at which time he conquered the city of Ionia, and the city
of Amphipolis, and wanne the Isle of Syros: he subdued Asia from Ionia unto
Pamphylia, and Diverse victories of Cimon.
brought them in subjection under the Grecians: Cimon after this went against
the Faselits, who were Grecians borne, and yet enemies unto Greece, destroyed
their country, and wanne their chief city called Faselis.

Again, Cimon had two great victories against the Persians in one day: one
victory on sea, where he took 200. sails prisoners at the river Eurymedon,
Ariomandes being the kings Diod. lib. 11.
lieutenant: the other victory on land, with great slaughter of the barbarous
people: al their tents and their pauilions he carried away. Plutarch says, that
these victories excelled the victory of Salamia which the Grecians wanne by
sea, and the other which they wan by land before the city of Platea.

By this valiant man Cimon the name of Athens was revived: for Cimons only
study and care was, to have Greece not to halt, Plutarch. in Cimon.
and therefore his secret desire and traueile was, that Greece should stand
upon two legs, which was Athens and Sparta. He always sought means to keep
the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians Athens and Sparta, the two legs of Greece.
in peace: for the Athenians thought themselves to be the only light of al
Greece, affirming them only to be bread and borne in the country as Indigenae,
seditious people, unquiet, (...).
and ever desirous of sovereignty, and therefore Cimon followed the
Lacedaemonians manners for their sobriety and temperancie of life, and wished
always their prosperity.

This Cimon while he lived, was the only man that Greece was beholden unto:
for under Cimon it flourished most, and Athens flourished under Cimon.
specially the Athenians, which Demosthenes affirms in diverse of his
orations, that they had the sovereignty of al Greece for Melancton lib. 2.
the space of 73. years, compting from the time of Cimons victories at
Euridemon, until the yielding of Athens unto Lisander: Athens flourished 73.
years.
for after Cimons death, no famous act was done by any Grecian to the
barbarous people, saving that Agesilaus king of Lacedemon came fifty years
after Cimons death, with an army of Grecians into Asia, and began a small
war of no notable exploit, for that he was called home again to Greece, by
occasion of new troubles and civil wars risen among the Grecians.

Now when Cimon had brought into Greece (as it were) an Plut. in Cimone.
other golden world, such as was in Saturnus reign: and having brought with
him to Athens the bones of Theseus 700. years after Theseus death: for the
which he wanne exceedingly the Athenians hearts, he died at the siege of the
city Citium Theseus bones by Cimon carried to Athens.
in Cyprus: after whom continued Pericles his colleague in government of Athens
for a time. About this time in Rome ten Magistrates were appointed and first
created, within a while after the putting down of Tarquinius the last king of
Rome, called December viri: from whom ambassadors were sent to Athens for the
laws of the 12. tables.

I will now leave to speak of Athens, and I will write what other cities of
Greece did, what kings reigned, and what government they had: for at this time
the chiefest cities of Greece were in an uproar: for Xerxes after his shameful
flight Xerxes tyranny in Persia after his fleeing from Greece. Herodot. lib. 6.
from Greece to Asia, slew his brother Mancistes, used abominable incest with
both his brothers wife and his daughter, and himself was after slain by
Artabanus.

Now while his son Artaxerxes reigned, he was virtuous, good, and liberal,
and favored peace more then war: he lived until the seventh year of the
wars of the Peloponesians. Agesilaus reigned king in Lacedemon. The Thebans
waxed strong, and began to have the better of the Lacedaemonians. Sparta was
now in the declining state, and had sustained much losses and harms by the
Boetians, and by the Thebans, by means of Epaminondas and Pelopidas: therefore
they sent for Agesilaus into Asia: for while he was in Asia, Lisander lost
again two great battles, and in the last Lisander himself Lisander slain.
was slain.

CHAP. VI.
Of the civil discention in Greece after Xerxes time, how every city was in
arms one against another: of their Peloponesian wars, which continued 27.
years, to the overthrow of Greece by Philippe, and after by his son
Alexander, which shall be set down in the next Chapter.

THus the Thebans joining with the Athenians, through the great courage of
Cimon having won these two victories, Athens by Cimon recovered.
the one by land the other by sea, Cimon by his prowess and valor, recovered
now Athens, which before he had lost. Athens began to lift up her self, and
Thucyd. lib. 1. and 2.
being well refreshed by the spoils of the Lacedaemonians, and encouraged by
the death of Lisander, and by the banishment of Pausanias, it was hie time for
Agesilaus to return from Asia unto Greece: for Epaminondas the Thebane
captain, used great celeritie in his wars, and many Stratagems against
Sparta. Conon hearing of Agesilaus coming, armed himself, and (as Iustine
says,) was then in Asia, and came that time from Asia, when Agesilaus came.

Agesilaus was scant come into Sparta, but Epaminondas Justinius lib. 2.
came spoiling and wasting, and sacking all the country of Lacedemon, with a
great army of forty thousand Thebans to the river of Eurotas, which was a
great terror unto Sparta, Epaminondas saying of Sparta.
having but six thousand, which Agesilaus disposed in secret places of the
town: for Sparta was not walled, and therefore the more doubted of Epaminondas.

Now both Agesilaus and Epaminondas stood on either side of the river Eurotas,
one beholding another: a sight not pleasant Melanct. lib. 2. chron.
to Sparta, and ready to be brought to that ruin which happened thirty
years before to Athens.

Now after Epaminondas had continued by Sparta 4. days, and saw that he could
not enter the city, after few battles on Epaminondas.
both sides of equal loss, he departed and went to Arcadia: such was the
magnanimity of the Sparta^s, though they were brought to that calamity by the
Athenians before, yet they held out while these flourished in Sparta, namely,

Euristhenes. Leonidas. Eurybiades. Pausanias. Agesilaus. Lysander. Cleomenes.
Argestratus. Doristus. Archelaus. Agis. Archidamus. Cleombrotus. Brasidas.
Metagenes. Clearchus. Gilippus.
With many like, but chiefly with Lycurgus who made Sparta most famous in
discipline by his laws.

Epaminondas and Pelopidas were chief governors of Thebes, Epaminondas praise.
who not only restored the Thebanes diverse times their liberty, but also
resisted the violence of the Lacedaemonians, and ouerthrewe their Seigniorie,
and brought Sparta so under foot, that these two valiant captains did break
and cut in sunder the lincks and chains that made the Lacedaemonians Diod. lib.
15.
strong. The Lacedemonia^s who at that time were almost lords and masters of al
Greece, had diverse overthrows by Pelopidas: such was his good success, that
during his life (as Plutarch affirms) he was governor of Boetia, or general
over the Thebanes: he wanne the victory of the Lacedaemonians at the battle
Pelopidas victory at Tegira.
of Tegira, where none else then Pelopidas might callenge any part of that
victory: thereupon a new supply was sent from Lacedemon to Tegira, where a
new battle was presently offered to Pelopidas, in the which battle he had the
victory, and slew both the generals, as well him that with a new army Victory
the second time at Tegira.
came from Sparta to Tegira, as also the other which had the overthrow.

Now as the Thebanes waxed strong by the means of these two Captains
Epaminondas and Pelopidas: so were they also overthrown by diverse, as by the
Plateans and Boetians. But Thucyd. lib. 2.
Sparta was much molested with the Thebanes: so that by happy success of
Pelopidas many victories were won, and specially at the battle of Leuctres,
where both Pelopidas and Epaminondas played the champions: for Epaminondas
being general, The victory at Leuctres.
brought all his power and force to give the charge upon Cleombrotus then king
of Sparta, with great fury. Pelopidas perceiving the intent of the
Lacedaemonians, together with Epaminondas set upon Cleombrotus, before he could
order his army, with such incredible courage, that the Lacedaemonians the only
soldiers in martial discipline, were driven (beside their Thucyd. lib. 1.
skill, and wonted courage of sighting) to turn their backs and to take their
flight, and there were slain that day more Lacedaemonians in that battle, then
we read of in any former battle. Their king was slain, and a thousand of the
best of authority, the most part noble men of Lacedemon, and almost brought to
utter ruin: for this war at Leuctres was as famous as any one battle of
Greece.

This time only was Epaminondas governor of Boetia, and Plutarch in Pelop.
general of the army: afterward they were both governors of Boetia together:
at what time they both invaded the country of Peloponesus, and made the cities
to rebel against the Lacedaemonians, Melanct. lib. 2.
and passed over the river of Eurotas with seventy thousand men, and took
many little towns of the Lacedaemonians, wasted and destroyed all the country
to the sea side. The reputation of these two men Pelopidas and Epaminondas,
made all men most willingly to march under their conduction. This great battle
at Leuctres happened in the 32. years of Artaxerxes surnamed Mnemon, 29. years
after Lisander had brought Athens in subjection, in the 102. Olympiad, before
Alexanders Sp^rta destroed 30. years after Athens was destroyed by Lysander.
reign 36. years: so long held the Lacedaemonians the Empire of Greece after
the victory of Lisander at Athens, which was thirty years.

And now Sparta is brought into that misery by Epaminondas and Pelopidas, as
Athens was by Lisander, the only two lamps of Greece, the two eyes, and the
two legs of Greece, and yet the only two that were the cause of the
destruction of Greece. The cause of the wars of the Pelopones.
The cause of these great and long civil wars seemed in the beginning but
small, but (as Pindarus says) Scintilla parua magnam syluam comburit: and so
it came to pass by occasion of a little contention between the Athenians and
the Magareans, de luco incenso. The Athenians made a decree, that it was not
lawful for any of Megara to enter into any part of Attica: Read Thucyd. the 1.
and 2. book.
this was thought injurious, and therefore complaint was made unto the
Lacedaemonians, who sending messengers unto Pericles the chief governor of
Athens to entreat that that decree should not stand, Pericles answered, that
the Lacedaemonians sought a thing of small moment: but that the example of the
fault was intolerable, and therefore the Lacedaemonians should command
Pericles and all Athens in causes of greater weight.

This grew into such suspicion with the Lacedaemonians, that wars of 27.
years came of it, which was called Bellum Peloponesiacum, Melanct. lib. 2.
the Peloponesians war. This spoiled and wasted Greece: this war full ended
the glory of Greece, and brought the whole Empire to ruin, to whom within 50.
years before this war, all Asia was brought subject, as Xerxes could well The
opinion of Xerxes.
witness that Greece flourished, when he was forced with shame and loss secretly
in a small boat to escape into Persia, which Xerxes entered Greece with ten
hundred thousand soldiers, with 1200. nauies, some write 3000: He that
thought Hellespont could not contain the number of his nauies, and supposed
that all Greece were not able to receive his army, even he after that
incontinently lost four great battles, and was like a coward driven out of
Greece, leaving Mardonius his lieutenant with three hundred thousand soldiers
behind him, who likewise at the battle of Platea was slain, and his army
overthrown.

Then Greece flourished, when Darius Histaspis, which was Xerxes father, had
the overthrow at the great battle of Marathon: at which time that noble and
valiant man Miltiades was general for Athens. Then flourished Greece, when the
Lacedaemonians lived after the laws of Lycurgus, and when the Athenians kept
the laws of Solon. Then flourished Athens, Atheneus lib. 12.
when the revenues of Athens came yearly to the accounts of six hundredth
talents: nay it is written, that Demetrius Phalerius which then governed
Athens, had yearly coming into the treasure house twelve hundred talents, to
the which Budeus does agree. The city of Athens flowed in wealth, when that
P^eus lib. 2. de Ass.
Isocrates could get 20. talents for one Oration, and when Demosthenes had of
Harpalus 20. talents for one days silence.

When the Athenians took the Isle Cythera and the castle Silence well sold.
Nisaea which was the only strength of Megara: when they vanquished the
Lacedaemonians at Epidaurus, and compelled them to make league with the
Persians, and craved their aid and help against the Athenians: when
Thrasillus gave an overthrow to the Lacedaemonians by sea, and to their general
Mindarus between Sestos and Abydos, and yet they lost more then they gained by
the Lacedaemonians: such was then their malice as Cleon the Athenian, and
Brasidas the Lacedemonian, two valiant captains in the battle at Amphipolis,
fought so, that they Cleon and Brasidas slain at Amphipolis.
were both slain and all their soldiers: so in like sort was all Greece
destroyed by civil wars: such was the malice and envy that one city bare to
another in the time of the Peloponesian war. For from the battle at Salamina
where Xerxes had the great overthrow, until the battle at Leuctres, these
iolie captains flourished at Athens.

Callimachus. Miltiades. Themistocles. Aristides. Phocion. Cimon. Pericles.
Alcibiades. Nicias. Conon. Thrasibulus. Thrasillus. Leosthenes. Nicostratus.
Aristonymus. Cleon. Aristarchus. Theagenes.
With many such, but specially with one Solon, who beautified Athens before.

But now Athens by this civil wars is much eclipsed from her glory: for
this war of the Peloponesians, brake the back of all Greece. Alcibiades
rashness was much given to prick forward this wars: for he was joined
with Nicias, who favored the Lacedaemonians, and sought Niceas.
means to keep the Athenians in friendship with the Lacedaemonians, which
purchased Nicias great love and favor of the people, which spited much
Alcibiades to see Nicias in such credit with the people, and therefore he
studied how to infringe Diod. lib. 12.
this peace, and to diminish the fame of Nicias, no other ways then you heard
before of Themistocles and Aristides, the one envious and glorious, the other
good and just, and so surnamed Aristides the just, one finding fault with the
other, to the great danger and trouble of Athens.

After these succeeded two great men Pericles and Cimon, Alcibiades the author
of Sicil wars.
the one factious and stubburne, the other meek and gentle: and even so now
Alcibiades young and ambitious, Nicias sober and temperate, for Alcibiades being
the author of the wars of Sicilie, alluring the people with his pleasant
tongue, to make wars in Sicilia a beginning to further enterprise, Nicias
persuading to the contrary, with all means possible affirming plain that the
city of Syracusa was too great a matter for Athens to take in hand. Alcibiades
brought the Athenians much Alcibyades brags.
attentive unto him, promising them to bring to pass great wonders, he
assured the Athenians that if Syracusa might be conquered, Lybia and Carthage
might soon be conquered, and so pass to Italy.

The Athenians people most desirous to enlarge their Segniorie, who much
coueted in Pericles life to have Syracusa in hand, now being persuaded by
Alcibiades, they are most willing to set him forward, having 140. galleys, and
5000. footmen, very well armed and appointed, besides archers and other light
armed men to the number of thirteen hundredth: but Alcibiades did no great
exploit, saving the winning of the Plut. in Alcib.
city Catana: for he was called home immediately by the Athenians to answer
certain accusations laid to his charge: he returned from Sicilia, not daring
well for fear of his enemies to come unto Athens: he sent unto Sparta to have
safe conduct and license of the Lacedaemonians to dwell in their country: his
request being obtained, he practiced upon his first Alcibyades counsel.
coming, service against his own city, he counseled the Spartans speedily
to send aid to the Syracusans, whom they had of long time before delayed.
Gylippus was sent from Sparta to Thucyd. lib. 7.
Sicilia to overthrow the Athenian army. His second counsel Thucyd. lib. 7.
was that the Lesbians, and they of Chios which were not in league with the
Athenians should begin to war upon them. The third counsel was, that the
Lacedaemonians should fortify Alcibiades entertained with the Lacedaemonians.
the city of Decelia, which was within the territories of Attica. Alcibiades
himself would sail unto Ionia to persuade those cities to join with Sparta.

By this time Athens was on every side troubled, and the Athenians force
diminished: whereby grew great wars and civil Melanct. lib. 2.
discord among the citizens of Greece. The authority of Alcibiades, his
credit and his fame got him both envy and malice, and that of the best: they
feared his favor with the people, and (as Plutarch says) he had such
entertainment of Timea the Queen, (king Agis wife of Sparta) that the king
being Timea king Agis wife.
abroad in the wars, Alcibiades got the Queen at home with child, and
therefore the chief magistrates of Sparta called Ephori, wrote letters unto
certain captains of the war to kill Alcibiades.

But he having some intelligence hereof by the Queen, Justin. lib. 3.
practiced with Tisapharnis the king of Persias lieutenant, to withdraw his
favor from the Lacedaemonians, and to join with the Athenians. For by this
time Alcibiades had some hope by his friends means, to be called home again
to Athens: for true it was, he went to Samos, (...) was an army of the
Athenians ready to sail to Athens: there Alcibiades was honorably received,
and by means of Thrasybulus he was Alcibiades received to Athens again.
shortly after most lovingly received into Athens, at what time he did some
good service to Athens, and requited the spite and envy which the
Lacedaemonians showed him in Sparta.

For now Myndarus the Admiral of the Lacedemonian army by sea, having
threescore ships, and having given the overthrow once or twice to the
Athenians: with this Myndarus joined also Pharnabasus the king of Persias
(...), with a band of footmen: for now Tizapharnes (...) good friend died,
and in his place came this captain ^arnabassus: Pharnabassus.
being thoroughly stirred to revenge the malice of Sparta, he went with a small
number of galleys to the Isle of Cos: there he was advertised, that the
Athenians and the Lacedaemonians were in battle by sea before the city of
Abydos: and being in Thucyd. lib. 8.
the midst of their fight, Alcibiades discovered his galleis, and commanded
straight to set up his flagge in the top of the galleis of his Admiral, and
in the very heat of the battle when that the Athenians were at the worst,
Alcibiades freshly Alcibiades victory at Abydos.
did set upon the Peloponesians, brake their ships, chased them to flight,
and got the victory over the Lacedaemonians by sea: and after this victory
straight the Peloponesians with an other army, and Pharnabasus with Mindarus
were together in the city of Cizicum. Of this Alcibiades having intelligence,
hasted toward them: for he had not forgotten the letters of the Ephores to the
captains for the killing of him.

Mindarus the Admiral, and Pharnabasus the general were Mindarus overthrown.
no sooner on the maine sea, but Alcibiades with his Athenians gave them
battle, and ouerthrewe them, scattered them, and slew a great number of them,
drowned more, and killed Mindarus the Admiral in the field fighting
valiantly, and forced Pharnabasus to fly cowardly, and to take the city of
Cizicum: their loss was so great, and their strength so diminished, Diod. lib.
13.
that Sparta hearing of this great victory of the Athenians, fell in great
despair, and doubted much of their state and government: for by this victory
the Athenians had the possession of the whole country of Helespont.

After this Alcibiades went again against Pharnabasus, spoiled his country,
took diverse of his towns, and gave the overthrow Alcibiades victory at (...).
to the general in his own territories. Alcibiades thence went and made
wars against the Chalcedonians, who were now revolted from the Athenians, and
had received a governor and a garrison of the Lacedaemonians into their city:
he laid siege to Chalcedon: Pharnabasus came to aid Pharnabassus.
the Chalcedonians, but he was with shame (as before) put to flight, and
Hyppocrates the Lacedemonian governor, slew before the city a great number of
his men, and took many of them prisoners, and at that time made the Bythinians
to make a league with the Athenians, yielding their town and their possession
into Alcibiades hand.

After this victory of Chalcedon, he took the city of Selybrea, and went in
arms against Byzantium, where after a terrible Byzantium which is now called
Constantinople.
battle he wanne the city, and got the victory with three hundredth
prisoners of the best citizens. Thus Alcibiades having won five several
victories by giving of five terrible battles.

1 The first victory at Abydos with great celeritie. 2 The second victory at
Cizicum. 3 The third victory against Pharnabasus. Five victories of Alcibyades.
4 The fourth battle at Chalcedon. 5 The fifth and last battle at Byzantium.
After these five victories Alcibiades hoysed sail and directed his course
toward Athens, where he was most honorably Thucyd. lib. 8.
received.

About this time the Egyptians revolted from the Persians and the Medes, but
Darius subdued them straight again to the Medes: the Rhodians likewise brake
their league with the Lacedaemonians. These Lacedaemonians kept the Persians
always in their hand, when need required it, to aid them: Diod. lib. 11.
for of all Greece the Athenians were most hateful to the Persians, for that
in the battle of Marathon the Athenians gave so great an overthrow to the
Persians, that twenty thousand Persians were slain, and many of them great
men. 20000. Persians slain at Marathon.


This rancor boiled in the Persians hearts, though they had diverse times after
the like overthrow, as at Thermopila by Leonidas, at Salamina by Themistocles,
at Platea, and at other places: yet no battle grieved them so much as the
battle at Marathon by Miltiades. Athens was the only Lady of all Greece,
Thucyd. lib. 1.
in whose lap were more noble and courageous captains nourished, then in all
Greece beside: and therefore she was feared of all Greece, and envied of all
Asia.

Now after many good fortunes of the Athenians, it fell out otherwise to them
in the wars of Sicilia: their state declined, and their force diminished: for
by this time Alcibiades the third month after his return being puffed up
with former pride, went with an hundredth ships into Asia, Alcibiades in Asia.
where he lost more to Athens in that one journey, then he gained in the last
five victories, only by his negligence, letting to one Antiochus the charge,
and himself purposing to pass to Hellespont upon pleasure.

The Athenians hereby being brought into great despair, understanding that
Alcibiades willingly absented him self with a voluntary banishment from
Athens, made a choice of Conon to succeed him in government, whose unhappy
succession was no better then banishment, according to the law and custom of
Athens: for they had in Athens a kind of banishment Ostracismus in testa
script.
called Ostracismus, that when any Magistrate, general, or captain waxed
great and a potentate or mighty, (fearing that his greatness should annoy the
state public Petalisimus in folio (...) script.
by some private hatred,) he should be banished for ten years. The like
law the Syracusans had concerning the banishment of their great men, which
they called Petalisimus: which was a banishment for five years. These kinds
of Diodor. lib. 19.
banishments did suppress the fury and malice of the Captains and great men,
for any offense likely to be suspected in them.

Now after that Alcibiades had overthrown the whole force Melanct. 2. Chron.
of Athens in this sort, and that Lysander had a great spite to the state of
Athens, seeing the town weak, unfurnished, and unfortunate, without men or
munitions: he besieged Athens, which without great difficulty was yielded up
upon Athens destroyed.
the sixth month, and the sixteenth of March.

Behold the fall of the great glory of Athens, which before mastred all
Greece, and now by Lysander brought in subjection and made even with the
ground: and in stead of good governors he appointed thirty Tyrants that
should 30. Tyrants appointed governors of (...).
govern Athens as pleased them, subject to Sparta, and almost vassals of the
Lacedaemonians: and beside, order was taken, that Alcibiades should be slain by
means of Pharnabasus Darius general, doubting much that if Alcibiades were
not prevented, Athens should again flourish: so ambitious and so unquiet was
Alcibiades, that scant all Greece could suffice him: which Agis king of Sparta,
and Lysander saw in him.

When Alcibiades by deceit was slain, and Athens conquered, Alcibyades slain.
the Lacedaemonians were lords of all Greece: notwithstanding, when the Thebans
and Corinthians contended to have the city of Athens altogether quite
destroyed, and from the ground raised up, that there should be no mention made
of Athens for ever after: the Lacedaemonians consented not to that, saying that
Athens had been of long time one of the two legs of Greece, and further
said, that it had been one of the two eyes of Greece, which had brought many
great men up, Athens one of the two eyes of Greece.
the nourse of knowledge, and the lantern of Greece, which had resisted the
violence of all Asia, and had given many times the overthrow to the barbarous
nations, and therefore not utterly to confound it.

In this war there were thirty thousand taken captives of the Athenians,
which against the laws of Arms were slain by Lysander: some writers
appointed the destruction of Athens to be in the last year of the Peloponesian
wars, and in the second year of Artaxerxes surnamed Mnemon, seventy and
seven years after the great victory at Salamina, and before the taking of Rome
by the Gauls, nineteen years, as Polibius sets down. The cause of this
overthrow begone by the Athenians (as you heard before) was the hatred of
Pericles Thucyd. lib. 2.
against the Magarians.

In the very year that Athens was by Lysander destroyed, Darius Nothus died
the sixth king of Persia, whose younger son Ad Aegos potamos.
named Cyrus governed then the Lydians, and the Medes. This year also was
Dionysius the king of Sicilia banished: the poor Athenians were sore
afflicted: Thebes, and Argos and many towns besides of Greece, were full of
miserable and banished men from Athens, amongst whom Thrasibulus a worthy man
of great courage was forced to fly, and to leave Athens under the government
of tyrants, who having a guard of thirty thousand of citizen soldiers to
defend them in all Xenophon lib. 2. ^e. Gr^ec.
tyranny, made havoc and spoil, and great slaughter in Athens, in so much
that they made the children to dance in their parents blood.

Amongst these thirty tyrants was one named Theramenes, who doubting that this
tyranny could not long endure, persuaded Theramenes.
with Critias to have more mitigation and lenity in the government, saying
that Thrasibulus and Conon were yet alive, and had taken a strong fort in
Attica called Philen. Diverse cities of Greece bewailed the lamentable estate of
Athens. Critias accused Theramenes of treason, and though it was in the city
known that Theramenes was honest, gentle, and a good citizen: yet Critias
cruelty was such, that Theramenes died.

Thus I leave Athens foming in blood under cruel tyrants, Artaxerxes and Cyrus
wars.
and will something speak of Artaxerxes Mnemon, to whom this very time the
kingdom of Persia now happened by Darius Nothus his will, bequething to Cyrus
his younger son Lydia and Ionia. Cyrus was not pleased with this will, and
whether he was by his mother moved, (for Cyrus was the only joy of his
mother) or by him self enflamed through desire of sovereignty, he gathered
an army of the Xenophon lib. 1. de exped. Cyri.
lesser Asia, and brought them over the river Euphrates, and began war with
the king his brother. The battle was sharp, and went in the beginning with
Cyrus: for Artaxerxes host yielded for a time to the fury of Cyrus soldiers,
and Artaxerxes himself had a wound given him by Cyrus his Melanct. lib. 2.
Chron.
one hand: but afterward Cyrus was taken, and was bound with fetters of
gold, and had at that time died, if his mother had not most earnestly
entreated for him.

Cyrus by his mothers means being let at liberty, with great fury followed
his first purpose, gathered a far greater Cyrus second battle.
army, wherein were ten thousand Grecians, well and strongly furnished,
which came out of Greece to aid Cyrus. To be short, it was in vain: Cyrus was
slain in that battle, and his army overthrown: yet Iustine says, that the
Grecians Iustine lib. 4.
valiantly stood to it unconquered in that wing of the battle where they
stood. Of this war does Xenophon most Zenoph. de exped. Cyri.
amply entreat, with whom Cyrus the younger himself was brought up: of this
Cyrus and of his acts Xenophon wrote sixteen books, eight of discipline
military, and other eight of Xenophon of Cyrus.
his wars.

Now to Athens again, where tyranny all this while governed: but Thrasibulus
was not careless how to repress these tyrants, whom Ismenias a prince of
Thebes secretly aided: and when that Sparta had made a decree, that no city of
Greece should suffer any exiled Athenians to enter into it, the Thebans
resisted the decree, and they also made not only a decree within Thebes and in
all Boetia, that no house should be shut to the Athenians, but aided them with
men and money. Likewise Lysias an orator of Syracusa bestowed 500. ready and
well furnished soldiers to aid Athens.

When this preparation was heard of in Athens, the Tyrants sent to Pausanias
king of Sparta to defend them, which 30. Tyrants and their government
overthrown by Thrasybulus and Conon.
he with some conscience refused: for the which afterward Pausanias was
accused by the Lacedaemonians. In the mean season Thrasybulus gave battle to
the thirty Tyrants, ouerthrewe them, and took the city of Athens, restored
liberty to the citizens: at what time he brought in Solons law to forget
Xenophon lib. 2. reg. Gr^r.
the injuries past of friends, of parents and of children, which were slain
in Athens under these thirty Tyrants. This law of Thrasybulus was revived by
the Senators of Rome The law of forgetfulness
which were in the time of Trium viri, which were Octauius Augustus, Marcus
Antonius, Lepidus Aemilius, when Julius Caesar Melanct. lib. 2. Chron.
was slain, to forget the revenge of Caesar's death, to avoid civil wars
within Rome.

A little after this, Conon again scattered the force of Sparta, and after much
hurt to the Lacedaemonians, he came to Athens, Conon joined with Thrasibulus.
and joined with Thrasybulus, by whose courage and valor Athens by degrees
revived: for yet the civil wars in Greece were not ended: for as these
afflictions and miseries happened to Athens by civil wars: so after to every
city of Greece the like happened, that of the only country of the world, it
was brought into a most miserable destruction.

And for that you may read the strength and force of Greece while they held
together, I will set down the wars and the victories which the Grecians have
had over the Persian kings, and over all other barbarous princes in Asia, and
The victories of the Grecians.
in all parts of the East, at that time when that the Persians were lords and
princes of the whole world, and held the Monarchy only, without resistance
of any king or country: yet in the most flourishing time of the Persians, the
Grecians had these victories of them which are laid down before you, viz.

THe great battle at Marathon, where Miltiades got the victory over Darius
Histaspis the third king of Persia. 1


The famous enterprise and victory of Leonidas at Thermopila, 2
where he slew twenty thousand Persians, with three hundred Grecians.

The two terrible battles at Salamina, where Themistocles 3
and Aristides, had the victory against Xerxes both by sea and land.

The battle fought before Platea against Mardonius, where was slain six and
twenty thousand, and Mardonius the 4
king of Persias lieutenant. The victory hereof was given to the Athenians:
yet the honor of the victory by common report 5
yielded to the Plateans, at what time Aristides was general of Athens, and
Pausanias king of Sparta, was general of all Greece.

The wars of Chalcedon against Pharnabasus, where Alcibiades 6
wanne the victory.

The wars between Ptolomey king of Egypt, and Alexander 7
king of Macedon, the son of Amyntas, pacified and ended by Pelopidas, and
took the kings brother called Philippe, which was Alexander the great his
Father, and thirty more of the noblest men's sons in Macedon to Ostage, and
brought them to Thebes, to let the world see the reputation of Greece then.

The victory of Aristides gotten at Psittalia, where he took 8
three Persian lords sons to Sandauce king Xerxes sister, and the Grecians
were of one mind, and thought with such courage to bring Asia under the Empire
of Greece.

The victory of Cimon in the country of Thracia, where he vanquished certain
great men of Persia allied to the king 9
himself, and kept the City of Eronea upon the river of Strymon, ouerthrewe
the barbarous people, invaded the Thracians, drove the Persians away, and
possessed al Thracia, and appointed Grecians to inhabit the Country: thus had
the Greeks victory out of Greece before their civil wars began: this Cimon
plagued the Persians, past into Asia, and returned with diverse victories into
Greece again.

When Nicias wanne the haven of Syracusa, and besieged 10
the City in such sort, that Euripides made an Epitaph upon the grave of
Nicias, and had gotten eight several victories over the Cicilians.

The victory which Agesilaus had of Sardis, the chief City 11
of Lydia, and the victory over Tisaphernes lieutenant of all 12
Persia, who gave battle to the Nation that dwell in Acarnea, ouerthrewe them
and destroyed them, and had victory, 13
and after went to Egypt being an old man, to Tachos king of Egypt, where he
used a Stratageme, that he got victory of Tachos unto Nectanebus: now when
Persia, Asia, Egypt, Lydia, felt the force of Greece, then was Greece renowned.

The victory of Phocion in the Isle of Naxes in a battle by 14
sea, and another victory of the Macedonians in a battle that Phocion had
with Antipater, where Leonatus, who came out 15
of Asia to join with Antipater, was killed.

The battle at Mantinea the chief City of Arcadia: 16
the victory hereof fell to Epaminondas, and to the Thebans.

CHAP. VII.
Of the last destruction of Greece by the Macedonians, by means of civil
discord, and the Peleponesian wars, the only cause of their ruin and
confusion: at what time king Philip brake their backs, and his son Alexander
their necks: and after them the Romans kept them in perpetual servitude.

WHat should I write of the victories of Epaminondas, Agis, Cleomenes, or of
others, which fell before the civil dissension of Greece, I mean chiefly the
Peloponesian wars, though some of those victories Greece flourished before the
Peloponesian wars.
were after the wars of Peloponesus, yet certeinely while the Grecians held
as some time they would, then was Xerxes driven out of Greece, and beaten in
his own country: then was Pyrrhus not only resisted, but also slain at
Argos: then was Philip king of Macedon kept out of Greece, until they began
to be factious and seditious, one city against another, and some had sought
help of Philip to suppress their own Country men, until he was made
governor of Greece, Greece was not altogether conquered, though in deed they
were sore Philip left a way open to Alex. his son.
oppressed by the Peloponesian wars: but now by Philip king of Macedon it
was brought again to ruin, and the way left open to his son Alexander the
great, who after brought all Greece subject to Macedonia, whither the Monarchy
of the Persians was translated, and under whom all the world almost was
subdued.

Now that I opened few victories unto you, which the Grecians with fame and
great honor wanne, if I should set down the victories which one City wanne
of an other, or one Country of an other, they should be infinite: for within
twenty seven years all the Gities of Greece, (which were not for their number
to be numbered, and for their strength not to be spoken) were destroyed: for I
dare speak it, that Greece had more annoyance by two battles, then all the
gains of the victories which the Greeks had over all the barbarous Aegos
Potamos.
nations. The first was at the river of goats given by Lysander against
Athens, called the battle at Aegos Potamos: the Two battles. Aegos Potamos.
and Leuctres.
other given by Epaminondas against Sparta, called the battle of Leuctres.
These two Cities being the two eyes and the two legs of Greece could never
agree, the one envying the state of the other, until both were destroyed, and
by their occasion all Greece also destroyed.

About this time Camillus flourished in Rome, who both Camillus.
gave the repulse to the French men, even at the gates of Rome, when they had
taken Rome, and also triumphed over the Volscans, over the Veiens, and over the
Hetruscans: for which good service he was the next year following made
Dictator in Rome. This fell in Rome, when Mausolus king of Caria died, and had
by his wife Artemesia his tomb made so gorgeous, that it was reputed as one of
the seven wonders of the world.

In Athens now after the thirty tyrants were overthrown, governed ten men
of equal authority by Thrasibulus and Conon appointed called Decennales
principes: these two lifted Decennales principes.
Athens on foot again: for Conon had fifty talents, which he had gotten in
Cyprus by king Euagoras: this he bestowed to raise up the walls of Athens,
which Lysander made even to the Thucyd. lib. 8.
ground: for yet flourished in Athens after these Peloponesian wars, though
not great captains, yet famous Philosophers and eloquent Orators, which kept
Greece in memory, and by whose means many monuments in Greece were reserved:
For now flourished Plato, and after him his scholar Aristotle, Alexander the
great his scholemaster, for whose sake Athens was had before other Cities in
reverence, Alex. in Egypt spared for Arius sake.
in like sort as Augustus Caesar spared Alexandria in Egypt, for Arius the
Philosophers sake, who then dwelt there: yet Alexander made all means possible
to take such Orators as did persuade the Athenians in arms against him, and
against his father before, which were Lycurgus the Orator, Demosthenes,
Aesc^nes, Demades and others: which like barking dogs kept these wolves from
Athens, in persuading the people to be in arms against foreigne princes in the
defense of Greece: but when they had no enemy, they became enemies within
themselves.

When Greece was by reason of these civil wars made weak, and not able to
resist any great strength, (for after the death of Epaminondas, greater wars
and more seditious stirring fell in Greece then before:) Philip king of Macedon
having Xenoph. lib. 2.
full intelligence of the state of Greece, how by long wars between
themselves, they were easily to be ouerrunne, he secretly kindled a second
fire in Greece by stirring of secret captains to increase the hatred of the
Grecians one against an other, which could never be extinguished: such was
their desire to rule and to triumph one over another.

Philip king of Macedonia, Alexander the great his father, as Iustine in lib. 8.
yet like a fox hiding himself in a den, watched opportunity of time,
until contention grew between the Phoceans Diod. lib. 16.
and the Thebans about the sacrilege, which the Phocians committed in the
temple of Apollo at Delphos: of this occasion began the wars called bellum
sacrum, of the which mention Amphictions Judges of Greece.
is made often in histories, and specially with the Orators of Greece, who
cried crucifige upon the Phocians for so execrable a thing, before the Judges
Amphictions, which were appointed general Judges for the whole state of
Greece. This war began in the time of Ochus the eight king of Persia: the
Judges laid a great fine upon the Phocians which they grudged to pay, beside
the secret persuasions of the Lacedaemonians, promising them aid to stand in
arms against the Thebans, who had before accused them. Functius lib. 3.


Philomelus a Phocean captain gathered a great army, brake the decree of the
Judges, burned the tables where they were written, and ouerthrewe the judgment
seat of the Amphictions. By this occasion great wars grew between the
Phoceans Xenoph. lib. 1.
and the Lacedaemonians of the one side, the Thebans and the Thessalians of the
otherside. About the beginning of this war, Alexander the great was borne.
Philomelus being killed in the fourth battle, after he had done some harm to
the Thebans. Onomarchus was appointed in his room, who likewise overcame the
Boetians, and took one of the chief Cities Iustine lib. 8.
called Coronea: he ouerthrewe the Thessalians in two battles, and slew a
number of the Macedonians which Philip had sent to aid the Phoceans.

The Thebans being thus weakened by the Phoceans, they sent to Philip for aid,
and besought him to be their General in this war. This delighted much the
king of Macedon: for now he saw an easy way to conquer the Phoceans, the
Athenians, and the Lacedaemonians, and to bring all Greece subject under
Macedonia. Philip came with great force, not to revenge the Thebans (as he
said) but to revenge the sacrilege which the Phoceans did in Delphos: for it
is written, that they spoiled the temple of ten thousand talents, which (as
Melancthon Melanct. lib. 2. Chron.
says) is threescore tons of gold.

In the third battle one Narchus was taken by Philip, and hanged, and six
thousand of his soldiers slain: the Phoceans had won three principal
Cities in Boetia, Orchomenon, Coronea, and Corsia, whereby they might easily
subdue all Boetia at their own will. This war of the Phoceans began
fifteen years after the battle of Mantinea, where the worthy and valiant
Epaminondas was slain, with who^ this Philip king of Macedonia dwelt in house,
when Philip was taken an ostage The due praise of Epaminondas.
by Pelopidas of Antipater, as you read before. Philip seemed to have observed
many good instructions, which he no doubt learned at Thebes in Epaminondas
house, and yet as great difference between the two men as is between gold
and silver: for Epaminondas left not his fellow behind in Greece after him,
so rare a man to be found, in Philosophy few like him, brought up under
Lysias the Pythagorian, in other exploites of wars not to give place neither
to Pyrrhus, nor to Hanibal.

The calamity of this Phocean war annoyed Greece more Philip lay in wait
for Greece.
then the wars of Peloponesus: for the foolish Thebans did send not for a
helper but a destroyer, when they sent for Philip: for he ever had a desire to
Greece: he expected opportunity, and wrought all secret means possible to set
all Greece by the ears. About this time Ochus recovered Egypt again, which
Ochus.
had reuoulted from the Persians since Cambyses time. Also he recovered Cyprus
and Phoenicia. Temnes betrayed Sidon unto king Ochus, whom he afterward hanged
for his pains, after that Philip had taken Toron, Olynthus, and Miciberna, 3.
towns of Helespont, and had wasted and destroyed many Countries and Cities of
Greece by the only means of this Phocean wars, which continued ten years.

While Greece stood in great danger of Philip, the Athenians and the
Lacedaemonians gathered their force again, but to no effect: Philip waxed so
strong in Greece, that they were forced Greece sought peace of Phil.
to seek to entreat for peace: for all Greece feared Philip more then they
loved him: for such were his secret stratagemes, with deceitful promises, that
all Greece saw his malice: but such was their inward envy, their hidden
hatred, and their secret Diod. lib. 16.
working against themselves, that they had rather have any barbarous nation to
govern them, then one to love an other, and to join with common assent for
the defense of their Country.

This was the first cause of the Peloponesian wars, the second cause of the
Phocean wars, the third and last cause of the destruction and slavery of
Greece. Alexander the great, a Alex. the great
man of great fortune, and of greater ambition, being by Darius entreated to
peace, offering unto Alexander his daughter Roxane in marriage, with Mesopotamia
and diverse other provinces and territories, answered in this sort, That as the
heaven could not abide two suns, so the whole earth could not suffer two
Alexanders. It seemed truly that there was in every City of Greece an
Alexander: for it is recorded in histories, that Sparta might not endure two
Lysanders at one Lysander.
time, Athens might not suffer two Alcibiades, Thebes might not suffer two
Pelopidas, neither the earth suffer two Alexanders: Alcibiades.
but as Alexander had no longer time to flourish then twelve years, so the
whole state of Greece, their Empire and their glory continued not above a
hundred and fifteen years; Greece flourished for 115. years.
beginning from the battle at Marathon, to the battle at Salamina, ten
years, from the battle of Salamina unto the first wars of the Peloponesians
fifty years, from the beginning of the Peloponesian war unto the last of
the same at the battle at Aegos Potamos, twenty seven years, which was the
time of the civil war of Greece, and from that to the battle at Leuctres
Beroaldus lib. 4. Eratosthenes.
thirty years: so long the glory of Greece endured without conquest: all
which time was Greece a lady and mystresse of all nations.

I have found so much error in the Olympiads, that I use them as little as I
may: for Thucydides and Xenophon, that only wrote of Greek histories, were
much deceived in the Olympiads, and yet they know their error: and therefore
they used the Olympiads most seldom, though they lived and wrote in The error
of the Olympiads.
the flourishing time of the Olympiads. After this they were had by Philip king
of Macedon unto some bondage, though they warred thirty years, and kept him
hard play, until the Thebans (as you heard) sought his help against the
Phocians, Iustine lib. 9.
and made a rod to beat themselves: even so now were the Phoceans forced to
ask aid at Ochus hands king of Persia, Ochus sent 300 talents to the Phoceans.
who did send three hundred talents with a hundred fourscore thousand crowns.
Philip was commen with a great band of Macedonians and of Thessalians again
into the coast of Boetia, where Phallecus the general of the Thebans was also
with an army in arms ready to give battle to the Phoceans: who Melanct. lib.
2. Chron.
when he saw the great power of king Philip in field, he entreated of peace:
which being granted by the king, upon condition he should go out of Boetia
unto Peloponesus, this being done by Phallecus, Philip had without resistance
all Boetia yielded unto him.

The Phoceans are now brought subject unto Philip, their Cities and Towns
destroyed, and the people dispersed unto small villages, paying three score
talents yearly unto Philip, the liberty and dignity of the Judges
Amphictions The Amphictions restored.
were restored, and a decree made, that Philip should be Duke of all Greece:
thus Philip triumphed the more, for that he had this good fortune in so honest
a cause, as in defending of the temple at Delphos, and the judges seat and
dignity of the Amphictions.

When he had ended this Phocean war, called bellum sacrum, Bellum sacrum.
he again returned into Macedonia in the first year of the 108. Olympiad.
When the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians saw the force of Philip much to
increase in Greece, Demosthenes being ever an enemy to the Macedonians,
persuaded the Thebans and Cities of Greece to join against Philip for the
common liberty of their country. Nine years after Melanct. lib. 2. Chron.
the Phocean wars, came Philip again in arms into Greece, after he had
taken many Cities in Thracia, and had driven Callias the tyrant out of Euboea:
he likewise wanne the City of Bizantium, which is called now Constantinople,
some time a City under the Lacedaemonians, and sometime under the Athenians. A
great battle was given unto Philip at Cheronea, fifty seven years after the
overthrow of Athens at Aegos Potamos Diod. lib. 6.
by Lysander, which was so fought out, that it was doubtful for a time where
the victory should fall, until Alexander the great, being of the age of
eighteen years, thrusted himself freshly into the midst of the battle, by
whose prowess the Grecians gave back, and their army was overthrown. In this
battle, six thousand Citizens of Athens were slain, and two thousand
Citizens taken, but many more of the Thebans were both killed and taken.

Amongst the Athenians which were taken, Demades the Demades.
Orator was one, by whose means king Philip granted them peace, and delivered
them free from their ransom for Demades sake: for Demades bare good will
always unto the Macedonians, clean contrary to Demosthenes, who both envied
Demosthenes.
them and spited them, calling Alexander the great brainelesse boy: but he
notwithstanding esteemed Harpalus the Macedonian, when he bribed him with
twenty talents: this made Orators in Athens to speak as Aeschines did, or to
be dumb as Demosthenes was.

For such was the liberty of the people of Athens, maintained by the Orators
against the Magistrates and chief men of Attica, that when it pleased the
people, they would advance whom they would, and pull down whom they list,
banish whom they liked not, and call again whom they favored: insomuch that
Athens was always The three monsters of Athens.
governed by a state of Democratia, which made Demosthenes to exclaim in these
words, Noctua, populus, and Draco tria monstra Athenis: for in Athens they
esteemed more the servants, poor people, strangers, and specially mariners,
more then their Magistrates, noble men, officers, or their chief Citizens. The
people grew so strong and so headie in Athens, that it was not lawful to
banish strangers, or to punish Xenoph. de Rep. Athe. and. Lace.
servant: to be short, of the common wealth of Athens and of Sparta, read
Xenophon.

Now again to the victory at Cheronea, the last and the Corinth the 3. city
of Greece.
sorest battle which brake the back of the City of Athens. Philip king of
Macedon called together all the States of Greece into Corinth, where by common
consent he was chosen and named Prince, or rather General of all Greece,
against the Persians. All Greece being now quiet in peace, Philip began
wars against the Persians, and with great celeritie he sent an army into
Asia. While these things were doing, Philip was slain by Pausanias, when he
was of the Melanct. lib. 2.
age of forty six years, after he had reigned king twenty Philip slain
by Pausanias.
five years.

Greece thought by the death of Philip again to recover their former liberty:
they little doubted, Alexander being then but young, neither Arideus which was
Philips base son by Laryssea, which for a time reigned after Alexander: but
according to their wonted manners, full of innouations, ambitions, contencions
and hatred, never quiet, but one City or other would be iarring, the Persians
power grew great, and the Greeks began to reuoult from Alexander, which by
succession after his father should be their chief General.

The Thebans offered themselves to join with those Cities that would defend
the liberty of Greece, and exclude those Macedonian soldiers, which Philip
placed in the castle of Thebes called Cadmea. Hereby Alexander took occasion
New wars by Alexander in Greece.
to enter in arms, ouerthrewe Thebes unto the ground, wasted, and spoiled
diverse. Cities in Boetia: for at one time, the Athenians, the Lacedaemonians,
and the Thebans reuoulted from Alexander by persuasion of Demosthenes, being
corrupted with rewards of the Persians. But when Thebes was destroyed,
Alexander sent to Athens, offering peace unto the Athenians, upon the yielding
up of Demosthenes, Lycurgus, and others by the Citizens unto Alexander.

Unto this demand of Alexander, Demosthenes brought in the fable of the
Woolfe, who offered peace unto the Shepheardes Demosthenes fable of the woolfe.
upon condition to have the shepherds dogs away: applying the moral hereof
unto the Orators of Athens, who by continual barking to the people kept
Greece from foreign sovereignty: but the Athenians standing much in fear of
Alexanders force, and beside knowing their own weakness, they sent Demades the
Orator to entreat for peace: which being obtained of Alexander by the means
of Demades, the Athenians, the Lacedaemonians, the Thebans, Demades entreats
for peace.
and the rest of the Cities of Greece having obtained peace, likewise by one
consent they appointed Alexander their captain and chief general against the
Persians.

At what time reigned Darius the tenth king of Persia, to whom many of Philips
children by other marriages fled, to see the events and sequel of the wars
between Alexander and Darius. This last yielding up of Greece unto Alexander
Peace by Alex. granted to all Greece.
was three years after the great battle of Cheronea, and after the wars of
the Peloponesians three score years.

Of this war Thucydides divided his eight books, concerning the civil
wars of the Grecians, which continued twenty seven years, every book
comprehending three years wars, until twenty one years expired: at what
time Thucydides died, then Xenophon began where Thucydides ended.

Thus ended the glory of Greece, which flourished in wisdom and knowledge
from Solons time until Plato, two hundred years, and from Platoes birth
until this last conquest of Greece a hundred and twenty years.

Though yet Greece brought many learned men after Alexanders time, yet the fame
and renown of Greece was carried unto Macedonia, their Empire translated, their
liberty lost, and all Greece made subject unto Macedonia, at what time the
Monarchy of Persia was lost, and brought by Alexander unto Macedonia.

OF THE KINGDOM OF Macedonia: of the continuance, laws, and government of
their Kings, and of their wars, until the time of Alexander the great.
AFter I have briefly entreated of Greece, and have abridged many things which
might have beeue well in the histories of Greece: yet I have many times
occasion to speak of Greece in handling of Macedonia: neither need I long to
stay in Macedonia: for of all the kings of Macedonia before Philips time,
little or nothing is to be spoken of them, so obscure a kingdom Macedonia was
before Philpis time: and for that the wars of Philip and of his son the
great Alexander are mentioned in the Persian and in the Grecians history, I
need not much to Justin. lib. 7.
write of them: therefore I will begin with the descents of the kings of
Macedon, and of the first names of the country which was called Emathia of one
Emathius, which was the first that Emathia.
obtained sovereignty in Emathia, which name continued until the time of
Deucaleons nephew named Macedo: he cha^^ged the name of Emathia and called it
after his own name Macedonia, Melactho^ says that the name of Macedonia is
come of Kittim, the son of Iauan the son of Iaphet. Herodot and other
ancient writers affirm, that the kings of Macedonia take their (...). Solinus
cap. 13.
original from Hercules.

Now the land which before was called Pieria, Migdonia, or Emathia, is now
called the Realm of Macedonia, a country bounded on the East side with
Thracia, on the South with Thessalia, on the West with the Illyrians, having on
the North side Peonia as Pomponius Mela says, the Macedonians inhabited Pomp.
Me^ lib. 2. cap. 3.
many Cities, of the which Pella was the most renowned.

The kingdom of Macedonia in the beginning was of^o great fame until Philips
time, which was Amyntas son, and Alexanders father, who first brought the
name of Macedonia to be spoken of, though before of sclender renown and
obscure fame, rather deserving the name of a Province then of a kingdom, as
Ruffinus writes: for as Cyrus reign does Of Cyrus reign in Persia many err.
much lighten the whole history of the Persians, and the very time of their
kings in respect of Cyrus his decree and dealings with the Jews, by the means
and traueile of Zorobabel, Esdras, and Nehemias, mentioned in Scripture: even
so does the name of the great Alexander reform many errors in Xenophons Of
Alex. time in Macedonia.
histories, for that the certeintie of the Macedonian history depends upon
the time of Alexander, which of necessity must be within a 130. years of
Cyrus, though many of the best writers err much in this.

After Macedo succeeded Cranaus a captain of certain Peloponesians, he was
the first that had the name of a king, he builded a City according to the
Oracle, that he should follow a heard of goats, and where they stand, there
to build a City which he named Aegea: others say, that he came upon Solinus
cap. 3.
a tempest to a town named Edissa, and there beholding goats together, he
changed the name of Edissa unto Egea, there he builded and made his Court, and
gathered together the scattered Aegea called after the name of Gotes.
Macedonians into one place, and began to reign there as a king.

At what time Procas Siluius reigned over the Latins, Ozias reigned over the
Hebrews, Jeroboam in Israel was king, and Alexander reigned king in Corinth:
this time Arbaces translated the Monarchy of Assyria unto the Medes, having
given the overthrow to Sardanapalus, whereby both the kingdoms of the Medes
and of Macedonia begin at one time: for now the kings of Lacedemonia ended
(...) government, and Funct. Cron.
these kingdoms began to flourish 37^. years after the destruction of Troy,
in the beginning of the thirteen Iubilee of the Jews, before the Olympiads
the space of one whole Iubilee which is fifty years.

This Cranaus the first king of the Macedonians reigned twenty eight years,
whose successor I read in Eusebius and Caenus. 2. king of Macedon.
Glareanus was Caenus: he reigned the second king of Macedonia twelve years,
at what time Amulius Siluius the fifteen king of the Latins reigned: this
Amulius the younger son of Procas Siluius drove Numitor his elder brother out
of his Country, and also Numitor had a daughter, whom he caused to be a
vestall virgin to avoid marriage: but notwithstanding she was gotten with
child of two children in stead of one, which were called Romulus and Remus,
of whose education and strange bringing up, how they slew Amulius, and restored
their graundfather Numitor to the kingdom again, and how they both builded
Rome, you may read in the histories of the Roman kings: after whom succeeded
the Roman kings.

In Egypt reigned this time Sabachus, this is named in Scripture Sech: the
third king of Macedonia was Tyrimas, who succeeded Tyrimas 3. king
in the kingdom in the time of the second Olympiad, as Eusebius and Glareanus
do witness, whom I follow chiefly Iustine lib. 6^.
in placing the kings of Macedonia, though Iustine and Sabelicus say
otherways, that one Telegonus reigning in Paeonia which is a piece of
Macedonia, and one Europus who likewise on the other side of Paeonia governed.
These two bare most sway in Macedonia, until Caranus came with a great number
of Greeks by the Oracle commanded to seek a seat in Macedon, who by force
expelled Mida, which governed in a part of Macedon, and forced other governors
which then ruled diverse countries De orig. Maced. Ruffi.
about Macedonia, which was no large kingdom in the beginning, but Caranus by
this means augmented much the Country of Macedon.

After this Caranus Iustine sets down Perdiccas, with whom agrees Soli^,
and says that this Perdiccas was the Perdiccas.
first that bare the (...) of a king in the twenty two Olympiad, The first
that bare the name
who lived in such liking and love of his subjects, that his life seemed a
law, and his death an oracle, for which he died being an old man: he called
his son named Argeus, and showed him a secret place where he would have
his body buried, and his successors the kings of Macedonia after him. This
superstitious burial the kings of Macedonia Burial for the kings of Macedon.
held as by an oracle, commanded until the time of Alexander the great, who
was the ninteenth king after this Perdiccas. Argeus succeeded his father, and
was a modest Argeus.
prince, he did minister justice to his subjects, and lived in Ruffi. de
orig. Maced.
Jove and favor with his people, leaving behind him to govern the
Macedonians his heir Philip, who died in his youth and left the kingdom to
Europus a young child, in whose time the Thracians and the Illyrians had
continual wars with the Macedonians.

The Illyrians vexed and ouerthrewe the Macedonians in a great battle,
despising the infancy of their king, and little waiing the Macedonians in
respect of their king: they were hereby much moved to fight again, and
gathered a huge host, Europus in his cradle brought to the field.
brought their king in his cradle to the field, and gave battle to the
Illyrians, ouerthrewe them, vanquished them, and slew the most of them: for the
sight of their young king made them like lions hungry of their pray, with
double courage to fight. But I will return to Eusebius and Glareanus where I
began, and whom I chiefly imitate, though Solinus and Eusebius.
Iustine wrote otherways: for it is no rare thing to have writers to vary,
specially in histories of long time: for here Perdiccas is placed to be the
fourth king, which both Iustine and Solinus wrote to be the first king of
Macedonia: in this Functius in his table of the kings of Macedon, a singular
Chronographer Functius.
following the best learned and next agreeing with the Scripture, does set this
Perdiccas to be the 4. king, who came of a mean state to be a king of Macedon,
where he reigned 51. years.

This time Romulus had great wars with the Sabines which continued three
years, with whom Tatius Sabinus reigned in Rome together with Romulus five
years. About this very season Saneherib was overthrown for his great
Saneherib.
blasphemy against God, with a hundred fourscore and five thousand slain in
one night by the Angel of the Lord, while this Perdicas reigned in Macedon.

Merodach the son of Baladan, after he had governed Babylon twelve years,
and overcame the Assyrians, and brought the Monarchy again to the Chaldeans:
about the thirty year of Perdicas Egypt was governed by twelve Magistrates of
equal authority. After Perdicas succeeded Argeus his son, the fifth king of
Macedonia, of whom you read before Philip 6. king.
by Iustine set down to be the second king. Philip the sixth king of Macedon
reigned thirty eight years, in the 34. Olympiad, in whose time happened in
Rome great wars between Tullius Hostilius the third king of Rome, and the
Sabines. The Latins war with the Romans.
The Latins likewise began wars with the Romans, which continued five
years: this time reigned in Egypt Necho, who had wars with the Chaldeans, at
what time he overcame the Syrians, and slew Josias in Mageddo: the Messenians
reuoulted from the Lacedaemonians, and the rude barbarous Scythians entered into
Asia, spoiled and wasted all the Country, until they came unto the land of
Palestine.

This time Periander reigned in Corinth, whose life you may read in Herodot,
of whom is also written a history of Herodot. lib. 1.
this time of Phaortes, the sixth king of the Medes, who was slain at the
siedge of Niniue by the Assyrians with all his company.

In these days Tullius Hostilius with all his family were burned in his own
house: in the thirty five Olympiad many great wars and blooddy battles fell
in the time of this Philip, for both Ieconia with all his friends, likewise
Daniel with his fellows were carried away captive unto Babylon, and within a
while after Jerusalem was besieged and made even to the ground, and the Jews
carried captives unto Chaldea.

Again Ciaxeres which is by Daniel and others named to be Darius Medus, had
great wars: thus the Assyrians took the city of Niniue, and revenged the
death of Phaortes, and so the Assyrians were quite destroyed, and brought the
monarchy unto the Medes. All the wars that Ancus Martius the fourth king of
Rome had with the Latins, Fidenats, the Sabins, the Veiens, the Volscans and
others, were in this kings time.

After this Philip succeeded Europus the 7. king of Macedonia, Europus the 7.
king of Macedon.
of whom as of the rest nothing is to be written worth the memory: for yet the
name of Macedonia was no further known then to their neighbors, which were
the Thracians, Illyrians, Thessalians: for all the fame and report of the whole
world the Macedonia yet not known.
Chaldeans and the Assyrians had, for they held the monarchy so long, that
though the Egyptians flourished at one time, and gave them sundry battles at
their noses in Assyria, and likewise the Hebrews gave diverse overthrows in
Iosaphats time, Ezechias and Josias kings of Judah, yet they continued welnigh
thirteen hundredth years lords and monarchs of the world, until the Medes
began to plague them, and had taken the monarchy from them. And then the
Persians took it from them, of whom al writers were busy to write their
wars, their battles, and of their conquest, until the time of Alexander the
Of this Europis Herodot makes mention lib. 8.
great, which is yet to come in the hundredth and fourteen Olympiads, and now I
entreat of histories of those kingdoms done in the 43. Olympiad, which is 300.
years: for so long was between the first of Nabuchodonosor, which was in the
17. Iubilee, and the last of Alexander, which was in the 23. Iubilee, which is
six Jubilees, which is 300. years: for every Iubilee is Six Jubilees 300.
years.
50. years. It does agree with the Olympiads, so far am I behind to speak
any great matter of the Macedonians, saving of Philippe Alexanders father, a
history of two hundredth years, and therefore I will hasten to run over the
names of the first kings.

Alcetas the 8. king of Macedonia reigned 29. years, after Alcetas the 8. king.
whom succeeded Amyntas the ninth king of Macedonia, which reigned 50. years.
Of this Amyntas Iustine writes a history, that when the Persians had sent
ambassadors into Macedonia to entreat of peace, in their wine they began
wantonly and rudely to handle certain ladies and gentlewomen of Macedonia.
Alexander the son of Amyntas a young galant prince being Justin. lib. 7.
hereby much moved, entreated his father an old man to take his rest that
night, and said he would entertain and keep company with the ambassadors of
Persia, who were well whittled with wine: the ladies being desirous to depart
were kept against their will under, Alexander the young prince promised other
ladies to bear them company the rest of the night.

Now Alexander got certain young gentlemen in the habit and form of women,
having under their long clothes their Ambassadors of Persia slain.
naked daggers, and commanded them that when the Persian ambassadors should
abuse them, or offer them any villainy, they should out of hand stabbe them,
which was accordingly brought to pass: upon this occasion war was proclaimed
between the Persians and the Macedonians. Bubares was sent with an army of
Persians into Macedonia, who after he had Bubares fell in love with Cygaea.
seen Cygaea the daughter of king Amyntas, he was more prone to love then bent
to war: he married Cygaea, and thereby peace was had between the Macedonians
and the Persians.

About this time the Lacedaemonians had wars against Polycrates the tyrant of
Samos: of this Polycrates success, happiness, Herodot. lib. 3.
and great fortune of his reign, read Herodotus. The same time were the most
part of kings called tyrants, they were so full of blood. Tarquinius superbus
the seventh and last king of the Romans for his great tyranny and
outragiousnes, and for the wicked abuse of Lucretia by his son was odious and
hateful to the Romans, and became an enemy to Rome. Cyrus was in his greatness
this time, and the only great man of the world: for he wanne the Assyrians, the
Chaldeans, and the Medes, and brought them under the Empire of Persia, he
overcame also the great and mighty Croesus king of Lydia.

In Macedonia reigned after Amyntas his son Alexander: Alexander the 10. king.
this king was accounted rich, and not without cause: for he had so good
success in increasing his substance, that he first of al sentimages of clean
gold for a gift, one to Apollos at Delphos, another to Jupiter at Elis. He was
greatly given to delight his ears, in so much that he entertained many that
were cunning Solin. cap. 13.
upon instruments, amongst whom was Pindarus the harper. Iu. Solinus says,
that Archelaus had the kingdom of Macedonia at this man's hand: he was politic
in feats of war, and judged the first deviser of battle upon the sea.

This Archelaus affected the company of learned men: he Archelaus a friend of
Euripides.
so much delighted in learning, that he called Euripides the tragical Poet, to
be one of his privy council, for whose death afterward Archelaus long mourned,
and shaued both his head and beard at his funeral. After this king the state
of Macedonia being much troubled with dissension by the space of 10. kings
governments, was stayed at last in the reign of Amyntas, which was father unto
Philip, who was father unto Alexander the great: and for that there is not much
to be written of the most part of the kings of Macedonia unto Philips time, I
have set down their names according to Eusebius and Herodot.

The names of the kings of Macedon according to Eusebius. The names of the
kings of Macedon according to Herodotus. Cranans and Caenus. Alexander the
son of Amyntas. So many Herodot in the latter end of his 8. book does
rehearse, and after comes to Philip, omitting the rest.
Tyrimas and Perdicas. Amyntas the son of Alceta. Archaeus and Philippus.
Aloeta the son of Aeropus. Europs and Alcetas. Aeropus the son of Philip.
Amyntas and Alexander. Philip the son of Argaeus. Perdicas and Orestes.
Argaeus the son of Perdicas. Archelaus and Pausanias. Armintas and Argaeus.
Alexander and Ptolomeus. And Philip Alexand. father.

Of these are not much to be spoken (as I said before) therefore I will begin
here with the reign of Philippe, of whom Macedonia had such expectation, that
they saw in him a light and such ready proof of him, as Philip.
of one brought up for three years for an ostage of the king of the
Macedonians in one of the chiefest cities of Greece, and that in the house of
Epaminondas, the rarest Philosopher, and the greatest captain of those days.

Now the cities of Greece being full of civil wars, some of them made means
to Philip to aid them, and thereby elected him their chief general: in short
time the occasion being thus offered to Philip, he increased his own kingdom
of Macedonia with the ruin of Greece: for first he began to Macedonia
enriched with the ruin of Greece.
make war upon the Athenians the second city of Greece, a famous city and
full of civil discord, which Philip well perceived, and therefore he used great
celeritie to win Athens, and great policy to keep Athens being won: for
he favored them when he could have spoiled them, he let them go free without
ransom that he took in the wars.

After he had brought Athens to his bow, he took the most Diod. lib. 16.
noble city of Larissa, and subdued all the country of Thessalie being the
next joined country to Macedonia: he fed diverse captains secretly in Greece
to move civil seditions, knowing that division in a kingdom is the only
ruin of a kingdom, as in the wars between the Phocians and the Thebans
Bellum sacrum.
was truly proved, and by Philip fully performed.

After this it happened that two brethren contended about the kingdom of
Thracia, which to avoid wars, both consented to the judgment of Philip, who
not like a Judge in giving The falshod of king Philip.
judgment, but like a fox came with an army and subdued both the brethren,
and so got the kingdom of Thracia subject to Macedonia: by these subtle
dealings he also wanne Cappadocia and Epire, and made wars against the
Scythians. All the endeavors of Philip was to this purpose, that he might be
the lord of Greece, and upon that he called all Greece to the city of Corinth,
and offered to make wars upon the Persians Philip greedy of Greece.
in his own person. This was to flatter Greece, but Virtus an dolus quis in
host requirit? for the Persians ever annoyed Greece. After that Philip had won
Athens, he was sure of the Thebans and of the Boetians, who always were in a
league with Athens by means of Demosthenes, who ever persuaded (...) as (...).
much as tongue could do, to stand against Philip: but when Philip waxed
strong, who sought with flatery with his friends, and with gold with his
enemies, and Greece waxed weak by reason of their civil wars and spoiling
one of another, he had free passage every where, being made governor of all
Greece: he then easily subdued the Illyrians and the Olynthians, conquered
Amphipolis, Pyrinthus, and Byzantium: and by this means Philip became the
only king of all Macedonian kings Philips victory at Cherronea.
before him. He grew so great after his victory at Cherronea, that he made then
ready an army to Persia, and he devised to bring the monarchy from Persia to
Macedonia, which his son Alexander did within a while after. Philip being
thus advanced with many victories and triumphs, leaving behind him at every
victory some triumphant pillar or arch, as trophes and monuments of his
fortune, was in the midst of his glory by the Oracles of Pythias warned of his
death, at what time he sacrificed to his gods a crowned bull. Read more of
this Diod. lib. 16.
in Diodorus.

After that Philip had much moved all the cities of Greece to resist the
Persians, and to make one chief general over all Greece against the Persians:
for Pliny writes, that Philip in the Plin. lib. 2. cap. 27.
hundred and eleventh Olympiad, had much weakened the state of Greece, and
therefore he was the sooner chosen their captain: which being obtained, he
had what he sought.

Upon this he returned into Macedonia, prepared soldiers, made ready his
army, and was in the midst of his greatness, when Pausanias for an injury
received before, for want of justice between Attalus who had most horribly
abused him, and Philip being king to whom he appealed, of whom he had
Attalus.
(though oftentimes he sought) no remedy, but rather flouts and scofs, which
kindled in Pausanias such hatred, that he revenged Pausanias revenge upon
Philip.
the foul fact of Attalus upon king Philippe, and that with death. Thus Philip
reigned in Macedonia 23. years, at what time Ochus reigned in Persia, and
recovered Egypt, and Camillus triumphed in Rome, and overthrew the Frenchmen.
About this time died that noble Philosopher Plato, after whom succeeded
Speusippus, after him Zenocrates. Demosthenes and Aeschines, two famous Orators
flourished in Greece.

CHAP. II.
Of the renown and fame of Macedonia during the reign of Alexander the great,
of his conquest and victories over all the East: of his dangerous wars in
India, Egypt, and in Scythia, and of the subduing of Darius, and the taking
away of the Monarchy from Persia into Macedonia.

ALexander the great being of twenty years of age, succeeded and exceeded his
father Philippe, both in virtue and in vice: they were thus far one from
another in nature, that what Philip did through policy and subtlety, that
Alexander would do with open strength and courage: Philip rejoiced when he
Comparison between Philip and Alexander.
might deceive the enemy, Alexander when he could overthrow them: Philip more
politic like afoxe in council and device, Alexander like a lion more fierce
and courageous in conquering and subduing: Philip sought means to be beloved
of his enemies, and to make his foes his friends, Alexander sought to be
feared, and to make his friends his foes. These and such other comparisons
does Iustine setforth between justin. lib 9.
the father and the son.

Alexander began to reign (by Curtius computations) after the building of
Rome four hundredth twenty and fix years: at what time Ca. Sulpitius, and
Lu. Papyrius were Consuls Melanct. lib. 2.
of Rome, in the hundredth and eleventh Olympiad, when Iaddus was hie priest in
Jerusalem. Plutarch writes, that Alexander was descended from Hercules by
Caranus side, and that of his mothers side he came of the blood of Aeacides by
Neoptolemus. Olympias his mother dreamed the first night Olympias dream.
that she lay with Philip, that lightning fell into her belly, and that light
fire dispersed it self in diverse flames about her: and king Philip also
dreamed, that he did seal his wives belly, and that the seal left behind it
the print of a lion. Philippes dream.


Alexander was borne the sixth day of June, on the very same day that the temple
of Diana was burned: he had diverse grave tutours and governors. Leonidas was
chief governor unto Leonidas Alexanders governor.
Alexander, for that he was a noble man and a kinsman to the Queen Olympias.
Aristotle was his chief tutour, one of the greatest Philosophers and best
learned men in his time. King Philip had taken before, the city of Stagira,
where Aristotle was borne.

While this Alexander was yet young, one Philonicus a Thessalian had brought
Bucephalus a gallant horse to be sold unto Bucephalus.
Philip: the price was thirteen talents: they brought the horse to the field
to be ridden, whom they found so rough, that the riders said he would do no
service, affirming that it was impossible to tame him, they found him so
churlish, yerking out and suffering no man to come nigh him. King Philippe
commanded them to take the horse away. Alexander misliked the riders and took
the horse in hand, being a very Bucephalus tamed by Alexander.
young man, and turned him toward the sun, (for that Alexander saw before
that the horse started at his own shadow) Alexander used the horse so, that
he rode him, and made him as gentle as could be, both with the spur and with
the bitte, and so lighted from the horse: to whom Philippe his father then
said (for joy weeping,) Seek a greater kingdom son Plutar. in vita. Alex.
then Macedonia is: for Macedonia is to little for thee. This Aulus Gellius,
Plutarch and Pliny do affirm. This horse Alexander kept for his own saddle
until the wars of India, where the horse with sickness died: where he
made a monument in memory of Bucephalus, a town after the name of Curtius
lib. 9.
the horse, and named the city Bucephalia, which he builded upon the river
Hidaspis. Read the whole 16. book of Diodor. Diodor. lib. 16.
Siculus of the wars and government of Philip.

Now as soon as Philip his father died, he went into Peloponesus in Greece,
and there called al Greece together, and claimed the sovereignty which his
father had over them against the Persians: which being granted, and he being by
common consent appointed their only and chief governor against the Persians:
within short time after many of these cities began to murmr against
Alexander, and to revolt from Macedonia. When Alexander perceived that the
Athenians, the Thebans, the Argiues, the Lacedaemonians, the Arcadians, studied
and conuented together for the liberty of Greece, he presently without any
delay (as his nature was) had war with Thessalie the next country unto
Macedonia: after, he subdued Thermopyla, and urged the Amphictions which were
then appointed Judges The inco^stancie of the Grecians.
universally for all Greece, that with all their decrees and laws they would
move Greece by fair means to surrender the government which his father had,
and also to him granted. After that, the Athenians sent ambassadors, and
offered all courtesy to Alexander: the Corinthians likewise sought to please
him in like sort, which Alexander accepted in good part, and returned with his
army from Greece into Macedonia: he was scant in Macedonia, but the Grecians
according to their custom began to send from city to city, to stand
against Alexander in the defense of their country: the Thebans sent
ambassadors to the Arcadians, the Arcadians to the Argiues, the Argiues to the
Aeolians, to whom the Athenians sent also by the persuasions of Demosthenes,
though they were before the first that entreated for peace at his hand.

Alexander hearing of these often false dealings, he then comes Diod. lib. 17.
from Macedonia and Thracia with a huge army of thirty thousand footmen,
and three thousand horsemen, and understanding that the Thebans had him in
contempt, he fully determined to destroy their city in such sort without
mercy, that it should terrify all Greece thereby: he laid siege to Thebes
three days, and the fourth day he made it even to the Thebes destroyed.
ground: there was not death spared neither to children, nor to women: the
slaughter was so terrible, that there was slain within the city of Thebes
above six thousand, maimed and taken above 3. hundredth thousand: this fell in
the hundredth and in the last year of the 11. Olympiad. This terror made
Greece to quake.

Alexander being more angry with Athens then with the rest, he sent
ambassadors to Athens to have the 10. Orators sent unto him: for Alexander
knew that the Orators whetted the people to revolt, and that they persuaded the
Athenians with their eloquencie always to rebel. Athens was put now to her
shift, until Demades, one of the Orators, sought license to go to Alexander
from the city as an ambassador: he used that force of eloquence to Alexander
for peace, which Demosthenes used against Alexander to the Athenians for
wars: by Demades persuasion Alexander was won to pardon the Athenians
again. Alexander returned into his own kingdom, and left Greece in quiet for
a short time.

After, Cassander the son of Antipater builded up Thebes Alexanders voyage to
Asia.
again: and then Alexander made himself ready to go unto Asia, and with
great celeritie (as his manner was) he brought his army out of Europe into
Asia: he had in his band thirty and two thousand footmen, five thousand
horsemen, and an hundredth and eight ships.

These news being brought unto Darius the last king of Persia, which had under
his government all the East kingdoms, and saw him self so strong that he
called him self king of kings, and cousin to the gods, he little esteemed the
report, and Darius opinon of himself.
made small account of the Macedonian number, commanded some of his princes to
take Alexander and to beat him like a child with a rod, and after to bring
him unto Darius: but Alexander was no longer in getting the victory over The
first victory at the river Granicus.
the huge host of the Persians at the river of Granicus, then Darius was in
directing his captains to beat Alexander with rods: this was the first
battle and victory which Alexander had, where twenty thousand footmen and
250. horsemen were slain.

After this battle, Alexander took Lydia in hand, wanne the Ruffin. de orig.
Maced.
city of Sardis, and shortly all Lydia: he took Ephesus, and Miletum, two
famous cities: he besieged Halicarnassus, wasted and spoiled it to the ground.
Alexander in this voyage after he had brought Lycia and Pamphylia under his
wings, he Q Curt. lib. 3.
still invaded Darius provinces and territories further to provoke him to
war: many wondered at the a gilitie of Alexander, and fearing much the
greatness and good success of Alexander being so young a king, that they
began both to fear him and to love him, and to forsake Darius. Alexander
went forward still conquering and subduing all countries: he came into the
territories and provinces of Darius, and he entered Paphlagonia and came to the
city called Ancyra, who without any strokes yielded themselves by these
occasions of Alexanders good success.

Darius thought it was but fortune, and not the deserts of Darius caused a
muster at Babylon.
Alexander: he caused therefore a great muster at Babylon, and made an army
ready of seventy thousand footmen, and thirty thousand horsemen of the
Persians: he also had beside ten Darius army.
thousand horsemen of the Medes, and fifty thousand footmen: two thousand
Bactrians horsemen, and ten thousand footmen: he had of Armenia forty
thousand footmen, and seven thousand horsemen: of Hircania six thousand: of the
Derinces forty thousand footmen, and two thousand horsemen: from the Caspians
eight thousand footmen, and two hundred horsemen of Greece were joined unto
Darius, that expected the overthrow of Alexander with his thirty thousand: he
had such a huge number, that he feared that Alexander would fly before he came
to make battle: for so Darius said to Amyntas the Macedonian.

But it came to pass otherwise: Alexander had the victory Plutar. in vita
Alexand.
in that place which Darius appointed: this battle was fought in Cilicia, where
Alexander killed above a hundredth thousand The second victory of Alexander in
Cilicia.
footmen, and ten thousand horsemen of Darius men: this was the second
battle, in the which Darius mother, and his wife, and two of his daughters
unmarried, were taken prisoners and brought to Alexander, whose misfortune he
more piried, then he rejoiced at the victory: such was the clemency of
Melanct. lib. 2.
Alexander unto these miserable captive Ladies, yea such was his chastity,
though they were (as Plutarch faith) most comely and fair, not once to offer
any word of dishonor to them. A greater conquest (as I take it) to overcome
himself; then the victory against Darius.

Alexander after this victory removed his camp to Marathon, thence to
Phoenices and to Biblon, and having gotten these three cities, he came to
Sydon a famous city, wanne that also: for all Syria and Phoenicia (Tire
excepted) were brought by Alexander subject unto Maccdonia: he besieged Tire,
and continued seven months both by land and by sea: for it was a city of
invincible force, and kept Alexander hot Tire besieged and taken.
assaults, using all engines and policies, and yet stood in great doubt of
the getting of Tire, until one night he dreamed that Hercules held out to him
his hand over the walls of Tire and called him by his name: then he followed,
and continued his siege, until he had quite overthrown Tire. This town was
builded by Agenor. Tire by Agenor builded.


While Alexander conquered and subdued all places, Darius was not idle to
prepare his forces to give the third Q. Curt. lib. 4.
battle unto Alexander: he sent to Bessus his lieutenant in Bactria,
commanding him to come with as many soldiers as possibly he could, and so
the rest of his lieutenants: he likewise sent and to make as great an army as
might yet terrify Alexander: he sent to the Scythians, and to the Indians,
and D^rius 3 preparation against Alexander.
brought his force to Babylon. At that time he had thrice as many as he had in
Cicilia.

In the mean season Alexander went to Gaza one of the Gaza besieged.
chiefest cities of Syria: at this town Alexander had two several wounds very
dangerous, and yet not so dangerous as the victory was famous: thence he
removed his tents and passed forward to Egypt, sent his footmen to Pelusium:
he himself with few chosen soldiers passed over Nilus to Memphis, and thence
to all the parts of Egypt, where he was received as Diod. lib. 17.
a conqueror without battle given. When he had set things in order in Egypt,
altering neither their laws nor their customs, he went forward and found a
place where he builded the city Alexandria, and named it after his own name.

After he had conquered all Egypt, this city was builded in Alexandri^ builded
420. years after the building of Rome.
the seventh year of Alexanders reign, four hundredth and twenty years after
the building of Rome, at what time Caius Petileus, and Lu. Papyrius were
consuls in Rome as Liuie writes. When Alexander had brought all things to pass
as he wished, he left two overseers in Egypt with four thousand soldiers with
them, the one was a Macedonian named Pencestes, the other a Rhodian named
Aesculus, and returned and pitched his tents hard by a little village of Assyria
called Arbela, where the The third battle of Alexander at Arbela.
last and the greatest battle was between Darius and Alexander. But because I
have spoken of these three great victories of Alexander in the histories of
Persia, where I opened particularly the whole discourse of the wars, I may
pass to other matters with this farewell to Alexander, that so few in number,
with so young a king against such a mighty monarche, as at that time had almost
all the world under his government, and yet in three victories his kingdoms
was taken from him, above a hundred thousand slain, and Darius himself fled,
and being hard followed was slain by Bessus.

Of this Alexander Daniel prophesied, that such a king should come that might
do what he list. Iustine says, that Darius justin. lib. 11.
had in his army three hundredth thousand footmen, and a hundredth thousand
horsemen. Diodorus varieth much from that number, and so does Curtius:
Plutarch says that Darius Curtius lib. 5.
had ten hundredth thousand fighting men at that battle at Euphrates. Also
some writers differ for the place, that this great battle was not at Arbeles:
Plutarch a man of great judgment, Plutarch. in Alexand.
whom I had rather follow in matters of any controversies, then any other in
this history between Alexander and Darius, therefore he sets down the
first victory at the river Granicus, the second victory in Silicia, the
third at Gausameles, and not at Arbeles, as the most writers affirm.

After these victories which Alexander had, he removed to Babylon, where he
continued 34. days, from Babylon to Susa where he found within the castle
four thousand talents in ready coin of gold and silver, beside other infinite
treasures. These towns yielded to Alexander after the last overthrow of Darius
without any assalt given: and from Susa went after Darius to Media where he
fled, and where he found Darius slain by Bessus one of his own captains
which was Darius lieutenant Darius slain by Bessus.
over the Bactrians. This Bessus perceiving that Alexander was following hard
at the heels of Darius, thinking much to please Alexander slew his own lord
and master: for the which Alexander rewarded him not according to his
expectation, but according to his deserts, commanded that he should be bound
between two trees, and by horses to be The punishment of Bessus.
drawn in pieces. It is written that when Alexander saw Darius dead, he wept
and covered his body with his own Plut. in Alex.
cloak: so wept Julius Caesar when he saw the head of Pompey, and Antigonus
when he saw the head of Pyrrhus, though they were enemies. Now by Darius the
Persians lost their monarchy, Melanct. lib. 2 Chronicles.
and by Alexander the Macedonians wanne it.

Aristotle hearing of Alexanders good success, his victories and his conquests
over so many nations to be such, wrote unto the king, putting him in
remembrance that GOD gives victories, and kingdoms are given by GOD, to do
good and not evil, to use justice and not injury, to be a king and not to be
a tyrant. By this time Alexander had reigned eight years king in Macedonia,
after he had conquered the Carians, the Lydians, the Cappadocians, the
Phrygians, the Paphlagonians, and Diod. lib. 17.
the Pamphylians: also he subdued the Cilicians, the Syrians, the Phoenicians,
the Armenians and the Persians, the Medes and the Parthenians, and was king of
all the East countries: yet he was not satisfied, for he saw the Scythians,
the Hircanians, the Curtius lib. 7.
Bactrians, the Sogdians, the Massagets and the Sagaes and the Indians
unconquered, he could not quiet his mind before he had subdued these nations.

Alexander sought where he might hear of a kingdom unconquered, and hearing
of Hercules acts and exploits in the West kingdoms, he fully had determined
after he had brought all Asia and the East countries as he did to subjection,
to lead his army and to pass into Affricke, to Carthage and to Numidia, and
thence to Gades to see Hercules pillars: Alexander determined to imi^ate in his
victories Hercules.
thence he thought to lead his army unto Iberia, which is Spain, and from
Spain to the Alps, and so to Italy, and from Italy to Epire, leaving no where
in his mind unconquered: So he fumed and fretted at the fame of Achilles, of
Theseus, and of Hercules: for Hercules was the only man that Alexander The
hautie mind of Alexander.
emulated, he thought of Hercules as Caesar thought of Alexander. This king
was of such wonderful hautinesse, that he thought that the earth might not
suffer two Alexanders, no more then the heavens might co^taine two Suns: so
he answered Darius when he entreated for peace, and offered thirty Alexander
pa^em non patitur.
thousand talents for his wife and his daughters.

And Alexander hearing Democritus the Philosopher affirming that there were
many worlds, he brake out in tears, Diod. lib. 17.
and in great fury said: Is there more worlds then one, and yet I have not
conquered half one world? But he was prevented with a contrary course, he
fell to take ease at Babylon, where he gave himself to banquets, to riot, to
surfeting, and to drinking, and so he bestowed in Babylon the rest of his life
in all kind of pleasures and pastimes. He married the Persian ladies with
noble men of Macedonia, and he himself married Statira Darius daughter: he
married in Susa eighty and Roxana.
two nohle men of Macedonia unto the Ladies of Persia and Media upon one day,
and made a brave large tent of four The first feast.
furlongs about, and appointed an hundredth gorgeous rich beds: where also the
kings bed was furnished with too much riches to be spoken of. I will they
should read Quin. Curtius, Q. Curt. lib. 7. and 8.
and Diod. Siculus, of the rich and sumptuous solemnity of this feast, of the
regal magnificence of Alexander, of the pomp and glory of these Macedonian
marriages with these Persian Ladies.

After these great marriages of himself and of his nobles, Melanct. lib. 2.
and of his sumptuous feast which continued five days, he made also a solemn
feast of common marriages, where 9000. Q. Cur. lib. 8.
were married, to whom Alexander gave a cup of gold to every one to honor the
feast. He became from a famous conqueror, The 2. feast.
a voluptuous man, a drunkard furious and fell, at last in his rage to kill and
to murder his dearest friends, as Hermolaus, Parmenio, yea Clitus his own
foster brother, who saved Alexanders life at the battle at Granicus, at what
time Rhosaceris a Persian captain had slain Alexander, had not Clitus been:
he slew Calisthenes the Philosopher for his good counsel. Alexander said,
Odio qui sibi non sapit: he could not abide to Odio qui sibi non sapit.
hear any praise of his own father Philip, he would be called the son of
Jupiter, disdained his noble men and old soldiers of Macedonia that served
his father: he forgote to do good (as Pindar truly said) and gave himself to
be a tyrant after Babylon was taken.

Alexander was modest, discreet, wise, just in judgment, temperat in diet, for
a time, but the reward of sin fell upon him, many hated him, and many
conspired his death: as Sostratus, Philota, Antipater, Epimenes, Nicostratus
and Anticles, but Epimenes disclosed his conspiracy to his brother named
Eurilochus, to whom Alexander gave 50. talents for these news, and pardoned
Plutarch. in Alexand.
Epimenes, but the rest he executed. Yet still more conspiratours grew, in so
much that Antipater his lieutenant in Macedonia, yea as some do suspect, by
Aristotle's counsel, poison was sent from Macedonia unto Babylon, and delivered
to Cassander which was Antipaters son, to Iolla and to Philippe, Diverse
opinions of Alexanders death.
which were Antipaters brethren, which were of the kings privy Chamber, and
these when they saw their time, bestow a cup of drink upon Alexander for
his last farewell: which when he perceived that there was no help, he took
his ring from his finger and gave it to Perdica, with a commandment given,
that his body should be carried to Jupiter Curtius.
of Ammon. Yet some write that he died of a hot fever.

A little before he died he was demanded who should reign king after him: he
answered, even he that is most worthy to come after me. And then being again
asked at what time he would have his body buried: he answered, when you are at
rest and quietness. And so it came to pass, that he was left unburied in
Babylon until Olympias his mother came from Macedonia, and caused his body to
be carried to Alexandria: Melanct. 2. Chron.
for as soon as Alexander died, they contended to be kings, and so forgot to
bury Alexander according to his commandment. Thus Alexander after he had
lived thirty two years, and reigned twelve, he died, at what time happened
the saying of Demades to be true, that the kingdoms and soldiers of Alexander
The kingdom of Alexander compared to a Cyclope.
should be like a Ciclope without an eye: surely so it came to pass, that
after Alexanders death the most part of the world was without a king: for
Alexander had so many kingdoms, that when he died he left no king behind
him, until again they began with the sword to claim kingdoms.

After Alexanders death, who died two hundredth and eight Buchol. in Chro.
Alexander died 280. before Caesar was slain.
years before Julius Caesar was slain, during twelve years which Alexander
the great reigned in the whole: he reigned six of these twelve years king
over the Chaldeans and the Assyrians, over the Medes and the Persians, leaving
Roxana king Darius daughter great with child, for the which the Macedonians
did her great honor: for king Darius had three daughters, Statira, Roxana, and
Bersene, who were all married unto Alexander.

This time began the Romans to flourish, and had conquered the Sabins, the
Samnits, the Latins, the Fidenats, the Hetruscanes, the Volscanes, and diverse
other countries, and began to look further from Rome unto other kingdoms of
the world. For now had triumphed in Rome during the reign of Alexander,
these many gallant fellows.

1 Marcus Valerius Corinus. 2 C. Mar. Corolyanus. 3 Tit. Manlius Torquatus. 4
Lucius Papyrius. 5 Fabius Maximus. 6 Mar. Curious. 7 Lucius Voluminus. 8 Caius
Sulpitius. And 9 Caius Decius.
And as Liuie says, al these seemed in courage and prowess to be young
Alexanders. Liui. lib. 9.


CHAP. III.
Of the division and parting of the kingdoms of Asia and Syria after the death
of Alexander between his captains: for he left no king to succeed after him
but the sword: so many kingdoms were void by his death, that his captains
that fought then under Alexander for wages and spoils, fought now for
kingdoms and Empires: of their wars and of their continuance.

But to come to Macedonia again, where these great captains fell at variance
Contentions between Alex. captains.
after the death of Alexander, how the kingdoms of Alexander might be
divided: six days they were in discoursing of these causes who should
succeed Alexander in the kingdom of Macedonia, some greedy of pray, some of
ease, some after long wars, some of one thing and some of another: the noble
men and chief captains, they had an eye to the treasure of Alexander which
was one hundred thousand talents, beside his revenues yearly Perdicca.
which was three hundred thousand talents: Perdiccas thought Roxana being
great with child by Alexander (if it should be a son) that he should be king
of the Macedonians: Meleager contraried Perdicas saying, That Alexander had a
gallant Meleager.
youth to be his son by Arsine named Hercules, more fitter for the crown of
Macedonia, then to expect a doubtful chance by Roxana: others thought that
Aridaeus a bastard Iustine lib. 13.
brother of Alexanders should succeed in the kingdom. Read Q. Curtius of
the orations and persuasions of several Dukes and captains concerning the
succession after Alexander Ru ffi. de origi. Maced.
in the kingdom of Macedonia. After long debates and several opinions
touching Alexanders posterity, it came at last to the murdering of his wife
Roxana being great with child by Alexander, to the killing of young Hercules
Alexanders Alex. posterities slain.
son by his wife Arsine, to the slaughter of his mother Olympias, and of his
base brother Aridaeus: it came in fine to bloody civil discord, that the
calamity and misery of Macedonia after Alexanders time, passed far the
felicity and iollitie of Macedonia during the time of Alexander: for after
that Antipater had murdered all Alexanders stock, his wife, children, mother,
brother, and all Alexanders nigh kinsemen: he armed himself against
Lysimachus, by whom Antipater was slain.

Thus after long seditious contentions, they agreed among themselves, that
Antipater should govern Macedonia Funct. comment. lib. 3.
and Greece: that Ptolome should govern Egypt and Afrike, and part of Arabia:
Learchus should govern Lycia, Pamphylia, and the greater Phrygia: Cappadocia,
and Paphlagonia, were assigned to Eumenes: to Laomedon were assigned Syria and
Phoenicia: to Cassander Caria: to Menander Lydia: and to Lysimachus Thracia
Pontus and Cilicia: Illyria to Philotes: to Leonatus the lesser Phrygia: these
with others, whose names Functius sets down. These princes within fourteen
years by civil Iustine lib. 23.
discord fell to variances and contencions, that they destroyed one another:
such is the force of ambition, that it Ambition among the kings after Alex.
never contains within any bound of reason.

I will not repeat the names of those that were likewise assigned to govern
the Sogdians, the Bactrians, the Indians, and other places which in like manner
through mutual dissension slew one another. Alexander for a while was left
unburied in Babylon quite forgotten of all his princes, until Ptolome, as
Curtius does witness, sent for his body, brought it to Memphis, Curtius lib.
10.
and from Memphis it was carried to Alexandria, and there in his own tomb was
buried.

Now after these Princes were thus destroyed, the Empire void of any good
government: for though they with Arideus the first king elected after Alex in
Maced.
one consent elected Arideus to be king of Macedon, yet their obedience was
far from their election, but every man aspired to a kingdom: all the
Countries between the river Hydaspes, and the river Indus, Taxillus governed:
In Persia governed Neoptolemus: in Parthia, Nicanor: in Babylon, Pencestes: and
Archesilaus had in his hand Mesopotamia. All these practiced means how they
might from governors become kings: for as I said before, Alexander left no
king behind him, for so it was before Alexander by Cyrus, before Cyrus by
Nabuchodonosor, Alex. left no heir but the sword.
before Nabuchodonosor by Merodach, before Merodach by Ninus, before Ninus by
Nimrod.

So God from the beginning by his great wisdom has established kingdoms and
commonweals, that where he gave his sword, there the victory went, and
there the Monarchy flourished: so God ordained things to come to pass, that
now again the Empire of Alexander should be divided, as Daniel the Prophet
had before told saying, That a Daniel cap. 11.
strong king should come and govern, and do what pleased him, but it should
be divided in quatuor ventos Coeli, as then it happened truly between four
princes, though Josephus says five: the first was Cassander, the son of
Antipater, Cassander.
and even he who poisoned Alexander, he I say after his fathers death, and
after he had destroyed the whole progeny of Alexander, invaded Macedonia and
usurped the kingdom: the 2. Ptolo. Lagi the first king of Ptolome.
Egypt, and had the most part of Syria under his Scepter: the 3. Seleucus
surnamed Nicanor, king of Babylon, and of Seleucus.
Asia the greater: the 4. Antigonus king of Asia the less. Antigonus.


These and their posterities had entered in arms, and began to war within
them selves, that they likewise came to ruin and were destroyed one by
another, as you shall read more in the histories of the kings of Asia and
Syria.

In the mean season the Athenians again, a people ever desirous of
sovereignty, understanding that Alexander the great was dead, were in arms
against Antipater, still looking Curtius lib. 13. Iustine. lib. 13.
to have their former liberty, joined with themselves the Aeolians, gathered
three thousand soldiers, two hundred nauies, and now Demosthenes being
banished from Athens being at Megaris, or as as Plutarch says at Aegina, for
his 20. talents in bribes received of Harpalus, was called back by the
Athenians, who through his wo^ted eloquence allured the Argiues, the
Corinthians, and the Scicionians, to join with the Athenians against
Antipater, who by election was king of Macedonia next after Alexander, and
chief governor over all Greece as Alexander was and his father Philip before
him. In these wars the Athenians had very good luck in the beginning,
Leosthenes.
while yet Leosthenes their general was alive, but he being dead, their good
hap and success died also, before Leosthenes had shut up Antipater in the
city of Lamia, and straightly had there besieged him.

But this continued no longer then to the battle of Cranon, where again the
Athenians were overthrown, and Demosthenes with many of their Orators fled,
and after to avoid Antipaters hand rid away themselves by poison. Cassander
began in Macedonia and in Greece to practice falsehood, after he had married
Arideus daughter Thessalonices: for by consent Arideus.
of all the princes, Arideus was appoinred to succeed Alexander, and he
reigned seven years king in Macedonia, but Olympias Iustine lib. 14.
Alexanders mother made means to dispatch both Arideus, and his wife Euridices
out of the way, for that they resisted the Queen Olympias to come into
Macedonia from Epire, and Olympias her self lived not long after: for the
Macedonians honored her much for Philip her own husbands sake, and for
Alexander her son, until she became to be cruel and to use much tyranny.

But Cassander who far exceeded her in murdering and in destroying, took
her also, and commanded her to be Diod. lib. 19.
slain, and likewise commanded Roxana Alezanders wife to be kept, and to be
looked unto, being sent with her son Alexander to Amphipolis, but she and her
son was slain. While The cruelty of Cassander.
in this sort Cassander fomed in blood, Antigonus who had obtained to be king
of lesser Asia, came in arms against Cassander. Lysimachus king of Thracia,
and Seleucus king of greater Asia joined with Cassander, and the battle was
given at Gaza, a city of Palestina, where Demetrius Antigonus son had the
worse. Cassander within a while after this battle died, when he had reigned
eighteen years.

After whom succeeded two sons of Cassander named Antipater and Alexander,
who in much discord and with much adooe they reigned four years: this young
king Antipater after he had reigned three years, perceiving that his mother
was more bent to favor her other son Alexander, with his own hand slew her:
upon this vile murder Alexander presently sent to Demetrius for aid, and to
revenge his mothers death upon his brother: Demetrius was glad to hear such
news, that Antipater had slain his mother, and now Melanct. lib. 2. Chron.
Alexander to rise against his brother, saw an open passage hereby offered
unto him to become king of Macedonia, which so came to pass, for both
Antipater and Alexander one destroyed another: for Lysimachus slew Antipater,
and Demetrius Demetrius.
Alexander, left the kingdom to Demetrius: the posterity of Cassander had no
longer time in Macedonia, it was Gods judgment: for this Cassander as it is
reported, poisoned Alexander the great, being with two other of his brethren
Iolla and Philip, gentlemen of his privy chamber their race ended: for in the
Cassanders treachery and murder.
time of Antipater and his son Cassander, Demosthenes, Demades, and the most
part of the noble Orators of Athens were slain.

And now Demetrius the son of Antigonus was proclaimed king of Macedon, and
beside Macedon he had Thessalie, and the most part of Peleponesus: he further
did lead his army against the Boetians, laid siege to Thebes and took it:
after that hearing that Lysimachus king of Thracia was taken prisoner by a
barbarous nation, he went with his army to invade Thracia: he was skant in
Thracia but Lysimachus came home, and beside hearing that Pyrrhus had forraged
all Thessalia, Pyrrhus.
and had entered already into the streightes of Thermopiles, Demetrius was
constreined to leave both Thracia and also Thebes, and to return against
Pyrrhus: and for all that Pyrrhus Funct. lib. 3. Comment.
sought Demetrius with his army to give him battle, and Demetrius sought also
Pyrrhus, yet they mist both at that time: but after Demetrius his lieutenant
named Pantarchus, a strong man and of great courage gave to Pyrrhus battle,
which victory fell to Pyrrhus the only king that imitated Alexander the
great, and to him by all men's report most like in courage and prowess.

After this victory of Pyrrhus, he again invaded Macedonia, being advertised
that Demetrius was sick, in the which journey Pyrrhus came as far as the
city Edissa without resistance: yet Pyrrhus was driven out of Macedonia that
time with all his force.

Demetrius wanting leisure to fight with Pyrrhus, having Diod. lib. 17.
many wars in hand beside, concluded a peace with Pyrrhus: for then Demetrius
was troubled diverse ways. Lysimachus king of Thracia invaded the high country
of Macedon next unto Thracia, and Ptolomei king of Egypt entered with his army
into Greece, and Pyrrhus though there was a peace concluded, yet stepped in with
Lysimachus, entised the Macedonians partly through fair means, and partly
through flattery to forsake Demetrius: by this means Macedonia was divided
between Pyrrhus and Lysimachus, and Pyrrhus was proclaimed king in Macedonia,
after they had chased Demetrius, Pyrrhus reigned in Macedonia seven months.

Again Lysimachus made war on Pyrrhus, and after many battles Lysimachus
got the victory, and reigned king in Macedonia seven years. Iustine praises
this Lysimachus to be Iustine lib. 15.
the rarest man of his time valiant and wise, and a great Philosopher, of a
noble house borne of Macedonia, where now he is become king. It is written
that this Lysimachus slew a lion The praise of Lysimachus.
with his own hand: but I leave him king of Macedonia, and return to
Demetrius, who for three years had been tossed Curtius lib. 8.
with extreme hard fortune: now for recovering of his kingdom again he had
levied a great army of one hundred thousand footmen, of twelve thousand
horsemen, and had Demetrius army.
gotten five hundred ships together, part in the haven of Piraeus, part at
Corinth, part at the City Chalcis, and part about the City Pella.

His enemies hearing of these news, I mean three kings, Seleucus, Ptolome,
and Lysimachus, joined themselves there together against Demetrius: and beside
they sent to Pyrrhus, that poor Demetrius misery from princely happiness
Funct. lib. 3. Coment.
so overthrown, that his army forsook him, himself yielded unto Seleucus,
his wife named Phila, for very grief poisoned her self, and so kept as
prisoner in Syria by Seleucus, where Demetrius turned captivity into pleasure
unto his dying day, who after he had reigned six years dyed in Cherronesus,
leaving behind him by his wife Phila two children, Antigonus and Stratonice,
and other two sons both named Demetrius, of whom you shall hear more
hereafter: both Plutarch, Iustine, Plutarch in Demetr. Demetrius left two of
his name behind.
and Ruffinus affirm, that the posterity of Demetrius succeeded kings in
Macedonia, until the last king named Perseus: this time also died Ptolomei
Lagi king of Egypt with great fame and report.

Now Lysimachus reigned this while in Macedonia, using such tyranny and
practicing such cruelty against his own subjects, that they reuoulted from
him and fled to Seleucus: then war grew between them, that Lysimacus
Lysimachus.
lost what he wanne, fifteen of his children, and his life also by Seleucus:
this was the last battle fought amongst them that were of Alexanders
successors. Seleucus not long lived, but within seven months after was Diod.
lib. 17. and 18.
by Ptolomei surnamed Cheraunos, brother to Ptolomeus Philadelphus, the second
king of Egypt after Alexander the great, slain: for Lysimachus had married the
sister of this Ptolomei and reigned after his brother in law in Macedonia the
space of one year: after this Macedonia was continually plagued until their
last king of Macedon named Perseus, whom the Romans overcame by Paulus
Aemilius, and so brought Macedonia a Province under Rome.

Now this while Perdica used another way to be king All means made for king
domes.
of Macedonia, he made means to marry Cleopatra the sister of Alexander the
great, and thought so to overthrow Aridaeus: but he was prevented by
Antipater and slain by his own soldiers: some thinks that the ambition of
Perdica was the first cause of all civil wars in marying Cleopatra. Polib.
lib. 2.
Polybius says, that all these jolly captains, Ptolomie the son of Lagi,
Seleucus, Lysimachus, and Ptolomie Cerannus, died in the 124. Olympiad.
Macedonia had little good success of their kings, as you heard of Cassanders
two sons Antipater and Alexander, The destruction of many kings within few
years.
who reigned but four years, Demetrius six, Pyrrhus seven months,
Lysimachus seven years, and Ptolomei Cerannos one year, after whom succeeded
Meleager two months, Antipater forty five days, yet Iustine says he
reigned one whole year, and Sosthenes two years.

After these kings the kingdom fell to the house of Demetrius (as I said
before) to Antigonus the son of Demetrius, borne of Phila the daughter of
Antipater and sister to Cassander. This Antigonus was called the second
Antigonus: for the first Antigonus which was this Demetrius father, was
supposed Antigonus the first the base son of Philip.
and taken to be a base son of Philip, and a brother of Alexander the great:
for so he himself in his decrees and statutes named himself Philips son, of
whose wars against Emmenes when he was king of Asia, I spoke in the history
of the kings of Asia and Syria.

The second Antigonus which was Demetrius son, is much praised for his
justice, government, modesty, and of such good virtuous disposition, that he
was surnamed of the Grecians Euergetes. Of this second Antigonus issued forth
the second Funct. lib. 3. Comment.
Demetrius which reigned ten years: I will speak of the troubles in
Macedonia during the reign of Ptolomei Cerannius the seventh king after
Alexander, of Meleager the eight king, of Antipater the ninth, and of Sosthenes
the tenth king: these four kings reigned not above four years.

After Lysimachus by this false treachery of his brother in law, Ptolomei was
deceived and settled himself king in Macedonia he concluded a peace with
Antiochus, and entered in friendship with Pyrrhus, and by these means he was
far from Ptolome Ceran.
any fear of foreign enemies: he mused how he might destroy his own sister
Lysimachus wife and his children, who of right ought to be heirs to the
crown of Macedonia: he swear that he would marie his sister, and make her
children by Just. lib. 24.
Lysimachus his own to inherit the kingdom: but he was no sooner within the
City of Cassandria, where he should marie Arsinoe the Queen, but he commanded
that both her sons, Tyranny rewarded with tyranny.
the elder named Lysimachus after his fathers name, of sixteen years of age,
and Philip three years younger then his brother, to be killed, and their
mother forced to steal away by night into Samothracia: but he was well
requited by Belgius, hackt and slain, and his head cut off and carried upon a
spear in open sight of the Macedonia^s, which put them in no little fear.

Sosthenes was proclaimed king of Macedonia, a man of great Sosthenes.
courage: he resisted the fury and rage of the Frenchmen, which wasted the
country and spoiled the Cities, until that Brennus another captain of the
Frenchmen joined with Belgius, with a hundred and fifty thousand footmen, and
fifteen thousand horsemen, and easily being so many might overthrow so few.
Sosthenes was feign to take a hold: for that time Brennus and Belgius spoiled
Cities and Countries, robbed Diod. lib. 18.
their temples, and had infinite treasure from the temple of Apollo. Thus the
Macedonians were sore plagued, and had these two great overthrows by Belgius
and Brennus, but the third overthrow fell to the Frenchmen in such extreme
sort, that Brennus slew himself.

After this the Frenchmen again invaded Macedonia, while Antigonus which was
Demetrius brother reigned, where they Demetrius.
were vanquished and overthrown in most miserable sort: this got to Antigonus
great credit, until Pyrrhus got the victory of him, and forced him to take
his flight. So poor Macedonia was still by one or other put to worse, Pyrrhus
mocking Antigonus for his bravery to go in purple like a king apparelled,
being chased out of his country by him and by others, yet it was Antigonus
chance to have Pyrrhus head brought unto him by Alcioneus his own son from
the siege of the city of Argos, Alci^neus brought Pyrrhus head to Antigonus.
where this great king after many victories over kings was slain at a woman's
hand by throwing of a tyle stone.

When king Antiochus saw Pyrrhus head thrown before him by his son in such
contempt, he laid his staff about his sons back, calling him a cruel
murderer, and an unnatural barbarous beast, and turning his eyes from the
sight thereof weapt, remembering Demetrius hard fortune which was his father,
and also the misery and end of the first Antigonus his graundfather: he most
honorably caused his head and his body to be burned and his ashes burned. Thus
thestate of princes is changed sometime in the height of good luck Instine
lib. 25.
and favor, and sometime forsaken of their own friends.

Antigonus having this great victory of Pyrrhus, used all clemency toward
Pyrrhus son named Helenus, sent him unto Plutarch in Pirrho.
his Realm of Epirus with honorable conuoye, seasing all Pyrrhus camp and
army, used his friends courteously, and received many of Pyrrhus soldiers
and preferred them. Thus Pyrrhus who held out against three kings, Lysimachus,
Demetrius, and Antigonus, beside his magnanimity and prowess showed against
the Illyrians, the Cicilians, the Carthagineans, and against the stout
Romans, and yet never conquered. Hanibals words of Pyrrhus.
This Pyrrhus was preferred by Hanibals judgment to be the second soldier of
the world next to the great Alexander, after whose death Greece fell to
contencions, as Macodonia by Antigonus flourished but a short time: for as soon
as Pyrrhus dyed, the Peloponesians yielded to Antigonus. Pyrrhus had a son
named Alexander, who burned in fury Antigonus Overthrown by Pyrrhus son
Alex.
to revenge his fathers death, began upon the confines of Macedonia to
quarrel with Antigonus: he was no sooner returned from Greece into Macedonia,
but Antigonus had both lost his kingdom and himself by a fair battle given
to him by Alexander the son of Pyrrhus. Antigonus had a brother named
Demetrius after his fathers name a very young man, who so revenged likewise the
overthrow of his brother, that he recovered not only Macedonia from
Alexander, but forced him after a great overthrow to fly from his own
kingdom of Epyrus: so variable is the chance of war, and so mutable the
state of man, that sometime Fun. lib. 3. Co^t.
they be kings and conquerours, and straight banished men.

Now Alexander fled to Arcadia, from whence he was restored Alex. again was
overthrown by Demet. Antigo. his brother.
to his kingdom within short space: for Demetrius after the death of his
brother Antigonus, continued not long king in Macedonia: for by time Agas king
of Cyrena died, and had left for his heir one daughter named Beronices, whom
her father espoused to king Ptolomeis son of Egypt: but now Arsinoe king
Agas her husband being dead, and also hearing that king Antigonus was dead,
she made means to send for Demetrius, who came with all speed from Macedonia
to Cyrena, and having a sight of Arsinoes beauty, he fell more in desire of
the mother then of the daughter. This Demetrius being a proud insolent young
king, and giving great cause to Demetrius.
Beronice the young lady to hate him, he little esteeming that followed his
fancy to win Arsinoe, which when it was well known to the daughter, and to
many of the Court after how Demetrius used himself, Beronice and all men
began mortally to malice Demetrius, and to turn their minds again toward
Ptolomeus son. They hated him in such sort, Iustine lib. 26.
that snares were inverted for Demetrius, and watches appointed to find him in
the fault, and so it came to pass then when he was in bed with the mother,
the daughter brought certain armed men into the chamber, commanded them to
kill Demetrius. Beronice entered not the chamber, but stood at the door, and
spoke unto them that they should spare her mother, which when Arsinoe heard
after she had done what she could to save Demetrius concerning his body with
her body, of force she was taken from him and he slain: thus Beronice revenged
the wrongs and spite of Demetrius done against her self, and Demet. slain for
adultery.
her mother, and after married Ptolomeis son, according to his father king
Agas commandment: this was the end of king Demetrius the son of Demetrius.
About this time Megasthenes There is Metasthenes and Megasthenes.
a Persian Chronographer wrote his histories: some call him Metasthenes: this
time the Romans began to flourish in all kind of excess, as in wearing of
rings and costly tires, which (as Pliny says) were skant before this time
seen in Rome: this time also was the Bible translated by the 70. interpreters
into the Plini. lib. 33. Cap. 1.
Greek tongue.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the Roman wars with king Philip, and his son Perseus, the two last
kings of Macedonia: of their overthrow by Paul. Aemilius, and of the
overthrow of false Philip, and counterfaite Andriscus by Q. Metellus, in the
last conquest of Macedonia.

Now to return to Macedonia, after that Demetrius was slain as you heard,
Philip Demetrius nephewe, and son to Antigonus succeeded in Macedonia. You
must Philip king of Macedonia.
take heed least you be deceived in the names of diverse Demetrius: for the
first and the greatest was called Demetrius Antigonus, whose life Plutarch
does write at large: another Demetrius surnamed Poliorcetes, who in Plut in
Aemil.
his time destroyed a town of Samaria which Perdicas builded up again: and
the third named Demetrius Phalerius, which Diverse Demet. Plut in Demet.
was governor of Athens under Cassander: and the fourth Demetrius Antigonus
son, of whose death for adultery with Queen Arsinoe you read of before: so
likewise you shall read of diverse Seleucus, of diverse Antiochus, and of diverse
Ptolomeis, where I speak of the kings of Asia, Syria, and Egypt, much error
may grow hereby without heed taking. Philip reigned now in Macedonia, and
having no long time to rest, but at his first entry had wars by the Romans,
for whom Ti. Quintus T. F^minius.
Flaminius the Consul was in person to offer battle in the defense of Greece,
and the rather for that Philip king of Macedon aided Hannibal against the
Romans with all the force he could.

Philip provided all things ready: a man might think that Liui. lib. 31.
Philip had force and power sufficient against a Consul of a city, being a
king of a whole Realm: and surely so he had, had not Titus by his eloquence
won al Greece against Philip, and yet before this time the Grecians bare no
great good will to Philip refused to meet Flami. in battle.
the Romans as Plutarch affirms. Diverse times Flaminius offered battle to
Philip, but still refused and by Philip avoided, fearing such hard fortune as
his predecessors had: he kept the top of the mountains with his army, that
when the Romans forced to get up the hills, they were received with darts,
slings and shot that lighted upon them from the tops of the hills, that
the Romans were sore anoyed.

But after they found means to win the hills by the advice of Charopus, a
great man of Epirus: Titus divided his army into three troops, and himself
went with one of the three. Philip lost then about two thousand soldiers, the
Macedonians fled, and the Romans spoiled their camp, took all that they
found in their tents: Titus had some advertisement that Philip fled by
Thessalia: the Consul with great modesty Philip fled.
did forbear the spoiling and wasting of the Country: hereby he wanne many
friends: Philip was most desirous to have peace with Titus, and it was offered
him upon condition that he would that Greece should be at their liberty, and
The Cities of Greece yielded to Tit.
remove his garrisons out of their City: this Philip refused, and thereupon all
Greece came in, and offered themselves unto Titus without compulsion.

Now having Greece on his side he went toward Thessalie, with great hope to
overcome Philip: Titus had in his army about six and twenty thousand
fighting men as Plutarch writes, king Philip on the other side had no less in
number: they began to march the one toward the other near the City of
Scotusa, there they determined to try the battle, where Titus gave the
overthrow, and slew eight thousand Philip at the battle of Scotusa lost 8000.
in the field, and took five thousand prisoners in the chase: Philip was
driven to entreat for peace, which was granted unto him upon the condition
before offered, and taking one of Philips sons in hostage, sent him to Rome
to the Senate: for then Hannibal of Carthage, a great enemy of the Romans was
overcome by Scipio Affricanus, and banished out of his Country, and commen to
king Antiochus, whom he persuaded with all diligence to follow his good
fortune, and the increase of his Empire.

Hanibal sought still to find occasion to make wars with Hanibals
persuasions to Antiochus.
the Romans, and went about to bring Antiochus to join with Philip, two
mighty kings against the Romans. In the mean time Titus had commissioners
sent from Rome to aid him, Plutarch in Tito.
and to assist him in the affairs of Greece, willing him to look to the
Cities of Corinth, of Chalcides, and of Demetriade, Liberty proclaimed by
Titus to the Greeks.
and to make sure that they should not enter into league and alliance with
Antiochus, and all the rest of Greece to set at liberty: this was done by
Titus, and proclaimed by the Heralde, and authorized by the Senate of Rome,
that all Greece should be free from all taxes, impositions, and subsidies.
After that Titus had sent Lentulus into Asia to set the Bargilians at liberty,
and Titillius into Thracia, and Publius Julius sent to king Antiochus to set
the Grecians at liberty.

Titus himself went to the Province of Magnesia, and from thence to Argos to
set the Greeks at liberty which were under Philip and Antiochus, from Argos
returned into Rome after four years war with Philip, saving that Pu.
Sulpitius had the charge against Philip the first year being then Consul of
Rome before Titus time, who for the time of his being Ruffi. de Mace.
in Macedonia gave two overthrows unto Philip king of Macedon, and forced him
to flee in great danger of his life. But to return to Titus, who being called
to Rome by the Senate, Tit. Flami. triumphed over king Philip^ son at Rome.
came in solemn triumph with king Philips son before his chariot, and
brought at that time (says Plutarch) infinite treasures, and leaving Philip to
pay to the Romans a thousand talents beside, and not to molest and vex the
Cities of Greece, and that it was not lawful for Philip to war, or to fight
out of his own kingdom, unless he should be required thereunto Liui. lib. 2.
Decad. 4.
by the Romans.

Thus Philip being daunted of his great courage, and much weakened in strength
by the Romans, having two sons, the Secret envy between Philips two sons.
one named Perseus, the other Demetrius, between them both grew secret
seditions, and proceeded so in malice, that though Demetrius was in Rome in
hostage with Titus as you heard, and Perseus in Macedonia with his father,
accusing his brother of his secret treachery toward his father Philip and
his country, that the king was in offense against Demetrius, and grew more
and more by Perseus, soliciting the cause to doubt Demetrius, he could not
quiet himself, until Demetrius poisoned.
Demetrius was had out of the way by poison (as Ruffinus says) but it was not
long after but Philip had knowledge of the injury he had done to his son
Demetrius, by the false accusation of his son Perseus, he studied how to
take revenge upon Perseus for the death of Demetrius, and saw no way unless
he would leave Macedonia without a king: for then Perseus was the last of the
line of Antigonus.

Thus poor king Philip being plagued by the Romans Philip died.
for his kingdom, and brought to a full weariness of his life at home, by his
two sons, fell to a consumption and dyed, afterhe had reigned king of
Macedonia forty two years.

Plutarch recites a history of one Antigonus surnamed Doson, that was cousin
to the other Antigonus surnamed Gonates: this Antigonts Doson reigned before
Philippe fifteen Of Antigonus the first the 2. and the 3.
years. As I toulde you before of the names of so many Demetrius, so now the
names of so many Antigonus may trouble the reader, and therefore I will show
the order of it. The first Antigonus was taken to be base brother to Alexander
the great, who after Alexanders days was taken to be the greatest and
mightiest of all his successors.

This Antigonus had a son called Demetrius, of whom came this second
Antigonus surnamed Gonatas: the third Antigonus surnamed Doson, and after this
Antigonus reigned Philip, who dyed for sorrow and grief for Demetrius death.

Now Perseus the last king of Macedonia, succeeded his father Philip king of
Macedonia in the five hundred seventy Perseus the last king of Macedonia.
five years of the building of Rome, and in the hundred and fifty Olympiad,
at what time reigned king in Egypt Ptolomeus Philometor the sixth king: and in
Syria reigned Antiochus Epiphanes the eight king, and also this time over the
Parthians reigned Mithridates Arsaces, who succeeded his brother Pharnachus:
this did great exploites, of whom you shall Iustine lib. 41.
read in the histories of the Parthians written by Iustine: in Rome Lucius
Manlius and Quintus Fuluius were Consuls.

This Perseus succeeded Philip his father, found the strength of his kingdom
so great and so well provided, that he had The rich state of Perseus after
Philip his father.
in his armorie to arm thirty thousand: he had in his fortes and strong
places eight million bushels of corn safely locked up, and he had ready as
much money as would serve to enterteine ten thousand strangers in pay for
ten years: this also he found ready men leauied a great number, which his
father had prepared for the second wars of Macedonia. Perseus being thus
furnished, took that in hand which was Philips purpose, to war against the
Romans, and he maintained wars a long time, and had in the beginning good
success Perseus.
against the Romans, that in the first battle he made, he gave the overthrow
to Pu. Lucius the Consul, and at that time Perseus 1. victory against Pu.
Lucius.
general for the Romans: he slew 2500. of his horsemen, and took six
hundred prisoners, and beside he did suddenly set upon their army by sea,
riding at anchor before the city of Oren: he took twenty of their great
ships, and sunk the rest which were laden all with corn.

Thus Perseus began very hotly with the Romans, and gave the overthrow to the
first Consul: the second battle which Perseus fought was with Hostilius the
second Consul and general Perseus 2. victory against Hostilius.
of Rome, whom he likewise repulsed: and when that Hostilius attempted by force
to invade Macedonia, Perseus offered him battle in Thessalie, and he refused
him.

Perseus seemed so proud of these two victories against the two Consuls of
Rome, that he little esteemed the Romans, went and fought a battle in the
mean time with the Dardanians, where he slew ten thousand of these
barbarous people, and brought a marvelous great spoil away: beside this he
got the Gauls that dwelt about the river of Danubie to join with him, and
practiced with Gentius king of the Illyrians to join also in this war with
him. The Romans being of these news advertised, they thought good to send a
Paulus Aemilius chosen Consul.
skillful soldier and a wise captain (as Paulus Aemilius was) whom the Romans
chose now the second time to be their consul and captain in this second war,
to whom they gave the whole charge of Macedon. Aemilius prepared an army of an
hundredth thousand against Perseus, and when he had arrived into Macedon, and
being advertised how Perseus lay at the foot of mount Olympus with 4000.
horsemen, and with forty thousand footmen: beside he had Gentius king of the
Illyrians, to whom Perseus promised thirty thousand talents to aid him
against the Romans.

Now Scipio surnamed Nasica, the adopted son of the great Liui. lib. 5.
Scipio the Affricane, and Fabius Maximus, of whom Cicero said, Cunctando
restituit rem, two young valiant Romans offered to take the straights, offered
to do diverse services: but old Aemilius having won many victories, he could
stay leisure and opportunity of battle. Now Perseus having pitched his camp
before the city of Pydne, where Aemilius in have marched and met in battle.
Polibius writes this story, and says: so soon as the battle was begun,
Perseus withdrew himself and got into the city of Pydne out of the battle,
under pretense to do some sacrifice unto Hercules: but Aemilius with his
sword in The battle at Pydne.
hand lay on upon the enemies. The slaughter was so great on Perseus side, that
Plutarch says that the river of Leucus ran Plutarch in Aemilio.
all bloody: the battle was so fierce on both sides, that it continued not
above two hours: the victory fell to the Romans, with the loss of 25.
thousand Macedonians. This victory was heard of in Rome the very day that it
was won, saying that Castor and Pollux brought these news to Rome.

In this battle I note one rare history of Mar. Cato the son Mar. Catces
sword lost and found in the battle.
of great Cato, and son in law to Aemilius, who most valiantly fighting in
the midst of the Macedonians, by chance his sword fell out of his hand, the
which he took so grievously that he ran to the Roman army, where he told
them what had befallen unto him, praying some of his friends to help him to
recover his sword: saying, that he thought more honor for him to die there,
then living to suffer his enemies to enjoy any spoil of his: whereupon a
number of lusty valiant soldiers rushed in straight among their enemies about
the place where The magnanimitic and great courage of the Romans.
the sword fell: their force and fury was such, that it made a lane through
the enemies, and as young raging lions with such force cleared the way in such
sort, that the sword was found: this happened in the midst of the battle.

Again in this battle of Pydne a great fear took Aemilius Aemilius
heaviness.
after the victory: who being very late in the night, and brought to his tent
with torches and links, missing his son, beholding how his soldiers after
this victory decked themselves with crowns and garlands of laurel, became
sad and heavy, supposing his son to be cast away, until Scipio returned from
following the enemy: then Aemilius joy was doubled, but that shortly followed,
which then missed. Now Perseus fled from Pydne to Pella. After this victory,
Aemilius made a progress into Greece, and coming to Delphos, there he saw
king Perseus Perseus image thrown down at Delphos.
image of gold set up upon a great pillar of 4. square. Aemilius commanded
that image of him being conquered to be taken down, and his own image being
the conqueror to be set up: thence he went to the city of Olympia to visit the
temple of Jupiter Olympian, and after he redeliuered to the Macedonians their
country and towns again to live at liberty, paying to the Romans for
tribute yearly 100. talents. After, he went to Epirus, having put al things at
stay in Macedonia, that the Macedonians submitted themselves to Aemilius.
Aemilius sent his lieutenant by sea to take king Perseus, who fled to
Samothracia, where he and his children yielded unto Cneus Octauius lieutenant
to Aemilius. Of this great victory news came to Rome from Macedonia in one
day, some say 4. days.

This king Perseus was a very covetous prince, hated of his The misery of
Perseus.
subjects, and of no man beloved, and noted to be such a coward, that Aemilius
mocked him for it. This Perseus lost in 2. hours in the battle of Pydne (to
the Romans great glory and praise) the fame and renown which Alexander the
great had brought and won to Macedonia. Of these 2. wars of Macedonia with
the Diod. lib. 31.
Romans, and of their last king conquered, read Liuie and Appianus Liuie lib.
4. and 5.
in that book entitled Mithridaticus. This is that Macedonia which then
Alexander had augmented with these many kingdoms, Persia, Media, Armenia,
Albania, Cappadocia, Iberia, Syria, Egypt, Bactria, Scythia, India, all Asia,
and welnigh all the world, now brought by Paulus Aemilius to be a province of
the Romans, who in one day sold (as Ruffinus wot) 82. cities. 82. Cities sold
by Paulus Aemilius.


Thus is the kingdom and monarchy of Alexander king over kings, trodden down
by Aemilius a magistrate of a city: thus is Macedonia whose empire reached
into the furthest part of the world, made a province unto Rome, which in the
time of Alexander was so famous: neither the Assyrians by Ninus, neither the
Chaldeans by Nabuchodonosor, neither the Medes by Darius Medus, neither the
Persians by Cyrus were of such fame, as Macedonia was by Alexander. It is a
true saying, Per me reges regnant, All kings are by God established.
etc. It was decreed above before God, how long the Caldeans should reign
before the Assyrians, the Assyria^s before the Medes, the Medes before the
Persians, the Persians before the Macedonians, and in like sort how long the
Romans shall continue.

This was by Daniel divinely reueiled by the 4. great beasts that came up from
the sea, one diverse to another: the first a lion which had egles wings: the 2.
was like a bear: the 3. like a leopard: the 4. was terrible, and it devoured
the rest. And Daniel in Susa in another dream (or rather a vision) saw a
battle between a ram and a goat, which is Persia and Greece. I refer you to
the 7. and 8. of Daniel for the interpretation of the Daniel 7. and 8.
same, where the text is most plainly by the prophet Daniel set down, where
Daniel briefly deciphered the whole world in a short history, and laid down
the ground of all the histories Daniel a sound warrant for the histories of
three monarchies.
of the world, I mean after Daniels time, who lived and prophesied in Cyrus
time: after whom the Persians, the Grecians and the Romans flourished.

Now to return to Aemilius, whose family (says Plutarch) does proceed from
Numa Pompilius the 2. king of Rome, and whose diverse victories over the
Ligurians, Illyrians and other nations of Affricke and others, might have
challenged triumph in Rome without contention, which was resisted by Seruius
Galba, for that he was so long as four years in wars against Perseus.
Seruius Galba.
Galba, and diverse others thought it dishonorable to the Romans to consume so
long a time with king Perseus, since the Romans made king Antiochus to forsake
Asia, driven thence beyond mount Taurus within the borders of Syria, and before
that they had overcome king Philippe in Thessalie, and delivered Greece from
the bondage of the Macedonians, and had conquered Hannibal the only enemy of
Rome and soldier of the world, unto whom no king or captain could be
compared, and therefore not to have a triumph. But Marcus Seruilius Mar.
Seruilius.
who had been a Consul, and had fought 23. combats of life and death in his
own person, and had slain as many as challenged him man for man, he furthered
the triumph, which was by the whole consent of the Senate and the people of
Rome granted unto Aemilius: but I omit to speak of his triumph, until I set
down the triumphs of the kings, consuls, and Emperors of Rome, because he is
a Roman.

Here I write of Macedonia, of their kings and of their triumphs, who ended
their government in Perseus time, in the 153. Olympiad, after the building of
Rome 586. years, and in the beginning of the 26. Iubilee. At what time reigned
in Syria Antiochus Epiphanes the eight king, to whom Pompilius was sent from
the Senate to command Antiochus to depart Egypt, and that to answer the
Romans before he should go out of a little circle which Po^pilius made with his
white stick which he had in his hand, either yea or no. This time Prusias king
of Bythinia committed his son Nicomedes (as Liuie says) to the Romans,
within short space after that king Perseus was conquered Perseus overthrown
the fourth of September.
by Paulus Aemilius upon the 4. of September, and that the Romans had brought
Macedonia under the Empire of Rome.

One Andrisius a mean man claimed by succession to be king after Perseus,
affirming himself to be Perseus son, and changing his name from Andrisius to
be Philippe, gathered a great host, usurped the kingdom, until Lu. Tremelius
came from Rome and gave him battle, in the which Andrisius was quite
overthrown. And so Macedonia after the government of 36. kings (as Ruffinus
says,) but as Functius and Trogus Pompeius say, 38. kings: for from Cranaus
unto Alexander the great were 23. kings, from Alexander to Perseus 15. The
names of those 23. kings before Alexander, I wrote them before Alexanders
reign: the other 15. are these following.

1 Aridaeus reigned 7. years. 2 Cassander. 18. 3 Antipater and Alex. 4. 4
Demetrius. 6. 5 Pyrrhus. 7. months. 6 Lysmachus. 5. 7 Ptolomeus Ceraunus. 1. 8
Meleager. 2. months. 9 Antipater. 1. 10 Sosthenes. 2. 11 Antigonus Gonatus.
36. 12 Demetrius. 10. The names of the kings of Macedonia after Alexander.
13 Antigonus Dosen. 15. 14 Philip. 2. 15 Perseus the last king 10. years.
OF THE FIRST WARS of the kings of Asia and of Syria with the Romans: of
their succession in the wars, and of the continuance of their kingdoms after
Alexanders death.
AFter the death of Alexander the great, the world being left without a king,
his No king lest after Alexander.
princes, nobles, and old soldiers, who did more advance the renown and
fame of the Romans then the glory of Macedonia or Asia, after much blood,
shedding and great cruelty every man fought for a kingdom: it came to pass
as Daniel the Prophet said, that all the kingdoms of Alexander Daniel cap. 11.
fell between 4. princes, and were divided into four kingdoms: which was,
Egypt appointed to Ptolomey the son of Lagi: Asia, to Antigonus: Persia and
the East part to Seleucus Nicanor: and Macedonia unto Antipater, as you heard
in the history of the kings of Macedonia.

Now I have in hand to speak of Seleucus the great king after Alexander for
after Antigonus was slain, and his son Demetrius Seleucus.
dead being taken captive by Seleucus, he entered into Asia and conquered from
mount Taurus into Ionia, which before Antigonus had under his government, and
had subdued all the regions of the greater Asia, and made himself mighty and
Diod. lib. 19.
great, which was in the 14. year after Alexanders death. The Jews do
account the government of the Grecians in Syria, from the first year of
Seleucus Nicanors reign, which in the Machabees is observed.

This king grew so great, that having subdued all Antigonus kingdoms, and
having given Lysimachus the overthrow being of the age of 77. years, he
thought no less in his mind after such great victories, but to become another
Alexander, and to bring all the world under his government: for he overcame
the Bactrians, and passed to the Indians, having already under his Scepter all
Asia, Persia, Syria, Babylon, with diverse others. Of this Seleucus Iustine
writes a strange history, how his mother Laodice being married to Antiochus,
seemed in Laodices dream.
a dream to have layen with Apollo, and to be by him with child: and of a
ring, which Laodice dreamed to have of Apollo, in the stone of the same ring
was an Ancre imprinted, which afterward was the cognizance of all Seleucus
posterity. This ring did Laodice deliver to her son Seleucus, at that
Justin. lib. 15.
time when great Alexander took his conquest to Persia, under whom Seleucus
was then a soldier: for he was but base borne, as in that history ye may
read further: yet this Seleucus after that Alexander died, had grown to be
the only great king of all Alexanders successors, and builded a great city,
and named it Antiochia after his fathers name, which was Antiochus a captain
under king Philip Alexanders father.

The elder that Seleucus waxed, the more ambitious he was: even so was
Lysimachus as old as he, the one seventy Ambition is dangerous.
and four, and the other seventy and seven, and yet both given to seek more
kingdoms: and at last seeking one to conquer the other, (as it came to pass
after many battles) Lysimachus was overthrown and slain by Seleucus. Of this
great victory he waxed so proud, that he forgate the frailenesse of fortune,
and the inconstancy of time, not thinking that his death should be within
seven months after: for Ptolomeus surnamed Cerainon, whose sister Lysimachus
had married, revenged the death of his brother in law. This battle between
Lysimachus and Seleucus was the last battle of all those that served Alexander
in his conquest: for as Lysimachus overthrew Pyrrhus, so Seleucus overthrew
Lysimachus, and now Ptolomeus Seleucus slain.
overthrew Seleucus, and that (as I said before) within seven months after
Lysimachus overthrow. But Iustine says Seleucus was slain by snares and
falsehood.

By this time died the most part of those that were Alexanders Melanct. chron.
2.
princes, and in his iourneyes with him chief captains, as Perdicca,
Craterus, Emmenis, Antigonus, Antipater, Cassander and his two sons. Polibius
says, that Ptolomeus the son of Lagi, Lysimachus, Seleucus, and Ptolomey
Cerainon, died in the hundredth twenty and four Olympiad, which was after
Alexanders the great ten Olympiads, which is forty years: for he died in
the hundredth and fourteen Olympiad. All writers do agree of this Olympiad:
for the Greeks compted their The cry oftrue Chronicles upon the Olympiads.
years from Alexanders death forward: for before Alexanders time the Greeks
histories erred much, and specially by their Olympiads which made
Chronographers to err: for all chronicles cry out upon the Olympiads.

Seleucus after he had gotten so great fame, that all Asia and Syria obeyed
him, he began to build towns and cities, as Functius.
Antioch, Laodicea, Seleucia, Apamia, Edissa, Berouea, and Pellum, and brought
the Jews to inhabit these cities: he gave them equal laws and ordinances,
together with the Grecians, to live and to enjoy their liberty thereby: and
after he reigned one and thirty years he died.

After him succeeded Antiochus Soter the second king of Syria: Melanct^ 2.
Chron.
he reigned 19. years: after whom succeeded Antiochus, surnamed (...). This
king played his part, he was the cause of all the wars between the
Egyptians and Syrians: he had great spite unto Philadelphus the king of Egypt,
wasted The praise of Philadelphus.
and spoiled much of his country: this king Philadelphus was adicted more to
peace then to war, more given to his books then to brawles: he took greater
care to furnish Egypt with the laws and ordinances of the Jews, then to
provide preparations against Antiochus, and therefore to avoid war (whereby
he might finish many good things which he took Antiochus (...) the third king
of Syria.
in hand, and specially the translation of the Bible from the Hebrew unto the
Greek tongue by 70. grave, wise, and learned men) for that cause he gave his
daughter Berenices in marriage to Antiochus. This king Antiochus had before
married Laodices, by whom he had two sons: the elder named Seleucus surnamed
Functius lib. 3. Comment.
Gallinicus, and the younger Antiochus surnamed Ierax. The mother of these two
was divorced for a time from king Antiochus.

Now after he had married Berenices, he lived in quiet and in The tyranny of
Laodices.
favor with his father in law Philadelphus as long as he lived: but when
Philadelphus died, he called Laodices his first wife again, and turned
Berenices aside for a time. Laodices being returned unto her husband, devised a
way to kill Berenices Philadelphus daughter: but first she imagined to requite
her husbands courtesy, for calling her home: and fearing he would do the like
again, she gave him a cup of drink and dispatched him quite: then she
called both her sons, and made them with speed (only to feed her fury) to
put Berenices out of the way. Hence grew the cause of all the wars (as I The
cause of the Syrian wars.
said) between the kings of Egypt and the kings of Syria: and not only
between those, but also poor Judea was so beaten and afflicted between these,
as they often times made a spoil of Jerusalem, of the temple, and of Gods
flock. Of this Daniel spoke, that Berenice the kings daughter of the South
should be Daniel 11.
matched with the king of the North, which was Antiochus (...) king of Syria,
which is in the North in respect of Jerusalem, for that the Prophet gave the
situation of that place to be between the South and the North.

When Philadelphus died and his son Ptolomey Euergetes succeeded, he thought
to revenge the murdering of his sister, and made a great army ready to give
battle to Seleucus, and took from him the most part of Syria, wasting and
spoiling Sedition and great mutiny in Egypt.
all Asia beside: and hearing of sedition and mutiny in Egypt his own kingdom,
he returned having done great harm to Seleucus, to answer those which
rebelled in Egypt. In the mean season Seleucus thought not only to recover his
loss by Ptol. Euergetes, but also to requite him with the like. After this
little stay, Seleucus came with a number of nauies, and thought Diod. lib. 18.
to have again those towns and cities which he lost to Ptolomey: but a sudden
tempest overwhelmed that enterprise, and left nothing to Seleucus of al his
preparation, but nudum corpus and spiritum, himself with few others from
shipwreck: he stayed by these repulses, and could not revenge the wrong he had
by Ptolomey, until he saw his time convenient, at which time (as a man borne to
be overthrown) he fled from the battle with loss and shame to Antioch, and
from thence he sent for aid to his brother Antiochus to Silicia.

Ptolomey understanding of Antiochus aid, he presently concluded Peace between
Seleucus and Ptolomey.
a peace between Seleucus and himself for 10. years. Antiochus perceived how
the matter went, and where he came to aid his brother, he now turns his force
and power against his brother: and having many of the Celtes (which were
Frenchmen) his hired soldiers, over whom Brennus had the charge, (not Bre^nus
that sacked Rome, for he was before 108. years, but Brennus.
he gave the overthrow to his brother Seleucus,) he was met again with Eumenes
king of Bythinia, who saw a platform laid before his face to possess Asia, if
these two brethren might be conquered: and therefore Seleucus being overthrown
by his brother Antiochus, Eumenes again overthrew Antiochus, Eumenes overthrew
Antiochus.
and drove him out of Asia even to flee to Ptolomey, where he was claptin
prison, from whom he secretly stale away, and fled, but being taken by thieves
was slain. About that very season, his brother Seleucus by a fall he had from
his horse, lost both his life and kingdom, after he had reigned king of Asia
and Syria 20. years: and so these two brethren by discord lost both Syria and
Asia. After this Seleucus came and succeeded his son Seleucus Ceraunos the 5.
king of Asia and Syria: he, after he had Seleucus Ceraunos the 5. king of Asia
and Syria.
reigned 3. years, was slain by one of his own noblemen named Nicanor. Then
followed Antiochus surnamed the great, the 6. king of Syria, who indeed was so
great, that he wanne to his kingdom more then any of his predecessors: and
having Antiochus the great the sixth king of Syria.
long wars in Egypt, with Ptolome Philopater, by him for all his greatness he
had an overthrow or two. But this Philopater died, and left behind him a young
son, whom he committed for the safeguard of his kingdom, to the Romans,
commending both his son in his minority, and his kingdom into the fidelity
of the Senators: for all kings in their distress fled unto the Romans, as to
a sanctuary of refuge.

Now Antiochus the great in his mind contemned the Romans, Ieseph. lib. 7.
cap. 27.
and made wars in Egypt upon this young king: to whom the Senators sent
Ambassadors, commanding him to avoid Egypt, and not to war upon the young
king, whom the Senators of Rome took to their tuition. Antiochus esteemed not
much the threatening of the Senators, but rather despised the messengers, making
his army ready against the Romans, having by this time Hannibal, who by
Scipio Affricanus was overthrown at the battle of Zama, which was the last
overthrow of Hannibal: for the Carthagineans had lost Sicilia, Sardania, and
Spain, and Hannibal fled to Antioch.
Hanibal was driven out of Italy to Affrike, and from Affrike to Asia unto king
Antiochus, where he was with great courtesy received.

By this time the Senate had intelligence, that Nabis the tyrant Nabis the
tyrant.
had invaded diverse countreies of Greece, and subdued many cities, and
therefore they wrote unto Titus Flaminius, that Greece should be set at
liberty from Nabis, as Macedonia was from Philip. The greatness of the Romans
was such, that they thought to execute all wars by their commandment: yet
the name of Hannibal carried great reputation with all men, Hanibals name.
and specially with the Romans, who had for 16. years well tried his valor.
Antiochus at the first made much account of Hannibal: for had he followed
Hannibals advise in his wars against the Romans afterward, as he did at the
first, Antiochus Justin. lib. 31.
had done far better: for Hanibals counsel was, that Antiochus should make
war with the Romans in Italy: for (said he) Italians must overcome Italy,
and Romans must conquer Rome. Hanibal hated the Romans, and therefore he
studied Hanibal hated the Romans.
how to set forward Antiochus, and persuaded Antiochus, (who trusted still in
peace) that as the Romans had gotten the most part of Europe and Affrike, so
would they not give over until they would get Asia if they might. The
authority and credit Melanct. chron. 2.
of Hanibal made Antiochus so to yield, that Hanibal himself was sent to Syria
to levy a great number of ships, and he was made general of Antiochus army by
sea, together with one Apollonius. This battle by sea had no good success: the
victory fell to the Romans: Apollonius fled, and (as Plutarch says) we find
that Hanibal did nothing worth the memory. After this battle, as soon as
Antiochus was overcome by the Romans, Hanibal fearing he should be delivered to
the Romans, fled to Prusias king of Bythinia, at whose hands he was required
again by Tit. Flaminius.

Now king Antiochus having lost 50. thousand footmen and Antiochus desires
peace of the Romans.
4000. horsemen, was forced to desire peace, which the Senate granted him, upon
conditions that he should avoid forth of Europe and Asia, and meddle no further
but within the precinct of Taurus: and also that he should pay to the Romans
ten Joseph, lib. 7. cap. 27. de bell. Iudaic.
thousand talents, and 30. pledges for the assurance of his provinces: and
lastly that he should deliver Hanibal, who had been the only procurour of the
battle. These conditions being performed by Antiochus, the Senate gave all
those cities of Asia which Antiochus had lost, to Eumenes king Atalus brother:
Eutrop. lib. 4.
they gave also to the Rhodians diverse other cities, for that they had assisted
the Romans against Antiochus.

After this great victory, Lucius Cornelius Scipio returned to Rome, and with
great glory triumphed, and then obtained the like name in Asia as his brother
had before in Affrike, which was, to be called Scipio Asiaticus, for that he
conquered Antiochus Scipio Asiaticus.
the great at Magnesia, and had driven him out of Asia, even as his father the
elder Scipio was called for subduing of Hanibal, and the driving out of Hanibal
of Affrike, Scipio Affricanus. All this while the Jews were so much troubled
between the kings of Egypt and the kings of Syria, that they found that same
true: but specially by the king of Syria, and therefore the Jews rather did
join their force to the Egyptians against the kings of Syria: for while
Antiochus held wars with the Romans, Scopas king Ptolomey Epiphanes general
was in Coelosyria, possessed Samaria and other cities of Judea, and molested
the Jews at that Joseph. lib. 12. cap. 3.
time much, until Antiochus overthrew Scopas at the flood Jordan, destroyed
his army, got those cities which Scopas had, and entered into Jerusalem, where
he was fully pleased with rewards, and satisfied with money, with whom they had
peace: for Judea (as I said before) had peace and quietness from Alexander the
great, until Antiochus the great, which was 100. years and odd.

About this time 3. notable triumphs were at Rome: the one by Scipio forth of
Affricke, before whose chariot Asdrubal was Melanct. lib. 2. Chron.
led: the other by Metellus forth of Macedonia, before whose 3. Triumphs at
Rome.
chariot Andriscus was led: this was that false named and cou^terfaited Philip:
the third triumph was by Metellus surnamed Mummius over the Corinthians,
before whom were carried the brazen ensigns and painted tables and other
sumptuous ornaments of that famous city.

CHAP. II.
Of that wicked and most blasphemous king Antiochus Epiphanes son to
Antiochus the great, and the type of Antichrist: of his usurpation and tyra^nie
of the kingdom: of his sacking and cruelty in Jerusalem: of his bloody wars,
and persecutions of Christians.

DVring the wars of Antiochus the great with the Romans, civil wars began
in Greece again between the Athenians and the Aetolians. Of these wars
read Polibius and Plutarch in the life of Philopomen. Likewise Mithridates
king of Parthia waged battle with the Sinopians. About this time Siphax king of
Numidia was after sundry battles by Masinissa Polib. lib. 4.
overthrown and driven out of his kingdom. This time Pharnaces the fourth
king of Parthia conquered those people called Mardi, astoute nation, as Iustine
says. In the time of Antiochus the great, there happened in one year 57.
earthquakes, insomuch that Rhodes and Caria were so shaken thereby, that the
huge idol of Phoebus (called Colossus solis) fell.

In these days an infant was borne having a head like a sow, and many other
monstrous things fell in the time of Antiochus as Liui reports. Eratosthenes
the philosopher flourished in this time. The Romans were so strong in these
days, as Carthage, Liuius lib. 3.
Numidia, and all Affricke were subdued: Greece, Macedonia, Pontus, and all
Asia were conquered: all kings of the world almost came then to Rome, to see
the majesty of the Romans, to behold their triumphs, and to offer themselves
in service. The end of this great king was to be slain by rude country
people, as he would rob the temple of Belus: he that thought to conquer the
stout Romans, was conquered by silie and simple men of Syria: he that brought
all Greece and Asia under his beck, had this his death by his rashness and
folly, and as Antiocus is slain.
Melancthon says of Antiochus, (...), Of an ill beginning proceeds an ill
ending.

When this Antiochus so was killed, he left behind him 3. sons, and one
daughter married to Ptolomey, of whom Philometor was borne: his sons were
named in this sort: Seleucus Seleucus Philopater the seventh king of Syria.
surnamed Philopater was the eldest, who reigned 12. years: of whom we read
nothing worth the memory, a man given to all vices, to all idleness, lust,
wickedness, and powling of his subjects. This history is only written in the
Macabees, where Simon utters what treasure was in the temple, and how
Heliodorus was sent by the king to take them away: but he was stricken of God,
and had the repulse with such terrible sightes Heliodorus punishment.
and strokes, that Heliodorus wished death rather then life, until the high
Priest Onias prayed for him. Of this Seleucus Daniel said, In loco Antiochi
stabit vilis questor, etc. for there was nothing left unspoken by Daniel before
hand, which should happen afterward. This Seleucus began to reign after his
father in the 125. year of the Grecians reign in Syria, after the building of
Rome 566.

After this Seleucus died, Antiochus surnamed Epiphanes, the second son of
Antiochus the great, being a pledge then in Antiochus Epiphanes.
Rome with Demetrius, hearing that his father was dead, he secretly fled from
Rome, and came with all force unto Syria, usurped the kingdom, and drove
Seleucus son out of his country: this began his government in the 130. year
after Alexander the great his death. Polibius affirms this man to be such,
as no wickedness escaped him, crafty and subtle, furious and full of al
mischief, and of the best writers named the type of Antichrist. Of the fury
of this Antiochus, and of other kings of Syria, Daniel does fully describe
them, and does foreshewe their tyranny against Judea. Read the 11. of Daniel,
where he prophecieth against the kings of Syria, together with the Persians,
Grecians, Egyptians and Romans, how all these should afflict Judea.

This Antiochus in the beginning of his reign, beingfully Antiochus Epiphanes
the 8. king of Syria.
acquainted with the Romans power, having been so long in Rome a pledge for
his father, dissembled with the Senators, and bare himself a friend unto the
Romans for fear more then for love: after that he had filled Jerusalem with
blood, and Joseph. lib. 1. and cap. 1. de be^ud.
had killed Onias the high priest, a holy and godly man, he took money of
Jason which was Onias brother, and made him high priest, who received Antiochus
with all reverence and duty into Jerusalem, who slew the best citizens,
spoiled the town, and robbed the temple: this was his first voyage to
Jerusalem: the high priest Jason which Antiochus had made, played the tyrants
Melanct. lib. 2. Chron.
part, slew his own citizens, and made havoc in Jerusalem of his own
countrymen, friends and kinsmen: but this king and this priest had the like
reward by God appointed, shame and confusion. Read the Machabees, and you shall
have the history before you, that Jason, after he had wandered from city
Machab. 2. cap. 5.
to city like a vagabond, hated of all people, and beloved of none, being
banished from Jerusalem, died most miserably in Arabia, being accused before
the king then named Areta. Some write that he fled from Arabia to Egypt.

But I will return to that cruel monster king Antiochus, who after he had
dissembled with the Romans, pretended care and government over the young
Philometor king of Egypt, being his sisters son: for Cleopatra the daughter
of Antiochus the great, was married to Epiphanes, who had given her for her
Cleopatra married to Epiphanes.
dowry Coelosyria, Samaria, Judea, and Phenicia, by whom this Philometor was
gotten.

This young king being yet in his minority and tender of years, and by his
father (when he died) committed to the fidelity of the Senators of Rome, whom
he made tutors over his son Antiochus: Epiphanes clayming some title to
ouersee Philometor Cleopatras son by Ptolomey Epiphanes.
the young king his nephew, led an army from Syria unto Egypt, under pretense
of love and care toward his nephew the young king: but he more thirsted for the
kingdom then he esteemed the king: he laid garrisons in Memphis, and filled all
the cities of Egypt with soldiers, specially Pelusiu^, and other strong
cities. Functius lib. 3. Comment.
Philometor misdouted these endeavors of Antiochus, and so suspecting his uncle
to be one that waied more the kingdom then the king, he fled to his younger
brother to Alexandria, sent to the Romans for aid against Antiochus: who
perceiving that they were put in trust to have some care of this king by his
fathers last will and testament to them committed, they determined to send
Popilius from the Senators, to command Antiochus as his father before him was
commanded to depart out of Egypt, and to suffer king Philometor to enjoy his
kingdom quietly.

While this Roman ambassador was preparing to come, Antiochus hasted his
purpose in following fast at the heels of Philometor, which was the elder
brother, and therefore by succession king of Egypt: he shipped in Cyprus, and
from thence to Coelosyria, thence to Egypt, and so passing over Nilus, to
Leusnies a city not far from Alexandria: where the Roman ambassador
Popilius was sent to Antioch.
Popilius met him, and delivered the mind of the Senators in writing to him:
which being read, he paused, and said that he would consider further, and
co^sult with his friends to answer the Senators. Popilius having a white
stick in his hand, made Justin. 34.
around circle about king Antiochus saying, Answer the Romans Popilius words to
Antiochus.
before thou go out of this circle, that I may declare to the Senators thy
words.

Antiochus was so amassed at the stout words of Po^pilius, that Tit. Liuius
lib. 5. Decad. 5.
he was constrained to say, I will do that which the Senators would have me to
do. And so he was forced in great fury to depart out of of Egypt, but he
revenged his wrath upon the poor Jews: he so plagued Judea with spoil and
slaughter, and caused them to forsake their true and ancient religion which
they had from Moses: he burned the books of Moses, The tyranny of Antiochus.
and of the Prophets: he made the idol of Jupiter Olympus to be set up and to
be worshipped, and commanded all idolatry and wickedness to be had in
Jerusalem in reverence. This proud king entered into the temple of Solomon,
after he had made such a slaughter of young and old, of women and children,
that within three days 80. thousand were slain, and 40. thousand taken
prisoners.

Menelaus the traitor, the high priest, a murderer before Machab. 2. cap. 5.
of Onias, and now a traitor to his country, brought Antiochus into the
city, guided him from place to place, that after he had taken 800. talents
away from the temple, he gate him away to Antiochia, thinking in his pride to
make men sail upon the dry land, and to walk upon the sea. The filthiness
and abomination of this beast is set forth in the Macabees in the second book
the fifth and sixth chapters, from the beginning unto the end.

This was the second coming of Antiochus to Judea and to Jerusalem, in the
eight year of his reign, two years after his first being in Jerusalem: whose
coming, and whose doings were by the Prophet Daniel before spoken: for he
said, Daniel cap. 8.
that this tyrant should continue 3500. days in wasting and spoiling of Judea,
in profaning the temple, in killing and murdering of Gods people. The number
of these days are six years and six months: so long endured this wolf.
Joseph. lib. de antiquit. 12. cap. 13.
After this, Habuit mercedem, God rewarded him: for he died in such torments,
that his bowels were eaten with worms, and himself brought in such misery,
that he died according as he lived, after he had reigned twelve years. During
his time, the wars continued in Macedonia between Perseus the last king, and
Titus Aemilius the Consul, and at length the conqueror of Perseus. Prusias
king of Bythinia came with his son Nicomedes to Rome, where he commended his
son to the Senators. About this time Terentius flourished.

Now when Antiochus surnamed Eupator had entered in his Antihchus Eupator.
fathers seat, in the 150. year of the Greeks being in Syria, and in the
beginning of the 26. Iubilee, he followed his fathers steps, came with an
army to Jerusalem, and besieged the castle of Sion: but while he laid siege,
his general Lysias told him that his kingdom was invaded by the enemies.
Then he concluded peace with Judea, and returned in all haste into Syria,
Demetrius Soter the 9. king.
brought Menelaus that wicked and cruel high priest with him, who after much
mischiefs done, died at Beroea, a town of Syria. Antiochus had not reigned
but one year, but Demetrius Soter fled from Rome where he had been a pledge,
during the whole government of his brother Antiochus Epiphanes, which was
twelve years, and during some years of his graundfather Antiochus the great:
he came to Syria, entered the City of Tyrus, where his soldiers apprehended
both the king and his general Lysias, whom Demetrius commanded Joseph. lib.
13. cap. 4.
to be killed, before he should see them, though Eupator was his sisters son.

This Eupator ended his life, after he had reigned but two years. In the
mean time, Onias the son of Onias the high priest, which was also slain by
Menelaus who succeeded him: this Onias being of the Jews surnamed the just,
lamenting Esai. cap. 19.
much the miserable estate of Judea, fled into Egypt to king Pto. Philometor:
and having license of the king, he builded a temple in the city of Heliopolis,
to the likeness of the temple in Jerusalem, according to the saying of Esai,
In that day shall the altar of the Lord be in the midst of the land of Egypt:
and the Lord shall be known of the Egyptians, and the Egyptians shall know the
Lord. In that day Assure shall come to Egypt, and Egypt into Assure.

This Demetrius sent Alcimus against Judas Machabeus, who Alcimus sent by
Demetrius to Jerusalem.
by flattery entered into Jerusalem, and slew three score of the chief and
greatest men of the city, and after gathered a number of wicked persons
together, who did much harm in Judea: to whom king Demetrius sent Nicanor
with an host of Melanct. lib. 2. Chron.
soldiers to aid Alcimus. This Nicanor blasphemed God, profaned the temple,
threatened the Jews, and came to Bethoron, where Judas Machabeus gave him
battle and ouerthrewe him.

This Demetrius was no less cruel to the Jews, then either his father or his
brother were before him: he played the bear, until Alexander Epiphanes,
Antiochus Eupators son came to the City of Ptolomais. Iustine says, that
this Alexander was a base man borne, named Prompalus, and that he was Alex.
otherwise Prompalus.
made by others to take this name upon him, and to say that he was Antiochus
son. Atalus king of Asia, Ptolome Philometor king of Egypt, and Ariarathes
king of Capadocia, counseled Prompalus to invade Demetrius kingdom, which was
done, and a battle given, in the which Demetrius was slain, after Demet.
slain by Alex. otherwise Prompalus.
he had reigned ten years.

Now after Alexander had the victory of Demetrius, he claimed to be the king
of Syria by succession, fayning himself to be Antiochus Eupators son: he
married Cleopatra king Philometors daughter of Egypt: the marriage was celebrated
in the City of Ptolemais. This Alexander was not aided by these kings for any
great affection they bare him, but for the hatred they had toward Demetrius,
who was so ambitious, proud, and cruel in the beginning of his reign, that
these three kings, of Egypt, of Asia, and Arabia, had sustained loss and harm
before Demetrius was overthrown by Alexander: he had two sons, whom he sent
with great treasures to a Iustine lib. 35.
friend of his named Gindius, to avoid the danger of the wars: the elder
of them was named Demetrius after his fathers name, who hearing of his fathers
death and of the riot and lust of this Alexander, a man given to al vices and
wickedness, came into Syria being aided by the king of Creete, and possessed
certain Cities in Syria: he appointed his general one Appolonius, who too
much trusting his own force and Apollonius Demet. general slain.
courage, was in the first battle by Ionathas overthrown.

Ptolome within a short time came with a great army to see* his son in law
in Syria: to whom all the cities opened their Funct. lib. 3. Coment.
gates to welcome their king of Egypt, they rather thinking that he came to
make peace between Demetrius and Alexander: but Ptolome imagined how he
might deceive them both for a kingdom: he placed his soldiers in diverse
Cities of Syria: and because Alexander was then in Cicilia, he took occasion
to offer him wars by taking his daughter away from him, whom he gave in
marriage again to Demetrius.

Alexander hearing that his wife was taken from him, and married to Demetrius
his mortal enemy, summoned his father in law to battle, wherein he had the
overthrow, and Joseph. lib. 13. Cap. 8.
was forced to fly to Arabia where Alexander was taken and slain, and his
head sent by the king of Arabia to Egypt to king Ptolome. Thus was Prompalus
(otherways named Alexander) thrown down from the throne of his kingdom,
deceived Alex. head sent from Arabia to Egypt.
by fortune, and revenged by justice. This reward he had, to feign him self
Antiochus son, and falsely to alter his name from Prompalus unto Alexander,
that Ptolome who aided him to the kingdom and gave his daughter in marriage to
him, the same Ptolome drove him out of the kingdom, and had both his head and
his crown given him. But Philometor enjoyed not long these great honors: for
within three days after he had received Alexanders head, Ptolome died: so long
he Ptolo. dyed.
ware the crown of Syria. When the Syrians heard that Alexander was dead in
Arabia, and Ptolome dead in Egypt, they slew all the soldiers of Ptolome which
were left in garrisons in the Cities of Syria, and received Demetrius Nicanor to
be their king, which was Demetrius Soters son. Now when Demetrius Demetrius
Nicanor.
had recovered his kingdom again, he fell in short time in as great contempt
with all men for his slothfulness, as his father before him was for pride:
and to avoid that fault, he waged wars with the Parthians, to whom he gave
two several overthrows by the aid of the Bactrians, and the Persians: Demet.
taken prisoner.
but afterward he was taken, and sent prisoner into Hircania to Arsaces king of
Persia.

While Demetrius was in these wars, Ionathas the high Ionathas the high
priest slain.
priest was by deceit slain by Trypho: also he slew young Antiochus, over
whom he was tutour, and reigned three years king in Syria. Cleopatra Demetrius
wife fearing the tyranny of this Trypho, and knowing her husband to be
captive in Hircania, she married Antiochus Soter her husbands brother, she
being then in the city of Seleucia. Antiochus levied an army, came to Syria,
pursued Trypho, from whom reuoulted all his soldiers, and he himself fled.
Antiochus possessed Syria quietly: and calling to mind the pride of his father,
and the slothfulness Antiochus Soter.
of his brother, for which faults they were both hated of their subjects, he
used great diligence and fair means to win those cities which had reuoulted
from his brother: yet according to his predecessors the kings of Syria, he
began shortly after this good mind to molest Judea: he besieged Hircanus the
high priest in Jerusalem, but he took money, and removed his siege.

In the twelfth of his reign, Antiochus began to war against Phrahartes
king of the Parthia^s, levied an army of eighty thousand men. Phrahartes had
Demetrius the brother of Antiochus in custody with him, to whom his father
Arsaces The king of Parthia overthrown.
had promised him before he died to restore him to his kingdom, and thereupon
gave his daughter in marriage. The king of Parthia was overthrown and driven to
slight in two or three battles, leaving al Parthia wasted and spoiled by
Antiochus. In the mean time Demetrius was sent by Phrahartes to his kingdom,
while Antiochus was absent from Syria.

In this wars of Parthia Antiochus came to Babylon, where Antiochus against
the Parthians.
many kings gave him the meeting: for he waxed great and strong: and there
hearing that his brother Demetrius was commen to Syria from Parthia, and was
received again to his kingdom, he made haste to return with his soldiers to
Syria: but Phrahartes had prepared an army upon the way to meet him, and to
give him battle, where Antiochus Iustine lib. 38.
was slain.

CHAP. III.
Of the last destruction of Asia and Syria, through their civil dissension and
long wars one with another, the only cause of their bondage afterward to the
Romans, under whom they lived as subjects, and all Asia and Syria made
Provinces under Rome.

WHen the king of Parthia had the victory, he much repented him that he let
loose Demetrius, but he could not help it. When Demetrius had bin from his
kingdom Funct. lib 3. Comment.
thirteen years captive, but with great honor (for that he married Arsases
daughter king of Parthia) his return to Syria was in the six hundred twenty
seven year after the building of Rome, and he reigned afterward four years:
for in the fourth year after his return from Parthia, where he had been
thirteen years captive, he levied an army against Hircanus: but Demetrius
woonted and intolerable pride was such, that the Syrians by no means could
abide him, and therefore they sent to Egypt to king Ptolome, that he would
appoint them a king of the blood and house of Seleucus. Such Egypt too much
trusted by the Syrians.
were the manners of the Syrians, that upon any broile or diffidence they had in
their king, the kings of Egypt should be their shield and defend them, and by
that means only diverse kings of Egypt became kings of Syria.

The people of Syria having sent to Egypt, Ptolome prepared Alexander Zebenna
with a great host against Demetrius, from Alexander Zebenna.
whom most of his subjects reuoulted, and therefore the easier to be
vanquished, as it came to pass in the very first battle, between him and
Zebenna. This Zebenna was one Protarchus son, a mean man, and such a one as
Prompalus was, of who^ you read before. These false pollices and crafty
devices are Funct lib. 3. Coment. Iustine lib. 39.
always in courts about kings and princes: as in Macedonia a false Philip,
and after him again a fained Perseus: so in Syria a false Prompalus, and after
him a false Zebenna, of whom read the fable in Iustine and in Functius.

When this Alexander Zebenna had overcome Demetrius, he enjoyed the kingdom of
Syria two years quietly: but shortly Zebenna enjoyed Syria.
he waxed so proud and arrogant, that he little esteemed king Ptolome, who only
made him king in Syria. Ptolome hearing of these news, reconciled himself
first to his sister Cleopatra, who had bin married to both the brethren
Antiochus and Demetrius kings of Syria, and straight after sent an army to
aid Gryphus, who was by his mother appointed king, which gave battle to
Zebenna, and overthrew him, and forced him to flee to Antioch, Gryphus
overthrew Zebenna.
where for want of money to pay his soldiers, he robbed the temple of Jupiter:
from thence he was driven by the country to take his flight. Again, his
soldiers forsook him, and left him: he was taken and brought to Griphus, and
by commandment slain.

Now Griphus having obtained his fathers kingdom, Zebenna slain.
doubted nothing of his mother Cleopatras treason being busy in other affairs
of his kingdom, until he was made acquainted with his mothers intent, of
who^ he had some trial both toward his father, whom she betrayed being her
husband, and his brother who^ also she slew being her own son: her ambitions
and impiety was so found, that when she offered a cup of drink to her son
the king, she was commanded to drink the same her self, and so the poison
with the which she thought to poison her son, was made to be her own draught
and her own death. After this, Griphus reigned Cleopatra by her own drink
poisoned.
king in Syria eight years very quiet, before Cizicoenus his brother began
to war: he was his brother by the mother side, borne by his uncle Antiochus
Sedetes: while the state of Syria was thus afflicted with continual wars
between brethren and brethrens children, Ptolomeus Physcon died, who left
behind him the kingdom to his wife and to his son, of who^ I have entreated
in the history of Egypt. But now the civil wars being in Syria between
Antiochus Griphus, Demetrius Brethren and cousin germans.
Nicanors son and Antiochus Cizicenus Antiochus Sedetes son, though they
were brethren by the mothers side, and cousin germans by the fathers, yet
their ambition was such to the kingdom of Syria, that they forgate fraternity
in blood, and Joseph lib. 13 antiq cap. 21.
fell to strokes, one persecuting the other with continual wars and sundry
battles, until at length Antiochus Griphus was slain by Antiochus Griphus
slain.
the treachery of Herodianus in the 662. year after the building of Rome, in
the 29. year of his reign. I remember a history in Dionisius Halicarnassaeus,
in the which history Rome is much commended Dioni. Halicr lib. 2.
in respect of other countries, as Persia, Greece, Maccdonia, Syria and Asia,
kingdoms of civil wars, the very cause of their ruin: but in Rome no civil
war was known, no mutiny, no discord was seen for 620. years, from the
time of Romulus the first king of Rome, until the time of Tiberius Gracchus,
which was the first that died in an uproar which he himself began.

But while these civil wars endured in Syria, Masinissa king of Numidia was
occupied in Affrike, having great wars between the Carthagineans and the
Numidians. Aristonicus also the son of Attalus king of Pergamus, and brother
to that valiant king Eumenes, invaded Asia as his own kingdom fallen to him by
succession of his father. At that time reigned in Bythinia Nicomedes, and in
Po^tus Mithridates, the son of that great Mithridates, who held wars with
the Romans of a long time. Joseph. lib. 13. cap. 8.


About this time began the sects of people in Judea, the Pharisees, the Saduces,
and Esseni: Of these Josephus writes: beside, Esseni were as the Scribes among
the Jews. Mysipsa.
we read of them in the new Testament. In the time of Antiochus Griphus,
Mecypsa king of Numidia died, who left 3. sons behind him named Adherbalis,
Hiempsalis, and Iugurtha: of this Salust makes mention in the wars of
Iugurth, which war happened in this time of Griphus: for Marius the Roman
Consul about this time triumphed over Iugurth. Pompey the great was borne about
the time of that triumph, and Lucretius the Poet also.

But I will come to Syria, where after king Antiochus was slain, his son
Seleucus succeeded him: this prepared to revenge his father upon his uncle,
gathered his force, and gave him battle, and slew his uncle Antiochus
Cizicoenus, whose son Antiochus slain.
reue^ged upon his cousin his fathers death: he gave him battle, ouerthrewe
him, drove him out of Syria to Cicilia, where he was burned in his own house,
and all his friends with him.

Skant was this mischief done, but straight another followed: Seleucus brother
named Antiochus followed fast Cizioenus son, and slew him with all his army.
Then Philip the third brother of Seleucus took much of the kings treasure, and
went privately and dwelled in a part of Syria, until that Ptolome, who by his
own mother before that time was expelled out of Egypt, though afterward he
was received king again in the 663. year after the building of Rome. This I
say brought the Nothing in Syria but blood.
fourth brother of Seleucus named Demetrius Eucerus to Damascus, where he was
crowned king, who joined with Philip, overthrew Antiochus their brother, and
the eldest after Seleucus.

This murdering one another in Syria, with such tyranny and bloody treason
between brethren and brethrens children, that all the kings of Syria even from
Antiochus Epiphanes the eight king of Syria until Philip the seventeenth king,
no foreign enemies needed to invade Asia, but one king destroyed an other by
civil wars. About this time Cneus Pompeius father to the great Pomp,
subdued the Picents and the Marsies, and Silla overcame the Samnites. Between
this Silla and Marius began a great quarrel about the wars of Mithridates:
Silla and Marius two great enemies of Rome.
these two, though they did much good to their Country, and were equal to the
best, yet they past al men in offense and harm toward Rome, so that they
only were the two fire brandes of Italy.

Mithridates king of Pontus invaded Asia, objected himself against the
Romans: but Silla who at that time triumphed over all the countries and almost
over Rome, stayed Mithridates. Lucullus waged wars this time with the
Parthians: Nicomedes king of Bithinia in those days died, and made the Romans
his heir, as Attalus king of Asia did Mithridates. Now Philip and Demetrius
two brethren reigned the last kings of Syria of the blood of Seleucus, which
reigned not long: for Demetrius went against Alexander king of the Jews, by
whom he and his company Demet. overthrown by Alex. king of Judea.
were vanquished and driven out of Judea. Demetrius being thus expulsed,
gathered those scattered soldiers, which Alexander king of Judea dispearsed,
and laid siege to the city of Berea where his brother Philip lay, where
Demetrius was taken by the Parthia^s and sent to Parthia to be kept as a
prisoner, where Demetrius taken by the Parthians.
he died. After that Demetrius was sent to Parthia, Philip came out of Beroea,
and entered into Antioch, and obtained the whole kingdom of Syria into his own
hand: but he was shortly vanquished and overthrown by Gabinius the Roman. The
Syrians were compelled by this civil war to commit themselves to foreign
kings, to avoid the tyranny which long endured between the kings of Syria, so
that both the kings and the kingdom of Syria were at the last breath, some
willing to call Mithridates king of Pontus, some Ptolome king of Egypt, and
some Tygranes The kings of Syria brought to extremity.
king of Armenia. At length they made a choice of Tygranes to be their king,
the rather for the society of the Parthia^s, and the affinity of Po^tus,
which were the next kingdo^s unto Armenia.

While these brethren Philip and Demet. were at variance, such an earthquake
was in Syria, that 170000. men perished thereby, and many cities laid prostrate
to the ground. Tygranes governed Tygranes reigned 18 years king of Syria.
the Syrians 18. years quietly without any war or business, though in deed
diverse there were that hoped for a day, specially Antiochus Cizicoenus, which
all this time lay close in Cicilia. Tygranes had thought to subdue Palestina,
and so after some leisure to war upon Judah: but hearing that Lu. Lucullus
after that Mithridates was by the said Lucullus conquered, marched forward into
Armenia, Tygranes was driven to forsake Syria, and in all haste to return to
defend his own country, where he was overcome in two or three great battles,
and at length taken in his chief city called Artaxa.

Now Tygranes could not return to Syria, but he was led captive to the
Romans by Pompei the great: who after that went Melanct. lib. 2. Pomp the
great brought Syria to be a province of Rome.
in person into Syria, and brought it to the form and government of a
province, for that Syria (as Plutarch says) wanted a lawful king. He made a
province of Syria to the Roman Empire: he conquered al Jury, and builded
certain cities in Judea: this very time M. Crassus with his son, and with
all his army was overthrown and slain in Parthia. Likewise Julius Caesar
came into England called then Britain, and conquered it: at what time Iu.
Caesar came to England.
reigned in Britain Cassibelane, who after two or three repulses given to
Caesar, yielded and consented to pay tribute. At the coming of Pomp into
Syria, Diodorus Siculus a great writer went to Egypt, where he wrote in a book
of his, the antiquity of the Egyptia^s. About this time Titus Liuius the
historiographer, Diodo. lib. 2.
and Horace the Poet were borne: but the history of the kings The kings of
Aram which is Syria are more in sacred histories then profane.
of Syria is set forth with the kings of Israel and Judah, and also in the
Machabees: for in the sacred histories of the scripture much mention is made of
the kings of Aram, by the names of Aram Soba, Aram Padan, Aram Damasci, Aram
Naharaim, by the which names Syria is better described in Genesis, in the
Kings, in Paralipomenon, and in Deuteronomiu^, then by Ptolome, Strabo,
Pomponius Mela, or Solinus: for the kings of Aram which is Syria, have diverse
names in Scripture, as Aram Naharaim, which is that part of Syria which is
between Euphrates and Tygris: the region Judge. cap. 3.
thereof is called Mesopotamia: read the 3. of the Judges. Likewise Aram Padan
which is a country in Mesopotamia, and often Genesis. 48.
taken for all Mesopotamia, where Jacob me^cioneth of Rahels death his wife,
when he came from Padan Aram.

Again, Aram Damasci, where Benadad king of Aram being sick, sent Hazael to
the man of God Elisha, to know whether Benahad should recover his health. To
be short, Aram Macat, Aram Soba, Aram Rhohab, and Aram Damasci are regions and
countries in Mesopotamia, Coelosyria, and in the higher Syria far from Perela
and Galaad, the country of Ruben and Gad, and of the half tribe of Manasses.
But these names of Syria were long The true warrant of all antiquities is in
the sacred Scriptures.
before any profane writer wrote of Syria: few profane histories were before
king Philips time Alexander the great his father: all true antiquities are
contained in sacred histories, in Moses, in the Chronicles of the kings of
Israel and Judah, and in the Prophets: late writers began in the time of Cyrus
to write of the Monarchies of Persia, of the Grecia^s, and of the Romans, of
whom Daniel before had spoken, and likewise gave light unto profane writers to
write their histories.

These kings of Aram then were the most cruel tyraunts, and most furious
enemies of Judea, of the people of God, and of his Church: and likewise these
last by the names of the kings The continuance of the kings of Syria.
of Syria, which continued no longer then from Alexander the great which was
the first, until the time of Pomp the great, which was the last, that brought
all Syria a province to the Romans. As God dealed with the kings of Aram in
the behalf of Judah then: so he wrought with the kings of Syria now in the
behalf of his Church, who ever prevailed against all kingdoms of the world,
as God caused Senaheribs army one to kill an other to the number of 185.
thousand in one day and night. So he likewise raised one king against an
other in Syria, that from Antiochus the great, until the last king, there was
nothing but killing and murdering in Syria: for the tyrant Antiochus
Epiphanes his son after he fomed in blood, The kings of Syria one mur thering
another.
died most miserably: his son likewise Antiochus Eupator was slain by his
uncle Demetrius: Demetrius was slain by Alexander, which fained himself to be
Antiochus Epiphanes son: Alexander was slain by the king of Parthia, and his
head sent to Syria. After Demetrius Nicanor was kept out of Syria, by his own
brother Antiochus Sedetes: this Sedetes was killed by Tryphon: again Tryphon
was slain quickly of his own people.

Then Antiochus Gryphus Nicanors son, and Antiochus Sedetes son killed one
an other in such sort, that Syria wanted Seleucus house destroyed by civil
wars.
heirs of Seleucus house to be kings, and also Syria was brought so low and
so poor by these civil wars, that the Romans prayed over them, after they
had reigned two hundred eighty nine years, and brought Syria a province
subject to Rome. All the names of the kings of Syria and Asia, since Alexander
the great his time are these.

1 Seleucus Nica. reigned 31. 2 Antiochus Soter. 19. 3 Antiochus Theos. 15. 4
Seleucus Gallinicus. 20. 5 Seleucus Ceraunus. 9. 6 Antiochus magnus. 36. 7
Seleucus Philopator. 12. 8 Antiochus Epiphanes. 12. 9 Antiochus Eupator. 2. 10
Demetrius Soter. 10. 11 Alexander Pro^palus. 5. 12 Demetrius Nicanor. 2. 13
Antiochus Sedetes. 3. 14 Trypho reigned 3. 15 Demetrius again Nicanor. 4. 16
Antiochus Griphus. 29. 17 Antiochus Cizicoenus. 18. 18 Philipus the son of
Griphus. 2. Functius does vary a little from Iustine in the years of these
kings.
OF THE FIRST AFFRICAN wars between the Carthagineans and the Romans, which
continued 24. years: and of the victories of the Romans over them.
Having something entreated of the kings of Asia and Syria, and yet nothing so
largely as the history required, how be it the kings of Asia and Syria are
spoken of both in sacred and profane histories, and have also an intercourse
between the kings of Assyria and of Egypt: I will therefore pass to the kings
of Affrike and Libya, and speak of their wars with the Romans. This
Country (as Pomponius Mela describes) is on Pompo. Mela. lib. 1.
the East part bounded with the river Nilus, and enclosed North with the sea
Libicke, on the South with the Ethiopian sea, and on the West with the
Antlantike sea.

Affrike is shorter then Europe, and far lesser then Asia: it is more in
length then in breadth: the breadth of Affrike is thirteen thousand furlo^gs,
which is a thousand six hundred miles and more: the length (as Strabo writes)
is as much again, Strabo. lib. 17.
which is 3200 miles, and all that part of Affrike which is beyond the Mores,
called the Nigrites and Pharusians, do extend into Ethiope. The Ethiopians
possess thence unto the borders of Asia: also the white Ethiopia^s and
Libyaegyptia^s dwelling above Africa described.
those places before recited: then the Numidians and the Mores, of who^ the
Mores extend to the Antlantike sea. I think it a work needles to describe
Affrike more amply then it is by Julius Solinus, and Po^ponius Mela, written
in Latin: the rest is set forth by Strabo, of whom for that he writes more
large, I note him chiefly for mine author.

(...) dearth hapened amongst the Affricanes, that the Romans could no longer
remain there: but they returned to Rome with their victorious nauies in great
pomp and glory, having 484. ships sailing in brave sort toward Rome, with
infinite wealth and treasure.

Behold in the midst of this great pomp, the events of fortune: The great
loss of the Romans by shipwreck.
a very great tempest rose, so that they suffered such shipwreck about the
coast of Sicile, that scant were saved 80. ships of the 484. yet the invincible
and stout courage of the Romans were such, that their minds were nothing
dismayed with these missehaps, though it was the very greatest shipwreck that
ever the Romans had, or any other nation in the world. New supplies and other
captains were straight appointed, with 260. ships to take voyage to Affrike,
who likewise when they had won certain cities and towns in Affrike,
returned to Rome with great spoil, but sustained the like shipwreck again.
The Senate finding these continual dangers of sailing and seafight, thought
good to forsake the sea, and to fight upon the land: for having won the
victories of four battles upon the sea with infinite treasures over the
Affricanes, Eutrop lib. 2.
they lost by three shipwracks, more then they wanne by the four victories.

In the fifth year after Regulus was taken by the Affricanes, Metellus was sent
from Rome to Sicilia, where the Carthagineans came with 130. elephants: of the
which number Metellus got Metellus victory.
26: he slew 2000. Affricanes as Eutropius says, but Melancthon in his
chronicles says, that Metellus slew 36. elephants, and took alive 146.
elephants, which Metellus in great triumph Melanct. lib. 2.
brought with him to Rome. The Affricanes after these great mischances,
required Regulus a Roman captain, whom the Affricanes took captive and kept
in prison until this time: him they sent unto the Senate to entreat for
peace, who when he came to Rome, persuaded the Romans that peace by no means
should be granted to the Affricanes, alleging that they were void of all hope
to recover their former estate: they were quite quailed and dismayed, and
ready to yield all Affrike up to the Romans: he refused to tarry in Rome,
though Luc. Florus lib. 2.
the Senate sought him, but returned to Carthage according to his oath and
promise, with a denial of peace, where he was with most cruel torments put to
death. Thus Regulus that might have saved his life in Rome, lost it in
Carthage, and that most willingly.

After this, the Senate sent Publius Claudius and Caius Iunius Pullius Claudius
overthrown.
with an army of Romans, but not with such good success as Metellus had: for
in this journey the Affricanes overcame the Romans, so that of two hundredth and
twenty sails they saved but thirty, 89. were taken, and all the men which
fought in The Affricke victory over the Romans.
them: the residue were sunk: besides, the Affricanes took 20. thousand of
the Romans prisoners. Thus sometime the Carthagineans, and sometime the
Romans prevailed, and so still continued with mortal malice. Caius Luctatius
was sent presently with 300. sails from Rome, after this great loss that they
had by the Affricanes, in the 9. year after the victories of Metellus. This
Luctatius with great courage perceiving the Affricanes to be puffed up with pride
of their last victory, and now again Eutrop. lib. 2.
that they sent Hamo from Carthage with an army by land, and an other to
Amilcar Hanibals father by sea, Luctatius before Melanct. lib. 2.
these armies came together, gave to the Affricanes a sore battle, which was
fought over against Lylibium a city of Sicilia, with such passing valiantnes
of the Romans, that they took 73. ships of the Affricans, they sunk 125. they
took 32. thousand men prisoners, and slew 13. thousand, with an infinite deal
of gold and silver, which Luctatius brought with him to Rome.

After this great overthrow of Hanno, Luctatius hasted to the city of Erix,
where Amilcar stayed with his power, whom Luctatius victory over the
Affricanes.
he forced to forsake the town to his great loss: the residue of the
Affricanes were by Luctatius sold for eighteeene Melanct. lib. 2.
pence a piece. The Affricanes being thus spoiled and overthrown by Luctatius,
entreated for peace, which was to them Affricanes sold for 18 pence a piece.
by the Senate granted, which peace continued between the Affricanes and the
Romans 26. years. Thus ended the first wars of the Affricanes, which
endured 24. years. During which time Ptolomey Euergetes reigned in Egypt, and
Seleucus Gallinicus reigned in Syria.

The Parthians began to set up a kingdom this time, and Antigonus surnamed
Doson reigned then in Macedonia. About this Polib. lib. 2.
time Aratus an excellent Greek, the governor over the Achetans, exempted al
kind of tyranny out of the city of Corinth, and brought the Megereans in
society with the Corinthians. About the latter end of this first war between
the Affricanes and the Romans, came Hiero the mighty and puisant king of
Sicilia to behold the enterludes at Rome, where he distributed amongst Hiero
his liberality in (...) Rome.
the Romans two hundred thousand bushels of wheat.

During this first war of Carthage, M. Claudius gave a great overthrow to the
Frenchmen, and slew their king called Viridomarus with his own had, as
Eutropius says. The greatness Viridomarus king of France slaie by Mar. Claudius.
of the Romans was such then, that they had wars with Illyrians, with the
Istrians, with the Frenchmen, with the Affricanes, and with diverse others, over
whom the Romans triumphed: at which time they concluded a peace with all
nations, which never happened to the Romans since the first building of Rome,
but only in Numa Pompilius time.

CHAP. II.
Of the second Affricane wars between the Carthagineans and the Romans,
which endured 17. years. During which time Hanibal held terrible wars with
the Romans, which brought the Empire of Rome wellnigh to Carthage: but at last
by Scipio Affricanus the wars were ended, Carthage overthrown, Africa
won, and Hanibal forced to flee.

NOw after that Hamilcar died in Spain, a man of great skill, to whom the
Affricans Hamilcar was Hambals father.
in the first Punicke war committed the whole government of Affrike: this
Hamilcar made wars with the Romans in Sicilia a longer time then it was
looked for. After that, he kept them play in Hamilcars praise.
Affrike, and from thence he was sent governor and general for the Affricanes
into Spain. This Hamilcar was surnamed Barcha, after whom succeeded Hamilcar.
Asdrubal his son in law, for that Hanibal Hamilcar his own son was but
young and tender: notwithstanding he was hardened now against the second wars
of Affrike, where he far excelled his fathers doings in his first wars.

After the first war ended, Hamilcar Hanibals father died: he continued
three years in the service of the wars under the conduct of Asdrubal his
brother: for at what time his father Plutarch. in Hanibal.
had him first to Spain, he was but nine years old, and after that to
Asdrubals death (as Polibius affirms) seventeen years: so as Plutarch and
Polibius agree, he was 26. year old Eutrop 3.
when he was chosen lieutenant general against the Romans: but Eutropius says
he was but twenty: but he was no sooner chosen general, but he bent himself
fully against the Romans, to whom he bare a secret malice for the loss of
Sardinia and Sicilia, but specially for his fathers Hamilcars sake, who hated
so Hanibal succeeded Hasdrubal.
the Romans, that he compelled Hanibal his son being but a boy, to swear at
a sacrifice which Hamilcar made, that he would be a mortal enemy to the
Romans. Liui. Flor. lib. 2. cap. 6.


The remembrance of which things enticed Hanibal to attempt wars against the
Romans, at what time Hanibal swear upon his fathers grave, that he would be an
enemy to the Romans, and perform the oath which he swear to his father
Hamilcar. This inheritable hatred made Hanibal to practice innouations, and to
find occasion to begin this second war. There was a town named Saguntum,
the people hereof confined indifferently between the Romans and the
Carthagineans: Saguntum besieged and taken by Hanibal.
this town Hanibal assaulted, to whom the Romans sent ambassadors, to will
him to cease from battle: for the Romans were always loathe to use force, if
either entreaty or courtesy might take place: but Hanibal refused to speak
with them. The Senate sent to Carthage, willing that commandment might be
given to Hanibal to spare the Saguntines, which were in league with the Romans:
but they had the like answer in Carthage, as they had of Hanibal. Then Fabius
who in his embassage offered to the Carthagineans the choice

It was doubtful a long time, whether there were a sea beyond Afrike, or
whether the land might be coasted about, or whether Afrike being barren and
waste, full of deserts and mountains, Hanno a traueiler.
might extend so far as that there were no end of it, until the voyage of
Hanno a captain of Carthage, who took upon him to search the coasts: and
when he had traueiled much, he returned home with this answer, that he wanted
not sea room but victual. After Hanno, another called Endoxus passed out of
the gulf of Arabia: he traueiled so long, that he brought notice with him of
countries and other things Pomponius Mela lib. 3.
unknown in Affrike and Libya: you must think that Affrike and Libya is all
one generally.

In this country of Affrike is Mauritania, a large and a wide country: the
end of this coast is the river Mulucha, and the beginning thereof is from the
Promontorie which the Greeks call Ampelisia: from Mulucha Molochathi, (as
Strabo writes) to Pompo. Mela. Lib. 1.
the river Ampsaga, lies Numidia, a country not so large as Mauritania, but
wealthier and better peopled: Cirta is the greatest city therein, the palace
of king Iuba and king Siphax, and after Massinissa and Mycipsa, and of a long
time their successors. To describe Affrike perticularly, it is infinite, for
that the most part of it is wast ground, unmanured, and void Strange beasts in
Affrike.
wilderness, where strange and diverse kinds of beasts do breed, and also
many fabulous things of Solinus and Strabo written, as Satyrs, Blenias, and
such wild people, that rather are like beasts then men: read Solinus and
Strabo of all the sundry sorts of serpe^ts, strange beasts, and of the
monstrous kinds of creatures, which breed in Affrike and Libya. I will
declare Lib. 17.
briefly the report of al Carthage and Numidia, two of the chiefest cities of
Affrike: of these towns mention is made of diverse writers. This Carthage was
builded at such time as Hiarbas reigned in Libya, by a lady named Elissa,
otherwise named Dido, king Pigmalio^s sister of Tire, borne in Phoenicia,
after who^ Tirians long inhabited: a hundred thirty five years before Joseph.
lib. 1.
the building of Rome was Carthage builded: some say that Carthage was builded
before Didos time by people of Tire, of who^ Carthage was first named Byrsa.
Joseph sets down the names of those kings that reigned Joseph. lib. 1.
contra Appio.
in Tire, before Dido came to Affrika.

1 Abibalus. 2 His son Hiramus. 34. 3 Abdemonius. 4 Hyramus. 2. 5
Baleastartus. 43. 6 Abdastartus. 9. 7 Astartus the son of Baleastartus. 8
Astarimus which was slain 9 by his brother Phelles that succeeded him. 10
Ithobalus. 11 Badezorus the son of I* 12 thabolus, after whom succeeded his
son Mettinus. 13 And last reigned Pygmalion, which was brother unto Dido.
These were the kings that reigned in Tire, before the building of Carthage.
Strabo says, that there were 300. cities in that part of Affrika before the
building of Carthage, which were destroyed by the Pharusians and Nigretes. Next
unto Carthage in authority Vtica.
and power was the City of Vtica, famous for the name of Cato: these two
Cities were the only havens to the Romans to enter into Libya. Not far from
Vtica was Appollonia Apollonia.
and Hermea, two populous Towns well inhabited.

In this lesser Asia where Carthage and Vtica were both builded by the
Phoenicians, are diverse others Towns, as Hippo, Hermea.
Rheguis, and Tabraca: this part of Affrike flourished, and became so famous,
that the Romans who in those days waxed strong, had an eye to Affrike, and
(as their manners and custom were never to be satisfied until they were lords
of the whole world) they began to be enemies to the kings of Libya and Strab.
lib. 17.
Affrike, held them wars the first time for the space of twenty four years,
with equal conquest to the Romans. It is written, that in this first years
war which the Romans had with the Carthagineans, that the Romans sustained
great loss and much harm, specially by shipwreck. The Romans never waged
any battle out of Italy before this time, and therefore to know what power
they were ableto make within the city Muster in Rome. Eutrop. lib. 2.
of Rome, they mustred and numbered them by the poles, and they found within the
city of Rome 300. thousand able soldiers to serve, saving 500. When Appius
Claudius and Q. Fuluius were Consuls in Rome, the first battle was fought in
Sicilia, where the Romans gate the victory, and Appius triu^phed over Hieron
Appius triumphed over Hieron.
king of Sicilia and over the Affrikanes. The second and the third battle the
Romans wrought very great enterprises, and gate the victories against two
nations of Africa. This time again the Romans triu^phed over the Affricanes,
and Hieron king of Sicilia entreated for peace, and in consideration thereof
gave to the Romans 200. talents of silver: but this peace endured not long:
for within five years after the wars began, the Romans understanding that
the Affricanes came in heaps from Libya into Sicilia, prepared an army under
the conduct of Cneus Cornelius The second triumph over the Affricanes.
and Caius Duillius then Consuls of Rome: this battle was fought on the sea,
where Cornelius the Consul was deceived by train: but Eutropius says that the
other Consul fought out the battle, and overcame the Affricanes: he took 31.
ships and sunk 18. he slew 3000. and took seven thousand men prisoners.
Read Polyb. of the wars of Affricke.


This victory upon the Sea happened better to the Romans then they looked for.
Although the Carthagenians were often discomfited and overthrown by the
Romans, yet they escaped not free, and specially upon the sea, where the
Romans sustained diverse losses, and such losses, as were equal to the
Melancth. lib. 2. Chron.
victories which they wanne upon the land. When Lucius Scipio had won Corsica
and Sardinia, being then Consul at Rome, and led from them with him to Rome
many thousand prisoners, over whom he triumphed by these diverse victories and
triumphs which the Romans had over the Libyans, the Carthagenians were forced
to forsake Sicilia, and to return to Africa, where the Romans within a while
transposed their wars against Hamilcar captain of the Carthagineans, to
Hamilcar discomfited upon the sea.
whom battle was given upon the sea, where Hamilcar was discomfited and
constrained to retire back, after he had lost 64. ships. This was the second
victory which the Romans had upon the sea over the Affricanes, yet this time
the Romans lost two and twenty ships: this battle was won by M. Attilius
Regulus and Lu. Manlius then both Consuls at Rome.

These captains after they arrived farther into Affrike, Clipea the chiefest
city of Affrike yielded themselves to the Romans: now Manlius returned to Rome
with great pomp, brought Clipea the chie fest city in Affrike.
with him twenty seven thousand prisoners. Regulus remained still in Affrike,
whose worthy acts and famous victory against the Carthagineans in the absence
of his fellow were Lu. Florus. lib. 2. cap. 2.
such, as he joined battle with three of the best captains of all Affrike at
that time, which was Asdrubal and Hamilcar, Hanibals father. In this victory
Regulus slew eighteen thousand Regulus victory.
of his enemies: he took prisoners five thousand and eight Elephants, and at
that victory (as Eutropius says) he received under obeisance threescore and
thirteen cities.

The loss was such to the Affricans, that they desired peace of the Romans:
which was denied by Regulus contrary to a Romans nature, which always used al
nations with great clemency: but Regulus gained nothing by this, but shame and
loss: for the Carth^ineans desired the aid of the Lacedaemonians, which with
all diligence sent a band of men with one Regulus too severe.
Xantippus, through whose means Regulus was overcome in the next battle,
where the Romans had a great overthrow, by the only severity and too much
insolency of Regulus. The Affricanes slew thirty thousand Romans, and took
prisoners fifteen thousand, and Regulus himself was taken, and cast into
prison.

Thus he that triumphed over Affrike with great fame Regulus vanquished.
Melanct. lib. 2.
and commendations, lies now a captive in a dungeon, at the disposition of
the Affricanes. The Romans hearing of these news, they presently sent M.
Aemilius Paulus, which passed over into Affrike with a navy of three hundred
sails: The great victory of the Romans over the Affricans.
the battle was renewed, and fought upon the sea with such courage of the
Romans, that they sunk a hundred and four ships of their enemies, took
thirty ships and all the men within them, slew and took prisoners besides
fifteen thousand: with the spoil of Affricanes Aemilius enriched his
soldiers.

All Affrike had been conquered this time, had not such

either of war or of peace, gremio togae excusso, pronounced openly public
wars to the Affricanes. In the mean time the Saguntines famished: yet some
writers report, that Saguntum The Saguntines famished.
endured 8. months siege, as Plutarch and Liuie affirm. The taking of this
city was a great furtherance to Hanibals enterprises.

The Romans hearing of these news, divided the provinces between the two
Consuls, Publius Cornelius to Spain, and Titus Sempronius to Affrike and
Sicilia: and then the Romans sent certain of the noblest men of Rome to
Carthage, to pronounce Wars pronounced to the Carthagineans.
open war to the Carthagineans, which was as bravely received, as it was
lustily offered. Hanibal hearing of this preparation in Rome, he left Asdrubal
in Spain, and himself passed over the mountains Pyrenei, making his way
where no way was as yet, over the Alps. Eutropius reports, that Hanibal
brought with him to Italy 80. thousand footmen, twenty thousand horsemen, and
37. elephants.

Hanibal had great hope that the Ligurians and the Frenchmen would aid him,
which in deed came to pass as he expected. Sempronius Gracchus conveyed his
army forth of Sicilia. Scipio in the mean time encountered with Hanibal: but
he was discomfited, his men put to flight, and Scipio himself The first
victory of Hani^al.
returned wounded to his tents. In like manner the other Consul fought with him
at the river Trebia, and was overthrown, and escaped hardly himself. Thus
Hanibal got the victory of both the Consuls, yet it cost Hanibal the setting
on: for he lost many of his men, and the most part of his elephants.

After this battle, Hanibal overcame all the country, and did Florus lib. 2.
cap. 6.
put all to fire and sword, whereupon diverse in Italy for fear yielded
themselves to Hanibal. There were at that time five and twenty thousand
Romans slain, and the residue fled. Flaminus the Consul at that very time was
also slain by Hanibal at the lake Thracimene which is in Perusia, who had the
charge of Sempronius place. The Romans hearing of those hard Plutar. in Fab.
news, appointed Fabius Maximus general against Hanibal, a grave wise man,
and of great authority and estimation with the people of Rome: this Fabius by
tracting the time and dalying, Q. Fabius made general.
brake the violence and force of Hanibal, and thereby gave him oftentimes the
overthrow. Hanibal used kinds of policies to draw Fabius to fight, who removed
his camp from city to city, and from place to place, with such fury and
rage (to Florus lib. 2.
see the delay of Fabius) that Hanibal lost more then he wanne during the time
of Fabius. Of this it is written, Cunctando restituit rem. By this time there
were two other created consuls in Rome, Luc. Aemilius and Pub. Terentius Varro:
these succeeded Fabius, but not with such good success, nor with the like
fortune as Fabius had: for Fabius advertised both the consuls, that they could
never overcome Hanibal but by prolonging to fight: how be it light heads will
follow no counsel, as it came to pass by the rashness of Varro contrary to the
mind of the The great victory at Cannes.
other consul, who joined battle with Hanibal hard by a little village in
Apulia named Cannes, where the Romans had the greatest discomfiture that ever
they had: for in this battle the Affricans slew (as Liui says) 40. thousand
footmen and 2700. horsemen. Plutarch says, that there were slain 50. thousand
Plutarch. in Fabio.
footmen, and 14. thousand taken prisoners, Aemilius the consul slain, and to
the number of 20. others of the order of consul Polib. lib. 5.
and Pretors. Again, in this great overthrow, there were taken and slain of
the Senators 30. of noblemen and gentlemen 800.

After that battle many cities in Italy which were before under the obeisance
of the Romans, fell from them to Hanibal: Eutrop. lib. 3.
from that battle of Cannes, Hanibal sent to Carthage 3. bushels Three bushels
of rings only, as Eutropius says, sent by Hanibal to Carthage.
full of rings and chains, which were plucked from the necks and hands of the
gentlemen, Senators and soldiers of the Romans.

Thus Hanibal had such good success in the beginning of his wars, having
subdued the Saguntines, overthrown the Romans at the river Trebia, slain the
consul Flaminius, and the most part of his army at the lake Thrasimene, and
then the great slaughter and murder of the Romans now at Cannes: yet the
Romans never quailed for all this, their stout minds were such, that they could
not hear of peace: the Romans were never more valiant, then when they were
conquered: their courage, Melanct. lib 2. Chrop.
their magnanimity and noble virtues were most seen in their adversity. Now
while Hanibal flourished thus in Italy like a (...).
co^querour, his brother Asdrubal whom he left behind him in Spain, sustained
a great overthrow by the two Scipios, in which battle he lost 35. thousand men.
Now in the 4. year after that Hanibal invaded Italy, Marcellus was sent against
Hanibal, who Marcellus came against Hanibal.
in truth fought with good fortune at Nola a city of Campania, and made
Hanibal to forsake Nola with all his army. By this time Hanibal had gotten
many cities from the Romans in Apulia and Calabria: the fame of Hanibal was
such, that all the world spoke of it: for Philip king of Macedon sent to offer
aid to Hanibal against the Romans: the messengers were apprehended by the
Romans, and the whole matter known, whereupon the Four generals sent by the
Romans to four several kingdoms.
Romans sent 4. generals at one time to 4. several places: in Italy against
Hanibal: in Macedonia against king Philip: in Spain against Asdrubal Hanibals
brother: and in Sardinia against a Carthaginean captain called also Asdrubal,
who was taken by Tit. Manlius the proconsul: who slew besides of the Affricanes
12. Tit. Manlius victory.
thousand, and took 1500. prisoners, which Manlius brought with him to Rome.

On the other side Hanibal played the lion, besieged Tarentu^, and wan it,
after that the Romans had before won it, and possessed it 100. years and more:
how beit Marcellus hindered Hanibal of his purpose sundry times, and gave him
diverse overthrows: for of all the Roman captains Marcellus matched Hanibal
either in policy, counsel, wit, or any other stratagem devised, of whom
Hanibal said, that he dealt with an enemy that could be never quiet conqueror
nor conquered: and so he spoke of The saying of Hanibal of Fab. Maximus.
Fabius Maximus, when he had again won Tarentum, saying, The Romans have
also their Hanibal.

Hanibal yet triumphed of his victories, and was emboldened by his good fortune
to march forward, thinking to invade the city of Rome, came and camped within
24. furlongs of Hanibal camped within 3. miles of Rome.
Rome, which is but three miles, and from thence he came with two thousand
horses so near unto Rome, that riding from the gate Colnia unto Hercules
temple, he had leisure to Hanibal came to Romes gate.
view at his pleasure the situation and walls of Rome, and might at that time
have conquered Rome, if he had then gone forward with his victories: but he
feared the Consuls and retired: for both the Consuls came with an army against
him: and to Eutrop 3.
increase the fame of the Affricanes, Asdrubal slew both the Scipios, which so
long had been conquerours in Spain. Eutropius says, that they were rather by
train beguiled, then vanquished by manhood.

About this time a great part of Sicilia was recovered by Marcellus the Consul:
but Hanibals fortune continued still, though he had diverse overthrows of
Marcellus and of Fabius Maximus, two worthy Roman captains: yet he was far
before hand in victories, and did much more harm to the Romans then Pyrrhus,
Mithridates, Philip, or Antiochus the great. Read the whole 3 Decade of Liuie.
After that Hanibal had thought to have invaded Rome, he retired to Campania,
and upon the sudden he assaulted Cneus Fuluius being then in Italy, slew him,
and eight thousand ofhis people: but Hanibals head was much occupied about
Marcellus, never ceasing to lay ambushes in every place to murder him, until
at length he laid certain bands of Numidians Florus lib. 2. cap. 6.
in a grove to entrap the enemies passing to and fro. Marcellus coming to view
this grove and the situation of that place, fell unfortunately into Hanibals
ambush, where he was compassed on either side with his enemies, and fighting
then most Marcellus slain.
valiantly was slain.

Hanibal being advertised that Marcellus was slain, he was so glad (in respect
that Marcellus ever hindered his victories Liuie lib. 8.
and most troubled him of all the Roman captains) that Hanibal supposed
better ofhimselfe, with hope he should meet no more with such as Marcellus
was: but he was deceived: he met with an other Scipio, though in truth two
were slain by Asdrubal in Spain before: but this Scipio revenged their Scipio
requited the slaughter of the Romans.
deaths, and fully requited all injuries that the Romans received, with the
slaughter of many thousand Affricanes, with the subduing of Carthage and
Numantia, and with the conquest of Hanibal with both his brethren, Asdrubal and
Mago.

Until this time Hanibal excelled all the captains of the Liui in the end of
the 2. and 3. Decade.
world, as he spoke ofhimselfe, if he might have conquered Scipio. Now the
state of Carthage changed, and the fortune of Affrike fell, and now the Romans
began again to be advanced: for after that Scipio had won new Carthage in
Spain, where the Affricanes had all their gold and silver and furniture for
war remaining, sending to Rome such hostages of the best Affricanes taken,
amongst whom Mago Hanibals brother Mago Hanibals brother sent to Rome.
was sent also with the residue, there was great mirth in Rome of these news.

Now while Scipio conquered Carthage in Spain, Q. Fabius Plutar in Fab.
Maximus recovered Tarentum in Italy: for diverse cities of Italy hearing what
victories Scipio had in Spain, revolted from Scipio conquered Carthage.
Hanibal, and yielded to the Romans, as Capua, Salapia, and others in like
manner: all the Spaniards took part with Scipio against Hanibal, after that
Scipio had subdued Carthage, discomfited Asdrubal, and vanquished the two kings
Mandocius and Iudibilis. Scipio having sent before to Rome great spoils, he
himself returned to Rome after he had gotten in Spain in one year 69. cities.

Now Hanibal began to decline from his former fortune, Asdrubal sent for out
of Spain, to whom battle was given where he was slain.
sent for his brother Asdrubal out of Spain, who delivering his place of
government unto one Hanno a noble captain of Carthage, came with a great army
to Italy, where he was by Marcus Liuius the consul met at Sena a city of
Apulia, where battle was given to Asdrubal. Of that battle Plutarch reports,
that fifty six thousand were slain of the Affricanes, and Asdrubal
himself: so that the overthrow of that battle at Sena was almost as great, as
the overthrow which was given to the Romans at the battle of Cannes: yet
Eutropius says, that Asdrubal fell into the ambushments which of set purpose
were laid for him by Claudius Nero, and Liuius Salinator.

These, to spite Hanibal the more, they set up Asdrubals head Sol. lib. 15.
upon a pole, and they sent to Hanibal notice of these news: this grieved not
Hanibal a little, to see his brothers head set Liui. lib. 27.
before his tent, his other brother Mago prisoner at Rome, and himself in some
despair of his country: yet Hanibal when he saw his brothers head, said,
Cannam, Trebiam, and Thrasimenum Hanibals words at the sight of his brothers
head.
fraterno capite pensauimus: reviving much his heavy heart with the
remembrance of so many Consuls, Dictators, and captains heads of the Romans
slain at the three great battles of Cannas, Trebia, and Thrasimene. Even then
Hanibal was called for into Affrike: for Scipio the year before was made
Hanibal called to Affrike.
Consul at Rome, and sent by the Senate to Affrike in the fifteenth year after
this second war which began by Hanibal, Florus lib. 2. cap. 6.
where all Affrike was in such doubt of Scipio, that of necessity they did
send for Hanibal, and yet before he came, Scipio overcame the valiant captain
Hanno, slew 11. thousand of his Scipio his victories in Affrike.
soldiers, took his tents with 4500. of his soldiers, and again he took
Syphax king of Numidia or of Massylia prisoner, because he aided the
Affricanes, invaded his tents and Eutrop. lib. 3.
sacked them, and sent king Syphax with the most nobles of Numidia prisoners to
Rome, with an infinite spoil: of which news Rome rejoiced not a little.

But now to Hanibal, who after he had been such a scourge to Rome for 16.
years before he was called to Affrike, it is written in Plutarch, that after
the last battle which he had in Italy with Sempronius, before he took the sea,
he set up a triumphing A monument of Hanibal.
arche or pillar by the temple of Juno Lucina, in the which arch were briefly
engraven his noble victories, both in the Punicke and Grecke tongue, for a
memorial of his being in Italy: and after he sailed to Leptis, and from thence
to Zama, and there when Plutarch. in S^pione.
it was told Hanibal of the state of Affrike, and the victories which Scipio
had had and like more to have, considering that Sardinia, Sicilia and Spain
were lost, and now the wars were driven out of Italy into Affrike, where
Syphax king of Numidia was taken, Carthage spoiled, and in great want, and all
Affrike in despair: he was hereby bent to peace, and entreated with Scipio for
peace, which was offered upon these conditions, that Eutrop. lib. 3*
the Affricanss should pay to the Romans 500. thousand pou^ds. But after long
talk between Scipio and Hanibal, no peace was agreed upon, insomuch that
Hanibal was constrained to make his last battle: this field was appointed to
be fought, where they prepared themselves to battle by the city of Zama, where
The battle in Zama.
Scipio had the victory. In this battle Masinissa king of Numidia did
valiantly: this of a young boy affected much Scipio, and he was a sure friend to
the Romans al his life. Hanibal was welnigh Hanibal fled.
taken in this battle: but he escaped, and left his tents behind him, where
were found 20. thousand pounds of silver, and 800. thousand pounds of gold,
with infinite other treasures.

After this victory as Scipio came from the battle, he met with Scipios
victories at Zama.
Vermina king Siphax son, who at that instant brought an army to aid the
Affricans: he likewise was put to flight, and followed into Carthage gate. When
the Carthagineans heard that Scipio was marching toward them, they were much
dismayed Eutrop. lib 3.
thereby, and sent to entreat for peace being advertised that Hanibal was
overthrown and put to flight: this peace was granted Peace granted to the
Carthagineans.
by Scipio unto Carthage, upon such conditions as pleased best the conqueror.

Now after that Affrike was conquered, no nation then was ashamed to be
overcome by the Romans, for Affrike was made a province, and as it were an open
passage to increase and enlarge Affrike was made a province to the Romans.
the empire of Rome. When Scipio had brought the Affricanes subject under the
Romans, before he departed from Africa, he restored Masinissa to his kingdom
again, adding thereunto the best part of king Siphax country. After this,
Scipio entered into Rome with pomp and great triumph: of the manner thereof I
shall have better cause to set down in the Roman history.

Thus was the end of the second Punick war, which endured Mel^nct. lib. 2.
Chron.
19. years, as Eutropius says, others affirm but 17. years. There is an
history extant in Appia^, how Hanibal and Scipio fought hand Scipio and Hanibal
fought hand to hand.
to hand in this battle, and after them how Masinissa and Hanibal fought very
egerly with such bloody strokes, that both were rescued twice or thrice. Read
Appian and Polibius of this battle. We read not of such a triumph as Scipio
had, though many had more shows in plates, treasures, captives, and prisoners,
as Silla, Marius, Pompey, Caesar, with others: yet the conquest of one Hanibal
was such a thing, all Affrike being on his side, and almost Hanibal of any one
man most plagued Rome.
all Italy, as did more advance the triumph of Scipio, then all the aforesaid
triumphs: for during the space of 17. years the Romans had more to do with
one Hanibal, then they had with all the kings of Asia and Europe at one time.

The battles of this second war of Africa were equal to either Alexander,
or Xerxes, as the battle of Ticinu^ where Sempronius The six great battles in
the second Punicke war.
the Consul was slain: the second at the river Trebia where Pub. Aemilius the
Consul was slain: the third at the lake Thrasimene where Manlius the Consul
was slain, and all Read Plut. in Hanib. of the 2. war.
his army: the fourth at Cannes: the fifth at Sana: and the sixth at Zama where
Hanibal was put to flight. And yet these two famous captains, had some enemies
at home that envied their glory and great renown. It was a common saying,
Hanibal had in Carthage his Hanno, and Scipio had in Rome his Fabius: but
because I shall have occasion to speak of these two valiant captains in
diverse other places, I will briefly pass to the third wars of Affrike,
which happened 52. years after these second wars.

Now what dealings fell in other countries during the time of these 17. years
wars, you shall read that about the beginning of this second war, that
Ptolomey Philopater king of Egypt, he had wars against the Jews, spoiled
Jerusalem, profaned the temple of Solomon, and troubled all Judea. This very
time the Rhodians waged wars against the Bizantians, and the people of Creete
had wars with the nations about Polibius lib. 4.
them called the Gnosians and Litians. Polibius in his fourth book likewise
says, that Mithridates king of Pontus had wars with the king of Sinopenses.

About this time the wars of Syria began between Antiochus the great king
of Asia, and Ptolomey Philopator king of Wars between Antiochus the great,
and Philopator.
Egypt: for Hanibal fled this time from Affrike to Asia to Antiochus, after he
was conquered by Scipio at Zama. During these Punicke wars, Hiero the king of
Sicilia died, which aided the Affricanes against the Romans in the first
wars, and his son named Hieronimus succeeded him, who for his great
insolency and pride was slain by his own people. This time the Macedonians
had a great overthrow by the Romans by the city Appolonia, at what time
Nenius Crispus was general for Rome. Likewise Nicanor surnamed Sicamber, had
Polib. lib. 5.
the like overthrow by the king of Orchades.

During this war, Attalus king of Asia, Pleuratus king of Three kings became
in league with the Romans.
Thracia, and Scerdiletus king of Illyria, became in league with the Romans: at
what time war was proclaimed by the Romans against king Philip of Macedonia.
This time reigned in Parthia Pampatius, otherwise by Iustine called Phrahartes,
the third king of Parthia. Liuie does write, that about this time a child
was borne with a Sowes head, and other fabulous Liui. lib. 31.
things in that place, as an ox to speak with man's voice. The Samaritans
annoyed much Judea this time. The Romans lost more Senators, Consuls,
noblemen, and gentlemen, in this The second war of Affrike annoyed much the
Romans.
second war of Affrike, then they did in conquering of Macedonia, Egypt,
Syria, and Asia. And yet in civil wars between Silla and Marius, I find in
Eutropius such slaughters of Consuls, Praetors, Aediles and Senators, as the
number shall be set down in the civil wars of Rome.

CHAP. III.
Of the third and last Affricane wars between the Romans and the
Carthagineans, which endured four years: of the overthrow of Carthage and
Numantia: of the ruin and last conquest of Africa by the Romans.

THe state of Affrike being by their last second war weakened, and almost
brought to nothing by the Romans, the Affricanes were two and fifty years in
The third wars of (...) began 52. years after the second war.
recovering any strength, either to defend themselves or to offend others: in
the mean time the Romans very ambitious, and very impatient to hear of any
kingdom to flourish, having waged war with the Affricanes 24. years the
first time, and 17. years the second time, and that out of Italy such nations
and sundry kings, yea with all Africa, which is described to be welnigh the
third part of the world: having, I say conquered all Affrike, and Libya,
Wars against the Macedonians.
the Romans proclaimed war against Philippe king of Macedonia: there T.
Quintus Flaminius had such good success, that peace was concluded upon such
conditions as pleased Flaminius.

Then had they wars against the Lacedaemonians, vanquished them and their
general called Nabides: submission was made to the Romans, and peace also
granted to them upon the like condition, as was granted to Philippe. After
this ensued wars in Syria against Antiochus the great, whom likewise Wars
in Syria against Antiochus the great.
the Romans so pursued after diverse overthrows, that his tents were invaded,
and Antiochus himself was put to flight at the battle of Magnesia, by
Cornelius Scipio, surnamed Asiaticus.

The Romans began to be in such admiration with all Asia and Europe, having
already subdued all Africa, that the name of a Roman was a very terror unto
those kings that were furthest off. The Affricanes, while the Romans were
busy in Asia, they began to quarrel with king Masinissa, a sure and a
constant friend to the Romans, being in arms in person against the
Affricanes, during the time of all the second wars. The Romans hearing of
these news, sent Melanct. lib. 2. Chron.
ambassadors to Carthage, to require them to withdraw from Numidia, and to
cease the wars from their old friend Masinissa: the Carthagineans refused to
obey the Romans, whereupon the third battle was taken in hand against the
Carthagineans, in the year after the building of Rome six hundredth and four:
yet Eutropius says, six hundredth and one, and in the 52. year after the
second battle finished.

The Consuls took their voyage from Rome to invade Carthage. In this journey
Scipio, nephewe to Scipio Affricanus, Wars against Carthage.
was deputed general of the army, a man well beloved, and much reverenced,
for that he was a passing and good captain, ready and very circumspect of
his charge, by whom the Consuls with the army were twice saved at the
besieging of Carthage, to the great honor of Scipio their general.

The Carthagineans, being not so strong, neither so able to resist the violence
of the Romans as they were in the time of Asdrubal and Famea, 2. captains
over Carthage.
Hanibal, appointed two valiant men named Asdrubal and Famea, to be captains
of Carthage, to whom the charge of Carthage was given: these two iolie
captains, Asdrubal and Famea, so much sought to avoid the meeting of Scipio,
as they thought to prolong the wars by keeping off, rather then by coming
into battle: for the names of Scipios was terrible to the Affricanes.

Hereby the renown of Scipio was such, that the Senate called him home to
Rome, to have the honor of Consulship, Scipio made Consul.
being yet but a very young man: and before he should be sent to assault
Carthage, some dissension fell between the Senate, Debating at Rome about the
destruction of Carthage.
whether Carthage should be quite destroyed or no. Some thought that Carthage
being so strong a city, would never long be quiet with the Romans: others
thought that Rome should want the friendship of Carthage, if Carthage should be
destroyed: it was at last agreed, that the general Scipio, should do as
pleased him, by occasions given of the enemy.

Upon this Scipio was sent again to invade Carthage, about which time
Masinissa died, after that he had lived ninety and seven years, who left
behind him 44. sons, whom he Masinissa died.
committed to the faith of Scipio, and amongst whom Masinissa requested Scipio
to distribute his kingdom: which being Eutrop. lib. 4.
done, Scipio went and besieged Carthage, kept out victuals from the city,
having also given them many hard and sharp battles as well by water as by
land, whose good success happened all well at last to Scipio: for after he
had conquered them both by sea and by land, then he applied his force to
destroy Carthage, a town of great strength, and very populous, a great and a
large city of six Germane miles compass, and two Germane miles diameter
every way. This Carthage was first builded by the people of Tire, and was by
them called Byrsa. Byrsa.


Scipio commanded the city to be rased from the ground, The destruction of
Carthage, before called Byrsa.
giving license to as many as would save themselves, to go out of Carthage: at
what time 50. thousand saved themselves by escaping away, the rest so
despaired, that some poisoned themselves, some killed themselves, and the most
part burned themselves. Asdrubal their general fled to Scipio for mercy,
Melanct. lib. 2.
who hearing that his wife and children would not save themselves, but
willingly died within Carthage, he also killed The burning of Carthage endured
16. days.
himself. The burning of Carthage endured 16. days.

During which time, Polibius (who writes all the Affricane history) says,
that Scipio beholding the ruinous state of Carthage, and the lamentable
destruction of the people, recited a Latin verse weeping, Illa dies veniet cum
fato Troia peribit. And being demanded why he wept and used those words, He
answered, I weep for that I think others shall see of Rome, that which I see
now of Carthage: for that shall come (said Scipio) that Rome shall likewise
perish, such is the misery and state of this world: and so fell it to Rome in
the time The sayings of Scipio of Rome, concerning Rome.
of Totilas king of the Goths, 700. years after the burning of Carthage.

When Carthage was thus destroyed, the rest of the Affricanes yielded all their
towns, which were in the beginning of the wars in number 300. Also they
yielded 200. thousand armories which they had in Lybia, 3000. pieces of
artilleries, and all other engines and instruments of wars, as though they
would never again take war in hand: yet when Carthage was by the
commandment of the Senate reedified in Affrike Strabo lib. 17.
22. years after that it was destroyed by Scipio Aemilianus, surnamed by the
victory Affricanus the younger, thither went diverse citizens of Rome to dwell.
This city was begun by Caius Grachus, and afterward was fully restored to her
former state and beauty by Julius Caesar, and his nephew Octa. Augustus his
successor in the Empire. After the burning of Carthage 14. years, Eutrop. lib.
4.
was likewise Numantia a city in Celtiberia destroyed by the Melanct. lib. 2.
same Scipio Aemilianus, a city that did much annoy the Romans, of great force
and power a long time, insomuch that the overthrowe of Numantia was more
terrible then Carthage: for they were brought to that famine within the city,
and yet would not yield themselves, that some killed themselves, some The
desperate minds of the Numantines.
with poison, some with the sword, and some with fire: at last, like desperate
people, they burned the town and themselves.

While Scipio laid siege to Numantia, news came from Rome Numantia destroyed
by Scipio Aemilianus.
that Tyberius Grachus was slain in such seditious quarrels as Tyberius
himself began: the cause being opened to Scipio of Tyberius his death, he
recited a Greek verse of Homer, saying to the company, (...) that is, let him
die with the like death, that commits such a fault. But that verse cost
Scipio his life: for after he returned from Numantia Scipios saying of Lib.
Gracchus.
home, for that he said Tyberius was justly slain, Scipio was found the next
morning dead in his bed. This was the end of Scipio Affricanus the younger, he
to be killed in Rome for his service to his country, as his graundfather
Scipio Affricanus was banished out of Rome, to die in other countries.

But to return to end this third and last wars of the Affricanes with the
Romans: though Carthage and Numantia were Eutrop. lib. 4.
overthrown, yet in Numidia usurped Iugurth the kingdom, who after he had
slain both his brethren Adherbal, and Hiempsal, thought to withstand the
justice and revenge of the Romans herein: for king Myrpsa who succeeded
Masinissa, left these Iugurth revolted from the R^manes.
three sons, Iugurth, Adherbal, and Hiempsal: all these were friends to the
Romans, and therefore the Senate sent Calphurnius the Consul with an army: but
he was corrupted with money by king Iugurth, gave him and concluded such a
peace as contented not the Romans, and therefore it was forthwith infringed.
Then Albinus Posthumus was sent the next year, who likewise had no good
success, for that he committed the battle to his brothers guiding, who fought
against the Numidians very unfortunately.

The Romans being not a little offended with these news, sent the third time
Quintus Cecilius Metellus, who with his wisdom, sobriety, and courage,
discomfited Iugurth in many Iugurth vanquished.
battles: of the which read Salust of the wars of Iugurth. This Metellus
ouerthrewe him, and took all his Elephants, Metellus.
and now when Metellus was at the point to have finished this victory over
Iugurth, Caius Marius came from the Senate, Iugurth.
and succeeded him: he most easily overcame both Iugurth king of Numidia, and
Bochus king of Mauritania, who assisted Iugurth Bochus king of Mauritania.
in this war against the Romans: yet Eutropius says, that both Metellus and
Marius had triumphs granted them by the Senators over Iugurth.

After Iugurth we read nothing worth the memory in Affrike. In the later end
of this third war, there were five triumphs Five triumphs in Rome at one
time.
together at Rome: one by Marcus Iunius, who vanquished the Danes in France:
the second by Minutius Rufus, who overcame the Scordicians, Triballians in
Macedonia: the third by S. Cepio, who subdued the Portugals in Spain: and the
two other triumphs which Metellus and Maurius had over Iugurth. And thus ended
the third and last wars in Affrike, which continued four years.

Of this Affricane wars there are many writers as Polibius, Liuius, Appian,
Eutropius, Melancthon, and others: but of the people, their country, their
cities, their manners and antiquity, Strabo. lib. 17.
read the 17. book of Strabo, where you shall read of Affrike, and Libya at
large. I did nothing but briefly run over the history, and took of every
writer herein so much as I thought good to finish the history, and the rather
for that it is a known history to many.

Thus from the beginning of the first war, until the end of the last war,
are accounted a hundred and eight years: so From the begiuning of the first,
until the end of the 3. and last 108. years.
long they continued in wars against the Romans, at length all were brought
under the Romans, as were of Affrike habitable. So the Romans had of all
Europe dominion, saving of some dwelling beyond the river Ister, and of some
others that dwell between the river of Rheine and Tanais: even so had they the
government over all Asia, saving the Scythians, the Indians, and the Bactrians,
which the Romans made no Strabo lib. 17.
great account of, being so barbarous people, and so far from them.

OF THE ANTIQVITIE OF old Italy first called Ianicula, and then Saturnia: of
the beginning of the Kings of the Latins, the first kingdom of Italy: of
their laws and governments from Faunus until Aeneas, and from Aeneas until
Romulus.
Now to the greatest and last Monarchy of the world, I mean the Romans,
which by Daniel is also set forth as the other three before: for Macedonia,
Greece, Annius lib. 1.
and Italy, are by the name of Isles named, where Iaphet and his offspringes
took first possession: for Iauan the son of Iaphet, which of Melancthon is
supposed to be of profane Genesis 10.
writers called Ianus, with his four sons, Elisha, Tharsis, Kittim, and
Dodanim, inhabited first the Isles of the Gentiles, which were divided in their
lands, every man after his tongue, and after their families in their Nations.
Of this Kittim the Prophet Isai speaks, and Isai. 25.
also Jeremy in this sort to the rebellious Jews, Ite in Cedar and insulam
Kittim, etc. Go ye into the Isles of Kittim far off, take diligent heed,
and see whether such things be there, they change not their gods, but Israel
have changed me for idols.

This Kittim is mentioned often times in the Prophets and Kittim.
in the book of Nombers, where it is said, The ship shall come from the
coasts of Kittim and subdue Ashur, and shall subdue Eber: and again in
Ezechiel, The company of the Assyrians have made their banckes of Iuorie,
brought out of the Isles of Kittim: so that by Kittim is meant Greece and
Italy by the best learned Jeremy cap. 2.
Divines, and so expounded by the 72. interpreters: for Moses does warrant
these antiquities, concerning the five sons of Sem, that from Elam the eldest
son of Sem, the Persians have Number. 24. 27.
their beginning: from Assure the second son of Sem, the Assyrians: from
Arphaxad the third son, the Chaldeans: from Aram, the Syrians: even so from
the posterity of Cham, the Egyptians, Ethiopians, and Libyans: and from the
children of Iaphet, the most part of Europe and of lesser Asia.

But how grossly and how foolishly do profane Historiographers err in their
fabulous antiquities, which with fained, How fabulous profane writers are in
antiquities.
false, and strange names oppose themselves against the prophetical histories?
for the Jews committed to their superstitious Rabbis all knowledge, the
Egyptians to their fabulous priests, the Persians to their insolent Magi, and
the Greeks even to their own fancies, following their imaginations in all
their histories, that of all men they are reprehended, and the cry of all
Chronicles against them, naming it Graecia mendax, Graeci pueri and fabulosi:
and therefore Kittim is the warrant for the antiquity of the Italians, as Chus
is for the antiquity of the Ethiopians, and Lud for the Lydians, and so of the
rest.

And therefore I will return to old Italy, which had diverse (...) de an^.
Hetrur^e.
names, as Ianicula of Ianus, whom the Greeks call Oynotria, Camesena of
Cameses, Saturnia of Saturnus, Hesperia of Hesper, and Italia of Italus: the
which to write particularly I should but gather fables together, of which
Fabius Pictor is full. Julius Solinus says, that Italy is set forth by so
many, and specially Solin. cap. 7.
by M. Cato, that there can be nothing written, but the diligence offormer
authors have prevented i^ for the description Strab. lib. 6. Cap. 2. and 3.
thereof read Solinus and Strabo: therefore I leave to the Jews their
Talmudistes full of lies, to the Egyptians their priests full of fables, to
the Greeks their innouacions and inventions full of uncertainty, and so
forth of others: for if I should write what I find of the antiquity of old
Italy, by them that were never in Italy by 2000 miles, I mean Berosus of
Babylon, and 10. Annius, I should be but tedious.

From Ianus first coming into Italy, which was by them thought to be Noah,
until Cameses time, is 141. years: so long Italy was called Ianicula: from
Cameses which was in Ninus time, until Italus or Hesperus two brethren, 430.
years: during Annius co^putation of the antiquity of old Italy before the
building of Rome was 1450. years.
which time Italy was called Camisena or Saturnia: for that these two reigned
kings in Italy at one time. From this Italus whom the Greeks called Atlas,
and by who^ the country was named Italia, from which time to the last
destruction of Troy were 454. years: from the ruin of Troy to the building of
Rome four hundred and thirty years. So long Italy was by the Thuscans,
Hetrurians, Samnites, Sabines, Fidenats, Vuiens, Volscans, Latins, with
others, inhabited before the name of the Romans were known: for first in
Italy dwelt Greeks, Arcadians, Salentines, Lacedaemonians, Cicilians,
Rutilians, with many more nations, as Myrsilus a Lesbian writer does note: of
the Annius de antiq. Etruria.
which Annius in his institutions of the antiquity of Etruria, of their laws
and government during the time of their magistrates called Lucumones, has more
then is necessary written.

In like manner Fab. Pictor a noble learned Roman of the stock and house of
Fabians, endeavored with all his study to prove the antiquity of old Italy
from Ianus time, which Fab. Pictor. Deau^o seculo.
he most surely accounted to be old Noah, attributing to the Thuscans so much
as Annius before. In his first book he entreats from Ianus and Saturnus
time, until Romulus time: in his second book from Romulus forward: for all
agree that the late Romans after Romulus time have had their discipline, their
religion, their laws, their divination, and all such ceremonies from the
Hetruscans. The like traueile M. Cato in Myrsilus de bell. Pelasgico.
in his fragments De originibus took: the like pain as the before named
Annius and Fab. Pictor did for the antiquity of old Italy. I will come
therefore to the kings of the Latins, which were the first kings that we
read of in Italy, where reigned before Aeneas coming to Italy five kings,
Read in Cato de Fragmentis.
as Ruffinus affirms: but as Annius, Fabius Pictor, and M. Cato, reigned
twelve kings, and from Aeneas until the time of Romulus, sixteen kings
reigned: of the which briefly I mean to speak a little, setting down the
names of their kings and the number, of the time that they reigned: and for
that Aeneas was prima Imperij Romani origo, the first beginning Read Annius de
antiq. Hetru.
and the original of the Roman Empire, and the only author of gens Iulia,
from whence Julius Caesar, Augustus, and the Emperors of Rome come off: I will
therefore set down the time of his coming into Italy, his continuance and
his posterity after him, until Romulus time the first builder and founder of
Rome.

Aeneas, after the Greeks had taken Troy, having gathered the noblest and best
men with all the strength and treasures of Troy, took the Castle Ilion for his
defense, until he perceived that he could not resist the violence of the
Grecians, Strabo. 5.
determined to escape the enemies, and to send some of the best before with
abundance of treasures to mount Ida, and there to tarry until Aeneas and the
rest saw their time to escape: which being performed, they departed from Ida,
took the sea Helespont, into Thracia, from Thracia to Macedonia, as Beroaldus
affirms: from Macedonia to Cicilia, Beroal. lib. 2.
from thence into Italy: where then Latinus reigned King of the Country, with
whom the Rutiles people dwelling at Ardea, a Town distant from Rome a hundred
and three score furlongs held war. Of this Latinus, Aeneas was so enterteined
and his army, that he granted Aeneas a place to inhabit, not far from
Laurentum, where Latinus might use Aeneas aid in this war.

Aeneas builded a Town for his aid against the Rutiles, and named it after
his wifes name Lauinium: for he grew in such favor with king Latinus, then
being in wars with Mexentius, and with others, that after two or three
overthrows by the Troianes given to Mexentius king of Tyrrhenum Halycar. lib.
1.
and to Turnus king of the Rutiles, who should have married Lauinia before
Aeneas, for that she was espoused to Turnus first. Aeneas good success in
wars was such being king over all the Trojans, and so named of his soldiers,
that Latinus gave his daughter and heir of the kingdom to Aeneas, Latinus gave
his daughter to Aeneas.
that after Latinus was slain in battle, Aeneas was the right and lawful
king of the Latins, where he reigned three years and died, leaving his son
Ascanius to succeed him king of the Latins. Now before Aeneas time reigned
five kings over the Latins, by the names of

Ianus. Saturnus. Picus. Faunus. Latinus. the sixth Aeneas.
These kings reigned about 150. years in Italy before Ruffi. de Latinor.
origin.
Aeneas came to Laurentum, which was about the time of David, who began his
kingdom in the four hundred thirty four year after that the Israelites
left Egypt, in the beginning of the eight Iubilee.

Yet Annius in his Chronicles of the Hetruscanes says, that Annius de antiq.
Hetruria.
after Hesperus died, his brother succeeded him named Italus in Vetulonia, the
chief Town at that time in Italy: this Italus had a daughter named Roma, who
builded Capua in Latio, in the place where now Rome is builded upon the one
side of mount Auentine, as Fabius Pictor affirms in his book De origin
Vrbis Romae: this does Annius set down in this sort. Fab. Pictor.


1 Roma reigned in Latio years. 46. 2 After Roma her son Romanessus. 79. 3
After him Picus Priscus. 57. 4 After Picus, Faunus Priscus. 30. 5 After Fannus
his daughter Agilla. 54. 6 Then reigned Vulcanus. 36. 7 After Mars, surnamed
Ianus junior. 23. 8 After Ianus succeeded Seculus surnamed Saturnus. 36. 9
Picus Junior. 34. 10 Fannus Junior. 24. 11 Latinus Aeneas father in law. 38 12
And after Latinus reigned Aeneas as his heir married to his daughter. 3.
In this both Annius and Fabius Pictor do agree, which years amount to 454.
years that Aeneas predecessors reigned before the destruction of Troy, and
before he was king of the Latins. Sempro. de diuisione Ital^.
Of this Roma which was Italus daughter, Rome was first named, as Sempronius in
his book of the division of Italy affirms, and says further, that Romulus
had his name given by the place named Roma, and not Roma from Romulus.

But Ruffinus and Functius says, that Ascanius began his kingdom over the
Latins, when Samson was Judge in Israel, No time certain of the nestruction
of Troy.
in the sixth Iubilee after Moses, which is an hundred years before David's
kingdom.

But omitting controversies, Ascanius being in quiet possession of the
kingdom, he caused a monument to be erected up in manner and sort like an
arche or a pillar, whereupon he caused this sentence to be written round
about that monument as follows: Patri deo Indigeti qui Numici amnis vndas
temperat. This pillar is made and consecrated to the Dionis. Halicar. lib. 1.
god of the Latins, who has power and sovereignty over the river Numicus.
Some say, that Aeneas made this in memory of his father Anchises: other say,
it was Ascanius doing in memory of his father Aeneas, who vanished away at the
river Numicus: others say, that the Latins did it in remembrance of their last
king Latinus: but how so ever it is, a grave there is as Halicarnassaeus
says, that it is composed fine Aeneas monument at the river of Numicus.
and artificially made of wood and stone in most curious manner: but I will be
brief, and omit these things, and will as I have promised, only set down
the names of the kings of the Latins.

2 Ascanius Aeneas son reigned after his father the second king of the
Latins: this Ascanius had a son named Lib. 1.
Iulus, of whom does Gens Iulia spring out. Ascanius is called in Halicar.
Eurilion, who reigned twenty eight years.

3 After Ascanius succeeded Syluius a brother of Ascanius, and a son unto
Aeneas by Lauina king Latinus daughter, whom Aeneas left great with child when
he died: she for fear of Ascanius, hid her self in mountains and in
wooddes, until she was brought to bed, and therefore her son was named
Syluius, after which name all the kings of The cause why the kings of Alba were
called Syluij.
the Albans were named Syluij: this reigned king after Ascanius, and Iulus
which was Ascanius son, who became a priest, and a religious man unto the
gods, which until the time of Augustus the family and stock of Iulia
remained and continued as great Bishops named mag ni Pontifices, or else as
high priests named summi Sacerdotes, among the Romans the only men of great
renown and fame. This Syluius reigned twenty nine years and dyed, and left
behind him Aeneas Syluius.

4 Aeneas Syluius reigned thirty one years, and left behind These kings are
set down in this order by Halicar. lib. 1.
him a son named Latinus Syluius, the fifth king of the Latins.

5 Latinus reigned after his father fifty years, and left behind a son
named Alba Syluius, which was the sixth king of the Latins.

6 Syluius Alba reigned thirty nine years.

7 After him succeeded Capetus Syluius the seventh king of the Latins, 24.
years. Eusebius named this king Atyn. Eutrop. lib. 1. does call him Epidum:
so does Ovid in Metamorph. Read Manethon supplem.
lib. 14.

8 Capetus left behind him Capis Syluius the 8. king of the Latins, who
reigned 28. years: of this king Capua a City in Italy was first builded.
Eutrop. lib. 1.


9 After this succeeded Calpetus Syluius the ninth king of the Latins, who
reigned thirteen years, and left behind him a son named Tiberinus.

10 Tiberinus the tenth king of the Latins reigned 8. years and was slain in
a battle fought by the river Albula: Tiber first named Albula.
some say, that he was drowned in Albula, and therefore the rivers name was
altered and named Tiber, after the name of Tiberinus, which is that river that
runs through Rome: Annius in Cron. Etrusca.
this Tiberinus left a son to succeed him called Agrippa Syluius.

11 Agrippa Syluius reigned forty years, being the eleventh king of the
Latins.

12 Alladius Syluius the twelfth king of the Latins succeeded Agrippa, and
reigned nineteen years, whom Eutrop does call Remus Syluius, a wicked man
and a cruel tyrant, using many horrible attempts against God, and therefore
Eutrop. lib. 1.
was worthily slain by a thunder boult: for he went about to make the people
believe that he was a God: he would gape, and receive the lightning into his
mouth, but he and all his house was therewith consumed. Halic. lib. 1.


13 After him succeeded the thirteenth king of the Latins, which was named
Auentinus Syluius, which reigned thirty seven years: of this king mount
Auentine, one of the seven hills in Rome was named, for that this king
Auentinus was buried there. This time reigned Amazias king of Judah, brother to
Amos Isaiah his father, at what time reigned in Assyria Sardanapalus their last
king.

14 Procus Syluius succeeded the fourteenth king of the Latins, which reigned
twenty three years, who left the Read Annius Chron. of Hetruria of the
succession of these Latin kings until Romulus time.
kingdom to his eldest son Numitor Syluius, and left to his other younger
son, money and great wealth: but this Amulius drove his elder brother Numitor
out of his kingdom, and Numitor was constrained like a private man to lead
his life in the Country. Amulius having usurped upon his brother, studied to
root out and to make an end of his brothers house, to be the surer in his
kingdom: but he was slain in the Town of Alba by Romulus, who came of the
body of Numitor by his daughter Rhea, and (as Annius does write) begotten of
Amulius his uncle, by whom the kingdom of Alba descended unto Romulus, and was
the seventeenth king from Aeneas. This I have laid down as I found in Annius
and Halicarnassaeus word by word, whereunto agree Fabius Pictor, and M. Cato
in his fragments.

CHAP. I.
Of the first building of Rome by Romulus: of his government, laws, and
appointing of Magistrates after he had founded the city: of his wars with
the Sabines: of his conquestes and victories over these Sabines, Fidenats, and
of his triumph over king Acron.

IWill omit to write of the profane antiquity of the Tuscans, and of their
chief city Hetruria, of whom you may read These 3. wrote more then they
could prove of Italy, or more then is allowed by Myrsilus or Halic.
Sempronius, M. Cato, Fabius Pictor, and many others, where you may satisfy
your selves of many such fables as are to be found in profane histories: and
therefore I will begin the history of Rome from the Latins, and so briefly
pass unto Romulus the first builder and first king of Rome, whose lineall race
descended from the kings of the Latins, in the which kingdom reigned
successively sixteen kings before Romulus builded Rome from Aeneas time, as in
the histories of the kings of the Latins is declared.

And now in what Olympiad Rome was builded, the Chronicles cry out one
against another in such sort, that some say The history of the Latins.
that Rome was builded in the fifth Olympiad, some in the sixth Olympiad, some in
the eight, some in the ninth, and some in the twelfth Olympiad. But the best
agree, that Rome was builded in the seventh Olympiad: for yet profane
histories were not acquainted with the actions of time, for few or none wrote
in those days, or within three hundred years after: for Rome in Romulus a
warlike king.
the beginning was but a little town, and so from time to time increased her
Territories, and enlarged her Confines, first by Romulus policy in wars,
and secondarily by Numa Pompilius Numa Pomp. a peaceable prince.
wisdom in religion and peace.

At what time Phul Assure reigned the second king of new Assyria, for now the
monarchy of the Assyrians was taken away into Babylon after Sardanapalus time,
by Phul Belochus the father of this king: for the kingdoms of new Assyria or
of Babylon, of the Medes, and of Macedonia, began before the kingdom The
kingdom of Lydia began in the first Olymp.
of Rome the space of one Iubilee, which is but fifty years: and the kingdom
of Lydia began 26. years before Rome, in the first Olympiad. Thus at one time
almost five kingdoms began their government. About the name of Rome, diverse
opinions are: some say, that the Pelagians, after they had overcome the
greatest part of the world, and had subdued many nations, in the end did stay
there, and named it Rome first: some say, that after the destruction of Troy,
certain Trojans (to save themselves from the sword with their wives) took
sea, and were driven by wind to the Thuscan shore near to the river Tiber,
and that one Roma M. Cato defrag.
a Troiane lady named Rome, after her own name: others hold opinion, that it
was Romanus the son of Ulysses and of Circes, Fab. Pictor de aureo seculo.
that first named Rome: other say otherwise. Read Plutarch, Fabius Pictor,
and Cato, of the sundry opinions of Rome, you shall find all in Halic.

Many fables are written concerning the name of Rome, and as many about Romulus
birth, who (as the best writers agree Halicar. lib. 1.
) is the most likest to have first named Rome. This Romulus descended right
from the line of the kings of Alba, even Romulus lineally descended from Aeneas.
from Aeneas body, which was the first king of the Latins that became king of
Alba: for so were the kings of Alba before Ascanius time named, from whom
Romulus by succession lineally issued. The historic is known of the two
brethren, Numitor and Amulius the last kings of Alba: these brethren agreeed by
lotte for the kingdom to make division, the one to have the gold, silver,
jewels brought thither from Troy, ready money and goods, which fell by lotte
unto Amulius: and the other the kingdom which fell to Numitor. This had a Rhea
Romulus mother.
daughter named Rhea, of some named Syluia, of others Ilia: this was Romulus
mother afterward, though her uncle Amulius had put her to be one of the vestal
virgins, which by the law might not be married before thirty years of age,
unto whom Amulius had a special regard lest she should have children:
notwithstanding she was found with child against the profession of the vestall
virgins, and delivered of two twins.

This put Amulius in great fright for the kingdom, which Amulius hindered of
his purpose.
for all his sleightes in seeking means to destroy these two twins, he
could not hinder one jot of Gods providence herein: this Romulus grew in
time a goodly young man in height and strength passing all his people, he was
holy and religious, and much addicted to observe diuinations, and understanding
the lewd practices and wicked intention of Amulius from time to time without
consent of his graundfather Numitor they sluehim, and restored their
graundfather Numitor into the kingdom of Alba: and having many fugitive slaves
and banished men which came from diverse countries with Romulus and Remus to
kill Amulius, they thought good to build them a city in that place where they
both were brought up first, at what time strife began betwixt Romulus and
Remus the two Strife between Romulus and Remus.
brethren, about the placing of Rome, which could not agree before Romulus had
slain his brother Remus.

After whose death Romulus laid the first foundation of Rome the twenty one
of April, which day the Romans kept holy and in memory of the nativity of
their country: they kept a feast day which the old Thuscanes kept before, and
upon that day named the feast of Palilea: yet some write, that the foundation
of Rome was laid by Romulus the thirty of April, Fabius Pictor lib. 2.
Eutropius the second day of May.

But when he had builded Rome, and situated the City upon four little hills,
to them three other little hills afterward were added, whose names were written
by Fabius Pictor in this sort.

The first Mount named the mount Tarpeius. The second mount Quirinall. The
third mount Palatine. The fourth mount Caelius. Dionis. lib. 2.
The fifth mount Exquilinus. The sixth mount Auentinus. The seventh mount
Viminalis.
After Numitor his graundfather died, the kingdom of Alba fell unto Romulus by
inheritance: and after he once builded Rome, he was also by common consent of
all made king, which Romulus refused before he had seen some mystery by
divination wherein Romulus was very expert: but after that he had offered
sacrifice unto Jupiter, and saw light shining upon the left hand toward the
right hand, which among the old Hetruscans were signs of good success,
Romulus was persuaded by divination to take the kingdom of Dionys. Halic. lib.
2.
Rome upon him: he being king in his kingdom confirmed and made a law, that
no king should be in Rome after him, but such as by auguration had some happy
tokens of his success in government: this law continued not only all the
time of the Kings, but also in the time of the Consuls it was No king in Rome
without divination.
observed: that no Consul nor Dictator should be elected without consultation
with Augurers, according to Romulus law. read more in Halicar.

Now after that Romulus had builded Rome in this sort, Plutarch in Romulo.
and had gotten the kingdom of Alba into his hand (for now Numitor his
graundfather died) he divided his best fighting and chosen men into two
companies: in every one of 3000. footeme^ and 300. horse of the old Romans
called legions.
these companies were three thousand footmen, and three hundred horsemen,
which were called by the old Romans Legions. After this, he instituted a
common wealth, he ordained a hundred counselors which were named Patricians,
or Senators.

In the fourth month after Rome was builded, Romulus feigned certain plays
in Rome to draw people into the City, whereby he appointed by that means to
entice the Sabines daughters, and the women of Alba to come to Rome to see the
plays: at what time a number were ravished by Romulus and his soldiers: the
number of women which were thus ravished, some say were but thirty, others say
five hundred twenty seven, and others say six hundred eighty The rape of the
Sabines virgins.
three: of the which maids Romulus took but one only to him self, named (as
Plutarch calls her) Hersilia, a wise sober Virgin, and who afterward was the
mediation of peace betwixt the Romans and Sabines: and they say, Talassiues
was the watch word given by Romulus to his men, at that time when this
rauishment should be executed, which name was so much honored amongst the
old Romans, as Hymeneus was amongst the Grecians. For as the Greeks do
celebrate the feast of Hymeneus, and so honor him with songs at marriages:
even so the old Romans used the like ceremony of Talassiues, when any Roman
was married: in Greece, they used songs to Hymeneus at the marriages, in Rome
songs named Talassion.

I refer them that would feign delight them selves with Plutarch. in Romul,
those matters, to Fabius Pictor and to Plutarch, and I will briefly return to
the Roman histories which are long and large, for that the Romans of this
little poor beginning which you heard of (I speak of Romulus a mean man in
the beginning, Fabius lib. 2. De aure^ seculo.
and of Rome a little Town at the first) became so great in time, that it
devoured and swallowed up all the kingdoms Eutrop. lib. 1.
of the world: so Eutropius says, that the Roman Empire which at the first
beginning thereof was the least of al other, in process of time became the
most ample of all other Empires. Now while Romulus devised by all policy to
make Rome of some fame, Acron king of Ceminenses mistrusting the old
enterprises Plutarch.
of Romulus, and fearing the like attempt as he did to Fabius lib. 2.
the Sabines, began to make hot and violent wars upon him Eutrop. lib. 1.
with a puissant army, invaded Romulus territories, where Romulus met him
courageously, and (to avoid the slaughter of many) a combat was betwixt the
two kings in persons appointed, in the which combat Romulus killed Acron,
ouerwho^ Acron king of Cemnens. killed by Romulus.
he first triumphed and got the victory. This was the first battle that
Romulus began with such good success, that he overthrew the Ceminenses, the
Antenates, and the Crustumens, being aided by Seuis king of Etruria. Romulus
(to discharge his vow made to Jupiter) made his triumph over these nations,
hanging the armor and weapons of king Acron about the bow of a young oak,
which Romulus carried on his right shoulder marching on foot before the army
toward the city, with a royal song of victory. This was the first triumph of
Romulus, and the The first triumph in Rome.
first entry given into other triumphs that followed presently. After this
triumph of Romulus, the Sabines could not forget their injury for their
daughters and virgins ravished by Romulus, Tatius elected general for the
Sabines against the Romans.
but elected Tatius a gallant gentleman to be General of the Sabines, and to
revenge the wrong done by Romulus. Tatius besieged Rome: that time one named
Tarpeius was appointed captain of the Castle, whose daughter named likewise
Tarpeia, betrayed the whole City for a reward, which Tatius promised: some say
that Tarpeia was Tatius daughter.

By this treason of Tarpia, the Sabines entered Rome, and great war continued
betwixt the Sabines and the Romans 3. years.

But in time betwixt Romulus and Tatius peace was concluded, and they both
together reigned jointly, and governed Rome five years, Tatius dwelling by
mount Tarpeius, afterward called the Capitol, and Romulus on mount Palatium:
Wars between Tatius and Romulus.
but within a while in this five year Tatius was slain, and Romulus governed
himself and overcame the Antenates, the Veients, and other nations, triumphed
over them the second time. And when that Romulus had reigned thirty seven
years, after three several triumphs he died, of whose death diverse Read
Dionis. Halicar. lib. 2. and Eutrop. lib. 1.
opinions are of Romulus assencion into heaven in the sight of Proclus, and of
a voice heard he should be called Quirinus after his death: read Plutarch
concerning his vanishing away, and concerning his whole life. Romulus strength
and his whole force exceeded not above two thousand footmen, and not three
hundred horsemen, when he began his kingdom in Rome: but when Romulus died,
he left forty six thousand footmen, and a 1000. horsemen.

During the time of Romulus government reigned in Assyria Salmanasser 10.
years, by who^ Samaria was subdued, and the 10. Dionys. Halic. lib. 2.
tribes of Israel carried captive into Babylon. Also Senaherib his son reigned
after his father seven years, he likewise wasted and spoiled Judea in the time
of king Ezechias, until he was vanquished and al his army to the number of a
hundred twenty six thousand. In Lydia reigned two kings during Romulus time,
Haliagtes the 2. king, and Meles the 3. king. In the beginning of the Romans
kingdom the third kind of gouerme^t began in Athens after 17. kings government,
and then after 13. Judges. Now began the third alteration of the state
called Decennales principes, a magistrate that should continue ten years in
office, and then another elected into his room.

Now in that time that Romulus reigned, began in Rome diverse kinds of
magistrates and officers, laws and orders were by Romulus appointed for the
better government of the city of Rome, as Senators, Tribunes, Aediles, Celeres
and diverse other sacred and religious offices, as Flamines, Bishops, Foeciales,
Salij, vestal Nuns, southsayers and others: the right use of their offices
being not known to the reader, unless he be well read Romulus laws.
in histories, I have orderly as they were appointed by Romulus, here set down
as many magistrates, officers and offices, as were in Rome by Romulus first
instituted during his reign.

After that Romulus had builded Rome after the death of his brother Remus he
made these many laws.

1. First he divided the whole company of the multitude into three tribes, and
he divided the three tribes into 30. parts, which were called Curiae.

2. Then he elected one chief magistrate to govern Rome in his absence, which
was named Praefectus vrbis, as Viceroy, or as lieuetenant to Romulus, as Julius
Caesar and Augustus 750. years after Romulus time used the like.

3. Romulus made a choice of 300. stout and valiant soldiers called Celeres,
and a captain over them called 300. Celeres.
Tribunus Celerum, these were Romulus guard: the Tribune was as Esquire of the
body, or as captain of the guard, to defend him from any sudden assault, and
ready to execute the kings commandment.

4. Romulus appointed 12. men officers called Lictores, 12. Lictores.
that should carry tipstaues or rods to make room and way before the king.

5. He also appointed after them 12. othermen called Caduceatores, which were
appointed next the kings person before him to carry axes, or mases, as
Serieants at arms, an office of great antiquity in all countries of the
world: for we read in Homer that Agamemnon sent a Serieant at arms The
antiquity of Serieants at Arms.
called Talthubius to arrest Achilles for his abse^ce in the wars, and for
his disobedience to Agamemnon, being then appointed general for the Grecians
against the Troyans.

6. When Romulus had provided these officers for the sauegard of his person, he
likewise erected counselors, and made choice of a hundredth grave and wise men,
who for the honor of their place, and dignity of their calling, should be
named Senators, to govern and to foresee the Senators by Romulus first made.
dangers and perils of the city, to punish vice, and to reward virtue. These
were called by strangers, princes of Rome, to whom the king committed the whole
direction and correction of the city. The family and stock of the Senators
were called Patricij: for all Senators were elected out of the Patricians.

7. He appointed the place and the time where the Augurers and Southsayers
should use their divination touching The time and place of Augurers.
the events and proceedings of Rome, which should be before Sun rising, and
after sun setting: for Romulus himself carried the Augurers crooked staff
for his skill in divination.

8. Then he erected three Augurers with their orders Read Fenestella and Pom
L^tus of these laws.
and authorities, by whom all sacrifices and religious ceremonies were
solemnized. These three he elected out of the three tribes.

9. He instituted that no man might enter into the Senate to hear any cause
pleaded or consulted, before he were 25. years of age: he seemed to be of
Aristotle's opinion, that held, Iuuenem non esse Philosophiae idoneum.

10. After that Romulus had invented these many good and seemly decrees, to
set forth that little kingdom of Rome: Now last of all he made laws for
setting forth the dignity of a king, as to wear purple colors: for Romulus
The dignity of a king.
ware a coat of purple in grain: and upon that a long robe of purple color:
for this princely and rich color was only esteemed of the old Romans, and
so honored, that none might wear it but the kings of Rome, and after the
kings time, only the Dictators and Consuls.

11. Romulus instituted a feast in memory of Hersilia, and other Sabine
virgins which were ravished, by whose means peace was concluded between
Romulus and Tatius king of the Sabines. These feasts were called Matronalia.
Matronalia.


12. He also instituted the feast called Lupercalia, which Lupercalia.
was celebrated in Rome in memory of Romulus escape, when that he slew Aemilius
his father unknown, but taken for his uncle, he ran with a naked sword in
his hand from Alba, to the very place where the wolf gave him suck first.
Read Plutarch of Romulus life. They used at this feast a sacrifice in a den
under mount Palatine in the month of February, A sacrifice to Pan and to
Faunus.
in the honor of god Pan and Faunus.

Now Rome having her first foundation by Romulus, and much increased by the
policy and government of Romulus, that the confines of Rome extended into
diverse parts of Italy, and so enlarged by the wars of Romulus, and yet not 8
miles from the town of Rome, that Numa Pompilius who succeeded him not in
blood, but by election, for that he was a Sabine borne in the city of Cures,
and had married Tacia the only daughter and heir of Tatius the Sabine, who
before had governed Rome together with Romulus.

This Numa was entreated to accept the kingdom by ambassadors Numa Pompilius
the second king of Rome.
sent unto him from the people of Rome with one consent, who after a long
negative oration made unto Proclus and Valesus, and being urged thereunto both
by Sabines and Eutrop. lib. 1.
Romans, accepted against his will the government of Rome: after the Senators
bare rule by the space of five days, which was called interregnum between
Romulus and Numa, which Interregnum for five days.
was accounted one whole year.

This king was virtuous, godly; and religious, addicted altogether to govern
Rome with peace: for during the whole time of his reign, Numu waged no war,
but established laws, and framed such decrees and orders, as kept the people
which had been so long accustomed with wars, under Romulus in quietness and
tranquillity, which never happened in Rome, but only in Numas time, and once
in Augustus Caesar's time. When Numa was consecrated king of Rome by the
Augurers, he begins with the service of his gods, and therefore he
instituted bishops, and diverse kind of priests: he erected a college for the
vestal virgins: he appointed the holy Flamines, F^ciales, Salij.
and immortal fire, with honor and reverence to be kept by the vestal
virgins. These ceremonies he had from Greece: for the like ceremony was in
Athens by old women, in watching the holy lamp, and in Delphos in the temple
of Apollo. Ceremonies in Athens.


He founded diverse temples in Rome, with innumerable rites and ceremonies: he
first corrected the Calendar, though not so exactly, yet he so perfected it,
that then the Roman year The year corrected and augmented by Numa.
of ten months was made twelve, by adding January and February. Which Numa
not only added to the year of ten months, but he mended also the 10. month,
and the days of the months: he corrected the Kalenders which was also by
Romulus begun, but finished by Numa.

This continued from Romulus until Julius Caesar's time by the name of Romulus
year, who then caused the year to begin in March, a month which he
consecrated to his supposed father Mars, not knowing then Aemilius to be his
father whom he slew then. But to Numa, in whose time a great plague reigned
in Rome, at what time fell from heaven a brazen or copper target, and lighted
between Numas hand called Ancylia. Of this target I shall speak in another
place.

The laws that Numa taught then to the people being rude and ignorant, were no
otherwise made, then the laws of Lycurgus Dissimulation in Religion.
in Sparta, or of king Minos in Creete: for Numa made the people to believe
that the laws which he gave, were from the gods sent into him by the nymph
Aegiria, with whom he had sundry times conference in mount Auentine. So did
Lycurgus admonish the Spartans with the laws from Apollo, which Lycurgus
Lycurgus.
(as he said) brought from Delphos into Greece: in like fort Minos made his
people believe, that his decrees and Minoes.
laws were given to him by Jupiter in mount Curetes. So did Plat^iae Sil^t.
Silla make his soldiers believe, that he had some spirit in a little table
that hanged about his neck, that instructed him in all his wars. And so did
Sertorius by his white hind make Superstition soon believed.
his captains think, that he was sent from the goddess Diana.

Now Numa a peaceable and religious prince, advanced tillage in Rome, and
divided his people into diverse occupations: he limited bonds to the
territories of Rome, and took away all factions that held before with Romulus
and Tatius, and governed Rome with such justice and clemency, that all wars
and dissentions were forgotten in Rome: the temple of Ianus was shut, which was
an old custom in the time of peace, which continued the whole reign of Numa,
which was 43. years: for the Romans had no wars in all Numas time: for (as
Plato says) there is true government, and there Platoes saying of a king.
is a happy common wealth, where the mind of a wise Philosopher is joined to
the majesty of a king, where grave counsel is given, and good lessons taught,
the virtuous man rewarded, and the vicious man punished.

This good king lived of al others most happy in peace and The happy reign of
Numa.
quietness, all the days of his life: and the misfortune of five other kings
which after him succeeded, caused the honor of Numa to shine with more glory:
for (as Plutarch says) four of them died not their natural death, three were
killed with Plutarch in Numa.
treason, and the fourth was stricken with a thunder bolt, and burnt with
lightning, and the 5. driven out of his kingdom, and died in exile: so that of
the seven kings Numa only excelled, of whom some say that he had no children
but one daughter called Pompilia, which was married to C. Martius Coriolanus.
Pompilia.
Of this Pompilia was borne Ancus Martius the fourth king of Rome: some say
again, that Numa had four sons, named Pompo, Pinus, Calpus, and Mamercus:
and of these four The 4. sons of Numa.
descended the noblest races and most ancient houses of the Romans. Read of
this king more in Plutarch, and in Dionisius Halicar. lib. 1.
Halicarnassaeus. In Aethiope reigned while Numa lived and ruled Rome, a king
called Tarachus, which came to aid the king of Egypt against Tarachus.
Sanaherib king of the Assyrians, at what time the Empire of Egypt was divided
into twelve provinces, by equal portions betwixt 12. princes. When Numa
began his kingdom in Rome, Candaules the fourth king of Lydia governed the
Lidians, whose history both of his wife, and of his life, together with
Herodot. lib. 1.
the fable of Giges ring, is written in Herodotus at large. Manasses also king
of Judea for his wickedness against the Lord, was delivered into the hands of
Benmerodach king of the Chaldeans, and was carried captive into Babylon. Deioces
the fifth governor that governed the Medes, and the first king that reigned
over them, lived this time. In Athens reigned Leocrates the fifth magistrate,
Absander the 6. magistrate, and Erixias the last magistrate of Athens, in that
government of 10. years to Decennales principes, continued ten years.
every magistrate appointed, which continued the time of 7. several
magistrates, which was 70. years.

Concerning this kings death, he himself commanded that his body should be
burned, and therefore they made two coffines of stone: in the one of them Numas
body was laid: in the other, his books which were written with his own hand:
twelve books were written concerning the office of the priests, and 12. other
concerning Philosophy, and the discipline of Numa. He commanded in his last
will, that these Numa buried at the hill Ianiculum.
books should be buried with his body at the hill called Ianiculu^: and so
after he had lived 80. years, and reigned 43. years, he died: who in his life
time instituted these laws. Dionisius Halicar. lib. 3.


1. He instituted the kinds of priests which were called Flamines, of these
were 4: one to Jupiter called Flamen dialis Flamines.
who only should be present at sacrifice done to Jupiter: two unto Mars called
Flamines Martiales: these in like manner should instruct the people the manner
and order of sacrifice done to Mars.

3. And the fourth he appointed in the honor of Quirinus, called Quirinalis
Flamen, to celebrate the memory of Romulus: for so Romulus was honored and
called by the Romulus called Quirinus.
name of Quirinus. After this these priests were all bishops, archbishops,
cardinals and patriarchs, by the names of Flamines, Protoflamines,
Archiflamines, etc.

4. Then Numa instituted another order of priesthood called Faeciales, which
were peace makers, to pacify quarrels, Faeci^es.
to entreat of peace, if they could, else to denounce wars: for without their
license the king might not commence war with the enemies.

5. Again he appointed another number of priests which were 12. named Salij,
that should dance and leap before the sacrifice in the month of March,
apparelled with pide cassocks, girded with swords about them, with copper
helmets on their heads, with Thracian targets, and short daggers in their hands.

6. He augmented the number of soothsayers by Romulus first instituted, and
erected a college of soothsayers, appointing Pomp. Laetus.
one to be chief called Pontifex Max. that had the auctority of hie priest,
and was master of all the po^tifical laws.

7. He also made a law that no stranger might be of this sacred society, but
such holy devout and religious men, as Pontifex Max. with his college of
soothsayers, should elect by divination.

8. He also appointed 4. vestal virgins, which should watch Plato in Numa Pomp.
and attend the holy and immortal fire, with reverence and great honor
consecrated to Vesta, which used like ceremonies as the old women did in
Athens in watching the holy lamp.

9. He decreed that the targets called Ancylia should be in Ancylia.
the custody of the 12. priests called Salij, in like manner as the custody
of the lamp was commanded to the virgins. 12. Salij.


10. After this he divided his people into diverse occupatio^s, some to tillage,
some to one science, some to another.

11. He instituted certain priests to Berecynthia, which should be gelded,
which were named Galli, aster the name of a river in Phrygia, where they were
gelded: but this was Pesinuntia as Images brought to Rome by Scipio Nasica,
long after Numas time, to whom these ceremonies were done in memory of
Claudia, who with her girdle halde the ship where the idol of Pesinuntia
was. Read of these laws and orders more in Pomp. Laetus, and in Fenestella.

CHAP. II.
Of the government, laws and orders of Rome after Numa Pompilius time, until
the end of Tarquinius the proud, the last king of Rome: of their wars and
victories during this time over their neighbors about them: of the enlargement
of the city of Rome, and of their territories: and last of the banishment of
their kings.

AFter this Numa succeeded Tullus Hostilius borne in the town of Medullia, the
Tullus Hostilius the third king of Rome.
third king of the Romans, a man of clean contrary disposition to Numa: this
followed the nature of his grandfather Hostilius Tullus, a dear and a sure
friend of Romulus, of whom by his service Hostilius Tullus a friend of Romulus.
against the Sabines and others, he well deserved to be esteemed: this was the
first in Rome that ware a garland of oken leaves, in token and proof of his
victory against the Fidenats. Such one was this Tullus, more bent far to
war then to peace, ready to take any quarrel in hand to defend the city,
which happened unto him as soon as he had entered into his kingdom: for C.
Cluilius chief governor of the Albanes much envying the good success of
Rome, permitted the Albanes to rob, to spoil, and to waste the territories
of Rome, most desirous of wars against the Romans: but before he could do any
exploit, he was found dead in his tent.

After him succeeded in his place Metius Suffetius, which M. Suffetius.
likewise usurped and followed his predecessor. Cluilius among all the injuries
against Tullus Hostilius, against his faith and promise to the Roman Empire,
who in right of blood were kings of the Albanes, and to whom they then ought by
law of arms to have paid tribute: but M. Suffetius had the like end as
Cluilius had. Read the whole history in Dion. Halicarnassus Halicar. lib. 3.
of this king. Now Tullus having this occasion offered to him by the Albanes, he
waged wars against the Veients, and Fidenats, and gave them such sharp
battles, that after he had conquered The wars of this king is written in Li^i
lib. 1.
them and triumphed over them, he also in like sort went against the Albanes,
overthrew them, and took their city, which was builded in Aeneas time by his
son Ascanius, named Alba longa, which had flourished 487. years, brought the
people captive to Rome after much slaughter, so that by the ruin and spoil of
the Albanes, the Romans glory increased, and their kingdom Eutrop. lib. 1.
was enlarged, for that the Latins were the first stock of the Romans from
whence they had their first beginning and offspring.

A history worth the reading is written in Halicanassaeus, how Tullus king of
the Romans, and Suffetius governor of the Albanes, Halicar lib. 3.
consented to avoid great slaughter and much effusion of blood which should
happen to both parties if their armies would enter into battle, to commit the
battle to three men chosen of either parties, 3. of the Romans and 3 of the
Albanes, and where the victory shall happen, there the other party should
yield. The king Tullus brought into the field 3. men that were brethren, the
sons of Horatius a noble Roman. Suffetius likewise Horatius.
brought into the field 3. brethren the sons of Curiatius: Curiatius.
these 3. Albane brethren were cousine germans to the 3. Roman brethren.
These six men after they had sacrificed unto their gods, and had taken leave
of their parents and friends, they entered the battle, and after a long and
doutful combat betwixt both parties, the Romans conquered the Albanes, and so
by law of arms Alba longa their chief city, and all the kingdom of Alba
longa destroyed.
Albania was made subject to the Romans, though still they rebelled and held
out against the Romans many battles and sundry events of wars, until Tul.
Hostilius did fully conquer them in the 28. Olympiad, at what time mount
Coelius was adjoined to Rome, and made habitable by the king, and there Tullus
the king kept his court.

Now as soon as the Albanes were conquered, the Sabines Oros. 2 lib.
again waged wars against the Romans, and were vanquished in the battle of
Malicusa. After that Tullus Hostilius had conquered Alba longa, which was
distant 12. miles from the city of Eutrop. lib. 1.
Rome, then Veiena and Fidena, the one 6. miles, the other 18. miles distant
from Rome, and had enlarged the city with these Halicar. lib. 3.
confines and territories more then Romulus did, he was stricken with lightning,
that both he, his wife, and all his house were burnt, when he had reigned 32.
years, in the 35. Olymp. When this king reigned in Rome, Zaleucus governed the
Locresia^s, who for his law making, and law keeping, is much mentioned in
histories: Zaleucus histor.
for in that law against adultery his own son first offending should have
lost both his eyes, but his nobles made great intercession for the kings son:
the king to satisfy their requests, showing himself a natural father to his
son, and a Rare justice.
just king to his people, caused one of his sons eyes, and another of his
own eyes to be taken out, to perform the law which he made.

In the time of Tul. Hostilius, Manasses king of Judah was converted unto his
God, and thereby restored to his kingdom when he expelled idolatry, and served
God the rest of his life. In Chaldea reigned Nabuchodonosor the father of the
great Nabuchodonosor, and in Media Phaortes the 6. king of the Medes. During
the time of this king in Rome, reigned in Lydia Ardis their 6. king: and in
Macedonia Philip their 6. king also: for the Medes, the Macedonians, the
Lydians and the Romans began their Empires within 60. years together.

Tullus Hostilius the third king appointed two Quaestors, as it Two Quaestors
by Tullus Hostilius appointed.
were two Treasurers, to sease by the pole every citizen of Rome, to leauie and
to keep the same money to the use of the city: he created also 2. Judges
which were called Duum viri: these should determine causes for life and death.
In like sort of Ancus Martius with his laws, Tarquinius Priscus and his
decrees, you may read in Pomp. Laetus and Fenestella.

Even so Seruius Tullus the 6. king of Rome, perceiving that the Senators had
more to do then they could well accomplish, especially in private causes of the
city, he instituted two Two Censors by Ser. Tullius.
men called Censors, to record and to write the number of all men in service,
to take view of such offenders within the city, and to punish crimes and
offenses: and if any Senators should not execute justice, he should be deprived
out of the Senate. If any of the magistrates created by Romulus should not
imitate and live within the law of Romulus, they should be by the Censors
punished. If any of the religious officers and the priests which Numa
instituted, should transgress the law of Numa, he should also by these
Censors be reformed: this office continued 5. years, and upon the fifth year new
Censors Pomp. Laetus.
were made: this was called Lustru^, at what time althe city Lustrum.
was visited, all faults opened unto them, and all injuries done reformed by
them, as C. Fabritius being Censor, removed from the Senate P. Cornelius
Ruffinus, for the expenses of 10. pound more then was allowed by these Censors:
and so M. Cato banished The justice of the Censors.
C. Flaminius brother from the Senators, for the favoring of a prisoner at the
request of a woman. The authority of those Censors were such, as might reform
all things by law.

The old Romans used to account their actions, and to number their years
every fifth year which they called Lustrum, as Fenestella de mag. Romans
the Grecia^s used to number the years by their Olympiad, which the Greeks
named Penterides. This office of Censors continued for a time in Rome, being
renewed every fifth year, which was a great day in Rome, and appointed by
Seruius Tullus the Beroaldus lib. 1.
sixth king of Rome, and endured until Vespatian the Emperors time, the last
conqueror of Jerusalem 650. years: yet I read not but of 75. Lustrums which
is 360 years. For Eutropius says, that both Lustrum and the Olympiad, endured
no longer then The Olympiads continued until Constantine the great.
Sillas time. But yet compted until Constantines time.

Tarquinius the proud appointed 3. men to keep the Sibillas books, after they
were augmented from 3. to 10. and at last from 10. to 15. These were chosen out
as well of the Patricians, as of the vulgar people: they should once a year in
the month of February read these books, and after they should see the
books safely kept until February again.

Now after that Tullus died, succeeded in Rome Anc. Martius Ancus Martius the
fourth king of Rome.
the 4. king, one in nature like unto his grandfather Numa Pompilius, and one
that in the beginning of his government imitated Numa in all points, commanding
the people to observe the laws and ceremonies of his grandfather, thinking
thereby to have the like success of quietness and peace, commanded Numas laws
to be written in tables, and be set on posts and pillars in the market place,
studied diligently to keep his people Numas laws in tables.
in peace, and thought to live quietly with that little territory that then the
city of Rome governed. But it happened otherwise: for scant he had established
himself in his kingdom, when the Latins under their governor there, waged
wars against the Romans, and brought an army to the very town of Medullia,
which they took, and possessed for 3. years in spite of Ancus Martius. Now this
king was forced to forsake Numa, which lived in peace, and to follow Tullus his
predecessor in wars, and therefore he altered his mind, and gathered force
together, Halicar. lib. 3.
and began stoutly to answer the Latins, and to give them so many battles,
that he destroyed, vanquished, and wan their chief cities, as Politoriu^,
Telena, Ficania, and diverse others: he recovered Medullia, and gave diverse
overthrows to the Latins: All this history is read in Liui lib. 1.
then straight he was much troubled with the Sabines and Fidenats, the Veients,
and the Volscanes: these people ever warred against the kings of Rome: for yet
Rome was not come to any greatness. But when they had quite conquered the
Sabines, Latins, Veients, Volscanes, Fidenats, and other nations next unto
Oros. lib. 2.
them, which oftentimes they did, and they still revolted, then the city of
Rome began to look unto other kingdoms: but during the time of their kings,
their own neighbors annoyed them most.

This king Ancus Martius had no rest during his whole government, until he had
brought these people before spoken unto subjection: then he began to build, and
to enlarge the city Mount Auentine joined ^o Rome.
of Rome by taking mount Auentine unto it, and the hill Ianicula a large ground
of 18. furlongs about, full of diverse young trees, specially laurel, but by An.
Martius made habitable and populous, and there upon the hill Auentine a fair
temple was builded unto Diana: and to this mount, Martius brought from Telena
and Politorium and other towns, men and women to dwell there. A bridge made by
Ancus Martius over the river Tiber.
After this, the king builded a town fast upon the sea shore called Hostia 6.
miles from Rome, and made a bridge over the river of Tiber which ran by Rome:
he also builded a prison house to punish offenders, and diverse other momuments,
which you may read in Halicarnasaeus: when he had reigned 24. years he died,
leaving Ancus died a king.
behind him 2. sons, the one an infant, and the other not able to succeed his
father in the kingdom, and therefore Tarquinius, Tarquinius Priscus the fifth
king of Rome.
a man of good service before time known, and in great friendship with Anc.
Martius, was by consent of the Senators and of the people elected the 5. king
of the Romans. In the beginning of whose reign Thales, Periander, and
Terpa^der, even then the 17. Iubilee after Moses began, in the 41. Olympiad.
Errors in the Olympiads.


But first I must set down what kings reigned in other countries, before I
speak of Tarquinius Priscus. In the beginning therefore of Ancus Martius
reign, reigned king of Egypt Necho, by whom Josias king of Judah was then
slain, and in Media Ciaxeres, in Daniel called Darius Medus. This time reigned
in What kings reigned this time in other Countries.
Babylon Nabuchodonosor, by whom Ioakim king of Judah was carried captive unto
Babylon: and in Lidia reigned Sadaites their seventh king. Then the Prophet
Jeremy prophesied the 70. years of captivity to the Jews, in the time of
Ancus Martius, after whom Tarquinius Priscus, by election and not by succession
became the fifth king of Rome. Of whose country, parentage and friends, and how
he came to be king of Rome, read Halicarnassaeus, where you shall find the
whole history thereof. Against this king the Latins had diverse aids from the
Hetruscans, specially from five great cities inhabited by people called
Clusini, Arretini, Volaterani, Rusellani, and Vetulonenses. And in like manner
as before to Ancus Martius, so now they began with Tarquinius Priscus, one that
had good cause to know them, for that he had tried them before, and therefore
used Priscus an old soldier of Anc. Martius.
them as his predecessors did, overthrew them, and subdued them, so that their
cities, their towns, and their countries were made even to the ground.

By this king were the Fidenats, the Latins, and the rest of those nations
about Rome subdued and destroyed: the Hetruscans which kept Tarquinius in
wars nine years were overthrown, in so much that they made Tarquinius
prince of Hetruria: Priscus made prince of Hetruria.
so the Hetruscans after nine years wars being broken and weary, thought good
with one consent to send ambassadors from all the cities of Italy to Tora to
entreat for peace: Means made to Priscus for peace.
which was granted unto them, upon condition that they would make Tarquine
their prince, and to have the name of their chief magistrate in every city,
which were called Lucumones, Lucumones old magistrates among the Hetruscans.
to hold of him. This being of mere force consented, Tarquinius Priscus
granted them their own laws, customs, and liberties in all points as they
had before. After this, he governed in peace, after he had triumphed with great
pomp and solemnity as then the time served. He went daily most sumptuous
inapparel: he ware a crown of gold upon his head, and had on Togam pretexta^,
with a scepter of Iuory in his hand, which was then strange to see in Rome: for
Romulus had his scepter Priscus Scepter of Iuory.
but of wood: he sat in a chair of Iuory, and his Serieants about him, where
he gave laws to the people: he was admonished of this good fortune when yet he
was a stranger in Rome by an Egle, who took his hat from his head in his claw,
and flew so hie in the air, that scant the Egle could be seen: and in
Divination by an Egle.
the sight of al his people the Egle brought the hat again, and let it fall
upon Priscus head: he was by this persuaded, that it signified good, and
therefore expected the kingdom after Ancus Martius, though a stranger, and
that Ancus had 4. sons to succeed him.

The Sabines which held the Romans play for 5. years, were also by Tarquinius
overthrown. In these wars against the Sabines, Ser. Tullius was made
general: this for his good service Ser. Tullius general under Priscus.
and wise policy, afterward succeeded Tarquinius in the kingdom: for he was
esteemed of the people, and in much favor with Tarquinius: in the like favor
was Tarquinius before with Ancus Martius, whose service seemed such, that he
was elected king over the Romans, though he was a stranger.

Now after that Tarquinius had subdued al towns and cities about Rome, and had
made the confines of Rome larger then before: yet (as Eutropius says) all the
wars, victories and triumphs which Romulus, T. Hostilius, Anc. Martius, and
this Tarquinius Priscus, these 5. kings had over many people, extended not
above 15. miles from the city of Rome, so hard were the Romans kept in wars
on all sides, and applied with their neighbors, and so long were they
augmenting their Empire.

But to return to Tarquinius, who made the city of Rome far The great
benefits of Priscus to the city of Rome.
more famous then before, by building the walls thereof, by doubling the
number of the Senators, and the first beginning of the capitol: this king also
builded a place for plays, called Circus, and instituted diverse games there,
betwixt mount Aue^tine and mount Palatine: he made sinks to avoid the filth and
ordure of the city, and with great expenses made it to be carried into the
river of Tiber. This Tarquinius was the first that The first triumph with
Chariot.
entered the city of Rome with any triumph on chariot, though some say that
Romulus, some Valerius Publicola: but Tarquinius Priscus by common consent was
the first that set forth triumphs in so stately and magnificent show, and he
himself the first that triumphed on triumphant chariot, and that three several
times, over the Latins, Sabines, and Hetruscanes: and when he had ^aigned 38.
years, he was slain by the sons of Ancus Priscus slain.
Martius his predecessor.

During his government, reigned in other countries these kings: in Lydia,
Haliactes their 8. king, in Macedonia, Europus their 7. king, in Egypt reigned
Apries, whom Jeremy calls Hophra: at what time Jerusalem was destroyed by
Nabuchodonosor, and the Jews brought captive unto Babylon. In this kings reign
the wars grew betwixt the Lydians and the Medes, when Astiages reigned king
over the Medes. This time flourished in the last years of this king many wise
men, as Solon in Athens, Thales in Miletu^, and others called the 7. sages.
Likewise about the last years of this king, Nabuchodonosor was by repentance
for his transgressions against the Lord, restored to his kingdom again. Now
after this, the 6. king of the Romans was named Seruius Tullius, of whom you
heard before, how he was a captain Seruius Tullus the 6. king of Rome.
under Priscus, and now elected king in the 50. Olympiad, and in the beginning
of the 18. Iubilee, being married to Tarquinius his own daughter a noble woman
borne, yet a captive and Liui. decad. 1.
a handmaid. This time lived Accius Nauius, a great soothsayer of great favor
and credit in the city of Rome: this man before the king, who scoffed the art
of Nauius and carried in his bosom a hard flint stone, only to try the skill
of Nauius, which he with a knife did cut through the midst, and therefore Cicero
3. de diuina.
the king commanded his statue or image to be made, and to be erected up in
that very place where he used this feat before Priscus Tarquinius, in memory
of his art, with his flint stone and knife in his hand. His fathers name was
Tullus, and his mother Halicar lib. 3.
was named Ocrisia: he was wise, eloquent and discreet, whom the people
honored much, and whose counsel Tarquinius used in any doubtful action as an
oracle: he was brought up in military discipline, as both the Sabines and
Hetruscans can testify.

This king perceiving that Ancus Martius sons had slain king Priscus his
predecessor and his father in law, understanding himself to stand in the
like danger if they should live, they being right heirs to the Empire of Rome,
Seruius by decree banished the sons of Martius out of the territories of the
Romans: yet Fabius Pictor says, that they were the sons of Tarquinius
Priscus: but he is reprehended and convicted The error of Fabius Pictor.
with probable reasons by Halicarnassaeus. But howsoever it was, the like end
that Tarquinius Priscus had by Ancus Martius sons, the same had Seruius
Tullus by Tarquinius sons, both murdered.

As touching the government of Seruius Tullius in the Ser. Tullius the sixth
king of Rome.
wars against the enemies of Rome, he excelled his predecessors, and brought
the people, the towns, and cities about Rome most willingly to yield
themselves, after that he had triumphed over them with 3. solemn triumphs:
for this king for the space of 20. years, waged wars with the Hetruscans,
with the Sabines and others, so that he conquered at length all places about
Rome without blood: for the Romans yet had no great force to make war far
from Rome: for during the ^trop. lib. 1.
time of their kings which was 244. years, which was the first infancy of
Rome, they had their hands full to answer those next cities, and their next
neighbors dwelling about them.

This king was the first that invented mustering of men, The first muster of
Rome.
which before this time was not known, as Eutropius says, in all the
territories of Rome: for in Seruius Tullus time, the names of all the
inhabitants of Rome were taken and accounted by the pole, there were found in
the City of Rome eighty four thousand Citizens able men. In Seruius time
brass was coined in Rome, and after Seruius time two hundred years there was
no silver coined in Rome. By this king three hills were annexed to Rome, the
one was called Quirinalis, the second Viminalis, and the third called
Esquilinus. By this king the walls Halicar. lib. 4.
of Rome were entrenched round about, and by this king was a fair Temple
builded upon mount Auentine to the godesse Diana. Read more in Dionysius
Halic. but the end of this king was (as I said before) to be slain by the
wickedness of his son in law Tarquinius, who was son to the last king
Tarquinius Seruius Tullus slain by his daughter.
Priscus, who^ this Seruius Tullus succeeded, and the treachery of his own
daughter who^ he had espoused to the said Tarquinius. Thus was he slain when
he had reigned forty four years king of Rome.

During which time reigned in Egypt king Amasis, and in Macedonia Alcetas. In
the time of this king Seruius, Croesus the last king of Lydia was conquered by
Cyrus, and the kingdom of Lydia brought under the Persians, at what time Cyrus
began his Empire in Persia, after he had conquered Astiages, the last king of
the Medes, and made Medea as Lydia was, subject unto Persia at one time: for
Cyrus grew in Seruius time the strongest king, and the only Monarch of the
world: for Lu. Tarq superbus the last king.
after he had conquered these two great kings, Croesus king of Lydia, and
Astyages king of Media, he also at that instant subdued Balthazar the last king
of Babylon, so that he adjoined to the Empire of Persia, the kingdoms of
Media, Lydia, and Babylon. This time did Daniel prophecy of the four
Monarchies by the four beasts rising out of the seas the very ground of all
Chronicles. In Seruius Tullius reign happened the renowned and famous battle
betwixt the Argiues and the Lacedaemonians, Hab^ar. lib. 4.
three hundred against three hundred on either side, to try and to make a full
conquest by them of all their wars: which happened to the Lacedaemonians, for
that three of the three hundred escaped, and all the rest on both sides died
Herodot. lib. 1.
manfully in the field. This time flourished Stesichorus and Hiponax, likewise
Anaximenes the Philosopher, and Chilo one of the seven wise men lived in this
age.

Now I will return again to Rome, and speak of Lu. Tarqninius surnamed the
proud, who succeeded Seruius Tullus in Lu. Tarq. super. and the last king.
the kingdom not lawfully, but by force and strength, in the 601. Olympiad
sixteen ye^es before the beginning of the nineteenth Iubilee. In this Olympiad
Agatharchus wanne the victory in the games of Olympus. This king as he entered
unto the kingdom of Rome with force and violence, so he continued with
cruelty and tyranny, far differing from Tarquinius Priscus his
graundfather. This king planted himself in Rome against the Senators and the
people, and guarded himself with Halicar. lib. 4.
wicked and lewd people, translating the whole government of the kingdom into
tyranny: he married his daughter to the Governor and Dictator of the Latins
named Octauius Mamilius of the stock of Telegonus, the son of Ulysses by
Cyrses, Oct. Mamilius.
to strengthen himself against his enemies.

This Tarquinius was married to Seruius daughter, a very virtuous and modest
lady, and his younger brother named Arnus The difference of two brethren married
two sisters of contrary disposition.
married the younger daughter of Seruius, a wicked and lewd woman not of the
disposition of her elder sister, a match unfit for so quiet a husband, not
like his elder brother: the difference between Tarquine the proud and his
brother, or his son as some suppose, and also the difference between the two
sisters was great, the one rash, cruel, wicked, false, and full of all
impiety, to whom happened an honest, sober, and virtuous lady, and yet could
not do any good unto him: and to his good brother being gentle, courteous,
good and godly happened (as I told you) that wicked scorpion the younger
sister, who when that she could not persuade her husband to any wicked act,
she came to him, (I mean to Tarquine the Tarqui. wife a virtuous lady.
proud) who was as ready as she to kill, to murder, and to commit any wicked
thing else: she councelled him, and she furthered him to murder the old
king her father, and Liui. lib. 4.
to take the kingdom into his hand. What should I rehearse the number of this
woman's faults? Read ^iui and Halicarnassaeus, and you shall read how
Tarquinius slew the king his Dionys. Halic. lib. 4.
father in law, and usurped the kingdom, and afterward how tyrant like he
governed the City of Rome, until he became so odious, as he was deposed from
his Throne, and banished Tarqui. deposed from his kingdom.
from Rome, as well for his own tyranny and murder, as also for his son
Aru^tius Tarquinius his rape and wicked incontinencie: for when he had forced a
noble woman named Lucretia, the wife of Colatinus, (who when she had of this
injury Rape the cause of putting down kings in Rome.
complained to her husband and other her friends in the presence of them all
she slew her self) the filthiness and horror of this wicked act, kindled the
hearts of the Senators and the people against Tarquinius.

Sp. Lucre. Pu. Val. Publicola. C. Lu. Iunius Brutus, swear in that place the
destruction of Tarquinius, and he himself became general for the Citizens,
that they deposed him from his kingdom: such was the severity of the Romans
in punishing adultery, Tarqui. deposed from his kingdom. Eutrop. lib. 1.
being the only cause of the first alteration of the state public in Rome.
For before Aru^tius Tarquinius had committed this abominable actio^ with
Lucretia, the Romans had forgotten the faults of the father in killing his
father in law, for he had conquered the Volscans, he subdued the City of
Gabios, and of Suessa, and after he overcame the Thuscans, he made peace with
them, and he builded Jupiter his Temple in the Capitol, and he was laying siege
to the city of Arde ten miles from Rome, when his son Aru^tius did defile
Lucretia: the foulenes of the fact was such, that the soldiers forsook the
father for the offense of the son, and the gates of the Romes gate shut
against Tarqui.
City were shut against Tarquinius at his return from the siege of Arde.

Thus when he had reigned twenty five years, he fled with his wife and
children: he was the seventh and last king of the Romans, though afterward he
sought the help of Porsenna Read Plut. in Publ.
king of Thuscia, and thought to recover his kingdom again. But when he
perceived that the Romans would not accept Read the 4. b^oke of Hali. of the
two last kings of Ser. Tullius and Tarqui. super.
him longer for their king, and that Porsenna would aid him no longer to his
kingdom, he departed to Thusculi a City not far distant from Rome, where
he lived with his wife a private man for the space of fourteen years, and
then dyed: his son Sextus was slain in his own city Gabia, whither he
fled for refuge.

In this sort reigned in Rome seven kings for the space of two hundred forty
four years (as you heard before) who for all their force and courages, for
all their long wars and sharp battles, their Empire extended not above
fifteen miles from Rome: the reason was, that they fought with Romans like
them selves, though they were called first by the All Italy was inhabited long
before Rome was builded.
names of Sabines, Volscans, Thuscans, Veients, Fidenats, Samnites, and
Latins: for until Romulus time the name of the Romans was not known: the
Latins were the first ancient name of the Romans: from them Romulus and his
brother Remus had their beginning: for (as you heard) before Romulus builded
Rome, reigned amongst the Latins fifteen kings. Thus much for the kings of
Rome, of their continuance and of their government.

Now what was done in other Countries, and what kings reigned while Tarqui.
the proud governed Rome, Herodot and Iustine does write that. Cyrus the great
king of Persia, was conquered and slain by Tomyris Queen of Scythia.
Psammenitus the last king of Egypt was subdued, and all the kingdom of Egypt
made tributarie unto Persia by Cambyses, who at that very time hindered the
building of the Temple of Jerusalem, until The Persians conquered Egypt at what
time the Romans banished their kings.
the second year of Darius Hysdaspis the third king of Persia. That Darius in
the time of Tarquinius Superbus made wars against the Scythians, by who^ he
was forced to take his flight.

This time wicked Haman used great means to destroy the Jews with king
Ahashuerosh, which in profane histories is named Darius the son of
Hisdaspis: but his council then against Mardocheus happened to himself and to
his ten children: the history is written in the book of Hester. This time
reigned in Athens Hyparchus the tyrant, which afterward Harmodius and
Aristogiton slew. In the time of this Tarquinius the Persians reuoulted from
their king Darius the son of Hysdaspis, but by the subtlety and sleight of
Zopirus recovered, and afterward the Persians by the means of Megabisus
Zopirus Herodot. lib. 5.
some chief captain of Darius, took the City Perinthus and subdued Thracia
and Peonia. Here I have set down the names of the seven kings of Rome, and
their continuance in government.

Romulus reigned 38. Numa Pomp. 43. Tullus Hostilius. 32. Ancus Martius. 24.
Lu. Tarquinus Priscus. 38. Seruius Tullus. 44. Tarquinius the proud. 25.
Now during the whole time of these seven kings which were two hundred forty
three years, which was the first infancy of Rome, for all their wars, their
victories and triumphs had first over the Hetruscanes, the Sabines, the
Latins, the Fidenates, Antenates, Veients, and the Albanes, their Empire
extended no further then Ostia eighteen miles distant from the city of Rome.
After that the name of a king was banished, and two Consuls were created to
govern and to command with Serieantes before them, with the authority and
full power of kings.

CHAP. III.
Of the first change of government in Rome from a Monarchy unto Aristocratia,
at what time one Dictator and two Consuls were appointed to govern the people
in the room of kings: of their good government, laws, wars, and victories,
until the Tarentine wars where Pyrrhus began to aid the Tarentines
against the Romans.

AFter these kings were thus banished from Rome, Consuls reigned in Rome 464.
years.
they created in the place of one King two Co^suls, which continued after it
was first instituted, until Julius Caesar's reign, which was 464. years: it
was decreed that these two Consuls should not rule above one year, least the
continuance of the office should make them wax hautie. In the first year
Eutrop. lib. 1.
after the expulsing of the kings Lu. Iunius Brutus, who had of all others
procured most the banishment of Tarquinius was made the first Consul in Rome,
and with him Tarquinius Dionys. lib. 5.
Collatinus, the husband of Lucretia: how be it Collatinus was forthwith
deprived of his Consulship, for that it was agreed, that none should remain
within the City that bare the name of Tarquinius: whereupon Valerius Publicola
was elected Consul in his room.

These two Consuls were not long in their office, but Tarquinius who a little
before was banished, assembled a great army to aid him to recover his
kingdom: in this battle Brutus the Consul, and Aru^tius Tarquinius his son
slew one an other. This battle seemed doubtful for a time on both Brutus
slain.
parties: but at last the victory fell to the Romans.

The death of Brutus was much lamented in Rome: for he so loved the liberty of
Rome, that he caused his own sons who for that they seemed to favor
Tarquinius case, In. Brutus their father brought them into the market place,
and there Publicola being Consul at that time, commanded them first to be
beaten with rods, and after to be beheaded before all the people, for that
they preferred the case of Tarquinius, before the state of the City: and
therefore the women mourned for Brutus death a whole year: in whose place
Publicola has chosen Consul in Brutus room Spurius M. Horat. Pull. made Consul.
Lucretius, Lucretias father, who dyed by sickness.

After him Horatius Puluillus was made Consul: for in the first year of
Consulship sieve Consuls reigned one after another: again war was attempted
by Tarquinius against the Romans. In this war Porsenna king of Thuscia,
aided Tarquinius, but to no effect, and therefore Tarquinius gave over longer
to war against his Country, contented himself to live the rest of his time
a private man, and troubled not Publicola: who being left quiet by Tarquinius,
when he Liui. lib. 2.
saw that neither by war with the which he often asfailed his Countriemen,
neither with treachery which he practiced with the families of the Vitellians
and the Aquillians, he could any way profit.

Then Publicola gave himself fully to look unto Rome, Valerius Publi. his
rites and laws.
which was so impouerished by civil wars, that collection of money was made
for the burial of Valerius the Consul his fellow in office.

He first redressed things decayed in Rome, in supplying the number of the
Senators that were slain in the wars of Tarquine, in whose places he chose
new Senators to the number of a hundred sixty four: after, he defended the
City against Porsenna, and destroyed the Country round about, and slew of the
Thuscanes five thousand: he also The victory of Publicola.
vanquished the Sabines, and triumphed over them, and he subdued the Latins,
who were most busy against the Romans this time: for Rome was found in the
time of this Publicola sore unpeopled and poor, by reason of the civil wars
of Tarquinius, and therefore all the Nations which the kings of Rome before had
subdued, began to reuoult and to wage war freshly against the Romans
again: but they were by this valiant Roman brought to their first state, and
Rome much enriched by the spoils of the Sabines, Latins, Thuscans, and others.

This Publicola was Consul four times severally, he was a good man and a just
Roman: he made laws and decrees Public. four times Consul.
within the City: first, he ordained by law, that all offenders being
condemned by the judgment of the Consuls, might appeal unto the people.

He likewise decreed, that no man might exercise any Plutarch in Publ.
office, unless he came to it by the gift of the people: and he also made a
law in the favor of the poor Citizens, that they should pay no custom nor
impost whatsoever. This hedid to win the peoples favor, and to keep them in
hand: many women then in Rome esteemed little of their life, in respect of
their Country, as Cloelia, Cloelia. Valeria.
Valeria, and diverse others, whose statues are erected up on horseback in the
holy street. Appius Claudius, a very rich man of the Sabines, came to Rome
this time to dwell, and Appius Claudius.
brought with him five thousand families with their wives and children, of the
most peaceable, and esteemed men of the Sabines.

In the ninth year after the banishing of Tarquinius, there was a new office
created in Rome called Dictatura, which A new office in Rome called Dictator.
far excelled in authority the office of the Consuls. In this office Titus
Largius was first instituted Dictator: and in the same year an other new
officer called magister equitum, an officer deputed to be attendant upon the
Dictator, in the which office Spurius Cassius was appointed. The Dictator was
not to continue in his office above six months: for such was the authority
of the Dictator, that he might deal in all No appeal from the Dictators.
causes, and judge of life and death, without any appeal either to the Senate,
Consul, or to the people: and therefore the people much complaining, began to
make vproares, and fell to dissension, and to require for an officer to aid and
defend the people: and for that the Senators and Consuls (as the people
pretended the cause) would have them oppressed, a co^mocion was thereby in
Rome by the commons, and therefore they created two men whom they called
Tribuni Tribuni Miletum appointed in Rome.
Militum Tribunes of the people: they were assigned to be peculier Decisers
and Determiners in causes belonging to the people. This office continued until
Sillas time, by whom the office of Tribuneshippe was abrogated, but after by
Pompey the great restored.

In Rome dwelt a rare man of great service in the wars of Tarquine, whom
Largius the first Dictator knew to be such as Eutrop. lib. 1.
deserved great praise then, being a young man: for he was crowned with Oken
leaves according to the Romans manners in Tarquinius days, and sithence
profited Rome in diverse services, in subduing the Volscans, in winning the
city Corioles, he invaded the Antiates, and often repressed the insolency of
the people, insomuch that the Romans having many wars in those days, this
Corolianus was at them all: for there was no Corolianus his due praise.
battle fought, no war enterprised, but Coriolanus returned from thence with
fame and honor. But his virtue and renown gate him much envy: for hereby he
was banished Coriolanus banished.
Rome by the Ediles and Tribunes of the people, against the Patricians will:
but the Romans made a rod to beat them selves, when they banished
Coriolanus: for he came in arms against his own Country and City with the
Volscans, being at that time their general: he with great fury invaded the
Territories of Rome, he caused the communaltie of Rome and Nobility to fall
to civil dissension, he so plagued the Romans diverse ways unto the very
gates of Rome, he was so much moved against them, that he refused three
several Coriolanus stomach against Rome.
Ambassadors to hear them, being his chief friends, sent unto him by the
Senate to entreat for peace: he refused to hear the Bishops, and the
Priests Feciales.

He likewise denied the Augurers, the sacrificers, and the Liui says that
Volumnia was his wife, and Votaria his mother.
ministers of the gods, until Volumnia his mother, and Virgillia his wife
with their two young sons gotten by Coriolanus, with Valeria the sister of
Publicola, and diverse other Ladies of Rome came to meet Coriolanus, to
entreat for peace unto the Volscans camp, and what time he had compassion of
his mother, of his wife, and of his two sons, and of the other Ladies being
his near kinswomen: then he withdrewe his army from Rome, and yielded to the
tears of his mother: but the fickle minds of the people by the conspiracy of
Tullus Aufidius were such, that Coriolanus was murdered Coriola. slain in the
city Antium.
in the City of Antium, at his very return from that voyage.

What shall I say of Caius Mutius Sceuola? of his noble attemptes against king
Porsenna, of Horatius Cocles, and of diverse others, whose statues at Rome, and
whose histories in every book written, and in every man's mouth can witness?
Halicar. lib. 4.
for in this very time in Rome when Cresius Fabius and Titus Virginius were
Consuls, three hundred noble men of 300. Fabians slain.
the house and stock of the Fabians, took upon them alone to wage battle
against the Veientines, offering themselves to T. Liui. lib. 2.
the Senators and to the people of Rome to fight: from this 306. Fabians slain.
battle not one escaped of three hundred Fabians but one, and another which was
young at home, not able to go to warrefare: for all the males of the Fabiaus
were slain in that battle.

These wars were extremely handled and prosecuted by the Hetruscans,
Fidenats, and the Falascies against the Romans, when Rome was in most
adversity and poverty, as well for the late civil wars of Tarquine the
proud, as also diverse other foreign enemies, which on every side assaulted
Rome.

These 300. Fabians full of prowess and valor, undertook this war against
the Veients: but being over charged with multitudes, were all slain saving
one, to their great Oros. lib. 2. cap. 5
fame, yet this followed after their death: presently the Fasiliscians yielded
them selves to the Romans, the Fidenats destroyed them selves with fire, the
Veients were overthrown and slain by Camillus, so that the deaths of these
three hundred Camillus reue^ged the Fabia^s
Fabians were fully revenged.

These were chief men that reigned in Rome after the kings until the
Decemuiri, which had been Consuls, Dictators, and the chief magistrates of
Rome, whose names are these.

1 Lu. Iunius Brutus. 2 Pub. Valerius Publicola. 3 Mutius Scaeuola. 4 Cai.
Horatius Puluillus. S Horatius Cocles. 6 Titus Largius. Magistrates of Rome.
7 Spu. Cassius. 8 Mar. Coriolanus. 9 Fab. Vibulanus. 10 Q. Seruilius. 11 And
Appius Claudius: from whom sprang the stock of Claudia, until the time of
Decemuiri.
Now to speak some thing of that which was done in other countries about the
time of the banishment of these kings, Alexander the tenth king of Macedonia
slew the Persians Ambassadors: at what time Bubaris a noble Persian, and an
Ambassador sent unto Macedonia, married the daughter of Amyntas and sister to
Alexander, and by that means peace was concluded between the Persians and the
Macedonians. About this time also the Persians vanquished the Ionians, and
took Miletum. About the time of Tarquinius death, flourished Callimachus in the
famous battle at Marathon: and a few years after, Egypt reuoulted from
Persia, at what time Darius Hysdaspis thought to invade Greece: after whose
death, presently Xerxes his son sent his brother Achemenes to Egypt as his
general, Herodot. lib. 7.
where he was slain by Psammetichus his son king of Libya, In the great
wars of Xerxes in Thermopila, and in Artimesia The two wars in Thermopila and
in Artimesia.
when Themistocles flourished and triumphed over the Persians, then flourished in
Rome Coriolanus, in whose days the Romans had no store of coined money, their
wealth was in cattle: for a mutton was then for ten obolos, the price of an
ox a hundred obolos.

Cimon a famous and a noble captain of Athens, subdued all Asia from Ionia
unto Pamphylia, and banished from Greece Cimon a noble captain.
all the barbarous people: but within a little while after, Athens was by
Mardonius taken, about which time the three hundred Fabians were slain in a
battle against the Volscans.

This time flourished in Greece Diagoras, Sophocles, Euripides, Pindarus, and
Xerxes the famous painter. In Rome at this time a new Dictator was created,
and a muster taken within the City the second time. Quintus Cicinatus was
taken from the Q. Cicinatus.
plough, to wear the garment made for the Dictator, called Toga pretexta, he
took his journey forthwith against his enemies, and putting them to flight
delivered the army of the Romans, and besieged the hill Algidus. This year
ceased the office of the Consuls for a time, and in the place of the two
Consuls, were chosen ten men which should bear chief authority in the
City, and they were called Decemuiri. During Decemuiri created.
which office certain noble men were sent from Rome to Athens, to see the
vsages of the most famous Cities of Greece, and to confer with the most
learned men touching the laws which they called the twelve tables.

At that time Spu. Posthumous, Publius Sulpitius, and Aulus Eutrop. lib. 1.
Manlius, three expert Romans, took the voyage to Athens, brought the laws
of Solon with them, and the laws called the twelve tables.

By these laws which they wrote themselves in brazen tables, the ten men
ruled the Romans the first year, with the good liking of the people: the
second year, to the hurt and prejudice of Rome: and the third year, to the
great infamy and shame of the Decemuiri: for when Appius Claudius Decemuiri
deprived.
one of the ten Commissioners had defloured Virginia, the only daughter of
Virginius, he began a commotion among the soldiers, and chose to slay his
daughters rather then to suffer the shame: for which fact the Decemuiri were
deprived of their authorities, and they them selves condemned.

This is the second alteration of the state of Rome, and all Dionys. Halic.
lib. 10.
for women: the first for the deflowring of Lucretia, the kings were expelled:
and now for the like foul fact, the Decemuiri were overthrown by a decree
had in mount Auentine, after Decemuiri co^pted ten Tarquines.
they had reigned in their full authorities three years, being rather ten
Tarquines, or ten tyraunts to destroy their Country, then Judges or
Commissioners to defend and to save their Countries. I have set down their
names to your view, as they were put in the commission, by Isidorus lib. 5.
Halic. lib. 10. Liui. lib. 3. and the first Decad.

Appius Claudius. Titus Gematius. The names of the Dece^uiri.
Pub. Cestius Valicanus. Spurius. Caius Julius. Aulus Manlius. Publius
Sulpitius. Titus Romulus. Veturius Geminius. Publius Curiatius.
In the three hundred and fifteen year after Rome was built, the Fidenats
rebelled against the Romans, with whom the Veintines joined themselves to
assist them: at what time Tolominus reigned king over the Veentines.

These two Cities were not far from Rome. Fidena was but seven miles, and
Veiena eighteen miles distant from Rome: but the Fidenats, Veientines, and the
Volscans, which also Fidena.
took part against the Romans, were overthrown by Marcus Veiena.
Aemilius then Dictator. In that battle Telinus king of the Veientines was
slain, the Romans could never keep their neighbors under hand, though
they had often subdued them: for Furius Camillus when he was created Dictator,
he was sent unto those unruly people with an army of Romans, who discomfited
and vanquished them. Immediately The French men invaded Rome.
hereupon the Frenchmen invaded Rome, and pursued the Romans unto the flood
Allia, within two miles of the City of Rome: they besieged the City, and
wanne it, and the chief of the Citizens fled with Manlius unto the Capitol
for their defense: where if Camillus had not in time T. Liui. lib. 5.
removed the Frenchmens siege (and yet at that time, he was banished from Rome)
the Capitol had been won: for before Camillus came the holy Geese saved the
Capitol: for Geese saved the Capitol from the Gauls.
they ran up and down for fear, and bewrayed the Gauls with their noise.

The terriblest and greatest victory about one time happened now in Rome: for
after their great overthrow given to the Romans at the river Allia, the
Gauls laid siege presently to the City of Rome, entered the City, and finding
Florus lib 1.
no resistaunce, they feared some treason marching up to the Town to the
market place, they saw sitting there in iuory chaires with crowns and
garlands upon their heads, men all in purple long gowns with white staves in
their hands, with long white beardes, who seemed to be of such majesty, that
the Gauls supposed them at the first sight to be some gods, that sat like
men to defend the City, and were about to retire, until they perceived Rome
taken by the Gauls.
that they were men: whom they with much fury slew with the sword, and then
raunsackt the Town, killed and spoiled, and possessed the whole City saving Ti.
Manlius, who with a thousand Romans took the Capitol for their defense,
whom the Gauls could not win in seven months assault: so long the Gauls
had Rome in possession. But to be Camillus restored Rome being banished from
Rome.
short, they were to their loss constrained to forsake Rome, and were glad to
take their flight by Camillus, who then though banished by the Romans, saved
and rescued Rome at that time.

But Camillus removed them, put them to flight, and pursued them with such a
slaughter of them, that he recovered Camillus rescued the Romans from the
Frenchmen, and saved Rome.
the gold and treasures, and ensigns of wars which the French men had
gotten, and returned to Rome, and so entered the City with his third triumph,
and was called the second Romulus, for that he recovered his Country from
the enemies: for in the time of his Dictatorshippe, he ouerthrewe the
Phalissians, Capenats, the Veients, took diverse Cities, and wasted their
Territories, over whom he triumphed. After this, Camillus besieged the
Falerians, and overthrew the Latins, and the Volscans: he wanne the field of
the Prenestines, The office of Camillus.
and slew the great army of the Thuscans at Sutrium. Camillus gave diverse
repulses to the Gauls, and resisted stoutly the furi^ of Brennus their king:
for in the time of this Camillus, Rome was destroyed and quite burnt, and
again built, Halicar. lib. 10. 11.
and by him afterward, as by a second Romulus defended: for he was chosen
Censor first: he was chosen twice Tribune of the soldiers, and he was five
times chosen Dictator: for then the Romans had altered their government from
Kings to Co^suls, from Consuls to Dictators, from Dictators to Decemuiri, which
Decemuiri continued not long, and then again Liui lib. 3. 4.
to Consuls: for in the first year after Rome was taken by the Gauls, (for in
those days they were not named French men, but Gauls, which is a more
general name) two men were created, which were called Tribunes of the
soldiers, Tribuni Militum created.
in stead of the two Consuls, which were of no less authority then the
Consuls.

How be it the dignity of the Tribunes endured not long, for that office
ceased: for the people of Rome were so seditious in the time of Camillus, that
nothing could please them, neither Kings, Counselors, Dictators, Praetors,
Tribunes, or any other officer: for now the Consuls were caused to be banished
as the kings were, and in their roumes were placed the ten men called
Decemuiri, which continued but two years, The office of Consulship put off.
and out the third year: then were placed magistrates named Tribuni Militum,
which governed 43. years: and then again, Consuls were placed in their
authorities, after Rome had been without Consuls 45. years. Thus the people put
up and put down whom they list, insomuch that Sex. Ruf. says, that Rome was
without any magistrate for four years: for they stoned Posthumus the
general, and banished Coriolanus Camillus, that such a fury reigned in the
people, that four several seditions grew in Rome by mutual discord.

The first in Sacro Monte, where the Roman people came armed in the 71. Olymp.
against usurers, where at that time Dionys. 6. Lib. 2.
Menenius Agrippa an eloquent Roman, appeased the fury and rage of the
people, with the fable between the belly and all members of the body, by the
which oration he brought them to quietness.

The second discord at Rome was in mount Auentine, 302. Val. cap. 9.
years after the building of Rome in the time of Decemuiri, whose insolency
and tyranny were such, that they forgote the destruction of their kings, the
arrogancy of Tarquine in rauishing of Lucretia, they committed all offenses,
injuries Dionys. 10.
full of filthy lusts without respect of law or conscience, that Virginius
seeing his daughter so oppressed by Appius Liui. 3.
Claudius, slew her in the market place with his own hand to avoid the
present infamy and shame that his daughter Virginia was at hand to come unto.

The third sedition at Rome on mount Ianiculu^ under Carmilius then being
Tribune of the people, and general over The third sedition in Rome
them in the dangerous seditions: the cause was for the indignity of marriages
between the Patritia^s and the common people, Lib. lib. 4.
which Liui at large sets down in his fourth book.

The fourth sedition in Rome and the cause thereof was ambition and desire
ofhonor, that the co^monpeople would have magistrates created jointly with the
Patricians: here grew mutiny and discord between the Patricians and the
vulgar people: this discord fell in the second age of Rome called
Adolescentia Romae. Adolescentia Romae.


About this time flourished in Greece Pericles, who succeeded Themistocles in
his room, and governed Athens forty years with great fame: at what time
hot wars were between the Athenians and the Peloponesians. During these
broils at Rome, Xerxes the great king of Persia was slain by Thucidides lib.
1.
Artabanus, after whose death Artaxerxes surnamed the long handed, did send
Esdras to Jerusalem from Babylon to repair the City, to build the Temple,
and to reform the common wealth of the Jews destroyed by the Chaldeans,
before Cicilia was plagued by the Carthaginians, and often oppressed by the
common people.

Now reigned in Macedonia Perdicas the eleventh king: this time flourished in
Greece

1 Heraclitus. 2 Empedocles and Liui. lib. 4.
3 Parmenides, and after 4 them Aristophanes, and 5 Hypocrates that famous
physicion: at what time also the great Philosopher 6 Soorates Platoes master
kept his school at Athens.
This time reigned in Sparta Agis king of the Lacedaemonians: in Macedonia,
Archelaus their twelfth king. About this time the original of the The
original of the French men.
kings of France began to spring in Germany, who at that time were driven
out of Scythia to the number of four hundred eighty nine thousand, first
being called Neumagi, secondly called Sicambri, and the last time called Franci.

About this time the whole states of Greece were by the ears, and began the
wars of the Peloponesians which endured twenty seven years, of whom
Thucidides wrote a whole volume of eight books. The Egyptians reuoulted from
the Persians and rebelled, until Darius Ochus time the eight king of Persi^.

Let us return to the history of the Romans: for as soon as Camillus dyed,
the French men arrived and camped in Italy, Camillus died.
against whom Quintus Cicinatus being then elected Dictator, was sent with an
army against the Frenchmen: where Titus Manlius provoked one of the French
army to fight with him hand to hand, who^ he slew, and after he had slain him,
he Oro. lib. 3. cap 6.
plucked a chain of gold from his enemies neck, and put it about his own
neck, for the which he and his posterity were called Torquati, for a
perpetual memory of that fact. This was done A surname.
30. years after that Camillus had expulsed the Frenchmen.

The like history is written of Marcus Valerius, who being T. Liui. lib. 7.
challenged by a Frenchman to a combat, accepted the challenge and came ready
armed unto the field, where a crow lighted upon his right arm and sat there
still, until his adversary came to handie gripes. The crow flew and smote the
Val. Max. cap. 16. lib. 8.
Frenchman upon the eye with his wings, that he could not see to fight: by
means whereof he was slain, whereby he was surnamed Coruinus, as Torquatus
was. At what time the Frenchmen M. Valerius surnamed Coruinus.
were put to flight, and again by Sulpitius the Dictator they were subdued,
and the Thuscans likewise were the very same time vanquished by Caius Martius,
who then led prisoners C. Martius his triumph over the Thuscanes.
with him to Rome in one triumph 7000 captives.

By this time the Romans force increased, and they prevailed in warlike feats
and in chivalry, although yet their wealth and substance were very slender:
for men reigned then in Rome, as had this sentence always in their mouths,
Agere magna, and pati fortia Romanorum est. Mutius Scaeuola spoke it The praise
of the old Romans.
first before Porsenna king of the Thuscanes: so great were the Romans, so full
of valor, and so renowned were their actions, that the Dictator of Rome was
more feared, then any Emperor of the world, and a Consul more esteemed then a
king, as by their victories and triumphs over all nations may appear.

The discipline of the Romans was such, as their generals, lieutenants,
captains, officers, yea the private soldier, if he The discipline of the
old Romans.
had deserved, should have had his triumph, or be preferred unto a higher
place of service. Pliny says, the garlands which were made for the
Conquerors, were some of laurel, some of oken leaves, some of Myrtle, some of
green grass, and some of gold. The city of Rome was full of statues and
images erected, as monuments of the Romans pictures set up at the Statues and
images.
bars where the Orators did plead: and images in the market place of
Dictators and Consuls, that to be a soldier in Rome, was more then to be a
captain in Greece, and to be a Consul in Rome, were more then to be a king in
other places: so mighty the Romans waxed by this, that they warred now Of
this war writs Liui lib. 9. and Oros. ^ib. 3. cap. 21. and 22.
a hundredth and three miles distant from Rome, and took the Samnits in hand,
against whom Lucius Papirius Cursor then created Dictator, went with an army,
giving charge at his departure from Rome, to Quintus Fabius Maximus (who at
that time was appointed an officer attendant upon the Dictator Fabius. Max.
called Magister equitu^) that he should not fight with the enemies during his
absence. Howbeit, upon occasions Fabius with great good luck fought with the
Samnits, and vanquished them, for which disobedience (notwithstanding his good
success) Luc. Papirius after his return gave sentence of death The severity
of the Romans in military discipline.
upon him: but he was delivered through the passing great favor of the people.

In the second battle the Samnits overcame the Romans, and caused them (to
their reproach) to creep under the yoke, which was made with two spears in the
earth, and the third upon the top of them, like a gallows. In the third
battle Tit. Liui. lib. 9.
Luc. Papirius had the upper hand over the Samnits, and caused To creep under
^he yoke a great reproach.
seven thousand of the Samnits to creep under the yoke, at the battle of
Allifas.

Thus the Samnits were discomfited by the Romans: but nevertheless they still
renewed their battle, until Fabius Maximus Eutrop. lib. 2.
came to aid his son Quintus, who was vanquished by the Samnits, and three
thousand of his soldiers slain: for of all nations that the Romans had to
do withal, the Samnits diminished most the force of the Romans, as in the
bloody battles at Tifernum, Longula, and at Lantula, where Quintus Aulius
general of the Romans was slain. Likewise in the battles Liui. lib. 9.
at Satricula, and Suessula, the last overthrow of the Samnits: read Liui of
the Samnits wars, who continued their wars with the Romans 49. years, but
in an exceeding great battle they were slain and overthrown by Pub.
Cornelius The Samnits quite vanquished.
Ruffinus, and Marcus Curious Dentatus, then Consuls at Rome.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the wars and victories of the Romans over king Pyrrhus, called the
Tarentine wars, until the Carthaginean wars: of their victories and
triumphs had over Italy, with diverse other foreign nations and kingdoms.

WHen the Romans had thus conquered the Samnits, they proclaimed open wars
against the Tarentines, which inhabited the furthest part of Italy: for they
had Pyrrhus came to aid the Tarentines.
injured the Romans ambassadors, who sent for Pyrrhus king of Epire to assist
them. Pyrrhus forthwith came: for he ever envied the glory of the Romans,
and wished to have some dealings with them: for he was accounted Hanibals
saying of Pyrrhus.
the second soldier of the world next to Alexander the great: for he was like
to Alexander in all points.

This king descended of the line of Achilles, and was named Pyrrhus, as the
name of Achilles son: he was glad to have occasion offered him to war
against the Romans, he gathered soldiers and his forces together: he
associated with the Samnits, the Lucanes, and the Brutaines, and joined his
army with the Tarentines, and marched forward to give battle to Publius
Valerius Leuinius the Consul, to whom Pyrrhus gave Pyrrhus victory of
Leuinius the Consul.
the overthrow: for Pyrrhus was then an old soldier, and had practiced arms
against Lysimachus king of Thracia, and against Demetrius king of Macedonia.
Then the Consuls lost of Roman soldiers to the number of fifteen thousand,
and Eutrop. lib. 2.
Pyrrhus got not that victory without blood: for he had slain of his
soldiers by the Romans seven thousand: and Eutropius says, that Pyrrhus had
fled and lost the field, had not his Eus. ^ib. temp.
elephants been, by whose means only he ouerthrewe the Romans.

Pyrrhus, to show his greatness to the Romans, sent the Plutarch. in vita
Pyrrhi.
prisoners which he took without ransom: but the majesty of the Senate
requited Pyrrhus, in letting so many prisoners of the Samnits and Tarentines
free to Pyrrhus.

After this the second battle betwixt the Tarentines and the Plutarch. in vita
Pyrrhi.
Romans, was at the city of Ascalum, where likewise Pyrrhus had the victory
over the Romans. This time the Carthagineans offered aid to the Romans, and
sent their ambassadors with a crown made all of gold, in token of their good
will: this gift should be put in the Capitol in the seat of Jupiter. Liuius
lib. 7.


The Romans were somewhat heated by Pyrrhus, and having lost two victories,
they prepared for the third battle, whose charge was given to M. Curious
Dentatus then Consul: who exspecting aid to come from Lucania, until king
Pyrrhus a hot rash captain did set upon them, but to his great loss, and to
one of his last overthrows in Italy. I find in Eutropius, that Pyrrhus The
Romans victory over Pyrrhus.
lost twenty thousand of his soldiers, his elephants and himself sore
wounded.

Pyrrhus having this repulse, sent one Cineas an ambassador to the Romans, an
excellent eloquent Orator and one of Demosthenes chief scholars: he thought
to entreat for peace upon indifferent conditions: but no condition pleased the
Romans, unless Pyrrhus would depart out of Italy. This answer being returned
from the Senate, Pyrrhus demanded of Eutrop. lib. 2.
Cineas what manner of place Rome was. Cineas answered, that Rome was a city of
kings, saying further, that every one in Cineas saying of Rome.
Rome was such as Pyrrhus was in Epire. Then said Pyrrhus, were I king of Rome,
or had I Roman soldiers, I should soon conquer all Asia and Europe.

Then Fabritius a noble Roman was sent against king Pyrrhus: this Fabritius
was so honored at Rome, and so esteemed abroad, and yet a poor man, that
Pyrrhus offered him gold Read Polibeus of this war, lib. 2.
and silver, yea the fourth part of his kingdom if he would forsake Rome.
This was that Fabritius that refused Pyrrhus gifts, and also opened the treason
and conspiracy of his Physician, who offered for money to bring Pyrrhus into
Fabritius hands: and this was he that forced Pyrrhus to flee to Sicilia, and
after he had subdued the Samnits, and the Lucanes, he had his triumph
granted him. While Pyrrhus stayed musing in Sicilia, Curious Dentatus, and
Cornelius Lentulus being Consuls, were sent to meet Pyrrhus, and to give him
battle: for the Romans suffered him to have no rest within Italy. In this
battle the army of Pyrrhus was slain, his tents sacked, and he himself
Pyrrhus army slain.
driven to Tarentum, he lost 23. thousand that day, over whom Curious Dentatus
triumphed in his Consulship: he brought four elephants into Rome, which were
the first that ever were seen in a triumph at Rome: for before Pyrrhus wars,
the Florus lib. 1. cap. 18.
spoils and the treasures of the Volscanes, and the Sabines, were but cattle:
the spoils which the Romans had of the Gauls, were Carpenta: the spoil of
the Samnits, were but armours Val. Max. cap. 12.
and broken weapons. The like poor spoils and prays had the Romans over the
Fidenats, poor towns, not yet well enriched for the civil wars which they
had with the Romans: But Pyrrhus brought the strength and treasure of a king,
his gold and silver, his elephants and camels, that the victory Read Plutar.
in Pyrrho.
which Curious Dentatus, and Fabritius then Consuls at Rome had over Pyrrhus, so
rejoiced Rome, that their triumph then over Pyrrhus, was the most joyful and
acceptable triumph that ever Rome saw at that time.

To this end came the vain hope of king Pyrrhus, who Pyrrhus driven out of
Italy.
thought to have conquered Italy, and thereby to be king of Rome. After he had
spent 6. years in continual wars with the Romans he fled, after whose
flight immediately all Italy was conquered, and Sicilia. Not long after Pyrrhus
was slain at Argos a city of Greece: for after Tarentum was destroyed, then
the Picents and their town Asculum, were also subdued by Sempronius. After the
Picents, the Salentines and their chief port Brundusium, was conquered by Mar.
Attilius: and last of all the Volscanes were also overthrown by Fabius Gurges.
Fl^. lib. 15.
Thus was all Italy soon subdued after the overthrow of Tarentum. Oros. 4.
cap. 6.


At this time flourished in Greece, Agesilaus a noble man of Sparta, and after
the death of king Agis he was elected king in Who flourished this time in other
countries.
Sparta over the Lacedaemonians, with whom flourished for a time Lisander a
valiant captain of Sparta, and a great enemy of Athens. Alcibiades was famous
in Camillus time, and Niceas the Athenian, who during Camillus wars in Rome,
and before his time a little, all Greece were busy in the Peloponesian war.
This time Diogenes the Cynicke, Plato the Philosopher lived, and his scholar
Aristotle was borne.

In Persia reigned Artaxerxes Mnemon, surnamed the great, Artaxerxes Mnemon.
who held wars for a short time with his brother Cyrus whom he slew. Read
of this king in Xenophon his fifth book, and after, his son Ochus reigned
king in Persia.

In Macedonia reigned Philippe, Alexander the great his father, who subdued and
conquered many nations in the time Philip.
of Camillus, and after succeeded him his son Alexander the great, whose
renown and fame are in all books manifest. This time lived Mausolus king of
Caria, whose tomb when he died, the Queen his wife Artimesia made so gorgeous
and so sumptuous, that it was reckoned in the number of the seven wonders.
Alexander Pheraeus the tyrant of Thessalia reigned at this time, with whom
Pelopidas had battle, and who by Epaminondas his friend was rescued. Likewise
governed in Egypt as revolted kings from the Persians since Cambyses time, The
Egyptians revolted from the Persians.
the second king of Persia, until Darius Ochus reign the eight king of
Persia, Nepherites six years, Achoris twelve years, and Nectanabus eighteen
years. When now that Camillus was dead, there succeeded a number of valiant
Romans, as

1 Tit. Quintius Cicinatus. 2 Tit. Manlius Torquatus. 3 M. Val.
sirnamedCoruinus. 4 Q. Fabius Maximus. 5 Luc. Papyrius Cursor. 9 And Curious
Dentatus.
With many more valiant Romans, that augmented the glory of Rome, in subduing
the nations about them, as the wars of the Volscans; Thuscans, Samnits and
Torentines can witness, of which you may read in Liuie, in Halicarnassaeus, in
Eutropius, and in others.

During which time the kings of Egypt (after Alexander the great) with the
kings of Syria and Asia, were as well occupied Alexander the great.
with wars in their own kingdoms, as the Romans were in Italy: so likewise
were the kings of Macedonia, and all the states of Greece: for Alexanders
soldiers and his captains, had filled all the East part of the world with
wars: for Alexander had subdued and conquered the most part of all the kings
then living, and brought them to pay tribute to the kings of The greatness of
the Empire of Macedonia, by the means of Alexander the great.
Macedonia. So that after his death, they fought for kingdoms, and every king
sought by wars to become like unto Alexander, and so by that means one
destroyed another, that then proud Persia, which had the Chaldea^s, Assyrians,
Lydians, Medes, Egpptians, all Asia, and all the world vassals and subjects
under them, were then made to yield to the Macedonian empire.

You have read how hitherto the Romans have from a little town in the
beginning, crept over all Italy, and now are ready to try their valor
abroad, and so to set foot in Affrike and Lybia, countries far from Rome:
for yet the Romans had never waged war forth of Italy. And to the end they
might understand what power they were able to make, there was a muster had, and
the names of the Romans were nombred 300000. Citizens mustered in Rome before
the first wars of Affrike.
by the pole, which amounted to the number of three hundredth thousand citizens.

In the 480. year after the building of Rome, the name of the Romans became
famous, insomuch that they proclaimed Polibius lib. 1.
wars against the people of Affrike: at what time Appius Claudius surnamed
Caudex, and Q. Fuluius were Co^suls. This war endured until Q. Luctatius, and
Aulus Manlius consulship, which was 22. years. Of these 3 several wars which
the Romans had with the Affricanes, I have said some thing in the Affricane
history. The first war was against Hamilcar Hanibals father, The first
Affricane wars*
a famous Captain at that time of the Carthagineans, with whom Hanibal in his
youth was brought up in Spain, at what time the Romans pretended wars
against Hieron king of Sicilie. But he together with the residue of his
nobility, made peace with the Romans, and gave them in consideration thereof
Eutrop. lib. 2.
200. talents of silver, and then the Affricans were overcome in Sicilia, which
was the second time that the Romans triumphed over them. After ^his the
Carthaginea^s were discomfited on the sea in the third battle, where the Romans
took 31. ships, and sunk 18. beside the slaughter of 3000. and the taking of
7000. with fewin days after. This time Caius Aquilius, and Lucius Scipio were
Consuls: for then Scipio wanne Corsica and Sardinia, and led with him many
thousand prisoners, and triumphed in the second battle Hamilcar the general
of the Carthagineans discomfited by Regulus.
by sea. Hamilcar the general of the Carthagineans lost 64. ships, and was
forced to retire back, at what time Clipea the chiefest city in Affrike was
yielded up to the Romans.

After this great victory Manlius the Consul returned to Rome, and brought 27.
thousand prisoners, and triumphed with great pomp and solemnity: and Attilius
Regulus the The noble victory of Attibus Regulus.
other Consul remained still in Africa, who while his fellow was in Rome,
joined battle with three great captains of the Carthagineans at one time, of
whom Regulus got the victory, slew 18. thousand Affricanes, took prisoners
5000. men, and eight elephants, and brought under obeisance of the Romans
threescore and thirteen cities, and at that time the Carthagineans desired
peace of Regulus.

The invincible courage of the Romans was such, that during the first Punicke
wars which continued 22. years, in four battles upon the sea, the
Affricanes were quite vanquished Halicar. lib. 1.
and subdued, not without great losses of the Romans which they sustained by
shipwreck, and therefore the Senators thought good to give over that kind of
battle, for the continual and often damages which they sustained, and
specially The great over throw of the Romans.
in that battle when the Lacedaemonians aided the Affricanes, at what time
thirty thousand Romans were slain, fifteen thousand taken prisoners, and
their captain Regulus taken and put in prison. But this great overthrow of the
Romans Florus. 2. cap. 2.
was fully requited by Marcus Aemilius, and Sergius Fuluius made Consuls for
the next battle: for (as Eutropius affirms) the Romans were so furious for
the overthrow of Regulus, that they prepared 300. sail to pass into Affrike.
In this Eutrop. lib. 2.
battle Aemilius sunk 104. ships of his enemies, took thirty Aemilius
victory.
ships with all the men that fought in them, slew and took prisoners 15.
thousand Affricanes, with an exceeding great spoil, with the which he enriched
his soldiers.

At this time all Affrike had been subdued, had there not at that very time
chanced so great a dearth in Affrike, and yet the Consuls for all these
victories suffered such shipwreck by Great shipwreck of the Romans.
a sudden tempest about the coast of Sicilie, that of 484. ships, skant eighty
could be saved.

Many of these shipwrackes happened to the Romans, which made their victories
of less renown: but they were of such courage, that nothing could dismay
them, on land nor on sea. For though Publius Claudius had lost his people in an
unlucky battle by land, with no less evil success by shipwreck, then
before you heard by sea: yet with greater courage Oros. lib 4. cap 10.
then before (being more kindled to revenge their losses and damages) they
prepared 400. sail well furnished, for the which voyage they created Caius
Luctatius, and Aulus Posthumus Consuls. The battle was fought over against
Lilibeum C. Luctatius and Aulus Posthumus Consuls victory.
a city of Sicilie, where the Romans took 32. thousand prisoners, slew
thirteen thousand, and sunk 125. ships.

Upon this overthrow the Affricanes were compelled to desire peace, being not
able to wage war longer with the Romans: for they had lost both their chief
captains, their ships, their munitions in this only battle, and so their
first war ceased, and peace proclaimed by the Romans, which continued 24.
years, until the second wars begun by Hanibal. These were the names of the
Consuls and the chief valiant Romans that flourished then in Rome, during the
first Punicke war.

Appius Claudius, surnamed* Caudex. Q. Fuluius. Luc. Manlius Volso. Mar.
Attilius Regulus. Mar. Aemilius Paulus. Sergius Fuluius. C. Sulpitius
Paterculus. Attilius Calatinus. Cneus Seruilius Sepio. C. Sempronius Blesus. C.
Furius Placidus. Cn. Cornelius. and C. Duilius. C. Aquilius Horus. Lucius
Cornelius Scipio. C. Aurelius Cotta. Pub. Seruilius Germinus. These captains
flourished in Rome in the first Punike war.
Mar. Fabius Licinius. Mar. Octacilius Crassus. C. Luctatius Catullus. Aul.
Posthumous Albinus. Lu. Manlius Regulus. Mar. Valerius Maximus. Q. Luctatius.
With many other noble Romans, Consuls, Dictators* Tribunes and other
magistrates, which then lived at Rome at the time of this war.

CHAP. V.
Of the Roman wars, and of their conquest over Carthage, Numantia, and all
Asia: and of their diverse victories and triumphs over other nations, during
the time of this Affricane wars.

IN other countries and kingdoms, while this war endured betwixt the Romans
and the Affricanes, these kings reigned. In Bythinia governed king Nicomedes,
who builded a great city, and named i^ after his own name Nicomedia. In Asia
and Syria reigned Antiochus surnamed Theos the third king, after Alexander the
great died: and Ptolomey Euergetes r^igned likewise the third king of Egypt.

During this first Affricane wars, the Parthians which were vassals under the
Macedonians, erected up their kingdom, over whom reigned as their first king
one named Arsaces, after whom the kings of Parthia were all named Arsaces. In
Macedonia All the kings of Parthia were named Arsaces.
this time reigned Antigonus, surnamed Gonatus, whose successors continued
kings in Macedonia, until the Romans overcame and subdued them.

Alexander the great had not heard of the Romans in those The name of Rome was
not heard of out of Italy in the time of Alexander the great.
days, their fame and renown being yet not far known: for they were from
the first building of Rome, until the first Punicke wars occupied in Italy,
where diverse stout and valiant nations inhabited, who were brought under the
obeisance of Rome, and so soon as Rome could command Italy, they commenced
war against the Affricanes. But before, when Alexander was in arms against
the Persians, and in armor against all the East kings, the Romans had wars
in Italy, at what time so many Alexanders, so many Pyrrhus, so many Hanibals in
Rome lived then in valor and courage, that both Pyrrhus and Hanibal felt of it
to their loss, and the overthrow of themselves. Liuie writes a noble history
in comparing certain Romans, man for man to Alexander, and of those that
lived about the time of Alexander the great: for he died about sixty years
before the first Affricane war. For (says Liuie) had Alexander come to Rome
as conqueror then of all the East kings of the world, he had found in Rome
many conquerors, and many Alexanders like himself, as these vndernamed.

Mar. Valerius Coruinus. Tit. Manlius Torquatus. Caius Martius Rutilius. Caius
Sulpitius. Lucius Papyrius Cursor. M. Curious Dentatus. Qu. Fabius Maximus.
Lucius Voluminius. Certain noble Romans compared to Alexander the great for
their worthiness and valor.
Qu. Publius Philo. Mar. Valerius Publicola. T. Veturius Caluinus, and 2.
valiant Romans callled Decis.
If then Alexander had made his voyage to Rome, he had found in his days
these gallant Romans being all Consuls or Dictato^ and all conquerours: he
might well have come to Rome like Alexander the conqueror: but Liuie doubted
he T. Liuius praise of the Romans, lib. 9.
should be driven out like Darius conquered. So were Pyrrhus and Hanibal, who
came both in Arms into Italy to conquer Rome, but both driven out of Italy,
and conquered: for Pyrrhus at last saw it, and said, Italy could not be
conquered but with Ittalians, neither could Rome be subdued but with Romans.
Pyrrhus saying of Rome.
For it was told him by his Orator and also his ambassador Cineas, that Rome
was a city full of kings, and that every Consul or Dictator of Rome was like
king Pyrrhus himself in Epire. Hanibal was also compelled to say (after many
bloody battles and victories had over him, and over his father Hamilcar
Hanibals words of Rome.
) that the Romans had many Hanibals. If Alexander might have come to Rome
before his time, he should have found Camillus another Alexander: before
Camillus he should have found Coriolanus: before Coriolanus, he should have
found Publicola: and every one of these esteemed and proved as Alexander.

After that the Romans had concluded peace with the Affricanes, they were also
at that time at rest from war with all nations, which thing happened not
since the building of Rome until that time, but once in Numna Pompilius
reign. But they were not so long: for when Lucius Posthumous Albinus was
Consul, war was begun betwixt the Illyrians and the Romans, over whom
after they had taken many cities, they triumphed, and the Illyrians yielded. At
what time the Frenchmen invaded Italy with an army of eight hundredth thousand,
but they were overthrown by Aemilius the Consul, and 40. thousand of the
enemies slain, for the which a triumph Eutrop. lib. 3.
was decreed unto Aemilius: and the like triumph was granted unto Marcellus,
who with a small troop of horsemen slew Viridomarus the king of the Frenchmen
(as Eutropius says) Virodomarus slain.
with his own hand, and overthrew his army, conquered Millaine, and brought
to Rome an exceeding great spoil. Plutarch. in Marcel.


The Istrians and the Ligurians also were within a while after subdued by the
Romans, at what time Tenca Queen of the Illyrians slew the Roman
ambassadors, against the law The Roman ambassador slain by Tenca.
of Arms. By this time the Carthagineans had gotten some strength, and made
themselves ready to revenge the great losses and wrongs that they sustained in
the first wars by the Romans. In the second wars, Hanibal the son of
Hamilcar being of the age of 20. years was made general, as his father was in
the first, and presently with great fury began to lay siege to Saguntum, and
famished them: thence he passed over the Alps, and brought to Italy 80.
thousand footmen, and 20. thousand horsemen, conveyed his army to the river
Ticium, where Pub Cornelius Scipio the Consul was discomfited, Ticium.
and his army slain and scattered, himself wounded and welnigh taken, had
not his son Scipio afterward called Affricanus rescued him

Hanibal passed still forward with his army, and camped by the river Trebea,
where he gave the like overthrow to Polibeus lib. 3.
Sempronius Gracchus, the other Consul. Thence Hanibal passed into Hetruria, at
what time by a great tempest he was much hindered, being before wounded at the
battle of Trebea, and now his eye by mischaunce lost, he marched to
Placentia, Flaminius the Consul slain by Hanibal.
where in a great battle he slew Caius Flaminius the Consul, and 25.
thousand soldiers. Hanibal being thus heated with good success of victories,
he passed unto Apulia, where he gave the greatest overthrow to the Romans that
ever Eutrop. lib. 3.
they had, in the battle at Cannes, at what time Lucius Aemilius and Pub.
Terentius Varro were Consuls: for in this battle Aemilius the Consul was
slain, and twenty other of the order of Consuls and Praetors 30. slain and
taken of the Senators, Liui. lib. 22.
infinite number of noble men, gentlemen and soldiers, which Florus lib. 2.
I laid down more particularly in the wars of Affrike. This only battle made
all Italy to quake, and many cities and countries The most part of Italy
revolted from the Romans.
to revolt from the Romans, as Capua, Campania, and other places. It is written
that Hanibal did at that time send to Carthage three bushels full of rings and
jewels.

Howbeit Asdrubal which was Hanibals second brother, had not the like luck in
Spain, as Hanibal had in Italy: for he lost that very time of his men thirty
and five thousand, by the two Scipios which were then in Spain captains of
the Romans. The victories of both Scipios in Spain over Asdrubal and Mago.
And within a while after, both Asdrubal the second brother, and Mago the
third brother of Hanibal, were the second time overcome by the two Scipios
again in Spain: for at that time that Hanibal played the Lion in Italy, and
had taken many cities from the Romans in Apulia and Calabria, yet the Romans
in four several places at one time had four general lieutenants in arms.

1. In Macedonia, Valerius Liuius against Philip. 2. Titus Manlius Torquatus,
in Sardinia against the Sardinians. 3. Pub. Cor. Scipio in Spain against
Asdrubal. 4. In Italy against Hanibal.
The fury of Hanibal continued in Italy for ten years, so that all Italy
stood in despair of themselves. But when Fabius Max. was sent against
Hanibal, he by detracting of time and delays hindered the violence and rage
of Hanibal, and Cunctando re^ restituit.
thereby finding opportunity to set upon Hanibal, gave him of tentimes the
overthrow, and therefore he was called Scutum Romanum, The Roman targat,
only by delays. And even Fabius the target of Rome.
so was Marcellus for his heat and fury called Ensis Romanus, and likened to
Hanibal himself: for Hanibal himself called Marcellus being the sword of
Rome.
Marcellus the Roman Hanibal: and said further, that Marcellus was neither
quiet being conqueror, nor conquered.

But while this violence of Hanibal continued in Italy, in the tenth year
after that he invaded Italy, after many victories over the Romans, he
approached within four miles of Rome, and his horsemen came to the very gates
of the city. At what time (to increase his fame) his brother Asdrubal slew
Pub. Scipio. Cneus Scipio.
both the Scipios in Spain, to the great discomfort of Rome, who had for many
years been conquerours in Spain. Hanibal might then have easily conquered
Rome, if he had set forward his army (for so Caesar said afterward) but he
feared the Consuls which were ready to come out of Rome to give him battle.
And not without good cause: for Hanibal found so many Scipios, so many Fabius,
so many Marcellus, and so Hanibal droupt.
many Hanibals like to himself, that he still stood in awe of the Romans:
for he heard that an other Scipio went to Spain, in the place of the two
Scipios slain by Asdrubal, and also he heard of his victories over many
cities, and shortly after he heard of Carthage in Spain, in the which wars
he took Mago Hanibals brother, and sent him with the residue of the prisoners
to Rome.

This daunted the courage of Hanibal, and augmented the glory of Scipio, being
then of the age of twenty and four years: after whose going into Spain, the
fortune of Hanibal declined in Italy: for Fabius Maximus recovered Tarentum,
Tarentum recovered by Fabius Max.
and many other cities which had yielded to Hanibal, submitted themselves to
Fabius. Marcellus had also recovered Salopia, and had taken Syracusa, and many
other cities in Campania, and had sundry times scattered Hanibal and his army
at Canusium: for either of these two Consuls, Fabius and Marcellus, had been
twice Dictators, and five times Consuls.

In Spain also Pub. Scipio gave an overthrow to Asdrubal at Betula, and slew
eight thousand Affricanes and Spaniards. Pub. Scipio.
In the eleventh year after that this war began, Marcellus that noble
captain whom Hanibal feared most, was slain at Venusia, being then Consul,
whom Hanibal most honorably The Consul Marcellus slain.
caused to be buried in Venusia.

As Hanibal flourished with his victories in Italy, so Scipio excelled in
Spain, and had victories at will: for he discomfited the king of Spain, and
achieved great conquests.

About this time Hanibal sent for his brother Asdrubal to come from Spain to
Italy, who being prevented of set purpose Asdrubal which was Hanibals brother
slain.
by the way was slain, and all his army, by Appius Claudius Nero. In that
time were fifty and six thousand slain, and Asdrubals head brought, and was
thrown before the tents of Hanibal his brother.

Hanibal then began to despair of the success of this war: for both in
Spain and in Africa, he was by this means weakened: in Italy all reuerted
and slid from Hanibal: Scipio subdued the Carthagineans, and took Syphax king
Scipio took Syphax king of Numidia.
of Numidia prisoner, who had joined to aid the Affricanes against the
Romans, and had also expelled by war Masinissa out of his kingdom.

This great overthrow in Spain and in Affrike, caused Hanibal to quake: for
in Italy he began to be forsaken of his former fortune, and in Affrike they
cried out for aid at All writers make mention of this second Punicke war.
Hanibals hand. Now Hanibal perceiving that all went to decay, and being also
sore wearied with continual battles, desired peace, which was granted upon
such strait and hard conditions as pleased not the Carthagineans, and
therefore they willed Hanibal rather to fight it out. This last battle
whereupon the whole state of Affrike depended, was appointed to be fought at
Zama.

But before these two great captains should join in battle, Hanibal desired
to speak with Scipio openly or privately. Scipio denied not the meeting of
Hanibal in the sight of both the armies. The speech of Hanibal tendered peace,
which Scipio Hanibal and Scipio talk together.
without accepting the conditions before spoken, would not allow: the effect of
both the speeches is written in Liuie. To be short, the battle at Zama ended,
where Scipio conquered the Affricanes, and put Hanibal to flight, and then were
the Affricanes to accept such conditions as Scipio offered them before:
Conditions of peace to the Affricans.
for of necessity they sought peace. The conditions of peace were, to restore
Masinissa first to his kingdom, and to return all Roman prisoners into
Italy, to yield all their ships saving ten, to deliver all their elephants to
the hand of the conqueror, and that they should not make war within Africa
or without, without license of the Senators of Rome, and Yearly revenues out
of Affrike to the Romans.
yearly revenues of 10. thousand talents of silver to be paid to the Romans.

This war being finished and peace thus concluded, Scipio was received unto
Rome with a great triumph, having a surname given him by the conquest of
Africa, called Scipio Affricanus. Of him, and of others that served in the
second war of Africa, of those that triumphed, I mean Dictators, Consuls,
Praetors, and other Roman magistrates and captains, I have laid down to
your view, their names together in order, as they served in that field.

Publius Cornelius Scipio. Titus Sempronius. Quintus Flaminius. These triumphed
with great pomp in Rome, saving few of them that were slain in these wars.
Lucius Aemilius Paulus. Marcus Attilius Regulus. Publius Terentius Varro. Luc.
Posthumous Albinius. Qu. Fabius Maximus. Mar. Claudius Marcellus. Mar. Valerius
Leuinus. Pub. Sulpitius Galba. Cneus Fuluius. Quintus Fuluius Flaccus. Mar.
Liuius Salinator. Tit. Quintius Crispinus. Lucius Veturius. Quintus Caecilius
Metellus. Appius Claudius Nero. Scipio, surnamed Affricanus the son of Pub.
Cor. Scipio.
These flourished chiefly, and triumphed in the second wars of Affrike,
which endured (as Eutropius says) 19. years: The fame of the Romans after the
overthrow of Hanibal.
but others say 17. years. Of this war the Romans waxed so strong, that
they soon conquered al nations, and presently ensued war in Macedonia
against king Philippe, for yet in Macedonia the Monarchy since the time of
Alexander the great, remained: for the Romans had driven before this time,
that noble and valiant captain Pyrrhus out of Italy, and now after Pyrrhus
they have driven out Hanibal, the very scourge of Italy and whippe of Rome:
they have also conquered Hanibal the whip of Rome.
the stoutest and the valiantest nations that then reigned on the earth, the
Carthagineans, the Libyans, and the Affricanes, with such terrible wars, as
Alexander might not compare neither in his great battles in Persia, where he
subdued Darius, neither his wars in India where he conquered king Porus, for
that Alexander made a conquest of many kingdoms without fighting: as Egypt,
Judea, Greece, with diverse other kingdoms Consuls of Rome.
which yielded unto him. And so Cyrus before Alexander had the like luck to
conquer with great fame, but not with such terror and danger of life as these
Consuls of Rome.

But to the history. Skant had the second wars of Affrike been ended, but
Ambassadors came from Athens to Rome for aid against the king of Macedon: the
common people Wars against the Macedonians.
murmured, for that they were weary with continual wars. But the whole
Senate agreed with the Tribune of the people, to send Titus Flaminius, the
son of him that was slain at Flaminius sent to Greece.
the battle of Thrasimen: who at his first coming to Greece, gave battle to
Philip hard by the haven Epirus, and overthrew him and his army. Flaminius the
Consul had a brother named Lucius Flaminius, with whom joined Atalus king of
Pergamum in Asia, with certain Rhodian soldiers, who took Euboea, and all
the sea coasts. Philip to become stronger, joined in friendship with Antiochus
the great, king of Asia. How be it Flaminius had such good success in Greece,
that Philip was forced to entreat for peace, which was granted upon these
conditions: That all the Cities of Greece within Asia and Condicio^s of peace
granted to king Philip.
Europe, should have their own liberty and laws, That al Roman prisoners
should be delivered to their Country, That all their great Nauies should be
delivered to the Romans, with all their Elephants, That he should keep no
army above the number of five hundred soldiers, and that he should commence
no war out of the Confines of Macedonia Val. lib. 7. cap. 5.
without license and leave of the Senate. These conditions of peace were
proclaimed with the sound of the trumpet through all the Cities of Greece. By
this time Hanibal, who escaping from Scipio at the battle of Zama, came to
Antiochus, Liberty proclaimed in Greece.
councelled him with all means possible to war upon the Romans, being now
so weakened by the last Affricane war. The authority of Hanibal moved
Antiochus to take wars in hand against the Romans: for as soon as the war
in Macedonia finished and were given over by Philip, the wars in Syria began
by Antiochus, and were executed by Hanibal. But Hanibal The wars of Syria by
Anticchus the great.
was discomfited in battle on the sea, and Antiochus himself put to flight at
Magnesia a city of Asia, by Lu. Cornelius Scipio, brother to Scipio
Affricanus, in the which battle (as Eutropius says) were slain fifty
thousand footmen and four thousand The victory of Lu. Scipio.
horsemen.

Eumenes king of Pergamum the son of Attalus, being (as his father was)
always a friend to the Romans, made all the power Eumenes.
he could against Antiochus, for an old grudge that Eumenes had to Antiochus.
To this war of Syria came Scipio Affricanus to aid his brother Lu. being
Consul then, against Antiochus: for Antiochus was so beset with M. Attilius
Glabrio the Consul on the one side, and Scipio Nasica on the other side at
Thiatira, by Emilius Regulus at Mionesus, and by Lucius Scipio at Magnesia.
Now Nabides again after he had submitted himself to Flaminius Nabides
submitted him to Flaminius.
upon what conditions he would, being then vanquished and Armenes his son
together with king Philips son Demetrius, were led before Flaminius charet as
hostages and pledges to Rome, began to kindle more fire against the Romans: but
he was slain by the Aetolians. Eutrop writes this history otherwise: but I
stand not upon controversies.

After this overthrow given to Antiochus, he made means Antiochus sought peace.
to the Romans for peace, which was granted, if he would avoid forth of
Europe and Asia, and meddle no further but within the precinct of Taurus, and
give to the Romans 10. thousand talents, and 30. pledges for the assurance of
his promise: and in conclusion, to deliver Hanibal to them, who had bin the
cause of this war. This being done, the Senate gave to Eumenes all Plinij lib.
33. cap. 11.
these cities of Asia, which Antiochus had lost in battle, and likewise they
gave to the Rhodia^s diverse other cities, for that they assisted the Romans
against Antiochus. By this victory triumphed Scipio surnamed Asiaticus.
Lu. Cornelius Scipio in Rome, where he brought infinite spoil and treasures
of Asia, and had the surname of Asiaticus given him, and was called Scipio
Asiaticus, as his brother was called Scipio Affricanus: but both these brethren
were much envied for their greatness: Scipio Affricanus was accused by Marcus
Por. Cato, by whose means afterward though he was not banished, yet he most
willing departed from Rome into Lucernum, saying these words: O ingrata
patria, non habebis ossa mea. His brother Scipio Affricanus was both accused
and condemned The words of Scipio of his country.
when Caius Flaminius was Consul.

About this time Hanibal died, and is buried at Libissa, a banished man out of
his Country, a man likewise that had deserved well of his country. Philip king
of Macedon died also this very time. This had both warred against the Romans,
and assisted them against Antiochus. After Philip died, his son Perseus
rebelled in Macedonia, and reared wars against the Romans, with who^ joined
Cotys king of Illiria: the Romans were not long about Perseus: for he was
vanquished in one battle, Perseus the last king of Macedon taken.
yea and (as Phil. says) in one hour: he fled from Pydna to Pella, and within
few days yielded himself to Cneus Octauius in Samothracia: and was brought
out of hand to Paulus Emilius, who after his honorable progress in Greece and
in Macedonia, he shipped at the city of Orica, and returned to Italy, to who^
a triumph was granted, and such a triumph as far excelled others, equal to
Pompey or to Caesar's triumphs. For Emilius had Emilius his triumph over Perseus.
in this triumph led before his chariot, king Perseus himself, being forty
five years of age, and his two sons, and in an other chariot, Gentius king
of the Illyrians, with his brother C Anitius triumphed over Gentius king of the
Illyrians.
and his sons, over whom triumphed Caius Anitius. This triumph is set forth
in Plutarch, to the admiration of many strangers which then were at Rome, as
Eumenes king of Asia, and Prusias king of Bythinia, who at that time brought
his son Nicomedes with him to Rome, and committed him to the government of
the Senators.

CHAP. VI.
Of the conspiracy of L. Catelina: and of the two civil wars, the first
between Marius and Silla, and the second between Pompei the great, and Iu.
Caesar: during which time Carthage and Numantia were subdued in Hispaine, and
the last conquest of Affrika by Scipio the younger, and also surnamed
Affricanus the younger.

Now that the Romans had quieted Asia, and brought the kings of Egypt to be
friends of the Romans, subdued Macedonia, and made all Greece free from
wars, and when (as they thought) that they might take some repose and rest
from further wars, they were certified of news from Carthage, that the
Affricanes and Carthagineans had broken the league of peace with the Romans,
whereupon the third wars were taken in hand: The Romans had in 5. places
wars at one time.
for all this time of fifty two years, peace was kept between the Romans and
the Affricanes, at what time the Romans were occupied in the wars of Syria,
against Antiochus: in the wars of Macedonia against king Philip, and his
son Perseus: in Greece against Nabides the tyrant of Lacedemonia: in Illyria
against king Gentius: and in Bythinia against Prusias, who had married the
sister of Perseus.

These kings and countries were no sooner quieted, but the Affricanes began to
commence war the third time with the The third war of Affrike.
Romans: at what time Lu. Martius Censorinus, and Marcus Manlius were Consuls
at Rome, in the year after the building of Rome six hundred and one, some say
six hundred and five. These Consuls took their voyage to invade Carthage, and
by Mar. Portius Cato his council being at that time the wisest Catoes council
concerning Carthage.
man in Rome, to raze Carthage from the ground, or to make it even to the
ground: yet Scipio Nasica a good man, and so of the Senators esteemed and of
the Citizens accounted, contraried Cato in that council, persuading lenity to
be fit for the Romans being conquerours.

The war was taken in hand, and so furiously followed, that Carthage within
four years was destroyed by Scipio Emilianus, nephewe to Affricanus, who was
deputed general of the Roman army at that time, of whom Cato was wont to
say, Hic solus sapit, one in virtue and courage most like to his predecessor
Scipio Affricanus. The chief captain then in Carthage was one Asdrubal and
Phanea, or as some say Famea. These Phanea.
names, Hamilcar and Asdrubal, were in Carthage, as Scipio or Fabius were in
Rome. In the beginning of this war died Masinissa, Hamilcar and Asdrubal a
great name in Carthage.
an old constant friend always to the Romans, after that he had lived
ninety eight years. Now Scipio with invincible courage assaulted Carthage,
and wanne and plucked it to the ground: he waxed so famous thereby, that being a
young man, he was created Consul, who by his prowess and valor merited to be
called Scipio Affricanus the younger.

In the mean time while this war was in Carthage, one usurped the name of
Philip, and of the kingdom of Macedonia, and proclaimed wars against the
Romans, and gave Publius Inuentius Praetor then of Rome the overthrow, and
made such a slaughter of the Roman army, that none skant escaped alive Q.
Cecilius Metellus was deputed captain, and sent against Andriscus named
Psendophi lippus vanquished by Metellus.
this false named Philip, who slew twenty five thousand of his men, recovered
Macedonia, and took prisoner this false Philip. This time Corinthus the third
city of all Greece was overthrown, and plucked to the ground by Mu^mius the
Consul, Mummius.
which City was builded by Beletes Hippios son nine hundred fifty two
years before: so long Corinthus flourished.

Likewise at this very time again, one in Macedonia usurped in like manner as
before one false Philip now usurped the name of Perseus: but he was soon
subdued by Tremilus the Questor, so that at once entered into the city of Rome
four Perseus overthrown.
triumphs: the first by Scipio Affricanus the younger, forth of Affrike over
Asdrubal: the second by Metellus forth of Macedonia over Andriscus, which was
that false Philip before spoken: the third by Mu^mius the Consul over the City
of Corinth. After this triumphs, Scipio was sent to Spain to the Numantines,
who had a little before discomfited Q. Pompeius the Consul, over whom he had
his second triumph: but shortly by Scipio the city of Numantia was subdued,
he had triumphed over Affrike. About this time, Attalus king Eumenes his
father, some say his brother, died, and made the people of Rome his heir,
Eutrop. lib. 4. Iustine lib 37. Gellius lib. 1. cap. 13.
and so by testament Asia was annexed to the Roman Empire: notwithstanding
war ensued in Asia by Aristonicus a base son of Eumenes, and in that war
Pub. Lucius Crassus was slain, his head cut off and brought to Aristonicus,
and his body buried at Smirna. It is written of this Crassus, that he might
brag of 5 principal great gifts: To be most noble, The most wealthiest, Five
great gifts in Crassus.
The most eloquent, To be the most learned ciuillian, And to be the most high
Bishop.

About this time Carthage in Affrike was reedified by the commandment of the
Senate, after that it was subdued by Scipio 22. years, and (as writes Polib.)
diverse Citizens of Rome went to dwell in Carthage. Not long after this Scipio
was found dead in his house, not without great suspicio^ of Caius Graccus: now
war was by the Romans co^menced against the Thracia^s, at what time
triumphed in Rome the two brethren Metelli in one The two brethren Meielli
triumphed.
day: the one over Thracia, and the other over Sardinia: the wars of Iugurth
immediately after this ensued, of who^ Salust makes mencio^. This was the son
of Micipsa, king of Numidia, who having two other brethren beside himself,
named Adherbalis, and Hiemsalis, these Iugurth slew, and usurped the kingdom:
for this fact, the Romans sent Lucius Calphurnius then Consul against Iugurth,
but he did no good: for he was corrupted with money. After Spurius Albinus
Posthumus was sent by the Senators, who fought with Iugurth, but with great
dishonor. The third time Quintus Cecilius Metellus was sent, who vanquished
Iugurth, and subdued Numidia, and at last took him and brought him prisoner to
Rome. Of this Iugurth, Read Salust of Iugurth wars.
you shall read more in the Affricane history: and I will lay down the names
of the Roman Consuls, captains, and generals that triumphed from the end of
the second Affricane war, which was from Scipio Affricanus the elder, until
the time of Scipio Affricanus the younger, which was 56. years.

1 Ti. Quin. Flaminius. 2 Lu. Flamin. his brother. 3 Lu. Cornelius Scipio
surnamed Affricanus. 4 Lu. Valerius Flaccus. 5 M. Portius Cato. 6 Lucius
Manlius. 7 Scipio Nasica. 8 Ti. Sempronius Longus. 9 Spu. Posthu. Albinus. 10
Quintus Martius. 11 M. Aemilius Lepidus. 12 M. Sempro. Tuditanus. 13 Lucius
Anitius. 14 Au. Manl. Torquatus. 15 C. Lu. Crassus. 16 Quintus Opimus. 17 Sci.
Africa. the younger. 18 Q. Cecilius Metellus. 29 C. Cecilius Metellus. 20 Lu.
Cornelius Cnima. 21 M. Liuius Drusus. 22 C. Papirius Carbo. 23 Lu. Celius
Metellus. 24 Cneus Octauius.
These with many other noble Romans flourished in those days: for now the
Romans after all their wars in Affrika, brought all kingdoms under the Empire
of Rome: for from that time forward the glory of Rome did excel, saving for
some civil wars that grew beeene Marius and Silla, and after beweene Pompey
and Caesar, else Rome was in Marius the first cause of the civil wars.
her greatness: for in the 646. year after the building of Rome Caius Marius, a
man of great service amongst the Romans in consideration that he had been
seven times Consul in Rome, was the only cause of the first civil war in
Rome, upon indignation taken, that Silla was preferred in the wars then against
Mithridates king of Pontus, who had already done good service in Asia and
Achaia, though Mithridates had persuaded the Athenia^s to resist Silla: for at
that time Mithridates held a great part of Asia in his hand, and of Thracia, so
that many thought that Mithridates should in time conquer the Roman Empire:
for he was eager and cruel against those that loved the Romans. But Silla in
spite of Mithridates and his philosopher Athenius, and Silla and Marius two
enemies 10 Italy.
his successor Aristo the tyrant, besieged Athens, and wanne it, where he
killed a number of the Citizens: many before were famished, for a measure of
wheat called Medinus, was sold in Athens then for a thousand Drachmes, which
do mount to a hundred crowns, which before in time of peace was sold for five
Drachmes.

After he had taken Athens, he marched to Beotia, and ouerthrewe Archilaus
Mithridates general, and slew a hundred thousand Melancthon Chron. lib. 2.
of his men: and from thence to Thebes, and did much harm both to the City
and Citizens. Marius disdaining the good success of Silla, made means to the
Senate to have that war into his hand, which Silla had against Mithridates.
Eutrop. lib. 5.


This was granted to Marius, whereupon Silla in a great fury with all his
army returned back to Rome, entered the City, killed Sulpitius, slew many,
and drove Marius to flight, and secretly went to Apheca.

Silla and Marius began now both to neglect the wars abroad against
Mithridates, and like two furious enemies of Italy, spoiled their country,
and gave liberty to the enemy Cilla and Marius civil wars.
to vanquish and subdue in this time Armenia the less, and all the sea coasts
called Ponticum and Bosphorus. Silla by consent of the Senate, took his
journey against Mithridates, recovered Greece (as you heard) and other
provinces. But to be short, Silla overcame Marius after many hot broiles in
Italy, concluded peace with Mithridates, returned to Rome, at what time Lu.
Scipio and Norbanus were Consuls in Rome. These both thought to resist Sillas
coming to Rome: but Lu. Scipio with all his army went and yielded to Silla,
and the other Consul Norbanus the Consul slew himself.
fled to Rhodes, where for fear to come to Sillas hand, he slew himself.

That year Silla was made Dictator in Rome, six hundred seventy three years
after the building of Rome, at what time he tyrannized against the Citizens of
Rome, so that Silla after much good service first done to his country,
afterward fell Silla made Dictator in Rome.
to such slaughter and tyranny, that he had been better unborn then borne.
And so of Marius may be spoken, who played the like part before Silla, and were
both called faces and faeces Italiae, for their bloodshed in their country:
for Marius before Sillas slaughter and murdering of the Citizens of Rome, he
Faces Italiae.
killed Cneus Sulpitius, and others: so Sulpitius and others slew in Rome Cneus
Octauius, and many of the best of Rome, as well Noble men, Senators, and
Consuls, as others. This civil war in Rome (as Eutropius and Melancthon
affirm) endured ten years, in the which were slain above five hundred
thousand Eutrop. lib. 5. Melanct. lib. 2.
soldiers, twenty four Consuls, seven Pretors, forty Tribunes, and (as
they write) three hundred Senators beside. Read Melancthon of this war.

Now after that Silla had these ten years fomed in blood, Read Val. Max.
lil. 3. cap. 2. de Mario.
and had subdued both Marius, and his son the younger Marius, he triumphed
over Mithridates with great glory. In the latter years of Silla, young Pompey
afterward surnamed the Silla triumphed over Mithridates.
great for his prowess and courage, was much honored of Silla, who appointed
him his lieutenant general over his garrisons for Cneus Carbo the Consul, which
fought with young Marius together against Silla, which Marius was slain by
Silla in Preneste. At what time Carbo fled, and was slain by Pompey, and
after that Pompey slew Domitius a captain of Marius Pompey triumphed over
Affrike.
his side, and withal slew Hiarbus king of Mauritania, being of Domitius side,
and therefore triumphed Pompey over Affrike being but twenty four years of
age, which was never erst granted to any Roman, and having not been Consul.

While this civil war continued in Rome, little or nothing was done in other
countries: for now all places were made quiet by the Romans, saving some of
Marius friends, who fled after Marius death, held out, and did what they could
to trouble the Romans, as Hirtulius, Sertorius and others of Maririus friends
that stirred wars in Spain, in Cicilia, and Pamphylia: Sertorius a valiant
captain of Marius side fled to Spain.
against these Q. Metellus, son to that Metellus which subdued king Iugurth,
was sent, and with him Cneus Pompeius was sent to aid him: for Sertorius was a
valiant approved captain. Apius Claudius was then sent, after his Consulship
was expired to Macedonia where he died, without any harm done to the enemies:
in his place succeeded Scribonius Curio, who for his Pub. Seruilius sent to
Cilicia.
good service merited a triumph. Then was sent into Cilicia and Pamphylia
Publius Seruilius, a passing good captain: for he wanne the worthiest cities
of Licia, and subdued Cilicia: he wanne Phasilides, Olympus, and Coritum,
three great cities, and finished his wars in three years, and returned to
Rome, and had a triumph granted him over the Isaurians. So had Metellus over
Spain, Scribonius Curio over Macedonia, and Pompeius again Mithridates
infringed the league.
over Spain, which was his second triumph: so at that time were four triumphs
in Rome together.

Again Mithridates infringed the league before made, and renewed wars with
the Romans, and would have invaded Asia and Bythinia, had not Lu. Lucullus the
Consul, and his fellow M. Aurelius Cotta come in time: for before this time,
he pretended war against Bythinia and their king Nicomedes, and after that
invaded Capadocia, and Paphlagonia, and drove Eutrop. lib. 6.
both Nicomedes king of Bythinia, and Pilemenes king of Paphlagonia to exile,
and from thence he went to Ephesus, killing and flaying the Romans friends:
and withal he was so cruel, that Plutarch in Pompeio.
he sent letters through all Asia, that wheresoever any Citizen of Rome might
be found, he should be killed, though he was discomfited by Silla and
Lucullus, and at last driven to flee for succor to Tigranes king of Armenia, a
captain of great renown in those days: for this Tigranes was so mighty a
king, that he had subdued the Persians, and Mesopotamia: he also wanne Syria,
and a piece of Phoenicia: yet still Mithridates renewed wars, called his army
from Scythia, and joined them with Tigranes force. Mithridates a great enemy
to the Romans.


But Lucullus followed Mithridates hard to Armenia, and required Tigranes to
deliver him Mithridates: which being denied, Lucullus forth with invaded king
Tigranes realm, and gave him a great overthrow, and passed from place to
place as conqueror, destroying of countries, and taking cities, until he came
to the river Danubius: he destroyed Appolonia, Parthenopolis, and other cities
of Pontus, and returned to Rome a conqueror Iustine lib. 37.
of many countries both he and his cousin german M. Both Luculli triumphed.
Lucullus, and triumphed with great glory, but yet he missed of king
Mithridates: he played still the tyrant with the Romans, until Pompey the
great came, who overcame Mithridates in Armenia, sacked his tents, and slew
forty thousand of his army, and forced Mithridates to flee, when he
poisoned himself and died, after he had kept wars with the Romans forty
years: for this war of Mithridates began with Silla, and was ended by
Pompey. Thus the Romans at last conquered the Mithridates vanquished by Pompey
the great.
great king Mithridates, who had not continued so long, had not civil wars
been in Rome between Marius and Silla, and after that the conspiracy of
Cateline, and after Cateline the civil wars between Pompey and Caesar: of
this you shall read hereafter. In the mean season there was no war in other
kingdoms: for Syria, Egypt, Libya, and all other places were friends and
subjects to the Romans: for now the Romans were in their greatness and in
their most glory and fame. Such men lived then in Rome, as did conquer the
whole world.

Now as soon as Mithridatates was by Pompey overthrown, he addressed his
battle against Tigranes, who yielded unto Tigranes yielded to Pompey
Pompey without battle, and came to Pompeis tent, fell prostrate before him,
and delivered up his crown unto Pompeius.

After the yielding of king Tigranes, Pompey made wars with the Albanes, and
overcame Orodes king of the Albanes in three sundry battles: he also subdued
Arthaces king of Iberia, and received him under the allegiance of the Romans.
To be The victories of Pompey the great.
brief, Pompey was the only man that not only augmented the glory of Rome,
but also enriched Rome with infinite treasures gotten by his conquest of
Cilicia, Syria, Phoenicia, Judea, Mesopotamia, Capadocia, Armenia, Iberia,
Albania, and a great part of Arabia.

By these kingdoms whom Pompey conquered, the revenues of Rome were augmented
three thousand and five hundred Myriades. The glory of Pompey grew to be such
in Rome, 3500. Myriads the revenues of Rome augmented.
that he was elected to be a Consul alone himself without a fellow: for
Pompey at his triumph over Mithridates his son, (for Mithridates him self,
as you heard, died before the triumph) had Tigranes also and his son, and
Aristobulus king of the Iues led before his chariot: for at that time he
triumphed over two kings, and over two kings sons.

The pomp and pride of that triumph far excelled other The triumphs of
Pompey the great.
triumphs: for Eutropius says, that at that very triumph Pompey had
vanquished certain pirates on the seas when Lucius Metellus had triumphed over
Creete, and therefore surnamed Metellus Cretius.

After that Pompey had finished these wars in the six hundred Catelines
conspiracy.
eighty nine year after the building of Rome, Lucius Catiline, a man of a
noble stock descended, but of an evil disposition, Anno 689.
conspired with diverse other rash young men like himself, but yet were they
noble men, and many gentlemen: but by Ciceros means then Consul, Cateline was
expulsed forth of the City, and shortly slain in a battle by Caius
Anthonius fellow Consul with Cicero: some of his confederates Lentulus
Cethegus and many mo of Catelins conspiracy slain.
were apprehended and thratled in prison, others, as Lentulus Cethegus with the
rest, slain. About this time, Horace the Poet was borne, and within few
years after, Octauius, which was called Augustus, was borne afterward. This
time reigned in Egypt Alcetes the father of Cleopatra, after whom Cleopatra
with her brother reigned, until Marcus Anthonius time, Alcetes.
with whom she lived and died: for now reigned in every kingdom lieutenants
and governors under the Romans: all kingdoms and countries were made
provinces under Rome. These pirates nauies (as Plutarch says) were about a
thousand Piracie by Po^pey the great subdued.
in number: they had taken above 400. Towns, they had spoiled many temples, as
in Samos the temple of Juno, and in Tenaria and Catabria, the two temples
dedicated to Neptune, the temple of Apollo in Actiu^, the temple of Aesculapius
in Epidauru^, and so of others. The greatness of Pompey grew to be such in Rome,
as Silla who was the first that called him by the name of Pompey the great,
envied his fame, Lucullus who much hated the pride and insolency of Pompey,
called him in scorn Agamemnon regem regu^, king of kings: and Pompey in like
sort called Lucullus Xerxem togatum. This envy bred hidden hatred in Rome, and
made the people to become factious, sometime with Silla, Pompey called
Agamemnon by Lucullus. Lucullus called Xerxes Togatus by Pompey. Melanct. lib.
2.
sometime with Marius, and now between Lucullus and Pompey, and after between
Pompey and Caesar. They were so factious, at that time in Rome, that then
Julius Caesar a man of great prowess and of a singular dexterity, whose
service was such, that it seemed from the beginning of his birth that he
should grow great in Rome, and therefore Pompey looking into the disposition
of Caesar, married his daughter Iulia, and joined in the beginning with Caesar.
While Pompey stood to Caesar his father in law, they were too strong to be
resisted either Lucullus, Crassus and Pompey the only three that bare sway in
Rome when Caesar came in.
by Lucullus or by Crassus, though Crassus before he was slain in Parthia,
was equal to any of them both.

But when Iulia Caesar's daughter and Pompeis wife died, and the other third
champion Crassus was slain at Carras in Parthia by Surena, some square fell
betwixt Caesar and Pompey: for Pompey would have no equal man with him in
Rome, and Caesar could abide no superior: and thus for a little demand made
by Caesar to become Consul in Rome once for his great service in France and in
other places, being denied by Marcellus then Consul by the means of Pompey,
grew this great The cause of the civil wars between Pompey and Caesar.
civil wars thirty years after Sillas death. Caesar having both friends
and enemies in Rome who became factious, his enemies Marcellus, Lentulus, and
others, joined with Pompey, and persuaded to keep Caesar from being Consul:
his friends made much means to the Senators and to the people to have Caesar
to be Consul, as Marcus Antonius, and Quintus Cassius. Caesar was much agreeued
to see such in gratitude showed to him that well deserved to be Consul, and
came in arms against the City of Rome. Much fear was in Rome and great
Caesar came in arms against the city of Rome.
tumult in Italy upon the coming of Caesar* some ran out of the City to
Caesar, and some ran from Italy unto Rome unto Pompey: the manner and order
of this civil war between Caesar and Pompey from the beginning unto the
ending, is set forth in Oros. most briefly lib. 6. cap. 15.

Cicero traueiled much to pacify these quarrels, but to no effect. Pompey with
all the Senators and noblemen of Rome, departed forth of the City, and went
to Brundusium. When Of this war read Appian lib. 5.
Caesar came in arms, before he entered into Rome, he besieged Brundusium.
Pompey secretly by night escaped Caesar, and fled: Eutro. lib. 7.
the Citizens yielded to Caesar, who marched to Rome without resistance, entered
to the Senate, opened the cause of his coming, not as Silla or Marius to
destroy his Country, or to Iu. Caesar's request unto the Senators.
murder his countriemen, but persuaded the Senate to send Ambassadors unto
Pompey for peace. After this, he committed Rome to Lepidus, and Italy unto
Marcus Antonius, and he himself went into Spain, and forced the army of
Pompey to yield. Lepidus made labor to the Senators to have Caesar Dictator,
while Caesar was absent in Spain. Caesar at his return to Rome made himself
Consul, and Scruilius Ismaricus the other Consul, to whom he committed Italy
and Rome. Caesar took sea, and sailed after Pompey to Epirus, and from thence
to Dyrachium where Pompey was, and where also Caesar had the overthrow by
Pompey. Caesar departed to Thessali, Pompey followed, being puffed up with some
pride of the last overthrow of Caesar, The victory of Caesar over Pompey in
Pharsalia.
and a great battle was fought in Pharsalia, where Caesar got the victory,
slew fifteen thousand of Pompeis soldiers, Caesar crying out upon his
captains to spare the Citizens of Rome, whereby twenty four thousand were
taken prisoners, and Pompey himself put to the flight.

But while Caesar and Pompey were thus in Pharsalia, Celius and Milo began to
quarrel and make sedition against the Consul Seruilius, but they were both
slain. But Pompey being thus discomfited, Plut. in Alex.
fled into Alexandria, where he thought to have certain aid of the king of
Egypt, over who^ Pompey was appointed Tutor by the Senate, during the minority
of the king. But Pompey was deceived of his expectation: for he was killed, and
his head cut off and sent to Caesar from Egypt: which when Eutrop. lib. 6.
Caesar saw, he wept to see the head of so worthy a man as Pompey.
Melancthon says, that Pompey was slain by the Pompey slain in Egypt.
council of Photinus an Eunuch, and by Theodotus the kings schoolmaster.
Achillas and Septimius were sent from the king to kill Pompey: this Septimius
had been a captain under Pompey, and had charge in service, and Pompey knew
him and spoke to him. As Pompey was reading of a greek oration which he had to
speak with the king, Septimius thrust him through with the sword behind, and
brought him to Ptolomy the king the son of Auletes and brother to Cleopatra,
in the ^ght of Cornelia Pompeis wife and his two sons, who fled to Aphrica to
Scipio and Cato Pompeis friends: after whom Caesar followed, and Melancthon
Chron. lib. 2.
in a great battelfoure years after his father was overthrown at Pharsalia, he
was slain in Spain. The other son of Pompey called Sextus Pompeius, lived
eight years after Caesar was slain.

Not long after Pompeis death, Caesar came to Alexandria, Pompeis son slain
in Africa.
where certain conspired his death by the advice of Ptolome. Caesar hereupon
made wars upon the king, whom he overcame and put to flight, and so drowned
himself in the river Nilus. Melanct. says, that those very men, Achillas
Photinus Septimius which slew Pompey, conspired against Caesar: who
understanding of this, commanded them to be slain. The king for fear also of
Caesar fled, and was amongst others drowned, seeking to escape. Egypt was given
by Caesar to Cleopatra the kings sister, Caesar had a son by Cleopatra called
Caesarion.
whom he after used as his paramour, and returned from Egypt after Pompeis
friends who fled to Africa, where Caesar had sharp wars and very doubtful
battles: for in the last battle fought at Munda with Pompeis son, Caesar was
driven to so near a straight, that his men fled from him, thirty thousand
Melanct. lib. 2. Chron.
were slain, and Caesar thought to slay himself. Cato and Scipio, Afranius,
and Portreius fought so desperately, that they feared no danger, yet Caesar got
the victory.

This Scipio which was of the stock of Scipio Affricanus, and father in law
to Pompey, slew himself: so did M. Cato. M. Petreius, Lu. Florus lib. 4.
and Iuba king of Mauritania. But Quintus Varus Pompeis lieutenant, Lu.
Cornelius, Faustus Sillas son the Dictator, Afranius and Cneus Pompeius the
eldest son of Pompey the great were slain in battle. While Caesar was in
Affrike in these wars, Marcus Antonius made him Dictator in Rome.

CHAP. VII.
Of the alteration and change of the common wealth of Rome from Aristocratia to
Monarchia again: as before from Kings to Consuls, so now from Consuls to
Emperors. The state was altered by Iu. Caesar the first Emperor, and the last
Dictator of Rome: and so from Iu. Caesar unto the end of Nero, which was the
last of the progeny of Augustus.

POmpeis friends and adherents being thus subdued, and the civil wars
clear appeased, Caesar returned to Rome with great triumph, where he was
chosen to be perpetual Dictator, and named of the people Emperor: he used
great clemency toward Pompeis friends, and caused Pompeis Images being
thrown The humanity and great courtesy of Caesar.
down before, to be set up again: he raised the children of those parents
which were slain in the civil wars between Silla and Marius, and therefore
the Romans dedicated the Temple of clemency to Caesar for his courtesy.

Caesar was not idle after the civil wars, and after many dangerous
battles: for in October he entered with his triumph to Rome, at what time he
reformed the inequality of the year, and brought to perfection the Calendar,
so that Caesar did what it pleased him in Rome, without regard of the Senators
or Consuls, which was the only cause of Cassius and Brutus conspiracy: and
yet Caesar saved Brutus life once or twice after Pompeis death. This
conspiracy being concluded Conspiracy against Caesar by Brutus and Cassius.
between Brutus and Cassius, with many Senators and gentlemen of Rome more,
the time was appointed and the place, diverse strange impressions were seen in
the air: also strange marks found in Caesar's sacrifice, the Southsayers
warned Caesar of the Ides of March: his wife Calphurnia Calphurnias dream.
certified Caesar of a dream she saw, and with tears desired him that day
not to go to the Senate: the conspiracy was delivered to him in writing upon
the way as he went to the Senate, but destinies may be easier foreseen then
avoided, Destinies hardly avoided.
Caesar was that day slain, and so murdered that he had 23. wounds on his
body.

Thus the great Caesar had butfrom October to March to live in Rome as
Emperor: all the rest of his life was 56. years, his wars, his dangers, all
the toil and traueile he took, was to Caesar's death.
come to be Emperor of Rome which he enjoyed not 5. months. Caesar had five
triumphs very solemnly: the first he had over the Frenchmen: the second over
the king of Egypt: the third over Pharnaces Mithridates son king of Pontus:
the fourth over Africa of Cato, Scipio, and Cneus Pompeius: the fifth of
Caesar's five triumphs.
Spain. Thus far the glory of Rome flourished, their fame and dignity
extended to al parts of of the world, as by their victories and triumphs over
all nations may appear: for during the reign of the Consuls which governed
Rome 467. years: for from Iu. Brutus, and Publicola the first Consuls after the
time The glory and fame of Rome during the time of Consuls.
of the last king, until Pausa and Hirsius the last Consuls under Julius
Caesar the first Emperor, reigned in Rome 936 Consuls, all which time the
Romans increased from the very beginning their Empire, as may appear by the
victories and triumphs over so many countries and kingdoms, as here I lay
down to your view.

FIrst Sicilia was subdued by Marcellus then Consul, over which he triumphed
with pomp, and brought Sicilie a province under Rome.

2 Sardinia and Corsica were by Metellus conquered and made by him a province
under the Romans.

3 All Africa and Carthage, was by Pub. Cornelius Scipio brought subject under
the Romans, and after again by Scipio surnamed the younger Affricanus.

4 Numidia and their king Iugurtha, was by Marius then Consul, after many
sharp battles overthrown and subdued, and Iugurtha brought prisoner into
Rome, where he pied in prison.

5 Mauritania was in like manner held by Bochus and Iuba, but both were
vanquished, and all Mauritania by Iu. Caesar then general for the Romans in
the West, brought under the Empire of Rome.

6 Hispaine was brought under by Decius Brutus, and made a province under the
Romans, and after by Metellus and last by Pompey the great, who utterly
subdued Spain.

7 After that all Africa and Spain was made subject to These kingdoms made
Provinces to Rome by Consuls.
the Romans, the kingdom of Macedonia and all Greece were subdued and brought
to Rome first by Tit. Flaminius, and after by Paulus Aemilius.

8 The Illyrians which aided the Macedonians, were by Lucius Manilius
conquered, and their king Gentius carried captive into Rome, over whom he
solemnly triumphed.

9 The Thracians were by Lucullus vanquished and subdued, and so made servants
to the Romans.

10 Asia was destroyed sundry times, but last by Scipio surnamed Asiaticus, so
named for his victory over Antiochus Asia and Affrike brought subject under
the Romans.
the great, and over Asia, so that near al Asia and all Africa were made
subjects under the Romans.

11 All the country about mount Taurus, was subdued and brought under the
Empire of Rome by Seruilius, who also conquered the Isaurians, and therefore
surnamed Isauricus for his victory therein.

12 Lucius Silla subdued the Parthians, and constrained their king Arsaces to
pay tribute to the Romans.

13 Lucius Lucullus vanquished the king of Armenia, and brought him to hold of
the Romans.

14 Pontus, Mesopotamia, Arabia, Judea, and diverse other kingdoms and
countries were made provinces under Rome by Pompey the great.

Frenchmen were first by Camillus and after by Marius vanquished: the third
time all France was conquered by Julius Caesar.

Creete was by Metellus subdued, and therefore Metellus was surnamed Creticus.

Cyprus by Marcus Cato was made a province of the Romans.

Pub. Ventidius triumphed over the Persians, and brought them subject to Rome.

Egypt under diverse Consuls kept under the Romans Empire, and at last made a
province unto Rome, and was appointed Aegyptus Horreum Romae.
to be the treasurer of Rome, and called Horreum Romae, the barn of Rome.

For while Pompey flourished in Rome, Caesar was also of great credit, and had
been Questor and Tribune of the soldiers, and after was sent Praetor to Spain:
for Caesar was a valiant soldier and a skillful captain, his prowess and
deeds of arms excelled Silla, Marius, Crassus, Lucullus, and Pompey. Read
his life in Plutarch, and you shall find how many nations, and how many
towns Caesar conquered in the wars with the Gauls, he brought welnigh all
France to subjection.

After he warred upon the Illyrians and Heluetians, at what time Cassius
Lopanus reigned king: and soon after upon the The wars and victories of
Caesar.
Britains, which at that time never heard of the Romans, whose prowess and
great courage Caesar in his own Commentary does much commend. Caesar waged
battle with diverse nations of Germany, as with the Tigurians, the Belges, and
the Neruians: for in Germany are sundry sorts of people, as Sicambri,
Tenterides, which Caesar subdued.

These conquests of Caesar, made Pompey much to fear the greatness of him, if
he should once come to be a Consul in Rome, and therefore Pompey labored to
keep Caesar still occupied in France, in Spain, and in Germany, the only
soldiers of the world. But Caesar could not be kept back, but Caesar's
greatness.
would be a Consul for his long service, and sent to Rome to his friends for
that purpose.

The civil wars being thus ended betwixt Pompey and Caesar which continued
five years, to the overthrow almost of the whole Empire, and Caesar also after
the civil wars of five The civil wars between Caesar and Pompey
continued five years.
years, was slain within 5. months. Marcus the chief friend of Caesar, a man
of great credit in Rome, was made Consul, and for his greatness sake, he was
matched with Dolabella, of this purpose done by the Senate, to curb Antonius:
for they doubted Antonius would aspire the kingdom as Caesar did. Cicero
labored to bring Thrasibulus law called (...) to Rome, to quiet and pacify
the tumult and war which was like to ensue by Caesar's death. But to no
effect: for the Senate took part with them which had slain Caesar. Antonius
sought by all means to revenge Caesar's death: whereupon grew again civil
wars betwixt Octauius and Antonius. This Octauius was The third civil war
between Octauius Augustus and M. Antonius.
sisters son to Julius Caesar, and he had adopted him to be his heir in the
Empire of Rome in his testament. This was called by the Senate to withstand the
fury of Marcus Antonius. So Pansa and Hircius then were Co^suls, joined with
Octauius, as both Eutrop. and Melancthon says. These 3. captains went against
Antonius, and gave him the ouetthrow. Antonius fled to Lepidus an old friend
of Caesar's, and had at that time great bands of men ready: they joined their
force together, but by These were called Triumuiri.
Lepidus means, Octauius and Antonius were made friends. These three,
Octauius, Marcus Antonius, and Marcus Lepidus had all the government of the
city.

Octauius this time caused the Romans to create him Consul, Octauius at 20.
years made Consul.
when he was but twenty years of age. Every man saw how it would be in Rome,
and perceived that this civil war would exceed the rest before betwixt Silla
and Marius, and between Pompey and Caesar: for Bratus and Cassius that slew
Caesar, prepared an army at Philippos a city of Macedonia, where they joined
battle with Octauius and Antonius.

In this battle Cassius was slain, and in the next battle Brutus was slain,
and an infinite number of nobility: for during Cassius slain at Philippos.
the wars that these triumuiri first had with Brutus and Cassius and their
adherents, and then with Sextus Pompeius the younger, son to Pompeius the
great, there were many Senators, Consuls, noblemen, and gentlemen slain on
both sides. Pompey well-beloved of the people.
It could be no other ways, considering the love which the Romans bare to
Pompeius, and their fear which they bare to Caesar.

Now Lepidus one of Trium viri died in Africa, and the government fell wholly
between Octauius Caesar, and Marcus Antonius. Antonius had from Euphrates unto
the sea Illyricum, and Caesar Octauius had from the sea Illyricum to the West
Ocean: but their friendship in government continued not long. It is an old
saying and true, that Principality can abide no equality, and therefore
civil dissension fell between Octauius and Antonius. Before they fell out
betwixt themselves, they slew and murdered without law whom they lusted, as
Cicero, Hortensius, Lucullus, with an infinite number of Senators, of Consuls,
of noblemen and gentlemen, which died in the wars of Brutus and Cassius. And
now again new civil wars began, which continued twelve years, betwixt
The most part of Roman ge^tlemen died in the wars of Brutus and Cassius.
Octauius Caesar, and Marcus Antonius: but in the end after many cruel battles
and much slaughter, Octauius got the victory, at what time Rome was so
weakened by these civil wars, that if then Pyrrhus, Hanibal, or Mithridates
had lived, they might soon have conquered Rome.

Now when Antonius was vanquished by Octauius in a battle at Actium a town of
Epirus, he flead to Egypt, being exempt Antonius vanquished by Octauius.
of all hope to recover his former state: he slew himself, and presently
after him Cleopatra procured means to die for company of her friend Antonius.
It is said that Cleopatra affecting much the Empire of Rome, was the cause of
Read Oros. lib. 6. cap 19.
this civil discention: for she was the last Queen of Egypt: after whose
death, Egypt was annexed to the Empire of Rome by Octauius, and Cneus Cornelius
Gallus was appointed lieutenant there. This was the first Roman that governed
Egypt.

Octauius Augustus, after he had vanquished Antonius, and had gotten the whole
Empire into his own hand, he became so loving to the people, so gentle to the
Senators, and so liberal to the soldiers, that he wanne the highest and
lowest with great love to favor him.

The civil wars being thus ended, Augustus became Consul Augustus in his
fourth Consulship had three several triumphs. Augustus saluted of the people
as Pater patriae.
the fourth time, at what time he entered into Rome with three triumphs: the
one over the Illyrians: the second over Marcus Antonius: the third over
Cleopatra, at what time he was saluted by the name of Augustus, and Pater
patriae. This time Ianus temple was shut the third time in Rome, and now was
the beginning of the peace and quietness of the Romans: for from the building
of Rome until Augustus reign, we read that Ianus temple was not shut but
twice before Augustus, in whose time wars were pacified through the whole
world: and for joy of these happy days, the month Sextilis then The month
Sextilis called August.
was called Augustus after the Emperors name, as his uncle Julius had in the
honor of his name the month then called Quintilis to be called Julius.

This Emperor Augustus was fortunate in wars, and circumspect in peace: he
enlarged greatly the Empire of Rome, he annexed Egypt, Hungary, Illyria,
Rhetia: he vanquished the Danes in battle, and slew great armies of Germans,
and brought 400. thousand Germans forth of Germany prisoners, and placed
Suet. in Aug.
them in France, and replenished France with inhabitants of Germany: he
brought France to pay tribute, and brought Judea a province under the Romans.

During the time of the Consuls, which endured 447. years, it is to be
wondered, that one nation, of one town, and that without a king, but by
Consuls, should bring the most kingdoms of the world subject to Rome, as
Affrike, Hispaine, France and Britain, of this side Rome, made by Co^suls to
pay tribute The conquest of the Romans.
unto the Romans: beyond Rome Eastwarde, and round about Rome Northward and
Southward, these kingdoms and countries were brought subject to Rome, and made
provinces of the Romans by Consuls, as Illyrians, Istrians, Dalmatians,
Macedonians, and all the Greeks, the Medes, the Thracians, and the great
Antiochus driven out of Asia by Consuls of Rome: Valiant Pyrrhus, and mighty
Mithridates kings of Epirus and Pontus, overthrown by Consuls of Rome:
Tigranes king of Armenia by Consuls: Mesopotamians and Parthians brought in
league with the Romans by Consuls: to be short, all Syria, Egypt, and Sicilia
were brought by Co^suls of Rome to be provinces under Rome. What part of the
world, but Consuls of Rome were known? Yea, the Arabians and Saracens knew
the force of the Roman The fame of the Consuls of Rome.
Consuls: and when that the Roman consuls were lords of the whole world,
finding no nation able long to encounter with them, their courage was such,
that they envied one another greatly, they spited one another in service, and
at last fell to civil wars between themselves, as between Marius and Silla in
the first wars, between Pompey and Caesar in the second wars, and between
Mar. Antonius, and Octauius Augustus in the third wars, to the overthrow
welnigh of the whole Roman empire. For histories do report, that in these
three civil wars before mentioned, died more Senators, Consuls, magistrates,
noblemen, and gentlemen, then in the three great Affricane wars: the first by
Hamilcar which endured 22. years most cruel: Civil wars.
the second by Hanibal which endured 17. years most terrible wars: the
third and last by Asdrubal, which continued four years, all which annoyed
not Rome so much as did these three civil wars.

But let us return to the happy reign of Augustus called Augustus the prince
of peace.
the Prince of peace, the father of the country, and Emperor of Rome: whose
happy government made unhappy Rome happy, and raised up Rome from the ground
up to the heavens. To this good Emperor the Persians, and the Parthians sent
ambassadors with presents: to this the Scythians, the Indians, and the
Garramants, people that never heard before any speech of the Romans, sent both
Legates and presents. What shall be spoken more of this Emperor? In his days, in
the two and fourtieth year of this Emperors reign, the Emperor CHRIST borne
the 42. year of Augustus. Eutrop. lib. 7.
of all Emperors, and King of all kings, was in Bethleem a town of Jury
borne of the Virgin Mary, the only begotten Son of God, and the only
Savior of the world. This is the true Messiah sent from Heaven to earth, to
satisfy the wrath of his father. This was the Lamb of God which took away
the sins of the world. And therefore Augustus was the happier, for that in
his time JESUS CHRIST the Son of God was borne, as the Prophets had before
spoken.

Now after that this good Emperor had lived eighty six Read Suetonius in
Augusto.
years, whose honor and love was such in the whole world, that towns were
builded and named after the name of Caesar, one by king Iuba in Mauritania,
another by Hero in Palestina: and many kings left their own kingdoms, and
came to Rome, to do service to Augustus. He reigned fifty and six years
Emperor, he died at Atella a town of Campania, was brought to Augustus died
at Atella.
be buried at Rome, and was canonized after his death as a god. Augustus had
three things in Rome granted: the first, to be Consul of Rome before he was
twenty years old: the second, he was freed from any decree or law of the
Senators: and the third, he had his image on horseback set up in the market
place, which was granted to none but to Silla and Caesar. Augustus great love
and honor in Rome at his death.
In this Emperors time flourished in Rome many notable learned men, whose
names are here subscribed.

Virgil this time flourished. Horace also, and Tibullus. Propertius and
Vitrimius. Vitr^uius.
Titus Liuius, and Ovid. Valerius Maximus, And Strabo.
When Augustus died, there was peace over the whole Augustus died the 14.
Kalend. of October.
world: for the Son of God was then borne, the king of all peace, whose fame
by miracles filled all the earth. At what time reigned Tetrarche in Judea
Archelaus the son of that Herod, who slew so many infants, thinking thereby
to kill the Son of God, and therefore spared not his own sons Aristobulus
and Alexandeer. I have spoken of this more in the history of the Church.

In the time of this Emperor Augustus, the kingdom of France began to be
so named, after the name of one Francus France first named.
the son of Antharius king of Sicambria. This Francus, after that his father
died, made a decree, that Sicambria should be called Francia after his own
name: of whom I shall speak in the history of France.

And now I will return to Tiberius Caesar, who was Liuia Augustus wives son,
and Augustus son by adoption, the Tiberius the third Emperor.
successor of Augustus, and the third Emperor of Rome: of whom we read,
that he was very eloquent and well learned, but a great dissembler, who
governed the Empire with avarice, cruelty, lust and cowardlinesse: for he
waged battle no Suetonus is Tiberi.
where himself in person, but by his deputies and lieutenants. He began his
Empire in the 768. year after the building of Rome, and in the 15. year after
Christ was borne: at what time Sextus Pompeius was Consul in Rome.

This Tiberius had some wars with the Germans, which were before subdued by
Augustus, but now again rebelled and brought to subjection by this Emperor
Tiberius. Of these wars read Cornelius Tacitus. He had wars before in
Illyria, Tacitus lib. 2.
in the time of his father in law Augustus, over whom he triumphed. In the
last year of Tiberius Nero was Domitius borne. Tiberius was certified by
Pilate from Jerusalem, where he governed under the Romans, of the miracles
of Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Christ, of his fame, and of his life and doings. Pilats letters were showed to
the Senators, and Pilate was blamed and reproved, for that he suffered that
JESUS to do any miracles without the consent of the Senators: for Pilate put up
the Image of Tiberius in the temple at Jerusalem.

But in the latter end of his reign he fell to great negligence of
government, he gave himself to be idle, and thereby became intemperate with
inordinate lust, in so much that Tiberius died the Kalend. of April.
he was flouted and scoffed, and called Biberius Mero, in stead of Tiberius
Nero: and after he had reigned twenty and three years he died in Campania (as
is supposed) by the means of Caligula, who succeeded him in the Empire.

This Caligula was son to Germanicus, a lewd Emperor and a wicked, who
far exceeded Tiberius in cruelty and in Oros. 7. cap. 6.
horrible life: he commanded his Images to be put up every where, and altars
to be consecrated to him, and caused his Eutrop. lib. 7.
Images to have divine honors: and he sent to Judea, and Oros. lib. 1. ca. 6.
commanded that his Image should be set in the temple, boasting of his
filthy life and government, naming himself Jupiter for his incestuous life,
and naming him Bacchus for his drunkenness. He had car^all copulation with
all his three The incestuous beast of Rome, Caligula.
sisters, and with his daughter whom he begat upon one of his sisters: he
defiled noble women and chaste matrones, and gave them after to others to be
defiled: he was called the beast of Rome, who after he had reigned four
years, using great cruelty, avarice, filthy lust and horrible incest, he was
slain in his Palace by his own soldiers, as Josephus writes Caligula
slain the ninth Kalend. of February.
in his nineteenth book. His birth, his life, and his death, is set forth at
large by Suetonius: who also wrote of all the lives of all the Emperors most
amply, omitting nothing that belonged to the Roman history during the time
of the Emperors. What were done in other countries since the death of that
good Emperor Augustus, what wickedness ensued in Rome by his successors
Claudius Tiberius, and Caius Caligula, Tacitus, Suetonius, Liuie, and other
writers have written very largely.

In the time of Tiberius Nero, within two years of Augustus Of these 12.
cities, read Tacit. lib. 2. This earthquake happened in the reign of Tib.
Caesar.
death, happened such an earthquake in the night time, that twelve great cities
in Asia fell prostrate to the ground: at what time Piso was Praetor in Syria,
and Pontius Pilate was President in Judea.

This very time the Parthians required of the Romans, king Phraartes son
named Vonones, which was by his own father put to the Romans in pledge of
loyalty, to come again to his kingdom: which being granted, he shortly
after was despised, and driven out of his kingdom by Artabanus. Mithridates
waged war, and died in the Isle of Thiae, banished from Rome: for at that
time there was a law made in Italy Tacitus lib. 2. Josephus lib. 18. cap. 7.
for the banishing of Sooth sayers and Mathematicians. Within a little while
after fell sharp and cruel war: of this war between the Parthians and
Hiberians, Read Tacitus.

At this time many great terrible earthquakes chanced, and many great wonders
were seeene a little before Christ Jesus suffered his death and passion: for
after the last earthquake (spoken of before) fell again thirteen great and
famous towns by another earthquake, whose names Eusebius sets down in this
sort, as in the margent you may Ephesus. Magnesia. Caesarea. Apollonia. Dia
Hircania. Philadelphia. M^rthina. Mostheme, etc. Temis. Cumae. Sardis. Himulus.
And Megachiero.
read. Our Savior Christ died in the Emperor Tiberius his reign, at what
time were finished the seventy weeks spoken of in Daniel: about which time
Philo Iudaeus was sent from Alexandria to Rome, to entreat the Romans to be
friends to the Citizens of Alexandria. This Philo Iudaeus was of great
authority in those days, being a Jew borne: his first coming to Rome was
accepted the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius: the second coming was
in the second year of the reign of Caius Caligula, where he was but little
welcome: and with threatening words of Caligula he returned back to Alexandria.

In the time of this C. Caligula came Herod the Tetrarche from Iewrie to Rome,
and was by Caligula then banished from Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Judea to Lugdunum a town in France: and Pontius Pilate who gave sentence of
death upon the Son of God our Savior JESUS CHRIST in Jerusalem, this time
fell into such miseries and calamities, that he with his own hand killed
himself. Matthewe the Evangelist wrote his Gospel in Pilate killed himself.
Judea in the Hebrewe tongue, in the last year of the Emperor Caligula: at
what time Simon Magus the Sorcerer flourished, and was honored as a god in
Rome, and in many other places.

I will return to the successor of Caligula, Tiberius Claudius: he saw
Drusus an uncle by the father side to Caligula Claudius Drusus Emperor.
and brothers son to Tiberius Nero: this made wars upon the Britains,
which is now called England, over whom he triumphed at Rome, and at that time
he annexed certain Islands Eutrop. lib. 7.
situate beyond Britain called Orcades, to the Empire of He triumphed in Rome
over the Britains.
Rome: he appointed plays in Rome, at what time civil wars grew amongst the
Parthians.

In the time of this Claudius, diverse and sundry great famines were in many
countries: great famine was in Judea, and the Apostles suffered much
persecution: but they were comforted by the brethren. Of this famine spoke
Agabus in the Acts Eusebius lib. 2. cap. 8.
of the Apostles. In Rome also was great famine, and in Greece. This Claudius
Tiberius had a wife named Messalina, a woman most intemperate, given to much
filthy lust, never satisfied Messalina an intemperate woman.
with venerie, nor never weary: by this lewd Empress many were destroyed.
Many things did this Claudius very quietly, and many things he did very
cruelly without discretion: and behaved himself very courteously toward
diverse of his friends, and therefore was thought of many not to be wise.
Eutropius says, that there was a most honorable tomb made Claudius tomb.
to him at Mentz in Germany.

This Emperor lived 64. years, and reigned in Rome Emperor fourteen
years: after whom succeeded Claudius Domitius Nero, who was son in law
unto Claudius Drusus, who adopted him to be his successor in the Empire, after
the building of Rome 807. years: some say 809: and after that Christ died, 57.
This was the sixth Emperor of Rome, Of the first 5. years of Neroes
government, the saying of Traian.
who excelled all good Emperors for five years government: for Traian the
Emperor was wont to say, Omnes principes procul a Neronis quinquennio distare:
for he builded the Anephitheaters, and founded Bathes, and named them after
his own name at Rome: he ordained certain places every five Quinquenale,
imitating the Greeks in their Olympiads, and named them Neronea, the plays of
Nero: he much resembled Plays made by Nero on every fifth year, called
Quinquenale.
his uncle Caligula, a man much given to all kind of riot, charges and
expenses: he poisoned the son of Claudius whom his father surnamed
Britanicus, in remembrance of his victory over the Britains: he married
Octauia, and slew her husband, and (as Eusebius says) slew her also: he
married a courtezane named Poppea and slew her: he had carnal copulation with
Agrippina his own natural mother, and after Nero began well and ended ill.
slew her: he also slew a great number of the Senate, and diverse other worthy
citizens.

This Emperor exceeded all tyrants in cruelty, he committed diverse murders
upon his own kinsefolkes, and slew his scholemaster, that grave and learned
man Seneca. When that this Nero had given himself wholly to all tyranny, and
Suet. in Nero.
became an enemy to all good, he would dance and sing openly with strumpets
in the apparel of a common minstrell. Now when he had murdered Senators,
citizens and diverse gentlemen, and had slain his own brother, his wife, and
his The great murder and tyranny of Nero.
mother, he set the city of Rome on fire, and let it burn for 6. days, to
make him know how the city of Troy burned when it was on fire by the Grecians.

And when he had left no evil thing undone on earth, he began to persecute
the Church, and to murder the saints of God, as shall be spoken in the History
of the Church, of Paul, Peter, and others. Read Tacitus of this wicked
Emperor. While he fomed in blood at Rome, the Parthians bereft him of Tacitus
lib. 14. 15* and 16.
Armenia, and he had almost (as Eutropius says) lost Britain: he durst do
nothing in feats of arms: for these cruel facts, he was abhorred of all men,
and clean forsaken of his own friends: he was adjudged of the Senate to be an
enemy of the weal public. Nero hearing that he should be drawn naked through
the city, and be whipped til he were dead, he fled secretly forth of his
Palace by night with his Eunuch Sporus, and slew himself 4. miles from Rome.
Nero slew himself.


In the time of Nero, fell by an earthquake three towns in Asia, called
Laodicea, Hieropolis and Colossa. Diverse earthquakes and many wonders were
seen in Rome, murder and slaughter Plini lib. 2. cap. 8.
in Judea, battles and blood. At what time Albinus governed the Jews under the
Romans. In Neroes time governed in Britain Aruiragus, in whose days many
Britains were converted to the faith by Joseph of Arimathea, a Jew borne, and
one of them that buried our Savior Christ. Thus the tyrant Nero, which wished
that all the city of Rome had but one neck, Neroes wish.
that he might with one stroke cut it off, died after he had reigned fourteen
years Emperor, and lived one and thirty years.

CHAP. VIII.
From Nero the tyrant the sixth Emperor of Rome, until the time of Lu.
Antoninus Comodus the cruel, the 18. Emperor a match meet for Nero: in the
one the stooke of Caesar was extinguished, in the other the blood of Antoninus
ended and quite failed: two Emperors of like condition and manners: of the
government of them over Rome from Nero to Comodus, during which time reigned
twelve Emperors.

AFter Nero succeeded Sergius Sulpitius Galba Galba the 7. Emperor of Rome.
the 7. Emperor, a noble Senator of an ancient house: he was 73. years old
when he was chosen Emperor by the Spaniards and Frenchmen: he had borne diverse
offices in Rome, and in the field sundry times he had been a captain in most
perilous battles, and had governed diverse provinces: he was used to say to his
soldiers, Disce miles militare, Galba est non Genlicus, as though he said,
Soldiers look to your charges, Galba is present. His empire was of short
continuance, for he was slain by Otho, when he had reigned but 7. months.

This Otho after he had slain Galba, invaded the empire, and detained it with
the sword ninety and five days: for Aulus Otho the 8. Emperor of Rome.
Vitellius being then with an army in Germany, was made Emperor of Rome by
the soldiers, at the very time that Otho had slain Galba. This Vitellius
attempted battle against Otho at Bebriacus, where Otho was discomfited, and
after slew himself, with his own daughter, when he had reigned not eight
weeks.

Vitellius succeeded in the empire the 9. emperor, descending of a noble
family: his father Lucius Vitellius had been Au^us Vitellius the 9. Emperor.
thrice Consul of Rome: notwithstanding he had the like forture as his
predecessors Galba and Otho had; and that most worthily: Eutrop. lib. 7.
for he was equal to Nero in great cruelty, and in excessive gluttony: he
feasted four or five times in one day: he The excess of Vitellius.
affected much Neroes doings, and would gladly imitate Nero in gluttony and
riot: for he had at one time set before him two thousand fishes, and seven
thousand birds, besides other charges and expenses. These wickednesses and
vices cannot long endure in any man, much less in Princes. He had not reigned
but 8. months, but he was slain by the captain of Vespasian, for that
Vitellius had slain first Sabinus Vespasians brother, whom he burned in the
Capitol which he set on fire. Sabinus Vespasians brother slain by Vitellius.
But Vitellius had a reproachful death for it: for as he lived like Nero, so
he died like as Nero should have died if he had not killed himself.
Vitellius was drawn naked through the city of Rome along openly, with a
sword naked set under Vitellius drawn naked through the streets of Rome.
his chinne, and every man which he met, threw doung upon him, and with
spitting in his face railed on him, and after that his throat was cut, and he
thrown into the river of Tiber.

Thus the three last Emperors Galba, Otho and Vitellius, tyrants and not
Emperors, beasts and not men, ended their Oros. lib. 7. ca. 8.
lives when they had reigned all three, not above eighteen months.

After this glutton Vitellius, followed Vespasian the tenth Emperor, a prince
endued with most excellent virtues, a Vespasian a good virtuous Emperor.
maintainer of civil order, who assigned in Rome certain stipends to learned
men, and a man for his private life worthy to be had in memory: and amongst
other virtues, he excelled in this, not to revenge any wrong done to him: he
also bare patiently the bitterness of his friends, and the taunts and scoffs
of his enemies: he married Vitellius daughter a noble man of Rome, though
Vitellius was his great enemy, and had slain his brother Sabinus.

This Emperor was most gentle and courteous, and behaved himself in the
Empire very moderately. This Vespasian, (at what time he was sent by Claudius
into Germany, and from thence into Britain) fought five several great
battles, Eutrop. lib. 7.
and annexed two mighty nations to the empire of Rome. In this time was Judea
also annexed to Rome, and he triumphed over them: he repaired the Capitol the
temple of peace, and the monuments of Claudius. From the time of Augustus
Caesar, not one good Emperor reigned in Rome until Vespasians time. This is the
tenth Emperor in order and number, but Vespasian a good Emperor.
this is the second in goodness and virtue. This Emperor Vespasian reduced
Achaia, Licia, Rhodes and Byzantium, which is now called Constantinople: he
brought Samos, Thracia, Cilicia, and Thracia into the form of Provinces
subjects to the Romans. This Emperor was honored of the Senate, and beloved
of all men, and had triumphed over Jerusalem, together Joseph. lib. 7. cap. 24.
with his son Titus, the eleventh Emperor that succeeded his father, a
Prince in all good virtues like to his father: for what praise Chronographers
do yield to the father Vespasian, for his gentleness, courtesy, patience, love,
liberality, and infinite more virtues, the same do they write of his son
Titus, and therefore I need not much commend Vespasian. His mother was named
Domicilla a rare woman.

Titus was given unto all kind of liberality, and as soon as Read of the
father and of the son in Egnat and in Sueton.
his father had called him to be a magistrate in the weal public, and had
given him charge of soldiers, he contended to excel his father in all good
and civil government, insomuch that he was had in great admiration for his
virtues, Eutrop. lib. 7.
and commonly called Delitiae hominu^, the love and delight of mankind. He was
so excellently seen in the Greek and Latin tongue, that he could make
diverse Poetical tragedies in Greek, and pleaded causes himself in the Latin
tongue. He was so liberal, that he would say that day to be lost when he The
saying of a good Emperor.
had given nothing. And being counseled by his friends that he should not be
so liberal: he answered, None ought to depart from an Emperor sorrowful, for
not obtaining their requests: but he had no long life to make proof of his
greatness. He was very eloquent, of passing great sobriety, and a stout
warrior. It is said of Titus that he was an excellent archer: for at the
assaulting of Jerusalem he shot 12. arrows, and killed with every arrow a man.

These two good Emperors Vespasian and his son Titus were well esteemed of
in Rome, but they lived not long: for Titus died.
Vespasian the father reigned but ten years, and his son Titus reigned two
years, two months and twenty days after him, and died in the very place
where his father dyed, at a Manor of his own among the Sabines, in the eighty
three year after the death of Christ.

By this Titus Jerusalem was the last time destroyed, and the Jews most
miserably vanquished and scattered: for Vespasian Eusebius. lib 3. cap. 12.
had commanded that none of the stock of David should remain alive in
Jerusalem, lest any should claim the crown, which lineally descended from
David, to hinder the Roman title. This time all was quiet abroad, the broiles
that at this time reigned, where in Rome it self, one Emperor preventing an
other, by murder, poison, or by some other sleights and snares, so that it was
more perilous to be Emperor of Rome, then to be a subject: for the majesty
of the Senators, and the dignity of the Consuls were much How Rome flourished
in the time of Kings, Co^suls, and Emperors.
obscured by the tyra^nie of Emperors: they durst do nothing that might offend
the Emperor, or displease the people: they bare only but the name of Senators
and Consuls after Augustus death: the which Consuls flourished 447. years being
aided with Dictators and Tribunes, and not with Kings or Emperors: for under
Kings, Rome was a servant, under Emperors, Rome was a Captive, but under
Consuls, Rome was the only mystresse and lady of the world.

Behold the state of Rome under the 11. last Emperors. ^lauius Domitianus 12.
Emperor.
And now I begin with the 12. one that passed the rest in pride and cruelty:
he in all points resembled more Nero or Catigula, then he did his father
Vespasian, or his brother Titus, though in the beginning he behaved himself
with great tempera^cie and modesty. But he was not long troubled with these
good qualities: he was too soon infected with anger, cruelty, pride, fleshly
lust, avarice: he blotted out and abolished the memory of his good father and
brother, he waxed such a tyrant, and such a monster in Rome, that he commanded
by a decree Sextus Aurelius.
to be called a God, and to have his statues in many places of the Roman
Empire adored, and would not permit the Romans to set any pictures of him,
unless they were of gold or silver: such was his horrible pride, and that
joined with cruelty: for many of the best Senators he slew, and many
Dominianus called a second Nero.
he banished: he was the only persecutor of the Christians, and therefore
called the second Nero: he expulsed the Philosophers and Mathematicia^s forth
of Rome, which both his father and brother enterteined with annual stipend.
This Domitianus, though he triumphed twice over the Danes and Cattians, and had
subdued the Sarmatia^s, yet he sustained great damages and sundry losses in
those battles: for Appius Sabinus one of the Consuls, Domitianus exercise
called (...).
and Cornelius Fiscus captain of the emperors guard, were slain: so were his
legions and captains in Sarmatia: his exercise every day for an hour secretly
in his palace was to catch Read Sueto. of this Emperor.
flies: he also forbade to gelde any male kind: also when one knocked at his
door and asked if any man were within, No, says Domitianus, not so much as a
flea. Now when Domitianus was so long detested, and abhorred of God and man for
diverse wickednesses, he was slain by his own men in his palace, after he had
reigned 15. years and lived 45. years: he was so Domiti. was used as
Vitellius was after his death.
hated in Rome, that being slain, they haled his body through the streets,
all his pictures and statues thrown down, in so much that they could not
abide to look upon any monument of his, neither to hear of his name.

Notwithstanding so much good he did to Rome, that he finished sundry works at
Rome, which was the Capitol, and Isiu^ and Serapiu^ two galeries made by
Domitius.
the two galleries called by Eutropius Isiu^ and Serapiu^: he made also the
tilt for men to run in, and builded a place for musicians and singing men. In
the sixth year of Domitianus government, Antoninus Pius was borne, which
afterward was emperor in Rome. About which time, the Picts came from Scythia to
seek habitation in Britanie: their captain was called Rodericus. When
Richimer reigned king in France, diverse sects of heresies began this time,
under Menander one of Simon Magus disciples. In the last year of Domitianus,
the apostle John wrote Iren. lib. 1. cap. 21. Ireneus lib. 5.
his book of Revelation in Pathmos. Here I write the Consuls names, which
governed yearly in Rome with Domitianus: for after the emperors began to
command what they lusted in Rome, they made a choice of one Consul with his
brother Titus when he was emperor after with him: these governed his own
friends, whom he himself made choice of, as other emperors did before him.

Val. Messalinus. Virg. Rufus. Sabinus. Verus Pollio. Ser. Cornelius Dolabella.
Lu. Minutius Rufus. Fuluius, which was Antoninus Pius his graundfather. Coceius
Nerua, which succeeded Domitianus in the Empire. Ac. Volusius Saturnius. Vl.
Traianus Crinitus. This succeeded Cocceius Nerua in the Empire, whom Nerua
adopted after him. Glabrio and Nonius Aspreanus.
Domitianus himself was the other Consul, for the Emperors would not permit
two Consuls to govern together, unless they were special friends to the
Emperors: so that the dignity of the ancient Consuls daily decayed by the
tyranny and greatness of the Emperors (of those last six Emperors Suetonius
does set forth the lives of these 6. Emperors at large.
I mean) Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasian Titus, and Domitianus, which
Suetonius does write at large. It were too long a history for me to write of
all their lives, how be it I briefly touch and speak of their chief and
most principal dealings. This time within few years, the Goats, which are
West countries waxed mighty and the East decayed by degrees.
also the Getes, the Vandales, and the Hungarians began to grow strong, with
whom the emperors of Rome had much to do: for then waxed the West part of the
world strong, as Spain, France, Germany, and Britain, and were in arms
against the Romans, as you shall in the history understand: for as Sueton.
with many other writers, set forth the exploites of those six which I now
named: even so does Dion write of Nerua, Traiane, Dion writes of these 3. good
Emperors.
and Adrian, three of the best emperors. Iu. Capitolinus an ancient writer
omitteth nothing, that might be spoken of Antoninus Pius, in whose time Rome
was like to be on fire, had not the river Tiber with a sudden inundation stopped
the rage of the fire, and yet 340. houses were quite with fire consumed: so by
this writer were Antoninus Pius, and Antoninus surnamed the Philosopher, which
of some is called Mar. Aurelius written of, and likewise of the laws and
exploites of these Emperors, Pertinax, Opilius, Macrinus, Claudius Albinus,
Maximinus, Gordianus, Lampridius wrote.
and Balbinus, La^pridius wrote of. Also he wrote of Comodus, and Heliogabolus,
two wicked and cruel Emperors. The Romans wanted no writers to record their
fame: for in truth, as they excelled all other nations in power, greatness, and
dignity, The Roman history.
so had they more notable histories written of them.

What kingdom, what country, what nations were not by the Romans conquered?
for you have read in the history before, how the Affricanes, Spain, and
Carthage, with their most famous captains Amilcar, Asdrubal, and Hanibal, were
vanquished The conquest of the Romans.
by the Romans: how the successors of great king Cyrus, and the posterities
of the great king Alexander, two of the greatest kings of the whole world,
were subdued by the Romans: how the most worthy and next unto Alexander the
great in prowess, Pyrrhus king of Epire: how Mithridates the king of Pontus,
who kept most terrible and cruel wars with the Romans forty years: how
Antiochus surnamed also the great king of all Asia: in fine, how the
Parthians, the Scythians, the Sogdians, the Indians, the Arabians, and the
Egyptians were by the Romans conquered, and therefore I will as briefly pass
over the history as I can, partly for that many have translated the lives of
the Emperors, and their exploites are here and there in fragments, and partly
for that it were tedious to write all the Romans history in particular: for
the best reading is of the Romans history, during the reign of the Consuls
four hundred forty seven years, all which time their conquests were great,
and their victories infinite: but after the dignities of the Rome flourished
most under Consuls.
Co^suls were eclipsed by the greatness and cruelty of the Emperors, the
state of Rome also began by a little and a little to loose her former fame,
and to decay in credit, for that they esteemed money more then men.

This vice of avarice excluded all kind of virtues out of Hidden hatred,
private wealth, and young counsel: three dangerous monstersin a common wealth.
Rome, and received into the City hidden hatred, private wealth, and young
council, whereby the lady of the whole world sometime, is become now by
avarice to be the handmaid of Spain and France, yea to be led by every city
of Italy. Thus was the glory of Rome brought under her own servants to be a
captive, even as Babylon, Jerusalem, Egypt, and other kingdoms, of whom the
Prophets have spoken and prophesied, the reward of their wickedness,
idolatry, and horrible superstition. The like destruction the Romans must
look to have, as the Affricanes had, after them the Chaldeans, the Hebrews,
The reward of idolatry is destruction.
and the Egyptians, for their idolatry and contempt of God. The like end and
destruction as had the Persians, the Medes, the Macedonians, and the Greeks,
must the Romans by the prophecy of Daniel expect: for I will the Reader to
read Daniel, Esai, Jeremy, and Ezechiel, of these great kingdoms before time
for some destroyed and consumed, and I will return to the history.

Now after that good Emperor Cocceius Nerua had reigned but one year, four
months, and nine days, he adopted Wpius Traian 14. Emperor.
Traiane to the Empire, a Spaniard, and not an Italian, as many would have it,
a godly Emperor a good man: of whom many good things are written, amongst the
which he is most commended in two principal things, sanctitas domi, fortitudo
for is: Oros. lib. 7. cap. 11. 12.
he was patient in all traueiles, and in all adversities: he was very diligent
in civil causes, and very expert in military discipline: he was most
liberal to his soldiers, and beneficial unto all men: he much honored all
learned men* he only of all other Emperors observed justice, and practiced the
same to his people: he governed the weal public in such sort, Traiane the
mirror of Emperors.
that he ought worthily to be preserved above all other princes: he enlarged
the borders and marches both in length and breadth of the Roman Empire, which
from the time of Augustus was but defended and conserved by other Emperors,
until this time: he is thus commended in Eutropius, that his Eutrop. lib. 8.
courtesy and sobriety far excelled his martial feats: he was so
familiar, that he would ride, go, and sit with his familiars: he would also
banquet amongst them without esteeming The affability of the good Emperor
Traian.
of himself more then of another: he openly and secretly enriched not only his
friends, but those whom he well heard of, and advanced them to honors with
whom he had small acquaintance* he infranchised many cities, he did so many
great good things as well in repairing ruinous Towns and Cities, as also in
building new Cities and Towns in diverse countries, that in a manner he builded
a new world again: for he builded six great Temples,

1 To Apollo. 2 To Mars. 3 To Jupiter. 4 To Aesculapius. 5 To Ceres. 6 To
Berecynthia.
And therefore he was reputed in all the whole world of all men, and likened
unto some god, which had some divine power to finish and to perfect a ruinous
common wealth, being by his predecessors Nero, Caligula, Heliogabolus,
Domitianus and others, welnigh wholly destroyed and defaced. Traiane.


So much prevailed in him the fame of perfect goodness, that at the election
of any prince in Rome after Traians days, The Senators words.
the Senators and the people would wish him to be as fortunate as Augustus, and
in behavior of virtue and goodness, to be like the good Traiane, who both for
his goodness and virtue was also called Pater patriae, as Augustus was, for that
he The love of Traia^ in Rome.
subdued Dacia, recovered Armenia which the Parthians had won: he reduced
under the obeisance of Rome, Spain, Moscouia, Arabia, and the inhabitants of
Cholcos: he had great wars in all the East countries, and brought Assyria
and Mesopotamia Traian wanne and recovered many countries by his predecessors
lost.
under his hand. He reduced many kingdoms to be provinces under the Romans:
he wanne Seleucia and Babylon, and prepared a navy for the red Sea, that
thereby he might spoil and destroy the borders and coasts of Judea.

About this time the Temple of Pantheon in Rome was burned: he triumphed over
the Danes, and over the Scythians, and brought Rome again to her former fame
and glory, as it was in the time of Octauius Augustus.

The two mirrors of Rome lived in Rome and dyed with the like love and fame,
after they had purchased great glory and Traians monument in Rome to this day
called Traians pillar.
renown both for civil and marciall policy. Traiane was canonised, and was
the first emperor buried within the City, his bones were put in a golden
cup, and set under a pillar which mounted in height to an hundred forty
four foot.

He reigned nineteen years, whose facts and worthiness are rife in memory.
If you list to read further of them, look in Capitolinus: amongst all the
emperors, this you The fourth persecution.
shall find to excel the rest. In Traianes time fell the fourth persecution
of the Christians, in whose time also dyed John Oros. lib. 7. cap. 12.
the Evangelist, after whose death flourished his scholars and disciples,
Papias, and Polycarpus, and Ignatius. In Traians time happened such an
earthquake, that four great Cities in Asia fell flat to the ground: three
in Galatia, and two in Greece. A great earthquake in Traians time.


Traiane dyed of the flixe at Seleucia a town of Isauria, when he had lived
sixty three years: after whom succeeded Aelius Adrianus the fifteenth
emperor, an Italian borne, he was sisters son to Traiane, and yet not
adopted to the Empire by Traiane, but by means of Plotina Traians wife: he
was singularly learned, both in the Greek and in the Latin: Adrian sister
son to Trai.
he was excellently seen in Music and Geometry, and was so expert in
Astronomy, that he made yearly Prognostications for him self: he excelled
in diverse arts, as in caruing, grauing, paynting, cutting, either Princely
qualities.
in brass or in marble.

Iustine writes of this emperor, that he could write, talk with his
friends, ask questions, and answer matters at one time: he gave him self
wholly to purchase Adria^ praised.
peace and quietness, and would often say that he did more good in Rome by
idleness, then his predecessors by weapons: for he purchased peace during
the whole time of his Empire.

In his time the Christians were sore persecuted, until certain learned of
the Christians wrote books unto the Emperor Adrian for mercy in sparing of
Christian blood: whereupon the Emperor wrote diverse Epistles to Judea, and to
all Oros. 7. cap. 13.
provinces belonging to the Empire of Rome, that no Christian should be
apprehended for religion sake, at what time Jerusalem was named Aelia, after
that he had quieted the Jews by Jerusalem was named Aelia by Adrianus.
his Sendrus, and slew of them five thousand. The Emperors name Aelius
Adrianus, for after that the Emperor Adria^ wrote his letter to Minutius to
stay his persecution, certain heretics began to trouble the Church, as
Saturnius, Basilides, and Menander, the successor of Simon Magus, of whom in
Ecclesiastical history you may read more.

The fault of this Adrian was, that he envied the glory of Eusebius. lib. 4. cap.
6. Heretics trouble the Church.
Traianus, and was most ambitious of honor and fame: otherwise he aduauntaged
the common weal of Rome more then any: for (as I said) he was called the
father of the Country, and his wife Sabina was also called Augusta: he
ordained laws to the Athenians, which he himself picked out of Draco, and of
Solons laws: he in person traueiled all the Empire of Rome: he builded a
fair Temple unto Venus: The care and travel of Adrian.
he was very circumspect about the treasury, and when he had reigned twenty
two years, he died in most miserable pains in Campania, about the age of
threescore, offering himself to be slain to any of his dear friends. These
Adrian died.
were the chief men in Rome when Adrianus reigned.

Amilius Aelianus. Lucius Verus. Acilius Auiola. Cornelius Pasna. C. Bellicius
Torquatus. Catilius Seuerus. Titus Aurelius Fuluius which succeeded Adri anus
in the Empire. Titus Appronianus. Quintus Agulinus. Salinator and Rusticus.
At. Titianus. M. Acilius Glabriotus. Auius Libo. Iuuentius Celsus and
Neratius Marcellinus. Lenas Pontianus. Antoninus Ruffinus. Sergius Seruianus.
Seruilius Hasta, and Valerius Messala.
With many other great men which then governed as officers and magistrates in
Rome when Adrianus reigned: in whose time such earthquakes fell, that Nicopolis
and Caesarea, 2. great towns in Palestina fell to the very ground in the one:
and in the other earthquake, in Macedonia a great city, and the most part of
Nycena lay prostrate on the ground, which was rebuilded by Adrianus.

This time revolted the Brytanes from the Romans, but were by Trebelius (as
Spartianus writes) mitigated and brought again Titus Antoninus Pius
to subjection. Titus Aurelius Fuluius succeeded Adrianus in the Empire by
adoption: This was also called Antoninus Pius, for the great pity and
gentleness which he used toward all men. A good Emperor, compared of
writers to that religious king Numa Pompilius, in like sort as Traianus Antho.
Pius compared to Numa Pomp.
was likened to Romulus: he was beloved as a father, and feared as a king. He
was borne in Gallia Transalpina in a city named Nemesa, which in the time of
Julius Caesar was established a Colonie of Rome. The Indians, Hircanians, and
Bactrians sent Ambassadors with gifts and presents to honor him. He was wont
to say, that he had rather save one friend, then destroy a thousand enemies.
The people would often call The saying of Anto. Pius.
him by these names, Lord, King, Emperor, Judge, Patron, and father: he
endeavored himself rather to defend then to amplify, and the Empire he
assigned to the most honest men, the grave, the learned and the just men to
have offices and to bear rule in the city: he advanced good men, and Read
Sueto. of this good Emperor.
detested evil men, and used no rigor nor cruelty to them. Kings and
captains in his time laid aside their wars, and would bring their
controversies and quarrels to be decided by the Emperor Antoninus Pius: he was
so just and so pitiful in all causes toward all men, that therein he far
excelled all the Emperors: he much honored learned men, and had in his days
many of them in his Court with him. In his time Alexander Seuerus borne.
was Alexander Seuerus borne, which after was Emperor of Rome. During the time
of his whole government, which was 23. years and 3. months, there was neither
wars nor quarrels in Rome. In this time flourished many excellent men, as
these underwritten.

Galenus the mirror of Physicians. Ptolomeus the great Astrologer. Apolonius
and Basilides 2. great Philosophers, and scholemaster to the Emperor Verus.
Nesomedes a Musition. Taurus a Philospher of Platoes sect. Arrianus a
Philosopher in Nicomedia and Maximus surnamed Tyrus likewise a great
Philosopher.
At this time the Jews began to fall into a fury, to kill both the Greeks
and the Romans, and to practice much tyranny both in Egypt and Alexandria,
and in Palestina, at what time governed Tinius Rufus in Judea under the
Romans, but they were soon pacified and quieted.

CHAP. IX.
Of the good Emperor Ma. Antoninus surnamed the Philosopher, and of his son
Comodus: of the difference in their government: of the love which the father
had in Rome, and of the hatred and contempt which the son had: of the murder
and slaughter of diverse Emperors, from M. Antoninus the 17. Emperor, until
the time of Dioclesian, the 38. Emperor.

AFter Titus Antoninus succeeded Marcus Antoninus Verus in the Empire, a man of
rare virtues, and borne of a great stock: for his descent was by the fathers
side from Numa Pompilius, and by his mothers side from king Salentinus. This
Emperor was a very learned man, and he reigned jointly with Lucius Antoninus:
for in his days the Romans began to have two Emperors of equal authority,
to govern the common weal. These two were (as Eutropius says) brethren, and
they waged battle against the Parthians, which never rebelled from Traianus
Eutrop. lib. 8.
time by whom they were conquered, until Marcus Antoninus time. But they also
conquered the Parthians round, and brought a triumph, and did solemnize the
same with his Great odds between Verus and Commodus two brethren.
brother.

This Verus Antoninus achieved sundry victories: he wan Seleucia a famous
city of Assyria, by means of these noble captains, Statius Priscus which
subdued Armenia that then rebelled, Sueto. in Antoninis.
and Auidius Cassius which likewise kept Media and Babylon in subjection. But
as this Lucius departed from the city Oros. lib. 7. ca. 15
Concordia, he died of an issue of blood, after whom again Marcus Antoninus
governed as Emperor, more to be maruei M. Antoninus.
led at for his rare virtues, then to be commended for his singular learning.
This professed not in outward show to be a Philosopher, but in living. He was
had in such admiration even Read Egnatius in Adria.
from his infancy, for his grave behavior and sober life, that Adrianus
purposed then he being but a child, to leave him as his successor. In
philosophy he was instructed by Apollonius a Chalcedonian Philosopher, and he
was brought up in the Greek tongue by Sextus Cherronesus nephewe to Plutarch
the Emperor, and in the Latin tongue he was brought up with Frontus a very
great Orator, so that Marcus Antoninus M. Antoninus excelled all Emperors in
all kind of knowledge.
excelled all other Emperors in all kind of knowledge: he was exceeding
liberal, as at his wars which he had against the Marcomenes, where the
Vandales, the Sarmatians, and al Barbary were ready to maintain wars
against the Romans, and were seen: for he made open sale of his plate, he
sold all his apparel, and sold diverse jewels and ornaments of precious
stones: he sold all his substance, to avoid the exactions of his subjects.

But the victory which then he obtained, repayed all his debtes, and brought
again his plate, his jewels, and all other his substance home: for it is
written, that these wars continued three years, and were the most terrible
wars, and equal to the wars of Carthage. And when he had reduced Orosius
lib. 6. cap. 15.
Rome to a most fortunate state, and had reigned to the contentation of all men
18. years, and had lived 61. years, he died, and was canonized at the earnest
labor of all the people: after whom many mourned in Rome as well of the people,
and citizens, as Senators. He was also called Pater patriae, with Traian,
Adrian, Vespasian, and with Augustus. During These 5. Emperors were called one
after another, Pater patriae.
the reign of this good Emperor fell such a great pestilence in Italy, among
the inhabitants thereof, and other provinces about Rome, that there were new
laws made, and ordained for the burial of the dead.

At this time Asianus and also Appollinaris Bishop of Hieropolis, wrote both
two books in defense of the Christian religion, and dedicated them to the
Emperor Antoninus. In France, under Farabertus the 28. king then reigning in
France, dyed many by persecution for profession of christianity, at what time
Lucius the son of Coyllus reigned king among the Brytanes: who in the 13.
year of his government received the Christian faith, as both Gyldas and Beda
affirm. Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, the disciple of John the Evangelist, came
into Rome in Antoninus time, whom Ireneus much commends. Ireneus lib. 3. cap.
4.


Now for that the name of Antoninus was so much honored of the Romans, it was
decreed that none should be so named, but by consent of the Senators, and such
Consuls as then reigned: for Antoninus became as great a name in Rome, as
Augustus was, such was the love and honor that the Romans yielded The name of
Antoninus much honored in Rome.
to this name. The Senators had no greater present to present Alexander
Seuerus, then to offer him that name, and so to be called Seuerus Antoninus.
The virtue and rareness of the men made the name so honorable, and therefore
I will put them down with the magistrates and Officers that ruled in Rome,
during the time of these two rare Emperors, Antoninus Pius, and Antoninus
surnamed the Philosopher.

Plautius Syluanus. Julius Seuerus. Marcus Aulius Antoninus. Herodes Atticus.
Lollianus Auitus. Grauius Maximus. Seleucus and Ruffinus. Gallicanus Glabrio.
Torquatus and Camerinus. Marcus Vibullius surnamed Augur. Atidius Cornelianus
who had charge in Syria at Antoninus death. Quintilius and Priscus. Pescenius
niger. Metilius Bradua and Lucius Aelianus. Lucius Aelius Verus. Stacius
Priscus and Auidius Cassius two notable captains. Aufidius Victorinus. Iunius
Rusticus and Elius Celsus. Erutius Clarus, Flaccus Piso, and Iulianus which was
afterward Emperor. Claudius Pompeianus and Cethegus. Heren. Apronianus and
Quintilinus. These with many more notable men that governed in Rome when
Antoninus Pius reigned.
This Quintilinus whose house and stock Commodus the emperor after destroyed,
who likewise was by his father made Caesar, and had triumphed before with his
father: These were the chief men that then bare rule in Rome in the time of
Marcus Antoninus, few such Emperors were found in Rome after they dyed. In
time of Marcus Antoninus, Smyrna a famous town of Asia fell by an earthquake,
to the repayring whereof this Emperor bestowed much money, and Commodus 9.
Emperor.
the Temple of Serapis was this time in Alexandria burned. Now when Lucius
Antoninus Commodus began his Empire Read Lampridius and Herodia lib. 1.
after his father, the virtue of his father shined the more (being dead) by the
vices of the son that succeeded after, who from his cradle was wicked,
cruel, and beastly: he so defamed himself with riot and ribawdry, that he
had three hundred concubines, and three hundred delicate males youths which he
used as women: he commanded his Colossus or image to be put up, and withal
made a decree that he should be called God Hercules.

This shameless Emperor, unworthy of the name of Antoninus, would play
openly upon the Theater with fencers, and he used himself so hatefully, that
he was abhorred Vices most odious in a magistrate.
of all men and envied as an enemy of mankind, and so he ended his life,
being either thratled or poisoned, after he had reigned thirteen years. For
it was a wonder to see two good Emperors to succeed one another in Rome: A
rare sight in Rome to see a good Emperor.
nay we cannot read but of only two which were good, Vespasian, and his
son Titus: all the rest cruel tyrants degenerated from kind, and in whom
appeared nothing more then treason or murder.

After whom followed the Emperor Pertinax, an aged Pertinax.
man, who had done much service, and therefore advanced to the empire much
against his will: for he was 69. years Read more of him in Eutrop. lib. 8.
old when he was chosen Emperor: scant he had reigned eighty days, but he
was slain of the soldiers, and his head cut off and carried round about Rome
by the commandment of Iulianus, who was the wolf that caused this murder,
but he was well requited. The like death happened to Iulianus, Iulianus.
being a man very factious and seditious, and very ambitious: this was nephew
to that Iulianus which lived in Adrianus time: he was disco^fited by Seuerus
Septimius, at a place called Lucius septimius Seuerus 22. Emperor.
Miluius bridge, and soon after slain in his own palace, his head cut off,
and put up in the market place: at what time Pescennius was in Antioch, and
Septimius Seuerus was in Panonia, both created Caesar's. But after that Seuerus
slew Pescennius, he took the rule and government of the Roman empire, and
was the first Emperor created forth of Affricke. This was of great credit,
for he had bin treasurer and Tribune of the soldiers, and at the last had the
charge of the whole weal public. This the Senate gratified much according to
his request, and gave him the name of Pertinax, whom Seuerus loved so well,
that he both desired and commanded to be called Pertinax: whose Sept. Seuerus
would be called Pertinax.
death Seuerus revenged upon Pescennius and others. He was a valiant man: for
he overcame the Parthians, and the Arabians, and therefore was surnamed
Parthicus Seuerus: he subdued Britain, who then after the death of Lucius
began civil wars between themselves, and were almost utterly conquered by
Seuerus, by reason the noble men and Britain held civil wars.

During which time, Clodius Albinus created himself Caesar Albinus head sent
from France to Rome.
in France, whom he slew at Lugdunum, whose head he sent to Rome, and whose
friends in Rome at his return he persecuted to the last. This Emperor was
well learned, and a great Philosopher. This Emperor Seuerus, after he had
repaired many things throughout the Roman empire, and had made Rome again
chief mistres of those provinces lost, he passed over the Sea unto Britain,
where after he had subdued them, he dyed among them in the city of York, in
the eighteenth year of his reign. Polidore does not agree Read Polid. in
lib. 2.
with Eutropius in this: but in the Roman history Eutropius must be believed.

After Seuerus succeeded his son Aurelius Bassianus, who also was called
Caracalla: he was in conditions much like to Antoninus Caracalla 23.
his father but more sharp: he was out of measure given to sensuality, and
carnal concupiscence: he espoused his mother in law named Iuba, of some named
Iubba, though under color to demand Artabanus his daughter king of Parthia in
marriage, which he falsely deceived, beside the expectation of Artabanus, he slew
many of the Parthians. This Antoninus Read Victor Aurel.
Caracalla having had a sight of Alexander the great his picture, wherein he
noted his stern countenance, with his head somewhat leaning to the left
shoulder, he caused the like picture to be made for himself, and commanded all
his soldiers Caracalla commanded himself to be called Alex.
to call him Alexander. This Emperor died as he was preparing a voyage against
the Parthians at Edessa, when he had lived 43. years.

Presently after the death of Caracalla, Opilius Macrinus and Opilius Macrinus.
24.
his son Diadumeus were created Emperors, who after they had reigned jointly
fourteen months, they were both slain in a sedition which fell among the
soldiers, without doing Marcus Aurelius Heliogabolus 25. Emperor.
any thing worth the writing. After them stepped to the empire, Marcus Aurelius
surnamed Heliogabolus, and well so named for in all beastliness he resembled
his predecessors, these underwritten.

Nero Caligula. Sergius Vitellius. Domitianus Commodus.
This Heliogabolus was supposed to be the son of Caracalla: he likewise
defamed himself with all kind of shame and reproach, whose filthiness and lewd
behavior you may read in Herodian: He was slain in an uproar which the
soldiers made, at what time also his mother Semia Sira called of some Herod.
lib. 5.
Semiamira died, after he had lived very unchastly and filthily Unhappy are
those empires where tyrants reign for kings.
for 4. years, but Eutropius says 2. years and 8. months. During the reign
of these 3. last emperors, there were no good things done in Rome, but vprores
and sedition of soldiers, creating whom they would to be Emperor one day, and
the next day deposing them from life and empire. Only this happened, that the
Amphitheator was set on fire, and few fellows were quiet at Rome. The great
men of authority then, were these.

Titus Saturninus. Marcus Noninus Mutianus. Cornelius Amulinus. Lu. Torpilius
Dexter. C. Gallus Gentianus and Bassus. Gentianus. Clodius Albinus. Balbinus
chosen Emperor against Maximinus. Aur. Alex. Seuerus and Maximus were both
made Emperors.
Aurelius Alexander Seuerus was chosen Emperor when he was but twelve years
of age, whom the soldiers named Alex. Seuerus made Emperor at twelve years
of age.
Caesar, and the Senate created Augustus: he was a very virtuous Prince, and
one that favored all good men: he gave him self to martial policy, and
took in hand about the 9. year of his reign, wars against Artaxerxes king
of Persia, who had before vanquished Artabanus king of the Parthians, who then
governed the Persians.

And as Artaxerxes overcame Artabanus, and was the first king of Persia after
Darius, who before was conquered by Alexander the great: so this Artaxerxes was
subdued by this Alex. Seuerus, with great glory, and had his triumph granted
him in Rome, being but 21. years of age: he had such care of the Empire, and
such diligence, that he committed the charge of Armenia to a noble captain
called Iunius Palmatus: he committed the province of Illyrica unto Varus
Macrinus, and the country of Mauritania to Furius Celsus. Of these 3.
Captains victories in these countries, read Lampridius. This Seuerus Court
flourished with learned men.
was the first Emperor that favored Christians, and being so young an
Emperor, he associated with him to assist him in judgment, Vlpianus a great
Ciuilian, a law maker, and had an office called Magister Scrinii, as it were
Master of the Rowles: he had in those days in his Court a number of learned
men, whose names Lampridius sets down in this sort, whom he used as
Counselors.

Fabius Sabinus. Domitius Vlpianus. Aelius Gordianus. Julius Paulus.
Modestinus. Pomponius. Alphenus. Africanus. Florentinus. Proculus. Martianus.
Callistratus. Hermogenes. Tryphonius. Metianus and Celsus.
The most part of these were Ciuilians, and scholars to Papinianus. Besides,
these lawyers flourished in Seuerus Court, Quintilius Caius Marcellus, Aelius
Seuerianus, and Cutilius Seuerus, Read Egnati. and Suetonius of this Emperor.
three singular learned Romans: but he reigned not long: for he was slain in
France, in a tumult that grew amongst the soldiers, he, and his mother
Mammea, in a town called Moguntia, after he had reigned 13. years.

After this good Emperor Seuerus, succeeded Julius Maximinius, a man of mean
parentage, whose beginning was to be a shepherd in Thracia, and after came to
be a soldier, and Maximinius slain and his son. Oros lib. 7. Cap. 19.
in process of time, came by the means of the soldiers to be Emperor
without consent of the Senators: who in the beginning had some good success
against the Germans: but not long after slain by Pupienus at Aquilea, and his
young son called also Maximinius, when he had reigned three years.

After him succeeded Pupienus, Balbinus, and Gordianus, three Emperors
together in Rome: but Pupienus and Balbinus were slain at Rome, and Gordianus
obtained the empire, and held it Gordianus. 27. Emperor.
six years alone: he espoused Tranquillina Masetheus daughter, and after
took his voyage into Persia, and ouerthrewe Sapores king of Persia, took
diverse cities, and in many sundry Pupienus and Balbinus two Emperors, slain
at Rome in their Palace.
skirmishes did greatly afflict the Persians. But as he returned thence, he
was likewise slain through treason of one Philip, who succeeded him in the
Empire: but his monument is erected up by one of his soldiers in memorial of
him, and that place is called Gordianus grave. Eutrop. lib. 9.


Marcus Julius Philippus, after he had slain Gordianus, he and M. Philip. 28.
Emperor.
his son Philip came to the empire, and reigned jointly five years. In the
time of these two Philips, there was celebrated in Rome great solemnity and
preparation of Gunnes and shows, with such pomp and magnificence, as
Capittollius affirms, Read Iuli. Capitol. of these places.
that the like before in Rome scant had been seen. Philip builded a town in
Thracia, and named it after his own name. Not long after, both the father and
the son were slain, the father at Verrona, and the son at Rome, being of
the age of 12. years. About this time lived Julius Africanus, Hactenus Iu.
Capito. and Herodianus.
a great Historiographer, and that godly man Origin wrote his book of Martyrs.

After these two Philips succeeded Decius, borne at Bubalia a Town in
Hungaria, a man well instructed in all kind of sciences: but he was the eight
Emperor that persecuted the Christians, and beside commanded by an Act, that
all that worshipped Christ, should be slain: he repressed Oros. lib. 7. cap.
21.
some wars that were co^menced in France, and made one voyage against the
Goths, at what time he caused his son to be created Caesar. This Decius
founded Bathes in Rome, who when he had reigned two years, both he and his
son died in Barbaria. Some judged that he was swallowed up in an earthquake:
and some affirm, that he was drowned in a river of Thracia, called Abricium.

Then were created Emperors in Rome, Gallius Hostilianus, Gallus Hostil. 30.
Emperor.
and Voluntianus his son: they committed no act worthy of writing, but they
were likewise persecutors of the Christians, and in their time fell great
plagues and sundry other diseases in the Roman Empire: and after they had
reigned scant two years, they were slain, and within three months after them
Aemilianus who succeeded them in the Empire, was in like sort slain: so that
of 30. Emperors which reigned since Octauius Augustus time, until Licinius
Valerian, Licinius Valerianus 31. Of 30. Emperors, not 3. escaped free from
murder.
six of them escaped not the hands of murderers. Such was the envious estate
of Rome from time to time, such was their tyranny and avarice, until the
Romans fame and dignity was much obscured, and so little esteemed of the
kings about, over whom they had before so long triumphed even from the Consuls
time until this time: for the glory of the Romans excelled all the nations
of the world in power and fame, until tyranny, murder and persecution
Tyranny and murder, the cause of destruction.
filled the streets of Rome with blood, whereby their glory decayed, and
their state diminished.

Licinius Valerianns, of whom I made mention a little before, began his
Empire in the year after Christ's incarnation 256. who had the government
then of Rhoetia and Noricus, being made by the soldiers Caesar, and soon
after Augustus. At what time Galienus also was created Caesar at Rome, Galienus
by the assent of the Senate: and this was the only occasion why so many
Emperors of Rome were murdered, to have two Emperors at one time of equal
authority to govern, Two Caesar's hardly agree, in one town or country.
Sext. Aureli^.
which kingdoms and principality could never well abide. For after the
authority of the Consuls ceased, they created in the place of 2. consuls, two
Caesar's, which should govern jointly, the one in the city, the other abroad.
These 2. Caesar's practiced more co^spiracy one to destroy another, to have sole
government over the empire, then they used diligence and care together to save
the empire: for every Caesar had great desire, and was much ambicious how he
might be created Augustus, which was the greatest name of dignity among the
Romans.

Thus the state of Rome by ambitious men's government, became at length to have
so many Caesar's in the field, as then pleased the soldiers, and to have so
many Augustus in Rome, as pleased the Citizens, until the Germans, Goths,
Vandales, Hungarians, Frenchmem, with other nations might as well Eutrop. lib.
8.
come with an army into Italy and beard the Romans in their Country, as the
Romans might come out of Rome to commence war any where out of Italy. For
now in the time of these two Caesar's, Licinius and Galienus, the Germans
Galienus. read of this more in Trebellius.
grew so bold, that they entered within Italy, and approached into the City
Rauenna, at what time the other Caesar Licinius was disco^fited and taken
prisoner by Constantine at Nicomedia a city in Bythinia, and was slain
contrary to the oath and promise which Constantiine made him, and yet had
espoused Constantia Constantines sister. Now the Almanes had spoiled France,
and invaded Italy, Greece, Macedonia, Pontus, and all Asia were over Rome fell
to variance in these days.
run by the Germans and the Goths. These which were brought before by
Traianus and by Augustus under the Roman Empire, are now by foreiners
vanquished: the cause was, the Romans anoied the Romans even as Pyrrus said,
or as Hanibal unto Antiochus, that the Romans must be conquered with Romans:
which is now seen in the time of these Caesar's: for now the Parthians base
people and servants sometime of the Macedonians, after they had gotten
Mesopotamia, they pretended to claim a title to Syria. For now the strength
of Romans began to fail, and their kingdoms and their teritories The glory
of Rome decayed.
revolted from them, and went to wrecke. For at that very time a base Frenchman
called Posthumous, intruded into the Roman Empire, and governed the same by
the space of ten years, but he was slain by the soldiers in a tumult by
the snares of Lollianus.

After Posthumous, a man of a mean occupation, a handy craft man named Marius
got the empire into his hand, and the next day after was slain. This time
Lollianus also began another co^spiracy, at what time Victorinus governed
France, who was slain in the city Agrippa through the treason of one Acturius,
for that he defloured many maids and matrons, and gave himself altogether to
a filthy life. See and mark the state of Rome in Lycinius and Gallienus time:
First Posthumous and his son Eutrop. lib. 9.
were slain by the conspiracy of Lollianus: Lollianus slain by the treason
of Marius, Marius also dispatched out of the way by Victorinus, and Victorinus
killed by Acturius: after who^ succeeded Read Trebellius of the miserable
murdering and killing of Roman Emperors.
Tetricus the Senator, who in like sort as others were, was by Aureolus slain:
and Aureolus, after he had concluded peace with Gallienus and Valerianus, who
were both slain at Millaine reigned alone. See the murder and slaughter of
Emperors in Rome in those days: for an Emperor was no sooner made, but he
either was killed violently, or murdered secretly. For Rome in those days was
the only Theater of tyranny, and so continued until a great part of the
Empire was taken into Constantinople: and within a while after it was fully
gone into Germany, so they kept the name of an Emperor only for a time, but
the dignity was decayed in Rome, and began to flourish in other places.

After that time Aureolus in the 9. year of his reign was likewise slain by
Flauius Claudius, a very good Emperor, for he Flauius Claudius 32. Emperor.
recovered again many things which were gone to decay during the reign of
Licinius and Gallienus: he was chosen Caesar by the soldiers, and created
Augustus by the Senate, a just man, and fit to govern the weal public: he
brought again the Goths, the Macedonians, and the Illyrianes under the Roman
yoke, and wanted but time only to bring the other countries which were lost
by his Predecessors under the Romans: but he died too timely, when he had
reigned but 19. months: after whom succeeded Quintilius, brother unto
Claudius, and was nominated Emperor by the consent of the soldiers: and for
that he was a man of singular fobriety, worthy to be compared with his brother
Claudius, he was by the Claudius had a golden target set up in the Council
house.
Senate created Augustus, and he continued but 17. days but he was slain.
Eutropius says that Flauius Claudius the Emperor had a golden Target hanged
up in the Council house, and had also in the capitol a golden Image set up
for a perpetual memory of him: and he appointed before he died that Aurelius
Valerianus should reign after him, a stout Emperor and one that subdued the
Marcomanes, which then did spoil Au. Valerianus a stout valiant Emperor.
and waste Millaine and the countries about. He also subdued the Thracians and
the Illyrians, he overcame the Goths, and slew their captain Cannaba beyond
the river of Danubus. After this he commenced wars in the East countries,
where Odenatus king of Palmirea had gotten many provinces out of the Romans
hands: but he was subdued, and his wife Zenobia taken prisoner, over whom
Aurelianus the Emperor triumphed: and after his triumphs he environed the
city with stronger walls, he founded a Temple in Rome, which he dedicated to
the Sun, upon the which Temple he bestowed an infinite deal of gold and
precious stones. Eutrop. lib. 9.


Aurelianus, after he had reigned 6. years, he was slain through the treason of
his own servants in the mid way between Constantinople and Heraclea, in a place
called Cenophrurium, but his death was not vnreue^ged: after that this
Aurelianus was slain, Rome was without an Emperor for 7. months, until
Annius Tacitus was elected Caesar, a man of such good conversation as Annius
Tacitus 34.
was meet to govern an empire. Howbeit, he deceased within 6. months, and was
by death prevented, as his successor Florianus: who in like manner as Tacitus
reigned but 2. months and 20. Florianus 35.
days, died without any mention made of any things worth the memory. After
whom succeeded Probus a singular soldier, a Probus 36. Ann. Dom. 279.
man most expert in warfare: for he subdued the Germans, the Sarmatians and
the Illyrians. He overcame the Goths in Thracia, Read of these Sex. Aurelius
Victor.
he vanquished in sundry skirmishes diverse which attempted to usurp the state
imperial, as Saturninus, in the East country Bonosus and Proculus, which
affected much the kingdom of France, and Agrippina that claimed a title to
Hispanie and Brytaine, he vanquished them and triumphed over them: this emperor
licenced the Frenchmen and the Hungarians to have vineyards. This emperor was
a just and a stout man, equal in all points to Aurelianus his predecessor,
and was slain also Oros lib 7. cap. 23. and 24.
in an iron tower at Sirmium in an uproar, which grew amongst the soldiers
after he had reigned 6. years and 3. months.

After this emperor, was Carus elected to govern the Roman empire, who
presently after he had obtained the empire, Carinus and Numerianus two Caesar's.
Eutrop. lib. 9.
made his 2. sons Carinus and Numerianus, Caesar's, and commenced that war
against the Persians again, which Probus thought before he died to have taken
in hand, which Carus performed, and subdued Mesopotamia, and achieved things
manfully against the Persians. He wanne Seleucia the chiefest city of Syria,
and Ctesiphontes a town in Persia. And when he had reigned two years, he was
stricken with lightning, Carus stricken withlightning.
and his son Numerianus was slain being very young with his father in the
wars of Persia, by the persuasion of Aper his father in law. The other son
of Carus called Carinus, being deputed Caesar over Illyria, France, and
Italy, defloured noble women, put innocents to death, and practiced all kind
of mischief, until he was overthrown by Dioclesian the emperor: who next
succeeded his father Carus. During which time Rome was in great trouble, and
the empire in great danger: at what time these Magistrates and noble men
flourished, and some of them became emperors.

Patrenus Volisianus. Pomponius Bassus. Flauius Aclianus. Annius Tacitus
afterward Emperor. Lucius Ragonius Vrinatus. Gallius Hostilius afterward
Caesar. Numus Albinus. Maximius Dexter and Arcesilaus. Iunius Tiberianus.
Pomponius Victorinus. Aurelius Probus after made Caesar. Iunius Messula.
Oniuius Paternus. Iunius Maximus. Lurius Orphitus. Pomponius Ianarius.
These bare most sway in Rome during the ^e of these seven Emperors, which
reigned no more but 18. years.

All these seven Claudius. Florianus. Quintilus. Probus and Aurelianus. Carus.
Tacitus.

So short a time the Emperors of Rome then reigned, that any Caesar was slain
sooner then any common soldier. At Orosius lib. 7. cap. 22.
the which time Germany and France waxed so strong, that the Romans had
their hands full to resist them and to keep the^ from Italy, and now they
had entered Italy with great force spoiling and wasting the countries about,
until they came to Rauenna, and Valerianus possessed Pannonia: and Carausius
governed the Brytaines, which he detained by force, when he Carausius held
Britain by force.
fled for fear of Maximianus.

CHAP. X.
Of the rest of the Emperors of Rome after Dioclesians time, at what time
their Empire at Rome began to decay: for that the dignity of the old
Emperors were diminished, by reason that Constantinople, whom Constantine the
great had so enriched and beautified with their ancient monuments of Rome, that
old Rome was hereby defaced, and new Rome thereby flourished, so that the
Empire was divided between two Emperors, the one to be at Constantinople, the
other at Rome.

Now to Dioclesianus, who began his reign, after that Carus Augustus was
Dioclesia. the 38. Emperor.
stricken with lightnings, and his son Numerianus slain by treason, he was
created Augustus: he was borne at Dalmatia, a Scriueners son, as Eutropius
says, but others affirm he was a bondsman to Amulinus the Senator. This
Emperor as soon as he had obtained the Empire to his hand, Read An. Victor
of this Dioclesian.
he revenged the death of Numerianus, slew Aper his son in law, and after
subdued Carinus least he would claim the Empire, being Carus his eldest son:
he associated to himself in the Empire Maximianus, surnamed Herculius, and
made him Augustus, who was before but Caesar. Beside he created other two
Caesar's, Constantius Clorus, and Maximianus Gabrius, borne in Dacia, for that
in diverse countreies war waxed hot, and that Dioclesian of necessity must
needs appoint these two Caesar's, and take Maximianus to be his fellow in the
Empire.

This Dioclesianus caused Galerius to take to wife his daughter Galerius married
Dioclesians daughter.
Valeria, and caused Constantius to marry Theodora, daughter in law to
Herculius. This time governed in Egypt Achilleus, whom Dioclesian subdued, and
after took Busiris and Copon, two cities of Egypt, slew a number of their
nobles, and gave Achilleus to be devoured of wild beasts. In the eight month
of his war in Egypt he took Alexandria, and after he had pacified Aurelius
victor
Egypt, he returned to Rome, at what time Herculeius returned from Affrike:
and after he had finished his wars where he had subdued the Quinquagentia^s,
and concluded peace with them, afterward these two emperors lived and reigned
together Read Oros. lib. 7. cap. 26.
twenty years: they overcame Narses king of Persia: they subdued the Caspians
and the Basternes, and conquered the Sarmatians, and did triumph over them.

After this triumph Dioclesia^ waxed so proud, that he would The pride of
Diocles. Eutrop. lib. 9.
be worshipped like a god, and would be called brother to the sun, and to the
moon: he had his shoes wrought with gold and precious stones, and caused
people to come kneeling and kiss his feet. Yet Eutropius writes, that after
these great triumphs, which both Dioclesian and Herculeius had at Rome over
Narses concubines, his sisters, and his children, they resigned up the imperial
state, and lived a private life, the one in the city of Solona, and the other
in Lucania, for the which cause Dioclesianus was canonised after his death
though he dyed a Dioclesian canonised.
private man, which was never granted in Rome to any private man.

Then Consta^tius and Galerius, which were but Caesar's during the reign of
Dioclesian, were both made emperors, and the whole government was divided
between them both: The Empire divided between Galerius and Constable.
France, and Italy, and Affrike were committed to Constantius: Illyria, Asia,
and the East parts to Galerius: but Constantius, a man of great modesty,
declared his worthiness, refused the trouble and toil of wars that he
should have in Affrike, France, and Italy, and contented himself with the
name of Augustus: and after he had reigned two years, deceased at York in
Britain, where Constantius had a base son that became governor in his
fathers room in Britain.

Galerius, when he heard that Constantius his fellow in the Empire died in
Britain, he substituted under him two Caesar's. This time some commotion began
at Rome, where they nominated Galerius after the death of Constable. substituted 2.
Caesar's under him.
Maxentius son to Herculeus late Emperor, which when his father heard of, he
came in all haste from Lucania to Rome, and by all means possible persuaded
Dioclesian to resign the Empire into his hand again, which he refused to do.

Then Seuerus Caesar was sent to appease the commotion which the guard had made,
where he was slain: then Herculeus seemed as though he would depose his son
Maxentius, under color of cruel pretense, thinking to go to France as
intrueth he went, meaning to kill his son in law Constantinus, accusing his
own son, how he repulsed him from Rome, and would have killed him if he had
not fled: but his guile War began between Maxentius and Constantinus.
was detected by his own daughter Faustina, who disclosed all her fathers
conspiracy to her husband Constantine, whereupon Herculeus fled to Massilia,
where he was slain, a man void of all humanity, hurtful to all, etc. After
Herculeus was slain, Galerius dyed, and then the empire was governed by
Constantinus and Maxentius, whose fathers were before them emperors, and by
Licinius and Maximinus: but so many Four Emperors at once in Rome.
lords could not agree long: for Constantine vanquished Maxentius at Miluius
bridge. Within a short time war grew between Licinius and Maximinus: and to
avoid the Constable. would have no companion in the Empire.
emunent mischief, Maximinus dyed suddenly at Tharsus. Constantinus being of a
hautie courage, coveting to be a sole Emperor, made war upon Licinius dis
dear friend and his brother in law, who had espoused his daughter Constantia,
with whom he had diverse battles. the one in Hungaria, the second in
Cybale, the third in Nicomedia a famous City of Bythinia, where Licinius
yielded himself to Constantine, and yet contrary to the law of arms, and to
the oath and promise made between them, Licinius Oros. lib. 7. cap. (...).
was slain: now there was no war in Rome but between the Emperors, and
nothing is to be written but of murdering and killing of Emperors: where
before men wrote of their foreign victories, of their conquests of kingdoms,
of their triumphs, of their pomp and glory, of their port and The sayings of
the old Romans.
fame, in so much that the Romans only bragd of themselves and said, Magna
agere and fortia pati Romanorum est.

Now Cerausius fled before to Britain from Maximianus, where in Dioclesians
time he was slain by Alectus his companion, after he had kept Britain by
force for three Cerausius slain.
years after Cerausius, and Alectus. Alectus was subdued by Asclepiodotus
captain of the guard, and so Britain was recovered again within ten years
after Cerausius had taken it.

Now after that Maximianus Herculeus was slain at Massilia, thinking to
return to his son Maxentius again, Constantine the great having
intelligence of these practices between the father and the son, presently
after the death of the father Maximianus, he commenced war upon his son
Maxentius, and ouerthrewe him as you Eutrop. lib. 10.
heard before. Then the great Constantine having the Empire Constantine the
great made his three so^ns three Caesar's.
in his own hand, he appointed Constantinus Crispus his son to have the
government in France, his other two sons Constans and Constantius had the
rule in the East parts: his three sons were made three Caesar's, and him
self made Augustus.

His great fortune was such, that Constantinus was surnamed the great: for he
was compared, for the good success he had in the beginning of his Empire, to
Cyrus the great king of Persia, and to Alexander the great king of Macedonia,
and in like sort prospered as they did at the first: but afterward being
altered from his wonted gentle and flexible mind, he persecuted his own
blood: he slew his own wife Fausta, and his sisters son a very notable young
Euselius of Co^stantinus life read more there.
man: he persecuted sundry of his friends, and many of his alliance.

Constantinus was endued with many excellent virtues: he was of such passing
industry in wars, that he sundry times over threw the Gotes, and wan great
praise among the Barbaria^s. This Constantinus praised.
emperor was much adicted to the study of the liberal arts, and he endeavored
to gain the love of the people. There was nothing wanting in Constantine, that
should be in a good emperor. he enacted and established many sound laws to the
Romans, and furthered the Church of Christ with all care and diligence: for he
destroyed many temples of the Gentiles.

In his time sundry Synods were called, which shalbespoken of in another place,
and specially the great Synod at Nice in Bythinia, where 318. Bishops were
together, at what time the 318. Bishops in the counsel at Nice.
heresy of the Arrians as overthrown. He rebuilded in Thracia Byzantiu^, and
named it after his own name, Constantinople: and he reedified in Bythinia a
town called Drepana, and named it after his mothers name Helenopolis: of whom
Eusebius does write, that Helena the mother of Constantine found the cross
Eusebius. Tripa. lib. 2. cap. 18.
whereon our Savior Christ suffered at Jerusalem: and when he had made great
preparation against the Parthians, he dyed in Nicomedia, after he had reigned
thirty one years, and had lived sixty six years, and left behind him his
three sons, Constantinus, Constans, and Constantius, to succeed him in the
Empire. He left also a very gallant young man his brothers son named
Dalinatius, which was slain in an uproar which fell among the soldiers in
Thracia.

The three sons of Constantine had the Empire among them, as by will and
testament Constantine had commanded: but the elder brother not long after his
fathers death, attempted war against his youngest brother at Aquileia,
Constantine slain in Thracia.
and was slain, and then the Empire fell between the two other brethren
Constantius and Constans, the one governing in the East, the other in the West.
In the same sort was Constans slain in the Castle of Helena at Magnensium, as
his Constans two sons slain.
brother Constantine was in Thracia. The third brother had diverse and sundry
battles against Sapores king of Persia, who never had good success in any
battle he took in hand, but that battle which he fought at Singara, and
yet sustained the loss of the victory of that battle. Thus the two sons of
so worthy an Emperor dyed without any great conquest made.

Now by this time new matters grew in Illiria: for Magnentius Magnentius made
Emperor.
possessed Italy, France, and Affrike after the death of Constans, though
Sextus Aurelius writes otherwise. Yet this Magnentius was made Emperor by the
soldiers, at what time in Rome, Nepotianus, sisters son to Constantine the
great, Nepotianus.
was also by the people their created Caesar, whom Magnentius returning from
Affrike to Rome subdued within twenty eight Pau. Oras. lib. 7. cap. 29.
days after he was made emperor, after he created his own brother Decentius
to be Caesar, and reigned jointly three years Eutrop. lib. 10.
and six months, until the unhappy battle at Marsa, where a great number of
the Romans were slain, and Magne^tius vanquished, who shortly after slew
himself at Louaine. Which news being toulde to Decentius, he for very grief
hanged Eutrop. lib. 10.
himself.

This time Constantius deputed his uncles son Gallus to be Caesar over the
East parts: but shortly after, both Constantius Sex. Aurel.
and his cousin Gallus waged civil wars, in the which war Gallus was slain
by Co^stantius. This time Syluanus being made Caesar, attempted new matters in
France, and was likewise slain within thirty years after. Now Constantius
was Emperor alone, and having the whole Empire in his own hand, he appointed
Iulianus his uncles son, and brother to Gallus, Caesar over France. This
recovered the spoil of the Barbaria^s, the towns and cities which they
besieged, and slew a great army of the Almaines at Arge^tine a city in
France. The overthrow was such, that their king was taken prisoner, and
France again recovered. This time was Co^stantius occupied against the
Parthians: and returning home from thence to pacify that co^motion, he died by
the way, after he had reigned 38. years, Constantius died and Iulianus made
Augustus.
at what time Iulianus was made Augustus. But let us know who flourished in Rome
during the reign of this great Constantinus and his three sons, which was
seventy years.

Ruffinus Volusianus. Arcadius Rufinus. Anicius Iulianus. Acilius Seuerus.
Paulinus Probianus. Valerius Maximus. These flourished as chief magistrates in
Rome at that time.
Septimius Bassius. Syluanus Caesar. Faecilianus and Tacianus, who were Consuls
when Constantine the great dyed. Crispus Caesar. Ouinius Gallicanus. Annianus
and Anicius Rufinus. Metilius Halarianus. Dalmatius Caesar. Nepotianus Caesar.
Catulinus Philomanus. Publitius Optatus. Lucinus Caesar. Magnentius and
Decentius both Caesar's. Gallus Caesar. Cornelius Sergius. Daelius Probinus.
Valerinus Proculus. Fabius Titianus. Mereatius Caerealus.
Claudius Iulianus Caesar, who was next Emperor after Constantinus, and his
sons, made great preparation against the Parthians, at what time sundry
Towns and holds were peaceably yielded to Iulianus: he returning from
Assyria Iulianus slain.
as a conqueror, was slain by his enemies in the seventh year of his reign.
This Emperor Iulianus did excel in the Greek and in the Latin tongue: he
was passing well seen in all the liberal arts: he was very eloquent, and a
great Philosopher. Julian likened to M. Antonius Oros. lib. cap. 30.
Eutropius says, that Iulianus resembled much Marcus Antonius, whom this
Emperor in all points endeavored to imitate: but he was a persecutour of the
Christians.

Iouinianus succeeded next Iulianus, being chosen by consent Iouinianus.
of the soldiers: he was a very good Emperor, and a Iouini. a good Emperor
and a favorer of the Christians
great favorer of the Christians: but being once or twice vanquished by the
Persians, he sustained such reproach, that hewas forced to make peace with a
great portion ofhis empire, which was not seen since the foundation of Rome.
This Iouinianus was borne in a province of Pannonia, the son of one
Verromanus, who in his sleep was warned, that this Emperor Eutrop. lib. 10.
should be named Iouinianus: who after he reigned eight months died: but
Eutropius affirms that he reigned Emperor seven years.

After him succeeded Valentianus the son of Gratianus, a mean man of birth,
in whose time the West kingdoms began Valentianus. Read Oros. lib. 7. cap. 32.
to annoy the Roman Empire: for hitherto the Romans kept the sole Empire in
Rome, until the time of Theodosius the great, which was the fifty Emperor
from Julius Caesar. Valentianus The glory of the Empire went by Constantine to
Thracia.
and his son together had the Empire between them twenty one years:
Valentianus the father reigned of those, fifteen years: and his his son
named also Vale^tianus, being a young boy proclaimed Caesar by the soldiers,
reigned the other six years.

After them succeeded Theodosius Junior, in whose time the Gotes and the
Vandales began to be governed under kings. The Theodosius Junior. This time
began the Vandales, the Huns, and Longbards their kingdo^s.
Longobards and the Hunnes at that very time began their kingdoms. Many other
kingdoms began this time, as Britain and Scotland: and diverse nations in
Germany waxed so strong and so mighty, that by often quarreling and long
tedious wars, the Empire was not only divided, but quite taken into the West
parts of the world, so that from the name of the Emperor of Rome, he was long
named the emperor of Constantinople, and after that named the Emperor of
Almaine, where between these Gotes, Vandales, Longobards, Hunnes, Polonians,
and diverse other Potentates of Germany, beside France, Spain, and England,
the empire still remains in Germany, so that the dignity of A Pope rules
Rome in the stead of an Emperor.
Rome, the great glory and long renown thereof, is fallen from an Emperor to
a Pope, after that Rome had flourished under kings 243. years, until the time
of Consuls, under Consuls and Dictators 467. until the time of emperors, and
under emperors 447. years. Now I will end this Roman history, for that the
glory of the Romans died, and the dignity of the empire taken away, and
nothing to be spoken of the Romans after Iouinianus time, which was the 43.
emperor after Augustus reign, which governed Rome with glory and fame for the
space of 407 years, as Sex. Ruffi. affirms: yet these emperors whose names I
have subcribed, governed as emperors until Charles the great: at what time
the empire began to quail, and the Germans began to flourish, and Rome quite
forsaken and decayed.

And now for that the Empire is fully come to Germany, I will only put down
the names of the emperors of Rome, from Iu. Caesar until Theodosius the
great, which are these.

Iu. Caesar five months. Octauius Augustus 56. years. C. Tiberius Nero. 23.
years. C. Caesar Caligula 4. years. Tib. Clau. Drusus 13. years. Cl.
Domitius Nero 13. years and 8. months. Serg. Sulp. Galba 7. months. Siluius
Otto 95. days. Aul. Vitellius 8. months. Fla. Vespasianus 12. years. Tit.
Vespasianus 2. years. Fla. Domitianus 15. years. Coc. Nerua 16. months.
Vlpius Traianus 17. years. Aelius Adrianus 21. years. T. Antonius Pius 23.
years. M. Aurelius Antoninus, surna med the Philosopher 19. years. Lu.
Aurelius Commodus 13. years. Aelius Pertinax and Didius Iulianus, both these
2. Emperors reigned 5. months. L. Septim. Seuerus 18. years. Au. Antoninus
Bassianus, who was also named Caracalla 7. years. Opili. Macrinus with his
s^ne Diadumeus, both Emperors slain by the soldiers within 14. months of
their reign, these with others are omitted among writers by reason of their
short government, one murdering of an other. M. Aurelius Heliogabolus 4.
years. Au. Alex. Seuerus 13. years. Maximinus with his son named also
Maximi. was of a mean soldier made Emperor without the authority of the
Senate and reigned 3. yeeeres. Balbinus and Pupienus reigned one year, and
were both slain in an uproar of the army. Gordianus reigned Emperor 6.
years. M. Julius Philippus with his son named Philip reigned 5. years, this
was the first Christian Emperor. Decius and his son 2. years. Gallus
Hostilianus with his son Volusianus 2. years. Lucius Valerianus and
Gallienus reigned both Caesar's jointly 15. years. Fla. Claudius reigned 20.
months, and his brothea Quintilius reigned after him but 17. days: both good
Emperors, and yet according to the custom slain by them who made them and
proclaimed them emperors. Val. Aurelianus reigned six years and was slain.
Annius Tacitus reigned six months and was slain. Florianus reigned 84. days
and was killed. Aurelius Probus reigned six years, 3. months. Carus with his
two sons Carinus and Numerianus in like sort slain within two years after
he was made Emperor. Dioclesianus Iouius reigned 20. years, with whom
reigned Maximianus, Gallerius, and Co^stantius Chlorus. Constantinus the great
reigned 31. years. This appointed the first order of the account called
Indictiones, after the Olympiads were expired. After Constantine the great
reigned his son Constanstine and his two brethren Constantius, and Constans,
14. years. Magnentius reigned 3. years. Beraldus says that he reigned more
years. Iulianus reigned 7. years. Iouinianus reigned eight months.
Valentinianus reigned jointly with his brother Valens 15. years. Theodosius
the great reigned 17. years.
After this Theodosius no mention is made of any famous exploits or conquests
done by the Emperors of Rome, but of slaughter and murder during the time of
the other Emperors, which was not long: for that the Empire was translated
into Germany. And it was gone to Constantinople from Rome before it came to
Germany.

Much more might have been written of other emperors which continued in Rome,
tantu^ nomine, for the dignity of the empire, and the glory of the old
Romans was quite defaced, and that little sovereignty which was left in Rome,
was by the Pope obscured: for as the kings of Rome within 243. years were
exiled, and Rome became subject to Consuls, so likewise Consuls within 467.
years, became subject to the emperors: And even so the glory and renown of
the emperors within 470. years, was diminished by the Popes: so that now Rome
is without either King, Consul, or Emperor, but only a Pope, and the pomp of
the Pope begins to quail. And Rome compared to Babylon in greatness of
glory and pomp.
therefore Rome was well compared by P. Orosius to Babylon, whose glory for a
thousand and odd years, far excelled all the kingdoms of the world: and
even so Rome, who seemed to be a whole world of it self, is now brought to
nothing, and so the beasts that Daniel saw in a vision, the one like a lion,
which betokened the Assyrians: the second like a bear, which signified the
Persians: the third like a leopard, which signified Rome was the fourth
devouring and terrible beast, that stamped all kingdoms under his feet by
Daniel expounded.
the Macedonians: and the fourth beast was fearful and terrible, it had great
iron teetth, it devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue under his
feet. So the Romans used all other kingdoms, and now are almost in the like
case, as the Persians, Assyrians, or the Macedonians.

And now I leave the Romans, and speak of the cruel persecution that chiefly
reigned every where under the Roman Emperors after our Savior Christ died,
until Constantine the great, leaving the history of Germany, where now the
Empire rests, to every man's reading: for that it began of late time, and
also for that the most part is therewith acquainted. And therefore I end this
history of the Romans in this place, with Eutropius, with S. Aurelius Victor,
and with Sextus Ruffinus. Hitherto Rome held the Empire with some glory and
renown, and after it decayed from one Emperor unto another, until the Empire
was taken into Germany: for when the kingdom of France began in Faramundus
time, I thought good to make an end of the Empire of Rome in Theodosius the
great his time, who lived and reigned at one time with Faramundus: for France
flourished by the ruin of Rome.

OF THE TRIAL OF THE Martyrs of God in the Primitive Church from the first
persecution under Tiberius the 3. Emperor, in the which Stephen was stoned,
James beheaded, Philip hanged, with infinite more tormented and persecuted,
until the 3. persecution, which began under Domitian the 12. Emperor of Rome.
THe policy of Satan from the beginning of mankind was such, that he invented
many ways to hinder the Church of God among The first persecution under
Tiberius Nero the third Emperor of Rome.
the old Patriarchs, and the members of gods Church: then before the Law was
given in the mount to Moses, and after the law was given, with all kind of
superstitious idolatry of Idols and Images, until our Savior Christ's time:
then Satan stirred with much more policy then before, with persecution and
heresies, to animate his soldiers against the Gospel in every kingdom and
country.

For when our Savior Christ was ascended up to God his Father, leaving his
Church to endure such persecution, and afflictions for the exercise of the
faithful, as might in despite of Satan and his angels (as he before had told
to his disciples) triumph by the blood of Christ Jesus, and after be confirmed
by the blood of so many millions of martyrs, as were by God appointed to be
witnesses of his Church, he was no sooner ascended unto heaven, but his Church
was persecuted on earth, which was the first persecution by the Jews under
Tiberius The first persecution under Tib. Nero, the third Emperor of Rome.
Nero the third Emperor of Rome: though the emperor was instructed by
Pilatus the Roman President, which continued then at Jerusalem 10. years,
that Tiberius read the letters of the Senators, opening the miracles of Christ
Jesus in the Senate, the order and manner of his death, and of his resurrection,
in so much that the emperor would have the Senators to put him in the number,
and to record him as one of the gods: for it was a decree among the Romans,
that none should be recorded one of the gods, without the Senators The Senators
of Rome canonized whom they would to be gods.
consent. As Eusebius recites the words of Tertulian in this sort: Nullum
deum a rege consecrandum, priusquam a Senatu probaretur.

But when the whole world was fully instructed by the Apostles of Christ, who
were dispersed and persecuted every where, so that in omnem terram exiuit sonus
eorum, their words, their lives, and their doctrine went into al parts of the
world: The spirit of God stirred many zealous, faithful, and godly men, to
receive the doctrine of Christ our Savior, and reueiled to the Gentiles that
which the Jews would not receive, The stubborn and rebellious Jews.
and therefore even from the blood of Abel the just, until Zacharias the priest
which was slain, etc. God will call them to account.

Now after that Pilate had slain himself, even with those hands which he
washed in Jerusalem like an hypocrite, as giltlesse of the death of Christ
Jesus, after he had given sentence of death on him: and also after that Herod
died, being banished, full of calamities and miseries, eaten of vermines as a
just revenge of impiety and tyranny: about which time Tiberius the emperor
died also, during which time in Jerusalem persecution was yet hot and
vehement: and even then they allowed to Simon Magus the sorcerer (after he came
from Samaria to Rome) all honor and reverence, and his Image to be put up in
Rome with this title, Simoni deo magno, and refused Christ, though Tiberius the
Emperor first sought it by all means. And again Philo a learned Jew sent
from Alexandria to Claudius the next Emperor that succeeded Tiberius, Philo
came to Rome the 2. time in Caligulas reign.
who willed and counseled the Senators in many good and godly things
concerning the Jews: for whose cause he came from Alexandria to Rome. Caius
Caligula began to reign Emperor of Rome, under whom the Jews were
miserably afflicted, and most cruelly persecuted.

In that time grew between the Greeks and the Jews sedition Sedition in
Alexandria.
at Alexandria: for the which cause both the Jews and the Greeks sent to Rome
to Caligula ambassadors, for the redress hereof. Philo a learned Jew, who had
been at Rome before in Eusebius. lib. 6.
the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius, was now again sent in the
second year of Caligulas reign, in the behalf of the Jews, and Appian in
the behalf of the Greeks. An other tumult began in Jerusalem: (Petronius
being then President Petronius President in Jerusalem.
at Jerusalem) for that Caligula had commanded his Image to be put up in the
temple at Jerusalem, and to be had in reverence as much as the Image of
Jupiter. This could not be suffered, and therefore Caesar's Image was taken away
for this cause, and others which Caligula supposed against the Jews, for that
he hated them extreemely.

Great slaughter was in Jerusalem. Agrippa being cast into close prison by
Tiberius, is now not only released and set at liberty, Joseph. cap. 15.
but also made king of Lysania, and chief in the Tetrarchie in the place of
Herod before him, but both Herod and Agrippa were exalted into these great
honors, as scourges and tortures to the Christians, whom they persecuted to
the death: for now the Apostles were dispersed preaching the Name of The
Apostles dispersed in to every country to preach.
Jesus in all countries, John in Asia, Andrew in Scythia, Thomas in Parthia,
Peter in Gallatia, Bythinia, Pontus and Cappadocia. Paul also after his
conversion doubted no danger, feared no death, but boldly and constantly
preached: In omnem terram exiuit sonus eorum, that many godly men were stirred
by their preaching to follow Christ: first at Caesarea, and then at Antioch,
for there were first Christians converted.

Many wonders were done by the Apostles through the name of Jesus: the more
that tyrants persecuted them, the more increased the doctrine of the Church:
the more they were More Martyrs then Tyrants.
slain by the sword, the more they increased in number by the word: for at
the stoning of Stephen the first Martyr, many dispersed themselves into sundry
places. At the beheading of James the brother of John, at the hanging of Philip
the Apostle at Hieropolis, at the martyring of James surnamed the Just, The
first persecution.
called also the brother of Christ in Judea: these with infinite more Martyrs
in the first persecution made the whole world amazed at their constancy and
faith, though the devil stirred his apostles, and sent them abroad likewise as
adversaries to the Church of God.

Simon Magus the Samaritane sorcerer flourished at Rome under Claudius the
Emperor, having all divine honors attributed Simon Magus had his ^mage set up
with this title, Simoni Deo Sancto.
unto him, with his Image set up, and his Epigram, Simoni deo sancto, having
before seduced many in Samaria and in other places from the truth. This Simon
Magus the first causer of heresy, after whom succeeded a monster likewise of
Samaria, Eusebius. 3. cap. 23.
professing himself to be the Messiah, whom the Jews looked for, saying that
he came from heaven to earth to save mankind, with such other blasphemies, as
Eusebius sets forth at large. Of these and of others I shall speak when I
entreat Heretics are Satan's soldiers.
of heretics, among whom Simon was the first fountain and chief head of
heresy: so that Satan did set forward his church with all care and travail,
obiecting himself with his disciples against our Savior in all doctrine, as
long as it pleased God to license him.

This time Tiberius Claudius reigned the first Emperor in Rome, and in like
order as his predecessor Caligula persecuted the Church. Under this Emperor
great famine happened Acts 11.
in all parts of the world: at what time Paul and Barnabas relieved the
brethren at Jerusalem, and in other places persecution grew more and more even
then, in so much that Paul and Peter were pursued from place to place, until
they came to be Eusebius. 2. cap. 25.
martyred at Rome: the one beheaded, and the other hanged: yet had they
established the Church before their death. Marcus the Evangelist and the
disciple of Peter preached Christ in Egypt, and taught in Alexandria, so that
many were converted and believed. He was the first bishop of Alexandria, and
Mark the Evangelist died a martyr under Traiane the Emperor.
taught in the regions about, until Pentapolis, and after was lead with a
halter about his neck, and burned by Idolaters, under Traiane the Emperor.

Matthewe being before one of the 70. disciples, and after joined by drawing of
lots into the number of the twelve Apostles in the place of Judas the traitor,
taught and preached to the savage people in Aethiopia about the river Phasis,
where Matthew the Apostle taught and preached in Ethiops.
he left his bones in testimony of the Gospel in the city of Sebastopolis by
the temple of the Sun. Even so Luke borne in Antioch, a Physician by
profession, a follower of Paul, by whose admonition he wrote the Acts of the
Apostles, preaching and teaching the Gospel every where, died at Ephesus. So
that in those days the Apostles and the other disciples, which then followed
the Apostles, were so persecuted by tyrants that mightily travailed among the
people of God to reduce them from the Church: as Aegyptus a false prophet,
Aegyptus a false prophet seduced 30^0 Jews.
who by subtlety and craft of the devil, seduced thirty thousand Jews, and
brought them from the wilderness where he taught them, into mount Oliuet,
thinking thereby to lay siege and to take the city by the sword: but he was
prevented by Felix the Roman. Of this Aegyptus Paul was Acts. 21.
cried out upon, when the sedition was in Jerusalem. Read the one and
twentieth of the Acts, when Paul was brought Paul brought before Felix.
before Felix.

And now in the time of Domitius Nero, under whom the second persecution
began, they were more weary of their The second persecution.
slaughter of Christians, and of their tyranny toward the Church, then able
to weary those whom God raised as defenders and governors of his people: for
while this cruel Emperor Nero reigned, Felix ruled in Judea: at what time
began Felix ruled in Judea.
(between the bishops and the hie Priests, against the people, and against
the chief Citizens of Jerusalem,) a new sedition, in the which many of the
Jews perished: amongst whom Ionathas was slain. The like happened (as
Jonathan slain.
you heard) in the time of Claudius about the feast of Easter, that thirty
thousand Jews were slain.

This Nero armed against God, and settled to some in Christian blood, first
charging Felix to kill, to murder, and to persecute all sort of people, but
specially the Jews: After he sent Festus to succeed Felix: and after Felix,
Albinus (a cruel man by whom much blood was lost) was sent from Rome to
Jerusalem, all persecuters and tormenters of the faithful, in so much that the
congregation of the faithful at that time in Jerusalem, were warned to remove
to Pella a village beyond They fled from Jerusalem to Pella a village beyond
Jorden.
Jorden, to avoid the fury and hot persecution of that time: for this cruel
Nero was not only contented to be a tyrant far from Rome, but also in the
city of Rome: he would see the people of God so martyred before his face, some
with the sword, some with fire, and some otherwise, that he was most meerie
when he saw much blood, and yet was not satisfied until he saw Rome on fire it
self: he is named amongst some writers (...): for while this Emperor reigned
in Rome, Peter and Paul were martyred. But his tragical actions had their just
reward, even in Rome where he was Emperor, after that he had reigned almost
14. years.

The contempt of Christ Jesus grew such in Judea, though the Prophets before he
was borne, preached unto them the danger The insolency of the Jews.
of their incredulity, and the Apostles after he was borne taught them, and
showed the works of Christ, and Christ him self while yet he lived among
them, wrought miracles and wonders: yet the Jews in contempt of this, waxed
more stubburne and more insolent. The slaughter was such in Judea, that the
Saduces began to tickle the people again with their inventions: that hearing
of Festus death, Ananias the hie priest Ananias a hie Priest.
(before Albinus was come from Alexandria that succeeded Festus, the Roman
President) persecuted many of the Saints in Jerusalem, and did put to the
sword every one that he suspected to hold the doctrine of the Apostles. So
that by many tumults and seditions of the Scribes and the Pharisees, the
tyranny and cruelty of the hie priests, and the people, who ever kindled the
Romans to fury, all Judea was full of blood until the last destruction of
them and of their country, of the God uses all things by means.
which they were often warned, both by the Prophets and by Christ himself: but
Titus the Emperor was appointed to be their scourge, to destroy their proud
city, to burn their idolatrous temple, and to end their tyranny which they
used against God and his Church.

During which confusion and ruin of Jerusalem, the congregation Titus the
scourge of Ier^salem.
then removed by divine warning to Pella a town beyond Jordan: for at that
time (says Josephus) were in Jerusalem 30. Miriads of people, every Miriad
being 10. hundredth thousand. Eusebius. 3. cap. 8.
The history is known, and therefore I refer you to Josephus of the Jews,
and Eusebius his Ecclesiastical history, at what Joseph. lib. 6. cap. 31.
time Achaia, Lycia, Rhodes, Bizantium, Samos, Thracia, and Sicilia, were made
Provinces under the Romans.

CHAP. II.
From the third persecution under Domitian the 12. Emperor, unto the 6.
persecution under Sept. Seuerus 22. Emperor: of the constancy of the faithful
Martyrs euerywhere in the Church of God: of their godly lives, their deaths,
and their glorious victory over Satan.

FLauius Domitianus, Titus his brother, under whom another persecution began
over allthe The 3. persecution.
stock of David, left none of al them that were of kin unto David in flesh.
This showed himself another Nero, far unlike unto his father Vespasian, or
to his brother Titus: and therefore named for his tyranny (...). This time had
reigned in Rome since the Apostles times, these 3. bishops: Linus which was the
first, Anacletus, which was the second, and Clemens which was the third.
Likewise in Antioch andin Alexandria, 1. Anianus. In Alexandria. 1. Euodius. In
Antiochia. Simon 2. Albilius. 2. Ignatius. and Iustus, 3. Cerdo. 3. Heroes.
bishops of Jerusalem were persecuted under Domitianus.

Now after this persecution under Flaminius Domitianus, who banished from Rome
all the Philosophers and the Mathematicians, who played the wolf with the
flock of Christ, under whom Simeon the second ^shop of Jerusalem was most
Eusebius. 3. cap. 29.
cruelly tormented and martyred, and all the remnant that were alive of the
stock of David, and all the Jews which were any way in flesh kin unto our
Savior Christ: After this followed the 4. persecution under Traiane, which was
so hot and so The fourth persecution in Traianes time.
terrible, that it past and far exceeded the 3. other persecutions before under
Caligula, Nero, and Domitianus. It was such, that it moved Plinius secundus to
write unto Traiane the Emperor Eusebius. Eccle. lib. 10. cap. 32.
in the behalf of the Christians, to mitigate the fury and rage of
persecution that reigned every where in Syria, Judea, Alexandria, Antioch, and
all other places, considering they did nothing Plini wrote to Traiane.
but rise in the morning and meet together to sing Hymns, and Psalms to
praise God: for Plini was amazed and quite astonished to see the multitude and
number of Christians daily increasing, notwithstanding all the persecutions and
slaughter that was most extreemely used against them from time to time.

This caused Traiane the Emperor somewhat more mildely to handle them,
commanding that the Christians should not be sought for to be persecuted, but
yet being found to punish them: for at this time flourished many godly and
learned pillars of the Church, as Ignatius bishop of Antioche, Fire and blood
the Enfignes of tyrants.
Polycarpus bishop of Smirna, Papias bishop of Hieropolitu^, who suffered
diverse kinds of torments, and were martyred, some devoured of beasts, some
with the sword, some with fire, some with hanging, and many with many new
invented torments. For at that time lived many of perilous nature, that sought
to please evil men, and to punish good men.

The Jews, as men full of madness, and void of the fear of God, began a
tumult again in Egypt and in Alexandria, All the Jews were driven out of
Egypt.
and slew both Romans and Greeks: they did use such tyranny at Cyrene, at
Thebes, in the 19. year of Traianus, that Turbo the Roman slew and drove all
the Jews out of Egypt and Libya. So likewise did Lucius Quintinus, he slew
many thousand Jews, and banished them to Mesopotamia by the commandment of
Martius. Yet the Jews continued until the severe commandment of Adrianus the
Emperor, who succeeded The Jews banished from their country by the
commandment of Adrian the Emperor.
Traiane: who perceiving their often tumults and seditions to be such, as the
Romans could have no rest while any Jew lived in Judea, he most straightly
charged that they should be driven out of their country, and that not one
should stay in Judea.

And Adrianus commanded that none should be suffered to dwell in any den of
the earth, so that the city which a little before he destroyed and the whole
country conquered, now the remnant of the Jews as men forsaken of Eusebius.
cap. 6.
God, are like vagabonds and roges, banished and whipped out of their country,
and strangers are come to their place, and the name of Jerusalem changed, and
called Aelia, according to Jerusalem named Aelia.
the name of the Roman Emperor.

This was the last end of Jerusalem, where Eusebius named 15. bishops even
from Christ's death until the destruction of the city, faithful and constant
Christians, in spite of many persecutions: and therefore I have set down their
names before you, as I found them in Eusebius.

1 James named Iustus. 2 Simon which was martyred under Domitianus. 3 Iustus. 4
Zacchus. 5 Tobias. 6 Benjamin. 7 Ioannes. 8 Mathias. 9 Philippus. 10 Senecas.
11 Iustus. the 2. of that name Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 9.
12 Leui. 13 Ephres. 14 Ioses. 15 Judas, the last bishop of Jerusalem. These
were Bishops according to the Law of Moses of the Circumcision.
Now by the means of Adrianus, and his Epistle written to Minutius Fundanus
his lieutenant for the stay of this sore and extreme persecution in all parts
of the East, the members of Christ had some rest until Antoninus Verus,
another persecutor and a vexer of the Church, clean against the good Emperor
Antoniuus Pius his predecessor, who wrote into Gentiles commended the
Christians.
all parts of Asia, a little before his latter end, not only to spare the
Christians from persecution, but also to favor them and to aid them: letting
them to live to their God whom they served, commending much their constancy
and faith toward their God.

But while God stirred some good Emperors to favor his Church and the members
thereof, the devil was as careful to raise sects of heretics most wicked, to
blaspheme the doctrine of the Church: as first Simon Magus and his disciple and
successor Menander the Samaritane, by whom two great heresies began, the one
being in Antioch, the other in Alexandria, Menander the Samaritan, Simon Magus
scholar.
the first schole of the Christians. The heresies of these two filled all Egypt
and Syria, even in the first place where Christ was preached: but it was by God
so appointed to exercise his people, so that both heresy and true doctrine
does increase with persecution. Now began Basilides, Carponates, and
Saturninus 3. great heretics, successors of Mena^der. Of these and of their
Three great heretics.
fundrie sects, I have to speak in their place.

Now Antoninus Verus succeeding his father Antoninus Pius, reigned in Rome:
under whom that godly bishop Polycarpus Eusebius. 4. cap. 15.
suffered martyrdom in Smirna, little esteeming the threatening of the Roman
Proconsul under Antoninus Verus, the people that were Jews in Smirna crying to
have him thrown to the Lions, Saying, that he only was the father of all The
fifth persecution under Antoninus siranmed Verus.
Christians in Asia, a contemner of our gods, and a teacher of false doctrine:
but neither the fire that should burn him, neither beasts that were threatened
to devour him, neither any torment might fear Polycarpus, so that he most
constantly withstoode their torment. So did Metrodorus and Pionius, two other
constant Martyrs at that very bar with Polycarpus, and companied him into the
midst of the flame, where confessing their God, they died like good
Christians in Smirna where Polycarpus was bishop. Anno Christi 170.


Likewise at that time in Pergame a town of Asia, Papilus and Carpus, two
valiant soldiers of Christ Jesus, and Agathonicus a constant Christian endured
the force of the flame, and died, and were crowned with martyrs. Justinius the
Philosopher, and a worthy Martyr of the Church of God, recites in his
Apology other 3. faithful Martyrs, named Centurio, Ptolomeus and Lucius, who
altogether most boldly stood to the face of Vrbicius then Proconsul of Rome,
and said, that he judged neither like the godly Emperor his father, neither
like an Emperors son, being a Philosopher, neither in any part like a sacred
Senator, making no account of his insolent Godly Martyrs feared nothing.
speech, but died like martyred Christians.

In the 17. year of this Antonius Verus, diverse parts of Asia, and Affrike
were with persecution visited, insomuch that the congregation of the faithful
dwelling in Louaine and Vienna, (parts sometime of Gallia,) sent letters to
comfort the brethren every where dispersed in Asia and Affrike: amongst whom I
found these many professing the Name of Jesus, offering themselves unto God as
sacrifices ready to the fire, to the sword, to beasts, or to any other
torments for Christ Jesus sake. Among whom was Vetius Epagathus a young man, who
Vetius.
lived so to God, that many followed him with great triumph into the fire:
Potinus bishop of Lugdunum, full of the spirit, Zacharias Zacharias.
the priest, Sanctus a deacon of Vienna, Attalus borne in Luke 1.
Pergamus, and Maturus. These contended for victory, and to wear the glorious
crowns of Martyrs: for they saw before their faces, how constantly Blandina
did stand to the tortures, and how she was bound to a tree, that fierce and
wild The glory of God is in his Saints.
beasts might devour her. But God turned the fury and rage ofbeastes to spare
and favor his Saints.

The like we read of Alexander a Physician borne in Phrygia, which for the
Gospel was judged to be devoured of beasts. Infinite was their joy which they
received by the spirit of God in their torments, and innumerable were the
multitude of the Saints, that daily more and more increased. And as among the
old Jews, sundry sects of heretics began to vex and trouble the Church
of God, as the Saduces, Eusebius. 4. cap. 21.
Pharisees, Samaritans, Essaei, Masbothia, and other: so at this time sprang
many sorts of heresies: first from Simon Magus the Samaritane: Simon Magus.
from Menander his disciple and successor: from Saturnius, Valentianus,
Cerdon, and many other, whereby many false prophets, false apostles, false
antichrists, sowed sedition in the Church, and opposed themselves against
Christ and his Church.

But in vain were all the shifts of Satan: for God raised such armies against
them of men, of women, of children that The shifts of Satan is in vain.
confirmed their doctrine with their blood. The more they wrote, the less
credit it had: the more they stirred, the less they accomplished: for the
Martyrs of God amazed their fleshly cogitations, and fully vanquished their
wicked devises, God raised good and godly men, and singular well learned, as
Hegesippus, Appolinarius, Meliton, bishops of Sardis, Pinitus bishop of Creete,
Dionisius bishop of Corinth, and Irenaeus, with many others. And for that,
Irenaeus himself wrote a catalogue of the succession of the bishops of Rome
after the time of the Apostles, I have set them orderly down as I Eusebius 5.
cap. 6.
found them in Eusebius.

1 Linus. 2 Anactelus. 3 Clemens. 4 Euaristus. 5 Alexander. 6 Xistus. 7
Telesphorus. 8 Higinus. 9 Pius. 10 Anicetus. 11 Soter. And 11 Eleutharius.
I will set down in order the names of other godly bishops, as of Jerusalem
and other places, where God has been glorified by his Martyrs, because they
shall go together: for after the 15. bishops which were in Jerusalem, before the
destruction Godly bishops in Jerusalem after Vespatians time.
thereof by Vespasian, others followed good and godly, which stood to the Church
of Christ most constantly and boldly: their names are thus named of the
Gentiles.

1 Marcus. 2 Cassianus. 3 Publius. 4 Maximus. 5 Iulianus. 6 Gaianus. 7
Symachus. 8 Dolychianus. 9. Caius And Iulianus the 10. the 2. of that name. 11.
12. Capito and Valeus. 13 Narcissus.
After the destruction of Jerusalem, in Alexandria in the ninth year of
Comodus the Emperor, was Iulianus bishop of Alexandria after Agrippinus, at
what time Pautenus read the Divinity lecture to the Christians, a great
scholar and a Philosopher of the sect of the Stoikes, a man full of godly
zeal, that travailed from Alexandria to Judea, to preach and to teach Christ.
Likewise in Antioche Cornelius the fourth bishop, During the time of Comodus
the Emperor many godly bishops flourished.
Heroes the fifth, with the successors of them, flourished this time. And in the
tenth year of Antonius Comodus the Emperor, many learned, grave, and godly men
flourished in this blasphemous time, among so many wicked and lewd heretics,
that lived now in the world, as Theophilus bishop of Caesarea, some say of
Antiochia, Banchillus, and Policrates, the one bishop in Corinth, the other in
Ephesus, Demetrius of Alexandria, and Serapion of Antiochia, the eight bishop.

After the Apostles there was no part of Asia empty from godly men, of whom
particularly to speak, how they lived, Eusebius. 5. cap. 19.
and bow they died, I may not, for that their number is infinite, and noting
only the chief bishops and learned men, and few Martyrs in respect of the
whole, I will but briefly touch them. In this Emperors time the Church had
some quietness, and in respect of much persecution before, they were called
Halcyonia sub Comodo Ecclesiae, (and yet Comodus a wicked Emperor as ever
lived) at what time they received the faith: for even then Appolonius a
Philosopher, a Senator Apol. the Philosopher martyred.
of Rome, a man of singular learning and zeal, who before Perenius the Judge,
in the Senate before all the Senators of Rome, maintained his apology of
Christianity, and read his writing before them, and confirmed the same with
his death: for he was at that time by decree of the Senate beheaded in Rome.

About this time Smirna a town of Asia, fell by an earthquake, and the temple
of Serapis in Alexandria was burned. By this time reigned in Rome 13. bishops,
after the time of the Apostles: in Alexandria ten bishops, in Antiochia eight
bishops, besides many bishops of Corinth, of Creete, of Ephesus, of Caesarea in
Palestina many of these bishops. And specially of Jerusalem, are not found in
Eusebius distinctly.

Hitherto the Roman bishops stood constant and stout in the faith, with all
humility and zeal: after this time, by degrees The bishops of Rome in the
beginning good constant Martyrs.
they waxed worse and worse, until they became worst of all.

CHAP. III.
Of the tyranny of the time from the sixth persecution under Seuerus, unto the
ninth persecution under Dioclesian the Emperor: of the zeal and constancy of
the godly in their Martyrdom: and of the tyranny and wickedness of the kings
of Persia, and of the Emperors of Rome, at that time in the persecution of the
Church.

I Will pass to the Martyrs of the Church in all countries, which now again
begins, what in Alexandria and in Egypt, in the time of Septimius Seuerus
the Leonides the father of Origin beheaded.
Emperor. At what time Leonides the father of Origene was beheaded for the
profession of his faith, leaving his son a young man behind him, who
vehemently Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 1. Eccl.
persuaded his father to stand constantly to Christ: and after being grown to
some years, taught in Alexandria Christians that came unto him, as Olutarchus,
who to prove his zeal, and to show himself a Christian, became willingly a
Martyr of Jesus Christ.

Also his brother named Heraclas, who being instructed by Origene, came in time
to be a bishop of Alexandria: so many zealous men flocked to this vertous and
good man, that he gave up his other profane study, as Grammar, and
Rhetoric, which Demetrius then bishop of Alexandria committed to his charge,
and taught Christ to the brethren and Christians that came from ^uery part unto
him, in so much that diverse of his scholars proved themselves constant Martyrs:
as these, Serenus, Heraclides, Heron, Serenus (an other from the first) and
Rhais a woman: Diverse Martyrs in the time of Origin.
these were crowned as victorious Martyrs. After whom followed Potamaena, a very
fair and virtuous virgin, who together with her mother Marcella, offered
themselves to the like torments for Christ Jesus: but being pitied of many,
that so fair and a beautiful virgin should die, she little regarded her
beauty but said, Gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus, and so was with
her mother Marcella burned: whose constant A good verse for a fair woman.
zeal moved many in Alexandria to profess the Christian faith, as Basilides
a soldier, and even he who brought Potamiaena to the stake, was within four
days after put in prison, and there baptized, and after beheaded as a Martyr.

Diverse beside, by the instructions of Origin, became faithful Martyrs in
Alexandria and in other places: for during the reign of Septimius the
Emperor, great persecution fell every where: in whose time this Origin
flourished amongst the Martyrs of the Church, a man singularly well learned,
most zealous, and most godly in all his life, even from his childehood: whose
fame grew such, that Mammea Alexander Seuerus his mother came to Antioch for
to see Origin, and was in the tenth year of Alexander Seuerus made priest at
Caesarea in Palestina. Tertulian was in the time of Origin.
Tertulian was in the time of Origin, in the first year of Antoninus surnamed
Caracalla, where he came to Alexandria: he commanded that all the young men
should be called before him: and being together in one place, he gave a sign
or a watch word to his soldiers to kill them, as both Herodianus and Functius
do affirm.

In the time of Origin, Asclepiades was the ninth Bishop of Antiochia, Calixtus
the fifteenth and Vrbanus the sixteenth Bishops of Rome, Philetus in Alexandria
the tenth Bishop. At this time, Nicopolis a town in Palestina was builded,
being before called Emmaus. In the time of Maximinius the Emperor, Origin made
a book of Martyrs: for during the whole reign of Nicopolis before was called
Emaus.
this cruel emperor, continued a vehement persecution of the Church: Origin
confuted many Philosophers, and converted many heretics, disputed and wrote in
the face of the adversaries, insomuch that he reduced Berillus Bishop of
Bosterna in Arabia, after sharp and severe disputation in the doctrine of the
true Church, from his error concerning the divine nature of Christ: his fame
was such, that Athinedorus and his brother Gregory Nazianzenus, with other,
many became his scholars. Dionysius also Bishop of Alexandria, in the time of
Decius the Emperor, which was a vehement persecutour of the Christians, wrote
this of himself in an epistle to Fabius Bishop of Antiochia, how he by Gods
providence was wonderfully delivered from great dangers, and many of the
brethren with him, and how constant in the faith many at that persecution in
Alexandria continued and stood most boldly unto the last breath: as Metra a
priest being taken, was commanded Metra a priest tortured.
by the Roman Judge to speak some wicked blasphemous words, which he refused,
and therefore he was beaten and bruised with clubs, and after pricked in the
face and in the eyes with sharp needles, and at last haled and drawn through
the town and stoned to death.

Metra Quinta a faithful woman, was likewise taken and brought into the temple
and there commanded to worship their idols, but she lothing their idolatry
refused to obey them: she was therefore bound both her feet together, and
drawn naked through the streets where sharp picked stones were for the
purpose set in the way, and certain torturers, with whips in their hands
scourging her as she was haled. Appollonia a virgin of ardent zeal, refusing
to blaspheme her Appollonia a zealous maid much tormented.
God with idolatry, and with wicked sp^ches after them in their temple, they
brake her chawe bone, and all her teeth they violently knocked out, and brought
her unto the stake where fire was ready kindled for her, and there being
demanded by the magistrates whether she would convert from her God, and from
his religion: she looked on them, and said, When I come from my God unto you
again, I will answer you, and withal leapt into the fire and ended her life
with a glorious death: and to be short, innumerable were they at The infinite
number of Martyrs.
that time in Alexandria, that willingly confessed themselves to be Christians,
and so bent to offer their bodies to any torment for the proof of the same,
that at that very tumult and sedition, the wicked and ungodly fed on the
Christians and devoured them as wolves or lions devour their pray: nay
wolves, lions, bears, and other sauadge wild beasts spared the people of
God, and had no power to touch them: Savage wild beasts spared the people of
God.
for God so stopped their mouths, that tyraunts and cruel murderers might be
warned thereby: and for that it is infinite to prosecute the whole histories of
Martyrs, I pass over them lightly, noting unto you some few for example sake,
as now under Decius the Emperor these many.

1 Metra a Priest. 2. 3. Quinta and Appollonia two virgins, you heard of these.
4 Serapion martyred with all the torments that might be. 5. 6. Iulianus and
Coronion after scourging, and sore whipping, were thrown to Camels, and after
burned to ashes. 7 Marca a blessed Martyr and a stout Christian at that time,
was burned alive. 8 A soldier that stood by and saw the tortuers so cruel,
resisted and stood stoutly to the face of the Magistrates in the profession of
Christ, and was after great tortures beheaded. 9. 10. Epimachus and Alexander
after long imprisonment and diverse torments, were thrown to the fire with 4.
worne^ The multitude of Martyrs.
14 more to accompanny them. 15 Likewise Amonarium a blessed virgin. 16. 17.
Mercuria a sage and godly matrone, and Dionitia a faithful woman, they made
the magistrate amassed and the torturers astonished to behold their constancy in
their torments. 18 Hieron Ater, and Isidorus 3. Egyptians and Dioscorus a boy
of 15. years were most cruelly torn and broken in pieces by tortures, and at
last burned. 22 Menesion an Egyptian full of faith endured most willingly The
zeal of Martyrs in those days.
to be martyred for the Gospel.
These with infinite more does Dionisius a priest write to Fabius bishop of
Antiochia, setting forth his own danger many times, and also sets down
that persecution which continued most cruelly for one year: for the number of
the faithful so increased, their constancy and their faithso amassed the
wicked, that they were both weary and fearful to follow their tyranny, and at
last overthrown by their guilty conscience: but Dyonysius says that diverse
times came in place to see these persecutions certain soldiers, who seeing
the orders and manners of the Christians toward God and his Church, Many
converted unto the faith.
felt them selves much converted and most desirous to confess themselves
Christians. At a great persecution in Alexandria standing before the Roman
Magistrate, when a certain Christian among the rest waxed timorous, and feared
such torments as he saw other suffer he thought to recant, but these
soldiers comforted him with signs, and persuaded him with secret words, and
at length they came openly unto him, councelled and comforted him to die like a
Christian, and at length started in, confessed themselves to the Magistrates to
be Christians, and therefore most willing with the rest to die for Christ Jesus
sake. It made the the Roman judge, and the rest of the Commissioners afraid,
supposing further, that if The Judges were amassed to see such constancy in the
Christians.
they would use this extreme cruelty of persecution, all Alexandria and al
Egypt would become in time Christians, and therefore they rose up from their
seat frighted and amassed of these strange sightes, and the Christians had some
rest. The names of these last soldiers worthy to be engraued Captains on
marble for their victories and conquest over them selves, which is the greatest
conquest of all, I cannot omit: they were four in number.

1 Ammon. Eusebius. 6. cap. 41. and 42.
2 Zenon. 3 Ptolomeus. 4 Ingenus.
And beside these four, an old man named Theophilus, in Theophilus.
the next place he brings in Ischyrion, a faithful Martyr of that time, and
Cheremon, an old Bishop of a City called Nilus, Cheremon.
who fled with his wife and children to the mountains of Arabia, to avoid the
tyra^nie of that time: likewise of Vrbanus, Sidonius, and Selerius, three
Martyrs which suffered all kind of torments, to enjoy the glorious crown of
Martyrs. When this cruel Emperor Decius died, Gallus succeeded him both in
life and in persecution, about what time Origin also died. This time in Rome,
Cornelius was the twentieth Bishop: in Antiochia, Origin dyed.
Demetrianus was the fourteenth Bishop: in Alexandria, this Dionisius that
wrote of this last persecution, the 13. Bishop. In other places other godly and
faithful Bishops reigned, as Theoctistus in Caesarea, Mezabantes in Jerusalem,
Marinus in Tyrus, Heliodorus in Laodicea, in Cappadocia Firmilianus, Helenus in
Tarsus, and so (to be short) in all Syria, Arabia, Pontus, Bythinia, Many godly
and good Bishops.
and Mesopotamia, godly and good Bishops lived under the fear of God. This did
Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria write to Stephanus the 22. Bishop of Rome, of
the peace and the stay of the persecution in all the parts of the East
countries.

To this Bishop Stephen, Ciprian bishop of Carthage wrote concerning those that
were here tikes converted, that by baptism Cyprian bishop of Carthage.
they were first to be received into the Church. During this little quietness
and stay of persecution diverse and sundry sects of heresies began to rise in
many places: as Heresis Nouatiana, and Sabellaena, with others. Cyprianus
bishop of Carthage, a singular devout man, and a Martyr of the Church, was of
the Carthagineans and the Affricanes honored as a god, to who^ they erected a
temple in memory of him, and celebrated a solemn feast, calling often on the
name of Cypria^, which temple the Vandales in the time of their king Tuorichus
destroyed. Thus much Euagrius in his histories of the Church wrote of Cyprian,
who also dyed a most constant Martyr of Christ Jesus.

I omit with Dionysius to name the Martyrs which dyed under Valerianus the
emperor, because they were so many, The 8. persecution under Valerianus.
men, women, children, old men, young men, old women, virgins, soldiers, and
all kind of people, who became most willing Martyrs, and suffered diverse
torments for religion sake. Amongst whom Lucius Maximus Demetrius, Faustinus,
and Aquila suffered in Egypt: also Eusebius was then Deacon, Martyrs increase
in every country.
and after made Bishop of Laodicea in Syria, and Faustus who succeeded
Eusebius, Cheremon, Caius, and diverse other, who from place to place, to avoid
that terrible persecution which reigned under the Emperor Valerianus, wandered
many Countries, deserts, and mountains. And as for the Martyrs of Caesarea,
specially there were three, which willingly came from their houses in the
Country to Caesarea, being ashamed and sorry to have seen so many good and
godly Christians contending for the same noble crown of Martyrs, The crown of
Martyrs is eternity.
that they were so long negligent and careless of so glorious reward, and
therefore Priscus Malchus, and Alexander claimed before the Judge the reward
of Christians, and straight they were delivered to be devoured of beasts, from
whom these three stout Christians shrinked not.

I will not omit the history of Marinus a knight of Caesarea, who when he
obtained that honor by just deserts, which was among the Romans a reward
for victory, and The history of Marinus a Roman knight
thereby to be called Centurio, a certain Sycophant accused this knight to
the Magistrate, saying that it was not lawful by the ancient laws, that
Marinus should have that Roman dignity, for that he was a Christian: who
being demanded, most boldly confessed himself to be a Christian: and yet
having three hours to deliberate of this cause, Marinus went to consult with
Theotecnus bishop then of Caesarea, by whom he was in this instructed: he
brought him into the Temple, and offered before him a naked sword, and the The
new Testament, and the naked sword.
new Testament of Christ Jesus: Choose, said the bishop, which thou will:
whereby he was admonished to stand to his faith most stoutly, and dyed for the
same.

This time again another sedicion began in Alexandria: for sooner the great
Ocean could be emptied from water, then Alexandria purged from sedicion. Of
this sedicion, Dionysius wrote to Hierax bishop of Egypt, and also a terrible
sickness Alexandria a very seditious town.
that then reigned in Alexandria for the reward of their persecution, which so
long and so vehement endured, which was war, hunger, and pestilence, that
they were so plagued in Alexandria for their cruelty against the Church of
Christ, as Egypt was for their tyranny showed to the Israelites. These and
many other things wrote Dionysius into Egypt, into Affrike, and to al Asia, to
instruct the brethren of the tumults, sedicion, and persecution in Alexandria,
and after of the Dionysius.
wars, hunger, and plague that ensued the same.

Now a Synod was called at Rome to consult of the heresy of Paulus
Samosatenus, who denied the Divinity and Eternity A Synod at Rome.
of our Savior Christ: for at that time Paulus Samosatenus succeeded
Demetrianus in Antiochia, and for that he thought so impiously of Christ,
affirming in all points that he was but a man, a Synod also was called at
Antiochia, where diverse learned bishops, and other godly preachers came
together: amongst whom, Firmilianis bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, Gregorius
Nazianzenus and his brother Athenodorus which were bishops in Pontus, Helenus
bishop of Tarsus, Hymeneus Samosatenus confuted.
bishop of Jerusalem, and Theolecnus with Maximus, the one bishop of Caesarea
in Palestina, the other bishop of Bosteana in Arabia, with many more which for
brevity sake I omit, where Samosatenus was confuted by Malchion a reader of
the Greek lecture in Antiochia, a subtle schooleman and a perfect Persecution
slacketh, heresy reigned.
good Christian, so that at length Samosatenus was condemned as a heretic, and
driven out of his bishoprike by the commandment of Aurelianus the Emperor.

This time began one other heretic called Manes to sow the seed of Satan: of
whom sprang those heretics called the Manichees: and as persecution seized
some time, so heresy at that very time began to increase. Now reigned this
time these bishops in Rome, Alexandria, Antiochia, and in other places.

1 First in Rome after Stephanus reigned Xistus 23. Bishop of 2 Rome, after him
Dionysius the 24 Bishop, after Dionysius 3. 4. Felix the 25. then Eutichianus
the 26. Bishop, and Eusebius. cap. 27.
5 Gaius the 27. Bishop. In Alexandria after that godly Dionysius of whom you
6 heard of, succeeded Maximus, after Maximus succeeded 7 Theonas. After
Demetrianus in Antioch fourteen Bishops. This Paulus Samosatenus being as an
Heretic condemned, succeeded him Domnus Demetrianns son. After him succeeded
Timaeus. After Timaeus, succeeded that great and famous scholar, Cyrillus. In
Laodicea Eusebius a learned man was Bishop, and many other Bishops in other
places, as Hymeneus and Labdas, two Bishops of Jerusalem.
CHAP. IIII.
From Dioclesian under whom the vehementest persecutions of any reigned, until
the reign of Alexand. Seuerus: by whose good means and great trauatle
persecution somewhat slackt, at what time diverse Heresies began fresh in many
places of Asia and Europe.

Now Dioclesianas the Emperor begins to reign in Rome, under whom the
greatest perseucution of all fell: for the like against the Christians was at
no time seen: for some rest they had in all places by means of learned men's
Epistles to other emperors before this: but now were Churches thrown down,
sacred books burned, and godly learned Bishops persecuted in such sort, that I
wish them that desire to know the misery and aflictions of Christians of that
time, to read Eusebius his eight book of his Ecclesiastical histories, and
there Eusebius. 8. book
he shall read how that in Palestina and in Phoenicia, Christians were
thrown most cruelly to be devoured of beasts, (...) The tyranny under
Dicclesi^ over the martyrs of God.
which beasts though they were such as were called (...), yet had no power to
touch them, though they were lions, bears, wild bulls, and such others,
which made the people amassed: which thing being certified unto the Roman
magistrate Viturius, he commanded them to be slain with the sword, and their
bodies to be thrown into the sea.

The like persecution fell in Egypt, where an infinite number were haled and
drawn by the head and by the feet, some Persecution in Egypt.
having their bones broken, some their sinowes stretched, some hanged alive to
famine by their legs upward, some tortured sundry ways in the fire, with
diverse other inventions of torments, that some days ten, some days twenty,
some thirty, and some days a hundred were persecuted most tyrannically, which
continued not for days but for years: for it was lawful for any other man to
abuse, to punish, and to compel Christians to Idolatry, and to obey their
religion. The persecution was so sore in his time, that 1700. were martyred
1700. Martyrs in 30. days.
and slain in thirty days, and they were the best and chiefest men in
Palestina, Phoenicia, and Egypt: so was Philoromus a governor and a magistrate
in Alexandria Phileas Bishop of Egypt, and these whose names among thousands I
picked out, for that they are great men and magistrates and governors.

1 Authimus Bishop of Nicomedia. 2 Lucianus Bishop of Tyrus. 3 Senobius one of
the elders of Sidon. 4 Syluanus Bishop of Emisa, who in the very town where he
was Bishop, with diverse other Martyrs with him, were made A most vehement
persecution.
as baits and prays for ravening beasts. 5 Another Syluanus, who was
martyred with 39. other Martyrs of Palestina: this Syluanus was Bishop of Gaza.
6. 7. Pelus and Nilus two Bishops of Egypt, with many more, were martyred with
diverse torments, and at last burned. Pamphilus an Elder, the very ornament of
Caesarea died, a most constant Martyr.
Out of Alexandria were martyred most cruelly for their profession and faith,
many grave learned Bishops and Elders The blood of godly Martyrs are precious
in the Church of God.
of the Church of Christ: as

Petrus then Bishop of Alexandria, with whom dyed Faustus, Dicius and
Ammonius, three of the most learned and virtuous Elders of that Church. After
these Phileas, Hesicheus, Pachimius, and Theodorus: 4. godly Bishops over the
Churches of Egypt, perfect Martyrs of Christ Jesus and of his Church.
What should I rehearse millions more, that constantly professed Christ,
refused no death, no torments for his sake? such was the mercy of God toward
his Church, that the more that tyraunts persecuted Christians to death, the
more the number multiplied, their faith increased, and the Church flourished,
insomuch that a noble man of Nicomedia A rare example in Micomedia.
perceiving the tyranny and the affliction of the Christians, and the vehement
persecution, that now endured in the time of Dioclesian, being a Magistrate,
in the very face of the Romans brake in pieces the Emperors letters, and
Eusebius. cap. 6.
his decree concerning further punishment of the godly, though in Nicomedia
then were two Emperors, yet this noble man feared not for JESUS sake and his
saints, not only to break the commandment of Caesar his lord and Emperor,
but also most boldly stood to it to the death.

Besides, diverse others at that time in Nicomedia, suffered most willingly to
be martyred: yea some from the Emperors Court, of his family, as Dor theus,
Gorgonius, and other Courtiers Christians.
Courtiers: yea, they of the Emperors chamber, his own cousins, being some
but very young, of great honor and great favor, love, and liking with the
Emperor, made more choice of this service and cruel death, then of that
Courtly Courtiers Martyred.
and gallant life: among whom I find one named Petrus, a young lusty prince,
who refused to bow to Idols, or to do any sacrifice unto them: he was
commanded to be lifted up naked, and there to be whipped and scourged, until
he would willingly sacrifice to Idols ^hee stood stout and constant, until
by beating unto the very bones his fiesh from his body fell by pieces, and then
they took salt and vinegar mingled together, and powered it in purulentis
corporis partibus (as the history says) and yet he yielded not: then the
brought him to the fire, where they pinche^ The tyranny of persecut. o^.
him with hot irons, and pricked him with sharp bodkins: and perceiving that
he would not recant, he was commanded to be burned.

In this Dioclesians time, all prisons were full of Christians, and all Towns
and Cities full of persecutions. In Arabia, All prisons in Towns and Cities
full of Christians.
multitudes of Martyrs were tormented with sundry inventions, as breaking of
their legs, pulling out their eyes, cutting of their nostrels and their
lips, knocking out their teeth, and such unchristian like torments. In
Antiochia, with burning coals they tortured the Martyrs of Christ Jesus. In
Pontus, Perillus scholars invent tortures to destroy Christians.
the Martyrs were thus tortured, with sharp, long, and strong needles,
thrusting them up under the nails of their fingers, and under the nails of
their toes. To be short, in some places their right eye was put out, and the
left knee was cut off: in some other places, in boiling lead they were by
little and little tormented: and in other places with In Dioclesians time hell
was opened to let the furies out.
all tortures in their privy members, most terrible to be spoken, punished,
and martyred. In all places all kind of torments were most cruelly used
against the Saints and people of God. When Dioclesianus had reigned twenty
years, and had fomed like a bloody bore against the Church, he dyed: in whose
time the Christians multiplied by his tyranny more, then reason or sense can
allege.

After him succeeded Maxentius an Emperor, who though he dissembled for a while
to get the Romans good will, yet he shortly proved a tyrant, and so
hateful to good men, that between Maximinus in the East countries with his
hypocrisy Maximinus.
and superstition, and Maxentius in Rome with his filthiness and tyranny, the
Church again and the members thereof were most miserably afflicted in such
sort, that neither Mazentius in Rome, nor Maximinus abroad could neither
stop nor stay the multitude, that daily came into Gods Tenth persecution.
Church, neither their murdering and killing in every country could fear
them any thing at all.

Maximinus, one of the greatest persecutors, saving Dioclesian, who in thirty
days slew and martyred 1700. Christians, 1700. Christians Martyred.
by some divine justice of God fell grievously sick at Tarsus: where
despairing of his life, and feeling his conscience accusing him for the great
slaughter he used against the Christians, he caused by an edict, persecution to
stay, and to loose prisoners out of prison, and to set captive Christians at
liberty: but this continued not but while the emperor was sick and liketo
die* for Maximinus sick.
when he recovered his health, he waxed more cruel the^ before, sparing neither
man, woman, nor child, using all kind of The tyranny of this time might well
be compared to the rage of Pharao over the Israelites
torments on the Bishops and learned men in all Countries, so that his tyranny
over the Christians might be well compared to the rage and fury of Pharao
over the Israelites.

But he was cut offro^ this murdering and slaughter of the Christians by
Licinius the Emperor, who then had married Constantia sister to Constantine the
great: for at this time four emperors were at once governors of Rome: and so a
little before, Maxentius the other persecutour was discomfited and vanquished by
Constantine the great at Miluius bridge.

Thus far fomed tyraunts in Christian blood, and the Church was sore
afflicted every where, where the Roman Emperors governed. And thus far does
Eusebius his ten The great clemency of Constantine the great toward the
Christians.
books handle and set forth of those kingdoms and Countries, where this
persecution and affliction of the Church remained, even from the Apostles time
until Constantine the great. This Constantine was a godly Emperor, who
defended the Christians and the Church of Christ, that in stead of
persecution, brought liberty to the Church, and in stead of war, peace: for
after that Constantine the great had vanquished Licinius, and had gotten the
Empire into his own hand, he established first religion, and caused a Synod of
Bishops at Rome to determine, and to agree concerning the agreement in
religion: he wrote to Miltiades Bishop of Rome, he sent to Affrike to his
lieutenant Anilinus, that Cecilianus Bishop of Constable. caused a Synod at Rome.
Carthage, with the other ten Bishops that accused him, should be sent to
Rome, and there further to examine the faults and errors of Cecilianus, and to
avoid that controversy between these bishops, that then in diverse places
lived. He wrote, that bishops out of France, and out of Affrike, should
again come together to reason in causes of the Church, and to moderate the
same: for during the time that Licinius his Colleague in the Empire reigned,
specially in the end, Licinius Licinius persecuted the Christians.
began to hate Constantine, and to persecute the Church, waxed cruel against
good bishops, and persecuted them most vehemently, and threw their Churches
down, and slew and murdered the people most miserably: for then Licinius
commenced not only war against Constantinus, but also against God and his
Church. He caused Basilius Bishop Licinius tyra^nie against the Christians.
of Amasia in Pontus to be slain with the sword, and a hundred other. His
fury continued not long, and therefore God raised up this good Emperor, to
revenge his people, not only now upon Licinius, but also upon Maxentius and
Maximinus, two great persecutours of the Christians.

After this (as you heard) Constantinus studied how he might benefit the
Church, establish religion, and aid the afflicted members that long suffered
sharp persecution, and were now scattered into wildernesses, into mountains,
and into such places where they might hide themselves from the sword and from
the fire. This time flourished Egypt with sundry learned and godly Philosophers.
Also in Mesopotamia Rufinus lib. 2. cap. 8.
the like godly men lived, some in wildernesses and in mountains, as these
whose names I lay down, as I found them in Rufinus.

1 Marcereus and another of that name lived in the wilderness. 2 Isidorus in a
place called Scithi. 3 Pembus in the desert of Egypt. Moses and Benjamin in a
place called Nitria. 4. 5. 6. Scyron, and Helias, and Paulus, lived and hid
themselves in Apeliote. 7. 8. Poemen and Joseph in Pispirihill, these with many
others that lived in diverse parts of Egypt true and sound Christians.
Now when Constantine the great had by his greatness Constantine the great
compared to Cyrus and to Alex.
enlarged the Empire of Rome far more then any of his predecessors, in so
much that he was compared unto Cyrus king of Persia for his valor, unto
Alexander the great for his victories and conquests, who visited in like manner
as Alexander did, India, Aethiopia, Scythia, and other far kingdoms from
Rome: and having stayed persecution in most places, he comforted the
Christians, so that the Gospel began to flourish among the Barbarous people in
Armenta and in Persia. He reedified great and chief Cities, as Nicomedia in
Bythinia, and also Bizantium in Thracia, and made it equal to Rome in all
points, and named it after his ownename, Constantinople: Sozomenus 2. cap. 2.
for there was nothing in Rome, but this Emperor builded the like in
Constantinople, in so much that it was called new Rome, the only City of
fame and renow me in all the East countries.

To this Town many of the best learned men both Greeks and Jews have come
and dwelt there: here now religion flourished, Christians rejoiced, and all
learned men of the world frequented. Again, Constantine caused a temple to be
made by the oak of Mambre: this is now Terebinthus, a place The Oak of Mambre.
from Hebron distant fifteen furlongs, and from Jerusalem 250. furlongs. To
this place the Phoenicians and the Arabians were wont once every year to come,
to traffic and to merchandise with the Jews: they kept a solemn feast in
memory of Abraham the Patriarch, and offered in sacrifice after the law of
Moses either an ox or a goat, or else a sheep or a Cock. Every nation
honored this place: the Jews in memory of Abraham, the Gentiles in memory
of the Angels Herma. Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 3.
that there appeared unto Abraham: the Christians in memory of CHRIST JESUS
the Son of GOD being there then the third Angel seen of Abraham before he
took flesh of the Virgin Marie, well nigh two thousand years. This place
also Constantine adorned and beautified with many monuments.

It were long to rehearse the goodness of this Emperor, and to repeat his
care and doings in all parts of the world for the Church: he caused a Synod
at this time to beehad at Nice in Bythinia, where were gathered together three
hundred and eighteen Bishops: in the which, the heresy of Arrius was
condemned. At what time Athanasius was appointed Bishop of Alexandria, to
succeed Alexander, who deposed Arrius.

The Arrians persecuted this Athanasius, so that he was forced to flee for
succor to the Emperor Constantine. Athanasius by the Arrians persecuted.
This time succeeded in Antioch after Tiranus the nineteenth bishop, Vitalis
the twentieth: after him, Philogonus the twenty one: after him, Paulinus:
after him Eustachius, whose place (after he was banished for the Gospel) the
Arrians occupied.

In Rome Marcus the second of that name was Bishop, after whom succeeded
Julius the third. In his days the Armenians The Armenians and the Indians
became Christians.
and the Indians received Christianity: yet in Persia under king Sapores, the
Christians were sore persecuted: the Magi of Persia persuaded Sapores the king
to punish Simeon the Archbishop of Seleucia, for that he was a friend to the
Romans. By this means, great persecution began in Persia, against the
Archbishop Simeon and Vstazanes an old man and likewise the kings tutour, for
The Sun worshipped in Persia.
that they would worship not the sun after the manner of the Persians.

Likewise Pusices a noble man of the Court of Sapor, Pusices.
with his daughter a fair virgin did suffer torments for the truth. Anania
and Azadis the Kings eunuchs, and Tarbula the sister of Simeon in like sort
suffered violent death, and on that very day the Jews by the commandment of
Magi, being by the king licenced, brought an hundred Christians, some of them
were Bishops, some Elders, and some of other orders of the Church, which for
that they would not worship the sun wereslaine with the sword.

It is written in Eusebius in the Ecclesiastical histories, of Her. Zozamenis,
that two hundred and fifty Bishops were put to the sword by commandment of
Sapores Zozam. lib. 2. cap. 12. 250. Bishops executed by Sapores, who reigned
70. years.
the king, for their constancy and faith in CHRIST JESUS: whose names, though
not all, yet some as I found in the history, I set down: which are these.

1 Barbasymes. 2 Paulus. 3 Gaddiabes. These were al martyred in Persia under
king Sapores.
4 Sabinus. 5 Mareas. 6 Mocius. 7 Manfriandes. 8 Hormisdas. 9 Papas. 10
Iacobus. 11 Romas. 12 Maares. 13 Agas. 14 Bochres. 15 Abdas. 16 Abdiesus. 17
Dausas. 18 Abranims. 19 Agdelas. 20 Sabores. 21 Issaac and 22 Dausas.
These were taken captive and brought before the Magistrates, and for not
worshipping the Sun according to the The Emperor Constan. wrote to Sapores
king of Persia in favor of the Christians.
Persians manners, the king commanded, that they should be put to the sword.

To this king Sapores, Constantinus the Emperor wrote in favor of the
Christians, which Epistle is extant in Eusebius in the life of Constantine.

Thus much I thought good to set down among other wickednesses and tyrannies
that reigned among the Roman Emperors. He that will see more of persecution
and heresies, let him read Eusebius, Nicephorus, and others, and he shall
satisfy himself therein. I thought it fit to annexe thus much of
persecution to the Roman Emperors and to Popes, as to the authors of all
persecutions in all Countries.

OF THE ANTIQVITIE OF Spain, and of the original of their kings, and of their
contiuuance from Tubal unto Hispanus. During which time they were called by
diverse several names, as Caetubales, Hiberi, Celtiberi, and Hesperij, of which
I shall briefly speak in their places.
I Have almost placed and followed all Iaphets sons, and now I come to
Hispaine, where Tubal took possession, which name is interpreted to be
Hispaine by Josephus. I will be as Melanct. lib. 1.
short as I can, for that I would feign come to England, and yet France is upon
my way, where I must of necessity stay a little to speak of them very briefly.

Spain was divided in old time but into 3. Provinces: into Lusitania, which
is now called Portingale: into Tarraconenses where the two Scipios builded a
city, and named it Tarracon, after the name of the Province: and into Baetica,
which is so Baetica now called Andolosia.
called by the river Baetis. This Province is now named Andolasia, or Granado.
The Romans at what time they were lords of Spain, made no other division but
high and low Hispaine, by The Romans made but two Provinces of Hispaine.
the name of superior and inferior Hispania. After, it was divided into six
Provinces in this sort named, as follows.

1 The first Province called Terracon. 2 Called the Province of Carthage. 3
Lusitania, which is Portingale. 4 Gallacia. 5 Baetica, which is Andolisia or
Granado. 6 Called Tingitana, a Province being within Africa.
Of these 6. Provinces 2. of them are called Consulares prouinciae, which is
Betica and Lusitania: the other 4. called Presidiales.

Spain is cut from France Eastward by the mountain Pyrenaeus, which does
extend it self from the South unto the North along between France and Spain.
On the West Spain has the ocean sea: and on the South the middle land sea.
This country is very barren in some places, specially from Hercules pillars to
the mountain Pyrenaeus: in other places, it abounds in all kind of good
things, for wines, olives, iron, mines, silver and gold. The length of Spain
from the West into the Read of Hispaine, Strabo lib. 2. and 3.
East is 6000. furlongs: the breadth of Spain is almost 5000. in some place
scant three. Of the description of Spain, of the abundance and plenty of
things, of their cities, towns, rivers, mines, lakes, mountains, and mounts,
read Strabo, Pomponius Mela, and Iu. Solynus.

Of the antiquity of these people, and of their first arrival Pomp. Mela lib.
2. cap. 6.
into Spain, I find some controversy, and in many things apparent errors.
Both Plutarch and Liui affirm, that in antiquities Liui lib. 2.
men may most easily err, specially in these first actions of time, when
kingdoms first began. Therefore I begin from the Center and ground of all
true and perfect Chronicles, the 10. of Genesis, where we read of the increase
of mankind after the flood, and of the beginning of countries and cities: and
here all countries were divided one from another in language and in kindred. And
had not Moses set down the names of the first princes and their children, and
the countries All writers are to hold by Moses.
and kingdoms by them first inhabited, we had been as blind men, not able to
judge of colors, or as they that never saw the Sun, not knowing light from
darkness: and they that wander with profane writers from Moses and from the
prophetical histories, shall be in no better case: for of necessity we must be
forced to confer with divine histories for the certainty of truth in many
things in the beginnings of kingdoms and Controversy.
countries: for otherwise men do err most grossly following their own
fancies, one reprehending another more to increase controversies, then to find
out the truth: as Appion accuses Herodot for his mere fables in the history
of Egypt, and Josephus reprehendeth Appion for his great lies in the history of
the Jews. And here Berosus, who sets down the first beginning of Spain
and of Chaldea and Syria, is of many cried out Contentions among Historians.
upon, as a fained and lying Berosus, yet many allege him and follow him of
the best writers, as Functius, Ruffinus, and others.

Berosus says, the Spaniards took their beginning from the Caspians, a people
in Scythia, as the Persians the Phoenices people in Syria, Celtes people now of
France, and the Mores, and that is probable: for after the flood, the arc of
Noah resting in Armenia From whence came the people after the flood to seek
dwellings.
not far from Scythia, after 150. years, people being then multiplied, came
from thence to seek countries and to inhabit every coast of the world. Chus
the father of Nimrod went to Aethiope: Mizraim the son of Chus went to Egypt,
possessed about the river Nilus: Gomerus the eldest son of Iaphet into that
country afterward called Italy: and Tubal the fifth son of Iaphet came into
that country which is now called Spain.

Because I wrote of this in the beginning of every kingdom, I need not much to
speak of them: and therefore I will leave the sons of Sem and the sons of
Cham in their first possession, and I will follow Iaphets sons, which came here
to Europe, The time of Tubals coming to Hispaine.
of whom I have spoken, saving of Tubal, who came into Spain in the year after
the flood 143. within 12. years after Nimrod began his kingdom in Chaldea,
within two years after his eldest brother Gomerus came into Italy, and 3.
years before Mizraim (which is called Oceanus) went to Egypt, as Functius
sets it down in his tables.

This Tubal began to build and to inhabit first in Celtiberia, Celtiberia
called now Byska^.
a country in Spain which is now called Byskay: he made a town, and named
it after his own name Tubal, in that Province of Spain which is called
Baetica, and kept many sheep The simplicity of the first kings, not only of
Hispaine, but every where.
and cattle, for that they are most necessary for man to live by, both for
clothing of the body, and for feeding of the belly: for in the first beginning
of time, men were not so ambitious as to aspire great things. When Tubal was
settled in his own town, he made laws for his people to live by, and taught
the Berosus in Nino.
Celtiberians and the people named Samotes. To Tubal came one Samotes surnamed
Disteltas, a most wise man, yet not known, but supposed to be Tubals brother
one of Iaphets sons: yet Moses makes no mention of him. Of the coming of
Ianus, (which Berosus and other affirm to be Iauan) from Phaenicia to Africa,
and from Africa to Celtiberia to his sons son, and Annius de reg.
Hispaniae.
with the people which he brought with him to dwell in Celtiberia, I refer you
to Berosus and to Annius.

Thus Tubal being 155. years old died, five years before Abraham was borne,
which was in the 43. year of Ninus. The people were called Caetubales after
Tubals name, until Iberus Tubal died.
time the 2. king of Celtiberia, after whose name both the country and the
people changed, as Functius says: other say, they were called Iberi of the
river Iberus: but Berosus (who^ Functius in all this history does follow) says
of Iberus the king the river also was so named, and the people that dwelt about
the river were called Iberi. So likewise of Celtiberia, some writers affirm
that it was so named, because it is next to those people of Conjectures in old
antiquities allowed.
France called Celtes, and therefore called Celtiberia: and surely the best
conjectures in things unknown are best to be allowed. This Iberus reigned 37.
years, and died in the 37. year of Semiramis Queen of Babylon.

During the life of Tubal, Samotes had a son called Magus: he reigned then
over the people Celtes, where he builded Berosus.
many towns, and governed the people with care and great diligence. Also in
the 22 year of Semiramis, Sabatius Saga after that he came to Italy to old
father Ianus, and had taught the Sabatius Saga.
countrymen tillage and other kind of husbandry, he sent Sabus to that
people which were called Sabines after, and continued by that name until they
were subdued by the Romans. In the time of this king Iberus, Isis was borne in
Egypt, the wife of Osiris, of whom the Egyptians did glory much: for they
found in a pillar of brass this sentence written of Isis as The monument of
Isis ^n Egypt.
an Epitaph over her grave, I am Isis Queen of Egypt, wife of great Osiris,
and mother to great king Orus, taught of Mercurius to give laws to my people
which none shall infringe, to invent the use of sowing of corn. I have builded
the famous city Bubastia. Rejoice Egypt, that has brought up such a Queen. I
have lived with you your Queen, and now being dead I am placed among the
glittering stars by the name of the star Canis. This monument was of the
Egyptians much honored.

Now followed in Celtiberia Iubalda the son of Iberus, and the 3. king of
Celtiberia: he began his reign in the year 1993. after the creation of the
world: he dwelt hard by the mountain Iubalda, which he named after his own
name. This is Manethon de reg Hispan^e.
since called of the Mauritaines, Ibiralta and of others corruptly: he reigned
66. years, of whom nothing is to be written, but that he at that time
increased by little and little his territories, not by the sword (for few people
knew then contention, for they had more countries then they had men to
inhabit) but with people, for no war was yet known any where but with the
Assyrians, who first used to trespass upon other nations about them, even from
Nimrads time.

In Iubaldas time, Hercules Libyus flourished, before the Hercules of the
Greeks welnigh 700. years. In this Iubaldas time died Noah the righteous
preacher, whom profane writers call Bifrons Noah died in Iubaldas time.
Ianus, and so is in every country painted and set forth in histories. This
Noah, forsaw the great misery and calamity of Gods justice for sin in the
first age, and the general plague that followed the destruction of the whole
world with a flood, and after he saw himself despised of his wicked son
Cham, and contemned of his posterities in the second age at the building of the
tower of Babylon, where he saw the pride, disobedience, The town of Babylon.
and impiety of his own people that came out of his own body, who to seek
immortality upon earth, sought to avoid God and his power, and to seek to
skale (through too much folly) the skies: but they were confounded, and their
devises Noth died after he had seen in the world more misery then any man:
for that he saw before the flood and after, the idolatry of the people.
brought to nothing. No doubt he saw more misery come to man, and more
wickedness committed by man against God, then any man ever could see. He died
350. years after the flood.

In Assyria reigned Zamisnenias, which in Genesis is called Amraphael, the fifth
king of Assyria. Abraham was called from Vr in Chaldea to the land of
Palestina, and after three years driven to Egypt, for that the famine was so
great in the land of Canaan. This time governed in Egypt Osiris, which was that
Pharao that Genesis 12.
took Sara Abraham's wife away, but was warned in his sleep not to touch her,
and commanded by God to restore her to her Pentapolis five cities destroyed.
husband again. During the time of this king Iubalda, Sodom, Gomorrha, Zeboim,
Adama, and Segor, five noble cities of Canaan were destroyed by fire from
heaven for their abominable wickedness: and there remains in memory of their
filthy vicious lives, in the place of these five cities, a stinking horrible
Stagnum Asphaltidis.
great lake, called Stagnum Asphaltidis.

The 4. king that succeeded Iubalda in Celtiberia, was named Brigus: he began
to reign in the 4. year of Arius the 6. king Brigus the 4. king.
of Assyria, at what time Hyarbas Priscus began to govern in Libya, a stout
and a fierce king in arms, and therefore the Numidians would be called after
him Hyarbae, for stout and warlike The Numidians would be called Hyarbae.
people. This Brigus builded many strong castles in Celtiberia: in that
province of Lusitania he builded 2. great castles, and called them after his
own name, Laccobryga: and Mirobriga and he builded also Brygantum in the
province of Taracon.

This time governed the Celtes an expert skilful man, a man in those days of
most honor for his wisdom and judgment in all things, named Drius, after
whose death the priests of the Drius.
Celtes were named Druydes, of whom mention is made in Caesar Druydes priests
and in Plini. The authority and credit of these priests in their days was
great: they were honored and reverenced of all people: their words were had
in such estimation, as though they had been Oracles given: for at this time it
was rare to see a wise man, or to talk with a learned man: for the Magi of
Chaldea, and the priests were not heard of, no philosophy The simplicity of
the first age after the flood.
spoken of, no Art taught, few schools or none known, in so much that almost
300. years after the flood there reigned no malice, no pride, no ambition, no
war in the most part of the world, and therefore it was called Aureum
seculum, for the Aureum seculum.
simplicity of the people, and of the plenty of al things which was common
among all men: saving in Assyria, where the first Monarchy began, and quarrels
grew, as you shall hear between the Chaldeans and the Assyrians, and after
between the Assyrians and the Egyptians. So that nothing is to be written
Consent of time the touchstone of truth.
of any great exploit done in Celtiberia all this time, neither in any place
else, saving to set down the names of those kings that then reigned, and to
know the agreement of time, which is the touchstone of truth.

In this Brygus time Abraham offered his son Isaac, at what time God blessed
all the nations of the world in the seed of Genesis 22.
Abraham. One Bardus reigned this time in Celta, which was of great authority
with them for his first finding of Music and meeter. In this Brigus time,
Araunus the son of Cranus, which was the son of Ianus, builded a temple in
Vetulonia, and dedicated the same unto Ianus, which they also called Vertumnes:
A temple builded and dedicated to Ianus.
and therein he erected up the image of Ianus: and after he builded a chapel
to the god Razenus in Vetulonia, so that now idolatry began in every country,
and the number of the gods so increased, that superstition had the better hand
of true religion every where, saving in Gods own Church, and those 2.
Patriarchs Abraham and his son, for Sara was now dead.

But I will pass to the fifth king of Celtiberia named Tagus, surnamed Tagus the
fifth king.
Orma: of this king the river Tagus takes her first name. Of this I read
nothing worth the nothing, but as his predecessors he reigned by the name of a
king without resistance: with The old kings of Hispaine are set down by
Manethon, as the kings of Assyria are by Berosus.
whom reigned together in other kingdoms Baleus Xerxes the eight king of
Assyria: this increased the kingdom, and conquered every where until the
Indians, for he was valiant and courageous, and very fortunate in all his
affairs. In the beginning of this Tagus reign, the Argiues kingdom began,
where Inachus reigned their first king. Phaeton came this time to Italy, at
what time many towns and cities were burnt about the river Ister, and about
the Cymerians and Vesunians, and the places burned, to this day are named
Palestina (that is to say) the country burnt, recorded with writers Phaetontis
incendium. Esau and Jacob were borne this time: and a little after, their
grandfather Abraham the patriarch died, 101. years after he was called Abraham
died.
from the Chaldeans, and in 175. year of his age.

After Tagus succeeded Belus the 6. king of Celtiberia: he began to reign in
the 482. year after the flood, and reigned in Belus the sixth king.
Celtiberia 31. years: at what time Eusebius sets down the 17. Dynastia of
the Egyptians, where shepherds governed and bare rule in Egypt, which
government continued 303. years in Egypt. With this Belus began Armatrites to
reign the 9. king of Assyria, a king given to idleness, and to al kind of
pleasures. About this time died Sem the son of Noah, who likewise saw (as his
father did before) much wickedness and abomination: he died Sem lived 600.
years.
35. years after Abraham was dead. Sem lived 600. years.

Pharoneus the 2. king of the Argiues (of whom Plato makes mention in the
beginning of his book,) made laws to the Plato in Tim^o.
Argiues, and was of them greatly honored after his death. In this kings time,
Nilus did ouerflowe all the country of Egypt, and Osiris slew the great giant
called Lycurgus in Thracia. Of this Osiris (whom the Egyptians named Serapis,
to whom they used much divine honor and solemn sacrifice, as to one of their
principal gods) read Herodot more of this god, there you shall find how king
Cambyses, Cyrus son, second king of Persia, gave a blow, and wounded him in
his temple, whereat the Egyptians Herodot. lib. 2. and 3.
were more offended, then for all the cruelty and tyranny which Cambyses did
to them. It made them to revolt from Cambyses, and to be in arms against the
Persians, and to revenge the blow which Cambyses gave to their god Serapis.
Deabus in Deabus found the first mines of gold.
Celtiberia (he is also named Gerio^) used this time great cruelty and
tyranny: he found then one of the first mines of gold, and after, he found
many other mines of gold, silver, and of other metals. This time Mena reigned
in Egypt the first king, who instructed them in many things in Egypt, as to
woorship their gods, to do sacrifice, with diverse other ceremonies, where Mena
is supposed to be Osiris, which Moses calls Mizraim, and whom Berosus calls
Oceanus.
in Egypt excelled all other kingdoms: he taught the^ the use of beds to lie
on, and tables to sit at meat. This Mena is supposed to be Mizraim Osyris,
which of Berosus is called Oceanus.

About this time dyed Ismael the base son of Abraham by his maid Agar after
he had lived 137. years: he left behind him twelve sons, princes over the
people and over his tribes. In this tyrant Deabus time, (otherwise called
Gerion) Joseph was sold into Egypt, and the Indians brought presents and
committed themselves unto the Chaldeans: for by this time many parts of the
world were well inhabited, and some kingdoms began to be populous, and kings
grew strong and mighty on the earth: for now reigned in Assyria Baleus Junior,
who flourished by his prowes and courage, augmented the territories of the
Assyrians into the confines of India, and excelled in fame next unto Semiramis
Queen of Assyria. Osiris also had now gotten all Italy into his hand, and
held it for ten years. Typhon became a great tyrant, killed his brother Osiris
the just, usurped the kingdom of Egypt. So I might say of Anteus in Lybia,
Triphon, Anteus, Gerion, and Busiris sound tyrants.
of Busiris in Phoenicia, and so of this Gerion in Celtiberia, and of diverse
others who forsook to be kings, being not contented with one kingdom, became
tyrants, and used all kind of cruelty, deceites, and treason to enlarge their
dominions.

When this tyrant Gerion died in Celtiberia, his 3. sons succeeded after him
called Lomuini: they builded a great town in Celtiberia, and named it after
their names, Lomuinia. These brethren, after they jointly governed the
Celtiberians for the space of 52. years, they left the country to be
governed by one Annius de regibus Hispani^.
Hispalus the son of Hercules Lybius. This governed the Celtiberians for
seventeen years, and builded a strong town and named it after his own name
Hispalis. In his time the kings of Egypt became first to be called Pharaoes, a
name given to them of dignity: for in the beginning of kingdoms, men were yet
simple, contented with one Town, for diverse cities with a small territory in
steed of a great kingdom, which shortly grew to that pride, that kings would
not be contented with a kingdom, neither with 2. or 3. kingdoms: they would
feign get the whole world, and some weep with Alexander, because there were
no more but one world to win.

So grew the intolerable insolency of princes in short time upon the earth,
that they would be called gods, and commanded by edicts, that they should be so
worshipped: as Belus among Med called gods.
the Assyrians, Nabuchodonosor among the Caldeans, Osiris among the Egyptians,
Alexander the great among the Persians, and Dioclesian among the Romans.
Idolatry, superstition, vainglorie and self love entered into men's hearts, and
possessed their minds in such sort, in steed of truth, simplicity, justice,
contentation and quietness, which yet reigned among men, dum aureum
seculumfloruit.

During the reign of Hispalus in Celtiberia, that government called Dynasteia
Politanorum began in Egypt, which continued 348. years. Argus the fourth
king of the Argiues governed, after Hispalus had governed 11. years. Hispanus
succeeded king of Celtiberia, which governed them for 32. years: of this king
Hispanus Celtiberia was named Hispaine: for in Egypt The kings of Celtiberia
were called kings of Hispaine, about that time that the kings of Egypt were
called Pharaones.
began the names of Pharoes, when the kings of Celtiberia were named kings of
Hispaine.

CHAP. II.
From the time of Hispanus by whom they were called Hispaniards, until the
monarchy was dissolved, and the names of kings ended: after what time
Hispayne was divided unto particular Provinces and several dominions after the
reign and government of four and twenty kings, even from Cetubal the first
unto Mellicola the last.

HItherto you read how that the first inhabitauntes were called by diverse
names, first of Tubal their first king, by whom they were called Cetubals: at
the second change, they were called Hiberi, and the country Hiberia, after
the name of Hiberus their second king: the third time, they were called
Celtiberi, and the country Celtiberia: the fourth time, the country was
called Hesperia: and the fifte time now of Hispanus, the country is called
Hispayne.

This time in the East kingdoms nothing was done worth the writing: Forkinges
were scant yet known, no Nothing among the old kings of Assyria and of
Hispaine worth the writing.
great wars yet heard of, for at this time reguli non Reges fuere, and
therefore I thought it the best course, to set down the names of the first
Kings, that then inhabited in Hispayne: for all this while, and of long time
after, no war, no victory, no martial exploites were in any part of the
world, saving in the East among the Chaldeans and the Assyrians, which grew
by this time so mighty, that they held between them the first monarchy, and
yet their dominion seemed not to extend far by the sequel. I will therefore
be brief, for that I cannot find during the time of these 24. kings, any
history worth the writing, nor of long time after these four and twenty
kings reigned in Spain one after another.

1 Tubal their first king by whom they were called Cetubals, which reigned 155.
yeeeres, and had settled some seats and builded some towns and died.

2 Iberus his son and their second king reigned 37. years, he also died.

3 Iubalda the third king and the son of Iberus reigned 66. years, and dwelt
hard by a mount of his own name, called Manethon would feign have had cause to
write of old Hispaine.
Iubalda, which unto this day is of the Spaniards named Gibralta.

4 Brigus succeeded Iubalda in the 20. year of Arius the sixth king of the
Assyrians, and governed in Celtiberia 51. years.

5 After him Tagus which is called Orma, governed the Celtiberians, and reigned
30. years, he began to govern his kingdom with Baleus Xerxes, the eight
king of the Assyrians, and at what time the Argiues reared first there, and
Phaeton came to Italy. Phaetontis incendium.

6 Then succeeded in Celtiberia Betus their sixth king, which began his
reign when Armatrites the ninth king began in Assyria and reigned one and
thirty years: this time Eusebius sets down the 17. Dynasteia of the The
17. Dynasteia of Egypt which endured 103. years.
Egyptians which endured 103. years. During which time the shepherds had
government.

7 Gerion surnamed Deabus reigned 35. years, he invented the use of many good
things and found first the use of mines of gold, silver and other metals.

8 After whom succeeded his three sons surnamed Lomuini, which builded a
town after their own name Lomuinia: Lomuini.
they also reigned 42. years after their father.

9 Hispalus the son of Hercules Libyus, and the 9. king of the Celtiberians,
he reigned 11. years, he began his government in the 36. year of Baleus
Junior the II. king of the Assyrians, he did nothing, but builded a town and
named it after his own name Hispalis.

10 After Hispalus succeeded the tenth king named Hispanus, From this Hispanus
the country of Hispaine was named.
which reigned 32. years, by whom the whole country was called Hispania. This
time Jacob with his children went to Egypt, when the great famine was almost
over the whole world: so long the name of Hispaine continued.

11 Hercules after the death of Hispanus, being very aged, reigned 19. years:
at what time Mamitus the 13. king of the Assyrians governed at Niniuie.

12 Hesperus reigned after Hercules 11. years. In Egypt began this time to
reign Mispharmutosis: about which time Joseph being an hundred years old, died
in Egypt. Narbon reigned Narbon.
in that part of France which was called Celta, after whom the country was
after called Narbon.

13 Kittim called in some places Atlas, after he had forced Annius de reg.
Hisp.
his brother Hesperus to forsake the kingdom, and to fly into Italy, reigned
in Spain 11. years. With this Kittim began to reign in Assyria Maucaleus
the 14. king, and over the Argiues Crassus the fiftking.

14 Sicorus reigned after Kittim Atlas, who reigned 45. years: for Kittim
having his son in his steed to govern Spain, Kittim Atlas.
went to Italy, and reigned there, and was called for his great virtue and
excellency of mind, of that country Italus. This married his daughter Electra
to Cambo Blaston a Prince of Manethon de reg. Hispaniae.
the Ianigenes. During the time of Sicorus Kittims son in Spain, reigned in
Egypt Amenophis a cruel king, who made a law that all the male children of the
Israelites, which then were in great cruel bondage in Egypt, should be drowned
in the river Nilus: at which time Moses being borne then in Egypt, was thrown
to Nilus: but he was preserved by the appointment of God. This time reigned in
Assyria Spherus the 15. king.

15 Sicanus the son of Sicorus reigned after his Father (...). Sicanus is
(...). (...) of Spain.
12. years king of Hispaine. Phorbas the sixth king of the Argiues began in his
kingdom to reign, and Sparetus the 17. king of the Assyrians.

16 After Sicanus succeeded Siceleus, which reigned in Siceleus.
Spain 44. years: this king came with the Sicilians to aid Iasius against
Dardanus, who both were in arms for the kingdom of Italy, and did no other
great thing. In the beginning of this Siceleus reign, the kingdom of Athens
began under Cecrops their first king, in the fourth year of Sparetus the
seventeenth king of the Assyrians, and in the sixte year of Marathus the
thirteenth King of Peloponesus. At what time Troyphas reigned the seventh king
of the Argiues, and Acengeres reigned king of Egypt. Functius says, that
Mercurius Trismegistus an Egyptian Philosopher flourished about this time, a
great learned Priest, whose books yet are to this day extant, though some do
doubt of the same, as in so ancient a thing men may easily doubt. I think
there Hermes Trismegistus.
was not so much divinity then in Egypt, as Trismegistus seems to write in
his books.

17 After that Siceleus had reigned 44. years, his son named Lusus succeeded
him, and reigned thirty years: this Lusius 17. king of Hispaine.
dwelt in that part of Spain which he called after his own name Lusitania:
thither he brought many from Italy and other places to inhabit. This Lusus
began to reign in Spain in the thirteenth year of Ascatades the 18. King
of the Assyrians, in the very year that Dardanus slew by The only use of
this history is for consent of time.
deceit his brother Iasius, and after fled to Samothracia. In the beginning
of the reign of this King, the Israelites were delivered from their bondage
and great misery under Pharao in Egypt, after they had continued four hundred
and thirty years there in servitude. This time reigned in Athens, Cranaus
their second king, and over the Argiues, Crotopus their eight king.

18 Siculus the eighteenth king of Spain succeeded Siceleus, and reigned 64.
years. That time that he began to (...) kings of ^ria, and the ^nges of
Hispaine governed about one time.
govern Spain, then Dardanus began to erect a kingdom in Dardania, which
afterward was called Troy, which was in the last year of Ascatades the 18.
king of Assyria, 830. years after the flood of Noah. This Dardanus after he
was fled to Samothracia, for the killing of his brother Iasius for the
government of Italy, he sought no right in Italy, but resigned the same to
Turrhenius, who sailed into that part of Italy, called Ianigena, and possessed
it, and reigned 51. years, and Dardanus began his kingdom, and was the first
king of Dardania, after called Troy. This time Faunus Priscus reigned over
Faunus Priscus.
the Latins then called Aborigenes: for Latinus was the fifth king after
Faunus, after whom they were called Latins, after Latinus name their first king.

19 Testa succeeded Siculus in Spain, and reigned seventy years. During
which time Manethon which only writes of the first 24. kings, does set
down nothing worth the writing: for these kings were not heard of any way out
of Spain: they lived so simply, and unpeopled, without any war or other
exploits done: the best is the noting of time, thereigne of other kings, and
the histories of the East countries are by this history briefly passed over.
During the 70. years of these kings, Bellopares the 21. king and Lamprides the
22. king of the Assyrians reigned at Niniue. Menophis governed Egypt, Minos in
Creete, Abas over the Argiues, Erictheus the sixth king of the Athenians. In the
latter years of this king, Samgar which succeeded Ehud, judged Israel: after
Samgar, Debora, and Barac.

20 Romus the twentieth king that governed in Spain: he reigned three and
thirty years, at what time reigned in Assyria Romus 20. king.
Lampares the 24. king, and over the Argiues Agrisius their fourteenth and last
king. In Dardania reigned Tros their third king, who enlarged the city of
Dardania very Manethon does write more of these histor^es.
much, and altered the name of Dardania after his own name, and called it
Troia. I take little heed to Manethon, for he does much differ from others
in many things, and I make as much haste as I can to come to an end. Now
after that Romus dyed, Palatinus succeeded and raygned eighteen years: in
whose time the kingdom of the Argiues Palatinus.
was translated into Mycena, where for a long time it continued.

21 This time reigned in Troy, Ilus, after whose name Troy was called Ilion:
and in Assyria governed Paninas Cacus found first the use of yrons.
their 25. king: Gedeon judged Israel. This Palatinus being a young man, was
driven out of his kingdom by Cacus into Italy, from whence after a while he
returned and got his kingdom, and forced Cacus to fly into Italy, being
now again in his kingdom placed, he found the use of yrons, and taught
first the Spaniardes to make diverse kinds of weapons. I find in Manethon that
Palatinus reigned eighteen years in the first time before he was forced by
Cacus to fly into Italy: and after he wanne his kingdom again, after that
Cacus had reigned six and thirty years in Spain: he governed Spain six
years. This Cacus was supposed of the ancient Spaniardes, to be the son of
Vulcan, for that he taught to make weapons for to fight in the field, and
found the use of iron. This Cacus was borne in Celtiberia a part of Spain,
two and forty years before Hercules was borne, as Manethon affirms: he
governed Spain 222. years after the going of Israel Manethon. de reg. Hispan.
out of Egypt. At what time reigned in Egypt Romascs the second Larthes.

22 Now reigned Dedalus, of whom the Poets feigned that he with his son
Icarus fled with wings for Greece into Creete, for the passing celeritie of
his sail. This time Abimelech governed Israel, who slew his seventy brethren,
and was slain himself after in the third year of his reign by a woman at
Thebes. Aegeus King Pandeons son and father to Theseus, reigned in Athens
this time.

23 Erithrus the 23. king of Spain, succeeded Palatuus Erythrus 23. king of
Hispaine.
and Cacies: he reigned king in Spain 66. years. During which time Iair
judged Israel, and after Iair, Ieptha. Mytreus the 27. king of the Assyrians
reigned in Niniue. In the eleventh year of this Erithrus reign, came Euander
out of Arcadia into Italy, to whom Faunus the governor and ruler of this
scattered people that dwelt about Rome called Aborigines, which yet had
certain dwellinges, gave a field, Aborigenes.
and a little hill afterward called Mons Auentinus, where Hercules slew Cacus,
at what time Hercules came from Spain into Italy, before Aeneas coming 55.
years. Theseus governed Athens, after he had subdued the monster Minotaurus,
and conquered Creete. This Erithrus reigned in Spain, until the very year
that Troy was by the Greeks destroyed.

24 After him succeeded Gargorus Mellicola, the 24. Gargorus Mellicola the last
king of Hispaine. Halicar. lib. 1.
and last king of Spain, who reigned 75. years until the first year of
Aeneas Syluius the fourth king of the Latins, at what time the Lacedaemonians
and the Corinthians began to set up their kingdoms: for as the Troianes, the
Peloponesians, and the Spaniardes ended their kingdoms: so they at that
instant began to flourish in their new kingdoms: for the Peloponesians,
after they had had six and twenty kings, they were governed by Priests
called Carin. The Troianes also were overthrown after six kings reign, and
their The kings of Hispaine end their monarchy about the time that the
Greciaus destroyed Troy.
Country destroyed with sword and fire, so that the remnaunt were scattered
to seek new kingdoms and other countries, some to Greece, some to Italy,
and some to other places: and the Spaniardes even so after 24. Kings, their
kingdom was turned into provinces, and other particular gouernements.

Thus Spain, after it reigned under kings for the space of 988. years, is
now become into provinces, governed by Hispaine divided into provinces after
the reign of 24. Kings.
several magistrates: during which time of 988. years which their kings
reigned, yet were they not herd of in any part of the East countries: their
fame grew no further then to the Confines of Italy, and to the furthest
precinct of Spain. Ephorus an ancient writer affirms, that all Spain was
taken to be but a city named Iberia of all the East countries: and I can
easily believe it: for the Romans during the time of their seven kings, were
no where spoken of but within Italy, not so much as the Grecians their next
neighbors made any mention of them: neither Thucidides, nor Herodot, late
writers, never thought of them in all their histories: specially Herodot, who
wrote generally of all Asia. In like manner the Grecians were not known unto
the Persians before Xerxes time: Joseph. lib. 2. cont. Apio.
for so Strabo affirms, saying, nec Graeci Persas nec Persae Graecos nouerunt
nisi perparum quantum fama percepissent. What fragments Manethon and others
found of the antiquity of Spain, Strab. lib. 3.
and of their first government of their kings, I have briefly noted but the
time only, omitting other things of those days as mere fables and trifles,
not worth the writing.

CHAP. III.
From the dissolution and change of the kingdom of Hispaine into Provinces and
Dominions, until they were subdued by the Carthagineans and Africans under
whom they were subjects, until Scipio Africanus time, at what time both
Africa, Carthage and Hispaine were made tributaries unto the Romans.

Now after the kings of Spain had finished their kingdoms, and the country
was changed into particular provinces and several dominions, which so
continued until Spain was subdued by the Carthagineans, under whom they lived
until Afrike and Carthage were conquered by the Romans. While Spain was
quietly governed by their kings, their wisemen called Turdetani, wrote their
chronicles, Strab. lib. 3.
their laws, and the antiquities of their Country in ancient Poemes of 600.
years old, as they write: These Turdetani Turdetani were wise men of Hispaine.
were so honored of the old Spaniardes, as Magi were of the Chaldeans,
Gymnosophistae Of the Indians, the Druydes of the old Gauls after called
French men, and as the Priests of Isis and Serapis were esteemed in Egypt: for
at that time they were led by oracles as the other countries were.

The Spaniardes used to consult with the oracles of Mnestheus, The oracles of
Mnestheus.
not far from the high tower of Capio, which was for that purpose builded, as
the tower of Pharaoh was in Egypt to give light to the Mariners upon the Sea in
winters dark nights. Many good things were in Spain in the time of their
first kings, which were not found afterward until the Romans The commodity of
Hispaine not well known before the Romans time.
came: for when the Romans became lords of Afrike and of Spain, which was
the first conquest that ever the Romans had out of Italy, and the only
hardest and most dangerous victory, almost to the ruin and confusion of the
Romans, as at the battle of Trebeia, of Cannes, of Thrasimene, and of other
bloody battles seen and proved: when (I say) they subdued Spain, they found
the country so fertile and so rich, that both land and water yielded plenty
of all things: for the Romans found mines within twenty furlongs of new
Carthage, and the mines were of circuit round, about four Mines found by the
Romans in Hispaine.
hundred furlongs, where the Romans kept four centurions to work and to
dig for silver: they wrought so, that it was worth to the Romans day by day,
five and twenty thousand Drachmes.

The Romans were so flesht with the conquest of Africa and Spain, that they
left no hill vndigged, no river unsounded and no place unsought, insomuch that
Pluto had much to do to escape the avarice of the Romans. So Hanibal seemed
to judge The avarice of the Romans.
of them when he answered Antiochus the great, when he showed Hanibal the
abundance of his wealth, and his infinite treasures: this says Hanibal, will
please the Romans, but not suffice the Romans. But I will return to my
History, Hispaine was governed by several Magistrates in diverse provinces for
nine hundred years after their kings.
having nothing to write of them since the time of their kings, until the
first Roman wars in Affrike and in Spain, which was after their kings nine
hundredth and odd years. During which time, they lived under several
government: the most part of which time they lived subject under the
Affricanes and Carthagineans, by whom Spain was so fortified, that the
Carthaginians used Spain for their strongest hold, and their only stay and
succor against the force of the Romans: in so much that the Romans had
always in Spain during this Affrican war, some of the best and The first
subjection under the Carthagineans.
most notable Roman Captains, as their proconsuls and lieutenants to keep
Spain in awe. For from Spain, Hamilcar, Asdrubal, and after them Hanibal had
their chiefest strength at any sudden pinch: for Publius Cornelius Scipio, The
two Scipio^.
and Cn. Cornelius Scipio two brethren were both appointed lieutenants general
for the Romans: Pub. Scipio for the Sea, and Cn. Scipio for the land: by
whose great service and noble victories, all Spain was welnigh revolted from
the Carthagineans.

When the Romans had gotten Spain, they were not long after in getting
Carthage and all Affrike: yet in the very year that Fabius Maximus and
Claudius Marcellus were Consuls at Rome, Mago and Asdrubal, two noble Affrican
Asdrub. Mago.
Captains, gave such diverse great overthrows to the Romans, as the furthest
part of Spain, which the Romans* called Vlterior Hispania, forsook the
Romans, and were ready to yield to the Carthagineans, had not Pub. Scipio at
that The great victories of Pub. Scipio over the Hispaniardes and Carthagineans.
instant aided the Roman army with his own company, at what time two and
twenty thousand Spaniardes and Carthagineans were slain in two several
battles, ten thousand taken prisoners, and 36. ensigns. Notwithstanding the
Carthagineans passed from one town of the Romans to another, from Illiturgum
to Bigerra, from Bigerra to Numidia, Bigerra the valor of the two Scipios.
from Numidia passed to Auringes, sparing no town of the Romans, though it
were to their loss: for through the valor and courage of both the Scipios,
being aided by king Masinissa an old sure friend of the Romans, the Affricans
and the Carthagineans were vanquished and slain. But yet had Asdrubal the
son of Giscon an other conducting of a great army, and the other Asdrubal
son to Amilcar and brother to Hanibal (which Hanibal all this time held
war with the Romans within Italy, and had given diverse great overthrows to
the Romans) these two Asdrubals were with two great armies, and Mago the noble
captain of Carthage had the guiding of the third army.

The Roman Scipios being advertised of these three great Three great captains
of Africa.
armies conducted by the three most famous captains of Afrike, devised in like
sort to give battle to these African captains, at what time Pub. Cornelius
took upon him to give battle to Mago and to Asdrubal Giscon, and Cn. Scipio
with the third part of the army to set upon the other Asdrubal Barchinus an
old captain in Spain: but in this war, after that the Scipios had fought
like noble Romans to the last, Pub. Cornelius Scipio was slain, in the
seventh year after he was sent by the Senators to Spain, and 29. days
before his brother Read Liui. lib. 5. dec. 3.
Cn. Cornelius Scipio was slain. Eutropius affirms, that they were rather
beguiled by train, then vanquished by manhood: for Asdrubal had many
overthrows by the Scipios: in one battle, he lost 25. thousand men: Again,
Asdrubal the second brother of Hanibal, and Mago the third brother of Hanibal,
were both overcome in Spain by the Scipios: of the manner and order of the
wars of the Scipios in Spain you shall read more in the African wars.

Great mourning was made in Rome and in Spain, when these two Scipios were
slain: for now the Romans from time The two Scipios slain, were much mourned
for in Hispaine.
to time had no less care of Spain, then they had of Italy: and now
especially when these good Roman captains were slain, they could not upon
the sudden find out fit men for Spain, some naming one man, and some naming
another, until by a general consent of the Senators, of the Consuls, and of
the people, Pub. Cornelius Scipio the younger, and son to that Pub. Scipio
that died in Spain, being four and twenty years of age, was appointed to
be sent into Spain to his fathers room, a man of singular rare virtues, The
praise of Scipio.
and one judged of all the Romans that were either in his days or in any time
since, most worthy of praise and fame. For while he lived at Rome in his
youth, he would take nothing in hand before he had gone into the Capitol,
and there considered with great judgment what he had to do.

This young Scipio being sent to Spain, in the five hundredth Scipio sent to
Hispaine.
forty and four year after the building of Rome, at what time M. Claudius
Marcellus was made Consul the fourth time, and M. Valerius Leuinus the second
time, lost no time, but assaulted new Carthage, where the Affricans New
Carthage assaulted and subdued by Scipio.
had all their gold and silver, and subdued it in one day From thence he
passed forward into Betula a city in Spain, besieged it, took it, and gave
battle to Asdrubal, and overcame him, took Mago Hanibals brother prisoner,
and sent him to Rome with the residue. All Spain revolted from Hanibal with
one assent, and took part with Scipio: for Asdrubal overcome.
he had slain Carthalon chief Captain to Hanibal, and put Asdrubal Hanibals
brother to flight. The fame of Scipio increased, and his good success in his
affairs in Spain was Mago Hanibals brother taken by Scipio.
such, that he recovered seventy Cities, and many Cities which erst had
yielded to Hanibal from the Romans, did now submit themselves to the Romans.

Now all things prospered with the Romans against Hanibal and his friends in
Spain: for one of his brethren named Mago, was prisoner at Rome, and now
Asdrubal, as he would have secretly fled from Spain to Hanibal his brother
into Italy, and to fly from Scipio, he was prevented of set purpose upon
the way by Appius Claudius Nero, and M. Linus Salinator, and slain with all
his army. Asdrubal slain.
Scipio full of prowess and courage after this overthrow of Asdrubal, fought
in Affrike a battle with Hanno a captain The victories of Scipio over
Asdrubal.
of the Carthagineans, slew him, ouerthrewe his whole host, took his tents,
slew eleven thousand, and took four thousand prisoners: he was sent for to
Rome, and Hanno slain.
created Consul the second time, and after returned to Numidia, and made war
with Siphax king of Numidia, for that he joined to aid the Affricans against
the Romans. King Syphax taken by Scipio
In this battle Siphax was taken, and his kingdom given to Masinissa, who in
all danger followed Scipio.

This very time M. Portius Cato ouerthrewe a band of Spaniardes, and after
subdued certain Cities in Spain, and triumphed over them with great pomp at
Rome. Now Liui. 4.
Iugurth being a very gallant youth, was sent of Micipsa his uncle a captain
of a company of horsemen into Spain, to associate Scipio and to aid with him
in his war at that time Scipios commendation of Iugurth.
against Numantia a great City in Spain: this Iugurth behaved him self so
well in all this war, that Scipio, after Numantia was destroyed, wrote to
king Micipsa in commendation of Iugurth, to will him to esteem of such a one
as in all chivalry and manhood resembled his graundfather Masinissa. Iugurth
by this means was adopted by Micipsa Micipsa adopted Iugurth for his son.
to be his son, to join with his other two sons Adherbal and Hiempsal,
whom he exhorted to be true to the Romans, and to hold with his brethren. But
of this I wrote in the Affrican History.

When Scipio had conquered all Africa, and brought all Hispaine subject to the
Romans, he returned into Rome with his great triumphs, and left all things in
quiet, until Viriatus time, a mean Spaniard, but a shepherd in the
beginning, Viriatus called the Hercules of Hispaine.
and after became a captain among robbers and thieues. This Spaniard grew in
time to be called Protector of Spain against the Romans. This Viriatus
stirred many battles, and raised the Spaniardes for the space of fourteen
years against the Romans.

They hearing of this at Rome, Quintus SeruiliusC epio was sent forth with a
Roman army against this Viriatus. The battle was waged in Lusitania, now
called Portingal, where Viriatus was slain by his own soldiers: yet all
Spain was in an uproar by this Viriatus, and many cities of Spain revolted
from the Romans, and were at that time in arms: for Viriatus had given a
great overthrow to Caius Vetilius and all the Roman army, and Q. Pompeius
then Consul was discomfited by the citizens of Numantia the Vitilius and Q.
Pompeius two Consuls overthrown by Viriatus.
worthiest City of Spain.

And after him, Caius Hostilius Mancinus had the like reproach, and was forced
to make infamous league with the Spaniardes, so that the stout Romans were
twice discomfited by the Numantines: and Spain again began to spite the
Romans. This Viriatus kept play with the Romans, and gave them many hard
battles, and vanquished many great The names of Scipio known in Hispaine.
Romans, until another Scipio came, and brought Spain as low as his
predecessors did, and thereby was called Scipio Affricanus the younger: for of
long time, after the two Scipios the brethren, and after Scipio Affricanus the
elder, that Pub. Scipios son that died in Spain, by whom all Spain was
subdued, quietness was in Spain, and they paid tribute unto the Romans,
until the third Affrican wars, which began two and fifty years after the
second war, and in the six hundredth year after the building of Rome. Then
Famea and Asdrubal.
Famea and Asdrubal (for this name was among them as Scipio was among the
Romans) were appointed lieutenants for Spain, who held out for a time, until
by Scipio the younger they were vanquished: for still Spain was aided Sertorius
by the Carthagineans and Affricans, and both Carthage and Affrike were
strengthened by the Spaniardes. Carthage aided by the Hispaniardes.


After Famea and Asdrubal were overcome, Sertorius a noble Roman, who took
part with Marius against Silla in the civil wars at Rome, doubting the
fortune and force of Silla, fled to Spain, stirred the Spaniardes to battle
against the Romans. This war was great and bloody for Sertorius a noble
valiant Roman.
the time that it continued, for Romans fought against Romans: for Metellus,
who was sent from Rome to Spain against Sertorius, for all that Metellus was
an approved soldier, Metellus.
yet he was ouermatched by Sertorius. The Senate sent Cn. Pompeius to aid
Metellus: yet Sertorius assailed Cn. Pompeius sent to Hispaine against
Sertorius.
them, and kept sharp and eagre war with equal fortune. This war en dured
eight years, until Sertorius was slain by his own soldiers. At that time
Spain again submitted themselves to the Romans: the war now ceased in
Spain, and both Metellus and Pompeius had their several triumphs over ^aine
in one day, in the which day two other great triumphs were at Rome: the one by
Curio over Pompey and Metellus triumphed over Hispaine upon one day at Rome.
the Macedonians, the other by Seruilius over the Isaurians: so that in one day
four triumphs entered into the City of Rome together, so great and so famous
was the glory of Rome.

Then we read of nothing done in Spain until Sextus Pompeius, who after his
fathers death Pompeius the great at Egypt, fled into Spain, to whom fled
M. Cato and diverse other noble Romans: they took certain Cities in Spain,
stirred the Spaniardes to withstand the Romans, opening the violence and
civil wars of Rome, the cruelty and slaughter M. Cato.
of their friends, and the utter destruction of their country. This war was
appeased by Julius Caesar, after many sharp and doubtful battles between
Sextus Pomepius and Caesar: at what time Julius made his triumph with great
glory and pomp over Spain, which was the last conquest of Spain: for by
this time Caesar had triumphed over Spain last conquered by Iul. Caesar.
the Frenchmen, over the Egyptians, over Pontus, over the Affricans, and over
Spain last of all, and brought Spain subject to the Romans.

CHAP. IIII.
From the time that the Romans conquered Hispaine, unto the time of the
Vandols the third conquest of Hispaine, and from the Vandoles unto the Goths
victory over Hispaine the fourth conquest, and from the Goths unto the time
of the Saracens the fifth conquest of Hispaine.

AFter which time, Spain was so obedient to the Romans and so serviceable,
that when Caesar died, and good Augustus had taken the Empire in hand, the
Spaniards Augustus Caesar so honored, that the Spaniar^s compted their years
from Aug^stus time.
so honored Augustus, that they began to make their accounts, and to number
their years from the reign of Augustus: for as the Romans used to number
their years from the first building of Rome, the Grecians from their
Olympiads, the Saracens and the Arabians from Mahomet, and the Christians from
the birth of our Savior Christ: so the Spaniards numbered their years from
Augustus, whom they so esteemed and loved, that they builded certain towns
and cities, and named them after Augustus name, and so continued until the
time of the Vandols and Goths, and after them the Saracens.

So long was Spain under Augustus, and under the Empire of Rome: for as in
Augustus time the Spaniards endeavored every way to please the Romans, in
accompting the years from Augustus by these four letters A. Er. A. which
signified A Er. A.
Annus erat Augusti, as the Arabians made their account by the word Hegyra,
which Mahomet commanded of late days Hegyra.
to be kept: And of late days among the Romans they nombred their years per
Indictiones, which Constantine the great Indictiones.
had made by Law to be observed: for the old accounts and nombring of years of
the Egyptians from the flood, of the Chaldeans from Adam, the old Greeks from
Ninus, and long after What time the Gentiles began to account their years.
from the Olympiads: so the ancient Romans from the building of Rome, and so
diverse others from the destruction of Troy, and the Christians from the time
that our Savior Christ was conceived in the womb of the Virgin.

But now all Spain was brought a Province by the Romans, under whom Spain was
governed by the space of 420. years, Hispaine under the Romans 420. years.
until the Empire was taken from Rome to Constantinople, at what time the
kingdom of the Goths, Vandols, Hunnes and Lumbards began to flourish in the
West countries: for during The time that R^me flourished.
the glory of the Romans, (which was from the very building of Rome, until
the overthrow of their Empire, about 1200. years) there was no stirring in
these countries that I named last: for the name of Germany (where now the
Empire Germany of no name before Augustus time.
lies) was not heard of in Rome before Augustus time to any purpose: for
during the time of their Consuls, which was the second and the third age of
Rome, called Adolescentia and iuuentus Romana, they had conquered and subdued
all kingdoms and countries, and had made them Provinces under the Romans.

Now Spain being brought under by the Vandoles, under whom Spain was governed
95. years, and after by the Goths who possessed that part of Hispaine which
Gunthericus king of the Vandales had first subdued, being removed thence
further Blondus and Ritius.
to Affrike, the Goths inhabited that country of Spain, which the Vandols
left, and were lords of Hispaine for two hundredth and odd years, until the
coming of the Saracens, who again vanquished the Goths, and kept Hispaine
under them after they had overthrown the Goths 800. years.

And within short space, Ricardus king of Vestgothes called a Sinode of 62.
bishops into Tolleto the chief city of Spain, where he caused the heresy of
Arrius to be condemned.

Then in Hispaine (after the Romans) was Luyba chosen, who Gundericus began in
Hispaine, when Faramundus began in France.
reigned three years king of Spain: after whom within 3. years his brother
Leogildus succeeded, and subdued certain cities of Spain that rebelled after
Luyba his death.

After him, this Ricardus, who began to set his seat more firmly in Spain,
and to call a Synod of bishops, and to plant Read. ^idus lib. 10. cap. 26.
religion: he brought all Spain into a Monarchy under him, but that Monarchy
continued not long: for the Saracens invaded Spain, and brought them under
their government, and had driven those Christians that lived under the Goths
into Astura, where they made a king to themselves named Pelagius, not using the
title of the Goths, but the title of Pelagius.
Astura. The multitude of the Saracens was such, that they invaded all parts
of Spain, and possessed the best places in Spain, and dwelt there
successively during the time of fifteen kings of the Saracens which governed
Hispaine: but the fifteen kings continued but 20. years, but this happened by
the means of wars: but after they continued lords of Hispaine for 800.
years, as you heard before.

This is the fifth subjection that Spain was brought into.

1 The first time they were subdued by the Carthagineans. 2 The second time by
the Romans. 3 The third time by the Vandoles. 4 The fourth time by the
Goths. 5 And now the fifth time by the Saracens.
These Saracens placed themselves in the best places of Spain, in the time
that Rodericus the last king of the Vestgothes reigned: Rodericus.
at what time reigned in France Theodoricus surnamed Cala, and Leo the third
of that name, surnamed Isaurus, was Emperor of Greece, and had his Court at
Constantinople.

The Saracens were governed at their first arrival in Spain, under one named
Muza. Muza.


The Christian princes being sore afrighted with many sudden invasions of such
a multitude of infidels in diverse places of Christendom, and specially in
Spain which they wholly possessed, they leauied their armies and gathered their
forces, and gave them diverse overthrows. This time came out of Spain into
France 400000. Saracens with their wives Four hundredth thousand Saracens
invaded France.
and children, being enticed thither by the duke of Vastonia: but the slaughter
of them was such, that their king also Abdimarus was slain among them by
Carolus Martellus anoble valiant prince of France, and the remnant that were
vnkilled of the Saracens, fled, and were by Humildus and Vaifarus led into
Aquitania, spoiled with sword and fire all that Country of France, but still
were overthrown by Martellus.

Again the third time the Saracens invaded France, and Saracens invaded
France the third time.
took by treason Auenio: but Martellus pursued them, and assaulted the town
and subdued it, at what time many of the Saracens were slain, and their king
Athinus escaped by flight to Narbon: yet Amoreus another king of the Saracens,
was slain at that time by Carolus at Illiberis, who persecuted them from place
to place, so that he overthrew and slew them like sheep, and burned their
towns. How be it, the Saracens still so increased, that the most part of
Europe was in great danger of them.

After that Carolus Martellus had played his part with the Car. Martellus had
diverse victories over the Saracens.
Saracens, Carolus surnamed the Great, began to war upon them, took
Augusta, Pampile, and many other towns and strong holds from the possessions
of the Saracens: for at this time reigned king over the Saracens in Spain
Aygolandus, Aygolandus king of the Saracens.
with whom Charles the great had many sharp battles: for the Saracens had
wasted and spoiled Sardinia, and Corsica, against whom Jews (surnamed the
Godly, son to Charles the great) leauied an army, and passed to Spain,
besieged Dercosa, but in vain: the fury and strength of the Saracens was then
such, that Charles the great (being both Emperor and king,) was constrained to
conclude peace for a time with the Saracens: at which time Abumalach reigned
king in Abumalach.
Spain over the Saracens. With this king the league was made: during which
league, Charles died.

All this time that Carolus Martellus, and Charles the great were in wars
with the Saracens, after that Pelagius had reigned 1
twenty years king of Astura or of Legio, (for so he willed Pelagius the
first king of Astura.
himself and his posterity to be called, quite renouncing the title of the
Goths, who had reigned kings in Spain before the coming of the Saracens)
after him succeeded Phasilla his son the second king of Astura: this was
torn in 2
pieces of a bear, as he was a hunting of wild beasts, after he had reigned
two years.

Alphonsus surnamed Catholic succeeded in Astura the third 3
king, and reigned 19. years. After Alphonsus, succeeded 4
his son Phroilla the 4. king of Astura, and reigned twelve alphonsus son
named Catholic. Phroilla the 4. king.
years: at what time he was slain by his brother Aurelius, who reigned six
years after his brother by usurpation, and he made his heir and resigned the
kingdom to Veramundus which was his brothers son, whom he slew, for that
Veramundus should not bewray the murder of his father: But Veramundus mist the
kingdom for his conspiracy and wicked silence. Sillo reigned king, who had
married Aurelius sister 5
named Egmund, until Maruegatus a bastard son of Alpho^sus 6
the Catholic, by the aid of the Mauritanes got the kingdom, Certain number
of young virgins paid for tribute.
to whom he paid for tribute certain number of Virgins yearly, during the
life of Maruegatus: but he died within three years, and that custom was
disanulled.

Then Veramundus the son of Bilmarus, which was son 7
to Alphonsus the Catholic succeeded, and reigned two years, and then
resigned the kingdom to Alphonsus the son of Phroilla, and became a
religious man. This Alphonsus was 8
surnamed the Chaste, and reigned 36. years: he overthrew and subdued the
Saracens that possessed Lusitania, and took their Lusitania is now Portingale.
chief city then called Olisiponis, now called Lysborne. Read Aemil. lib. 2.
This Alphonsus kept the Saracens in some awe, and gave diverse overthrows unto
them during his time.

After whom succeeded Raimiris the first of that name, and 9
9. king of Astura and Legio: he reigned six years. In his time Raimiris.
Abderana king of the Saracens sailed with a number of ships from Africa, and
invaded many places in Italy, and used great cruelty: of whose tyranny and
spoils every where you may read in the History of the Saracens.

I name none here, but such as troubled Spain, whose history I have in hand,
during the time that they reigned in Spain. This time Theophilus held the
Empire at Constantinople, and Jews (surnamed the Godly) the son of Charles
the great, was king of France and Emperor of Rome, as his father was.

Now succeeded in Spain Ordonius the first of that name, who reigned king
after Amiris 10. years. During which time, the Normanes and the Danes rushed
into France, and annoyed the country much, burnt Antwerpe, and afflicted the
Friseans most miserably. All this while, the cruel Saracens were no where
quiet, especially in Italy, where they spoiled and killed The spoil and wast
of the Sara^ in Italy.
all that they came unto with sword and fire, even unto the very gates of Rome,
burning all the suburbs of the city.

About this time Anno 838. the Danes invaded England, but they were to their
great loss overthrown and vanquished by Egbertus: at which time died Jews
king of France, surnamed the Godly. After this Ordonius succceded Alphonsus
the Alphonsus tyranny.
third of that name, surnamed the Great: he reigned as a wicked cruel king,
who to avoid suspicion of his tyranny, fained a conspiracy to be done of
his own brethren against him, and therefore caused that all his three
brethrens eyes should be plukt out, thinking thereby with less danger to
govern his kingdom.

Then succeeded Garsia, who reigned 3. years: after whom Ordonius the second of
that name, followed king of Astura and Legio. This king also used cruelty, and
caused 4. of the chief Castile revolted from Ordonius.
noblemen in the Province of Castile to be imprisoned, and in prison to be
slain, for which cruel fact the Province of Castile revolted from Ordonius,
and they elected four Judges to govern the Province of Castile: since which
time (which was 900. years after Christ) kings began a kingdom in Castile:
for now was Spain governed as England was, by 7. kings, the government whereof
was called Heptarchia: and therefore I will pass over the time, and infinite
quarrels and toiles which continued for a long rhyme in Spain: First, between
the Vandols and the Spaniards, after between the Goths and the Spaniards, and
then last between the Saracens and the Goths.

CHAP. V.
From the time that the Saracens possessed Hispaine until the time of
Ferdinandus the great, and Alphonsus king of Arragon, which were the only
first two kings that possessed all Hispaine, from the first Monarchy of their
kings, which was 2400. and odd years: so base a Country was Hispaine, and
conquered so many times, until Ferdinandus time.

AT what time, in diverse Provinces of Hispaine dwelt several kings, which then
governed and possessed Hispaine, whose names are these that follow.

The first king after the invasion of the 1
Saracens, (which was driven out of the kingdom,) was Pelagius, who reigned
twenty years in Astura.

Phafilla Pelagius son reigned two years, and was slain by 2
a bear in hunting.

Alphonsus surnamed Catholic, the first of that name, reigned 3
19. years.

His son Phroilla succeeded his father in Astura and Legio, 4
and reigned twelve years, and after was by his brother Aurelius slain.

Veramundus Phroillas son succeeded, but was forced to fly 5
by Sillo which governed the kingdom after Phroilla 6. years.

Mauregatus a base son of Alphonsus the Catholic, took the 6
kingdom of Austria by the means of the Mauritanes, and reigned three years.

Veramundus the son of Bilmarus, which was son to Alphonsus 7
reigned two years.

Alphonsus the second surnamed the Chaste, reigned thirty 8
and six years. This king reigning, the Saracens spoiled and wasted all
Sardinia and Corsica.

After him succeeded Raimirus the first of that name; and 9
reigned six years, in whose time Abderana king of the Saracens, with an huge
army used great cruelty and tyranny in many places.

After him Ordonius the first which reigned also ten 10
years: after whom Alphonsus the third surnamed the great, 11
which reigned 46. years.

Then succeeded Carsia the first of that name, and reigned 12
three years: After whom succeeded Ordonius the second, who 13
used tyranny in Castile, the only cause of their reuolting, and of the
change of their government, in choosing first to them four Judges, and after
erected kings. At what time the kingdom of Castile began. Read Ritius more
of this history.

Then succeeded Ordonius Phroilla the second, which reigned 14
two years: and after him Alphonsus the fourth, which governed 15
in Astura and Legio, five years.

Raimirus the second of that name reigned nineteen years: 16
this caused his brother Alphonsus eyes to be plucked out, and after to be in
close prison, for that Alphonsus denied to become a Christian. In this Raimirus
time the Hungarians overcame Lodowicke king of Germany, and both Luitboldus
duke of Bauaria, and Burgardus duke of Thuringia, were slain at that time of
the Hungarians.

Ordonius the third of that name, reigned five years, and 17
Sanctius the first of that name, reigned 11. years king of 18
Astura.

Raimirus the third being a child, obtained the kingdom, 19
and reigned 25. years, by whom Abdera then king of the Saracens in Spain
was vanquished: but Luiterus says that Luiterus lib. 5. cap. 1.
one Ramirus king of Galatia; vanquished the Saracens and their king, whom he
named Abdamara. This time Enechus County of Bigora gave a great overthrow to
the Saracens, and made the Saracens to forsake their cities, and to fly from
many parts of Spain. This Enechus founded then the kingdom of Nauarra, as
Ritig. affirms.

Then succeeded in Spain Veramundus the third, who reigned 17. year. This
king after he had once or twice vanquished 20
the Saracens, yet they so prevailed, that he was vanquished and overthrown,
his city of Legio assaulted and taken, Lusitania possessed again, and the
most places of Spain, won again which the Saracens lost before. This time
the kingdom of Polonia began.

Alphonsus the 5. reigned 37. years: during which time, the 21
Saracens entered into Italy, took Capua, assaulted Baru^, destroyed many
places, and spoiled cities. In this Alphonsus time, the kingdom of Hungary
began: in whose time reigned in France Hugo Capetus the first king of the
Gauls.

Veramu^dus the 3. of that namereigned after Alpho^sus 6. years, 22. 23.
and Ferdinandus governed at Astura and Castile 40. years.

Sanctius the 2. king of Castile, and Alphonsus the 6. king of Astura: 24
the one reigned 13. years, the other seven years: but Sanctius being not
contented with the kingdom of Castile, drove Alpho^sus out of his kingdom and
possessed both Legio and Astura, who fled to Toletum to the king of the
Saracens, who was within 5. years after restored to his kingdom, and Sanctius
slain of his own servants. This Alphonsus (as both 25
Blondus and Aemylius affirm) plagued the Saracens, took Toletum their chief
City, and restored to the people the Christian faith. The kingdom of Bohemia
began in the 9. year of Alphonsus government: at what time Henry the fourth
reigned Emperor of Germany, and Lodouicus Crassus governed France.

Alphonsus the 7. succeeded and reigned king four years: 26.
Sanctius the 3. one year: and Ferdinandus the 2. governed 17. 27. 28.
years.

Alphonsus the 8. surnamed the good, reigned 50. years: in 29
whose time Rogerius king of Sicilia warred upon the emperor of Greece, and
took certain cities, and at that time gave some overthrow to the Saracens:
but he was spoiled by the Venetians in his return at that time.

After all this, succeeded Alphonsus the 9. which reigned 28. 30
years. Some writers omit this, and Polidorus calls this Alpho^sus Tolyd.
lib. 5.
the 8. This time Illomaniolinus king of the Saracens spoiled Spain with fire
and sword until the coast of France, and possessed diverse Cities: but all the
kings of Spain joined their force together, and agreed with one consent to
give battle, in the which the Saracens were overthrown, and infinite numbers
slain: but Illomamolinus took Granata at that time. Illomamolinus.


Ferdinandus the 3. who succeeded Alpho^sus. I omit Henry the 31
first, that reigned 3. years being a young boy, who playing among children,
brake his neck by chance at Palentia. Then Ferdinandus finding that the
Saracens were sore weakened, and had lost many strong cities, he leauied an
army, gave Hispaine set much at liberty by Ferdina^dus.
sundry battles, and forced those Saracens to fly out of the Isle Maiorica,
and got their chief City and hold which was called Valentia, and after
obtained many Towns and Cities of the Saracens: for at this very time, by
Ferdinandus Spain was almost every where set at liberty from the Saracens.
After that Ferdinandus had reigned 28. years he died, 1250.

After who^ succeeded Alphonsus the 10. of that name, king 32
Legio and Castile, and reigned 23. years. All this time Spain was possessed
by the Sarace^s, who were called kings of Spain: other kings that reigned in
some places of Spain, as in Castile, Asturia, Legio, were as kings of little
provinces, and (in respect The force of the Saracens tried.
of the Saracens) were of small force. Notwithstanding, the Saracens were so
beset on every side by sundry Christian princes, and so often discomfited and
vanquished in many battles, that now they are constrained to call their force
together: for Iacobus king of Arragon, through the aid of other princes, had
obtained and got the Isles called Baleares.

This time reigned in Castile Sanctius the 4. who after he had 33
reigned king of Castile and Legio 11. years, he died. After him succeeded
Ferdinandus the 4. which reigned 15. years, who 34
plagued the Saracens and destroyed them in many places, burning and spoiling
their holds and fortes. After him followed Alphonsus 35
the 11. of that name, who subdued and conquered them at his will: he so plagued
them, that he took their only cities, Alcala, and Bencay, which is called the
kings palace, and slew many of the Saracens in the region of Granata, where
200000. Saracens Alphonsus victory over the Saracens.
camped, either to recover their great losses which of late they had sustained,
or else to lose their lives together. Alpho^sus gave them such a meeting, that
he slew of the horsemen thirty thousand, and fifty thousand footmen: the
rest of the Saracens skattered and fled from the slaughter to save themselves:
but the rest continued not long after. Spain now began to recover Saracens
overthrown in Hispaine,
her former liberty, and to flourish, which had bin so long kept under
infidels, during the time of 38. several kings. After Alpho^sus had reigned 40.
years with happy co^quests, he died, and Petrus the first succeeded and reigned
king of Castile 19. years: whose cruelty was such, that his own brother Henry
was constrained to flee to the king of Arragon, by whose help he vanquished 36
his brother the king, and possessed the kingdom of Castile: at what time the
king went with his three sons over into Aquitania, from whence he came with
an army, and gave battle to his brother, and recovered his kingdom again.
Henry being thus vanquished, he renewed his force, and co^menced Petrus slain
by Henry the second.
war with Petrus, in the which Petrus was slain, and Henry the 2. time
restored to the kingdom of Castile. Ritius at large speaks of this war. Now
in France reigned Charles surnamed Read Polyd. more.
the wise, and Charles the 4. the son of John king of Bohemia, which had been
emperor in Germany.

Between England and France were great wars at this time: for a little before,
Edward the 3. had gotten victory by sea over the Frenchmen at Clusa, when the
Frenchmen lost 400. ships and 30000. soldiers. Henry the 2. succeeded and
reigned 10. years, 37
Ritius says 8. some say 6. this sent aid to Charles king of France against
the Englishmen, between who^ whot wars and sharp terrible battles
continued. Then did John the first succeed king 38
in Castile, and reigned 11. years: war grew between this John king of
Castile, and the king of Portingal. 1378.

Then succeeded John the 2. which reigned 47. years, yet Functius places Henry
3. king of Castile after John the first, which 39
reigned 16. years: of who^ read Polidor, how he established his Lib. 20.
kingdom: for I may not be longin dilating histories, but briefly pass over
the names of the kings that reigned in Spain, and of their wars, first with
the Carthaginea^s, then with the Romans, then with the Va^dales, and the last,
and the most dangerous wars they had with the Saracens, and after the Saracens,
the civil wars they had to bring Spain to a monarchy. Now after John the
2. had reigned 47. years he died: during which time, Sigismundus king of
Hungaria was created Emperor of Germany, and Charles the seventh reigned king
of France, which France at that instant was most miserably wasted and spoiled
The French writers can omit English victories.
by Henry the fifth king of England, who also was crowned king of France in
the chief city of Paris, where he kept his Christmas. Neither Paul. Aemilius,
nor Arnoldus Ferronus make mention of this war, neither Tilius in his
Chronicles of the kings of France, seems to make any great matter of it, but
that the Frenchmen through discord and civil dissension, were overthrown in a
battle by Henry the fifth: but they could speak more of Martellus for his
victories against the Saracens, of Faramundus, of Charles the great, whose
greatness was Henry the fifth crowned king of France in Paris.
never such as to be crowned king in England, as Henry the fifth was in Paris:
but they want no writers to set forth their glory. The decay of the Empire
made them to flourish by means of the Popes, who ever aided them in any great
actions, and at last the Popes brought France to Rome. After this, succeeded in
Spain Henry the fourth, who reigned 23. years: 40
this time died Fla. Blondus a learned Chronographer at Rome, 1463. when Lewys
the 11. reigned king of France.

Ferdinandus surnamed the great, succeeded king of Spain, 1475.
and reigned 41. years. In this kings time the whole kingdom of Spain was
divided between Ferdinandus and Alphonsus king of Portingal, and John king of
Tarracon, Navarre, 41
Sicilia, and of the isle Maiorica, and of all that part of Spain, when he
died, he gave to this Ferdinandus Alphonsus son, who for his often great
victories against the Saracens, and many other good successes in other wars,
was thereby named Ferdinandus the great, and also surnamed the Catholic: for
The first time that Hispaine was divided between two kings.
he had gotten the kingdom of Granata by the sword, and excluded all infidels
and Saracens thence, and in their room planted religion, and placed
Christians. This was the first time that all Spain was governed by two kings,
the one in Portingall, the other in Spain: for until Ferdinandus and
Alphonsus time, Spain was (as you heard) by the Saracens possessed: before the
Saracens, by the Goths: before the Goths, by the Hispaine five ^euerall times
^onquered.
Vandales: before the Vandales, by the Romans: before the Romans by the
Carthagineans: so long to so many kingdoms was Spain subject: for of all
nations in the world, they were only the longest in slavery and bondage under
strange and foreign kings. They were from Hispanus time the 9. king of Spain
after Tubal, after whose name the country was first called Hispaine, 2200.
years past, and Spain continued that name under bondage for the space of
2100. years, which was from Hispanus unto the time of Ferdinandus and
Alphonsus king of Portingal who first began to be acquainted with the Indians.

This Alphonsus king of Portingal dyed of a fall which he had Hispaine first
acquainted with India.
from his horse, and afterward his brother named Emanuel succeeded, who made
great preparation to sail to India. About this time dyed Philip Archduke of
Austria, father to Charles the fifth, at Bruggis in Spain: and Frederike the
third Archduke of Austria, was elected Emperor of Germany.

After Ferdinandus the great had reigned 41. years, succeeded Hispaine began to
flourish this time and not before.
Charles Archduke of Austria to be king in Spain, who also was elected
Emperor of Germany: for he was crowned king of Spain and of Sicile the
seventh day of February 1518. and reigned 43. years. Under this king Charles
the fifth, the Spaniards got many victories in diverse countries: they tamed the
Affricanes, and subdued Holand, Flanders, and places in Germany: they were
skant known for all their vauntes and bragges Hispaine got her greatest glory
by Charles the fifth.
before Charles the fifts time: then they began to travail countries, and to
find prays and spoils, so that now a world cannot conteyne them, forgetting
that they were vassales and subjects, first to the Affricanes, then to the
Carthagineans, next to the Romans, after to the Goths, and last of all to the
Sarace^s, who possessed well nigh al Spain for many years, they are so
glorious of their enterprises, so proud of their victories. But as we read
one kingdom to rise by the ruin of another: as the Assyrians began to flourish
by the decay of The insolency of Hispaine of late.
the Chaldeans, the Persians by the fall of the Assyrians, the Macedonians by
the Persians, the Romans by the Macedonians, and The decay of one country is
the advancing up another.
now Germany by the ruin of Rome: even so ma^y a man speak of Spain. By the
late decay of Naples, Jerusalem, Sicile, and other countreies, Spain
begins to flourish being well aided thereunto by the Indians: they which were
as dead men, bond slaves, and subjects in the world, neither known nor heard
of for the space of 2000. and odd years, became so sudenly The Hispaniards
seifeloue.
great and mighty, that they think well of no nation but them selves, by their
fury and wicked rage.

It seems that they should not long endure, unless God raised them for
scourges and plagues for the punishment of sin, and to punish other, as they
were before punished of the Saracenes and infidels. But consider the time, how
after 600. years the pope the Roman bishop, and Mahomet the prophet of the
Saracenes began at one time: the one in Arabia, the other The Pope and Mahomet
com pared.
in Rome. This priest in Rome, and this false prophet in Arabia, brought all
the world welnigh to commitidolatry, and to live in awe and fear of them: and
now of late, the Turks and the Spaniards revive the memory of the tyranny of
the Saracenes, the one mainteining the idolatry of the Pope, the other
defending the wickedness of Mahomet.

Thus much I write of Spain, during the time of their long bondage under so
many nations as you heard. I have put down the names and the numbers of their
first kings, which were 24. at their first coming into Spain, and then of
their The long bon* dage of Hispaine.
several government under particular magistrates, and then of their subjection
under the Carthagenians, and after under the Romans, and then under the
Goths, and last under the Saracens: so long the Saracens governed as kings in
Spain, as 40. several kings of Spain lived, and governed as mean and simple
kings in few places of Spain, as in Astura, Legio, and Castile.

But now from the time of this Ferdinandus, which reigned king in Spain 41.
years, their chief credit and renown appeared, Ferdinandus.
but specially under Charles the fifth, who governed the kingdom of Spain 43.
years, and the Empire of Germany for sharles the fifth.
39. years with great glory and fame. After whom succeeded in the Empire his
brother Ferdinandus, to whom he resigned the empire alive at Frankford, and
after went with both his sisters, Mary and Leonora, into Spain, where he died
in a Monastery upon the 20. of September, where succeeded him his son Philp
that now lives: of whose large territories, great possessions, mines,
treasures of India, books are full and set only forth for that purpose, so
that I need not to speak thereof.

OF THE BEGINNING and the original of the Nation which was called Galgreekes,
or Gallograecians: of their invasions, spoil, and slaughter in many Countries
of Asia, and of their overthrow by Cn. Manlius, who with great pomp triumphed
over them at Rome.
GAllograeci a French nation mingled with the Grecians, as both Josephus and
Zonaras Strab. 4.
agree: This people dwelled sometime in Galatia, being from the beginning
Joseph. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Frenchmen, and by the reason they were in so many places skattered, after they
Zona. lib. 1. cap. 4.
were driven from Rome by Camillus, and after that Brennus their chief
captain Iustine lib. 15.
died, that at one time all Asia was full of Frenchmen by the name of Galli.
Iustine says, that no king of the East Country would take battle in hand
without a French army. Again, if any king were by force driven out of his
kingdom, they fled no where for aid, but to Brennus captain of the Gauls.

These people bearing such sway in diverse places of Asia, King of Bythinia.
that the king of Bythinia having occasion to crave some aid for the defense
of his kingdom, who having won the victory, the king divided the kingdom
of Bythinia between Lu. Florus lib. 2. cap. 11.
him and the Frenchmen, and therefore the Bythinians and the Frenchmen, for
that they dwelled in one Country being two several nations, were called
Gallograeci: for so Liuius agreeing with this history of Iustine says, that
when any French na^on dwelt in any part of old Greece, those people were called
Iustine lib. 25.
Gaulgreekes, by reason of their mingling with other, they were called gens
mixta and adultera: for after they had divided Gallograeci.
themselves into diverse countries, after Brennus their captain was slain (as
I said before) they spoiled Greece, and the most part of Asia: the number of
these Galgrecians were such, as all Asia stood in great fear and doubt of them.

These Frenchmen flourished under Brennus a captain, fit Brennus the Britain
invaded Italy and took Rome.
for such mercenary soldiers: and as Liui says, Gens auidissima auri spared
neither Town nor Temple: for at that time when the Frenchmen invaded Italy
and had taken Rome, and had spoiled and destroyed cities and countries being
such number together 300000. as says Iustine, dividing themselves some to
Macedonia, some to seek one way, and some to seek another way, that the
Frenchmen were a terror in Asia: some of these dwelt in Galatia, some went to
Phrygia, and there in many places inhabited. Now both these countries Bythinia
and Galatia are called Gallograecia, and as many as dwelt in any part of
Greece, they were called Frenchgreeks: for at what time Co^suls Ambigatus.
reigned after the kings in Rome, reigned likewise in a part of Gallia called
Celta, a king named Ambigatus, whose country was so populous, that skant the
soil was able to entertain them: he sent two nephews of his being brethren,
the one called Bellencsus, the other Sigonesus, furnished them with men and
munitions, Bellenosus and Sigonesus.
and willed them to seek some country and to travel for a kingdom by the
sword, having Brennus their chief general: Brennus general.
they as men greedy of spoil, wasting and destroying towns and countries,
besieged Rome, took it, and wanne the Capitol. After the spoil of Rome, they
passed into Thracia, where they possessed many cities: thence they passed into
Asia, and into Helespont, where braules and contentions grew between their
company, that Lomnorius returned again with his Lomnorius. Lutarius.
men into Byzantium in Thracia, and Lutarius into Macedonia.

After this, Nicomedes king of Bythinia did levy a great army of these
bastard Frenchmen, that these 2. great captains Lutarius and Lomnorius the one
came from Macedonia and the other from Thracia and met in Bythinia, and they of
Celta hearing of the treasures and great spoils which their countrymen had,
came more in heaps daily from their country unto them, that the French army
waxed so strong and so great, that they were a terror unto all Asia, in so much
that the kings of Aisa and of Syria paid yearly stipends unto them, and so
continued these Gallogrecians, so named by their several dwellings amongst the
Greeks, until the time of Antiochus the great, The kings of Asia and Syria
paid tribute to the Gaulgreekes.
who became so strong in Asia and Syria, that he began to war upon the
Romans: for at that time some of them dwelled in Bithynia, some in Galatia,
and some remained of them amongst the Tectosageans, Tolossa a wealthy country
full of gold and silver: in that country is Tolossa, from whence the Romans
as both Strabo and Possidonius affirm, had 15. thousand talents 15000. talents
of the gold of Tolossa.
at one victory: the gold of Tolossa grew to a proverb, Aurum Tolossanum: of
this Cicero in his 3. book de natura Deorum make mention: of this Tolossanum
aurum does Gellius repeat Gellius lib. 3. cap. 9.
an History which does agree with Trogus Pompeius, who says that when Caepio
the Roman Consul had robbed lib. 32.
and spoiled the temple of Tolossa, the sacrilege seemed such unto the
Tectosageans, that they were warned by their oracles, that unless they would
revenge the sacrilege done by the Romans unto their Temple, they should be
all consumed The temple at Tolossa robbed by the Romans.
with the plague, for the Romans had taken ten hundred thousand pound of gold,
and fifty hundred thousand pounds of silver from the temple of Tolossa: and it
is written in that History, that the Roman Consul and his army were
overthrown by the Tectosageans: but when Antiochus was forced Sacrilege
revenged.
to flee from Asia being overthrown by the Romans, at what time Mar. Fuluius
and Cneus Manlius were made Consuls at Rome, these Gallogrecians were so
scattered after the taking of Rome, that they possessed many places in Asia and
in Europe, being named according to the places where they dwelt, Gallogreeks,
for so were they called being mingled with the Greeks, dwelling in diverse
parts of Greece and about Greece: they brought al Asia and much of Europe to
be afraid, spoiling and robbing all kingdoms and countries where they came, and
for a long time plagued the^, that they seemed lords of al places, being hardy
and rude barbarous people, able to suffer any Diod. lib. 5.
hardness, apparelled in skins of beasts, and lying upon the ground, a
shameless and filthy nation in beastly lust, wicked and most cruel in all
their dealings: insomuch that they sacrificed those captives and prisoners
taken in the wars, The savage and cruel tyranny of the Gallograecians.
upon long stakes and sharp poules unto their gods: using the greatest
tyranny that they might invent, against those whom they subdued and conquered.
Thus much and more does Dio. Siculus write of them, concerning their manners
and living, of their garments, weapons, and order of fighting: but they were
in time vanquished by the Romans, Ruffinus de Origin Gallograec.
and quite subdued in all parts of Asia.

These Frenchmen otherwise called Gallograecians, flourishing in many places,
the Romans had an eye unto them: and fearing they should be put to greater
force, they sent Cneius Manlius then Consul to war upon the Gallograecians:
where they had a terrible battle by mount Olympus, and there were slain of the
Cneus Manlius triumphed over the Gaulgreekes.
Gallorgecians forty thousand. After this battle the Consul did lead his army
to the Tectosageans, and laid siege to Amyra the chiefest country, and took
it, and after gave a great battle to the Gallograecians, where they were all
ouerthrown, over who^, Florus lib. 2.
after he had brought those cities and towns about mount Olympus under the
Roman empire, and had again brought the Tectosageans and Tolossa, after he
had subdued and conquered the Gallograecians, he returned to Rome, and
triumphed, when Quint. Faminius and Marcus Aemilius Lepidus were consuls, after
Liuius lib. 8. decad. 4.
the building of Rome 567. years. Thus ended the time of the Gallograecians by
Ruffinus and by Liuius writing: I might of this have written more, but by
reason of the history of France where they shall be touched again, I cease,

OF THE OLD GAVLES CALLED now Frenchmen of their first arrival and
continuance in wars before they were seated in France, by the name first of
Newmagi, secondly, by the name of Marcomanni, thirdly Sicambri. And first from
Marcomirus unto Francus time: during which time, they were called Sicambri for
400 and odd years.
I Need not long stand in France, neither in describing the country, neither
much trouble my The first coming of the Frenchmen into Germany.
self with the late histories, which are known to the most part: this only as
I have done of other countries, set down their antiquity of their first
coming into France, of their continuance under diverse names, and of
succession of their kings. Leaving Gomer the eldest son of Iaphet with his
posterities among Gomer.
them by the name of Cimbri, Sicambrians and others, I will speak briefly of
their first arrival from Scythia, of their coming to Germany, of their first
habitations about the river of Rhene, and of their continual wars and
victories in enlarging Beroal. lib. 4.
the territories of their first possession which was but little, by many sharp
battles, and continual long wars at home, and brought all Gallia subject
under them, which now is the only flourishing kingdom of the world, that
erst contained many nations by the name of Gallia, Cisaphina, Transalpina,
Belgica, Strab. lib. 4. 5.
as now Germania does, and is situated between the river of Rhene and the
mountains Pyrenaei, a fertile and a rich country replenished with plenty of al
things, well watered with rivers and fountains. Solinus writes, that out of
Gallia you may travel to any part of the world: the most part of this country
is now Mela lib. 2. 5.
called France, of whose description, situation, and other commendations due
to that soil, of the length, breadth, and manners of Frenchmen, Read Srabo,
Pomporius Mela, and Solinus.

As for the original antiquity of the people, I read that Solinus cap. 22.
they are little beholden to them selves, either in finding out their
antiquities, or recording of the same: but such fables as their parents yielded
from time to time, as the Egyptians did and others, which for want of true
Histories, fill their books with fables. And for that they were first
strangers and foreiners in Gallia, coming from Scythia into Germany, where
their king named Marcomirus with the most part of his army was slain by the
Goths, Marcomirus his Marcomirus slain by the Goths.
^onne governing the rest of the Scythian army, brought his people to the
confines of Germany, ad ostia Rheni, seeking out void places to inhabit: to
whom in the seventh year of his reign, came 489. thousand more Scythians,
and there Marcomirus son began a new kingdom, and possessed many places by
force about Rhene: and they were called of the Germans, Neumagi, at their
first dwelling: after they were called Sicambri, and lastly they were called
Franci.

The Frenchmen were in their first coming to Gallia, so The Frenchmen forced
to seek dwellings by the sword.
tossed and so afflicted, for want of dwellings (their number and multitude was
such) that of necessity they were forced to seek seats to dwell in by the
sword, and won diverse places about the river of Rhene, and possessed many
fertile places in Germany about Hercinia: for Julius Caesar in his History of
France says, Fuit tempus etc. There was a time, that the Gauls, which
afterward were called Frenchmen, did vanquish They dwelt about the river of
Rhene, and after in Bohemia, and about Witenberge.
the Germans in war, and for the multitude of their army wanting places to
inhabit, they in spite of the Germans possessed about the river of Rhene and
other places, about Witenberge and Boemia. And so Liuy affirms, that the
people named then Celtae, (which are Frenchmen now) were scattered over all
Europe, and dwelt in Panonia, before the Romans had any being there. And so
Iustine seems to affirm, when he had said that 300000 Galatae sought new
countries to dwell in, naming them Gens aspera and bellicosa, and the first
nation Gens aspera and bellicosa.
after Hercules that led an army over the Alps, at what time they went to
Illirica, and from thence to Panonia, where likewise Appianus does verify
their coming, when Camillus had driven them and their captain Brennus from
Rome. Herodot Brennus driven from Rome by Camillus.
also does remember these Scythians, how they came to dwell among the
Cymbrians, and how their number increased. It is evident in Polibius, Strabo,
and in Appianus, that the inhabitants about Rheni and other places of Germany
called Diverse names of the Frenchmen.
Boios Brenici Tenani and Senoues were Frenchmen: but for that nothing is
certain before Augustus time in Germany, as Strabo says who lived in
Augustus time, but controversies are such about the antiquity which in truth
is very ancient, and Strabo lived in Agustus time.
about their names which are many and diverse, as Neumagi, Marcomanni, Franci,
Salii, Cimbri, Celtae, Galli, before they were called Frenchmen, that it would
be both tedious and unpleasant, and also uncertain, for the variety of
opinions. Leaving therefore the dissension of these writers and the uncertainty
of kingdoms beginning, I will briefly speak of Marcomirus the first king of
the Frenchmen named yet Neumagi, in whose time the country of Gallia was sore
afflicted for Marcomirus made sharp wars, and died after he had reigned
eight and twenty years. After whom succeeded his son Antenor, who having
married a wife, learned and a modest Queen borne in Britain named Cambra
daughter to Bellinus the great, after whose name they were called Sicambri,
which continued until Neumagi called Sicambri.
Francus time which was the sixtenth king after this Queen Cambra and her
husband Antenor who reigned in the 91. olympiade: Cambra Bellinus daughter.
at what time the Egyptians revolted from the Persians in the time of Darius
Nothus the sixth king of Persia, they were called Sicambri: for Galli, at that
time were not called French, but Gauls.

Of these Pau. Aemylius takes no notice, neither does Arnoldus Ferronus make
any mention, two of the chief Frnech writers, neither the French chronicles:
but Tritemius is recited by Functius, who sets down what Tritemius thought
of the original of the Frenchmen: yet Aemylius affirms in that Aemil. lib. 1.
the antiquity of the Frenchmem is from the Trojans. At what time Aeneas came
from Ilion to Laurentum after the destruction of the City, one Francus a
Captain of some number of Trojans came with his company ad paludem Meotim:
after The Frenchmen challenge to come from the Trojans.
whose name they were named Frenchmen: but let Tritemius and Paul. Aemylius
dispute of that matter. I will set down the names of the kings, from
Marcomirus until Francus.

I will briefly run over the History: for at the first arrival over of
these Scythians into Germany, they invaded many places, and grew so strong in
so many places, that they possessed many Cities, Towns, and Castles, that for
the space of four hundred years and more (during which time 400. odd years
reigned the kings of Sicambri.
reigned sixteen kings over the Sicambrians) they had continual wars one
after another, until Francus time, and from Francus again until Faramundus
time, another four hundred years and more still in wars: of whom Tritemius
writes severally, and observes the like order in his history of the Kings of
France, as Suetonius does for the Emperors Tritemius.
of Rome.

Marcomirus waxed so great, that the Romans had much a do in his time, not
only to keep those holds which they had, but also were constrained to answer
these fellows in Italy: for the Sycambrians were so fleshed with diverse
victories which they had over the Gauls, and over the Germans, The victories
of Sicambri.
that they were determined to stay no where, before they had first destroyed
Rome, and sacked all Italy.

The Romans had thought to see the hardiness and strength of these people to
curb them: but perceiving the multitude to be such as terrified all Europe,
and doubting that they should have the like wars with the Sicambrians as they
had a little before that time with the Affricans, so much the Romans The
Romans much affrighted.
were fearful of these people, that they appointed Caius Marius Consul
against the law being absent, which was never seen before in Rome but once in
the time of Cornelius Scipio in the wars of Affrike. Marius the Roman Consul
was appointed General against these Sicambrians, whom the Romans called
Cimbri.


But to benefit a common weal, laws may well be infringed, and specially
when necessity forces the same: as at that time, Marius was appointed against
these stout and strong people whom the Romans called Cimbri: but I refer
you to Tritemius, who only wrote of these sixteen kings and of the people
called Sicambri. Likewise read Plutarch in Marius, and you shall know what
strong wars, what sharp battles, and with what invincible courage they
fought against the Romans.

Caius Marius, Catulus Luctatius, and other Roman captains can well witness
of the hardiness of this nation: for since The Frenchmen came from Scythia
about 400. years before the birth of Christ.
the first time that this people came out of Scythia, which was 400. and odd
years before our Savior Christ was borne, they gaped always for the Country
of France being then inhabited with Gauls and the people Celtae, and the
country it self called Gallia. They held the wars with the Gauls nine
hundred years, sometimes conquerours, and sometime conquered: they ceased not,
until they wearied all the Country about them, and diverse places of Germany
and of Gallia waxed weak and feeble: so the Frenchmen began to What the
Romans lost, the Frenchmen wanne in time,
be strong, and to win that which the Romans had lost.

After that this Marcomirus had expulsed and vanquished the people that dwelt
about Rhene, and had committed to his brother Sunno the possession of that
country, he went and passed over the river of Rhene, in the four and
twentieth year of his reign, with a very huge army of Sicambrians and
Saxons, wasted and spoiled with sword and fire many towns and countries in
the West Gallia: and after he had made a great slaughter of the Gauls, he
entered in league with Britains, and returned a conqueror to see how the
Germans behaved and used Sunno, where he died after he had reigned eight and
twenty years. Read Iornandus de reb. Get.


This Marcomirus was so famous, and had done such worthy feats in arms, that
the^ his people after his death were called Marcomanni: for so Pliny does name
them, lib. 12. cap. 4. While this Marcomirus held wars with the Gauls,
civil wars began in Greece which continued seven and twenty years.
Marcomanni
Darius Nothus governed the Persians, at what time in Rome a law was made, that
it should be lawful for the Patricians and Senators to join in marriage with
the common people.

This time flourished in Greece Pericles the Athenian, and Socrates the
Philosopher. After Marcomirus his son builded towns and cities, and made
strong holds and castles: he taught the use of many things to his noble men,
and he also taught the women which erst were rude and ignorant in Scythia to
sow flax and hemp, and to weaue silk and other like things. He made laws
to his people which never before Cambra a wise woman a Britane taught her
husband and her people civility.
heard of any law in Scythia, and brought them from rude and wild men to
knowledge and civility: for this Antenor was taught by his wife Cambra
Bellinus daughter king of Britain. She was wise, modest and virtuous, and
brought up her son Priamus in civil knowledge, and made him acquainted with
orders and laws insomuch that when his father Antenor died, he was able to
govern his people with laws: for in the eight year of his reign, he and his
mother Cambra builded about the river of Rhene two great towns, the one he
named Neopagus where long the kings palace stood, and the other Neopagus.
Neomagus in memory of his name. Neomagus.


The Sicambrians this time began to speak the Saxons tongue: for the manner
and order of this people at that time whersoeuer they were scattred in any
place of Europe or Asia, they were named after the name of the place as I told
you. At their first coming into Germany from Scythia, they were of the
Germans named Neumagi: after, they were called Neumagi.
Marcomani after the name of Marcomirus. Then Sicambri after the name of Cambra
Bellinus daughter: for so long as they tarried Marcomani. Sicambri.
in Scythia they were named Scythians, in Armenia they were called Armenians,
in Gallia they were called Gauls, who when they had sacked Rome and taken it
for seven months, they were constrained by Camillus to go from thence to
Galatia, Macedonia, or to any part of Greece: they were called Gaulgreekes, and
so bare they as many names as those countries Gaul Greeks.
had where they dwelt, until Francus time by whom they were called Franci which
to this day they hold. Now after that Antenor had reigned thirty years, and
his son Priamus after him 27. succeeded Helenus the 4. king of Sicambria,
Helenus the fourth king of Sicambria
which reigned 19. years. This king had the Gauls in hand, and plagued them:
he gave them diverse repulses, and in battle slew of them sixteen thousand,
wasted and subdued Gallia unto the river Mosa: for this was the country that
they gaped and thirsted for.

During which time of 16. kings which governed after Ca^bra Bellinus daughter,
they persecuted the country of Gallia one king after another successively,
until Francus time. In the time of this Helenus and his father Priamus,
reigned in Persia, Artaxerxes Mnemon surnamed the great, and in Caria reigned
Consent often time of kings in other countries.
king Mausolus a country in Greece. In Macedonia reigned now king Philip.
king Alexander the great his father, the son of Amyntas: this time Marcus
Manlius conspired against Camillus, and moved sedition in Rome, and therefore he
was adjudged to be thrown headlong down from the rock Tarpeia.

In the time of this Helenus Plato died, in whose place succeeded Speusippus
the Philosopher, Aristotle the Philosopher, and Demosthenes the Orator
flourished, and Iaddua was high priest in Judea, and continued 27. years
until Alexander the great his time. Diocles the eldest son of Helenus
succeeded the fourth king, and reigned 39. years, a severe man, bold and much
given by nature to wars: he followed his predecessors in commencing war in
Gallia, having like affection to Diocles 4. king.
the kingdom of France, as his father and grandfather had These kings by
succession professed arms.
before him: he reigned king amongst the Cicambrians when king Alexander the
great was in war against Darius king of Persia, and after Alexanders death
30. years: for in Diocles time the kingdoms of Egypt, Asia and Syria began to
flouri^h Alex. the gre^ reigned in the time of this Diocles.
again under new kings, which were soldiers and captains under Alexander the
great, of whose civil wars you may read in the histories of their kingdoms:
for Darius surnamed Codomanus the last king of Persia was slain, and his
kingdom subdued, and the monarchy taken into Greece under the kings of
Macedonia.

About this time the Romans began their great wars with the Samnites, when
Pyrrhus king of Epirus had sailed with great navy Pyrrhus reigned in Helenus
time which was Diocles son.
and entered Italy, of whose war there at that time Liui speaks of, and
called it Bellum Ausonium, when Pyrrhus was driven out of Italy, and Lu.
Papirius Cursor triumphed over the Samnites, at what time he was Dictator in
Rome: after whom Quintu^ Fabius being Dictator ouerthrewe the Samnites in a
great battle. Tritemius writes that the Goths commenced war this time
against the Saxons, wasted and The victory of the Saxons over the Goths.
spoiled many towns in the confines of the Saxons: for at that time five
kings joined in a league of amity with the Saxons, and gave a great overthrow
to the Goths, to the number Diocles the fifth king of Sicambria.
of a 100000. Goths. After this victory, Diocles was all the days of his
life in fighting and wasting of Gallia, and did much harm unto them, and when
he had reigned 39. years, died: after who^ succeeded his eldest son named
Helenus the 2. of that name, and the 6. king of Sicambria, who was neither
Helenus 6. king was removed from his kingdom.
beloved of his people, nor profitable to the kingdom: for he was foolish in
time of peace, and peevish in war: and therefore he was removed from his
kingdom, for that he was not found sufficient to govern, and his younger
brother Bassanus was crowned king in Sicambria, a man of great stoutnesse, The
book of the law, and the sword of punishment carried before Bassanus.
wisdom and justice: in so much he spared neither friend, kin, brother, or
son that violated his laws: wheresoever he would travel, he commanded two
things to be carried before him, the book of the law, and the sword of
punishment.

Tritemius writes this history of Bassanus, that he had a son named:
Sedanus, who committed adultery against the law, and was of his own father
thus punished: although his nobles and great men made much means to the king
for Adultery punished by Bassanus.
his life, yet Bassanus executed the law, saying to his noble men in this
sort: I have made a law with your consent, and to your contentation: will you
be against your selves, and against me in per^urming of the same? and turning
his speech to his son, he said, My son, I do not kill thee, but the laws
of the country, which thou have willingly violated, and therewithal took him
by the hairs of his head, and with Bassanus a just king.
his own hand beheaded him. So just a king was this Bassanus, so severe to
wicked men, so gentle to good men, and so well esteemed of his people, that as
Amerodacus a Philosopher of their own nation says, he was Appetentissimus
diuinitatis. Read more of this king in Tritemius: he reigned six and thirty
years, and builded in memory of his victory Tritem. in Bassano.
had over Taborinus king of the Tegurans, a strong castle, and named it
Montabur. While this Bassanus flourished in Sicambria, Mo^tabur builded by
Bassanus.
Demetrius the son of Antigonus governed in Macedonia, Lysimachus in Thracia,
and Philadelphus in Egypt: at what time the Hebrew Bible was translated from
Hebrew into Greek by the means of Philadelphus. In the time of king Bassanus
began the first war between the Romans and the Affricanes. Zeno the Stoike
Philosopher died this time, and Eustratus the physician flourished.

Now when Bassanus died, his countrymen can onized Basanus after death called
Basangor.
him amongst the number of the gods, and did of long time worship him after
his death, calling him Basangor: after whom followed his own son named
Clodomirus, and reigned Clodomirus 7. king of Sicambria.
18. years, in whose days the feasts called Floralia, were celebrated in
Rome: at what time the Romans had peace with the Affricanes, but were occupied
in Bello Lygustico. The Parthians which before were obscure and base people,
and banished out of their country, began to stablish a new kingdom, and
became so strong that their kings were named Arsaces, a name of dignity, as
the Egyptians by their Pharoes and the Romans by Caesar's. I see I should be
long to speak severally of the Arsaces the names of the kings of Perthia.
rest of the kings of Sicambria, which are yet nine to write of, therefore I
will only lay down the names of these kings from Marcomirus the first king
of the Sicambrians until Francus the last king, to avoid tediousnes.

1 Marcomirus the first king reigned 28. years: he made the first wars in
France and subdued unto the river of Mosa. 2 Antenor who married Cambria the
Britain Belinus daughter, reigned 27. years. 3 Priamus the son of Antenor
by Cambria reigned 27. year: in this Kings reign the Sicambrians began to
use the Saxons tongue. 4 Helenus the fourth king reigned 19. years. 5 Diocles
the son of Helenus reigned 39. this king lived in the time of Alexander the
great. 6 Helenus the second of that name, and the son of Diocles reigned 14.
years: this king was abstracted, and therefore he was forced to forsake his
kingdom. 7 Basanus the brother of Helenus reigned 36. years, at what time
Philadelphus reigned in Egypt, and Antiochus Soter in Syria. This Bessanus
builded a famous strong castle, in memory of his victory had over Taborinus
king of the Tegarenes: and he named the castle Montabur. At what time
Heligastus a Priest, and a Prophet amongst the Sicambrians flourished. Al these
kings hold their names from Cambra, and were called thereby Sycambri from
Autenor, who married Cambra unto Francus time.
8 Clodomirus the son of Basanus reigned in Sicambria 18. years. 9 His son
Nicanor reigned 34. years, in what time the second wars of the Romans began
against the Affricanes. 10 Marcomirus the second of that name, and the 9. king,
reigned 28. years. 11 Clodius the tenth king of Sicambria reigned 10. years.
12 Antenor the eleventh king reigned sixteen years: in the time of this king
and his predecessor, Terentius made his Comedies. 13 Clodomirus the 2. of that
name, and the 12. king, reigned 20. years: in whose time began the third
and last war between the Romans and the Affricanes. 14 Merodacus the 13.
king reigned 28. years: this king invaded Italy, with 3000000. read more in
Plutarch of this people in the life of Marius. 15 Cassander the 15. king of
Sicambria reigned 21. years: this king joined with Arathius king of the
Saxons, and Borbista king of the Goths entered into Germany, and made a great
slaughter of the Teutones. 16 Antharius the sixteenth king, he reigned five and
thirty years: this king also played his part with the Romans, and wan
Moguntia, and made it even to the ground. In whose time Julius Caesar made his
voyage to Britain.
CHAP. II.
From Francus the sixteenth king of France then called Sicambri, until the
time of Farabertus the 12. in number after Francus: of the wars, invasions,
and victories, of the enlargement of their kingdom from one king to another,
until Farabertus government: during which time, they were called Franci,
after the name of Francus.

IN the year before the birth of Christ Francus the first king by whom the
kingdom of France was so ^amed.
245. Francus the eldest son of Antharius, after that his father was slain
by the Gauls by the aid of the Romans, succeeded in the kingdom of
Sicambria, and became such an enemy to the Gauls, that he destroyed their
towns and cities, wasted their territories, and spoiled the people, not only
the Gauls, but also the Goths and other nations: insomuch that the Romans
hearing of this Francus courage and stoutnesse, sent Lollius with a Roman
army, Tritem. in Franco.
who in the first battle that he gave in Germany, slew of the^ 18. thousand.
Francus sent his son Clogio to aid his neighbors, by whom the Romans were
put to flight, with a great slaughter Lollius with his Roman army put to
flight by Clogio.
of Lollius soldiers. In the mean time Francus when he had driven out the
Goths from Germany, after he had plagued the Gauls, and had most miserably
wasted and spoiled the country, unto the river Mosa, and as histories affirm,
slew 200000. Gauls. which news frighted much the Romans. In the 24. 200000.
Gauls slain by Francus.
year of his reign, after he had concluded peace with diverse nations in
Germany, he made a decree that Sicambria should be called Francia, after the
name of Francus, which to this day Sicambria now is called France.
continues a strong and a stout nation, and the only kingdom of the world
for all commodities.

During which time, civil wars waxed hoate between Julius Caesar and
Pompeius the great, which being soon extinguished both by the murdering of
Pompey in Egypt, and by the like murder of Caesar at Rome in the Senate: after
which began another new civil war between Augustus Caesar and Marcus
Antoninus, which endured 12. years: at what time Ianus Temple was shut the
third time, and peace was then Ianus temple shut in all August. time.
granted to all nations by Augustus. But the antiquity of the name of
France, beginning from Francus time in the 190. Olympiade, and in the
beginning of the 29. Iubilee, at what time Augustus Caesar subdued all Spain,
and brought them under the Roman Empire. Now the names before named Neumagi,
Marcomani, Cimbri, Celtae, Sicambri, and Samothei, are now changed, to be
called Franci: after this Francus succeeded his son Clogio the second king
of France, which reigned 30. years, a wise man, and a great Astrologer,
Clogio 2. king. For his knowledge and skill in Astrology surnamed Magus.
a Southsayer, and for skill and knowledge in many things he was named Magus.

In the fourth year of Clogios reign, Tiberius was sent by Augustus to
Germany with a very high host of Romans, who destroyed all places where they
came into. Clogio with an army gave unto Tiberius a battle, in the which
Tiberius wanne no great conquest but rather loss, and at that time departed A
battle between Clogio and Tiberius the Emperor.
from field without victory: yet the name of France was skant known a far
off, for the newness and late change of the name: and therefore the nations
round about called Clogio a Germane, and not a Frenchman. Notwithstanding,
Clogio being grown to so great a name, that he was feared as his father was
before him of the very Romans: he made his son named Phrisus a king, and
named the region where Phrisius the son of Clog^ made king in Friseland.
he governed Phrysia, which at this day is called Frizeland: this was made
subject to France at that very time, paying yearly tribute unto France 260.
oxen: this was done by consent of all France, for this Phrysus was the second
son of Clogio.

Now France began to be known by the name of Tribute of 260. oxen paid
out of Friseland into the crown of France. Tacis. 4. 5.
France: for Clogio having some aid of the Saxons overthrew the Romans
army, and slew Marcus Lollius their general in the field, and after
vanquished still the Gauls, until he became so mighty, that he left
behind him his second son king of Phrysia, and his eldest son and heir
king of France named Herimerus, who reigned after his father twelve years:
whose success was neither like to his father Clogio, nor to Herimers 5. king
after Francus.
his brother Phrysus: who flourished in his new kingdom, and gave diverse
expulses to the Roman force: insomuch that Friselande began to be spoken of
through the prowess and martial feats of Phrisus their first king. For
Herimerus the elder brother fighting against his enemies, very unfortunately
Herimerus slain.
was slain when he had reigned twelve years: he died in the 32. year after
Christ's birth: at what time governed in India, Pontius Pilatus President to
the Roman Empire. About this time, Herodes builded a city in the honor of
Tiberius Caesarea before called Turris Stratonis. Tacitus lib. 4.
Caesar the Emperor of Rome, and named it Caesarea, which was before called
Turris Stratonis.

In the time of this Herimerus in the city of Fidena, a Theater fell down at
the play of an interlude, which the Roman Attilius builded for sword players,
where fifty thousand were sore bruised, maimed, and slain. The fourth king of
France Marcomirus 4. king.
was Marcomirus, which reigned eighteen years, and had the like dealings
within Gallia, as his predecessors had. In the seventh year of Marcomirus
reign was Caius Caesar Caligula made Emperor in Rome. Read Tritemius of this
Marcomirus, and of his son Clodomirus, who held sharp war with the
Romans in Maguntia, and many sore battles Clodomirus 5. king. after Francus.
within Gallia. This time Guidericus king Bellinus son reigned king in
Brytaine: after whom succeeded by force of arms in Britayne Armiracus, whom
Claudius Caesar vanquished and triumphed over: but let us return to the kings
of France.

After Clodomirus succeeded his son Antenor the 2. of that name, and reigned
6. years, who in the last year of his reign having occasion to pass over the
river of Mosa, the bridge thereof being broken with the weight of the kings
company, he This king with 60. of his noble men was drowned in the river Mosa.
and more of his Princes, were at this instant drowned, and threescore noble
men more of France, beside other Gentlemen and Captains, after whom followed
Rhaterus the eldest son of Antenor, who reigned in France 21. years, he
also did handle the Gauls in like sort, for before his predecessors had won
that country, which lay beyond the river Mosa, Gallia sore plagued.
and had brought the Gauls most miserably under foot, yet still they held long
wars, and many sharp battles with the French men until Faramondus time, who
was the first king named of Gallia: which was 400. years and odd.

After Francus time, this Rhaterus after he had bestowed 21. years in wars
against the Gauls, they renewed the league Raterus 7. king.
which his predecessors had made with the Germans, Saxons, and an other nation
called the Dorings: he builded a town, and named it Rhaterodamum and died.
This kings life and doings is set forth by Arebaldus in verse, and after
augmented by Hunibaldus. In the second year of this Rhaterus reign, Nero then
Emperor of Rome played his bloody tragedies against the Christians, persecuted
and tormented them, and slew them with diverse kinds of death: this time Alani
a people of Alani.
Scythia invaded Media, and made havoc unto the confines of Armenia, at what
time all the Philosophers and Mathematicians Joseph. lib. 7. cap. 27.
were banished from Rome and Italy: in this kings later time was Quintilianus
brought to Rome by the Emperor Galba from Spain.

After Rhaterus succeeded his son Richimerus, which reigned 24. years, and
had great wars both against the Richimerus 8. king.
Gauls, and against the Romans, and being aided by the Germans gave a sharp
battle both to the Romans, and to the Gauls, not far from the city of
Basana. Tritemius affirms Joseph wrote his history de bello Iudaico in
Richimerus time.
that in that very year the Goths had invaded the coasts and confines of
Germany, and were by this Richimerus king of France, and Fernefrides kings
of the Dorings, Turings, and by Vidikindo king of the Saxons overcome. But in
truth the cry of Chronicles is against it, and says that these kings of
the Saxons, and the king of Turings were long after Richimerus time: but it is
most certain that at that time the Germans, the Saxons, the Turinges and
Frenchmen took possession in that Country which is now called Marchia
Bradenburgensis, where Sunno the son of Richimer did first and before any man
inhabit there, and was the first prince Sunno.
that governed the Country and ruled the people, and as Tritemius says, he
was set there by his father and the other kings before named, to withstand and
resist the foreign armies, and other people coming from the East into
Germany. The Gauls and the Romans sore plagued by Richimer.
This Richimer was a very notable stout captain, a boulde man and a severe
king, who during the whole reign of twenty four years which he governed in
France, the Gauls and the Romans were by him sore plagued and sore
afflicted, sometime with slaughter and victory over them, and sometime with
repulse.

This time Traiane the Emperor had wars in the East part, and subdued the
Sauromaties, the Arabians, the Agarens, Odemarus 9. king of France,
the Bospherans, and was ready to make his voyage to the red sea, and so to
conquer India. The fourth persecution fell in the time of Richimer, after whom
succeeded his son Odemarus the ninth king of France: he reigned fourteen
years, The 4. persecution in Richimers time.
and began to govern France in the year after Christ a hundred forty
four. This king Odemarus was much given to seek peace, and by all means
studied to maintain the same: Odemarus concluded peace with the Romans.
for after he had concluded peace with the Romans and with the Gauls, which
peace during his life he kept inuiolated: for he thought himself contented and
fully satisfied to defend that coast of Gallia, which his predecessors had
with long and sharp wars gotten:

Neither Tritemius, Lazius, nor Functius do write any thing of this king worth
the memory, but his care and diligence of peace keeping: for since Francus
time the first king of the name of France, until Odemarus the ninth king, not
one of them sought peace but wars: and therefore they succeeded Vows and
oaths made the Frenchmen for Gallia.
one after another, with oaths vowing to come and to possess all Gallia by the
sword. And having now subdued diverse parts in Gallia being a large kingdom,
even from the river of Rhene, unto the mountains called Pirenaei, and naming
them kings Read Paul. Aemil. lib. 1.
of France, for that they could not yet conquer all Gallia, though (as I
said before) one king after another shot at it for nine hundred years
space, until all the realm of Gallia became the kingdom of France.

But while this Odemarus reigned in France, the Romans The West kingdoms
began to flourish.
whose force more and more grew in the Countries of Germany: until the Gauls,
Saxons, Goths, Vandales, Hungarians, and diverse others waxed very strong in
the West Countries, that the Romans were constrained to neglect the East
part, and to look about home: for it is in all histories known, that the
kingdom of France began to flourish when the Empire of Rome began to decay.

But to my French history again, first setting down the names here under of
those kings that reigned in France from Francus until Farabertus time, as
follows.

1 Francus the first king after the name of Sicambri was finished, and after
whose name Sicambri were called Franci, he reigned 28. years. 2 Clogio the
son of Francus reigned after The names of those kings that reigned in France
from Francus to Farabertus.
his father 30. years. 3 Herimerus the son of Clogio reigned 22. years. 4
Marcomirue reigned 18. years. 5 Clodomirus the son of Marcomirus reigned 12.
years. 6 Antenor reigned after his father Clodomirus 6. years. 7 Ratherus
succeeded his father Antenor, and reigned 21. years. 8 Richimerus his son
reigned 24. years. 9 Odemarus reigned after his father Richimerus 14. years.
10 Marcomirus the second of that name, and son to Odemarus reigned 21.
years. 11 After Marcomirus succeeded Clodamirus, and reigned 17. years. 12
After Clodomirus succeeded Farabertus his son, and reigned 20. years.
CHAP. III.
Of the continual wars which the Frenchmen had still in seeking for the
quiet possession and the whole government of all France, from the time of
Farabertus, until the time of Pharamundus, during which time they were called
Franci: for as they were before called Sicambri from Marcomirus unto Francus,
four hundred and odd years, so now from Francus to Faramundus they were
called Franci for four hundred and odd years, that well nigh nine hundred
years they were before they could possess the kingdom of France.

WHen Odomarus dyed, his son Marcomirus the tenth king succeeded him, who
Marcomirs 10. king.
reigned twenty one years, after whom succeeded Clodomirus the eleventh
king, Clodomirus 11. king.
and reigned seventeen years. After Clodomirus succeeded Farabartus the
twelfth Farabartus 12. king.
king of France, which reigned twenty years: during which time of these
three kings, which was fifty eight years, the Romans being yet in full
strength and The Romans did stomach the greatness of the Frenchmen.
courage, kept their Empire on foot, and kept other kingdoms under foot, that
the French kings were forced to make peace at home with their neighbors to
keep wars with the Romans.

So Farabartus did confirm the first league which Francus the first of their
name had in his time agreed upon with the Germans, Saxons, Dorings, Tretones,
Marcomans, and Cimbrians. They joined their forces together for to resist the
Romans, Farabertus con cluded peace with the Germans, and other nations about
them to keep wars with the Samanes.
who were always so greedy of countries and kingdoms, and so desirous of
Territories, that they sought to make themselves lords over all the West
kingdom of the world, as in truth they were at that time kings and emperors
over the East countries, until they had lost both their sovereignty and
dignity in the East and in the West, and at last lost the Empire it self. The
Romans hearing of this strong league confirmed between these Frenchmen and the
Germans, Mar. Aurelius Antoninus, surnamed the Philosopher, prepared a great
army under the conuoy of his fonne Aurelius Commodus, being at that time
appointed Caesar, and commanded by his father the Emperor Commodus the
Emperor forced to fly.
to pass into Germany, and to commence war against the Daces, the Saxons,
Marcomanes, the Frenchmen, and other in Germany, in the which voyage Commodus
gained but little credit: for he was with shame forced to forsake the field
with great loss of his men. This battle is mentioned in many histories: for
it was so great and so terrible, that Functius and Bellum Marcomannicum.
Orosius affirm, that bellum Marcomannicum, the like is skant read of.

Again in the next year being the 11. year of Farabertus Orosius lib. 7.
cap. 15.
reign, an army of Romans was sent into Germany, of whom the like almost is
read, saving that of the parties the slaughter was great. This war continued
until the good Emperor Antoninus dyed, yet he and his son Commodus had
triumphed over the Marcomanes, which are thought to be Boremians, before he
dyed: but while these wars endured of these three last named French kings,
Marcomirus and his son Clodomirus, and his son Farabertus: the Britains
made some insurrections for their former liberty, and were in arms until by
Lollius Vrbicius the Roman Ambassador, they were again repressed.

Sunno by this the son of Clodomirus flourished in that government The
Christian faith received into Britain.
which he had in Marchia, and builded a great City in memory of the
Frenchmen, and named it Francofordia, and builded another Town hard by the
river Suenus, and named Franford builded by Sunno, and also Sunnia, which is
now called Sunda.
it after his own name Sunnia, which is now called Sunda. About the twelfth
year of Farabertus king of France, reigned in Britain Lucius the son of
Coilus, who in the thirteenth year of his reign, as both Beda and Gildas
affirm, received the Christian faith from Eleutherius then twelfth bishop of
Rome: for Lucius king of Britain sent to Rome for that purpose Ambassadors,
with whom Eleutherius sent two bishops, the one named Faganus, the other
Diuianus, in the 239. Olympiad, and in the 179. year after our Savior Christ.

Tritemius and Hunibaldus, two French writers at large do Tritemius and
Hunibaldus.
handle the history of Farabertus, and therefore I will pass to Sunno his
son, who succeeded him in the kingdom, and reigned twenty eight years.
This king reigned in France when Lucius Septimius Seuerus held wars in
Britain: for after the death of Lucius the Barons of Britain fell to civil
wars, at what time he caused a trench to be cast from sea to sea along the
length of 22. miles, (as Eutropius says) but Functius affirms it was in
length 131. miles: but here Polydor criethin his chronicle Variety of opinion
in time
and says, that this was done 200. years after.

The next king that succeeded Sunno, was Heldericus his son, of whom
Tritemius writes much and says, that the Frenchmen before his time were not
so civil, neither in behavior nor in clothing: before Heldericus time they
were rude The mean state of France in Heldericus time.
and barbarous, and at that time they had no sumptuous buildings, no brave
dwellings, being brought to civil order by Hildegastus, a man of great fame
amongst the Frenchmen. In the time of this Hildericus the kingdom of Persia
began again under Artaxerxes, who slew at that time Artabanus king of the
Parthians, and he was the first king in Persia since the conquest of Darius
Codomanus by Alexander the great, which was six hundred years.

In Rome this time reigned Emperor Alexander Seuerus, in whose days the City
of Rome flourished with wise men and learned in all knowledge. This Hildericus
had a son named Batharus 15. king.
Batherus, who reigned eighteen years, at what time reigned in Rome that idle
and lascivious Emperor Gallienus: he was so careless of his Empire, that
thereby opportunity was given to Batherus, who ever lay in watch as his
predecessors did before him to annoy the Romans, and to subdue the Gauls:
he (I say) brought an army of soldiers into Italy, being aided by the
Germans, who began to thirst for the Empire of Rome, which daily fell at
that time to a declining state.

Batherus spoiled and wasted all the Country of Italy Itale spoiled with the
sword unto Rauenna.
with sword and fire until Rauenna, and having done much harm, he returned
back to his Country with great spoil: who after his return from Italy,
leauied an army of Saxons and of Germans, and passed the rivers of Rhene and
Mosa, and Mosa.
entered into Gallia, where he made great slaughter of the Gauls, and subdued
Gallia unto the river of Sequana, which is called Seen, and from thence to the
confines of Spain.

This overthrow both of the Romans and the Gauls, was in the thirteenth
year of Batherus reign, who lived after five years and dyed. After whom
succeeded Clodius, the eldest Clodius king after Farabertus.
son of Batherus: he reigned king over the Frenchmen twenty seven years,
during which time reigned in Rome thus many Emperors: Aurelianus, which reigned
6. years, Annius Tacitus, and Florianus his brother, and Aurelius Probus:
these four Emperors reigned in Rome, while this Clodius reigned in France.

For in the third year of this Clodius, the Romans being mindful of their
late injuries by Farabertus and Batherus, they sent a Roman army into
Almania, where Tritemius says, that many a Roman lost his life: for at that
time the Frenchmen invaded the country of Gallia, and subdued a great part
thereof, and possessed the same for the space of seven years. For Gallia was
the only Country that the Frenchmen shot at: Gallia not yet gotten by the
Frenchmen.
for all this while their Territories about the river of Rhene, and from thence
to the river of Mosa, and had some part of Gallia gotten.

A little before this time reigned king of the Saxons Marbodus, whose two
sons named Antharius and Luterus were in that voyage made into Gallia, in the
time of Batherus this Clodius father. Now this king Clodius after he had
reigned twenty Vprores in many countries in Claudius time.
seven years, he dyed: during which time many Countries were in an uproar, as
Archileus in Egypt, Narseus in the East part rebelled, the Quingentians
molested Affrike, aed Caransius detained Britain with the sword, neglecting
the charge of Maximianus the Emperor, and his duty and Eutrop. lib. 9.
allegiance to the Roman state, fled to Britain to avoid the Emperors
wrath, where he was slain by his companion Alectus, after he had governed
Britain seven years with Alectas slain by Asclepiadotus.
force. Alectus after he had slain Carausius, took upon him the government
of the Britains for three years, until he again was slain by Asclepiadotus
a Roman, who governed the Britains ten years peaceably.

After this succeeded in France Gualterus: he reigned eight years, after whom
succeeded Dagobertus, or as Functius says, Gualterus 5. king after Farabartus.
Degenbertus, who reigned 11. years: after him reigned his son Clogio two
years, in whose time the Romans and they of Gallia invaded that part of
France, where Clogio and his ancestors did possess, and made great spoil
and waste of towns and people. Many sharp battles were commenced by the
Clogio 7. after Farabertus.
Romans, at what time this Clogio the 19. king of France was slain in the
field, whose body being dead, his own brother Clodomirus withdrew out of the
field, and armed himself with Clodomirus his valor and courage to revenge his
brothers death.
Clogio his armor, lest he might be known to be killed, and came to the field
armed in all points like unto the king his brother, and was taken both of his
own soldiers, and also of the Romans and Gauls to be Clogio, entered into
the midst of his army, encouraged them with his person ma^fully fighting as
though he had bin a common soldier, whereby he kindled the hearts of the
Frenchmen again, that they recovered their courage, and put both the Romans
and the Gauls to flight, and got the second victory by Clodomirus, though
they lost the first, and their king Clogio: and though Clogio had two sons,
the elder Clodomirus victory.
called Helinus of twenty years of age, the younger Richimerus of eighteen,
yet for that it was enacted that none should be king in France until he were
twenty four years of age as Tritemius affirms:

This Clodomirus their uncle and brother unto Clogio succeeded in the
government of France, and reigned 18. years: Clodomirus succeeded his brother
Clogio.
during whose reign the Switzers called Sueni, and the Dorings had such hot
civil wars between them, that no peace by no means could be had of neither
parts: and therefore the Dorings to avoid these continual sharp wars,
offeredthis large territory and country, for the which this strife grew to
Clodomirus. The Frenchmen being most glad thereof, accepted the offer, and
removed from the river of Rhene where they first dwelled after they came out
of Scythia, unto the number of 30000 armed men, 2686. husbandmen, with their
wives and children, 2686 husband men with their families.
over whom Clodomirus appointed his brother called Genebaldus governor, under
the law and condition that Genebaldus and his successors for ever should be
subject to the kings of France, paying yearly tribute unto France, and to be
ready in any service of war.

This Country was called Menigauia, and lies about the river Meanum, and
after East France, which in time grew to Menigauia when Genebaldus reigned,
paying tribute unto his brother Clodomirus.
be one of the strongest dukedomes in all France. Here Genebaldus reigned
quietly 20. years: of this king, Hunibaldus and Tritemius write at large: for
I find that 20. dukes successively of one stock reigned in the dukedom,
until the time of Pipinus, which was 414. this is called now Franconia. Now
while Genebaldus ruled this part of France, his brother Clodomirus died, after
whom succeeded his son Richimerus, and reigned thirteen years: at what time
Constantinus the great was Emperor of Rome.

Gebrich king of the Gotes, and Visumoar king of the Vandales, he in the fourth
year of his reign entered into Gallia, with an Gebrich king of the Goths.
army of 200000 soldiers, wasted, spoiled, and subdued many places in Gallia:
he gave battle to Tiberiunus the Roman lieutenant and gave him the
overthrow, and in the sixth The victory of Richimerus.
year of his reign Richimerus again came in arms against the Gauls and
Romans, in the which battle in the first time the Romans were victors, but
in the second time were conquered: but in the thirteenth year of this kings
reign, at what time Constans the eldest son of Constantine the great reigned
Emperor of Rome, Richimerus was slain in the field fighting valiantly
against the Gauls and the Romans. After Richimerus slain.
whom Theodomirus came to the government of France, and reigned ten years:
during which time he had sundry conflictes Theodoricus 38. king.
with the Romans, but in the tenth year of his reign, he and his mother
Hastila was taken by the Romans and put to death. After the death of
Theodomirus, Clogio took the government of France, who reigned 18. years,
and left three sons behind him: but I will write of him who succeeded his
father which was named Hector, surnamed Degenbart, of whom lineally From this
Hector Degen^bart Charles the great descended.
descended king Pipine and Charles the great, as Tritemius affirms. For
Marcomirus the son of this Degenbart, was a very notable soldier and a
valiant man, and bridled the Romans 4 years with continual wars: over whom
he had diverse victories. But one great victory he had at Agripina, with
incredible spoil and riches: for this Marcomirus was both a luckie name, and a
great name amongst the Frenchmen. Marcomirus a great name in France.


In Degenbarts time the Hunnes invaded the Goths, at what time the Goths had
passed the river of Ister, and invaded Thracia. And the Saxons also invaded
that time the Roman confines: The Saxons invaded the Romans confines.
for by this time these kingdoms began to be mighty and strong in Germany:
the kingdom of the Vandols, of the Goths, of the Hunnes, and of the
Longobards. At what time Rome began to shrink, and to be much defaced of her
former dignity: for now by little and little the Empire yielded to these West
kingdoms, until the whole Empire was transposed into Germany.

But to Marcomirus again, who after he had good success Four noble captains
under Marcomirus.
in many and sundry battles with the Romans, he turned his force into
Gallia, having Antenor, Priamus, Sunno, and Genebaldus, four worthy captains
to lead his army, committing several charge to either of them, whose
prowess and exploits were such, that at that time they wanne and subdued much
of the country, and joined the same to the kingdom: so that Gallia was daily
weakened and diminished of her power, and France was strengthened and
increased in greatness and force. For (as I said before) the fall of Rome was
the rising The fall of Rome was the rising of Fraumce.
of France.

Now after Marcomirus had recovered these towns and countries, which were by
his predecessors lost to Maximus and to the Romans, and after he had done
great harm and spoil to the Romans, he was slain in the field valiantly by
Valentinianus and his army, after whose death the kingdom of France was
governed for the space of 26. years without a The kingdom of France without a
king 26. years. Interregnum.
king by the states of France, which is called Interregnum.

During which time Valentinianus the Emperor, seeing great opportunity,
demanded of the Frenchmen tribute being due to the Romans, which the
Frenchmen denied: affirming beside, that they would lose both lives and
livings, before they would lose their liberty: And also boldly again
affirming, that they were never conquered by the sword, but with deceit.
Wars between the Romans and the Frenchmen.
By this means new wars freshly began between the Romans and the
Frenchmen.

This time in France were appointed two chief governors called Interreges,
the one named Dagobertus, the other Genebaldus, who governed discreetely and
soberly, with the rest of the nobles and Barons of France for 21. years,
until Faramundus time, who then governed East France under the kings of
France: this was by common consent of the States of France taken from his
dukedom, and made king of France in the 299. Olympiad. At what time reigned in
Rome the Emperor Honorius, and Arcadius Emperor at Constantinople: and in
Persia governed Vararanes the fourth of that name and 14. king, with whom the
Romans this time had Faramundus by common consent made king of France.
great wars. About this time certain Jews were banished forth of
Alexandria: likewise this time S. Hierome died, and Augustine his scholar
flourished, and was made bishop of Hippo in Affrike.

Thus far the kings of France from Francus time, continued successively
after Francus name, until this Faramundus which was four hundredth years:
during which time reigned four and twenie kings. And from Marcomirus the first
of them that came out of Scythia, until Francus time, another The French
nations were 800 years and more in getting of Gallia.
four hundredth years: so that from the beginning of this nation, being by so
many names called, as the names of the countries were, where they dwelt, where
eight hundredth years passed before they could be called kings of Gallia, for
all their long wars and continual battles. And for that it may be with more
ease known how, when and where, they reigned, I will set down all the names
of those kings that reigned from Francus time (which was in the time of Pompey
the great) until Faramundus, in like sort as I have laid down the 16. kings
of Sicambria.

For lineally did 24. kings reign from the father to the son, for the space
of 404. years, even from Francus unto Farabertus 12. and from Farabertus to
Faramundus 12. which was the first king of all Gallia: for as the first name
continued after the name of Cambra, by the name of Sicambri, or Cimbri, as the
Romans called them, until Francus time: so from Francus From Faramundus, I use
P. Aemilius.
time unto this Faramu^dus time, the name of Franci continued: so now from
Faramundus forward, they were named Galli, and became the greatest kingdom of
Europe, especially since the Roman Empire decayed. For as the Romans were
strengthened by the subduing of the Latins and Albanes, (Crescit Roma Albae
ruinis,) even so France became strong by the ruin of Rome.

1 After Farabertus succeeded his son Sunno, and reigned 28. years. 2
Hildericus the son of Sunno. 40. years. 3 Batherius the son of Hildericus.
18. years. 4 Clodius the son of Batherius. 27. years. 5 After Clodius
succeeded his son Walterius and reigned 8. years. 6 After Walterius reigned
his son Dagobertus or Degenbertus. 11. years. 7 After him his son Clogio.
2. years. 8 After Clogio, his brother Clodomirus reigned after him 18. years.
9 After Clodomirus, his son Richimerus reigned These kings reigned from
Farabertus to Faramundus.
13. years. 10 After him reigned Theodomirus. 10. years. 11 After him reigned
Clogio. 18. years. 11 After Clogio Marcomirus the third of that name.
CHAP. IIII.
From Faramundus the first king that had all France in his hand, and from whom
all Historians and Chronographers begin the history of France: who began
his reign in France, in the year of our Lord and Savior 420: of the laws,
government and wars from that time, unto Clodouaeus the first Christian king
of France, and so until Clodouaeus the second of that name, and the 12. king
after Faramundus.

NOw this Faramundus the son of Marcomirus the great, when he was made
Faramundus appointed his brother Marcomirus East France.
king of France, he committed the charge of his former government which he
had in the East France, to his brother Marcomirus, and he governed the
Frenchmen in Gallia 7. years: and he augmented the crown of France with more
territories, as Mosellana, Augusta, and other places. He instructed the rude
people, and brought them from rudeness to civility, taught them to live under
a law, made decrees and statutes to govern his country.

Here the cry of Chronicles: for Pau. Aemilius, writes this history far
otherwise: so does Langaeus, and he says that P. Aemil. lib. 1.
the Frenchmen were named Franci, of one Francio the son of Hector. But the
truth of this history is found rather in Tritemius and Hunebaldus, with whom
both Functius and Lazius do agree. In this they agree all, that from
Faramundus time Faramundus the first king of Gallia.
the kings of Gallia were nombred.

Julius Caesar, (who long served under the Romans in France) divided Gallia
into three countries: from the river of Rhein, unto the river Sequana, and that
country is called Gallia Belgica: from the river of Sein unto Garumna, that
country is called Celtica: and from Garumna unto the mountains Pyrenei, which
is called Aquitania, which was before called Amorica. With this Plini does
accord. All these people were in ancient time called Celtae. Read Strabo and
Plini in the description of Gallia: from mount Pyrenei to the river Garumna,
lies Aquitania, Plini lib. 4. cap. 17. 18.
from thence to Sequana dwelt the Celtes, and from thence to the river Rhein,
the Belgians.

I will pass to the kings, who begin in this Faramundus time to be kings of
Gallia, after 870. years wars by his predecessors before: he reigned seven
years, and others affirm 11. years. In this Faramundus time the Law called
Salica Lex Salica made in Faramundus time. Clodius the second king of France.
was made. After whom succeeded Clodius his son, surnamed Crinitus, or
Comatus, the second king of all France, which was called then Gallia: he
reigned 28. years, and plagued the remnant of the Gauls which dwelt in Gallia
unconquered. He gave diverse sharp battles to the Romans, and commanded by an
Edict, that the Frenchmen should let their beards, and the hairs of their head
grow, and so to comb and keep it without cutting: because they might be
known hereby to be the Frenchmen, and to make a difference between them and
others that dwelled within Gallia: wherefore he was surnamed Clodius Crinitus.
Clodius was surnamed Crinitus.


In the sixth year of his reign, he overcame those people called Senouenses
and Aurelionenses, which dwelt about Lutetia, and joined them to the kingdom
of France. He likewise in the ninth year of his reign subdued the Saxons,
the Trentones, the Doringes, and brought all that part of France bordering The
diverse victories of this Clodius.
upon the sea into subjection: and in the thirtieth year of his reign, he also
brought Bataui, Tungri, Menaxij, and diverse other people that were co^morant in
the edge of France: at what time the Goths had done great harm in that part
of France called Aquitania, and also the Burgundians subdued much in Lugdunum.
This time the Scots and the Pictes invaded Scots and Picts invaded Britain.
Britain, and spoiled the country and did much harm. About this time Atala
king of that nation called Hunni in Germany had much to do with the Romans,
and both gave and took diverse repulses.

This Clodius when he had enlarged the kingdom of France with the most part
of Gallia, and had reigned twenty years, some say 17. years, he died: in
whose time Valentinianus Clodius died.
had married Eudoxia the daughter of Theodosius the Emperor, by whom
Valentinianus was made Augustus. This time Theodosius waged wars against the
Vandols, who had a Ruffinus de orig. Francorum.
king named Giezirichus, who had license by Valentinianus to dwell in Africa:
who had dwelt there in despite of the Romans for the space of 95. years, until
by Iustinianus the Emperor, they were thence expelled and driven out: and at
that very time the Hunnes entered and spoiled Thracia and Illyrica, and subdued
with sword and fire, until they came to Thermopila. Likewise in the
foureteenth year of this Clodius, the Goths brake their league against
Spain, and possessed with the sword the next territories to Spain, and
besieged the city of Narbon.

This time Patricius was sent from Celestinus then bishop of Rome to Ireland,
to instruct the Irishmen in the Christian faith: of this Patricke the Irishmen
brag much. In the time of Read Gildas, Giraldus and Beda in the history of
Britain.
this Clodius, Vortigerus with the Saxons by deceit and craft invaded Britain:
for hitherto the Britains kept tacke with the Romans, sometime in war with
them, and sometime in The antiquity of English Saxons in Britain, called
before Arubrones Roxones.
peace. Read more of this in Beda. This was in the year after Christ 446: at
what time great persecution was in Affrike under king Giezirichus the Vandole,
and the heresy called Eutichiana began to rise in Constantinople. This time
reigned in Persia, Vararanes the fifth of that name, and fifteenth king of
Persia.

After this time we read of no mention made of any Olympiad, though long
before they were little used: for the Olympiads flourished until the time of
Lucius Silla the Dictator: yet The errors of the Olympiads.
used for computation sake, (but with most absurd and gross errors,) both of
Zenophon and Thucydides, who little used them, and yet erred in them, though
they lived and wrote then when the Olympiads most flourished: and it made me
also oftentimes to avoid the Olympiads in my histories, for that I found great
errors in them.

But I will come to the third king of France Meroueus the son of Clodius,
who succeeded his father and reigned Meroueus the third king.
12. years, others say but 10: and so the error which was in the years of
Faramundus, is corrected and amended. This king lost nothing which his father
got. He did not only defend and maintain all those countries and territories
which were joined to the kingdom of France by his father, but also enlarged
the same with the vanquishing and subduing of the Romans in many places.

These French people by this time became so strong and so mighty, that they
were feared of all Northren nations, and therefore certain countries conspired
against them, and commenced war against them, as Attila king of the Hunnes,
Attila king of the Hunnes, Vualaricus king of the East. Goths, Ardaricus king
of Gepida, joined together against the French.
who slew his own brother called Bleda, (which jointly reigned in the
kingdom) for to have the sole government: with him that time joined Vualaricus
king of the East Goths, Ardaricus king of Gepida, and other nations of the
North. These commenced war upon Meroueus with five hundredth thousand
soldiers: but he was aided with Theodoricus king of the Vestgothes, and with
Aetius the Roman lieutenant. And the battle was terrible and great, and
endured from Sun rising to Suune setting, where 188. thousand were slain,
but Til. in Cron. Franc. Reg.
the victory fell to the Frenchmen, with great slaughter on either side: for
in that battle was slain Theodoricus king of the The great victory of the
Frenchmen.
Vestgothes, whose body was brought with great pomp and solemnity to Tolosa
to be buried.

In the next year after this great battle, Attila king of the Hunnes (being
of the mightiest power, and of the greatest Attila a strong king.
force of all Germany,) invaded Italy, overthrowing and utterly spoiling all
parts and places of Italy where he came into: the harm and spoil he did was
such, that Leo the first of that name, then Bishop of Rome, came in his
pontifical robes and met him, (to whom Attila used great reverence,) Joseph.
lib. 71. cap. 8.
and obtained peace. The like is written of the great Alexander, who with the
like honor reverenced the high Priest at Jerusalem, by whom Alexander was
pacified, and his war turned to peace.

Now after in the eleventh year of Meroueus, he besieged Augusta besieged by
Meroneus.
Augusta the chiefest city of Treueres which Attila a little before took with
the sword, and possessed it, but recovered into France again: so that the
Frenchmen by this time grew so great and so strong, since the time they came
first from Scythia These places the Frenchmen first inhabited after they had
come from Scythia.
into Germany, when they dwelt about the river of Rein, in those places which
are now called Holland, Gilderland, Cliueland, and Frizland, that they began
to advance themselves, and to extol their kingdom above the Empire: for with
continual wars of almost 870. years, with the slaughter of many of their
kings, dukes, and barons, when they were yet called Sicambri, and after Franci,
and now Galli, they became at length so strong, that rather the empire was
subject to France, France flourished.
then France to the empire. For this French nation (as I said before) behaved
themselves so in all places where they dwelt, that they would both use their
manners and speech, and therefore were they called by so many names, as Neumagi,
Marcomani, Sicambri, Germani, Franci, and Galli. But this word France was
increased more and more, and what victory or conquest The Roman Empire fell
to decay.
soever these kings obtained, still they joined it to that part of France where
they first inhabited, until they had conquered all other names within Gallia
to be France, and that even from Francus which reigned but few years before
our Savior Christ.

Now after that Merouaeus had reigned 12. years he died, after Childericus the
fourth king of France.
whom succeeded his son Childericus, who after he had reigned king for one
year, he used such an inordinate filthy life and insolency, that he was
dispossessed of his kingdom: in whose place Egidius a Roman was elected, who
reigned eight Egidius reigned 8 years.
years, some say but 3. years after. But before he went he reposed all his
trust in Virodomarus his friend, an excellent soldier, to whom he gave half a
piece of gold, and kept the other half himself, willing him to believe no
message without he saw that half piece of gold. But read this history in
Aemilius and you shall find how Childericus was by Virodomarus Aemil. lib. 1.
restored to his kingdom again, and how Virodomarus was brought from Turingia
with all the nobles of France into his kingdom: where Childericus was placed
again in his kingdom, being then gone to Bisinus king of Turingia for refuge
and succor, and with him came from thence Basana the kings daughter: some say,
that she was Bissinus wife the king. Til Chron. Francor. r^g.
The histories say, that she came and followed after Childericus from her
father, whom Childericus married, and by whom Clodoue^s the first of that name
received first the Christian faith in France.
he got Clodoueus, which was the first king that received the Christian faith.

Childericus after his return to his kingdom, remembering the victories and
co^quests of his father, began valiantly to recover those places and towns
from the Romans, which Egidius while he governed France had willingly lost. He
laid siege to P. Aemil. in Childe^ico.
Coloni^ and overthrew it, he removed Odoacer from France which he invaded
with a huge army, and put him to flight: and when he had recovered all France
from the Romans subjection, he appointed lieutenants and generals in every
province of France, and left all France free from the Romans to Childericus
died.
his son Clodoueus, and died when he had reigned 26. years: others say 23.
years, Paul. Aemilius affirms 30.

In the time of this king came Ambrosius Aurelius the Roman, and took the
government of Britain, after 20. conflicts he A number of B^itaines came over
sea, and possessed Aquitania.
was slain by the English Saxons: at what time certain Britains sailed over
and came and possessed Aquitania. For now reigned in Italy Odoacer (Hercules
being driven before out of France as you heard by Hildericus) this Hercules
having settled him self in Italy, and assuming there the name of a king, the
Empire was removed at that very time into Germany, and Rome and all Italy were
governed by strangers. All the West kingdoms were much molested and sore vexed
this time, for (as you Vortiger and after him Hengistus.
heard) Vortiger, and after Hengistus scattered the Britains to seek new
dwellings, so me into Cambria (which is now called Wales, where they ever dwelt
since that time) and some to France, which is called in France to this day
little Britain. Again The first time that Armorica was named little Brita^ne.
the Longobards settled themselves about the river Danubius, and diverse other
nations in Germany, and in the West countries were placed and again displaced
by war.

But to Clodoueus the son of Childericus by Basana, who came Clodoueus the fifth
king.
to the kingdom of France at the age of 21. years, and reigned 30. years:
he lived 15. of them a Pagane unchristened: in the other 15. he was christened,
and was the first that received the Christian faith into France, and also the
first king that possessed all Gallia under the crown of France: for in four
great battles he had these victories.

The first against the Romans, whose lieutenant was called Read of th^se 4.
great victories Blondus and Procopius.
Siagrius, who was taken in the bat^aile and slain, and the army of the
Romans put to flight and slain.

The second war was against Gothemarus and Gotegiseleus, who before had
slain in war Chilpericus his wives father, and Sigismundus his wives uncle:
this war Clodoueus took in hand at the suite and earnest request of his
wife Clotildis, for she was a Christian, who labored much with the king her
husband to become a Christian, and with as great care she daily solicited the
king to revenge her father and uncles death.

The third war was against the Almanes, at what time Clodoueus the first
performed his oath and became a Christian, after his victory had against the
Almanes.
he vowed if God would give him the victory, he would become a Christian,
which he performed, and obtained the victory, and was baptized by Remigius
bishop of Rheme.

The fourth war was against Alaricus king of the Goths, whom he slew in the
field, and discomfited all his army.

By these four great victories Clodoueus had brought all Gallia to be all
France: for during his bastards sons time, he subdued Turingia, and enlarged
his country from the river of Rhein, unto the river Sequana. Theodoricus being
by his father Clodoueus sent as President to Aquitania, at what time he brought
diverse people (by the sword) under his fathers subjection, as Albios,
Rhatenes, Tolasates, and the people called Auerni: He subdued Vastonia and
other places. Read more of the wars of Clodoueus, of his vows, and
conversion to the faith, and of his victories, in Paul. Aemilius, and in
Tilius: who after he had reigned thirty years he died, and was buried in
Paris. Thus far Hu^ibaldus.


Hitherto reaches Hunibaldus history of the antiquity of France, which he
wrote and divided into 18. books, containing the history of all the kings,
from the first Marcomirus which came from Scythia, until the time of Clodoueus
death, which were 47. kings which reigned by sundry names for the space of 950.
years.

While this Clodoueus reigned, the Saracens invaded Phoenicia, Syria, and
Thracia, and did great harm. This time reigned In this time of Clodoueus,
reigned Emperor Anastatius, and in Britain reigned Arthur.
in Persia Lambases, whom Procopius named Blasen: and about this time
Anastatius the Emperor builded a most strong city in Mesopotamia, and named
it after his own name Anastasia: and walled the city of Theodocia in Armenia,
which the Emperor Theodosius had builded.

In the time of this Clodoueus Arthur reigned in Britain, who did much annoy
the Saxons, and had if he had long lived, restored the Britains again to
their former liberty. But to return to the successors of Clodoueus, who left
behind him four sons, Theodoricus, Clodomirus, Childebertus, and Lotharius,
Cl^doueus 4. sons.
amongst whom the kingdom of France was divided, the whole kingdom made a
Tetrarchia: and so in process of time the whole kingdom fell to Childebertus
hand, from whom the lines of the kings of France descend until Hildericus,
though some say it does descend from Lotharius: yet reigned these 4. brethren
in several Provinces of France, as four Tetrarches for a time. During which
time, read Procopius and Paul. Aemilius and see the events of fortune, the
uncertainty Procop lib. 1. de bell. Gothor.
of states, and change of earthly dignity, and how Theodoricus, and Clodomirus
two of the brethren, with all their children died: then Childebertus divided
the whole kingdom between him and his brother Clotarius.

In the mean season let us see what was done in other countries: for while
these four brethren governed France, Rome Read of these 18. year war
Procop. lib. 2 de bello Persico.
was taken being besieged by the Goths, and destroyed and left desolate by
Totila king of the Goths: he also vanquished the Brutians and the Lucans, he
took Apulia and Calabria, and besieged Placentia. This war of the Goths
continued 18. years, during which war reigned 3. kings over the Goths: the
first Vitiges, who destroyed Rome in his time, but reedified and builded again
by Belisarius: the second king Alaricus, who was slain within few months: so
that the most time of this 18. years were continued under Totila, who plagued
so sore This king Tot^la plagued Italy and Rome.
Italy and Rome, that after that time Rome was so decayed and possessed with
strangers, that sooner you should find in Italy a Germane then a Roman: and
in Rome it self, ten Vandols, ten Goths, or ten Longobards, for one
citizen, in so More Vandols and Goths in Rome then Citizens.
much that they were not able to appoint a Consul to govern them, who had
governed them for the space of 447. years: so long the Consuls of Rome governed
the city, which was until the Emperors time, and then they governed the
whole world. But now, not only the dignity of Consuls was lost, (which were
of long time languishing and decaying, since civil wars between themselves,
with persecution of the godly, and tyranny of the wicked Emperors) but the
name it self utterly perished and quite abolished by those nations of
Germany, who were scant known in Augustus Caesar's time: and therefore valeat
Roma cum Papa, who entered into Rome, and took possession thereof within 40.
years of Clotarius government. At what time he erected up his Papacy The
kingdom of the Pope, and the kingdom of Mahom^t, began at one time.
in Rome, when Mahomet advanced up the kingdom of the Saracens. The Pope
began his Papacy in Rome 14. years before Mahomet began his kingdom over
the Saracens in Arabia.

Now a Pope for an Emperor governed Rome, a prophet for a king reigned in
Arabia: of whom I spoke in the history of the Church, and in the history of
the Saracens. And now I will make mention of Iustinianus, who governed then as
Emperor: under whom Bellisarius annoyed Italy, subdued Siracusa, and took
Catina, and in the last year of his Consulship subdued Sicilia.

After that, he passed into Africa, and delivered Carthage from the siege of
Stoze, and appointed one Solomon governor over the town. This Bellisarius
proved so excellent a Bellisarius much commended.
captain under Iustinianus the Emperor, that he advanced the name of the
empire through his victories gotten in diverse battles, that some write that
Bellisarius had a triumph granted him at Rome, appointed by the Emp.
Justinian: much is written of this Bellisarius in the wars called Persicum,
which Iustinianus Bellisarius a noble captain under Iustinianus.
began, but Bellisarius ended. This Bellisarius took Catina, Siracusa, and
subdued al Sicilie, Rauenna, and Naples, and was made general under Justinian
in the East empire, where he merited the name of a good soldier. Iustinianus
made the 4. books of the Institutes and other 50. books of civil law,
called the Pandects, Pandects made by Iustinianus the Emperor.
which Tribonianus ended, and brought to perfection.

This time Cosroes king of Persia invaded Cilicia, and Syria, he took
Antiochia, and now again the fourth time, after he had concluded peace with
Iustinianus, he invaded the territories of the Romans, but he was now driven
thence by Bellisarius: at what time Arethus king of the Saracens came, and
yielded to Iustinianus both his kingdom and his children. Totila king of the
Goths this time gave an overthrow to Demetrius upon the sea, and took
Neapolis. During these 45. years, Hunni invaded This time died Arthur i^
Britain.
Europe, spoiled and wasted into Bizantium, which is Constantinople: in
Britain died Arthur the son of Vter Pendragon, after whom succeeded
Constantius a wicked lewd Prince, about which time, Narses a Persian with a
great army entered into Italy, vanquished the Goths at Tagira, and again the
Goths overthrown by Narses at Necerium, and at Prccopius of the wars of the
Goths thus far.
last driven out of Italy, and their king Totila slain. Thus far Procopius
writes of the wars of the Goths. Now to Clotharius, which reigned in
France 5. years after the death of his three brethren and their children, and
died, as Blondus says, at Tridentum: after whose death, France was again
divided between the sons of Lotharius, who is called in Beroaldus, De Chron.
Fran^.
Clotarius, which reigned 5. years after Childebertus, and died and was buried
in the church of S. Medardis in Suetia, which Church he began to build a little
before he died.

After whom succeeded Cherebertus the son of Clotarius, Cherebertus a wicked
vicious prince.
a wicked vicious king, who after he reigned 9. years, died in the arms of
his concubine at Paris: after him Chilpericus raigued 14. years, as vicious and
wicked as his brother, yet of him lineally do descend the line of the kings of
France until Childericus time, he was caused to be slain between Landricus
and This time began wars between the Romans and the Persians.
his strumpet Fredegunda, and was also buried in Paris. Now Justinius the
younger, a daughters son of Iustinianus, governed in the empire: warrre was
proclaimed by the Romans against the Persians, at what time Hormisda reigned
king of Persia, who was vanquished by Tiberius Constantius: and again the
Persians lost those towns which they had gotten during the government of
Iustinianus.

This time Chilpericus left a child of the age of 4. months, called Clotarius
the second of that name, and the 10. king of France, who reigned 44. years:
this king being yet an infant Clotarius the tenth king.
under the protection of Landricus, whom Guntrandus the kings uncle had made
master of the horse, Childebertus king of Mediomatrices sought to attempt
through force to govern France, but in vain, for he mist of his purpose: for
he and his wife died within a while after upon one day, supected to be
poisoned. Howbeit, when Clotarius came to any estate civil, wars began Read
Tilius de reg. Franc.
in France between the king, and Theodobertus and Theodoricus two sons of
Hildebertus: these two brethren plagued sore the king, until they were divided
one against another, and then al France was afflicted. But during these civil
vexations in France, the Persians wasted Palestine, took Jerusalem and their
patriarch Zacharias, they raged against the Egyptians, and they subdued
Alexandria and Libya, until Aethiope, took Carthage, and proudly denied the
Emperor Heraclius peace: but the Persians and their king Cosroes repented
their denial, for The victory of Heraclius over the Persians.
Heraclius prepared war, and levied an army, and entered into Persia, and
flew in that voyage 50000. Heraclius the second time persecuted the Persia^s
with sword and fire so hard, that Cosroes their king was slain. By this time
the Persians were on every side so assaulted and so weakened, that they were
most miserably Polyb. lib. 4.
slain and destroyed, and their kingdom taken by the Saracens.

About this time Caddwalader the last king of the Britains, Caddwalader the
last king of the Britains.
was by a dream admonished to leave his kingdom, and to pass over sea to
Rome, at what time the English Saxons possessed the whole Isle of Britain,
saving Scotland and the Picts.

Let us leave France for a while in their civil dissentions between Clotarius
and the two sons of Childebertus, named Theodoricus and Theobertus, who after
they constrained the king Wars between Theodoricus and Theobertus.
to accept what conditions of peace they lusted, these two brethren fell out,
that again all France was in arms, and for a time France was most miserably
afflicted. Now Persia being destroyed the third time by the Sarace^s, we will
pass ouerthe Pope in Rome, and Mahomet in Arabia, and return to Germany, a
country so famous of late, that the Monarchy and sole empire flourished
there: though the Romans in Julius Caesar's time made no Va^doles, Goths,
Hunnes, Danes, Hungarians, and others, were by the old Romane^ called Germans.
account of them, calling all those nations which are called Vandols, Goths,
Hunnes, Hungarians, Danes, Sueuians, Russians, and others by one name Germans.
These countries and kingdoms flourished when the East kingdoms decayed, and
that within 500. years of Augustus time, when Rome was in her most glory and
dignity: and for that the names of their kings may be read in Functius, I will
not set them down: for those that were of any great renown in histories,
chiefly the Goths and Va^dols, who hitherto had 24. kings, and the Longobards
who had 17. kings. Diaconus writes of them, and Functius in his table records
them: and therefore I will return to Clotarius, who when he had reigned 41.
years, he assigned Dagobertus his eldest son king of Clotarius died.
Austratia, jointly to govern France with him for three years more, and then
Clotarius died in the 44. year of his reign.

This Dagobertus was the 11. king from Faramundus, and had a Dagobertus the 11.
king.
brother named Aribertus, to whom he gave Aquitania in possession, and governed
himself after his father in France 14. years: he was very vicious and so
given to women, that when he would travail he would have his women carried with
him, Agmina Scortorum, a whole army of concubines, who went Til Chron. Franc.
reg.
in habits of Queens, and dwelt in palaces made unto them by the king
Dagobertus. And with this vice there was joined an other virtue, which was to
banish all those Jews out of France, that would not become Christians: for
now France has their vines and grapes, and all the country of France
flourished since Probus the Emperors time, who first France suffered to have
their vines by Probus the Emperor.
suffered them to have the use and benefits of all vines.

By this time his brother Aribertus died in Aquitaina, and left a son behind
him, named Hilpericus, who likewise died after his father shortly, and all
France fell to Dagobertus: who at that time placed his eldest son Sigebertus
king of Austrasia, where sometimes Dagobertus governed during three years of
his fathers reign. Dagobertus had wars with the Vuindos whom he vanquished
by the aid of the Saxons, and also he Dagobertus died upon the 4. kal. of
February.
had wars against the Vascons, who though they revolted as Tritemius
affirms, yet received them into favor. In Rome now had reigned 9. several
popes, whose names are set down in the history of the church, and over the
Saracens (who quite had subdued all Persia before) reigned already four Amyras
of Mahomets sects. Thus in Rome a silly priest became a great Pope, and in
Arabia a false Prophet of one age with the pope Mahomet.
became a mighty king, which by his greatness attained a surname called Amyras:
of whom likewise I have spoken in the history of the Saracens.

1 Pharamundus reigned 8. years, Beroaldus says 11. years. 2 Clodius
Faramundus son surnamed Criuitus reigned 18. years. 3 Meroueus succeeded his
father Clodius, and reigned 10. years. 4 Hildericus the first reigned 26. this
is called of many Childericus. 5 Clodoueus reigned 30. 6 Childebertus reigned
45. years. 7 Lotarius or Cotarius 5. years. 8 Heribertus reigned 9. 9
Hilpericus or Chilpericus 23. for mark who^ Beroaldus, Ruffinus, and others
do name Chilpericus, that same does Functius name Hilpericus, and so of
Cheribertus Functius he names Heribertus. 10 Lotarius 2. the son of
Hilpericus 14. years. 11 Dagobertus succeeded his father, and reigned 14.
years.
CHAP. V.
From Clodoueus the 2. who began his reign 645. unto the reign and government
of Charles the great, the patron and only mirror of France, by whom chiefly
the French men flourished, in famous renown, and in whom all the laws,
relikes and monuments are established.

Now I will go forward with the histories of France, and speak of
Dagobertus, who when he had reigned 14. years died, Aemilius says, 16. years:
for he reigned 2. years in Austrasia, and is buried in S. Denis which he
himself had builded the second of that name, and the twelfth king, after
Pharamundus succeeded. This was called Lewis, the first Jews the first.
of that name. This time raygned king of the Goths Sisenandus, who was by them
and of Dagobertus advanced to govern the Goths. The Emperor Constantinus
surnamed Junior was by his stepmother Martina poisoned after he had reigned
four months, for that she practiced to have her son Emperor, who reigned
with his mother two years: and then the treason of Martina was found, which
Martinas treason found, and after punished
was in this sort revenged: his nostrels were cut, and his mothers tongue was
taken out: and so were both, least again they might be forgotten and be
received to the Empire, banished from Constantinople.

By this time died Sigibertus king Clodouaens brother, who adopted before his
death Ildebertus the son of Grimoaldus, supposing that he should have no
heir of his body: but his wife being with child when he died, had a son
named Dagobertus, who was sent to a Monastery in Scotland secretly to be
brought by Grimoaldus: for which cause Clodouaeus waged Dagobertus sent to a
Monastery by Grimoaldus.
war with Ildebertus the king, and with his father. Ildebertus was slain in
the field in battle, and his father taken and put in prison in Paris, where he
died: at what time Clodouaeus appointed his own son Childericus king in
Austrasia. This Ildebertus slain.
time in France the famine was such, that the king Clodouaeus ooke all the
gold and silver which his father Dagobertus had set up in Saint Dennis and
other places, and all the treasures Aemil. l. b. 2.
out of the Temples in France, to help the poor of France.

After Clodoueus had reigned seventeen years, succeeded Clotarius the third
of that name (he died and is buried with his father in S. Dennis) and in
Beroaldus table named Dagobertus Clotarius the 3. of that name.
the second, who reigned four years. After whom succeeded his brother
Theodoricus, who was in the first year of his reign banished out of his
kingdom for his incontinencie. After him Hildericus, Theodoricus brother was
elected king E^l. de reg. Fra^c.
of all France, he reigned 12. years: Beroaldus says five, he was slain in
hunting, by one Bodillus, whom the king had before most cruelly caused to be
bound to a stake, and to be whipped with rods: which he requited to the king
with death. Theodoricus by Bodillus slain in hunting.
Which news being heard of, Theodoricus the kings brother being before as you
heard banished, returned from a Monastery, and took again the kingdom of
France, and reigned fourteen years. The kingdom of the Saracens had not
only vexed and molested the East kingdoms, but also afflicted The Saracens
held wars in diverse countries.
and persecuted the West countries, and had diverse and sundry battles with the
Emperors, the Goths, and the Longobards, and are now become nations most
mighty and strong in all the West, of whom read Diaconus de gestis
Longabardorum.

After these things reigned Clodouaeus the third of that name, who reigned
four years, after whom Hildebertus Clodouaeus Clodouaeus.
his brother succeeded, and reigned eighteen years: but here some of the good
and the best writers do disagree Hildebertus.
for the state of France, as well for the names of their kings, as also for the
history it self, as some following Read Tilius chron. de reg. Franc.
Tritemius, and some imitating Paulus Aemilius, that one Chronicle cries
against another.

During the reign of Hildebertus, Muhamad the Saracen invaded Armenia, and
entered into Africa: for now the kingdom of the Saracens grew so mighty and
so strong, that they troubled all the Nations of the world, as you may read
in their histories.

This time reigned over the Longobardes Chimibertus, and over the Goths
Vitiza: for these two kingdoms flourished now in Germany, and began to
match the Empire. After this reigned king in France Dagobertus the second of
that name, four years after whom, Lotharius Dagobertus his brother reigned
two years: some say seven years. Chil^ericus by the aid of Martellu, was
crowned king of (...).
Beroaldus in his table affirms, that for these two years France had no
king therein crowned, but Interreges were appointed: after which Chilpericus
surnamed Daniel, by the aid of Carolus Martellus was crowned king of France,
and reigned five years. After him governed Theodoricus, (...) Cala. 20.
surnamed Cala, the son of Dagobertus the second, he reigned fifteen
years.

Anastasius the second, surnamed Artemius, held the Empire for two years:
and after, Theodosius the third of Gizid.
that name other two years. This time Gizid the twelfth Amiras, who reigned
four years, and his son Euelid after him, played their parts in Asia and
in Europe, as sometime the Scythians were wont to do: they laid siege to
Constantinople, The Sarac^ns by cold and hunger driven from Constantinople.
but were thence expelled by hunger and cold, and with all their whole nauies
were burned and destroyed upon the seas.

In the time of this Theodoricus, the Cities of Italy began a new regiment
under Dukes: every City elected and made a choice of one governor, under
whom, and to whom they The government of exarchie in Italy altered.
lived as to their king, laying aside the last kind of government, called
magistratus exarchatus. This time the Scots and the Picts quieted themselves
within their limittes, and spared their often invasions into England: at what
time Ceolulphus reigned in that part of Englaud called Northumberland. With
Beda this time lived.
this king Beda a learned man amongst the Britains, was in great reverence and
honor, and dedicated to him the history of the Church in English, and by
Bedas means, Ceolulphus delivered Ceolulphus became a Moncke.
the government to his uncle Egbertus, and became a Moncke.

In the time of this king the Saracens which inhabited in diverse parts of
Affrike and Spain, were driven thence forth to the number of four hundred
thousand by Edo, at what time they invaded France, and were so miserably
persecuted every Edo and Abdimarus two kings of the Saracens.
way, that they lost Abdimarus their king, with a great number of the Saracens:
but more is written of this in their own history.

Now to Hildericus the third of that name, surnamed Stupidus, the son of
Theodoricus Cala, who reigned nine years, and after was by consent of all the
princes of France deposed Hildericus surnamed Stupidus.
from his kingdom, and in his place governed eighteen years Pipinus: during
which time Hildericus lived privately and secretly in an Abbie.

By this time died Carolus Martellus a great Prince of France, and lies buried
among the kings at S. Denis. Of whose valor, fame and courage not only in
France, but every where, Read of this Noble Martellus, and of his diverse
worthy and Martellus died
renowned victories over the Saracens in Paul. Aemilius in the beginning of his
2. book: after whom succeeded Carolomanus which then yielded all his signories
and titles of dignities unto Pipinus: who presently thereupon called a
Parliament of all the Princes and Barons of France, to stablish laws and
Pipinus the first anointed.
decrees for the receiving of the Roman religion, and allowing of the dignity
of the Pope into France, for the which Pope Steven created king Pipine one of
the Roman Patricians: this king grew so great in France, that the Saxons
sought his friendship, promisig to aid him at all times with three hundred
horsemen to any exploite. In the time of king Pipine Salim a great Prince of
the Saracens with eight hundred Salim.
thousand Saracens invaded Cappadocia without any great exployt done: this time
the Turks issued forth of their Caspian holds and invaded Armenia, and after
commenced war with the Arabians in France. The Popes authority first allowed
in France.


After that Pipinus had quieted the state of France, and was confirmed by the
Pope to his kingdom: for he was the first that allowed the authority of the
Pope in France: and after that Thassillo king of Bauaria had yielded himself
to the crown of France, and that the wars of Aquitania was ended, when
Nauserius their governor was slain by his Read Pau. Aemilius lib. 3. of
Charles the great.
own soldiers: then Pipinus died, after whom succeeded Carolus the great, who
reigned in France six and forty years.

It is read that in every country or kingdom, some men are noted chief one
excelling another, and among these few gallant and famous, one is ever
preferred in all countries, of whom they hold and brag of, their
antiquity, their laws, kingdoms, their chief conquests, and victories
generally they do attribute to one above another: as for example here I set
down.

Among the old Assyrians.
Nymrodes. Belus. But specially Ninus.
Among the old Egyptia^s.
Vexores. But specially Sesostris, the Hercules of Egypt.
Among the old Persians.
Darius Histaspis. Artaxerxes Mnemon: But especially Cyrus.
Among the Greeks.
Miltiades, Phocion, biades, Pelopidas, Pericles, and diverse others: above all,
Themistocles.
Among the Romans.
Titus Manlius. Val. Coruinus. Coriolanus, and Camillus with others, yet one
Julius Caesar above them all.
In Spain.
Amongst all other jolly fellows Viriatius most commended, and of late,
Charles the fifth.
And so in France.
Francus. Marcomirus, and Pharamundus. Yet Charles the great, the only man
that advanced the name of France.
This king after his first entry into France, took Aquitania and Vastonia
under his hand, and after went into Italy, being Charles the great advanced
the fame of France.
thereto requested by Hadrian then Pope of Rome, where he waged sharp wars
with the Longobardes, whom he vanquished and quite destroyed both them and
their government out of Italy, where they reigned 204. years after their I
followed in all points Paul. Aen^lius from Pharamu^dus, until Henry the first,
and from thence I followed Arnol. Fernonus, unto Jews the 12. the two only
best writers of the French.
first entering into Italy: in the which voyage he not only confirmed that
which king Pipinus his predecessor had before granted to the Pope Stephen, but
also charge and commands that all the rites and ceremonies of the Roman
religion should be used and solemnized within all the kingdom of France.

After this he returned into France, and made a voyage with an army into
Spain, and took many towns and cities of the Saracens, wasted and spoiled,
and did great harm in Spain, and did the like annoyance after his coming
home into Germany: for he subdued the Saxons, and brought the Bohemians under
the crown of France. After this, he made wars against the Hunnes, which
endured well nigh eight years. This king ended many broiles and quarrels in
diverse countries, and withal he had so enlarged the kingdom of France, and
brought all places and all nations subject to France, that he was by his good
success and great victories had over diverse regions, called Carolus the great:
and for that the government of Carolus the great was such, that almost all the
Northwest kingdoms were either made fearful of France, or paying tribute,
or some service to France: so that Carolus by his greatness every where, and
by his favor with Pope Leo, was by the means of Leo created Augustus and made
Emperor, and the Empire brought from Rome into France, from thence into
Germany, where it remains by the name of the Emperor The empire of Rome
brought to France by Charles the great.
of Almania, the third remove of the Empire: for first from Rome to
Constantinople, where it continued for a long time, and from thence removed to
Germany, and last into France.

I will set down the names of all the kings of France, from Clodouaeus the 2.
and the 12. after Faramundus, until this Charles the great, the 12. king of
Gallia, as I found them in Functius and in Beroaldus table: for Pharamundus
began his reign in France in the 299. Olympiad, and in the year of our
Savior 420. and reigned as here you may read in this table.

1 Clodouaeus 2. reigned after his father 17. years. 2 Lotarius 3. succeeded
and reigned 4. years. 3 Hildericus the 2. reigned 14. years. 4 Theodoricus
succeeded his brother Lotarius, and reigned 14. years. 5 Clodouaeus 3. 4.
years. 6 Hildebertussucceded his brother Clodouaeus, and reigned 18. years. 7
Dagobertus the 2. called alsoin Functius Clodouaeus Though Clodouaeus the 2. of
that name be the 12. king in number after Pharamundus, yet because of the
division of the histo^e I begin from him as from the first unto Charles the
great.
reigned 4. years. 8 Lotarius 4. of that name and brother to Dagobertus
reigned 7. years 9 Theodoricus surnamed Cala, son to Dagobertus, the 2.
reigned 15. years. 10 Hildericus surnamed Stupidus 9. years. 11 Pipinus
surnamed the short, came after Hildericus, being deposed from his kingdom and
reigned 18.
CHAP. VI.
From Charles the great, the only king of France in fame, of whom all the
states of France hold their laws, monuments, and other ceremonies belonging
to their inaugurations, crowning, and their several pomp: of his wars and
victories against the Saracens: of his diverse conquests every where, and of the
taking of the Empire into Germany.

CHarles the great, the twenty three king of France, who was made Emperor,
and created Augustus by Pope Leo, and the Empire brought thereby to France,
and into Germany: for until this time the Empire remained in the East part
called imperium Orientale, which was Constantinople, and removed into France
From Pharamundus to Clodouaeus the 2. and from him to Charles the great.
and Germany, where it is called imperium Occidentale. Hitherto I have set
down the names of the kings of France lineally from Pharamundus the first
king of Gallia, which reigned in the year of Christ our Savior 420. until
Carolus the great the 23. king after Pharamundus, who being both Emperor and
king, governed France forty six years. This succession of kings continued
408. years: so that from the first coming of the Frenchmen out of Scythia,
which was in the 85. Olympiad, twenty years before the twenty one Iubilee,
until this Charles the great, which was in the 814. year of Christ, from
Marcomirus unto Francus, 106. Olympiad, whhich is 424. years: during which
time they were called Neumagi Marcomanni and after I use not these Olympiads
for any just number of years, for that there was error in them.
Sicambri until Francus, from Francus unto Pharamundus 113. Olympiad, which is
452. years, during which time they were called Franci: from Pharamu^dus to
Charles the great 393. years, at what time they were first called Galli: so
that from Antenor, who married Cambra the daughter of king Belinus the Britain,
until Charolus the great are 1270. years. By this time the kingdom of
France waxed so mighty, that Carolus was made Emperor by Leo the Pope, as I
said before. Now France by means of his great fortune favored so Charles
the great made Emperor of Rome.
much Pope Leo, that Rome by France, and France by Rome became strong.

The Popes of Rome after this time by means of their religion received into
France, into Spain, into Britain, into diverse parts of Germany, and into
other kingdoms of Europe, began again to revive their Empire under the
Pope, and brought the Emperor subject to the Pope, made kings and princes to
creep to the Pope, and entised all Europe under Popes flourished after the
Emperors.
his cross, yielding homage and paying tribute unto him, as to their chiefest
and only Monarch of the world: for before the Popes time the Emperor of Rome
subdued and conquered all nations, and forced all kingdoms to pay tribute unto
Rome.

Now the Pope subdued the Emperor, and made him his general lieutenant: after
the Emperor he substituted the king of France, and the king of Spain
martial of the field to fight for him, that he became so great, that though
he called The greatness of the Popes of Rome.
himself seruus seruoru^: yet would he be compted and esteemed lord of lords:
for he would bind, and he would lose, he would curse, and he would bless, he
would forgive sins, and pardon offenses: he kept the keys of heaven, and of
hell. Who ruled like lords, and commanded like kings, but the Pope and
Mahumet, of equal antiquity and of like nature? the one in Arabia the other
in Rome, two mo^sters of the world, and two enemies of Christianity, whom we
leave a while and turn to France, where the Empire remained this time. The
kingdoms of the North began now to flourish.
And for that the kingdoms of the Danes, of the Sueuians, of the Noruegians,
and other nations of the North begin now to flourish: and also, for that the
state of France are now become acquainted with all writers as diverse Chronicles
are extant thereof, I will only therefore set down briefly their kings and
their names from Carolus the great, until the time of Jews the 12. of that
name: rather for that the histories of France are now familiarly known by
reason of their wars, and of the greatness of their kingdom, then while
they were yet strangers by the name of Neumagi first, and after Sicambri, and
then Franci, and last Galli. Beside other names, as Cimbri with Beroaldus lib.
4.
the Romaus, Galatae with the Greeks, after called Gaulgreekes in Asia, Belgae
while they dwelt in Germany, Armeni while they Gaul greeks.
were in Armenia, and Scythae before they came out of Scythia. But how so ever
writers vary in their names, they agree that they were called Celtes, Galli,
and Franci, which name they held from Francus time, because they were of long
continuance: all other names were given to them according to the countries that
they dwelled in.

But let us return to Charles the great, who after he had reigned 46. years
he died, after whom his son Jews surnamed Lodouicus pius succeeded his
father Charles the great, both in the kingdom, and in the Empire.
the Godly, succeeded and governed France 26. years. This was also crowned
Emperor after his father, by Pope Steven the fourth of that name: at what time
Michael surnamed Curoplates was Emperor of Constantinople, who sent
ambassadors to Jews for conclusion of peace: for the Saracens about this time
took Creete and possessed it, and vanquished in two or three battles the
Greeks, and subdued many towns in Asia. This king Lodouicus now consecrated
Augustus, appointed his three sons to have several governments: Tilius de
reg. Francor.
the one called Lotharius whom he sent into Italy as a king to rule and to
order the States of Italy: the second son named Pipinus he sent to govern in
Aquitania: the third after his own name Jews, whom also he sent as king over
the Noricanes. After Jews died, his son Lotharius succeeded and held the
Empire 15. years, until his brethren commenced The great slaughter in the
civil wars of France between brethren were such, that all Carolus stock was
welnigh extinguished
war against him, and such terrible and bloody wars, that all France was
weakened thereby, and all the blood of Carolus extinguished: for in these
wars were slain above 100000. of the flowers of France on both sides. But
in fine they agreed amongst themselves, that Lotharius should hold the Empire
and govern over Italy, and other nations in the East, and Carolus (surnamed
Caluus) should be king in France, and the third son should possess in
Germany and in Hunnia under the name of a king.

This Carolus Caluus reigned king in France 38. years: he Carolus Caluus.
imprisoned close in a monastery his brothers children, which was Pipinus and
Jews. After this, Carolus died in Mantua, being poisoned by Sedechia a Jew,
and his own Physician: then succeeded Jews surnamed Balbus who reigned two
years, and Jews surnamed Balbus.
was created Emperor by Pope John in France. He had two sons by his
concubine, named Jews and Charlemaine, they both succeeded their father as
kings of France: Jews died in Jews the third, and Carolomanus the 27.
the fourth year of his reign, and Charlemaine in the fifth year. After whose
death, the Danes and the Normanes invaded France, and filled all France with
blood. Carolus the third of that name surnamed Crassus, after these two
brethren, reigned Carolus surnamed Crassus the 28.
five years, Beroaldus says 7. years.

About this time the Danes gave sundry battles in England, and were often
vanquished, but still they continued their wars until they made a conquest
of all the East parts of England. This time Odo the son of Robert duke of
Anioy reigned Odo the 29.
in France, and governed it 9. years: In whose time the schole in the
University of Oxeford was builded by Alfredus king of Northumberland, in the
year of Christ 895.

By this king the Flower deluce was first appointed in the ensign of France,
then Carolus (surnamed Simplex) reigned 27. Carolus Simplex.
years: this was the son of Balbus.

But to avoid tediousness, (according to my promise) I will pass over the
rest of the history, and of the names of the rest of the kings of France
until Jews the 12: for I may not stand long to entreat of every country
(for that I write of Jews the 12.
many countries,) only touching the antiquities of kingdoms, their
continuance, their beginning and ending, the time of their government, and the
names of their governors, committing to your view this compendious abstract of
all Chronicles, and all their histories, which would make infinite volumes to
be read in those Chronographers that I follow Tilius table chiefly in setting
down the kings of France
largely wrote of them.

31 Rodulphus duke of Burgundy, and after king of France, reigned. 2. years.
32 Jews, who fled into England with his mother named Oginia, returns now
into France, and reigned with Rodulphus 10. years. But he reigned king in the
whole. 27. years. 33 Lotharius the son of Jews the 4. by Gerberga the
sister of Otho the Emperor, he reigned 31. year. In whose time the kingdom of
Polonia began, in the year of Christ 963. The kingdom of Polonia.
34 Jews the fifth of that name reigned. 1. year.
Hitherunto have reigned from Faramundus 34. kings: now reigned after this
Lotarius these many kings, which you see Read Aemil. lib. 1.
here under written in this table, which hitherto continued in the line of
Francus: and now I will set down the first king of Hugo Capetus the first king
of those that were naturally borne Galli.
those that were naturally borne Galli, the third name of the kings of France.

35 Hugo Capetus reigned 9. years. This was the first king borne of those that
were called Galli: for hitherunto the lineal sucession of Francus endured. 36
After him his son Robert reigned 34. years. In the beginning of whose time
the kingdom of Hungary began. 10. Tilius de reg. Franc.
37 Henry the son of Robert succeeded and reigned after his father. 30.
years. 38 Philippe the first of that name, and son to Henry reigned 49.
years. In whose time began the kingdom of Bohemia.
In the time of this Philippe the first, two most famous men and worthy
Captains took their voyages, the one named Godfrey of Bullen, with an army
from France into the holy Land which was Jerusalem, so called after Christ's
time on earth: Jerusalem called the Holy land.
this war is called bellum Sacrum the sacred wars, against the Saracens.
Read Tilius Chronicles of the French kings, where you shall find a Catalogue
of the nobles, peers, and gentlemen of France, and of diverse other countries
that went on that voyage with Godfrey of Bullen to Jerusalem: the other
Captain came to England, William the bastard of Normandy, afterward called
William Conqueror, of whom our English chronicles can testify. But I will
briefly pass over the kings.

39 Jews surnamed Crassus reigned 28. years. 40 Jews surnamed Junior. 43.
years. 41 Philippus Augustus surnamed Deodatus 43. years. In whose time the
Jews were banished out of France. 42 Jews the eight of that name. 4. years.
43 Jews the ninth, surnamed Holy. 43. years. Both Functius, Beroaldus, and
Tilius agree in placing these kings in this sort.
44 Philip the 3. surnamed Audax, son to Jews. 9. 15. years. 45 Philippus the
4. surnamed Pulcher the fair, and son to Philip the third, reigned 28.
years. In this kings reign began the kingdom of Ottoman the Turk. 46 Jews
the 10. surnamed Vtinus, king both of France and of Navarre, reigned almost 2.
years. 47 Philip the 5. surnamed Longus, reigned 5. years. 48 Carolus Pulcher
king of France and Navarre 7. years.
Now after this, Philip the first of the house of Valois began, in the 1328.
year of our Savior, whose line has continued even from this Philip of Valois
the first king of that house, until Frances Valois last king of France, and
the last of that stock, which continued 263. years: whose names successively
are here set down in Tilius Chronicles, as follows.

49 Philip of Valots the first king of that name. 22. years: The house of
Valloys began.
50 Whose eldest son named John was the first Dolphine of France, which to
this day does continue. He reigned after his father king of France. 14.
years. 51 Carolus the 5. surnamed the wise, reigned 18. years. Whose brother
named also Philip was made duke of Burgu^dy. About this time John Wicleue
opened much falshoode yet unknown of Papistrie, both disputing and writing
against it. 52 Carolus the sixth, surnamed Been amatus reigned 42. years: this
ordained first the 3. Flower deluce. This time reigned in England Richard the
second. 53 Charles the seventh reigned 38. years. This king commenced war
against England, at what time Henry the 5. reigned, who subdued all France,
and was crowned king in Paris. 54 Jews the eleventh reigned 23. years. 55
Carolus the eight reigned 14. years. 56 Jews the 12. reigned 17. years in
France, being the 1500. year of our Savior Christ: Read of this king
Arnoldus Ferronus all his third book which he only wrote of this Jews the
12. At what time reigned in England Henry the 7.
Thus far briefly Iranne over the state of France, omitting many things
willingly and wittingly, which I particularly I have followed Paulus Aemilius,
and Al^. Ferranus, since Faramundus unto Jews the 12. and have also co^ferred
both them with Tilius Chron. Before Faramundus by Tritemius.
touch in the history of Spain: for I took not in hand to write at large, or
to set forth great volumes of superfluous histories, but only (as I said
before) to note the antiquities and first beginning of kingdoms, and to mark
the errors of profane histories in many things, dissenting from Moses, from
Daniel, and from the Prophetical writings, who opened all Chronicles: for they
could not agree in the chiefest points of all true Chronicles, neither the
Romans in the building of Rome, from whence they ground their histories:
neither the Greeks by their Olympiads: neither the Persians of Cyrus time,
neither Spain in their account of A. E R. A: neither the Arabians of their
Hegyra. In fine, impossible it is to find the truth of Antiquities in
profane writers, without conferring of the same with the Sacred histories of
the Prophets, who reueiled the truth of time by their Jubilees.

A BRIEF FOR BRITAIN.
SEeing that I have written of other countries, I can not tell how to answer
my countrymen well, if I should not also somewhat speak of the Britains,
though in truth many have sufficiently written of the coming of Brutus unto
this land, of his kingdom and succession of kings and continuance, which
though of some denied, which do now as they then did in the time of
Halicarnassaeus: Sempron. de Ital.
who after he had travailed his histories from Sempronius, Fabius Pictor, and
from M. Cato, and proved evidently the Fabius Pictor de aureo seculo.
coming of Aeneas into Italy, of his kingdom and posterity in Alba longa
until Romulus, being 17. discents after him: yet Mar. Cato de originibus.
some gens inuidiosa Traianis (as Halicarnassaeus calls them) seemed not to
allow the history, though they knew it themselves, and also read it by so
many proved, because they would Berosus and Manethon wrote unknown histories.
be named antiquaries, and the credit of the histories should come from them.

Such was Polidor Virgil in his history of Britain, such was Berosus in the
history of Hetruria, (being two strangers) and such was Manethon to write of
Spain. So there were among the Jews Talmudists, who among other matters which
they Talmudists fabulous.
wrote (for they were the only men among the Jews) would also by this credit
that they had among the people, write what they listed, that they became
thereby very fabulous in their histories. So among the Egyptians their
superstitious priests filled their books with lies: and so of diverse other
countries, men wrote rather fables then histories of their countries. But these
are rejected from sound approved authors, tanquam Mithici: The priests of
Egypt, Mithici.
for in reading of histories I find nothing so ready as errors in antiquities
of countries, and in original of nations.

And surely it is not to be wondered at, concerning the antiquities of time,
even from the beginning of the world, and the late beginning of writers from
Cyrus time, or rather Alexanders time: for in the first age from Adam to the
flood, no No profane writers known before Cyrus time.
truth is had nor known but only by Moses in the Genesis, and 1650. years
from the flood unto the time of the Olympiads, men wandered in no true account
of time, nor of histories, (excepting that which is written in the books of
Moses and the Prophets) nothing seemed sound nor certain, but co^iectures and
fained fables, as in the history of the Chaldeans, Assyrians, The uncertainty
of profane histories.
Egyptians, and diverse other nations, many things are written which is named
Mythycum very licentiously and to liberally: and after the time of the
Olympiads, how untrue profane historians wrote until Daniels time, who sees
it not?

Since which time, a brief of al true chronicles is set down by the Prophet
in describing the 4. beasts and their natures, Daniel a true Chronographer for
the 3. last Monarchies.
signifying thereby the Monarchies of the world, their government and their
continuance, the only ground from whence all writers make good their
histories. But let no man write of his country with more affection then truth
will warrant him for his proof, as it seems Berosus did of Chaldea, Manethon
of Egypt, Ctesias of Persia: for that they may easily be corrected by any late
writer that is seen in the Sacred histories (and yet they were men of singular
authority and credit in histories of their countries) who by conferring
Prophetical histories with their profane writings, men find nothing more then
fables of antiquities, and errors in lieu of true histories, not knowing the
Center of all certain Chronicles, I mean the Prophetical histories.

But have with them for my country also, being contented to be excused with
them by Liui, In tanta rerum vetustate, multi temporis errores implica^tur,
etc. For no doubt as Greek histories The Greeks histories more fabulous then
the Latins.
are more uncertain then the Latins, of whom Josephus says, that they had
nothing to brag of, but their lies, every man setting down in writing his
opinion, rather then studying the truth of the history. But as occasion shall
serve me, so shall I speak of them and of others. In the mean time I marvel
much how some men are more bent without either reason or authority, to
reprove that which in true Histories is approved.

Many of the best Roman writers seemed to be ignorant of that which they knew,
and yet would take no notice thereof: they would not have vrbem omnium
gentium, and Imperiorum dominam to be builded by any of Aeneas stock, or any
ofsprings of the Troyans: neither would they allow any part of Italy to be
inhabited with the Grecians, whom the Romans Fab. Pictor de orig.
mortally hated. They claim their antiquity from Noah by the name of Ianus,
who came from Scythia Saga presently after the flood into Italy: and after
Ianus from Saturnus and from M. Cato de or^g. Ital.
Cameses. This Sempronius, Mar. Cato, and Fabius Pictor seem fully to prove,
and they stand to it stoutly: notwithstanding Semp. de diu. Ital.
they have as many Greek writers against them in proouing the contrary:
affirming, that the Grecians, Arcadians, Lacedaemonians, Achaians, and
Pelasgians first inhabited Italy. So Myrsilus Myrsilus de bello Pelasgico.
in the whole book which begins thus, Italiam primum coluere Graeci, etc.
proves the Grecians to be the first inhabitants in Italy. After Myrsilus
follows Dionysius Halicarnassaeus in like order and proof, as he that
reads Halicarnassaeus, Halicar. lib. 1.
reads Myrsilius: and after Dionysius, Herodotus who does not only fully
warrant Myrsilus and Dionysius, but also concludes with more warrants of his
own. This controversy rises between the Grecians and the Romans, about the
antiquity of Italy: the Greeks calling Italy, Spurcam, spuriam and nouitiam,
and the Romans naming Greece, Mendacem and fabulosam.

The like controversy grew between the Egyptians and the Scythians in those
days, and the like now about the coming of Brute unto this country, whose
coming has been Contention between the Scythians and the Egyptians.
received and confirmed by succession of kings from Brutus to Cadwalader. And
after the kings, the line and stock of Brutus unto this day 2700. years, sed
nihil magnum somnianti: for they can reprove without authority, but they will
not allow proofs with authorities: such is their credit with some people, as
Pythagoras was with his own scholars, who thought Pythagoras speech a
sufficient warrant to prove anything, only alleging (...). I doubt there be
many Pythagoreans, that Pythagoras authority with his scholars was no more
but (...).
stand too much in their own conceits, some dreaming the word Britania to be
Pritania, some imagining the Britains to to be Picts, and that the original
of the Britains should be from the Picts, and many such other reasons,
rather fables, wherein there is neither agreement of time, which is to be
noted, nor affinity with speech, neither likeness of names, nor any things
else like: for the Pictes came but the last day to Armorica, which is little
Britain in France, with one Rodericke their captain from Scythia, and not
with Aeneas Picts invaded Britain.
from Phrygia, to seek where they might have place to inhabit. I confess
that these Pictes and Scots, invaded Britain, and made often irruptions into
Britain in the time of Constantine the great, Iouinianus, Theodosius, and many
other Emperors: but they were repelled, and compelled with many a good beating
to retire. I should better allow the opinion of those that say, that the
Pictes are Scots: for with the Britains the Picts by no likeness may be
resembled neither by time, nor by tongue.

I will leave the Picts for the Scots, whose kingdom was subdued and
translated into Scotland, by Kenedus king of the Scots, where I leave them.
Many licencious writers have been, and are in the world, not only in matters of
antiquities, but in other matters also. Who will believe Polidor a stranger in
Britain, before Giraldus a singular learned man borne in Britain? who had
traueiled as many countries as Polidor did, and therefore was in great credit
with Rich. the second: who who will believe a foreign late writer before
Gildas the Britain, that wrote of his country in Claudius Caesar's time? If
neither Giraldus, nor Gildas, nor any other ex bardis Britannis are allowed,
let Ponticus Virunnius, let Iu. Caesar in his Comment, Pont. Virunnius
whosaid they were ex eadem prosapia, be allowed.

For the truth thereof I doubt not but I shall write as true as the Frenchmen
shall do of France, the Hispaniard of Hispaine, and so of the rest: I mean,
of the Saxons, of the Greeks, Brutus from Italy.
and of the Romans: and my reason shallbe as probable for the landing of
Brutus in this Island from Italy, as the Italians shall prove Ianus to come
from Chaldea into Italy, or as the Ianus from Chaldea.
Frenchmen shall prove Marcomirus to come from Scythia into Germany, and so in
time to come into France, and so to Marcomirus from Scythia.
hold the name of Francus.

I will not speak of Caetubales, Hiberians, Hesperians, nor of the old
Celtiberians, afterward called Spaniards, who had their name of Hispanus:
neither will I speak of the ancient stock of Brutus while yet they dwelt in
Creete, and after in Phrygia, and after that in Albalonga, and last in Rome,
but of the coming of Brutus unto this land the son of Syluius, the son of
Ascanius, the son of Aeneas, and from the name of the Britains since that
time, of the which if any man doubt, he may as well doubt of the antiquity of
the Latins, of the Albanes, and last of the Romans, which al did issue and
proceed of the house of Aeneas: for imperij Romaniorigo Aeneas, as is proved
by Halicarnassaeus, which affirms that Romulus the first king of the Romans
was the seventeenth king out of the body of Aeneas lineally descending: for
after Aeneas died, being at his death king of the Latins three years, after
whom succeeded his son Ascanius, and builded a town hard by Albalonga
builded by Ascanius.
the hill Alba, and named it Albalonga, leaving his fathers wife Lauina in that
City which Aeneas builded thirty years before Ascanius builded Albalonga:
where during his life Ascanius kept his Court, and it became the king of Albans
Palace: at what time the names of the Latins were changed to the kings of
Alba, which endured four hundred years and Read Dyonis. Halicar. of this
history lib. 1.
odd, until Tullus Hostilius the third king of Rome conquered them: so that
the right line and blood of the kings of Alba descended also from Aeneas by
succession, from the father unto the son, until Romulus time, as
Halicarnassaeus says: whose names are set down orderly in Annius chronicles,
and in Berosus, with whom Dyonis. Halicar does in all points agree, as well
for the continuance of time, as also for their sure naming of their kings which
reigned between Aeneas and Romulus.

So does M. Cato in his fragments, men of great credit in other histories,
and to be skant in the Britain history allowed, hinc liuor, the cause thereof
I take it in some rather negligence then ignorance: for in truth the Physician
must study to ease his patients, the Lawyer to please his client, the Divine to
feed the souls: so that few have time to study histories. Yea Halic. lib. 1.
Origo Romani imperij Aeneas.
many that read histories, are to seek in histories other ways then the
histories of England: but I will return to Aeneas which is as Annius says,
Imperij Romani origo, and therefore I will begin from the coming of Aeneas
into Laurentum in Italy.

Now as concerning the coming of Aeneas into Italy, his toils and
travails, read Helanicus an old ancient writer. My only purpose is to set
down the true histories of the Britains, having that name from Brutus, even
as the Frenchmen were named of Francus, and the Hispaniards from Hispanus.

If you read Fab. Pictor de aureo seculo, and Portius Cato, you M. Cato de
frag. origo.
shall find the kindred and predecessors of Romulus the first king of Rome so
plainly to come out of the very house and stock that Brutus the first king of
the Britains came out of: so that the last king of the Latins, I mean
Aeneas, and his son Ascanius the first king of Albalonga, are of that
antiquity and continuance in Italy, as Brutus is in Britain, now called
England. For as Romulus and the kings of Rome, and after the Emperors and the
Romans were offsprings of the kings of the Albanes and Latins, and the
Albanes and The Romans. come fromthe Trojans.
Latins offsprings of the kings of Troy: so is it proved that the Romans
came from Troy: for Ascanius was graundfather unto Brutus, who first came into
this Isle named then Albion, but by Brutus after named Britain. Some take this
for fables, certain it is that the beginning of antiquities seem fabulous,
for that the errors of time have obscured many things, as is proved of the
Roman histories, whom the Grecians never knew nor never heard of: for neither
Thucydides, nor Xenophon, two of the greatest writers in the flourishing state
of Romans not known to the Grecians before Alex. time, nei there the Grecians
to the Persians, until Xerxe, time.
Greece, yea and late after the foundation of Rome 360. years, neither Herodot
after them made any mention of Rome.

Even so the Grecians were to the Persians, and the Persians to the Grecians
most ignorant, not one knowing another before Xerxes with his huge army
thought to invade Greece: for these be the words of Strabo, Nec Graeci Persas,
nec Persae Graecos agnorunt. And as for France and Spain they were taken but
for two cities, the one named Gallia, the other Hesperia, as Josephus Strab.
lib. 15.
affirms.

Many men write very fables of their countries, as Berosus, if it be Berosus,
being a Chaldean priest, wrote of the Chaldeans mere fables, and more
licencious of the kings of Assyria, without any warrant of truth, not knowing
the Scriptures, Berosus.
where the best and soundest warrant of Chaldean histories are to be found. In
like sort Ctesias the Persian wrote of his country Ctesias.
23. books both vain and foolish in setting forth the antiquity,
government, and greatness of the king of Persia, then is truly proved by
true account of time, as Plutarch Manethon.
affirms. So Manethon an Egyptian priest, wrote so many lies of his country
of Egypt that accompteth 340. Pharoes successively from Amasis the first
Pharao, unto Amasis the last Pharao: but he is reproved to his face by
Josephus in both his books against Appion the Egyptian, and a scholemaster of
Alexandria: Joseph. lib. cont. App. on.
yet Manethon found great fault in Herodot for his fables and lies of Egypt.

But let controversies pass, all countries have their fables mingled with
truth: and so I will return to the histories of The proof of Brutus coming
into Albion more plain then of Francus into France, or of Hispanus into
Hispaine.
the Britains, whose certeintie and truth is as sound, and as true to be
proved, as either France, Spain, or any other country: whose continuance
was without change of name for longer time, then many bragging kingdoms, whose
laws, whose kings, whose country unconquered longer then any of them both,
easy to be proved by all sound writers: for Spain was conquered and subdued
first by the Carthagineans, and Affricanes: secondly by the Romans: thirdly by
the Vandales: fourthly by the Goths: and fifthly by the Saracens, who possessed
almost all the kingdom of Spain for 800. years. Read Annius de frag.
Hispaniae of the sundry names of Hispaniards.
So may it be said of the change of their names: as Catubales, Iberians,
Celtiberians, Hesperians and Spaniards, which during the time of this change,
served the Carthagineans, the Romans, the Greeks, the Goths, and the
Saracens. The Britains never The Britains never changed their names.
changed their names since Brutus time, which is 2700. and odd years, which
no one kingdom of the world can say so much, though in some part it was
subdued by the Romans, and then by the Danes, and last by the Normanes: yet
they reserved their names unchanged, and all the whole country of Camber the
second son of Brutus vnco^quered, which of late is called Wales, their
ancient name unchanged, and their language uncorrupted.

So may I speak of the Frenchmen which were called at The diverse and sundry
names of the French men.
their first arrival from Scythia into Germany, Neumagi: then were they called
Sicambri: thirdly Franci: and fourthly Galli. So were the Persians, Elamites,
Artaeans, and after Cephancs, and last of all Persians: so Egypt was called
Oceana, Nilea, Aerea, and last of all, Egypt. To conclude, there is no nation
that I can read of, but were subject to diverse names, and thereby known, The
Persians and the Egyptians were by diverse names called.
saving only the Britains, which continue unto this day: though the Danes
began to call them Welsh, as they call all strangers Welsh, which was 1800.
years and odd, as the reigns and government of the kings of Britain do
manifestly prove. whose names I need not to write, for that they be set down
to your view in tables printed with the pictures of all the kings of the
Britains: Now after

1 Brutus. 2 Locrinus. 3 Madan. 4 Mempricius. 5 Ebrancus and 6 Brutus, surnamed
Viridescutum, and so forward until Rudacus time, the 20. king Britain
divided for 50. years into four kingdoms.
after Brutus, at what time the kingdom was divided into four parts, and
governed by four several kings for fifty years: Rudacus king of Cambria,
which is Wales: Pinnor king of Loegria, which is England, Saterus king of
Albania, which is now Scotland, and Clotenus king of Cornubia, now Cornwall:
all the kingdom after fifty years came to Dunwallus, Clotenus son, about
700. years after Brutus, and continued until Elidurus the third, for the
space of a 182. years.

And after Elidurus the third, it continued the reign of From Elidurus unto
Belinus the great 185. years.
thirty three kings from Elidurus until Belinus the great, 185. This Belinus
was uncle unto Cassibelane, who reigned king in Britain when Julius Caesar
came into Britain, about a thousand and thirty years after Brutus: so long
was Britain unconquered, which as I said before: for the spite of Androgeus to
Cassibelan, he wrote his letters to Caesar after the first great overthrow of
Caesar: of which Lucan the Poet says.

Territa quaesitis ostendunt terga Britannis Romani, etc.
This Androgeus then Duke of Troinouant, now called London Androgeus the only
cause of Caesar's victory.
since king Luds time, promised his aid and help with all the Britains which
he could make, if after the conquest he should by Caesar be restored to
govern the Britains: but Caesar by this means brought the Britains to pay
tribute to the Romans, yet reigned kings in Britain from Cassibelan lineally
unto Cadwallader for seven hundred years and odd: The kings of Britain
continued 1800. years.
so that Britain was governed from the first king unto the last for a thousand
eight hundred and odd years, as Guidonius affirms.

But for that the kings of Britain are by all their names named, their
successio^s and continuance of time written in diverse Chronicles of England:
beside Doctor Powel of late has written of their civil wars, of their
kings, their laws, and Iu Caesar's stock proceeded from gens Iulia.
governments, that I need not further to write herein: my desire is no less
to satisfy those that will with reason and authorities be satisfied, then was
M. Coruinus a learned Roman Orator, willing to please Augustus Caesar for the
setting forth of his family and his house, in proouing gens Iulia, which was
the stock of the first Emperor Julius Caesar his uncle, to descend lineally
from Ascanius. The history is written in Coruinus de progeny Augusti, in
whose time Coruinus flourished; whom Augustus desired to traueile and to set
Augusts Caesar desirous to know his genealogy.
down the genealogy of his stock, that being so fortunate an Emperor as he
was, in subduing almost all the kingdoms of the world, and captiuating them
as Provinces under the Empire of Rome, he might know also whence gens Iulia
came, that he might assure him self of the certeintie of his house.

To satisfy this Emperor Augustus being thereunto by him entreated, Coruinus
briefly divided the whole earth into three several parts, Asia, Europe, and
Affrike: In this Asia the great is Asia the less contained: in the which
Country is a Region named Phrygia, into the which one Dardanus a great prince
of Creete that had the daughter of one Teucer given Dardanus married the daugh
ter of Teucer.
him in marriage, came with a great multitude of young men and soldiers to
inhabit about the time that Moses dyed, where he builded a great City, and
named it after his own name Dardania, and the inhabitants therein were called
Dardanians.

The fame of this king Dardanus grew so great, that Teucer his father in law
came from Creete, with a number of gentlemen to visit his daughter unto
Dardania in Phrygia, where Dardanus reigned three years, after whom succeeded
Ericthonius The successions of all the kings that reigned in Troy.
75. years: after Ericthonius succeeded Tros the king of Dardania, which reigned
sixty years, by whom Dardania was named Troy, after the kings name: after Tros
succeeded Ilus, who reigned 54. years, after whom succeeded Laomedon, and
reigned 36. years: and after him reigned his son Priamus named Dionys.
Halicar lib. 2.
Alexander in histories the sixth and last king of Troy: in whose time Troy was
destroyed by the Grecians. This Messala sets down in his history, how
Aeneas after the wars came into Italy, and married king Latinus daughter,
succeeded as heir of Aeneas married Latinus daugh ter.
the king in his kingdom, from whose body lineally descended these many kings:
whose names only I will set down for that I have in the history of the
Latins written of their continuance and of the time of their government until
Romulus.

1 Aeneas. 2 Ascanius. 3 Siluius. Dionys Halycar Annius, and M. Coruinus, set
down these kings in this sott.
4 Aeneas Siluins. 5 Latinus Siluius. 6 Alba Siluius. 7 Capetus Siluius. 8
Capis Siluius. 9 Calpetus Siluius. 10 Tiberinus Siluius. 11 Agrippa Siluius. 12
Alladius Siluius. 13 Auentinus Siluius. 14 Procas Siluius. 15 Amulius Siluius.
16 Numitor Siluius which was both gra^dfather by the mother side and uncle by
the father side unto Romulus.
M. Coruinus wrote unto Augustus the whole history of the kings of Alba,
until Romulus time, and proves plain in his book, that the noble Emperor
Augustus proceeded from the house of Aeneas, that gens Iulia came lineally from
the body Augustus Caesar lineally proceeded from Aeneas.
of Iulo, which was the surname of Ascanius: some affirm the contrary. Yet
Coruinus, an ancient antiquarie living in the time of Augustus, and writing
his book to Augustus at the earnest request of the Emperor Augustus,
affirms all this to be, which Halicarnas. in all points allows: but what
is to prove the Britains to come from the Trojans? or to prove Brutus to come
to England, as much and more it makes proof, that Brutus came to this land,
as Aeneas came to Italy: the one is proved by a number of Roman writers, the
other by so many of both Roman and Britain authors, and yet Aeneas is by
some enrious writers denied to come to Italy, as Brutus is to come to
Britain, of whom Dionys. Halic. says, Scriptores partim ignorati, partim
inuidia dissimulati de aduentu Aeneae in Dionys. Halicar lib. (...).
Italiam.

The history of Aeneas, and the history of Brutus, after the destruction of
Troy, is one of the most ancient histories of the Gentiles, though in some it
be fabulous, as all profane histories be in many points: yet from these
Trojans, as from the first original of their kings and Emperors, both the
Romans and the Frenchmen are by some of their own best writers proved: of
whom Aemilius writes of their antiquity.

It is most likely that every Country has more care of it self then of other
countries, and rather French writers are to be believed in the histories of
France, then foreign writers: so of the Romans, of the Grecians, and of all
other countries as Myrsillus says, Plus vicinis quam remotis, and multo plus
genti ipsi quam extremis credatur: and yet who sees not, but both the Romans,
the Grecians, the Frenchmen, and all nations, advance their countries with
best histories, and pass Diodor. lib. 2.
lightly over many histories that makes against their Countries? But as
Diodorus Siculus describes Britain, by the name of Britain, to be fertile
and plentiful in corn, cattle, iron, with diverse other commodities: so does
Strabo commend the Britains to be people far bigger and taller then the
Frenchmen are, in these words: Britannorum statura supra Strab. lib. 4.
Gallos procera, etc. and after he reports of certain Britains which he
himself saw at Rome in the time of Augustus Caesar, of bigger bodies, and of
taller stature then any Roman, by half a foot: for says Strabo, Vidimus
puberes Britannos longissimi corporis nostris indigenis semipede celsiores.

But to be short, as it was among the Jews permitted to the Talmudistes to
write their country histories, to the Indians Talmudists.
Gymnosophists to write of India: the old Gauls committed the old records
and Chronicles of their Countries to their Gymnosophists.
wise men called Druydes: the old Hispaniards, during the Druydes.
time of their kings, and long after even unto the Romans time, had the
antiquaries called Turdetani, to write the Chronicles Turdetani.
of their Countries: and even so among the old Britains were called Bardi, to
record their antiquity and their histories, men of like credit and
estimation among the Britains, Bardi.
as were these before named in their Countries: without whose consent and
council if any man wrote concerning the state and antiquity of their
country, he should be punished according to the custom of the Country. It
is easily spoken, there was no Troy: but all countries have allowed it, time
has confirmed it, both Greek and Latin histories have written of it.

It is soon said, There was no such Brutus: but continuance of time,
succession of kings, possession of the country do prove the contrary. If
neither Geraldus being of the time of Richard the second, neither Gildas long
before Geraldus, living in the time of Claudius Augustus the Emperor, both
singularly learned, if neither consent of time, succession of kings, the
antiquity of the history, nor the affinity of tongues, which no Grecian can
deny, (for we hold the ancient names of rivers, towns, mountains, and
other monuments even from Brutus time in the self same tongue that Brutus
spoke.)

Let them give some credit to Pont. Varunnius, Julius Caesar, who said, Gens
ex nostra prosapia est, being proved by M. Coruinus, and Halicarnassaeus,
lineally to descend from Aeneas. What should I write more? Inuidia serra
animae: and truly is that spoken, that three good virtuous mothers had three
wicked vicious daughters:

Familiarity the mother of contempt. Peace and quietness, the mother of
idleness. And Truth the mother of hatred.
Yet in spite of that scorpion, Su^s ex merito quemque tuetur honor. The
history of Belinus the great, whose daughter named Belinus the great.
Cambra was married to Marcomirus son, the first king from whom the Frenchmen
since their coming to Germany flourished by the name of Sicambri, after the
name of Cambra the Britain: the history of Brenus his brother are well known
with foreign writers: so of Rodericus the great, of Leoninus the Rodericus
the great.
great, who are in the Britain history as much commended, as Pompey the
great, or Constantine the great among the Romans: Leoninus the great.
for as Pyrrhus said, Italy was not to be subdued but by Italians, neither
Rome but by the Romans: even so the Britains were not to be overthrown but
by Britains.

And here I end.

