THE CHOICE OF JEWELS. By Lodowik Lloid Esquier.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Purfoot. 1607.

T Te^psichore comes with Clio in hand, to judge with graces three,
O Of one such like Lucina said, the Sun did seldom see.
A As she that sucked Mellissaes milk, fed on Sibillas breast,
N Nursed with sweet Ambrosias meat, with heavenly Nectar dressed.
N Now comes Urania on message sent, from states of greatest fame,
A Aurora like descends from sky to enrowle on earth her name.
Q Queen Pallas said, her name in Court should be Pan^^ophia stal'd,
V Venus smiling wished her name, might be Panphila called.
E Ever Juno sadly said, her name must Pandora be,
E Each Nymph, each Muse, each grace agreed, Pandora should be she.
N Now sits she on Mynerua seat, where all Cytherides gree,
E Euterpe should to Cynthia say, crown this Queen with Crowns three.
O On forth Eudora said, and send Medeas golden fleece,
F Fates all agreed Palladium should, to Britane come from Greece.
G Great thrice gracious graced she is, where graces three do tend,
R Right happy thrice and thrice Queen, where kingdom^ three do bend.
E Erato charged Iris straight* on knee to Euri^ia bend,
T That soon Euribia from Samos should, her crown and scepter send.
B Bellona armed with sword and shield: Eumenides stands in place,
R Rhamnusia shall revenge on those, that seeks this Queens disgrace*
I In strength from Delos Diana comes with bow and quiver bend.
T The Troiane Ladies from Ida did, the goulden apple send.
A Amarusia comes with Peplon on, her chore Calliope ^als,
N Now Daphnes comes with laurel crowns to crown her Ladies all.
H Her bowers the Dryads build up brave, and these the Oreads deck,
E Each Nymph with flowers and poesies sweet attend Pandoras check.
A Arabi^n Ladies with Saba came, with mirth and Cassia sweet,
L Like Libanon all these Ladies smell, which comes our Queen to greet.
T Triton sound the Trumpet out, make worlds her fam^ to know,
H Heavens have their stars of states, some such on earth be so.
TO THE MOST NOble and virtuous Queen Anne, by the grace of God, Queen of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, etc.
LEa and Rachel, (most Noble Queen) left and forsook their Country
Mesopotamia, to come to Israel, to be the mother of the twelve Tribes of
Israel* Ruth the Moabite, came from Moab to Judah, to be the mother of many
great and godly Kings in Judah. Your Majesty descending from many Kings and
Princes, came from Denmark to Scotland, from Scotland to England, to be the
mother of many Kings and Princes, in great Britane.

Thus we are bound to the providence of God, by whom Kings do reign, and
Kingdoms are supported, and that by Gods good and gracious means in women, as
by Thermu^^s Pharoes daughter to save Moses in Nylus; to bring the Children of
Israel out of Egypt, by King Tharbus daughter of Ethiop; to yield the City
Saba, and thereby the victory to the Hebrew Army; thus heathen women by God
are appointed to serve Israel at need.

How much more is Es^her famous for her great victory over the Persians. Judith
by cutting off Holofernus head was in Bethulia both for ever famous: noble
stratagems of women. But your Majesty by putting your Highness helping hand to
pare their feet lesser, their ears shorter, their eyes out, and their
monstrous heads off, that can come and go, that can see and hear from Rome,
from Rhemes, from Spain to Great Britain, such victories should have double
tryumphes, the one in earth, the other in heaven.

When Rachels Image was buried by Syche^, Israel began to flourish; then Debora
a woman within a while after became a Judge in Israel for 40 years in mount
Ephraim: when Maachas idol Priapus, was buried and ashes thrown to Caedron,
then Judah prospered, and Hulda a woman dwelling in Jerusalem, to whom Josias
sent to know how to serve the Lord, and to be instructed by a woman, to purify
Judah from Images and Idols.

God raised wise, godly* and virtuous women in all countries to fear him, and
to feed his servants; a woman in Sarepta to feed Elias, a Sanamite woman to
lodge Elizeus, to a woman of Samaria Christ asked drink, and confessed
himself to be the Messiah.

Since Christ was so conversant with women, that to women Christ spoke his last
speech before his death, and after his death he first appeared to women, I wish
some women should have Christ in their hearts in Great Britane, as Anna had in
her arms in Jerusalem, to pray to him and not to Saints, to worship Christ in
the Church, and not Idols and Images in Closets and Galleries: then did Judah
prosper, then did Israel flourish, and then shall Great Britane be happy.

Your Majesty's most bounden and dutiful servant. LODOVVIK LLOID.

To the most noble and virtuous Prince Christianus King of Denmark, etc.
Lodowik Lloids most humble Gratulation at his coming to great Britane.
WHo can pass in silence (most noble Prince) the joys and triumphs of these
Halcyons days, wherein Christianus King of Denmark, leaving his Kingdom, his
Queen, his Court, forsaking his imperial Sceptor and his Subjects, renouncing
all princely dignities, as a Prince that had his soul divided between Great
Britane and Denmark, esteeming more the one half in Britane, than the whole
in Denmark.

O love! excelling all love, and that in a King, which the heavens cannot
subdue, the earth forget, nor fortune overthrow; of whose eternal fame, fame
dare not lie.

Let Maro cease to commend his Troiane Aeneas: let Homer blush to advance the
greatness of Achilles, which disguised himself like a woman, lest he should
go from Greece to Phrygia. Let Greece not name Ulysses to feign madness, lest
he should depart from Ithaca, and his wife Penelope to Ilion.

But Christianus King of Denmark, whom neither mother, Queen, Crowns, or
Kingdom, could keep him from great Britan: where his Majesty may of right
more rejoice of his princely Progeny, than King Philip of Hercules stock in
Macedonia, or Augustus Caesar of gens Iulia in Rome, since the line of Hercules
expired in Alexander, and the stem of Aeneas in the Emperor Nero, so that
Romans now may say, Fuimus Troes; and Macedonians say, Fuimus Herculani.

But Great Britane was then never so great under Brutus the first King, as now
under James the second King, whose continuance well nigh three thousand years,
is now again like the Eagle renewed and revived, to be by Gods goodness
continued as long by the second Brutus, that babes in cradles may say, Iubilate
Britanni.

Much beholden we are to God, if we forget not God, and great cause have we to
love, and to honor his Highness in great Britane: if we look but unto the
greatness of his love to England in Queen Elizabeth's time, and now with
greater at this present to King James, if we should be deaf, and not hear of
it, or be dumb, and not speak of it, heaven and earth would accuse us of too
much ingratitude, wood and stones should condemn us of too much forgetfulness.

Since neither Syracusa, with their conuoyes and provision to the Romans at
Thrasymenum, neither Tire nor Sydon, with their Caedars of Lybanon to
Jerusalem, were so forward as Denmark was of late to England; but as Masinissa
said of the Romans, that there was one kind of people upon the earth, the
people of Rome, and among that one people one Scipio, to whom he fully devoted
himself, as one whose soul rested in Scipioes body: the like said Hyra King
of Tire, of Solomon King of Israel.

But neither Hyra with his Sydonians, was more grateful to Solomon King of
Israel, nor Masinissa with his Numidians more loving to Scipio the Roman
Consul, than Christianus King of Denmark, was to James King of great Britane,
whom neither heavens, earth, nor seas, neither Kingdoms nor Court, could keep
that loving King from his love, to come from Denmark as a crowned star of the
North, to shine in England, and to come to celebrate and to renew the name of
great Britane, to see the Queen his Sister, his Nephew, and the rest of the
Kings children, the sound and sacred anchor of three Kingdoms.

O love immortal! not to be wayed in balance, not with measure to be
measured, not knitted with Gordius knot to be cut by Alexanders sword, neither
with Hercules knot to be vnknitted by Phoebus, since all profane Histories
cannot allow but eight only of the like love, but not eight Kings, most
seldom two. For to see a King out of his kingdom, is as strange, as to see
the Sun out of the sky.

Let England be of equal love with Denmark, since love is recompensed with
love, justly weyed in equal balance, not with Philips silver swords in
Greece, not with Artaxerxes golden Archers in Persia, but with Pythagoras
weapons, one mind, one heart, and one soul, perpetual weapons, the triumphs
thereof have their everlasting tropheis.

Among such, what needs such leagues, and covenants to dippe our weapons in
blood, as the Scythians did? or die our clothes in blood, as the Armenians did?
or to drink blood out of our arms, as the Medians and Lydians did?

Since the league between great Britane and Denmark is consecrated with inward
blood of mutual hearts, and confirmed with the entrals and bowels of natural
Parents, that two Suns may be sooner found to agree in the sky, than these
two Kings to disagree on earth.

This God has appointed, nature confirmed, fates allowed, and fortune thereto
agreed.

Hence grow the cause of our public Iubilies, and crowned feasts, our daily
tropheis, and perpetual triumphs; that as the Romans loved and agreed with
the Sabins, yielding thanks to their God in the Feast Consualia: so the
Britanes with the Danes, yielding thanks to their God Jehovah in their Feasts
Scaenopegia.

The Choice of Jewels.
THE Empire of Women, and Courts of Queens, even from Semiramis time, have
governed countries and kingdoms, subdued Realms ruled States, and brought
under their obeisance both Kings and kingdoms; Asia builded by a woman of that
name.
as also before Semiramis time it may ^ee^e probable, for that Asia the
greatest part of the world was named Asia by a Queen of that name which then
dwelt in Asi^, whose fame continued until Semiramis the second Empress,
Semira^is the second Empress of Asia.
whose martial exploytes and government* has been such (if authorities may
serve) as neither Alexander the great could exceed in magnanimity, nor Cyrus
in victories, nor Xerxes in multitude of soldiers.

We leave the Court of Sardanapalus King of Assiria, who during his life,
exceeded in all effeminate wanto^nesse, having his Court full of such Jewels,
as he was wont to ^it amongst them in woman's apparel, among such light and
shameless women where women were in men's apparel, and men in women's apparel,
of which I will omit to speak; But I will begin with those women that were
special Jewels appointed not only to save his people, but to save kingdoms
and countries, not only among christi^ns, but among Heathens and Pagans.

DEBORA, DEBORA a Judge in Isarell.
a woman which dwelt in Mount Ephraim, and judged Israel forty years,
vanquished the Chananites, and slew Sisera.

HVLDAH, HVLDAH a Prophetess in Jerusalem,
a Prophetess which dwelt in Jerusalem, to whom king I^sia^ after the law
book was found, sent for Council to know how and what way God might be
pleased with Israel.

Who knows not, but Rebecca by God appointed, councelled her son Jacob to
flee from his brother Esau to M^sopotamia, where God appointed such two Jewels
for him, as made him the father of the 12 Tribes of Israel, in whom he and
his posterity was blessed by the seed of LEA, a woman?

JOSEPH, JOSEPH (...) to Egypt by his brethren.
a man sent by God to Egypt, (though sold by his brethren) where the like
Jewel was appointed him, to weete Assanetha an Egiptian, the mother of
Manasses and Ephraim, two adopted Tribes in Israel, by whom (during Joseph's
life) the Hebrews were Lords of the land of Goshen, and free from their bondage
in Egypt.

Was not THERMVTIS the Kings daughter of Egypt, THERMVTIS the daughter of Pharo
K. of Egypt.
a Jewel appointed to save Moses from drowning in Nilus, to name him Moses, to
bring him up as her son adoptiue to possess the Crown in spite of their
Priests of Memphis?

ESTHER an Hebrew maid, ESTER rare and zeal for the Jews.
married to A^ashuerosh the great King of Persia, a Jewel of God not only
appointed to save M^rdocheus her uncle, but all the Jews her countrymen
within an hundred seven and twenty Provinces, with the danger of her own
life, and the destruction of Seauenty and five thousand Persi^ns, and the
hanging of H^man, and his ten sons.

In Bethulia a woman widow ventured more then any man, The bold and rare
attempt of Judith a woman.
either Cyrus, Alexander, Or Caesar in their own persons, as she did* who
brought Holofer^^^ head in a bag through the Assirian camp to (...), whereby
the whole Assirian army was overthrown. A famous victory for a woman to be
recorded for the fame of women.

Observe therefore, how God chiefly by women, in all countries saved and
defended his people: In Mesopotamia, by Labans daughters, Lea and Rachell. In
Egypt, by THERMVTIS King Pharoes daughter. In Ethiopia, by Tharbis the King of
Ethiops daughter, whom Moses married and made her a christian, whom Pharaoh and
the Priests of Egypt gave him to the end to slay him; as Saul sent David to the
Philistians for the like purpose. In Persia by ESTHER King Ahashuerosh wife. In
Bethulia by Judith a widow, these were peculier women by God appointed.

What should we seek proofs far off, when we have examples at home. Had we
not in England, England, Scotland, and France, combined by women.
such a Jewel as combined France unto England? And another Jewel that
brought Scotland unto England, being two women?

Had we not such a Jewel of a woman in England, after ten terrible battles
wherein there were a Hundred Knights and Barons slain, ten Princes and Dukes
destroyed, and one Hundred thousand Englishmen slain in the field between the
houses of Lancaster and York, a woman being the only cause of a perpetual
League between both houses? And even at this present we enjoy such a Jewel,
that will bless Brittane, both with Tribes and Kings, as Lea and Ruth did
Israel.

This only shall suffice, Kingdoms and Realms, combined in a League by women.
that kingdoms and Realms are combined and joined together in perpetual
League of amity by women generally. And sithence in the seed of a woman all the
people of God are blessed, I need not to name the virgin Mary, whose womb was
blessed that bare him, and her paps that gave him suck; Nor make mention of
such women long before Mary, of whom lineally Christ descended. as Lea, and
Racheli the wives of Jacob, the mother of the Tribes of Israel, of whom the
Lion of ludah, and the star of Jacob descended, Ruth the Moabite.
Ruth the Moabite the wife of Booz, the mother of Obed, the father of ^sai, the
father of David, of whom came the Kng of Kings.

How much more then were godly and virtuous women blessed by Angels, by
Prophets magnified, and by Kings and Princes reuere^ced? Iae^^ the wife of Aber
the Kenite shall be blessed said the Angel, Ia^l that slew Sisera.
for she slew Sisera King Iabins General; And the victory of Israel was
obtained by a woman, as DEBORA said to the fame of women: Did not Osias the
Governor of Bethulia and of the army of Israel, The praise of Judith.
bless Judith? And so Achior blessed her, saying blessed art thou of thy God
in all the Tabernacles of Jacob.

Tugloria lerusalem, Tulaetitia Israel. As Much and more might be spoken of
Queen Est^er.

But to speak in particular of women, it were infinite. I shoud but weary the
Reader to run throughout the old and new Testament, with the due praise and
commendacions of such Jewels as are fit to attend in Courts of Princes: As of
the woman of Bahurim by hiding David's servants, The woman of Bahurim commended.
she saved their lives from Absalon, who made search to destroy the King his
father; she only thereby saved her self, the City, and all the Citizens.

So RAHAB in Jericho hid the Messengers of Joshua, RAHAB the like woman in
Jericho.
whereby she saved not only them, but also her self, her family, and all the
friends that s^^ called to her house, at the destruction of Jericho.

The Sunamites wife for her pity and compassi^^ of the Prophet Elizeus, to
make him a cham^^ in the house, to feed him being the man of Go^

The Widow of Sarepta entertained (...) with all the wealth she had, The
widow of Sarepta.
which was a handful of flower, a little cruise full of Oil. See a woman was
appointed to feed Elias; and a woman to make a chamber to welcome Elizeus in.

Such Jewels are to be entertained in Courts of Kings who are always ready
for good and godly suits; and not with Moloch his reaching hand, Moloch.
and his Caemorims Priests; nor with Judas with open hands to take what they
will.

Again to speak of wise and discreet women, The praise of wise women.
who could be wiser than ABIGAIL Nabals wife, who by her wisdom so entreated
David, that she saved her husbands life, and after became Queen in Israel,
even king David's wife?

The woman of Abella, who with her wisdom councelled with the chief
Magistrates of Abella, Sebaes head the Traitor.
and brought Sebaes head the Traitor, and threw it over the wall to Ioab; when
neither Ioab offered peace, nor the Magistrates of Abella sought peace, yet she
saved the Town, and the Army of Israel from much slaughter.

I will therefore conclude with an Epilogue of the new Testament, of women that
far excelled men in faith, in constancy, and in service of the Lord. Women
more zealous than men.
I will omit to speak of Marie Magdalen, Ioanna the wife of Chusa, Herod's
Steward, of Susanna, with many other such women, which ministered to the Lord,
as he travailed to preach. I need not make mention of Anna, who prophesied of
Christ to the people, receiving Christ in her arms at Jerusalem, confessed (as
Simeon did) the redemption of Israel; but even of Pilates wife, when all men
cried, Pilates wife
Crucifige, to crucify Christ, yet this only woman endeavored to persuade her
husband Pilate, to wash his hands from such a wicked fact, affirming he was a
just and a godly man.

I sieldome read of such faith in a man, as of the woman, who desired but to
touch the hem of Christ's garment, and to be healed thereby, as she confessed,
to whom Christ said, her faith had made her whole.

Now having heard, that as women ministered unto Christ in his preaching, so
women followed him to his death, and also attended him to his grave; More women
followed Christ, than men.
and more women were at Christ's death, than men; and as it seemed wept more
bitterly, than those few men that were there.

No doubt John the Evangelist wept, Joseph of Arymathia, and Nichodemus wept
and a few others wept, of whose weeping Christ took no notice; but to the women
who were many and wept much, the Lord spoke, saying, why weep ye for me, ye
daughters of Syon? with much compassion he pitied the women, who much lamented
his death; Christ first appeared to women after his resurrect on.
and after his death, Christ first appeared to women, when the Apostles fled,
forsook, and denied him.

I know most men doubted of Christ his resurrection, yea the Apostles, whom
the Lord reprehended for their incredulity, because they would not believe Mary
Magdalen to whom the Lord first appeared; The Apostles ^^redulous of the
resurrection of Christ.
neither would the Apostles believe the other women, whom the Angel sent to
tell them that the Lord was risen, and went before them into Gal^lie.

Mark how the Lord spoke to women his last words at his death, Christ appeared
twice to women after his death, before he appeared to his Apostles.
and likewise appeared twice to women after his death, before he appeared to
his Apostles.

If you read profane histories, you shall find Asia first christened by a
woman so named. And Europe by the name of a woman called Europe Agenors
daughter King of Phaenicia. Scithia of a woman that sprang out of the earth,
and named her son Scytha. The Romans brag of Rhea.
The Romans might better brag of Rhea a woman, a vestall virgin well known,
(the Mother of Romulus) than of Rom^^^^ whose Father was not known; or of a
farr^^ more ancient woman named Roma.

The Greeks might better brag of Helena (...) woman, The Greeks named of
Helena a woman, rarather than of Hellas a man*
and not as they would have it of Hellas (...) man; Helena made Greeks then
unknown, to be known; she was the woman that was the whetstone of Greece, by
this woman the Greeks became first famous. But we leave Asia, Europe, Phrygia,
Greece, Scythia, and Rome; if we omit the fame of women in these, what should I
recite Provinces and Isles, Cities and Towns named after the name of women? as
Rhodes, Corcyra, Salamina, Aegina, Many Isles named after the name women.
and of many more which Diodorus writes of, to whom I refer you.

And as the most part of the earth is Christened and named by women, so also
the most part of the stars are constellated with women, not only with the
names of women, but with the form, shape, and figure of women, of which I wish
you confer with that Astronomer Astratus, who filled the stars of women:
The most part of the stars are figured by the names of women.
considering there be but a thousand and twenty stars names known, I think
the most part are figured and named after the names of women.

I would have a good Scholar to answer me, that never loved a woman, That is
not true, since the form and jmage of Justice is formed like a woman with a
sword in her hand; Prudence with a glass in her hand; Temperance with a dyall
in her hand; Fortitude with a great huge Colossus on her shoulder, that
Hercules could not stir her. And all these are wrought in gold, in silver, in
Arras, and in all kind of Tapestrie.

The Queens of the Amazones courts were only of women, without men, where men
by Law and decrees made, might not govern or bear rule, but were exercised in
servile works, The queens of Amazons, and their exployts.
having their legs and arms made so weak by their Nurces, that they could
not bear armor, as Diodorus writes, Quoinutiles fierent bello. This was a
policy of the Amazones, to be careful to keep the anncient Law of Scithia,
that men should not govern them; who used to cut off the right pappe of every
female kind, because it should not hinder them in their shot and military
service.

An example of two or three; Myrina one of their Queens with thirty thousand
foot women, Myrinaes marshall acts and vic^^ries.
and two thousand horse, being armed with skins of great Serpents, after that
she had subdued many Regions and confines, even unto Libia, marched unto
Egypt, at what time Orus, Isis son reigned King there (so ancient a History
it is) with whom she consented to a ^eague of peace.

Thence she marched into (...), whom she much was^ed and spoiled; from thence
to Syria, whom she conquered with much slaughter. Thence she marched to
Mount (...) and over came the nations there about, so that Queen Myr^^a was as
famous in S^ythia, as was Semiranus in Asia; and both were as famous as
Alexander or Cyrus.

In like sort may it be spoken of Queen Medusa, Queen Medusaes warlike acts
and of her Court, as we did of Queen Myrina, that she likewise governed a
Nation of warlike women named Gorgons, who feared not to encounter with great
King Perseus, the most famous and warlike King of his time amongst the
Graecians, and kept him long and hard in two great battles.

The fame of these Queens grew so great, Hercules was amazed at the fame of
those Queens.
that Hercules hearing the fame of them, and of their courts, and of their
women, was much abashed, that so many Nations should be subdued by women.

Hercules, after Perseus, in great fury began his war against these Queens,
(after Myrina and Medusaes time, with whom Perseus fought) and slew so many (I
mean of the Gorgans and Amazones) that Queen Myrina buried so many of her
Ladies, that to this day their grave is called Tumuli Amazonum: which is in
Greece, and not in Scythia.

Among other Nations and Kingdoms the Court of the Queens of Saca, ought
justly for their misitary discipline, their victories and government to be
remembered. The queen of Saca.
Among many Queens that ruled there, I will only speak of one Queen, named
Tarina, who after she had subdued the Nations about her, Queen Tarinaes
victory.
and brought in subjection many countries under the Saceans, after peace and
quietness, had made such Laws to her Subjects that the Queens which
succeeded her, altered nothing thereof, but one Queen after another confirmed
Tarinas Laws in Saca.

Such was the love and commendations of this Queen, of her Subjects in her
Court, for her policy, wisdom, counsel, and benefits done to her country,
that such a Sepulcher was made for her after her death, that the Pyramides of
Egypt, and the Labyrinth of Creete might well give place unto it. Neither might
Mauseolum it self, which Queen Artimesia made for King Mausolus her husbands
Tomb, be preferred, though that Tomb was numbered one of the seven wonders of
the world.

The Queens of Scythia The Queens of Scythia.
their Court, a known History; whose antiquity is such that Diodorus, Cetesi^s
and others (...) of. But the Queens of Scythia, howsoever they were first
named, enlarged their kingdoms so greatly, that some were called (...), and
some Arimaspi; all warlike Queens, which subdued much of Asia, and of Europe,
so that many of the Queens of the Amazones The Queens of Amazones (...) with
the most famous conquerors of the world.
are most renowned for the watres which they had with the greatest Conquerors
of the world.

As Queen (...) with Hercules, Queen Tarina with Pers^^^, Queen (...) with
Achilles, Queen (...) with Cyrus, whom she slew in battle, with 200000.
Persians with him. And after Cyrus was slain in Scythia, King Darius thought
to reueng that shame, that the great King of Persea with his army should be
slain by a woman, but Darius was glad to leave Scythia unto women, and to
return unto Persia.

And also of Camilla, who came armed against Aeneas and his Trojan army;
Camilla.
with so many Kings as well of Asia, as of Europe, who felt the courage of the
Queens of Scythia, that Kings paid Tribute to Queens in Asia.

The women Laxamathae were Marshall women on horse back, the men of that
country on ^oote; The women Laxamathae marshallwomen.
In the field the woman fought on horseback with halters and short strong
ropes, and the men with spears and ^argats.

The women of Sparta, are preferred before men. The women of Sparta pr^ferred
for council and courage before men.
All care and business of Sparta are laid upon the women. For they sit in
Council, they Judge in causes, and make such Laws and decrees as to them
seemed good; which being objected against by a certain Gentleman, that only
the women of Sparta ruled over men; And well worthy, answered Leonidas wife,
we women only of Sparta bear men only. True it is, as women bring their
infants up in their youth, so are they found in their age.

The women in Persia, were so much honored, The women of Persia.
that they might not be seen, but covered secret in Coaches* So Themis^ocles
being sought for by the (...) and Lu^d^monians, escaped by favor, and was
carried among the Persian Ladies secretly. For none but the Persian Ladies might
have access to their Coaches, or presume to speak to them. So much in Persia
were women esteemed, that in all secret Counsels of States they were sent for.

Moreover the Persians would have their wives present in place to see them
fight in battles, The women would be pres^^t in eue^y battle where their
husbands fought as whe^stones.
that they might at the sight of their wives* be made more courageous to fight.

What can be said of men, but as much may bet said of women, or rather more?
Might Hercul^s any way have subdued Cerberus or led him in triumph, but by the
help and council of Proserp^na a woman? Neither Jason could possibly win
the golden fleece, and carry it away from (...) unto Greece, without the help
of Medea a woman.

Who taught Theseus the way to the Laby^^^^ at Creete to kill the monster
Mino-taurus, but (...) a woman? Who taught the way to were over so many
dangerous gulfes, fiery (...) frosty rivers, unto hell it self? but (...)
woman.

Therefore the Law was, that they that (...) to Carras into the Temple of
Luna, The Law in Courts of women.
and offered sacrifice to the Moon, such women should have the rule and
government of their husbands with good reason, and their husbands should be
ruled by them. And they which made supplycation and offered sacrifice to god
Lunus, such men had the dominion and gouernm^t over their wives.

The people called Sauromatae in Sarmatia, a Women ruled all Sarmatia.
very large country in Scythia, reaching from the river Vistul^ unto the end of
Germany, even unto the confines of Hyrcania in Scythia, and yet as large as
Sarmatia was, women ruled their coun^rey; for when all women rule their
husbands, they must needs rule the countries.

These be the scoffs of Cato against the Roman women, Scoffs of Cato in Rome
against women.
that the valiant Romans, that conquered all Nations abroad, were conquered at
home by women.

It is most strange, that women should so love men for children sake, and yet
the Male-kinde should neither bear rule nor govern amongst them.

THALESTRES Queen of Scythia, Thalestres Queen of Scythia went to see
Alexander the Great.
hearing of the fame and report of Alexander to be such for his martial
prowess and great conquest, she came with three hundred Scythian Ladies, not
only for the sight of Alexander, but also to get children by him and his
Macedonian Lords, that should be like their Parents.

And though Alexander had not so many queens as Solomon, yet had he (after the
Persian manner) as many Queens as there be days in the year; Notwithstanding
his sons should bear no rule in Scythia, though they were gotten of the
queen Thalestres, and of Alexander the great.

So it is historied of Ne^aule queen of Ethiopia, Queen Saba went to hear
Solomon.
that she came to Jerusalem to hear Salomons wisdom, and to propose unto him
hard questions, and dark problemes, being as willing to have as many wise
Salomons in Ethiopia, as Thalestres was to have valiant Alexanders in Scythia.

The Roman women, hearing such repor^ and fame of the women of Sparta, The
Roman courage to fight with wild beasts on Theaters.
of the Saceans, Sarmatians, Scythians, and of sundry other Countries, (having
no men to fight with for tha^ the Romans had conquered al Nations) came armed
upon the Theators to fight with diverse and sundry wild beasts, as Lions,
Elephants, Bears and such like: and when they were not permitted to fight upon
the Theators with beasts; yet would they overcome (as Cato said) the
Conquerour^ and Champions at home, which overcame Tigers and Lions upon the
Theators.

The Ladies of ROOM perceiving tha^ all the gold and silver which was in the
treasury of Rome, Due commendacions of the Roman Ladies.
to be consumed and spent in the wars against the Gauls, in the time of that
noble captain Camillus* the women brought all their gold, silver, chains,
earings, and all their Jewels unto the Senators, whereby the Gauls were
satisfied, and Rome again delivered* At which time the Matrons of Rome were so
advanced and honored by carrying in Coaches to their temples, and to their
Theators. So that now it was also decreed in the Senate house, that women being
dead, their commendations and praises should be recited in the pulpits at
their Funerals, in as large manner as men.

So was Popilia by her son Crassus. So Julius Caesar did commend his wife
Pomp^ia, and Ner^ his friend Poppea.

Again in the second Affrican wars, when Rome was so afflicted by Hanniball,
that both men and money were S^ant, but chiefly all the money in the treasury
was spent, the chief Roman Matrons (as before) brought all their rich
treasures, (which of long time they had kept) unto the Senate house, being
ready to be armed, whereby the Romans were so animated against Hanniball
again, that he was enforced after his great Victories in Italy, to forsake
Italy, and fly to Africa.

True it is, that Rome by women was twice recovered, and delivered from the
enemies, that the Gauls fled from Rome, and Haniball from Italy.

What praise had Veturia and Volumnia, Veturia and Volumnia two women much
commended.
two Roman Ladies worthy their commendations in the pulpit; the one entreating
her husband, the other her son, at that time that Rome was in Corolianus
hand, either to spill, or to spare?

How should I pass in (...) Cloaelia, that escaped King (...), and swimmed over
the River Tiber, and opened the secrets of Porsenna to the Roman Senators?

What great benefits had the Hebrews by the midwiues of Egypt, being by
Pharoh the King commanded to (...) the Male-children, The Midwiues of Egypt
(...) many thousands of the Hebrews children from Nilus.
and to drown them in (...) yet did they rather hazard their lives in breaking
the Kings commandment, than to offend God in so foul a fact; whereby they
are had in perpetual remembrance in the book of God, to save so many thousand
men's lives, with the hazard of their own, as it is recorded in Exodus.

These examples should move our Englishwomen to do good to their country, and
not seek the overthrow thereof.

The Sabine virgins, The Sab^ne virgins saved both the Roman and Sabine army.
after they were ravished by the Romans at the feast Cons^alia, and married
unto the Romans, so that wars grew thereby, they came in their smocks
between the two armies, the one part their husbands, the other their fathers;
So by the means of the Sabin virgins, peace grew between the Romans and the
Sabees.

When the Cartha^^n^^^ in their wars against the Romans wanted for their
matches, The women of Rome and of Rhod.
the Matrons of Cartha^e cause themselves and all the women to shave the hayres
of their heads.

So did the women of Rhodes.

Many grave and wise women, have stood much in stead as well in public
council, as al^o in private policies, to their countries, who^e devises and
sentences being set down, were imitated and found ^it to be followed and
therefore in diverse great kingdoms and countries, women bear such rule, that
they had the whole government of the common weal.

It never repented August^us, Liuia.
to follow the council of Liuia.

It much profited Ferdinandus, to hear what Isabella Isabella.
said, and to effect only what she said.

Xerxes the great King, among all his wise cou^cellors in Persia, would not sit
in council without Artimesias advice. Artimesia^ queen of Caria.
Ninus King of the Assirians, would effect nothing without Semiramis council;
And after his death you may read how she governed the Assirians for forty
two years together, as stout as Alexander ruled the Macedonians.

Therefore the Lacedaemonians admitted their wise-women, The women of
Lacedemonia admitted to ^it in council.
not only to come to hear council, but also to be heard and to set down
their opinions, touching as well Civil as Marshall causes.

Among the old Germans, upon any great affairs, touching the state of their
country, the women which were wise and discreet, did sit in council and give
their sentence and advice, and among the Germans were chiefly accepted, and at
this time more trust and confidence is given to women in Germany, than to men.
For women be there sober when men are drunken

The self same authority and credit had the women as well in that part of
Spain called Celtiberia, Women in Celtiberia.
as also in France; in which countries women were not only accepted in
counsel, but in any strife or controversy it was determined and adiuged by
verdit and Arbitrament of women.

In the time of Hanibal, in certain debates between (...)

^

^

(...), and other Countries, where Queens governed and ruled as kings, were
admitted as Judges, and fat as Counselors, to determine of right and wrong,
as you have heard between the Gauls, and the Carthag^mans.

Yea among the invincible Romans, by degrees were wise women admitted to have
access to the Senate, and their counsel heard by ^he Senators. Wise women in
Rome had access to the Senate.


So was M^tia, Agrippina, Cornelia, and others, that it came to pass in Rome,
that the women among the Romans were as much authorized as the women of Sparta.

So Candaces Queen of Et^iopia, was so singu^er^^ wi^e, The praise of Queen
Candaces.
that she ruled and governed her sub^ects in such sort, that she was so much
honored and beloved among the Ethiopians (as Asarces among the Parthians)
that all the Queens that succeeded her in Ethiopia, were called Candac^s after
her name.

Among the Li^ian people that dwelt in Asia the less, the women children were
named after their Mothers names, and not after their Fathers, and they by the
law and custom of that country, are heirs to their Mothers, and not to
their Fathers.

As among the Hebrew women, who gave such names to their children as pleased
the mothers, The Hebrew women gave names to their children without the consent
of husbands.
without the consent of their Fathers.

Sitones, people not far from the Sucu^^ns, had a Law that none might govern
over them, but a woman. The name of a King was to them odious, as it was of
long time odious both to the Romans and the Graecians.

Among the old Danes, if any soldier should not follow his Captain, and fight
valiantly for his Country, The Law among the old (...).
the law was their wives should master^ and govern them as their servants, and
their husbands should lie with their heads downward toward their wives feet,
as a mark fo infamy, to be known cowards.

The woman in Sparta, did meet their husbands and sons, (...)
using scoffing and flouting words saying; whether creep ye, ye cowards into
your Mothers and wives bellies again?

That made the (...)* (...)
that theiy would have their wives and concubines to see them how^ manfully
they ^ought, to avoid the name of cowards. For in Persia to be called a coward,
an^ Acion might be had against him in Law.

If you read Phylo^ophy, you shall find Aristipp^ daughter (...), in the
school of Athens, a reade^ and a Teacher of Philosophy in her fathers place.

Corynna was set forth and garnished with (...) several garlands of Laurel,
which she wanne o^ Pyndarus (the only Poet of his time) for that she^ excelled
him in verses and poems.

Eustochium and Blessilla, for Hebrew, Greek and Latin, A catalogue of rare
women.
were equal to a great number of the best learned in those times, in zeal of
true Religion, and in following of Saint Hyerom, for the further i^structions
of their faith. Of these (...) Hyerom made mention in his Prologues of Joshua,
of Esaias, and of Daniell.

Aspasia, a Greek woman, red Rhetoric in Miletum, Aspasia.
is to be praised.

Sappho red Poetry in Lesbos; both taught scholars with much commendations.
Sappho.


Leontinum a Grecian woman, wrote a whole volume against Theophrastus, the
great Philosopher, and as Cicero says, Leontinu^
Aiticosermone.

Hortensia in Rome, nothing inferior to her father, was as eloquent as her
father; For as many came to see Hortensias comely gesture and sweet
pronunciacion, as came to hear her eloquence. Hortensia.


Amesia pleaded her own causes before Q. Amesia.
Titu^ the Roman Praetor, with such manly courage, that she was called
Androgune. (...)


And Sara, Raguels daughter, To^ies wife, for her zeal and earnest prayers was
delivered from the spirit Asmod^us. Sara.


And Mary Magdalen for her inward love and faith to the Lord was delivered from
seven Asmod^u^ seven devils. Mary Magdalen.
And many such women, which to speak of in particular it were infinite, as
before is said.

The Romans made laws demaritandis ordinibus First by Q. Metellus, after by
Julius Caesar, and after him by Augustus, with gifts and rewards to entice
young men and maids to marriage, and to make choice of such as should always
continue.

So much was marriage esteemed for multiplication, Licurgus laws in Sparta.
Solon laws in Athens*
that Licurgus made laws in Sparta, and Solon in Athens, that men might
change their wives that were barren for others, to make trial in whom the
cause of sterility was, whether in the manner wom^n. And this was so common a
cou^^e among the Romans and the graecians* that Ca^o himself (...) Marcia in
Rome (...) his (...).

It was the opinion^ (...) Philosophers, yea^ the (...) that men might marry
for childrens (...)* as many wives as they would. Other for religion ^^rried
where they lift, for ^o was the law of (...), Chrysippus laws.
whose writing was full of Oracles.

Among the Hebrews the wives would bring their (...) unto their husbands.

Among the Graecians, The custom in Greece at marriages.
the custom was the mothers of the married persons should have (...) torches
ready to light, and their friends (...) Hymns and longs called (...) four
presidents of marriages, (...) Diana, and Suad^la, that these Goddesses and
Queens would vouchsafe to bless these (...), that (...) would make them
parents of children; that Venus would increase their love; Diana their courage
and chastity; and that Suadela would make them delectable and loving to her
husbands.

And the next day after their marriage, The ceremonies in Greece upon the next
day after the marriage.
the father of the bride should bring her (...) munus, a fair cloured boy in a
white colored gown, carrying a burning torch in his hand, after him a fellow
that brings the new Bride her attires and then they which bring a sum of
gold and silver, and after them they which bring household vessels and household
stuff, against whose coming the gates and doors of the house wherein these
new married couples are come to dwell, are opened.

In Sparta, they were appointed by Licurgus law, Licurgus Law of the orders and
ma^ners in any marriage in Sparta.
that the young mayds which should be married, should shave off their hair, and
be clothed in man's apparel, and be brought at night into a dark chamber
without light, and the Bridegroom then should loose the Brides girdle, which
betokened that both were but one. Yet in the Isle of Coos, the men must be
clothed in women's garments contrary to the^ of Sparta, and yet signified but
one.

The Lacedemonian maids that should be married, The manner of the
Lacedaemonians in their marriages.
do trusse their hairs up with a kind of spear called Celibaris, to signify
that they should bring forth such martial children, as would use both spears
and swords.

The Athenians also used to dress the head of the Bridegroom with palms and
Olives, Of the order of the Athenians in marriage.
to signify victory and conquest.

These Ceremonies were only to all^re and to entice young people to marriage,
for multiplication* and therefore the old Germans had his custom that the
young men should send to their Loves that should be their wives, (...), a
sword, (...)
a shield and armor, in and pledges of love, with a garland (...) Veruine
called Verb^na.

In Booetia, Of Boaetia.
they used to put a garland of Sparage upon the head of the new married maid.
In other parts of Greece made of Balsamet, called Sysimbrium.

The Locrians made crowns of diverse flowers gathered by the Matrons, Of the
Locrians.
and brought the day of marriage to the married maid.

The Macedonians used to cut a loaf of bread with a sword, and both parties to
eat of the same, Of the Macedonians.
was a full consent and decree of marriage.

The Latins in their marriage ware white garments, Of the order of the latins.
and their ceremony was, that the new married couple should stand together
under a yoke of Oxen, in token they should live and love one with another,
without offending the law of marriage.

So the other Goddess of marriage is called Juno iugalis, signifying concord
and agreement, and be yoaked together during life.

The Lusitanians, Of the marriage in Lusitania.
which are Portugales; the women must be drawn and forced out of doors before
they came to be married, to show how unwilling they were to forsake their
Parents, their friends, and their Countries, and now must follow a stranger,
having before her a Musician, and one that ^inges a song of Hymaeneus,
carrying with her a Distaffe, a spindle, and flax.

The people about mount Taurus had this custom, The people about mount Taurus.
that the women should gird them before they were married, with a woollen girdle
full of Hercules knots upon it, which should be loosed by the Bridegroom the
first night, in token he should be the Father of so many children as Hercules
had, Herotinu^ had 600. sons.
who left behind him when he died 70. sons; and yet not so many as Herotinus
king of Arabia, who had 600 sons.

Solon made a law, that the man might not come unto his new married wives
company before he had eaten Ex malo Cydonio, which was a notable Town in
Candie.

And so the custom among the Babilonians was, The Babilonians rule and order
in marriage.
that the young married folks might not lie together, before both had tasted
of a secret gum called Storiae. Such customs of these Countries were carefully
observed and kept.

In Greece they had these Ceremonies (as Pausanius affirms) that the Bride
should be carried from her Parents and Friends in a Coach, and the Axeltree of
this Coach should be burned at the door of the house, before the Bride would
enter into the house, Certain ceremonies in Greece.
signifying that there she should stay and tarry, and thence never to depart.

But if they were not carried in a coach, but went on foot, her husband should
ever be called Chamoepus, being a word of great reproach, The first miracle of
Christ in a marriage.
for that he made marriage honorable of no account, considering that the first
miracle that Christ did, was at a marriage in Chanaan, and so honored marriage
with his own presence.

It was lawful in Persia for the young married man to lie with his new
married wife before he had eaten (...), The laws of the Persians for marriage.
the marrow of a Camel: neither any thing else, but an Apple, and the marrow
of a Camel.

The ^ewes at their marriages, the glass that they drink in that day they are
married, the Bride and Bridegroom both jointly at night, break that glass, to
sign^fie the frailty of life.

A young woman not married, might neither among the Lacedemonions, The l^w of
the Lacedaemonians, and of the Romans.
or among the Romans come among married women, or to the sacrifice and
feasts of C^rus and Venus, but the ^^rier should openly charge and command all
unclean women* ^uch as had the Leprosy, or any breaking out of their bodies,
or ^ens^rium, should avoid the ^acred and secret s^ruice, and after all this
he commanded, and said to the woman unmarried* (...), that the maids
unmarried should go out of the ^emple, as an enemy to mankind.

And therefore the ^awe of Moses, was, that if a man should strike a woman with
child, the child being quick and thereby borne abortiue, the man should die
for it. The law was that he should yield, The law of Moses.
Animam pro anima. And if the child had life, the man should be punished,
Pecunia mulctetur, as much as the woman's husband would.

This condemns the absurd opinion of the Pithagorians, of their
transanimation which they call Metempsuchosis, that the soul should pass from
one body to another, and withal so gross, The absurd opinions of the
Pythagorians. (...).
that it should be transported from a man to a beast.

Hence grew the forbidding of eating of flesh among many, of whom Tertullian
spoke merri^^* Ne quisp^am bubulam de aliquo proauo obsonet; l^ast some should
eat of their old parents flesh.

Mose^ law was, that the young men should be married to maids, and such as was
of honest parentage, Moses law of marriage.
virtuous and godly education. Moses thought it not fit that young women of
ripe years, should be unmarried.

That was the cause why Lycurgus made such sharp laws in Sparta, that the young
men which were not, Licurgus law.
not would not be married in Sparta, they should go naked in the winter time
roundabout the market place, upon the market day* neither might these unmarried
ba^che^lors come to see the games and plays among the (...).

The like law made Plato, Plafoes^^^
that if any young man in Greece should be unmarried at 35, years, he should
be so little esteemed, that he should not be preferred before any man* but be
last man either going into any company, or coming from them, without any
countenance or credit given him.

This was the cause that the Lacedaemonians had such Laws and customs, that the
parents which had three children, should be freed from watch and ward; But
those parents which had four, ab omni onere immunis foret, he should be
discharged from all taskes and Subsidies.

And this was the cause why the Persians preferred the parents of children
before others, and that the King of Persia by the Persian law, was bound to
give a piece of Gold to every woman with child in any town the King came
through, and this was the only cause why those Hebrew women which were barren,
brought their maids unto their own husbands chambers for childre^s ^ake. As you
heard of Abraham's wife, and of Jacobs wives.

Such was the affection and love in Martial countries, to have young men
married to young women.

The warlike Romans would hardly suffer any Patrician that was not father of
many children, Patricians that were not parents of children, not esteemed in
Rome.
to be any Magistrate in Rome, either Questor, Praetor, or Consul. And if any
should feign to be parents of children, and not so found, he should be deprived
from his office and place per Senatus consultum.

And therefore Furius Camillus, and after him Posthumous, Furius, Camillus law
of bachelors unmarried.
at what time they were made Censors in Rome, made such decrees, that old
bachelors which were found unmarried in Rome, should pay such fine to the
Treasury as were imposed upon them by their Censors.

Sectio. 2.
SEe how much all heathen laws do esteem honor, The love of the mother more
then the love of the father.
and make much of marriage: And how much we owe to our mothers that nourish us
in their wombes, and our wives that bring us children. And therefore the mothers
are (as the Philosopher says) Philosturge, of the great love and affection
she bears more then the father, and we are or ought to be more affected to
our mothers. Plus paulo a matre, quam a patre suscipit faetus. For nothing can
be more repugnant to nature, The love of the mother proved by Gallen and
Hippocrates.
then a mother to hate and forget her own children, which is brought for an
example by the Evangelist of Rachell, whose complaint, wailing and weeping was
such for her children, that she would not, nor could not be comforted, which
is easily to be believed, sithence women feed us and nourish us with the
substance of their own bodies, as both Hippocrates and Gallen said, Ex Sanguine
Materno faetum ali. First for ninety days women bear us dead in their
bellies, the other ninety days women bear us quick in their bodies with
greater care and fear for our lives, then for their own; so that from the
very day of conception unto the very hour of our birth, they live in great
danger*

That made Alexander the great to answer Antipaters letter, Examples of
Alexander the great.
in the which he much complained of his mother Olympias, charging her with
great crimes; to the which complainte, Alexander smiling, said, Vna materna
lachryma, multas hujusmodi d^^ebi^l^^era. Does not Antipater (said Alexander)
know that one small tear of a Mother* will blot out many such complaints?

And therefore the Matrons of Rome, The Matrons of Rome much reverenced.
were so much reverenced, that it was decreed by the Law Senatus-consultum, ^et
down by the Senators and Consulls, that if any man should meet with any Matron
of Rome upon any pathway, they should as it were of a duty to be done,
discedered semitis, stand off and give the pathway. Neither might any officer
or Magistrate call a Matron of Rome into Law.

Among the very heathen, young virtuous virgins and young maids well brought
up, Poor young ^^gins sin Athens and in Sparta, provided for their marriage.
both by the Law of Licurgus in Sparta, and the Law of Solon in Athens, were
provided for, and carefully looked unto for their marriages, out of their
common Treasure. So were Aristides daughte^s in Athens, and Lysanders daughters
in Sparta. Among the Romans with no less care were the daughters of (...)
Fabri^ius, and Man: Curious provided for; which was the only cause that many
Noble women and Matrons in diverse countries bestowed Dowries, for the marriage
of poor virgins.

Sampsons mother was taught by the Angel how her son should be brought up,
Samsons mother wa^ taught how ^o bring her son up.
after the Angel had appeared twice unto her, saying: Behold thou art barren,
thou shall conceive and bear a Son, and thou shall bring him up and be his
nurse. Here the mother was charged to be the nurse to her son, and to bring
him up, and not the father.

The Hebrew women not only nourished their children, The Hebrew women.
but also named their children without consent of their father. So did Iochabed
nurse Moses her son.

Among the Lacedaemonians, the mothers were nurses to their Children, The
Lacedaemonians.
least by education and sucking of strange nurses, the infants should
degenerate from the nature of their parents.

The old Germans thought it not fit nor lawful to have their children brought
up or nourished by any woman, The old Germans.
but by the mother.

The Romans were warned and had council, that their children should be lulled
upon their mothers laps, and suck upon their mothers breasts.

So the blessed virgin Mary nourished her only son with her milk: The virgin
Mary nursed her own son.
And so Sarah nourished Isaac her son.

The Angel of the Lord appeared unto Agar the mother of Ismaell, and spoke
unto her in the wilderness o^ Berseba, and comforted her and said, Arise and
take ^e lad by the hand, for I will make of him a great people.

Hannah Hannah the wife of Elcanah*
the wife of Elcanah, made continual ^ute unto the Lord for a son, and never
went out of the temple, but still prayed until the Angel of the lord ^old*
her that she should have a son which was Samuel.

The woman of Chanaan never left Christ until uhee had obtained her suit of
the lord, The woman of Chana^n.
to heal her daughter being sick.

And the lord would have us earnest for our sins, Sampsons mother.
as Sampsons mother was for her son, and as the woman of Chana^n was for her
daughter, continually praying unto God for his goodness, and blessing toward
us.

Sara, Sara.
at 80. years was desirous to have a son, and had Isaac.

Anna* Elizabeth.
solicited God until she had Samuel. And so Elizabeth by praying got John
Baptist in her latter years. These godly women sought children at Gods hands.

Though Rachell made much means to her husband for children, Rachell.
saying* unless she might have children, she should die; yet far better
then such women are, Balphaegor P^iapus.
that go to Bal-phaegor to the image of Priapus to seek children by unlawful
means (as the Prophet says,) Auolabit gloria eorum a conceptu, and a partu.
They shall not be mothers of Children, they shall have barren wombs, Et arentia
vbera, and dry breasts.

So God did threaten superstitious women, Plangentes Adonidem.

Now that women are so set forth for their wisdom, learning, ver^ue, and for
their magnanimity, courage and government, and after their marriages had as
great care to bring up their children, as they had to please their husbands, I
thought good with some examples of diverse countries to confirm the same.

The Iacobites people in the East baptized, The Iacobites.
and used Moses law of circumsicio^, they burn their Infants upon the
forehead, or the breast, with the sign of the cross.

The custom among the old Romans was this, The custom of the Romans at the
birth of Infants.
first the midwife would lay the child newborn upon the ground, and after
sa^crifice done to E^d^sa, it should be presented to Nundina, by whom the
Romans were warned, that their infants should be carefully brought up by their
mothers.

Among the Graecians it was brought by the midwife, Of the Graecians.
and the women him associate at the birth before La^es their household Gods,
where the neighbors sacrificed for the health of their infants, and after
delivered them to the mother.

The Ethiopians ab ipso natali die, Of the Ethiopians.
the first day of their infants birth, have such care of their children, that
they do murere frontes in fantium, that they should ^uffer pain, and be known
ever after by that mark as the Iacobites were: so that the Ethiopians would
pro^e what spirit their children were of, by ryding upon Elephants and by
fl^ing on fowls backs, whereby they might know and see whether they were
coragious and bold, or timorous and fearful.

But we have children brought up from their cradle, taught to ride upon Lions
and Unicorns, and to fly over Seas upon Eagles, the chiefest Roman ensigns of
the Papists.

It is said, The Isl^s Baleares.
that the women of the two Isles named Baleares in Spain, never minister any
meat to their young infants, nisia baculo and funda, but from a sling or from a
staff, to signify they should avoid idleness and get their living by labor
and pain.

The women of Sparta according to Licurgus law, The women of Sparta.
used to wash their young infants with cold water mingled with salt, to make
them acquainted even from their cradle with pain and travel. Insomuch that it
came to a proverb, Solas Lacenas vtros parere, that the Lacedemonian women
only brought up children to be men

So it is written by the same author, The women of Creet and of Germany.
that the women of Creet, and the old Germans would bring up their children
from their birth day, to endure pain of cold and heat, and to suffer hunger
and thirst.

And so it is written, that the ancient women in Iberia, In Iberia.
being brought up ever to see such slaughter in their Country of their
husbands and children, that the Infants being newborn, have their first
feeding from the point of a sword, or of a Dart.

In India their Philosophers called Gymnosophystoe within 2. or 3. years after
they were borne, would examine what kind of trade they should profess.

And the same Gymnosophists thought Diem mortis esse diem natalem;
Gymnosophistae.
for the same Nation in Thracia weep and lament the birth of their children,
and at their death, rejoice and triumph.

The Persians had such care of their Infants, The Persians.
that they provided such Nurses as should bring them under in such severe
discipline, that they might not spit nor cleanse their noses in public
presence, neither might they sit in sight of their Elders, they might drink no
wine, they might see no naked persons; for such faults by the law of Persia,
were capital crimes: which was as strict a law as the Nazarites had.

Saba Saba.
in Josephus, called Nicaule, for her wise propositions to Solomon, called
Arabica Sybilla, and of whom Christ makes mention in the gospel.

Hydra Hydra.
also, whom Plato much commends for her probleame and dark questions, that it
grew to a proverb, capita Hydrae conficere.

And Dama Dama.
Pythagoras daughter in expounding her fathers dark and obscure questions,
might worthily claim to be Pythagoras daughter.

Caelius Caelius.
writes of some women named Mantinea, Lasthenia, and Axiothea, which came in
apparel like men, to hear Plato read Philosophy in schools.

Were not the Fathers happy to bring up such daughters, and were not their
husbands more happy to marry such wives?

To be short and to verify a french proverb, non est faelix natus, qui non est
faelix maritatus, so Aristotle says, that he which is not well married, has
lost the one half of his joys in this life: and so Pharoneus Phoroneus
a wise man and a law maker in his country told his brother at his death, that
he had wanted no felicity in this world, if he had not married such a wife.

Yet such sharp dames are sometimes necessary to Philosophers, Sharp dames
necessary.
to Physicians, and to Preachers, to reprehend them of their faults and to
cure them of their maladyes at home, as they reprehend and find faults in
others abroad.

Socrates so confessed, that Zantippe his wife did him as much good at home by
chiding, Socrates saying.
to learn him patience; as he did in School to learn his scholars
Philosophy.

I wanted more time, than matter to write of such Jewels as our mothers, our
wives, our sisters, our kinswomen; and finally, of such Jewels as the world
would be no world, without women the Mothers of the world.

But to be brief, let Semiramis be commend^^ in Babylon; let Atlanta with her
marshall women in feats of Arms be praised in Ar^^dia; let Camilla be spoken
of among the Volskans; Tomyris among the Scythians; Queen (...) in Aethyopia;
and all other renowned Ladies, and of worthy women, that with foeminine feats
merited manly fame, be eternized; and let them worthily sit in the triumphant
chaires of fame crowned with Garlands of Laurel, with branches of Palms in
their hands, as Victors over conquerours, and Conquerours of Kings and
Kingdoms. To these valiant exploits of women, Hercules must yield; or else
Omphale Queen of Lydia will make Hercules to yield. To these ex-exployts of
women, wise Solomon must yield; or else Pharaohs Daughter will make Solomon to
yield: So must Achilles to Polyxena: So must Caesar to Cleopatra: and so in
fine, all men must yield to women.

FINIS.

