THE IVBILE OF BRITANE.

By Lodowik Lloid Esquier.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Purfoot. 1607.

To the most Noble Prince Henry by the grace of God, Prince of Great Britain.
ROscius the Roman Tragedian (most noble Prince) contending with Cicero the
Orator, which of them both should persuade most people, either Roscius with his
motions, and gestures of his body; or Cicero with variety, and copy of his
tongue. This has been in exercise in Greece much used; and now in Rome more:
but of such motions and gestures of men, that can speak with their hands, with
their eyes, with their shoulders, and with their feet, Solomon bids us to take
heed, that will speak like Aristippus to Dionisius heels.

Such were they that held their heads on the left side, like King Philip of
Macedon, while Philip lived: such were they after Philip, that like Alexander
his Son with their bushes and standing hairs, would be called Opisthocomae,
because Alexander was so, and now too many such, like the Courtiers of Meroe in
Ethiope, where if their King halt, they will also halt, in such sort, that
Cirses and Calipso could not make such a Metamorphosis of Ulysses men, as men
make of themselves.

There was then in Rome but one bird that was taught to say, Aue Caesar
Imperator: one bird in Carthage to say, Deus est hanno: and one bird in all
Greece, that was taught to say, (...): but not only these flattering fowls
fled from Rome, from Carthage, and from Greece, to Great Britane; of whom we
may now say, as Cicero said then of the like, Quibus credamus, nescimus.

But also of late such Ravens and Vultures, that salute us with their tongues,
and say, Aue; and with their hearts, Cave, which if their bodies were opened,
as the Athenians did Aristomenes, or as the Lacedaemonians did Hermogenes, their
hearts should be found, as their hearts were, pilosa and hispida, full of
hairs and thorns.

In the time of Torquine the proud, there was in Rome but one Serpent that
could bark like a dog, and one dog that could speak like a man, but now so
many barking Serpents in Rome, and so many speaking dogs out of Rome, that,
Quos fugiamus, ignoramus.

But such are the fruits of some religion, that as then in Egypt, they had
their Sphinxes in their temples, to expound their dark and obscure Divinity
full of Oracles: so now they have in Rome, not only Egyptian Sphinxes in their
temples, but also Corinthian Sphinxes in their studies, such as Cicero charged
Hortensius to have in his house to plead his causes.

But as then many Philosophers went from Greece to India, and to Ethiope, to
see Sacerdotes solis, and the most famous table of the Son, in Sabulo, and to
hear Hiarchas lectures of the nature and motions of the stars, and of
Tantalus well. So also many now go from Great Britane to Rome, not as
Appollonius the Philosopher went from Greece to India, to hear the
Gymnosophists: but as Saul went from Jerusalem to Damasco, for commission and
authority to kill and murder Christians, and to persecute Kingdoms, and
Countries.

One of your Majesty's most humble Britanes, LODOVVIK LLOID.

The Iubile of Brittane.
Coelum coeli domino etc. The Heavens is the Lord; and the Earth he gave to the
children of men; to the land of Chanaan was given to Abraham and to his seed,
Deuteronomy. 2.
from the Iebusites, Heathites, Amalekites and others; the land of the Gyaunts
to the children of Lot, The Lord gives lands and habitations to men.
to Moab, and to Ammon; and the Lord gave Mount Seir to the children of Esau,
with a strict commandment to Moses and Joshua, not to trouble or vex them.

Gyauntes dwelt in Mount Seir before the Edomites time, whom the Edomites
called Horims, whom the children of Esau destroyed, Gyaunts dwelt in the land
of Seir, of Moab, and of Ammon.
and dwelt after them in Mount Seir; and so the land of Moab was inhabited
first by Gyaunts named Emims, engendered of the monstrous brood of Enachims, as
it seemed by Og King of Basan, whose bed was nine Cubits long.

And again, Gyaunts whom the Ammonites called Zomines, dewlt in the land of
Ammon before the Ammonites, and all the land of Basan was called terra Gygantum
until Lots time, to whom, and to his children the land of Gyaunts was given.

One language continued in the Patriarchs time until Nymrod.
Domini est terra, the earth is the Lord, and he gave it (as in the tenth of
Genesis, by Moses is set down) to the children of Noah, for from Adam to
Nimrod 1800. years was but one Nation, and one language, which was at the
building of the Tower of Babylon confounded, and divided at that time unto 72.
languages, so many were the builders of the Tower; Genesis 11.
hence comes the antiquities of all Nations and people.

The Schithians and the Athenians brag of their antiquity. Iustine 2. Hist.
Notwithstanding the Scithians brag, that they are as ancient as the Scithian
oaks, and therefore the old Scithians do were Akornes in their caps, for a
just remembrance of the same.

The Athenians say, that they be Terriginae borne ex attica terra, and
therefore wear Grasshoppers in the hairs of their heads, in token of the same.

The Argiues as old as the Moon, and wear the likeness of the Moon upon their
shoes, in memory of that; and so the Egiptians with the old Phrigians contend
about their antiquity. Herodot. 2


But this little treatise is not to entreat of antiquity, which is full of
errors, but of the Iubile Brittane, which ought to be full of joys, with
thanksgiving.

A year of Iubile with the Jews, A year of Iubile among the Jews.
was a year of liberty, free from all bondage and service, a year full of
joys and mirth, and to make feasts in remembrance of God his goodness and love
toward his people, which was every fifty year.

Our great Iubile in England was just upon the fifty year, The Iubile in great
Brittane.
which was between Edward the sixth, and James the sixth now our King, at his
first arrival unto England.

No greater Iubile could be in Judah, than in the time of young Josias, who
purified Jerusalem and all his Kingdoms from jmages and jdols, Oliuet called
the Mount of corruption.
from groves and supersticious alters in Mount Olyuet, burned, brake them, and
threw their ashes into the river Cedron.

Neither can there be a greater Iubile now in great Brittane, the^ to have such
a godly religious King after so good and so religious a Queen, whose fame
shall never die in Europe, Wicked people.
let the wicked speak what they list, whose lust is always to speak evil of
good and godly Princes.

They have also their Iubile like the Egiptians, The Iubile of Egypt.
whose Iubile was in drowning the children of Israel in Nilus, like the
Romans, whose Iubileis were to persecute the Christians with fire: for as God
revenged the Hebrews upon the Egiptians with ten such plagues that were never
heard, nor read the like; The Iubile of Rome.
so the Romans revenged the Egiptians upon the Christians with ten such
terrible persecutions of ten Tyrants, as could be most horribly invented.

Great controversy between fire and water.
Great controversy was ever between the Egiptians and the Romans about fire
and water; in Egypt they are most merry, when the whole Land of Egypt is
covered over with the water of Nilus, that is, the great Iubile in Egypt.

The great Iubile in Rome, is of such fire as they have in Scythia; Herod. lib.
4.
where wood is scant, they take the skin from the flesh of their beasts, and
take the flesh from the bones, and with the bones of their beasts, they boil
their meat: such fire was long used in Rome, that with bones and flesh* they
burned as godly and learned men, as were in Europe.

But this quarrel between Fire and Water was fully ended by a Persian Priest,
Heidfeld: de diis ca. 2.
and an Egiptian Priest, about their country Gods. The Priest of Persia said,
that his God would devour and consume all other Gods. The Egiptian Priest
denied that, so Ad certamen veniunt: The one came with fire the God of Persia;
the other came with a vessel of water, and hanged it on the fire, and boared
diverse holes through the Vessel, and stopped the holes with wax: the Persian
Priest expected when the Fire would burn the Vessel, and the Egiptian Priest
expected when the wax would melt, and the water would run out and quench the
fire; thus both expecting the trial of their Gods, the wax melted, and the
water flusht out through diverse and sundry holes, and so presently quenched the
fire, so that the judgment was given, Vicit Deus Egiptius: but if it had been
a Roman Fire, neither the River Nilus, nor the Ocean Sea could quench it.

Certain people says Pomp. Mela, De situ orbis. ca. 10.
quibus ignis ignotus fuit, who when they came where fire was, they thought it
was sweet and pleasant, and would often embrace it in their arms, until the
flame scortcht them, for that this people knew not what fire was; and
therefore one of these, or one like them, asked Aristotle if Fire in his own
nature were hot. I do not think (says Aristotle) that Carneades, Carneades.
which doubts of every thing, doubts not of that, and if you doubt of it
(says he) put your finger into the fire, and try it.

Surely some had the feeling of Roman fire in England, in Germany, and in
other places a long time; and of late their fire was so close kept, that it was
covered over with the ashes of Juniper, which as some write, keeps fire
unquenched a whole veere They sell these ashes very dear, and to none but to
their fellows in Religion, but as Alexander Seueru spoke of Thurinus, Fumo
pereat, qui fumum vendit.

The Monks say, that Saint Dominicks mother, the first Friar of that
Fraternity, dreamed being with child, that she brought forth a great mastiue
Dog with a great fire brand in his mouth, Legen. aurea.
with the which she thought, that this Dog burned every City, Town, or place
where he came, this dream proved too true in England, and in Germany.

A merry pleasant fellow was in place, where three great learned men were, and
asked them a merry question, where was the best, and dearest water sold.

The Philosopher first, told him his opinion and said in Omopolio, in the wine
tavern, where water is equally mingled with wine, and equally sold with wine.

The Physician thought that water dearest and best, Tranquil. in vespas.
the urine of the sick, as Lotium vespatiani, whose filthy gain was such,
that vespasianus was called Mastix Iudeorum.

The divine said, that the water of repentance Lachrimae piorum was the best
water, Magdelens tears in washing Christ's feet under the table, and Peter's
tears of repentance; if a Jesuit had been present, he had said holy water,
the coniured water of Rome, aqua benedicta, quae tollit omnia delicta.

'The like question of the like merry fellow, who were the three greatest
Conquerours in the world after they were dead.

Some said, that it was the great Emperor Ziscaes skin, who being asked at
his death, how he should be buried; after I am dead (said Zisca) pull my skin
off, and make of it a drum, that my enemies that feared my sight alive, might
fear the sound of my skin, being dead. Aen. Syluius lib. 3. de gestis Alphon.

Some said it was the ensign of Alexander the Great, which was put over his
Pauillion after Alexanders death to fear the enemy, the Images of two Lions
sitting in a chair.

Some said, that it was the statue of the Serpent Sphinx upon Augustus signet;
and some said, that it was Seleucus Anchor, for all Anchors belong to all
Admirals on the Seas, and therefore much feared

Thus some said it was one thing, Plini: lib: 2. cap: 9.
some another, like Aristotle musing how the River Euripus flowed seven times,
and eb'd seven times in one day, and so much in the night, and yet never flowed
nor ebbed in three days every month; and because Aristotle could not find
out the cause thereof, threw himself headlong into Euripus, saying, Quia te non
capio, tu me capies.

The like is written of Homer, Herodot: (...) vita homeri Heidfield de animal.
cap. 9.
for that he could not satisfy himself of a ridiculous problem objected to
him by poor Fishermen, wearied his head* and so died; and I believe this
problem would have wearied 20. Aristotle's, and so many Homers, before they
would find out these three terrible dead Conquerours, to be the skin of a
sheep, the Quill of a Goose, and the wax of a little Be, Haec tria verum
potiuntur, the pen, the parchment, and a little wax.

Many study such vain riddles, and think themselves well learned, when they
are furnished with these trifling problemes, and seek with the Jewish
Cabalists, Ex apice literarum, to make an Art, as the Jesuits and Roman
Seminaries hunt after secret signification of letters, as the Books of the
Roman Sibills, were full of mystical Letters, and of secret significations;
as three F. to signify that Rome should be destroyed ferro, flamma, and fame,
with fire, sword, and famine.

August: lib: de Gram.
Also they had three C. to note the cruel perverseness of Cor. Silla, Cor.
Cinna, and Co^. Lentulus, with the which Rome should he plagued.

We let pass the Books of the Sibils, and their letters, and we will speak
some thing of such mystery as they put in several Letters, which are more
dark and obscure, than the riddle of Sphinx to Oedipus.

Heidfield de Griphis Gram: cap: 2.6.
First they say, that three Letters make all bondmen free; and the same three
Letters again, make all free men bond men, which is Aue, and by conversion of
the word Aue, is Eua; and so by these two women came blessing and cursing.

Among the Greeks two C. were the worst Letters, (...).
Caca.

Among the Romans two P. were the best, Papa: in the praise of which two P.
many Books have been written, and as many against him.

Y Is a mystical letter Sect a bicorni, Cic. lib. 1. offic.
this is Phytagoras letter to note the strict and difficult way unto virtue,
and the broad and easy way unto vi^e; this letter Hercules and all the noble,
godly, and valiant Captains much embraced.

T. Is Tertullians letter, Lact. Hom. 33. contra martion.
comparing it to the Cross, of which Ezechiell speaks of, cap: 9. shall be
infrontibus nostris apud vera^ Jerusalem; many of our Jesuits and Seminaries
make much of this letter, with worshipping, knocking on breasts, and kneeling
on knees.

S. Litera Serpentis, Iud. 12. Schibboleth
an unhappy letter to the counterfeit Giliadites, that 42000. of them were
slain by Ieptha at the river Jordan, because they could not well pronounce
this letter.

Of this letter Messala Coruinas wrote a whole volume, and yet this S. litera
Serpentis was not half so ill as double P. Papalis litera.

Dionisius the Tyrant, Plut. apoph.
would needs among the rest, according to the custom of Siracusa, put to the
lotterie per elementa literarum, and drew out the letter M, the Siracusans
laughed and said it signified Morologos, no said Dionisius, it is Monarcha.

This ambitious Tyrant sought to be a King by a letter, Dionisius sought to be
a King by a letter.
but he was banished from Syracusa, and forced to keep school in Corinth,
such schoolemasters are many, as Appion in Alexandria, another in Phaliscus.

A. Is a complaining letter, of all the male Infants upon Adam, for taking the
Apple at Eues hand.

And E. is a letter exclaiming of the female infants upon Eve, Sapien: 7.
for taking the Apple at the Serpents hand.

And so is said, plorant adhuc proles, quod commisere parents, and they have
another old verse of the same nature: A genitor dat Adam, E dedit Eua prior.

R. Is canina litera, and the only letter which Demosthenes could not fully
pronounce, wherein Isocrates had some advantage of him, and yet at Rhodes
Isocrates reciting an Oration of Demosthenes, the people so liked it, cried
out, o quid si illam belluam etc.

But these Roman Cabalists after they had commentaried upon letters, they go
forward with joining of letters and some number of words, as upon the five
vowels they make aposie to the 'mperor Maximilian, for every vowell a word and
so it makes his posie to be Aquila electa just, omnia vincit, a Roman poesy.

Exodus 15.
They willing to imitate the latter Jews, who made the like poesy for
Machabeus out of Moses poesy, quis sicut tu in dijs Jehovah, which poesy both
Joshua and Judah used after Moses time.

But what these Roman Cabalists would bring to pass, by their number of five I
know not, as they make much of these five words of the virgin Mary, answering,
the Angel of God sent to her fiat mihi secundum verbum tuum.

And again they stand much more upon the number of the words which were but
five, then upon him which was Christ Jesus our savior, that spoke these words,
hoc enim est corpus meum.

Quintilian says, Quintil: lib: 1. institut: cap: 3.
that Chrisippus brought the first rod to whippe children in school, truly
it might seem so, for he makes more toil and study about Oracles and
letters, then the great Turk did to subdue Rhodes: these childish studies are
not fit for men of riper years.

These be they that contend with Chrisippus to overcome their own shaddows,
for there is not a letter in all the Alphabet, but they make such commentaries
as will fill the Turks Alchoran.

We will conclude and say as Plato said of a Cyraenian Cochman, Rhodig: 9: cap:
5.6.
who showing Plato all his cunning and skill to the most he could, one asked
Plato, how he liked the Cyraenyan Coachman? it cannot be said Plato, that this
fellow that has such pleasures in such trifling toys, can ever learn any
great thing.

Even so these fellows contend cum griphis Gra^maticis that bestow their time
with such toil and travail about Oracles and letters, to make an art of it,
it cannot be as Plato said, that they will give themselus to any great things
or learn greater matters.

A certain country Coridon a young youth, went to Athens to learn Philosophy,
who after he came home, with great welcome to his friends, and kinsmen, and
being in company where a Grecian was, his friends would have him to speak
some Greek to the Grecian, he answered he would, and took a cup of drink
in his hand and said boldly to the Grecian, (...).
Alpha, Beta, Gamma, whereat the Grecian blushed with silence; then his
countrymen and friends took this youth with clapping of hands for the victory.

Many went to Athens to learn Philosophye and returned to their country
fools; many went with the prodigal Son to trauile and see countries, but
such should not be received into Sparta by the Law of Licurgus, lest they were
in other countries taught to harm their own country at home.

A fit fable for this place, between the Nightingale and the Cuckoe, contending
which of them had the sweeter voice, they put their contention to arbitrament;
the Cuckoe would have but an Ass for his great long ears, to be the judge,
and so by this judge the Cuckoe had the mastery, many have long Asses ears in
giving of judgment for want of knowledge.

And for that I touched strifes and contentions which the world is full of, I
thought good for mirth sake to speak of some merry strange contention, not
such contention as was between Cicero the Orator, and Roscius the Tragedian,
which contended, whether Cicero could excel Roscius in coppie and variety of
eloquence or Roscius exceed Cicero in motions and gestures of pronunciations.
Arist. lib: 7 polit. ca. 7
But a far greater contention was between three brethren, grauia fratrum
bella, soon proved between Jacob and Esau, Genesis 4.
who contended in their mothers womb; and between Caine and Abell, the first
two brethren borne in the world.

These three brethren contended about their Fathers testament, whose will was,
that he that proved himself most beneficial and profitable to his country,
should be heir to his Father.

The first was an Orator, next in nature and proportion of study to a Lawyer,
and said, that no Commonwealth could stand without law.

The second brother was a Philosopher next to Divines, Heidfield^ lib: de
discordiis: cap: 22.
and said that souls were more precious than any Commonwealth, and therefore
said that he was the heir.

The third brother was a Physician, and said, that neither commonwealth, nor
souls, unless they had found and wholesome bodies to live in the
Commonwealth, and to enjoy clear souls; and therefore claymed his fathers
heritage. The Judges made a demurre in law, in judgment, and stayed to consider
of so difficult a Will between brethren, of which Augustine says, is most
hard to judge of.

Yet Archidamus king of the Lacedaemonians, being made an Arbitrator between two
great men, and great in favor with the King in the like contention; doubting
that he could not please them both, but one of the^ would be offended, brought
them unto a temple, and locked the door upon them, charging them not to come out
of the temple before they would become friends.

Kings may command, but judges must judge justly, or else stay the matter by a
demurre, as you have heard of the three brethren or else dismiss the matter
out of the court, as you shall hear of another three more difficult contention.

A man made his Will among three Sons he had, and made him his heir that
proved most ungracious and wicked of the three, the one was a drunkard, the
other an Adulterer, the third a Gamster and a Dicer.

The Drunkard would have his Fathers heritage, because he was a beast, and and
not a man.

The Adulterer would have his fathers heritage, for that he was both man and
beast.

The third son claymed his Fathers patrimony by swearing, and by
blaspheming: saying, he was neither man nor beast, but a Devil.

There is nothing that can be more aptly compared to men, than trees: So was
Nebuchadnezar, named a great tree: so Kings and Potentates of the earth to the
Cedars of Libanon, the just man to the Palm tree; the good and godly man to
the Olive tree; and the children of the godly like Olive buds; and Christ
himself to the Vine: and it is also written, that Christ died upon a cross
made of three kinds of trees, of the Pine Tree, the Cypress tree, and the
Cedar tree; in these trees no mothes, no vermines will breed, and that was the
cause why Nu: Pompilius laws endured ^30. years written on a Cypress table,
and Platoes laws written on Cedar.

But Abimelechs tree was a dry gorse and a low shrub, he delighted in such
trees that would soon burn, for Abimelech was that gorse that destroyed the
Sichemites, and burned Sichem their City, and sowed salt to make it for ever
barren.

Themistocles was wont to compare himself to a Plantane tree, to whom the
Athenians ran at any storm or tempest of wars, to shadow and defend them
from the Persians.

This Plantane tree was called Xerxes tree; for his broad branches, and large
bowghes, because Xerxes was wont with his army at any hot weather to use this
tree, to defend him from the ^on, but this Plantane might be better called the
Popes tree, than either Xerxes or Themistocles, whose bowghes and branches
shadows more Rebels, and to whom more traitors ran for succor and help, than
ran to Themistocles in (...).

This tree is called in Pliny, Plin. lib 1^. cap. 9.
Arbor, (...), because L. Mutianus would often use this ^^^^sant tree, with
some Gentlemen and Roman^ Ladies feasting and banqueting under this tree.

And after it was called Arbor religiosa, when (...), Alex: ab Alex: lib: 6:
cap. 12.
with the Priests of Jupiter (...), and with the Vestall Virgins, (...)
appointed to come (...) called, Adip^lis caena.

This custom contin^ed long in Rome, though the names were altered, yet the
ceremonies endured, the (...) altered to a Pope, Rex sacro^um which was chief
Sacrificer, altered to slaughterfice^: Jupiters priests.
Iupit^^s priests called Flamines altered to Franciscan Friars, and the vestall
virgins to lecherous Nuns.

And now of la^e the names altered again, from a Pope to a Scorpion, from
Franciscan Fri^rs to S^rpen^^, and from Nuns to Vipers, but we shall shak^
^hese Scorpions, these Serpents, and these Vipers off, as Paul did the Viper
that hanged above his finger, this is the custom in Rome. Adipalis caena is
their feast, the plantan tree i^ their temple, and the Calfe in Or^b is their
Idol to whom they make sacrifice, and by whose Oracles they first deceive
themselves, and then others.

Nisephor: lib; 12: cap. 2.
(...) Al^xandria in Egypt, when the temple of Sera^^^ was destroyed, all the
images were made hol^^^^ and fast to the wall, tha^ the priests might (...) and
go to feed the people, with such (...) speache^ (...) themselves, Joseph: lib:
18.
thus the priests at Delph^^ in (...) of Appollo, and in the temple of Jupiter
(...), they have such drifts to make their jmages to weep and to sweat, and
the priests themselves to speak within the hollownes of the jmages; these
flattering priests be these Serpents like Lazarus dogs, soothing the Pope
their master in all jdolatry, worse then Actaeons dogs in devouring their
master.

I may not omit in this place a fit history, of a certain Spaniard, that
bragged much before Maximilian the'mperor, of 3. such strange things that the
King of Spain his master had, that all the world had not the like, a great
Mountain of Salt, a bridge that fed yearly ten thousand of cattle, and a
City walled about with fire.

Albertus Duke of Saxony, hearing this brag of the Spaniard, said before
Maximilian, that he had in one of his Cities three greater wonders, three
Monasteries, the first of Friars praedicators whose barnes were full of all
kind of Corn and had no ground to tillage.

The second Monastery was of Franciscan Friars, whose Coffers were full of
money, without any revenues coming in.

And the third of black Muncks, who had multitudes of children having no
married wives, this is not strange in Spain, in Rome, or in any other countries
where monasteries be.

Fauorinus the Philosopher wondered more of three greater wonders, than the
Spaniard did of his Mountain, of his bridge, and of his city; or the Germane
of his three Monasteries: that he being a natural French man should be thought
a Grecian, and being an Eunuch, should be accounted an Adulterer, and Fauorinus
being an enemy to Adrian the Emperor should live. Heidfield de Arith. Cap. 31.

But Augustine bragged not like the Spaniard, nor like Albertus the Germane to
see his three Monasteries, he agreed with both in the number of three, for
Augustine wished to have seen Paul in the face, Christ in his body, and the
City of Rome in her chief flourishing time: but Beda wished but one, to have
seen Christ in suo decore, as Moses and Elias saw him in Mount Tabor.

We will leave to speak further of these things and proceed forward in our
Iubilies in the manner and form of election of Kings, with their Diadems,
Crowns, Scepters, and all other Regalia belonging to the inawguration of
Princes: and first of the Election of Kings.

Sectio. 2.
Howsoever Kings were elected among the Heathen, either by flying of souls, as
Numa Pomp. was in Rome; or by neighing of horses, as Darius in Persia was; or
otherwise by lot, as Saul was among the Jews.

1. To. ca. 10
So Saul first by casting of the 12. Tribes, and after by casting lots upon the
men, was elected the first King of Israel. And so in the new Testament by lot,
was Matthias chosen into the towme of Judas.

For God had his secret elections of Kings before they were of the people
elected. Secret elections.
So was Saul anointed the first king of Israel by Samuel; So was David
secretly in the time of Saul anointed also of Samuel king of Israel; So was
Jeroboam Solomon's servant, secretly in the time of Solomon anointed king of
Israel by Ahias the Shunamite. And so was Iehu secretly in the time of King
Ioram, anointed king of Israel by Elizeus.

Saul a Heard-man, seeking his Fathers Asses, found a kingdom.

David a Shepherd, 2. Reg. cap. 2.
the least and the youngest of his Brethren, was elected king in the midst of
his brethren

Jeroboam a servant of Solomon, took the kingdom of Israel from Salomons
son. And Iehu a Captain besieging Ramah under the king his Master, became
king to sit in his Masters seat.

These kinds of election are proper to God.

So was the election of God, of his Priests, of his Judges, and of his
Governors. For he called Moses a Heard-man from Madian unto Egypt, saying,
Mittam te ad Pharaonem.

Gedeon, Judge. ca. 6.
he elected from the barn a Thresher, saing, Tu liberabis Israel de manu
Madian. In like manner he called Ieptha from the land of Tob. Judge. ca. 11


But as before is said howsoever kings are elected, the honor, dignity, and
reverence of kings were such, that after Iehu was anointed king sitting among
other captains, his fellow captains, did put off their mantels, cloakes, and
gowns to make him a seat like a throne for a king to sit with sounding of
trumpets, and saying, God save King Iehu. such is the Majesty of the name of a
King, that God called them, Dij terrae.

Darius horse.
As soon as Darius horse neighed, the other six Princes which were in election
with him, lighted on foot prostrating themselves upon the ground after the
Persian manner, having the sacred fire, and the Image of the sun carried
before him.

What wonder is it for the Persians, Armenians, to whom it is peculiar to
worship their kings as Gods, sithence king David so honored his son Solomon
being a king anointed, and sitting on his Fathers seat, in such humble sort,
that being sick and old in his bed, Iosep. lib. 7. cap. 2.
bowed his head down, in token of his submission to the King his son; and as
Josephus says, Tanquam Deum coluit.

Diador. lib. 4. cap. 1.
We read, that the Kings of Aethyopia being elected by their priests, are lifted
up with such triumphs upon their shoulders, and carried so to be seen among
the people, Bacchantium more, flexis genubus vt Deum honorant..

The late Emperors of Rome being elected, were hoysed upon men's shoulders, and
carried with joys and triumphs, the people crying out, Viuat Imperator.

They used no other ceremony in ancient time with the Kings of France, but to
lift the new elected King upon a shield to be carried about the camp, saging,
Viuele Roy. So was Clodoneus the first christian French King.

The soldiers of Pharnaces upon a tumult made in the camp, Pharnaces King of
Pontus.
suddenly they put a Reed into Pharnaces hand for a scepter, and proclaimed him
King of Pontus. So the Jews put a Reed into our Saviors hand for a scepter,
in most contemptuous and ridiculous manner, and kneeling said, Aue Rex
Iudaeorum, hayle King of the Jews.

The soldiers of Amasis upon a sudden shift to make him King of Egypt, Amasis
King of Egypt.
they clapped upon his head in stead of a crown, a Helmet; and so proclaimed
him King of Egypt.

So the Jews clapped a crown of thorns upon christ's head; a more precious
Crown than the Amphictions of Greece sent to Alexander, or the Arabians, and
Armenians sent to the Romans.

In diverse other countries, Diodor. lib. 4. cap. 1.
they make choice of their Kings diversely. In some place of shepherds,
supposing them that have such care of their sheep, should have more care over
men. In Homer Kings are called Pastores populi, (...).
as you heard of the Kings of Israel, and others.

In other places they made choice of them that were most rich, thinking that a
rich King was best able to help his subjects, and defend them from their
enemies. These kinds of elections of Kings and of priests which governed
cheefely among the Ethyopians and Egiptians.

In Libia he only should be elected king, qui citissimo cursu valeret. In
Lybia.
He that was most swift in running.

In other Provinces and countries toward Arabia, he that excelled in strength
and courage of his body, supposing him to be most fit and able to govern
them. These Nations knew not God in their elections, and yet they seemed to
imitate the Israelites in outward form.

Alexi: ab. Alex. lib. 9. cap. 4.
The people called Cathaei in India, made choice of him to be their King, that
was most tall of stature and of goodly personage; like Xerxes King of Persia,
who among so many hundred thousands, was the only goodliest and tallest man.

Saul.
Or like Saul King of Israel, who was higher by the shoulders upward, than any
one man within the whole Kingdom of Israel, (for God would please the people
with such a King.)

In Mero Diod. lib. 4 cap. 1.
In Mero the King should be of sound limbs; for the Law was that if the King
should be lame, or halt, all his friends and household servants should also halt
and be lame. And with good judgment should they look of such a King, which
should not limpe or be lame.

The custom was also in Meroe, that the priests of greatest authority among
the people, should come and tell the King he must needs die, so the Gods
commanded, all the Kings obaied this Law, per responsa Deorum.

Among the Sidomites they did elect no King over them, unless he were of the
Kings stock, or have his birth from the Kings family; quite contrary to the
people called Taprobani in India, which suffered none to be King among them,
that were of the Kings stock, especially if they had any children, least they
should claim to be the King by heritage.

Sabaei, Alex: Neap lib. 4. cap. 23.
a Nation in Arabia, after they had made choice of their King, they had a Law
that it was not lawful for the King to go out of the Metropolitan City Saba
according to the Law, which if he were so found, Diodor. lib. 4 cap. 1.
he should be stonied to death, or should be deposed from his kingdom.

Such was the supersticiousnes of the heathens toward their Priests, that
Sabbachus King of Egypt though he was warned in his dream, Diodor. lib. 2.
cap. 2.
by the God of Heliopolis, saying Nec faelix, nec diuturnum Aegipti regnum
fore, unless all the Priests of Egypt were slain, and that the King withal
his army should march over their dead bodies.

Thus being often troubled with this dream, Diod. lib. 4. cap. 2.
the King called all the Priests of Egypt before him, and told them how he was
warned either to kill them, or else overthrow himself and his kingdom.

This supersticious King yielded the kingdom unto the Priests of Egipts hands,
and went to Ethiop, and by such means Priests grew in as much credit in Egypt,
as then the prophets were in Israel. Many such Kings were either so cursed and
banned in their kingdom, or else driven out of their kingdom, and others put
in by the Priest of Rome.

Such supersticious Laws and customs in Ethiop continued until one Ergamenes
was elected King in the time of Pto. Philadelphus the second of that name in
Egypt: this King expected the like end by the priests of Ethiop, as his
predecessors had, Ergamenes.
and therefore Ergamenes did that which Sabbachus should have done. And as
Iehu, Daniel at Babylon, and Elias did at the brook Kison, with the slaughter
of all the Prophets and priests of Baal.

Now having something spoken of the Election of Kings, so likewise of the
Election of the Judges, how they were chosen and elected. God elected Moses,
after he had fled from Pharo in Egypt, to lethro in Madian, from a shepherd to
be such a Prince and governor of such an army, as neither Cyrus led unto
Scythia, Cyrus. Xerxes.
or Xerxes unto Greece, or Tamberlaine unto Asia, and that in a wilderness,
where neither City, Town, or provision could be made. Deuteronomy. 2.

But the manner and form of this Election of Moses was, by a voice spoken unto
him out of a flame of fire, burning in a bush, and yet the bush not consumed,
the voice was, veni, mittam te ad Pharaonem, I will send to Pharaoh, to bring
my people Israel out of Egypt, that was his charge.

And the election of Paul, who was likewise in manner and form chosen as
Moses was.

The election of Joshua was like Moses, to whom the Lord said, Surge, transi
Iordanem. Be strong and valiant to fight against the Hethites, I will be with
thee as I have been with Moses. This was Ioshuaes charge.

The election which Israel made of Gedeon was after the Lord had said to him,
Judge. 8. The election of the Judges of Israel.
Tu liberabis Israel de manu Madian, and after his victories over the
Madianites, then they came and said, Dominare nostrum tu, and filius tuus.

The like election was of Ieptha after he was called from the land of Tob by
the Lord, Judge. 11. Ieptha.
yet he was elected, and chosen by the Giliadites, saying, Veni and esto
Princeps noster, Come and be our Captain to fight against the Amonites.

These were the Judges elected to fight the Lords battles against these Nations.

This was the manner of the election of the Judges and Governors of Israel,
Gedeon.
yet God had chosen Gedeon out of the barn, and called Iepthe out of the land
of Tob to be Governors over his people, before they were by the people elected.

The election of Joshua, Number. 17. Joshua.
was by laying of Moses hands upon him, to vanquish the Cananites, saying,
transi Iordanem, esto robustus, be strong and valiant to fight against the
Hethits, and to va^quish the Chananites.

Judge ca 1.
The election of Judah was by Vrim and Thummim, to overthrow the Amonites.

Sectio. 3.
NOw having spoken something of diverse and sundry elections of kings and
Judges; we are to entreat of sundry kinds of Scepters and Diadems among
heathen Kings

The first Kings of Rome.
The first Kings in the world had long gilded spears carried before them. For
the old Romans, and the first Kings of Rome used for their first Scepters, the
Augurall staff of Romulus, called Lituus, until Tarquiniu^ Pris^us the fifth
King after Romulus, who used to have for his scepter white Iuorie.

But after Tarqu^nius time, the Romans contemned Scepters, Kings, and crowns.

The Kings of India.
The Kings of India had their scepters only of Ebony, for it was not lawful
for them to have any other scepter, but of Ebony.

In Egypt though they excelled, all other Kingdoms in greatness and majesty
of Diadems, yet the Kings of Egypt had for their scepter, but the likeness of
a plough, in forma aratri, says Diodorus, to maintain tillage in husbandry,
of which I spoke in another place.

For as Egypt was divided unto six Tribes, India unto 7. Tribes, Athens unto
10, and Rome unto 35. Tribes that was the chiefest, they had care unto tillage.

The Persians next for all that they had fire carried in crystal, the Image of
the Sun carried upon the horse of Mars, yet the Kings of Persia had for their
Scepters, Diodor. lib. 2.
the likeness of a Spade, called in Diodorus, Pala, which the Kings held in
their hands, for none might speak with the great kings of Persia, unless the
King would move his scepter, so had Ester access to the King Ashuerus.

The king of Babylon used diverse kinds of scepters with sundry kind of figures,
as Lions, Eagles, and sometime the likeness of a golden Apple, which signified
for his roundnes the whole world.

The Kings of Sicilia used a silver staff, The Kings of Sicilia.
for their scepter carried before them.

The Kings of Lidia had carried before them great Axes for their Scepters. The
Kings of Lydia.


Many Kings had upon the top of their Scepters the figure of a Storke, to
signify Justice and piety, and on the other end of that scepter, they had the
figure of Hippotamus, Hyppotamus.
a fierce, and a violent beast, that Kings thereby should subdue their
outrageous lust and tyranny

Kings had need to have their Scepters full of eyes: such a Scepter had old
Osiris with the likeness of a man's eye written about it, Oculus iustitiae. For
those Prince^ that bear the Scepters of justice in hand, must not have eyes of
affections in their heads; Neither must those Judges that sit on the seat of
Justice, have long reaching hands to receive bribes like Molochs Image, whose
priests were called Chemarims. And therefore were Kings painted in Egypt in the
City of Thebes blind without eyes, Diodor. 4.
and Judges without hands; and Justice it self without a head; so that Justice
has neither eyes, hands, nor head.

Sectio. 4.
NOw after Scepters, the sundry fashion and manners of crowns and Diadems. For
among all heathen Kings, few or none were crowned as our christian Kings
were but with such Ornaments about their heads, as most Kings then used, and
with such Idolatrous ceremonies, sacrifices, and feasts, as were belonging to
their Idols, and such robes and garments, as were kept in their Temples, for
their inawguration, tanquam regalia.

Mythridates.
For it seemed that Mithridates King of Pontus, the great Roman enemy, and
Tigranes King of Armenia, ware such attires and ornaments on their heads, as
some kind of fine silk set with rich stones and pearls. For that which king
Mithridates wife, Monima.
Queen Monima ware upon her head for a diadem, with that she hanged her
self, least she should be taken captive by Lucullus or Pompey the Roman
consuls, and by them led as a prisoner unto Rome for their triumphs.

It might also seem, Darius.
that Darius the great King of Persia had on his head in his last battle which
he had with Alexander at Arbela, such a diadem as Mythridates the king of
Pontus had; for Alexander, after the overthrow of Darius, having Darius diadem
brought unto him, with the which he bound up Lysimachus wound.

Such a Diadem did Tigranes king of Armenia yield at the feet of Pompey the
great, Tygranes.
after that Pompey had subdued Armenia, and other kingdoms thereabouts, with
which Diadem Pompey bound up his sore leg, for the which he was suspected
of some of the Senators, to have affected the kingdom of Armenia.

All Kingdoms being subdued by the Romans, Crowns not esteemed of the Romans.
sent their Imperial Crowns to Rome. So did Areta King of Arabia send to
Augustus. So did Hircanus send from Jerusalem a Crown of gould to Marcus
Antonius. For after that the Romans had subdued Asia, Africa, and the most
part of Europe, all Kings held their Kingdoms under the Roman Empire: and
therefore sent Crowns for duty and homage to the Romans.

The old Romans esteemed more Militares coronas, military Crowns to animate
soldiers to remove siege; to win towns, or forts, or strong holds, they
should have graminea^ Coronam; for scaling of walls, they had murale^ Coronam,
made in form like the walls of a City; and for entering to a ship, Corona
naualis made like a ship.

The Emperor Caligula invented certain Crowns made in forma solis, Suet. in
vita calig. 7.
lunae, and syderum, like the Sun, Plut. in Coriol.
the Moon, and some like Stars, which Caligula called exploratorias Coronas,
with these they rewarded soldiers according to their expoytes and deserts, and
yet the Citizens, says vigetius quod magis miremur, had Coronas aureas Crowns
of Gold

Also it seemed that in Asia, during the time of the great Alexander,
Amphictions.
to whom the Amphictions sent a massy Crown of Gold, when Alexander was
elected general governor over Asia and Greece, against the Persians, Crowns
were sent to those mighty and great Kings, which held the Monarchy over other
Nations in submission and loyalty, not daring themselves to were Crowns.

The Kings of Egypt differed far from all other Kings for their Diadems,
excelled all Princes in Majesty and royalty, Kings of Egypt.
for they ware the Image of a Lion, sometime of a Draggon, and sometime of a
Bull; because they would be known the greatest and most ancient Kings of the
world; they would carry upon their Diadems the likeness of Fire, sometime of a
Tree, and sometime of a Serpent, as though the Kingdom of Egypt should far
exceed all kingdoms, for the Majesty thereof, the Kings of Egypt were chiefly
set out, by the regality of their Diadems.

The Romans and other heathen Kings, in their Temples had sundry kinds of
Crowns, consecrated to their Idols, Sundry Crowns.
and dedicated to their Gods, and they dedicate Crowns made of the rind of
Cynamon, pollished and trimmed about with Gold.

So religious were the heathen in their Atheism, that not only they crowned
their Idols with all kind of Flowers, but also trimmed and garnished the Altars
of their Idol Jupiter, Heathen altars*
with Crowns and oken leaves; the Alter of Appollo with Laurel Crowns: the
Altar of Pluto with Cypress, the Altars of Hercules with Poplar; the Alters of
Bacchus with Iuie. The prophet cries out upon the children of Israel, that
they obey not their God as the heathens did their Idols.

Sectio. 5.
THe regal ornaments of Persia, at the inauguration of their Kings, by Cyrus
in the time of Tarq: Priscus the fifth King of Rome, was a Diadem called
Cydaris, the sacred fire, and the figure of the Sun, carried by the horse of
Mars, and 12. several garments, which Cyrus instituted and by a decree
confirmed that they should remain tanquam regalia, to the posterity of Cyrus
in Persia at Persepolis, and to be used according to the law of Induendarum and
exuendarum vestium.

Cyrus.
These regal ornaments of Cyrus were used with the Kings of Armenia, Pontus,
and the most part of Asia, for that they held their kingdoms under the Scepter
of Persia.

Of Aegipt.
The regal ornaments of Egypt by Sheshac in the time of Solomon, were such
ornaments as the Priests of Vulcan in Memphis first invented, from the first to
the last, which was the sacred garment and rich robe of Isis, Regal Ornaments.
which the Queens of Egypt used to wear at triumphs or feasts, according to
the custom of Egypt, were reserved and kept in Sacrario Isidis for the
posterity of Sheshac, and the Kings of Egypt.

Of Rome.
The regal ornaments of Rome by Romulus in the time of Ezechias King of Judah,
was no more but a coat of a purple coulor, called Tunica Iouis, and a long
purple robe, which Romulus himself the first King first invented, to set forth
the Majesty of a King.

Of Cerinthia.
The regal ornaments of the Prince of Cerinthia, seemed most strange either for
that they were reserved so long, or that it was not lawful by the law in
Cerinthia to alter them, Pantal. lib. 6.
they were so worn and consumed (as Pantalion says) that the new elected
Prince came to be invested in such old garments, that were so worn as he
seemed more like a shepherd, than a King; And yet were these old garments so
reserved and kept, as diligently as King Cyrus robes at Persepolis in Persia,
or King Sheshacks garment at Memphis in Egypt.

The regal ornaments of Macedonia by Alexander in the time of their King,
Macedonia.
was a rich Hat full of pearls called Chausia, a rich slipper or pantofle
called Crepida, and a rich long robe which the Macedonians call Clamydem, which
Alexander the great used during his time; And after him when the monarchy was
brought to Rome, Pompey the great used Alexanders robe rather for that he was
likened to Alexander and for his sake, rather then for credit that any Roman
should seem to have by wearing a Macedonian garment.

I will omit to write of these christian Kings, but only of their time of
reuolting from the Romans.

The Longobardes, The Longobards.
the Goathes, the Vandolles, and Hunnes, by reason of civil wars between
themselves, were made provinces under the Romans until the Empire decayed;
and after they had revolted from the Romans, they elected Kings to govern them.

Among the Longobardes, Agelmundus their first King after their reuolting from
the Romans 394.

Among the Goths after their reuolting, Alaricus was their King. 404.

So was Gundericus over the Vandolles after their reuolting. 413.

And Attila King of the Hunnes, after they had revolted from the Romans. 430.

And after these Kings 1600. began the kingdom of Polonia, where their first
Crowned King was Miezlaus. 963.

In Hungaria, the first crowned King was as Pantalion calls him, Beatus
Stephanus. 1003.

And lastly in Bohemia, the first crowned King was called Vladislaus, 1080. of
whose inauguration he has set their Regalia aside, omitting their ceremonies
and inaugurations which they had from Charles the great.

Sectio. 6.
OF the manner and order of the Inauguration of Romulus, The inauguration of
the first King of Rome.
the first King of Rome.

It was not lawful by the Law of Romulus, to Elect any King in Rome without
divination, which during the first Kings of Rome continued in the self same
honor, as Magic did in Persia, where no Kings might be elected, or sit
without Magj in place, as in Rome without south-sayers.

In Rome the South sayers did go up to the top of a hill, where the
south-sayer sat upon a stone with his face toward the south, with his auguring
staff called Lituus, in his left hand, with the which he divided and marked
out the quarters of the Heavens: the four coasts the of south upon the right
hand, and the North upon the left. Having done sacrifice, and offered oblations
with sacred vows made to Jupiter and Mars, he laid his hand upon the new
elected Kings head, heauing up the other hand unto Heaven, saying, Jupiter
Pater si fas est, N. Pomp: etc. Then looking for lightning, or thundering, or
some flying of byrds, or some strange motion of the stars, at the sight of
which things, the south-sayer openly pronounce him to be King elected by
Jupiter and Mars.

Selostris in Herodotus, The inauguration of the Kings of Egypt.
and Josephus named Susacus, and in the Bible Sheshac, at his first coming to
his kingdom, was brought by the priests of Vulcan into Memphis, to the temple
of Isis, where the sacred book wherein the law and secret ceremonies were
written, which none might read in, but the priests of Vulcan, and the King at
his first entrance into his kingdom after the reading of the laws and
ceremonies of Isis.

The priests brought the King a standing cup full of liquor, Rosen or gum
gathered from the bark of a fur tree, a bole of milk, with a few dry figgs,
(not much differing from the ceremonies of Persia) after the King had tasted a
little of every one, he was brought by the Priests unto the door of Isis
temple, Diodor.
where the priests did give to the King the kaye to open the door: from thence
the King was brought by the priests unto the secret chauncell of Isis, and
after sacrifice the King did wash himself with the same water which is kept in
Sacrario Isidis, to wash the goddess Isis.

After this to the Kings are brought by the priests of Vulcan some regal
garments which the King took from the priests, and so unto the last robe which
is the sacred robe of the Idol Isis, according to the Law, Induendarum and
exeundarum sacrarum vestium.

The inauguration of the King of Persia.
The seven Princes and governors of the 127. provinces of Persia assembled
together in Persepolis, the chiefest City in Persia, to elect them a King after
Cyrus and his son Cambises, for Cyrus had no son but Cambises, and Cambises had
no son at all to succeed him in the kingdom.

The ceremonies of the Kings of Persia shall serve for the inauguration of the
Kings of Armenia, of the Kings of Pontus, and for the most part of the Kings of
Asia, for that the Diadem which was called in Persia, Cydaris, in Armenia
called Tiara, and in Pontus called Candis, differed only in manner, and
therefore all inauguration of the Kings of Asia shall be contained in the
solemnities and ceremonies of Persia, for both their ceremonies and form of
their Diadems were alike, for that all these Kings held under the Persians
while the monarchy was there.

In Persia the ceremony was, that they should sit in Cyrus chair, they put on
these twelve garments that Cyrus first ware, which were kept as monuments and
relics for the Kings of Persia in Persepolis.

The new King sitting so in Cyrus chair, three of the greatest Peers in
Persia, brought unto him three dishes, in the one were fine dried figs, in the
second a little turpentyne, and in the third milk.

After that the new King had eaten of the dry figs, Alex: genial: lib: 1. cap:
29.
and had tasted of the turpentyne, and drunk of the milk, he rose from Cyrus
chair, and thence was brought unto the next hill. For the Persians had no
temple nor altars in their countries.

The Funerals of the Thracians.
THE Thracians Funerals are full of mirth and melody with their Thracian wounds
gotten in wars, painted in order round about the Hearse, which was the
greatest glory of the Thracians. For when they bring their friends to the
grave, they use to singe Thracian songs with all sweet Music. Only this
ceremony they reserved, that when any man of great calling died, The Funerals
of the Thracians.
his wife is brought on the same day to the grave of her husband in her richest
Ornaments, and best apparel, accompanied with her parents and next in blood,
with great solemnity, which after sacrifice upon her husbands grave, she must
make sacrifice of her self.

So was Polixena sacrificed and slain upon the grave of Achilles in Troy. So
was Iphiginea Agamemnons daughter slain, and sacrificed at Aulis in Greece,
the one to satisfy Neptune; the other to pacify Diana. In great funeral
feasts called Lemuria, after the anointing of their crowns, and trimming of
their tombs, with sweet herbs and funeral flowers, after sacrifice done, and
diverse ceremonies, they fit round about a long flint stone, the parents, the
kinsmen, the brethren of the dead soulesome with beans; some with waffers;
some with dry figs; and every guest bring some things to this feast, where
they drink to their Gods first, and after to the soul of the dead, with great
mirth and sundry ceremonies, they rise up from the Tomb, all crowned with
crowns and Garlands made of sweet flowers, and funeral herbs in great
solemnity, dance about the Tomb, being brave garnished, as is before said.

So did Alexander the great with diverse Macedonian Peers, and Nobles crowned
with garlands, daunced about Achilles grave.

So did Traiane the emperor solemnize the funeral feast of Alexander, at
Alexandria in Egypt.

So did Cleopatra solemnize the funeral of Marcus Antonius. Ceramicus in
Athens was a burial place appointed for Generals, Captains, and for marshall
Magistrates slain in the field, as Martius field in Rome was both a burial
place for some Consuls and Dictators, so it was a place of exercise for the
Roman gallants upon the graves of these Noble Captains in memory of
Chivalry.

So did Achilles solemnize the funeral of his friend Patroclus, cutting the
fore-lockes of his hair, to set it among many other of Patroclus friends upon
his Hearse or Tomb in Troy.

The manner of the funeral Feasts and Ceremonies of the Macedonians.
IN Macedonia they used more solemn and mournful ceremonies, The Funerals of
the Macedonians.
at the funeral of their Kings and Princes; for they took down their
Bulwarks and Fortresses of wars, they vntiled their temples, they subverted
their altars, they rejected and deposed their Idols, they put out their fire,
and the men shaued both their heads and beards, and they clipped their horses
and left nothing undone that belonged to mourning

So Alexander the great solemnized the funeral of Hephestion.

So King Archelaus did at the funeral of Euripides, shave his beard, and his
head. So did Achilles etc.

Laws decreed for triumphs, are written in the fifth Book of Alexander. Cap.
9. called Leges funerales.

Laws funeral for the dead, written in the sixth Book, Cap. 13.

Of the funeral Feasts of the Roman Emperors.
THe Romans used to have their commendations recited in the pulpit, The
funeral of the Romans.
of which Val. Pub. made the first funeral Oration in Rome at the death of
Brutus his fellow Consul.

The Romans used to carry before the dead Emperor his statues and Images,
and after that the Statues and Images of his predecessors, to set forth the
dignity of his stock, as Ca: Caesar did at the funeral of his Aunt, mother
unto Marius; whose Statues Caesar caused to be carried with all the ensigns,
crowns, rich spoils and trophies which Marius had gotten in his victory.

In such manner Tiberius Caesar the third Emperor of Rome, caused at the
Funeral of his Father Drusus, that the Statue of Aeneas, and all statues of
the Kings of Alba, until Romulus time the 17. King after Aeneas, and the
statue of Romulus, and the whole family of Gens Iulia, from Romulus time unto
Julius Caesar lineally.

Of the funerals of the Egiptians.
THe Kings of Egypt were most sumptuously reserved, in this order: their bodies
were opened, and were in such sort used, as the Egiptians use with Myrrh,
Aloes, Honey, Salt, Wax, and many other sweet odors, being seared up and
anointed with all precious oils. The Funeral of the Egiptians.


So the Kings of Egypt reserved the bodies of their Kings in high buildings
made for that purpose, far from the ground, as in their Pyramides and
Laberinths, in such sort that the sons should see their fathers, and so many
fathers before his father, buried in such sort, reserved and kept with odors
and sweetness, as though they were alive.

They mourned seauenty two days, abstained from wine or any other meat,
saving bread and the water of Nilus. Abel, Mizraim.
So did they lament the death of Joseph.

Yet the Kings of Egypt before they should be buried, his fame, his great
actions and marshall exployts were rehearsed, publishing his whole life from
the beginning. If they had been vicious drunken, slothful, or had not done
justice, or done any great crime, he should not have that honor of burial,
which other Kings had, which was the greatest infamy to any King in Egypt that
might be; which Kings of Egypt had more care to be well buried, than to live
well.

The manner of the Scythian Funerals.
THe Scythians do in this manner; when one dies in Scythia of any great state,
his friends and his neighbors do carry all his beasts and kill them, for a feast
to solempnize the funeral of the dead. As the Romans and Graecians do
celebrate a feast for the honor of the Emperors and Princes birth, which feast
they call Hecatonbeon.

The Scythian funerals.
The son of this dead Scythian causes his fathers head (being filled with all
sweet odors) to be gilded over, and to be set up as a monument of his father,
where once every year upon the very day that his father dyed, he keeps a
solemn feast, where his friends and his neighbors do yearly at this feast
offer sacrifice with ceremonies, and drink out of this gilded head; where not
only his fathers skull, but his Graundfathers, and diverse of his
Graund-fathers predecessors, (as Boles and Cupps on the table at funeral
feasts,) were made of so many great fore-graundfathers skulls: for they
abhorred the rites and sacrifices of any countries besides their own.

So did the people called Sordisci in all points imitate the Scythians in their
funerals, in the self same ceremonies before recited.

FINIS.

