CATHAROS.

Diogenes in his Singularity.

Wherein is comprehended his merry baighting fit for all men's benefits:
Christened by him, A Nettle for Nice Noses,

By T. L. of Lincolns Inn, Gent: 1591.

AT LONDON, Printed by William Hoskins and John Danter, for John Busbie.

To the Right Worshipful Sir John Heart Knight, all health and Happiness.
HEathen people (Right Worshipful) lead by Nature, abhorred nothing more than
a man Ungrateful: The Christians taught from Heaven, command nothing oftener
than to be thankful. To avoid the reproof of the one, and obey the charge of
the other, I present your Worship (in sign of my sincere affect) with this
small conceit, pend by a Gentleman my dear friend. The matter may at the first
sight (I grant) seem nothing grave, but in the proceeding it will prove
Gracious: Diogenes reprooues the vicious, commendes the virtuous, vnmasks
sin, and sets down remedies. If you accept it and forget my boldness, my
desire is satisfied, and the Author no less pleased.

Your Worships humbly John Busbie.

Diogenes to such as are disposed to Read.
MEn, or Gentlemen, if ye be Gentlemen or men, accept the salutations of a
Cinicke: Diogenes wishes infinite good speed to your good proceedinges, and
curses endleslie your ill demeanors: wishing the last to perish without
supposing, the first to flourish without supplanting. That Diogenes is a Dog,
the worst doubt not: his reprehensions dogged, the most deny not: for what
fool blinded with earths vanity, accounts not reproof bitter, and the just
reproouer a byter. Seeing then the world is grown so sensual, no marvel
though Cinicks be slightlie set by. If any of you read and like, why then it
likes me: if read and dislike, yet it likes me: for Philosophy has taught me
to set as light by envy, as flattery. Greedines has got up all the garden
plots, and hardly have I a room left to turn my Tub round in: the best field
flowers now fade, and better than Nettles my lands will not afford. They that
list may take, the rest leave, and so I leave you.

Every good meaners wel-willer, Diogenes.

CATHAROS Diogenes in his singularity.
Interlocutors:
Diogenes. Philoplutos. Cosmosophos.
DIogenes: A goodly day if men were as good: The Sun I see rises upon many,
but not to their amendment. Good God what a City Athens is? Here are fair
houses, but false hearts: Many teneme^ts fit to make Temples for the Gods, but
few owners in them that tempt not the Gods: I see here goodly Palaces, and
rich, that spue out their Masters for Riot; A fair market place to encertain
much mischief. I wonder when our great Masters rise, how many sins shall
rise with them? Damocles lately acquainted with Philautia in speaking her fair
spends her much, and having a bold face has gotten bountiful fortune,
Aristippus though old yet lives he by the flattery of Alexander, and whether
is it better (my Genius) to be flea-bitten, or flout-bitten? There are so many
faces now in mask, that the World runs all a masking: and so many bad men
thrive by countenance, that necessity is the best man's cognisaunce. Athens
has many men that will spend a treasure for a title, yet having gained the
worldly title of happiness, (alas) how is it tickle? Is it not a gay world? I
saw Lais jest with Alcibiades last night, and he endured it: But when Phocion
the last day told him he was proud (Jupiter help me) how was he peevish? Our
Signiors are severe, our Ladies austeare. It fares in Athens as among the
Sybarites, who chase away Cocks from their Cities, because they are too
watchful: and our Athenians counsel from them, for fear they should become
honest. What should Diogenes then do but be singular, to see the better sort
so sensual? I think it rather better to wear patches on my cloak, than to
bear the patch on my head: and rather to feed on roots, than to be defiled
with royot: to serve Nature in want, than Fortune in wickedness. But why speak
I of want? Breathe I not air with the King? Is not sufficiency a sumptuous
banquet, warmth a worthy raiment, and a good thought a true kingdom? Tut,
Diogenes is rich: who loytereth not on down, whilst others lack devotion: who
sleeps (with Aristotle) to wake, and studieth (with Cleanthes) to watch. But
soft, Cosmosophos door is opened, and Philoplutos is stirring: shrowde thee
Diogenes, the one has a stinking breath that corrupts many complections:
the other a far reach which (exceeding the compass of the Moon) makes some
men sick for want of the Sun. So, see, how they prease forth: O Mercury,
what God so ever has a Temple, I am assured thou have a plentiful Altar. In
former ages Devotion was thy father, now Dooblenesse is thy furtherer: thou
had wings in thy hat, but they are moulten, and from their dust wickedness
is sprung in thy followers hearts. Blessing on him, how gravely looks
Philoplutos, nodding on his Mule as Silenus on his Ass, pretending much
gravity, but not a grain of honesty. Now shall our Notaries get some coin:
but note this, there is some roosenage: the still stream is deepest, and the
stearne look doublest. Ah Fox, are ye walking? But see, they are in
conference: the rot consume them, for they consume the world. Hide thee Cinick:
it is better to be Lord in thy tub, than a lackey in their triumphs. They
approach me, I would my curses could drive them from me. They cleave like
burres to woollie garments, and draw fleeces of wit from Philosophers: applying
it as crafty Physicians do their corosiues, smothering much pain under
pleasant persuasion, and making the world believe that Venus is all wanton, in
that (the report runs) she was bred of the foam of the water. Hushed
Diogenes, the vultures are at hand: silence in these days is a trim
safeconduit.


Cosmo: God give you a good morrow, Signior Philoplutos.


Philo: Thanks good Cosmosophos: whether away so early? I fear me you be sick
of Chrisippus counsel, thinking no time good that is not gainful.


Cosmo: Truly sir, to gain experience I am watchful, accompting the time
very well spent, wherein a man any ways learneth to be expert: what we lose
in sleep is but loss in life, neither can we purchase more in living, than
not to be dead to live.


Philo: You say well Cosmosophos: but some study so much on time, that all
their endeavors are out of time. I speak not this of you Sir, whose experience
in worldly affairs, has graced you among the better sort: but of those, who
nodum in cirpo quaerunt, tempring their studies in such manner as Musitions do
their strings, who wrest them to so hie a reach, that they stretch them beyond
time tune, or reason. But to let them pass, Cosmosophos, if your business be
not of great consequence, shall I be bold to crave your company.


Cosmo: You may command me: but whether, may it please you?


Philo: To Diogenes tub, who (as I understand) by his long plodding in
reprehensions, is become passing skilful in experience: and seeing many
faults, can more iudiciallie speak of folly. Now, since I am called to high
estate, and he is continually conversant in deep studies, I mean to question
with him, following the quality of the Be, who sucketh his honey from
hemlocke, and the prescruatiues of health from poysonable herbs.


Cosmo: You do very well: but might I whisper in your ear. I could advertise
you of a matter of much consequence.


Philo: Say on (good Cosmosophos) me thinks these gray hairs should include
much experience: thou can not but deserve well of the Commen-weale, when thou
entendest my commodity, who dare boldly say with Tully (who ever says
otherwise) that I am Pater patriae.


Cosmo: Your rare virtues (worthy Philoplutos) are in effect like Archidas
Dove, whom each Artist beheld flying, but could not make fly: you bear the
feather of a Phoenix in your bosom against all wethers and thunders, laurel
to escape lightning, and countenance to avoid contempt: which makes your
felicity more admirable, and your foes more mild. But to our purpose: since
you are singled from your train, may it please you in this manner to be
certified; There are many in our Commonweal of Athens, who have ripe wits
and ready toungs, who if they catch an inch, will claim an ell; if they put
in the finger, will thrust in the head. Of these you must take heed: for it is
an old reason of Charondas, (and not so old as true) that young fruitful
plants grafted on an old stock, will soon suck out the substance; and that
Aesops husbandman that warmed the subtle serpent in his bosom, was brought by
him unto his burial: such young nouices must be checked like wanton whelps,
their tungs must be wormed least they wound, and their feathers clipped least
they conspire. If they talk well, tell them they trip; it is better smother them
in the egg, than smooth with them in the bird: for the meanest sparrow has
his neb, the lions whelpe his clawe, the weak thorn his prickle, and the
poorest man his policy; which you may dreine from them, as the Uintners do the
wine from the lees, if the wine be too rich, give it a dash with water, if the
wit be too ripe, suppress it with seuerenes: who means to sit solie on
Olympus, must suffer no climers. By this (Sir, I doubt not) you conceit my
intent.


Philo: I think thou art Oedipus (my Cosmosophos) thou art so privy to my
conceits: But hark thee, I use our Athenian young men, as cursed mothers do
their unhappy children, I call them to me with a fig, and whip them from me
with a twig, with few crowns buy I their gleanings, and employ all this to
mine own glory: I know the heavens admits but one Sun, and high places but
one commander: which estate since my good fortune has called me unto, I will
have none see through my spectacles but my self, nor carry an oar in my boat,
least he turn me over board. But see where Diogenes sits gazing upon the
morning Sun, who (desirous to see the Summers beauty) hastily rouseth
himself from the Ocean. God speed thee Diogenes.


Dio: Evil may they speed, if they speed not thee Philoplutos: what, art
thou risen this morning as a Wolf to thy pray? or has some fat fool fallen
into thy laps? sure it is, thou waightest for some profit, thou have so soon
for saken thy pillowe.


Philo: No Diogenes, I am risen thus early to entertain thy counsel, thou
know I am called to high charge in this City.


Dio: I, and what of that?


Philo: My desire (for this cause) is, to be advised by thee (good Cinick) how
to behave my self in this weighty estate, considering the indisposed minds of
the common people, the dangers that weight on high degrees; the policies that
are required to entertain all Estates, the disciplines that are to be used in
reformation of abuses, and the rewards that are to be employed on such as
deserve well.


Dio: Sirrah, who appointed thee to govern in this state?


Philo: My Prince.


Dio: How ignorant was he to admit thee to that place the which thou art not
able to supply. Is not he an Ass that puts his affairs in the hand of
the ignorant? his ship to the conduct of a witless Pilot? his stock to the
disposing of an ignorant banquer? or his citizens to his charge that has not
long conuerst with counsel? Hear me Philoplutos, I fear me thou art quick
of sent with Demades, thou will smell more than thine own, and thy high
countenance in this city will be an occasion for thee to coulor thy wickedness?
Thou Iouest wealth too much to entertain wisdom, and the desire of the one
kills the hope of the other: yet since thou art Cock on horseback, I Will fit
thy stirrup, and tell thee what becomes thee, though I am assured thou will
not entertain it. Plato, with all the lawmakers of antiquity, as Charondas,
Solon, Sesistus, before them Boetis the Babilonian, Anacharsis the Scythian,
with others, have first (in the institutions of their Commonweals) induced a
fear of the Gods: which being naturally ingrafted in the hearts of men, makes
them entertain the written laws with more reverence. Numa (to color his
policies) said, he had his instructions from Egeria, Romulus (before him) from
Jupiter: in brief, the whole aim of virtuous men in times past, has been to
derive their laws from the Gods, and to confirm their Citizens in sovereign
awe of their heavenly Protector. First therefore, (Philoplutos, since thou art
made a Maiestrate) see thou diligently intend the service of the Gods, draw
thy decrees from their divine motions: so shall thy people more voluntarily
accept them, and thou with better conscience publish them. And (as a special
rule) learn this second lesson, Medice, cura teipsum: pull the beam out of
thine own eye, then help thy brother: reform thy faults, then punish others
folly. For men in authority are eyes of estate, according to whose life,
every private man applies his manner of life: so that the Poet said truly,
Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis.
Such beef such broth, such lips such lettice, such Lords such laymen. In
Traians time all men studied justice, in that he was just: in Octauius days
each one would be a Poet, because he delighted in Poesy. Order thou therefore
thy life in such sort, as it may be said of Athens, as Plutarch speaks of
Sparta, The young men carry old men's mediocritie, the old men are youthful
in magnanimity. In thy laws respect the nature of thy people: look into
Athens, a proud assembly of fine toungd fellows, dainty in attire, studious
of novelties, fond of fashion, too much addicted to covetousness, inclinde to
deceive their neighbors: now examine these by the strict laws of moral
virtue, and since they degenerate, devise how to daunt them. What so is not of
virtue, is against it: it is an ulcer and must be launced, an ill humor, and
should be purged. Let me have informers for sin, not for breach of custom: a
Censor to correct sin, not an incenser to continue sin. Let us have more
hospitalls for the poor, and fewer palaces for the rich: let soldiers have
more pay, and usurers less profit; let Catelines be cut short, and Ciceroes
calde home: then shall thou rule well in Athens, and the Citizens be better
ruled.


Cosmo: O how well speaks Diogenes?


Dio: Oh, how fondly flattereth Cosmosophos? Sirrah, shall I counsel thee?


Cosmo: Do, good Diogenes.


Dio: These kind words require a courteous requital: hark thee Cosmosophos,
thou know Timons fig tree.


Cosmo: And what of that?


Dio: Why go hang thee thereon, the world has too many loue-worlds, but too
few hate-worlds: shall I suit thee Cosmosophos?


Cosmo: How mean you that:


Dio: Why bestow a funeral bounty upon you in conceit, and tell you how in
conscience it ought to be liked.


Cosmo: Say on.


Dio: O ripe word, a kin to every lack-penie, who have learned the say on
their backs, but will never see the discharge of their bonds. Hark Cosmosophos,
I will have thee apparailed according to discipline and order: Thou shall wear
a bare hat, because thou art too great a niggard to buy a new; and carry
wolves skins for thy facing, because thou art a wolf in thy fashions. With
the finger and the thombe thou shall point at sins so long, till thou catch
them in thy bosom: and garter thy self upon a straight stock, till thou have
proved thy self to have a large conscience. I appoint thee no more
continency, than to eat while thy belly is full, nor constancy, but to
brawle rather than burn: a filbert is better than a faggot, except it be an
Athenian she handful: you know that Cosmosophos, ever since your last marriage,
how does the father of your son in law?


Cosmo: Do thou mock me?


Dio: No, I mean to move thee, and transform thy thoughts into actual
servants to wait upon thee: Thy kind thoughts (which may be duly called
actual Aequiuocations) shall be translated into fleshly seruitours, and they of
this sort shall be called by the name of flatterers: these shall carry Ostridge
plumes in their party colored hats to wave with every wind, and aspen leaves
in their mouths in stead of roses, by reason of their incertaintie in words:
For their liuerie, if they borrowe it of Iris, it is all one: party colors
serve them best that are never one: For their other thoughts, they shall like
the trim Ass in Aesop have trapping of gold, and a great choler of that
whereof one link will buy them an hundredth halters. They shall be called
Mercanti, Mercadanti, Impostini, Cacodemones, Daimones, Somnisophoi, Calopluti,
Crusoponeroi, Nay if they were worthy of Christendom they should not want
names: Being thus attended I know if Philoplutos be they friend, Diogenes with
the Wolves may bark against thee as the Moon, but never bite thee whilst thou
art a man.


Philo: Thou abusest my friend, Diogenes.


Dio: Nay do not thou abuse him? Trust him not Cosmosophos: here in Athens
the father has suffered his son to be hanged for forty sickles, and he
worth 400. talents: The brother has beggerd his brother in his ouerfaithfull
credulity, believe not these sort of men, who so are married to their money
are far from mercy: I have known ten men of his name and never a man
honest. A man need not Aristotle's instance if he can but point at them, there
is no word so common in Athens, as My friend: the usurer pretending Cosenage,
will say, you are welcome My friend: My friend, (says the retailer) by my
soul it cost me thus much, yet sels this man his soul for two pence, and bobs
thee out of thy Coin with My friend: Nay I will canuasse a friend out of
breath: Philoplutos, because you are so near me, It is an old proverb and
not so old as true, Amicus certus in re incerta cernitur, A true friend is
known in a doubtful matter: and what is more doubtful, than when in
borrowing money a man finds no friends? So Moss his mare leaping over my
Lords ditch, said my Master feeds me in Lanes, and is this friendship? Yet a
fling at friends, you are my Friend quoth the Cobbler, if I have but a penny for
my clout: My Friend (says the shoemaker) your shoe is good on the Last, but
who so puts it on shall find small peniworth in the lasting: All now a days
use this word Friend most commonly, yet lives there not any one who abuses it
not most contemptuously. Trust not this friendly flattering Philoplutos,
Cosmosophos; for if thou try him, thou shall find but a weak staff to stay
upon: for among all the uncertainties of this world friendship is least
certain, apparailed (in these days) only in good words, and fawning only on
prosperity: At simul intonuit, fugiunt, nec noscitur vlli
Agminibus comitum qui modo cinctus erat.



Cosmo: Well Diogenes, these words were better kept in, you are too plain with
Philoplutos, who is a man of worship and must be honored.


Dio: A worshipful man, a good word, he must be honored; what for a saint?
Beshrow Diogenes if he deem so, and fond art thou if thou imagine so: Honor
is due to our Gods, not to men rich in goods, I have seen Phillips statue
erected here in Athens for releeuing Greece: yet never knew I ante merit honor
for deceiving his Citizens.


Philo: Diogenes, you are too peremptory, we came not hither to hear
reprehensions, but to entertain counsels: neither should Philosophers (as you
are) be so forgetful of their duties; it is an old saying and a true, A
controller is not without contempt: cease therefore (good Cinicke) to complain
of my faults, least thou be convicted of thine own folly, and prosecute that
which thou have enterprised, and advise me in the administration of this our
Commonweal of Athens. Thou have in thy induction laid a good ground, inducing
the service of the Gods, and continued thy policies with judgment, as touching
the loose behavior of the Athenians: since therefore thou art so good an
Oedipus, I pray thee run through all estates in our City, that finding the
imperfection of every member, we may the better establish and bring in frame
the whole body.


Dio: Thou speak well Philoplutos, I will play the worldling a little to
please thee, and leave to rub thee on the gall, since thou art loath thy
imperfections should be: discovered. What estate shall we deal with first?


Philo: That which I ought not to complain of.


Dio: Then use Noli altum sapere, and feed on my roots: who have long hands
can catch a far, such as have clear eyes will quickly see, yet Argus non
videt omnia. It was a custom among our Athenian Painters to decypher the back
parts, not the fore parts of Venus, imagining least in painting the moale on
her face, they should displease, or in drawing her pale color to a right
sanguine, she should condemn them of flattery: Quae supra nos, nihil ad nos,
Gross Cinickes dare not talk of great Signiors: I had rather my Crow should
say, Aue Caesar, than he should answer me with Knave Diogenes. Tut, though I
be singular, semper excipio Platonem.


Philo: What think you then of inferior Magistrates?


Dio: If they be good, it is the better for them, if they be not good, Jupiter
mend them. Thou know Philoplutos, that the proverb is old, every thing is
worse for the wearing.


Philo: I, and what of that?


Dio: I wonder then, why some Athenians have bin worn so long time, and have
so much wool: I speak not of sheep, but of Wolves and Foxes.


Cosmo: Why, do Foxes and Wolves wear wool?


Dio: I, in winter Cosmosophos, it is a jolly medicine against a cold disease
to be well lined.


Philo: Your comparisons may be excepted against.


Dio: Why, dare men be touched with the shadow of beasts? a wise man regards it
not, for a fool it matters not. The sea (according to the Egyptian
Philosophers) is the well of all showers, and the lodging place of all floods.
All floods (says one, I would either of us were so honest) enter the sea, and
he yields them out again, and the floods return to their place they came
from, that they should flow again. I will for this neither allege lines nor
leaves; but so the Scripture says, by the head of Diogenes.

This sea by reason of his great magnificence and power went to the bank
thereof and said, I marvel greatly at thy hardness, and wonder at thy stout
heart, thou art ever contrary unto me, and continually withstandest me, thou
letcest me that I may not eat the earth and suffer me not to confound that
which I would consume: I desire thee therefore to be removed from thy place,
that I may prevail against the earth, and put him under foot, else shall I not
surcease to procure thy torment, and incense my self to thy trouble. The bank
hearing this bold attempt, answered and said, Thou art deadly bewitched my good
brother, for the maker of all things has ordained me in this sort, and I
suffer great trauail in containing thee, in respect that I would please him.
Thou come upon me oftentimes, and put me to great grief, I bear and
suffer for the love of God, in seeking to reprehend thee of thy gluttony, thou
ought not then to multiply unkind words against me: for I may not change
my place, nor be moved for thy peremptory threats. The sea hearing this,
answered in great woodnes; Since thou may suffer, suffer still, for never
shall thou have peace, but I will beat and punish thee with all my power. The
Bank said nothing, and so I took a piece of bread and cheese, and went my way.


Cosmo: And what mean you by this, Diogenes?


Dio: That which I swear never to tell thee, unless thou will be dishonest.


Cosmo: How mean you that?


Dio: I mean thus, I swear never to tell it until thou hear it, neither
can I tell it so soon as thou will be dishonest: This caveat is for such as
you Philoplutos, or (if you please) for all sorts. Such as are to govern in
Cities, ought to admit Counsailers like the sea banks to contain them, and
such as are Counsailers, are to behave themselves like the sea banks, to
resist the sinful if they exceed, as the bank withstandeth the billows if
they mount: yet is there an honest Church man satth, As the sea ever rebelleth,
and repugneth against the banks, by which it is restrained and kept in: in
like sort some persons repugne advice, which proves they are worthy of
punishment. Such as counsel, must have Clerks which like good shepherds
need not dread the malicious threatning's of the bad: yet such as counsel the
devil, cannot mend him of his evil. But to the purpose: The sea bank I told
you of, should resemble you, if you dissemble not. Oh how I mistake? You should
resemble the sea banks, which as they resist al storms whatsoever: so should
you (in such manner as waking shepherds are wont to do) keep your sheep
from cruel beasts, least Leodore come in with this Item, Evil shepherds take
no heed of their sheep, and hired men if they see the Wolf charging the
flock, they suddenly fly. O you sea banks, let me speak unto you before one
of your Masters, when fly you away? Certainly, when you are still and dare not
speak before the mighty, and when you are timorous and fearful to withstand
such as are tyrannous and froward. Shall I comfort you with an old father? I
marry sir, and will I: Entend you to please the Gods, as for the threatening of
man you need not care. Philip of Macedon (Philoplutos) was a wise fellow as
thou art, lame on his legs as I wish thee not: This Philip besieging Athens, in
steed of ransom of the Estate required ten Orators of his choice: but hark
what Demosthenes said, I tell you, or your worship, or your manship (for that
should be the best style) I marry will I, thus said he to the people, and
thus say I to Philoplutos: Wolves on a time spoke to the shepherds, and said,
Your Dogs are all the cause of the discord which is risen twixt you and us: if
you will be at one with us, deliver us your Dogs, and we shall be friends for
ever. When the shepherds had so done, the Wolves at their own pleasure
devoured the sheep. Take therefore good handfast Philoplutos on such as are
worthy to resist Wolves, and let not Athens be of them unfurnished: and as
those be to be esteemed, so set not by thy quick-sented hounds, who if they
fail thee (as they begin to fawn on others,) I believe in loosing thy dogs
thou will prove but a sheep, and they in scorn bark out; A murren on those
rotten Rams which will be so covetous.


Cosmo: Why, thou art altogether preposterous in this discourse Diogenes, using
such equivocations, and quiddities, that I am beyond my self to think on
them: now alludest thou the banks to great men, now the sea to no man; now the
banks to their followers, now the strength of those banks to the seas
misfortune: truly, truly, I know not where to find thee.


Dio: Then am I like Philoplutos flatterers, full of all religions, yet
following none: whatsoever I say, I will not stand too, if any man say I
speak ill, I will desire him to teach me better: if I hit by hap like a blind
woodman in the dark, let men not blame my frowardnes but their own fortune.
Have we talked of Magistrates all this while?


Philo: Yes Diogenes, hethertoo we have discoursed only of such as have the
administration of justice in this Commonweal of Athens committed unto them
from the higher powers.


Dio: Then mattereth it not how ambiguouslie I speak, for we ought not to be
too plain with such as they: yet will I prosecute my purpose to please thee
Philoplutos. Such men are like owches in gold, they are eyes of a
Commonweal, if not blinded with gold: they buy more fair words and caps in
a year with favor, than they can well digest with wisdom: every one
pretends them service in hope to end their suits, the flatterer studieth by
night how to deceive them by day, there is no fashion lost that fitteth not
their fancy, yet some have fallen in fancying fashions: they have many
Physicians for the body, but few true Physicians for the soul: they often
light on good servants, but seldom keep them: in brief, if they be not at
enmity one with another, they are happy: for I have heard among beasts that
corrupt intention to defraude, and ungodly purposes to devour, has cost the
deceiuer his head, and swalowed him in his own snare.


Cosmo: How among beasts Diogenes?


Dio: Thus among beasts Cosmosophos: The Wolf on a time sawed with the Ass,
but the Ass labored truly above, the Wolf deceitfully beneath: the Wolf
was malicious and drew the saw underneath, seeking an occasion to devour the
Ass, and to induce his quarrel, he thus doggedly attempted him: Why do thou
throw the dust into mine eyes? The Ass being a beast of much patience,
answered and said: I wrong thee not but govern the saw according to my
science: if thou will saw above I am pleased, and I labor beneath painfully.
To whom the Wolf said, I cannot, But if thou throw any dust in mine eyes, I
will pull out thine. Notwithstanding these words, they continually sawed, and
amidst their labor the Wolf blewe with all his power, being very willing to
fill his fellows eyes with the dust, but the timber stopped it, and caused the
dust to fall into the Wolves eyes, by reason whereof he was grieuouslie pained,
and swore, that he would overthrow the porters and bearers, which he
practicing to do, the timber fell suddenly in the midst of his sawing, and the
Ass lightly lept away, and was delivered: but the Wolf in his envious
imaginations was suppressed.


Philo: And what of this?


Dio: Nothing by the faith of a Cinick as touching good men, but if there be an
envious man in Athens that need rubbing, let him scratch: the more he strives,
the more scald will it prove. I wish no one to seek the suppression of his
equal, no not his neighbor, least in drawing the sword, they dye by the
smiter. Who lay nets to betray fat fowls or fools, or what you list: may
they not at last fall in the spring with the Woodcocke? He that ordains a
pit for his neighbor, shall fall into it him self. If you remember Aesops
Mouse Philoplutos, he teaches a good lesson, but I am very weary.


Cosmo: Why Diogenes.


Dio: In that we talk of the stars which are fatal in their workings: and
when they are disposed to be retrograde or opposite, they work wrack. Strive
not with a mighty man (says Seneca) nor contend not with thy better. I will
not judge with Midas to get long ears with pulling, I had rather escape a
pinch, than employ a reprehension, unless the world were in Athens as in old
time it was wont to be, when men thought no words bitter that sauoured any
wit. To be brief: if in the common weal the fear of our Gods be well
planted, the Prince well counseled, the Nobles better learned than bold of
belief, the highwaie is already found out to good government, we shall not
need any long disputation. But say there be a good Solon in a city,
Alcibiades may royot, Timon may curse, Diogenes may bite, Aristippus may
flatter: yet shall all these be but flea bytings, and may breed a spot in
estates, but not the spoil of state.


Cosmo: What think you of Divines and Lawyers Diogenes?


Dio: As of Divines and Lawyers. If good, the city has too few of them: If
bad, the gallows is sick for them. I cannot admit in these sorts any
mediocritie: for lukewarm professors in these things are lost professors:
hear my tale Cosmosophos, The Hare went to Athens to school, and in process
of time became a good Lawyer, furnished therefore with Arts, and fully stuffed
with arguments, he repaired to the Lion the sovereign of beasts, and the sole
pattern of bounty, and after a Scholars courtesy, with his round cap in his
right hand, his pen and iuke at his girdle, and his hood on his shoulders, he
began thus: My good Lord, I have spent my goods in following goodness, and my
liuelihoods to attain literature: since therefore I have attained the fulness
of the one through the default of the other, I beseech your Majesty that I may
be maintained, that having deserved worthily, I may live worshipfully, under
your Maiesticall protection, and the shadow of your bounty. The Lion seeing
his grave looks, his vnkembed locks (like Senecaes Philosopher) replied thus:
Friend, I will first make a proof of thy wisdom and cunning, and afterward
puruey thee of wealth and content: go therefore with me to see diverse things,
that I may prove thy learning and relieve thy lack. And as they went both by
a wood side, there passed by a hunter with his bow and arrows, who settled
himself to shoot at a Bear and a Fox: but the Fox was wily, and when she
espied the bow and arrow, she lept aside, and escaped from the stroke: the
Bear (contrariwise) was proud, and trusted to his own strength, and ran so
hastily against the man who intended to wound him, that the Hunter loosed his
arrowe, and smote the Bear and killed him. The Lion beholding this, said unto
the Hare, Make me a proverb of this, that I may know thy science, whereby I may
with more will admit thee to thy sallarie. The Hare (after a draft of merry
go down) wrote this, Against death it prevails much the life to prolong,
To have ripe wit rather than ribs strong.
The Lion hearing this conceit, commended the Proverb, and led the Hare with
him to a City, where they found a Lord rebuking his servants, of which the one
patiently endured the severe reprehensions of his Master, the other was
impatient, and full of froward aunsweres: for which cause, the Lord in his ire
all to beat him, and spoiled him, and expulsed him out of his service, and
kept still the patient servant, and promoted him to honor. Upon which
occasion the Hare wrote this: Far better it is many times to be still,
Than to speak bitterly, and to have ill will.
The Lion was no less delighted with this second Proverb than he was with the
first: for which cause he lead the Hare into another town, in which they found
a Labourer yoking his Oxen, assigning them to their journey to ear twelve
acres of land, delivering unto each of them for their feeding a bottle of hay.
One of these beasts went forth, and bare his hay without grutching: but the
other began to speak boldly and proudly, and said, What should it suffice us
to bear hay with us, he shall not feed us so: and using these contumelious
words, he would not carry hay to feed himself. But when they came to their
labor, and had eared whilst the evening, he that had the bottle of hay
refreshed himself: the other was weary, and having nothing whereby he might
be comforted, he dyed for great hunger* Whereupon the Hare wrote to the Lion,
saying in this wise: Better is it in need a small thing to have,
Than utterly nothing the life for to save.
The Lion considering all this, said unto the Hare, Truly (my son) thou have
studied well, and can decide wise questions. This said, the Lion promoted
him, to what I know not, but somewhat he had, and well he deserved it.


Cosmo: And what of this?


Dio: Oh worldly wiseman, you are still entering into the marrow of matters: but
I will fit you or I Will fail my self. All students of whatsoever profession in
Commonweals, seeking for honors from their Prince, must prevent their
Countries prejudice: you must study if religious, to reprehend without
flattery, if Lawyers, to judge without partiality: so shall their good
Proverbs get them pence, and they deserve it, for the Labourer is worthy of
his hyre. But, oh you Hares, take heed of the Fox in the long gown, that goes
in sheep clothing, but is inwardly a ravening Wolf, who is singular with
Diogenes to single out his pray, and sets light by his superiors: follow not
his counsel, take maintenance when you deserve it, least with the proud Ox
you die for hunger. To be provident is your daily lessons, let not therefore
curiousnes lick the fat from your fingers, by Jupiter I hope you will not, for
there is no doubt but age will bring on discretion.


Cosmo: Which ways should the Lawyer apply himself best:


Dio: In silence, till his vainglorie be overcome with judgment, in
abstinence when he is tempted with bribes, in sufferance when he is baighted
with injuries, in vprightnes when he decideth controversies.


Philo: How should the Divine apply himself best?


Dio: In speaking the truth without hypocrisy, in reprehending all sins
without flattery, in living himself uprightly, and discoursing on the
Scriptures reverently, in affecting no partiality, but ordring all things in
sincerity.


Cosmo: I, but Diogenes, the world is such now a days, as the purging of
grown sicknesses procures death, plain dealing commonly in this world
wears a bare coat. Such therefore as will thrive in the world, they must
some times dissemble: for since of two evils the least is to be chosen, I
think it better to forbear than to bear the faggot, and more meet to bear
the faggot, than to burn by the faggot.


Diogenes: I know thou speak according to thy conscience Cosmosophos, and I
bear with thee. But hear you me, those men that are called to the service of
the Gods, must have upright hearts, neither self will nor worldly promotion
must withdraw them, What profits a man to win the whole world, and to loose
his own soul? Such as are teachers of the simple sort must be as stars in
dark nights, lamps in blind walks. What profits it the talent to be
hidden, or what is gold unless it bide the trial? Those that have care of
souls, must be careless of the world, careless of wealth: and if danger
threaten their flock, they ought rather to suffer death, than to see them
seduced, as I will teach you by a pretty tale if you will hear it?


Philo: Say on good Diogenes.


Dio: I will satisfy thee Philoplutos. A Hawk called Ormarillus being a stout
bird of pray, and seeking out for a peer, met with a Goshauke, who became his
confederate: these two bold winged rauenors, seeking in the Summer evening for
their ordinary Supper, made this covenant between themselves, that whatsoever
they took should be equally divided between them: upon which conclusion, they
both at once seized upon a Quail, and seeing her a little bird too abject a
morcell for their hungry mawes, they began coulorably to undermine her, in
hope to surprise both her and her young, and courted her in this manner: Choose
thee whether (fair bird) thou had rather be devoured alone, or else
conducting us to thy chickens and young ones, to suffer death with them, to
satisfy our pleasures. The Quail being in a quandarie said: Anguish and
trouble is fallen upon me on every side, and what I should do I shun to do.
Should I loose my young ones? whom I have carefully covered in the shell, and
clocked under my wings? whom I have fed by my toil, and brought up with much
care? no I will not. Less hurt is it for me to die, and to fall into their
hands my self alone, than to suffer both my self and the silly ones both at
once to perish, whereupon without replye she humbled her to their grype; they
greedily devoured her, and the devil send them surfets that love such suppers.


Cosmo: How apply you this?


Dio: Why thus Sir: After the manner of this Quail ought our truly qualited
divines demean them selves, of two harms they must choose the less: better
had they suffer with a good conscience, than their whole flock should be
devoured in error, or missed through their envy, and made insolent with their
singularity. They are bound to die rather for a Common profit, than to live
for a singular avail. Among the Barbarous, many have been peremptory for
their cities safety. Marcus Regulus being taken prisoner in a certain
battle by the Carthaginians, was sent by them to Rome upon his faithful
promise of return, to ransom other captives which were in the hands of the
Romans: who entering the Senate house being an old man well stepped in years,
in steed of persuading his associates for the safety of the enemy,
voluntarily dissuaded them from exchange, alleging his old years, his
broken memory, his unable body, whereby he was unfit to pleasure his
country, nay rather he feared to be a burden: for which cause he humbly
entreated them with tears in his eyes, to return him home to Carthage, and to
detain the noble young enemies: in brief with much admiration he attained his
suite, returned to Carthage, and dyed constantly and confidently for his
country. Such should divines us, but I will leave to talk of them who are
best able to teach us: they that wear the shoe can best tell where it
wringeth, and no doubt they will against newfanglenes at last speak: for the
best sort of them are like those Orators, which in cases they spoke of seldom,
are sure then to deal very soundly.


Philo: Now as touching Soliciters in Law, unlettered Curates? What deem you
of them?


Dio: The first are like Coloquintida in a common pot of pottage, they make all
bitter, drawing their benefit from nothing but contention: they devise so many
stresses that they break plain men's heart strings. They buzze in rich men's
ears till they be lords of poor men's ernings. And then comes Sir John slitpen
to a Bailifes office, or else to keep a Leece, where he will so hunt poor
men's titles with the slender countenance of Littletons Tenures, as they shall
sooner catch a louse than keep their living. They write so much ad opus and
vsum eiusdem Iohannis, that they inuert all good uses: When as all
controversies in Athens were wont to be decided among courteous neighbors, and
the gang tooth was a seal of more truth, then the best bunch of seals in the
subtillest Scriueners shop in this City. Oh what swarms of them see I in this
Land, they iet up and down the streets grasping a paper in their hands for
fear a man should spy a true finger in the fist, carrying a pen in their
ears to note that which they deserve not, their gown is carried sidelong by
the wind like a misne sail, showing they are fit to turn to all subtilties,
their thumbes are goodly Alcumistes that with the very touch translate a fee of
ten groats to a signet of three pounds. But Philoplutos and Cosmosophos,
sharp though I be, and Cynicall in reprehending, yet is Diogenes as far from
envy as these petifogging pratlers he means from honesty, and reuerenceth
the grave and upright Lawyer, as the instrument of the Gods, poynting by their
wisdoms the wickeds punishment, and the innocents preservation, giving to
every man his proper right, and ending justly long hidden controversies: these
does Diogenes reverence with the Suns arise, and bans the other at his going
down, who cast oil into fire, and set a candle to kindled flax: who having
by such gleanings gotten once into their gards, wax then so greedy, that no
subornations are by them ouerslipt, till the good Lawiers finding their
subtilties, send them where they cannot slip till their ears be slit. These
are like hungry Dogs, who fight for a boane one with an other, and play the
wantons together when their Cliants so them not. They have learned the pulling
of the Goose beyond our Athenian kitchen men's conceit. They are not content
with the feathers, but they will have the fell: Shall I tell you a pretty tale
of them which may be pithilie alluded to them.


Philo: Ask us not whether thou shall tell, but tell us, matters of worth
among men of wit may never want attention.


Dio: Among men of wit: well applied Philoplutos to thine own flattery, Thou
attributest a pound of that to thy self, which a good man can scarcely wring
from thee by the penie-worth. But let that pass, and hear my pretense: There
was a fair goodly Cock with partie-coulored plumes, and a crimson comb, the
very Chauntecleere of all the dunghill. This proud bird was locked up in a
fair yard with a fat Capon: the Cock like the bird of the Sun was the
commander over the hens, the Capon enjoined to penance, in that he had lost
his stones, was nothing so stout. So it was, that amid the iollitie of the
Cock, and humility of the Capon, it unfortunately happened, that the Fox
finding a gap in the hedge, came and caught the Cock, and for all his courage
devoured him, and finding his flesh tough and somewhat rammish, he cast in his
mind by what means he might catch the Capon, whereupon reserving the comb of
the Cock, like a grave fellow in a guarded gown, he came and spoke in this
manner, Brother Capon, thy fellow Cock is departed, and in token of great love
I have brought thee his goodly comb, which he bare continually on his head.
The Capon sitting on the roust began to give great regard, and tickled like a
Samon trout in the gill was quickly beguiled, and now came it into his mind
that if he could compass the Comb he might be Lord over the heus, and
attain the pre-eminence of honor, for which cause he descended from the
Roost, the Fox started and caught him, and having deceived him deucured him,
etc.


Cosmo: And what of this?


Dio: Even like the Fox have our false hearted Atturnies dealt, First with
fair words have they got a fleece from the rich, leaving them a small title
for a great sum of money, yea some are sucked so near the bone as they have
no marrowe, a pitiful matter: Now these Foxes having furnished them with
their coin, begin to gather countenance, and making poor men believe all by
their big looks, they so rent them that they leave them no Rent, and trouble
them with so many writs that some of them are beside their wits: Alas poor
Capons, are you so greedy to buy a Cockescombe? Truly our husbandmen here
about Athens, are like Aesops Cock whom the Fox espied perched on a tree and
bearing a piece of flesh in his crooked nebbe: For which cause the crafty beast
incensed with hunger, bethought her self how to beguilde him, and therefore
she spoke and said: Brother Crow behold me and mark my sayings; thy beauty
passes the beauty of all birds, and thy strength exceeds the strength of
all other fowls, but I am only sorry that thou have no voice, nor cunning in
tunable and deliver notes to excel the music of the Nightingale, whom thou
exceedest in color although she be thought to be more cunning in cackling:
The Crow tickled with vaineglory suddenly began to sing, when as unawares the
flesh fell out of his mouth, which the Fox caught and eat up, and smilingly
went away. Such careless Crows are our Country men till they loose their
crowns, for having money in their fist they employ it in recovery of things in
discontinuance, and so at last loose both the estate and the stock. Oh sir
(says the Attorney) your father had it in possession thus long, and will you
lose it? What though your Landlord be rich, there is law for him? Thus so long
they law it with the poor man, that he proves a dawe in the end. And what
says the Attorney then? In faith your Counsel told me the case was plain.
But oh ye Athenians, hold your own, trust not, for trust is soonest betraide:
it is better to have one bird in the fist, than two in the field. Mark Catoes
words, Believe not thou another man, for belief is the step to deceit.


Philo: Now for ignorant and unlettered Curates?


Dio: In faith I leave to speak of them, till such as you bridle the impiety
of Farmers, Grasiers, and such greasy Patrones, who neither are able to supply
the place, nor will part with any indifferent maintenance for a sufficient man:
so I pass them to their superintendents, whose wisdoms can see best into
their unworthiness: I will only note a merry jest of Arlotto, which proves
their ignorance for the nonce. In the famous City of Millaine there sometimes
dwelled a Curate, a feat and delicious companion, cunning in merriment, but
ignorant of his Masse-booke: this Clergy man and ignorant Clearke, happening
to read the story of Jacob habens duodecim filios, fortuned in his Portasse to
find Ia on the one side, and cob on the other, and being very earnest to
prove himself a tall a b c Clearke, he read on, and Ia Ia Ia Ia, and wetting
his fingers so rubbed them with impatience, that at last with blushing envy
turning over the leaf, and finding long concealed cob hidden on the other
side, with an open mouth and a full throat he cried out, Cob sta vostre
signorie in questo luoco: was not this a pretty fellow at a Cob Philoplutos?
Believe me one learned Milo would carry too many of these Calves, who by use
if they prove not Oxen, are Asses in their age. But this common place is too
plentiful, and my mind too peremptory, therefore I will leave it (as I said)
to the good Pastors and Patrones to see into these faults, and to salve them
by their discretion.


Cosmo: So do Diogenes: and now to the Merchants, a greatlim of this City, men
of mighty possessions and woonderfully monied.


Dio: Oh stay there Cosmosophos, they are thy kindred, praise them not too
far, for thou art accessory to their faults: these men attributing all to
fortune, are all of them most drowned in folly: Insatiable are their desires,
and subtle their imaginations, they thirst after promotions vehemently without
moderation, wherein they seem to imitate the bird Laurus, of whom Solinus
uses this pretty discourse. Laurus (says he) lives on the water as well as
on the land, a byrd of black color and exceeding fat. This Laurus was a
shipman the greatest that could be, yet in all his travels he ever
ouercharged his ship, trusting to his own cunning. For which cause his
friends many a time and often rebuked him of his folly: yet nevertheless he
amended not, but intended his covetous course, in hope of sudden profit and
lucre. It fortuned therefore upon a time, that he fraught his ship excessiuely
with diverse merchandise, insomuch as he could not guide it by reason of the
great burden and troublous waves which enforced it, and for this cause the
ship sunk into the bottom of the sea and was drowned: and so this Laurus was
utterly undone and proved bankerupt: In conscience Cosmosophos, was not this a
very fool?


Cosmo: So I heard that Cato was wont to allude, who never condemned himself
more than for trusting the sea: but let us hear this parable applied, good
Diogenes.


Dio: I will, because it is weighty: Merchants should take heed hereto, and not
covet hasty winnings in hope to be suddenly rich by great peril, but surely
to increase in wealth with moderation: for Barnard says (yet Barnardus non
videt omnia) I will not suddenly be made greatest, but I will profit and
increase moderately from more to more. Hear an other pretty fable: There was a
fat Churl that had a fruitful hen which laid every day an egg, whereupon
he gathered many and sold them, and increased to his own advantage. At last
he thought (as covetousness still hatcheth new mischief) that if this hen
were killed and opened, he should have many eggs in her, for which cause he
commanded the hen to be slain: which done he found her void of eggs, and to
his utter loss failed both of the foul and the fruit, according to the common
proverb, He that coueteth all, oftentimes loses much. Merchants and Chapmen
ought therefore to beware lest they get any thing wrongfully, for unjust men's
goods shall be soon destroyed, according to the opinion of the Philosopher:
who says, that riches lightly gotten may not last long. Another also gives
them this lesson, Heritage that is hastily purchased in the beginning, shall
lack blessing in the end. Hark thee Cosmosophos a true tale, a fit note for
all Merchants, When a certain Merchant on the sea upon a time had sold his
wines which were mixed half with water, for as much money as if it had been
pure wine, he fortuned to open his bag to cast in the money, when as an Ape at
that time playing above the batches, espied the place where he buried it, and
in secret wise coming and catching the bag with the whole money, he fled to
the Anchor and began to verefie the old proverb, ill gotten goods never
prosper: for sitting thereupon, and beholding the playing of the billows
against the bark side, he played the upright dealer, for he opened the bag and
threw one piece into the sea, the other into the ship, and thus delighting
himself in his Apish vprightnes, (being ordained to punish the Merchants
dissembling) ceased not but cast out every penny, insomuch as the Merchaunt
had no avail by his fraud: so just are the heavens against al covetous
dissemblers, who using such tricks prove themselves but shifting Merchants.


Cosmo: I, but Diogenes, I have read that Usury is allowable, our Princes have
wincked at it, in that it has enriched the State.


Dio: Thou would say; in that it has robbed the State. I will tell thee,
this practice of corrupt heart, is the rotting sore of Athens. The Hebrews well
looking into the lamentable effects thereof, called it Neschech, that is to
say, a biting: a diction which is drawn from the theme Naschech, a word
attributed to Serpents: for as the Serpent stingeth and biteth, so Usurie
(according to the opinion of Rabbi Solomon) is the henemoust poison among men.
For as he that is stung by a Serpent in the foot, with small pain falls a
sleep, and in his slumbers (the poison being dispearsed) suffers death: so
the biting of Usurie makes but a little wound at the first, until such time as
it has grown to fulness, it consumes a poor man's whole estate, and
substance. The Chaldees in their Theology, call it Habuliah, that is to say,
perdition and corruption: for it destroys and overthrows men according to
the saying of S. Chrysostom, who following the Etymology of the Hebrew,
compares Usurie with the venom proceeding from the biting of a certain
Serpent, whose wou^d and sting is so sweet at the beginning, that it
engenders a desire of sleep, and then in the end the sleep kills him which
is wounded, at such time as the venom spreads it self through all the
members of the body: so he which is inchained in Usurers debts, thinks in
the beginning to receive some profit, but he does but cast himself a sleep,
and not acquitting himself at any time of the principal, in the end he
consumes himself altogether. There are Lawyers and Legists, who (according to
the opinion of Saint Hierome) compare usury unto a certain worm, who
naturally is so malignant, that after he has so long gnawen the wood that he
may turn him in the hole which he has made, he engenders another worm of the
same malice: so the Usurie with the debtor that makes satisfaction upon the
days of payment, hatcheth up another usury: and poor borrowers hatch worms
ad infinitum to their utter wrack. And in that the usurer is compared to a
worm, he shall have in recompense of his villainy, a worm which shall
incessantly feed upon him, and tire upon his conscience, as the Uultures that
gnaw the poor liver of Titius, according to Homers opinion: and this is my
opinion. This is the worm that shall not die as a Prophet spoke, more famous
than Plato for a Philosopher. The Usurer likewise is compared unto fire, an
actual and insatiable element: for as it burns and consumes all such wood
as is cast upon it, so the usurer the more he has in his purse, the more he
gnaweth and deuoureth, resembling in this point hell mouth. But I I may say to
thee Cosmosophos, I must now laugh hartelie.


Cosmo: And why?


Dio: Because this their fire of Covetousness shall burn the Author, not only
in this world where the wicked begin their hell: but in the other world, where
the fire of hell is unquenchable. In brief, these usurers (as Barnard says)
are Master burgess thieves, who as the Pyke in the pond deuoureth all other
fish, so does the Usurer the poor people in Cities, Towns and Uillages, till
some wild fire cut them short. Cicero and Cato accompteth them for homicides,
and Ausonius the Poet says Usurie kills suddenly. We Greeks call Usurie
Tocos, which is a name derived from Ticto, which signifies as much as to bring
forth, in such manner as infants are begotten: for with loss of time it
brings forth and begets much money: a plague on the fathers of such
monsters. Aristotle calls this cursed lucre, an infant begotten against
Nature. To speak in a word, this Usurie is against the laws both natural,
divine, and humane. That it is against the laws natural, the Philosophers
have sufficiently testified, who have detested the gain of Usurie: Plato in
his laws has forbidden the usage of Usurie, and has commanded to punish the
Usurer with the loss of his principal, and the forfeiture of the arrearage.
Plutarch has also made an express Treatise upon the same, where he proves
that by Nature we ought not to use feneration and usury: and for this cause al
Nations have it in horror, as the Turks, Moors, Saracens, Tartares and other
Infidels. The first proof is taken from Aristotle, who says, that money
cannot engender money, for it is against Nature, that a thing being of it
self barraine, should be are fruit. He then that seeks fruit from his
money, which is not admitted in the number of natural genetrices, how sins
he against the right natural? The second reason, It is injustice to seek to
draw profit from that which is not his own: but it is certain, that silver
lent, is not his own that has lent it, but both in the property and usage is
his for the time to whom it is lent, and therefore such a loan in Latin is
called Mutuum, of mine it is made thine, and if it be mine, it cannot at that
instant be thine. The third reason, To take any thing twice, is Larceny* the
Usurer does the same. And how? First he receives and takes the principal
sum, and secondly the intexest of the same, which is most great injustice. The
fourth, He that sells one thing twice, commits Larcenie and injustice: but
the Usurer does so. For in receiving his money, he receives silver for silver
in the same equality, and then in exacting the ouer-plus he sells the use,
and that is (in effect) to sell twice, considering that the usage cannot be
separated from the thing. I could yield examples of all these, but it were
vain, since the examples be continually laid before the eyes of Philoplutos.


Philo: But how is Usurie against the law of God, where it is written, that
each man may make profit of his own?


Dio: O Sir, that is to take toward a decent maintenance of your living, not to
the hurt of your neighbor. But that Usurie is against the Laws divine, it
appears both in the old and new Testament, which though I have never read,
yet as inspired I will preach them forth: for I am assured of the truth
thereof. First, God who commands in Athens and in all places, shows in
these especial words, that he is displeased with Usurie: Si pecuniam tuam
dederis (says he) populo meo pauperi, qui habitat tecum: non vrgebis eum quasi
exactor, nec vsura opprimes. And in another place, Si attenuatus frater tuus
fuerit, ne vsuras accipias ab eo. Mark what the Psalmist says, Lord, who
shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? who shall rest upon thy holy hill? He that has
not given his money to usury. Ezechiel writes (as having the revelation from
God, that That man is just, and shall live eternally, which has not lent unto
Usury, and has taken no ouer-plus: and he who shall do the contrary, shall
die, and his blood shall be upon him. Hark what Ecclesiastes says in the
xxix. chapter, and Jesus Christ in the Gospel likewise says openly, Date
mutuum, nihil inde sperantes, lend willingly, looking for nothing again. As
touching humane Laws, are not all Usuries straightly forbidden? These are
divided into Ecclesiastical laws and Politic: the Ecclesiastical Laws
abhor and detest it, as you may read in the facred Chronicles and reverend
Counsels, as well general as particular, in the volumes of the Cannon Law,
in the Decretalls, in the worthy and memorable writings of the ancient
Fathers and Doctors, as well Grecians as Latins, whose large Treatises against
this unmerciful sin, if Diogenes should recite, it would cost him a whole
volume, for which cause I wonder at Bodinus an old friend of all these usuring
factions which holds some vsuries lawful with Christians. But if his
mastership, or doctorship shall please to examine the laws politic in
general, he shall find that in all ages in all times and seasons, they have
forbidden them, principally the excessive vsuries themselves. The Laws of the
most greatest Politicians, as of Solon, of Licurgus, of Plato, of Aristotle,
and likewise of the ten Commissaries deputed to correct the customs of Rome,
and to make choice of the most profitable laws: These men and Magistrates
would not admit that usury should exceed the compass of one penny for an
hundred by the year, which they call vnciare, for that the usury of every
month, amounted not but to an Ounce, which was the twelfth part of the hundred
Crown or Denier which a man had lent: in such sort as the usurer who sought
more great profit, was punished severely. The same law was afterward
published upon the request of the Tribune Duilius the year after the
foundation of Rome 396, and ten years after, under the Consulate of Torquatus
and Plantius, it was reduced unto half an ounce by the month, and half a
Denier in the hundred for a year, in such sort as the surplusage should not
egall the principal, but in the space of two hundred years. The year after,
usury was forbidden by the law Gemetia, afterward by the law Gabinia which
chasticed the usurer which had employed his money beyond the permission of the
law, with the loss of his principal. Likewise the laws of Dioclesian
commanded to punish the usurer which practiced grievous and manifest vsuries.
And Plato says that the ancients were accustomed to punish the usurer with
the fourth part, and to draw the thief to the payment of the double: and not
without cause, for the Usurer (says the said Plato) is compared to the
Homicide. And saint Ambrose compares them to the thief and the Robber: as
much says saint Chrysostom and saint Barnard. Valentinian, afterward
Theodorus and Arcadius, commanded that all they should be punished with a
quadruple pain, which exceeded the usury of a hundredth. The prolixity would
surpass if I would seek further into the Civil law.


Philo: I but Diogenes, it is most certain that some Christian Emperors have
approved Usury, as Justinian: therefore every way ought you not to condemn it.


Dio: Approved it? I deny your assertion, but it may be they have permitted
it, should I say they have permitted it? I must then say they have permitted it
as a necessary evil, so as Cato was wont to say of women: you will tell me
that the Civil law withstandeth not the contracts of usury with a certain
moderation, neither punishes them; and approoueth them then; I deny the
consequence. For he which approoueth gives favor and license to execute that
which he approoueth: but so it is that there is not any imperial Law
whatsoever which has favored Usurers, for if so it were, they should both
inuert the divine Law, and intort the laws of Nature, and therefore the
Emperor commanded an inviolable observation of the Counsel of Nice, by which
all vsuries have been prohibited. But enough of Emperors, let us contain our
selves in the walls of this City, which I wonder it sincketh not for sin,
there is so much extortion, craft, and usury exercised in it. The Romans
exceeded but in ounces, but we in pounds: their laws admitted them some
sufferance in the compass of a hundredth, but we exceed in thousands, we
lack but some wise wag like Alcibiades to burn the Usurers bonds, bills and
contractes in the market place, which if they were set on fire, the bonfire
would be so big, as I fear me would consume the whole City: poor men cry out
daily, widows wail, all exclaim, there is none to comfort them, and how may
it be possible whereas all men study their own gain? Oh Philoplutos thou have
many Officers under thee, let one just man have a fee, who honoring equity
from his heart may relieve the fatherless, and comfort the desolate, for
surely such as forsake the poor in need, will at last be themselves forsaken:
such as leave their neighbors and deny them help when dangers shall oppress
them, shall themselves be denied, for no one man by worldly policy can warrant
a peace without change, neither is there any place so fortified that may not
endure a change or name of estate: As I will teach thee Philoplutos, with this
thy friend Cosmosophos, in a pretty tale if you will hear me. Isodore in his
twenty two of Etymologies describes the Griphon after this manner: The Griphon
(says he) is a feathered bird and fewer footed, and these kind of birds be
engendered among the Hiperbore mounts, that is, in Scithia, Asiatica: This bird
is like unto an Eagle both in head and wings, and in all other parts of his
body he is like unto a Lion, and he destroys both men and horses, and
puts a Smaragdine stone in his nest, against venomous beasts of the
mountains, he slays and destroys all men that dwell near about him,
neither is his insatiable covetousness ever satisfied: This Griphon took a
great province to rule, and the more to show his tyranny and covetousness he
commanded three things: First, that no stranger should be entertained in his
country either to buy or to sell: Secondly, that no manner of creature should
come thither from other countries: Thirdly, that none of all his people should
be so hardy to travel into other countries. All which three commandments were
observed by his subjects, and he lived in deliciousnes and pleasures, and
gathered goods and no wonder: For whatsoever came into his possession he
parted with no man, but kept it straightly to his own proper use: But so it
fortuned upon a time by the rightful judgment of God: that thunder, tempest and
lightninges destroyed all the country: For which cause the Comprouincials and
inhabiters thereof ran altogether to the Griphon crying and saying: Let us
hence oh king lest we die for hunger. And he sent forth Legates to other Nations
that were next adjoining unto him, that they should send of their goods and
grain unto him, and sell them at their own price. To whom they answered and
said: Thou would never sell us any of thy goods, neither now in thy need
will we sell thee any. Grieved with this answer he sent again other
messengers desiring them to come with merchandise and to have free passage at
their pleasure but they answered, thou would never receive us before this
time, neither shall thou now receive us: The third time he sent unto them, and
prayed them to receive him and his people. But they said, Thou never came
unto us till now at this time necessity inforceth thee, and for that cause we
will not receive thee, but rather drive thee from us if thou come unto us: and
so forsaken of all in great wretchedness both he and his people were famished.


Philo: And what gather you by this.


Dio: A lesson for thee Cosmosophos and rich usurers* of the City, intend more
pity, stretch your purse stringes, help the needy, favor the good deserving,
surcease your vsuries and oppressions, for storms will follow calmes. It is
therefore good to be curious and to receive forraines and strangers, and to use
merchandise with other Nations, and to depart our worldly goods with other, and
employ them for common profit: For our Savior says, Mat. 7. All things that
you will other men do unto you, do you the same unto them, so bids the Law
and the Prophets in general. It is read that when Alexander marched by the way
with his Host, and both he and all his train were well nigh lost with thirst,
one came and presented unto him a cup of fair water for a precious gift, and
he with great speed commanded it to be powered out, neither would he once drink
himself in that he could not give part to his Knights. Such a mind should
Philoplutos carry in respect of well deserving students, poor fatherless
children, widows, and the aged, such mind should the Usurer carry in respect
of those whom he has suppressed, such should Cosmosophos be, in regard of
those whom he has seduced: but the covetous man says contrary. Eccle. 10. I
have found rest unto me, and I will eat of mine own goods alone. Such
covetous men as these should be detested: wherefore in old time such as loved
Avarice should not be preferred in the common weal, as Valerius in his sixth
book tells us, that when two Consuls of Rome should have been sent into
Spain, and the Romans took counsel and deliberation thereupon; one among
the rest (the famous Scipio) said thus: Neither of them likes me, for the one
of them has nothing, and the other will be satisfied with nothing, judging
equally poverty and avarice in malicious people. Also Valerius tells that
Tiberius the Emperor changed his Officers very seldom, because they which were
new ordained, were very prompt and ready to receive. An example hereof is
showed by a man who was wounded, whose deep stripes a swarm of flies covered,
at which time it fortuned that one came by and saw them and drove them away to
whom the other said: Thou have done me wrong, for these were full and repleat,
now shall other come that be more hungry, and do me more grief. In like sort
Judges when they be needy or covetous, they be greedy to catch, and desirous
to have. It is read in one fable of Poetry, that Midas desired of Apollo that
whatsoever he touched might be turned into gold and it was granted him, so when
he should touch meat or drink with his hands or his lips it was turned into
gold, and he was often hungry and perished for sustenance, so abundance of
riches makes a covetous man hungry and destroys him. It is read in the
Chronicles of Persia, how Tomyris the Queen of Scythia (after she had taken
Cyrus King of Persia) caused his head to be smitten off, and put into a boale
full of blood, saying after this manner, Thou have ever thirsted after blood,
now drink blood thy fill: so shall it fall out in after-dayes with covetous
men and cursed tyrants, who desire the blood of the poor people, and the
spoils of the fatherles, that is to say, their goods and sore labors.
Covetous men in hell shall drink molten gold, as a Philosopher tells, that
Nero the Emperor was seen in hell bathing himself in seething gold: and when
he saw a great number of comers by, he said unto them, Come hither you
wretches that be sellers of your neighbors, and bath you here with me, for I
have reserved the better part for you.


Cosmo: Enough of this matter good Diogenes, there is a matter of more weight
to be decided, wherein your judgment is most ripe. Thou have lately (as it is
reported) visited Lais, to whose house our greatest Gentlemen resort: there
thou receiuedst an injury. It shall therefore stand with thy judgment, to set
down prescriptions to Philoplutos, what luxury and licentiousness is, that
knowing the detestable fruits thereof, he may prescribe laws to cool Lais,
and prefer lessons to young Gentlemen, who now a days are too much by
wantons withdrawn.


Dio: Well Cosmosophos, I see you would drive the rain from your boore, this
last storm I perceive has wet you: but that matters not so thou mend, for I
bit thee to that end. Now as touching luxury, I need not much define upon it
in general, since in particular signification, it is a voluntary effusion of
humane seed, and a disordinate carnal copulation without marriage: and this
is one of the seven mortal and deadly sins, called a capital vice, for that
there are eight infernal daughters sprung from it, and all these (Philoplutos)
richly bestowed on thy sons. The first Cecitie or blindness of spirit. The
second precipitatim. The third, inconsideration. The fourth, inconstancy. The
fifth, self-loue. The sixth, the love of the world. The seventh, the hate of
God. The eighth, the horror of that other world. The sins of lechery might
make Diogenes ashamed to show them, and you to hear them. I will therefore
only discourse upon her infernal daughters, who have cursed qualities even in
them, to discover their mothers imperfections, and first as touching her
daughter Cecitie or blindness of spirit, she will prove a pretty blindfold
mischievous child I warrant you.


Cecitas.
This cursed daughter of a lecherous mother extinguisheth the natural light of
his understanding that tyreth himself in the sports of Venus: so that
forgetting the duty whereunto he is called. He pretermitteth the service of
God: the hearing of his word: the exercise of prayer, wherein every good
Athenian ought to be exercised: In which he commits two sins, the one of
letcherie: the other of careless idleness. He likewise sins herein, who
casts aside the spiritual gifts, to have a taste of the carnal. Here we
see, that letcherie blinds the inward human eyes, as it is read of the
Sodomites, which were blinded interiourly and exteriourly: and the two old
falsewitnesses of Susanna to one of which Daniel said: Beauty has bewitched
thee, and concupiscence has subverted thy heart: that is to say, has blinded
thy spirit. Also, before it is said: That they had turned their eyes aside,
lest they should see heaven, and remember the just judgment of God. For which
cause Antiquity depainting the god of love Cupide, have given him no eyes, for
because love is blind, and makes them blind that follow it. And it seems,
that the wiseman speaks of them when he says: Their malice has blinded
them. And before him the Psalmist speaking of the wicked: He would not
understand to go well. This vice is contrary to one of the seven gifts of the
Holy Spirit, and likewise it blinds the eye of the soul, which we ought to
keep more charily than ten thousand corporal eyes, as Plato says: The
reason is, for because that by the same we behold and contemplate the essence
of God, according to the doctrine which Jesus Christ our master has taught us,
who says, that they are happy who are clean in heart, for they shall see the
face of God. The ancients likewise do very well manifest that luxury blinded
the cleerenes of the spirit. But the poor slaves of Venus prefer the bodily
sight before that of the spirit, and being in that sort blinded they know not
what to do, neither wot they how to savor the celestial delights, which
without comparison are far more great and more sweet than those delights of
the world. These are they that have drunk of the cup of whoredom which Saint
John saw in the Apocalips, that is to say, of lechery: which makes those
drunk with the wine of her wickedness, which inhabit the earth, and causes
them to forget the beginning of their birth and their celestial country. This
in my opinion was Homors animi, who writ that that the companions of Ulisses
after they had eaten of certain sweet and wondrous pleasant fruits in
Aphrica called Lopothages forgot their natural country and would have
continued always there where those fruits were: so that the valiant Captain
Ulysses, who represents unto us reason having brought them back again by
force was constrained to tie them to the mast of the ship for fear they should
return to their voluptuousnes. From hence the Greeks derive a proverb which
says: That he which has tasted of any dishonest pleasure, has eaten
Leates. And whence (I pray you) is sprung this dissolutenes among all sorts
in Athens, and the withdrawing from virtue of so many wan^^ing wits, but from
the taste of this voluptuousness? And for that they have dronken of the cup of
this devilish singularity in thought, blinding their understanding. It is
carnal liberty that has opened their studies, and hoysted the big voyced
exclaimers to high places: but it is behoouefull for those that are consecrated
to God, and the other which would attain to his strickt service, to take heed
least we taste thereof, and so fall into this blindness of spirit, which makes
us forget our celestial Country, whereunto we tend: neither need we but one
taste thereof to make us forget all. It is for that they err (says a good
Doctor) in that they deliberate to enter the lysts of Venus for one time only,
to the end they might be wholly satisfied, and afterward they deem that they
may the better observe abstinence: for one act engendereth the desire of two,
and two the desire of four, and ten the desire of twenty, in such sort, as
the more thou shall commit this vice, by so much the more thy desire shall
increase: for so far is such a fire from being extinguished by this means,
that more and more it inflameth. And for that cause, Plato in his Dialogues
compares Concupiscence unto a sieue, whereinto the more we power of water, the
more it runs out, being unable at any time to be filled: so a man that
thinks to content himself with this security, he fares like him that
thinks to fill a sieue with water. And the Doctor Gershon speaking on this
matter, brings in the example of him who is seized with some hot fever, (and
not without cause may lechery be called a hot burning fever) who if he drink
one glass of fresh water, he deemeth that he is well satisfied, but a quarter
of an hour afterward he is more altered than ever. This is the craft of the
devil, which tickleth him in the head to perpetrate this sin under coulor of
mitigating his affections, and hope to avoid his temptations: but in sooth it
is to no other purpose, but to deliver him over afterward to a more furious
assault. And the same doctor auerreth, that it fares with him that would
approve this pleasure, as with him who is full of itch, who the more he
scratcheth, the more mangie he becomes: Where if he had but a little
patience, he should be presently recovered. It is not therefore without cause,
that the Apostle says unto us: fly foruication: whence our fathers draw a
maxim to this purpose, which says: that the sin of letcherie surmounteth
it self rather in flight than in resistance. A man may likewise draw another
maxim and say: that it is far more easy for a Maid to be continent, than
for a Widdowe: more easy for a Widdowe, than she that is married and has her
husband absent: more easy for him which has never experienced the pleasure,
than for those that are exercised in it: and why? Because the experience of
such an act, augmenteth both the desire and the temptation. This being well
considered, it ought to yield good men more consolation to augment their
courage in abstinence, which is to live with clean bodies and clean hearts:
as I will prove you by a pretty tale.


Philo: May good Diogenes continue this course, me think thou art now in a
right bias, which will effect and bite more than all thy railing: I pray thee
prosecute this matter, and discourse on Precipitation.


Dio: Thou have won me. Sit down Philoplutos, I will fit you by and by: now
to Precipitation.


Precipitatio.
Next to this blindness, follows the second sister called Precipitation,
which hinders the providence and the Counsels we ought to have in our
actions, so that a man being transported by this Uenerian passion, regards
not what he does. For as Plato says, Uoluptuousnes is most insolent of all,
which perturbeth our spirits, and takes away the empire of liberty. Ah las,
how many are they who are slain and massacred in the act of Palliardise, who
die both body and soul. This being well considered upon by an Italian Poet,
he detested the vice of letcherie by reason of the dangers that followed it,
saying: Lacci ha amor mill est nessun tend in vano.


See then how he who pursues his pleasures, exposes himself to a thousand
dangers, according to the manner of him who imprudently casts himself down
hedlong from an high place. Precipitation also peruerteth the order which a man
ought keep in his actions, and the degrees whereby we ought to proceed. The
first is the memory of things past. The second: the consideration of things
present. The third: the providence of things to come. The fourth: the
docilitie by which a man acquireth the opinion of the most learned and
virtuous. He then that is driven forward by the impetuosity of his passions,
pursues his enterprise in forsaking the degrees of this order. This is it that
Cicero speaks: that voluptuousnes, closes up the eyes of the soul, and
impeacheth judgment. This vice also depends on another sin called
Impudency, and is mortal, according to the quality of the matter. Would to
God, that gentlemen, Captains, and soldiers, and they who have charge of
arms, would learn here their lesson, and propose Haniball for an example,
who after he had attained so many triumphs, was finally overcome, and
ouerthrewe both himself and his great army, laying both object to a certain
danger, through this only cause, for that he was addicted to this vice,
according as the Historiographers auerre: for there is nothing that more
weakeneth an Army, and obscureth the Art Military, than luxuritie and
palliardize.


Cosmo: Now to Inconsideration Diogenes, what think you of that?


Inconsideratio.
Dio: Inconsideration is a sin which hinders reason and judgment thorough
carnal voluptuousnes, as we have alleged by the two old Judges of Susanna,
who turned away their spirits least they should behold heaven, and remember
the just judgments: so Letcherie withdraws the understanding of a man, and
hinders him from the consideration of that which he ought to do, and the
searching out of the means to attain the sovereign goodness. Trouble me
not, now come I to Inconstancy.


Inconstantia.
Who so is transported with voluptuousnes, desisting from doing of that which
is necessary for his salvation, commits the sin of Inconstancy.
Likewise, he that is overcome with that passion, pretermitteth to perform that
which he had deliberated to do, as to intend the service of God, the use of
prayer, or the deeds of charity, and other good works, as it is said in the
chapter of blindness. From these four branches of Letcherie, Kings, Princes,
Judges, Prelates, and all sorts that have government of Estates or souls and
bodies, ought to guard themselves to the end that being beautified with
prudence, sapience, counsel, and constancy, they may well know how to
discharge their duties and govern those under their estate and charge. And
from whence comes ignorance, inconstancy, inconsideration, and precipitation:
whence comes the want of understanding, judgment and counsel in great men
and superiors, but for that they are swallowed up in the sink of this stinking
lust which makes them walk like blind men as the Prophet speaks? O God, how
is it possible they might give any good sentence, execute any justice, decree
any good ordinance for the policy of a Common weal, since Venus has ravished
their understanding? The Philosopher says: that it robs man of his spirit.

Itobeus accords hereunto, taking his president from Archilocus, who said:
that the force of love steals away the tender spirits of men. And the moral
Poet says: that lust forces the most fair and divine part of the soul on
the earth: for it makes it terrestrial, carnal, and dull: which is a
dreadful thing for them to behold, who penetrate and contemplate the very
beauty of souls. This vice (that more is) rauisheth a man into rage and
fury, as Plato proves in his Timaeo, where he says: that voluptuousnes is
the bait of all evils, by which a man becomes (as it were) phreneticall, the
which Cicero teaches in diverse places of his writings, where he says: that
the soul has no greater enemy than carnal voluptuousnes. And Philon names
it a dangerous Palliard which deceives and deludeth the spirit: This is
(says he) the Serpent, upon which Satan is borne. Socrates proves well, that
they which follow the same are nothing different from brute beasts, which also
is confirmed by many other Philosophers, according to the recital of the said
Stobeus alleged before time: who replyeth and proves, that it is no other
thing than a fury which seazeth on poor mankind and other mortal creatures.
He takes it from Euripides, who said: that Venus is all that which is foolish
in this world, and for that cause the name of folly best fitteth her. Will
you find her more bravely set forth than by the Poet Virgil, speaking of the
love of Dido, if he speak according to his conscience?

Uritur infoelix Dido totaque vagatur
Vrbe furens: qualis coniecta cerua sagitta
Quam proculincautam nemora inter Cressia fixit
Pastor agens totis, liquitque volatile ferrum
Nescius: illa fuga siluas saltusque peragrat
Dictoes; haeret lateri loethalis arundo
Saeuit inops animi totamque incensa per vrbem
Bacchatur:-
But why allege I profane men? have we not Solomon for an example, the
learned king that ever was borne of a woman? It is written of him, that his
spirit became altogether alienated, by reason of the pestilent Lechery which
he used with his Concubines, yea even unto the leaving of the true religion,
and embracing the false, as diverse have done in Athens, the more is the pity.
This was it that destroyed the bright beam of sapience, which God had endued
him with to rule and govern his people: a rare and great example for all Kings
and Princes which have subjects to govern over the face of the earth.


Cosmo: Now as touching self-love.


Dio: Thus of self-love.


Philautia.
He that loves himself more than God, commits the sin of Philautia, that
is to say self-love, which is the root of many evils: he that breaks the
commandments of God to follow whoredom, loves his body more than God, since
it better likes him to obey it than God: such a one (if it were lawful to
forge new words as Apuleius was wont to do) might be called Somalatros, that
is to say Idolater of his body, for in sooth it is a kind of Idolaty to be
more subject unto the flesh than to God: Saint Augustine says, that two loves
have builded two Cities: self-love has builded the City of the Devil, and
the love of God edested the City of God. This sin is so horrible, that it
has converted the Angels into Devils, who made themselves Reprobates by
overmuch self-love. Now for the love of the world.


Amor Mundi.
Those that love this world so well, that they would never depart out of the
same, but are willing to constitute their Paradise therein, offend both God and
humane nature, which has been created unto this end to issue forth of this
vale of misery, and to possess the heavenly Palaces, and what is this except
it be to sin against the law of Nature. It is also an other kind of
Idolatry to be too much besotted with the love of this world and a sign of
eternal reprobation, and therefore saint John says to the Christians of
Boerea, My children love you not the world neither the things that are in the
same, for he that loves the world the grace of God is not in him: For
whatsoever is in the world, is either concupiscence of the flesh, or
concupisce^ce of the eyes, or pride of life. And he says also, The world is
given over to all malignitie. And saint James says, That he who is a friend
to this world is at enmity with God. Now touching the hate of God.


Dei odium.
And for so much as self-love is incompatible with the love of God, he that is
vanquished by lust, loves himself more than God, whom he despises: yea
more, rather hates, by reason that prohibiteth him those things which he
longs after and desires, and chasticeth him for his sins in his person or
in his goods: This is the most sovereign sin of the world, for it causes a
man will that which he would should not be seen of God, if it were possible.
This is also the sin of the devils which makes them always rebels against
their Creator, so as the Psalmist speaks, The pride of those that hate thee
O Lord God increases more and more. That this sin is the most grievous that
may be committed. Aristotle himself knew full well, who says, That the act
which is opposed against the sovereign good, is the most wickedest of all:
Although I will not say that the divine essence may be the object of hatred,
considering that being soueraignely good, it may not be hated: notwithstanding
I say it may be hated in respect of his effects, as when God punishes sins
and offenses.


Philo: O Diogenes, this thy plain method, far from Ironicall captions,
proves thy singularity: I pray thee proceed, let us hear the horror of the
other world.


Dio: Thou shall hear it, or else thou art but deaffe, I will ring it in thine
ears in hope it may work thy amendment.


Horror alterius seculi.
The horror of this world engenders the horror of heaven, and therefore they
that say, that God ought to keep his heaven for himself, and leave the earth
unto men, blaspheme like Atheists as they be. And whence proceeds this? It
is for no other cause, but in that they are so fleshed with their sensual
voluptuousnes, as the Lotophages of Homer, that they would never taste the true
and eternal delights, which are (as sweet Nectar and sauorie Ambrosia)
prepared for the Gods, that is to say, for the servant of God. This vice may
also be referred to the sin of idleness. See here O chaste and modest souls,
(I speak to none of this auditorie, Philoplutos) the hideous Monsters that the
sin of Letcherie brings forth. Let us fly them then even as a plague, if
we hope for any part with the blessed, who by the lathers of continence and
chastity, have passed the starrie Regions, and have attained the celestial
palace and eternal mansions, which Jesus Christ has prepared for all chaste
and modest souls.

They that avoid not the degrees of Lechery, but admit them in taking pleasure
in them, commit a mortal offense. And what are the degrees of luxury? They
are seven. The first is, to suffer sensuality to move us without repressing
it: The second, the temporal delectation of sin: The third, the willing
consentment unto sin: The fourth, impudent regardes: The fifth, lascivious
and wanton discourses: The sixth, immodest kisses, touches and embracements: The
seventh, is the consummation of carnal delight, wherein rests the bitter
sting of death.

Who so flies not the occasions of this sin, but rather pursues them,
sins mortally: and what are the occasions of this sin? They are seven
also, as there are seven degrees. The first is idleness which has been the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha, and the ruin of Aegistus, etc. and
therefore the Poet says, Otia si tollas periere Cupidinis arcus,
Contemptaeque iacent and sine luce faces.


The second, too great repose, as they which sleep at their ease in their
down beds (as you do Philoplutos) against the counsel of the Apostles. The
third, the belly cherishing. The fourth, abundance of wine which is a most
luxurious thing (as says the wise man) and therefore saint Paul admonishes us
to take heed thereof, saying: Be not drunk with wine, in which luxuriousnes
abounds. The fifth, too great curiosity of the fine gifts of nature, against
which the Scripture says: Auerte faciem tuam a nuliere compta. The sixth,
pride and presumption, as Oseas speaks of Israel. The last and most
dangerous, is too great familiarity and conversation with women, which has
been the ruin of diverse men: For as the Poet says, Urit videndo Foemina,


Which is to be understood actiuely and passiuely, that is to say, she burns
her self and burns others in beholding, and other burn in seeing her. For
this occasion sage Sidiach admonishes us, not to be daily conversant among
women: For their words (says he) are more slipper than oil, but in the end
they are steeled arrows to destroy, as David testifies. The ancient Hebrews
were not ignorant hereof, among whom one called Rabi Iose, the son of Rabi
Iochanan of Jerusalem said, Multiply not too many words with a woman, for the
ancient sages have taught us, that as often as a man talks long time with a
woman, he procures his ruin and withdraws himself from the contemplation
of celestial things, and finally falls into hell: so hear the dangers that
follow the great pleasure we take in iybing and jesting with women, be they
good or evil, and I think it is the same which the Ecclesiastical paradoxe
would conclude, which says, that the iniquity of a man is better than the
good of a woman, that is to say, that there is no so dangerous habitation with
an evil man, as with the wife of his neighbor, for the peril is not so
great. For which cause saint Hierome has advertised his Nicotian not to suffer
young women to enter his chamber: Stay not thee with a woman in one and the
self same house in trusting to thy chastity: Art thou more strong than
Sampson? more holy than David? More sage than Solomon? And as touching the
religious man named Rustinus he wrote him back an epistle, in which he
advertised him that he very seldom times visits his own mother because he
would not be tempted by the regard of those who came with her, and for fear
the smoke should lie covered in his heart, which he might not extinguish when
he would: For this cause the holy ancient Hermits fled from the acquaintance
of women although holy. So then if the holy fathers admonish us to fly from
the familiarity of those that are virtuous, how careful should we be to fly
the conversation of those which are both wicked, wanton and light fingred?
These are the Sirens who by their melodious and attractiue song inchaunt meu,
and finally cast them headlong into terrible and dangerous shipwreck, that
which the Mithologia of Homer declares unto us, who says that the valiant
Captain Ulysses having stopped the ears of his companions for fear they
should hear the Sirens voice, he caused them to be tied to the Mast, to the
end that their melodious song should not cast them headlong into the sea. The
same also was intended in the history of the harlot Circes, who (as Homer
says, and after him Virgill (changed men into swine, Lions, Bears, and other
savage beasts, that is to say, that lubricitie changed the men into brute
beasts. It shall be easy to gather the mishaps which a dissolute and wanton
woman draws after her, which are taken from the Latin word Mulier, which
represents unto us so many evils as that contains letters, which are six:
to wite M. U. L. I. E. R. An evil woman is the evil of eulls: the vanity of
vanities: the letcherie of letcheries: the choler of chollers: the fury of
furies: and the ruin of Realms. Another good father has discoursed all these
Epithites according to the order of the Alphabet. But what is that the Italian
Poet speaks, when thus against that sex he inueigheth.

Credo che t'habbiae la natura, e Dio
Produtto o scelerato sesso, al mondo
Per vna soma, per un grave fio
Del huom', che senza te saria giocondo
Comm' ha produtto anco il serpenterio,
Eil lupo e l orso, e fa l'aer feconds,
Edi mosche, e di vespe, e di tafani,
El'oglio, e auena, fanascer tra i grani,
Perch fatto non ha l'alma natura
Che senza te potesse nascer' l'home,
Comme s'inesta per humana cura,
L'vn sopra l'altro, il pero, il sorlo, il pomo?
Ma quella non puo far' sempre a misura.
Anzi s'io vo guardar, come io la nomo.
Ueggio che non puo far' cosa perfetta,
Poi che natura femina vien detta.
Non siate pero tumide o fastose
Done, per dir che l'hom sia vostro figlio;
Che de le spine ancor nascon lerose,
E d'vna fedida herba nasce il giglio?
Importune, superbe, e dispettose,
Fr^^e damour, di feed, e di consiglio,
Temerarie, crudeli, inique, ingrate,
Par pestilentia eterna al mondo nate. etc.
I had rather some other should take the pains to translate these vearses into
our mother tongue, than my self: for now a days the world swarmeth with such
a number of privy Aristarchi, that think no meat can be good, that is not
sod in their own broth, nor Proverb well applied that has not past their
pen: wherefore I will spare that pains, and pass over the care thereof to
some of those which are so curious, to bestow their cunnings. Yet Philoplutos
and Cosmosophos, although Diogenes be blunt, I would have you witness with me,
that I wish all virtuous Ladies should understand, that none but Lais and her
faction are touched in this inuectiue: for them that are honest, I have a cup of
good fountain water, a dish of Coleworts, and a hearty welcome.


Cosmo: Well Diogenes, since thy discourse has proved the monstrous mother
Lechery so deadly, and each of her abortiue daughters so dangerous, we pray
thee so much farther to favor us, that in opening Scillaes gorge, thou teach
us to avoid Charybdis gulf: and having told us the rage thereof, we entreat
thee to prescribe a remedy.


Dio: I will perform your request, and before I finish my discourse, chop one
thrust further in, and talk of the remedies of luxury: by which, as with a
preservative and antidote, some of our vnreclaymed Athenian yongsters, may
(following the example of those happy souls and good Christians, which
pretend their part in heaven) keep and preserve themselves from this
contagion. First of all, we ought to call to mind, that sensuality and lust
destroys and dissipateth a man's goods, in such sort as it handled the
prodigal Child, who consumed all his substance with harlots.

The goods of a man are of three sorts, the goods of the spirit, the goods of
the body, and the goods of fortune, that is to say, gold, silver, lands, and
possessions: and finally, all that which a man may have in this mortal life,
either concerning pleasure or profit: Therefore the same it is which Solomon
says, he that nourishes a harlot loses his substance. It is not requisite
to discourse hereupon any further, since experience daily declares us by one
an other how many prodigal men fall in the pitfold. As touching the goods of
the body, it causes a thousand maladies, as the Surgians may testify, who
heal the pox, the sickness of Naples, cankers, and other villainies which come
thereby, it consumes the vital humor, and weakeneth the brain, and
consequently the nerves of the whole body, as Aristotle, and after him Galen,
which also natural reason sufficiently teaches us: for the act of
lasciuiousnes after it has consumed the natural heat, makes all the hot
body chill: nay more, cools the brain, which according to some Philosophers
is the siege of humane seed, which is cold of it self. From thence oftentimes
proceeds the Epelepsie and falling sickness, to which diverse sorts of men are
subject. I believe this was the reason that moved Auicen the Arabian to say,
that the exercise of palliardise is more permcious to the body of man, than if
he had diverse time endured letting of blood. In brief Lechery weakeneth the
forces, infeebleth the member, depriueth the body of his beauty, defaceth the
crimson taint of the visage, furroweth the brows, makes the eyes dim and
heavy, causes the Fever and gout, and finally abridgeth man's life. By reason
whereof the Philosopher said, that they which are luxurious, live not so long
time as those that are chaste and continent. All this being well considered, by
the great Philosopher saint Paul, he said unto the Corinthians, that he which
addieteth himself to fornication and uncleanness of the body, beside the
offense that is committed against the divine Majesty of God, sins against
his own flesh, in abbridging his days, and by consequence is a homicide of
himself. If there need any question to speak of the goods of the spirit,
it is most certain, that Iubricitie consumes them far more than any other
sin. First of all it destroys the infused virtues, which are the grace of
God, and the seven gifts of the holy spirit, which are incompatible with
luxuriousnes, and of which one only ounce out valueth all the goods and
benefits of this flattering world. Secondly, it consumes the four Cardinal
virtues, to wit, Prudence, Temperaunce, Fortitude, and Justice, so famous among
the Philosophers: it obscureth the understanding, blinds the memory, dulleth
free will, and in most takes away humane judgment, and makes him blind and
inconsiderate in matters as well modern, as necessary to his salvation. If all
this were well considered, our picked yongsters having their peakes starched
for fear of stirring, their coats perfumed, their garments iagged, would
leave to iybe with this cursed letcherie, for fear they Iigg them selves out
of heaven: and our pretty mistresses that set no foot on the ground, but as if
they tread on Moss: and trauerse more on the heel than they trip on the toe,
they would find here a good bridell for them to draw them from the love of
this infected letcherie. Secondly, they ought to consider how much this filthy
folly is both dishonest and indecent for a soul which is created according to
the image of God: Nay more, how detestable it is to a man to show himself in
this licentious act like unto brute beasts, to loose the use of reason, and to
make himself the slave of iniquity, which also the Philosophers themselves
have held in horror. Moreover, we ought to regard how vain this pleasure is,
and of how small continuance, and that it is but as a wind that passes, which
is followed with a thousand and a thousand remorses:

For the Proverb lies not which says, Pour un plaisir mill doleurs. The
fruit also of lasciuiousnes is but repentance, as Demosthenes declared to that
great harlot Lais. It is (I say) a true repentance to a sinning soul, which
sees, that the pleasure is goue and the sin and shame remains with him. Ah
las, said the Apostle, what fruit have you received of these things of which
you are ashamed? Know, that the reward of sin is death. Now little
contentment this pleasure yields, it sufficiently apeareth, since al
creatures but a Cock, as the Philosopher says, Contristantur post coitum: as
that feeling already the repentance and blot that remains, men and
reasonable creatures seeing themselves reduced by one so villainous an act to
the life of brute beasts, which is a great shame for them.

The third remedy, is to fly the occasions, in not regarding amorous books,
nor esteeming vain things, nor hearing immodest purposes, nor frequenting
Women, except under the title of virtue, and in sum, to avoid the other
occasions which are incident to incite us to this cursed error.

The fourth, we ought to fast, watch and pray, endeavoring by all good means
to subdue the flesh unto the spirit, which is a singular remedy, so as in
times past the ancient Fathers have experimented oftentimes in the solitary
Deserts, where they mortified their bodies. Benet and Frauncis, two myrrors of
chastity, whereof the first on a time being stirred with fleshly motions, he
cast off his clothes, and all naked laid him down upon sharp pricking
thorns, til being at last ouer-bloudied, he overcame the temptation. The other
being agitated with this passion, laid him down naked in depth of winter in a
pit of snow: and another time seeing himself tempted by a woman, he set his
naked feet (O incredible thing) upon the burning coals, rather desirous to be
burned with material fire, than with that fire which is inextinguible.

The fifth, is oftentimes to think on the day of death, at which time we ought
to enter into count with the just Judge, who shall cast all fornicatours into
perpetual darkness, stored with inquenchable fire: so as the learned Poet Dante
most eloquently describes. It is a remedy (says Athanasius) which saint
Anthony used, to think on the pains of hell, when he thought to exclude out
his filthy and dissolute thoughts: Which also the great doctor Iherome was
accustomed to do as he himself witnesses of him self.

The sixth, when a man is tempted to commit that vice, he ought to consider,
that God which is present in all places is at hand, and beholds us: and our
good Angel which sees us, before whom we ought to be ashamed to perpetrate so
villainous an act, since we durst not auowe the doing thereof before the poorest
man of the world. By this meditation, the Hermit Pasnacus converted a sinful
woman called Thais, giving her to understand that in no place of the earth, how
secret so ever it be, she could so covertly hide her self, that God would
not both epsy and behold her, and therefore said he: you ought not to be so
impudent and shameless, as to commit so villainous a sin in the presence of so
great a Signior: and although God did not see, us, yet ought we not to commit
the sin, it is so filthy and dishonest of it self. The Pagans themselves,
by a natural light, knew well to say this, as Cicero who writes, that a
chaste and virtuous person ought never to commit the foul offense of lust,
although neither Gods nor men were privy thereunto.

The seventh, we ought to consider, that there is nothing that more hinders
the humane spirit from Philosophy and true contemplation of heavenly things,
than the delectation of the flesh.

The same is that which Orpheus, Trimigistus, Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato,
Empedocles, Plotinus, Lamthiques, Simplicius, Plutarch, Cicero, and other
lights of moral Philosophy have left us in writing, saying the soul is tied
to terrestrial things by pleasure, as it were with nails, in such sort as it
cannot mount on high and contemplate divine things: and they hereunto annex,
that they who dispoyle themselves of these pleasures, went unto the heavens in
the company of celestial spirits, and dwell with God, where they experiment
a pleasure incomprehensible to the human spirit. But to the accomplishment
hereof, they ought first of all to hate their bodies, and chase away their
pleasures: for as Orpheus says: If thou hate not thy body thou can not
love thy self well. Is it not the true Orpheus Jesus Christ that says unto
us: He that loves (says he) his soul in this world, that is to say his
body, he shall lose it in another: And he that hates it in this world, shall
keep it in the life eternal. The same is it that Cicero intimates when he
writes: that the sensual sort, who have given themselves over for a pray to
the pleasures and delights of this world, and have violated both divine and
humane laws, are deprived of life in the other world, and abide beneath in the
earth, agitated and tormented from diverse ages to ages until such time as they
return: that is, they shall be tormented world without end.

The eight remedy, which is the most sovereign of all is: that we ought (when
we feel our selves urged by the inticements of the flesh) to have recourse
unto God by prayer and tears, and to implore his aid with an ardent
affection, as they that see themselves suddenly surprised with a huge tempest
in the midst of the Ocean sea: For in sooth, the combat of the flesh is a true
tempest and storm, and to this end it shall be good to present unto God some
good and short Prayers, such as Augustine in his temptations, and the Hern it
Isaac (as Cassianus writes) were wont to use. In sum, in taking these
courses we shall have fewer Lechers in Athens, and more religious.


Cosmo: Truly Diogenes thy plain method of doctrine in this point, argues
thy ability both to correct bitterly and to persuade blessedly: So that thou
seem to be no Grecian tied to earthly contemplations, but a man inspired
with more than Apolloes wisdom: for to discern matters incident to the sense
and subject to reason, is the part of a prudent man and a searching wit, but to
enter thus profoundly into the nature of sin, and the workinges of God,
argues that thy inspiration is from God: we therefore bide thy reprehensions
with more patience, and attend thy counsels with more perseverance.


Dio: Your conformity pleases me: have you not read that Diogenes is a dog
that biteth men but for their amendment, and not for envy: then hear me and I
will heal wounds. Philoplutos thou art in authority, wherein thou can not
so live, but thou must be subject to evil language, thou must have a serpents
ear to prevent the charms of the flatterer, and Linx his eye to spy out
contempts ere they attempt thee. If thou art reproved of the just for a good
cause mend thy self, for their second assault is seasoned with shame, if
wrongfully beware to stir too much lest being not guilty, thy stirring make
some suppose that thou stinkest. It is a trim thing to be silent, a wisdom to
be silent: thou may kill with thy eye when thou listest, but keep thine eye
from lusting after other men's blame, lest thou prove blind in thine envy, and
thine envy cause thy death. An envious man (in Virgils opinion) may be
compared to a Uiper that gnaweth the boanes and sucketh the blood and bears
his own torment in himself: In brief, if thou be envious thou shall live
Titius life, and be so wounded in heart, as neither the son of Saturn, nor
the god Phoebus, nor Aesculapius the cunning shall be able to cure thee.
Alexander the great said often: that the envious were their own hangmen; And
the wise Greek Periander, that even as rust eats the Iron, so envy
deuoureth his Master. Plutarch detesteth this vice. And Horace says: Inuidia
Siculi non in venere tiranni
Maius tormentum.


This is it which Martial condemns, and the reason that caused Socrates to
wish that all envious men were naught throughout every part but ears and eyes
to the end that seeing and hearing other men's prosperity, they might be the
more tormented, and receive their punishment which they deserve. Fly this
therefore Philoplutos, and with this, fly insatiable covetousness, which thou
shall effect if thou have a constant determination to live to Fame and not to
Fortune. It is better thou die with Phocion than live like Demades. Husband not
for many Winters, for thou art old. Care not for to morrow, let to morrow
care for it self. Only live well this day and lay thy hopes on heaven, and he
that provides for the little birds will not see thee want. Look on me
Philoplutos, my joints are not stiff, my face without furrows, my body
without sickness, my life without hate: and why? I satisfy Nature without
surfeit, I am not careful of worldly things which bewitch men. I am not curious
of delicates to increase diseases: neither envying any man, am I envied by any
man? Is not this a trim felicity in this life to be lord both over himself
and his affections? Now hear me further Philoplutos, thou must be liberal:
they that have full hands must have free hearts, who distributeth his store in
earth, heapeth up store in heaven. There is nothing nicknameth the mighty more
than niggardise. It is one of the vanities most vain under the sun as the
wiseman teaches, to heap up without reason, to keep with care, and to die in
contempt. All the victories of Alexander made him not so famous as his bounty
to Aristotle: Neither lives Scipio so much in his conquestes as in his
liberality to the learned. What avails it to build rich Towers which are
subject to wind, fire, force and engines? to erect huge Piramides, to plant
fair vineyards? these are but the scabs of superfluite, which posterity
perhaps become more continent, will blame as the ruins of the great buildings
of Constantine, before him Vaspatian, and diverse other Romans. Ah Philoplutos,
if thou will build a Palace of eternity, entertain learned writers about
thee, in whose lines thou and thy posterity shall live, when the Raven shall
build in thy brauest habitation. I know thou art in the way to honor, and by
reading and practicing the lives of the ancients thou have become a great
staff to the state: Seek therefore as careful of thy common weal after thy
death, to raise up by thy liberality those ripe wits who may when thou
want, profit the commonweal, so shall thou in time to come be thought a
Mecoenas, else now pointed at for a miser. And next to the learned with the pen,
forget not those who deserve with the Pike: they are members which while the
Persian Monarks kept in maintenance and exercise, they became Masters of the
whole world. Sesostris of Egypt had he not had these helps, and restrained
them in continence, and maintained them in credit, his father had lost all
before he had won any thing. It was an old custom of Philip to love
Parmenio, in that he was a good Leader, and Ajax had his place in the Grecian
wars as well as Nestor, and soldiers must be considered of, as well in peace
as in war. I know Philoplutos, thou buiest a warm gown against Winter and
linest it well, thou tylest thy house against storms and lymest it well, thou
fencest thy grounds against cattle and keep them well, and will thou not in
like care provide against the winter of envy, some able soldiers to prevent the
enemy? But thou will say soldiers are every where to be gotten for money,
Athens is full of men, we have store of munition, why then should we care? But
what said Hanniball to Xerxes, who demanded if his huge Army armed in gold
were not sufficient to overcome the Romans? Yes said Hannibal smiling, this
were sufficient to overcome the patientest and dastardest heart that lives,
much more the Romans, meaning hereby that pomp is not the terrifying,
neither the multitude the amating of the enemy: But resolute courages seeing
great prises before them, behave themselves as those at the games of Olimpus,
they stretch strings and heart strings in expectation of reward. Had not Darius
a huge Host bravely furnished? A milion of horsemen to attend on him: and what
then? Alexander with thirty thousand experienced Macedons overthrew him: Then
what is a multitude? We see by experience, that the old Ox trained to the
yoke draws better than the youngest Heighfer, and that use and experience
having the Maistery in all things, cannot be outfaced in military discipline.
Stretch policy to the highest point: in Salomons days (being the wisest
prince that lived, maintaining as great peace as ever was) the Captains and
the Officers of the Host were maintained, so were they in his fathers days, in
all good states, the maintenance of soldiers is the planting of peace: for the
exercise and value of the soldier breeds fear in the enemy. The Tartarians
that invaded Asia and some part of Europe, and whose conquests are famous in
India, at first were a contemptible Nation: But when Clangius the Smith had
first brought them in exercise, then beautified them with honors, what Nation
either heathen or Christian durst look upon them? The Spanish have as hot
courages as we, the Almaines are as big boand men, the French as pollitique,
all these more exercised then we be, as populous and more, what want they then
to be our Masters, what have we but hope and security, which may deceive
Athens as it did Siracusa, which was taken by a handful of men in despite of
the whole Island. Believe me Philoplutos, there is no inconvenience more in this
City than to see Brokers dining at our Merchants tables, and soldiers begging
at every man's door: To see Tailors well paid for inuenting a new fashion, and
soldiers scorned at for presenting a strong fortification. If our Athenians
will look for no change, then let them think to live in no world: If they be
assured there will come change, then let them be provident against the change
of the world. In nature and the natural constitution of the body, the hands
are as soldiers to execute the resolutions of the heart, and the heart from
her vital conduites sends blood to warm the hands. Such affinity and
alliance ought to be between the Governor that rules, and the soldier that
executes: there must some sweet shower of gold come out of his Coffers to
refresh them, or they wax dull, they are devoured with idleness, so that when
they should defend the heart, their fingers are numbde they cannot fight,
because they want the use of feeling. Look to this Philoplutos, be not
accused for this cause, the self care they say suketh all. The fair Lambs
are only reserved for self care, the vines drop Nectar for self care, the
trees yield fruit for self care: thus self care has the sweet of all
things, whilst poor soldiers sweat, fight and fast with care, and all for
care. But the proverb is, true care preserves all things, therefore self care
is not pollitique in leaving the soldier nothing. But the day passes,
Cosmosophos have at thee: Smooth thou no more left the Gods smite, whose ears
since they are open to hear prayers, will stir up his wrath to revenge your
pernicious cruelties. Flatter not your selves with opinions of delay, for
danger is no hireling, he comes as well in the dawne as in the dark, leave
thy corruptions, Simonies, Briberies, extorcions annihilations, exceptions,
paradoxes, policies: these are the steps to thy sin. These are the
mischiefs that have incited Achitophel and Judas to hang themselves, who being
not able to endure the violence and horror of their miquities, thought it
better to kill themselves than to abide their deadly corment. These are the
furies that agitated Orestes. These are they which as Cicero witnesses, will
break thy sleeps, because thy conscience beats thy brain and procures thy
bane: being therefore worldly wise so long as to extreme age, became godly wise
at last Let not worldly occasions detain thee. Twere better for thee to dance
in thy I acket than to be hanged in thy Iirkin. Thou must not say, I am
enforced to deceive others, in that I must live: for by this life thou
atchieuest death. It is better to be poisoned with Socrates, than to flatter
with Aristippus. Shut the door before the steed be stolen. Look before thou
leap. Fear before thou fall. Repent before revenge come. The day is spent, I
am weary with speaking. The hour of meditation bids me leave you. Go you to
your sumptuous leastes, Leave Diogenes to his chaste fast. To morrow, if you
visit me again, I will rip up now griefs. Till when, get you gone: and if
you forget good Lessons the devil go with you; for goodness is departed from
you.


Philo: Farewell Diogenes, as our occasions serve we will seek thee out: mean
while I pray thee mittigate the austerity of thy tongue for it is too busy.


Dio: Nay some sickness fall upon thy fingers for they feel too soon.


Cosmo: Good Diogenes be patient, he speaks for thy best.


Dio: God better him and thee too, or else the best is noughts.


Philo: Come let us leave him, when he leaves his crabbednes the Sun will
want clearenes.


Dio: And if you want craft, the sea will lack water.


FINIS.

