THE KINGS SHOE. MADE, AND ORDAINED TO TRAMPLE ON, AND TO TREAD DOWN
EDOMITES; To teach in brief, what is Edoms doom; what the careful condition
of a King; what the Loyal submission of a subject, and what Proiects are only
to best purpose. Delivered in a Sermon before the King at Theobalds, October
the ninth, 1622 by WILLIAM LO, Doctor of Divinity, Chaplain to his Sacred
Maiestiy in ordinary.

In re sartoria sutore opus est. Sarata tecta erit res, si suitor non vltra
crepidam.

Anonym. LONDON, (...) by I. L. for William Sheffard, and are to be sold at
his shop, at the entering in of Popes head Allie out of Lumbard street. 1623.

To his most worthy friends Master WILLIAM FREEMAN, and Master RAPHE FREEMAN
Merchants, a most natural, and most loving pair of true-hearted brethren,
Patrones of Piety, Patterns of much good. Grace be multiplied in Christ.
Loving, and beloved brethren. Your true, natural, honest, and hearty
affections, your mutual concurrence, and concordance in your Matrimonies,
Patrimonies, legal Trade, and brotherly Trust; your Pious practice in
endeavoring to recon^ vnneighbourly grudges, and in composing of con^ among
those of your own rank, and pro^, your true, and hearty love to Sovereign,
(...), City, and Country, and your well wishing all; but especially your
unfeigned love to God, and (...) charity to the distressed, as they do suffi^
vindicate you from all aspersions of Malig^, unless they are incarnate devils,
and deter (...) black-mouthed Shemei, or railing Rabshekah once to dare to
vent any the least misprision of you in these particulars, so would they
continue blessed memorials unto you, albeit I had never been borne, or these
my lines had never been directed unto you; yea as these blessings from God
stir up all good minds to love your ciuility, courtesy, Mansuetnesse, and
good natures; so also are they as Precedents of godly disposition to others,
who seeking after grace strive to imitate, and express that in themselves,
which they behold, and see in you. Flattery I have ever hated, and accounted it
the very basery of baseness, yea I know it dwells no where, but in a base
beggarly, and degenerate breast. It is a plain Manifesto, to as many as know
you, and me that not only public Motives, but private also both inuit, and
enforce me to the tendering of this my love, or rather to the rendering of this
my thankfulness unto you for your charity extended, both to my dead, and to my
living. And I trust the God of heaven for Christ his sake will never wipe out
that Christian kindenesses which you have showed to both. Touching this
occurrence, you see in the frontispice what the sum is, which because it gave
some content to his sacred Majesty; and for that I was not able, it being an
itinerant Sermon so fully to express my self being straightened with shortness
of time, and for as much as diverse desired (because it was an unusual Scripture
to be handled) that, what I had delivered with some speed in the voice of a
living Man to a few, might be published to the view of many, I have been
contented to bury it in a dead letter, and subject it to the censure of more
then a good many curious in this censorious age. Especially having considered
that indeed a man's lively voice moves much, yet a man's writing teaches more.
Words spoken are (...), but writings are monuments, and memorials, words reach
to them that are near, writings to them that are far off. Words to them that
are alive, writings to them that are yet v^borne. Speech profits the
auditorie to whom we speak, but writing profits all, and he that preaches
profits for an hour, but he that writes profits for ever. These
considerations I say persuaded me to this ouerture. And the best is, that
usual by word of Ne suitor vltra crepidam, cannot justly be obtruded upon me.
For I being conscious to my self of mine own unworthiness meddled not above
my reach with the Kings Sword, Robes, or Crown, but as my text pointed to his
foot, so there did I cast down my self at the feet of Majesty, and tendered
my service, and duty both to God, and to the King, in all submission, both of
a subject, and servant; and I hope to the glory of God. Scoffing Ismaelites,
mocking Esa^itz, maleuolent Iebusits, unbelieving Atheists, and profane
Achrists usually take offense at the plainness of such texts; but where the
holy Ghost speaks familiarly as it were of set purpose, I had rather undergo
ten thousand scoffs, and disgraces of such miscreants, then in the least
decline the blessed intendment of so infallible an inditor, and so undoubted a
penman. Such giddy spirits, and dizzie brains of foolishwise worldlings may
as well scoff at Gideons wet, and dry Fleece, his barley cake, his stratageme
of Judge. 6. 39. 40 Judge. ^. 13. Judge. ^. 16. Judge. 15. 4. Genesis ^1. 1. 2. Genesis
44 12. Genesis 49. 14. Hosh. 7. v. 8. Ios. 9. 3.
trumpets, and lamps in pitchers, at Joseph's lean, and fat kine, Sampsons
foxes; Beniamins cup in his sack, at Isachar the strong ass, at Ephraims a
cake on the harth not turned, at the Gibeonites old clouted shoes, and diverse
such like passages which are upon record in the old Testament. And in the new
Testament at those familiar resemblances of the sower, of him that Mat. 13.
Mat. 22. Romans 9. 21. Mat. 13. 33. Apoc. 3. 3. Luke 17. 37.
made a marriage for his son, and ordained a great supper, of the Potters
vessels, of the woman that leauened her bread, of the bridgeroome, of the
thief, of the dead carcass, and the like. All which plainly show unto us the
exceeding favor, and love of our God, who has bin pleased to subject his
blessed spirit to speak unto us (sinful wretches) as things are, and
ofttimes in usual, ordinary, and familiar phrases to reveal unto us high and
heavenly mysteries. Not that hereby the Majesty of Gods spirit is in the least
disdignified, or disgraced, but rather thereby much magnified, and highly
honored. For this apparently shows how contrariant the gracious Spirit of
God is unto the gay, and garish glozings of the sons of men, wh^ for the most
part study to invent, and devise, huge, haughty, and houen words gilding them
with outward luster, enameling and varnish, and all to no other end, but to set
out some rusty, rotten, and despicable design, Whereas the work of Christ's
spouse is, to make borders of gold enameled with silver. Men of this Cant. Sol.
1. 11.
world guild silver with gold; but God guilds gold with silver. The king of
heavens daughter is all glorious within, the daughters of the sons of men are
al glorious Psalm. 45. 13.
without. Hypocrisy blancheth, Sincerity is simple, plain, and pure. The
plainness of this text will not offend good, and honest hearts, who may hence
learn in brief, and as it were in a vewe what is the doom of profaneness,
even to be trampled on, and to be trodden down, what is the careful condition
of kings, what our loyal submission to our Sovereign, what Sanctity is
required in our selves, and what sincerity in all our Proiects, and practices.
What ever this be, I tender it unto you (most loving brethren) not only as a
pledge of mine unfeigned love and affection, but also as a piece of my
thankfulness, intending it also to the benefit of others. The God of heaven
bless you both in all your legal, and godly affairs, prosper you, your
children, and all your whole tribe, and grant you, and all yours eternal
happiness in the (...) mercies of Christ in whom I am.

Yours much devoted, and ever to be commanded, WILLIAM LO.

THE KINGS SHOE, or Edoms doom.
PSALM. 60. 8. Over Edom will I cast out my shoe.
1. GOds Direction is the soul 1. The sum.
of this Psalm, and the Kings Action is the body of the same. The State is
troubled, the King prays, God answers and directs, and accordingly the
King acts. The people have a part, whose calamities touch the Kings heart.
God pittieth them at the instance of the King, promises him, and them better
success. In confidence whereof 2. The title. Aquila reddit titul. (...)
Symmachus, (...) Septuagint. (...) vt intelligeremus esse titulum memorabilem,
dignum qui nunquam aboleatur.
the King purposes, proiecteth, and he, and his through God do valiantly.

2. Michtam of David, or the golden Psalm is the title of this celestial
song. No monument, column, statue, or Pyramid more memorable, more remarkable
in perpetuam rei memoriam then this Epigraphe or Inscription, to teach both
Prince and people what to do, and how to deal in cases of greatest import,
and consequence. How to the humble, when we are humbled, and where to seek
refuge; when we are distressed what to do, and how to deal with persons of
all ranks, estates, qualities, and conditions.

3. Composed was this Psalm, at what time 3. The occasion. 2 Samuel 8. 3. 1 Chronicles. 18. 3.
the King strove with Aram Naharim, and with Aram Zobah in the vallye of salt;
where Abishai the brother of Ioab at the first onset slew six thousand, and
Ioab prosecuting the victory, slew twelve thousand more, in which conflict,
and slaughter of eighteen thousand; Siria was clean vanquished, and subdued.

4. Yet has not the King his Quietus est; Idumaea also is to be subjected, for
they of Edom had rebelled, and aided Siria.

Nunquam bella bonis, nunquam dissidia cessant;
Sed quocum certet men's pia semper habet.
The King therefore consults God touching his purpose, and intendment against
the Idumaeans, lays forth to view former calamities happened to his people,
whereby he moves God to pity them; Afterward receiving warrant from God, and
grounding his confidence thereon, he resolves with himself, and encourages
his army to do valiantly. This is the occasion, title, and sum of this
psalm.

5. The text has a twofold reference the one 4. The reference.
to the context, what God speaks in this psalm. The other to what God has
taught me to speak to the soul of this regal Auditorie from the light of
this psalm. God speaks verse 6. and the king acts, v. 6. 7. 8. God gives
warrant, and the king gives warning. God speaks in his Holiness, Quod
nasceretur ex te Sanctum vocabitur. Luke 1. Deus erat in Christo mundu^
reconcilians sibi 2 Cor. 4. Non sarcastice, sed sacre deridet, vt. Psalm. 2.
or from his holy place, or by his holy one the Messiah, and the king goes on
rejoicing, Deuideth Shechem, Meets out the valley of Succoth, Appropriateth
Gilead, and Manasses, Makes Ephraim his counsel, Shows that Judah is imperial,
Depresseth Moab, Has Philistia in derision; And resolves over Edom to cast
out his shoe. The other reference looks to what God teaches me to say hence,
and leads me to the Topique of Obedience in the book of Homilies. This
Obedience also has a double reflect. The one upward in the kings obedience
unto his God, the king of kings. The other downwards reflecting upon the
people in their obedience, and evangelical allegiance unto the king their
natural Liege Lord, and Sovereign.

6. In the text I see three passages in great fullness. 5. The parts of the
text.
1. An Agent. 2. A Patient. 3. A Project. 1. The Agent is the person of a king,
and by way of Excelling; of the king, even of king David, a man after Gods own
heart, indeed Gods dear Darling, and Anointed. From whose person issues in
the Revewe. 1. A Power to act. Projiciam. 2. An intendment, or rather a
resolution to act. I will. 3. A regal Extent. Out and Over to, wherein is
exquisite skill. I will cast out, over. 2. The Patient is Edom, or Idumaea the
land where Esau dwelt, and of him is called Edom. 3. The Project is that Edom
must be subdued, and more then that; for it must be so subdued, that it must be
subjected Prouerbi^ dicuntur, quasi Perro verba, quia praeter literalem sensu^,
quem exterius praetendunt, procul aliud interius dicunt Nam in terra aurum, in
u^ce nucleus, in hirsut is castane arum operculis fructus late^s requiritur ita
in paraboli^, sensus mysticus excudatur.
even unto vileness, expressed in that then usual, and prouerbiall manner of
speech in casting out a shoe; so the text speaks plainly, Over Edom will I
cast out my shoe. The life of this text, together with the remarkable
Praecedents, and Subsequences begins motion at the sixth verse of this Psalm,
(as I have said,) from whence as from a fountain of living waters this Kingly
Power, Purpose, Project and Resolution receive Strength, Warrant, Guidance, and
effectual Operation. God speaks and decrees, and many noble, wise, worthy,
weighty, and excellent affairs are really and actually performed, For Kings
have much to do, God guide them.

The text admits a double sense and meaning, 6. The sense and meaning of the
text. Quam speciosi pedes Euangelizantium pacem. Nahum. 1 Romans 10.
the one plain and obvious in the letter or history. The other couched more
abstrusely in the mystery or prophecy. In the mystery by the spirit of
Prophecy is meant by casting out a Shoe over Edom, the spiritual enlargement
of the territories of the Kingdom of the Messiah, by the preaching of the
Gospel unto the Gentiles, such as those Idumaeans or Edom were, amongst which
people the Gospel should take footing, and leave steps and prints behind Amb:
institut. Virgin. cap. 14. Nazianzen. de orat. Sanct. Gregor. hom. 7. in
Euangel. Cl^m. 5. Strom.
it of glad tidings, and everlasting happiness to the people. Deeply and
divinely in this kind have labored Saint Ambrose, Nazianzene and Gregory. More
plainly and yet pithily, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Chrysostom and Cyrill
August de essent: diuin^. Hieronym: in cap. 11. Esaiae.
besides Saint Augustine, Hieronyme and modern writers sans number. I purpose
not to dwell or once to deal in the mystery. The plain letter, and this
familiar, ordinary, prouerbiall phrase in the history, affoords a fullness to
my purpose, the various readings whereof I now set out in a vewe, that it may
be the better understood. Saint 7. The diverse readings of the text.
Jerome reads the text thus, Super Idumaeam incedam calciamento meo: that is
to say, I will go or tread upon Idumaea with my shoe. The Tygurines render it
as it is here translated to my hand. (...) Apollin. in locum. Here the
Talmudis^s stream runs muddy, for they as some others now adays will be
tampering, and preiudicing Kings affairs, which God-wot they either fowly
mistake or no whit understand. Aram Naharim in the title of the Psalm is
Mesopotamia
The Chaldee Paraphrase makes the text speak thus, I have set my Shoe upon the
collors of the ^ecks of the stoutest Idumaeans; or as Nebiensis has it, My
Shoes have trod upon their necks in the hinder parts. Apollinarius
metaphraseth it into Ante Idumaeam. The Talmudists understand it without
limitation conceiving that all the land of Canaan should first have been
subdued before any other nation had been dealt withal. And ^eare not to
affro^t David herewith, saying, that he ^iolated Gods purpose in subduing
Mesopotamia, and Syriah Zobah, as is plain in the title of this Psalm. and yet
suffered the Iebusites to dwell in Ierusa^m, and so near his Court. The
Septuagint ^ade the text with this word (...), which Saint Ambrose renders by
Ambulare or Ingredi, both which import Conculcation; So that all agree in ^is,
that by Extention, Immission, or Proiection of the shoe, either upon the necks
of people, or over their Countries is meant nothing else but to overcome,
subdue, bring under power, possess, and subject even to vileness such men,
and such Countries.

The very vulgar acceptance of the word Possession 8 The truth of this
familiar sense.
in the Grammatical sense imports as much. For the etimologie of Possessio
is no more but Pedu^ positio. This manner of speaking also has allusion to the
positive Law recorded in Deuteronomy. For Deuteronomy. 25. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
the letter of the Law is, that if the kinsman would not marry the brothers
widow, and raise up seed unto his brother. The widow loosing his shoe, and
spitting in his face, he lost the claim and interest of such possessions as
belonged to the woman in right of her husband. And the house of such a man was
called Domus Discalceati, that is to say, The house of him that had his shoe
loosed. The Ruth. 4. 7.
practice also of this law we find recorded in the book of Ruth in the case
of Elimelecks land between Boos and the kinsman about the widow Ruth; who had
her interest by right of her husband in the said land.

Moreover the frequent use of this phrase meeting us very often in the book of
God, makes this to be the meaning of the words, as clear as the day. This king
elsewhere singing his trophe^ says, They are fallen under my feet. Caleb the
son (...) Psalm. 18. 38. Deuteronomy. 1. 36. Ibid. 2. 5.
Iephunneth shall possess the land he has trod^ upon. But the people must
not meddle with Mo^ Seir, for God would not give them thereof so much as a
footes breadth; yet even the place, whereon the Deuteronomy. 11. 24.
soles of their feet should tread from the Wilderness of Lebanon, and from the
river Euphrates, unto 25.
the utmost sea should be theirs. If we take the words yet more properly, and
punctually, as the shoe to be first taken off, and so cast out, and over, then
the words signify not Subiugation only, but Regum est, parcere subiectis, and
debellare superb^s.
Debellation also of the proud, and imperious Idumaeans. The prouerbiall phrase
importing that those stout-hearted people should be glad to carry shoes after
the King, and further implying that these Idumaeans, or Edomites were not
wor^hy to come so near unto the Kings person, as to ^ntie the latchet of his
shoe, and therefore (...) defiance of them, the king would cast off his ^ooe
out at them, and over them to, yea and as af^erward it came to pass in the
days of Amos the Amos 2. 6.
^rophet, that the wicked rich men sold the poor ^r shoes, whereby was
signified the base esteem ^ey rated the poor at; so now was Edom estee^ed in
the eyes of the king. For he now purpo^th, and resolves to be unto them as
Asher, of Deuteronomy. 33. 25.
whom Moses prophesies, that his shoes should be ^n, and brass, to bruise,
break, and subdue where ^er he came. Lastly, Antiquity tells us as much. ^r
as the manner is now adays in the beleague^g of a City, the Assailants
oft-times cast their ^signes over the Wall into the City, not only to courage
their soldiers to follow their colors, ^t also in token that they resolve not
to depart thence until they have won the City: so in R. Him Manuel in
tractatu d^ more regum in obsidione vrbium Chirothecas, Manicas, and calceos
proijciendi. Videri posset simile quiddam sibi velle Cicer^, scribens mirari
setamdiu morari Antonium, quia soleret ipse accipere manicas, nec diutius
obsedionis metum sustinere. Philipp. 2. 9. The warrant of this resolved Action.
Iosu. 10 24. 25.
ancient times they used to cast over the Walls their Gauntlets, Gloves, or
Shoes to betoken the same things. Thus it is plain by several readings of
the text, by positive law, and practice of the same, by scripture phrase, and
approved Antiquity that the Intendment and absolute resolution of the king was
to subdue, and subject, as he had done Moab to be his Pollubrum; so Edom also
to be his Scabellum, that is, even to Conculcation.

10. What scruple now should let the king thus to resolve? The Lord God of
heaven had taught the king, and he knew well how to distinguish between an
Edomite and an Ephramite, otherwise he would never have placed the one at his
head, the other at his foot. The one to be the strength of his counsel, the
other to feel the weight, and crushing of his foot. Besides, the king had a
fair President before him: Iosuah at Gods command had done the like to the
kings of Jerusalem, Hebron, Iarmuth, Lachish, and Eglon five in number, upon
whose necks he caused his Captains, an^ men of war to put their feet in
Triumph, and s^ not to fear, or to be dismayed, for God wou^ do so to all
their enemies against whom the^ Iosu. 9. 4.
should fight. The like also Iosuah having receiue^ warrant from God did to the
Gibeonites, who^ he made hewers of wood, and drawers of wa^ to the whole
congregation, putting them vnd^ tribute; and as it were setting his foot upon
the^ every one knowing that by the shoe both Sy^ dochicos and Metonymic^s is
understood the foot. Ex. 3. 5. Iosu. 5. 15.
When Moses, and Iosuah were commanded to loose their shoes from of their
feet; What other thing was meant thereby, but that God would subdue Pharoh, and
his to the one, and Jericho, and hers to the other. And to assure them, that
those, who have the Lord of hosts for their guide, need not fear, or depend
upon humane Elias Creteusis in Orat. 1. Nazianz. 11. 146.
power; because they dwell under the protection of the Almighty. Shoes we use
to save our feet from every offense that may happen in our iourneying, but
those that rely upon the Lord of hosts, and resolve with their God shall not
need to trust in the arm of flesh, for rather then fail innumerable, and
invisible armies of Angels shall be commanded to see that they dash not their
feet against a stone. In all this Explication I see four things, tending to
Application which are these, 1. The trampling on, and treading down of
Profaneness by the King. 2. The exceeding careful condition of a King. 3. The
loyal submission of a Subiest: And 4. A Direction for the purposes, and
proiects of both. The first of these we see in this ^oble Kings purpose, and
design, which is, Over Edom to cast out his shoe; whereby we learn that,

It is a regal resolution to trample 1. The first Observation.
^n, and to tread down Profaneness ^n Church, City, Court, and Country,
be it in what personages soever. God tells the King, that Conculcation is Edoms
doom, and the King resolves to do it.

1. Edom is Esau, and Esau is a profane person, 2. The revelation of the
point. Heb. 12. 16.
so the spirit of God speaks of Esau. Least there be any fornicatour, or
profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright;
Profane persons care not for any title, claim, or interest to heaven, so they
may enjoy their sins without Controlement, and have the pleasures of this
world, albeit they continue but a short time, Edom is Profaneness, and
Edomites are profane persons, who are well known to the King by their Cry,
Cruelty, Pride, Rebellion, Riot, Contempt of God, and scorning of good men,
and all goodness. The cry of Edom is, Down Psalm. 137. 7.
with it, Down with it, even to the foundation thereof. Albeit this cry
exasperate the raising of holy Jerusalem. In the law of Requital therefore the
King resolves, Down with them, Down with them, even to the very trampling,
and treading under foot. Profaneness is most cruel. For it is unreasonable,
unmerciful, and implacable. A profane Amos 1. 11.
person like Edom will pursue his brother with the sword, casts off all
pity, his anger teareth perpetually, and keeps his wrath forever. Witness
dogged Doeg the Edomite, who slew fourscore, and five persons that did wear a
linen Ephod, when the Kings servants would not put forth their hand to fall
upon the Priests of the Lord. Toward such therefore the king extends no mercy
until he have subdued them to his foot. Proud is Profaneness also as Lucifer.
For, the pride of heart has deceived Edom the profane person, He conceiteth
Obadiah. cap. 1. v. 3.
that he dwells in the clefts of the Rocks, And dwelling so high, he says in
his heart. Who shall bring me down to the ground? But God has made, and
ordained the kings power to trample on thee, albeit thou be never so big-bon'd
a Nimrod, yea, and to tread thee under his feet. And 4.
though thou Exalt thy self as the Eagle; yea, and though thou set thy nest
among the stars, yet thence will I bring thee down says the Lord.
Rebellious, and riotous is profaneness, to the King traitorous, and
treacherous to the Commonwealth. What can he be but a faithless wretch to
the king, who has not the Lord for his God? And what a bane is he to the
Commonwealth, who practices nothing daily, but to run to the excess of all
riotous living. Kings therefore as they tender their own safety, and the good
of their countries endeavor by all possible means to subdue, and subject if
it were possible even to annihilation such rebels, and wretches, that they may
not appear or peep once above ground.

2. Contemners they are of God, and cursed Scorners of all goodness,
Lucian-like, and Iulianlike behauing themselves in City, Court, and Country,
especially when they come into the Church, and assembly of the saints. For
there they show themselves true Edomites indeed. It is Luke 1 10. Alios video
stare, and nugaridum preces fiunt; neque solum du^preces fiunt, sed and dum
sacerdos benedicit. Nescis quod cum Angelis stas? Cum illis cantas? cum illis
hymnos dicis? and stas ridens. Non mirum esset, si fulmen emitteretur non solum
in eos, sed etiam in nos. Digna enim fulmine sunt haec. Non est Ecca^
Tonstrina, aut vnguentaria taberna, aut officina forensis Sed locus angelorum,
Regia coeli, coelum ipsum. Chrysostom. hom. 24 in Act. Hom. 36. in 1. Cor. Hom:
in 2. Io. 14. Cum flagellis vtitur Christus ostendit tales homines servile
genus esse, non filios, sed seruos, vel macipia diaboli.
said in Luke, that the whole multitude were without in Prayer, while the
incense was burning, so reverently, and so Religiously did they then use the
place of Gods presence. But these Edomites as says S. Chrysostom stand, and
trifle while prayer is said, yea not only when Prayer is said, but when the
Priest blesses. Do thou not know that thou stand with the Angels, singest
with the Angels, say Hymns with them? and stand thou grinning, and
laughing? It were no marvel if God should send out a thunderbolt not only
upon them, but upon us also; that are present with such vipers, for surely
these things deserve a thunderbolt says that Father. Know wretched miscreant,
that the Church of God is not a Barbers shop says he further, or an
Apothecaries house, or a common Court, but a place of Angels, the Court of
heaven, and heaven it self. The king therefore being jealous of Gods worship
in imitation of Christ, whips such out of his presence, Court, City, and
Country, showing by that base punishment, that such kind of people are base,
not sons, but servants, and servile slaves of the devil. For while the
Priest stands offering up the prayers of all, these profaners slyre, and laugh
fearing nothing. Into a Princes Court they enter not; without looking to order
their habit, countenance, and gesture, but entering into the Church, which is
the Court of the heavenly king, these Edomites prate, iangle, and walk. And as
the swine puts his filthy foot into the very same trough, where he puts
his mouth to take his meat; so these profane men and women prate there to
their dog, where they pray to their God. Thus are they odious to God and the
King for profaning the house of Almighty God.

Churches are like those Cities of refuge, which God appointed among the
Israelites, whether he that had offended might fly, and find pardon; only
those Sanctuaries were for some kind of faults, but the Church is for all
kind, so that we heartily, and unfeignedly cry, Lord forgive. What a
comfortable Meditation is this, if we follow ^t? What a blessing do those
profane Mis^rants lose, who contemn, and scorn so great favor from the king
of heaven? Wicked profane men forget, and forgo this blessing, and will not ^e
reformed, until Gods wrath by the Kings power (...) liquisti (...) du^
soqueris, o profane.
break out against them, as it did against Ni^anor, Antiochus, and Heliodorus
in the Macchabees and Belshazar in Daniel.

3. Scorners these are also of all good men, and goodness, what holy and good
man could ever escape the virulence of these Edomites either a^ue or dead?
Munster is termed a mad man. Pet. Martyr a paultry Jack, Bucer infoelix puer.
Philip Melancthon a fool, Zanchius a dolt, Calvin is accu^d by Surius the
Commentor rather then the Commentator, and Bellarmine to have dyed of ^e
disease called Pthiriasis, when it was but ^hthisis at the most an ordinary
disease. Chemnitius is called the Archaeretique. Luther, the incestuous Monk,
Zuinglius, the Helvetian Swash-buckler, Doctor Fulke, the Protestants
post-horse, John Hus, an haereticall fire brand, and Theodore Beza, a Monster,
and such like scornful, and contumelious reproaches wherewith those profane
Edomites have always not spared to lade the memorial of such as were precious
with godly Princes on earth, and now are without doubt blessed with the Lord in
heaven. The king then thus discerning these bad members, and perceiving their
spirits by such ouert, and open transactions resolves with Princely courage to
quell them under foot, that they may never be able to hold up their heads. He
resolves in City they shall bear no office, in Court they shall have no place,
in ^omer. Iliad. 8 3. The practice.
Church no dignity, in Country no regiment. O most gracious king (...). Shoot
so still, Resolve so still. Let not the cry of the Edomites prevail, 1. Edoms
cry.
that would down with Church, Chancell, Steeple, Bells and all, that cry Down
with Ecclesiastical policy, Down with Prelates, Down with the foundations,
and yet what has the righteous done? 2. Edoms cruelty. 1. Sam. 22. 19.
Let not cruel Doegs have leave, for fearce is their wrath, not only toward
the Priests of the Lord, but even in Nob the City of the Priests will they
smite with the edge of the sword, both men, women, 3. Edoms pride.
children, and sucklings, oxen, and asses, ye^ and sheep too. Let not the
pride of their hearts have their desire, for they will be too proud, put them
in fear, and by the power that God has given you let them know themselves to
be but men, and of the worst sort too. Riotous they are 4 Edoms riot and
rebellion.
already, and rebellious they will not stick to be ^rebus sic stantibus,) if
occasion be offered, which profane Edomites greedily look for. And suffer ^ot
blessed Sovereign a contemner of God, and ^f Religion to advance himself
near unto your ^cred person, but let all such know the weight of ^our Princely
power, and Gods doom of them, which is to be crushed, to be bruised, to be
broken, ^d to have their backs always bowed down, ^d never to be able to
hold up their imperious ^d profane purposes. Let them have their de^rt, pay
them their hire as the Lord have spo^n it. And think not Dread Sovereign that
^u shall escape the scorn of Edomites. For when ^od shall take away your
breath o noble lion and lions must die) a living dog with such pro^ne persons
shall be more precious then a dead ^n; yea those stinking dead flies will
corrupt the ^eete ointment of the Apothecarie. Trample ^, and tread down
therefore all those enemies ^ your God, of his Church, of your court, cities,
^d Countries. Let none of those wicked ones Psalm. 101.
and in your presence, cut them off from your ^ourt, suffer them not to live,
nor to tarry in ^ur sight. So shall you destroy all the wicked of ^e land, and
cut off all wicked doers from the ^ity of the Lord: so shall you advance
Ephra^tes, depresse Edomites, supplant profaneness, ^d tread down wickedness
even to the ground. God preserved Iaphet to dwell in the tents of Sem.

The second of these observations I see in v^hilico 1. The 2. observation.
Psalmi, which is that.

The height of Sovereignty is daily encumbered with an exceeding weight and
world of occurrences, affairs, and deep designs, all of surpassing, and
especial care, singular skill, exquisite cunning, and important consequence.
1. Encumbered I say on all sides, upon all occasions. See the context, the
people are cast off. The 2. The revelation of the point.
king must interceede to bring them in again. The people are scattered, and
God is angry with them, the King must cry to God, O turn thee to us again. If
the land tremble with fear; be broken with faction, shake with the breaches
thereof. The king is importuned to cry, Heal the breach^ oh Lord. Let hard
things attend the state, and ^ God make the land drink the wine of
Astonishment. The king must cry for an ensign to be displayed, that his
beloved may be delivered, the God may save with his right hand, and m^ hear
the king when he calls upon him.

In case of famine, the woman that was dec^ ued by her neighbor in the siege
of Samari^ when they were constrained in the famine to e^ their own children,
and to make their wombes, 2. Reg 6. 26,
tombs to bury their seed, the king was importuned by the women with Help my
Lord oh King; and the King is constrained to answer their importunity 2. Sam.
24* 17. Penuria multo, continet in ossi, ^io. Copia ad proter viam meum
perpell^ filium inquit pater in Acolasto. At Salisbury in his Majesty's
progress 1620. Petitions were put up to our Sovereign that some order might
be taken against the cheapenes of corn, wherein it was also suggested that
some Merchants had of set purpose by importation brought in corn hither to
continue still the cheapnes of grain. Pellucidum, and pisculentum mendacium.
with this. If the Lord do not help thee, how shall I help thee? In case of
the plague of pestilence the King is perplexed, and cries when he saw the
Angel of the Lord smite the people, Lo I have sinned, and I have done
wickedly, but these sheep what have they done, let thine hand I pray thee be
against me, and against my fathers house. In case of war and hostility be it
either domestique or foreign, who is called upon? whom does it concern more?
who mustereth, who mastereth the occasioned occurrences but the king? Thus be
it Dearth, Death, or Devil that troubles the State, the King lies at stake
for all. Do you think the case is otherwise in Plenty, peace, or prosperity?
Surely nothing less.

2. For Plenty in some States is often times more intolerable then Penury.
Prodigal bloods are then most rank, and most unquiet. Have not I seen
Majesty petitioned against the cheapenesse of corn? yea and I remember well
how it moved passion into extremity, and that most justly. For what should a
father do? that carefully has provided for his children to feed plentifully,
and then they exclaim of being too full. In Peace ^he stirring brains of a
State are never at rest in ^euising Monopolies, Exemptio^s, Engrosings, and
what ^ot? And who in all these and the like is importuned, and incumbered but
the king? Many driuers, but few that can hold the plow aright, as the old
(...). Plato.
verse says, yea here one only stands and must look to all. All ranks and
conditions refer unto the King, Peers, Prelates, People, All even from sea
to sea, and from the river to the lands end. Some for their bodies that are
^othsomely diseased, some for their minds that are distressed, some for their
children, some for their state. Of all some upon some pretense or other. Who is
troubled with foreign affairs but the king? who releeueth the careful and
aduenturous Merchant in transmarine parts, but the Kings alliance, and
reference with the States beyond the seas? Saint Augustine wrote a tract, De
cura pro mortuis gerenda, I am sure none better then Kings may write, De cura
pro vi^ gerenda, yea and pro mortuis too. For if a subject come to a violent
and untimely end, does not the Coroner inquire of his death that the Kings
Delegates may be assertained how the Kings subject came by his death, and
order is taken accordingly. A purblinde Paynime could say of the careful
Condition and restless state of Kings and statesmen. Hom. Iliad (...). Philo
lib. de vita Mosis. Plato in Theaet. Arist. Ethic. 11 Clem. Alex. 1. Strom.
Basil. hom. 16. Procop^in Genesis c. 4. Euthym. in Praef, Psalm.


(...)
3. Calling Kings (...): The peoples sheepheards. Of which Analogy, Philo,
Plato, Aristotle, Clemens Alexandrinus, Basile, and Procopius have lately
descanted. The plain song Euthymius in his preface to the book of the Psalms
has briefly delivered. Showing that the king who composed this Psalm was by
Gods direction first taught by a shepherds sollicitous employment, how to
govern a State, and was fitted thereunto at the first by his carefullnesse
amongst and over unreasonable creatures. Whereby he afterward conceived the
more readily, and practiced more diligently how to Watch, to Strive for his
flock, to expose himself to dangers, to Contend against wild beasts, thieves,
famine, cold, to go out, and in before them, to call them to the pastures, to
the shades, to the fountains of running water; to recall them to the folds, to
cause them to flock with his Croke, with his voice, with his whistle, with his
pipe; sometimes chearing them, sometimes deterring them, sometimes curbing
them, sometimes curing them, in all, desiring not only to have them his fat
flock, but also his well disposed, and well ordered slocke, That so he might
feed them according to the integrity of his heart, and Psalm. 78. 72.
guide them by the skilfulnesse of his hands, Which Caietaine expresses thus
with innocence of heart, Caietain. c. 10. 16.
Prudence of head, and Example of hand. Kings then you see have their Hearts
full, their Heads full, and their Hands full. Cast 'your eye once more upon the
Context. Is there cause of Division? The king must have skill in Arithmetique.
Of mensuration? He must be a good Geometrician. Of Appropriation? A spirit of
Discretion is required in him. Of Election for Counsel? Many circumstances in
that Realtie to be considered. Does he long Prospicere and alteri saeculo
serere, Not only profound, but even in a manner prophetical skill is to be
sought for. Stand there Opposites in the Verstegan in le Restitution of decayed
intelligences.
way? Cunning; yea exceeeding Cunning, (of which word antiquaries have derived
king ( quasi Cunning) to be so called) must affront them, and sort them. Some
to be Pollubra as Moabites, some Scabella as Edomites, some (...), as
Philistines. In all these passages see we not what great carefullnesse, and
manifold incumberances attend the height of Sovereignty, when the Princes,
Peers, Prelates, People, all refer unto it, at all times, upon all
occasions, and from all places? Weigh we then this regal weight upon the
balances of our love, duty, and allegiance, and we shall learn our obedience
the better.

What honest, and good Christian heart in 2. The practice of the point.
consideration of the premises is not moved, na^ resolved hereby to practice
that most holy, and Apostolic counsel. That first of all Supplications
prayers, Intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men. For kings,
and for all that are in authority, 1 Timothy 2. ^. 2. 3
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life i^ all godliness, and honesty,
for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. For Kings I
say by name, and for their Delegates, yea and that upon all occasions. In time
of trouble, The Psalm. 20. 1. 2.
Lord hear him in the day of trouble, the name of the God of Jacob defend him.
Send him help from his Sanctuary, and strengthen him out of Sion. In the time
of his Devotion: Remember all his offerings O Lord, and accept his burnt
Sacrifice. Grant him according to his own heart, and fulfill all his
counsel. In the desire of his triumph. The king Psalm. 21. 1. 2. etc.
shall joy in thy strength O Lord, right glad shall he be in thy Salvation.
For thou have given him his hearts desire, and not denied the request of his
lips. In request for his life. He asked life of thee O Lord, and thou gave
him length of days, even a life for ever, and ever. In love to his posterity.
Give thy judgments O God unto the king, and thy righteousness to the kings
son. So shall he judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with
judgment.

For the enlargement of his territoris. Let him Lord have dominion from sea to
sea, and from tho River to the lands end. For the well ordering of his Court. O
Lord, let the King set no wicked thing Psalm. 101. 3, 4, etc.
before his eyes, let him hate Apostataes. Let Lord the froward depart from
him, let him not know a wicked person. He that slaundereth, or has an high
look, or a proud heart, let him not endure, and he that tells lies, let him
not tarry in his sight. Against all his enemies. Do unto them O Lord as unto
the Midianites, as unto Sisera, as unto Iabin; Which perished at Endar, and
became as the dung of the earth. Make their chiefetaines like Oreb, and ^eeb,
yea their Princes as Zebah, and Zalmanah. Make them Lord as a wheel, as
slubble before the ^inde, Fill their faces with shame; let them be confounded,
and troubled for ever. This ought to be our continual pious practice upon
these, and all other occasions whatsoever that occur, as the law of God,
Nature, and Nations, as our duty, love, and allegiance do more force, and
obligue us to do.

Look to a third lesson, which is written in the very brow of this text thus:
2. The third Observation.


Not only the power of the King, but his Will, and skill also are both
positive, and indicative, peremptory, and Imperative. 1. For as concerning the
Power, of a King that 1. The Probate thereof.
is without all controversy, and doubt. Whether we respect the extent. For
every soul in every Romans 13. 1. Gualt: in locum Col. 3. 21.
thing, to every superior (so S. Peter teaches) must be subject. Or the
manner. Every soul ( Omnis anima ex animo) even from the heart must be
subject; not with eye service only, as men-pleasers, but with faithful, and
good minds, as herein also serving the Lord. Or the absoluteness. For I say
Bern: Ep: 24. ad Archiep. Senon-ensem.
every soul to, without exception. Si quis ten^ quenquam excipere, conatur
decipere, as S. Bernard reasons with the Archbishop of Senon in France. If
seditious Papists, and tumultuous Anabaptists, and other Sectaries endeavor to
exempt themselves from regal Power; yet it is sufficient for a temperate sober
minded Christian to know, that Christ aliter iussit, aliter gessit, (says the
same Father.) He taught otherwise, he wrought otherwise. In vain is it then,
for the dizzie brains of wretched men to coin a counterfeit exemption, where
the God of heaven has made no exception. Moreover note that the Mandate is
indefinite Subjection is proper unto them as they are Powers, 1 Pet. 2. 18.
not only if they be good, and gentle, but also if they be sullen, froward, and
disorderly. In fine see the Plea in bar that the God of heaven has set
against the opposite hands, hearts, and imaginations of all the sons of
Belial in this case. First against the violence of hand, Though not mine
anointed. Psalm. 105. Eccles. 10. vltimo.
Then against the virulence of tongue; Curse not the King. And lastly, against
the giddy thoughts; Curse not the King, no not in thy thought. For if thou do,
thou art a Traitor, and those treasonable thoughts of thine, if past or
present are to be repented of, and the future to be prevented with more blessed
cogitations. So that hereby we see the Sovereign Power vindicated from all
controulement. For if Powers be not so consonant as they should be, yet Habent
sanctitatem vnctionis, Aquinas in cap. 13. ad Romans
licet non habent sanctitatem vitae. But this is not all For it may be objected
thus. Put the case that the Power of kings be peremptory, yet I hope the Will
of kings is not. Yes their very Will is not only positive, and Indicative, but
also peremptory, and imperative. Over Edom will I cast out my shoe. The Power
of a king is from God, and invested in the kings own person, for all inferior
Delegates whatsoever derive their authority personally, that is, from the kings
person, which person of a king ^n law is mixta persona, and iurisdictionis
capax; and this personal power regulates its own will. It is required then of
Subjects. iussa capessere, non praerogatiuarum, and Priuilegiorum apices
excutere. It is for Subjects to suffer the Will of a Sovereign to be done
either of us, or on us. Of us, when the kings Will is regulated by Gods
wisdom, and by Iussit quod splendida bilis.
Gods revealed Will. On us, when his Will is wilfully distempered by
misguiding, and misperswading passion, or otherwise.

2. In his irregular, and exorbitant Will, we must be Patients, in the other
we must be Agents, ready to go, to run, to die, to do all things with
singular cheerfulness, and alacrity. In the the kings transcendent, and
extrauagant will, we must be Patients couching down under the burden,
weeping by the waters of Babylon (not warring) but looking up to God for
release. In this case a Buckler, not a sword is to be used. For the command is
not, that we should be subject to virtuous, and godly Governors, but (as I
have said) it is indefinite to Powers, in that they be Powers. For if the Power
shall be willing to cast out, or over us even his shoe, none ought to dare
once to lift up his heel against it. Albeit the will of a Sovereign be to
cast out, or over us his shoe. Shall we cast our selves out of our duty of
Allegiance? or seek to cast away our king? Absit. Hear in 1 Samuel 8. 7.
this point what the Lord said to Samuel; They have not cast thee away, but
they have cast me away, says the Lord, that I should not reign over them; for
as much as all Power is of God. Romans 13*


To conclude this point then, if the chief Apostles Saint Peter, and Saint
Paul enjoined all men in their times to submit themselves unto governors,
albeit they were worshippers of Devils, and cruel persecutours of Christians;
how much more should we now obey, and honor religious kings, who are defendors
of the faith, and nursing Caes. Baronius in prafat ad 11. tom: annal.
fathers of the Church, as Caesar Baronius in his preface to the eleventh tomb
of his Annalls has well and honestly observed against the bloody practices,
and turbulent proiects of statizing Jesuits. But this is not all neither, for
there is great skill in these Proiestments, which ignorance of state affairs
in many, may cause them maruelously to mistake. Conceiving that certain
passages may be the kings Will only, when as it is indeed the kings most
excellent, and exquisite Skill of, and in the affairs and mysteries of state.
The king deuides Scechem, but it is arithmetically with justice distributive,
to avoid Confusion, as Iethro taught Moses. He measures out Succoth, but it
is to set lymmits, that the bundaries may be exactly known, to the end that
no furious Iehu, no mighty hunting Nimrod do oppress the helpless multitude.
He appropriates Gilead, and Manasses, but it is Geometrically with commutatiue
justice, that Anabaptisticall Community the aberration of Anarchies might be
avoided, and that Meum, and Tuum might be the better known, He aduanceth
Ephraim, but he knows therein what he does very well; it is to be sure of
faithful Counselors. He setleth Judah, It is to place for an other age. In
all this here is no cause of Depression, no occasion of Conculcation, no, nor
any matter of Sleighting. But now when the king must deal with Moab, or must
have to do with Edom; It is as proper in regal Skill, and policy of state to
make Moab, that is like an haggard hawke to come to hand, and to suppress Edom
to the feet; as it is to settle Ephraim at the head, or Gilead and Manasses at
the side. And it is as proper in the cunning of a king to Slight Philistia,
and to have it in derision, as it is to be careful for Judah touching the time
to come. So then we see what an high pitch of policy they fly, who manage,
and sway the scepter of kingly cunning. It is not for owls, battes, and
wagtailes to soore toward this pitch, their sight serves them not, their flight
is impt with feathers of a lower train.

3. Is there then any Power then like this among the sons of men, which is
immediately from God, A quo rex secund: post quem primus, says Tertull. in
^ol. ^ont. gent. cap. 30.
Tertullian in Apologetico. Is any Will more absolute, which must not be
affronted though irregular; but must be suffered to be done on us, albeit
Preces and lachryma arma Christian^rum:
we suffer death for it. Is any Skill branched into more Species, or is of an
higher strain, that must attend so many, so mighty, so manifold occasions, and
occurrances? If then any Power resist this regal Power, and prevail, we may
boldly pronounce of that Power, and that time; that, It is the Luke 22.
hour and power of Darkness. If any Will affront this absolute Will of the
king. It is a masterlesse Wilfulness, and deuoyd of Conscience, which neither
Perk. in tract: Consc.
Gods law properly by absolute, and sovereign authority, nor yet man's law
which takes power from Gods Law, can order or bind. Indeed this Wilfulnes is
rather a furious Rage in the valor of man, then Christian courage; it is
rather a peevish and perverse passion, then any sanctified sobriety of man's
faculty that way. If any Sk^l will be curious to pry and search into the
secrets thereof, and to wave this Cunning, albeit it be the Counterplea of some
brabbling Lawyer; yet it may receive this lawful reply, That Law has a
directive Lex habet vim directiuam, non coactiuam in reges. Rat. Quia omnis
Potentia actiua est principium transmu tandi in aliud. Gregor. de valentia.
Calvin. in 1. Cor. 14. and lib Instit. 4. cap. 10.. 30.
power, not a coactiue over kings. And Gregorius de Valentia renders the
reason, for that all active power is a Principal that transferres into
another, and reflects not. Besides Master Calvin says very truly, That the
Directions, and Edicts that come out from the Power, Will, and Skill of a king
are somewhat more then humane traditions to be accounted of, for that they have
not only their foundation upon the general Commandment, but also they have
their warrant from the mouth of Christ himself.

4. So then to the kings rightly regulated, and well governed Will, we ought
all of us that be Subjects like a swarm of Bees to follow the master be,
like flocks of sheep to follow the Antecedent, like Cranes to follow our
captain, ordine literato, as Jerome says in his epistle to Rusticus. And if
it be a distempered, and misguided Will, yet in this case we must not rebel,
nor resist in action, no nor revile, or curse in faction, or thought, but we
ought obeying God, rather then man, keep our minds and consciences pure, and
undefiled before God, but suffer we must even unto death if the will of God be
so, rather then in any sort to break out against our Sovereign. And I had
rather have my Sovereign tread on me, then some to look upon me. For pes
hominis est beatior oculo suis. The foot of a man is better then the eye of a
swine. But in this scripture is the case so, does the king here take upon him
these several Proiects of Division, Mensuration, Appropriation, Exaltation,
Conculcation, and Subiugation even to vileness out of his own absolute Power,
or does the king follow his own Will, or rely upon his own Skill? O nothing
less, indeed the king acts Ase of himself, for he is Aperse; but not Ex se,
not out of himself: that is, non ex suo ipsius cerebro, like the (...), that
subsist only out of their own substance. For this very Psalm compiled by
this good king, is a Mirror for all Magistrates, and a pattern for all
private persons also. The King consults God in all.

For his Power. The king acknowledges whence Psalm. 60. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
he has it. O God thou have cast us off. Thou have scattered us. Thou have
been displeased with us. Thou have made the land to tremble. Thou have broken
it. Thou have showed thy people hard things. Thou have made us drink the Wine
of astonishment. Thou give an Ensign to them that fear thee, that it may be
displayed because of thy truth, that thy beloved may be delivered. Give help
in trouble; Vain Psalm. 60. 11, 12.
is the help of man. Through God we shall do valiantly. And in the very
phrase of my text the king says, It is God that shall tread down our enemies.
Here we see the king acknowledges when they fail, and when they prevail;
They fail, when God is offended with them, they prevail, when the God of
Jacob is pleased to return to them again. The king also consults God in the
purposes of his Will. Quis ducet? Quis deducet? Who will bring me into the
strong city? Who will bring me into Edom. Nonne tu. Wilt not thou O God? For
his Skill, the king does nothing, wills nothing, resolves of nothing until he
have direct, and perfect warrant from God. Mark then how ready the God of
heaven is to guide such a king. God speaks in his holiness to the king. And
so the king limmits his Power by Gods permission, regulates his Will by Gods
direction, or dereth his Skill as he has Gods Oracle for his Warrant.

5. In all which does not the king make a plain Manifesto, and acknowledgement
that his God is a Powerful, Puissant, Jealous, Terrible, Strong, yea and a God
to be feared; and therefore to be consulted in all. In his own oneness the
king durst not so much as say Proijciam; for fear least for his Presumption
the king of heaven should say Eijciam. He would not say in his own fancy; I
will cast out, or over this or that, for he knew that God could cast him out,
yea cast him off, and cast him away to; that God could cast his breath out of
him, and then he must die, and all his thoughts, pro^, and purposes would
perish. Yea this good king knew that if he consulted not God; his own devises
of Division would become Confusions Perez, his Measuring would prove out of
measure sinful; his Appropriating would be Impropriation, his exalting of the
unworthy, his neglecting of the best deserving, his sleighting of the Precious
would prove dangerous in time to come. Yea the good king knew, that without
this blessed direction from God, Monarchy would become the Wilfulness of one,
Oligarchie of some few, Democracie of many, and Anarchy of all. But now having
consulted God, he is resolved, as Iehosophat spoke to his judges. To be of good
courage, and to do it, and assueredly God would be with the good. To do as
Iosuah did to the five kings, and to the Gibeonites mentioned before, having
received the like warrant as Iosuah had from the mouth of God. In all this we
see how the king goes fairly on a fide ad fidem, from faith to faith. Namely
from the Groundwork of Faith, to (...) the Trust thereof, from the Trust, and
Confidence to a reverend boldness of approaching the throne of Grace; and so
from these former to a full Persuasion of Faith to do valiantly. Kings and
great personages have their remembrance^. I am conscious to my self of mine
own weakness, and unworthiness once to open my mouth to teach, especially in
this place, where the height of Sovereignty settled on Gods Sion, sees, and
suruayeth more, then ten thousand Millions such Perpusilli as my self, that
live below in the valley; I will leave that to my learned brethren that sly an
higher pitch to speak of the kings Crown, and of the kings Sword. It is
sufficient for me, that from my heart acknowledge my self unworthy to touch
the hemme of the kings garment, it suffices me I say to point; but at his
shoe, whose shoe points I am unworthy to unloose. Yet give me leave for Gods
cause in this point to be a Remembrancer only, and to tell you what I see
further in this Oracle of Scripture, and that is this plainly. The fourth
Observation. Dei deposita, nostra proposita esse debent.


All our Proiects, and Purposes are then, and then only legal, and
Evangelical, when God says A men unto them, otherwise to Religion,
Republique, and private Estates, they ^roue detriments, and Deiectments. 1. For
the further enlargement hereof, if you The Proof.
lease but to set before you a Celestial, and terrestrial Globe, and take in
your hand a pair of Compasses, you may easily measure this out to ^e full even
the length, breadth, height, and ^epth of this tried, and known truth; you
shall ^bserue all along as you go ^ow ill it fares with ^s here below, when
the heavenly bodies are dis^mpered, and in velloped. And whole Countries,
Cities, and Cittadels on earth will show you that a witless Proijciam, if it
be warrantlesse has ever received a check from God with a witness, even a
Reijciam, or an Eijciam, or a Deijciam te at the least. See this in case of
Religion. That transcendent, extrauagant, and unlimited Power of the Pope
abusing Super aspidem, and basiliscum, ^mbulabis, conculcabis leonem, and
draconem. O portentum. Josephus Stephan: in tractatu suo satis lutulento non
luculento vt Lor: abutitur hoc loco ad supplicem exosculationem pedum Vicarij
Christi; summi pontificis. O Ce^ebellum.
this text, and other Scriptures as warrants for him to tread, and trample upon
the necks of Kings, and other Gods Anointed. What has it brought the Papacy
unto; but even to Cecidit Babylon. To what has that wilful Sic volo, sic
inbro brought the sea of Rome, but that the God of heaven has ever crossed
that Wilfulness with Sic Nolo, Sic Rugeo. Imo dominus deus exercituum tales,
Doctores, seductores, pastores impostores, Pr^latos Pilatos, Oppugnabit,
Expugnabit, conculcabit. To what pass has that subtle Skill of Equivocation,
Mental Reservation, and the like cunning practices brought that holy fry, but
even to this, that they like Cassandra are not believed oft-times, when they
tell the truth, and at the best it is as Syracides says, A fine subtilitie,
but unrighteous. The old Graecians called it (...) That's to say To dissemble
deeply, and profoundly. And purblind Paganism in blind Homer, yet saw more
then these, and learned, to detest it thus.

(...), Homer: Iliad.

2. See in a Republique, What caused that mournful lamentation, and pitiful
Hadadrimmon in 2 Chronicles. 35. 20. 21. 22.
the fields of Israel, and Judah, but because Josiah abusing his Power, and
growing headstrong, would needs causelessly fight with Pharoh Neco in the
plain of Migiddo, and never consult with God, whether the cause were right or
wrong. What caused the fearful Revolt in the reign of Rehoboam the son of
Solomon, but his own Wilfulness, being misguided by those younglings that
were about him in his Court. For his words were I will add to your yoke. I
will chastise you 1 Reg. 12. 11.
with Scorpions, etc. And to what disconsolate ends all the skillful plots, and
cunning proiects of the Herod's, brought them, both that of the Wise men, and
the other of the Spies. Are they not recorded ^n the histories of the book of
God, and of the Church? I could easily enlarge my self in the ^istories of the
heathen. Wherein God has not ^eft himself without witness. For therein you
shall find that the change, and alteration of go^ernments did chiefly arise
from the headstrong Wilfulness of governors, as is most manifest in ^he
relation of their kings that were driven out; of their Duumvirs, of their
Triumvirs, and other se^erall forms of state, that were some of them al^ered,
and changed, and some utterly overthrown ^hereby. Yea I may come nearer home
to Charles ^he fifth Emperor of Germany, and instance in him among many; who
was in his first designs a most ^ortunate Prince; but in his later time, when
he ^ilfully set himself against the Duke of Saxony; ^he Land-graue of Hessen,
Mauritius, and others of ^he reformed religion, as if all had been Edo^ites,
he was most disgracefully beaten, constrained to skale the Alps by
Torch-light, and most ingloriously compelled at last to abandon the field.

3. I could mention but that Wilful invasion in 88. and that's at home, and
somewhat modern; for which I hope we shall ever remain thankful to our God
for our deliverance. At what time doubtless the Man of sin, that great
Archimandrites the Pope of Rome had said in his heart; Over England will I cast
out my shoe. But he spoke this in his humane slippers, and not in his papal
shoes. For notwithstanding all that solemn Project long before consulted of
in the Preparation, and at the time of the Invasion strongly set on of purpose
to cast out, and over to, yet this unwarranted Wilfulness was ouercast, and
received from God a memorable overthrow. Nay yet I ^lectere si nequeam superos,
Acheronta mo vebo. Be^tholdus Schwartz primus inuentor pulueris tormentarij,
professione F an ciscanus. Paut^l de viris illustrib: Germ:
may come nearer home even into our own bowels, what time neither God nor
Angel, nor Saint, nor man were consulted withal, but Diaboli podex in specu
was the oracle. I mean that matchless, and merciless treason of the
gunpouder plot. The Wickedness, and Wilfulness of which Powder-blast I trust
has blown up all good opinion that any wise sober English heart should have
of such hellish Miscreants.

4. By this we see then plainly, that when great ones will make lust their
law, and their own Wi^ their Warrant, kings are dethroned, and driven out,
Duumvirs dejected, Triumvirs rejected, and Deuolutions of all estates, by such
exorbitancies became either miserably altered, strangely changed, or utterly
extinguished. The bitter Mutations Non declinabis ad dixteram nimis
superciliose, (...) ad sinistram nimi^ superstitiose Lyran: in cap. 5 Deuteronomy.
of estates proceed even then from this, when the true worship of God is turned
into superstitious, and supercilious conceits of men. The translations of
States, when they are devolued from this people to that people, as water is
powered out of one vessel into another; the dissipations of States, when as by
aberration of Anarchy they become as a vast, and roaring Wilderness, and the
^umultuous vexations, and grievous garboiles of se^erall signiories, even all
these, and such like miseries proceed from hence, because men of eminent place
will not consult God in their actions, but will go a whooring after their own
Wilful, and ^isleading inventions.

5. If then unwarrantable proiects prosper not ^ith Kings in case of state, nor
with Churchmen (...) case of religion; what hope can private men ^aue to think
that their devises should do good, ^r that their Guiles should be Gains. What
mean ^hen, nay, how dare the Macheavillian Deuiders ^ractise their Divide and
Impera without warrant? 1. I will divide Schechem.
^aying, it is good to fish in troubled waters, and therefore they will
practice to set division be^eene the King, and the Subject; and as if they were
Saturnus, and ^upiter faciunt (...), M^s, and (...), (...) Ptolo^.
^ke the Ephori in the state of Lacedaemon, or the ^ribuni in the state of
Rome, or Demarchi oue^ the ^enate of Athens endeavor to maintain a power ^ the
people against the higher powers founded ^y God. But God has in all ages
confounded such Babel builders, who with Ludouicus Sfortia; and Caesar Borgia,
put in practice such heady, and hellish positions. The ends that befell these
two, for whom Macheauill that Florentine Secretary especially framed his
hideous heap of politic proiects, might be a warning to all succeeding
times; the one coming to a violent, and untimely end; the other living
ingloriously in the Prince of Arragon his Kitchine, and dying a death mos^
despicable. Let such mischiefs befall all such Catiffes, who take not God for
their Oracle, but like furious Iehues, and big boned sons of Ana^ break
through all in their Wilfulness, and dare the God of heaven to control them.

6. How dare those Measurers, and improuen 2. I will meet out the valley of
Succoth. *
of their land grind the faces of the poor toyling, sweating, laborious
husbandman with rackings, and raisings of rents until they have made up the
measure of their sins out of measure sinful? Do they conceive, that their
heirs shall ever comfortably enjoy their substance, or their Babes after them
the Remainders. A Jesuitical spirit first deuized these improuements to the
racking of Heretics as they termed them, and others since, who have made
great outward semblance of i^tegritie, have yet been like apes to imitate
those misguiding miscreants. Make a model (say they) of a^ your land to a
Molehill, that so you may lie i^ your bed, and see in a view every field,
closse, groue^ meadow, acre, and head land in your Farme^ whereby you may set
it to the utmost advantage. For it is lawful for you to make the most of your
own, it makes no matter, albeit the Tenant, and his, eat whig, and whay, and
all that he has be at your command, whiles your great knightship, and your
new vpstart Mushrom lady must like prodigious Commets be feared and awed in all
the country. In all this you no one whit consult with God, who teaches by his
Apostle, That Christian charity seeks not her own. 1. Cor. 13.

But to what pass comes all this great ouerture of impronement? how does it
prove with them? Surely these improouers are like to the men of Babel, who
worshipped Succoth Benoth, that is, an hen and chickens as some Talmudists have
conceited: so vain is this great Landlords boasting, for whiles he, and his
for a time do ruffle in their silken rags like some Montebankes of Italy,
his Willship; Worship I would have said, is not an ace above a beggar, but must
after a little while desire some of his Tenants to be bound with his greatness
for taking up of an hundred pound. So light is the gentleman become in his
dancing the measures.

7. Yet it were somewhat mannerly if these Macheavellian 3. Gilead is mine, and
Manasses is mine.
statizers would cast out their shoe over their own lands only by their
unmeasurable, and unreasonable manner of Improuements, rackings, and grindings
of the poor husbandmens faces; but they will also, (and ask God no leave)
rush into Gods Inheritance by Appropriating that to their profane use, which
was given for the perpetuating of Gods service on earth.

But how do you think? Are not they trow* ye traitors to God, who ((...),)
clip, and wash the Coin that God has set his own stamp upon? How much more
they, who sweep all away, and say Gilead is mine, and Manasses is mine, yea
all is mine, (quoth the devil) when in truth they have no interest nor title,
no not to, or in the least tittle. Yet ofttimes in such a depopulatio^, not the
tena^ts houses only; but the Chapel, Church, and Chancel, Bells, Baldricks,
and all are trodden down under foot, and are turned into uncouth Desolations,
for Ohim and Zim, and dancing Satyrs, for Owls, and Iackdawes to build in by
day, and to roust in by night. Welfare the zeal of former times, for our
forefathers, when they gave ought to the Church, they set as a bar to
posterity for touching it, this fearful execration. Si quis dempserit,
clepseritue, etc. If any shall hereafter seek to alter, or claim any thing
from the Church to which we have given, let his account be without favor in
the day of the Lord. Memorable therefore shall that answer be of a right
worthy and noble personage of this kingdom to the question moved, what might
be the cause that diverse of the Nobility and Gentry of our Nation do not in
these times maintain the ancient port, hospitality, and good usage toward
their Tenants in their fines, and takings, as their forefathers have done,
notwithstanding the heirs have improoued the Remainders left unto them by
almost a third, and diverse also have received almost a third more in favors
from their Sovereigns, and yet all will not serve. Surely says he, I see the
former times were Dative, but ours are Ablative. For our ancestors were never
well, but when they were giving something unto the Church, and we in our time
seek, and study nothing else but what we may pull, and severe from the Church,
and therefore I am persuaded God blessed them with plenty, and blows upon us,
and ours with penury. For shall we hate the wolf, because he is ravening, and
think the fox a goodly creature, there is no color for it in the world.
Besides we see our Pride Epicurisme, and loose life have compelled us to leave
our ancient Mansions in the Country, and to hide our selves in poor Celles
in, or about the chamber of the kingdom, Elogium vere aureum and viro long
nobilissimo dignum. To which purpose, and resolution of this ^ious noble man,
it were easy out of the records, and Court rowles of many Cathedral Churches
^n England to affront even tabellis obsignatis, the Gainesaiers of the truth.
For many* Donations were given in days of Yore to the Church as thanksgi^ings
to God for recoueries of health after a long and dangerous sickness, for
deliverances from ^angers by sea, by land, and such like occasions before ever
the terms of Satisfaction, Merit, ^r Superarrogation were ever heard of in
the world. 4. Ephram is the strength of my head. Inda is my lawgiver.


8. What also may we deem of those, who en^eauour to advance no Ephramites or
I^daitz to ^laces of eminency in Church and Commonwealth, but those who are
most corrupt in their S^risburiensis in Polycratico. Budae. de Ass. Cominaus
says lib. 6. cap. 8. That he passed his time in making and undoing men; quasi
non vt prosit, sed vt praesit tantum. Aug. cont. Faustum, lib. 22. 56. In the
reign of K. Edward the fourth, were ordained pen^ll statutes in Parliament
against excessive pride in Apparel, especially against long picked shoes, then
usually worn, which grew to such an extreme, that the pikes in the toes were
turned upward, and with silver chains, or silk laces tied to the knee. Speed
in his large history of great Brit. page 675.
manners, and most corrupting others with bribes are set up. That scholar is
learned enough with such if he can say these three words, Do, Dic^, Addico.
They care not whether he be Gileadite, or Ephramite, or whether he can say
Sibboleth, or Shibboleth; so that he can tell who was Melchisedechs father, and
grandfather in their language, that is scholler-ship enough, Hinc illae
lachrymae.

Heu serui dominantur, aselli
Ornantur phaleris, dephalerantur equi.
9. What God do ye think these, and such like painted sepulchers consult
with? Surely I conceive they serve such a God as Lodovicus the eleventh,
sometime the French king used to wear in his cap, which was a leaden God
amightie. To which he would often say taking of his cap, and kissing it. Good
God forgive me this sin also, what miserable outrage, or bloody act soever
he had committed, as he had done many, and afresh would endeavor the like.
With Diotrephes these strive to have the only preeminence, and to tread all
others under foot. These spend more in their shoes, and shoe-strings then
served their more honest grandfathers in their whole apparel all their life
time. These wilful ones consult as Saul did with the strange woman that has
Ob, that is with their harlots, curtesans, and whipsters, and whatsoever they
wish them to do, be it never so ungodly, or base, they wilfully will do it,
albeit they seem even to themselves to rage with reason. Or else some barmie
project works in their pates, which causes them to cast out their heels
very lightly, or lift up their heels against God, as did that foolish Dutch
Dynasta, who forsooth set his cap with a feather in it upon a long pike in
Triuio, and all the boores that pass by that way, must bow and make a leg
to his cap upon pain of death, which witless and senseless project, one
William Tell refusing to obey, was enjoined for to save his life, to cleave an
apple with an arrowe set upon his sons head, the child being set some
distance of. Munster in Cosmograph. Germ.
Thither comes the foolish proiectour, and Tell, and a multitude of people.
Tell brings with him ^wo arrows, shootes one, and by Gods direction cleaues
the apple, hurts not the child, and saues his ^wne life. The multitude give a
shoute, and mag^ifie God for his mercy to the father and to the ^onne. The
Dynasta asks Tell, why he brought ^wo arrows, he being to shoot but one.
Tell ^nswereth boldly, if I had killed my son with the one, I would have
killed thee with the other. The tyrant commands hands to be laid on Tell, ^e
escapes over an hedge, draws forth his ^rrow, shoots and kills the barmie
Proiector. The people rise, take part with Tell; hence follows a ^onfederation
(the cousenage of Princes) which ^rooues a great impeachment, and prejudice to
^he present state, En quod temmulenti and temerarii ^tratagema? yet here this
Wilfulness rests not, ^t is restless. For some giddy headed lizards stick
not to make Gods Will to patronize their wilful, wicked, and uncharitable
courses. Ask one of these why he deals so hardly with a neighbor to press
him so sore with his shoe in case of a forfeiture, or the like. O brother says
he, this is an Edomite, Over him I may cast out my shoe, it is the will of God
he should fall into my hands that ^ may afflist, and plague him for his
impieties, and impurities as you know, etc. But if you reply and say, God will
have us merciful in (some degree of Quality, albeit not in Equality) as he is
merciful* Yea brother will he reioyne, and say, This is true in Gods
antecedent Will but not in his consequ^ will, Gods antecedent will may be
resisted, his consequent cannot. O the wit of man, and the conceits of lizards
to creep into such thickets. God bless me from this hypocondriacall Divinity.
Popisme indeed and Arminianisme tends this way. But can a sober minded man
think that Gods Will Damascen. lib. de fide Orthodox. cap. 29. (...)
(albeit as Damascen says, it be Antecedent and Consequent, is contrary to it
self. The will of m^ we know is but (...), whereby man is moved* and does
move it self to that which is good only in show, and opinion of man, and this
is not the Will of thy God. The Will of thy God is Abs^lute, as being an
Absolute Agent, having both Will, Skill, and Power, which causes absolute
perfection The conformity of our Wills, with Gods is sec^t in the form, which
is the manner of Willing, ^ in the end which is the glory of God, or in the
Efficient, when man wills that which God by ^is revealed Will would have him
will, albeit God (...) his secret will wills another diverse thing, as ^hen a
son prays for the life of his sicke-fa^er, whom yet God by that sickness
purposes (...) take away. The son sins not, albeit his ^raying according
to Gods revealed will seem (...) affront Gods secret will, which is to take
the ^ther away by death. Wilful art thou then O ^ypocrite, that conceitest
thou may make thy ^rother an under trodden wretch with pretense of ^ods secret
purpose to color thy wicked and ^nwarranted proiects.

But blessed be God who has enlightened a ^mpe in the heart of our King, who
from Gods ^outh has known to maintain his Sechem, ^ Shares, Hundreds,
Wapentakes, and Tythings, ^ that in several Leets every man to a number of
^nne may have justice throughout the land. He ^th measured his Succoth into
number weight, ^d measure. The Clarke of the market having ^ care of all this.
He has appropriated hearty ^leadites, man full Manasses, and wise Ephramites
^ be his favorites, Chieftaines and Counselors. ^e have Benjamin to be our
ruler, from whom, ^d from his O God let not the scepter depart till ^ilo come
in his second aduent. Yea O Christ ^ake the Kings, and his sons enemies thy
foot^ole. Cast thy shoe over Satan, and his Com^ices over their sin, over
all torment of consci^ce that it may not touch them, over the Malediction of
the Law that it come not near them, over Death, and Hell, that so through
thee O God they may victoriously triumph. As for the Remainder, if there be any
incestuous brood tha^ infest him, let them be like the Moabites, make them
his Pollubra, to be useful unto him for his further, and future Designs, and
when he has done with them, let them be as an earthen Was^pot subject to his
Annihilation of them. If there be a profane race of Edomites, Esauits,
Iebusites, Jesuits, and the like, let such be subjected even to Conculcation,
yea let our King O God kick them out of his Court, Church, Cities, and
Countries as Salem insipidum. If there be any forraignly transported with
transmarine affection of any Nation whatsoever, let our King (O King of Saints)
slight them as David did the Philistims. If the Tabernacles of Edomites,
Moabites; and Hagarens. If Gebal, Ammon, and Amalech rise up against them, yea
albeit Assure join with them, and help the children of Lot, and albeit the
Edomites cric Down with them, down with them, even to the very ground, yet O
God remember thy promised mercy ever of old, and make those enemies like the
dunge of the earth. Fill their faces with shame, and ever bow down their
backs. That we alone thy people may always rejoice in thee, and may ever see
upon our king, and his, that their Crown flourish. Assuring our selves that
thou O God wilt tread down his, and our enemies at last (whether they be
spiritual or temporal) even under our feet. And we shall through thee do
valiantly to the glory of thy great name, to the comfort of thy chosen, and to
the salvation of our souls, and bodies for evermore. Say Amen, hereunto O
faithful witness in heaven, that unto thee with thy holy Father, and the holy
ghost we may render all praise, power, might, Majesty, and Dominion with the
faithful in the Church, as it was in the beginning of time, and before all
times, is now in all the world among all faithful ones, and shall be ever
continued (when this world is ended) in that everlasting world of blessed
Angels, and glorified Saints before Christ Jesus his presence for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

