CV^ BONO DEO.

RAIN FROM THE CLOVDS, upon a Choicke Angel: OR, A returned Answer, to that
common Quaeritur of our Adversaries, Where was your Church before Luther?

Digested into several Meditations, according to the difference of Points.

Extorted off the Author, for stilling the incessant, and no less clamorous
Coassation of some Patmicke Frogs, against the lawfulness of our Calling.

MATTHEW. XXI. VERSE. 23. etc. And when He was come into the Temple, the chief
Priests, and Elders of the People, came unto Him, as He was teaching, and said;
By what authority do Thou these things? and who gave Thee this authority?
ABERDENE, IMPRINTED BY EDWARD RABAN, DWELling upon the Marketplace, at the
Towns Arms, 1634. Cum privilegio.

BON ACCORD
Insignia Vrbis abredonie

blazon or coat of arms of Aberdeen

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, AND TRVELIE RELIGIOUS, Sr ALEXANDER GORDON Of
Clunie, Knight, Grace, Mercy, and Peace, etc.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL,
I have dared, out of the temporalitie (as we learn now abusiuelie to
speak) to emprunt your Worships Name to this little unpolished piece of mine
unworthy workmanship; as justly fearing to disjoyne in my Dedication, whom
GOD has so happily conjoined in so tender and hearty affection: which your
Worship shall give as the truth bears, not to any itching desire on my part
to put hand to the pen, as if in boc mustaceo quaererem laureolam; Nay, as
who am more than loath and unwilling of my self, to give ought forth to the
public view, out of a consciousnesse of my weakness, whereof I am not the
least ashamed to give open signification; besides diverse others more than just
reasons and respects best known to my self: But to the inopportune
importunity of the Adversary, enforcing this task upon me, and expressing
it of me, how nilling so ever: As semblably to that due regard had by me
(...) ^rueth, (whereof it beseems every Gregarie Christian in common to be
charie) though not the least here endangered of it self, and in it self; yet
turning quaestionarie with some of the blacker note amongst us, as the easier,
so as yet (blessed be GOD for it) the best prey of our compassing Adversaries;
to whom we envye not much these their so well accomplished Proselytes. Certes,
I have not subserved here my humor in this my Dedication, neither yet sub manu
demum hic mibi natum consilium, as the trivial adage has: But to speak
sadly, and no less sincerely, without the least assentation, as which proves
not much compatible with my natural, if I durst gloss my self, not without
right putation and due pondering of the matter, have I recoursed with these my
barelie and nakedlie delineated, and vnfilled up as yet lineaments, to the Zoar
of your Worships Name; that shrouded and sheltered under the shadowing wings
of the same, they may find the better harboring at home, and receive as the
safer conduct, so the friar passage abroad: as who truly here find my self,
as emboldened on every hand, so necessitated on every side; whether from that
your Worships respectfull regard to all, and reverend eftimation of all of my
Coat; or from that your Worships sincere love to the Truth, (for the which
we have matter to praise GOD, and pray for the happy and long continuance
thereof, with a daily increase, because of this so thick apostating
Generation) from whence the meanest indevours of any in this kind cannot but
find most gracious acceptance, and hearty welcome, at your Worships hands.
Expecting and expeting your Worships charitable construction, to the better
part of those my simplaries, or rude and homely labors; and so bold, as
familiar usage of your Worships Name, in full acquytall, of these whatsoever my
pains, I most humbly take my leave: this one thing entreating, what is wanting
here in the effect or work it self, your Worship would be pleased, out of
that your Persian mind to arcesse and repeat it from the workmans
praepondering affection; and here withal most heartily wishing your Worship
the comble of all true happiness, here and hence.

Your Worships in all obsequiousness, most humbly devoted, ANDREW LOGIE,
Arch-Deane of ABERDENE.

AVTHOR I.
DIssidium sine dissidio, sine lite maligna
Cui lis and bello qui sine bella gerit,
Militat ille DEO vere: velut umbra vagantur
Qui secus hic vires exseruere suas.
Ista LOGI Tua laus. Nam dum Te ostendis in armis,
Oppugnatque novam Te duce Roma vetus,
Dumque (aevi fatum!) velut unda supervenit undam
Schismata schisma parit, vulnera vulnus alit,
Vsque sacram puris manibus Tu tendis olivam,
Vsque Tibi CHRISTI tessera, PACIS AMOR.
At nunc o strages! o funera! sanguine templi
Non aditus, verum ipsa immaduere adyta.
D. Wedderburnus.

IN LAVDEM AVTHORIS.
SAepius externis pugnans LOGIAEVS in oris
Praevalidis rationum armis, Romana subegit
Arma, ducesque ipsos: Patriis quoque victor in oris
Exultat, calcatque hosts ratione, sagaci
Ingenio, verboque sacro, flammantis Olympi
Quod pater ipse dedit. Telo hoc Hoc enim nomine se insignari vult Georgius
Lestaus, Romano Catholicus, Meletemata haec doctissima Authori extorsit.
Archangelus ipse
Confusus periet; Romanorumque phalanges,
Pontificemque premet gladio hoc penetrante, ruinam
Dogmatibus falsis feret hoc. LOGIAEVS; hic omnes
Expediet nodos, quoscunque vet Itala tellus
Opposuit veris verbi praeconibus olim.
To the Author.
Brave LOGIE, so continue to beat down,
By Scripture, Fathers, Reason, what is hatched
Against the Truth, by Doctors of new Rome:
And show, that much of Untruths is but patched,
Which they maintain. So Truth shall Thee vp-holde,
And make Thy foes to quail, but Thee more bold.
Amoris ergo posuit Cargillus.

MELETEMATA (...), Quibus aseritur Vocatio nostrorum ab Adversariorum
velsycophantiis quibuscunque.
THere came to mine hands another straying leaf, with the loins trussed,
carrying or bearing this inscription; Who want lawful calling, are Robbers,
according to the wayrands following, etc. secunded and excepted by a farrage of
rudely consarcinated, and confusedly amassed passages of Scripture:
needleslie to prove the necessity of Calling; as which is not so much as
contraverted amongst us.

Truly we admit this leslaean, as less indeed lying position, vel. ultro;
as who acknowledge in common, Quod nemo debeat (...), or, (...) Ministerium
invadere: That none must take this honor to himself, Heb. 5.4.
but he who is called as Aaron. Where in the very entry we would headilie
distinguish betwixt these two, To defer our travels to the Church; and, To
obtrude them on the Church, and intrude our selves into the Church: for the
first may be lawful in cases through the iniquity of time, Vbi non virtus aut
meritum, sed favor ereat presbyterum: but this last remains still unlawful.
It holds always true, that in a Minister there is required, as (...) or
faculty to teach; (for (...) must not be (...), but (...) would be (...):)
so (...) or potestas, as they speak in Schools; he must be instructed with
commission. Hitherto the LORD is said to have called Bezaleel by name, and to
have filled him with his spirit for working in his Tabernacle, Exodus 31.
Hitherto the LORD commanded Moses, to take Joshua the son of Nun, in whom the
spirit was, and to put hands upon him, Number. 27. verse. 18. Hither-to we see,
Numbers, 17. amongst all the twelve Rods of the Princes of Israel, only
AARONS Rod to have budded, blossomed, and borne ripe Almondes; where-by we
are taught symbolicallie, that the LORD will only bless their Ministry,
whom he sets aworke himself. Matthew. 28.19.
Hitherto we see the marriage of these three in unum Spiritum, Ite, Docete,
Baptizate, Matthew. the last at the vpshot, whereas CHRIST sent forth his
Disciples to that public Ministry. Hitherto we see with what care the whole
Prophets, at least in common, alleged still in the entry of their prophecy
to their warrant of Calling. Yea, last we see, quam severe a DEO hic
animadversum in sacri bujus ordinis temeratores, but the least regard to their
quality. But in respect our Adversary goes no farther length, but contenteth
him simply to amasse some passages together, enforcing the necessity of
Vocation or Calling, I might vel citra tenuissimum pulvisculum hoc labor
defungi, by subscrybing to this granted and acknowledged truth in common: the
quaestion still remaining, with whom this vocation or calling is. Always I
shall lay hold on the matter even from so far, and impose here a necessity
on my self, whereas there is none so much as deferred, or but barelie offered;
not out of the least consciousnesse of any unlawfulness of our Calling, or
the least weakness therein; Neither yet herein sillilie to subserue the
humor of our Adversary; Neither yet out of the least praesumption on my part:
but fiducia bonae causae; as likewise to satisfy, in some measure, as the
expectation of all, so the most earnest expetition of the well affected: as
last of all, lest else I might justly seem, overpassing it with a dry foot,
to overleape it like a Ditch, from whence I feared danger: Yea, and be
misconstrued, as to detrect the Combat, whiles being so pointlie poynted at,
etc.

Out of these considerations then, one word, en passant, with a running pen, of
this so much ventilated quaestion, of our Church her being before Luther; which
our Adversaries with so open and full mouth noise so much to day, yea, fill
both Heaven and Earth with the brute hereof, and wherein they place the
strength of their cause, as Sampsons strength lay in his hair. Truly, to
untie and unloose this their Gordian knot, non expectandus hic nobis Elias
aliquis, aut (...).

Primum Meletema.
FIrst of all, this maine ground would be laid, and headilie adverted unto, in
the Frontispice of this Work: to wit, That the Church is still one and the
same, though not always alyke affected; as a man remains one and the self
same man in sickness and health. Now from hence the ridiculous folly of these
demands of our Adversaries appear of will: to wit, Of the being of our Church
before LVTHER; as likewise, If she was in Poprie or not. Certes, Papatus
invasit Ecclesiam, Poprie has invaded the Church: for accidentis est inesse
subjecto, but not on the contrary, subjecti inesse suo accidenti: so that the
Church throughout her diverse conditions, before Poprie, under Poprie, and
delivered, or come forth of Babel, is but one and the same, remaining thus one
common subject, liable to diverse alterations; and like herein to the natural
or physical body of man, diverslie affected. Hitherto it is that you see the
two witnesses, Revel. 11.3. to be clothed in sacke-cloath, ob tristem,
videlicet, Ecclesiae statum; and again, the Angels coming forth with the
seven Plagues, ad sumendum debitas de Antichristo poenas, to be clothed, in
sign of victory and triumph, sutablie in pure bright linen, Revel. 15. ob
laetum Ecclesiae statum: Now Est of the third adjacent, praesupponeth Est of
the second, as they speak in Schools: And so it remains quod subinde alia,
atque alia sit Ecclesiae facies. Whitherto she is well likened by the Fathers
to the Moon, which remains one and the same, etiam vel ubi patitur
deliquium, even while she is eclipsed. For closure then, as the Church
remained the same even whilst holden in captivity in that Eastern Babylon; so
did she remain one and the same, whilst thralled and enbondaged in that
Western and mystical Babylon, etc.

Secundum Meletema.
WE acknowledge all in common, the Church for the ground and Pillar of the
Truth; the word Pillar here being taken aright, ratione, scilicet, forensi,
and not Architectonica (for else all shoud prove confused in that speech of
Saint Paul's; as if domus, and id eui innititur domus, that is, the Truth and
the Church were one and the same, as our Adversaries here confound: yea, as if
the Church were not built on that foundation of the Prophets, and Apostles
their doctrine) as likewise allusion here being made, ad domum illam Salomonis
totam columnis conspicuam. I leave to speak of the different interpunction,
which as it would clear all here, so has it no little probability, because
of the synapticke or copulative particle, Kai, in the beginning of the next
verse, which would seem to knit these words with something going before, to
this sense; That CHRIST, or GOD, manifested in the flesh, is the ground and
pillar of the Truth, and without controversy the great mystery of
godliness. But to follow the received interpunction and interpretation, ne
crabrones irritemus, it is clear from hence, that we must needs acknowledge
that pillar for the Church, whereupon we find the Truth appended, since that,
ad Ecclesiam, tanquam ad columnam prostat veritas; in ea demum comparet; so
that from the doctrine, judgment must be given of the Church, and not on the
contrary. Whitherto Gregory Nazianzen says well, (...). Wherefore thus are
we led by the hand to institute a trial, penes quod sit veritas, where and
with whom the Truth is; this proves in the end the last analysis or
resolution of this quaestion. If I durst make bold, I would pose our
Adversaries here a little of their judgment, Whether it be safer and surer
work, with Tertullian, personas ex fide, or on the contrary, fidem ex
personis aestimare: now our Adversaries hold this latter, and so must. needs
promiscuouslie receive the leaven of the Pharisees, because they sit in MOSES
Chair, for sound and true Doctrine. That I may make this farther tributarie to
the errand in hand, from hence I thus argue demonstratiuelie:

That Truth which CHRIST and his Apostles taught, wanted never men in all Ages
constantly to profess the same: (for the Truth could never want witnesses)

But so it is, that which we hold and teach, is one and the same with that
Truth which CHRIST and his Apostles taught.

Ergo, This our doctrine wanted never men in all Ages to profess the same.

Thus we bring our Adversaries from the historical part, to the doctrinall.
Always, lest I should seem here to decline this other part, I must speak a
little hereof. Truly, pudendam and stupendam prodit bic (...), he bewrays
a gross and inexpiable anistoresie, who denies, that there were not still
more Christiani, so to speak in opposition, than Papani, more not
acknowledging the Pope, and his authority, than adhering to him, even before
LVTHER, and detection of Poprie by him, throughout the world, as were easy to
prove by induction. It is clear, ex Pauli veneti navigationibus orientalibus,
that there were most frequent Christian Churches in those days wherein he
wrote, some three or four hundredth years since, as apud Indos, ultra and cis
Gangen. Amongst the Tartars or Tatars, in Scythia, In utraque Armenia, in
Mesopotamia, besides diverse other places. Now the greater part of all these
Christians scarce understood so much as by hearesay, of the bare and naked name
of the Pope. Again, in Aethiopia, the large and ample extent of the Abyssin
Churches is known: where if we should be pleased to measure the extent but
of those Provinces, we should find even those alone to exceed far all
those which in Europe acknowledge his holiness, for-sooth. Further, si adhuc
libeat and ad septentrionem exeurrere, we shall find most largely diffused
Churches, as Moscorum, Ruthenorum, Russorum; yea, yet intra mare Caspium, we
shall sinde many Churches over which the Pope has not the least power. But
that we may do etiam supra id quod rogatur; the Europaean Graecians do no
less execrate the Pope, than we do. They excommunicate him yearly, they
instile him in common, with us, by the name of Antichrist. I would learn of
our Adversaries, what they can say de Anglis, quid de Bobemis, quid de
Valdensibus, Albigensibus, of the Wallons of France, who being dispersed
diverslie throughout Europe, proseminarunt eadem dogmata, sew the same doctrine
which Hus, and before him, Wicleff, and after both these, LVTHER but renewed.
If we should be pleased to repeat and a^cesse the Histories but of these
Europaean Christians, out of our Adversaries their own Monuments, who wrote
against them in those times, we shall find the most approved Writers amongst
them, eadem ipsis dogmata pro erroribus impingere, to lay the same Dogmaes or
points to their charge for errors, which we acknowledge and sustain to day
for true Dogmaes, and Articles of Christian Faith. As for taste; That the Pope
of Rome had overwhelmed by the multitude of his Traditions, as by a deludge,
the whole Christian Church. Item, that the expiatorie Sacrifices for the quick
and the dead were null; That there was no Purgatory; No merit of works;
besides diverse other points which they denied, as, Nundination of
Indulgences, (...), etc. Yea, and whereas amongst the rest of their Articles of
the Popish Faith, this obtained, Tenendum Imperatorem non immediate a DEO, sed
a Papa potestatem accepisse; That it was to be holden, that the Emperor had
not, or held not his power immediately from GOD, but from the Pope and his
holiness, for-sooth; and that these who thought otherwise, were to be ranked
amongst the Manichaeans, as who thus established two Principles. It is more
than notoriously here known, quam acriter insectati hic Albigenses, how
odiouslie they traduced them, etiam hoc nomine, multis ad hoc ridiculis and
contumeliosis ad ludibrium confictis nominibus, as is clear out of the Edicts
of Frederick the second Emperor: as now calling them, by the name of
Iosephytes, now of Turripines, now of Picards, now of Lombards, now of Tatars,
as it were voyaging men, to wit, from the places through the which they were
diverslie dispersed; yea, at last, (ne quid hic deesset) by the name of
Manichaeans. Now you see the traduction of our Church, at least per tempus,
tempora, and dimidium temporis: for three hundredth and fifty years, and even
so long before Hus, Hierome of Prague; yea, or Wickleff, let be LVTHER.
Catalogus testium veritatis shows, ah omni aevo reclamatum doctrinae
Pontificiae; and points deicticallie at those who opposed and oppugned the
same, and stood for the contrary truth. Nay, let us but evolue and turn over
their Monuments, and we shall find store of those who long before LVTHER,
diverse ages, not only set themselves against that Antichristian doctrine;
but suffered for this their opposition most exquisite torments: and
quaestionlesse we should have had yet far greater store of such examples,
nisi historiarum custodia penes ipsos fuisset, and sic partus Israeliticos
vndis wersissent.

To wind up this point: Could this their Church be then the sole, and the
Catholic Church? Vincentius Lyrinensis defines (...), quod semper, quod
ubique, quod ab omnibus: Now from this my historical deduction, it is clear,
that Poprie cannot be said to be such; for it obtained not always: for non
ab initio, though it began well tymouslie to be aworking in the very Apostles
their days, albeit well imperceptibly, according to the nature of a mystery;
it obtained not every where, nor amongst all, etc. Nay, you may see from this
my discourse, that it was so far from being simply Catholic, as that it
was not so much as such, but in relation, or comparison, etc.

Tertium Meletema.
ME thinks it strange, how our Adversaries can urge the visibilitie of the
Catholic Church: for (...) incurreth not in the sense, Mente non sensu
depraehenditur, percipitur: sensus quippe est singularium. Again, the
Catholic Church is an Article of Faith: Now Fides est (...), an evidence of
things not seen, as the Apostle says, Hebr. 11. verse. 1: and as Saint
AUGUSTINE says, Si vides, non est fides. Whitherto BELLARMINE is driven thus
to pronounce here, De Ecclesia, Lib. 3. Cap. 15. Melius dico in Ecclesia
aliquid videri, and aliquid credi: videmus enim eum coetum qui est Ecclesia,
sed quod ille coetus sit Ecclesia, hoc non videmus, sed credimus, etc. Thus to
trace here but our Adversary, Nihil Ecclesiae formale, aut Ecclesiae, qua
talis, constitutivum, vel ipso hic nobis suffragante, astipulante, est visibile
aut sensui expositum. The Catholic Church consists of CHRIST the Head, of
the Church triumphing in Heaven, and of this Wayfaring and Warre-faring on
Earth. Now, who can sustain to affirm this Church to be visible? I grant,
that the matter prooveth easier with our Adversaries, who have CHRIST with them
bodily still present in the Hostie, for-sooth, upon the Priests intention;
and the Saints and Angles semblably in their representing Images. Nay, to
deal here well liberally with our Adversaries, and give them, that, that
which is but the most ignoble part of the Church, which repit or serpit humi,
which is but a edolating, exasciating, effigiating, or efforming here but by
piece-maile, may be called by the name of the Catholic Church. I pray you,
may all these particular Churches, so diverslie dispersed throughout the whole
world, gathered of every Trybe, Nation, Kindred, Language, be together, and at
once pointed at by finger? for it is headilie to be observed, how our
Adversaries confound in this argument, (...) visibile, and (...) videri; taking
(...) visibile, non de potentia, sed de actu, etc. As to that their Palmarie,
or maine Argument here, Quod, cujus parts omnes sunt visibles, and ipsum
totum tale sit; and so that the Catholic Church must needs be visible,
because of the visibilitie of all the particulare Churches. Truly this
argument, non tam habet paralogismum, quam sapit, redolet helleborismum; as if
all the particulare Churches throughout the world, Locorum intervallis tam
dissitae, simul and semel digito notari possent. But to bind our Adversaries
here, I argue thus:

Quod desideratur vel in toto Physico, illud frustra requiritur, male exigitur
in to^o mystico: That is, What is found wanting, or is not findable in a
physical body, is ill required and sought for in a mystical.

But so it is, vel in toto Physico, even in a Physical body, quantitatis,
scilicet, ita discretae, ut parts longissimis locorum intervallis a seinvicem
distent, parts omnes simul and semel digito notari non possunt.

Ergo, far less is this findable in a mystical body; yea, in such a body,
quod simul and continuum and discretum praedicatur esse in Scripturis; as which
is named by the names of things, quantitatis utriusque, continuae and
discretae, as of an House, of a Flock, etc.

I leave to show, How the Church may be called visible, and invisible, in
different regards, respectis (...) materialis, or (...) formalis; respectu
formae internae, or externae; which external form again, variis mutationum
vicibus ac gyris obnoxia, ac infesta est.

Quartum Meletema.
IF so be, That the Church may suffer such eclipse, as to her external form
or visible face, as that she cannot be espied, and discerned, there remaining
but a remanent through the election of Grace; then it follows, that this
demand of our Adversaries, Concerning the being of our Church before LVTHER, as
to that her external form, or visible face, is but idle. But we may see the
possibility of this hypothese under both the Testamentes: in the days of Eli,
under the old Testament, 1. King. 19; and in Saint Paul's time, under the new
Covenant, Romans 11. verse. 5. Then the question turns to this, to see, When and
where this case has behappened the Church: wherefore, from hence thus I reason:

In the days of Eliah, there was a true Church in Israel, which the LORDS own
answer returned to Eliah upon that his complaint, instructs to the full:
except that seven thousand, Numerus definitus pro indefinito, can not make up
a Church with our Adversaries here, who can cut her shorter at times to their
own advantage, as in their private Communion:

But so it is, this Church suffered eclipse, as to her outward form, or
visible face: for how could she else have escaped even the sight of the
Prophet, cui erant and ad videndum oculi?

Ergo, a Church cease not to be simply, whilst eclipsed as to her external
form, or visible face.

Thus you may perceive evidentlie, how our Adversaries here deceive the
simpler sort, urging still the visiblitie of the Church: for what has already
behappened the Church, the same case may again befall her; and so their
quaestion resolves in the wind.

Our Adversaries here perceiving and feeling themselves straited, as touching
the Church in Israel, are forced to bethink with themselves of some escape
here, whitherto to have their refuge; wherefore they grant this to be true of
the Church of Israel, or of Samaria: but they pretend, that there was then a
flowrishing Church in Jerusalem, under the reign of Asa and Iosaphat, godly
Princes; and so that this instance proves nothing for the whole Church under
the Law.

For answer: First, we allege not hitherto that instance, that thereupon
we may conclude the general, or in the general, of the whole ancient Church
under the Law; but only to prove, that these may suffer, yea, and have reapse
suffered divorce: that is, That a Church may remain simply a Church, though
eclipsed, as to her external policy, outward form, or visible face; which
our Adversaries flatly deny, because of the errand in hand.

Next: it is sufficient for probation of our Theme, and decyding the quaestion
betwixt them and us, to prove this of any particular Church: for why may not
the same case befall any sister Church? So frustra sunt Adversarii; whereas
they except, that this alleged instance by us prooveth nothing for the
Catholic Church, or for the whole Church under the Law: for we are not so
swollen up, as to acclaime to us the name of the Catholic Church, but humbly
acknowledge our selves but Daughters of that Mother.

Last, ut dejiciamus eos hoc praesidio, that we may drive them from this
starting hole; I would pose our Adversaries, if the Church of Judah had any
farther Privilege here. Truly, we may see Judah to have surpassed her
Sister Samaria in her abominations; nay, to have exceeded Sodom, and her
daughters, Ezech. 16. yea, we find her revolts so general, as that Prince,
Priest, and People, all in common, abandoned the Law of GOD, declined from His
service, fell away to Idolatry, and followed after the same, Ezech. 7. verse.
ultino. But because that generals cannot bind, nor work with our Adversaries,
let us instance the matter more particularly. Whereas King Ahaz set up a
strange Altar, after the fashion of that of Damascus, in the house of GOD; nay,
the Priest himself, Vriiah, made it, and set it up at the wicked Kings
commandment, and sacrificed thereupon unto the gods of the Damasconians: yea,
last, whereas this wicked King gathered together the Vessels of the House of
GOD, brake them, and shut up the doors of the House of the LORD, made him
Altars in every corner of Jerusalem, and in every City of Judah made high
places, to burn Incense unto other gods, 2. King. 16. Item 2. Chron. 28. verse.
23.24.25. I would pose our Adversaries here, where was the visible face of the
Church of Judah, whilst Idolatry thus occupied, and filled the Temple; nay,
filled every corner, and every high place? And because una birundo non facit
ver, I would inquire yet farther, Where was the visible Church of Judah,
whereas Manasseh restored Idolatry, as likewise under Amon?

If our Adversaries would except here, That there remained still a Church
throughout all those days and times, to wit, in some certain persons, as
Prophets, and others of the same note, the answer should prove easy. The
quaestion is not of the Church simply, for there remains still a Church,
while there remain any two or three, qui Patrem in CHRISTO per Spiritum
invocent; but of the Church, as to her external policy, If she remain
always so visible, as to her external form, as that she may be straight
discerned, or internosced by the eye, from other companies, whether acclaiming
or not acclaiming to them this name: for our Adversaries cannot away, that any
Church receive the name of a true Church, which is not instructed with this
external policy, furnished with this outward visibilitie, eutaxie, and
constitution.

If you could be pleased, here to eye a little with me the Church,
throughout her whole marching, from Families to the Tabernacle, and from thence
to the Temple; as likewise throughout her whole estate, before the Law, under
the Law, and under Grace; you should see her still to have suffered eclipses,
and deliquies, as to her external form, or visible face: so that our
Adversaries denying, That a Church can turn invisible, quoad externam' (...),
politiam, and yet continue a Church, bewray an inexpiable anistoresie, or
ignorance of the sacred history. Read you not in the third Chapter of
Genesis, of the fall of our first Parents? and at the closure of the fourth
Chapter, how men began to call upon the Name of the LORD, as Enoch was borne
to Seth, which imports a prior suppression of Religion? How long continued
the true Religion vnviolated, Etiam in sancta illa gente, even in that holy
posterity of SHEM? Were not ABRAHAM'S Fathers Idolaters? and himself called
out of VR of the CHALDAEANS, being an Idolater? Again, Did not the people
follow Idolatry the space of two hundredth years in EGYPT, without so much
as any open opposite? Ezechiel 23. Verse. 3. and 19. Here both the Daughters,
IVDAH as ISRAEL, or SAMARIA, idolatred, and committed Fornication, as is clear
from the alleged place.

What will our Adversaries say here, where the whole people idolatred, and
worshipped the golden Calfe, etiam ARAONE duce? Exodus 32. For as to that, That
MOSES was free here, it is nothing: for he is Ecclesiae, but non Ecclesia.
BELLARMINE here affirms yet farther; That the whole Levites remained pure,
and free from this contagion, because that the whole sons of LEVI are said
to have gathered themselves unto him, Vbi ultionem pararet, poenas exigeret
Idolomanias illius. For answer, BELLARMINE plays the Sophist here; for the
Text serves to show indeed who they were that adjoined themselves to MOSES,
that they were Levites: but it says not, that the Levites were all to one
pure, and free from this contagion; nay, it is not probable, that all the
sons of LEVI gathered themselves to MOSES: for so, if omnes sese ad ultionem
accinxissent, majorem indubie edidissent stragem: for a little after, Habito
eorum censu, they are reckoned forth about nine thousand. Always the first
answer serves the turn. What can our Adversaries say to their manifold and
most frequent revolts under the IVDGES? Nay, What can they possible except
here, whereas we read, Judge. Cap. 8. Verse. 27.33.34. of the general revolt
of the Judge and people in common, whilst even GIDEON, one of the Judges, of no
slender note, made an Ephod, and put it in EPHRATH his City, where all ISRAEL
went a-whoring after it: Yea, and not staying here; after his death, went
a-whoring after Baalim, and made Baal-Berith their god?

By the way here it is observeable, what answer that ARCHI-RABBI
BELLARMINE, returns to this exception of our men: to wit, Of the general
inveighing of the Prophets, against the general defection of the whole body
in common, of the whole people, head and tail, as it were: to wit, That, that
is directed to all, oratorio more, which pertayneth but to the greater part:
that is, per (...). Now then, to take but what he gives; it holds then
still true, Ecclesiam deficere saltem secundum rationem (...): or, in respect
of the greater part, Aufugiente and subducente se interim muliere in desertum,
the Woman taking her flight in the mean time to the Wilderness, ubi a DEO
mirabiliter pascitur, rationibus nobis saepe occultis, sibi autem ut
notissimis, ita facillimis.

But to come a little nearer: I would learn of our Adversaries, Where the
visible face of the Church was, whereas CHRIST came into the world; If this
was to be measured, ex visibili illa Sacerdotum successione, from that visible
succession of the Priests? Again, I would understand here, What shall be
the visible, or external form, or face of the Church, whereas CHRIST shall
come to judgment, whiles He has fore-prophesied Himself, He shall scarce
find Faith on the Earth? This I urge only, ad sensum currentem. I grant
indeed, that there may be such a visible Church, as our Adversaries require,
and hold; to wit, As consisting of members devoyde of Faith, Hope, and
Charity: for I would have you to remember here that of BELLARMINE, de
Ecclesiae, Lib. 3. Cap. 2. Sect. ultima, where he says, Non requiri ad hoc
ut quis sit membrum Ecclesiae, ut habeat Fidem, Spem, Charitatem. And yet, Si
diis placet, this Church shall be (...). Whereas the Church rested, as some of
themselves even acknowledge, in the person of the blessed Virgin, where was
then the visible face of the Church?

I would farther pose our Adversaries; If the Kingdom of GOD may not admit and
suffer translation, from one Nation to another: nay, and if it has not indeed
suffered the same? What folly, or yet madness is it then, so pertinaciouslie
to pretend here, That a Church cannot suffer such eclipse, as to her
external form, as that she may not be espied? Wherefore, to deal a little
more presslie here, I would understand, if What has behappened to any one
part of the Catholic Church, that is, to this or that particular Church, may
not befall another: or else, the reason of the difference here: But so it is,
This or that particular Church may suffer this eclipse, yea, admit this
translation, as the Church of EPHESVS, to mention it exemplarlie: for, Nonne
CHRISTVS hoc ipsum interminatur in Epistolis ad Asiaticas Ecclesias tollam
Candelabrum? does he not thus menace the Church of EPHESVS, Revel. Cap. 2.
verse. 5. that he will come against her shortly, and remove her Candle-sticke
out of his place, except she amend? Then it remains, That the like case may
befall any Church else.

To use yet a few particulare instances, for the fuller and clearer conviction
of our Adversaries, Vbi Mahumetismus omnia in Orient obtinuit: nay, Vbi totus
orbis ingemuit, and sese Arrianum factum esse, miratus est, ubi visibilis illa
Ecclesiae facies quaeso videris? Whereas Mahumetisme obtained throughout the
whole East; nay, and the whole world groaned under the heavy Yoke, and
Burden of Arrianisme, where was the visible face of the Church?

Truly, there is nothing more certain, than that there were many most
flowrishing Churches in the East, which are to day (proh dolor) transformed in
Muscetas Mahumetanorum. Nay, I have it of those, who had it ex (...), that they
saw in Greece many flowrishing Cities, wherein there was not so much as the
least trace of any Church, nor vestige of any Christian doctrine: omnia
quippe occupaverat Mahumetica colluvies. But lest I might seem here, vel e
sinu proferre testem, as is ordinary with our Adversaries, I stick not to
defer this to their own testimony, or the testimony to themselves. I pray
you then, what lets me to reason here, by way of Analogy, and so
conclude, That what has behappened this or these particular Churches, may
befall others their Sisters, nothing more here privileged against the same
danger?

That we may come yet nearer, and strike home, let me demand of our
Adversaries, Whether or not the Church under Grace should have her flight to
the Wilderness, and that with Eagles wings, not only for pernicitie in
flying, but for continuing of the flight, in respect of tract of time, and so
lurk there for a goodly space? I hope our Adversaries dare not so far
forth rub their foreheads here, as openly to disavow this, the Scripture
being here so express and formal. Now, this being laid, the answer to
the maine quaestion prooveth easy: Our Church was lurking in the Desert,
fleeing the persecution of the Dragon; as that Church of Israel lurked under
that persecution of Achab and Iezabel. Nay, this affords us an infallible
demonstration for us, and against our Adversaries, to this sense:

That must needs be the true Church, which according to Saint John's
prophecy, has had her flight to the Wilderness: But so it is, such only is
ours, and not theirs, according to their own confession and concession,
whereas they stand to the constant visibilitie thereof. Ergo, with us still is
the true Church.

Thus, who sees not, except a borne-blinde, that our Adversaries wrong their
cause mightily, through imprudencie, or impudency; whereas they contend,
That their Church was not only visible, but still actuallie seen? for,
differunt haec duo, quantum actus and potentia, adeoque non statim desinit esse
visibile, quod non actu videtur; it cease not straight to be visible, which
is not actuallie seen: which our Adversaries still confound in this argument;
as who deny straight the visibilitie of a Church, except she may be still
actuallie pointed at by the finger: as if the Sun ceased to be visible,
whiles the sight thereof is intercepted from us, by the interjection of a
Cloud; or through the weakness of our seeing faculty, unseen of us.

Thus you see, how variable a Church is, and may be, us to her outward
policy; so that our Adversaries have here no just matter offered them of
offense, whereas tracing herein the Fathers, in whose words else they swear,
yea, their faith resolves, we liken the Church to the Moon, propter varios,
labores, defectus, eclipses, deliquia. Hitherto Saint AUGUSTINE, Ipsa est quae
aliquando obscuratur, and tanquam obnubilatur multitudine scandalorum;
aliquando tranquillitate temporis quieta and libera apparet: aliquando
tribulationum and tentationum fluctibus operitur atque turbatur. But let us
hear the Church of her self, and for her self, Micab, Chap. 7.8. Rejoice not
against me, O mine Enemy; though I fall, I shall arise: when I shall sit in
darkness, the LORD shall be a light unto me, etc. Here this is spoken in
the person of the Church, which calls the malignant Church her enemy. Now
(...) praesupponeth (...), or, Est of the third adjacent, Est of the second.
Then the true Church may fall, and sit in darkness. Hitherto read we, Isaiah,
Chap. 1. verse. 8, where the Daughter of Zion is likened to a Cottage in a
Vine-yarde, to a Lodge in a Garden of Cucumbers, and to a besiedged City, etc.
which if committed with these other places importing, at least poynting at her
conspicuitie and visibilitie, serve to show forth her variableness, and
shadowing by turning.

I know, that our Adversaries except against the former part of my Discourse;
where I concluded from the Jewish Church to the Christian, because of the great
odds here, and diverse privileges of the Christian Church above the Jewish:
wherefore, it stands us upon, to eye a little into these alleged
Privileges, as we would have my prior Discourse to remain in its full vigor.

The Privileges of the Christian Church above the Jewish, at least alleged
unto in this Argument, I find in special to be these two: The first, The
universality of the one, above the other; and this to this sense, As that
there is no salvation without the Christian, but was not so of the Jewish. The
second is, That the Christian has far fayrer and larger promises made to
her.

As to the first, taken from the universality of the Christian Church, lest
they might seem here to stand but to a bare and naked Assertion, they thus
instance the matter, from Job, and some yet from Melchisedecke.

That I may proceed here the more orderly, first I will treat a little in
the general of the whole matter, and then come to the particulare exceptions,
and their probations.

To the general then, I would first inquire and learn of our Adversaries,
Whether the Church under the Law, and under Grace, be two different Churches,
or but one and the same in matter and substance, though differing in respect of
the external scheme or Vesture, Jewish or Christian; as still the grace
dispensed under both the Covenantes, was but one and the same, the manner of
dispensation but varying.

Next, I would understand, Whether or not, Eadem fit analogia partium
similarium; so that what behappeneth any one part, may befall another: and so
all in common are liable to the same dangers? Last, the Apostle vvideth this
process here to our advantage, Romans 11. where he shows, That the Christian
Church of the Gentiles is capable of excision, incase she persevere not; as
was the Jewish Synagogue: nay, he reasons from the more to the less.

Now, to the particular exceptions: As to the first, I avouch, That the Jewish
Church ceedeth not the least here to the Christian; and, That without her,
there was no salvation. For proof hereof, besides diverse other passages
making hereunto, let us advise the Apostle, Ephesians. Cap. 2. Verse. 11.12; where
we shall see what is his construction of the uncircumcision, during that their
state: to wit, People without CHRIST, aliants from the Commonwealth of
ISRAEL, strangers from the Covenants of Promise; yea, without hope, and
without GOD in the world. From hence thus I reason:

If there was any salvation for those of the uncircumcision, or for those
without the Iewishe Church, (for Circumcision was their Sacrament of
Initiation) then was there salvation for people without CHRIST, for aliantes
from the Commonwealth of ISRAEL, for strangers from the Covenants of Promise,
yea, for people without hope, and without GOD in the world.

But I hope our Adversaries dare not aver that there was, or could be, any
salvation for such.

Ergo, There was no Salvation, or yet could be, without the Jewish Church.

As to the instances, from which they go about to instance this exception in
the particular, of Job and Melchisedecke; first of the first: I grant indeed,
that it were well hard divining about the time, or of the time, wherein Job
lived: but even from off of this uncertainty I collect, That this instance
drawn from his person, cannot prove of great force, and demonstratiuelie
conclude this their point. Next, giving he lived under the Law, and yet was
not circumcised, were it safe argumenting thus to reason from one particular
exemple, against the constant tenor of the whole Scriptures, denying salvation
to those who were not enrolled amongst the people of GOD by Circumcision? Yet,
if it should not offend, I would gather for my self, that he was so far
from living in the days of Moses, that at the least he lived before Abraham,
out of the last of his Book, at the vp-shot, from that his age, where it is
said, And after this lived JOB an hundredth and forty years, and saw his
sons, and his sons sons, even four generations, etc. Now, what
convenient time can we assign to him before this? If we assign to him but
some fifty or sixty years, his whole days shall amount to some two hundredth
years, or there-about. Now we see not any in the days of MOSES to have come
near this age; nay, we read not of any after ABRAHAM that came to such:
yea, he lived not so long himself. Last, the whole narratiue of his history
would seem to make him more ancient than MOSES. But I take not upon me to
define ought here; only I would show, that our Adversaries can argument but
well weakelie, from so slender and so uncertain a warrant.

As to the other instance of MELCHISEDECK, I am ashamed so much as to mention
it but the least: for he is said expreslie To have blessed ABRAHAM before his
Circumcision, or receiving of the seal of the aliance or Covenant, and To have
teethed LEVI in ABRAHAM'S loins. Truly, magnum hic (...), hiatus multus
betwixt MELCHISEDECK and MOSES; wherefore, this instance is altogether (...),
or impertinent.

Our Adversaries being now thus deboutted from their first Exception, let us
see into the second, if it be of any greater force, which concerns the
Privilege of Promises.

I would learn of our Adversaries, If the LORD tendered less that His Church
under the Law, than He does this under Grace? and, If the Promises were not
semblably made to her, as to the Christian Church, by GOD, of His gracious
assistance and praesence? Hic haeret iis aqua, the Apostle being so express:
For amongst the many Privileges of the JEW above the GENTILE, Romans Cap. 9.
he reckons this as one, That unto them the Promises were made. Nay, the
Apostle Saint PETER, in the second Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, at
the thirty and ninth Verse, witnesses disertlie, That the Promises first and
especially concerned the JEWS, and the GENTILES but in the next rowme: For
the Promise is made unto you, and to your Children, and unto all that are
afar off, even as many as the LORD our GOD shall call, etc. Did not one and
the self same Spirit, still inform this one and the same mystical body?

Quintum Meletema.
THat we may the more happily verse in this business, and travel in this
matter, we would here headilie distinguish betwixt the essential and
integrant parts of a Church: for a Church may remain and consist, whiles
constant ei sua essentialia, though lamed or maimed in respect of her parts
integrant; (I know the integrant parts to receive their subdivision here,
into those which are more or less principal, or into the principal and
secundarie parts) as it is with a natural or yet artificial body: so that
it follows not straight, That a Church cease to be there, where she is
not visible; but only this, That she is not quoad sua integrantia: so that
she cease only to be in a certain regard, remaining always simply a
Church, quantisper constant ei sua essentialia, supersunt duo aut tres Patrem
in CHRISTO per Spiritum invocantes, there remain vocatio activa and passiva,
which are the essentials of a Church.

It rests then, that the want of external policy, or outward visibilitie,
praevaileth not so far, as to abolish simply a Church. But yet as to this,
we deny not, but that it ought to be de jure: But the quaestion is de facto;
and of the force of this actual want, if it be such, as prooveth destructive
of the subject simply, and not in a certain regard only, etc.

Sextum Meletema.
AS to the promises made by CHRIST to his Church throughout the Gospel, they
would be understood aright; which are indeed here misunderstood, and
misconceived by our Adversaries: for they draw straight whatsoever promise is
made to the whole body of the Church in common, to the Roman Church, (...);
nay, and require the accomplishment and fulfillment of the same, in every
particular Church, or in every part of the whole. Now, from hence it is
clear, that this consequence is very inconsequent, that the Church cease
simply to be visible, because this or that particular Church, or yet both,
are devoyde of this visibilitie: for first, the Church may be visible
elsewhere: and next, the Church may remain even there where she is eclipsed
of her visibilitie, to wit, as to her essentials.

Again, our Adversaries yet deceive here, whilst they tie these promises of
CHRIST, as De firmitate Petrae, De continua spiritus sui assistentia, and
others of the same note, to the external form of the Church; and so will have
them only to concern that external Policy: for so CHRIST should cease to
be the Head of His Church, and to His Church; whereas the Woman subduceth her
self, and takes her flight to the Wilderness, and lurketh there. Thus that
House-holder, Matthew. Chap. 21. Verse. 33.34. should have casten off all care of
his Vine-yarde, whiles he lets it forth to those wicked and perfidious
Husbandmen. Nay, did not CHRIST well often subduce Himfelfe? Did he not take
Him to flight, even praesentlie and immediately after His birth and nativitie?
Fled He not into EGYPT, and abode there till the death of HEROD? and yet the
Father has appointed Him over all things, to be the head to the Church, Ephesians.
Chap. 1. verse. 22.

Thirdly, our Adversaries fraudem hic faciunt, yea, fucum manifestissimum,
whereas they reason so in this matter, as if the holy Spirit wrought so in
this mystical body, ad modum agentis naturalis, non voluntarii, as a natural
agent, and not voluntary: for if this were the manner of the Spirits
operation in the government of this mystical body, then there could be no
place left for sin in the will, more than for error in the mind; there
should be no place left whether for virtue or vice, for merits, or demerites;
there should be no further two principles in man; he should no farther carry
about a double man, the old and the new man: for nature works still after
one constant tenor, actiones naturales sunt uniformes; they admit no
relaxation, no intension or remission. The Spirit then works in this
mystical body, as a voluntary agent, and so admeasureth forth according to
his own pleasure, secundum oeconomiam consilii sui non nostri arbitrii; as
likewise, ad modum receptivitatis subjecti, as we learn to speak. And last,
GOD even so works in the works of Grace, ut causas secundas etiam proprios
suos motus exerere and exercere sinat, as Saint Augustine says well, de
Civitate DEI, Lib. 7. Cap. 30. From whence it is, that the action sapit ac
redelet proximum canalem, tubulum, siphunculum.

Our Adversaries reason so here, as if the Spirit not only wrought as a
natural agent, but as if he should together, and at once, agere and peragere,
work and persite this work, which were foolish to urge in nature; as if Trees
should come at the first to their perfection, as if men behoved to be perfect
at their first birth, etc.

Truly the Spirit of GOD is still a-working; agit quidem continuo, sed non
simul peragit and perficit omnia, semper hic locus aedificationi; then shall
the Church be stayed before her immortal Husband perfect, Vbi celebrabuntar
nuptiae Agni, ubi deducetur in domum mariti; till then her face shall not want
its wrinkles, nor shall all tears be wiped from her eyes.

Last of all, those promises made by GOD to his Church, whilst considered in
relation to us, are not to be conceived as absolute, but conditional,
scilicet, Si manseritic in sermon meo; Si servaveritis mandata meae.

Our Adversaries here quite mistake this point, while as they gather, that GOD
cannot but continuallic assist this or that particulare Church, because of that
promise made in general to the whole body in common, Ego sum vobiscum, etc.
Matthew the last. Howsoever she carry her self, she hearken and follow the
voice of the Brydgroome, or not, etc.

Septimum Meletema.
WHereas Saint PAUL answering for himself, Acts, 24. to that accusation of
TERTULLUS the Orator laid forth against him ad longum, alleges to this,
That he worshipped the God of his Fathers, after that way which they called
Heresy; which he could not mean of his immediate idolatrous Fathers, but of
his mediate Fathers, yea, of ABRAHAM, ISAAC, and IAAKOB: there is no matter,
Wherefore our Adversaries should here construe so hardly of this, as a silly
effuge on our part, if we should be pleased to use this answer amongst
others, peradventure more pressing, That we worship the God of our Fathers,
after that way which our new Pharisees call Heresy, meaning by our Fathers
here, CHRIST and His Apostles. What lets here, why we may not by way of
Analogy thus repart to the quaestion, Of our Church her being before LVTHER,
or, Of the being of our Religion, since the distance is far less here
betwixt us and them, than was that Chasme or Gulf of two thousand years
betwixt ABRAHAM and PAUL?

Octavum Meletema.
A Church cease not to be visible, (though not still obvious, and exposed to
their sight, who either have not eyes to see, or else animum tantum ad
infestandum, odii scilicet glaucomate excaecati, have but a mind to infest
her: nay, albceit she escape even the sight of the sharper sighted,) more than
that there ceased to be a Church in ISRAEL in the days of ELIAH, whereas he
complained, that he was left alone, and so could not see into that great
number which the LORD had reserved to himself, and preserved from bowing of
the knee to BAAL: So to speak here accommodate ad subjectum, albeeit that
that ANTICHRISTIAN smoke before LVTHER overwhelmed so the Temple for a space,
that it could not be discerned, and pointed at by the finger; it follows not
from hence, that either there was no Temple, or yet that there were no
witnesses therein, though it seemed so generally and commonly, albeit perhaps
not universally, shut altogether, because of that thick mist of superstition
hanging over it, and overclouding it. Hitherto you see, Revel. Chap. 15. verse.
5. how Saint JOHN subjoyneth straight his vision of the open Temple, to those
his other visions of ANTICHRISTS tyranny. So it rests, that the LORD had
still an open Temple notwithstanding of whatsoever ANTICHRISTS Tyranny and
Power; albeit this Temple latebat canes illos venaticos, and was not obvious,
and exposite to these Inquisitours. CHRIST cease not to be that true Light,
licet tenebrae non compraehendant hanc lucem, though darkness comprehend it
not, etc. Lucerna lucet sed iis qui sunt in domo. It is not simply necessary,
that always it diffuse its light to those that are without: whereas CHRIST'S
Disciples shut themselves up for fear of the people; noti erant and visi sibi
invicem, they were known and seen one to another: though they escaped there
the sight of those, who only had mynds to persecute them.

Nonum Meletema.
But if it please you, let us retort the Argument here, and demand our
Adversaries, Where is your Church in SCOTLAND ENGLAND and the LOW COUNTRIES? I
hope the Catholicisme of their Church may not suffer them to deny, That they
have one here. Now, if they affirm, That they have one here, let us regest,
atqui nullum sublatum vexillum, they have no public, open, or avowed
Ministry here, no visible face of a Church. Then, as they must needs grant,
That their Church lurketh here, why will they not suffer us, using the same
liberty, to say, That our Church ceased not to be simply, even whereas she
lurked, patrum nostrorum memoria, under Antichrists persecution, more than
theirs cease to be with us to day?

For closure, It would be headilie here adverted unto, how our adversaries
here reason and conclude ab authoritate, negative, Vestra Ecclesia non fuit
visibilis, ergo non fuit; which argutation, rather than argumentation, non
recto stat talo, aut ingreditur pede; as which deceives (...).

Decimum Meletema.
WHereas the current of the ordinary Vocation is intercepted, or interrupted
through the iniquity of time, licet hic DEO aliquid extra ordinem, the LORD
may here extraordinarily stir up men to the redintegration of this
broken-off work, as the story of the old Church, both under the Judges and
Kings, may instruct to the full. I would inquire of our Adversaries, Vbi
interruptus fuit ille syndelechismus (notius est hic illud institutum DAVIDIS,
1. Chron. 24. quam ut necessum habeam illud commemorare?) whereas the daily
Sacrifice was broken off, from whence was the redintegration or reformation
hereof to be expected? If from GOD here extra ordinem, by stirring up men
for his own work; or if ab ipsis deformatoribus? and if even those
praebuerunt sese instaurandae religionis administros, and so reparation was
made even by those, who in common had miscarried (which case who dare sustain
to deny to have behappened?) whether or not GODS Hand is to be acknowledged
here singularly? Thus there were no danger here, if we should be pleased
to recourse to this help of extraordinary vocation: for the LORD has one and
the same right still, and may always dispose of his Church as pleases him
best, under Grace, as under, or yet before the Law. But this were but frustra,
or in vain on our part, ubi nulla cogit necessitas, etc.

XI. MELETEMA.
THE Calling even of those our men, which our Adversaries singularly aim at,
at least produce exemplarlie, as of LVTHER, was ordinary quoad ortum, as to
his separation to the work, or to the Gospel; though extraordinary in some
regard, as of those heroical motions, whereby he was stirred up, matters so
standing, to attempt a Reformation. So here we may distinguish betwixt (...),
and (...), respectu (...), his Calling was ordinary; but respectu (...), it
was extraordinary; not so much in respect of the Calling in it self, but
relate ad subjectum, in relation to the person called: for as the Apostle
Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. Cap. 4. Verse. 7. Quis te discernit? so to trace our
Adversariee here, who separated LVTHER? Truly, ubi corpus in commune
laboraret, whereas the body was affected in common, this his separation, not
to the work simply, whereunto he had an ordinary calling; but in a certain
respect, to wit, in regard of a greater measure of purity in the work, was,
and may be called extraordinary.

I say of LVTHER, That he had an ordinary Calling to the work it self, if
so be that there was any ordinary vocation with our Adversaries for the
time: for do they not acknowledge this, whilst they arcesse us of secession;
which praesupponeth and subinferreth a prior union, and being amongst them?
except, as it prooveth indeed well ordinary with them, they hold quod vnum
relatorum possit esse absque altero; quod sublato fundamento, locus queat esse
termino, as ye may see, In that matter of their Vtopicke Purgatory, In the
retention of the punishment, the fault being remitted and pardoned; as if
there could be possibly any place condemnationi and morti, or judicio, ubi
reatus nullus, condemnamentum nullum, which the Apostle makes as consequents,
and after-effects. Nay, which is yet farther, though we should simply grant
of the calling of our first men, that it were extraordinary quoad ortum; the
function should not cease from hence to be ordinary: for ortus
extraordinarius may give beginning functioni ordinariae; as may be instanced
in Aarons Priesthood, which was an ordinary function, though as to the spring,
extraordinary: for as to Moses part, it was no creation, but renunciation;
he created not, or made him Priest, but simply renounced him for Priest, and
declared him to be such.

And last, whereas our Adversaries require faith to be made to the
extraordinary vocation of our first men, by some miracle, or extraordinary
sign; truly if we eye the matter aright, nec hoc defuit, neither was this
wanting: for I pray you whilst they confess and acknowledge, that so few in
number, so obscure in quality, bore out this work so mightily against so
great opposition, do they not imprudently thus acknowledge GODS hand
warranding this his own calling here miraculouslie? for quis hic tam (...),
cujus sensus hoc non feriat, afficiat?

XII. MELETEMA.
TO ordinarium is to be considered two manner of ways: first, for that which
is agreeable to that order at the first established by GOD himself: and
secondly, for that which through an inveterated custom has commonly
obtained. Now, as to that vocation obtaining with us to day, it is ordinary,
as to the first acception of the word ORDINARY, and may indeed be called
again extraordinary in some regard, the word being taken in the latter
acception: as theirs is likewise in part ordinary, and in part extraordinary;
I say in part: for you would remember, that even in that Popish Ordination,
traditur ordinato codex Evangelii, vocatur ad praedicandum Evangelium, non
simpliciter ad sacrificandum CHRISTVM. Wherefore, as our Adversaries here
check us into those words of Saint PAUL, Nos talem consuetudinem non habemus:
so if the Apostles Patres Patrum were alive, they should not fail to except
them by, the like check, in eadem verba, Nos talem consuetudinem non habuimus.

XIII. MELETEMA.
WE have not made the least secession from the Church of ROME, neither as she
is a Church, nor yet as such, to wit, gathered at ROME: for as to this last,
there is no evil in the word ROMANA; for fides Romanorum praedicata fuit per
universum orbem: and would to GOD we had that ancient ROME, whiles she kept
the Truth in sincerity; but only from her as she is Papana, or rather,
that we may secerne here secernenda, a Papatu, from this accident, and not
from the subject; which is but a betaking of us from a foul place to a
cleaner, and not an egression out of the Church simply, (which phrase cannot
be used properly, except ROME, which is but a sister-Church, and collateral,
were the sole Mother Church) or a secession from the same; for a secession
subinferreth, nay, praerequireth, and praesupponeth a prior union. Now Papatus
and Ecclesia, Poprie and the Church make up but one, as a subject does with its
common accident, as Hydrops and homo do. So the secession of our first men
from Poprie within the Church, was not properly or simply a secession; but
this their foorth-comming, whiles the body was in common affected, was rather
terminatiue of a prior secession or common defection.

From hence, it might seem but needless, (if I might speak it with reverence
of greater and better judgments,) to seek so carefully to the just causes of
our secession, to wit, the Heresy, Idolatry, and Tyranny of the Roman
Church, or in the Roman Church, whereas the ground it self, or the secession,
is justly denyable. Now, non entis nulla sunt accidentia.

XIIII. MELETEMA.
WHereas our Adversaries suffer not that to be called Rebaptization, whilst
they superadde de suo, their toyish assumentes to that Baptism conferred by
our men: as hereby acknowledging the Baptism in it self to be valide and
lawful, quod viz. simus in ministerio, si non ministri, as the matter and
quaestion was cleared and decided about BARBARIUS PHILIPPUS his acts of
Praetorship, that they were to be holden rata and grata, and not to be
rescinded, quod fuerit in praetura, licet non praetor; nay, and as the case I
hope holds de Ioanna Papista, who was in Papatu, though not Papa: and
semblably, whilst it falls out, that an Heretic, nay, a Magitian, or
Necromancier possesses the Chair, which cases have proven possible, as the
Councels can bear us here record.

Now, that I may reason hence by way of Analogy, using the like liberty; Why
may they not suffer the vocation and ordination obtaining with us, go for
current, Cum nostri ordinatores fuerint saltem in ministerio, si non ministri?
Or, I pray you, is Ordination of greater weight and importance than Baptism?
Or, may Baptism be conferred and administered by any not instructed with
commission? May these but suffer the least divorce, which CHRIST Himself has
thus coupled, MATTHEW the last, Ite, Do^^te, Baptizate? Certes, me thinks it
strange, how our Adversaries so far forth miscarrie here, as to permit to
Laickes the administration of this blessed Sacrament; yea, farther, acknowledge
it lawful, whilst conferred but in sport and merriment, and that not in the
ordinary element thereof, appointed by CHRIST, but in sand, yea, and but by
Children. Truly, horret animus, yea, tremunt artus, whilst I but show quam
impie hic ludant in re tam seria.

To make collection to the errande in hand, If our men may baptize, Or, if the
Baptism conferred by them be valide and effectual, then they may teach, and
have the warrant of Ite, are instructed with commission; and so from the first
to the last, viget inter nostros vocatio, vel ipsis hic Adversariis nobis
suffragantibus astipulantibus, etc.

XV. MELETEMA.
IN that Vocation or Calling obtaining with our Adversaries, and which our men
brought from thence with them, (giving we had our Calling of them) these three
acts are distinctlie to be considered; GODS own act, penes quem summum
vocandi jus, ac mittendi imperium, and from whom is that inward Calling; next,
The Church her act, from which as GODS Instrument in this work is that
external, or outward Calling; The third is of the Church popishlie affected,
or of the Pope his act, and of his Bond-slaues, from whence is vitium
Vocationis, or that faultiness and vitiositie in the Calling. Now, this last
cannot (...), or make devoyde, and of null effect and force the two (...); so
that there remains still a Calling amongst our Adversaries, though well
vicious. Thus whereas our men came as it were forth from amongst them, they
but renounced this latter part, constantly retayning quod DEI erat, and quod
Ecclesiae.

It is to be adverted here, That we traduce not even those Ordinations
obtaining to day with our Adversaries pro nullis, sed pro vitiosis; as we
acknowledge a Church with them, whiles the matrimonial Tables are not rent, or
repeated, nor a Bill of divorce given, ubi libellus repudii? as it fared with
the adulterous ISRAELITES, they continued GODS people even after their many
adulteries and spiritual whoredoms: I say, that we acknowledge their Church
as veram Ecclesiam, though not veracem, as a true Church, in regard of a
Physical verity, though not of an Ethicall veracitie.

Always, it is to be considered headilie, how the case here alters,
whilst their ordinations are not so much as warrandable by their own Canons,
as whereas they deferred orders to Idiots and Children: for here non habemus
hujusinodi ordinationes pro vitiosis, sed pro nullis: for the lawfulness of
the Cheirothesie depends from the lawfulness of the praeceeding Cheirotonie,
and not on the contrary, this from that other; the sign being suspended from
the matter, and not the matter from the sign.

XVI. MELETEMA.
WHere-as there concur and occur some three acts even in that Vocation
obtaining with our Adversaries, and so in that Calling which our first men
brought from thence; so the concurrence and occurrence of the same are
necessary to a lawful deposition: for the same must occur and concur to a
lawful destitution, which to the prior institution. For exemple, Where
Kingdoms come by election, the same consentes are required to a Kings
destitutione, which to his prior institution in Regem; and else, to meddle with
the sacred person of a King, is to touch and meddle with the LORDS anointed:
yea, and to fail and fault even against the Law of Nations. These are
hitherto; to meet here with our Adversaries, excepting, that we have losed
by excommunication, what right we had from amongst them formerlie by any
vocation. Certes, the Pope here cannot (...), or make of no force, neither
quod DEI est, nor yet quod Ecclesiae. Nay, in common, and promiscuous
marriages, multa quae impediunt contrahendum, non dirimunt contractum. Again,
without the concurrence and occurrence of the whole acts in the destitution,
which occurred and concurred to the prior institution, the proceedure is well
summarie and vnformall, as I hope is clear from the instanced exemple. I leave
to speak of the ground of the excommunication, according whereunto judgment
must be given of the excommunication it self; where it fears me, the
matter has proceeded clave errante. As likewise, quod non statim rumpatur
interius illud spiritus coagulum, vbi rumpitur exterius illud vinculum; giving
that a sister-Church, to wit, the Roman Church, could have lawfully sentenced
us, where-about sub judice lis est.

XVII. MELETEMA.
WHereas out of the common College of Presbyters, or Elders, one began to be
praefected over the rest, and be singularly so called by the name of BISHOP,
(I dispute not here, whether this Be ju ris divini, or positivi) (...), or
the act of Ordination, or matter it self remained common, sola (...), or ritu
ordinandi manente penes Episcopum singulariter, the sole Rite or external
sign of ordination being appropriated to the BISHOP singularly.

But no, not even then, whereas this custom first obtained, and was in its
greatest vigor, (...), was the Rite or the external sign (...), scilicet,
solelie proper to the Bishops so called in opposition, as that it was not
administered and peracted by Presbyters; as the Fathers here, Saint AMBROSE
and AUGUSTINE, bear us record; and ALEXANDRIA and EGYPT can bear witness,
where consignabant, or consecrabant and Presbyteri: for the one uses the word
Consignandi, as the other Consecrandi. Nay, seeing it cannot be denied, actum
ordinandi, rem ipsam, scilicet, (...), which is the greater part, mansisse
penes and Presbyteros, what lets why that which is but the lesser part, the
sign or the bare and naked Rite, may not remain common to Presbyters with
Bishops so called antitheticallie? for cui competit quod majus est eidem
adscribi nil vetat quod minus est, modo sint ejusdem generis: but the gendre is
still kept, etc.

It stands us upon yet a little to eye more nearlie into this matter, because
of our Adversaries. Saint CHRYSOSTOM, posing the quaestion cur Apost. ad
Philip. transeat ab Episcopat^^ ad Diaconatum, nullo relicto loco intermedio
(...) Presbyterorum, thus answers the matter, Quod (...), that the order is
but one and the same: and straight subjoyneth, quod eadem conveniant
Presbyteris, quae Episcopis, (...), sayech he, to the one which to the other:
nay, which is yet farther, he speaks more peremptorily to the matter, and
says positiuelie, that the Bishops herein wrong the Presbyters, That they
appropriate this singularly to themselves, (...). I know this place to be
wrested to the contrary, to the establishment of this their praerogatiue, as
if the same were the force of the word here in composition, which it carries,
whilst resolved in its pure simples, whereas (...), cum Chrysostomo, bears
this other signification, which is quite contrary. And lest this might seem
but an idle Grammatication, not having any foundation in the truth, I pray
you observe with me the use of this word in sacred Scripture; as I. These.
Chap. 4. Verse. 6. (...), ne quis opprimat aut circumveniat fratrem suum in
negotio, etc.

I forbear here to meddle with that idle difference, so hotly and
contentiouslie tossed and agitated amongst us to day, Whether a Bishop be
greater, than a Presbyter, Institutione Dominica, or dispositione
Ecclesiastica; whereas it were far safer, privatas has simultates deponere,
quo melius reipub. Christianae in communi possemus consulere; yea, and where
frustra contentiosum funem ducimus: as who may agree in the matter, without
great prejudice to the truth, scilicet, that the order is but one and the
same, admitting always a disparitie or difference of degree (...); and this
not absolute or simple, but relative or respective ad (...), according to the
different measure of graces and gifts in the LORDS worke-men, and sutablie to
CHRIST'S institution, who gave some to be Apostles, and some Evangelists, and
so forth. Nay, according to that seeming, at least subinsinuated and employed
difference, or disparitie amongst the Apostles, where some are called (...),
besides some other names to this same purpose, importing, at least bewraying a
distinction.

But to the matter again vnde digressi you see how Saint HIEROME prooveth
this power of Ordination to be common to Presbyters with Bishops, by an
argument taken from the more to the less. Quod qui possunt corpus CHRISTI
conficere, possint and Presbyterum creare; except (forsooth) it be more to
consigne a Presbyter, than to create our own Creator. To this same sense and
purpose I would pose our Adversaries here a little, possuntne Presbyteri, so
called antitheticallie, or in opposition, Christianum efficere, or baptizare? I
take these for one ex bypothesi ad bominem; for our Adversaries hold and
maintain, quod per Baptismum character indelebilis imprimatur, That by
Baptism an indelible character is imprinted. Now, there is none who can deny,
but that this latter may be adscrybed to any Gregarie Presbyter; Ergo, the
first may be said to be no less competent unto him.

As to those places of the Apostle, where this seems singularly to be
adscrybed unto one, they are to be taken communiter, or in common to be
understood: for non statim de caeteris negatur, quod de uno praedicatur; yea,
heerefore what the Apostle seemed singularly to have taken and acclaymed unto
himself in the one place, 2. Timoth. Chap. 1. Verse. 6, he shows plainly ao
have been common to the whole Eldership, 1. Timoth. Chap. 4. Verse. 14.

I fear to wade any farther in this point: for non nise caute incedendum per
ignes suppositos cineri doloso; adeoque offendicula vel in ipsis picturis nudis
tollenda. And yet I need not fear much the incurring here the offense of
any, ut qui Episcoporum axioma ne vel minimum hic eam imminutum, so far
forth as I can trace any light going before me, for warrant and appuy to my
conscience: for as to that Primacie of order without power, whether absolute or
by delegation, which may suffer upon abuse repetition by the party delegating,
I cannot so much as by dream conceive thereof: for albeit all be called to
one and the same Ministry, it follows not straight, quod simil and quisque
vocetur ad parem in ministerio gradum, more than in the College of Justice all
are of alyke power and dignity in place: nor yet of that Orbiculare
praesidence falselie fathered upon Saint AMBROSE, upon a wide
misinterpretation and mistaking of his mind; cum varii sint modi recedendi, as
also that so I could not see, how the first Presbyter could be called by the
name of Bishop singularly; whereas in a circle there is nothing first or last,
nisi recurras ad puncta imaginaria.

But how-so-ever the matter go, this must be given to the praesent
necessity, because of our Adversaries excepting here against the lawfulness
of that bygone Ministry with us these diverse years heere-to-fore, quod
nostri destituti fuerint (...) Episcopali. You see that this cannot evacuate,
or but the least enervate our Calling; both these being but one, the word
being taken ex usu Scripturae, where we see the one subjoyned to the other
exegeticallie, as Acts, Chap. 20. Verse. 28. The Elders of the Church of EPHESUS
accersed, or sent for to MILETVM, are exhorted to take heed to themselves, and
to their Flocks, over the which the holy Ghost praefecit cos Episcopos, had
made them Overseers. As likewise, we see The Apostle to pass straight from
the Name to the Office, which would argue a communion in the one, as in the
other: nay, we see the Apostle to require the same thing in a Presbyter, which
in a Bishop; which subinferreth a necessary competencie of the same in common
to both.

As last, we see the Apostle Saint PETER himself, and synpresbyterum sese
indigetare. But besides this, that both these are but one and the same, the
words being taken exusu Scripturae, true is it not, that all our first men
were devoyde of this sort of Ordination, which our Adversaries so praeciselie
urge.

XVIII. MELETEMA.
LEst there might seem here justly not the least part of this work wanting,
if I should over-passe by silence that point of Succession, which our
Adversaries esteem to be of such poyse and weight, as if without it there
could be no lawful Church nor Ministry; it stands us upon to speak so
far forth of it, as the praesent necessity requires.

Wherefore, seeing nullum apud eos sonorius crepitaculum, quo vehementius nos
obtundant, I shall touch it a little en passant, if it were but to silence
their so clamorous cries here; though it may be, if GOD shall give grace and
leave, I speak more properly and fuselie of this argument in its proper
place, Of the notes of the Church.

In the entry here, I pray you always to remember, that it was the
doctrinall, and not personal succession, which those Ancientes so highly
regarded, and that they mentioned but this last, because of the first, as which
is the very soul and life thereof. Again, it would be headilie remembered
here, that those Haeretiks, against who^ those Ancients instituted their
Disputations, by alleging to the persons professing, and not to the doctrine
professed, (as we see TERTULLIANE to reason against the MARCIONITES and
GNOSTICS; Edant Origines Episcoporum suorum, evolvant seriem antistitum it a
per successionem ab initio decurrentem, vt primus ille Episcopus aliquem ex
Apostolis vel Apostolicis viris habuerit auctorem and antecessorem; hoc enim
modo Romanorum Ecclesia CLEMENTEM a PETRO ordinatum refert, confingant tale
aliquid haeretici, etc.) that those Haereticks, I say, denied, either in whole,
or in part, the Scriptures, wherethrough the Dispute could not be instituted
from hence against such. So then, thus the Ancientes adorted those Haeretickes,
and improoved their doctrine, because they could not show any constant
profession of the same, they could not point at those Bishops who professed
with them, where the ROMAN Church is well often exemplarlie alleged unto.
But it is to be observed, how Tertulliane in the alleged place, alleges
the exemple of the Church of SMYRNA, as a Transmarine Church, as he does the
exemple of the Church of ROME, as a Cismarine Church; that so he might show
evidentlie, doctrinam Novati, Marcionis novam and inauditam prorsus fuisse, as
which was not acknowledged, or believed by any Church at all, whether on this
side of the Sea, or beyond the Sea. Thus then, it was to this sense, that the
Ancients urged the argument from succession; from whence it is clear, that the
personal succession was still alleged unto, because of the doctrinall only.

But to speak conciselie and sinewishlie of this matter, first we shall show,
GOD willing, That there is no necessity of this succession, which our
Adversaries solelie and singularly require. Next, that this sort of succession
is not findable with themselves. Last, That we have that succession which is
necessary penes nos* or with us.

That I may borrow mine empledged word, let me, as to the first, pack up the
matter by form of Argument.

If so be, that personal and local succession suffered even then and there
interruption, where it was of greater necessity, it follows, that it may
suffer the like with the less danger, where it is of lesser necessity:

But so it is, the first holds and proves true:

Ergo, the same judgment must be given in this latter case.

For probation of the minor; the Priesthood of AARON may serve to the full,
from whence we thus bind up the Argument.

Whereas the Priesthood under the Law was tied to AARONS carnal descent,
truly then this personal succession behooved to be of greater necessity,
than it can be now under Grace, where the matter goes by free election:

But so it is, that even then this personal succession suffered diverslie
interruption:

Ergo, it may admit yet the like interruption, without the least danger, etc.

For probation of the minor; were not NADAE and ABIHU stricken with fire from
Heaven, who should have succeeded by Line? Next, whereas it came to ELEAZAR, I
would enquire, if it continued still in him and his race? Was it not upon their
abuse translated to the stock of ITHAMAR? Now, rested it in the stock of
ITHAMAR? Was it not broken off, because of the wickedness of ELIES sons,
HOPHNI and PHINEHAS, albeit it had well long continued in the house of ELI? Was
not ABIATHAR the last Priest of that stock deposed by SOLOMON, and ZADOK
substituted and suffected in his vice and place? Thus I hope it may appear
most evidentlie, to any who shuts not his eyes wilfully against this so
clear a light, from this my so long deduction of the matter, That the Church
is not tied to any personal succession, suite, or train of Bishops; which
were here indeed to lay a false reckoning and count; as if filii ABRAHAE
omnes secundum carnem censendi essent in semine, and not these only, who are
Children after the Promise.

In the next room, I would have you with all diligence and headiness to
advert here, that the place gave the praeheminence to the persons, and not the
persons the dignity or primacie to the Seage or Seat: That is, that it was
not whether the residence or death of an Apostle, in this or that Seage or
Seat, which gave the procathedrie, and praeseance here to the after
succeeding Bishops in that Seage, or in that Sea; from whence our Adversaries
collect and conclude the Procathedrie, nay, that general Prostasie of the Pope
of Rome, as Saint Peter's Successor, forsooth, in sedem Apostolicam: but that
the Seages or Seas received this praeheminence, according to that rank they
held and obtained as Cities of the Empire: for else, I hope it could not be
well denied, but that the first place here were due to Jerusalem, before
Rome, if succession can make ought to the praeheminenee or primacie of place:
for did not CHRIST Himself preach, yea, and suffer at Jerusalem? Nay, did He
not accomplish there all the mysteries of our Salvation? Did not all the
Apostles issue as it were from thence? Preach, yea, and reside there for a
goodly space? Do not the Ancients here agree as it were in common, That James
turned the ordinary Bishop of Jerusalem, whereas the matter of Peter's being
at Rome, and Bishopric there, is at least so doubtful.

I would pose our Adversaries here a little, How is it here, that the Bishop
of HIERVSALEM was not reputed and holden for the first Bishop, if the persons
gave the primacie or praeheminence to the place? Nay, we see it especially
provided, Council. Nie. 1. Can. 6. that honor should be deferred to the Bishop
of HIERVSALEM, without the least praejudice to that honor and regard due by
him to the Bishop of CAESARIA, his Metrapolitane. Thus it is clear from hence,
That this sort of praeheminence in those Apostolic Seages, or Seas, was
unknown then in those old times, and to those holy Fathers, gathered at that
Council.

Thirdly, giving here liberally for the time, That a constant and
uninterrupted succession of Bishops were an infallible note of a true Church,
wherefore should not this militate as well for the three other Seages, of
ALEXANDRIA, ANTIOCHIA, HIERVSALEM, as for the Sea of ROME; seeing, as EVSEBIVS
witnesses in his Ecclesiastical History, Lib. 3. that they have this
succession? Why then should the Church of ROME be more instyled by the name of
the true, sole, Catholic, and Apostolic Church, than the Church of
ALEXANDRIA, ANTIOCH, etc? What can this succession to PETER in sedem Romanam,
import and rapport, beyond the succession to any Apostle else, into any other
Seage or Seat? I would be glad to be instructed here, where I promise to
follow the light, as docilem me praebere.

Fourthlie, If this sort of Succession, to wit, personal and local, which is
the only Succession urged and required by our Adversaries, were simply
necessary to the constitution of a true Church, and lawful Ministry, and
were an infallible, if not constitutiue, at least oftensiue note of a true
Church; then we behooved to acknowledge that Church straight for a true
Church, where this were to be found: For nota debet (...), or retrocommeat
with the subject noted, as (...) risibile does cum homine: but I hope our
Adversaries shall not stand hereunto; for then they behooved to acknowledge
the GREEK Church for a true and lawful Church, which they most
pertinaciouslie here deny: for and haec bac Successione gaudet, possent and
hi longam seriem texere, Catalogum instituere EPISCOPORVM. Nay, then the
ARRIANS should have made up a true Church, because of this Succession obtaining
likewise with them.

Our Adversaries here finding themselves strayted, are driven to seek to some
posture, whitherto they affirm, That the Argument proceeds here but
negatiuelie; that is, That it serves not so much to show where the Church
is, or, What is the true Church; as Where she is not. Whereupon it follows,
That this Succession shall be nota non nota, or nota non notificans, a note
not notifying or poynting forth the subject; which is to convell the
fundaments of all true and sound Philosophy.

But to trace them yet here, and deject them from this refuge: Thus there
should not have been a Church in the beginning; neither should there be one
at the consummation of the world: as where utrobique hic defectus comparet,
haec successio desideratur, this Succession is vvanting. Wherefore, the
Argument proceeds not so much as by way of negation.

Fiftlie: The practice of the Primitive Church stands here to the contrary:
where we find a double sort of Vocation, where-of una fiebat (...), alia
(...). Now, I would understand of our Adversaries, their judgment of and
about those Ordinations used by those old ancient Fathers, which were called
absolutely; If they be to them, or with them, either for null, or for
vicious? But so it is, This Succession which they press, to wit, personal and
local, was here wanting, where-in they place the very essence of Succession,
etc.

Sixtlie: I would inquyre of our Adversaries, Whereas CONSTANTINOPLE was made
a Patriarchall Seat, tempore THEODOSII Magni, which City before was still
subject HERACLENSI Episcopo; tantum abest ut CONSTANTINOPOLITANVS Episcopus
fuerit Patriarcha, ut ne Metropolites quidem: Whether or not they will take
upon them here to condemn this, because of this defect of a personal and
local Succession in Caput; although else it was a cooptation in commune
corpus, tagma, Collegium, systema reliquorum Patriarcharum, according to those
absolute Ordinations used of old by those ancient Fathers, etc.

Seaventhlie: If this Succession personal and local, were simply here
necessary, then it should follow to their great praejudice here, quod nulli
novi Episcopatus possent condi, institui, That no new Bishoprics could be
erected: so that here they praejudge, through imprudencie and inconsideration,
their so due and just deserved praise, of their so fruitful labors amongst
the INDIANS, where they have builded and created so many new CHURCHES, etc.

Last of all: Where-as our very Adversaries conclude this point from that
Succession of the Judges of ISRAEL, why may they not admit here, That this
Succession may fuffer interruption? as we see that to have been reapse
diverselie, and eft-soones interrupted under their diverse enemies, MOABITES,
CANANITES, AMORITES, and so forth; and that now for longer, and now for
shorter space; as now for the space of twenty years, now of seven, yea,
now of whole forty. Truly, this Argument here militateth (...). Thus I
hope I have improven to the very full, the necessity of this Succession, to
wit, personal and local, which our Adversaries here urge and press so much.

As to the second I promised to prove, that is, That this Succession is not to
be found with our very Adversaries, I shall, GOD vvilling, prove this by
infallible demonstrations.

No Haereticke has jus ordinandi, or power of Ordination, even according to
some of their own Canons: (Thus I argue not by position, but of supposition
only ad hominem: where I deny not likewise BABEL to be confounded, etc.

But so it is, that many and diverse of their Popes have proven such:

Ergo, for the least during this space, this Succession has suffered
interruption: nay, it follows from hence, That there has been no lawful
Church, or Ministry with them since, so much as vvarrandable by their own
Canons.

For probation of the minor: Our probation shall not stay it self here in the
Scriptures, which were indeed sufficient, but of surplussge, and for the
clearer conviction of our Adversaries, and to take from them all effuge and
means to escape here, I offer me to prove, That diverse Haeretickes have
possessed that Chair, and occupied the same, even according to that way which
themselves call Haeresie: where I may reckon forth a great train of them, as
were LIBERIVS, FOELIX the second, LEO the first, GELASIVS the first, VIGILIVS,
GREGORY the second, ZACHARY the first, ADRIAN the first, NICOLAS the first,
JOHN the eight, NICOLAS the second, COELESTINE the third, INNOCENT the third,
JOHN the twentie-two, and INNOCENT the eight; all which have erred in that
which concerns the Faith; else our Modern Doctors prove heterodoxe, as who
hold not, nor maintain the same doctrine with them.

But for shortness sake, I will content me to point at those who have been
condemned for such, by lawful Councels. First then, I would pose our
Adversaries, what they can say to HONORIVS the first, condemned in two general
Councels, the sixth and the seventh; and anathematized as an Haereticke, for a
Monothelite?

Our Seraphicke Doctor BELLARMINE can tell us here, that HONORIVS erred, but
as a private man here, and not as Pope. A brave eschappatoire, forsooth,
ficulneum ADAMI praesidium, a fine Coat of fig tree leaves, to cover his
nakedness. I pray you, if HONORIVS being consulted as Pope in a matter of
Faith, controverted upon for the time, answered not to the point as Pope, but
as a private Doctor or man; in what posterne shall we seek his Holiness,
forsooth, whereas his person speaks to us, that we be no farther here
deceived? Nay truly, if so be he may err, whereas advised and consulted in
a matter of Faith, I see not what profit his pretended privilege of not
erring, (...), can rapport here to the Church.

But this cannot help our Adversary here; for HONORIVS was anathematized as
Bishop of ROME, and not as a private man, or Doctor. Nay, which is yet farther,
LEO the second, his own successor, confesses of HONORIVS, that he polluted
that holy Seage or Sea: whereupon it follows by an inevitable consequence,
that he erred as Pope: for else his private souilleurs, or pollutions, could
not have polluted this sacred Seage.

Last, for my self, I would not be here curious for the second person of the
Pope his Holiness: but would be content to take order with his private
person, for his miscarriage, forbearing his Holiness, or the second person he
sustaineth out of pure and mere religion, for-sooth.

Next, I would learn what our Adversaries can say to JOHN the twelft,
condemned for most enormious crimes, in a Council holden at ROME, as for
carowsing of Wine, for love of the Devil, for directing his devotion, at least
in sport and merriment, to IVPITER and MARS, I, to IVPITER and VENUS their
Proprogoddesse! What will they say to JOHN the three and twentieth, or four
and twentieth, denying the Resurrection, condemned in the Council of
CONSTANCE? Last, what can they except against EVGENIVS the fourth, deposed in
the Council of BASIL, and condemned for Haereticke? Now, quicquid h^die
Episcoporum, aut ordinis (...) superest in Ecclesia Romana, ad hoc font
profluxit: and so it follows, that these two hundredth years since, or
there-abouts, there has been no lawful Vocation with our Adversaries, which
they can warrant by their own Canons. Now, quis dabit mundum ex immundo, who
can bring a clean thing out of filthiness.

It is worthy our best observation, that BELLARMINE having acknowledged, even
by the force of the Truth, That this Council was lawfully indicted:
whereupon it followth, after their own Canons, that so it could not err;
says, That it turned vicious: and whereas he poynteth at the faultiness
thereof, it is here, forsooth, quod pronunciarit secundum Concilium. Truly,
it is well here, that they may authorize, or exauthorize, at their pleasure,
as they find ought to make for them, or against them.

I should but miss-spende good time, if I should reckon forth all those
vicious and monstrous heads the have adapted to this body, some Infidels, some
Magitians, some Necromancers, as SYLVESTER the second; some attayning to the
Popedom by brigandise, by Arms, some by one finesse, and some by another;
scarce one amongst numbers entering in at the Door so much as of an external
Vocation, warrandable by their own Canons. Nay, I might here arcesse them all
in common of Simonie: for if all came not thus by the place, at least all to
one thus carry themselves in the place: for they expose to sale the Graces and
Gifts of GOD, and hold them get-able by Money; as their Nundination of
Indulgences, Soule-Masses, and their other Wares of this Note, may instruct to
the full; where-thorow they approve themselves to have succeeded indeed to
SIMON, but SIMON MAGVS, and not SIMON PETER, to be his singular Successors.

Vendit Alexander Claves, Altaria, Christum.
Vendere jure potest: emerat ipse prius.
And BAPTISTA MANTVANVS to this same sense:

-- venalia nobis
Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria, Sacra, Coronae,
Ignis, Thura, Preces, Coelum est venale, Deusque.
I would understand of our Adversaries, If their election was canonical, who
came thus by the Popedom, as by Simonie, Brigandise, Arms, etc.?

Pope LEO tells us, that those four are required to a canonical and lawful
Election, vota civium, testimonia populorum, arbitri a honoratorum, electio
cleri. Now, I would demand our Adversaries here, If the free suffrages of the
people be so much as required to the election of a Pope to day? And yet
BELLARMINE himself, Lib. de Clericis, Cap. 7. is forced to confess, That of
old none was holden for lawful Bishop, who wanted the suffiages of the people
to his election: whereupon it follows, that they walk not in the old way,
but they have declyned in the latter days.

I would feign learn of our Adversaries, Whether this Succession was free from
suffering interruption, whereas the ROMISH Bishops were divided amongst
themselves by Schisms, for many years together? I remit the Reader here to
that great papist ONUPHRIUS, in Chronico, where he reckons forth roundly
some thirty Schisms in the Church of ROME: as the first, between CORNELIUS
and NOVATUS; the second, betwixt LIBERIUS and FOELIX; the third, betwixt
DAMASUS and VRCISINUS, which prooved a well bloody Schism; and so forth of
the rest of that note.

I would in like manner inquire here, Where one Pope disanulled the Acts of
another, and reordained those who formerlie had received orders of his
Decessour, as thus not acknowledging that prior Ordination for lawful and
valide; as, for instance, Pope SERGIUS the third, carried him toward his
decessour Pope FORMOSUS, besides diverse other instances, whether of those
contesting Fathers shall we acknowledge for his Holiness, and from whether
shall we derive and aestimate the succession? Truly, dignus hic vindice
nodus. I hope those may suffice here ad gustum, yea, and to bring in distaste
this their so much boasted-of Succession, with those whose sensorie is not
altogether distempered; yea, who are not devoide of the sense of tasting.

Certes, the providence of GOD is singularly to be admired here, in that He
has not suffered those probations and Monumentes, of the turpitude of this
holy Seage, for-sooth, to be so far forth suppressed, as that we have not
sufficiency of proof for clear conviction of the ADVERSARY; and yet
questionless hi non defuerant sibi, etc.

But to arcesse this matter from on high, and deduce it vel a capite, from
PETER'S being at ROME; if we show but (...), that PETER was never there, the
after-substruction falls of will: wherefore, thus I argue:

If Saint PETER was never at ROME, then this Succession to him into that Seat
or Seage cease:

But so it is, Saint PETER was never there:

Ergo, this Succession cease, and falls of will.

For probation of the minor, I purpose not no treat of this ad longum, but
only so far forth as the necessity of the praesent errand requires: so
that I will content my self here but to point at some few things, exerto vel
intento demum digito.

In the entry here, I would have you to observe these generalles: That the
first Father or Author of this Forgerie, is one PAPIAS, a mere Fabler: so that
all the many Witnesses, which our Adversaries here allege for this his
being at ROME, resolve in one, and are but one in substance: for they all have
it but from him; and so this prooveth the last resolution of the matter, PAPIAS
a fabulous Tale-teller related so. Ergo. Nay, BARONIVS in his Catalogue of his
Authors for this Forgerie, goes no higher.

Again, that great confusion of BABEL would be headilie adverted unto, where
scarce one understands another Language here. Me thinks it strange, how
they all, at least in common, agreeing in the general, that PETER was at ROME,
should so universally vary in every circumstance, as about the time of his
going thither, some standing for one year, and some for another. Truly, all
these cannot stand and subsist together, the first, the second, the sixth, or
seventh, the thirtienth of CLAUDIUS, etc. Again, about the place from whence
he went thither; now from HIERVSALEM, and now from ANTIOCH. Again, about
that conflict with SIMON MAGVS, which they make the end of his going thither.
Certes, omnia hic (...), and fabu^osa: wherefore, as this alleged end of his
going is but a Fable, his going it self may justly seem to be but fabulous.

Let me pose our Adversaries here a little: Why is not this SIMON'S opposing
of PETER mentioned, as we see the wickedness of ELYMAS the Sorcerer against
Saint PAVL? Or, I pray you, Was not PAVL ^ble enough for the work, who smote
that Sorcerer with blindness? But I should but in vain busy my self here in
this matter of SIMON MAGVS, ubi omnia scatent fabulis: nay, where our
MIDIANITES mutuis se conficiunt vulneribus.

Again, about the place, time, and quality of his death; yea, and about his
burial: and last, about his Successors, some standing for CLEMENT, and some
for LINVS.

Now, what can we lay hold on in so great vncertaintis? Whereupon can we
appuy or rest here our Faith? And yet, si Diis placet, this is rei summa and
caput, PETER'S being at ROME.

Questionless, it is from hence, that BELLARMINE finding but so weak a
foundation to build the Popes headship upon, as convinced in judgment,
against the light of his conscience, seeks thus to shift off the matter, and
betaketh him to this posterne, nec requiri, nec sufficere, that this is neither
requisite nor sufficient to make PETER Bishop of ROME, de Romans Pontif. lib. 2.
cap. 1. which he prooveth by parts: The first, Because thus PETER should have
been Bishop of HIERVSALEM, CAESAREA, and so forth of all those places
whither-to he came. The second, Because many were Bishops of ROME, who came
never thither, as CLEMENT the fifth, JOHN the twentie-two, BENEDICT the twelft,
CLEMENT the sixth, and INNOCENTIVS the seventh; which were ordained Bishops in
FRANCE, and abode still there.

I would inquire of our Adversaries, Why they fight so much for this, which
according to their own confession and concession, can neither serve the turn,
nay, ix not so much as requisite thereunto? May it not justly seem that they
are but led here by the spirit of Contradition?

I leave for the time to dispute the matter, whether this be requisite or not,
that one come to that place, yea, and reside there, whereof he is created
Bishop: for our Adversaries thus imprudently wrong their own cause of
personal and local Succession, except a designation to a place be to them
for local Succession; and so an habitual Bishop and an actual be with them
for one and the same. Last, it is well, that PETER thus of an Apostle turns
an irregulare Bishop, and a pattern of non residence.

But to deal a little punctim, as we have done caesim:

The first Argument may be drawn from the putation and committing of times,
to this sense.

If we shall be pleased to commit and collation together the first and the
second Chapters of Saint PAUL to the GALATIANS, we shall see PETER to have
kept in IEWRIE, and therea-bout, some eighteen years after CHRIST'S Passion,
as is clear out of Saint PAUL his visiting of him at JERUSALEM so many
years after his conversion, and of his after rebuking of him to his face at
ANTIOCH. Now, if we shall add to this number, the seven years of his
being at ANTIOCH, and the twentie-fiue years of his Bishopric at ROME,
there shall arise the sum of fifty years, or there-abouts. From hence it
follows, That PETER could not have suffered Martyredome with PAUL, as the
common tradition has at ROME, the twelfth or thirteenth year of NERO: for it
is most certain by collationing of the sacred and profane story, that there
ran but thirty and seven. years for the most, from CHRIST'S Passion, to the
very end of NERO his Empire. What shall be done with these supernumerarie
years here? Nay, though we should praecide and cut off here those seven
years of his abode at ANTIOCH, lest we might seem too strict in putandis
temporibus, we shall yet find hiatum multum, no little gulf or distance.

Truly, hic haeret iis aqua, our Adversaries cannot possibly expede and
extricate themselves here, vtut in omnes se vertant parts: wherefore
expectandus iis ELIAS aliquis, aut (...), qui nodum hunc solvat, fortean vel
secet.

In the next room, I might reason from that general, yea, and universal
silence of the whole Scriptures here; as where we can find nothing for his
going thither, as we do for PAUL'S, nor of his being there. Certes, in
summis fidei capitibus argumentum recte procedit negative. Now, this is rei
summa and caput, PETER'S Bishopric at ROME, which our Adversaries collect of
his being there; and conclude from hence, as who can find no better warrands
else: whereupon it follows, quod super arenaceo fundamento omnis illa insana
substructio exstructa sit.

But of surplussage here; the Scriptures furnish us store of Arguments against
this forgerie: for if PETER had been at ROME, before PAVL'S coming thither,
either he was negligent, or else his ministry there was fruitless, and
ineffectuall: for PAVL tells roundly, That he found the JEWS in common
innorant of CHRIST altogether, and His Gospel; as which they odiouslie
instyled by the name of a Sect; and such a Sect, as generally evil spoken of,
Acts, Chap. 28. Verse. 22. Or do we think, that the JEWS at ROME would have
carried greater reverence to PAVL, than to their own ordinary Apostle, if so
be he had been there?

Again, the many Epistles which PAVL wrote from ROME, wherein he does not so
much as make the least mention of PETER, whether in Salutation, or Valediction,
argue to the full, that he co-lived not with PAVL at ROME. Nay, PAVL'S
complaint, That he was left alone, and forsaken of all at his first
compearance; and his deposition, that at the second time LVKE only was with
him; these joyntlie considered, serve to prove, That PETER was not at ROME now
with PAVL; except we would brand him with this foul not of Apostasy, or
deserting of PAVL in the common cause of CHRIST, and the Gospel.

Again, me thinks it strange, how PETER, writing two Epistles to the
dispersed JEWS, in diverse Countries, could so deeply forget those at ROME;
as not the least to mention them, if so be they were his chief charge, and
ROME it self the Seat of his Popedom.

Last, were not this flat against that compact betwixt him and Saint PAVL,
That he should go to the JEWS, and PAVL to the GENTILES; which the Fathers
acknowledged as singularly administered by GOD, as you may see out of Saint
HIEROME, on the second Chapter to the GALATIANS; and which we see done with
uniform consent of the rest of the Apostles? How could we free Saint PETER
here of faedifragie, if contrary to that covenant, thus solemnlie made, he
should not only have preached upon occasion to the GENTILES, and as it were
extraordinarlie, or (...), or by the way, but turned their ordinary Apostle;
yea, not Apostle, but Bishop, to the great praejudice of his Apostolical
authority: as who is reckoned with them Apostolorum primus, as who perhaps was
first called to the Apostleship, though ANDREW was called prior to the
Discipleship.

But to wind up this point, lest I might seem forgetful of my promise in the
beginning of this Treatise, and so seem too deeply drowned in this
Meditation, let me thus argue for the general:

That Religion whose foundation and maine ground is purus putus stochasmus, a
mere stochasme, cannot be but stochasticke, and conjecturall:

But such is the Popish Religion to day: for Saint PETER'S Bishopric at
ROME, and his being there, which is rei summa and caput, is but an ylde
forgerie, and foolish conjecture; as I hope is clear to the full, from this my
deduction of the matter:

Ergo, the Popish Religion is but stochasticke, and conjecturall.

Wherefore, seeing this point non cadit sub fidem, immo ne sub sensum quidem,
there can be no certainly in their Religion, to settle men's consciences.
Truly, there is great need here of a well implicit Faith.

Last, I offer me, ne quid desit, to prove this point by that constant and
ordinary practice with our Adversaries, even unto this day.

Is not this the nature and quality of their suffragant Bishops, as that their
ordinations are absolute, absolutae, or solutae forte and dissolutae? Those who
understand but the least into this matter, know, that here for common both
these Successions are found wanting, personal and local: for ex trivio nomen
arripitur and inditur, non scrupulose inquiritur in statum Ecclesiae, from
whence my L. receives his name. Truly, the institution of these is but a
mere histrionicall and dramaticall action.

Always, lest I should seem to father an untruth upon them, I must entreat
your patience here a little, that I may snew the form and manner of the
creation of these suffragant Bishops: wherefore, thus take the matter.

REVEREND. D. BOGVINTINVS, HOSTIENSIS, or COLONIENSIS, stands in need of a
suffragant, as who cannot do all by himself; nay, as with whose dignity it
cannot stand omnium vertices contrectare, inungere. Now, this Suffragant can
not do those things, which my L. should have done by himself, except he be
instructed with power, and so created Bishop: for non potest quis in alium
confer, transfer, quod ipse prior non habeat: wherefore he is created
Bishop of some Transmarine Church, or other, from whence he may receive the
denomination, whereas in the whilst they are altogether ignorant of the state
of that Church, yea, do not so much as understand of the Vacancie of the
Seat; as we had with our selves in SCOT-LAND some Bishops of ATHENS,
for-sooth.

The Suffragant being thus created, least he should seem a non resident,
dat se in viam, he betaketh him to his journey, to his Station, for-sooth; but
ad tertium aut quartum ab urbe lapidem, some three or four miles off of the
Town, one is summitted, and so per lucida intervalla another, to show him of
the danger of the journey, of the great loss and pert the Church should
sustain through his departure: in a word, and in effect, to recall him to my
L. whereupon he returns; and upon his return, is praefected over some of
his Churches, as his Vicar and Suffragant, where he attends my L. Mandements.

Now, who sees not, except a Borne-blinde, that there is neither personal
nor local Succession here? And yet these are the Fathers of all those other
Bishops with our Adversaries to day; these are they qui generant tot
Episcoporum examina, etc.

Thus I hope, nisi mea me hic destituat spes, I have shown to the full, That
this so much noysed Succession, is not to be found with our Adversaries. Now,
I come to the last thing I promised to prove, to wit, That we have such
Succession, as is necessary and requisite here.

For the clearing of this point, you must here headilie distinguish betwixt
those things which are essential in and to Succession, and so are altogether,
or simply necessary, and these which are but accidentarie, and so may be
praesent or absent without destruction of the subject. Now, there be two of
each sort; of the first are Successio Doctrinae, and Successio Vocationis: for
it is here simply, and altogether necessary, vt succedatur in doctrinam
Apostolicam. And the second is no less necessary, successio Vocationis: for
quomodo praedicabunt nisi mittantur? nemo sibi hunc honorem assumit, etc. It
has still proven a matter full of danger, to usurp sacred Functions. But as
to those other two, personal and local Succession; that is, that a person
succeed to a person, in and to a certain place, these are not essential, and
simply necessary, as without which a Church and ministry may be, yea, and
are de facto amongst themselves, as their new built and instituted Churches
amongst the INDIANS may instruct to the full; and as I have proven already at
large, yea, and besides other probations, from the practice of the primitive
Church, where fiebat vocati^ (...) as (...).

Last, giving that there were such personal and local Succession with our
Adversaries, it were no less ours: Communes enim fuimus possessores, licet
deturbarint nos de communi possessione, adeoque non excidimus jure ad rem,
licet soli vsurpare velint jus in rem: siquidem non magis haec sunt Papae, quam
Templum DEI, illius Idoli fuisse censendum est, quod in eo collocarat ANTIOCHVS
Epiphanes, rectius Epimanes.

XIX. MELETEMA.
HIERVSALEM which is Above, is Mother of us all, Gal. Chap. 4. Verse. 26: as to
the Church of ROME, she was for the best but a Sister-Church, and collateral;
but now we affirm her to be heavilie affected and diseased. It is true
indeed, that the Bishop of ROME was called in common with the rest of the
Patriarchs, by the name of occumenicall Bishop; as which all joyntlie and
commonly repraesented (...): Nay, we deny not here yet farther, that the
Bishop of ROME obtained at last (...), a certain Procathedrie, or preseance,
and this perhaps not only because that ROME was seeds, or Caput Imperii, the
Imperial Seat, or Seage; or yet because it prooved a ZOAR, or place of refuge
to them of the Eastern Church, during the ARRIAN persecution; but even because
of the faith, as which kept then the Truth in sincerity, where-as other
Churches were more corrupted; But all this is ours: for, as POMPEY said well,
Non est in parietibus Respuplica: so, no more is the Church of ROME within her
Walls.

Again, it is an evil collection, to gather, or conclude straight an
universal Prostasie from a particular Procathedrie. Nay, and albeit the Church
of ROME was alleged unto exemplarlie, whilst she kept the Faith in purity
and sincerity, follows it from hence, that she was either the
Mother Church, or the Catholic Church, which were orbem vrbi includere? The
Ancients indeed adducebant Ecclesiam Romanam, sed vt exemplum particulare,
scilicet, during that space of her purity, sed ne vel tum quidem vt attributum
universal, which our Papists do to day. You know, that this is ordinary
with us, whilst any differ arises, to appeal or provoke to the most famous
Church where we live, as in FRANCE, appellation is for common made to the
Church of GENEVE; or yet to defer the cognition of the matter to some
Transmarine Church: but shall any infer from hence, That by this appellation
we abjudge the name of a true Church from our selves, or yet singularly
adjudge this name to that Church, whereunto we appeal? Nay, last of all
here, Ab Ecclesia Romana, during that her flowrishing age, ad hodiernam
Papanam non est concludere: distant ac differunt haec du^ immane quantum, immo
(...).

XX. MELETEMA.
THe Chief Priests and Elders of the People, where-as they could not except
against Christ's works, or authoritatem factorum, they began to quarrel
authoritatem faciendi, and so to quaestion Him, by what authority He did
these things, and who gave Him this authority, Mat. 21.23. Thus it fares with
our Adversaries, or these our new Pharisees, to day, since they can not except
against (...), or the doctrine which we teach, lest else they should have
nothing at all to hold their poor bewitched people in hand, they must needs
except here, and quarrel authoritatem (...), and so squabble about our
authority in Teaching, if not authority of Doctrine: wherefore let us give
this to their so great and pressing necessity.

There is one of our Men, no less truly in Dignation than Place, who has
lately written most learnedlie in defense of our CALLING; vvhere-at I can not
hear of any amongst our Adversaries, who has so much as snatched as yet but
like a Dog leaping at NILVS: so that I grant this to be but a superfluous
labor on my part, vvhere-in but been actum male ago: yet I can not but look
for a charitable construction: voluntas quum sit actionum mensura; and that it
may be permitted to those, qui prae tenui peculio vitulum vivum divis minus
elustrare possunt, vel taurum e farina fingere; yea, and as who could not be
altogether here muet, being so deicticallie pointed at, and pressed by the
greater part in common, but at least some advantage taken by the Adversary
upon my silence against my self, though not to the least praejudice to the
errand or common cause, or yet derogation to the credit of the Ministry with
us, through my weak sides: wherefore, gentle Reader, give to necessity
whatsoever thou find here done; and vouchsafe at least thy best
countenance, which is grace enough against all disgrace I fear these
whatsoever my pains shall incur with the enemy, yea, or be liable unto:
for if thou pardon my praesumption, and accept of this my mean endeavor, thou
shall perhaps encourage me to some greater attempt: what well done, give GOD
the praise; and where I have taken the pains, reap thou the profit: what thou
find amiss, corrigi ac sanari posse ne despera: as who, aliis vt prosim,
veritatis Discipulus esse malim, quam, aliis dum praesim, erroris Magister, etc.

VIVE. VALE.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page lin. for read 6 Margent, insignari, insigniri. Ibid. Ibidem. Meletemata,
qui Meletemata. Ibid. 7 periet, pereat. 9 17 appear, appears. 11 21 quod,
quos. 20 24 estate, estates. 22 25 whiles, whiles as. 23 27 videri^, videsis.
43 13 Papista, Papissa. 49 3 solelie, solly. Ibid. 6 Saint, Saints. 50 1
Chrysostomo, Quarto. 51 15 ao, to. 52 10 word, words. Ibid. 19 thing, things.
54 32 solelie, solly. 59 3 absolutely, absolutae. 65 6 defuerant, defuerunt.
69 27 not, note. 71 4 certainly, certainty. Ibid. 23 Boguintinus, Boguntinus.

Item, in some places of this Treatise, for pretend, read pertend.


