A brief discourse of the most renowned acts and right valiant conquests of
those puisant Princes, called the Nine worthies: WHEREIN IS DECLARED their
several proportions and dispositions, and what Arms every one gave, as also
in what time each of them lived, and how at the length they ended their lives.

Compiled by RICHARD LLOYD Gentleman.

Imprinted at London by R. Ward, dwelling at the sign of the Talbot near
unto Holburne Conduit. 1584.

THOMAS BROMLE.
To God give honor due, fear him above all things:
He is the Lord of Lords, and only King of Kings.
Obey the Princes laws, the poor do not deny:
Make peace where discord is, remember you must die.
Avoid unruled wrath, judge justly to each wight:
Set naught by worldly pelf, in the respect of right.


Be stout unto the proud, and gentle to the meek:
Reprove the wicked sort, reuengement do not seek.
Of flattering toongs beware, let none your secrets kno:
Many seem a friend, yet prove a very fo.
Look you attempt nothing, but wey the end before:
Eschew each vice, and love each virtue evermore.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MY GOOD LORD and Master Sir Thomas Bromley Knight,
Lord Chancellor of England, and one of her highness privy counsel.
PErusing over sundry books of volumes large and great,
Which of the worthy feats of Fame, and Martial acts entreat,
Of mighty Princes of the world, accomplished of yore,
In diverse kingdoms upon earth, and countries heretofore.
I find in ancient Histories, by learned men laid down
The conquestes of the Worthies nine to be of most renown:
Who are by famous Register enrowled in record
The greatest and mightiest conquerers, and Worthies of the world:
As well for their couragiousnes, as magnanimities,
Their valiantnes, their wisdoms rare, and Princely policies:
As for the wonders marvelous, and miracles also
In their exploytes, and their affairs, which God for them did show.
How God exalted them on hie, to earthly dignity,
And gave them Kings and kingdoms by tryumphant victory:
Appointing them to be his scourge, the wicked to confound,
And their unrighteous seed vnroote, with sword from of the ground.
How God remained to the end, with them that godly wear,
And prospered all their attempts, which him did love and fear.
How other were amid their pride, in highest room of all,
For that they had forgotten God, brought to a sudden fall.
As for example: Joshua the Judge of Israel,
The first of all these conquerers, in virtue did excel.
And doughtie David in like sort, in whom God did delight,
From shepherd being made a King, was righteous in Gods sight.
And noble Judas Machabeus, these three Jews by birth,
And feared God continually, while they did live on earth.
Wherefore the Lord wrought miracles upon their enemies,
As shall be afterward discust here in these Histories.
Then Hector fearce the Phrigian Prince, and Alexander great,
And Julius Caesar painyms all, their God they did forgeat:
For which, amid their most estate, when they were highest of all,
Ambicion, Pride, and Avarice, gave each of them a fall.
Then Arthur, Charle-mayne and Guy, were christians as I guess,
The one was plagde in his most pomp, for his lasciviousness:
The other two were godly men, wherefore they dyed well,
As in their several Histories the Sequel plain does tell.
A brief of all whose lives, I have in meeter with my pen
Compiled out of sundry books of famous learned men.
And as I read of them also, according to my skill,
I have all their proportions depainted with my quill:
And drawn the arms and cognisaunce in every several shield,
Which when they lived upon the earth they bare unto the field:
The year and time where they did reign, and when and where they died,
And what they were inclined too, I have herein discried:
Beseeching that your honor will accept in gentle part
This little book which I present, to show my faithful heart.
And when your leisure so shall serve, vouchsafe I humbly crave,
To read it over once or twice, and where I erred have,
That crime or fault committed so, let ignorance excuse,
Blame not the man that means well, but blame his simple Muse.
Record the matter in your mind, although this style be base,
Then shall your Lordship plainly see before your present face,
A myrror of man's mortal life, by them compared right,
Which well may be a looking glass, to every living wight:
And chiefly to the higher sort, whom God shall please t'aduance,
In any wise here upon earth to rule or governance:
To learn thereby to know the Lord, who lives eternally,
Not to forget their own estates, through pride nor surquedry:
To abandon wicked vice away, and virtue to embrace,
That to their latter end they may run out a happy race.
Thus humbly I do take my leave, and heartily do pray,
That God will grant you Nestors years, in virtues honor ay.
Your humble Servant, Richard Lloyd.

A description of the bodily proportion of the Nine worthies, with what Arms
every one of them gave.
Joshua was of good stature, strong and hardy to endure,
In judgment just, godly, and wise, and cruel to his enemies:
Right fortunate and happy in fight, in virtue was his whole delight,
He bare sables into field, a Batte displayed in his shield.
HEctor was indifferent tall, well compact and strong withal,
Courteous, quick, and deliuere of might, in arms a very goodly Knight:
His head was white and curld I find, his beard was white, he was sandblinde,
And somewhat he did lispe also, a gentler wight no man might know:
He bare two Lions combatand, or in asure (I understand.)
David was but little of bone, in courage stout as any one,
Of his complexion brown was he, addicted unto venerie:
With goodly eyes the scripture tell, this man in wisdom did excel,
And was both godly and fortunate, and courteous to every estate:
He bare a harp for his ensine, or in asure as books define.
ALexander (as I read) of person was not tall in deed,
But made after the middle sort, and of a very princely port:
Quick and nimble swift and light, valiant fearce, and happy in fight.
Of his complexion white and read, on the left side bowing his head:
Very proud and liberal, and given much to wine withal:
This puisant prince and conqueror bare in his shield a Lion or,
Which sitting in a chair hent a battle axe in his paw argent.
IVdas Machabeus was strong, big of limbs, square and long,
Of noble courage, godly and wise, forward against his enemies,
Fortunate and happy in fight, meek and gentle to each wight:
In field two Ravens he did bear, in pale proper which sables were.
IVlius Caesar sklender was, and lean likewise of body and face,
Pale and megre to behold, wise and learned, stout and bold:
Ambitious and hauty of mind, of nature courteous and kind:
Displayed an Eagle he did bear, sables in or as may appear:
ARthur was of body square, of visage grim, and full of hair:
Strong and bold, and liberal, of nature gentle over all,
And stout unto his enemy, but given to adultery:
In martial acts he did delight, and loved every noble Knight:
He thirteen crowns did bear also, or in asure against his foe.
CHarles was well proportioned, strong and wise, and doughtie of deed:
Of learnings lore a favorer, and very pollitike in war:
Merciful and fortunate, and gentle unto every estate:
This king bare the Jerusalem shield, paid with the imperial coat in field.
GVI was tall and large of limb, none in his days were like to him:
Of good complexion, seemly of face, and liberal in every place:
Valiant, strong, and venterous, godly, kind, and courteous:
He or and asure books discrie, a cheueron ermine bare checkie.
VTERE IVSTITIA SI VIR VIS IVSTVS HA(...)



THE HISTORY OF THE conquests of the noble and virtuous Duke IOSVA.
I Am the worthy conqueror Duke Joshua the great,
Whom God did ordeine and appoint to reign in Moises seat:
To lead his people Israel to the land of behest,
Which God to Moises promised, as scriptures have expressed.
When he dwelt in the wilderness, and had miraculouslie
Escaped through the great red sea, from Pharaos tyranny.
Two thousand and two hundredth years, with five and thirty more:
After God had made the world I reigned: and before
The day that Jesus Christ was borne, in books as plain appeeres.
One thousand and seven hundredth and seven and twenty years.
A Jew I am by due descent, of such exceeding fame:
As through the world shall flourish ay the honor of my name.
Much favor with the Lord I found, whose thundering voice full often,
Appeared unto me on earth from scarlet skies aloft:
Commanding me nothing to dread, but boldly on to fight:
Assuring me the upper hand of every living wight.
And not to part form me, where so I did my army lead:
Yea, and to give me all the lands whereon my feet should tread.
The great flood Jordan he dried up for me and all my power:
And brought us safely through the same, and all within an hour.
Dividing with his mighty arm the waves most woonderfullie:
On either side as we did pass, like hills or mountains hie.
The lofty walls of Ierico fell at my prayers down:
Through which I entered valiantly, and quite destroid the town.
I put each woman, man, and child, therein unto the sword:
As I had incommandement by Gods most holy word.
No living soul escapt away out of that bloody strife:
But Rahab and her family, to whom I granted life.
For that she in her house did hide the men I sent to view
The City: and did them convey from those that did pursue.
I sacked the city of Ay eke, Bethoron and Bethell:
And many mighty cities more: which now were long to tell.
I slew there people more and less, with famine, sword, and fire:
For God appointed me his scourge, to accomplish his just ire.
The Lord at my request did stay the sun amid the sky:
While I causd many hundereths and thousands for to die.
Whose numbers were so infinite, that God did also rain
Great stones from heaven on their heads, and slew them on the plain,
As they did fly before my face even from Bethoron,
Until they to Esaka came, that few escapt or none.
I chased great and mighty kings to hide them on the earth
In caves: and there to curse the time of their unhappy birth.
And burnt their cities, towns, and towers unto the very ground:
And they themselves I hanged on trees, in place where I them found.
And after threw their carcases into the caves again:
And rouled thereunto great stones, where yet their bones remain.
And at the water of Merom I killed with my hands,
Thousands of mine enemies, whose number as the sands
Were gathered against Israel: but God the Lord of might,
Delivered them all unto me, not one but died in fight.
Their horses and their chariots eke I burned and destroide:
Their countries, towns, and cities all, which lately they enioide.
Wherein were one and thirty kings, all which with one accord,
Were enemies to the living Lord, and his precepts abhord.
Whose names, in the old testament the scripture plain does sho
In order written: the first was the King of Ierico.
The kings of Ay and Ierimoth, of Lachis and Hebron:
The kings of Jerusalem, of Gaser and Eglon.
The kings of Dabir and of Cred, of Gader and Horma,
Of Magedo and Makeda and the King of Libna.
The kings of Hepher and Bethell, the kings of Adolam:
The kings of Apheck and Thaphnah, the King of Iackanam.
The kings of Laseron and Madam and the King of Gilgall:
The King of Simron Merom eke Ibrought to utter thrall.
The kings of Hasor and of Dot, of Cades and Tenach:
The kings which reigned in Ascaph, and the kings of Thersach.
The Enakites I overcame which in the mountains dwelled:
I put them all to cruel death, because they then rebelled.
Neither did I cease continually each living wight to kill,
Till all the land of Canaan was subject to my will.
The confines of which coast does reach, from the wide wilderness
And desert wastes of Libanon, to the flood of Euphrates.
And also unto the greek sea whereas the sun goes down:
These countries all I conquered unto my high renown.
And plast my people in the same, who did the land possess:
And lived ioifully therein with rest and quietness.
Where I long reigned over them by the Lords only grace,
In virtue, honor, and much fame, and led a happy race:
Instructing them in God his laws, and offering sacrifice
Unto the Lord of thanksgiving, for his gifts many wise.
At last unwieldy age approcht, and dreadful death being pressed,
Did bring my carcass to my grave, where yet my body rests,
In mine own City which I built, that Thamnath Sereh hight:
Being five score years and ten of age, my soul with Angels bright.
FINIS.
An Example of this former History.
BY this renowned prince we see, and by his life we understand,
How virtuous men continually prosper in that they take in hand:
And how the godly flourish still, possessing all things at their will.
For in the scripture is discride the virtues like the planted tree,
Which grows by the river side shall flourish in prosperity:
And God his Lord shall him defend in all his doings to the end.
The lord the righteous shall uphold, for why: his ways to him are known
God shall him bless a thousand fold, he shall be never overthrown:
He shall for ay the land possess, and live therein in quietness.
His seed for ever shall endure, and their inheritance enjoy,
What so the wicked do procure, shall work the righteous no annoy:
For in each peril God will see that he shall not confounded be.
And by these heathen kings also, whom he did conquer and destroy,
We find, as scriptures plainly sho, of wicked men the fading joy:
Who like a flower, shall withered be, and blown quite out of memory.
And as the smoke consumes away, or as the fat of lambs do melt,
So the ungodly shall decay, and all the places where they dwelt:
The sword shall pearce through their own hearts, which they prepared to others
smarts.
And their unrighteous seed likewise shall be vnrooted and out worn
From of the earth before men's eyes, as though they never had been born:
And all that they possess or ought, like chafe with wind shall wear to
naught.
Wherefore, from every evil fly, abandon vice and wickedness,
Do that is good, live virtuously, and so thou shall the land possess
In happy state: and after thee thy children continually.
FINIS.
AGREDIARE NIHIL SVBITO SED PROSPICE FINEM



THE HISTORY OF THE conquests of the mighty Prince and conqueror HECTOR.
I Am Hector the peerless prince king Priamus eldest son:
Many a land through force of arms and prowess, I have won.
In Paponie my puissance great I have approoud in fight:
In Greece and Phrigia I have slain, and conquered many a knight.
I am that martial knight of fame, which slew so many a Greek,
When they were pressed for Helens rape to Troie revenge to seek.
Being furnished with eleven score sails and forty for the war:
All full of armed soldiers, assembled from a far.
And threescore noble kings and nine, which landed before Troie:
With minds conspired all in one, the Trojans to destroy.
At whose arrival first on shore I met them in the field:
Where, at one time with my own hand, a thousand men I killed.
Beside the great and mighty King, which Prothefilaus hight:
Whom I did cleave unto the chinne, in all the armies sight.
And six and twenty princes mo, during that ten years strife:
When I did meet them day by day, I reaud them of their life:
As Patroclus of Phithia King, on Galathee my steed:
With deadly spear through plate and maile, his heart blood I did sheed.
And Lufor, and Boetes kings, and King Archilogus:
And Merion the King of Creete, and King Epistrophus.
And Prothenor of Boece King, and King Lepedemon:
Deipeynor and Phidippus fearce, the King of Calcedon.
Dorius and Polixenus, and King Zantippus eeke:
And Serpedon the famous prince, and much renowned Greek.
Leonteus of Larissa King, and Polybetes stout:
And Alphinor a valiant wight, amongst the greekish rout.
Philete and Letabonis, Isideus and Menon:
Humerus and Maymentus eke, with peerless Palamon.
Schedius King of Phocis land, in open field I slew:
Whose sudden death full many a Greek with bleeding heart did rue.
King Phillis and King Octamen, I struck so mortallie:
With deadly spear, that therewithal they died presently.
The mighty Agamemnon king I threw unto the ground:
And strong Achilles felled often with many a mortal wound.
Proud Diomed and Ajax fierce, I met often in this broile:
With many Greekish captains more, and gave them all the foil.
And so continued six years space amongst my mortal foes,
Most like a valiant conqueror, still dealing deadly bloes:
And chasing them with bloody blade unto the very strand:
Where, some did leap into the seas, to shun my heavy hand.
And there were drenched in the waves most miserably:
Wherefore the Greeks among themselves complained secretly,
What slaughter and occision I made upon their men:
And for redress thereof, they held a privy counsel then.
Wherein they did conspire my death in this vnknightly wise:
That when I came into the field against mine enemies,
Achilles should with many knights awaite me to oppress:
When I were occupied in fight to bring me to distress.
Affirming otherwise, while I in Troie alive did reign,
Impossible it were for them the victory to attain.
Yet serud their treason, for a while to small effect or none:
I did distress them (as before) and killed many a one:
Till casually upon a day I marched to the field
In former wonted guise: to prove my force with spear and shield:
Although forewarned by my wife, who by a dream did see,
That if I that day went to field, my life should ended be:
Where I like mighty Mars himself slew down on every side,
And brake their rays and renges all where I did go or ride:
And killed anon two mighty kings before Achilles face,
Who: seeking to revenge their death, I wounded in that place:
And forced him to withdraw himself to bind his mortal sore:
By this the fight with fierce assault increased more and more.
At last by chance I flew a King, whose armor for the nones
Was richly en brodred and set forth with pearls and precious stones.
The sight whereof did so inflame my heart with covetousness,
That for to spoil him of the same my self I did address:
Forecasting naught what might befall, nor having no regard
To shun the train of my mischaunce, which was for me prepared:
Nor fearing thousands of my foes, nor waying any friend,
Although the state of their welfare on me did all depend.
But hent him up upon my steed, and rode out of the throng:
And for my better ease my shield upon my back I flong,
While I did spoil him of his weeds, careless of any wight,
My naked breast disarmed then, Achilles had a sight
How I was busied: and therefore from covert where he lay,
Toward me him to revenge he took the ready way:
And suddenly with fatal spear or that I might aduert,
He came unawares behind my back, and stroke me to the heart.
Thus died I through avarice, whom thousands could not kill,
Till mine own only wilfulness my self did fondly spill.
Whereby (alas) it came to pass, my country did it rue:
For shortly after to them all destruction did ensue.
My body was brought into Troie with woeful showts and cries,
With piteous plaints and grievous groans, whose echo pearst the skies.
And in Apollos temple enterd and closed deep in claie
After the Paynims rites, being a Paynim in my lay.
Two thousand and seven hundredth years, adioining fifteen mo,
Since the creation of the world I raignd, as books do sho.
And before Christ Jesus birth one thousand full complete,
Two hundredth forty years and seven, this hapt in Troie the great.
FINIS.
An Example of this former History.
THis history does plain express, and witness unto every wight
The woeful end of covetousness, and such as have therein delight:
And shows both the harm and scath, which wicked avarice brings and has.
And scriptures truly do record, who so at leisure them will scan,
Nothing to be more deeply abhord, nor yet worse than a covetous man:
Nothing so wicked, no vice such, as to love money over much.
For he that loves gold so well, in Ecclesiasticus I find,
For money has his soul to sell, so avarice the heart does blind:
Record of Dives, who denied, poor Lazarus what time he died.
Saint Paul writing to Timothy in his epistles, does express
The woeful end and misery of such as dwell in covetousness:
Which says, he drowneth many a one, in sorrow and destruction.
How many vices do proceed from covetousness that wicked crime?
What Kings and kingdoms do we read to be destroid from time to time?
What bloody murder, what distress, what envy comes through covetousness?
What rigor, wrong, and perjury, what rauine, and what mortal strife,
What malice, and what cruelty, and finally, what loss of life
Breeds covetousness to every such, as love this worldly mucke too much?
This noble prince and conqueror a good example well may be,
Whom covetousness did quite devour, being drowned in this misery:
But Gods just judgment has prepared, for every sin a due reward.
FINIS.
NON IN(...) ^VSTVM NEC SEMEN EGENVM



THE HISTORY OF THE conquests of the virtuous and valiant King DAVID.
I Am David most doughtie of deed, the King of Israel:
By Samuel the prophet great anointed there to dwell.
A Jew I am in Bethlehem borne, and by Gods only grace
Promoted up to regal rowme, though come but of mean race.
Next to Saul I ware the crown, I had continually
Seven and thirty mighty men as captains under me.
Whose names in the old testament in the books of the Kings
At large are written, and set forth with many other things.
Peruse well the old testament, and mark the text aright:
Then thou shall find that I am he in whom God did delight:
Of whom in pleased him to say, Behold in every part,
At last I have found out a man according to my heart.
No prophet ever raignd on earth more greater than was I,
To whom the Lord did deigne to give such spirit of prophecy:
Nor unto whom my God vouchsafd so largely to behight
Such ioifull promises: nor found more favor in Gods sight.
First, in my childish years when I a shepherd was,
I slew a Lion with my hands, as he my sheep did chase:
And killed a great and ugly Bear, which came in ravenous wise
Out of the wilderness to spoil my flock before mine eyes.
And being by my father sent my brothers food to bring,
Who served then as soldiers in field with Saul the King,
I slew the Giant Goliath, most lothlie to behold,
Who was from the Philistines sent on Israelites to scold:
And proudly stood between the hosts trusting unto his might,
And called upon Israel to send him one to fight.
This man was captain of their host, which then in Socohe lay,
He ware a coat of maile, which did five thousand siccles way:
And was six cubits large in length, and on his legs did wear
Boots of brass: and on his breast a brazen shield did bear.
And in his hand a spear he held, whose brazen head also
Did wey (as scriptures do declare) six hundred siccles mo.
Which thing, when Saul the King beheld, he highly esteemed me:
And brought me home unto his house his servant for to be:
And gave me his daughter to wife, for whom I paid in fight
Two hundred foreskins of my foes, whom I slew through my might:
With many a thousand mo beside, whereby my fame so sprung
Throughout the land of Israel, that women on me sung
In all the cities where I past, dancing most ioifullie,
With fiddles and timbrels well tund to advance my victory,
Saying: David has ten thousand killed, and Saul one thousand slain:
Wherefore, the King was woonderous wroth, that I did so attain
To worthy honor and renown: and for this did conspire
My death, by all the means he could in his outrageous ire:
And often times he did attempt, when he tormented was
And vexed with the evil spirit, to slay me in the place:
But then I played upon my harp, and so I did expel
The wicked spirit, by Gods grace which in King Saul did dwell.
And yet, as soon as I did cease, the spirit would him torment,
And then, to slay me as before again he would attempt.
At last, to shun his wicked hand, by help of Ionathas,
I fled unto the wilderness, where I in sorrow was
And deep distress for many a day, oppressed with hungers rage,
Until Ahimelech the priest my hunger did assuage:
And after fled to Achis King, thence to the desert cave
Of Odolam: to Mazphah thence my self from Saul to save.
To Engedi and Keilah, thence to the wilderness
Of Phran: thence to Zikelege, where I brought to distress
Thousands of Philistiens: at last King Saul was slain:
And then, over all Israel I was elect to reign:
And ruled as their sovereign King with famous victory,
Subduing great and mighty Kings, and nations under me.
As the perverse Amalakites, which Zikelege did burn:
Whom I pursued so narrowly, that few did back return:
The Syrians, and the Edomites, the Iebusites likewise,
The Iesurites, and Gersites that did against me rise:
The Philistines and Moabites, the tower of Sion eeke,
And Isboseth the son of Saul, who did the kingdom seek.
I overcame Iesby of Nob, a Giant fierce and fell,
Who had six fingers on each hand, as scriptures truly tell.
And Saphon strong, whose fearful looks all Israel did dreed,
The ghastly Giant I subdued, and causd his men to bleed.
Adadasor the mighty King as prisoner I did hold,
Bereauing him in battle strong of many a shield of gold.
Unhappy Absalon my son, who thought ambitiouslie
To conquer me (although his sire) was brought to misery:
Yea unto such a woeful end, that others justly may
Example take: and learn by him their parents to obey.
For as he through the woods did fly my soldiers force to shun,
Who fiersly him pursued behind the field when they had wun,
His locks being long, the trees being low, the boughs crauld in his hair,
And plucked him from his foming steed, and hanged him in the air:
Where finally Ioab him found, and piteously him slew
With many of his confederates, whose death I much did rue.
This woeful slaughter brought to end, I reigned quietly
Amongst my people many a day, and found no enemy:
For God my Lord was on my side, whose force than should I fear?
Thus reigned I in Israel, and Hebron forty year.
And in my crooked extreme age my body fell on sleep,
And in the city of David lies in earth enclosed deep:
After the framing of the world two thousand and fifteen,
Adding seven hundredth years and ninety, as I ween:
And one thousand years also ere Jesus Christ was borne,
One hundredth fifty years and seven expired out and worn.
FINIS.
An Example of this former History.
LO here behold a mirror bright, wherein the reader well may find
Expressed, and set forth aright the virtues of a pacient mind:
And learn also himself thereby, both meekenes and humility.
Which virtues being duly waide, each living wight ought to embrace:
For in the scriptures it is said, and writ at large in many a place
By the old prophets long time since, what virtue is in patience.
By patience (says Solomon) a prince may soon be pacified,
And patience is a just token whereby man's wisdom is discried:
The patient man also (says he) shall govern in prosperity.
And David this most virtuous King says in his Psalms: The patient
Out of his troubles God shall bring, he will not suffer him be shent:
For patience comes of the Lord, even as the prophet does record.
In Ecclesiasticus also the first chapter, the text does say,
The patient will endure each woe until the very appointed day:
And then for him shall be prepared, for his meekenes, a due reward.
Saint Paul in his epistles writes of patience and humility,
And James thereof likewise endites in many a text apparantlie:
Our savior Christ did patience teach, when he himself on earth did preach.
Saying (in Matthew as I find) Learn ye of me humility,
Because I humble am of mind, and suffer each thing patiently:
Again he says, The humble wight, shall be exalted to much might.
And in Saint Luke is written eeke, He has plucked the mighty low,
And exalted the humble and meek, what need I more hereof to show,
Since Christ himself has left behind, examples of a patient mind.
Whose patience and humility each christian ought to imitate,
For patience brings victory, as proof does tell to every estate:
Record of this worthy of fame, whose patience declares the same.
FINIS.
NEMO BEATVS SEMPER ERIT FRAGILI FORTVNA



THE HISTORY OF THE great and famous conqueror King ALEXANDER.
I Am the great and worthy King, the prince of peerless might,
The wide renowned conqueror which Alexander hight:
Son to the prince of Macedon, a man of noble fame,
Whom famous Phillip men did call, Olympias was my dame.
I was but twenty years of age when first I ware the crown,
And conquered the Athenians unto my high renown:
The Getes and Lacedaemonians, the Argeans stern and stout,
The Thaulants and Anterians strong on many a hideous rout.
The Tribals I compeld to yield, all Greece I did subdew,
And thence I went to Hellespont, beginning wars of new
In Asia, where I did prevail, and at one time did slay
Of Persians twenty thousand and two hundredth in one day:
There got I cities many a one, as Sardes and Lydia,
Magnesia, Phrygia, Ephylos, Pamphylia and Caria,
Pysidia, Lycia, and Gordyn, Helicarnasus to,
Melyton and Celenas eke, with many cities mo:
As Ancyre and Paphlagony, Solos and Malon,
Lyrnesus, Islon, Cebestus, with strong Castabulon.
Thence past I to Cilicia, a country large and wide,
Where I subdued Darius King for all his pomp and pride,
Took both his mother and his wife, put him to shameful flight,
A hundredth thousand Persians and mo, I slew in fight.
Strato King of Arade I forced on bewed knee
With all the Kings of Syria to yield themselves to me.
The city of Tire I put to sack, the strongest under sun,
Which never to this day was got since first the world begun.
Then into Egypt forth I saild, from Egypt over Nyle:
From Nyle to Affricke, where I wan by conquest many a mile.
I marched then to Araby a fertile soil in sight,
Where great Darius took his death with many a worthy Knight:
So passing over Euphrates and Tiger speedily,
I came at length to Babylon, which yeelden was to me.
Unto Armenia thence I marched, and thence to Atrapene,
And so unto Persepolis, thence to Paralecene:
From thence into the Mardons land I entered: where at length
That monsterous nation I subdude, and conquered through strength
The Medes: the Partthians and Spartans, the Thracians I subdude,
The Achaians and Boetians, the Cannians nothing rude
Besyra, Nisa, Pysides, and many mo with these
I conquered through force of arms, quite to the Caspian seas.
And when at length I had atchieud Lyrcanias furthest band,
I passed then to Amason, and wan it with my hand.
From thence to Dranga forth I went, which country I destroid,
Compelling strong Nabarzanes to India thence to void.
The land of Aracosia I causd to yield to me,
Rude Acadera and Bactria I sacked valiantly
The city of Cyroposis, all Scithia and Bub acen,
Basarians: Dahanes and Maurians, all these became my men.
To India then I took the way, which erst was won by none,
Nor entered in by any: but by Hercules alone.
Thence went I to mount Meroe, and thence to Dedala,
Which countries all I brought to wrack, with rich Amzaga.
Mount Arum I besieged long, and wan it with much fame,
Yet Hercules assaulted it, and could not sack the same.
King Omphis, Abiasares, and Gamaxus kings of Inde
Did humbly yield themselves and theirs to do what I assignde.
Then passed I Hydaspis streams, where Porus king did reign,
Who through my force was overcome, and all his power slain.
From thence: through deserts forth I went unto the Sobians land,
To Sugdrians and Mallians: whom I conquered with my hand.
And thence unto the Oxidricans, where: at a siege alone
My self the city entered in, and slew there many one.
From thence unto the Musicanes, and thence to Prestia cost:
From thence unto Pathalia I did convey mine host.
Thus when I had the furthest bonds in all the Orient kend,
And saw my self a conqueror unto the worlds end,
I sailed on the Ocean sea, where no man erst had been:
There many strange and wondrous things by me were heard and seen.
Some countries strange there I did find, with nations rude to see,
All which I forced through dent of sword, to yield themselves to me.
And when at last the raging sea, my passage did deny:
Right as a worthy conqueror again returned I.
And marched back to Babylon, triumphing as a God,
Where all the princes of the east for me made their abod.
There did I hold a paleament, almost of all the world:
For over all the orient I was the sovereign Lord.
Wherefore I was so proud in heart, so pompous and elate,
That I did utterly forget my self, and my estate,
Only attributing the fame of all my good success,
And conquests in so short a space, to mine own worthiness,
And not contented yet therewith, did take presumptuouslie
Upon my self the son of mighty Jove to be.
But in my most prosperity I had a soddaine fall,
I was by them betrayed, whom I trusted best of all.
Casander, Phillip, and Iolla, these three did work my fine
In Thesalus Medius house, with poison mixed in wine.
Thus died I through treasons train of those I loved most:
Thus were my conquests lately won within a moment lost.
Thus spiteful envy threw me down from fortunes stately stage
Bereft of life, being but two and thirty years of age:
My body was from Babylon to Memphis forth conuaide,
And thence to Alexandria by Ptolomeus aid:
Even in the year of the world four thousand, save eight score,
And before that Christ was borne, one hundredth and two more:
A Paynim I am in belief, a Paynim eke by birth,
Accounted son to Jupiter, and now consumd to earth.
FINIS.
An Example of this former History.
WHere pride infected has the heart of any wight what so he be,
All virtue in him is laid apart, so great is prides peruersitie,
As witnesses this worthy King, whose pride untimely death did bring.
For pride through false presumption made him so lofty and elate,
Being puffed with promotion, that he knew not his own estate:
Nor took regard to any wight, but trusted only in his might.
The honor due to God on hie he attributed to his own name,
And in his swelling surquedrie the Lord he robbed of the same:
Wherefore amid his most renown, God for his folly threw him down.
For by the prophet Jeremy the Lord himself even thus does say,
I will to none give my glory: and eke by the prophet Esaias,
The haughty I will pull down low, and cause the meek hearted to bow.
To Moises eke in Exodus, A ielous God says he, am I:
The prophet Sophony writes thus, I will visit each arrogancy:
In Ecclesiasticus I reed, Thy self exalt not in thy deed.
The eight of John does bear record, No man can any thing receive
But it proceeds from the Lord, who every perfect gift does give:
And if each gift from him proceed, to glory than what have we need?
All flesh is hay, and as a flower his glory all away shall pass,
The prophet says, and in one hour (as Job does tell) consume to grass:
All pride (as Solomon does write) is abominable in Gods sight.
Lucifer once an angel bright, for pride was thrown down to hell:
Antiochus for all his might, Herod who did in pride excel,
Through pride with plagues most miserably, tormented were or they did sdie.
Nabuchodonozar the King God plucked down from regal seat,
And for his pride in every thing became a beast, and grass did eat:
And many mighty Kings beside, the Lord has plagued for their pride.
Abandon then this wicked pride which God himself does so abhor,
Or else it cannot be denide but God will plague us heretofore:
For every gift give God the fame, and honor still his holy name.
FINIS.
NON HOMINVM CONSTAT TVRBA SED NVMINE PALMA



THE HISTORY OF THE conquests of the virtuous conqueror IVDAS MACHABEVS.
I Am Judas Machabeus, in might surpassing all,
I found not yet in Israel for strength my peregall:
A Lion fierce I was in field, as holy scriptures say,
And as a raging Lions whelpe that roreth at his pray:
An enemy to wicked men, a friend unto the good:
A plague and scourge to every such as shed the guiltless blood.
A Jew I am of noble birth, I saw the living God,
For fear of me the heathen fled as children from the rod:
I am the same which did redeem all Israel from thrall,
Even he whom God the Lord did raise, Antiochus pride to appall:
Who had the land of Israel most cruelly oppressed,
The city of Jerusalem both sacked and distressed:
The temples robbed and destroide, and thousands piteously
Murdered, and led away into captivity:
And placed wicked officers throughout the land likewise,
His heathenish laws to maintain, and Gods laws to despise:
As Phillip in Jerusalem a cruel man of mind,
Andromichus, and Menelaus at garrison assignd:
And Apollonius a prince of Syria also,
With two and twenty thousand men, who wrought the Jews much woe,
And murdered them in wilful wise without desert or cause,
Compelling such as did remain to obey his wicked laws:
Whose bloody hand to euitate, I was constraind to fly
Unto the woods and wilderness, in desert caves to lie,
With many of my brethren mo, where we consulted long
Amongst our selves what we should do for to redress this wrong:
At last, with one consent we agreed courageously to stand
Against the wicked heathen sort, who then possessed the land:
And being about six thousand men I took the charge on me,
By one accord chose and elect their captain chief to be,
To fight it out with manly heart, and after prayers made
I marched forward with my folk the heathen to invade:
And met with Apolonius, and slew him with my hand,
And all his people more and less, which then with me did stand:
His sword I took amid the strife perforce from him away,
And therewith fought during my life in many a bloody fray.
The city of Jerusalem I wan from them again,
And slew the heathen upon heaps which did therein remain.
I took the temple, and did cleanse and purify the same,
I did destroy the altars which they builded there with shame:
And since erected altars new, as they had been of yore,
And offered thereon sacrifice, and incense, as before.
I overcame Seron in fight, with thousands of his train,
By me eight hundredth of his men were in one battle slain.
Gorgias the captain great I put to shameful flight,
And slew there thousands with the sword, and by Gods only might,
Who sent his angels from above armed in glistering gold
On horseback with a spear in hand, most terrible to behold.
The valiant captain Lysias of King Antiochus,
With threescore thousand in one troop, though it be woonderous,
I conquered, and put to flight, and slew five thousand tho,
Yet had I to encounter them ten thousand and no mo.
In Idumea I did kill of heathens many a man:
At Arabathan in like sort great slaughter I began.
Gazer, Maspha and Casbon I did destroy with fire,
Mageth, Bosor: for they did against Israel conspire.
The gate of Iamnia I did burn, and many a ship therein,
And all that dwelt in Ioppa I plagued for their sin.
Timotheus with his Asia troop I met, and through Gods aid
Which he from heaven sent to me, my foes were so dismaide
And confounded with such darkness of lightning on them thrown,
And fiery darts of present death, that therewith they fell down
For fear: where twenty thousand men and five hundredth were slain
Of footmen and of horsemen more six hundredth on the plain:
And Timotheus being fled, and in a corner found,
With Cereas his brother hid, I slew with many a wound.
Ephron and Carnaym eke strong cities I did sack,
And every male therein with sword did bring to utter wrack:
Yea, so great a multitude, that every street therein
Was couerd with dead carcases, so God did plague their sin.
The city Hebron in like sort and Azot I did burn,
With altars, idols, images, which heathen did adorn.
The puisant King Antiochus I met with all his train,
And slew six hundredth of his men (as scripture tells plain:)
His captain Nican or also I killed at Bethoron,
And all his soldiers in one day, there escaped never a one:
His head and hand I did cut off, being of the Jews abhord,
His tongue I cast unto the fowls, which did blaspheme the Lord.
Thus ruled I in Israel with honor and renown,
And wan the palm of victory in country, field, and town.
At last it was my fatal lot amid my foes to die,
Even as the Lord decreeed had upon my destiny
For secret causes to him known, which must be accomplished:
My death was this, as you may and in scripture if you reed.
When King Demetrius understood how Nicanor was slain,
He sent his captain Bachydes to Judah land again
With two and twenty thousand men well furnished to fight,
With whom, my country to defend, I met as it was right,
Accompanied but with a few, three thousand and no mo,
Whereof the most part stole away or I to fight did go,
And left me there all desolate, but with eight hundredth men:
For which, my doubtful mind was tossed with extreme trouble then:
Yet choosing rather loss of life than cowardly to fly,
I gave the onset on my foes, and fought it valiantly
From morning until it was night, where I slew many a one,
But what against so great an host could I prevail alone?
There was I killed in the field, yet to my lasting fame:
Far better is to die renownd, than for to live in shame.
Thus in defense of God his laws I shed my vital blood,
Wherein (I trust) I pleased the Lord, and did my country good.
My mangled corpse conveyed was, out of the bloody field,
And to the city of Modin brought his due to earth to yield:
Whereas the same enterred was after the world was made
Four thousand save one hundredth years (in authors as I read:)
And before Christ's birth also about two and threescore,
When I was dead all Israel was in a great uproar.
FINIS.
An Example of this former History.
THe wisdom, wit, nor policy, the courage, strength, nor worthiness,
The might, nor magnanimity, the manly force, nor valiantnes
Of any wight, but little may
Prevail, if God be not his stay.
A vain thing is a horse (god wot) to save man's life, the spear nor shield,
Nor thundering cracks of cannon shot rare or never winnes the field,
Except the Lord God present be,
Who gives every victory.
What does prevail the Elephant, so fierce and terrible in sight,
Or numbers great of men to daunt the enemy through their own might,
Since victory scripture concludes,
Confisteth not in multitudes?
But in the Lord the God of hosts, who made the earth and heaven hie,
And only rules in all costs, and gives every victory:
As by examples permanent
Unto this day is evident.
Senacharib of Assyria King, many thousands in one rout
Of the Assyrians did bring, King Hezekiah to root out:
But for that he blasphemed God,
He sharply felt his heavy rod.
For in one night the Lord did slay an hundredth fourscore five thousand
Of the Assyrians, which then lay of purpose to invade the land,
And drove Senacharib again
To Nineveh where he was slain.
King Pharao with a mighty host the Israelits pursued apace,
But in the seas his life he lost, and all his people in the chase:
Yet Israel through it did pass,
For God the Lord their leader was.
The great Antiochus also (as plain this history does express)
With thousands and with millions mo, this worthy Judas did distress:
And only with six thousand men,
For why, the Lord fought for him then.
Because his only quarrel was in the defense of God his laws,
For which, it after came to pass that God did help them in each cause:
And gave him victory with fame,
Which purchased him a lasting name.
Wherefore you worthy warriors all, no quarrel take but it be right:
Learn warily by others fall, to serve the conqueror of might,
Who does reward most liberally
His soldiers with victory.
Fight valiantly in the defense of his pure laws and ordinance:
The kingdom shall not be long hence, whereto the Lord shall you advance.
For evermore in bliss to dwell,
The ioies whereof no tongue can tell.
FINIS.
MORI QVAM VITAM DEGREE PBRO PR(...) (...)E



THE HISTORY OF THE conquests of the famous conqueror JULIUS CAESAR.
I Am the worthy conqueror, the prince of high renown:
Who first by name of Emperor, did wear the Roman crown:
And Julius Caesar is my name, well known both far and near:
A Painim I am in belief, I reigned in the year
Since the creation of the world, four thousand fully told,
Deducting fourscore years and two by count of writers old,
And forty years before Christ's birth. I am the very same,
Which wan great victories in Spain to my perpetual fame:
And conquered most valiantly the people all and sum
Where I did pass: even unto the sea Oceanum,
And marched into Gallia, which now is called France:
And into Germany also mine henor to advance.
And conquered the Heluetians and Latobrigians,
Tulingians and Rauratians, with warlike Boyans:
And overcame the Marcomans, the strong Seducians,
The Haruds, Tribocks, Vangians and the Sueuians:
The Nemets, Sedunes, Veragrines: the Ambiliats and Venets:
The Diablinters, Digerons: the Tarbels and Naunets:
The Osisenes and Tarrusats: the Vocats and Pretians:
The Flustrats, Garites, and Garumnes, the famous Ansians,
The Sibuzsates and Cocosats, the Aulerks fierce in field:
And did compel Viridouix, their captain stout to yield,
And slew in numbers infinite, the Morines, and Treuires,
Menapians and Lexobians, and burnt their towns with fires.
And strong Induciomarus killed the captain with my hand,
The Belgies, Neruians, Aduaticks, and chased them from their land.
And Acco prince of the Senons, did kill in knightly wise
Condrosies, Segnies, Eburons, which did against me rise.
And overcame the Brittons fierce, to my perpetual fame:
And causd Caslibelan their King pay tribute for the same.
And forced Catiuulcus king, for fear, with poisons force
By drink to work his fatal fine to work his trembling corse:
And vanquished Lytauicus, a valiant man in fight:
The city of Genabum eke did sack through my great might.
The city Valaundunum, and Nouiodunum too
I causd to yield up unto me, my will with them to do:
And battered Auaricum unto the very ground,
And forty thousand slew therein with many a mortal wound.
King Theutomatus I subdued Camalogenus killed
Eporidorix, Cotus, Canarill, took prisoners in the field,
Sedulius prince of Lemouix, I at Alexia slew,
Vergassilaunus took alive, and causd thousands to rue:
Threescore banners and fourteen at one conflict I wan
With twenty thousand prisoners, and many a noble man,
The captain of Bellouocans a man of worthy fame:
In marshall wise I conquered which Corbey had to name:
Drapes, Surus, Suturuate, renowned captains all,
With bloody sword I overcame, and made their men to thrall.
Luctarius a valiant prince, I chaste so narrowly,
That he through famine was constraind for want to food to die.
And versing Etorix also a great and famous king:
His own soldiers, I forced to me as prisoners to bring.
And Pompei proud the Roman prince in many a bloody broile:
I chaste abroad from place to place and gave him many a foil.
And at Pharsalia in fight I killed in one day
Many thousands of his men where he in poor array
Out of the camp conveyed him self in Egypt finally
Through treasons train, his life he lost most miserably.
The King of Egypt I subdued, and in his seat did place
His sister Cleopatra Queen, who in my favor was
And Pharnases of Pontus King I chased from his land,
And Iuba King of Africa I conquered with my hand.
And took strong cities in the same, whose names at large appear,
Where diverse of mine enemies did kill themselves for fear.
The sons of Pompei with their power I overcame in field,
Seeking to venge their fathers death with many a spear and shield.
I came unto the gates of Rome, which were shut me again
And for I should not enter in I made my passage plain:
And battered them unto the ground, and made the towns men thrall,
Who yielded them on trembling knees, to be my liege men all,
Whereas I governed in peace, and ruled as I would,
Of Europe all, as sovereign Lord, as Mars in battle bold.
Having subdued with my might, in Gaul and Germany
Eight hundred stately towns at least, and conquered valiantly
Three hundred several nations, in less than ten years space,
So highly I esteemed was, in fawning fortunes grace.
But lo, whom millions could not match, nor all Europa stain:
Not Mars himself, were he alive the same has envy slain,
Whose secret trains, and hidden traps, unawares prevented me
With sudden death, by foes conspird amid my iolitee.
For as I in the Senate sat, with many other mo,
By Cassius and Brutus hands, there I was murdered tho,
With bodkins, knives, and daggers sharp, when I did deem no ill
They fell upon me suddenly, and thus they did me kill,
My carcass after Painims rites, in Rome enterred was:
Lo, thus the glory of the world does were away, and pass.
FINIS.
An Example of this former History.
THe hautie and ambitious mind desires daily to aspire:
Vain glory does his eyes so blind, and set his heart on such a fire,
Till envy come and pluck him down, and rifle him of his renown.
As by example may appear of this most puissant conqueror,
Who for his conquests far and near was in his days the only flower:
Yet such was his ambition, to clime up to promotion.
That he envied at other men, who were in rule and dignity:
Seeking to suppress them then, for fear of coequalitie.
For hautinesse does ever hate, the fellowship of any mate.
And only this procured the iar of mortal war, and deadly strife
Between Pompeius and Caesar, which was the loss of many a life.
And brought to ruin utterly, the state of the whole monarchy.
For Pompei died most miserably, as you have heard declared before:
Caesar for all his victory through envy also was forlore.
The measure he to others gave, the same did shape his fatal grave.
Thus may you see where envy is what mortal plagues therewith ensue:
How fickle is the vading bliss of envious men appears true.
And how unhappy is the land, where envy has the upper hand.
Through envy Herod long ago did many a harmless infant kill.
Envy procured Saul also to seek king David for to spill.
Through envy eeke was Abel slain, and murdered by wicked Caine.
Through envy Christ our savior accused was, and put to death.
Through envy Satan did procure, to mortal man the loss of breath.
What plague on earth is greater then, where envy reigns amongst men.
FINIS.
HONOR MORI QVAM VITAM DEFERE PBRO PRESTAT



THE HISTORY OF THE conquests of the noble conqueror ARTHVR.
OF Brutus blood in Britain borne I Arthur am by name:
Through christendom and heathenes well known is my fame.
In Jesus Christ I do believe, I am a Christian borne:
The father, son, and holy ghost, one God, I do adorn.
In the four hundredth ninety year over Britain I did reign,
After Christ my saviors birth, what time I did maintain
The fellowship of the table round, so famous in those days,
Whereat a hundredth noble knights and fifty sat always:
Who for their fame in martial feats (as yet books do record)
Amongst all kind of nations were feared through the world.
In the castle of Tintagill King Vter me begat
On Igrayne the beautiful, a Lady of high estate.
And when I was fifteen years old, then was I crowned King,
All Britain being in uproar I did to quiet bring,
And drove the Saxons from the realm, who did usurp the land,
And conquered through manly mart all Scotland with my hand.
The Orcades eke I overcame, and Islands all about,
Which on the Ocean seas do lie, with many nations stout:
Ireland, Norway, and Denmark, these countries wan I all:
Gutland, and Island also, and made their Kings my thrall.
King Bladulfe, and King Collegrine, both two I slew in fight:
And forced Cheldrike of Almayne King to take his death by flight:
And Lot the King of Orkeney I brought to deep distress,
With many a valiant knight with him, which came me to suppress.
I conquered all Gallia, which now is called France,
And slew the hardy Froll in field my honor to advance.
The ouglie Giant Dinabus so horrible to view,
Which in Saint Bernards mount did lie, through force of arms I slew.
And Lucius the Emperor great of Rome, I brought to wrack,
With thousands mo, whom fear of death had forced to turn their back
Five Kings of Painims I did kill amid that bloody strife,
Beside the Emperor himself, who also lost his life:
Whose carcass I did send to Rome, clad poorly in a beer,
And after I did pass Mount loy: the next approaching year
I came to Rome, where I was met right as a conqueror,
By all the Senate solemnlie, and crowned Emperor.
One winter there I made abode, then word to me was brought,
How Mordred had usurped the crown, what treason he had wrought
At home in Britain with my Queen, wherefore, I came with speed
To Britain back with all my power, to quite that traitorous deed:
And as at Sandwich I did land, there Mordred me withstood,
Yet landed I at length, but with effusion of much blood:
For there my nephew Gawin died, being wounded on that sore,
Which Lancelot du lake in fight had given him before.
Thence chased I Mordred away, he fled to London right:
From London to Winchester: thence, to Cornewal took his flight.
And still I did pursue with speed, till at the last we met,
Where by accord the day of fight appointed was, and set
Between us both, and at the time we encountered in the field
With many a noble knight to try it out, with spear and shield:
Where we did fight so mortallie of life each to deprive,
That of an hundredth thousand men scarce one was left on live.
There all the traitors men were slain, not one escapt away,
There died all my valiant knights (alas the doleful day:)
There all the noble chivalry of Britain took their end:
See how uncertain is their state, which do on fate depend.
There slew I Mordred with my hands, the causer of this strife,
And there my self receiud the wound which took away my life:
But yet I went from thence alive to be cured again,
To the vale of Auillion (as Chronicles write plain.)
And afterward was never seen, nor what became of met
Was never known unto this day, for any certaintee.
I reigned two and twenty years in honor and much fame,
And thus by death am suddenly deprived of the same.
FINIS.
An Example of this former History.
THe liking of unlawful lust, whereto this worthy was inclind,
Deprived him by judgment just, from life and kingdom (as I find)
And threw him down most suddenly, amid his fame and victory.
Whereby Gods plague and punishment upon adulterers is seen,
Whom suddenly he does prevent with sharp correction in his teene:
The proof thereof no less does tell, of his incest, being wayed well.
For Mordred his fatal fo, he did beget incestuously,
Unto his utter overthrow, on his own sister wickedly:
And thus the father was forlorn, through his sons force in incest borne.
A good example to bewray the due reward of every vice,
Thy sins (the scriptures plainly say) shall thee condemn before thine eyes:
And likewise he the death shall die, who does commit adultery.
Was not the world once overflowed for this offense of lavish lust?
Sodom and Gomor overthrown with fire and brimstone unto dust?
Was not Sichem through lust destroide, and all his city sore annoide?
Died not Ammon through his incest? and was not Absalon eke spilt
Through lechery, (as is expressed?) and died not Abner through this gilt?
And what incestuous seed by Lot, upon his daughters was begot?
Lewd lust did Hollofernes kill, through lust the Judges lost their life,
Because they might not have their will accomplished on Ioakims wife:
What plagues did fall on Benjamin, only through lust that filthy sin?
Thus may you see, of lechery the punishment and due reward,
Then fly far from such misery, and thereunto take no regard:
Gods plague is sore if he begin, and death is the reward of sin.
FINIS.
SPLINDIDA CRVDELEM POST MORTEM FAMA MANEBIT



THE HISTORY OF THE conquests of the mighty conqueror CHARLES the great.
I Am the Emperor Charlemaine, surnamed Charles the great.
I reigned six and forty years as King in royal seat.
Both King and Emperor also of kingdoms many one:
I am a Christian, and believe in Jesus Christ alone.
The Father and the holy Ghost, one God in Trinity,
Which made both heaven and the earth, and lives eternally.
My fathers name Pipinus was, in Inglehem also,
In the county of Palatine my mother bare me tho,
But little from the city Meutz, My fame and worthiness
Is known well through Christendom, and also heathenesse.
I warred against the Sarracens in Gascoine many a day,
And caused them to yield and turn unto the Christian lay.
The Saxons fierce I did pursue for thirty winters space,
And at the last constrained them on knees to sue for grace:
And to my Empire to obey, and christian faith to take,
And eke their Painims false belief, for ever to forsake.
King Desiderius I subdued, with many a Lumbard mo,
As he was marching toward Rome, to work Italians woe,
And saved Rome and Italy, from danger of the fire:
Whose spoil, this king of Lumbards did malitiouslie conspire.
And laid him, his children, and his wife in prison strong,
At Liege the city great, whereas they all remained long.
I took all Lumbardie by force with famous victoree,
And placed officers therein to govern under me.
Tassilo, Duke of Baiarland, I conquered in fight,
His men of wars I overthrew: his son (a noble knight)
Renowned through his manly acts, and feats of chivalry,
I overcame with mine own hands in battle valiantly.
The bishop Leo I restord unto the dignitee,
Whom Romans had exiled Rome, when he fled unto me.
All Italy I brought perforce to my obeisiance,
Where I slew many doughtie knights, with dent of deadly lance.
Eight years I warred in Hungary against those nations stout,
And ceased not till finally I rooted them all out.
From whence I brought abundance great of gold and silver bright:
And therewith highly did advance and prefer many a knight,
Lecho king of Behemie, I vanquished in field
Both he, and all his subjects did to my subjection yield.
All France I had under my power, all Germany was mine:
And all the countries that doelie upon the river Rhyne.
In France I held long wars and great against four kings of fame,
Who were the Duke of Dordons sons, at last I did them tame.
In Rome I was crowned Emperor, whereby the monarchy
Translated was from Rome unto my country Germany.
I was both King and Emperor of all the west empire,
And brought the same to quiet state, what should I more desire?
All the kings through Christendom I might command at will:
It lay in me as sovereign Lord to pardon or to spill.
When I had thus triumphantly obtained what I would:
I was content to live at rest, because I waxed old.
And then I led in quietness the last part of my life,
Redressing wrong, maintaining peace, suppressing every strife.
In which time I did build and found three Universities
Of fame, in Italy and France, whose several names be these:
Bononie and Padua, which lie in Italy,
And Paris the chief town of France, these founded were by me.
In fine as every mortal wight to death must yield his due,
At Aken so I changed life, I could it not eschew.
When I had lived seventeen years and two accounted just:
My body was enterd in earth, where it consumes to dust:
In the year after Christ his birth eight hundred and mo
By true account of authors old, full seventy and two.
FINIS.
An Example of this former History.
THe bliss and long felicity, which here this worthy did enioie
Through palm of famous victory raining most like a princely boy,
Foresheweth unto every wight, the virtues of this noble knight.
The zeal he bare to learnings lore, his life also declares the same,
And God advanced him therefore, with much increase of daily fame,
And held him up in his renown, that no foes forse could pluck him down
For God will always his defend, and them direct in every cause:
He gives long life and happy end to such as do observe his laws:
In whom he does good works begin, he will continue them therein.
FINIS.
QVI FAMAM QVERIT VIGILET (...) IVVENILIBVS ANNIS



THE HISTORY OF THE conquests of the puissant conqueror GVY.
I Am Guy the Barron bold, of deed the doughtiest knight
That in my days in England was, with shield or spear in fight.
An English man I am by birth, in faith a Christian true:
The wicked laws of Infidels I utterly eschew.
Nine hundredth twenty years and one after Christ his birth,
When King Athelstone ware the crown, I lived upon earth.
Sometime I was of Warwick Earl, and (for to say the truth)
A Ladies love did me constrain to travel in my youth
To win me fame in feats of arms, in strange and sundry lands,
Where I achieved for her sake great conquests with my hands.
First I said to Normandy, and there I wan in fight
The Emperors daughter of Almaine from many a worthy knight.
Also in Lumbardie my self, with three knights and no more,
Slew sixteen Lumbards being ambusht to murder me before,
Through false Duke Ottons treachery, who bare me mortal hate,
Cause of the wound I gave to him in Normandy of late.
Then passed I the seas to Greece, to help the Emperor right
Against the mighty Souldans host of Persia to fight:
Where I did kill of Sarracens and Painims many a man,
And slew the Souldans cousin eke, who had to name Coldran.
And Eskeldart a famous knight to death I did pursew:
And Elman King of Tire also, most horrible to view.
I went unto the Souldans host, upon embassage sent,
And brought his head away with me, having killed him in his tent.
There was a Dragon in that land, which also I did slay,
As he a Lion did pursue most fiercely by the way.
To Almaine thence I did retire, and thence to Loraine right,
Where I the Duke of Painie killed, his treason to requight.
Then into England I did sail to wed Phelis the bright,
For love of whom I traveled so far, to try my might.
And when I had espoused her, I staide but forty days,
Until I left the Lady fair, and went from her my ways,
Unto the seas in pilgrim sort my voyage for to take,
Even unto the holy land for Jesus Christ his sake.
Where I Earl Jonas did redeem, and all his sons fifteen:
Who with the cruel Sarisins in prison long had been.
I slew the Giant Amerant, in battle hand to hand:
And doughtie Barnard killed eke, and Duke of Painie land.
And since came into England, and there with Colbrand fought:
An ugly Giant whom the Danes, had for their champion sought,
And overcame him in the field, and sieve him valiantly:
And thereby did release the land from tribute utterly.
And afterward did offer up the weapon solemnlie
In Winchester, wherewith I fought in sight of many an eye.
In Windsor forest I did kill a Bore of passing strength,
Whose like in England never was for highness, breadth, and length.
Some of his bones in Warwick yet, within the castle lie:
One of his shields unto this day does hang in Couentrie.
I slew also in Dunsmore heath a monsterous wild beast,
Called the Dun cow of Dunsmore, which many men oppressed:
Her bones also in Warwick lie yet, for a monument,
Which unto every looker on a wonder may present.
And in Northumberland I did a Dragon fell destroy,
Which did both men and beasts oppress and country sore annoie.
And then to Warwick came again, but there I was not known:
Wherefore I led an Hermits life, a mile out of the town.
Where with my hands I hewed a house, out of a rock of stone,
And lived as a Palmer poor within that cave alone:
And daily came to seek my food unto my castle gate,
Not known of my loving wife, which mourned for her mate,
Till at the last I fell sore sick, and found that I must die,
I sent to her a ring, by which she knew me presently:
And so repairing to the cave, before I gave the ghost,
She closed up my dieng eyes, whom once I loved most.
Thus dreadful death did me arrest, and laid my corpse in grave,
Thus as a Pilgrim died I, and all my soul to save.
My body in Warwick lies yet, though now consumed to mould:
My stature there engrand in stone this day you may behold.
FINIS.
An Example of this former History.
THe affection of impatient love procurd this knight to take
His manly forse, and might to prove, in many a strange and foreign land:
Whereby it came to pass that he, advanced was exceedingly.
For through his warlike feats of fame, and marshall magnanimity,
He wan to wife a passing dame, being borne of high nobility.
With Earledoms two which by her right, descended to this noble knight.
But see in him example rare, when he the lady wedded had:
With her the story does declare, but forty days his life he lad,
Till leaving all in poor araie, on pilgrimage he took the way
Toward Jerusalem to obtain remission for his sinful life,
Because he had so many slain, for love of her which was his wife,
And not for Jesus Christ his sake, for which he thought amends to make.
With punishing his body so, as then it was the wonted use,
Which of repentance plain does sho a token, though through great abuse,
For want of knowledge of the truth, of holy scriptures: the more ruth.
And afterward at his return, all worldly pleasures he defied,
In poverty he did bemourne his youthful days, and so he died:
All these declare a contrite heart, which God accepted in good part.
Finis huius libri.

