THE Life and Death of william Long beard, the most famous and witty English
Traitor, borne in the City of London.

Accompanied with many other most pleasant and pretty histories, By T. L. of
Lincolns Inn, Gent.



Printed at London by Rychard Yardley and Peter Short, dwelling on Breadstreat
hill, at the Sign of the Star. 1593.

THE LIFE AND death of William Long beard.
How Willyam Long beard betrayed his elder brother unto his death, of his
falling in acquaintance with the Abbot of Cadonence in Normandy and how
cunningly and coulourably they got authority from the King to accomplish their
ambitious pretenses.
WHilst all the world was in uproar, and schisms reigned in the Church, when
God by prodigious signs, threatened pestilent plagues: at such time as two
suns appeered in our Horizon in England, and three Moons were discovered in
the West in Italy, William with the long beard was borne in the famous City
of London, of greater mind then of high parentage, a graft of mighty hope at
the first, though (as it afterward proved) his parents spent too much hope on
so little virtue. This free Citizen borne, tenderly fostered in his infancy,
was afterward trained up in good letters, wherein he profited so suddenly,
that most men wondered at his capacity, and the wisest were afraid of the
conclusion: And for that the age wherein he was bread (being the third year
of Henry the Second) was full of troubles, this young man's rare gifts were
raked up in the embers, little regarded because not yet ripened: but at last as
years increased the mind ordained for mighty things began to mount, the
rather because ambition sealed his eyes, which made him with the Dove soar so
hie, till his own cunning and labor made him be ouerturned: for when he
perceived his fathers foot already prepared for the grave, his mother seized
by age, and more besotted with affection, himself at man's estate and without
maintenance, he thus began the first fruits of his impiety, the sequel
whereof exceeds all conceit, and testifies his deuilish and damnable nature.
He had a brother elder than himself in years, but yoonger in policy, who
(having by his own frugalitie gotten great wealth) was called to be a Burgess
of the city: a man beloved of all men for his upright dealing, and lamented
of al men for his untimely death. For William little regarding the benefits
he had received of him in his youth, the brotherly kindness, the bountiful
courtesies, sought all means possible to betray him, who had trained him up, to
suck his heart blood, who had sought his hearts rest, and to that intent seeing
the opportunity fitted him, in the reign of Richard the first, that noble
Prince of famous memory, he suborned certain lewd and smister confederates of
his to accuse him of Treason: for which cause poor innocent man being
suddenly apprehended, his goods were confi^cate, his body imprisoned, his wife
and children left succourlesse, whilst wicked William being both complotter,
informer, and witness, wrought so cunningly with the kings council that the
goods were his, which his brother with his long labor had gotten, and the
poor innocent man brought out before the Judges with weeping eyes, beheld his
yoonger brother both reuelling in his riches, and reiocing at his ruin. Many
were his obtestations before God, and protestations to the Judges, many his
exhortations to his brother, and detestations of his perjury. But William
whose heart was the very harbor of all impiety, ceased not in his own person
to solicit, and by his companions to incense the Judges in such sort, that his
brother was at last by them condemned and adjudged to death, as some Writers
suppose for coining. And being led forth to his execution like an harmless
innocent, the people mustering about the place, the curssed brother the
occasion and compactor of his confusion accompany him, with these or such like
words he finished his life. Thou God that know the cause of my untimely
death, can in iu^ice punish my unjust accusers, mean while take mercy on my
poor soul, who am forsaken of my private friends, be thou a safeguard unto
me, who am left without succors, and help the desolate widow with her
distressed children: This said, after some private conference by permission,
between his brother and him, he suffered torment.

But William having gotten wealth began to take upon him state, and
understanding his father and mother through hearty grief were in their
extreme age committed to the grave, he seized on their goods, carrieng such a
countenance in London that all men wondered at him: In wit he was pregnant; in
public affairs pollitike; in reuenges constant, in speeches affable, in
countenance grave, in apparel gorgeous, yea so cunning was he to insinuate
himself among the Commons, that as the report went, he had more Prentises
clubs at his command, then the best Courtier had servants to attend him.

And as the custom is whilst thus he behaved himself, it fortuned that he
fell in company and conference with the Abbot of Cadonence in Normandy, a man
as high minded as himself, and more subtle than Sinon, by whose advise and
directions he grew so craftily conceited, that under a holy pretert he
wrought more mischief, than either the Council of England could for a long
time remedy, or by industry reuerse, and thus it fortuned. After that the
noble and warlike Richard the first of that name, had to his immortal glory
recovered his rights in France, established peace with the French king, and by
the persuasions of his mother Dame Elianor, reconciled his brother John, who
had before that time been at deadly ^d with him. It plesed his Majesty,
partly for his own recreation sake, partly to remedy the discontents of his
subjects, to go on Progress in the eight year of his reign, and in the
year of our Lord 1197. at which time the Abbot of Cadonence and William
watching an occasion and opportunity, so cunningly wrought she matter, that
they had audience at his Majesty's hands, and attained under the broad seal
the whole sum of their requests. The Abbot colored his stratagem under the
coppie of conscience: assuring the king that the corruption of his officers
were the chiefest grounds of public contention, praieng him in the bounty of
an heroic and princely potentate, to take some order for she correction of
them, least at the last it should turn to his own confusion.

His majesty that had ever regard of the poor, with gracious good words
thanked him for his good will, giving him warrant and authority to redress
those inconveniences, and promising him great promotions, if he took any
profit by his policy. William now that has the second subtlety to enact,
suited his looks in all sobriety, and stroaking his long beard which he
curiously fostered even from the beginning, told the king of the insolence
and outrage of rich men who spared their own and pilled the poor, robbed Irus
and clawed Midas: beseeching in the commons behalf, a remedy for this
inconvenience: whereunto the king easily condiscended, so that he likewise was
authorized to redress such enormities, and both he and his fellow Abbot, were
with many princely favors dismissed.

Mounted thus upon the wheel of Fortune, which every way sheweeth her self
as fickle as she is favorable, as full of gall as she has honey, they both of
them depart for London, carrieng so high countenances as every one were amazed
at their manners. My lord Abbot first suited in his Pontificallbus called forth
diverse officers, purposing to examine their accounts, taunting them with
untoward languages, and accompanieng threats with imprisonment. But as the
Giants that threatened the heavens were over, thrown in their most hautinesse,
and as Phaeton usurping his fathers seat was confounded for his ambitious pride
by untimely death, so the Abbot of Cadonence, when he thought to cauell at all
accounts, was called to account himself, before she Tribunal justice seat of
God, and died in midest of his iollitie. But William who towred with the
Phaenix to burn in the sun, and adventured to cross the troblesome seas of
this world to perish with overmuch wrestling in the same, now began his pageant
exhorting and stirringe the commons to love and embrace liberty, to fight and
labor for freedom, briefly to detest and blame the excess and outrage of
rich men, who as he told them reaped the sweet whilst they poor souls
sweat for it. Hereunto wrested he many stories of antiquity: First the
Laconian state, next the popular government of Athens, wherein peace never
flourished better said he, than when the Commons had freedom of speech. With
these and such like honey speech, he so animated the multitude, that like a
second Hercules he drew them by the ears through the honey of his eloquence.
And to his words he annexed action, undertaking many poor men's causes, who
were ouerborne by the rich, handeling his matters with such policy, as that
he was held for a second God among the poor, and for a long time esteemed for
a good subject by the Prince. Yet notwithstanding this, the mighty maligned
him greatly, for that he had informed the king that by their means his
Majesty lost many forfeits and ^scheats which were due unto him: and for that
his detested subtleties may be more apparent, where through he cloked his
succeeding treacheries, I have thought good to set down some one of them,
which may give a taste to those tragike miseries which shall ensue.

How William with the long beard handled the cause of Peter Nowlay a Cobbler,
who was iniuried by Robert Besant, sometime Bailife of London.
DUring the time that William long beard flourished after this manner in all
pomp and pleasure, attended daily and hourelie by hole troops of Citizens, it
fortuned that one Peter Nowlay a cobbler, a man of little capacity lived in
London, who having gotten up by his own handie labor and endeavor, the
sum of forty marks, and not knowing the means how to employ the same to his
best commodity, solicited one Robert Besaunt, sometimes Baylife of London, to
take the same money into his hands and to employ it to some good use, to the
end that after his decease, his poor infants which were twoe in number might
have some succor and maintenance.

This money Robert Besaunt accepted, having the use thereof for the space of
ten years, accustoming poor Peter as these great men are wont to do, to a
Sundaies dinner, and sweet words (which in these our days is the very poison
of this world, and in that time was no small pestilence) At last, pleased God
to call the Cobbler to his mercy, where through his poor wife lived
distressed, his children complain their misery, and all his neighbors
considering the honesty of the man in his life, were compassionate, and
pitied his Orphans after his death. The poor mother seeing her necessities
increase, and her ability quite overthrown, separated apart from all
company, began to weep very tenderly, recommending her poor babes to his
mercy, who had no doubt lent them her to a better end than famishment.

Ahlas (said she) my God, if the least Sparrow is not vncared for by thee, what
lets me to trust my childrens health unto thee, who having bestowed breath
upon them, may likewise in favor bestow bread upon them. Thou see Lord
their friend is taken from them, and the mothers neastlings without thy help
must become staruelings: Woe is me; would God I had forgon my life, or
forgotten love: o^ would my hands were as plentiful, as my heart is
pitiful. Ah Pelican, I must imitate thee, and pierce mine own breast to the
end I may foster my babes, otherwise the help is vain which hope yields,
since charity is cold which should feed hope. Woe is me, where should I begin
to mourn, that have no end of moan. Shall I lament my marriage: no, the
heavens ordained it: shall I complain of Fortune? no: for then I suppose an
enemy where there is none: shall I blame my fruitfulnes? how vain were that?
since it is a felicity to enjoy babes. What then shall I do? truly put my
whole trust and confidence in Gods mercy, who being Lord of all plenty can
best of all relieve necessities. Scarsly bad she ended these words, when as her
young ones, the one embracing her neck cried for meat, the other kissing her
hands moorninglie bewraied his wants: whilst she like Mirrha having tears to
bewail them, no tresure to relieve them, sung this woeful Lullabie unto them,
whilst the music of her voice enforced them to listen her.

Lullabie,
Ah little Laddes
Give ceaselesse sorrow end with lullabie,
Suck up my tears
That stream from out the fountains of mine eye,
Feed, feed on me
whom no good hope or Fortune glads,
Oh set me free
From those incessant and pursuing fears
which waken up my woes and kill my pleasure.
Lullabie,
Weep, weep no more
But let me weep, and weeping weep life hence,
That whilst you want,
I may not see false Fortunes proud pretense.
When I am dead
My God perhaps will send you store.
Oh smile in need,
Poor hungry babes let smiles be nothing scant
I tears, you smiles; both have no better treasure,
To bring these woes exceeding mean or measure
To Lullabie.
Noe sooner had she finished her song but Robert Besaunt entered the house, who
though altogether given over to covetousness, yet beholding the woeful estate
of the poor wife and children, he comforted them the best he might, sending
for some little sustenance to yield her and her little ones some succor, and
after some conference about her husbands state, and his manner of death, he
desired colourablie to see her writings, to the end he might couenablie
conuaie out of her hands the bill of forty marks, which he had past unto Peter
her husband in his time. The silly soul supposing his alms deeds was
vnattended by treachery, drew out of an old till, certain briefes which she
had, using these or such like terms. Master Besaunt (says she) your worship
as I remember, ought to be a patron of these poor infantes: for I have
oftentimes heard my husband say (when I had a motherlie care what should
become of my children) that he had provided for them, charging me to remember
that till ever when I needed, and to use you as a father for these infants,
whose honesty as he swear, he would build his soul upon: for which cause
(giving him the writings) I beseech your Worcester. quoth she, to pervse all his
secrets, and to stand my good friend in this my miserable widdowhood. Master
Besaunt touched to the quick, changed color very often, and receiving them
at her hands with a quiuering fear (proceeding by reason of his earnest
combat between conscience and covetousness) he at last, after long perusing,
found his own bill, which he carelessie tearing, told her that all of it was
but wast paper, and thereupon blushinglie departed, giving her but cold
comfort for her great hope.

The good woman animated by some divine power, and ^spieng the scales of his
shame shadowed in his blushing brows, took hold of his gown sleeue, praieng
him to stay a little while, and not to leave her so suddenly: for (said she)
good sir, if you thus leave us, you shall prove that you little love us:
besides, your have makes me to misdoubt your honesty (pardon good sir I pray
you if I mistake) for thus to wreak your self on paper, and to show by your
suspectful looks, your apparent misdoubts, makes me imagine you have deceived
my Peter's hope, besides these papers which you have torn, may perhaps be some
testimonies, which I will gather as she relikes of your rage (and therewithal
she stooped and took them up) But above all good master Besaunt remember God,
quoth she, and if there be ought that concerns these little ones in your
conscience, cloak not in that behalf, for God who gave them me, will not
suffer their innocence to be vnreue^ged.

Master Besaunt sore incensed with these words, and suspicious least his
council should be disclosed, by the broken and scattered papers: at first by
smooth speeches, began to persuade her, to restore him them; but when reason
and entreaty inioyed no place (for the more he moved her, the more she
suspected) he began to use violence. When as she poor children seeing their
mother injured beyond measure, cried for help for her, whom motherlie care had
animated already, even to the trial of death, rather than to leave her papers.

The noise in the house, and the cry of the children, called in the neighbors,
who seeing Robert Besaunt, a man of such reputation as he was held: not daring
to enforce, began to entreat his forbearance: who dreading his own discredit
beyond measure, left her for that time, puffing, sweating, and swearing, that
he would be revenged on her, who had in this sort wrought his discontent: to
be short, he never desisted, till she were imprisoned, vowing never to grant
her liberty, till such time as she restored to him the torn writings.

The miserable Widdowe in this peck of troubles, gathering a very confident
boldness unto her, denied the restitution. And finally, after the council of
some poor Citizens, put up a supplication or a supplantation (as the
sillier sort of people called it) unto William with the long beard, presenting
him likewise with the broken and torn p^ces of paper, never ceasing in most
humble and pitiful manner, to entreat a merciful and tender compassion,
toward the relief of her self and her poor children. William that
pretermitted no occasion whereby he might insinuate himself amongst the
poorer sort, and win the credit of a good Iusticer at his princes hands,
began to examine every circumstance, and to leave no mean unsought, where by
he might get himself glory, and do the poor widdowe good.

First therefore, he joined the papers, and conferred the manner of the injury
with the other circumstances, and at last he evidently found, and therewithal
certified others, that these torn papers, was the bill of debt for forty
marks. Finally, comparing the estate of the poor man with that of Besaunts,
the time the money had been in the defendants hands, and the corrupt intention
of the rich man, who by renting the bill, thought to race out the remembrance
of his due debt, he called him before him, charging the official to bring the
widow and her children before him in open sessions: where after long debating,
and trouble on both sides, Besaunt standing on his credit, the widow on her
innocence: William willing to catch the cat with his own clawe, began thus.
Master Besaunt, you are called into justice, not that we suspect your
honesty, or detract from your estimate, but for this cause are you called:
that if you will be deposed, that all allegations which may be alleged against
you by this widow are false, you may see her punished, and justice executed.
Besaunt little suspecting the snare that was laid, and the subtlety intended,
began with huge oaths to protest, that he neither stood any way indebted to
the poor Coblerlatelie deceased: neither was in any sort liable to the false
suggestions of the widdowe. William perceiving evidently she ungodly intent
of the man to defraud, and how gracious a deed he should do, to speak in the
innocents defense: First commanded Besaunts Oath to be taken, and after that
rowsing himself in a maiesticall manner, he began thus.

I see well my countrymen, that justice had need of a patron, when those that
should maintain her, seek to maime her: Ah what a world live we in, when
trust shall be betrayed: when simplicity, shall be undermined with subtletie:
and poverty ouertopped by power. Behold says he, my contreymen (and
therewithal he caused the two children to be placed by him) two harmless
infants: for whom the poor father labored in his life time, both left to
beg after his death. Alas that corruption should blind judgment so far that
where we ought in charity to succor these, men make no conscience to supplant
them. The Cedar though a tall tree, lets the little shrub prosper under him:
the Eglantine flourishes by the Oak: the Gold^nch feeds by the Griffin: but
the proverb is true among us nowadaies. Homo homini Demon.
We live as we should know no lack, we flourishe as if we fear no fall, we
purchase as if life could not perish: to win the world we make shipwreck of
our souls: and in such a world where corruptions are so rife, justice must
not sleep: for if it should, the weak should to the walls, and the penny
father by his power, should ouerpresse the penilesse in their pouerties. Now
therefore countrymen give ear, and hea ring, pity: and pittieng, patronize
these poor souls. This Besaunt wrongeth them, making his credit the
countenance of his craft, and his goods the color of his ungodliness: behold
his hand writing, wherein he thinking to extinguish the memory of his debt,
has renewed the means of his own destruction, (which said, he publikelie
showed the papers) and after that turning him to M. Besaunt, he expostulated
thus; Well sir, since your corruption is found out, and your ungodly oaths
have doubled your offense, by that authority which I have received from his
majesty: I condemn you to pay the sum of forty marks with the use thereof,
for ten years, unto this widow and her children: next, for your perjury,
wherein you have offended God especially, and next your country: I adiudge
you to pay, in way of a fine to his Majesty, two hundredth pounds sterling:
aduising you hereafter, to use your conscience more vprightlie, and to deal by
the poorer sort more justly.

Besaunt who highly stood on his reputation, was so amazed at his so sudden
conviction before the assembly of the city, that he knew not what to say: his
own hand he could not denle, and if he should, there were some in the
company well acquainted therewith. To be adjudged thus of by his inferior (as
he thought) it was no small disgrace: for which cause, smothering under fair
looks his false heart, he appeled to the king and his Council: assuring
William that he would not be discredited in that sort, and that it should cost
him a thousand pounds, but he would be revenged. With these and such like
speeches, the court brake up, the widow and the children were dismissed with
gifts, and William with a thousand Citizens at his tail, was with great
triumph conuaied to his lodging. But Besaunt for all his braues, was
committed, and enforced to pay the penalty, yea so did William work with the
king and his council, as had not this corrupt merchant with great sommes got
himself free, no doubt he had been brought within the compass of a Praemunire,
such subtle suggestions had William practiced against him.

How William with the long beard behaved himself toward the Courtiers, and
of his love to his fair Lemman Maudeline.
WIlliam (having by this means insinuated himself into the favor of the king,
and by that reason brought the citizens in fear of him) like the untoward
child, who having an inche, steals an elle: began to presume above the
latchet (as the proverb is) setting light by all men, animating the baser sort
against the better: so that the Nobility put up much injury at his hands, the
clergy were badlie used by him, and the officers of the city highly
offended. The earl of Durham then Chancellor and bishop, taking the part of a
chapleine of his, who was iniuried by a mean and mechanical townesman, was
braued by him in Cheap side, beaten of his horse, and had not the Bailifes of
the city rescued him, the common speeches went, he should never have courted
it more. A gentleman in court at another time, vpbraiding William of his base
estate and birth, told him that the worst hair in his beard, was a better
gentleman than he was: for which cause William mightily agreeued, and
watching opportunity of revenge, at last incountred him brave lie, mounted on
his foot cloth in Friday street, where taking him forceably from his horse, he
carried him into a Barbers shop, and caused both his beard and head to be
shaued close, pleasantly giving at him in this sort.

Gallant, now have I cut of the whole train of of the best gentlemen, you
durst compare with me the last day, and if hereafter you bridle not your
tongue, (as base a Gentleman as you make me, I Will have you by the ears. The king
informed hereof, grew highly offended, but William who wanted neither money,
friends, nor eloquence, so ordered the matter, as his maligners might bark,
but not bite him. But for that all his mind was planted on ambition, and his
greatest fear was, least by over forward thrusting himself into state, his
cloaked aspiring should be discovered, he began for a while to leave the
court, to intend only the causes of the poor, and complot those means,
whereby laboring for mightines without suspect, he might attain the same
without counterchecke: and first to make show how much his mind was altered
from high climing, he craftily pretended a new conceited love, and but
pretending it at first, at last was enforced to practice it, and thus it fell
out.

An honest and well disposed Merchant of London, had by his wife a fair and
amiable young maiden to his daughter, being the only hope of his age, and the
fruit of his courage: This lovely Mawdelin (as the lesser stars are in
respect of the sun, or Mercury in regard of the Orb of Venus) amongst our
London damsels, was the A perse for beauty, ^d the parragon of perfections,
her looks full of quickening purity, were able to animate love in Marbel,
nature could do no more but wonder at her own handiworke; and art had naught
but shadows, in respect of such a substance. Al eyes that beheld her wondered,
all pens that praised her were quickened by her excellence. To be short, her
least worth was of so great consequence, as the best writer might be abashed,
to conceit or imagine them: with this fair damsel William Long beard
traffiqued his fancies, summoning her yielding affections, with so many
earnest suits and services, that he at last conquered that fort, wherein fancy
himself took delight to tyranize: and as the Iet draws Amber, the Load
stone the Steel of the compass, so her beauty assaulted his senses, that all
of them had no power of their offices, but were fatallie assigned to subscibe
to her sorceries, And where as authority and countenance are wrested, the
bulwark of chastity (though otherwise impregnable) is oftentimes impugned,
and not only assaulted, but at last subdued: William by his friends and
followers so wrought, that what by his friends and fair words, he won her for
his Lemmon, sparing no cost to trick her out in bravery, to the end he might
by that means, give a foil and glass to her beawtie. This Maudelin thus
compassed, her paramour began to pranke it in the brauest fashion, wresting his
wits to make an idol of her worth: whose amorous passions, since they are of
some regard, I have here set down for the courtliest care to censure of.

Amidst the maze of discontented mind,
The royal trophey of ioy-breeding love,
A happy hold and resting place did find,
Within that breast which erst earthes hell did prove.
Since when my long-enfeebled eyes have reard,
Their drooping sight to gaze upon the sun,
Since when my thoughts in written lines appeard,
Rejoicing at that Palm my faith had wunne.
Ennobled thus, by that thrice-nobled passion,
Which has the power all worldly cares to banish,
I fly sweet-seeming leures of false occasion,
And let al thoughts but loue-sweet vade and vanish.
The fruits I reap in spite of Fortune froward,
Makes me suppose no torment too untoward.
Another he made upon this occasion. Maudelin his mistress had a fair Jewel,
wherein the twoe Cupids of Anacreon were painted, wrestling the one with the
other, with this Motto Pro palma, for which cause he wrote this sonnet, and
presented her therewith.

Ye braine-begotten dieties agree you,
Nursed by transparant crystal of chaste eyes,
Least she that gave you life on sudden see you,
And frowning kill you both who causde you rise.
From her you came young Cupids from no other,
And but for her if envious you shall wrestle,
I fear you both will lose a lovely mother,
Her brow your bower, her bosom is your castle.
There gree you both, there both together go you,
And suck the April riches of her breast,
Then I who long have served and love to show you
How much I love the bosom where you rest.
Will come and kiss and bless you little wantons,
And feed you kindly wantons if you want once.
Another in respect of the occasion, I could not find in my heart to forget, for
being at supper once in her company, where were many that discoursed of love,
showing all the idolatry of their pens, in exemplifieng that unchaste deity,
he at last when the table was taken up, remembering him of a sonnet in an
ancient French Poet, on sudden wrote this imitation.

As soon as thou do see the Winter clad in cold,
Within September on the Eaues in sundry forms to fold,
Sweet Swallow far thou fliest till to our native clime,
In pleasant April Phoebus rays return the sweeter time.
But Love no day forsakes the place whereas I rest,
But every hour lives in mine eyes and in my heart does nest.
Each minute I am thrall and in my wounded heart,
He builds his neast, he lays his eggs, and thence will never part
Already one has wings, soft down the other clads,
This breaks the skin, this newly flegd about my bosom gads.
The one has broke the shel, the other soars on hie,
This newly laid, that quickly dead, before the dam come nie.
Both day and night I hear the small ones how they cry,
Calling for food who by the great are fed for fear they die.
All wax and grow to proof and every year do lay
A second neast, and sit and hatch the cause of my decay.
Ah Maudline what relief have I for to remove
These crooked cares that thus pursue my heart in harboring love.
But helpelesse of relief since I by care am stung,
To wound my heart thereby to slaie both mother and her young.
At another time, being absent from his mistress, by reason that he had a
poor man's cause in Essex to be heard, he wrote this brief fancy to her,
after the manner of the Italian rimes.

Oh fair of fairest Dolphin like,
within the rivers of my plaint,
With laboring finnes the wave I strike
whose floods are honored by my saint.
Withouten heart or gall I spring,
And swim to hear thee sweetly sing,
All like the fish when natures art
Has reft of ^ate and tender heart.
And in the sea for love I burn,
As for Arion did the fish,
At every note I skip and turns
I hark, I praise, I like, I wish.
But out alas with better chance
The friendly fish did him advance,
He bare Arion on his back
Where I thy sweet imbracements lack.
These ofher twoe for their shortness and strangeness, I could not find in
my heart to pretermit, knowing that the better sort, that are privy to the
imitation and method, will have their due estimate.

My mistress when she goes
To pull the pinke and rose,
Along the river bounds
And trippeth on the grounds
And runs from rocks to rocks
With lovely scattered locks
Whilst amarous wind does play
With hairs so golden gay
The water waxes clear
The fishes draw her near
The Sirens sing her praise
Sweet flowers perfume her ways
And Neptune glad and feign
Yields up to her his reign.
A^ther.
When I admire the rose
That nature makes repose
In you the best of many
More fair and blessed than any
And see how curious art
Has decked every part
I think with doubtful vieu
Whether you be the rose, or the rose is you.
An Ode he wrote amongst the rest I dare not forget, in that the Poesy is
appertinent to this time, and has no less life in it than those of the
ancient, and the rather because hereby the learned may see, how even in those
days, Poecy had her impugners, and industry could not be free from detraction.

His Oade.
Since that I must repose
Beyond the infernal Lake,
What vailes me to compose
As many verses as Homer did make?
Choice numbers cannot keep
Me from my pointed grave,
But after lasting sleep
The doomb of dreadful judge I needs must have.
I put the case my verse,
In lieu of all my pain,
Ten years my praise rehearse
Orsomewhat longer time some glory gain.
What wants there to consume
Or take my lines from light,
But flame or fiery fume
Or threatening noice of war or bloody fight?
Excel I Anacrion
Stesicores, Simonides,
Antimachus or Bion,
Philetes, or the grave Bacchilides?
All these though Greeks they were
And used that fluent tongue,
In course of many a year
Their works are lost and have no biding long.
Then I who want wits sap,
And write but bastard time,
May I expect the hap,
That my endeavors may ore-come the time?
No, no: it is far more meet
To follow Merchants life,
Or at the judges feet
To sell my tongue for bribes to maintain strife.
Then haunt the idle train
Of poor Calliope,
Which leaves for hunger slain,
The choicest men that her attendants be:
These and such like fruits of his fancy, may sufficiently testify unto you,
both the high spirit and deep invention of this crafty Citizen, who
flourishing thus in the very fullness of loves joy, and reuelling in the
chiefest palaces of pleasure, at last recalled to mind, the ambitious desires
that were wont to accompany him, which having the nature of fire (which no
sooner catches hold of dry matter but presently it consumes it) from a
light smoke at last fell to so huge a flame, that himself was confounded
therewith, and all his hopes made frustrate: and thus it fell out.

The kings Majesty hearing of his continual assemblies, and comparing his
purposes with his practice, began under no small grounds to conceive his
curssed intention: for considering with himself the manner of his life, the
business of his brain, the (...) eloquence of his tongue, and the mightiness
of his mind; he imagined (as afterward it fell out) that so great means of
quick and capeable fuel; would at last break out to an unquenchable flame:
whereupon the K. with considerate judgment called him to court, commanding him
to cease his disordered assemblies, least in seeking to exterminate the
injuries of the rich, he should revive the in solence of the poor. For (said
he) William, who sees not whereto these routes tend? who thinks not that
riot will follow them? The laboring men that were kept from innonations by
their work, are now capable of all chang and novelties in their idleness: In
living as they do, they rather are drawn to detest labor, then to follow it:
wherthrugh the offices and mechanical crafts in the citiie do cease, and by
the omission of industrieriseth, the pretermission of duty. For this cause, as
you have care of my love, incite them not to too much liberty. Further them
what you may, if they be wronged: but let not justice be a color to win
them to wickedness. With these, or such like admonitions king Richard attempted
him, and so wrought him, that for a while the commotions and motives of trouble
were laid apart, so that he walked London streets with lesser troops, and
wholly adicted himself to play with his fair Maudeline, whose unchaste life
was abi-word in the city.

How William with the long beard slew Arthur Brown, who deceived him of his
Maudline.
WHilst William was conuersent in the affairs of state, intending every way
to enlarge his own power, and attending daselie upon the kings pleasure; it
fortuned, that one Arthur Brown, fur me red by his youth, and fitted by
occation, fell in with Maudline, Willams wanton concubine: and having wealth
sufficient, and wit no less subtle, he so craftily handled the cause, that
he won the young woman to stoop to a second lure, and to accept his love.
Many and often times had they intercourse, so that at last the rumor passing
in every place, it could not choose but light at last in Williams hearing:
who moved beyond measure to see himself outfaced by one, who had so long time
been feared by all, he frowningly prepared revenge, resolving with himself
that no means were too mean, to give a tragical sauce to his corrupt meaning.
Whereupon, breaking his mind with certain of his faction, he a greed to watch
an opportunity to revenge impiety: and for that cause watching very craftily
when Arthur his rival should repair unto his lawless lemman, he at last
surprised and encountered him, and causing some of his train to muffle him in
his cloak, and to stopp his mouth for fears of crieng, he stabbed him with a
dagger in diverse places, and in the last wound left the same sticking,
fastening the poor caitifes own hand with his own dagger, which he had
purposelie (to avoid all means of suspicion, and to raise an opinion that he
had murdered himself) sheathed in Arthurs own body. This done, he departed
unespied and unsuspected: and the body being found, according to the censure
and verdict of the Jury which beheld the same, was thrust through with a
stake, and so buried as if he had been guilty of his own murder. William
thus delivered of a supplanter of his pleasure after some unkindness past and
calmed between him and his Maudline) finally fell to an accord, accustoming
her as he was wont, under promise of more constancy in affection, and to the
intent she should remember her of the injuries offered, he wrote this with a
poin ted Diamond in her glass.

Think what I suffered (wanton) through thy wildenesse,
When traitor to my faith thy losenesse led thee:
Think how my moodie wrath was turnde to mildness
When I bad best yet baser grooms did bed thee.
Think that the stain of beauty then is stained,
Whenlewd desires do alienate the heart:
Think that the love which will not be contained,
At last will grow to hate in spite of art.
Think that those wanton looks will have their wrinkles,
And but by faith old age can merit nothing,
When time thy pale with purple ouer-sprinkles,
Faith is thy best, thy beauty is a woe thing.
In youth be true, and then in age resolve thee,
Friends will be friends, till time with them dissolve thee.
But leaving these his effeminate follies of youth, wherein he so vngratiouslie
passed his time, let us draw to the consideration of his traitorous practices,
and finally, as the fruits of such sinister follies conclude with his
tragical end. After he had for a time, until the princes mind were otherwise
withdrawn with more weighty matters, ceased both his routs and riots; the old
ranckled venom of his ambition began more freelte to break forth, so that
what before time he colored under conscience, now at last he manifested with
audacious considence: The mighty in court that maligned him, he ouermaistered
by his attendants, swashing out in open streats upon every light occasion:
for himself, he thought no man sufficient to suppress him, ^or of
sufficiency to brave him: for at a beck, Cobblers, Tinkers, tailors, and all
sorts of the hare-brainde multitude attended him, fought for him, supported
him, and made him Lord of their factions: where-through, the better sorts
neither were Lords of themselves, neither commanders of their own
liueliehoods. From some he extorted wealth by corrupt witnesses, sparing no
means to enrich his followers, by racking and wresting the kings authority:
and no sooner did he hear that the king had given order to his council to
sensure on his bad demeanors, but gathering to himself a huge multitude, he
openly used this discourse unto them, beginning his exhortation with this
place of Scripture: Haurietis aquas in gaudio de fontibus saluatoris
Which is as much to say, as, You shall draw waters with Joy out of the
fountains of our Savior. For, quoth he, my worthy and faithful friends,
who have more courage than coin, and ability in arms then possibilities of
wealth, I am the savior of you that are poor, and the sovereign of such as
are penilesse: you that have assaied the hard hand of the rich, shall be
succored by the happy hand of the righteous.

Now therefore draw your happy fountains of council out of my words, and
turn the troubles you have, to assured triumphs: for the days of your
visitation is at hand. I shall depart waters from waters; I mean, the proud
from the poor, the merciless from the merciful, the good from the evil, and
the light from the darkness. I will oppose my self against all dangers, to
prevent your damage; and loose my life, but you shall have living. Be confident
therefore and bold: for such as have courage, are sildome conquered. Let the
greatest vpbraid, they shall not bite: we have weapons to withstand, as well as
words to persuade: we are as courageous as our enemies are crafty. Stick
therefore unto me, who will strive for you: let me be suppressed, you are
subdued: let me flourish, you are fortunate: but if finister chance threaten;
why, Alea iacta est: vnasalus victis nullam sperare salutem
Thus daily and hourelie animated he the ill minded sort: and although the
king did oftentimes summon him, and by letters disuaded him from his ill
demeanor: yet was he enforced to use violence; or otherwise, that stripe
which at first seemed to be but a fillip, would at last have grown unto a
Fistula. For which cause, Hubert then Bishop of Canterbury soundly resolving
in his thoughts, that forbearance would be the means of further mischief, by
the advice of others of the Privy council, called him in question, summoning
him against an appointed day, to come and yield a reason of those his factions
tumults.

William, that saw the iron ready to war hot, and the hammers ready to
strike, began to remember himself; and his guilty conscience (which as the
wise man says, is a hundredth witnesses) would not suffer him to walk with so
great confidence, yet least fear should be suspected in him, whose good
fortunes and life wholly depended on his courage, he oftentimes looked abroad,
but attended by such a band of base companions, as if it had been the proud
Changuis leading his legious of Tartars through Europe. But when the day of his
appearance came, he was backed with such a number of mechanical rebels, that
Hubert in stead of attempting him with vpbraids, was feign to temper him with
flattering persuasions: yea the stoutest councellor, though never so
considerate, were feign to entreat him, whom they had resolved to threaten and
imprison. William seeing them abasht, wared bold, and in these wordds saluted
them: Honorable Fathers and grave Counselors, according to your Honorable
summons, and the duty of a subject, I present my self before you, attended in
this sort as you see, not to violate laws by lewd insurrections, but both to
present my service to my Prince and your Honors, and to draw my friends and
well willers to that duty, whereunto in soul I am devoted to this state. If
therefore you have ought to command me, or if my services in times past be any
way suspected; I stand ready to satisfy you in the one, or answre to the
other. Hubert, that knew well that soft drops in time, pierce hard stones, and
that the Diamond though not tainted by the hammer, is tempered in strong
vinegar, began to color where he might not command, and flatter where he
could not enforce; and thus he said:

Being assured, William, that good subjects tied by no bounty to their prince,
yet yield him all observance, we cannot persuade our selves that you, who
have been authorized by your prince to counterchecke injustice, will be the
pattern of injurious insolence: for which cause we have called you, not as
condemners of your faith, but commenders of your forwardness: neither have we
so bad an opini^on of th^se good men that follow you, that either they would be
drawn to violate justice, or you could be induced to violate and al ter their
honest and christianlike duties. Our only request to you in the kings
behalf, is to cast off this Lordly train, and suffer these poor men to
follow their professions, least being unawares assailed by want, they shall at
last desparatelie attempt wickedness. As for these good fellows who in their
looks promise no losenesse, I beseech them in his Majesty's name to keep
their houses, promising them in general, that if any one of them be wronged,
they shall have remedy. Nay, we will have remedy in spite of you, said they,
as long as William lives. And this said, without all reverence they departed
the place, carrieng with them their captain commander, scoffing at the
fainthartednes of the Archbishop: for full well was he assured, that greater
severity was concluded upon, then he there would insinuate: for which cause he
continually stood on his guard, spoiling all such men as he thought were
abettors of the Bushop.

The Bailifes of London, according to their authority, seeing matters were
grown to such extremity, kept diligent and strong watch, drawing some of the
commons from him by fair words, and some by gifts: This notwithstanding,
William was never vnattended. The Council, who every ways were vigilant to
root out this viper from the common weal, what they could not by proves, they
adventured by policy, animating diverse valiant men with huge promises to
mark his manners, and when the occasion was offered, to apprehend him at such
time as he little suspected. But long was it yer they either could find
opportunity, or catch the Fore in his form: yet at last, when he least
suspected, they caught him tardee in Breadstreat, attended only by ten or
twelve; at which time, they drawing their swords assailed him valiantly.

But he, who in all conflicts of Fortune was both confident and courageous,
first animated his retinue to the fight, and after that wresting himself by
maine force out of their hands, he took him to flight toward the heart of the
City, and ran into Cheapside. They who were bus^ed against his poor
followers seeing him fled, gave over fight, and earnest lie pursued him. By
this time, the city was in an uproar: the poorer sort labored to rescue
William: the Bailifs with the best Citizens armed them to back the kings
officers: so that the city was altogether up in arms. William long beard
seeing himself hotly pursued, and knowing no mean to escape, stepped to a poor
Carpenter who staid in Cheap for work, and taking his Axe from him,
desperately assailed his pursuers, and with his own hands valiantly sieve some
of them: but when he perceived the factions of his enemies to be great, and his
friends well nigh tired, he betook himself at last into Bow church, not for
his sanctuary, but for a bulwark of his safety.

Thither repaired all the poor commons, some with bats, some with spittes, and
such weapons as they had, driving away all the kings officers in despite of
their friends, and determining with themselves rather to die than to lose their
William Long beard amongst the rest Maudline his minion knowing that his wrack
was her ruin, came unto him where weeping mild tears from her immodest eyes,
she so mollified his marbell heart, that (as some testify) he was more moved
therewith, then with the threats and terrors of his greatest enemies: but see
impiety where it prevails, how it works? That church which was sacred to
prayers, was now made a den of rebels: those places which were reserved to
holy uses, were now soiled with dishonest abuses: where before our Lady was
prayed to, lewdness was played withal. But to bring these causes to their
Catastophe, suffices it that darkness for this time ended the discention, and
the coming on of the night, wrought also the conclusion of the fight.

How William with the long beard after long trouble was taken by the kings
officers, and executed for his misdemeanors.
NO sooner began the hours draw forth the brunisht chariot of the sun, and the
star that beau tifieth the morninges break, shut up her beams in the bowels
of the hidden Hemisphere, but Richard and his council assertained of that
which was happened, commanded the Bailifes of the city by express letters to
ferret him out of his hole, and cease the tumultes, by their authorities, for
which cause, ^he Bailifes attended by a bold troop of men in harness came
into Cheap. The eldest of whom, being called Gerard de Antiloche, handled
himself with such gravity, and used so effectual persuasions, that the
commons for the most part withdrew them to their own houses, and after
assurance of pardon from his Majesty, b^tooke them to their labor. As for the
rest in the Church, when neither persuations could allure them, nor threats
intenerate their hearts, the Bailifes fell to arms, and for the space of four
hours continued a bloody and desperate fight. But when they perceived the
Traitors were desperate, and the Church was sufficiently strong to keep them
out: they at last found out this worthy policy.

They caused some chief men to bring them great store of straw, which they
f^ered in diverse parts about the Church, and in every corner whereas the wind
might work the smoke any entrance, which so smothered and stifeled them in
the Church, that they were all of them for the liberty of a short time of
life, to submit themselves to the judgment of succeeding death. Hereupon,
after many woeful plaints powered out on every side by William, his Maudline,
and other malefactors, they were all enforced to leave the church, and submit
themselves to the hands of the Bailifes, who according to the kings command,
picking out William with nine other his confederats, committed them unto ward
for that time, dismissing the rest under the kings general pardon: who
certified hereof, was not a little solaced. For which cause, he sent some of
his Council and Judges the next day who ascending the judgment seat, called
forth William with the Long beard with his confederates, arraigning them of
high treason against God, the king and country.

Among all the rest, William showed himself most confident: for neither did
the ta^nts of the Judges extennuate his courage; neither could the bonds he was
laden withal abash him any ways, but that with a manly look and enticing
eloquence, he thus attempted the justices. You lords and Honorable Judges,
though I know it a hard thing to strive against the obstinate, or to extort
pity there, where all compassion is extinguished: yet will I speak, using
the officer of nature to work you, although I know I shall not win you. I am
here called and indighted before you for hie treason, a heinous crime I
confess it, and worthy punishment, I deny it not; but may it please you
with patience to examine circumstances: I have imboldened the poorer sort to
innonation, to fight for liberty to impugn the rich; a matter in the commonweals of Greece highly commended: but here accounted factions, and why?
there subjects made kings, here kings master subjects: and why not say you,
and why not think I? yet am I faulty under a good president, and the ambition
which has entangled me, has not been without his profit. To offend of
obstinate will, were brutish: but under some limits of reason to defaulte, can
you (my Lords) but think it pardonable? I have raised one or two assemblies,
and what of this? peace was not broken, only my safety was assured: and were
it that the Law had been injured, might not the righting of a hundred poor
men's causes, merit pardon for two unlawful assemblies? But you will say, I
have animated subjects against their prince. I confess it, but under a milder
title; I have councelled them to compass liberty, which (if nature might be
equal judge between us) I know should not be so hainoustie misconstred.

For my last tumult, I did nothing but in mine own defense: and what is
lawful, if it be not permitted us, Vim vi repellere? But why plead I
excuses, knowing the laws of this Realm admit no one of my constructions? If
it be resolved I must die, do me this favor my Lords, to protract no time:
execute your justice on my body, and let it not pine long time in fear
through supposall of extremes. For my soul, since it is derived from a more
immortal essence, I dare boast the liberty thereof, knowing that eternity is
prepared for it, and mercy may attend it. But for these poor ones who have
defaulted thorough no malice, but have been misled through vain suggestions,
how gracious a deed should your honnors do, to exemplify your mercy on
them? poor souls, they have offended in not offending, and but to enthrone
me, have overthrown themselves: for which cause, if consideration of innocent
guiltines, and guilty innocence may any ways move you, grant them life, and
let me solie enact the tragedy, who am confirmed against all Fortunes
tyrannies.

These latter words were delivered with so great vehemency of spirit, and
attended with so quickening motions and actions of the body, that every one
pitied that so rare virtues should be ravished by untimely death, or
accustomed with so many ungodly practices. The Judges, who were Socratical
in all their speeches, showing their Rhetorique in their upright judgments,
not quaint discourses; after the examinations, indictments, verdicts of the
Jury, and such like, at last gave final and fatal judgment: That William
with the long beard with his confederates, should the next day be hanged
drawn and quartered: and so, after some other worthy exhortations to the
people to maintain peace, and that they should show themselves more dutiful,
and after thanks to the Bailifes and good citizen for their faithful and good
service to his Majesty, the assembly broke up, and the prisoners till the
next day were committed to the dungeon.

No sooner was the gaie mistress of the day break prepared in her roseat
coatch, powdering the heavens with purple, but the Bailifes repaired to the
prison, leading forth William and those his other confederates to their
execution. Then flocked about them diverse sorts of people, some to see those
who were so much searched after: others to lament him whom they had so loved:
at last arrived at the place where they should finish their days, and all
stood to behold their death. William, as principal in his life time of
seditious practice, was to enact the first and fatal part in the tragedy: for
which cause boldly climing up the ladder, and having the rope fitly cast
about his neck, after some private prayers, he spoke after this manner unto the
people: My good countrymen, you are repaired hither to see a sorry spectacle,
to behold the folly of life paid with the fruits of death, to mark how
sinister treasons, end with condign torments: if you apply what you here see
and behold to your own profits, I shall be glad, who now even at this my
last hour, desire rather you should reconcile your selves from all wickedness,
then be dismayed ormoued with my wretchedness.

Oh my dear friends, I now protest before God, and vow before men, that mine
own presumptuous climing has been the just cause of my confusion: I have had
more desire of glory, then respect of God, more regard of dignity, then of
duty, deeming it better to be a famous Traitor, then a faithful and true
subject. For which my inestimable sins I cry God heartily mercy, I beseech
his Majesty to forgive me, and pray you all by your prayers to implore Gods
grace for me. Neither deserve I death only for the offense I have made the
king, but my conscience accuses me, and I here do openly confess it, that
I was he who murdered Anthony Brown, in that he was a rival in my most
lewd love, This, this, if naught else, my countrymen, suffices to condemn
me, for this and al I am heartily sorry. My God, I repent me from my soul, my
God. Which said, lifting up his eyes to heaven, he prayed a long time very
vehemently and after many fruitful exhortations, finished his life to the
comfort of those who wished his souls health. The rest his confederates after
their several confessions, were served with the same sauce, and thus ended the
troubles with their tragedies.

Their bodies cut down, were buried by their friends, and happy was he among
the poorer sort that had any thing to inritch the funeral of William Long
beard: and notwithstanding his confession at his death, and diverse other
evidences at his condemnation: yet were there diverse, who after his death held
him for a saint, casting out slanderous libels against the Archbishop, terming
him the bloudsucker of good men. There were many superstitious women, who in
their devotion were wont to pray to him, and after his death dug up the
ground about the gallows tree, affirming that many had been healed of
sundry sicknesses by the touch thereof. All this their idolatrous
constructions at first began by reason of a priest, a near alie to William,
who openly preached, that by virtue of a chain wherewith William was bound,
during the time of his imprisonment, there were diverse men healed of hot
feauers, the blood that fell from him at such time as he was quartered, they
cleerelie scraped up, leaving nothing that could yield any memory of him,
either unsought or vngotten: But at last the Archbishop of Canturburie remedied
all these things, who first accursed the Priest that brought up the fables,
and after that caused the place to be watched, where through such idolatry
ceased, and the people were no more seduced. But for that William wrote many
notable Poems and translations in the prison, which if you pervse will notify
unto you his singular wit, I have thought good to subscribe them, desiring your
favorable censure of them.

William Long beards Epitaph.
Untimely death and my found fruits of Treason,
My lawless lust, my murders long concealed,
Have ship wract life amids my April season,
Thus couerd things at last will be revealed.
A shameful death my sinful life succeeds
And fear of heavenly judge great terror breeds.
My mangled members in this grave included,
Have answered laws extremes to my confusion,
Oh God let not my murders be obtruded
Against my soul wronged through my earthes illusion.
And as the grave my liuelesse limbs contains,
So take my soul to thee where rest remains.
Thou trauailer that treadest on my toombe,
Remembers thee of my untimely fall,
Prevent the time forethinke what may become,
See that thy will be to thy reason thrall,
Scorn worlds delights, esteem vain honor small:
So may you die with fame, where men of conscience foul
Perish with shame and hazard of their soul.
I have here unto annexed likewise some other of his spiritual hymns and
songs, whereby the virtuous may gather how sweet the fruits be of a reconciled
and penitent soul.

The First.
That pity Lord that erst thy heart inflamed
To enterteine a voluntary death,
To ransom man by lothed sins defamed,
From hell, and those infernal pains beneath:
Vouchsafe, my God, those snares it may unloose
Wherein this blinded world has me intrapped:
That whilst I traffic in this world of woes,
My soul no more in lusts may be intrapped.
Great are my faults, O me most wilful witted:
But if each one were just, there were no place
To show thy power that sins might be remitted.
Let then O Lord thy mercy quite displace,
The lewd and endless sins I have committed,
Trough thine unspeakable and endless grace.
The Second.
Such dark obscured clouds at once incombred
My mind, my heart, my thoughts from grace retired
With swarms of sins that never may be numbered,
That hope of virtue quite in me expired.
When as the Lord of hosts my gracious father,
Bent on my dulled powers his beams of brightness,
And my confused spirits in one did gather
Too long ensnard by vanity and lightness.
A perfect zeal (not office of my senses)
So seazde my judgment smothered in his miss,
That heaven I wished and loathd this earthly gaile,
My heart disclaimd vile thoughts and vain pretenses.
And my desires were shut in seemly veil,
So that I said, Lord, what a world is this?
After such time as he had received his judgment, he grew into this meditation
of the miseries of life, which I dare anow is both worthy the reading and
noting, yea even among the learned

The Third.
A shop of shame, a gain of liue-long grief,
A heaven for fools, a hell to perfect wise,
A theater of blames where death is chief,
A golden cup where poison hidden lies.
A storm of woes without one calm of quiet,
A hiue that yields hemlock and no honey,
A boothe of sin, a death to those that try it,
A fair where cares are sold withouten money.
A fleshlieioy, a grave ofrotten bones,
A spring of tears, a let of true delight,
A loss of time, a laborinth of mones,
A pleasing pain, a prison of the sprite,
Is this my life: why cease I then resolved
To pray with Paul and wish to be dissolved?
Thus ends the life of William Long beard: a glass for all sorts to look
into, wherein the high minded may learn to know the mean, and corrupt
consciences may read the confusion of their wickedness, let this example serve
to with draw the bad minded from Bedlem insolence, and incorage the good to
follow godliness. So have I that fruit of my labor which I desire, and God
shall have the glory, to whom be all praise.

FINIS.
Of many famous pirates, who in times past were Lords of the Sea.
THere were many worthy Pirates in our forefathers days: but among all of
greatest reckoning, Dionides was not least, who exercised his larcenies in the
Leuant Seas in the time of Alexander the great and Darius, disdaining either to
serve the one, or submit himself to the other: yea so resolute was he in his
robberies, and dissolute in his life, that he neither spared friend nor
sauoured foe, but robbed all in general. Against this man Alexander levied a
great army, and by strong hand subdued him: and afterward calling him into his
presence, he said thus unto him: Tell me Dionides, why have thou treubled all
the Seas? to whom he thus replied: Tell me Alexander, why have thou ouerrun
the whole world, and robbed the whole sea? Alexander answered him: because I
am a king, and thou art a Pirat: truly (replied Dionides) D Alexander, both
thou and I are of one nature, and the self same office: the only difference
is that I am called a Pyrat for that I assault other men with a little army,
and thou art called a prince, because thou subduest and signiorest with a
mightic host: But if the Gods would be at peace with me, and Fortune should
show her self perverse toward thee, in such sort as Dionides might he
Alexander and Alexander Dionides, perhaps I should be a better prince then thou
art, and thou a worser Pyrat than I am.

Stilcon for sixteen years space was a pirat in the Carpathean Sea, and
executed many great robberies upon the Bactrians and highly infested Rhodes.
Against whom king Demetrius levied an army, and finally took him: and
calling him to his presence said unto him. Tellme Stilcon, what harm the
Rhodians have done thee, that thou so much indemnifiest them? and wherein
have the Bactrians defaulted, that thou haste thus ruinated their Realms?
Stilcon answered, I would thou wou'dest tell me Demetrius, what harm my
father did unto thee, that thou commandedst him to be beheaded? or wherein have
I injured thee, that I am exiled by thy judgment? I council thee in this my
last hour, and not with the least consideration, that thou persecute not,
neither pursue any man as much as shou may, because it is a matter very
dangerous to deliberate with them of peace, who are desperate both of life and
honor.

Cleonides was a pirat in the days of king Ptolomey, and scowred the seas for
the space of twenty and two years, and for seven of them never set foot on
land from out his Gallie: This Cleonides was squint cied, and crup shouldred,
not unworthily in that manner marked by nature, because every way he was most
tyranouslie minded against cuerie prisoner he took: he never observed promise,
or pitied prisoner: but those enemies he took (amongst other millions of
torments where with he tyrannized over them) he powered hot scalding oil into
their fundaments, and set their feet in boiling oil, till they were burnte and
scorched. Against him, Ptolomey sent out an army; and having taken him, called
him before his judgment seat, and spoke unto him after this mannre: Tell me
Cleonides, what barbarous inhumanitie or infernal fury have instigated thee,
to inflict such insufferable torments on those who as thy self are men, and
being as thy self, ought to be pitied by thy self? to whom Cleonides gave
this churlish answer: It suffices not me thou king, to execute my envy upon
the bodies of those I hate, and who have persecuted me in their life times;
but also I resolve to burn their bowels up, and scalde out their hearts
wherewith they hated me. Prolomey wondering at his desperate inhumanitie, gave
him this judgment: that he should likewise by little and little be dipped in
scalding oil, to the end he might taste the self same torment where with he
had attemted many others.

Chipanda the pirat was a Theban borne, and flourished in the time of Cyrus, a
man of high mind, great valor, generous heart, and virtues hardiness: for he
had under his conduct 130. ships, with which he brought under his subjection
all the kingdoms of the Leuant, and struck continual fear into all the
hearts of the princes in the West. Against him Cyrus rigged out an army, by
whom his ships were conquered, and himself taken captive: who coming into
Cyrus presence, was by him saluted in this manner: Tell me Chipanda, why
forsookest thou my pay, and afterward submittedst thy self to the service of
the Parthian? to whom he thus answered: The laws which are made on land bind
not those that serve by sea: and those also which we capitulate at Sea, are not
accustonied or used on land: and I tell you this O king, because it is an
ancient Custom amongst us pirates, so often to alter and change our patrons
as often as you shall see the winds alter and change at the Sea.

Millia the pirat lived in the days of Dionisius, the first tyrant in
Syracusa, and both of them were highly at odds the one with the other: yet in
such sort enemies, as they contended not which should exceed one another in
goodness, but which of them should have the palm for ungodliness: for
Dionysius ruinated all Scicily, and Milia sacked all Asia: he used this
exercise of pyracie more than thirty years, and at last the Rhodians arming
themselves against him, took him: and afterward they bringing him to the place
of his execution, he lifted up his eyes to heaven and said thus: O Neptune
god and lord of the seas, why will thou not help me at this hour, who have
sacrificed and drowned flue hundred men in thy waves, and p^cemeale cut them in
gobbets before thy majesty? Forty thousand have I sent into the bowels of the
flood, to the end they should enrich the bottom, and thirty thousand have
died in my ships through sickness: twenty thousand have perished in my
galleys manfully fighting: and shall it now suffice in that here I die
alone, who have glutted thy vast waters with so many carcases.

Alcomonius was a pirat at such time as Scilla and Marius flourished (and
following the faction of Scilla, was he that took Caius Caesar when he fled
from Scilla, whom Caesar very often after a pleasant manner assured, that he
had deliberated to hang him and all his confederates by the neck, and according
to his words accomplished his promise, at such time as he came to the
government of the Roman commonweal. This Alcamonius being ready to die,
said; I am little grieved for that I lose, and less afflicted for the manner of
death by which I die: but this is it that urges me, that I fallen into his
hands who was once my prisoner, whom I might have hanged then, as he now
hangs me.

There were likewise many other ancient and modern pirates, whom for that I am
studious of brevity, I in this place willingly pretermit: It only suffiseth
you, that you consider that no one of them died in his bed, neither made
testament of his goods, but as soon as the fatal hour of their destinies
was arrived, they died both defamed unto the world, and detested for their
wickedness.

The Agisincts were famous pirates in the time of Themosticles, who turned out a
hundred Galleys amongst them, and took all of them: and after he had
imprisoned and disarmed them, hanged them up: which act of his caused him to be
favored in Greece, and feared on the sea.

Frauncis Enterolles a famous pirat was borne in Valentia of noble parents and
a princely stock: This man committed mighty and many robberies at sea, and
in the river of Genoua: and finally, when in the year 1491. he had long time
followed a chase, he was by tempest and Fortune driven upon the Island of
Corsica, and those wh^ by chance escaped the danger and sury of the Seas,
incountred death on the land, and were all of them with their captain Francis
hanged by the neck for their piracies, the rest that were left, were made
Gallie slaves, being by the Ilanders surprised in their Gallie: and this was
the end of this noble Valentinian.

Monaldo Guecca a famous pirat borne in Nauar, flourished in the year 1496.
This manne having occupied and strengthened himself upon the rock of Hostia,
hindered all the convey of victuals to Rome after such a manner, that neither
wine nor corn, neither any other march andise could be brought either from the
kingdom of Naples from Corsica, or the river of Genua unto the city: Against
him Pope Alexander sent the great Consaluo; who took the rock, and brought
Menaldo bound to Rome upon a lean Jade in manner of triumph. And it is reported
that he went with so confident a countenance; that he enforced terror in all
those that beheld him, Consaluo, for that he was a Spaniard, got him his
pardon, and wrought the Pope to be very bountiful unto him.

A true and famous History of Partaritus king of Lombardie, who being pursued
by Grimaldo, fled first of all to Cucano king of the Auarior Huns, and then
into France, and finally after many travails was restored to his kingdom
with much majesty, wherein the worthy memory of two faithful servants is
happily registered.
PArtaritus was the son of Albert king of Lombardie, who after the death of
his father reigned himself in Millan, and Gundibert his brother in Pauia.
Betwixt these twoe there grew a mortal discention, for which cause Gundibert
sent Caribald Duke of Turinge to Grimoald duke of Beniuent a most worthy and
valiant Captain, requesting his assistance in arms against his Brother, and
promising him in reward thereof, to bestow his sister upon him in marriage.
But Garibald used Treason against his Lord, animating Grimoald to the
enterprise not as an a better, but a conqueror. For (said he) you may easily
occupy the kingdom, by reason of the twoe brethren, who through their
dissentions have almost ruinated the same. Grimoald asserteined her of, made
his son Duke of Beneuent: and leuieng a mighty power, set onwards on his way
to Pauia, and through every City that he passed, he drew friends unto him,
and won the better sort with benefits, to the end they should assist him
toward the attainment of the kingdom: and coming to parlie with Gundibert who
(little suspecting the trecheries which Garibald had complotted, came
slenderly and courtly accompanied to intertain him) he on sudden slew him,
and occupied the kingdom. Partaritus assertained hereof, abandoned Rhodeline
his wife and his iit tle son, and fled to Cucano king of the Auarior Huns:
Grimoald confirmed in the kingdom of Pauia, understanding that Partharithus
was entertained by Cucano; sent ambassadors unto him, threatening him, that if
he retained Partharithus his enemy in his kingdom, he should be assured to
purchase of him a mighty enemy, and more, to occasion a present and dangerous
war.

The king of the Hunns assertained hereof, called Partarithus unto him, and
said thus: I pray thee, gentle friend, depart into some other place: for if
thou be here resident, my good will toward thee will occasion great wars
against my self. Partharitus understanding the kings mind, returning into
Italy, went and sought out Grimoald, reposing his life upon the good
dispositions of his enemy: And drawing near the City of Lodi, he sent
before him one of his faithful servants called Vnulfe, who might make manifest
to Grimoald, both how much he trusted him, and what he required at his hands.
Vnulfe presenting himself before the kings Majesty, told him that Partaritus
his master had recourse unto his clemency, and sought succor in his court:
Grimoald admiring his confidence, faithfully promised him that he might
repair unto him, upon the faith of a prince assuring him, that before he
should be harmed, he would hazard his own heart.

A little while after when Partharitus presented himself before Grimoald, and
humbly kneeling on his knees be sought his favor, the king pitiouslie and
graciously entertained and kissed him, whom in humble manner Partharitus
saluted thus: mighty Sovereign, I am thy servant, who knowing that thou art a
Christian, doubt not of thy compassion. I might (as thou know O king) have
lived among Pagans: but what life were that? and how base confidence were I in
rather to trust the faithless, then humble my self to the faithful? I
beseech thee of mercy, and kissing thy feet crave maintenance. The king
according to his manner swering a solemn oath, promised him saying: By him that
begat me, since thou have recourse unto my faith, I will never forsake thee;
but I will take order for thee in such manner, that thou may both honestly
and honorably live in this country. Whereupon he commanded him to be
worthily lodged, giving charge that he should be furnished of all necessaries
whatsoever, upon his treasury.

It chanced that Partaritus departing from the king, and repairing to his
lodging, was suddenly encountered with a whole troop of Citizens of Pauia,
who came to see him and salute him, as their sorestemed friend. But see what
great mischief proceeds from an evil and detracting tongue? For some
malignant flatterers beholding the same, sought out the king, and gave him to
understand, that if he made not Partaritus suddenly out of the way, himself
without all doubt should lose both his kingdom and life: swearing to him, that
all the city was already addicted to take his part.

Grimoald considering these thoughts, and by his overmuch credulity suspecting
more then he needed, suddenly resolved on the death of miserable Partharitus:
and calling his council unto him ceased not to contriue the means how the
innocent might be made away. They seeing that day far spent resolved the deed
should be done, the next morrow animating the king by good words, who
otherwise through fear was almost out of his wits: notwithstanding through
their persuasions gathering to himself more confidence, the better to color
his intention, he sent unto him that night many excellent dishes and strong
wines, purposing (if it were possible) to make him drunk: assuring himself
that by the means thereof he for that night should have more care of his
sleep than regard of his safety.

But see how God helps the innocent: for a certain gentleman who before time
had been a seruitour in Partharithus fathers court, presenting him with a
mess of meat from the king, and leaning downward as if intending reverence to
his Majesty, told him secretly how the king the next day had resolved to
put him to death. For which cause Partaritus suddenly called his squire,
willing him for that night to give him no other drink but a little water in a
silver cup: knowing this, that if those who presented him in the kings behalf
would request him to carouse to his health, he might easily do without
intoxicating his brains, drinking only water. Those that served him at the
table, seeing Partaritus take his liquor so lively, certified the king
thereof: who with much ioyfulnesse said, let the drunkerd drink his fill for
this night: but to morrow yer ever he suspect the banquet, I mean to feast
him with his own blood.

This said, he caused his guard to be set the house, fearing and suspecting,
least Partaritus should escape him in any sort. The supper being ended, and
every one having taken his leave, Partharitus thus left alone with Vnulfe his
trusty servant and the Page who ordinarily attended on him to bed, he
discovered unto them how the king had resolved to kill him: for which cause
Vnulfe winding him about the neck with the sheets of the bed and laieng the
couerlet and a Bears skin upon his back, leaving him without capp, as if he
were some rusticke or common drudging fellow, began to drive him out of the
chamber, doing him many injuries and villannies, so that he very oftentimes
fell to the ground.

Grimoalds guard, who were appointed unto the watch, seeing al these outrages,
asked Vnulfe what he meant. Why said he, my masters, this rascal slauehath
made me my bed in the chamber of that drunken palliard Partharithus, which is
so full of wine, that he sleeps as if he were dead without stirring: and this
is the cause why I beat him, and I pray you does he not deserve it? They
hearing these words, and believing them to be true, did all of them laugh very
heartily to hear the tidings, and giving both of them license to depart
Partaritus hasted to the city of Hasti, and from thense went into France,
praising God for his happy delivery.

As soon as they were got away, the faithful page locked the door very
diligently, remaining all that night alone in the chamber: and when the
messengers of the king came with commission to bring Partaritus to the palace
the next day, they knocked at the door, whom the page in humble manner
saluted, praieng them to have patience for a while: for (says he) my Lord
being weary of his last journey, sleeps now very soundly: The messengers
returning to Grimoald, told him the pages answer: who all enraged, charged them
presently to bring him to his presence: who repairing again to the chamber
door, were in like sort once more solicited by the page to use forbearance:
but they admitting no delays, cried out hastily and heartily, tut, tut, the
droonkard has now slept enough, and thereupon bearing the door of the hinges
they forcibly entered the chamber, and sought Partaritus in his bed, but
found him not: whereupon they asked the page what was become of him, who
answered them that he was fled: The messengers all amazed herewith, furiously
laieng hands on the childs bushie lock, and buffeting him pitiouslie, brought
him to the palace: and conducting him to the presence of the king, said,
Mighty Prince, Partharitus is fled, and this caitife boy helped to convey him:
and for that cause meriteth death: Grimoald commanded them to lay hands off
him, and willed him with a friendly countenance to discover unto him the
manner and means how his master had escaped away: The page told him every
thing as it had past; whose faithfulness when the king had considered upon, he
royally offered him to make him one of his pages, assuring the lad that if he
would be as faithful to him as he had showed himself toward his old master,
he should both be rewarded and regarded.

After this, he made search for Vnulfe, who being brought before his presence,
was pardoned by him, and not only pardoned, but commended. But as where
affection is rooted, there no favors can supplant it, nor promises suppress
it: so these two loving their master Partarithus very dearly, took no
delight but only in desire they had to see and serve him: for which cause a
few days after they repaired to Grimoald, beseeching him of license to seek
out their master. Why my friends (quoth he) had you rather seek out your
necessities, then live with me here in all pleasures? By God replied Vnulfe, I
had rather die with Partharithus, than live in all other worldly contents and
delights. What (said the king to the page) will thou also rather seek out a
bannished man, then serve a king? I my Lord, said he: for they are bad
servants that will leave their masters in misery. Grimoald wondering at their
confidence, and praising both their faithes, dismissed both of them with all
favor, giving them both horse and money to furnish and further them on their
journey.

The two faithful servants humbly thanking the king, took their way into
France, hoping to find their master in that place according as was appointed.
But Partaritus fearing least by reason of a peace latlie capitulated betwixt
Dogobert king of France and Grimoald, he should be there surprised suddenly
by some sinister subtletie, took shipping for England: and having already
sailed from the shore, the voice of a man was heard among the rocks, which
asked for Partaritus and whither he were in that ship. Whereto when answer was
made that there he was, the voice replied, Then will him presently repair
unto his country: for Grimoald a three days hence is departed this life:
Partaritus suddenly returned back, commanding the mariners to reenter the
harbor: and as soon as he was landed, he diligently sought out the messenger
that had thus informed him: but finding him by no means possible, he supposed
it to be some message sent from God. For which cause, poasting toward his
country, and arriving amongst the confines of Italy, he found there a great
number of Lombards who expected him, with whom he entered Pauia, and driving
out a little son of Grimoalds from the kingdom; he was by general consent
created king of Lombardie three months after the death of Grimoald. For
which cause he presently sent unto Beneuent for his wife Rhodolinde, and his
son Cunibert: And being a godly Catholic and just man, a liberal patron of
the poor, and father of the innocent: as soon as he had quiet possession of
the kingdom; in that place from whence he fled, which is on the other side of
of Tesinus, he buil ded a monastery to the honor and glory of God his savior
and only defender, wherein there were diverse Nuns enclosed, whom he always
enriched with many very goodly possessions.

The Queen likewise builded a church in honor of our Lady without the city
walls, adorning it with marvelous rich ornaments: his page and trusty servant
returning to his court, as soon as they had tidinges of his establishment, were
by him favorably entertained and richly rewarded. Finally, after he had
reigned eighteen years, he departed this life not without the general lament
and tears of the whole inhabitants of Lombardie.

The wonderful dream of Aspatia the daughter of Hermotimus the Phocencian a
very poor man, who afterward through her wonderful virtues, became the wife
of Cyrus king of Percia and was afterward married to Artaxerxes.
ASpatia was the daughter of Hermotimus of Phocis, who after the death of her
mother, was brought up and nourished in great poverty: yet was not her
poverty so grievous, as her continency was gracious: in her infan^ie she had
under her chin a great swelling, which dis^igured her face, and was a great
disgrace to her fairness. For which cause her father desirous to have her
cured, carried her to a physician, who promised to heal her for a certain
sum of money. The good old man having no money, told the Physician of his
little means, beseeching him to stand favorable unto his child: but the
greedy wretch which was too well learned in no penny no Pater noster, told
him, that then he had no medicine for him: for which cause the poor Hermotimus
and his sickly daughter repared home without succors. Aspatia being thus ill
bested, entered her chamber, and setting her glass between her legs, she
gased so long intentiuelie on her imperfection, and with so many tender tears
bemoned her wants, till at last she fell asleep, where upon a sudden she
behold a dove changed suddenly into a woman, which said unto her, Be of good
cheer, and leave these drug-maisters, and go unto the dried crown of Roses
upon Venus head, and taking some of them beat thou them to powder, and then
do thou but strew them upon thy grievous sore.

Aspatia having performed no less then was commanded her in her vision, was
healed and (...) ^ie fair, and so many were the graces ^erwith ^he ^hed, that
no man could either compare or equal them. She had her hairs glorious and
goldlike golden, somewhat daintilie curled, her eyes fiery and christalline,
her nose hooked, her ears little, and the color of her face like unto Roses
washed in milk, her lips crimosin, her teeth more white than snow, her voice
was delicious sweet and musical, her delights were estranged from all
effemina^e newfanglenesse: she studied not to be rich in apparel (which is
but the very surfeit of substanc^) because being nourished in poverty, she
could not nor would not in any wise yield any art to her beawtie, wanting
both the means and the manner.

It chanced that this maiden amongst a great many others was bought by a
Baron, who belonged to king Cyrus, who seeing that she was beawtifull and
fair, brought her (after a very solemn and sumptuous supper) into the
presence of Cyrus, accompanied with three other Grecian maids, who were tricked
and attired by courtly dames before h^ide, to the end they might know how to
entertain and delight the king; only Aspatia would not admit any foil for
her fair, but after many refusals, at last consented to put on a sumptuous
habit, wherein she st^de so melancholy and blushinglie, as if she thought all
lookers on unworthy to behold her beawtie: and firing her fiery eyes upon the
ground, she wept bitterly before Cyrus, who commanded the three other Uirgins
to sit down by him, who were obsequious to his will: but Aspatia fained as
though she heard him not when he called her, until the Baron who bought her,
enforced her to sit by his majesty.

Cyrus dallieng and beholding the three other virgins, commended their
countenances, and condemned not their behavior. But having but touched Aspatia
with the the tip of his finger, she suddenly cried out, telling him that she
should be punished if she used such licentiousness. This her behauior pleased
the king, who afterward offered to dally with her paps, she presently flung
from him and offered to depart: for which cause Cyrus maruelling at the great
mind of Aspatia far against the custom of Percia, said unto him that had
bought her, Thou have only brought this maiden unto me free, sincere, and
without spot: these others are but counterfeits in their customs, and their
beawties are but borrowed not natural.

Here upon Cyrus affected by this means, and earnestly fixed his love upon
Aspatia so that he forgot all other fancies, addicting himself only to her
bed and beawtie. Not long after, Aspatia called to her mind the doom she had
seen in her dream, and the speeches which were used, and in regard of those
benefits she had received, she erected a ^atue of gold in honor of Uenus, and
annexed thereunto a dove beawtified with costly gems, offering daielie
sacri^ces to remunerate the Goddess kindness. She likewise sent unto her
father many rich Jewels, and made him a man of great authority. A few days
after a fair and curious Carkanet was sent out of Theslaly in present to king
Cyrus, who reioicing greatly at the same, and finding his Aspatia one day
asleep, laid him down by her, and (after some amorous embracings) drew the
carcanet out of a casket and said unto her. How say thou my love, does not
this jewel become either the daughter or mother of a king? yes my liege said
she: why then my love; it shall be thine quoth he: discover therefore thy
neck, and put it on.

Aspatia little respecting the rich gift, reverently and sagelie replied
thus, how should I be so bold to submit my neck unto that gift, which is a
present more convenient for Parisatides thy mother? Give it her my Lord, and I
am ready to show you my neck without any such ornaments. Cyrus rejoicing at
her answer, kissed her, and having written all the manner of discourse which
had past twixt him and Aspatia, he sent the same with the carcanet unto his
mother. Parisatide no less delighted with the letter than the carcanet,
renumerated Aspatia with rich gifts and royal presents, and conceiving a
gracious opinion in that Aspatia gave her place, she ever after loved her and
presented her both with the carcanet and much other treasure. Aspatia humbly
receiving her inestimable courtesies, sent both the jewel and treasure to Cyrus
with this message: These for a time will help thee, and for that thou art mine
ornament, meseeme^h I have obtained a great gift, if as I both should and
would, I heartelie love thee.

Cyrus was amazed at this deed, and not without reason, because this woman had
no mean mind, but the courage of a great and magnificent princess. But when
Cyrus was slain in the war which he waged against his brother, Aspatia
remained prisoner: notwithstanding sought out, and at the last found by the
noble Artaxerxes, she was delivered of her bonds, and such as had captiuated
her, were committed themselves. Finally, being richly apparailed like a
Princess (although by reason of the death of Cyrus she made great resistance,
Artaxerxes being vehemently enamored of her beawtie, after long entreaty and
comforts, at last won her consent and married her: yet as some writers
testify, the in tire affection she bare her last husband, was never
extinguished until she died.

A wondrous revenge executed by Megallo Lercato of Genoua upon the mighty
Emperor of Trabisonda.
AT such time as the Genowaies wear Lords of certain cities in the Leua^t it
chanced that amongst other Citizens who traffiqued in Caffa, and were most
familiar with the Emperor of Trabisond, there was one called Megollo Lercato,
who by reason of his rare quallities, was exceedingly favored by him: for
which cause he was greeuouslie envied, and hated by the principal courteors,
who ceased not continually to invent new means and ways whereby they might
bring him in disgrace. It fortuned that sporting himself one day at the game
of chesse with a young Noble man who was greatly beloved by the Emperor, they
fell at words and bitter vpbraides: amongst all others, the young Noble
uttering certain speeches in contempt of the name of Genowaies, Megollo was
enforced to give him the lie: but seethe other little moved the rewith, his
country dishonored, and the court laughing at him, he sought his remedy at
the Emperors hands, from whom he could get no redress in repair of his honor.

For which cause Megollo hotly discontent (though for a purpose he smothered
his displeasures a space) a few days after upon a lawful cause took
occasion to crave the Emperors license, and departing to Genua altogether
inflamed to revenge, he furnished himself by means of some parents and
friends, and rigging out two warlike Galleys, he sailed with them into the
great sea, and there endeavored him self to spoil all the coast and ransacke
every ship belonging to the Emperor: whomesoeuer he took, in way of
great disdain he cut off their noses and ears, and though there were many
ships set out against him, yet in spite of all he never desisted from
endangering him: and this might he the better perform, in that his ships were
very swifts: and when he found himself at any disadvantage, he could both
leave and take how and when it pleased him. It chanced amongst many other
preparations that were set out to entrap him; four stout. Galleys were rigged,
who upon consultation as soon as they had discovered him, divided themselves
apart, thinking to enclose him in the midst of them, and so all at once to
assail him. Megollo that quickly perceived their policy, suddenly fained
to fly: whom when their swiftest Gallie had long time pursued, and
ouer-wrought all her consorts, Megollo made head against them, and slew them,
and served them all after the same sauce, to the wonderful amaze and
discontent of the Emperor.

Amongst one of these Galleys, there was an old man wish his two sons, who
fearing the like fortune which had befalne others, should light on him and his
sons, humbly prostrating himself at Megollos feet, he humbly entreated him
for mercy: The old man's tears were gracious, and had such power over the
generous mind of Megollo; that he forgave both him and his sonns with the rest
that were alive in his Gallie, and sent him back unto the Emperor with a
vessel full of Ears and Noses, willing the old man to let the Emperor
understand that he would never cease to indemnifie him, until such time as he
had sent unto him the man who had so disdainfully and dishonorablie injured
him in his court.

The Emperor asserteined hereof, determined with himself as the lesser evil,
to go himself in person unto the sea, and carry with him (as he did) the young
man, who had occasioned all this trouble: Megollo hearing thereof, thrust his
Galleys nearer the shore: when as the Emperor presently in a light boat sent
him the young Noble with a rope about his neck: who having his eyes proud
with tears, humbled himself at Megollos feet, beseeching mercy: Megollo
compassionate therewith, bad him get him thence, telling him that it was not
the fashion of the Genowaies to tyrannize over effeminate milksops.

The parents of the young man seeing him return again beyond their
expectation, received him wish great joy: diverse offers were made by the
Emperor to Megollo, who refusing them all returned this answer: That he came
thither not for desire of riches but for honors sake, and to eternise the name
of the Genowaies, admitting no other couenantes but this, that in memory of
those his actions, a palace should be reared in Trabisond for the commodity of
the Genowaies, wherein he would that by a curious hand and cunning work man
those his actions should be eternized: which being afterward fully observed
by the Emperor, they who traffiqued there follow their merchandise with more
honor then they were accustomed. Megollo after this worthy act returned home
to Genoua, where he was received and gratified with great honors by the
Citizens.

The memorable deeds of Ualasca a Lady of Bohemia, who causing all other
Ladies to kill their husbands, Brethren, and sons, reigned seven years in
Bohemia.
I Read in the Bohemian history written by Pope Pius, that this Valasca of
whom I here mean to entreat, was a woman of great mind, bold in all
attempts, and highly favored by Fortune: and to the end you may the better
understand her history, I will first of all begin with her cause of hatred.
You have therefore to consider, that Crocus second Duke of Bohemia dieng
without issue male, his daughter Libussa (held in those days in as great
account as one of the Sibils) with the favor of the people, and good liking of
the better sort, was placed in her fathers seat, and governed that Province
many years, with the general good liking of all men. Finally, having given
a just sentence in right of certain possessions against a mighty man in that
country, he being there with incensed, provoked up the people against her,
saying that it was an oprobrious and scandalous thing for such a people as they
were, and so great a Nobility as was resident in that place, to suffer the
kingdom and causes of justice to be under a woman.

Libussa having entreated silence at their hands for a time, said unto them
that she knew their new desire, and was not ignorant of their firm
determination, disabling her self to satisfy their expectations, praieng them
to assemble the next day; which, according as she willed them they performed.
The morning began noe sooner to pushe forth his blushinge beawties, but the
people repaired to the judgment seat in great multitudes: and as soon as the
palace was filled every ways by them, Libussa began to speak unto them on
this manner: You know (Bohemians) that to this present day I have been your
peaceable and bountiful Lady according to women's custom, who are audatious
in nothing but in offering courtesies. Hitherto have I not been offensive to
any of you, either chargeable by reason of Pomp, showing my self rather a
mother unto you, then a mistress: but ingratefullie, unkind men as you are,
requite you my govern meant. But at these your actions wonder not I at all,
because you accustom your selves to the common fashions of men, who are never
content, but are more skillful to desire a just and merciful Lord, then having
him they have knowledge to keep him.

As touching mine own title, I wholly surrender it into your hands: and as you
have desired one who shall govern you, and order your laws as he list; so am I
contented you shall have him. Therefore go ye and take me a white horse, and
bridle him with all his other apparel and ornaments, and afterward lead him
to such a plain where he may take that way which best likes him. Which done,
let him trot as he list, and follow you him by his footsteps: as he turns, so
turn you: and as he returns, so return you: finally, when you shall see
him stay before a man that foede^h at an iron table, then assure your selves
he is the man forpointed to be my husband, and your prince. This his speech
pleased them all: so that taking with them the horsie as Libussa had instructed
them, they let him freely go and followed him. But scarcely had they
traveled ten miles, when as the horse stayed at a river called Bieli, and
arrested himself before a country fellow called Primislaus: showing many
signs of humanity and observance toward him.

The Bohemians, as well the nobles as commons, behoulding this, ran with all
have unto him, and after their salutations said thus unto him: Mount upon this
horse, and go with us: Libussa has chosen thee for his husband, and the
Bohemians admit thee for their prince: Primislaus, although he were a poor
country clown, not incapeable of the general desire of rule which attainteth
all men, gave unto them a homely salutation after his manner, and told them
that he was addressed to do whatsoever pleased them: and under standing that
he was to go to Libussa (as if he had a long voyage to make, he fastened his
bottle to his saddle bow, and grasping his bread and cheese in his hand he rode
on feeding like a rusticke king, which was a very sufficient evidence of that
which Libussa before time had declared and told unto them.

As soon as his guts were full and his bottle emptied, he mended his pace,
and they conducted him with great pomp and honnour into the city, where he
took Libussa to wife, and during all his life time was wholly ruled and
governed by her counsels and persuasions. But after she had submitted her self
to the destinies, the government remained wholly in Primislaus hands, and the
authority of Ladies ceased, which even unto that hour was both maintained and
augmented by Libussa. After this, Valasca (which whilst Libussa lived was her
secretary) being a Lady of great valor and no less resolution then an
Amazon, not enduring or abiding that the authority of women should be thus
annihilated, assembling one day in a privy place all those that were of her
faction, she said thus unto them:

My sisters, we have lost our good Lady, who always defended us from the
outrages of men, neither could she ever endure that we should be over borne by
them, so that she her self h^ld the Emperie, and we wish her were in respect
held and accounted for Queens. You see now, how enforced we endure a hard and
miserable servitude, living under the government of our husbands after the
manner of slaves, except of our selves we shall gather head and courage to
recover our former liberties. Wherefore, if your thoughts be as mine is, let
us join like heroic Ladies, and we will easily recover our estates. I (as you
know) was secretary unto Libussa, of whom I learned that which she knew: I am
skillful in enchantments, and the nature of herbs is not unknown vntome: if
therefore you have any meaning or will to follow me, assure your selves, that
you shall be once again lords over men.

Upon these words, the whole assembly of women condiscended to Valascas words,
and mutuallie conspired against men. During this time, Primislaus dreamed one
night, that a virgin gave him blood to drink: for which cause he being a
notable soothsaier, and willing to prevent a mischief which (as he imagined)
might very easily be impugned, he conuocated all the chief nobles of his
Province, under intention to prohibit the ouer-great license and liberty which
women had in the common weal: namely, the women were accustomed to ride and
run the race on horssebacke, to tournay, shoot, and follow the chase, and
briefly to exercise themselves in all warlike discipline, which (as he
thought) were matters manageable by men, and unfit tasks for women. But the
Barons scoffed at him when he told them there of, and said, that they rather
deserved love and reverence for their agilitie and hardines, then reproof and
dishonor.

Valasca mean while desisied not neither day nor night to exhort her
confederates, and often with drinks and inchatments turned away their
affections from the love of men, and day by day drew more and more into this
her League of conspiracy. Finally, when she perceived that she had gathered
a sufficient power both of married wives and maids, in one night she caused
every one of her faction to kill their fathers, husbands, brethren, and sons
in their beds, and afterward taking arms, with great expedition, they all
of them marched together to a place appointed them by Velasca, not far
distant from Prage, and subduing some that had them in chase, they made a road
to Vissigrade whereas Primislaus abode, intending there to surprise him: but
seeing they could not take the fortress, they retired themselves into a
mountain, a place naturally impregnable, and there building a castle, they
called it Deiuizo that is, the place of virgins, because that in their toonge
a virgin is called Deiuize.

This action of theirs seemed abominable to all the inhabitants of the
country, as well in respect of the great slaugh ter they had made, as also
because they had a great suspicion of further mischief, for which cause they
generally gave Primislaus to understand, that they were addressed to bid these
new Amazons battle, and that, if it pleased him to march forward with his
host, they also were in a readiness to follow him. The K. certified them,
that at that present he could not come, by reason that the Gods had admonished
him, that all those who were addicted to indemnifie the virgins, were to die;
certifieng them that it was behouefull to go another time. But they, who set
light by his counsel, leuieng by them selves a great army, marched toward
Deiuizo and striking battle with Valasco, were ignominiouslie overthrown and
put to flight with the slaughter of the greater part of the army: and whereas
in this service Malada, Nodea, Sua^acia, Vorasta, Ragda, Zastana and Tristana,
had behaved themselves valiantly; in reward of their service they had co^ars
and chains of gold given them: and amidst that unmeasureable pray which they
had, every one was rewarded acording to their desert.

Valasca slew with her own hand seven of her enemies, and after that time was
held and esteemed for a goddess, so that never after that time the Bohemians
had the courage to troble or molest them: But they every day ranged about the
confines, spoiling, robbing, and burning, and day by day enforced greater
dread and fear in the hearts of their enemies: and being now Ladies and
sovereigns of the better part of Bohemia, they were constrained to have the
company of men, by reason that other wise by course of time and wars they
were likely to be reduced and brought to nothing: for which cause, marrieng
themselves they made a law, that those maidens who were borne by them should
with all diligence be tenderly and carefully brought up: as for the
males, they commanded that their right eyes should be pulled out, and their
middle fingers cut off, to the end, that having attained Man's estate they
should be disabled to shoot in the bow, or to handle warlike weapons.

Finally, Velasca having afflicted Bohemia for the space of seven years, and
made them altogether tributarie, was deceived by Primislaus, who wrote her a
letter that the Barons against his will had attempted her with war, and that he
was greatly pleased that they had ^ceiued condign punishment for their in
solence: assuring her, that he had always held her in place of his daughter,
not only for that she had been secretary to his wife, and well thought of by
her, but for that she knew so well to govern so great a state as Bohemia was
for the space of seven years. And moreover, that now since he felt himself
old and unable to govern his subjects; on the other side, his son too young
in years for so weighty a credit, that his will was to render into her hands
the fortresses, so that by this means at one time he would yield all Bohemia
into her hands, referring the estate of his son and heir, to her kindness
and courtesy, contenting himself to return unto his first estate, and live
satisfied in the town from whence perforce they had taken him, and afterward
unwillingly crowned him. And him seemed as he wrote, that it should so be,
that as from a ladies hands he received the thre^e, so to a ladies hands he
might return the title. This letter written and sent unto her, won such
credit with her, that presently she sent before her a squadron of her best
Amazons to receive the fortresses, who were brought into the land with great
solemnity, and entertained in the Dukes own palace: but whilst thee were at
the table, they were all slain by a troop of armed men, who were hidden for
that purpose. They having flaine these, ran to Deiuizo with a great army, and
Valasca having notice of the strange accident, issued her self smallie
vnattended and cloased in glittering arms, and mounted upon a very brave and
lusty courser, that lightened fire from his nostrils, she was followed by
some few a far off, whilst her self solie incountred the whole host that
came against her, and without any word speaking she laid about her like a
Lioness or a Libian Tygre in his great fury. Finally, failing in the midst
and thickest of her enemies, she died valiantly.

Her companions a far of as soon as they understood of the death of their
princess, not under any hope to conquer, but stimulated to work revenge,
fell to arms: betwixt whom and the Bohemians was a most bloody and desperate
fight: but the Ladies at last having the worst, were enforced to fly, whom the
Vissegradians following, entered together with them into their Castle, and
having caused the gates to be shut, and being Lords of the fortress, they cut
all the poor women to pieces. And thus was Bohemia delivered from the tyranny
and thraldom of women: And Velasca, being worthy to be eternized amongst the
Ladies of most famous memory, lay unburied, and served for a prey for birds
and beasts to feed upon.

An excellent example of continence in Frauncis Sforza.
AMongst all other I will not pretermit a singular example of continence in
Francis Sforza, who deserved in this action of his to be compared with
Alexander the great, and Scipio the noble: Cassanoua a castle of Luke be ing
forciblie surprised by Earl Francis. There were certain soldiers who took a
fair and tender young damsel prisoner, who whilst they forcibly drew her
from out the house, weepingly besought them to present her to the earl Francis
Sforza and to no other, so that they who had outraged her, fearing the
displeasure of the county; suddenly presented her unto him.

At that time Francis by reason of his young years, and the sound complexion
of his body, was very proane and addicted to wanton and effeminate pastimes:
and although he were inueigled by the tender years and exceeding beauty of
the maiden, notwithstanding he inquired of her whither she had rather consent
unto every pleasure wherein he might employ her, or remain in their hands
who had first taken her. Whom she thus answered, that she would be always
ready to obey him, so that it might please him to set her free from the hands
of base injury. Where upon Francis presently commanded that she should be
conducted unto his pauilion. When night came, and before he entered the bed, he
asked the maiden again, if she were of the same mind, or whether she had
changed her purpose. Who answered him that she continued resolved, then he
willed that she should disrobe and unclothe her body, and so to lay her
self down by him.

But no sooner was she entered bed, but she espied the picture of our Lady
painted after the manner, whereon turning toward the Earl she wept and with all
reverence and shamfastnesse she said unto him: O my Lord I pray thee for that
unspotted virgins sake, whose image is in our sight, vouchsafe to be the
protector of my virginity, and thorough thy clemency grant that without stain
or dishonor I may return unto my betrothed spouse, who lives a desperate and
desolate life amongst the other captives. And whereas I promised thee to
submit my self to thy will, no other thing moved me there unto, then the
desire I had to deliver my self from the hands of those who ravished me: and
not that alone, but the justice and piety I have heard of thee, made me
conceive a great hope to submit to him who had so great virtues to command.

These words had so great power in the merciful and generous mind of the
Captain, that they extinguished in him all heat of vain desires, so that of
his own proper charges he rescued the husband and redeemed him from shraldome,
restoring the young virgin unto him as soon as he came in to his presence.
Her spouse kneeling upon his knees, and sighing bitterly, said; My Lord thou
dooest fully answer the great expectation and fame which through every part
is dispersed by thee, so that there is no land nor no peer in the world that
either may match thee for humanity, or conquer thee in clemency. Almighty
God, who may requite thee in our behalf, yield thee condign favors for thy
virtue: The County would have given him many things of that pray that he
had taken, but the young maiden would accept nothing, saying that the neighbors
seeing such gifts, would think and imagine that it were the price of her
virginity that she had lost, and so by that means she should fall into very
great infamy, which she ever rather chose to fly than death, whereupon
Frauncis Sforze dismissing them, they joy fully returned into their country.

Of many learned men ancient and modern, who violently and infortunatelie
ended their days.
THemostocles the Athenian slew himself. Lucretius the Philosopher died the
selfsame death, and Gallus (as learned as both they) was murdered by his own
hands: Pliny was smothered by fire in the mountain Aetna. Besides all these,
many other never seconded in science perished sinisterlie. Thales the Milesian
died for thirste, Zeno was slain by the commandment of the Tyrant Phalaris.
Anaxarchus by the judgment of Nicocreon finished his life with many tortures.
Archimedes the Philosopher an excellent Mathematisian was slain by Marcellus
soldiers: Pythagoras with his threescore scholars was put to the sword.
Anacharsis died suddenly. Diodorus burst thorough hearts grief, by reason he
could not answer a question which Stilbo the Philosopher had propounded him.
Aristotle after he had lost the favor of Alexander, being in Calcide, drowned
himself in the flood Euripus. Calistines his scholar was cast hedlong out of
a window. Marcus Tullius had his ears and hands cut off, and set up in the
public place where the Drators declaimed.

Seneca was put to death by his scholar Nero, who had first caused his veins
to be opened in a bathe of hot water. Johannes Scotus reading in England, by a
sudden conspiracy of his scholars was with his best favorites put to death,
but if I should undertake to repeat all the hapless ends of these ancients
who were excellent in learning, it were too long for me to write, or you to
read. For which cause I will begin to let you understand the death of some
modern learned. Petrach died suddenly, Domitius Caldarinus perished through
the sickness of the plague. Consiliator was burned alive. Angelus Politianus
finished his days by having his brains dashed out against a wall. Peter Leo of
Spoletum was drowned in a ditch, the Lord Francis Pico was slain by his
tenants. Fisher and Thomas Moore were beheded, Cranmer and Latimer burned, the
rest since fresh in memory I need not to trouble you with: I only set these
down for the learned to consider upon and examine themselves by circumstances,
and cunningly canuase in their conscience an argument a comparatis.

How king Rodorigo the last of the Royal house of the Goths, lost his
kingdom and life thorough his incontinence.
IN the year 712. Roderigo reigned in Spain, who earnestly enamored of a
daughter of Iulians County of Cantabre, and desirous to gather the fruit of
his love because otherwise he might not in that the maiden was very honest and
virtuous, he sent her father ambassador into France, and by that opportunity
enforcing her, he satisfied his lewd and dissolute lust. Julian returning into
Spain, and understanding the heavy case and estate of his daughter, made show
before the king that he was utterly ignorant thereof, and after a few days he
fled into Africa with all his family: taking up his house in the city of
Lepte: and seeking out Muca the governor of Africa he told him of the
outrage done him by the king, and how for that cause he was come unto him.
First to offer him a great rich, and fair empire: next, to profer him his
service: and moreover said he, the time is come to revenge the Arabians which
were slain a few years past in the host of king Bamba. To the performance
whereof I will back you with the greater part of the Lords of Spain, who
will be ready to assist you in this enterprise, because the king is deadly
hated of them, both for his cruelty and lawless corruption.

Muca sent him unto king Mulit in Arabia, who hearing Iulianos purpose,
dispatched him with letters to Muca where in he wrote that he should favor him
with all reasonable helps. Muca gave him an hundredth horse and four hundredth
men on foot, under the conduct of a famous captain called Tariffe: with this
power they passed the Seas, and landed in Spain: and to the end they might the
more securely beard the enemy, they builded a city which they called by the
name of Tariffe captain of the Barbarians. And as soon as Iulio had given
notice to his confederates for what occasion he was come, and what desire he
had to revenge him of the injury done unto him by the king, many of them
united themselves with the Arabians, and ouerran all the country of Algazera
which the said Iuliano had in government under the said king.

The Arabians of Africa seeing the great progress and fortune the county had,
and assured of his faith, sent him twelu thousand horse, and a great multitude
of footmen, by reason that they had intelligence that the king had sent against
him his cousin Ignicus with a huge host, who fighting many times unhappily with
the Moors, at the last was himself slain, and all his followers cut in
pieces: whereupon the Moors being rid of this impediment, ouerran and spoiled
a great part of Spain. For which cause the king levied a greater army than
the first, and coming himself to wage the fight with the Moors, there fell a
terrible and dreadful battle between both the armies, which continued eight
continual days, save only the intermission of night, but by reason of the
rebellion of the two late kings sons called Detifa the king had the worst and
perished in the field with many other valiant persons: and the Moors like
courageous victors possessed the spoils. This defeat was on sunday being the
xi. of September in the year 719 The Moors attaining victory, had the
dominion of Spain.

Of many famous men who leaving the government of the Commonweal gave
themselves over to a private life.
CAto the Censor was the most virtuous and best reputed Roman that flourished
in that time: for during all the days of his life, there was never man that saw
him commit any light action, neither lose or diminishe any one inch of his
severe gravity. This man after he had lived fifty and eight years, leaving
the travails of the common wealth, went and spent the remnant of his life in
the kingdom of Naples in a village called at that day Picenio, and in this
time Pozzuolo living upon his own liuelihoods and reuenews: And whilst thus
this good and virtuous Cato lived sequestered from all others, sometimes reading
his books, some other times trimming his vines, there was one of his neighbors
who wrote upon his gate with a coal, O fortunat Cato thou only amongst al
others know how to live in this world. Lucullus the Consul and Roman
captain remained in the Parthian wars, and continued the same for the term
of sixteen years: in which he acquired much honor to Rome, many lauds for
the common weal, much fame for himself, and as great riches for his house.
This man, after he returned from Asia to Rome, and found the commonweal
altogether swarming with dissentions by reason of the factions of Scilla and
Marius, purposed with himself to leave Rome and to build him a certain place
of pleasure near Naples, upon the river of the sea at this day called
Castello di Lupo, in which place he reposed ten years: entitled to all kind of
pleasures and quietness of mind, free from all travails and troubles, till
such time as he finished his wearied age with a contented and worthy death.

Dioclesian, after he had governed Rome and the emperie for the space of
eighteen years, utterly refusing all the Empire, departed Rome, and repaired
to Salona in Dalmatia where he was borne. But two years after that he had
refused the Romain empire, an honorable embassage was sent by the Senate unto
him, praieng him earnestly that he would have pity on the commons, and
content himself to return to Rome. It chanced that at such time as the said
Ambassadors came into his poor and homely cottage, he himself was in a
little garden he had, setting of Lettises and diverse other herbs; and as soon
as he had heard the discourse of that they were to deliver him, he returned
them this answer: Seems it a requisite matter unto you my friends, that he
who has planted, cut, and watered lettice as these be, should leave them to
seek royalties, and not to eat them in repose and quiet in his own house?
yes my friends, it is better eating these in quiet, then governing of Rome with
care.

Moreover he said unto them, Now have I proved how much it avails to
command, and how healthful it is to plough and dig. Leave me therefore, I
pray you, in my house: for why, I rather desire to get my living in this
village with my hands, than to have the charge of the Roman empire
accompanied with hate. Porides the Athenian having in great justice governed
his common weal for the space of six and thirty years, at last growing
old and fatiate of public affairs, departing Athens he went unto a certain
Lordship of his left him by his ancestors in a certain village without the
city; in which plieng his book by night, and laboring his fields by day he
lived fifteen years more; Above the doors of his house these words were
written. In veni portum: spes and fortuna, valete
Nil mihi vobiscum est, ludite nunc alios.


Scipio the Affrican was one of the best beloved and honored captains that
ever Rome had: for in the space of six and twenty years wherein he continued
war in Spain, in Africa and Asia, he never committed any dishonost action,
neither lost any battle: he never denied any man Justice, neither was there
ever one obscure or base thought known in him: he subingated Africa, ruinated
Carthage, overcame Hannibal, destroyed Nununtia, and also restored Rome, which
after the battle of Cannas was almost forsaken and abandoned. This man in the
two and fifty year of his age departed Rome, and retired himself unto a
little farm of his which was betwixt Pozzuolo and Capua, in which (as Seneca
witnesses) he had no other revenues but certain fields wherein he lived, a
house wherein he ledged, a barn wherein he bathed, and one of his Nephues who
served him: And with so great affection retired he himself to the farm
house, that for eleven years space which he lives, he went not once to Capua
or set foot toward Rome. All these excellent men of whom we have spoken, with
many infinite others also, left their kingdoms, Consulships, governments,
cities, palaces, favorites, cares and riches for no other intent, but a
quiet life: intending after worldly affairs to reconcile themselves to a more
straight order, having respect to that which insueth after death.

A most subtle dispute made in Antioch in the presence of king Ptolomey, by
seven several Ambassadors which of their Commonweals had the best laws and
most notable Customs.
PLutarch writes in his book De exilio, that king Ptolomey being in
Antiochus, there were upon an appointed day at dinner with him many
ambassadors from the Romans, Carthagenians, Scicilians, Rhodians, Athenians,
Lacedaemonians, and Scicilians: who falling into disputation amongst
themselves, every one began to praise and extol their countries Laws and
customs, as the best and most exquisite.

The dispute was handled with great feruencie between them, and with many
reasons each one endeavored himself to dignifie his state: for which cause
Ptolomey destrous to know the truth, and to bring all contentions and discords
to an exigent, commanded them that every one should write or speak their
customs or perfect Laws which they had in their commonweals: for by that
means it might be easily judged, which province best deserved the Palm of
justice.

The Ambassadors of Rome began and said, We hold our Temples in wondrous great
honor and reverence, we yield great observance to our governors and rulers, we
greeuouslie punish the wicked offenders and malefactors.

The Ambassadors of Carthage said, in the Commonweal of Carthage, the nobles
cease not to fight, the commons and mechanical persons to labor, the
Philosofers and learned to instruct.

They of Scicilie said, In our land we observe entire justice, we traffic
with upright conscience, and generally embrace equality.

They of Rhodes said, In our common weal the old people are honest, the
younger sort shamefast, the Ladies and women solitary and silent.

The Athenian Ambassadors said: In our common weal the rich are not permitted
nor allowed to be partial; the poor to be idle; neither those that govern,
are suffered to be ignorant.

The Lacedaemonians said, in our State, envy reigns not, because all are
egall: nor avarice because our goods are in common: nor any suffered to be
idle, but every one does labor.

The Scicionians said, In our common weal, we permit nor maintain any
trauailer, least returning home again he should bring us matters of novelty,
neither admit we Physicians, who spoil and kill the whole nor Orators, who
maintain public contentions.

As Soon as Ptolomey had heard all the seven Ambassadors, he praised all their
commonweals, saying: that they were justly and worthily governed,
commendinge their customs and holding their laws praise worthy: where upon
with great honors every one returned to his lodging, glorifieng and rejoicing
in their credit, and satisfied in his justice.

Strange Laws of Tirzus the Tyrant where-through he withstood Conspiracies.
TRizus the Tyrant indeuouring to prevent the coniurations and tresons which
might be imagined and wrought against him by his citizens: forbad them by an
especial and prescript law, to surcease their private and public conferences,
tyranizing as well over their toongs as their tresure. But his citizens enuieng
and hating this his commandments, kept their consultations by becks, gestures,
and eager countenances when they were agreeued, and smiling and pleasant looks
when they were contented: if dangers threatened them they frowned, if Fortune
fawned they were not froward: by this means expressing and showing the
affections of their minds, and de luding the policy of the tyrant.

Tirzus seeing and beholding this variety in the faces of his citizens, began
to fear, and for that cause forbad them such like significatiue and mute
consult: whereupon, one of his citizens amongst the rest, repining at his
tyranny invented a new means: and entering the palace with other friends,
wept and cried out very bitterly. The Tyrant understanding hereof, hasted
him with some of his guard, to deprive the eyes of their natural liberty, in
like manner as he had reduced the tongue and gestures into servitude, but the
people amazedlie hating his insolence, drew the weapons out of the hands of his
guard, and murdered both him and all his followres.

FINIS.

