An Argument, wherein the apparaile of women is both reproved and defended.

ANNO MDLI.

decorative border 1534



The printer to the reder.
THe gentilwoman, which has caused this matter to be printed, happened a
little before Shroftetide, to be at a bidden feast in London, in company of
diverse gentle men and gentle women: where amongst other talk, first of the
baseness of our coin, and afterward of excess in apparayle (which are the
common talks of these days:) One of the company began to make much adooe
against women, for laiyng out their hear, for wearyng of verdingales, for
bonne graces, for silks, and.xx. other things. Wherein it seemed to this
gentle woman, he used not that temperance, that his profession and lernyng
required. And therefore she mildely answered: that seus God has created the
things of this world for the service of man, and not man for them: she
thought, that women as well as men, might use the same fair things of this
world in their apparaile, which without some facion would be unseemly. And
like as their hear, or such other, was a beauty, which being coupled with
honesty, makes the person the more acceptable: so being coupled with the
contrary, it disgraceth and makes them the more loathsome. Wherefore the thing
being so indifferent, if it should not be laufull for them that be honest, to
be clenly and fair, it might follow, that the other sort should be more set by
than they: and so should honesty decaie. In deed (said she) if you could
bring men as well to reform their hertes, as ye would have women do their
apparaile, ye should never need thus to braule with us. Whereupon the man waxed
somewhat warm in agrauatyng the mattier, and (by a manner of raylyng) after
many sentences of scripture alleged, he fell into an oracion, that Cato made
against the insolence of women, and so handled the matter, that it seemed he
had put all men to silence: in such wise as for a good space, no man spoke a
word. At last master William Thomas, being in the company, began to say.
This is much like the nonnes lesson, that when she had found Omnia probate,
till she was great with child, could not find, Quod bonum est tenete. For
(under correction, quoth he) though ye have eloquently rehearsed Catos tale, yet
have you not told the occasion of the mattier, nor the end that it came to:
which if ye had done, should rather make against you, than with you. For when
Cato had sated, as ye have rehearsed, Lucius Valerius, one of the Tribunes,
arose and made answer. And so began he the oracion, that Valerius in that case
had made. Addyng further, that the law Oppia was thereupon abrogate. Which was
a plain proof (said he) that the Senate allowed not Catos opinion.

Thus they argued to and fro, till at length they agreed, that all clenly
ornaments were laufull unto wo^men, so long as they provoked neither
concupiscence, nor vain glory: wherein they ended the mattier for that time.
Now this gentle woman restyng, not fully satisfied with the once heryng of
those oracions, desired master Thomas of friendship, to send them translated
unto her. Which he promised to do. And all be it, that he willed her, to keep
it to her self: yet she thinkyng it such a matter for the honest defense of
women, as ought not to be hidden, has entreated me, thus to set it forth,
trustyng to pacify him well enough, though he would take it unkindly. Willing me
besides on her behalf, to beseech you all (gentle reders) not to think she
has done it of any purpose, to maintain excess (which she her self
naturally abhors) but even simply for the pleasant and well handlyng of the
mattier: to stop their mouths, that with raylyng on women's manners, seem to
procure them selves a credit.

The letter sent by master Thomas to the gentle woman, with the translacions
that she desired.
According to your request, I have done my best in translatyng as well Cato his
oracion, alleged (by the man ye wot of) in disprayse of women, as also the
other oracion, made by Lucius Valerius: which I recited for answer to the
same. And because the law Oppia, mentioned in both those oracions, is not
plainly set forth in Liuie, at the time of the making thereof: I therefore
have gathered such private contribucions, as the Romayne people charged them
selfs withal about that time, to the intent, that besides the argument of
your matter, ye may also understand the great kyndnesse, that the people at
those days used toward their common wealth. When almost every man had rather
perysshe privately, than through his default the common wealth should sustain
any prejudice. O, if we had no more but such women now, as were than, I would
think our world happy. But like as they than had golden hertes, what so ever
their apparayle was, so now (if I durst speak) I would say, there be many in
golden apparayle, that have rusty hertes. And what of that? Should I therefore
condemn you all? No no. If I had been so much your adversary, I would
neither in such a matt^er have taken this peine, nor yet (when it was) have
spoken as I did in mainteynyng your quarrel.

But because I saw you matched with one as rough as Cato, who not contented
with natural reasons, burdeined you so far with scripture, that ye should not
be allowed to wear any pleasant apparaile: me thought I could no less in
conscience, but take your part. And though he mounted in choler against you (as
these men do, that may not be contraried) yet I trust, in a mattier of such
weight, ye woll be well advised ere ye follow his hasty persuasion. God
forbid I should pretend to maintain you in pomp. For I know there is so
little need thereof, that I would be sorry ye should not do as ye list. But be
it, or be it not, or be as it may be: Sens ye required me so ernestly to do
this for you, now I have performed my promise, I shall as hertily desire you
to take it for a witness of my good will and frendeship: and in no wise to
let it pass your hands, lest men should think, with flatteryng you, I
should go about to mainteyne a thing most necessary to be restreigned. Thus
with my herty commendacions. etc.

Your own to command William Thomas.

The notes of the peoples benevolence promised in my letter.
THE wars, that about.MM. years ago happened between the Romans and
Carthaginenses, were so notable, as lightly the greatter have not ben heard
of, as well for the puissance or greatness of both those common wealths, as
for the long time of their obstinate contencion. The circumstances whereof are
to be read in Liuie, and other good authors, that have written it at length.
But to my purpose now, ye must understand, that Annibal (the notablest enemy
that ever the Romans had) not long before these matters, had diverse times
overthrown the Romans in plain battle: and had so beaten them, that
after their fall at Cannas, where a wonderful nombre as well of Senators as
others, were slain, it was reasosoned in Rome: whether it were better for them
to abandon the city, and every man to shyft for him self: or else to abide the
adventure that the Gods would send them. For undoubtedly if Annibal after
his victory had gone straight to Rome, the romayne astate had than finysshed
his glory. But whether his slackenesse gave them courage: or their
valiantness made them desperate: or that the sterres had predestinate a
greatter felicity unto them: or what so ever the occasion was, the Romans
perseuered, and by littell and littell so recovered, that at length they chased
Annibal out of Italy, and sendyng Scipio into Affrike, did unto Carthage
that, which Annibal might have done to Rome, sacked it, spoiled it, burned it,
and rooted up the very foundacions. Nevertheless ete they could bring this
to pass, they were many times in so great extremitees, that if the private
persons of Rome had not with their own maintained the public charges, their
things could never have prospered as they did.

For first when Titus Sempronius, and Quintus Fabius Maximus, were consules,
the Scipios, that than had the governance of the armies in Spain, wrote unto
Rome specially for garments and vittailes: without the which they could not
maintain the wars. And because the tributes of Sicilia and Sardinia were
scarce able to furnishe the armies continuyng in those countries, and that
there were so many Romans slain at Tras^menus and Cannas, that few were left
to pay any tribute at home. Therefore Fuluius the Praetor, persuaded the people,
that for as much as the customers and fermours of the revenues of the common
wealth, were become very rich, as well of possessions as of goods, through
the use of public things: Therefore it was now necessary they should be
constreigned, with their substance to succor the common wealths necessitee,
in furnishing the army of Spain: to be paid again of the first money, that
should come to the Treasorie. For the which the Praetor appointed a day, that
the people should assemble to determine. At which day XIX. of those
customers and fermours offered them selves, to discharge the whole provision.
So that the army, for that time, was no less furnished, by private men, than
the common wealth would have done, in time of their most prosperitee.

Afterward, in the consulate of Quintus Fabius Maximus, and Marcus Marcellus,
upon the news, that the Sicilians rebelled, and were in arms, when Titus
Octacilius should be sent with an army thither: there wanted a nombre of
mariners and other things to furnyshe the navy.

Wherefore a general order was taken, that the Romans, after certain rates
of their substance should provide mariners at their own charges, some one,
some.iii. some.v. and some vii. paid for an whole year. Which was the first
time, that ever any Romayne army was set forth at the charges of the private
citesins.

An other time, when the Treasoury was clean without money, so that the
Censoures had not, wherewith to repair the temples: nor to give the Curules
their horses, nor to do such other things as apperteygued to their offices.
The calamitee thereof moved a nombre of those, that ought to have had money of
them, contrary wise to come with money unto them, exhortyng them to do all
things as liberally, as if the common wealth florisshed, promisyng, not to
demand repayment before the wars were finished: like as the masters, of whom
the slaves were bought, refused to take their money before the end of the
wars. Which good disposicion being also found in the people, moved the
officers to take up the goods of the widows and orphans upon credit, to be
answered of the common wealth: and so far this good will increased, that the
fame thereof engendered so great a liberalitee amongst the soldiers in the
camp, that no pryuate horse manne, nor Centurion, would receive his paies,
calling them Mercenarij that otherwise did.

But the last and most notable was, after the severe sentence given against the
Capuans, persuaded by the oracion of Marcus Attilius Regulus, the ambassadors,
as well of Sicilia, as of Capua being than dispatched, the Consules tended to
the appoinctment of the army, and that performed, began to treat of the
furniture of their navy. To the which, because they wanted as well mariners
as money, they commanded every private man, after his rate, to provide
mariners and galey men: and to vittayle and pay them for.XXX. days, as it had been seen tofore. This proclamacion so much sterred men's hertes, that they
wanted rather capitaynes, than matter of rebellion, saying, that the Consules,
after the ruin of the Sicilians and Capuans, had determined also to destroy
the romayne people, which was already consumed by the tributes of so many
years: having nothing left than but the bare land spoiled by the wars: their
slaves were all taken from them, some to the feelde, and some to the sea: And
between the findyng of mariners, and paiyng of tributes, that little silver and
money that they had, was clean spent. So that it was impossible to constreigne
them, to give that they had not. Wherefore if they would sell their goods,
they might: and than could they use no more crueltee but against their bodies,
that only rested: which if they should be compelled to redeem, they could
not, wantyng wherewith.

These things were not spoken privately, or secretly, but openly, and to the
Consules faces: the people assemblyng by heaps together, whom they pacified as
well as they could. Nevertheless the next day, the Senate being assembled,
it was after long disputacion concluded, that whether it were right or wrong,
this burdeine must needs be sustained by private persons, the Treasourie
being utterly without money. And every man restyng as it were amassed at the
mattier, the Consule Leuinus spoke on this wise.

LIke as our office is above the Senate, and the Senators superiors to the
people in honor: so ought we to be the chief and first of all other, to
enterprise any great or weighty matter. For he that woll charge his inferiors
with any grievous imposicion, and first practice it in him self, shall find
them the better disposed to obey, esteemyng their charge the less, when they
see their betters freely take the greatter part of the burdein upon them.
Wherefore to the end that the Romayne people be not disapointed of this navy,
that we intend to make, and that private men refuse not to find the mariners:
let us command as well our selves as all you that be Senators, that to morrow
next we put all our gold and silver, and out coined brass in common, i^ such
wise as no man reteyne more to him self than his own ^ynges, his wives, and
childernes: and to his son his table it is: and he that has wife or daughters,
one ounce of gold. And they that have fitten, as magistrates, in the feate
Curule, may reserve their horses fornimentes, and two pounds of silver, to
use in a salt and goblette for the divine service. The rest of the Senators to
have but one pound of silver, and all other householders to reserve only in
mass money, 5000. asses a piece. All our other gold and silver, and brass
money, let us immediately bring unto the.iii. magistrates of the bank, without
other determinacion of the Senate, to the end that our voluntary contribucion
and vehement desire to the maintenance of our common wealth, may first allure
the minds of the chivalry, and consequentely of the people, to do the like.
This only way we the Consules have found after much disputacion, which with
gods help let us take in hand. For as long as we preserve the astate of
our common wealth: so long we do mainteyne the surety of our own private
things. Where as habandonyng the public, we can keep nothing our own.
Whereunto universally all their voices were so agreeable, that the Consules
being highly thanked, and the Senate dissolved, every man applied him self
with so much have, to bring in their gold, silver, and money, that well was
he, which in the regesters might be written amongst the first, in such
wise, that neither the officers sufficed to receive, nor the clerks to write:
which conformity of the Senate, was generally followed by the knights, and
consequently by the people. So that without other commandment or persuasion
of the magistrates, the common Treasourie was furnisshed with money to make the
paies, and the navy sufficiently equipped to the sea. And so all things
necessary for the wars being provided, the Consules departed toward their
provinces.

T. L. Decad. 4. lib. 4.
EMonge the cares of the greatte wars, either yet scarsely finished, or like
to continue, there happened a small thing to be spoken of, though nevertheless
it increased by parttakynges to great contencion. Marcus Fundanius, and Lucius
Valerius tribunes, proponed unto the people the abrogacion of the law called
Oppia. This law was set forth by Caius Oppius, one of the tribunes, when
Quintus Fabius, and Titus Sempronius were Consules, as the greattest heat of
the punike war^ that no woman should have above half an ounce of gold in his
apparayle, nor wear garments wrought of diverse colors, nor should ride in
chariottes in Rouse or other town, or within a mile of any of them, unless it
were to the open sacrifices. Marcus and Publius Iunij Brutij like wise being
tribunes of the people, defended the law Oppia, saying: They would not suffer
it to be annulled. And many noble men drew together some to persuade, and some
to dissuade the mattier. In so much that the Capitol was replenyshed with a
multitude of men, aduaunsyng and repugnyng this law. The matrones, neither for
fear of authoritee, nor for shame, nor yet for the commandment of their
housbandes could be kept in: but fitted all the streets of the city, and
kept the ways enteryng in to the high street, entreatyng all men as they
passed: that seeing their common wealth florisshed, and every man's private good
fortune daiely increased, they would be contented, that the matrones might also
be restored unto their ancient ornaments. This frequensie of women daiely
increased. For the women of the towns and villages nere there about resorted
to the city, and took on them so much courage, that they went to the
Consules, the Pretors, and the other magistrates, besechyng them to favor
their cause. But Marcus Porcius Cato was so extreme an adversary against their
desires, that for the maintenance of the law, which they sought to abrogate,
he made this oracion.

The oracion of Cato against women's libertee.
IF every one of you, O Romans, had determined to have preserved the right
and majesty of a husband over his own wife, we should now have had less
business with all these women together. But as our libertee, by our own
weakness is overcome of the women in our own houses: even so here in the
open streets it is overthrown and trodden underfoot. And because we would not
every man particularly resyst his own: therefore now we are abashed to resyst
them all together. In deed I thought it had been but a fable feigned, that in a
certain Island all the mankind, by conspiracy of the women, was utterly
destroyed: but now I see, there is no kind so small, in whom consists not
extreme peril, it they be suffered to assemble, to devise, and to have secret
consultacions. And I can scarsely in my mind dyscerne, whether be the worse,
the thing it self, or the example, by which it is attempted. The one whereof
apperteyneth unto us Consules and magistrates: and the other unto you Romans.
For whether the thing proponed be convenient, or not for the common wealth, it
touches you, by whose voices it must be determined. This stir of the women,
whether it be grown of it self, or raised by you Marcus Fundanius and Lucius
Valerius, sens undoubtedly the blame thereof apperteyneth unto the magistrates,
I wotte not, unto whom it is more reprocheable, unto you the Tribunes, or unto
us the Consules. To you, if ye have allured the women to move Tribuniciall
sedicions: And to us, if we shall be now constreigned to accept laws by the
compulcion of women, as we have done here to fore by the common people. Treuly
I came even now through the midst of the women, not without blushyng. And if
the respect of the maiestee and shame fastnes of every of them apart, had not
retained me more than the regard of them al together (that they should not
seem rebuked of the Consule) I would have said: what new trycke is this? to
run abroad to stop the ways, and to entreat strange men? Could not every
one of you have desired this of hit own at home? what, are you more pleasant
abroad, than within the doors? and more of other men's, than of your husbands.
For in deed if men can not of their own right keep their wives within their
due terms, it shall little avail what laws be made or unmade here. Our
ancestors would not consent, that women should dyspose any thing though
well it were their own, without the authoritee of their superiors: And
therefore they were always directed by their fathers, their brethren, and
their husbands. And we nevertheless (by gods leave) woll suffer them to
meddle with the rule of the common wealth, to myngell them selfs with us in
the open street, in the parliament, and in the Squittines. For what else do
they now in the streets, and at the corners, but comfort, some to forder the
Tribunes purpose, and some other, that the law may be abrogate. Bridle (I
say) this arrogant sex, and these untameable beasts. For if ye do not
bridle them now, never look to bridle them. This is the least thing, that
offends the women of all the things, that by the customs or laws they are
burdened, but they desire a libertee of all things, or rather to say the
troth, a lasciviousness.

For if they prevail in this, what woll they not attempt? Consider all the
laws that concern women, by the which our ancestors restreigned their
libertee, making them obedient to their housebandes: and when you have all
gathered, it is evident, ye can yet scarsely rule them. Wherefore if ye now
suffer your wives to reprove laws, and thus by one and one to wrest them out
of your hands, and at length to make them selfs equal unto their husbands:
think you than, ye shall be hable to support them? For when they are become your
fellows: forthwith they woll be your betters. By god, they not only refuse
to be burdened with any new mattier, but also requiryng not the right they
offer a wrong: that a law, which by due order has been decreed, and with the
use and experience of so many years allowed, should now be annulled: Meaning,
with the abrogatyng of one law to weaken the rest. There is no law, that
serves to every man's profit: but this ought to be regarged, whether it be
commodiouse for the greatter part and generally. For if every man might repeal
or condemn that part of the law, that privately annoyeth him self: what
should it avail the nombre to make laws? when incontinently they, against
whom it were made, might annull them. I would feign hear nevertheless, for
what cause the matrones should royle forth so amassed, that scarsely they can
forbear the high street, or the counsel house. Is it for the redemption of
their fathers, their housbandes, their children, or their brethren out of the
hands of Annibal? There is no such cause why. And god defend our common
wealth should be in any such necessitee. And yet when it was so in deed, their
pitious prayers were rejected. Perchance they will say: neither pitee nor
care for their own, but religion only has drawn them together to receive
the mother Idea of Pesinunte, coming out of Phrygia. O, what pretense or
surmyse may be devised to cloak the sediciouse assemble of these women? They
may say, it is because we would glister in gold and purple, that we may
ride in chariottes through the city both workedaies and holydaies, triumphyng
over the law now overcome and abrogate: and over your suffrages taken and
wrested out of your hands: to the end our sumptuousenesse and excess be not
restreigned. You have heard me often complain of women's superfluouse
expenses, and many times of men's, not only of the private, but also of
magistrates: and that this city is pestred with two sundry vices, Avarice and
Prodigalitee: which two pestilences have been the subversion of all great
empyres. For now the more that the good fortune of our common wealth daily
increases, and that our Empire is enlarged, we being entered into Greece and
Asia, countries replenished with all deliciouse things: and that also we
begin to draw unto us the treasures of kings: the more do I fear, least
those things have rather taken us, than we them. These pictures and images
brought hither from Siracusa, are dangerous unto this town. Yea I here diverse
men ouermuche preyse the ornaments of Corinth, and of Athens, making them as
wonders, and laughyng these earthen gods of the Romans to scorn. But I had
rather we should stycke to these our favorable gods, as I trust they will
be, if we conserve them in their places. In our fathers time king Pirrhus, by
his ambassador tempted not only the minds of men, but also of women, with
presents, e^ ever the law Oppia was made to prohibit their excess: and yet
was there none that would receive them. And for what cause trow you? Even for
the same cause that our ancestors had, not to think that ever any such law
should need to be made. For there was than none excess that required it. Yea
like as it is necessary, diseases be first known er ever the remedies be
had: So evil desires are syredde er ever laws be made to refourme them. What
was the cause that the law Licinia for five hundred acres of land was made?
Law Licinia.
Was it any other, but the insatiable desire of men to ioygne land unto land?
And wherefore was the law Cincia, Law Cincia,
of gifts and presents ordeigned? but because the people than were beecome
tributaries and vassalles unto the Senators. It was no marvel, that neither
the law Oppia, nor any other like was than made for the bridelyng of women's
pomp, when gold and purple being freely given and offered, could not be
received. Mary if Cineas, with those presents, should now go about the town,
he should find them, that openly would receive them. And truly I can not
imagen either the cause or the reason of some men's gredines. For like as the
prohibityng of somewhat unto one, which to an other is permitted, seems to
be grounded on some natural shamefastness, or vncomelynesse: Even so, if all
the apparayle of you women were of one sort, whereof should any of you fear to
be noted? Truly the shame either of avarice or of pouertee is very great: but
the law clereth you of both, when you have not that, which is not lauful for
you to wear. O, (says the rich woman) I cannot away with this equalitee.
Why should not I be decked with gold and purple? And why should other folks
pouertee be hid under the color of this law? that wantyng the things they
can not have, it should seem they might have them, if it were not prohibited.
But will you Romans put this in strife amongst your wives? that the rich
shall have that, which other may not? And that the poor (because they would
not therefore be contempned) shall strain them selfs above their powers? For
seus they begin to be ashamed of that that needs not: at length they shall
not be ashamed when they need. She that can provide of her self, may do it,
but she that can not, must crave of her housebande. And happy shall that
housebande be, that whether he be prayed or not prayed (if he give not) shall
see that given by an other, that he has not given him self. Even now ye see,
they openly entreat other women's husbands, and more then that, they require
the law and the voices: and through their importance do of some opteine
grant, against him self, his goods and children. For as soon as the law
quayleth from bridelyng thy wifes excess, look thou no longer to bridell her.
Nor believe not (O, Romans) that ever the matter will return unto the astate
it was in before the making of this law. For it were better, not to accuse an
evil man, than to leave him unpunished. And this excess should have been more
tolerable, if it had never ben spoken of, than it will be now, if ye break
these bands. Like unto the prouokyng of a fierce wild beast, being left go
after he has been chafed in hold. Wherefore mine opinion is, ye should in no
wise abrogate the law Oppia. Not withstandyng I beseech all the gods to
prospere your determinacions, what so ever they shall be.

After this, when the Tribunes of the people, that had professed also to
interrupt this matter, had spoken somewhat to the same purpose, At the last
Lucius Valerius, for the opteynyng of the contrary (by him set forth
before) spoke on this wise.

The oracion of Lucius Valerius against Catos.
IF private men only had taken in hand to persuade or dissuade that that we
desire, I for my part, thinking there had been enough said on both sides, would
with silence have abidden your judgments. But now that so grave a man, as the
Consule Marcus Portius, not only with his authoritee (which though he had not
spoken, had yet ben of great importance) but also with a long exact and well
handled oracion has impugned our request. I am constreigned, with a few
words to answer him, though he has consumed mo words in women's correction,
than in disswadyng our purpose, and all to the end, that he would bring in
doubt, whether the thing by him reproved, proceeded of the women voluntarily, or
by our procurement. Wherefore I shall defend the matter, but not our selfs:
whom the Consule has burdeyned more in words than in deed. He calls this
company of women, sometime a sedicion, and sometime a rebellion: that the
wives, in the time of a peaceable florisshyng and fortunate common wealth,
should openly desire the abrogacion of a law, made against them in the
terrible sharp time of wars. I know, that to aggrauate the matter, both
these and other such words are gathered. And we all know Marcus Cato to be,
not only a grave orator, but also sometime very bitter: not withstandyng that
he is gentill of nature. But for all that, what noueltee have these wives
attempted in coming by companies abroad to pursue their own cause? Came they
never abroad before? I will turn over thine own books of Originalles against
the, and see there, how often times they have done this, and all to the profit
of the common wealth. And to begin, First when Romulus reigned, the Capitol
being already taken by the Sabines, and they feightyng with baners displaied in
the midst of the high street: was not the battle stayed by the women's
rennyng between both armies? And after the expulsion of kings, when the army
of the Volsci were encamped within five miles of this town, under the leadyng
of Marcus Coriolanus, did not the women turn back that army, that else had
destroyed this city? And when this town was taken by the french men, did not
the matroues of their own free will, openly give the gold, wherewith the city
was redeemed? Yea and (to pass over these antiquities) even in the last
wars, when most need of money was, did not the widows relieve the Treasoury
with their own money? And when the new gods were fet home to help us in our
great need, went not the matrones to the sea side, to receive the mother of
the gods? He will perchance say, the causes are not like. In deed I mean
not to compare the causes together.

For it suffiseth me to prove this no new thing. And where in things
indifferently belongyng as well to men as to women, no man has wondered at
their coming abroad: why do we now marvel, they should so do in a matter
of their own? And what (I pray you) have they done? Helas we are very heard
of hearing: if when masters disdeigne not to hear the requests of their
slaves, we shall refuse to here our honest wives. But now to come to the
matter, wherein the Consules oracion tends unto two points. First, it shall be
against his will, that any law should be abrogate: and specially, that a law,
which concerns the restreinct of women's excess, should be annulled. So that
the first part of the Consules oracion seems a common defense of all laws:
and the other against superfluitee, seems agreeable to his severe customs.
Wherefore it I allege not the vanitee that is in both these points, it were to
be feared, lest some of you might be persuaded to an error. For like as I
confess, that none of those laws, which were made, not of the necessitee of
a certain time, but for the perpetual profit to endure for ever, ought in no
wise to be annihilate: unless it be such, as either experience condemns, or
some state of the common wealth declares to be unprofitable. Even so do I see
those laws that special time has been the occasion of, to be mortal (if I
may so call them) and mutable as times are. For those that are made in peace,
the war many times does break: and the peace likewise them that are made in
war. As in guidyng of a ship, the caulme requires one thing, and the
storm an other. So that these things being of diverse natures, I would know,
of whether kind think you this law to be, that we do abrogate? Is it one of
those ancient kyngely laws, made at the foundation of this town? Or (in the
second degree) is it any of them, written in the.XII. tables by the.X. men,
created to prescribe laws? without the which (because our auncetours thought
the honor of women not possible to be conserved) we also should fear, that
with the breakyng hereof the shamefastness and holiness of our wives should
perisshe? Who knows not this to be a new law, made.XX. year ago, in the
time of Quintus Fabius and Titus Sempronius Consules, without the which the
matrones, having lived so many years with excellent customs: why should it be
feared, upon the taking away of this law, that they should fall to so
disordinate expenses? In deed, if this law had been made to bridell the excess
of women, it might be suspected, that the breche of it might revoke their
lasciuiousenesse. But why it was made, the time it self does well declare.
Annibal in Italy had won the battle at Cannas, and having gotten Tarentum,
Arpos, and Capua, it seemed he was coming with his army to Rome, Our
subjects rebelled. There were no soldiers to furnishe the army. None to
defend the navy. No money in the Treasoury. The slaves were bought to arm
the galeis, on condition their masters should be paid for them after the
war. At the self same time, corn, and all other things, that the war
required, being lackyng, the publicanes undertook the prouysion. We paid out
gallie slaves of our own purses, every man after the rate of his taxyn^ we
gave al our gold and silver to the public, the Senators being the first that
began so to do. The widows and orphans brought their money to the
Treasoury, and a certain proporcion was prescribed: above the rate whereof, no
person might keep in his house, gold or silver, or any coined money of silver
or brass. It is much like, that the matrones should be than so decked with
ornaments and excess, that the law Oppia was necessary to bridell them. When
(the sacrifice of Ceres being deferred, and the matrones all occupied in
mournyng) the Senators commanded them to cease their doule, within XXX.
days. Who knows not, that because it was requisite, all the private money
should be converted to the public use, that the very pouertee and misery of
the city has written this law to continue so long as the cause, wherefore it
was made, should endure? For it those things should be observed for ever, that
by the Senate was decreed, are by the people commanded through the necessitee
of that time: why do we repaie money to private men? why do we pledge our
public revenues for present money? why do we not bie slaves to send into
the wars? why do not we that be private, find galey men, as we did than?
All other degrees, and all men do feel the amendment of our astate: our
wives only shall not atteygne the fruit of our public peace and prosperitee?
we men wear purple embrodered, being magistrates and priests: and our sons
like wise wear gowns of purple guarded: the like whereof is permitted unto the
magistrates of our Colonies, and to our burgeses enfraunchesed: as here in Rome
the basest sort of magistrates, even the street masters, have their gowns
guarded. and not the quycke only have this pre-eminence, but the dead also may
be burnt in purple: and shall we keep the use thereof only from our wives? And
being laufull for the that art a man, to have purple in the coueryng of thy
bed: will thou not suffer the mother of thy house to wear a garment thereof?
Shall thy horse be better apparayled than thy wife? Mary in purple, which
wears and will consume, (though not rightful) yet I see some cause of
sparyng: but in gold, wherein beside the workemanshyp, can be no loss, what
evil can there be? But rather a store beneficial, as well to the public as
to the private behofe, proved by experience? He says, that when the women
have it not, there can be no private envy between them. But truly they are
all in sorrow and displeasure, to see those ornaments permitted unto the wives
of our subjects the latins, which are prohibited unto our own: and seeing
those decked with gold and purple, ride about the town, and them selfs follow
a foot, as though the empire were in their citees, and not in ours. Such
things are enough to sterre men's hertes: and what trow you than it will do
unto simple women, which will be moved with a little? They have no part,
neither in magistrates, nor in priesthod, nor in triumphs, nor in arms, nor
in guyftes, nor in the spoils of war. The only glory of women is their
clenlines, their ornaments and apparayle: wherein they rejoice and triumph.
Which things our auncetours called the women's world. And what other thing can
they leave of when they mourn, but purple and gold? Or when they leave
mournyng* what else can they take again? In the time of reioysyng, or of
supplicacions, what can they add but their better apparaile? what though the
law Oppia were abrogate, should it no more be in your powers, to forbid your
daughters, your wives, your sisters, and as many as be under your rule, the
things that the law now forbids? The women will never think them selfs
rid out of servitude, as long as ye keep their derest things from them. And
they abhor that libertee, that is like unto widowhead, or the death of their
parents or children. They had rather the rule of their apparayle were in your
power, than in the laws. And you ought to have them in your protection and
defense, and not in servitude* that ye might rather be called fathers or
housbandes, than masters. The Consule even now used greuouse terms, calling
this the women's sedicion and rebellion: as though it were to be feared, they
should take the holy hill or the Auentine upon them, as the obstinate people
sometime did. Nevertheless, what so ever ye shall determine: they simple souls
must abide it. Wherefore the greatter your power is, so much the more
temperately ought ye to use it. These things being spoken both with and
against the law: the next day the nombres of women increased abroad, and all
in a flock besette the doors of the Brutij, which were the Tribunes, that
resisted the purpose of their Colleagues: and would not depart thense, till
these Tribunes relented unto them. Whereupon there rested no more doubt, but
that all the Tribes would abrogate the law. So that.XX. years after it was
made, it was annulled.

A table of such words as the reder smally skilled, shall not well perceive.
ASses, comes of as, assis, a small coin among the Romans.x. of them did
countrevayle our sterlyng grote. five thousand amounts to viii. li. vi. s.
viii. d. sterlyng.

Auentinus, an hill at Rome.

Bank, is the place of exchange, or taking of money upon interest.

Capitol, was the fortress and chief place of Rome, where the Senate
assembled in council.

Consules, were two chief officers of the city of Rome, which were chosen
every year, and bare highest authoritee in the common wealth.

Censor, a judge of men's manners. Also such one as was appointed to value men's
goods.

Colonies were certain nombres of people sent out of Rome to inhabit the
countries conquered by them.

Curules, were little carts or dreies, having in them chaiers of yuory,
wherein there satte certain officers, which had the charge and ouersyght of
the buildyndynges in Rome: sometime it is used for the same officers.

Holy hill, when the people rebelled against their rulers, they took those
places for their strength: and kept them till they had their wills.

Idea, the mother of the gods.

Mercenarii, hired soldiers.

Matrones, were the citesyns wives of Rome.

Martius Coriolanus, a noble Romayne, who being unkindly exiled out of his
country, provoked a people called Volsci to war against them: and would by no
mean be pacified: but by the only entreaty of his mother, that made him
retire from his enterprise.

Praetor, in the old time was every officer, that had the rule of any army.
Afterward he that had judicial authoritee, as it were the chief judge, and had
other judges sittyng under him.

Phrygia, a realm in Asia the less.

Pyrrhus, a king of Epyre, that made war to the Romans.

Publicanes, were certain fermours that took the customs and other public
revenues in fee ferme.

Public, is as much to say, as the common.

Punike wars, were the wars between the Carthaginenses and the Romans.

Siracusa, a notable city in Sicilia, called at this day Sarragose.

Sabines were a people dwelling near Rom^ (...) ^ynes (hauys^ (...)) ravished,
for enci^ (...) ^cion.

Suffrages, the (...) ^^sembled, in geuyng their ^sent.

Tribunes, were certain officers ordained as proctours for the common people
to mainteyne the peoples libertee.

Tribuniciall sedicion, sedicion sturred up by the Tribunes in the behalf of
the people.

Tribe, a ward, a part of the people, sometime divided in three parts.

Volsci, were a people of Italy, enemies to the Romans.

FINIS TABVLAE.
JMPRINTED AT London in Fletestrete, in the house of Thomas Birthelet.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

(...)

(...) ^^^^erunt om^ia uerba oris tui^

Et cantent in uiis dn^i q^m magna est ga dn^i^

Qm^ excelsus dn^s and humilia respicit and alta a long cognoscit.

Si ambulauero in medio tibulationis uiuificabis me and super iram inimicorum
meorum extendisti manum tuam^ and saluum me fecit dextera tua.

Dn^s retibuet pro me dn^e miscdia tua in s^^m opera manuum tuarum ne despicias.

Dn^e probasti me and cognouisti me tu cognouisti sessionem meam and
resurrectionem (...)

Intellexisti cogitationes meas de long semitam meam and funiculum meu^
inuestigasti*

Et om^es uias meas preuidesti* quia non est sermo (...)

(...)

(...) est (...) ex me (...) and non potero ad eam.

Quo ibo a sp^tu tuo? and quo a facie tuo fug^^^

Si ascendero in celum tu illic es (...) ^^fernum ades^

Si sumpsero pennas meas dilucolo (...) in extremis maris^


