VOX clamantis. MARK. 1. 3.

A STILL VOICE, TO THE THREE Thrice-honourable Estates OF PARLIAMENT: And in
them, to all the Souls of this our Nation, of what state or condition soever
they be.

By William Lo, Doctor of Divinity, and Chaplain to the Kings most excellent
Majesty.

Printed by T. S. for John Teage, and are to be sold at the Sign of the
Golden-Ball in Paul's Churchyard, 1621.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE GEORGE, Marquess of Buckingham, Lord high Admiral,
Viscount Villiers, Baron of Whaddon, Master of his MAJESTY'S Horse, Knight of
the most noble Order of the Garter, Gentleman of his Highness Bedchamber, one
of his most honorable Priuy-Councell, a Patron of good Letters, and a Pattern
of true Nobility. Grace and favor be from Heaven by CHRIST.
MOST Noble, and most worthily honored LORD. The true, and hearty Zeal, which
I owe unto my God, King, Church, and Country, has moved, and made me to
prostrate before the Three thrice honorable Estates of PARLIAMENT, assembled,
And in them to all the Cleriques, Courtiers, and Commons within our Nation,
even from Sea to Sea, and from the River to the Lands end, (being led
hereunto by the words of the Prophet prefixed) the still passages of this small
Voice, which has lain suppressed some years, by means of a certain
Great-one, (who not long sithence was great, but now is not, so mutable and
nutable is the state of things on earth) taking offense at some passages
herein. Whose ouer-weening greatness, and wilfulness, had then at the least
shut me up, if not sent me (as there was great cause to suspect and fear) not
the way of all flesh in respect of the manner, but of mortality) if some
reverend Fathers of the Church, the blessed Beaue-Peeres of Divinity, had not
stayed that enraged fury against me: But not long after, the hand of Almighty
God surprised that greatness, clipped it, restrained it, that it might do no
more harm, and so it remains to this day. Happy had it been for that man,
that he had then hearkened to that Voice from God, delivered by the weak
ministry of him, who never saw his face to this day, that if it had pleased the
Almighty, his soul might thereby have been awakened out of that fearful
slumber, wherein he then lay, bewitched with the Circean Cups of Ambition,
Wantonness, and sensual security. Then had not his fingers, nor the hands of
others, his Agents in evil, dropped with the cruel bloud-guiltinesse, neither
had their consciences been tortured, and tormented with the Hellish horror of
heart-bleeding wickedness. What I then spoke in the accent, and action of a
living man, to the greatest Auditorie of this Land, I now present to public
view, in the less effectual elements of a dead Letter: To no other purpose
(God is my record) but intending and endeavoring hereby the advancement of Gods
glory, some good of his Church, and in all Estates a remembrance unto these
present times, a manifestation of our happiness under so Christian a King,
whose heart detesteth all injustice, the maintenance of the truth then
delivered, and that these palpable and pisculent imputations and aspersions of
Faction, and Sedition, might in some sort be spunged out, which it pleased that
Great-one mentioned to cast upon me at that time in an honorable Assembly, and
since that time some others (strangely alienated both from our Church and
State) who have endeavored to be-sprinkle me with the like, for that I
undertook, and did reconcile, and compose, by directions from his Majesty's
own mouth, some differences in Ecclesiastical discipline, happened into a
famous Fellowship, (to which I am much obliged) resident in part beyond the
Seas, whither I was not long sithence sent by authority, allowance, and
Recommendation of his sacred Majesty, and the most Reverend Archbishop of
Canterbury. Which employment and service, albeit it has in some part impaired,
yea almost impouerished me in my poor personal eflate, and lost me some
friends, whom I thought had been better minded, and may (in Gods good time)
bethink themselves better: Yet, were either the one abroad, or this service at
home to be done again; for the unfeigned love I bear unto the free passage of
Gods glorious Gospel, and to the present settled subsistants of the discipline
of our Church, I would not only (as a Merchant Aduenturer) hazard my weak
body, poor estate, and liuelihood; but also would willingly (as a free
Minister of the Gospel) expose my self to all the Snibbes, Quippes, Taunts,
Reproaches, Disgraces, and Punishments, that any wicked, and ungodly Great-one
(little, or not at all affected to God) should prevail against me in, that
(at the least) I might herein manifest to the World, my Willingness and
Endeavor to maintain and make good ( quantum in me) the sacred freedom of
the one, and the Christian Discipline of the other; both which, our Nation most
comfortably enjoys under God, by the blessing of so Christian a King as is
our most gracious Sovereign, under Christ Jesus, the breath of all our
nosthrils, my most dread Liege-Lord and Master. Desiring all true honest
English hearts, which are not poisoned with preiudicate opinion of, exotique
niceties, and imitation of strangers, to judge, if there be any passage herein,
that deserves either manicles, or menaces, or ought; but what becomes a
sober and a true English-hearted Divine. But be this little Hin of mine either
accepted or rejected (by such as care not how the World goes, so they may
atchieue their own ends) I pass not, so it may please your most noble Worth,
that it may shelter it self under your honorable protecting favor. When I
went over to that service mentioned beyond the Seas, I made bold to present his
Highness with a Tract entit^led, The Mystery of Mankind; and upon my return,
I vowed This, to your Honor. It is the poor Mite of him, that will ever
remain a Votary to God for you; That the magnificence of Gods favors, and the
munificence of his mercies may ever be multiplied upon you, and upon all your
godly endeavors; That so both you, and all you take in hand, in discharge of
your eminent places, may be sanctified, to the good of Gods Church, his
Mai^stie, and the State, to your own souls safety, and that you may be great
in the Kingdom of your heavenly Master, through the saving mercies and favor
of Jesus Christ.

Your Lordships to be commanded in the service of JESUS CHRIST, William Lo.

To the well-disposed Readers.
IN the worlds birth God spoke to our first Parents by a still voice in the
cool of the day; Genesis 3.
in the worlds middle age to Elyah after the wind, 1 Reg. 19.
earthquake, and fire, in a still small voice, and in this last age of the
world, by a didirecting voice from Heaven, Matthew. 17.
concerning Christ Jesus his Son our Lord, saying, Hear him. In the
beginning was the word, yet that word was before all beginning, but the world
knew not that Word, but by the voice of men and Angels. And albeit the Word, be
in itself before the Voice, yet to the sons of men the Voice goes before
the Word: Therefore is the Forerunner John Baptist called, The voice of a
Crier in the Wilderness.

That is most true: For Christ is the Crier, Musc. and Maldonat. in Mat. 3
the Baptist is the Voice; and as in his Forerunner, so also in his Apostles
that followed, and in all other Preachers of his Gospel, Christ says, and
speaks by the mouths of all his holy servants since the world began, even
to this day. Iansen Conco. 13.
Voice and Crying must go together, the Voice to feed with faith, the Cry to
call to Repentance; the Voice to comfort, the Cry to control; the Voice to
tune the music of Mercy, Diez: con. 1. Dom. 3. Aduen. Aquin. Caten. Matthew. 3.
and the Cry to sound the Trumpet to Judgment. The word of God in writing is
the Proclamation, and Gods Ministers are the Voices of the Criers, to give
notice to all the People, that the Proclamation concerns them, and every one
of them.

Church men then are crying Voices; they shall never be shent in sober zeal
for the cause of God, to cry out with David in general against all the wicked.
Psalm. 139. 21. Acts 8. Acts 13.
Do not I hate them that hate thee, and am not I grieved with them that rise
up against thee? That in particular cry against a Simon Magus: That he is in the
gall of bitterness, and in the bond of Iniquity. Against an Elimas: That he is
full of mischief, the child of the Devil, and an enemy of all
Righteousness. Against an heretical Marcion, that he is the Devils Darling.
Iren. lib. 6 cap. 3
For as to some meek and modest spirits, Preachers must be Barnabasses, the
sons of Consolation: So to others, whose sins are of a deeper dye, they must
be like James and John (Bonarges) sons of Thunder.

If we will neither hear Voice, nor Cry, nor the voice of the Crier; How do
we think God should lend an ear to our voice when we cry unto him? Is it not
just with God to say unto us, Proverbs 1.
Because I have called, and ye have refused; I have stretched out mine hand,
and none will regard: Therefore you shall call upon me, but I will not answer;
you shall seek me early, but you shall not find me. Think on this, ye that
forget God, ye that suffer Christ to call and cry unto you, by his Preachers,
and ye regard not. Consider this ye great ones, lest God lay your honor in the
dust: ye mighty, lest the Almighty throw you down, and there be none to help
you up, lest he tumble you from your seat, and set in your places the humble
and meek.

Do ye refuse to hear the still voice of the Crier, take heed lest the
shrill Crier himself cry against you with his great Voice, which is Powerful,
Psalm. 29.
full of Majesty, breaking the Cedars, yea the Cedars of Lebanon, even the
great ones, 4.
dividing the flames of fire, 5.
even his Ministers whom he makes flames of fire, shaking the wilderness, 7. 8.
9.
yea the wilderness of Kadesh, even the vast, wild, and wide wickedness of the
People. Beware that the Multitude think not themselves too many, nor the
Cleriques too classical, nor the mighty too maiesticall to attend the voice of
the Lord. For if they do so, and will not hear them cry, that wish them to
take heed of future we, then this wilderness of the world, a Desert of
Beasts, ravening Wolves, covetous Foxes, roaring Lyo^s, and the like, shall
cast them out into the Land of Oblivion, where they themselves shall do
nothing but howl and cry in woe eternally.

If the Voice and Cri^ be to exasp^rate (as you think) for the lowdnesse
thereof: Know ye, it calls to them that are gone as far off from God, as
the Prodigal was into a far Country, and these have need of a Trumpet to
recall them. If it be too plain for Clearenesse, know ye, it is the evidence
of the spirit of God that you might distinctly discern what is spoken,
proclaimed and sounded, that so you might prepare your selves unto the battle.
A lamentable woe would it be unto you all, if the voice of all such as cry unto
you from the Lord, should be the uncertain and hoarse voices of Heretical,
Schysmaticall, Atheistical, Papisticall, profane, vain deceivers.

For you know, that if the sons of men, who are ordained, and set apart for
this business of the Lord, do not lift up their voices like Trumpets, and
tell Jacob their sins, and Israel their transgressions, God will open the
mouth of an Ass to reprove them, yea God will cause things without life, the
stone in the wall, and the beam in the house, to cry out against them.
Farewell.

Yours in the Lord, William Lo.

A VOICE, RECORDED BY the Ministry of the Prophet Hoshea, and made remarkable
to our times, both by Explication, and Application.

HOSHEA. 5. 1. 2. Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor.



A view of the several passages sounded by this Voice.
The voice contains a 1. Proclamation summoning all Estates. 1. Priests. 2.
People. 3. Princes. O ye Priests. O ye house of Israel. O House of the King.

2. An Iniunction commanding. 1. Attention. 2. Intention. 3. Action. Hear
this. Hearken. Give ear.

3. An Accusation, or Declaration, pourtraying the sins of that time, in four
strains. 1. The quality of them, by Nets and Snares spread, where in is couched
the 1. Subtilty 2. Irregularity 3. Vtility 4. Captivity of their sins.

2. The height of them, by mountains. Mizpah and Tabor.
3. The horror of them, by words of degrees. 1. Reuolting. 2. Profoundnesse. 3.
Slaughter.
4. The insolency of them, in that they were become incorrigible, albeit. God
had been a Rebuker of them all.
4. Commination, or Commonition in an arrest of Judgment. For Judgment is
toward you.



A Reuiew of the several Collections resounded by this voice to our time, in
the particular passages thereof.
THE Spirit of God (by summoning all Estates, and exempting none) preuenteth
that wretched preuarication of all ranks, and conditions of mankind, now
adays, whereby they use so frequently, and so foolishly to cast, translate,
and bandy the sins of the time from one to another.

Judgment begins at Gods own House, and Churchmen if they offend but as
others, yet shall they be punished (even because they are Churchmen) more then
others, unless they repent.

In a religious Commonwealth, the common people are encompassed with blessings
from God on every side, from the Church, and from the Court, both set up by God
for blessings to their souls, bodies, goods, and good names.

No dignity of person, nor pre-eminence of place, is exempted, or excepted from
Gods justice, but even the mighty ones that offend, are often more evidently,
more exemplarily, and more severely punished then others of inferior rank and
condition.

It dearly and nearely concerns all degrees in Court, Church, and
Commonwealth, that they attend as well to the ripping up of their sins, and
to the Denuntiation of Gods Judgments for the same, as to the Promulgation of
Gods mercies, that all Estates having a sense, and sight of their iniquities,
may break them off by repentance, and obtain pardon by Jesus Christ our Lord.

No voice, nor rebuke of God, or good men laying forth the hideousness, and
horror of sins never so often to the view of the conscience, can prevail
with the mighty hunting Nimrods of this World, to restrain their rage, and
furious madness, but still they make their greatness in Church, Court, and
Commonwealth, baties, and guiles for their gain and glory.

God of his endless, boundless, and bottomless pity, compassion, and mercy,
for Christ his sake, does favorably and fatherly premonish before he punish.

A STILL VOICE, TO The Three ESTATES of Parliament.
O ye Priests, O ye House of Israel, O House of the King.
IVdgement meant, and menaced to all the Estates of Israel, (not yet sent out,
and inflicted;) is the maine of this Prophetical WATCH-VVORD. The Vials of
Gods Wrath prepared for them, but not yet poured out; the bow of Gods
Indignation bent, the arrows of his Anger made ready, the sword of his
Displeasure sharpened, the Axe laid to the root of the Trees, and the Fan of
his Fury taken into his hand; yea, all the Instruments of his Justice on the
string against the faces of all conditions, and ranks of men, how many, how
mighty, how high, or how holy soever they be, that will not return unto God,
and break off their sins by Repentance. Judgment awarded from the Throne of
God, not from Popular Discontent, or from intermedling busybodies, or
giddy-headed Statizers. It is Gods voice by the Ministry of his Prophet unto
Priests, Peers, and People. It is no Anabaptisticall Enthusiasme, no singular
spirit of Prophecy. It is a clear, and plain denuntiation of Gods Judgments
intended, and menaced; It is no sottish fanaticall fancy, like that of John the
Tailor of Leyden, Nipper-doling, or the rest mad men of Munster, no damned
dream like that of David George the Basilian Monster, no cursed frenzy,
David George called himself Gods Nephew, and said he was sent to show who were
wheat, who chaff^, and for this frenzy was burnt at Basile.
like that of English Hacket the Northamptonshire Maulster, nor yet any
perplexed prediction of Pererius that Hieroglyphicall principal of the
Ignatian fry, but this is the evident voice of God which discovers these
miscreants, and the like, to be Vere ignes fatui, Commets, Meteors, and
Monsters, in Church, Court, and Commonwealth, and the dizzy conceits that
proceed from them to be most apparent fopperies, most palpable, and pisculent
untruths.

In the fear of God therefore ( Men and Mortals) set before your eyes a
parallel of times pourtrayed in this Text, and fear the menaces of Gods
Judgments, knowing that if Gods right hand lay once hold of Execution, and
strike, who shall escape the blow? Let not the blessed peace we enjoy in our
Israel, mar our manners, corrupt our blood, or settle us upon our lees, as
many were in the time of this Prophet. Iebusitzs, Edomites, Ismaelites, and
such like, make themselves merry with God, and slight his Judgments; yet we
see disconsolate Saul when he felt God to depart from him, desires Samuels
prayers: Heathenish Foelix trembled at Paul's Sermon, which treated of judgment
to come, and foolish Ahab being terrified with the Prophets words of Judgment,
walks softly, and makes outward semblance, as if he had truly, and inwardly
repented. If the worst natures shuddered at Gods Judgments, menaced only,
shall not the best blood truly fear God, and tremble? Shall not the Beasts of
the Forest quake, when the Lion does roar? In this Watchword God threatens
his own people, yea, all estates of his own people by an old Prophet, not by
a young Scholar; (as Paul speaks to Timothy) but even by one that had been
threescore and ten years a Prophet, during the reigns of five Kings.

The form of speech used in this Watchword is iuridicall by way of
Proclamation, Declaration, and Commination. The Proclamation is a general
Summons set out by Exclamation, and Iniunction. The Exclamation cites the
parties, O ye Priests, O ye house of Israel, O house of the King. The
Iniunction enioynes them what they must do, that is, Hear this, Hearken, and
give ear. The Declaration sets forth the cause of their summons, which was
their sins. It also further discovers the quality of their sins, by Nets,
and snares, the height of their wickedness by the altitudes of Mizpah, and
Tabor, and the horror of their enormities by the aggrauation of these words,
Reuolting, Sacrificing, and Profundity. The imperious insolency of their
preuarications appeared, in that they were incorrigible; for they not only
slighted the Ministry of the Prophet sent from God, but despised even God
himself, who as the Context says, had been a Rebuker of them all. Lastly,
the Commination is a Commonition, or Watchword, that Judgment was toward them
all, for their great and grievous enormities. See the sum of all this in a
view. It seems that great was the Cataclysme of the exorbitant sins and
transcendent transgressions of those times: For all the Estates are summoned,
none excepted, none exempted. Their sins haughty, heinous, and heavy to the
whole Land, grown in sublimity like unto Mountains, deeper then hell in their
profound subtilty, and the actors of them grown incorrigible. Hereupon is
Judgment awarded toward them all, that as there was a parity in their
preuarications; so there should be also paralels in their punishments.

But I had rather you should hear an Explication of the particular sins of
that time, from the Prophets own mouth, in his own words. The sins of the
Churchmen of that time were as the Prophet says. That they refused knowledge,
Chap. 4.
they forsook the Law, and did eat up the sins of the people. Chap. 6.
Whereupon grew the Proverb usual in that time. Chap. 8.
Like people, like Priests. The Commons had no truth in them, but swearing, and
lying, Chap. 4.
and killing, and stealing, and whoring, they broke out, Ibid.
and blood touched blood. The Courtiers had lost their hearts with wine, women,
and wantons; they were covetous, and cried, 8
Bring, Bring; they did oppress the Comminalty, they flattered others, 7
and suffered themselves to be abused by flattery. Thus you see in the very
words of the Prophet, to what a height of presumption the sins of all Estates
were grown, how they all were become Nets, and Snares one to another in these
enormities; hear now the menaces of Gods Judgments toward them all in the
words of the same Prophet. Judgment was toward the Churchmen; They should
weep for want, Chap. 10.
Thorns and thistles should grow upon their Altars, and in the end should be
so confounded, Ibid.
that they should call, and cry to the hills and mountains to fall on them,
Ibid.
and cover them. Judgment was also toward the Commons, God should pour his
wrath on them like water, Chap. 5.
and his displeasure should be as moathes, and rottenness unto them, Ibid.
their young lings should be dashed in pieces, 14
and their women great with child should be ripped up. The Courtiers
Judgments were, That God would be as a Lion unto them, and as a Lions whelpe
he would tear them in pieces, Chap. 5.
and there should be none to deliver. Ibid.
He would destroy the King as the foame upon the water; 13
and bind up all their iniquities for their greater plague. In a word, Gods
voice to all Estates by the Prophet, is this; O ye Churchmen, Commons, and
Courtiers, Judgment is toward you all, and unless you all repent, you shall
all of you be as the morning cloud, and as the early deaw that passes away, as
the chafe which is driven with a whirlwind out of the floor, and as the
smoke out of a chimney; but he that is wise among you, will understand these
things, and he that is prudent, will know that the ways of the Lord are right,
and the just shall walk in them, but the transgressors shall fall therein.
Thus have you the sum, and substance of the Text, even in the words of the
Prophet; now let us see what we may learn from the parcels and pieces thereof.
Forasmuch as that we hear all the estates summoned, none excepted, none
exempted, we may see hereby, that

The Spirit of God (by summoning all Estates, 1. Position.
and exempting none) preuenteth that wretched preuarications of all rancks, All
Estates summoned.
and conditions of mankind now a days, whereby they use so frequently and
foolishly, to cast, transfer, and bandy the sins of the time from one to
another.

IT could heartily be wished, that this mutual, and usual fault of
translating our sins from one to another were so superannate, that it were
utterly abrogated, and antiquated, but alas it has been, and is too fresh,
and too frequent in all ages, and too triuial, both in Courts, Churches, and
Commonwealths. In the Court, Hypocritical Saul, 1 Samuel 14.
the King casts the fault upon the Prince Jonathan his son. 2 Samuel 15.
Traiterous Absolon the Prince puts it upon David his Father the King. Ill
guided Rehoboam the King obtrudes it upon the people. 1 Reg. 12.
Shameless Shemi the Subject shifts it upon David the King. 2 Samuel 16.
In the Church, Ioh. 7.
Caiphas the Caitiffe gives out that one must die for the sins of the people,
as if the Churchmen had been sinlesse, and not of the people. The piert
Pharisees say: The common people know nothing, and are accursed. Ioh. 11.
The prating people put it as fast upon the Priests. The mis-perswaded Jews
say to Jeremy: Ier. 7.
It was well with us, and we had peace, and plenty in our Land, when we
offered spiced cakes to the Queen of Heaven, but since thou have prophesied
amongst us, we see no good. In the Commonwealth: The giddy-headed Multitude
sometime retort it upon their King, as appears in the revolt from Rehoboam,
sometime upon the Magistrates, as did the murmuring Israelites in the
Conspiracy against Moses, sometime upon the whole Nation, as if they were not
Conterranei, or Indigenae, but Inquilini; especially in an eminent calamity,
how quickly Jobs exulcerating friends can obtrude the cause of his calamities
to his sinfulness, grown (as they say) out of measure sinful* The
Galilaeans, whose blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifices; and the eighteen
Laborers, upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell, Luke 13.
by the Pharisaicall fry are taxed and censured, as the most grievous and most
heinous sinners in all Jerusalem.

All which passages show to what a strange outre^udance our corrupted nature is
enhaunsed. For every one almost becomes a Pharisie proudly, and piertly
insulting over others, and soothing himself in his sleeue, with I am not as
other men are, I am a none-Parell; I have no Parallel, I was borne at
Nonesuch, and the like: All which arises from that bitter root of that
original guilt in the Worlds birth. Genesis 3.
God asks Adam of his transgression, and he bands it to Euah; Euah (being
questioned) shifts it to the Serpent. So that upon the point, every one would
very feign bandie and father their evil (what ever it be) upon their God. This
is too true, even in our times. For it is almost grown our very English
Idiome. Many great ones disdain, and grudge at Inferiors, the cart casts dyrt
at the Court, like dyrtie thorns, which both prick and defile. The Peers, as
if they were peerless, censure the people; The people, sparing none, tax
both Peers and Prelates: Insomuch that it is come to this pass, that the
discontented cast the fault any where, and the rude multitude (like Diogenes)
trample upon Platoes pride, with prouder disdain. Some (like Dictators)
conceit all others to be borne for their greatness; and they for no man's good:
yea, albeit even in our times, Ephraim be against Manasses, and Manasses
against Ephraim, and both against Judah, (as Evangelical Esaias spoke in his
time) yet this noise will not cease amongst us: The Scripture therefore
concludes the point with this; Like people, like Priests; like Princes, like
people; I am sumus ergo pares. We have seen the verity, the vanity, and
antiquity of this mutual broyle; now let us examine the causes thereof.

The prime and principal causes hereof are three, to wit, Ambition,
Covetousness, and an evil Conscience. Ambition, that grievous gangrene of the
mind, causes the sons and daughters of men for to be extreme in pursuit of
all their purposed designs: The Churchmen will be more then Reason, and
Religion permits; the Pope will be above all that is called God, and to
maintain that his transcendent conceit, upon whom will he not endeavor to
bruise the bean? The bu^ie-headed Lawyer will be more then Law, and bigger then
the Bench, to pry and intermeddle with State affairs, and to rush upon Princes
prerogatives, and that he may seem some body, what stone will he leave
unturned, or what letter of the Law ouer-curiously undiscussed? In a word,
Omnes apices ^uris excutiet.
all sorts striving and struggling to be more then they are, and bigger they can
be, basely, and ambitiously stoop to their own wilful and headstrong
desires, not caring whom they smite, and wound, by base Detraction and censure,
so they may seem to cast it from themselves, and fasten imputation of evil
upon their betters.

Covetousness, that driry dropsy, the more it has the more it would have,
and whom will not this Canker ^ret, both in Church, Court, and Commonwealth,
if any do but touch its Purse-strings? Hence the very set Courts of Law, and
Conscience censure and tax each other most dangerously, and all to bring the
Water to their own Mills. And an evil conscience, like the Iliaca passio is
always querulous, and grievously griping, feeding on no other viands, but on
Mischief, Discontent, Detraction, Censure; and unjust imputation of evil unto
others, yea, this froward, and wayward Xantippe will murmr against the
highest, and will not spare to implead the holy Magnificat.

The secondary, or accessory causes of this ouerspreading evil, are two. The
first is an houen imagination, and foolish leuitie of mind, which has caused
diverse men (to the end that they might make good their own fancies) not to
spare the sacred Book of God, but to abuse it to their own Destruction, both
by cogging, wresting, and patching, (as holy Hilary once said) that it may
seem to patronise their licentious tongues, Hilarious de Synodis, acut^. Ephesians.
4. (...).
and to such men who in Church or Court, that thwarts their Cassandrian
conceits, is not a fool, Racha, 2. Pet. 3. 16. (...). Mat. 9.
or Rake-hel, or I know not what. The other, is a wicked Desire which some have
to be-smut others, and to lay the blame of common calamities upon persons of
great and eminent place, whereby they seek nothing else, but by debasing and
vilifying others, to magnify themselves, that they with Diotrephes, may have
the pre-eminence, and with Simon the Magitian, be accounted the only Statizing
Politicians. (...).
The foundations whereon these frothie, dizzie, exotique, and barmie humors
do build, are nothing, but (as the Apostle says) Vain deceits, proud men's
conceits, and the worlds beggarly Rudiments, whiles every man will be a
Suffenu^ to himself, conceiting that he is either too high, or too holy, to be
equal, much less inferior to any.

The swarm of mischiefs in Church, Court, and Commonwealth, that issue from
this invndant evil, who sees not? Hence comes Flattery, that ayerie
Chamaelion, learning no other Lesson, but Vti foro scenae, and tempori
inseruire, palbably and grosely besmearing with the smoothing truell of an Oily
tongue, the facile and mean humors of those* whom it desires to abuse for the
accomplishment of some intended project. Infamous Libels spring hence, those
Vipers of States, that sow seditious, treacherous, and treasonable thoughts,
purposes, and plots, in the baser minds: Secret and suspicious whisperings,
those Scorpions that dread not to strike with the virulencie, and violence of
an hellish tongue, both Princes, Prelates, and People: Bold brasen-faced
Insolency: that like an armed Dragon has no other employment, but to speak
evil of all them that are in authority: Base Detraction that fretteth like a
canker, and blacke-mouthed Obliquie, that like a Cuttle^ish stains all about
it.

Hence proceeds Homebred Garbviles in an house, between man and wife,
malcontents in a State, between King and Subject, private judging of others,
public grudging at most, strayning of Gnats, swallowing of Camels, and
Self-love in all, making Relatiues Dis^unctiues, whereby we admire our selves,
and despise others, as if the whole World had none like us, and that others,
whom we neglect and slight, (be their place, pains, and incomparable
excellency what it will) are not worthy (forsooth) to be named that day,
wherein we are spoken of.

The consideration of which premises, lessons us (if we will be lessoned by
God) to leave this Tennise-play of bandying our sins from one to another. The
King is thy dread Sovereign, and Gods Anointed, how dare thou (traitorous
wretch) touch to hurt him, either with thy hand, tongue, or thought? The
Churchmen are Gods Angels by office, how dare thou offer them any harm,
seeing God says Do my Prophets no harm? The inferior Magistrates are the
Kings Delegates, thou owe them honor; How dare our tongues cast imputations
on such Principals? or how dare we smite with the tongue, those persons whose
places and faces ought ever to be of precious esteem with us? The Prophet
counsels us, Hag. 1. 5.
That every man consider his own ways, not another. Shall the King, because
he cannot give content to every private man's occurrence within his
territories, be censured, and taxed in his government? Who knows not, that
the present State, be it never so gracious, sweet, and amiable, is ever
grievous to some, whose nature is always querulous, and troublesome? Shall the
Churchman, because he cannot preach to every palate, be censured in his
ministration? Who knows not that Manna is worse then Mummi to some? Yea, God
himself shall no longer be God, if he please not some sort of men, Si Deus
homini non placurit, Deus non erit.
as Saint Augustine notes upon the Book of Exodus, in the case of the
male-contented Israelites.

It was the cursed madness of the persecuting times, when either Sword,
Famine, or Tempest was upon the State, to cry, To the Lions with the
Christians; casting the imputation of all evils upon them, as if they had bin
the only garbage and filth of those times. It was the Pharasaicall frenzy of
the great Jewish Rabbis, to despise and lode others with all foul obloquies,
when they (forsooth) must not be touched with the least finger, like the
Jesuitical fry, whom none of theirs must once mutter at; yea, the Jesuits are
the now new vpstart Pharisees, for Nazianzens rule is true, Non genus sed
genius, non gens but Men's make a Pharisie. It were therefore good for us all,
of all sorts and conditions, if we have not the principals of Prudencie, to
become Secondaries in the forms of Modesty, and so to leave this selfe-louing
ouerweening ^urquedry: Gal. 5. 1^.
For if we continue to bite and devour one another, take heed lest we be
consumed one of another.

It were good for all ranks and conditions to remember that part of the Wallet
that hangs on our own backs behind. It were good for the King to begin, and
to knock his own breast with David, and say, I have sinned, 2* Sam. 24.
what have these poor Sheep done? The Peers and Courtiers must follow, and
with good Nehemiah bewail their own sins. Nehem. 1.
It were good for the Prelates and Preachers to acknowledge with Paul, that
Christ came to save sinners, 1. Tim. 1.
whereof they are chief. The Commons of every rank and condition to cry out
as people truly touched with a sight and sense of their own guilt, Acts 2.
as the honester Jews did; Men and Brethren, what shall we do to be saved? It
will be good for all ranks, both Churchmen, Commons and Courtiers, to say and
practice with blessed Bernard, Bernard. in Cant. Volo vultui ir^e diuinae
praesentari iudicatus, non iudicandus
We will be presented before Gods Tribunal already judged, not to be judged:
for if we would judge our own selves, we should not be judged of the Lord. So
would this Panicall noise cease, 1 Cor. 11.
in clamoring one against another, and we should more diligently attend, what
God says to every state in particular, as follows.

O ye Priests.
Judgment begins at Gods own house, 2. Position.
and Church-m^n if they offend but as others; The Cleriques summoned.
yet shall they be punished (even because they are Churchmen) more then
others, unless they repent.
THE Churchmen first summoned in terms of displeasure, for God by his
Prophet calls them Priests simply without any modificatio^, as Priests of the
Lord, or the like, but in terms of Indignation. O ye Priests. And for this
there was great reason in Gods justice. The Churchmen being Gentinells for the
Lord, should not only have spent their voices, and best endeavors, but their
blood also (if need had required) that they might have rectified (as much as
was in them, and as much as their places required of them) the grievous
disorders both in Court and Country. Chap. 4.
But they as the Prophet shows had Rejected the sounder knowledge that their
brethren held in Judah, 6
they had forsaken the sincerity of the Law* and had made a medley of Gods will
and humane traditions. 8
Yea, they were contented because they were fat, and fed plentifully, even to
soothe, and say as the people did, without rebuking them, and to swallow up
their gross and grievous sins. Therefore they are summoned first, as being
first in blame, and are set foremost in the battle, after the Heluetian
manner, whose Parochi always lead forth their armies; hereupon we read that
Huldricus Zwinglius died in the forefront of a set encounter. In which orderly
proceeding of Gods justice we learn that

Judgment begins at Gods own house; and Churchmen if they offend but as
others, yet shall they be punished (even because they are Churchmen) more then
others, unless they repent.

Ely a Priest of the Lord had exemplarie punishment showed upon him, 1. Sam. 4.
in breaking his neck as he fell out of his Chair, for not better guiding
his sons; I read no such severity showed upon the Priests of Midian. The
Priests sons, Nadab and Abihu, Aarons darlings, Leuit. 10.
for offering strange fire, are burnt up suddenly with fire, that came out from
God; I read no such sudden plague to befall Adramelech and Sharazer, that
slew Senacherib their own father. Leuit. 21.
The Priests daughter that played the whore was to be burnt; I read not the
like sore punishment appointed to other men's daughters.

What shall we say? Apostles, not Apostates; Evangelists, not Extrauagants,
Prophets, not Poets; holy Virgins, not impudent Harlots, have been the
Spectacles of persecution, and gazing-stockes of disgrace, despite, and
cruelty both to men and Angels. Yea, no matricide as Nero, no fratricide as
Cayn, no Regicide as Rauillac, no sulphurous gun-pouder Traitor ever endured
such exquisite tortures and torments, wherewith it has pleased God to afflict*
try, and exercise his own Church by the hands of cursed Persecutors.

Prelates therefore and Preachers, must tremble under the mighty hand of God;
for albeit the Scripture entitles them Angels, yet they are not so by nature,
but by office. Devils may appear in the shape of Angels of Light, and take
part with the spirits of Darkness against Christ, yea, they may be bad Angels
in all kind of badnesse. Angels of Satan by discord, as were Iannes and
Iambres. Angels of Apostacy through Pride, as was proud Diotrephes; who loved
the pre-eminence. Angels of In^ubus by wantonness, as were the Priests of
Priapus, and Beelphegor* Angels of the bottomless pit, through base
Covetousness, who spend all their time in seeking basely to have. All these,
and the like, Apoc. 9.
are the Locusts of the bottomless pit, and their destruction is therein for
evermore. Prelates and Preachers are Stars, but if they become wandering
stars, Apoc. ^.
or bitter stars of Wormwood, or falling stars, or stars placed in the
Dragons tail; Apoc. 6.
their portion is to be cast down, and to be reserved to the blackenesse of
darkness for ever. Our Savior says, If the light of the world lose its
brightness, how great will that darkness be? and if the Salt lo^^ its
savor, wherewith shall it be seasoned? It is good for nothing, but to be cast
forth to the dunghill. Prelates and Preachers therefore (being the light of the
world* and Salt of the earth) must tremble under the mighty hand of God. Eus.
li. 3. cap. 11.
For if they be unsavory salt, like Ecebolius, they shall be trod under the
peoples feet: If negligent servants, their woe is at hand. And if the Doctors
of the Church become Seducers, the Prelates prove Pilates, Bern. lib. 4. de
Consid.
the Pastors become Impostors, and the Disposers of Gods truth turn
Dissipators, and destroyers, Gods judgment will be toward them, and that in
more grievous manner then toward others. Ezech. 33. 1.
For Sentinels in neglect of their watch or ward, are more to be punished then
the other ordinary soldiers; Commissioners bear blame, ^. Corinth. 5.
if their embassage be not carefully delivered, and the servant that knows
his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes.

Thus we see Judgment begins at the house of God, but the Scripture does not
say it ends there. If the Lord search Jerusalem with Lights, what will become
(think you) of Babylon? Zephon. 1. 12.
If the top of Carmel do wither, what will become of the valley of the
children of Hinnon? Amos 1. 2.
If woe be denounced against Capernaum, Bethsaida, Corazin, what belongs to
Damascus, Azzah, Edom, and the like? If the righteous scarce be saved, where
shall the wicked and sinners appear? The title of Priest being formerly
glorious, in this worst age of the world, is by dis-vsage and abuse grown into
miserable contempt, and disgrace; but howsoever the worldlings esteem of
Churchmen, (disgrace them how they will) yet it has pleased God to use those
weak and feeble instruments to the advancement of his glory, and the salvation
of man. Not by their own woorths, but by Gods own power and virtue, who when
he takes the meanest things into his hands, works powerfully by them,
whatsoever pleases him. By Salt taken into Gods hand, God makes the bitter
waters of Jericho to become sweet, by ordinary water of a common river, cures
the Leprosy of Naaman. 2 Reg. 2.
By dreams reuealeth the certainty of future occurrences to Pharaoh, Gideon
and Nebuchadnezzar. 2 Reg. 5.
By Clay makes the blind to see. By Touch cures the palsy, restores sight,
and raises up to life again. John 9.
By his word casts out unclean spirits; and by the shadow of a man, Acts 5.
cures diverse diseases. Say then if Prelates and Preachers, in the worlds
estimation, be but as ordinary water, salt, clay, and as the hemme of a
garment; yet we see, if God take them into his hand (as in his hand al his
Prelates and Preachers are) he works by them both great and marvelous
effects. Apoc. 1.
If the world esteem Churchmen but as ordinary Jordan; God may use them to
cleanse your Leprosies; but as salt, by Gods grace they may make you taste
goodness; but as dirt trampled under your feet, yet through God they may make
you see your selves, and sins; and if they be but shadows, yet they may
haunt you like ghosts, until you return unto the Lord your God. Yea say you,
But many Churchmen run before they be sent. True, But every plant that our
heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up. Again you urge, If
Churchmen were in the hand of God (as you say) there would no doubt be a
plentiful harvest by their hands. Well; was not Peter and Paul in the hand of
God (for I speak to Christians) why was one of them esteemed a drunkard while
he preached, and the other a mad man by miscrea^ts? Is not the seed al one that
is sowed, whence then is the difference of thirty, sixty, and an hundred fold,
and some-where no increase? No, no, Actus actiuoru^ sunt in patient^ disposito.
the actions of agents are in the Patients rightly disposed.

Therefore to the children of Wisdom the very feet of Churchmen are
beautiful, they pray for them, and count them worthy of double honor. Yea say
ye, so they are, if they be good Churchmen. Who art thou that iudgest an other
man's servant? And what wiseman cares to be judged of the world? Who knows not
that thousands have bin condemned in the world for evil doers, that are
Angels in heaven? and who knows not that Traitors, Emissaries, and
Assasinates of villainy have been canonized by the Popelings for Saints, that
have been on earth, the organs of Satan, and firebrands of matchless
mischief?

Never was any people more blessed then this our Nation with painful masters
of the Assemblies, preaching Prelates and careful Churchmen, whose names are
famous in transmarine parts, yea thousands there are of Churchmen of little
account in England, that are able (God be blessed) to cope, and encounter with
the proudest Cardinal in the Conclaue at Rome. Yet I am persuaded, and it is
easy to demonstrate, that the Seminaries of the Romish Church that are
imprisoned in London, and elsewhere, live in better content, then some worthy
conformable Churchmen in England. For, what between the Seminaries and
Jesuits without, and those that are auerse to the present government within,
together with the profane on every side, griping Patrons, peevish
Parishioners, and the like, the poor Conformalist so lives, that he may never
fear a Purgatory hereafter, he shall be thoroughly purged, I warrant him,
before he dies, to cause his passage easy, if need be. Insomuch that in the
day of Judgment God may call out some of the heathen to condemn this
generation, which despises the Priesthood. Out of the Graecians Alexander the
Great, who kneeled down to Iaddo the High Priest. Out of the Barbarians,
furious Attilas, who was appeased with the Oration of Leo Bishop of Rome. The
ancient Persians condemn our neglect of Churchmen, who honored their Magi.
The old Romans, who dignified their Vestall Virgins; the ancient Gauls, who
magnified their Druides, and the Indies, who deified their Gymnosophistes; yea,
among Christians the ignorant Moscouites, or Russites, who traveling up to
Mosco from Boristhenes, and other remote places, carrying thither their
children to be baptized, bring also with them their rich Felles and Furs, to
lay under the Priests feet in the extreamitie of cold, that they may take no
harm in the time they baptize their children: and our ignorant forefathers
will rise to condemn us (who pretend to have all the knowledge;) for if they
could have got but a sottish Mass Priest in a corner, Oh how would they
crouch, and cap, yea kneel to him, as if he had been some deity, and we
their posterity slight the Evangelical ministers of Jesus Christ?

But what think you hardens the hearts of profane persons against Churchmen?
Surely this, for that they see Gods own dear Children as much punished, yea,
often more then others. The Ark of God is taken by the Philistimes, and Israel
flies; good Josiah is slain by wicked Pharoh Neco in the field of Megiddo;
Turks subdue Christians; David, Gods darling does but number the people, and
is plagued; Augustus Caesar taxes the whole World, and is secure. Therefore
they resolve, that surely it is better to serve Mammon, then the Mediator. But
let all Worldlings take heed of such reasoning, and let all despiser stand
amazed, 2 Pet. 3.
and wonder; For God is not slack concerning his promise (as some men account
flacknesse) but is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance, let them answer God in this.
Romans 2. 4.
Do thou despise the riches of Gods goodness, forbearance, and
long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to
repentance? Saint Augustine will tell the worldlings, that in the world to come
so good things shall be given to the good, that the wicked shall not so much as
have either a sight or taste of them, and so evil things shall befall the
cursed, that the good shall not once touch them; for if in this life all
wickednesses, and all evils were punished, there would be nothing to be judged
in the other life, and yet if nothing at all were here exemplarily punished by
God, the worldlings would take no notice of his providence.

In conclusion therefore Churchmen must learn rather to reason with Saint
Peter, If God spared not the Angels that sinned, ^ Pet. ^.
but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into the chains of darkness
to be reserved unto judgment, will he spare them that are either wandering
stars, or stars of worme-wood? The bigbon'd Nimrods of the World, that put
far from them the evil day, must lesson themselves from Saint Peter, If the
just and righteous be scarcely saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner
appear? What then remains, 1 Pet. 4.
but that earnest prayers be poured out for my self, and my brethren the
Ministers of Christ? O Jehovah Eloim grant to our Prelates, that whiles they
are here, the zeal of thy house may ea^e them up, that they may guide thy
people with the sincerity of their hearts, and with the discretion of their
hands; and when they are gone hence, that they may shine with thee as the
stars of Heaven in glory. Grant to all Preachers that their hearts may be
clothed with thy righteousness, their minds rectified with thy saving
knowledge, and their mouths filled with thy most holy Word. Grant Lord that
both the life, and learning of Prelates, and Preachers, both in saying well,
and doing well, may be to thy people by the power of thy Word, the Water of
life, the Bread of Heaven, a Touchstone for discerning of heresies, a Sword for
decision of Controversies, the Keys to open Heaven, the Harp of David to
comfort the distressed, and that all thy people may esteem of Church^men, as
the co^uoyes of thy grace, of thy most sacred treasure, and of the most holy
relics of Jesus Christ. Grant Lord to Prince, Priests, and People, such
grace, that they make up their accounts with diligence against thy Judgment,
and great audite day. O let the faithful witness in Heaven say hereunto, Amen.

O ye House of Israel.
In a religious Commonwealth, 1. Position.
the common people are encompassed with blessings from God on every side, The
Laiques summoned.
from the Church, and from the Court, both set up by God for blessings to their
souls, bodies, goods, and good names.
THE Churchmen has been summoned in the first place, the Commonwealths men
follow in the second, with these terms of Summons: Hearken O ye House of
Israel. That they are an House is a special favor, but that they are an House
of Israel, is a supereminent blessing. Whence I observe that forasmuch as the
people are ranged between the Priests, and the Princes, and termed, The House
of Israel; it shows, that

In a religious Commonwealth, the common people are encompassed with blessings
from God on every side, from the Church, and from the Court, both set up by God
for blessings to their souls, bodies, goods, and good names.

This appears out of the very words of the Text: For these people not long
before were the House of bondage, and slavery, but now are settled in an estate
of freedom, and liberty. Heretofore they had been the House of limping Jacob,
but now a prevailing Israel; heretofore the House of Hadadrimmon, of woe and
weeping, but now a place of joy and gladness: heretofore a Beth haven, but now
a Bethel. In a word, when I see Israel to become a King, yea, to become two
Kings, and to have two Kingdoms, I say the World is well amended with Jacob
since the time he went over Jordan with his staff, since he made a stone his
pillow, since he served twice seven years with his churlish Uncle Laban, and
since he knew not where to lay his head. I admire therefore that ever any of
his generation should offend so gracious a God. But that of the Apostle is most
apposite to this purpose; All are not Israel, that are in Israel, Romans 9.
or of Israel.

This further appears how the common people are blessed on every side. First,
from the State politic, both in general, and in particular. In general the
Apostle says; Romans 13.
That the Magistrate is a Minister of God to thee for good, but if thou do
that which is evil, be afraid, for he bears not the Sword in vain: For he
is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil.
By the blessing of the higher power every man lives in quiet under his own
Vine, and under his own Fig Tree, and the reason is, Because God has set up
the King for a blessing to the people, that the weaker should not be oppressed
by the stronger. Psalm 2^*
What else would become of the helpelesse multitude? if they had not one set up
by God to order many? Surely if God had not taken care of mankind even in this
case, the wicked nature of man would daily break forth into shameless and
bloody shambles of thefts, butcheries, murders, adulteries, rapines, incests,
treasons, and what not? And unless Christian policy had found out days,
times, places, and persons to redress wrongs, and to distribute right to every
man, no man should have enjoyed the comfort of one day, nor known the blessed
state or condition of any pleasing time, or place.

Secondly, in particular this blessing of God appears, both especially and
indiuidually for body, goods, and good name; for the body, Cannibals must not
live among Christians. For the state-politique takes care that the hand of
violence shall not touch any subject, and if any man shed the blood of another,
by the man of authority his blood shall be shed. Yea, the tender hearts of
true Christian Princes have provided against the hot-spirited duels, that the
image of God may not be destroyed by sudden enraged passions, nor Subjects
wound their own souls by bringing in the price of blood upon their own
Families, as a Noble Lady once said to her brother in the like case. For Goods,
the State-Politique prouides, that every man eat his own bread: No
Platonicall community, no Anabaptisticall Anarchy, nor yet Plutonicall villainy
is heard of in a Christian Commonwealth: For he that does not labor, must not
eat. Idiots say, that which is mine is thine, and that which is thine is mine,
yet Indians and Tartarians speak not so. Ungodly persons say, that which is
thine is mine, and that which is mine is mine own. Indeed so speaks the
violent thief; that is, the robber by the highway; and the sly thief, which
is the Usurer. Mediocrity, and Piety, speak otherwise in a Christian
Commonwealth. Mediocrity says, that which is mine, is mine, and that which is
thine is thine, so speaks the moral Christian. But Pieties parlee is, that
which is mine is thine to pleasure and profit thee, and that which is thine is
thine own. Yea, the politic State takes care, not only against outrage
and violence, but also that no man be cosoned, or abused by forged cauilations.
Otherwise, there were no voyaging by Sea for Pirates, no traveling by Land for
Robbers, no sleeping in an house for Burglaries, no commerce for violence,
cosenage, deceit, and fraud, did not the wholesome Laws of the State-politique
prevent these miserable mischeeuances. Blessing comes upon our good names,
which is as a precious ointment, for our Reputations would be tainted by the
stinking Flies of Egypt, if the State-politique did not provide Antidotes
against so Epidemicall a poison. Yea, heaven and earth would be infected with
Libels of black obloquie, and the sons of men would fat themselves with
infamings and reprochings of others. Every man's brain would be a forge of
choler, and passion, every man's study a dung-hil of untruths, and all things
would be carried by passion, and not by judgment, yea the giddy multitude of
the sons of men, would become a rabble of blasphemous Goliahs against God,
the Lord of hosts, a rout of railing Rabshekahs against their betters, a skull
of scoffing Ismalites against their brethren, a fry of scorning Iebusites
against those that are in authority, and every man would give liberty to that
unruly evil of the tongue (which the Apostle says) is enraged by hell fire.

Thus are the people blessed by the State-politique, in body, goods, and good
name. Blessed they are also under the politic State, by the
State-Ecclesiasticall, both in their souls and consciences: Blessed in their
Initiation and reception into the Church, for when they are children, they are
brought into the Church by Baptism, afterward confirmed in the grace
received, which is as Palms to their hands, Crowns to their heads, Wreaths to
their brows, Triumphs and Trophies to their whole life: Blessed they are by
the ministerial function, in restrayning the sons and daughters of men from
their exorbitant and extrauagant courses, by all means possible that can be.
Sometime, by the menaces of Gods Desertion; for Churchmen tell them, if they
forsake God, God will forsake them: Sometime, by threatening them with Gods
fearful traditions, that he will deliver them that forsake him, into a
threefold misery; that is, unto vile affections, unto their own hearts lusts,
Romans 1.
and into a Reprobate sense. Sometime with menacing of judgment to come, which
has caused the very Heathen to tremble, as is apparent in the case of Faelix.
Blessed they are (when they are ready to fall) by the effectual assistances of
ministerial supportations, both Externally, Internally, and Eternally.
Externally, by the preaching of the Word, that heavenly Manna to feed their
souls, by prayer, and solicitation to God for them, and also by application
of the Word, which is as the balm of Gilead to the several cases of their
distressed consciences. Internally, blessed they are by the means of the
outward ministry, which works the illumination of grace inwardly by the
motion of the spirit, and in the communion of Saints, by the prayers of the
whole Church, both of the triumphant Church in general, and of the militant in
particular. Moses prays, and Joshua ouer-commeth; Peter is imprisoned, the
Church prays, and he is delivered. Eternally are they blessed, by the means
of Gods Church in the reception of the blessed body and blood of Christ
sacramentally, which if they receive worthily, they go on in the world,
breathing out breath, fearful to the very Devil himself, and to all the
powers of darkness (as golden-mouthed Chrysostom) used to speak unto his
Antiochians, yea, wherewith we go confidently on in the spirit of David, that
albeit we walk through the valley of the shadow of death, yet fear we none
ill, for every Christian in that case is as it were another Christ. So does
Saint Ambrose read that place in the Galathians. Qui sunt Christi in
nominatiu^ plurali.


In a word, the people are blessed by the State Ecclesiastical, through the
ministration of the Word, by which God remoueth all impediments that hinder the
course of their Salvation: For Christ thereby powers on them Ezechiels pure
water to purge their impurities, pruneth off the wild branches, cutteth off
all superfluities, and at last utterly abolisheth the hours and powers of
darkness, drowneth Pharaoh in the red Sea of his blood, and beats down
Satan under their feet. Thus are they blessed on every side, by Moses, by
Aaron, by the Pillar of a cloud of witnesses in spiritual affairs, by the
Pillar of fire in secular negotiations, by the Church, by the Court in their
all; Psalm. 3.
so that I may conclude with the Psalmist, Salvation belongs only to the
Lord, and his blessing is upon his people, both from the State politic, and
from the State Ecclesiastical.

The use of this concerns both the Kingdom in general, the Chamber of the
Kingdom in particular, and every man's conscience indiuidually. Does not the
people of this Land (the house of England) see, and consider how God has made
our State his own dear darling, which the Jesuits, and other emissaries of
Rome spite at. Has not God chosen it as his Lilly among the flowers of the
field? as the Dove among the Fowls of Heaven? as the Cedar among the Trees of
the Forest? as his Judea among the Nations? and as his Syon amongst the
mountains? Is not this our Island the house of prevailing Israel? a Sanctuary
for his Elect? an Oracle for his Word? and an habitation for himself? Is not
our Republique to Rome as Aegina to Athens, not only an eyesore, but an
heart-sore. The State-politique whereof does right every man both in judgment
and justice. The principal agent of Justice under the King, is called in the
abstract the Chiefe-Iustice. The King himself is the fountain of all Justice,
and does delegate his power of administration unto several Justices Itinerant,
who in their set circuits for the benefit and ease of the subject, do expedite
the lesser causes. Yea, the whole Land being divided into Shires, or Shares,
Hundreds, Wapentakes, and Tithings, that every man, to the number of ten, may
answer for each other, and may be liable to Law, if they do any harm, and
also may receive right to that number in every particular place, and Parish.
The inferior Courts are erected for the good of the subject in smaller causes,
and the Parliament in supreme causes is conueened, wherein the King himself
(albeit he has royal assent in all) yet by Law, Reason, and Religion, he is
legally limited, and concluded. So that uncontrolled no wicked Nimrod can
offend by strong hunting, no cursed Macheuillian, by damnable Statizing, nor
any griping Zacheus by forged cauillations. Our Christian King has so
provided, that this his house of England may be indeed the house of prevailing
Israel. That God may generally be honored, he has ordained (as the King of
Babel in his Provinces) that all his subjects within the four seas may truly
worship the God of Israel. That God may be pleased with our prayers and
fastings, he has ordained a Lent, as the King of Niniue a fast. That God may
be glorified with a Festiuity, he has consecrated the fifth of November to his
divine worship, in thanksgiving for the States wonderful deliverance from
the hellish Gun-pouder Treason, as Queen Hester ordained the Feast of Purim,
for the Jews deliverance from wicked Hamans cruelty. He has set an order to
things indifferent, as did good King Ioas, that there may be no confusion, no
schism in his Land. He has restrained foolish, vain, and idle questions,
both private and public, with all fruitless opposition, lest that
carpet-Preachers should through a singular spirit, broach the Lees of
Anabaptisme, Brownisme, Vorstianisme, and other fanaticall delusions, and lest
they should sow schisms, heresies, and seditious murmurings amongst his
Christian subjects. In a word, our King has taken course that the hand of
violence may in no wise touch the bodies of his subjects, to which purpose
Coroners are appointed in all shires, and corporate Towns, to enquire by
secret inquest upon such as come to violent or untimely deaths, that the Kings
Delegates may be certified how his Subjects come to their ends.

He has also most Christianly provided, that your goods may be kept from
rapine, fraud, and cousenage. To which purpose are ordained Clerks of Markets
to look to weights, and measures, and Judges and Justices for thieves,
robbers, and all other oppressors. And also for your reputation, and good name,
he has ordained that no black-mouthed Curre, with a tongue enflamed by hell
fire, shall besmut the same, but he is liable to censure.

Is not therefore the blessing of God upon the people from the state Politic?
Neither are the people less blessed by the state Ecclesiastical. Never more
preaching Prelates in our Israel, never more able Ministers over the Land,
applying themselves in every case of conscience, as godly Casuists unto all the
distressed in mind. To which purpose some have Moses Rod for miracles, Aarons
Belles for comfort, David's Harp for the howlings of hell, Salomons Sword for
decision of controversies; others have Ieremies Hammer to break the
hard-hearted, Esayes Trumpet to awaken the drowsy, Peter's Keys to open the
joys of Heaven to such as are weary of this life; becoming the sons of solace
to the tender conscience, and the sons of thunder to a boisterous and
bigboned Nimrod: In a word, becoming all to all, that they may win some. Say
then, if the blessing of God be not also on the people from the state
Ecclesiastique? Descend we from the state of the Kingdom, to the Chamber of
the Kingdom, the great City of London. What blessings has not that City from
the state Politic, in their bodies, goods, and good name, which if any man
impeach, he is liable to Law? How are the souls and consciences of the
Citizens blessed by that sacred Company of many able Preachers, to whom God
has given the Word? Insomuch that I may truly say, that no City in the World
on which the Sun shines, has more cause to magnify God, and to multiply
their thankfulness. Oh how many, and how manifold are Gods blessings upon
that City? Oh how many are the ways, that God has revealed for the salvation
of chose Citizens? Insomuch that a man may take up the words which Saint
Chrysostom used to his Antiochians: Is it possible that a people fed with such
holy viands, bred with such dainty fare, should be guilty of such gross, and
so grievous sins, eating sacramentally of the holy Lamb of GOD, should
become Wolves and Tigers one to another? For all in that great and populous
City are not pure wheat, some are tares; all are not wise Virgins, some are
foolish sleepers; all are not sheep, some are goats. Discontent is the food
of the wretched, to whom the present state is always grievous, and imitation
of strangers is a bane to others, whereby diverse are alienated both from
nature, and Nation, from Church, and Commonwealth: All which proceeds from the
want of comparing the State of other Nations with their own present blessed
condition, which causes them not to see their own felicity, and others
misery. O foolish people, do you thus reward the Lord? O England, destruction
is of thy self for thy unthankfulness.

Wherefore let all the people in Church, City, and Commonwealth, take hold of
the Lord, that their Houses may be as Sanctuaries which God does bless, that
they may be built upon the Rock Christ Jesus, to abide the tempest, that God
may not be angry with them for their ingratitude, and turn our House of
England, which is, and has been for many years an House of Israel,
prevailing with God for peace, plenty, and liberty, into an House of war,
bondage, and infamy. And see that you all look to this, before that God does
send you all to the House of death, designed for all. God persuade Iapheth to
dwell in the tents of Shem.

O House of the King.
No dignity of person, 4. Position.
no pre-eminence of place is exempted, or excepted from Gods justice, but even
the mighty ones that offend, The great ones summ^ned.
are often more evidently, more exemplarily, and more severely punished, then
others of inferior rank, and condition.
THE Court is summoned last, in these words: And give ear O House of the King.
By which term of House of the King, is not only meant the King himself,
which was Jeroboam the son of Ioas, the foundation of the House, but also the
Kings Children, the sides of that House; the Kings Counsel, the Pillars; the
Nobles, Peers, Dukes, and Captains, the beams and rafters; the Judges and
Fathers of the Law, the Standards; and the Courtiers, Attendants, and Officers,
the Hangings and Vtensils of that House. In that the Prophet summoning the
Court, says; O House of the King: it seems that the Kings Household, and they
that were about the King, were not as they should be, but were as much, yea,
more in blame then the King himself: For oftentimes it falls out, that a
sound Tenant dwelles in a rotten House, and a godly soul in a lustful body.
Nam ex quolibet ligno non fit Mercurius: Every man is not fit to be about a
King. Almighty God therefore cries by the Ministry of his Prophet; O Jeroboam
thou son of Ioas, I have loved the glory of thine House, and the place where
thine honor dwells: How is it that thou do not love the glory of mine
House, and the place where mine honor dwells? For thy Courtiers have lost
their hearts with wine and women, thy Judges love bribes, and say; Bring,
bring, thy Rulers oppress, and thine attendants flatter, and suffer themselves
to be flattered; and therefore judgment is toward thee, and thine House.
Whereby we learn, that

No dignity of person, nor pre-eminence of place is exempted or excepted from
Gods justice, but even the mighty ones that offend, are often more evidently,
more exemplarily, and more severely punished, then other of inferior rank,
and condition.

The Worlds Monarchs, and their delegates, may assuredly know this to be so
from the Prophet Esaias, who says, Esaias 4. 11.
that The Lord shall punish the Host of the high ones, that are on high: There
is Gods supreamacie above all high ones. Psalm. 82. 1.
He stands in the assembly of Princes (says the Psalmist;) There is his
prefidence, and presence in their conueenings. Psalm. 149. 1.
He shall bind the Kings in chains, and the Nobles with fetters of Iron, as
the same Psalmist says in another place. There is Gods restraint for
extrauagant great ones. Tophet is prepared for the King (says Esaias.) Esaias 30.
33.
There is Gods dungeon for the incorrigible, refractary, and impenitent great
ones. Furthermore, the Psalmist will tell you in what order God does this;
Psalm. 59.
God will break their teeth, that is, God will take away from them all means,
and occasions of doing evil any more. He will make them pass away like water,
if they boast what, and how great things they will do. He will cause them to
vanish like a snayle, and to be like the untimely fruit of a woman, if they
shall persevere in evil doing; and if for all this they shall continue
stubborn, and rebellious, He will wash his feet in their blood, yea, all this
shall be so evident, and exemplary, that the very common people shall see it,
and say, Assuredly there is a God that rules in the World. The dearest of his
Children (be they never so great) God will not spare in this kind. King
Josias, good King Josias causelessly fighting with Pharaoh Neco King of Egypt
in Charcamis, 2 Chronicles. 35.
and not consulting with the Lord, was slain in the field of Megiddo near
Euphrates. King David, good King David, was exemplarily punished for numbering
the people, to the price of therefore and ten thousand subjects, who died of
the plague of pestilence. Now what other thing means this strict, and severe
superintendency of God over the great ones, but to visit the mighty, that they
grow not careless like, Gallio the Proconsull of Achaia, to watch over them,
that they become not irregular like Ananias, to restrain them lest they grow
exorbitant like Manasses, and to show his power in plaguing them, if they be
rebellious, as he did show it upon Pharaoh, and upon all his servants.

But stay, is not Majesty and Sovereignty Gods peculiar? Doubtless: and he
is accursed that does not conceive so. Why then does God deal so severely with
them, as oft-times so evidently, and so exemplarily to punish them more then
others for their offenses? There are important reasons for it. First, because
great ones sin with greater impunity, and immunity then others. If inferiors
offend, they are liable to the censures of great ones; but great ones may play
the Pike in a Pond, and who dares control them? Psalm. 21.
I will up therefore says the Lord, and revenge. Secondly, great ones tax
others, and none dare touch them. Is not a John Baptist a black Swan? Who
dares tell a great one, Non licet tibi? Is not an Elias as rare? What is he,
and who is he that has an heart to tell a Cassandrian great one what Elias
told Ahab? Therefore God will speak to them himself. Thirdly, none are more
bitter then great ones to those that tell them their faults. For a careless
great one will scoff, and scorn at a sincere dealing John Baptist. A wanton
reputes admonition as an old wives tale, albeit it come from grave Zacharias.
A stern great one will presently enjoin you silence, as Amazia did Amos, and
an unbeliever will never leave till he have quite banished you. Fourthly, there
is no appeal from great ones, as in the case of Naboth, no Citizen of Samaria
durst open his mouth for that poor Innocent, Psalm. 119.
and therefore God said, I will arise and revenge his wrong, for it is high
time that the Lord set to his hand, when the great ones who have the Law in
their hands do destroy it. Fifthly, God deals thus severely with great ones
to appease the blasphemies of the enraged multitude: For what will Atheists and
wretches say, when they see great ones outrageously offending? What say they,
Ioh. 21.
where is Gods providence? What care has he of us to set a woolfe to govern
sheep? a tyrant to rule over innocents? Is God silent? Is he at leisure? For
these and the like blasphemies, occasioned by the unjust dealings and wicked
guidance of great ones, God being jealous of his own glory, will rise up, and
revenge, as it is most plain in the message that God put into the mouth of
Nathan, to speak unto King David, 2 Samuel 12.
in the case of Vria^s wrongs.

Great ones (if they have grace) may make good use of this: First, of Caution,
to beware how they abuse their greatness to ill example: For superiors like
stars are potent by their influence upon inferior bodies. If the head be
crasie, the whole body cannot be hail: If the air be infected with an
Epidemical quality, they that dwell therein cannot be very sound. And if the
Pilot be peevish, the passengers may be in great hazard. Besides, inferiors
are mutable: If the Abbot dance, the Monk will shake his heels; and if
Dyonisius study philosophy, his Courtiers will philosophize, if he but intermit
his study, they will altogether omit all study.

Now the reason of this facile inclination, which causes inferiors to be like
iron drawn with these Loadstones, and to be like straw drawn with these jeats
and ambers, is because great ones have eminency of place, therefore the poor
inferiors conceive, as therein is nothing but greatness, so there is nothing
but goodness. Secondly, because inferiors have an opinion of infallibility,
like the Pythagorians, and Papists, that the great ones are too big to be
deceived. Thirdly, the very imitation of great ones has hope of impunity. For,
with what face can he that is in place of authority punish an inferior, when
the great one is as grosely obnoxious, and as peccant in the same sin as the
inferior? Fourthly, inferiors have a desire to please great ones, insomuch,
that to creep into the favor of great ones, some have made no bones, not only
to imitate their gestures, and voices, but their vices also; yea, to stammer,
to lispe, to limpe, to wear long hair, yellow bands, and what not? such
Camelions, Apes, fawning Dogs, and questing Puppies are the giddie multitude
to please great ones. As therefore great ones (if they be good ones) are as
eminent and apparent Land-markes at Sea for safe direction into the haven: so
in evil they are like Eur^clidons to hurry many upon the Sands, Shelfes, and
Rocks of inevitable destruction.

In the second place, great ones may learn to practice humility, lest they
should be proud and forget their God. For it is neither Pharaohs greatness,
nor Nebuchadnezzars imperiousness, nor Iehues furiousnes, nor Herod's
craftiness, nor Saules goodlines, nor Rehoboams lustiness, nor any thing else
that can exempt them from the mighty hand of God, if they grow exorbitant. For
if Zenacherib be extrauagant, God has a hook to put into his nostrils, and a
bridle to put into his lips. If Baasha will become a Behemoth, of the flesh
of his progeny what the Dogs in the City leave, 2 Reg. 19.
the fowls of the field shall eat up. If Zimri be treacherous, 1 Reg. 16.
fire shall devour him, and the palace over his head. And if foolish Ahab
become hellish, 1 Reg. 22.
and sell himself to do evil, an Arrow shall pierce through the riuets of
his briggandine, and strike him to the very heart: yea for all great ones
(whosoever they be) that abuse their potencie, and opulencie, God has prepared
instruments of his judgments, even for all strong hunting Nimrods, profane
Esaus, threatening Rehoboams, and Machauilian Achitophels, albeit either to
uphold, or advance their greatness, they temper exotique poisons, consult
Wisards, use whores, hire bauds, and practice a thousand wickednesses, yet Gods
judgments shall come like water into their bowels, and like oil into their
bones, and some man of God shall discover the very secrets that such Arams do
in their very bedchamber, be the Curtains drawn never so close, whisper they
never so secretly. And then shall they curse the day, and the hour (when the
hand of the Lord is upon them) that ever they were borne, or that they did
enjoy the light of the Sun. Then shall they know that the fear of the Lord
in goodness, is better then all the greatness in the world.

In the third place is practice of Obedience for the Subjects, that they submit
themselves to every ordinance of God, whether it be to a Monarchy, wherein is
one Sovereign, as the head, or unto Aristochracie wherein is an assembly of
the best, or unto Demochracie, or Plebeian government. For there is no power,
but of God, whether it be like the confederation of the Heluetian, or the state
of the Grisons, Venetians, Ragusa, or other mixed gouernements, or the
Monarchies of England, Spain, France, and the like. Let not a Iacobine, or
Rauillack be once named amongst us, but ^et a traitor, and a rebel be
accursed on all hands, yea, not only the hand, that commits the treason, but
the heart that consents thereunto, and the head that conceiues it. Let that
hand dry up, as Ieroboams hand, and that heart tremble, as Balshazars, and the
head be like the heads of the Assiri^ns, that heard the clamor, and
disconsolately fled. Let the black Raven of the Valley, feed upon the eyes of
a Traitor for its cates; Let his flesh be carnage to the Fowls of the air,
and his bowels be given over to the merciless hangman.

In the fourth place is practice of vision, that great ones also may see that
they despise not little ones. For what is more frequent in the Scripture, then
for evil great ones to be vanquished with little ones. Jeroboam, the Colonel
of the horse, vanquisheth his foolish Master Rehoboam the King. Mordocheus, the
Kings Porter, puts down Haman the favorite, by the means of Hester a poor
captive Hebrew Girl. And the reason is, because God does not only work his
will by weak, and vile means, as the world often reputeth them, to the end that
no flesh should boast it self against God, but also oft-times God armeth in
his judgment little wicked ones to subvert great wicked ones, as it is most
plain in Baasha, Zimri, Omri, Asa, Ahab, Iehu, and others. Psalm 52.
Boast not thou thy self therefore, (O great one,) that thou can do
mischief, for Gods judgment is greater then thou. And let not great ones
forget by whom they reign: For what was more excellent in Heaven then an
Angel? yet for his pride he was cast down to Hell. What on earth more
glorious then an Emperor? yet Charles the fifth, being a most fortunate Prince
in many enterprises, yet when he set himself against God in warring with the
Duke of Saxony, the Lant-Graue of Hessen, and others of the Religion, he was
put to the worst by Mauritius a mean Duke. What more imperious in the Sea then
a Whale? yet in his pride when he endeavors to swallow up all the little
Fishes that come near him; in the end, with a herring fry, and scull that
comes on so fast he is clean choked. The Spaniard in eighty eight, that
brought to Sea that invincible Atalantado (as the Nun of Portugal called it)
for power and number, was scattered in the pride of the imaginations of his
own heart. And most memorable is that of Henry the fourth, the last King of
France, having two of his teeth stricken out by John Chastell, a Jesuits
Scholar; one of the Religion standing by (perceiving the wound not to be
mortal) be-spake the King on this fashion, O King, thou have denied God with
thy mouth, meaning the Kings outward revolt to Popery, but when thou shall deny
God with thine heart, God will stabb thee through the heart, which fell out
diverse years after in the bloody blow that Rauillac gave him, which was both
fatal, and final, for the Knife was found through his heart.

The last practice is of thanksgiving, which belongs unto the house of our
Israel, to yield unto Almighty God for the house of the King: For God has
loved the glory of our kings house, and the place where his honor dwells, in
giving us our King the foundation of this house, as another Z^roba^ell. The
Kings children to be as Cedars in the sides of this house; his prudent
Counsel, as a most provident Sanadrim; his Peers, and Nobles, the beams and
rafters, to be as the worthies of David, and the valiants of Iehu; his Judges,
the standards, to be as Vshai the Archite; his Courtiers, attendants, and
officers, the hangings of this house, to be as faithful Mordocheus. Let us not
forget therefore, seeing it has pleased God that we live in a Commonwealth
under a Monarchy which is the most absolute form of government: Wherein the
King is the Unite from whence all numbers are derived; he is the Father of the
Families, upon whom the whole household depends; he is the Pilote that stands at
the helm; he is one in the Commonwealth, as one Sun in the Firment, as one
heart in the body, and as one God in Heaven.

And seeing in the high Court of the State, which we call a PARLIAMENT, which
consists of a threefold State, and all of God, the King as the Monarchy, the
Vpper-house the Aristocracy, and the Lower House as the Democracy, which
nathlesse has freedom and liberty, both of suffrage, voice, and vote. Let us
not, (I say) forget to beg of our God, that of his infinite goodness and
mercy, he would remove from about the Kings sacred person, and from all his,
all treacherous flatterers, and time-seruing whisperers, from his Council, all
Matchauelian practisers, from his Peers, and Nobles, all base Oppressors, and
hard-hearted Landlords, who by Iesuited improuements, grind the faces of the
poor Husbandman to make the most of their own, from his Judges, and Justices
all corrupted, base, bribed, partial, basket-Iudges, chicking-Iustices, and
the like, who will transgress for a crust of bread, as the wiseman says in
the Proverbs, and from his Court all contemners of his Gospel, and despisers
of the Word of Exhortation, such as were Pharaoh, Ahab, Herod, and the like
miscreants. And that I may move you hereunto, let the great ones of the World
know that if they be scandalous, a woe belongs unto them; for Christ says:
Woe unto the World, because of offenses. If woe to the whole World, then unto
England* It were better that a great one which gives public scandal had a
great mil-stone hanged about his neck; and be cast into the Sea, then that he
should lay a stumbling block before Gods children, or that his wickedness
should cause the whole land to mourn, and bring in the sword of the enemy, by
Gods just judgment, to be sheathed into our own bowels. Let not the
greatness of other Kingdoms and States deter you: For as long as God is
with your King and you, fear not at all. God vanquished the imperious Romans,
by the Herulians, Goths, Vandales, Visigothes, and Ostrogothes; pulled down
the Metropolis of the Assirians, Tire, and Sydon, egypt, and Persia,
Palestina, and Constantinople, by despicable and poo^^ means. So also know ye,
that you through God shall vanquish the pride of the Spaniard, and the fury of
the French, or what Nation so ever shall band it self against you. At all
times therefore it is our duty according to the Apostles Council: 1 Timothy 2.
Let prayers, and supplications be made for all men, but especially for Kings,
and such as are in authority, that under them we may live a peaceable life in
all godliness and honesty. Thus have you heard the summons, and now hear the
charge.

Hear this; Hearken and give ear. 5. Position.

It dearly and nearly concerns all degrees in Court, Church, The charge to
all Estates
and Commonwealth, that they attend as well to the ripping up of their sins,
and to the denunciation of Gods judgments for the same, as to the promulgation
of Gods mercies, in favor of the penitent, that all estates having a sense and
sight of their iniquities, may break them off by repentance, and obtain
pardon by Jesus Christ our Lord.
THE charge to all is in these terms; Hear, Hearken, and give ear. This
threefold repetition, Hear, Hearken, and give ear, is no Battologie, no
Tautologie, but an elegant elocution of the spirit of God, usual in the
Scriptures. He that has ears to hear, let him hear (says Luke: Luke 8.
) And he that has ears to hear, let him hear what the spirit says to the
Churches, Apoc. 2. and 3.
says the spirit of God in the Revelation to the seven Churches of Lesser
Asia. Saint Augustine expounds it to our hands. Hear all ye Estates, that by
the same Gate through which sin first entered, Grace may now enter. Hearken,
that is to say, attend with your minds to understand what God says, and Give
ear, that is to say, intend with your hearts to do and practice what you
hear and conceive. The reason why the Scripture uses this earnest elocution,
as to say, He that has ears to hear, let him hear, (as if men did any thing
else with their ears, but hear) is this. Many men see with their ears, as
they do who but hearing ought of their neighbors (especially if it be of
evil report) believe it to be true, as if verily they had seen it with their
eyes, and these kind of people indeed see with their ears. The goutie have
two feet and cannot go: the goggle-eyed, bleare-eyed, and pur-blinde, have two
eyes to see, and yet cannot perfectly discern: even so, many have both ears,
who either with the Adder stop both, and so hear nothing, or being of the
generation of Malchus, they have never a right-eare, rightly to hear, hearken,
and conceive as they should. In this place therefore, obaudire is obedire: so
Christ himself says in a double parallel of the Gospel. Luke 8.
In Saint Luke, Christ says, concerning his Apostles; He that hears you,
hears me, and in Saint Matthew; Matthew. 18.
If thy brother hear thee, thou have woone him: In both which places, hearing
is obeying.

But what is it, that these parties summoned must hear? Even a plain
Demonstration of their sins, and a just Judgment awarded against them for
the same. Whereby we learn that.

It dearly and nearly concerns all degrees in Court, Church, and
Commonwealth, that they attend as well to the ripping up of their sins, and
to the denunciations of Gods judgments for the same; as to the Promulgation of
Gods mercies, in favor to the Penitent, that all estates having a sense and
sight of their iniquities, may break them off by repentance, and obtain
pardon by Jesus Christ our Lord.

What does all preaching avail else? if it has not this concurrence, and
relation? For they that hear, and do not understand, all Preaching to them is
a dream. They that have ears, and hear not, all Preaching to them is as a
fearful slumber. They that have ears to see, are they not monsters? and they
that have ears to attend vain and vile things, are they not contemners of
God, and all godliness? But here you see is enjoined, as the elegancy and
efficacy of this phrase requires, that we not only believe what we hear
from God, but assent also thereunto, and submit our selves by the obedience of
faith to be taught by the Spirit of God, as a Child submits himself to his
Tutor.

They that thus hear, whether they be sceptered, mytred, or inferiors, come
with grave modesty, and great reverence to hear God speak unto them: So came
Elias casting his mantle before his face, 1 Reg. 19.
when he hears the voice of God. So came Abraham with submission and much
modesty, Genesis 18.
when he makes suite for Sodom. Ezech. 1.
So came Ezechiel prostrating himself upon the ground, and made the earth his
veil. So came Peter crying out, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man. So
came the Syrophenician trembling, standing behind, and desiring but to touch
the hem of Christ's garment. So affected come all blessed, faithful, and
devout souls, whom doubtless the Lord does hear, and in his good time will
grant their godly requests. To this purpose you see also that Preachers are in
Scripture called, Trumpeters, Proclaymers, Ambassadors, to whom all audience
even from the greatest is usually given.

Moreover, is it not the House of God where we come to hear Gods voice? shall
we there offer the sacrifice of fools? Come we thither to make a Tabernacle
for God, or a golden Calfe for the Devil? Earings and Iewel^ were given to the
making of both, but by diversely affected people. But some happily may say; What
need all this Vociferation? The World was never more attentive to preaching.
True it is (blessed, and beloved) as long as Placentia are preached, but to
some giddy kind of people Zidkeiah is more welcome with his deceiptfull
falsehoods then Michaiah the son of Iimlah with the glorious sunshine of
Gods truth. Others as long as Preachers please them, they are pleased; but if
Amos tell the rich that they sell the poor for shoes, and the miserable for a
grain of salt: If Hoseah tell Ephraim that he is like a cake on the harth not
turned, and James cry out, Woe to the rich, and Esayas tell the Daughters of
Syon that they are proud, and go mincing, and so forth: Tell me then what
entertainment, respect, and audience Churchmen shall have, that speak in Gods
voice unto such kind of people?

God speaks out of a Whirle-winde, that is, either by outward affliction, as
he spoke to Job, or else by the inward sting of conscience: and so we read the
Jews were pricked to the heart by Peter's preaching, as is extant in the Acts.
It is the property of the voice of the Lord to break the Cedars, as the
Psalmist says, and to divide the flames of fire; that is, to rebuke them that
are of a high spirit, and to subdue the proud hearted: For God had rather have
one Publica^, that does despise and abhor himself, then a thousand Pharisees
that do justify and boast themselves. The sons of folly indeed reject the
words of Exhortation, but the sons of Wisdom say; Let the just smite me,
for the wounds of a friend are far better then the balmes of a flatterer.
Tell me who loves us more then God? and yet he does afflict the godly
Patriarchs with famine, and his own dear Israel, growing rebellious, with
sundry punishments.

The use of this is manifold. First of Enquiry for the Lord Jesus. Inquirator
pro Domino Jesus.
We read in Job that in an holy Assembly of the Children of God, the Devil
being not called, came thither also. So in diverse Christian Congregations
(according to the old English Proverb) Where God has his Church, the Devil
has his Chapel, Whence it is that many in Christian Assemblies, when they
should hear Gods voice, behave themselves as if they were Goths, Vandales,
Guelphes, and Gibelline^. For while other well-affected Christians attend,
read, lift up their hands to Heaven, pray, sing, sigh, fit still unto the end;
these ill-affected ones sleep, prare, put out the foole-finger, curse, grinne,
scoff, and hasten away as unworthy of the peace of God. Marvel not therefore
why so many come so often to Church, and are never the better: For their hearts
are waxen gross, and their ears and eyes, and all are stupefied by the
Devil. Hence is it that they come without heart to God, and are but half
Christians at the best, like Agrippa, or like Hagar, who sat right ever
against the waters and did not see them. Nothing likes these kind of people,
but a hunting Mass (as Henry of France was wont to say) and a straw-berry
Sermon.

But happily you will say: The Pulpits ought to be mercy-seates, and Chaires of
consolation, but they are become Tribunals, where the Auditory is arraigned,
accused, and condemned. I answer. Behold I show you a Paradoxe. It is a plague
unto you when you are not plagued, and you are undone, when you are not undone.
It was never worse with the Israelites, then when their mouths and stomakes
were full of Quails. The dolors of Synai, to some, are more wholesome then the
songs of Syon. Indeed he that endeavors to teach a fool, gleweth a
potshard together; and he that speaks unto a heart that does not attend, is
as if he should speak to one newly raised from sleep. Weep therefore over
the dead but seven days, because they are deprived of the light, but weep
over such fools every day, because they are destitute of understanding: Their
heart is like a broken pitcher, it will hold no wisdom, and if it do hold any
thing, it is like a syue that retains the chafe only, and lets the good
grain pass through.

Saint Augustine in his time was at a nonplus what he should preach: So may
the Churchmen be of our time; for says Saint Augufline, When I did behold the
lovers of this World, I knew not how to preach to them: For the rich disdained
at what I said, and the poor had rather have bread, then the Manna that I
brought; yea, and the miserable would often times murmur that it fared better
with the Preacher then with them. Yet for all this the true humble soul that
comes to God, puts on confusion, comes trembling, quaking, sighing, and
sorrowing, and puts on Elias mantle, which is verecundious modesty, that
Princely Robe so pleasing to Almighty God. The true Christian soul, though
afflicted in it self, comes yet well affected to be cured. If it has retters,
it is well content to have ink and gall to be sprinkled upon it; if it has a
perilous pleuresie, it is contented to have it launced, lest the cure grow by
delatory shifts incurable. Knowing that it is against the Law of Arms, Nature,
and Nations, that Herolds and Ambassadors should be euilly entreated. The
blessed souls that breathe and long for Heaven, will hear what the Lord will
say; for at the last he will speak peace unto their souls, that they return
not again to folly. They will hearken unto Gods voice, that he may hearken
unto their voice, when they call unto him in the evil day; and they will
attend and wait his pleasure: For in a still voice he will speak comfort unto
them, and with his powerful hand in his own good time he will take them unto
himself for ever; yea, albeit God tell them of their sins in plain terms,
and lay them open to the view of the World, yet will they assure themselves
that God does it, to make their iniquities appear in their right colors, (as
they are) exceeding and out of measure sinful, that so the godly having a
sight of the ugliness, filth, and horror of their obliquities, may the sooner
loathe them to the death, abhor themselves in a godly hatred, and sue for pardon
in the meritorious sufferings of their all-sufficient Savior Jesus Christ,
Assuring themselves that Gods word, which they hear, is not spoken in vain,
but in them that are saved, works that good effect wherefore it is sent, that
as the Snow and Rain, which descend down from Heaven return not in vain,
but water the earth, that it may bring forth fruit unto him that labors, and
seed unto the sower; so the word that we hear from God (if our hearts be not
heathy and sandy ground) works that which it was sent out for, to Gods glory
and man's salvation for ever.

You have been a Snare on Mizpah, and a Net spread upon Tabor, And the
Reuolters are profound to make slaughter, albeit I have been a rebuker of them
all.
No voice, 6. Position.
nor rebuke of God, or good men, laying forth the hideousness and horror of
sins never so open to the view of the conscience can prevail with the mighty
hunting Nimrods of this world, All Estates accused.
to restrain their rage and furious madness, but still rather make their
greatness in Church, Court, and Commonwealth, baits, and guiles for their
gain and glory.
YOu have heard the general Summons, the particular parties summoned, and the
Charge unto them all. Now ensues what they all must attend unto, which is the
Declaration, setting out their sins, and the Commination of judgment, which
is the sequel of their sins: The Declaration sets out the sins of all
estates to be subtle sins, high, heavy, and heinous sins. All this
appears by the Declaration in these terms: For you have been a snare on
Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor, And the Reuolters are profound to make
slaughter, albeit I have been a rebuker of them all. These words show four
things. First, the quality of their sins, that they were Nets and Snares. In
which resemblance of Nets and Snares, other four things are couched. First the
subtilty, and slyenesse of their sins: For their tricks and devices, like
Nets and Snares, were so cunningly set, that few or none could perceive them.
Secondly, the cursed gain which they intended by their sins, Nets and Snares
are not set for nifles, they intend not vaga indiuidua. Thirdly, the
irregularity of their sins, Quo warranto? What Law or what Warrant had they to
devise such tricks and proiects of having? Fourthly, the stength of their
Iniquities, for the seely souls whom they caught being free before, but now
captiuated, and ensnared in their trammells, were brought into great bondage,
and extreme misery, as seely Birds and harmless Beasts are caught in
trammels.

Secondly, in the Declaration is set down the height of their sins, by the
two Mountains Mizpah, and Tabor, wherein I will not either out of Saint Jerome,
or Martine Luther, Corographically describe their scites. It is most plain in
the book of Iosuah, that Mizpah was a famous hill, by the victory that Iosuah
obtained near unto it: It was a mountain, because they went up to it, and
upon it was an Altar, because it is said, they went up to the Lord in Mizpah.
Mount Tabor is famous in the Gospel, Matthew. 17.
by Christ's transfiguration thereon.

The litterall sense is this: The manner of these Reuolters was to intercept by
Ambuscados, the poor souls that fled out of Israel to Judah (where the purer
worship of God was) and to bring them back again to Bethel, or Dan, as the
manner of the Romanists have been, who have surprised upon the Alps those
devout souls, that hasted out of revolted Italy to Geneuah, and other
reformed parts, and to reduce them back again to their cruel Inquisition.
The mystical sense is: These Reuolters did ensnare Gods people by foolish and
fond traditions, enioyning the observation of them, as if they had been the
true doctrines of God. The Metaphorical sense is: As on these mountains the
fowlers, and hunters, did catch birds and beasts with nets and trammells; so
these in Church, Court, and Country ensnared poor weak souls with thousand
mischieuances. The Synecdochicall sense is: They did not only ensnare Gods
people, at Dan, and Bethel, but also extended their revolt to the tops of
Mizpah, and Tabor, and where not?

Thirdly, this Declaration shows the horror of their sins by words of
degrees. For these estates had not only internally revolted, but even to the
view of the world externally also, having no respect, either to time, place, or
person: The set place of Gods worship at that time was Jerusalem. They would
worship at Dan, Bethel, Mizpah, Tabor, any where. The times, and holy
festiuities appointed by the Law, they regarded not. The persons designed for
the Priesthood they fleighted. Moreover, they had multiplied their
Prauarications, by enhaunsing their Sacrifices, which the Spirit of God
laugheth to scorn, by terming a Coniugatis, their Sacrifices, slaughters,
their Temples, shambles, and their Priests, Butchers. Yea, and that which is
more, all the estates, as it seems, had subjected themselves in their revolt
to the base vulgar, desiring to give them content for advantage, in what
strain or depth of impiety so ever.

Fourthly, in this Declaration also is showed the insolency of their sins:
For they were grown to that impudency and height of sinning, albeit God
himself, both by immediate, and mediate means had been a rebuker of them all.
Wherein they endeavored to prevent the objection that is ordinarily made in the
Prophets, whereby they might have said to God, If we are deceived, thou have
deceived us. But the Text meets with that, and says, God himself had been a
rebuker of them all. O how great is the subtilty, deepenesse, and slienesse of
sin, that has all these foul and fearful ingrediences? Learn hence
therefore, that.

No voice nor rebuke of God or good men, laying forth the hideousness and
horror of sins, never so open to the view of the conscience, can prevail
with the mighty hunting Nimrods of this world, to restrain their rage and
furious madness, but still they make their greatness in Church, Court, and
Commonwealth, baits and guiles for their gain and glory.

This appears in the very terms and passages of the context: For from the
Court to the Cart, they would be Nets and Snares to one another, albeit the
Lord God himself had been a rebuker of them all for it. This is Patriarchall
truth; for righteous Noah, holy Lot, and meek Moses prevail not with some in
their times. It is Prophetical truth; for all the Prophets grievously
complain hereof. It is Evangelical truth; for, Christ himself preuailes not
with Herod, and other miscreants. And it is also Apostolical verity; for the
Apostles prevail not with such as Simon Magus was, and others of that stamp,
nor all the ministration of the glorious Gospel of Christ, (sithence that
time) does prevail with those that are miscreants, and none of Gods eternal
Election.

The reason hereof is plain: for these wicked ones are enwrapped in the snares
of the devil. 2 Timothy 2.
They are the Devils slaves, bound to do his will. They are unjust, and will
be unjust still. Ibidem.
They are filthy and will be filthy still. Apoc. 22.
They are plunged into the deepnesse of Satan, Apoc. 2.
and they are mis-perswaded, and misled, 2 These. 2.
by the mystery of Iniquity. This will further appear out of the Declaration,
both in Israel already revolted, and in Judah that yet staggered. Israel
revolted, is a Parallel of the Papacy, and staggering Judah is a type of
Cassandrian Protestancie. See this in both: first in Popery. Ierem. 51. 9.
Is not that of the Prophet true? We would have cured Babel, but she could not
be healed. For, albeit God himself has rebuked the Popish vassalls at sundry
times, and in diverse manner, not only by the sword of the Spirit, which is the
word of God (by which their Babylon is fallen;) but also by his immediate hand,
in bringing to naught their cursed, and damnable designements, and in showing
the very ruin of their rotten cause (as diverse and sundry instances may be
given, both ancient, and modern, at home, and abroad, especially of those two
in our own Nation, namely, the difference betwixt the Seminaries and the
Jesuits in Wisbich Castle, and the hellish gun-pouder treason) yet that great
Romish Archimandrites of the world, and his revolted ^ry, continue Nets and
Snares upon Mizpah, and Tabor, that is, Church, and Commonwealth, not only
literally in their ambuscadoes upon the Alps, but also Metaphorically at
Rome, at Remes, Loretto, Compostella, Hallas, Sichem, and where not? All their
doings and dealings being semblable unto Nets and Snares. In pretense of
Sanctify craking of nothing but of Religion, Mother Church, infallibility of
See, authority of Fathers, and Counsels, and such like boastings. Nets and
Snares for profit, witness their Bulls, Indulgences, the holy Exercise (as
they call it) of the unholy fathers the Jesuits. Nets and Snares for lawless
warranty, as appears in their Decretalls, in their Brutum fulmen of
Excommunication, in their captiuating seely souls that thirst after Christ,
with Masses, Dirges, Trentalls, Pilgrimages, Reall-presence, and many such like
encumbrances.

For you must know, that these Shopkeepers open not their Shops for nothing:
For all their tricks tend either to profit, or to pleasure, or to both. For
their profit, they have their several wares; namely, the year of Iubile,
Archiepiscopall, and Episcopal palls, Anniuersary-Masses, priuate-Masses,
privileged Altars, Taxations Apostolical (as they call them) for unlawful
faculties, dispensations against Scripture, absolutions, reuocations,
legitimations, and for what not? To instance would be teadious. Yea, to keep
this profit, they are no less cunning, Non minor est virtus, quam quaere^a,
parta tueri.
in their vows of single life, in keeping the Election of the Pope amongst the
Cardinals only, in winning the favor of the Nobility by making their
debauched sons Abbots, and Priors, and by making their collapsed daughters
Abesses and Nuns. As also, in be-fooling the Kings of the earth with a
Prime-rose, blessed by the Popes nowne mouth, a holy Sword, a military Belt, a
waxen Agnus Dei, and the like trumperies.

Moreover, they have nets and snares for their pleasure also, in keeping the
common people ignorant of the Word of God, in traducing the phrases of the holy
Scripture, and in preparing their baits for all palates. For the pompous, they
have the bait of the Papacy; for the sordid, the order of the Capuchini, and
Sfoliani; for the delicious, the Abacies; for the melancholy, the Hermites, and
Anachorites; for the wanton and lascivious, they have those days of privilege
at Rome, before every Carniuall, wherein they have liberty and license to do
what lustful wickedness they lift. Surely a man cannot choose but wonder to
observe their mixed compositure, (which doubtless, they themselves smile at in
their sleeves;) as namely, that the Popes should wash the feet of the poor,
and yet suffer the Kings of the Earth to kiss their feet. That they should
depose and set up the Kings of the Earth, with one and the selfsame Bull.
That they should take upon them to remit sins, vent the strange conceits of
Transubstantiation, auricular Confession, works of superrerogation, and the
like fopperies. Insomuch, that a man may truly take up a complaint, and say;
What soul does not bleed to see the spirit of God thus grieved? to see the
hearts of the sons of men so obdurate? and what faithful soul does not cry
out earnestly to the Lord in the word of David: It is high time for Thee, Lord,
to set to thy helping hand, for they (the Papists) have destroyed thy Law?

But that which is most maruailous of all, is to see, that these Romanists
should in all Commonwealths, where ever they live, be nets and snares, as
appears most plainly in our State, wherein these Flies of Egypt cannot
content themselves to live within the limits of the loyalty, and allegiance of
good subjects; (for I mean hereby such Cleriques, and Laiques amongst us as
are poisoned with the Cup of the Whore of Babylon) albeit they receive great
immunities, both of life, limb, and liberty, from our dread Sovereign King,
but they must attempt both by open violence, and sulphurious Gunpowder, and by
what not, to ensnare the whole frame and fabrique of our commonwealth, even to
the utter ruin thereof, and for no other cause, (if the most intelligent
amongst them be consulted) but for that our dread Soueragine King, will not
admit a tolleration of Religion (as they term it) a hodge-pot of Gods
service; as if his Majesty's own wisdom, his prudent Sanedrim, and the
experience of our State, could not ascertaine his Majesty that it is
impossible for this entire Nation of ours to bear a Lipsicum Interim, a Sphinx
Augustana, a Pandora Francofordiana, a Cothurnus Neoburgicue, or the like, in
all which there must needs be a fearful Amnesty of the integrity of Gods
true and real worship.

But leaving revolted Israel, let us return to staggering Judah, for GOD will
search even his own Jerusalem with lights; And if Judah become hypocritical in
her self, and critically look only upon revolted Israel, and taxing it,
forget their own obliquities, then these Iudaites will be like those witches
called Lamiae, that see only Extramittendo: For it seems by this accusation,
that both Court, Church, and Commonwealth were all in one predicament. They
were all become Birders, and Fowlers, Hunters and hauers, and therefore they
had devised Nets and Snares, trammels and tricks, to effect their proiects and
purposes. I have always hated Chams unnatural and cursed disposition, to make
bare pudenda parentum: But it is lamentable, and a thousand pitties, that in
high places, which are as the Sunne-risings of a State, there should be any
such persons, like Nets and Snares, that for Quid dabitis, will bring Idiots
and Asses into the Church of God: That there should be temporizing, and
Cassandrian great ones, which bend their wits to nothing else, but like
Jesuits to seduce the simple, and like Machauillians to supplant the great,
that oppose them: That there should be such great ones, in Church or Court,
that should think that all the World was borne for them, and they for no body;
such Judges that should be basely and scandalously obnoxious, and such Lawyers
that should be dishonest, and insatiable.

But blessed be God, our good Josiah the King has reasonably well purged his
house, Church, and Commonwealth of such dangerous nets and snares. Time would
fail me, and my senses would be stupefied with teadiousnesse, if I should take
upon me to enumerate all the nets and snares in Church and Commonwealth,
notwithstanding all his sacred Majesty's care to purge them, all the wholesome
Laws ordained by Parliament to restrain them, all prudent and pious courses
endeavor to reform them, yet that there should be chicken-Iustices, Knights
that like Kites feed on the garbage of their Country, Judges who like
Druggists, and Apothecaries, give Quid pro quo, Hab for Nab, this for that: Or
to number the time-seruers, time-sellers, the false-ballancers, the Simoniakes,
and such like: All which enormities proceed of nothing else but from a
Conscience morgaged to the World, which being like to a ship-mans hose, or a
large bowling-alley, a Franciscan sleeue-hand, resolved with the Neopolitane,
that if ever a man will be rich, he must turn his back upon God, or with the
Florentine, who was wont to say, that three things bred him all his wealth, an
Iron arm to take any pains, an Ants belly to live pinching, and basely, and a
dogs soul, to make no conscience of any thing. Whereupon, as the Prophet
says, Hab. 1. 16.
These worldings sacrifice to their own net, and burn incense to their drag:
because by them their portion is fat, and their meatplenteous.

What heart, unless it be a heart of flint, does not relent to hear the
grieunaces in streets, and highways, that brother makes against brother, and
neighbor against neighbor, the sum whereof I may instance in the words of
the Psalmist, who complains, Psalm. 35. 7.
That there was privily laid a snare for him, and without cause, they hid their
Net in a pit, yea without cause had dug for his soul. And what say the
wicked in all this: The Lord has forgotten it, he hides away his face, and
will not see it. These are the deepenesse of Satan, and the bellowings of
hell. Yet in all this, these mad fools do lie, for I have heard the
prayers, and praises of the godly: Draw me (says one) out of the Net which
they have laid for my soul. Our soul (says another) is escaped as a bird out
of the snare of the Fowler, the snare is broken and we are delivered. And do
we think that God does not hear the cries of his children? Yes assuredly, GOD
says to the fools, Deal not so madly, and to the ungodly, Set not up your
horn; you shall he slain all the sort of you, yea as a tottering wall shall
ye be, and as a broken hedge. Woe unto thee that spoylest, and thou wast not
spoiled, and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee:
Esaias 33. 1.
When thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled; and when thou shall
make an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee.
Yea, God has his nets also for such Fowlers and Hunters; I will spread my net
upon him, Ez. 12. 13.
and he shall be taken in my snare, and I will bring him to Babylon, to the
Land of the Caldeans, yet shall be not see it. Hos. 7. 12.
I will spread my net upon them, I will bring them down, as the Fowls of the
Heaven, I will chastise them, as their Congregations has heard. He will rain
upon the wicked snares, Psalm. 11. 6.
fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest; this shall be the portion of
their cup. Yet after all this, (if they do defer to turn unto God) God
has his great draw-net in the end of the world: For as a snare shall it come
on all them that dwell on the face of the Earth: Luke 21. 35.
And this draw-net is already cast into the Sea of the World, and shall gather
of every kind, which when it is full, the Angels shall draw it to shore, and
shall sit down, and gather the good into vessels, but cast the bad away. Math.
13. 49.
Even so shall it be at the end of the World; the Angels shall come forth, and
sever the wicked from among the just.

In that day, what will become of those that have been snares in the Church?
abusing their knowledge to filthy lucre, that study Bodines Commentaries,
Lipsius Pollitiques, and Machiuells Prince, and such like Quod-libets, more
then the holy Scriptures? What will become of them that have been nets and
snares in the Court? by scraping Monopolies, proling proiects, and cruel
cursed stratagems? What will become of all the fry and rabble in the
Commonwealth, who become nets and snares unto one another upon all occasions.
In base covetousness, becoming Apes, Lions, fawning Dogs, and Devils, and
all for money; in Malice, becoming Romish Butchers, never satisfied but with
blood, making all their life a Corban of cousenage, and a Mammon of wicked
guiles and gains, as if these mammonists did purpose to make no other
profession, but like Montebankes, that profess the frauds of Italy, like the
Scofiotti of Ferara, that fasten upon nothing but upon gains, like the Banditi
that are lawless, and like the Free-booters of Germany, imagining all to be
Fish that comes to their nets?

But there are some names in our Nation (as in Sardis) that are Gods, who would
not for all the World, with the Echronits, forsake God, and go to Beelzebub,
or with the Ammonites go to Melchom, or with Demas go to Mammon, knowing that
it is impossible that the sons of men should wallow in such ill-got wealth,
and swim in such abundance of cursed gains, but that the deceitfulness of
the Flesh, and of the World, does bear them up by the armeholes, and the
Devil holds them up by the chinne, until they are plunged into the deepenesse
of Satan, who teaches them all these cunning sleights, until he has
brought them to the fearful downfall of death, and then when they expect
comfort, he says unto them (as the Priests said to Judas, See thou to it,)
shift for your selves. This is the fearful, fatal, and final doom, this is
all the comfort and consolation that the mighty hunting Nimrods of the World
shall receive, as a guerdon for their misse-led and mis-perswaded wicked
courses.

Pray we therefore the great Majesty of heaven to inflame with zeal his
Majesty's heart on earth, as he has begun, even so to continue until he has
utterly purged both Court, Church, and Commonwealth of all such wicked
miscreants, and cursed caytiffes, who remain incorrigible, whatsoever either
God or good men from God shall say, or endeavor to reform, and rectify them
in. And seeing the word of God, which is the sword of the spirit, does not
prevail with them, that the Sword of Magistracy may be unsheathed against
their faces, that the secular power may put down and punish all wicked
practisers both in Church and Commonwealth, and that such as the Church has
justly cast out by excommunication, may be delivered to the secular power for
Execution; that so (if it be possible) they may be brought to Repentance, and
their souls saved in the day of the Lord. God effect this for his glory sake.

Judgment is toward you.
God of his endless bounty and bottomless pity, com. 7. Position.
passion, and mercy, for Christ his sake, does favorably and fatherly
premonish before he punish. All Estates menaced with Judgment.

IN the last place, after the Declaration of the sins of that time, is the
Commination, or Commonition of punishments due for the same, and that toward
all ranks, and conditions, indefinitely. For as all the Estates were Paralels
in their sins, so are they all liable to like punishments. It seems all
Estates were become Nets and Snares to one another. All therefore have
Judgment awarded against them. Judgment in Scripture signifies three things.
First, every action of God, the cause whereof is to us unknown. This is that
great deep which David could not sound: It is that profundity which caused
Paul to cry out, O altitudo; and taught Saint Ambrose to say, Non est
argumentum disputationis, sed stuporis. I am no Eagle to fly so high a pitch:
I desire to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified. Secondly,
Judgment signifies discrimination, or difference, and that must be left
until the general audit. I will not take upon me to judge before the time,
who are sheep who are goats, who are wheat, who are the chafe; for God has
appointed a day wherein he will judge the men of the World, by that God-man
Jesus Christ.

In a word, understand by Judgment in this place, that which Paul means in
his Epistle to the Romans. Indignation, and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon
every soul of man that does evil. So then the Judgment here meant, is that
Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, shall be poured out of the
vyals of Gods wrath upon all exorbitant Estates. But behold the exuberant
goodness of God, which thus speaks: Judgment is toward you; Judgment
instant, but not yet extant; Judgment toward you, but not upon you. Whereby we
learn, that

God of his endless, boundless, and bottomless pity, compassion, and
mercy, for Christ his sake, does favorably and fatherly pre-monish before he
punish.

The Psalmist tells us so. If a man will not return. Psalm 7. 12.
God will whet his Sword, bend his Bow, and prepare the instruments of death.
Here is only Preparation of Judgment, Jonas 3.
not Execution. Jonas comes with an ( Adhuc) yet forty days, and Niniue shall
be destroyed. The Psalmist with a day; To day if ye will hear his voice. The
Divine with a moment, Christ stands at the door, and knockes. This further
appears in sundry Judgments that God has showed in the World, from the
beginning, God himself preaches to the Protoplast before the fall. If thou
eat thereof, Genesis 3.
thou shall die the death. Before the deluge, Noah the Preacher of
righteousness, an hundred and twenty years forewarned the old World. Before
that sulphur showred down upon Sodom, how often was righeous Lot vexed with
their uncleanness? Moses and Aaron show signs and wonders, and bring plagues
upon Egypt, before Pharaoh was drowned in the Red Sea. How many times, and
manifo'd ways did God speak to his own people before they were carried into
captivity? Seven several portentous progedies God showed unto the Cizens of
Jerusalem before their utter destruction by Vespatian.

The Jews famous antiquary relates in his Book Ios^phus de bello Iudaico,
lib. 7. cap. 12.
of the wars of the jews, that before the utter destruction of Jerusalem, a
fiery Sword was seen in the firmament over that City, a light about the
Temple, and the Altar in the night season did affright them that waited, a Cow
led in for sacrifice brought forth a Lamb in the midst of the Temple, the
brazen gate of the Temple opened of its own accord, an host of Horsemen and
Spearemen was seen over the City in the firmament, a shrill voice heard in the
night season from under the Altar, crying, Get you hence, get you hence; and
one Jesus the son of Ananus not long before the siege went up and down the
streets, and could not by any means be silenced, but still he lamented,
saying, Woe to this place, Temple, and City: and at the time of the siege he
standing on the wall, cried, Woe to my self; at which words he was slain with
an engine by the enemy that beleagured the City.

I list not to wade into the shallow brooks of the Heathen; yet if a man would
but cast his eye into the tract of Suetonius, concerning the lives of the
twelve Caesar's, a man may see that God has not left himself without witness
in this kind, no, not among those Paganish miscreants. But you will say, what
is all this to us? I will tell you. I am no Prophet, nor yet the son of a
Prophet, but without any challenge of Enthusiasme, or any such dizzy dream;
Tell me if Gods judgments have not been toward us in our Nation both in
Court, Church, and Commonwealth? In the Court was not Judgment toward us in
the death of our late dread Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, when the eyes of the
Jesuits were ready to drop out with expectation of our ruin, and their
brains aked with plotting villainies, and perilous prophesies? When as at the
approach of our dread Sovereign James, this our state being in an Earthquake,
was shaken and settled in a moment. Was not Judgment toward us in that hateful
and hellish gunpowder treason, which had it been effected, the very frame of
the Court, Church, and Commonwealth had been overthrown in a moment? Was not
Judgment toward us when GOD took away from us that hopeful, peerlesse, and
valiant young Prince, Henry? Was not Judgment toward the Church, when a
Praemunire was endeavored to ensnare our Cleriques, but that God diuerted it
by affecting the Kings heart toward our reverend Beaue-Peeres of Divinity? Was
not Judgment toward the Church, when a nullity was intended, and endeavored to
be brought upon all proceedings of Episcopal jurisdiction, in our
Ecclesiastical discipline? Was not Judgment toward the Church, in the decease
of our rarest Divines and greatest Scholars, who were as the Chariots and
Horsemen of our Israel, Champion-like casting forth their gauntlets of
defiance against the proudest Prelate, and most carnal Cardinal in the
Conclaue of Rome?

If in these things the Judgments of God had been upon us, as they were
toward both Court and Church, the Comminalty had certainly had a share
therein, and undoubtedly had tasted of the same bitter Cup. Were not these
things the fore-warnings of future sorrows? That many other Judgments were
not continued upon this our Nation, as the universal plague of pesti'ence
(which extended it self even to the mountains of Wales) the inundation which
ouerflowed some part of our Land: ( What time the waters saw thee O God, the
waters saw thee, were afraid, and returned into their streame-race again) the
inflammation of the Element, which not many days before the Gunpowder treason,
in the West-part of this Land seemed all on fire: some fourteen years
sithence the first great frost, and this later, that made not only the poor
of the Land to mourn, but the very beasts of the field to roar, and the Birds
of Heaven to droope; was it not I say, the wonderful riches of Gods great
mercy? If now in the blessedness of peace, soundness of health, quietness of
state, plentifulnesse of feasts, and fullness of bread, the people of this our
Nation shall run to excess of riot, and great ones become Nets and Snares in
their high places, Mizpah and Tabor, to their poor brethren, sing Requtems to
their own souls, and contemn heavenly admonitions; take heed lest this
Judgment which is said to be but toward us, be not very near unto us, yea,
even at the door.

The case is otherwise with us in England (God be blessed) then it was in
Israel, at the time of this prophecy; For in our state, neither Prelates nor
Preachers become Nets or Snares unto our people. They make no merchandising of
the word of God, as do the Italian Montebanks of Rome. Our Churchmen ensnare
us not, (as the Romanists do theirs) with conceited Saints, as salues for all
sores, or with rotten Romish Relics, such as are Martines boots, George his
Sword, Crispines cutting Knife, Joseph's breeches, Thomas his Shoe, the
swaddling Clowts of Christ, the Milk and Hair of the Virgin Mary, and the like
sopperies. Neither do they tell us that the Breath of Christ is in that box,
as some hideous blasphemous impostors of the Latian-Lateran-monster have made
the seely multitude believe. The Church men of England preach unto us nothing,
but Jesus Christ crucified, the great Angel of the Lord, presenting to our God
the vialls of odours, which are the prayers of the Saints. They preach unto us
the pure Word, and administer the blessed Sacraments, (without blending or
mixture) as the relics of Jesus Christ. In the ministration whereof, albeit
they are by some sort of miscreants meanly handled, and coursly entertained,
yet they have resolved with Gideons soldiers to lap cold water, before they
would for filthy lucre or vainglory become Nets and Snares to entangle the
consciences of any the least of Gods dear ones with mis-leading untruths, or
mis-perswading traditions. Let us not therefore become a byword to foreign
Nations, but let us show our selves to be Gods true Israel, as a people
believing that God has appointed a day, wherein he will judge all orders and
conditions of all things that they have done, either on Mizpah, or Tabor, in
Church, or Commonwealth.

In which day of Judgment, he will judge our fins, that in this life have
been precedent, present, or to come: In which day the omnipotent, omni-scient
Judge will appear, the Assessors will be innumerable, and all men, of all
sorts, shall there be presented naked; Where Christ shall be the Lawgiver, the
Impleader, the Witness, Advocate, and Judge; Where many Orators shall impleade
one, the Angels whom we have grieved by our impenitencie, the poor and
helpless, whom we have wrongfully vexed. Vriah shall urge David, and Naboth
shall impleade Ahab for their bloods. Those that have been corrupted by our
persuasion, example, means, or money, shall cry out against us. In which
judgment there shall be no cuasion, no appeal: For if we deny any thing,
heaven and earth shall witness it against us: If we translate our crimes, we
shall be pointed at with this, Thou art the man: If we plead ignorance, the
long time of Gods sufferings, and the many years of the preaching of the
Gospel shall be urged against us: If we pretend necessity of sinning, it will
be answered, it was not of co-action, but of our own corruption: If we
aplogize for our selves in a Panegyricall commemoration, what good deeds we
have done, and how many Sermons we have heard, the voice will come forth from
God, I know you not that work iniquity: And if we become Suppliants, it will
not serve our turn, for the master of Requests will then be come out of
heaven: If we appeal, it will be told us, that God has delegated all the
judgment to his Son. Listen therefore unto the voice of Iehouahs fatherly
Admonitions, so shall you stand in that Judgment. Lift up your heads, and
rejoice to hear Christ say, Come ye blessed. But if you will not hear his
Commonition, Confusion shall cover you, as a Cloak, you shall roar for
dolor, and that great Anathema Maranatha shall plunge you into hell, with Go
ye cursed. There remains only an Exhortation, Deprecation, and Supplication,
wherewith I will conclude.

First, I exhort therefore, That Prayers and Supplications 1 Timothy 2.
be made for all Estates of this Land, Especially for the house of the King:
That the King as the foundation of his house, may ever love the glory of Gods
house, and the place where Gods honor dwells. That the Prince and the rest
of the Kings regal posterity, may learn to execute true judgment and
justice. That his Counsel may be loyal, and religious in the simplicity of
their hearts, and in the dexterity of their hands. That the Peeers and Judges
may be as prudent Patrons, Fathers, and guides to the whole State. That unjust
Monopolies which are but as the baits of these Nets, unnecessary taxations,
which are but the lead of these Nets, to make them sink, and fair pretenses,
which are but the cork, to make them floate aloft, may never be once named
amongst the Courtiers of this kingdom. Let us ever pray that God would always
keep three things in the Kings Court, that were reserved in the Arc of the
Covenant, that is, The Law of God, and the laws of our kingdom consonant
thereunto, whereby the policy of the State may be ordered, both piousty and
prudently: The Manna, which is the maintenance of the State, may be advanced:
And Aarons Rod, the Ecclesiastical Doctrine and Discipline, which may bud and
blossom, and bring forth Almonds of Peace and Piety, so long as the Sun and
Moon endure. So shall the House of our King, and Kingdom, be an
Administration of a most blessed Magistracy and a most sacred Ministry,
wherein shall dwest true Christian piety, and policy, until the second coming
of Jesus Christ. I exhort you also, that Prayers and Supplications be made for
all the Prelates and Preachers of this house of England, that the eminent in
the Church vaunt not themselves in their Domination above their brethren, for
that is but the bait of these Nets, nor that they exenterate their Clergy, for
that is but the lead of these Nets to make them unseen in the great waters,
nor pretend their greatness and superintendency only, for that is but the
Cork to make them floate above. But let us ever pray, that those that do rule
in the Church, may do it with singleness of heart, and those that are
subordinate, and are to be ruled, may be obedient unto them with all
cheerfulness, that all, as Gods good servants, may fear the Lord, may go
when he bids them go, and come when he bids them come, and never leave off
their Evangelical negotiations, but do it with all diligence until Christ
come. So shall our Churchmen be as precious Diamonds (like Zorobabel the son
of Shealtiel) upon Gods right hand, they shall be the Jewels of the State, and
by their constant preaching shall save themselves, and others. And I exhort
you, that Prayers and Supplications be made for the whole people of this Land,
that they may be obedient to their God in all goodness, subject, and
serviceable to their King in body, goods, and life, and ayding, and assisting
one to another in all Christian charity: so shall all of every order be a
people of Gods own acquisition, election, sanctification, glorification, and
as Gods blessed Israel. This God grant unto the Court, Church, and
Commonwealth, for his unspeakable loves sake, for his promise sake, which he
has ratified with the blood of his Son, and for the glory of his great Name.

For mine own part, I shall ever pour out my soul to God, that he would for
ever divert from the house of the King, the judgment of Proscription, that the
King may ever be safe under Gods wings, and secure under his feathers, that no
Iesuited Chastell, Baltazar Gerard, nor Iacobine, Clement, Rauilack, nor
Pouder-plotter, nor any such wicked villain, be able once to look upon him
with an eye, heart, or hand, to hurt him. That God would turn from our noble
Peers, the judgment of Desertion, that their hopeful sons may grow up as
Plants, and their noble daughters become, as the polished angles of the temple.
That God would divert from the Gentry the judgment of fearful slumber, lest
they forget their God that made them. From the Judges the judgment of
Reprobation, but that they may put on Justice, as a Robe, Honor as a Crown,
and unanimous consent for the good of the King and kingdom, as the linkes of
their collars of S S. From the Prelates and Preachers the judgment of
Dissension, Faction, and singular opinion, lest the seamelesse coat of Jesus
Christ be rent asunder. Clothe (O Lord) all the hearts of our Churchmen with
thy righteousness, their lives with thy grace, and their learning with thy
praise. And turn (O Lord) from the whole people of this Nation, the judgment
of Contempt of thy Word and Sacraments, lest devouring fire burn up their
houses to the ground, lest the air infect their breaths with the plague of
pestilence, to the death, lest the sword of the enemy be sheathed in their own
bowels, and lest every man become a Lion, A Wolf, a Tigar, and a Fox, to hunt
his brother with Nets and Snares.

Yea, I shall ever remain, during breath, an humble Suppliant before the
Throne of Almighty God, that the house of the King may always be as Gods Silo,
the Bishoprics as Seats, and Sees, for the principal wel-deseruing masters
of the Assemblies, the Deanries as the Apostolical Presbyteries, the godly
Magistracy of our Land, as Mount Gerazim, filled with blessings, and the sacred
Ministry, as mount Tabor, wherein the Churchmen may continually confer with
the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles learnings. Yea, that the whole people
may be Gods beloved Israel, the cities as Bethel, the Towns and Villages as
Bethphage, and Bethany, and the city of LONDON the chamber of the kingdom
(whither the prudent Tribes are now come up to be Assessors, and assistants in
Parliament, may be as a closet of all precious things. Make, Lord, the Citizens
Saints, their houses Sanctuaries, and the three Estates now assembled in
PARLIAMENT, the most pious, and most prudent Sanedrim, that ever the Sun shined
on. God persuade Iaphet to dwell in the Tents of Shem: And let the faithful
witness in Heaven say to all this ^


