THE MASQVE OF THE INNER TEMPLE AND GRAYES INN: GRAYES INN AND THE INNER
TEMPLE, PRESENTED BEFORE his Majesty, the Queens Majesty, the Prince, Count
Palatine and the Lady Elizabeth their Highnesses, in the Banqueting house at
White Hall on Saturday the twentieth day of February, 1612.

By FRANCIS BEAMONT, Gent.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by F. K. for George Norton, and are to be sold at his
shop near Temple Bar.

THE MASQVE OF THE INNER TEMPLE AND GRAYES INN: GRAYES INN AND THE INNER
TEMPLE, PRESENTED BEFORE his Majesty, the Queens Majesty, the Prince, Count
Palatine and the Lady Elizabeth their Highnesses, in the Banqueting house at
White Hall on Saturday the twentieth day of February, 1612.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by F. K. for George Norton, and are to be sold at his
shop near Temple Bar.

THE MASK OF THE INNER TEMPLE AND GRAYES INN, GRAYES INN and the Inner
Temple, presented before his Majesty, the Queens, etc.
THis Mask was appointed to have been presented the Shroue-tuesday before, at
which time the Maskers with their attendants and diverse others gallant young
Gentlemen of both houses, as their conuoy, set forth from Winchester house
which was the Rende vous toward the Court, about seven of the clock at night.

This voyage by water was performed in great Triumph. The gentlemen Maskers
being placed by themselves in the Kings royal barge with the rich furniture of
state, and adorned with a great number of lights placed in such order as might
make best show.

They were attended with a multitude of barges and galleys, with all variety of
loud Music, and several peales, of Ordnance. And led by two Admiralls.

Of this show his Majesty was graciously pleased to take view, with the Prince,
the Count Palatine, and the Lady Elizabeth: their highnesses at the windows of
his privy gallerie upon the water, till their landing, which was at the privy
stairs; where they were most honorably received by the Lord Chamberlain, and
so conducted to the Vestry.

The Hall was by that time filled with company of very good fashion, but yet so
as a very great number of principal Ladies, and other noble persons were not
yet come in, whereby it was foreseen that the room would be so scanted as might
have been inconvenient. And there upon his Majesty was most graciously pleased
with the consent of the gentlemen Maskers, to put off the night until Saturday
following with this special favor and privilege, that there should be no
let, as to the outward ceremony of magnificence until that time.

At the day that it was presented, there was a choice room reserved for the
gentlemen, of both their houses, who coming in troop about seven of the
clock, received that special honor and noble favor, as to be brought to
their places, by the Right Honorable the Earl of Northampton, Lord Privy
Seal.

TO THE WORTHY SIR FRANCIS BACON, HIS MAJESTY'S SOLICITOR General, and the
grave and learned Bench of the anciently allied houses of Grayes Inn, and the
Inner Temple, the Inner Temple, and Grayes Inn.
Ye that spared no time nor travel, in the setting forth, ordering, and
furnishing of this Masque, being the first fruits of honor in this kind, which
these two societies have offered to his Majesty: Will not think much now to
look back upon the effects of your own care and work: for that whereof the
success was then doubtful, is now happily performed and graciously accepted.
And that which you were then to think of in straites of time, you may now
peruse at leisure: And you Sir Francis Bacon especially, as you did then by
your countenance, and loving affection advance it, so let your good word grace
it, and defend it, which is able to add value to the greatest, and least
matters.

THE DEVISE OR ARGUMENT OF THE MASQVE.
IVpiter and Juno willing to do honor to the Marriage of the two famous Rivers
Thamesis and Rhone, employ their Messengers severally, Mercury and Iris for
that purpose. They meet and contend: then Mercury for his part brings forth
an Anti-masque all of Spirits or divine Natures; but yet not of one kind or
liuerie (because that had been so much in use heretofore) but as it were in
consort like to broken Music: And preserving the propriety of the devise;
for that Rivers in nature are maintained either by Springs from beneath, or
Shewers from above: He raises four of the Naiades out of the Fountains, and
brings down five of the Hyades out of the Clouds to daunce^ hereupon Iris
scoffs at Mercury for that he had devised a dance but of one Sex, which
could have no life: but Mercury who was provided for that exception, and in
token that the Match should be blessed both with Love and Riches calls forth
out of the Groves four Cupids, and brings down from Jupiters Altar four
Statuaes of gold and silver to dance with the Nymphs and Stars: in which
dance the Cupids being blind, and the Statuaes having but half life put into
them, and retaining still somewhat of their old nature, gives fit occasion to
new and strange varieties both in the Music and paces. This was the first
Anti-masque.

Then Iris for her part in scorn of this high-flying devise, and in token that
the Match shall likewise be blessed with the love of the Common People, calls
to Flora her confederate (for that the Months of flowers are likewise the
Months of sweet shewers, and Rain bows) to bring in a May dance or Rural
dance, consisting likewise not of any suited persons, but of a confusion or
commixture of all such persons as are natural and proper for Country sports.
This is the second Anti-masque.

Then Mercury and Iris after this vying one upon the other, seem to leave
their contention; and Mercury by the consent of Iris brings down the Olympian
Knights, intimating that Jupiter having after a long discontinuance revived the
Olympian games, and summoned thereunto from all parts the liueliest and
actiuest persons that were had enjoined them before they fell to their games to
do honor to these Nuptials. The Olympian games portend to the Match,
Celebritie, Victory, and Felicity. This was the maine Masque.

The Fabric was a Mountain with two descents, and severed with two Trauesses.

At the entrance of the King.
THe first Trauers was drawn, and the lower descent of the Mountain
discovered, which was the Pendant of a hill to life, with diverse boscages and
Grouets upon the steep or hanging grounds thereof; and at the foot of the
Hill, four delicate Fountains running with water and bordered with sedges and
water flowers.

Iris first appeared; and presently after Mercury striving to overtake her.

Iris apparelled in a robe of discoulored Taffita figured in variable colors,
like the Raine-bowe, a cloudie wreath on her head, and Tresses.

Mercury in doublet and hose of white Taffita, a white hat, wings on his
shoulders and feet, his Caduceus in his hand, speaking to Iris as follows:

MERCVRIE. STay, Stay.
Stay light foot Iris, for thou striuest in vain,
My wings are nimbler then thy feet.

IRIS. Away,
Dissembling Mercury; my messages
Ask honest haste, not like those wanton ones
Your thundering father sends.

MERCVRIE. Stay foolish Maid,
Or I will take my rise upon a hill,
When I perceive thee seated in a cloud,
In all the painted glory that thou have,
And never cease to clap my willing wings,
Till I catch hold of thy discolored Bow,
And shiuer it beyond the angry power
Of your cursed Mistress, to make up again.

IRIS. Hermes forbear, Juno will chide and strike;
Is great Jove jealous that I am employed
On her love errands? she did never yet
Claspe weak mortality in her white arms,
As he has often done: I only come
To celebrate the long wished Nuptials,
Here in Olympia, which are now performed
Betwixt two goodly Rivers, which have mixed
Their gentle rising waves, and are to grow
Into a thousand streams, great as themselves;
I need not name them, for the sound is loud
In heaven and earth, and I am sent from her
The Queen of Marriage, that was present here,
And smiled to see them join, and has not chid
Since it was done: good Hermes let me go.

MERCVRIE. Nay you must stay, Jove's message is the same,
Whose eyes are lightning, and whose voice is thunder,
Whose breath is any wind, he will, who knows
How to be first on earth as well as heaven.

IRIS. But what has he to do with Nuptial rights?
Let him keep state upon his starry throne,
And fright poor mortals with his thunderbolts,
Leaving to us the mutual darts of eyes.

MERCVRIE. Alas, when ever offered he t'abridge
Your Ladies power, but only now in these,
Whose match concerns his general government?
Has not each god a part in these high joys?
And shall not he the King of gods presume
Without proud Iunoes license? let her know
That when enamored Jove first gave her power
To link soft hearts in Undissolved bonds,
He then foresaw, and to himself reserved
The honor of this Marriage: thou shall stand
Still as a Rock, while I to bless this feast
Will summon up with my all charming rod,
The Nymphs of fountains, from whose watery locks
Hung with the dew of blessing and increase,
The greedy Rivers take their nourishment.
You Nymphs, who bathing in your loved springs,
Beheld these Rivers in their infancy,
And joyed to see them, when their circled heads
Refresht' the air, and spread the ground with flowers:
Rise from your Wells, and with your nimble feet
Perform that office to this happy pair;
Which in these plains, you to Alpheus did;
When passing hence through many seas unmixed,
He gained the favor of his Arethuse.

Immediately upon which speech, four Naiades arise gently out of their
several Fountains, and present themselves upon the Stage, attired in long
habits of sea-greene Taffita, with bubbles of Crystal intermixed with
powdering of silver resembling drops of water^ bluish Tresses on their heads,
garlands of Water Lillies. They fall into a Measure, dance a little, then make
a stand.

IRIS. IS Hermes grown a lover, by what power
Unknown to us, calls he the Naiades?

MERCVRIE. Presumptuous Iris, I could make thee dance
Till thou forgott'st thy Ladies messages,
And rann'st back crying to her, thou shall know
My power is more, only my breath, and this
Shall move fixed stars, and force the firmament
To yield the Hyades, who govern showers,
And dewic clouds, in whose dispersed drops
Thou form'st the shape of thy deceitful Bow.
You maids, who yearly at appointed times,
Advance with kindly tears, the gentle floods,
Descend, and power your blessing on these streams,
Which rolling down from heaven aspiring hills,
And now united in the fruitful vales;
Bear all before them ravished with their joy,
And swell in glory till they know no bounds.

Five Hyades descend softly in a cloud from the firmament, to the middle part
of the hill, apparelled in skie-coloured Taffita robes, spangled like the
Heavens, golden Tresses, and each a fair Star on their head; from thence
descend to the Stage, at whose sight the Naiades seeming to rejoice, meet and
join in a dance.

IRIS. GReat wit and power has Hermes to contriue
A liuelesse dance, which of one sex consists.

MERCVRIE. Alas poor Iris, Venus has in store
A secret Ambush of her winged boys,
Who lurking long within these pleasant groves;
First struck these Lovers with their equal darts,
Those Cupids shall come forth, and join with these,
To honor that which they themselves begun.

Enter four Cupids from each side of the Boscage, attired in flame colored
Taffita close to their body, like naked Boys, with Bows, Arrows, and wings
of gold; Chaplets of flowers on their heads, hoodwinckt with Tiffiny scarfs,
who join with the Nymphs and the Hyades in another dance. That ended, Iris
speaks.

IRIS. BEhold the Statuaes which wise Vulcan placed
Under the Altar of Olympian Jove,
Shall dance for joy of these great Nuptials:
And gave to them an Artificial life,
See how they move, drawn by this heavenly joy,
Like the wild trees, which followed Orpheus Harp.

The Statuaes enter, supposed to be before descended from Jove's Altar, and to
have been prepared in the covert with the Cupids, attending their call.

These Statuaes were attired in cases of gold and silver close to their body,
faces, hands and feet, nothing seen but gold and silver, as if they had been
solid Images of metal, Tresses of hair as they had been of metal imbossed,
girdles and small aprons of oaken leaves, as if they likewise had been carved
or molded out of the metal: at their coming, the Music changed from
Violins to Hoboyes, Cornets, etc. And the air of the Music was utterly
turned into a soft time, with drawing notes, excellently expressing their
natures, and the Measure likewise was fitted unto the same, and the Statuaes
placed in such several postures, sometimes all together in the Center of the
dance, and sometimes in the four utmost Angles, as was very graceful,
besides the novelty and so concluded the first Anti-masque.

MERCVRIE. ANd what will Iunoes Iris do for her?

IRIS. Just match this show; or my Invention fails,
Had it been worthier, I would have inuok'd
The blazing Comets, Clouds and falling Stars,
And all my kindred Meteors of the Air
To have excelled it, but I now must strive
To imitate Confusion, therefore thou
Delightful Flora, if thou ever felt'st
Increase of sweetness in those blooming plants,
On which the horns of my fair bow decline;
Send hither all the Rural company,
Which deck the May-games with their Country sports;
Juno will have it so.

The second Anti-masque rush in, dance their Measure, and as rudely depart;
consisting of a Pedant May Lord, May Lady, Seruingman, Chambermaide, A Country
Clown, or Shepherd, Country Wench, An Host, Hostess, A He Baboone, She
Baboone, A He Fool, She Fool vshering them in.

All these persons apparelled to the life, the Men issuing out of one side of
the Boscage, and the Women from the other: the Music was extremely well
fitted, having such a spirit of Country iolitie^ as can hardly be imagined;
but the perpetual laughter and applause was above the Music.

The dance likewise was of the same strain; and the Dancers, or rather Actors
expressed every one their part so naturally and aptly, as when a Man's eye was
caught with the one, and then past on to the other, he could not satisfy
himself which did best. It pleased his Majesty to call for it again at the
end, as he did likewise for the first Anti-masque; but one of the Statuaes by
that time was undressed.

MERCVRIE. IRis we strive,
Like winds at liberty, who should do worst
Ere we return. If Juno be the Queen
Of Marriage, let her give happy way
To what is done, in honor of the State
She gouernes.

IRIS. Hermes, so it may be done
Merely in honor of the State, and these
That now have proved it, not to satisfy
The lust of Jupiter, in having thanks
More then his Juno, if thy snakie rod
Have power to search the heavens, or found the sea,
Or call together all the ends of earth,
To bring in any thing that may do grace
To us, and these; do it, we shall be pleased.

MERCVRY. Then know that from the mouth of Jove himself,
Whose words have wings, and need not to be borne;
I took a message, and I bare it through
A thousand yielding clouds, and never stayed
Till his high will was done: the Olympian games
Which long have slept, at these wished Nuptials,
He pleased to have renewed and all his Knights
Are gathered hither, who within their tents
Rest on this hill, upon whose rising head.
Behold Jove's Altar, and his blessed Priests
Moving about it: come you holy men,
And with your voices draw these youths along,
That till Jove's music call them to their games,
Their active sports may give a blessed content
To those, for whom they are again begun.

The Maine Masque.
THe second Trauers is drawn, and the higher ascent of the Mountain is
discovered; wherein upon a level after a great rise of the Hill, were placed
two Pauilions: open in the front of them, the Pauilions were to sight as of
cloth of gold, and they were trimmed on the inside with rich Armor and
Military furniture hanged up as upon the walls; and behind the Tents there
were represented in prospectiue, the tops of diverse other Tents, as if it had
been a Camp. In these Pauilions were placed fifteen Olympian Knights, upon
seats a little imbowed near the form of a Croisant, and the Knights appeared
first, as consecrated persons all in vailes, like to Coapes, of silver
Tiffinie, gathered, and falling a large compass about them, and over their
heads high Miters with long pendants behind falling from them; the Miters were
so high, that they received their hats and feathers, that nothing was seen but
veil: in the midst between both the Tents upon the very top of the hill,
being a higher level then that of the Tents, was placed Jupiters Altar gilt,
with three great Tapers upon golden Candlesticks burning upon it: and the four
Statuaes, two of gold, and two of silver, as supporters, and Jupiters Priests
in white robes about it.

Upon the sight of the King, the vailes of the Knights did fall easily from
them, and they appeared in their own habit.

The Knight's attire.
ARming doublets of Carnation satin embrodered with Blazing Stars of silver
plate, with powderings of smaller Stars betwixt; gorgets of silver maile;
long hose of the same, with the doublets laid with silver lace spangled, and
enricht with embroderie between the lace; Carnation like stockins imbrodered
all over; garters and roses suitable; Pumpes of Carnation satin imbrodered as
the doublets; hats of the same stuff and embroderie cut like a helmet before,
the hinder part cut into Scallops, answering the skirts of their doublets; the
bands of the hats were wreathes of silver in form of garlands of wild Olives,
white feathers with one fall of Carnation; Belts of the same stuff and
embrodered with the doublet; Silver swords; little Italian bands and cuffes
embrodered with silver fair long Tresses of hair.

The Priests habits.
LOng roabes of white Taffita; long white heads of hair: The High Priest a cap
of white silk shagge close to his head, with two labels at the ears, the
midst rising in form of a Pyramid, in the top thereof a branch of silver,
every Priest playing upon a Lute: twelve in number.

The Priests descend and sing this song following; after whom the Knights
likewise descend^ first laying aside their vailes^ belts, and swords.

The first Song.
SHake off your heavy trance,
And leap into a dance,
Such as no mortals use to tread,
Fit only for Apollo
To play to, for the Moon to lead,
And all the Stars to follow.
The Knighs by this time are all descended and fallen into their place, and
then dance their first Measure.

The second Song.
ON blessed youths, for love does pause
Laying aside his grauer laws
For this device,
And at the wedding such a pair,
Each dance is taken for a prayer,
Each song a sacrifice.
The Knights dance their second Measure.

The third Song.
Single.
MOre pleasing were these sweet delights,
If Ladies moved as well as Knights;
Run every one of you and catch
A Nymph in honor of this match;
And whisper boldly in her ear,
Jove will but laugh, if you forswear.
All.
And this daye's sins he does resolve
That we his Priests should all absolve.
The Knights take their Ladies to dance with them Galliards, Durets,
Corantoes, etc. and lead them to their places. Then loud Music sound's,
supposed to call them to their Olympian games.

The fourth Song.
YE should stay longer if we durst,
Away, alas that he that first
Gave Time wild wings to fly away,
Has now no power to make him stay.
But though these games must needs be played,
I would this Pair, when they are laid,
And not a creature nie them,
Could catch his scythe, as he does pass,
And cut his wings, and break his glass,
And keep him ever by them.
The Knights dance their parting Measure and ascend, put on their Swords and
Belts; during which time, the Priests sing the fifth and last Song.

PEace and silence be the guide
To the Man, and to the Bride,
If there be a joy yet new
In marriage, let it fall on you,
That all the world may wonder.
If we should stay, we should do worse,
And turn our blessing to a curse,
By keeping you asunder.
FINIS.

