THE TRAGICOCOMEdie of Serpents.

By Lodowik Lloid Esquier.

Videte Canes.

Phil. 3. Domus impiorum delebitur.

Prou. 14. LONDON Printed by Thomas Purfoot, and are to be sold by Arthur
Johnson, at his shop near the great North door of Paul's, at the sign of the
White Horse. 1607.



TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY King, James by the grace of God, King of Great
Britane, France, and Ireland, etc.
ARchimedes a famous Mathematician (most mighty Prince) said, If he had but a
place to stand free from the earth, he could invent means to move the whole
earth: some such there be though not like Archimedes, to move the whole earth;
yet they move Countries and Kingdoms on the earth. And as Dinocrates that
skillful Architector thought to bring mount Atho, to the low form and stature
of a man, so some would bring hie Mountains, and great hills, as low as
mould-hilles.

Of such we may now so say in Britane, as Polemo spoke sometime of
counterfeit Tragedians in Smyrna, who with their false Solaechismes, lifting up
their dissembling eyes to heaven, saying, O coelum, when their treacherous
hearts and bloody hands be on earth, saying, O terra. These be they that have
with the Traitor Saba, what portion have we in the Son of Isa, or in the
house of Judah?

Against such, Joshua made a law in Israel, that no counterfeit Gibeonite
should bear Office in Judah, but hew wood, and carry water for Israel.

Iepthe made likewise a law, that no foresworne Giliadite that could not
pronounce Schibboleth, should pass over Jorden.

Your Majesty made also a law, that no treacherous ambitious Papist that had
Jacobs voice, and Esaus hands should stay within great Britane, they should
either obey the Roman law, lex Iulia, or the Athenians law Ostrachismos; and
therefore was the rod of Aaron, and the law Book commanded to be kept
together in the Arc, Vt quiescant querel^ Iudaeorum, which King Josias had,
both the Sword, and the Law book carried before him, Tanquam insign^^
Principis.

So Julius Caesar, as it appears, his Image that had a Sword in one hand, and
a Book in the other written upon his breast, Ex vtroque Caesar. But while any
of Saul's seed lived in Israel, Israel could not be quiet, nor David take rest.
Shall we wish as the Apostles did, fire to burn these Samaritans? or with
Elias, fire to destroy these Soldiers of Achab?

Themistocles wished a bridge of gold for Xerxes army to pass out of Greece
unto Persia. Scipio wished a brazen wall, to convey Haniball out of Italy into
Africa: truly the Persians were not more greedy of Greece, nor the
Carthagenians of Italy, as these Jesuits and Seminaries are of great Britane,
who have sworn and promised, as Zedech^as did with his iron horns to Achab,
His ventilabis Syriam.

These be the Frogs that went out of the Dragons mouth, spiritus Daemoniorum,
croaking in every corner of great Britane, to move seditions and treasons in
Kingdoms and Countries.

These contend, not as Ajax did with Ulysses for Achilles armor, nor like
Edom, though they be Edomites for the blessing of Isaak, but as Torquine did
with Brutus, who should rule Rome, a King, or a Consul; who should govern
great Britane, a King, or a Pope. Where many if they might hear the Bishop of
Rome, proclaimed a Pope in England, would as willingly die for joy in great
Britane, as Diagoras the Philosopher died at Rhodes, for joy to hear his three
Sons to be crowned in the games of Olympia.

Your Majesty's most humble and dutiful Servant, LODOVVIK LLOID.

IN ADVENTVM POtentissimi Principis Iacobi Dei gratia magnae Britaniae,
Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis; Ludouici Lloid Eboracensis gratulatio.
MVlti foelices fuere dies (Augustissime Princeps) dies solis supra Gabaon,
dies Lunae super Aialon, dies Martis non solum super Scotos in Scotia, sed
super Anglos in Anglia, in quibus vti Joshua de regibus sua fixit in coelo
trophaea, ita noster Iacobus de Tyrannis suos habuit in terra triumphos; O dies
que^ fecit Dominus, dies soli at coelo gratissimus, nobis foelicissimus, dies
Israel e Mesopotamia in Chanan, vti Chanan Judah diceretur, dies Iacobi e
Scotia in Angliam, vt Anglia magna iterum appellaretur Britania; an potuit vlla
foelicior Britanis euenire dies, quam in quo rex noster laureatus non armatus
venit, instar Alexandri, ad solium Cyri cum sanguine, aut instar Caesaris ad
Romam suam patriam in armis, quorum ius fine iure in armis fuerat.

Non venit galeatus, sed coronatus nuntius cum nuntio foelicissimo, quid enim
foelicius, quam in tria florentissima regna cum foelicissimo populi applausu
regem inaugurari: quid foecundius, quam de tribus in faecundis regnis, regna
tria faecundissima fieri, ita venit and inuenit Angliam, vti Alexander reliquit
Asiam, sine rege and regijs liberis, at quam foecundam ex infoecunda fecit
Angliam regia proles, inuenit Cambriam vti Augustus inuenit Romam, lateritiam
ac ruinosam. O qua^ marmor ea^fecit rex noster Iacobus, in quo tanquam in
secundo Bruto, in secundo rege, and quasi in secundo seculo, secula post multa,
quae aruerunt virescunt, and quae senuerunt in te hodierno die repubescunt.

O quanta hinc nostra foelicitas, si a tanta foelicitate non vincamur, (parce
pijssime princeps) potuit Lucullus atrum die^, diem candidum efficere Romany:
potuit Themistocles nephastum die^, in diem festum conuertere Graecis. O quanto
facilius poteris princeps, non diem, non annum, sed dies and annos plurimos
Britannis efficere foelicissimos, si de fictis Gabonitis, ita tua mundetur
Sparta ne contamnetur Israel, si de perfidis Efframitis, ita nostra purgetur
Britania, ne inquinaretur domus Jacob; Amphippi milites, quos omnis color cum
Aristippo decuit, Mercurij proles, qui pluris cum Vlisse de sua Ithaca, quam de
patria, quam de principe, vere or quam de aeternitate pensitarunt, quibus vnus
semper Catilina pluris praecij fuit, qua^ tercentu^ fabij quibus non quae lex,
sed quae nex digna querer eiur, qui magis saeuiunt in Britaniam, quam Caligulae
proles in Romam.

Atiquorsum est haec, cum anima nostra in tuo, (...) passer ereptae est de
laqueo venantium. Plaudite itaque Britani, clangite ^ubam Angli, nam vti Troes
cum Tyrijs vno nomine fuere Latini, ita Anglicum Scotis, qui sub vno rege
gubernantur, and vna lingua loquuntur, ita vna^lege vtantur, and vna voce
vocentur Britanni.

Sic Cotys rex Thraciae, Thraciam aeqnauit Athenis, sic Vespasianus ius Latij
Hispanis tribuit, sic Claudius ius ciuitatis Gallis and Graecis concessit, vt
cum externis unity Romani, Roma semper victrix, cum nec numero Hispanis,
necrobore Gallis, nec calliditate poenis, nec artibus Graecis par fuit Roma,
ita Graecia cum ciuibus vnita, quae gens par potuit esse Graecis, at diuisa
quanto facilius no^ a Persis, nec a Macedonibus, sed Graecia a Graecis victa.
Qua^ta virtus and victoria Iudaeorum, dum vna unity lege and religione. Quanta
vtriusque regni clades diuisa dici non potest. Quid multa, nihil aliud maius
fuisse fertur exitio Graecis, quam iura ciuitatis externis interdicere, leges
quas Solon Athenis, and quas Lycurgus Spartae sanxerunt, nam vti omnis virtus
vnita praestantior, ita omnis vis vnita fortior, vt Anglia sine Scotia minus
vigeret, ita Scotia sine Anglia magis langueret, ita regnum omne, ita orbis
totus langueret diuisus.

Quid opus est itaque cu^ctari de vnitate Britaniae, de perpetua vtriusque
regni pace, de fortitudine imperij, de magnitudine regis, saepe tamen non nocet
cum fabio cunctari, qui cunctando vicit Hanibalem, ita saepe non nocet cum
popilio imperare, qui imperando vicit Antiochum. At penes te est (inuictissime
Princeps) and cunctari, and imperare, quiad sacram Henrici 7. tui Attani sedem
cu^ lauro and oliua venis, cum regina foecundissima, cu^ Principe
prudentissimo, and cum caeteris regijs liberis, quasi fidissimis Britaniae
Scipionibus, de quibus ac de sacris regnorum anchoris omnis plaudit Anglia,
gestunt parietes Scotiae, Hibernia cuncta laetatur, and Cambria tota triumphat.

The Tragicomedie of Serpents.
I Have promised to add something to my last little Treatise, The practice of
policy, I thought I should write but of the policy of men, yet I have cause
to speak of diverse kinds of Serpents, of Devils Serpents, of Idols Serpents,
of Image Serpents, of beasts serpents, and of men serpents, which are the most
perilous serpents of all, according to the old saying, Homo homini Lupus, not
only a Wolf, but a Lion, a Tygre, a Devil to a man.

Hanniball, Hanibal a sworn enemy to the Romans.
a sworn enemy to the Romans, not only himself, but soliciting the great
Antiochus with Camels, and Pirrhus before him with his Elephants, and he
himself with serpents and vipers to throw in the faces of the Roman army, to
amaze their soldiers, and to put them in fright in their fight; Stratagems
allowed in war, but not among peaceable christians.

But these stratagems were of Africa and Asia against the Romans, who had but
Camels and Elepha^ts for their chief policy, with the which the Romans became
well acquainted, and exceeded them in their own stratagems, and overthrew
their Hanniball.

But now in Rome their is another kind of Hanniball, whose stratagems are
furnished with Wolves, Bears, Dragons, and Tygres, and those in the habit of
men, that far pass Tarquine the proud with his furious priests, with Snakes
in one hand, and firebrands in the other, Zozom, lib. 5. cap. 8.
and their Affrican Hanniball with his Serpents in one vessel, and vipers in
the other; but these would have Lions in one hand, and Unicorns in the other.

But we fear not the Camels of Asia, nor the Elephants of India, nor the
Serpents of Afric, neither do we fear the Basilisks of Rome, and the Romish
brood in great Brittane, which would feign ride on Lions and Unicorns.

For it was a long custom among the Romans, to fight with Lions on the
Theators, The custom of Rome.
and with wild cruel beasts, that the Romans became more cruel then
Serpents, and such Serpents that Rome and Asia are full of them.

Serpents borne in men's arms in Asia.
In Asia, they carry Serpents in their arms to cleanse their air, to purify
their temples, and to drive devils away from their Towns and Cities.

In Rome they sent for Serpents in any plague time to Epidaurus, to the jmage
of Esculap: whom they worshipped in the form of a Serpent, to heal them.

We overcame the old Dragon, the great Serpent in Paradise, by the seed of the
woman. The children of Israel overcame the serpents of Cadis-barne by looking
upon the brazen Serpent in that wilderness, and Moses with his Hebrew army
escaped the serpents in the deserts of Ethiopia, by their continual enemies,
the birds Ibides of Egypt.

But we have armed serpents, The armed Serpents of Medea.
engendered of the serpents teeth, which Medea not of Colchos but of Babylon,
where they carry such serpents in their arms, I mean their golden and silver
Gods, to be worshipped of men in the streets, these be the dangerous serpents.

After such serpents ran Laban after Jacob of more complaining for his jdols
and images the Gods of Mesopotamia, The Gods, Mesopotamia. Genesis 31.
tha^ for his two daughters Jacobs wives, saying, cur fu^atus es Deos meos, why
have thou stolen my Gods away from me.

Micah ran for such serpents after the Tribe of Dan: Mychaes Idol. Judge. 18.
exclaiming more for his idols, then for all the wealth and goods that they
took from him, saying, Cur Deos quos mihi feci, tulistis? why have you taken my
Gods which I made to my self, from me?

Many ran from great Brittane after such Gods, Many ran after their Gods from
great Brittane.
and such images, to Rome, to Spain; and many yet lurkes like Hydra in Laerna,
in their secret labyrinths more greedy for the spoil like moabites, than true
catholics for religion; these be the Roman wolves in sheeps clothing, like
Camelions in all kind of colors, scattered over all England, these be the
domestical serpents, tanquam lemures nocturni and lares domestici: in Cities,
in towns, yea, in our houses unknown, and not unseen enemies. I mean those
rebels and Trators, the target of treason.
which under color of religion, attempted sundry times our late queen, and
now our soueragine Lord and King.

That neither Hanniball with his fiery oxen, was so furious against Fab. Max:
Front. lib. 1. cap. 5.
and his Roman army.

Neither was Darius, with his barking dogs, and braying Asses left in his tents
to deceive the Scythians, so crafty.

Neither desperate Tarquine so cruel, to unbridle all the horses of his army,
and so to rush unto the midst of the Sabins his enemies, as these late fiery
oxen, these barking Dogs and braying Asses, left too long to bark and braye in
great Britain; these desperate horses, too long suffered to be unbridled in
England. Front. lib. 1. cap. 8.


The subject of this book is to write of Serpents, because we are troubled
with serpents.

Lib. 16. cap: 3.
Plinis writes of some kind of Serpents, that dare not approach the wild
ash-tree, nor the shadow of this tree, The wild Ashtree.
that if they be walled round about with great fire they will rather run
through the fire, then abide nigh the Ash tree or his shadow.

I wish there were more such trees in great Britain, for trees are aptly
compared to men; so are Kings, Princes and Potentates of the earth, compared to
the high and great Caedar trees in Libanon; Men aptly compared to trees.
the palm trees to the constant martyrs* the Olive trees to the just and
godly men; and Christ himself to the vine tree; too many like the Plantan tree
with fair and flourishing show without substance, called in Pliny arbor
luxuriosa; in Rome, arbor religiosa; and too few, like the wild ash-tree, to
drive away serpents out of great Brittane.

Melancthon was requested to show the cause why serpents bred in the raines and
bowels of dead men; In Euang. in Die. pasc.
answered, that man being infected with the poison of the first Serpent in
Paradise, since which he cease not, Aug. ad fratres in Eremo sermon. 8.
viuentibus insidiari, nec mortuos laniare, you shall find in dead men's sculs
Toads engendered of the brain, and serpents engendered in the raines, inuenietis
generatos in cerebro bufones, and in renibus serpents, says Augustine.

These be serpents by nature, serpents by education, and serpents by
succession, which shead much blood, and cause great slaughter in England,
Germany, and France.

It was not the great army of Xerxes at Marathon, 30. Tyrants in Athens.
nor the great force of Philip at Chaeronea, that so frighted the Athenians, as
the bloody streets in Athens, where the children were forced to dance in the
blood of their parents, in the time of the 30. Tyrants, and yet Thrasibulus
banished these tyrants from Athens.

Neither was it the tyrany of Antiochus, 4. Reg. 21. Sesostris in Herodot.
King of Cyria, nor King Susacus of Egypt, that so feared the Jews, as the
bloody streets in Jerusalem, where one neighbor might wash his hands in the
blood of another in the time of Manasses. Yet Josias delivered Jerusalem.

But these serpents, these Harpeis, these Crocodiles determined to leave
neither parents, children, or neighbors alive, but themselves to dance in our
blood. Such a dance delighted Nabuchodonozer in Babylon of Misael, Sidraach,
and Abednago. Such a dance of Herodias delighted Herod, for John Baptists head.

And such a dance would have pleased the Antichrist of Rome, if their Roman
Tragedy begun, had not ended like a Brittane comedy; and if their Egiptian
dance begun by Pharo, had not ended like the tryumphant dance by Jacob.

Sylla. Caligula. Nero.
Not Sylla which made the river Tiber ouerflowe with the blood of the Roman
citizens; not Caligula with his poisoned cups, that sought to destroy the
co^suls, the Senators, and the Magistrates of Rome; not Nero, which rejoiced
and sang when he saw Rome on fire; nor al turkish tyranny, all Pharoes
cruelties, were but jests and plays in respect of these furious Traitors, and
raging Wolves which thought in one day, yea, in one hour to overthrow three
flourishing Kingdoms.

Elias sacrifice.
But such fire as fell upon Elias sacrifice, shall fall upon these priests of
Bael, such gaping gulfs of the earth that swallowed up alive Chore, Dathan, and
Abiran, shall swallow up these rebellious Seminaries.

Some think that it would be as great a triumph to that Roman Achab, the
having of King James in Rome, as was to Tamberlaine, the having of Bajazet the
great Turk in Scythia, Oros. lib. 7. cap. 22.
or the having of the Roman Valerianus prisoner to King Sapor in Persia.

But these Serpents forgot that Pharo could not harm Moses, neither Saul
destroy David, they forgot though all Egypt was punished with terrible and
horrible plagues, yet the land of Gosen where Israel dwelt, was not troubled
with their frogs, locusts, flies, lice, neither with darkness, blood or
slaughter, they forgot what God said to his people, erit sanguis vobis signum
salutis: Exodus 12.
when the first borne of Egypt were killed throughout all Egypt, they forgot
the mark which God set upon his people in Jerusalem, Ezech 9.
super quem videritis Tau, ne occidatis.

But these desperate Traitors, these malicious Serpents, contemn Laws, despise
Magistrates, way neither for the sword nor the word of God committed to the
Prince, Saul's seed. 2 Reg. 21.
but as long as any of Saul's seed lived in Israel, the Gibonites could not be
in quiet, neither would they suffer David to take any rest.

But how shall we help this and purify great Brittane of these monstrous
brood, The brood of Enachims.
the brood of Enachims? they will not come to hear of God in his church, as
the Ethiopian Eunuch went to Phillip; they will not with Naman the Syrian be
cleansed of their leprosy, 4 Reg: cap. 5.
in the flud Jorden: they have water in Damasco, Abanah, and Pharpar; they have
water in Rome, aquam mercurij, and aquam benedictam.

They had rather drink of the puddles of Bethauen with Jeroboam, The puddles
of Jeroboam.
than of the well of Bethell with Jacob, they had rather trust to the
mountains of Samaria, than to be rich in Sion.

How shall this be redrest and clear our country of them?

If, Diverse kinds of purifications among the Gentiles.
as among the Romans who bound such in bags and threw them in Tyber, too many
should be drowned. If, as Xerxes among the Persians by decymacion, too many
should be slain. If, as Ulysses among the Graecians, with fire and brimstone,
too many should be burned.

Better rather as Theseus did, to seek out their labyrinths, and to find
these late brood of Minotaurus, that seek to feed upon the blood of their
countrymen, like Gorgons. Judge: 11. The false Ephramites could not pronounce
Schiboleth.


And to use them as Ieptha did the false Ephramites, if they could not
pronounce Schiboleth like true Israelites, they should not pass over Jorden to
gather a head again against Israel.

So they shall not seek a Roman Cateline for their Captain, nor a Spanish
Viriatus for their leader.

If we may not reueng our wrongs, as David did against the Ammonites, 2 Reg.
11. Judge: 8.
and Aramites his enemies; If we may not as Gedeon did upon Phanuel, and
Succoth; Yet they should have no such liberty that dreamed upon a monday at
night, that they should sup at London with a Roman regiment upon Tuesday at
night.

Hamilcars dream.
As sometime Hamilcar General for the Carthagenians, laying siege to Siracusa,
an jmage appeared in his dream, and told Hamilcar he should sup the next night
in Siracusa: so he did as a prisoner and captive by the Siracusans, and not as
a Captain with his Carthaginians; that selfsame Image, that Serpent appeared
to this treacherous crew, which openly pronounce with Seba the Traitor, what
have we to do with the house of Judah, 2 Reg. 20.
or what portion in the son of Isai?

Cyrus and Caesar's dreams.
These be Volitantes Serpents, flying Serpents dreaming like Cambises, that he
was lifted up above the clouds, and suddenly thought that he fell from the
clouds to the earth. Like Julius Caesar, who the night before he was slain
in the Senate, Cyrus and Caesar's dreams.
dreamed that he sat hard by Jupiters seat; but suddenly he fell flat on his
face to the earth: with the like dreams are these Serpents fed.

Not as Ezechiel which was carried in a Vision from Babylon to Jerusalem, Inter
caelum and terram. And God showed the Prophet the abominations of the Jews,
Ezech. ca. 8.
their jdols, their jdolatries, their manifold wickedness.

Paul also was carried either in body, or without the body he knew not unto
the third Heavens, and saw many things which was not lawful for Paul to
speak of.

But Ezechiel and Paul had better supporters to carry them, Ezech. cap. 40.
than either Cyrus or Caesar, they dreamed that they fell not when the one was
carried from the earth, to the third heaven; and the other carried from Babylon
to Judah, and lest on a Mountain in Israel.

But these dream of Images, and Idols, like De: Brutus, which dreamed of such
an Image, that never left him till Brutus fell upon his own sword at
Philippos. Plut. in Bruto.


And such an Image appeared to Hanibal, that never gave him over until Hanibal
had poisoned himself in Bythinia. Plut. in Hanib.


It was then a world of Images among Heathens and Pagans, and among
Christians at this time too many, though they know, Confundantur qui sculptilia
adorant.

I must needs borrow some terms of the Heralds, and as they describe the
natures of Lions being regal beasts. So must I describe the nature of Serpents,
being Devils themselves, and beasts for the Devils some dormient Serpents;
Descriptions of some Serpents.
some cowching, some walking Serpents, and some flying Serpents that soar so
hye, that at their fall, they are dashed in pieces.

Had Saul feared God, and not consulted with these Serpents, 1. Sam. 28.
he should have done as David, Asa, Iosaphat, consult with Samuel, while Samuel
lived, and not after he died: Saul consulted with Coniurers and Witches.
Saul should ask counsel of the Prophets, and not of Witches and Images, not
with Phaetanissa a Witch at Endor, but of Huldah a Prophetess at Jerusalem,
as Josias did.

Dan. 3.
Daniel choakt that great Colossus the Image of Baall in Babylon.

Jacob buried his wives Idols the Gods of Laban at Sichem.

King Asa burned to ashes, and threw into Cedron his mothers Idol Priapus.

Young Josias left not an Altar, an Image, an Idol, a grove within Judah,
destroyed the green Groves in Mount Olives called the Mount of corruption.

These were such Kings as should be imitated, who cleansed Angeus hall in
Israel, For such Kings the Prophet Elizeus wept
and extinguished the fiery furnace of Egypt in Judah: and not such as
Triphon, that killed his master King Antiochus; nor such as Hazae^ that
strangled his Master Benhadad.

Exodus 12.
Great was the lamentation and cry in Egypt, when the firstborn were slain
throughout the land of Egypt, even from Pharos throne, to her that grindeth at
the mill.

4 Kin. 19.
Likewise great was the fear and terror in Jerusalem, when Senacherib came and
determined with his huge Army to destroy Jerusalem, Senacherib.
saying, They should eat their own dung and drink their own urine, if they
refused to yield to the great King Nebuchadnezar.

England of late was not a little frighted, England late frighted.
when the Hispaniards with their great Armadoes laden with weapons and armor,
came fully persuaded to make an end of England.

But he that destroyed the firstborn of Egypt, from the highest to the
lowest, destroyed also Senacheribs Army, being a hundred fower-score and five
thousand Assirians. And the same Angel daunted the bragges of the Spaniards,
with the like revenge upon themselves, which they thought to do unto others.

The Sun, Iud. 5.
the Moon, the Stars, and the Heavens fought for Deborah, and gave her
victory over the Chananites: So the winds, weathers, storms, tempests,
rocks, and stones of the earth sung, and gave the victory to Queen Elizabeth
against the Spaniards.

Truly these were three great Victories without blood or sword drawn: 1. Sam.
7.
of which we may say as Samuel said for the like Victory he had against the
Philistines, Hitherto has the Lord helped us: and pitched there a stone in
remembrance of Victory, and named the place Lapis adiutorij.

So Joshua pitched a stone under an Oak at Sichem, Genesis 31. The manner of
Couena^ts among the old Hebrews.
as a covenant between him and the people. So Jacob gathered a heap of stones,
as a witness between Laban and himself.

We must likewise pitch a stone, Even that stone which the Builders rejected,
which to the Jews was a stumbling-blocke, and to the Gentiles folly, even that
stone must be our Angularis lapis.

Rhodig lib. 8. cap. 26.
We must not be like Philip of Macedon, after his great Victory at Chaeronea
over the Graecians, who waxed so proud and insolent, that he was sharply
reprehended of that noble Prince Archidamus, King Philip taunted of Archidamus.
Agisilaus son, saying, that his shadow was no longer after the victory,
than it was before his victory.

Neither must we answer as Epaminondas, being asked what was the greatest joy
he ever had in the world; The answer of Epaminondas.
he said, Leutrica victoria, the Victory of Leutricke.

All victories come from God.
In truth of our victories we ought to rejoice, and to give thanks unto God.
And we must put away all other stones, as our Idols, and Images, the Gods of
the Gentiles, being Lapidij Dij; and build all buildings upon that stone which
is, lapis Angularis.

This was the cause why Moses was sent an Embassabor to Pharo, to deliver
Israel from double bondage, where Israel served Pharo in slavery, and the
Devil in Idolatry.

This ought and should cause us to serve God in true and sincere Religion, and
not in Images, and Idols, as do the Heathens in the engendered Serpents of
Medea.

Dan. 7.
But that Monster and great terrible beast with iron teeth, which devoured and
stamped all others under his feet, never feared him that comes in red
garments from Bozra, Esaias 63.
that plagued the Idumeans, the Moabites, the Amonites, and the Jews after
them, even that God that says, Vengeance is in my heart, and I will tread them
in mine anger, and stamp them under foot in my wrath.

If you compare Bozra with Rome, Idumeans and Romans compared.
and the Idumeans with the Romans, you shall find the one to claim their
chief Religion from Abraham by heritage; and the other from Peter in like sort
by succession; and yet both worship Idols.

Who durst say, Zedechia one of Baals false Prophets.
that Micah was a true Prophet to Ahab. If Micah so say, Zedechia will strike
him before Achab.

If Jeremy prophecy to the King of Judah, the noblemen of Judah will set
Jeremy by the heels.

But they will hearken what Zedechia, 3. Kin. 22.
Baals Prophet will say with his iron horns, who told Achab his Master, His
ventilabis Syrtam donec deleas eam, with these horns thou shall overcome the
Aramites until thou have utterly consumed them.

There be (I doubt) many that so say of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

The Roman Achab will not be satisfied as the Ammonites were with the
Ambassadors of Israel, 2. Kin. 10. The Ambassadors of Israel abused by the
Amonites.
by cutting one side of their beards away, and one half of their garments, and
so in contempt of David sent back again to Jerusalem.

But they will have all David's beard, all his long garments: yea his crown
and all his Kingdoms, or they will hang with Achitophell. They will betray
their friends, their country, their King and Sovereign Lord, or they will
burst out their guts with Judas.

They would have all England, either to Rome, or to Spain; Hispaine in Rome,
and Rome England.
or bring Rome or Spain into England, At illa nobilitas cum plebe pereat, qui
patriam ita perire velit.

Number. 22.
When Balac King of Moab perceived that he could not subdue the children of
Israel, neither by strength nor by any policy, he practiced with Balaam to
destroy them be cursing, but Balaams curse was turned into blessing to Israel.

This practice has been long used in Rome, for when gifts and rewards
failed, then cursing and excommunicating was used.

Genesis 27.
Isaac in giving his blessing to Jacob, said Cursed be those that cursed Jacob.
The Pope has used too long this in Rome, to curse the house of Jacob.

So Joshua cursed those that would rebuild Jericho. And Moses cursed those that
transgressed the commandments of God. Some curses perilous.
These kind of curses are most perilous.

Genesis 9.
The curse of Noah fell upon his son Cham, so that all his posterity (which
was the third part of the world) became accursed and Heathens.

2. Reg. 6.
Elizeus the Prophet, being scoffed at by ungracious children at Bethel, that
called him Bald pate, he cursed them in the name of the Lord, and 2 Bears
came out of the wood, and destroyed 42 of those children: but these Serpents
fear no cursing, these traitors dread no punishment, but Tryphon.

1. Mac. 13. 4. Reg. 21.
These are like Tryphon that killed his master young King Antiochus; like Hazael
that strangled his master King Benhadad; and such like Tyrants which stories
are full of. Triphon. Hazael.
These slaughters and murtherings were ever common among the Turks, Romans,
and Syrians.

I wrote a Book of the stratagems of Jerusalem, and therein collected all
kind of Roman stratagems, as also of the Graecians, which far exceeded the
Romans. But of this late practice and stratagem, never man read or heard the
like.

Hanibal a captain full of fraud and subtlety, Cic. de diui. lib. 1.
devising every way to win Italy to his hand, he saw in his dream in Italy
a great monstrous Image appearing before him, and being at the sight thereof
astonished, asked what he was. The Image answered, Vastitas Italiae: This Image
deceived Hanibal, for he was forced to fly from Italy to Carthage, when he
thought to be Lord of Italy.

The like dream did Chaeremon a fabulous Writer in Egypt, Joseph. lib. 2 con.
Appio^.
that the Goddess Isis warned King Amenophis in his sleep to purge Egypt of
that leaprous and scabbie Nation the Hebrews, for so Appion terms them: and
it seemed that these Traitors were often troubled with Hanibals Image,
Vastitatem patriae; And with Chaeremons dream to purge Great Britane of
Heretics, and heresy (as they term it.) This is (as it seems) the law of
their Religion, and the full resolution of their dreams.

God send these Serpents no better success hereafter, The Spaniards.

The Romans.


than the Egiptians had against the Hebrews in the time of Moses; or the
Spaniards had against England in the time of Queen Elizabeth; or this Romish
crew now of late in King James time in Britane. But the Lord be praised, we
escaped better than the Massacres in Paris, at the murdering of the chief
Peers of France; Dreamers.
or the Murder at Blois.

Such Serpents and Dreamers are fedd with vain ambitious hopes, that seek to
overthrow Kings and Kingdoms; but such as destroyed these Tyrants, the Greeks
did yield to them divine honor. For to kill a Tyrant (says Seneca) is Spolia
opima Ioui, a rich spoil unto God.

Cato wondered to see so many heads of Roman Magistrates and Officers set up
by Sylla and Marius, Plut. in Catone.
in the market place, on the Capitol, and upon every gate in Rome, and that
no Roman for Romes sake had not killed Sylla and Marius, which had been the
next and the best way of reformation in Rome, to end the fury and rage of the
two fire brands of Italy, namely Sylla and Marius, and their adherents.

Goliahs head.
When Goliahs head was cut off and carried by David to Saul, the Philistian army
fled for all their brag of Monamachis. When Hanibal saw his brother Hadrubals
head sent in token by the Romans; Hadrubals head.
Hanibal made have to depart out of Italy for all his great Image which appeared
unto him.

Truly Images appear in dreams to such as worship and honor Images; 3. Reg 4.
but we leave them to such as walk in the way of Jeroboam, and seek to watch
with the house of Achab (I mean in marriage or otherwise) of whom more regard
with looking unto must be had, least that the wrath of God should fall on
Britanes, as it fell on Israel.

We must remember Lots wife, that looked back toward Sodom. Lots wife.


We must not put our hand to the plough to till Gods ground, and become
worldlings in Symonie and Usury. Symony and Usury.


Moses the mild servant of God, for a little incredulity at the water of
strife, might not go into Chaman, but see it only, and die at Mount Nebo.

David a man found of God, secundum cor suum, yet for Vrias wife he was
plagued with the rauishing of his own wives, the loss of his children, and
well nigh the loss of himself, and of his kingdom.

Jeremy a Prophet blessed in his mothers belly; Iere. 35.
though he escaped the malice of the Noblemen of Judah, yet for that he went
with the rest into Egypt, he was in Egypt by the Egiptians stoned to death at
Taphnes. Taphnes.


Therefore we must walk in the light, whiles we have light.

Sampson slept upon Dalidahs lap until the Philistines came and took him.
Judge. 16.


Zedechias fed himself with the flattery of his Courtiers, Eras. in Moria.
until the Assyrians took him and his kingdom: so we see, that Security and
Flattery are the only chief enemies in Court and Country.

So the Persians flattered Alexander, saying, That he was the Son of Jupiter,
The flattery of the Persians.
so that he wrote and made means to all the Cities of Greece, that the
Greeks by a decree, should make Alexander a God in Greece. Some were
contented, as the Lacedaemonians, saying, If Alexander will be a God, let him
be a God. The Athenians and others answered, they might not allow new and
strange Gods in Greece. So the Romans might not endure any strange Gods in
Rome; so they denied our Savior Christ.

And therefore the Prophet checketh the Jews, that they will not make so much
of one God, Heidfiel. de Dijs. 30000. Gods.
as the Gentiles made of many. So that Varro a Roman Register of their Gods,
being asked how many Gods were in all? I have registered (said he) 30 Thousand
Ex antiquis monumentis. But since they are grown infinite among the Jews and
the Assyrians, having as many Gods as there be Cities in Assiria: so many Gods
in Egypt, Ierem. 35.
as there be beasts in Egypt; so many Gods in Persia, as there be stars in
the sky; so many in Greece, as the Poets can feign, or Painters can make them.

The Idolatry of the Heathens.
And in Rome, Tot nomina Deorum, quot hominum. For their Images, and their Idols
are so many, that they seemed to be Populus lapideus, like people made of
stones, and yet none of these nations will suffer any strange Gods to be
worshipped in their Country, besides their Gods.

And why then should Christians (being sharply chidden by the Prophet) accept
of their strange Gods, Ignatius.
being crucified with Christ, as Ignatius says?

Many also like the Jews here in England, specially Grammarians, and
Schoole-maisters have sought means to be instructed in the Rabbis cabala of
the Jews, Cabala.
which made great matters de apiculis literarum, and that secret Science was
secretly read to many Scholars by Schoolemasters in their Fathers houses, and
by Tutors in the Universities, that they would feign, as the later
superstitious Jews would seek out of Bereschith, the first word of the Hebrew
Bible, to draw the full time of the Messiah, Bereschith.
from the very promise of the seed of the woman, unto the very birth of the
Messiah.

So also did the Jews draw Ex epinicio Mosis, Quis sicut tu in dijs Jehovah.
Exodus 15.
Of these words they picked such letters as they invented for the name of the
Machabees. For Joshua used these words as Moses did. And after Joshua, Judas
their third Judge used it as his poesy, Judas his Poesy.
the which was good and godly. But how they used their vain Cabbales out of
the other godly words, I know not, unless it were to know where, when, and how
long this Religion should endure; we know well how long it has endured.

In like manner Maximilian the Emperor used the five Vowels for his poesy,
Maximilians poesy.
which noted the Majesty and Justice of the Empire, a word for every vowel,
which was Aquila, Electa, Just, Omnia, Vincit.

Ulysses had rather see the smoke of Greece, than the sun shining in Phrygia.
Ulysses.
And some had rather see the smoke of Idolatry in Rome, than their fire in
England.

Ulysses confessed that he would willingly loose the solace and joy of
immortality, Ithaca Ulysses country.
before he would forget the sweet air and delight of his Country Ithaca. And
others cannot abide the sight or smell of their Country Britane. They cannot
endure to drink of the sweet Rivers of Bethel, but they can swallow up the
puddles in Bethauen.

Genutius a Roman Praetor riding out of Rome, Plinij lib. 11. cap. 37.
suddenly there sprange as it seemed horns on his head. This wonder was by
the Soothsayers interpreted, that if Genutius would return again to Rome, he
should be a King of the Romans.

He to avoid the name of a King (being an odious name in his Country)
willingly banished himself from Rome, The history of a Roman Praetor.
least he should be a King in Rome, to offend the Romans.

The Romans therefore set up his Image upon that gate he went out of Rome, in
memory of his great love toward Rome.

So did they upon the gate the 300 Fabij went out of Rome, to end the quarrel
between the Romans and the Viants: Then in Rome they rewarded good Captains
for their service; and now in Rome they reward Murderers and Tirants that can
invent mischief.

When Kings and Kindomes revolted, their policies were practiced; The three
Roman Ambassadors.
then three Roman Ambassadors were sent from Rome to Bythinia; the one of them
had a wound in his head: The second had a stitch in his heart: The third had
the gowt, or a sore leg. Of these three Ambassadors was Cato wont to jest,
Plut. in Catone.
saying, Behold the Roman Ambassadors without a head, without a heart, and
without a leg.

Such Ambassadors have been often sent into England; some with such wounds in
their heads, that their heads will not be healed without alteration of States,
and translation of Kingdoms; some with such a stitch in their hearts, that can
take no rest before they have gotten Spoliam opimam Patriae, the overthrow of
their Country; and some with sore legs, that cannot travail beyond the
Seas, but stay at home as standards and hospitals for such guests that come I
know not whence.

I much doubt, that there be too many with such sore legs in Great Britane,
Many Labyrinths in England.
that lurk in Labyrinths made for such Ambassadors; some as Tutors in the
Universities; some as School masters in Gentlemen's houses; some as Magistrates
and Officers in commission of peace; some matched in Marriage with great Houses,
and too many backed and countenanced, lie hidden in such secret Labyrinths, that
the Sun cannot see them, but the Son of God sees them, though they be kept
as secret as the Books of the Sibiles in Rome, or verses of the Driades among
the old Gauls.

Possidonius the Philosopher, Plut. in Marcello.
called Marcellus the Sword of Rome, and Fabius the Target of Rome, the one to
cut off the heads of Roman enemies with his sword, the other to guard and
defend Rome with his Target Cunctando.

I pray God there be not such a Marcellus or Fabius, to defend these Roman
Rebels in Britane, who might live and enjoy the liberty of their country, if
they were not like the Cappadocians, refusing their liberty offered the^ by the
Romans, Strab. li. 12
saying, Se non posse far libertatem; or like the Yonians, as Critobolus
said, Frugi serui, liberi mali; good Roman servants to the Pope, but bad
subjects in England.

These cannot abide the breath of Britane, Diod. lib. 4. cap. 2.

The Isles of Satyrs and Serpents.


they would feign alter the name of the Isle of Britane, either unto the Isle
of Serpents, which is in Arabia, or to the Isles of Satyrs, which is in
Africa, Isles of their own names.

Sectio. 2.
The saying of Lu. Crassus of Domit. Aenobarbus.
IN the time of Lu: Crassus the Orator, there dwelt in Rome a cruel dissembling
Hypocrite, one Dom: surnamed Aenobarbus: Of him Lu: the Orator was wont to
say, That it was no wonder for Aenobarbus to have a brazen beard, since he had
an iron face, and a leaden heart.

There be many now in Rome and out of Rome, that are like Aenobarbus with
brazen beards, Suet. in Nerone.
iron faces, and leaden hearts: which if their bodies were opened, as the
Athenians did Aristomenes, or as the Messenians did Hermogenes, their hearts
should be found pilosa and hijpida, hairie, and full of thorns.

Philost. in vita Antioch.
And of late we found many such brazen beards, such iron faces, and such leaden
hearts in Britane, as fear not the briars and brambles of Succoth, nor the
servitude and bondage of Joshua to the Gibeonites, nor the lamps or the
pitcher pots of Gedeon to the Medianites. Iud. 8.
But it must be gladius Domini and Gedeonis nostri, the sword of God, and our
Gedeon, that must tame these Tygrish Brutes, Josh. 9.
and not Britanes, whose hearts are in Rome, though their bodies be in England,
and though they be not in Rome, Many are absent from Rome, as the Jews were
from Aegipt.
yet Rome is in their hearts, for they are absent from Rome, as the Jews were
from Egypt, Corpore, non animo. But when the sun shines most clear, then
the Crabbe catches the Oyster, they are met and are found.

Policrates bragged so long of his fortunate estate, and good success, that
he threw his Ring into the sea to try further his fortune; yet after his Ring
was had again, he was hanged in Mount Mycalus in Persia, by Oron^es Darius
officer.

But Amasis a King in Egypt, Val: max. lib. 6. cap. 9.
doubting much of his happiness and great fortune, wished that he might taste of
some calamity, and say, Per varias fortunae vices, and not always to flourish
in prosperity.

Croesus judged himself the happiest man upon earth, Croesus forgot what
Solon said.
until he was taken with his Kingdom by Cyrus, then he thought what Solon
said of such slipperie happiness in this world, Quam vitrea est Fortuna.

Saint Ambrose with some of his friends came unto a lodging, Ad Marullum lib.
5. cap. 3.
where the Host said of his good fortune, and many bragged of their good
fortune; some said they knew not what calamity was; others knew not what
adversity was; and others knew not what sickness meant. Saint Ambrose made
have, and took his friends with him out of the house, and looking back, saw
the house swallowed up and all them, into the earth. Therefore I made have to
come out (says Saint Ambrose) from such company: and from all such braggers,
let all good men beware.

Milo Crotoniates thought his hand as strong as an iron wedge, Gel. lib. 15.
cap. 16.
which Milo took out of a mighty cloven Oak, and put his hand in* where his
hand was so clasped, Milo Crotoniates brag.
that he could not take it out, until he was of wild beasts devoured.

Many put out their hands so boldly, that they loose their heads for their
hands, and many put their hands as Jeroboam did, 3. Reg. 13.
who could not draw back again his hand.

Nebuchadnezar his brag.
Proud Nabuchadnezar that said, Is not this great Babylon which I have built
with these hands? He supped as a beast among beasts that night in the fields,
and not as the great Nabuchadnezar King of Babylon.

Many such beasts there be, that rather will with the prodigal Son feed upon
husks with swine (as all feeding is which is not fed with the word of God)
than to seek with the woman of Canaan, to be fed with the crummes that fell
from Christ's table.

Ruth. 2. Moab.
These had rather stay among the Moabites for their Watchword, Moab ad praedam,
than come with Ruth from Moab to Judah, to gather gleaning of corn in the
field of Booz in Judah.

These had rather serve Moloch with his priests Chaemarims, and to drink of
their puddels, Iere. 2. Chaemarims Moloch his priests.
than of the clear water at Bethel.

These are they that fled for succor to Egypt, to whom are reserved at last,
the sword, famine, and pestilence, and these will not be kept from Rome, no
more than the Jews from Egypt.

Ierem. 42. Jeremy could not persuade Israel from Egypt.
For all the persuasion of Jeremy, he could not persuade the children of Israel
from Egypt, they would serve the Queen of Heaven in Egypt, and not the God of
Israel in Judah, and though they had one foot in Judah, they had the other in
Egypt.

Like Rochardus King of Frishland, being by Wolfranius persuaded to be
baptized, having one foot in the Font, the other out, asked Wolfranius where
went the most part of his predecessors that were not baptized? To Hell, Fulg.
lib. 3.
said Wolfranius. Then Rochardus drew his foot out of the Font, and said,
rectius est plures, quam pauciores sequi. This is the very answer of some
papists, and the anchor of their Religion. This was our Forefathers Religion,
I was brought up in it, and I will not forsake it.

The Athenians sent to Delphos, to know of Apollo what Religion was best,
Heidfiel. ca. 2. de Dijs.
and it was answered by an Oracle, That the most ancient Religion was best.
Again being moved what was the most ancient? it was answered, The Athenians
sent Ambassadors to Delphos.
the best. The Athenians could have no other answer by the Oracle, but the
best religion was most ancient, and the most ancient, best; a most true saying,
truly conceived.

So Ignatius says, Mihi antiquitas Christus, cui nolle obedire, Ignatius.
exitium est. Yet will they prefer Boniface the third, before Christ; and the
Oracle of Apollo before the word of God.

So Paul found when he came to Athens, Acts.
reprehending their Idolatry, their Images, their Idols, and their Altars
dedicated ignoto Deo, he was called of the Philosophers Spermolegos, a new
inuenter of strange Gods; and yet Paul was suffered to speak and to dispute in
Athens; but in Rome he was hanged for his speeches against the Idols, and
Images; for in Rhodes were three Thousand, seven Hundred; in Athens as many; in
Delphos no fewer; but in Rome were so many, that they seemed Tanquam lapidij
populi.

But of these Images and Idols, how they were tended, served, and worshipped,
and with such slight taught by the priests to sweat, to weep, to reach their
hands, to shake their heads, and give Oracles by priests placed in the
hollownesse of these Images. Of this Josephus says. lib. 18. cap. 7. in Plut.
in Coroliano.

There is an Epigram of Beza of some contention between a Painter and a Baker;
the Painter bragged that his hand could set in lively colors, the Heavens, the
Earth, Angels, Gods, and Men. The Baker said, He could make loaves of bread;
as soon as the Priest touch the^, they are become Gods, whom heavens, earth,
men, and Angels must worship. Thou make God, for the bellies, said the
Painter. And thou make Gods for the eyes, said the Baker; A Priest was called
for a Judge, and the Priest was angry both with the Painter and the Baker, to
publish so sacred a secret, and said, pictor pingat, pistor pinsat, pastor
iussit esse deos. Let the Painter paint, and the Baker bake; the Priest makeeth
Gods: For as Rome then was full of Idols and Images made of stones, wood,
marble, and iuorie: so Rome now is full of Gods, if it be true that themselves
say, Qui creauit me, dedit mihi creare se.

Again with the like blasphemy in another place, Qui creauit me sine me,
Gabr. biel. super Cant. lect. 4. Satyr: 15.
creatur mediante me.

The Egiptians, Quibus in hortis suis nascebantur numina, which brag that
they have Gods borne and brought forth in their gardens and Orchards, as
Iuuenal says, were not so mad, nor so blasphemous

Eras. in Moria.
The Devil meeting with Saint Bernard, told him that he could show him 7 verses
in the Psalms, Quos qui recitauerit, he could not but be saved. Bernard would
know of the Devil what were the verses. The Devil denied that. Thou art a
liar, said Bernard. I read over the Psalms daily, The Devils speech with ^.
Bernard.
and if thy verses be there, I read them also. The Devil (after two denials
said) that they were the 7 Psalms.

So say the papists; Superstitious Papists.
if you say daily five Pater nosters, and fifty Aue Maria, with the repeating
of the Creed three times, which they call Psalterium Mariae, you may do what
you list all that day after; but it must be in Latin to the Virgin Marie,
roga patrem, iube natum, iure matris impera

For as the Grecians call all Nations barbarous, but such as could speak
Greek.

So did the Romans call also barbarous all but those that could speak Latin,
for at their first sailing to the Affrican wars, they called the Spaniards,
the Carthagenians, and the Affricans barbarous, for that they knew not the
Latin tongue.

And so in the time of Cicero they called the Gauls (their next neighbors)
barbarous, Cic. ad Q. fratrem.
because they could not speak Latin.

The like reason have the Papists, that all Religion is barbarous that is not
said in the Latin tongue.

The Hebrews thought both Greeks and Latins to be barbarous, and that they
ought not to speak nor to write illam sanctam, and sacram linguam, That holy
and sacred tongue; For, they said, That God himself, the Patriarchs, the
Prophets, and the Apostles, only spoke this tongue.

The Greeks brags also, that Jupiter spoke first the Greek tongue at Athens.

The Latins brag, The brag of the Romans.
that the Muses gave such sweet grace to their tongue, that all the world seek
to learn the Latin tongue.

With such superstitious people, the Devil is most busy, In vitis patrum.
and meeting with a devout Eremite, asked him three questions; The first was,
what should be the strangest thing that God made in a little frame? the Eremite
answered, A man's Face.

The second question, Where was the Earth higher than all the Heavens? He and
answered, Where Christ's body borne of the Virgin Marie, Three questions of
the Devil.
was adored of Angels and Archangels.

The third question, What space was between Heaven and Earth? Thou know
that best, (said the Hermit) which wast from Heaven, thrown down to the
earth. Their Books are full of these Riddles.

Chrysippus Oracles.
Chrisippus that wrote a whole volume of Oracles, some false, some obscure, and
some very doubtful, Vt interpretes egeat interpret, says Cicero; yet in
respect of the Popes Legends, Lib. 2. de Diuinat.
and Roman Calender concerning Images, Saints, and Devils.

Dicaearchus an ancient Philosopher, that gathered all the calamities, Li^s. de
constable. lib. 2. cap. 22.
the slaughter, of plagues of wars, of shipwreck, of famine, and especially
of the cruelties of the Spaniards, who slew in India 20 hundred myriades of
people, yet not equal to the Popes cruelty, if you account their burning and
killing, and the second death to go to purgatory.

The answer of an Hermit to a Philosopher.
Antonius an Hermit in Egypt, was asked of a Philosopher, How he prayed
without Books? The heavens above (said the Hermit) the Sun, the Moon, and
the Stars are opened Books unto me, there I see, and there I read the
wonderful works of God, Opera manuum ^ius annunciant firmamentum.

So Clemens Alexandrinus said, that the universal world is a Book of three
leaves, the Heavens, the Earth, and the Seas. In these three leaves are so many
letters as there be creatures. Of these you shall read Psalm. 19. Quam
admirabilis dominus in operibus suis.

For Saint Bernard was wont to say to his familiar friends that whatsoever he
read in the Scripture; Bernard his study.
he found the fruits thereof, Meditando and orando in agris and in siluis.
Bernard used no other School, no conference with any man, nisi quercos and
fagos.

But such Rebels esteem not caelestia numina, but terrestria nomina, they way
not for prayers.

These Fellows trust not to prayers, Arist ca. 5 de animal.
but to their prey, much resembling the nature of Vultures; of which Aristole
says, That their nests cannot be found, yet are they seen flying together,
following the army two or three days, watching for their prey before any
army fight, or any slaughter made.

So these Rebels accompany together like as these Vultures do, praesagire
caedem, and watch for their prey. They cannot tell how to please the Pope
better, than to do their best by fire, by sword, to burn, to kill, and yet
like Pharoes lean Kine, after they had eaten the other 7 fat Kine, they were
never the fatter, still hungry for more.

Sectio. 3.
Demetrius, King Antigonus Son, knew not how to certify King Mythridates of
his fathers fury toward him, Plut. in Demetr.
but wrote with the point of his spear in letters upon sands, where the King
should come, fuge Mythridates.

These also write unto their friends, like Demetrius on sands; like Pythagoras
on glasses: like Damaratus in wood, and all kind of Ethiop writings, which the
Greeks call Topoecon, but all with bloody pens like Draco, as Demades said.

Plat. in prafat. ad Dionisium.
Plato would not instruct Dionisius the Tyrant to write such letters, vt
possint legi, sed non intelligi. As their Scholemasters can furnish their
Scholars, they can write, read, and understand all kind of Hieroglicall
letters, all kind of writings, though they be as short as Scitalae laconicae.

Balthazer.
But Balthazer with all his Caldean Philosphers could not read the hand writing
on the wall, nor understand what was written, Daniel 5.
until Daniel told him.

John 8. Gel. lib. 27. cap 9.
Neither would the Jews stay, nor could stay to know what Christ wrote with his
finger upon the ground, for all the secret Cabala.

Caesar writing to his under Captains C. Opium, and B. Cornelium, per notas,
by marks and notes, lest his letters should be understood by the Soldiers.

Torquin the proud was sent unto by his son Sextus, to know what he should
do to the Gabians. Torquin brought the messenger to a garden, and with his
staff, altissima papauerum capita decussit, beat and stroke the highest tops
of pepper trees.

Dumme stratagems.
By this Dumme Stratageme the son knew what the father meant, he beheaded the
greatest and chiefest men among the Gabians.

The like Stratagem taught Thrasibulus from Athens to Periander in Corinth, in
spicarum detruncatione by cutting of the ears of corn before Periander
servant in a corn field, Herodot. lib. 7.
he was instructed by this dumme show to cut off the heads of diverse noble
men in Corinth.

These dumme shows are much used, and these obscure writings much practiced,
which among them are called muta eloquentia, and thus they muse on malice, and
glory of mischief in their hearts.

Like the brethren of Policrita being advertised by their sister, that the
Emperor Diognitus her husband did much abuse her, watched the Emperor at a
great feast, and came with some company of armed men: slew the Emperor and
many of his men, and brought their sister with them, and died for joy of their
victory at home, that they had killed the Emperor, and brought their sister to
Naxus again.

This is the very triumphs of the Papists, The Triumphs of the wicked.
to kill Emperors, Kings, Princes and Magistrates, to please the Pope, and to
be Canonized Saints for the same: and to be crowned with Caligulas crowns,
which he appointed for his soldiers, but fitter for the Pope, being the
successor of Caligula and Heliogabulus, and not of Peter, as they say* for they
ware solares, syderales, and (...) coronas, crowns made like the Sun, like
the Moon, and like the stars: fit crowns for such seditious soldiers and
treacherous Priests, that are constellated in heaven for their treachery.

They used in Rome in the time of Julian and Valens, Monks, Friars, and
Priests made at Rome soldiers.

Diacon lib. 12. Hist.


both Emperors, to make laws and decrees, that Moncks, Priests, Friars, and
Religious persons, should be ascripti milites soldiers ellected, which called
the holy band, sacram cohortem as the Persians called their Mellophori, and the
Egyptians their Calisiries, sacred soldiers.

Now these Monks and Friars are called in these days Jesuits and Seminaries,
tygrish and cruel soldiers, and no marvel, having such terrible beasts
carried before them; The Roman engsignes.
as in their ensigns, Dragons, Wolves, Bears, Mynotaurs, and such as were the
ancient banners of the Romans.

They were called draconarij milites, at what time Valens road in great pomp
to Rome, Vigit. lib. 2. cap. 13.
having in every Roman Legion ten Dragons carried before them in their ensigns.

Others soldiers were called minotauri milites, which was half a man, and
half a beast; the soldiers of this monster, were called semi virique boues,
semi bouesque viri: it squares well with the names of Jesuits and Seminaries,
half Priests, half Lai men.

Diodor. lib. 2.
For as Egyptians had their bull called Apis, their Crocodils, their Serpents
carried before them in their battle, which they worshipped as their gods.

Macab. lib. 2. cap. 12.
So the Iacobits, and the Iamnites had their gods in their bosoms, when they
went to any battle, and so found in their bosoms when they were dead and
slain in the field: and the Jews imagined they were slain therefore.

It is to be doubted, that the Papists have their Crucifixe, their Crosses,
their agnus Dei in any foul fact, or in any treacherous actions they take in
hand, imitating Infidels and Pagans, as Silla who had the picture of Apollo, as
Scipio had the picture of Jupiter to animate their soldiers to any hard
enterprise.

These therefore are not well to be trusted, lest they deceive us, Iapyges
stratagem.
as the people called Iapyges in the borders of Italy, who under color of
yielding certain Towns and Villages, and some number of soldiers in pleadges
of their submission to Publ: Licinius the Roman Proconsul: these soldiers
were placed in the rereward of the army, having agreed, that when these people
came to submit themselves on both sides the army; and also they of the
rereward fell suddenly upon the Romans, that many were slain, and the
General hardly escaped.

These Ismalites are backed with Rome on the one side, Ismalits.
with Spain on the other side: I trust they be not backed in Britane, for we
wish them as the Grecians wished to the Persians, to be out of Greece; or as
the Romans wished to the Affricans, to be out of Italy: and so we wish them
to be in Rome, or in Spain, if they cannot be quiet in Great Britane.

King Philip of Macedon the last, doubting that his soldiers durst not abide
the great hoasts of the Scithians, appointed certain horsemen to back the
timorous Macedonians, and commanded them not to let one live that would flee
from their company.

But the Britanes being better backed than King Philips army were, Britanes
better backed than the Macedonians.
and stronger wald than the Macedonians, as Josephus says, yea, then either
Carthage or Africa, and murus mayor quo septi Britanni, yet we may not trust
neither Friars, nor Monks which are now called Jesuits and Seminaries, the
only cause of all sedition and quarrels.

And therefore was Heraclitus requested by some of his friends to make some
speech in the pulpit, Heraclitus sermon.
to persuade love, friendship, concord and amity among the people, being at
variance by some seditious persons that love discord.

Heraclitus knowing the cause of this discord and varience, went up to the
pulpit, and called for a cup of cold water, Plut. de garul.
and a handful of flower or meal, and mingled it together, and drank it, and
came down without further speech.

Some of his friends said that his sermon was very short, and said it was a dum
sermon, yea said Heraclitus, short speeches and dum shows persuade most, if
men understand it; omes seditiones ex luxu nasci, understand that the water and
the mingled meal, that I drank in the pulpit, are as much as the words I
spoke, that all seditions grow of too much wealth and of abundance.

There was an old man in Greece, called Cleanthes, which always brauled and
chid with himself; his neighbor Theodectes asked Cleanthes with who^ he so
brauld and chid awaies? with an old friend of mine said Cleanthes, which has a
white beard and a graye head.

These gray heads and white beards, which we have in great Britane, might find
their own falts, as well as Cleanthes did; if they were as careful of their
heads, as Philetas was of his feet, or Cinesias was of his back.

Lib. 6. ca. 33.
Rhodiginus writes that one Philetas of Coos, was so light and so little of
body, that they put lead under the soles of his shoes, lest any great wind
should have blown him from the earth.

Heidfield de monst. hominibus.
And of another that was so long and so slender named Cinesias, that he was
bound with strong barks of Oaks about his back to keep his body straight,
lest he should bend and break his back.

I wish that our Countrymen had either Philetas lead under their shoes to
stay in England, or Cinesias cork under their backs, to hold upright their
backs in England, for all men see that they go not about to find out their
faults, or to chide with themselves: with Cleanthes for their fault. Neither
will they hear the speech of Augustus, audite me senem, iuuenes.

But they are ever laughing for their own wits and wisdom, Plin. lib. 2. cap.
10.
with Democritus in finding out their own destruction, and ever weeping with
Heraclitus for their folly when they bring these to destruction.

Archimedes after long study, if he had found in any hard or difficult
conclusion to satisfy his mind, he would for very joy, cry out in Greek,
(...), I found, I found.

Many do study how to find means, Archimedes much feared of the Romans.
Dinocrates.
not as Archimedes to invent Engines to fear the Romans from Syracusa* the
city where he dwelt, but like Dinocrates, who mused how he might bring mount
Atho to the form and figure of a man, to please their great Alexander.

Some such there be that study how to bring great mountains and hie hills,
as low as mould hills, but they so work under ground, that the ground falls
upon them.

It is written, that Tho: Aquinas was at dinner at Paris with Philip the Frence
king, musing long with silence, suddenly he so stroke the Table with his hand,
and said, ego vici, ego vici: the king asked him what he meant, Aquinas answered
and said, Aquinas.
an argument to overthrow the Maniches.

I would they should be so occupied to overthrow heresies and heretics, but
their heads are fraughted with greater things to overthrow Kings and kingdoms.

Hiedfield ^e Gryphis Gram. cap. 26.
This Aquinas being a young boy in school, was called of his school fellows,
bos mutus, ye said his schoolmaster when this dumb ox begins to low totum
(...) suo boatu replebit.

Such devilish scholemasters have bin, and (I doubt) are in great Britan, that
brought up many such dumb oxen as Aquinas was, to bring up their children not
for their country.

Appion. Phaliscus.
Such a schoolemasters was Apion in Alexandria, that moved sedition among the
Greeks, and the Jews And in Phaliscu another schoolmaster that brought all
the noble men's children being his scholars, to Camillus the Roman Consul,
that then besieged Phalisius.

And such schoolemasters had we (I pray God we have not) that bring up their
scholars for Rome, for Spain, and not for great Britane: in caves and
coniholes, as conicatchers, not only under ground, but on the ground.

Diodor lib. 17. bibliotheca.

Olaus mag hist Sepientria.


It was an exercise in Rome among the sword plaiers, called exercitium
laqueatoru^, and after much used in war in Finelan, and in many places of the
North: these soldiers were called laquearij milites, because they used
stratagems with ropes and halters, in throwing them up to the walls and forts of
the enemies.

Such soldiers were the Spaniards, with their halters and ropes, marching
toward England, to hang us in England our own native country: such were the
Massacres of Paris, that slew and killed the chief men of France, and such
soldiers do daily come from Rome to Great Britane, to practice this exercise.
And these be the soldiers of Pope Leo the 10, which had ever this wicked verse
in his mouth, Flectere sinequeo superos Acheronta mouebo.

There be other Soldiers, Three kinds of Captains over the Jesuits, and
Seminaries.
called Retiarij milites, exercising and practicing feats of Arms, with nets
named fitter for priests and preachers, than for Traitors and Rebels, which
will not lay their nets for small fishing, but for Kings and Kingdoms.

Yet there is the third of Soldiers, called Cunicularij milites, these
Soldiers are most dangerous, which keeps their Dens and Caves under ground,
where they have as many Labyrinths, windings, and turnings, with so many
subtle and crooked walks, as the River Maeander has, Maeandri.
which both for the crooked ways, and for their winding and turning about
Britane, they may be well called Maeandri.

These three kinds of Captains have their meeting places, Places for meeting
of Traitors.
though they be dispersed and scattered; others found, taken, and executed; yet
they have their places provided for them that escape, to consult again of
further treason.

It was a policy of the Roman Sertorius in Spain, when he saw his Army
compassed round about by the enemies, Front. lib. 2. cap. 13.
he counseled his soldiers to fly, and their flight to scatter and
disperse; and from the other, to avoid the sword of Q. Metellus, and his
Army, appointing to them a place where to meet again, where Sertorius the
Roman Captain appointed.

So these Rebels disperse themselves over all England, having their meeting
places and Synod of consultation to take breath, Synod and consultation of
Traitors.
and to deliberate of their treason, and they that escape are sent for more
Jesuits and Seminaries, to supply the rowmes of those that were executed.

These Jesuits use often times three kinds of stratagems, Three stratagems of
Jesuits.
an Egiptian stratageme to pitch their combat nigh some marish ground, which
they do cover over with sea reeds, and in the midst of their fighting they
fly, to draw their enemies to these bogges and marish ground, Egiptian,
and there to fall upon them.

They also use a Spanish stratageme, which viriatus the Spaniard used against
the Romans, much like to the same of the Egiptians, Spanish,
to feign to fly to quabbie places, bogs, and quicke-sands, they knowing how
to escape upon hard ground betweeene those bogges.

Romish.
These Jesuits, these Seminaries use too many Romish, Spanish, and Egiptian
stratagems in their own Country and native soil, against their own country
men.

I think neither the Macedonians, nor the Greeks were so glad to see King
Xerxes Palace on fire in Persepolis, as these Traitors would have rejoiced to
have seen such a bone-fier in Westminster Palace.

These be right Cuniculares milites, that are instructed with all kind of
stratagemes by Spaniards, by Romans, yea, and by Egiptians; these be they
that throw the keys of Peter into Tiber with Pope Julian the 2, these be
soldiers of Hyldebrandus, which made himself Pope, and made Rodolph an Emperor.

Gaza a great strong City, Curtius. ^.^.
which Alexander the Great long time besieged, in the midst of his great
toil, The saying of the great Alexander.
a Conie started out of a hole, which as soon as the great Alexander saw, Haec
vltima pestis Gazae, these Conie holes shall overthrow the strong City of
Gaza, and so it came to pass.

The like ruin fell to the Vients and Fidenates, Liui. lib. 4.
whose Cities were overthrown by such Caves and Dens wrought underground by
Conies.

But we have such Conies that works, not only underground, Josh. 10.
but also upon the ground: May not we stop their holes as Joshua did the five
Kings of the Amorites, which fled from Israel, and hid them in Spelunca vrbis
Maceda.

We must either so do with Joshua, Apion de bello Mythridat.
or as Lucullus the Roman Consul did at the besieging of Tem^shira, get
Bears and wild beasts, and hiues of Bees, and put them unto their Dens to
fright them, and to skirmish with them under the ground in the dark.

As the Lacedaemonians did teach their young Soldiers to fight in the dark, To
fight in the dark.
which was the practice of Iugurth with the Romans, and the policy of Pompei
with King Mythridates to fight in the night time.

Security is dangerous, Security is dangerous.
and negligence among Captains very perilous. Thrasybulus forgetting to
look to his watch, Amilius probus de vita Thrasibuli.
was taken in his Tent and slain; he that recovered Athens, and slew the 30
Tyrants a noble Captain was slain in careless security.

Lu: Martius for the Romans in Spain, and the 2 valiant Scipioes, after much
god service for their Country, for the same fault were betrayed, Liui. lib. 34.
taken, and slain, as Thrasybulus was.

We are not so secure, but they are as resolute; we are not so slack, but they
are as forward, and yet they seem to be cowching and dormiants, sed non
omnibus dormiunt: and therefore King Osyris had the likeness of a man's eye in
his Scepter, to look and to watch regia pericula.

Front. lib. 2. cap. 8.
Camillus perceiving his Army slack, and not willing to go forward, snatched
an ensign into his hand, and said, You soldiers that mean to follow Camillus,
follow me, and withal he spurred his horse into the midst of the Volscans,
and the Latins his enemies; his soldiers for very shame followed, and fought
desperately, and so got the Victory

M. Crassus the Consul.
Our treacherous soldiers want no Camillus to lead them, to recover their old
religious flagges and banners, lost here in Queen Mary's time; the Romans were
not more greedy to recover their chief Ensign the Eagle, lost in Parthia by
M. Crassus the Consul, than these are to win their banners in great Britane.

Lu: Silla his sayings to his soldiers.
Lu: Silla finding his soldiers timorous, and fearful to sight with
Archelaus King Mythridates General, drew out his sword, and said as Camillus
said, You soldiers that mean to fly to Rome, tell them at Rome, that you
left Silla your General fighting in the midst of the battle with the
enemies in Boetia.

I doubt some treacherous papist, some Rebel will so say in Rome, Treacherous
papists.
as Lu: Silla said in Boetia, that they left many such Sillaes, and many like
Camillus to revenge the quarrel in Britane.

These be Sagittae volantes in die, These be devilish arrows, and in the
Devils hands: these be Daemones meridiani, Acheldama
the very line over Rome, and the very Demon Maeridianus; which with their
devilish devise thought to make Acheldama of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and that with one shot.

It seemed that every Traitor, Many Legions of Devils.
every Rebel was led by a Legion of Devils, and truly they had more Devils
to practice their last stratageme, than the Romans had Soldiers to overcome
Asia, Europe, and Africa; and yet it was five hundred and fifty years before
they could do it.

But their Arrows were broken, The ashes of Juniper.
though they were the Devils Arrows; their fire was quenched, though it was
covered over with Iunipers ashes, and their devilish stratageme found out,
though it was invented by Devils, that we may say, and pray with the Prophet,
In Chamo and froeno maxillas eorum constringit Deus.

Pau: Aemilius a Roman Consul found the snares of the Boians, Aemil.
prevented the snares of the Boians.
by flying of multitude of birds in the Etruscan war, for those fowls fled
in such fright from a thick wood, that the Consul sent scowtwatch, and found
10 Thousand Boyans in watch for Aemilius and his Roman Army.

We should find greater birds in great Britane, if we should send scowt-watch
abroad, and yet I stand in doubt, Number. 13.
that as Joshua sent some of every Tribe to search the Land of Chanan; at
their return, they would not open the fertility of the Land for fear of
great men of higher stature, than the Israelites were, lest they should fight
with those mighty men, the brood of Enachims, saying, Nuncij cor nostrum
terruerunt, those Israelites feared men more tha^ God, they had rather return
to Egypt, than otherwise.

Cleonimus Dart.
They came from Rome to great Britane, as Cleonimus the Athenian with his
soldiers, went to Tracaena with a dart in his hand, which he threw over the
walls, which had written upon his dart, that Cleonimus came to deliver the
Trocenians from Craterus their enemy; Front lib 4 cap. 7.
by this policy Cleonimus wan Trocaena by sedition of the soldiers.

Hanibals policy.
The like did Haniball after he had gotten the great Victory at Thrasymenum,
wrote diverse Letters to sundry Cities and Towns in Italy, saying that Haniball
came from Carthage to Italy, to deliver Italy from the Romans.

Many use Hanibals speech and letters, that come in one hand with pardons,
indulgences, not only promising on earth absolution for their treachery, and
murder, but also to be canonized Saints in heaven, and in the other hand
Cleonimus dart, The Laws of diverse Kingdoms in punishing Offenders.
yea* Saul's dart, to throw to King David's face: such darts would these cursed
Crew throw to Kings and Princes faces.

Not what laws should be sought for these Rebels, but what punishment might
be invented for these Traitors? Antiochus invented torments to torture the
Jews that would not eat Swines flesh. Phala^is had by perilous invention, a
brazen Bull to torment Offenders.

Among the Greeks it was lawful for any man, to bring such Offenders to
Delphos, and there to offer them quick in sacrifice to Apollo.

Among the Romans to bring such to the Theators, and there to be hewd and cut
in pieces, Per Gladiatores, the Sword-players.

Among the Persians such should be quick buried, the Massilians had a naked
Sword, and a great Vessel full of poison hanged up in public sight, to
terrify such Traitors.

Sectio. 4.
THemistocles before compared himself to a Plantane tree, for that the
Athenians used it for to shadow them, and to defend them in times of wars
with the Persians; so in like sort said Themistocles, That Athenians use him at
their pleasure, sometime for their drinking Cup; and sometime for their Chamber
pot, and so often used him off, and on, Elian. li. 13 de var. hist.
to cast him of at their pleasure, and to call him again at their will, that
Themistocles would sometime speak to the Athenians, Illos non laudo homines
qui eodem vase pro calice, and matula vtuntur; I like not those kind of people
that uses one vessel, for to drink out wine of it in the morning, and to
make water in it at night.

So ungrateful people were the Athenians, that they wayed for nothing, but for
three Monsters of Athens, Noctua populus and draco, so full of flattery and
dissimulation was Athens, that every one stood in doubt whom to trust.

Many use such dissembling speeches and countenances in great Britane, Fab.
lib. 1.
like counterfeit Tragedians at Smyrna with their false Solaescismes, holding
up to heaven their bloody hands, and looking down to the earth with wicked
malicious eyes, longing to see their tree at Rome bring forth such fruits, as
the wild Olive tree did at Megara, a City of Achaia in Greece.

The wild Olive tree in Megara.
There was a City in the Marketplace a wild Olive tree, on which the
Captains and the soldiers used to hang their armors a long season, that in
continuance of time this tree, by hanging on of these armors, bred of it self
Armors, which was prophesied, that when this tree should breed of it self
Armors for soldiers, this City should be destroyed; for this tree was Arbor
fatalis.

Dan. 4.
There was a great Tree likewise in Babylon, which shadowed all beasts of the
field, and on whose boughs all the fowls of the air made their neasts, and
all the Kings of the earth hanged their Swords, their Targets, their Helmets,
and all their Military Armors.

The rotten Tree of Rome.
But there was a rotten Tree a long time in Rome, Religiosa arbor, on which the
Dominick Franciscans, and Benedicts Friars hanged their Caputium, their weeds,
and religious garments so long, that this Tree bred more Armors and armed men
in Rome, and out of Rome, than the wild Olive did at Megara, or the mighty
high Tree at Babylon.

But as the fatal Tree of Megara had an end: so the great Tree of Babylon was
cut down, and so the rotten Tree of Rome is as ready to fall down, for under
this Tree were more Traitors bredd, more Scysmes, and heresies brought up, than
were Soldiers at Megara: either beasts or fowls in Babylon. For these hold it
a principle or a maxim of their laws, that it was as lawful to burn a
Protestant in England, as to kill a Tyrant in Greece, and the reward was a
like, Spolia opima Ioui, a rich spoil to their Jupiter.

It was counted great tyranny in Tamberlane King of Scythia, Tamberlane King
of Scythia.
to use Baizates the great Turk (though as great a Tyrant as himself) being
taken captive, to carry him in his triumph from Country to Country in a
Cage, and to feed him like a dog under his table in that Cage. And it is
greater tyranny to feed Turks, and Tamberlanes to cut our throats in England.

Sapor King of Persia, Oros. lib. 7. cap. 22.
after his great Victory over the Romans, and had taken the Roman Emperor
Valerianus, he kept him as his Prisoner, and used him as a block on his knee
for the King of Persia to mount on horseback, to the great disgrace of the
Romans. These were tryumphs of Tyrants, and not of Kings. The King of great
Britane may use his enemies, as Tamberlane used the great Turk, or as Sapor
used the Romans.

I remember the tyranny of Sesostris, Melan. li. 2. Chron.
whom the Ethiopians call the Hercules of Egypt, which was carried in a Coach
(as Melancthon says, In curru ex auro lapidibusque praeciosis constructo) by
^ower Kings in a Chariot wrought with gold and precious stones.

But one of these 4 Kings ever looked back upon the wheel of the chariot;
Sesostris King of Egypt.
and Sesostris asked him, why he so often looked back; he said, I look upon the
wheel, how by course, the staves of the whele, are sometimes above, and
sometimes below Histories report, that he dismissed those Kings, and freed
them from such bondage upon these words.

Plut. in Pomp.
Such was the fortune of Tygranes the great King of Armenia, though he had 4
Kings waited on him at his Table, and ran sometime as footmen at his
stirrope, Tygranes king of Armenia.
yet was he forced to throw his Diadem at Pompeis feet. Thus Fortuna ambiguo
vagatur axe.

But the Bishop of Rome which had more Kings and Kingdoms under his obeisance,
Iud. 1.
uses much more tyranny, than Tamberlane of Scythia, or Sapor of Persia;
Adonibesek.
Yea greater tyranny than Adonibezek, who had 70 Kings feeding like dogs under
his table, without either toes to their feet, or fingers to their hands; but he
had legem Talionis.

Iud. 2.
This man of Rome commands his Ambassadors, as Nabuchadnezar commanded
Holofernes, Ne par^at oculus tuus vlli regno, Ashuerus.
to make Acheldama of England and great Britane.

Est. 3.
This is that Ashuerus, that willed proud Haman, De populo age quod placet, Do
what thou will with the Jews.

The like condition is between the Pope, and his people, who sends his
Heralds abroad, tanquam cursores, with his Bulls, and Agnus Dei, pardoning and
absoluing all murderers that will destroy all Kings and Kingdoms, that are
not of his Catholic Religion.

Massakers.
This has been practiced in France upon their chief Peers by the Massacres
in Paris, and by a Friar in auricular consession of a King. The practice of
Papists.


In England upon the best learned men of England, and upon our late gracious
and renowned Queen, if their often practices (by many pretended) had not
failed them.

And now of late upon our Sovereign Lord and King, upon our Queen, upon our
Prince, and upon their children, the sacred and stayed anchor of three
Kingdoms, and upon these three Kingdoms it self, At illos Deus e Coelo
subsannauit.

Is this the Catholic fruit of their Catholic Religion? Is Treason and
Murder the profession of Papists? We thank God with Paul, that has delivered
us from the snares of Satan, and from the practice of his fiery Soldiers,
and from these Dreamers.

Caligula that Monster, Caligula his wish.
wished but one neck unto Rome, one City that he might cut it off with one
stroke. That proud Haman sought of king Ashuerus, but to destroy the remna^t of
one nation, and that upon one day within a hundred and seven and twenty
Provinces in Persia. Hamans request.


But these Serpents in one hour with one flame of fire, fully decreed to
destroy England, Scotland, and Ireland, three flourishing Kingdoms. Quis non
meminisse horret? Who laments not to think, much more to have seen the terror
of that day? The inuenter thereof could not be but a Devil, and not one
Devil, unless it be that Devil which Christ commanded exi hominem, whose
names was Legio, a legion of Devils. Such a Devil might draw many Devils after
him. Catelin.
Such a treacherous Catelin had more with him to destroy Rome, rather tha^ 300
faithful Fabians to defend it.

Who sees not the monstrous intentions of these Traitors, after long lurking
in many secret Labyrinths of Britane, where so long they were hidden, until
they had decreed to bring their last Pageant of ostentation, The Roman Colossus.
not only with their great Colossus from Rome to England, and there to rest;
but also with their huge Pyramides from Egypt, to be buried in England, and to
make a Chaos of Great Britane, sometime called Insula fortiu^, and to christen
it again after their own name Insula Serpentum, Insula Ophiadum.
the Isle of Serpents, which is an Isle in Arabia, where such Serpents breed,
that are of 120 cubits long? And yet now in Britane (my heart bleedeth to
speak of them) we find longer Serpents, Diod. lib. 4.
that their bodies be in Britane, and their heads at Rome, I will not say
their heart and hands at Spain.

These are worse than the Athenians, that had certain Priests named Mantes,
which carried Firebrands in their hands, Priests of Athens.
and went before the Magistrates of Athens, and threw about their Firebrands in
sign of battle between the cities of Greece. These are worse then the Priests
of Rome called Faeciales, Alex. ab Alex. li. 5 ca. 7.
that went before the Consulls with bloody darts in their hands, which they
threw toward the Confines of their neighbors, to pronounce war.

The Priests of Rome.
And these our late Jesuits and Seminaries as Ambassadors came from Rome with
Firebrands, and bloody darts, not in their hands, but in their hearts, to
destroy their Country and Contrymen, and glad when they find means by any
policy to practice mischief.

But these hellish Harpeis, these cruel Crocodiles worse than Pharoh, that
said, Quis est Dominus? and worse than the Athiests, that say in their hearts,
there is no God. Such double faced Ianus children, such two-fronted Cecrops
brood, say with the fool, Non est Deus: who can only deliver us from these
that are double-hearted, double tongues, double faced?

Such, the law of God punished, so that fire from heaven devoured them, The
laws of God.
and the earth gaped and swallowed them up alive.

Such, Laws for Traitors.
the laws of men among all Nations have punished; as in Athens by Solon; in
Sparta by Lycurgus; and in Rome by so many laws that tortures, and torments
were invented to punish these tanquam sacrilegos in patrios lares, Diod. lib. 2.
focos, and deos penates.

The Egiptians with long sharp needles, The laws in Egypt. The laws of
Greece and of the Macedonians.

The Laws of the Romans.

Gibeonites.


per singula patricidae membra, torment such Offenders; the Grecians threw
such headlong down from high rocks; the Macedonians stoned them to death.

The Romans drew them in pieces, either between four horses, or 4 boughs of
a tree: and yet said Cicero, Quae nex tanta, tanto sceleri inueniri potuit.

And should not these false and forsworn Gibeonites be punished with
servitude, and bondage, and be rejected from the house of Judah, as Joshua used
them? Iud. 11.
And should not these dissembling Giliadites, which could not pronounce
Scibboleth, be used as Ieptha used the Ephramites at the river Jordan.
Efframites.


The Tyrant Antiochus gave them time by tormenting the seven brethren, either
to eat Swines-flesh, or to die. 2. Match. 7. Punishment invented by Tyrants.


The tyrant Phaleris in like manner torturing them with his frying-panne, and
with Perillus his brazen Bull, were not in such a rage, insuch a fury, and
that against the rule of reason, so long.

I never remember of the like, that in a whole year and a half, they could not
call upon God, and repent of this their determined tyranny, worse than Esau,
Esau.
who would have repented, and sought it with tears, but yet could not; worse
than Pharoh, for he desired Moses to pray to his God for him. Exodus 9. Pharoh.
But these refuse all men's prayers, but such as be Catholics like themselves.

Cain felt his conscience so to afflict him, that he thought that every man
that met him, Genesis 4.
would have killed him, and feign would die, but could not. But these without
feeling of any conscience, are worse than Cain, neither fearing God nor man,
worse than Esau, for they seek not to repent with tears; and worse than
Pharoh (as I said before) who sought Moses to pray for him.

The Sun stood over Gibeon.
These (I say) stood to their first long pretended tyranny to the very day,
most unhappy for them, and most happy for us. Dies quem fecit Dominus. Dies
solus supra Gabaon, the day of Joshua when the Sun stood over Gabaon. Josh.
10. Days to be remembered in England, and Scotland.
And Dies Lunae, when the Moon stood over Atalon. And Dies Martis, not only
in Scotland, but also in England; which day we should celebrate and solemnize
with eternal memory.

So did Moses set down the days which God commanded to be solemnized in
memory of the victories and tryumphes which he had against Pharoh, 2. Chro. 29.
called Paras^eua for the which both Ezechias and Josias proclaimed this feast
throughout all Israel from Dan to Berseba, with others, two feasts which were
yearly kept and solemnized at Jerusalem in memory of victories.

So Joshua remembered his victories over 31 Kings with thanksgiving to the Lord.
2 Chro. 35
So Machabeus in memory of his victories of that blasphemous Nicanor Antiochus
General, 2. Match. 15. Feasts ought to be kept.
and made that day to be solemnized.

So Mardocheus kept the feast called Phurim, in memory of the victory, Hest.
9.
which the Jews had against the Persians, in all the Cities of Persia.

These are the feasts of thanksgiving unto God, and not like such drunken
feasts as the Athenians did make in the Month of November to honor Bacchus; A
Feast to Bacchus in Athens.
neither such feasts as the Thracians had, worse than the Athenians, to honor
Dionisius; neither such Feasts as the Egiptians (worse than the Thracians) made
to the Image of Priapus. A Feast to Priapus.


In such a drunken Feast to Baall, Dan. 5. What fell to such drunken Feasts, to
Baall, and to Dagon.
Balthazar King of Babylon lost his Kingdom. In such a Feast to Dagon, the
house fell upon the 5 Princes of the Philistines; and in such was Benhadad a
drunken King of Syria slain with 32 Kings in his drunken Pauillion.

Of such drunken Feasts the Prophet says, That both Priests and Prophets were
drunken with wine, and that they failed in Prophecy, and stumbled in Judgment.
Therefore we must season and temperate our feasts (as Elizeus did the water of
Jericho, by casting salt into it.

In Rome and in Italy (as Varro says) they far exceeded the Athenians, the
Thracians and Egiptians in such filthy Feasts, until by the Senators these
kinds of Feasts were banished from Rome and Italy, Per Senatus consulium.

Sectio. 5.
THE Lampsenians understanding that Alexander the great, Val. max. lib. 2. cap.
3.
had fully determined to destroy the City of Lampsacus, they sent Anaximenes
the Philosopher Schoolmaster sometime to Alexander to entreat for peace. No
said Alexander, I have vowed, Anaximenes the Philosopher to Alexander.
that whatsoever thou sekest at my hand, I will deny it thee. Destroy then
Lampsachus, said Anaximenes, His request being denied, Lampsachus was saved.

This Embassage was better performed to Alexander by Anaximenes, then the
Embassage of Aeschines to King Philip.

This Orator being sent from Athens to King Philip of Macedon, Plut. in
Demosthene.
at his return to Athens, he much commended Philip for his beauty, for his
eloquence, and for much bearing of drink.

Demosthenes took up Aeschines, and said, That he made a woman of King Philip
for his beauty, a babbling Sophister for his eloquence, and a Sponge for his
drinking: you should have done as Demades did, being then as his prisoner, with
diverse other citizens of Athens, King Philip reprehended of Demades for his
drunkenesse.
seeing Philip crowned with garlands in his robes, and too much rejoicing in
his drink of his victories over his Captains and prisoners of Greece; Demades
boldly said,

Art not thou King Philip ashamed whom Greece made their General, like
Agame^non thou to make thy self like bibbing Thersites? with such taunts as
Demades made Philip to cast off his crowns, his garlands, and his roabes, and
for very shame to dismiss the poor Greeks his prisoners, with Demades to go
free to Athens, and other Cities of Greece.

The like is read of Polemon a gallant Gentleman of Athens, Polemo^ reduced
from his drunkenness by Anaxagoras.
but being drunk, rushed in his drunkenes into Anaxagoras school at lector
time: he perceiving that Polemon was beastly and shameless drunken, Anaxagoras
altered his days Lector to speak of drunkenness, in such sort, that
Anaxagoras made Polemon as shamefast of his dru^kenes, as Demades did king
Philip, both made to cast off their Crowns, their Garlands, and their Robes,
and to be ashamed of themselves.

Yet M. Antonius made a Book to defend drunkenness, Plin. lib. 14
being reprehended thereof by Cicero, which was the only cause of Ciceroes
banishment, M. Anton. hatred to Cicero.
and afterward of his death: another Glutton named Apicius wrote a whole volume
De gulae irritamentis.

And for the like speech Cicero used, was Hermodorus banished from the
Sybarites; with whom the law was, Cic. Tusc. lib 5.
that nemo apud nos frugi sit; they banished all kind of Artificers, because
they should not trouble them with knocking, ha^mering, carting, or any noise to
disquiet their drinking; The law of the Sybarites.
and withal the Sybarites made a law, that no Cock should be in their City to
wake the^ from their sleep. These were the Epicures, of whom the Prophet says,
Eadmus, bibamus, cras moriamur.

Of this company was Philoxenus and Melancthus, the one wished a Cranes neck;
the other a swans neck, Gel. lib. cap. 2.
and either of these two wished to have tricubitale guttur, a throat of 3
cubits long, to have more pleasure in their long swallowing of their meat and
drink, and yet see and observe the difference.

The great Alexander, when Ada Queen of Caria had sent him a dainty dish of
meat, thought she should be commended for her cookery, Plut. in Caesare.
and pleasant sauce; one said to her, Every soldier that Alexander has, is a
better Cook, and makes sweeter sauce, than the Queen of Caria can make.

Cic. lib. 5. Tusc.
The like Darius said, the great King of Persia, that he never drank better
wine in Persia, than that water which was brought to him by a soldier in his
Helmet.

So Ptolomey the first King of that name in Egypt, confessed that he did never
eat better bread in Egypt, Ptolomey.
than that which a shepherd gave the King out of his scrip.

Cic. Tusc.
See the difference between three base Epicures, and three of the most mighty
Kings upon the earth.

I know not which to prefer, Philip of Macedon for his ambition, or Xerxes
for his lust and pleasure: King Xerxes appointed pensions, and great rewards
for them that were named nouae voluptatis repertores, that could invent and
find out new kind of delights and pleasures.

King Philip gave much money to any man that would betray great Cities and
Towns, and would after give those Towns and Cities to those that would betray
Countries and Kingdoms.

Caesar suspecting the faith and promise of the Egiptians to be flattery, gave
himself to feasting and banqueting in Alexandria. Thus Caesar fed the
Egiptians until he wan all Egypt.

Diod. lib. 4.
So great King Cyrus stratagem was to make his foes become his friends in lieue
off punishment and slaughter, banquets, and plays; so he pleased the people
of Sardenses, and so he rewarded the rude and barbarous people Arymaspy, and
commanded they should be called Euargetes.

Leontinus Gorgius, being asked what he thought of a great mighty King? I
know not said Gorgius, whether he be Philip, or Alexander, a Merchant, or a
Soldier; for Philip wan all Greece, tanquam Mercator, as a Merchant; and
Alexander wanne all Asia, tanquam Victor, as a Conqueror; Alexander enquired
for good Soldiers; Philip sought good silver.

Like Dionisius the Tyrant, that asked his familiar and dear friend Antiphones,
where, and how he might get some money? At Athens said Antiphones, where the
Statues and Images of Harmodius and Aristogiton are made of pure silver; for
that they kill Pysistratus the Tyrant: that bold speech cost Antiphones his
life.

Plutarch recites a History of Dionisius barbor, who hearing in his shop many
attending their washing and trimming, Three great Tyrants.
that Dionisius, Anton: Comodus, and Alexander Pheraeus, and especially
Dionisius, and his son, was the most cruel Tyrant. Say you so said his
barbor? Sub cuius iugulo hanc teneo nouaculum: he was hanged for his speech In
manibus linguae mors and vita. But Dionisius the Father was slain by the
people, and Dionysius the Son expelled out of Scicilia by Dion a Noble man in
Sicilia, by the Council of Plato.

That was the cause why Philippides the Poet refused to be of King Lysimachus
Council, being in such grace and favor with Lysimachus, that the King spoke
with Philippides, Quid vis vt impartiar tibi? nothing said the poor poet, but
only this, ne sime consilijs tuis.

Orontes the Persian being cast out of favor with king Artaxerxes his father
in law, The saying of Orontes.
would compare the favor of Princes to Arithmeticians fingers laying down and
taking up, to make what sum they list: so might that great Philosopher Aratus
speak of king Philip when he vomited up blood, saying, haec sunt regia proemia.

Melanth. in vita Valentin.
Valentinianus the Emperor, after he had caused his familiar friend Aetius to
be slain, asked another friend of his, whether Aetius deserved death? that I
know not said he to the Emperor, but this I know, that you cut off your right
hand with your left hand; and it was true, for Valentinianus was slain by
Aetius soldiers.

Lamp. in vita Alex. Sever.
And yet better is an evil Prince having good and faithful subjects, than
wicked and false subjects with a good Prince.

Had Saul but ten such as Samuel, as he had ten Thousand Doegs about him,
no doubt he had obeyed God, and served him better, and governed Israel wiser.

4. Reg. 12.
Had Ioas but few such cou^cellors as Iehoida was, he had not been seduced to
forsake his God, to neglect his commandment, and to forget what Iohoida had
done for him.

Had Dionisius the Tyrant entertained but Ten such like Plato to tell him true,
as he had ten Hundred like Aristippus to flatter him, he had not need to be
guarded with armed men, and to say to his son, Haec adamantina regum vincula,
God would have but ten good and godly in Sodom, and Sodom should be saved.

Agamemnon wished but ten such as Naestor to vanquish all his enemies in
Phrygia, and set the Greeks at liberty to return to Greece again.

And yet Saul a wicked King, did many good things by the persuasion of Samuel.

And King Ioas while Iohoida lived, forsook not God nor his laws.

And Dionisius the Tyrant abstained from much tyranny, Plut. in Dione.
by the council of Plato.

But Saul had not so many Chusai, as he had Achitophels. Dionisius had not so
many Platoes to tell him truth, as he had of Aristippus to flatter him.

Plato asked Dionisius, why he went so guarded? Dionisius answered Plato,
Herodot. 7.
I told my Son a dumme stratageme that Torquinius Superbius told his Son
Tarquinius Sextus, and what Thrasibulus willed Periander to do, In spicarum de
truncatione: but all these damned stratagems were to effect tyranny, as you
read before.

But King Antigonus reprehended his Son, that handled his Subjects roughly,
saying, Do not thou know Son, that Regnum nostrum est splendida seruitus,
that neither arms, strength, nor treasures are so certain and sure to regal
Sceptors, as faithful friends.

So Maximilian the Emperor said in a public meeting with all the Princes of
Germany at Wormatia, Heidfiel. de honor and infamia. cap. 24.
where the Duke of Saxon, first preferring his Metals and rich veins of the
earth; the Duke of Bauaria much commending his strong and brave Cities and
Towns; the Duke Palatine his Wines and fertility of his Land; and the Duke of
Whitenberg said, I can lay my head, and sleep upon the lap of any Subjects I
have, idque subdio, abroad in the field every where, and when I will. Then
said Maximilian, Huic facile concedite palimam.

I would England might have so said in Queen Elizabeth's time; or now great
Britane in King James time; is hard to have it among such as think it as
sweet a Sacrifice to their Roman Mars, to burn a Protestant in England, as
in Greece to kill a Tyrant, to please their God Jupiter.

Oxford.
And as great a triumph was it in Oxford, to burn three famous learned Bishops,
as it was to Diagoras the Philosopher, to see his three Sons crowned at the
games of Olympia.

Cranmar.
This was proved in Queen Mary's time, when Archbishops, Ridley.
Bishops, learned men, and all kind of men were burned in all places of
England, and yet in all the time of Queen Elizabeth, not a hair of their
heads were touched. But of such Jesuits and Seminaries, which under color of
Religion, became Traitors and Rebels.

These forget Hectors verse out of Homer, chiding his friend Polydamus that
feared to fight for his Country, doubting soothsaying, Augurium optimum (said
Hector) patriam fortiter defendere.

Iliad. 12.
But these Jesuits hold with Pope Julian the 2, that threw Saint Peter's keys
over Romes bridge into Tiber; and with Pope Hildebrand which threw the
Sacrament into the fire, have that verse in their mouth, which Pope Leo,
Aenead. 7.
and diverse other Popes used to say, Flectere si nequeo superos acheronta
mouebo.

Of such Menedemus the Philosopher said, That many went to Athens, that thought
themselves wise before they went to Athens, and after a while being at Athens,
they thought themselves eloquent Orators: and straight after they thought
themselves to be grave philosophers, but at last proved very Idiots.

Many likewise go to Rome to see the Pope, Traitors and Rebels are canonized
Saints Rome.
the Senators, and people of Rome, and as some proved to be Idiots by going to
Athens, so some be proved to be Serpents by going to Rome, and such Serpents
that are Rebels and Traitors in England, are canonized Saints at Rome.

Beda our Countryman being at Rome, was requested by some Schoolmasters in a
scoff, to know what meant these four letters, S. P. Q. R. Beda dissembled out
the matter, said, Stultus populus quaerit Romam, Foolish people seek to see
Rome, yea, too many seek out Rome in England, and too many would willingly
build Rome in England.

Such a Schoolemaister was Appion in Alexandria that reioysed to make discord,
Appion.
and move sedition in the City, to set the Egiptians against the Jews, and
the Jews against the Greeks, to expel, to banish both Greeks and Jews out
of Alexandria, to have Egiptians only in Egypt, saying, o beatae ciuitas quae
me talem maeruit habere ciuem.

This seditious Schoole-maister Appion was more esteemed in Rome of both the
Emperors Claudius and Nero, Joseph lib. 2 in Appion.
in his Embassage for the Egiptians, than Philo that learned Jew, was on the
behalf of the people of God the Jews.

Of such Emperors Claudius Iester was wont to to say often to his Master,
that all the good Emperors of Rome, might be written upon a signet of a Ring,
and so of good Popes might be said, as was of Pius Quintus, when he dyed Inter
tot pontifices tantum quinque fuisse pios.

A stratageme of a Schoolmaster.
Another Schoolmasters in Phaliscus, that came to Camillus, and so bragged that
he would and could bring the whole City unto Camillus hand. How said
Camillus? Behold, all the Noble-mens Sons I yield to your hand, and so shall
they yield the City for their Children.

Many such braggers are, and say as a certain Grecian did of his Country, that
the Hebrews had but one wise man which was Solomon; the Romans had but two
wise men Cato and Laelius; but we Grecians have in Greece seven. Yea, (said
another) all the world knew Solomon to be wise; all Rome knew Cato and Laelius
to be wise; but you Greeks make your selves wise, yet all the world besides
call you Children.

So Asoches a priest of Memphis, spoke unto Solons face, Semper pueriestis
graeci.

Aristotle thought it strange, that Socrates was judged by the Oracle to be the
wisest man in Greece, Why was Socrates called the wisest man in Greece.
sithence he studied no natural philosophy, but moral. Plato thought that he
was so judged, for that Socrates said, he knew nothing, and sought not by his
study, but to profit his country Greece.

And so it seemed by his verse taken out of Homer in every place, Gell. lib.
14. cap. 16.
and in every company by Socrates used, aedibus in nostris quae recta aut
prauagerantur, for where families are well brought up, and Cities well
governed, there the Common wealth must needs flourish.

Socrates proved wiser by his moral philosophy, than Aristotle did by his
natural philosophy, to travail and to study for such natural causes, as he
could never attain unto, Quae supra nos, nihil ad nos, as in his book, De
caelo and mundo, and de anima, he much erred.

For he could never find out the cause, Plin. lib. 4. cap. 9.
why the River Euripus should flow 7 times, and ebb 7 times in one natural
day, and yet for three days in every month, neither ebbed nor flowed for
that he could not satisfy his mind in finding out the cause thereof, threw
himself headlong into the River Euripus, saying, Quia te non capio, tu me
capies.

The like is written of Homer, for that he could not satisfy himself about a
ridiculous problem of Fishers objected to him, he also died as Aristotle died.

But this seems rather a Fable, than a true History, if Gellius may believed
better than Pliny.

For Aristotle at his death, Theophrastus succeeded Aristotle in Athens.
being requested by his Scholars and friends to know who should succeed him
in his place in Athens? he answered, They should know straight; so within a
while he called for a cup of Rhodian wine: after he had tasted it, Truly,
Gell. lib. 13. cap. 5.
(said Aristotle) this is a very good sharp wine: and after a little time
called for a cup of Lesbian wine, and said, both excellent good wines, but the
Lesbian wine is more pleasant, than the Rhodian. By this gentle means, his
Scholars knew that he preferred Theophrastus before M^nedemus.

But it is neither Rhodian, nor Lesbian wine, unless it be made of Roman
grapes, Papists to Idumeans compared.
can delight a Papists taste, for as the Idumeans claimed heritage of Religion
from Abraham by succession, so the papists would feign claim succession in
religion from Peter, and they will have none to prove this but themselves.

Themistocles saying.
But as Themistocles being asked whose Oration he would hear? Even him (said
Themistocles) that can best set forth my praise, and advance my fame.

Yet Isocrates repeating an Oration of Demosthenes his Adversary at Rhodes,
they of Rhodes much delighting therein, and much commending the Oration that
Isocrates made, Isocrates words of Demosthenes.
though he was an enemy to Demosthenes, was forced against his will to speak
to the people, O quid si illam belluam audissetis. What if you had heard the
beast himself pronouncing his own Oration.

There was in Judea a River, that upon the Sabbath day did Intermittere
cursum, Drus. lib. 2 cap. 32.
and was therefore called Sabbation, for that the River stands still and
moves not.

And there is a Lake among the Troglodites, which in one day is three several
times bitter, and three several times sweet; and so in one night thrice sweet,
and thrice bitter: the philosophers being not able to find out the cause
thereof, Plin. lib. 31. cap. 2.
they named the River Lacum insanum, after they long busied their brains in
seeking the same, more than Ajax in his fury beating blocks and bushes, in
seeking Ulysses.

Aratus and Eudoxus two great Astrologers boasted and wrote that they (as
Augustine says) had the number of the Stars; August. li. 16. de ciuitat.
Dei. Esaias 40.
but God which made all the Stars said to Abraham, aspice caeli stellas and
innumera eas, look upon the stars, and count them if you can.

Aristotle in his time does report, that the Mathematicians made of the whole
Circuit of the earth, Lib. 2. de caelo and mundo.
but 40 Myriades of Furlongs, which is but 50000 Miles; but he that made the
Earth said, Quis mensus est terram, who has measured the earth.

There is nothing so strange, nothing so absurd, but some kind of philosophers
will defend it, and maintain it. So two of the greatest philosophers in their
time, the one says, That a man might be borne naturally out of the earth. So
says Auicenna, Hominem posse produci naturaliter ex terra.

Auerrois held an opinion, that a Maid might conceive without knowledge of man
in a Bath, the words are, Sine viri commixtione in balneo.

And yet not more absurd in philosophy, as the assertion of the papists in
their Divinity of the presence of Christ's natural body.

But the papists which have as many Gods as the Egiptians had, Plut. de Iside
and Osiride.
they must have as many Sphinxes in temples, as the Egiptians, to expound their
Divinity, being obscure and dark, and full of Oracles, as the Egiptians were.

Every priest had in Queen Mary's days in his own house, such a Corinthian
Sphinx, as Cicero charged Hortensius to have, Plut. in vita Ciceronis.
who fained that he understood not Cicero, pleading for his Client. That is
strange, (said Cicero) that you understand not my pleading, having
Corinthiacam sphingem.

These kind of Sphinx were wont to tell pretty tales to priests in times
past, I mean Horte^sius Sphinx, few or none of the Cardinals, but he has his
Corinthian Sphinx.

Sectio. 6.
Plu. in Themist.
ARtabanus King Xerxes General spoke to Themistocles, You Grecians above all
things esteem liberty and equality: but to reverence and adore our King, as
the Image of the God of Nature, we Persians judge far better.

The Egiptians.
The Egiptians have their heads and beards, and dedicate the hairs thereof to
God Serapis at Memphis, with sacrifice and supplications for their Kings and
Governors.

The Macedonians used to wear the picture of Alexander about their necks as
Jewels, and on their fingers as Rings.

The Indians.
The Indians so honored their Kings, that once in the year, the Peers and
Nobles of India went to the River Ganges, to offer sacrifice to the Sun, with
a number of black Bulls, and black horses, which color among the Indians is
best esteemed.

The Grecians.
The Grecians vowed for their Princes and Governors health and long life, to
dedicate Statues, and Images to their Gods in their temples, with crowns and
garlands.

The Persians and Armenians did honor their Kings, as their Gods.

And no Nation under the Sun reverenced their Kings more than England did,
before Titans children came from Rome to Britane, who were taught in Rome
mortally to hate Kings, they might not hear of the name of a King.

And it seems that these be right Romans, Alex. ab. Alex. lib. 4. cap. 3.
who never with Kings could agree, like to the Taprobanes a Nation in India,
where none might be King of the Kings stock, (especially if he had children)
lest they should claim the Kingdom by heritage.

The Priests of Egypt and Ethiop have a Law and a Custom to elect Kings, and
so long he should reign as pleased the priests. And they had authority from
their Gods to elect, and depose Kings at their will.

This continued until their God of Heliopolis, Diod. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Vulcan appeared in a dream to Sabachus King of Egypt, whom he warned,
either to kill all the priests of Egypt, and to march over their bodies with
his whole army, or to loose his Kingdom. But this idolatrous and
superstitious King yielded his Kingdom unto priests hands, and they banished
the King into Ethiop.

Some Kings in Europa have been, and are in the like homage to the priests of
Rome, as the Kings of Affricke have been to the priests of Egypt and Ethiop.

This law and custom continued with the priests of Egypt and Ethiop, Ergamenes
stratageme.
until Ergamenes time, who lived in Pto: Philadelphos time, who to avoid this
custom, he fained a great sacrifice to the Goddess Isis, and commanded by a
straight decree, that all Prophets and Priests of Isis should come to this
sacrifice. Ergamenes by this stratageme slew and burned all these Sacrificers,
and left not one alive.

4 Reg. 10.
The like did King Iehu to Baals prophets, and the like Elias did to the false
prophets of Achab, and the like did Daniel at Babylon, 3. Reg. 18. The
stratagemes of Iehu.
found out the policy, and practice of Nabuchadnezar priest.

These three great stratagems are equal (no doubt) to the Jesuits and
Seminaries, though not in number, yet in policy.

And truly far better sacrifice than the blood of Rams, Goats, Heiffers, and
thought to be better far than that good fire which Agesilaus commended in
Greece, when he saw the Usurers tables burn at Athens.

Some thought, yea too many agreed to practice Ergamen^s stratageme in England,
but I will let pass in silence the terror and horror of that day. The terror
of the fifth day of November.
The determinations of these Serpents were such, that neither by Tamberlane the
Scythian, neither by Roman Silla, nor by any Turkish tyranny could be
invented or practiced.

You read in this book before, how in Asia men carried Serpents on their arms,
to drive Devils and evil spirits from their houses: and in great Britane they
carry Devils in their hearts, not to drive Devils out of Britane, but to bring
more Devils into Britane by that Roman Beelzebub, as the Devil confessed, when
he knew not where to go, said; I will return whence I came, and brings with
him 7 Devils worse tha^ himself. So these Serpents go to Rome, and at their
return bring seven such, and worse from Rome, to great Britane.

While blindness and ignorance, with superstitious ceremonies were in England,
no such stratagemes were used, the Devil slept sound and secure; but now in
time of the Gospel, the Devils bestirre themselves, with their Priests,
Jesuits, and Seminaries.

And where before in Rome a Serpent barked like a Dog, Alex. ab Alex. lib. 3.
ca. 15.
and a Dog spoke like a man at the overthrow of Tarquine the proud.

And now in Rome such creeping frogs, that creepes from Rome to England, and
croaking in every corner, in every hole, and in every ditch, worse than
barking Serpents or speaking Dogs. These be Spiritus Daemonum, Apoc. 16.
that went out of the beasts mouth in farma runarum, to move contentions and
brawles between Kings and Princes of the earth.

I mean not true papists, nor religious Catholics, but these treacherous
Jesuits and Seminaries, Apoc. 16.
which do much resemble those* frogs that went forth of the Dragons mouth,
croaking in every place of great Britane, the Messengers of Satan, and the
brood of Serpents, to make debates and contention, not as Mimus Roscius did
with Cicero, which of them both should excel in their faculties, neither as
Ajax did with Ulysses, for Achilles Armor.

These frogs croake for Kings and Kingdoms, and they mean to have their
Babylon again so to flourish, that neither Semiramis, Cyrus, nor Alexander
shall prevail against it the second time.

These Serpents the brood of the Dragon, bestir themselves to get worke-men
and Soldiers to build the walls of their Babylon, and to turn the great River
Euphrates again, Front. lib. 3. cap. 7.
as their sure defense, I would they had fewer worke-men out of great Britane.

These Serpents, these devilish dogs, and croaking frogs will not be with
the briars and brambles of Succoth, nor with the lamps and pitcher pots of
Gedeon, but with the sword of God, and our Gedeon.

Manasses.
Manasses would not know the Lord to be God, before he was taken Captive, and
laid in bonds and fetters, by the Assirians.

And Sampson did not fully call upon God, until his eyes were plucked out by
the Philistians.

Nabuchadnezar. Daniel. 4.
Nabuchadnezer knew not God, before he was cast off among beasts to eat with
beasts.

Sampson had often revenged the malice and envy of the Philistians toward
Israel, and he might have had more revenge upon them, if his wife a
Philistian had not opened his problem, and betrayed him unto the Philistians.

Again Sampson might have been revenged of the Philistians before his locks
had been cut off, We are all Nazarites in this point.
had it not been for his wife Dalilah. This Sampson got by marriage of such a
heiffer.

Sampsons Heiffer.
Surely Sampsons heiffer, does vex and trouble many good husbands.

This jdolatrous heiffer, does molest many strong Sampsons; and many wise
Salomons, which that good King confessed that it was for his good, that God had
humbled him, and then he said, Virgatua, and bacculus tuus, etc. thy rod and
thy staff has much comforted me.

Athalia Sampsons heiffer, a wicked woman, constrained her Son Ochosias, to
walk in the jdolatrous paths of Achab.

The marriage of Sampson with Dalilah a Philistian, Judge. 14.
brought Sampson and all Israel to great vexation and troble.

It was a law in Israel, that the Jews should not marry out of their own
tribe, and being married they were straigsttly charged and commanded, to put
their wives away, for the Prophet compared the Jews to stoan'd Horses, neying
on their neighbors wives and daughters, which horse gave the Jews sundry
great falls.

This horse gave to King David, neying on Vrias wife such a fall, 2. Reg. 11. 3.
Reg. 11.
that the prophet Nathan told him, Non recedet gladius de domo tua: to Solomon
his Son, neying on Pharoes daughter, to the loss of ten Tribes of Israel: to
the Beniamites, such a fall for the Levites wife, Judge. 19. Gen: 38.
to the loss of 25000 Beniamites: and to the Sichemites such a fall for Dina
Jacobs daughter, to the overthrow of themselves, and of their City Sichem.

But for profane Histories, Paris had such a fall for Helene Menelaus wife, to
the loss of the greatest number of all the Kings of Asia, and of Greece.

Marcus Antonius for Cleopatra of Egypt, had such a a fall, that he lost both
the Empire of Rome, and the Kingdom of Egypt.

I know that matching in marriage, to be not one of the least causes of good and
evil religion in any Commonwealth. Matching in marriage.
As the marriage of Esau with foreign and strange Nations. The marriage of Ioram
King of Judah, with King Achabs daughter an Idolater, was the cause of much
wickedness in Israel.

The Law of Moses was, that the Hebrews should match with their own Tribe. The
law of Moses.
And therefore Esdras commanded the Children of Israel to forsake their
strange women.

Nehemias rebuked and punished the Israelites, for not putting away such
strange and idolatrous Nations.

Leuit. 24.
The blasphemer which was stoned in the wilderness, was the Son of an
Egiptian, gotten by an Hebrew woman.

Genesis 24. Abraham
Abraham was so careful of a wife for his Son Isaac, that he swear his
servant to bring him one of his own Tribe.

With the like care did Isaac send to Mesopotamia to his brother Laban, to
choose him a wife.

Old Tobias.
So did old Tobias send his young Son Tobias to Medea.

So God appointed such godly women to these godly men, that willingly they
forsook their friends, their kindred, their brethren and sisters, their Parents
and country, to come with their husbands to Judah.

Ruth forsook her idolatrous Nation the Moabites, and would not, Ruth. 1.
though she was sought earnestly to, return unto Moab. A blessed woman in the
Lord said B^o^* for she became the Mother of many blessed kings in Israel, and
of one most blessed King, even the King of Kings.

So Loah and Rachell the wives of Jacob, became the Mothers of the 12 Tribes of
Israel. Genesis 30.


Godly marriage.
These were godly marriages, for they forsook parents and friends, to come out
of such idolatrous countries to come into Judah, to serve God with a strange
Nation.

I could wish that there were not in great Britane those that would forsake
their native soil to be married in Rome, or in Spain to serve Images.

Caleb a zealous and earnest Hebrew promised his daughter A^^san in marriage to
him that overcame that wicked and perverse Town Zepheri. The promise of Caleb.


Dissembling Saul promised his daughter Micholl to him that could bring him 200
Philistims skins. And two godly and zealous men performed and effected the
same, namely David and Othoniel.

So did Clysthenes for his daughter Agarista, who made search throughout all
the Cities of Greece for a virtuous youth, learned and wise, fit for his
daughter.

And Themistocles was wont to say, Themistocles saying.
Mallem virum sine pecunia, quam pecunia^ viro i^digere, that was his choice.

Yet some philosophers were of opinion like the Papists; that men might have as
many women as they would, for multiplication

So Cato did by his wife Martia, Cato.
and Socrates by his wife Zantippa, change them for others, for that they were
barrein.

It was not only the opinion of Chrysippus (whose writings were full of
Oracles) but also of Socrates and Plato, Socrates.
and other which maintain Poligamia: but the papists will not allow their
Priests Monogamia, but as many Concubines and as many bastards as they list.

Phigius and Eccius, Andr. Frisc. lib. 4. de Eccles.
two famous Papists, left written in their books behind them, that Minus
peccat Sacerdos s^ortando, quam vxorem ducendo.

But when Pope Gregory had found in one of his Fishing-ponds 6000 heads of
Infants by his servants, Sigeb. in Chron.
he was forced (with shame) to say with Paul, That it was better to marry,
than to burn.

And when one of the Popes servants said, That it was not so rich a draught, as
the poor Milessian Fishers found at Miletum, where they took Mensem aur^am,
which was not fit for any of the Sages of Greece, but only for Apollo. Yea,
(says his fellow softly to him) this draught is as fit for the Pope, as the
other draught was for Apollo.

How many such draughts were drawn in the time of Papissa a woman of Miguntia,
Herotimus King of Arabia had 600 Bastards.
Gilberta, and not Ioanna an English woman (as Heidfield says) which bare at
one birth more than the Countess of Flanders, who had 365 at one birth; and
more than Herotimus King of Arabia, who had 600 bastards by co^cubines; but
Gilberta and her Successors so exceeded, that all the world is much trobled
with her bastards.

In Rome God Anubis fell in love with Saturninus wife the only fair woman of
Rome, The marriage of God Anubis.
her husband, her parents, her kinsmen, and friends brought her to the temple
of Anubis, where the Feast Lectesternium was prepared, where after the Feast,
they left Saturninus wife with God Anubis all night, where De: Mundus a young
Roman Knight was Deputy by means of the priests, for 2000 Drachmeis.

Heidf. de Diuit. cap. 23.

The marriage of M. Antonius, with Minerua.


Marcus Antonius coming from Rome to Athens, in all kind of habites and
ceremonies with Thyrsus in his hand, like Dionisius; he was so reverenced of
the Athenians, that they offered him their Goddess Minerua in marriage with
1000 talents for her dowry, which was well accepted of the Roman; so that the
God Anubis must have a woman, and the Goddess Minerua must have a man.

The brood of these great marriages were greatly multiplied in all Countries by
marriages of these two great houses, The Plebeans married with the Patricians.
Saturninus wife with God Anubis, and Minerua with M. Antonius; for before that
in Rome mean Families were matched with the Patricians in marriage, the
Senators and Consuls had the whole government over the Romans; but being
strengthened by marriage with the patricians, not only the election of the
Tribunes themselves, but of all the Magistrates of Rome, and the whole
government of the Romans, was Per plebem, and Tribunum plebis.

It was ever seen in all common wealths, that the vulgar people by being
Magistrates, or being in commission, by great countenance, by marriage, by
bearing and backing them in their Religion, be that Immanis bellua, the very
Monster among Nations.

A Thistle in Libanon sent to a Cedar tree in Libanon, saying, Paralip. 25
Give thy daughter to my Son in marriage; and there came a wild beast from
Libanon, and troad down under foot the Thistle, with a watchword given by the
Prophet to Amasias King of Judah, for the worshipping of the Gods of Edom, Deos
albatos filiorum Seir.

Unequal marriage specially in Religion, is like an Ox and an Ass to draw
under one Yoke.

This was the first cause of sedition at Rome, The first sedition of Rome.
in monte Ianiculo, between the Patricians and the Commons, Ob dignitatem
natalium.

Hence grew many seditions, and so many, that it was the overthrow of Rome.

For as Philip of Macedon made sale of Greece by discord of Grecians, for such
was the mutual discord of all the Cities of Greece, that King Philip, and his
son after him, became Ruler of all Greece.

So in Rome for the indignation of marriage of the Commons with the Patricians,
there grew co^tentions.

And therefore old Osyris King of Egypt, had the likeness of a man's eye in the
upper end of his Diadem, to put the King in remembrance carefully to see to
such Monsters cum oculo animi.

This must be be set upon the Diadem of a Christian King, The old Scepters in
Egypt, and in Ethiop.
a far surer Scepter, than the Scepters of Babylon with their Lions and
Eagles; than the Sceptors of Egypt with their Dragons and Serpents; than the
Diadem of the Persians, the likeness of the Sun, the Image of fire upon the
horse of Mars. Diod. 2. The ancient Scepters of Persia.


Yet had the old Persians their Scepters carried before them in forma palae,
like a spade.

And the old Egiptians, and the Ethiopians had Scepters Informa aratri, made
like a plough.

Some weigh not for spades, but for spoils; some weigh not for the plough,
Abimelechs plough. Iud. 9.
unless it be the plough of Abimelech, to sow salt for corn* to make barren,
and to destroy the Country; or the plough of Catelin, to sow the seed of
sedition, and to reap the fruit of Tribulation; to sow wind and tempest, and
to reap fire and brimstone.

Many sought Pompeis head to please Caesar: Many sought Pyrhus head to please
Antigonus: and too many seeks the heads of Kings and Princes, to please that
Antichrist of Rome.

Cyrses and Calypso that altered the shape and form of men unto Bears,
Woolues, Asses, and Apes, could make no stranger metamorphosis of men, than men
make of themselves.

And yet Pliny writes, Plin. lib. 18 cap. 43.
that the Ass loves so her young Fool, that she neither fears water nor fire,
nor any terror to save her young one in any danger, for Suos impencissime amat
foetus.

There be a number of christened Asses in the world, that esteem not so their
parents, their children, nor their Country, as these asses do.

These rather are like to Apes, who ever lickes and kisses, with such toys and
plays, and with such gestures, as are fit for Apes.

Julius Caesar seeing certain men of Apulia in Rome, carrying Apes upon their
arms playing, asked the men, had they no women in Apulia to get children to
play withal. Jesuits the Popes Apes. The Pope, the Devils Ape.


These Jesuits and Seminaries be the Popes Apes, kissing his foot, and licking
his hands: for as these Jesuits are the Popes Apes, so the Pope is the Devils
Ape, and the Devil would willingly be Gods Ape.

Sectio. 7.
THey that found Romulus staff among the scinders of the Capitol unburned,
Romulus staff.
thought themselves happy; but it was the Roman Scepter, not fit for them:
but for the Consuls, which succeeded the Kings of Rome.

They that brought to David Saul's Crown, Saules Crown. 2. Reg. 1. 2. Reg. 4.
thought they had reapt well. They that killed Isbosheth upon his bed, thought
they had likewise reapt well, but their rewards were alike.

The Fishermen of Miletum, thought they had treasure during life without any
more fishing, The golden table.
when they had drawn in their net, Auream mensam, a rich golden Table; but it
was told them, that it was fit for Apollo, and not for Fisher men.

And therefore a philosopher being asked why were philosophers poor? He
answered, for telling truth and suffering injuries.

And being again asked why were fools rich? For that (said he) they can
dissemble and flatter.

Macrob. in Satur.
Cicero was taunted by Liberius Mimus, being by Caesar elected a Senator,
sought a place to sit by Cicero in the Senate house, you should sit by me, but
that we sit too straight (said Cicero) together. Laberius answered, You cannot
sit too straight that has two seats to sit on, the one with Caesar, the other
with Pompey, taunting Cicero for his dissimulation and flattery, to both
Caesar and Pompey: for Cicero loved Pompey, and feared Caesar.

Yet Plato allowed, that dissimulation in Themistocles, to promise King Xerxes
to betray Greece, Plut. in Themist.
to that effect to save Greece, and to have Xerxes out of Greece.

Allowed also that dissimulation in Alcibiades to Agis the King of Sparta, to
betray Athens to save Athens.

But dissemblers in their Country against their Country, are most odious, and
yet live and enjoy the benefits of their Country.

Cic. lib. 3. de offic.
Ulysses which dissemled madness in joining an Ox and an Ass under one
yoke, and sowed salt for corn in his ground, lest he should go out of his
Country.

Achilles which dissembled to be a woman, and in a woman's apparel; left also
he should go out of Greece: the one was the only wise man of Greece, and the
other the most valiant man of Greece: yet that wise man had rather be accounted
a fool, and that valiant man had rather be accounted a coward, before they
should go out of Greece, their Country was so sweet unto them.

In truth flattering and feining, are good trades in some Courts.

For Lewis the sixth, the Prince King, would have his son that succeeded him,
to learn no more latin, but this sentence, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit
viuere.

But it was not so in Augustus Court, Sen. lib. 6. de benef. ca. 30
for he much lamented the death of his friend Varus, and being very sad, was
asked the cause of his sadness; because (said Augustus) I have none in my
Court to tell me the truth, but I must go to poor Philosophers and
Preachers, to seek and find out truth.

And some say, Philosophers Priests, and Preachers.
that Philosophers can flatter and dissemble; yea Priests and Preachers; and if
Philosophers cannot dissemble, these ambitious masters will learn fowls of
the air of Hanno to say, Deus est Hanno, or else in Greek with Psaphos to
say, (...).

These dissemblers and Hypocrites will not only learn Latin and Greek, and
all kind of tongues, but all gestures, manners and conditions of men: and
especially in Courts of Kings and Princes, where such flattery and
dissimulations are practiced, that sooner may Hannibal, as Augustus Caesar
often said, make a passage through the hard rocks of the Alps, to come to
Italy, then truth in Court, to come to Kings and Princes ears.

Heidfield de honor and in famia. ca. 24
That good Emperor Alexander Seuerus would also often say, veritas minime
peruia regum auribus. Diogenes, when he saw mise creeping for some crumbs to his
table, would say to his friends, behold: Et suos habet parasitus Diogenes,
as well as princes have their parasites.

These creeping flatterers like Diogenes mise, attend in every corner for some
crumbs, bending and kneeling at the beck of ambitious and self love masters, I
would they were not better fed then Diogenes mise were: nor better satisfied
then with Heliogabalus banquet, painted on wood, on stones, on Iuorie, and upon
wax.

But if a man try these dissemblers, as Alcibiades did, these who always
flattered him most, and prove them as Alcibiades did, who told in great secret,
and fained a great mischaunce, Polien lib. 1. stratagem.
that he had killed a man, and hid him in his house, and knew not what to do:
requested their helps and council. All his flatterers forsook him, saving
one Callias, a true and faithful friend of Alcibiades, of whom Alcibiades
would say, Callias instar omnium.

Notwithstanding, this Alcibiades could flatter his uncle Pericles, yet being a
young youth, asked his uncle Pericles why he sighed so often, and seemed so
sad? because said Pericles I must yield an account to the Athenians for much
money which I received, to build up a porch to Mineruaes Temple.

Rather said Alcibiades, Alcibiades council to Pericles.
muse how you may not give an account, and be merry, and make much of your
self.

Too few like Pericles, that think how much they are indebted to God, to build
his Church, and to maintain his Service: and too many like Alcibiades,
careless of the Church: though they live by the Church, and have honor and
dignity from the Church.

But let the Church be tossed on surging waves of seas, that cannot be removed:
yet she stands sure and certain upon a rock: Palinures.
though many Palinures were drowned and lay dead upon the sands, that had no
great care, neither to govern, nor to be governed by the Church, and yet they
will sit in Moses chair.

Saul could dissemble with David; The Church full of hypocrites.
and Absalon with the people of Israel; and the latter Jews were such
dissemblers and hypocrites, that Christ called the Scribes and the Pharisees,
hidden hypocrites, and false dissemblers* the Church were ever full of such
hypocrites.

A Roman Gentleman told Alexader Seuerus, that he was agreeued to see his
Court so pestered with dissemblers and hypocrites, and said, I will find out a
place to dwell, where no hypocrites be: the Emperor said, where will thou go
where no dissemblers be? thou must go beyond the Sauromates, and the frosen
seas, and yet when thou come thither, thou shall find hypocrites and
dissemblers.

And though Achilles in Homer exclaimeth out against such dissemblers, and say,
that he hates them worse the^ hell it self, that have two tongues, the one in
their mouth, Iliad. 9.
the other in their hearts: Qui aliud sentiunt, aliud loquuntur.

This was sometime a natural property to the Thracians to be liars and
dissemblers, and so to be taught with their hypocrisy and dissimulations,
that it grew to a proverb, Thrasica fides, so it was said of the Africans,
punica fides, and of the Grecians most of all spoken Nunqnam ista natio, says
Cicero coluit fidem, People of no trust, of no faith, that it grew to a very
scoff to the Grecians, Greca mercarifide, to taunt their lightness and
dissimulations.

Cic. ad. Attic. hist. lib. 1.
Of late we robde Thracians, Affricans, and Grecians of their properties, that
now Cicero may speak of us as he spoke of the^, Quos fugiamus, ignoramus;
quibus credamus, nescimus; and therefore it is good to follow Epicharmus
counsel, Sis prudens, memento diffidere: since we dare not trust our friends,
our kinsmen, nor our countrymen.

This dangerous time seems to be that of which the Prophet says, that the
father shall be against the son, and the son against the father: the brother
against the brother; but though this prophecy was performed in other kingdoms
of long time past: yet we ought to doubt and fear some justice at gods hand
for our sin, and only for our hypocrisy, dissimulations and flattery: the
three greatest Monsters upon the earth.

Lewis the tenth was wont to brag of his own kingdom of France, that it was
a kingdom that far exceded al other kingdoms, wanting but one thing. And being
requested to know what that was, he answered Truth.

And therefore Osymantes had his picture painted with his eyes shut, with a
tablet of gold about, hanging about his neck, with this word written
thereupon: ( veritas) And he willed that the Kings of Egypt his successors, to
wear that Tablet in memory of him.

So did Antigonus, Plut. in Apoph.
doubting much to hear truth among flattering Courtiers went with his Nobles
to hunting, from whom the King secretly departed, changed his garments; and
wandered like a stranger among countrymen, and lodged in a mean house: and
asked as an unknown man what was spoken of the King? King Antigonus went out
of his Court to hear Truth.
Of whom he heard, Omnia quae fecerat mala.

The next morning the King being sought for, and found, they brought such
princely garments as were fit for a King. Give said Antigonus these garments,
to him of whom, Nisi hac nocte verum de me nunquam audiui.

Torquin the proud, after he was put out of his kingdom, would say, that he
never knew his friends while he was King in Rome.

Ma. Antonius, surnamed the Philosopher, was most careful of his good name and
fame, willing the truth to be known by strangers report, and not by such
Courtiers which Constantine the Emperor calls Sorices Palatij, the rats of the
Court; or as the Philosopher terms them, vermes opum. Many good Kings used the
like means to avoid the one, and to seek out the other.

For Courts of Kings and Princes cannot be without limping and halting. In
Meroe a Kingdom of India, if the Kings were lame, or halt, or in any part of
their bodies, his Courtiers by the law in Meroe should be also lame, and halt
as the Kings did.

It is histored that in Macedonia in the time of Philip, and in Neapolis, in
the time of Ferdinandus, for that these two Kings held their necks a little on
the left side though it was a natural defect in others, yet in Princes
followed and imitated: and yet no longer then these Princes lived.

In the next King, it is clean altered, for in the time of Alexander the
great, for that he had a bush of hair standing up on his forehead, the
Courtiers in Macedonia left to hold their heads awry, after Philip the father,
and followed the son Alexander: every Courtier imitating the time with great
care and travail to make their hairs stand up upon their foreheads like
Alexander, and to be called Opisthocomae, as Alexander, Hector, and Pompei the
great were noted to have been.

Eusebius. li. 1. ca. 11. de vita Constant.
The Emperor Constantine practiced a policy to find out sound Christians, and
faithful servants in his Court, he fained a decree, and commanded all the
Christians to depart from his Court, and cingula Militaria deponere. The sound
and true Christians left the Emperor and his Court, and forsook their credit
and military dignity, and esteemed not his Court in respect of Christianity.

The other Christians which the Emperor found, tantum nomine, stayed behind, he
banished and revoked his decree, A worthy saying of Constantine.
and called back the other: and restored them to their former estate with
greater credit, saying, Qui suo numini fidi non sunt nec mihi. And so banished
those counterfeit Christians.

This sentence squares well with our rebellious brutes and not Britanes, The
wish of the wicked men.
who were never sound to God, faithful to their Prince, nor true to their
country: but as Caligula wished to Rome, so they wish to England: and as Haman
wished to the Jews, so they wished to the Britanes.

They wish with Midas, that whatsoever they tucht, should be gold: and
therefore they shall for hunger with Midas starve. They wish for blood, and
they shall be satisfied with blood in Britain, as King Cyrus was in Scithia,
or the Roman Consul Crassus was in Parthia.

From such people that so wished, Elias wished to die under a Juniper tree, and
among such people wished to know his friends from his foes. So King Antigonus
wished only to know his friends, for his foes he would carefully look unto:
but the wish of a perfect Christian is set down in the Lords Prayer, The wish
of the godly men.
Thy kingdom come, thy will be done, yet we are commanded to ask, to praise,
and to wish all good and godly things.

Simon wished to have Christ in his arms, and to embrace his Savior before he
died.

Saint Augustine wished to have seen Paul in his face, and also wished to have
seen Christ in his body.

Beda wished to see Christ in his eternal and glorious body in heaven, these
wishes are to be wished.

Many have Christ in their most wicked and blasphemous tongue, by all kind of
lies, swearing, and blaspheming of God.

So had Anam, Acts. 5.
and his wife Saphira before Peter that denied the truth, Et mentiri spiritui
sancto.

So had Julian Apostata, and confessed his impiety and wickedness, by throwing
out of his heart blood, saying, Liers and blasphemers
vicis^i o Galilee: and after such ungodly sort, too many throw their hearts
blood, and say, Vincisti veritas.

And what is the end of these rebellious and treacherous wishes, is it for
gold, and silver, is it for honor and dignity, is it for the whole world? O
fool said Christ, to win the whole world, and to loose thy soul.

Sen. epist. 95.
Of such fellows says Bernard, O gens auara? What is gold, but rubea terra,
red earth? What is silver, but terra allia, white earth? And yet we esteem of
that vile thing which is below, and but execrements of the earth, more then any
thing which is above the earth, even heaven.

Yea, we make much of that which the Indians, Ethiopians, Pagans, and Heathens
esteem as dirt For they use neither Gemmes, Tertul. de cultu mulierum.
nor precious stones, but only in soccis and cal^eis, and that in contempt of
it.

For with the Ethiopians, their manner was to bind their prisoners with chains
of gold, and their thieves with fetters of silver.

But the Romans would not be satisfied* before they should have all, and
notwitstanding in short time lost all.

The great Antiochus brought Hanniball to his Treasures, and showed Hanniball
his Gold, his Silver, his wealth and treasures: and asked Hanniball if that
would not please the Romans, yea said Hannibal it would please the Romans, but
not satisfy the Romans.

Rome was ever compared to Sodom and Gomorha for beastly inte^perancie,
Wesellus Groaning.
as Pope Sixtus the 4, who granted to use in the three hot months, June, July,
and August sodomitrie. Compared to Babylon, and so called for her Idolatry and
Pride: and for cruelty and greediness, compared to Turks, and to Tyrants.

If the comparison of Rome, with Sodom and Gomorrha, with Babylon, with
Turks, and Tirants will not serve, which most aptly agree with them.

I would also compare the^ to Alexanders horse, who feared not the persians
phalanges, the Camels of Asia, not the Elephants of India, and yet feared his
own shadow.

So the Romans that feared not Asia, Europe, nor Africa, yet feared their
own shadows at Rome.

A very rich man borne in Lydia, and dwelling in Phrygia, he willed his wife
to provide some great cheer for friends of his; so his wife did.

She covered all places over with gold, silver, Table, Cupbords, with all kind
of golden vessels, wherein for a while he delighted much, but being hu^gry,
called for his meat: she laid upon the table a painted dinner, and a banquet,
all manner of fowls, of fish made on stone* wood, iuorie, wax, and paimed the
gold and silver, and garnished it with rich stones.

Pithius waxed angry with his wife, Plut. de claris mulier.
and called for his meat; His wife answered: This is your meat husband, that
you feed night and day upon. I have no meat for your friends, but such as you
feed on, and with another taunt, said, That he could not live long that fed on
Midas table.

The like banquets made Heliogabalus of eight persons, 8 bald-men, 8 deaf
mien, 8 gowtie men, 8 black Ethiopians, 8 scoffers, and 8 of the fattest and
grossest.

And Heliogabalus commanded all these eights persons to bring him 1000 weight
of cobwebs, Lamp. in vita Heliog.
promising them to be well rewarded.

And being demanded what to do. He answered, Ex his colligi magnitudinem
vrbis Romae.

These gathered and brought Heliogabalus 10000 weights, to whom he made such a
banquet for these Eights, as Pytheus wife made for her husband.

Heliogabalus banquet.
Heliogabalus left these eights at their golden breakfast, and took the eight
that were burst with him, ad balneum, to bath themselves: and when these eight
had done bathing, the Emperor commanded them to go to breakfast with their
fellows, and he came himself and sat with them, and maruailed they could eat
no meat; I pray you come some other time, when your stomachs serve you, I see
you can eat no meat, and so let them go.

And yet both these Feasts were far better than the Archbishop of Mounse:
Hatto, Guil. Isengrin. in Chronol.
who in the time of great famine, fained and dissembled some alms, and
reliefes to the poor, and commanded they should be gathered together into a
great barn, under color to bestow his alms, and relieve them, and being
shut in the barn, commanded them to be all burned saying, That these poor
people were the Rats of the Country.

But this Archbishop was by Gods just judgment, devoured and eaten up with
Rats, Heidf. de animal. cap. 9.
and Mise* this Archbishop forgot the plague of Pharo by frogs, lice, and
flies: and forgot the Isle of Cyclades plagued with Rats.

Sectio. 8.
THere be certain Jews in the west parts of India, called Essa^i, which will
eat no flesh, drink no wine, nor use the company of any women.

There be also certain women in Scythia, called Amazones, which by the law of
their Country, men may not govern or dwell with them.

And yet such women did meet together in mount Quirina^ at Rome in the Court of
Heliogabalus the Emperor, who had Caenaculum Mulierum, and where nothing was
done, but by women.

And such did meet sometime in the Court of Solomon in Jerusalem, 3. Reg. 11.
where was the Court of Pharoes daughter, the Court of the Queen of the
Moabites: of the Queen of the Amonites, of Edomites, of Sydomites: and so many
Courts of Queens in Jerusalem, that there was no Court of Solomon.

These strange women did not only put Solomon king of Israel out of Israel, but
also the God of Israel, and brought their idolatrous Gods unto Israel, 7000
that bend not their kinds to Baall.
with so many Altars to Idols in Jerusalem, and Mount Oliuet, that God
rejoiced to have reserved yet in Israel 7000 that never bowed their knees to
Ball.

I would to God we might so say in England, that we had but 7000, that bend
not their knees, and knock their breasts to jmages and jdols in their closets,
who worship more the Queen of Heaven in bedchamber, than the God of heaven in
the church: and the star of Rempha, more than the star of Jacob.

Ierem 44.
And yet these women in Britane will excuse themselves, as the women of Israel
did in Egypt, that they did nothing but what they saw their husbands do. Yet
they saw Jeremy stoned to death at Taphnis, Taphnis.
for that he would not be an Idolater, and confess their beasts and serpents
to be Gods.

They also saw Esaias cut in the midst with a Saw in Jerusalem, in the
idolatrous time of Manasses.

Plin. lib. 8.
Pliny writes, that in furthest part of India breed many Monsters, and that
in Africa the Mother and the Nurse of strange Serpents: of one Serpent (among
others) I read of that which kept the River Bagrada, that much spoiled and
destroyed the Roman Army, then under Atillus Regulus the Roman General,
Regulus.
of which the Affricans were glad

But in time this Serpent was slain, and his skin sent to the Senators for a
wonder, for it was in length 120 foot. The skin of this Serpent bred so many
Serpents in Rome, that Rome filled all Europe with Serpents.

And we have found of late too many in great Britane, whose hearts were Pilosa
and Hispida (as is said before) yea double-hearted Britanes, one to Rome, the
other to Spain, but none to their own Country. Vae duplici cordi, like
Partridges of Paphlagonia.

Such Monsters are more monstrous, Monsters.
than those of which Pliny writes in the furthest part of India.

Of which some have heads like dogs that do always bark to move sedition
and mutanies; Plin. lib. 6. cap. 30.
some with long ears to their feet; such can hear from Spain, and from
Rome, to Britane.

There be some other Monsters, whose feet are so broad, that when they lie upon
their backs, the shadow of their feet does not only cover themselves from the
rain, heat, or tempest, but also cover them that be in their company.

Too many such Monsters are to be found every where. And yet (says the same
Author) that there is one kind of Monster more strange in India, India.
which have no heads, but a great huge eye in the midst of their breasts, who
can see further than Strabo Lincius that saw the ships of Carthage, from
Lelibium in Cicilia. But these can see from the north to the south, and from
the south, to the north.

But we must not look for fire from heaven, as Elias had in mount Carmell upon
King Achabs captains; 4. Reg. 1.
neither must we look for fiery Charriots, and fiery armed men, 4. Reg. 6.
as Elizeus had at Dothan against King Benhadad; Elizeus. Daniel.
But we may well do as Daniel did in Babylon, to seek, and find out the
print of the feet of Baals Priests, and of their wives and children.

So we may well trace out these Traitors, and seek to find the footing of
these Jesuits and Seminaries, and being found, there is no way to help this,
but by paring their feet lesser, their ears shorter, their eyes out, and
their heads off, unless prayers help it.

These be far worse than the Iebusites, Hethites, and Cananites, which were
left in Judah, as needels to prick them, and as Goads to sting Israel.

These Serpents, these Monsters, the very brood of Satan, seek not only in
the Land of Hus to destroy Job and his children, but in the Land of great
Britane to destroy King James, his Queen, his children, and their Country.
Hinc rubent eorum vestes, sanguine Sanctorum, The brood of Satan.
as Britane, France, and Germany can testify with the blood of more tha^ 100
thousand Christians, whom they slew and burned to feed that Monster
Mino-Taurus, not of Creet, but of Rome, not with the blood of the Athenians, to
please Androgeus, but with the blood of Britanes; not with their foreign
enemies blood, but with the blood of the best learned men in Europe.

The Serpent in Paradise.
The Serpent in Paradise promised Adam, if he would eat of the Apple,
immortality. And the Serpent Satan promised our Savior Christ* all the world
(which was given him as he said) if Christ would worship him.

The Roman Serpent.
The Pope promises Kingdoms on earth, and Kingdoms in heaven; for he says,
Heaven is his, and he has the keys of Heaven delivered to him only, and whom
he binds or loses on earth, the same shall be bound or freed in heaven; and
with this Serpent for money, a man may have some place in heaven, or some
Kingdoms upon the earth.

The Heaven of Heavens is the Lords, and the Earth he gave to the children of
men. And continuance of Kingdoms and Periods of Empires are from God, and not
by Oracles and Dreams, as Heathen Princes did observe.

Astiages King of Assiria was much disquieted upon a dream, Mandanes dream.
that the Mother of Cyrus, and his daughter Mandanes saw, that she made such
an urine that over flowed all Asia. And Cyrus thought to bring Scythia unto
Persia upon his mothers dream: and his Grandfather Astiages thought to have
both Scythia, Persia, and also Cyrus life from Cyrus.

Alexander the Great, for that he dreamed that Hercules reached his hand over
the walls of Tire, Alex. lib. 3 cap. 26.
he doubted not but that he should bring India to join with Asia, Alexanders
dream.
and yet it was 7 years before these two great Captains (though Hercules was
within Tire, and Alexander without) wanne Tire.

So many dreamers are in these our days, that dream to see some hands over
Rome, some over Rhemes; Dreamers of Rome.
that have such confidence in these hands, that these seek to bring Rome,
Rhemes, and Spain together by Images, or imagination to Britane.

So superstitious people are ever light of belief, that the Greeks thought,
Plut. in These.
and the Athenians affirmed to have seen Theseus many years after his death,
to go before the Greeks, against the Barbarians.

The Romans were informed by Castor, and Pollox against the Macedonians, and
other Kingdoms of their Conquests and victories.

The Machabees saw a Horseman all in gold armed, shaking his spear against
the Syrians, Lib. 2. ca. 3
to warrant the Jews of the victory.

The Jesuits and Seminaries dream, that they have many Hercules, many
Alexanders, reaching over the Seas to them, laying siege to England all the
Queens time 45 years, and to great Britane 4 years.

I wish that these Dreamers were sold to some Ismalite, or to some Egyptian
that do nothing in great Britane, but dream; and by their dreams work
mischief.

Val. max: de miraculis.
The Image of Juno appeared to one of Camillus soldiers, and willed the Romans
to banish the Egyptian God Serapis out of Rome, and that Juno then (said she)
would come to Rome.

There be some Dreamers in England, that if they might have the God of Israel
banished out of Great Britane, they would have Images and Idols in his place.

The Image of Minerua appeared to Augustus Physician, and told him how he
should heal his Master of his sickness.

Diogenes, of all the Gods, could not think well of Esculapius Image, for that
the Physicians make gain of men's goods, and sell men's lives for money, which
the Romans most esteemed.

Some Images of Devils appear to these Firebrands of Hell, to banish heretics
and heresies (as they term it) out of great Britane.

Tho: Aquinas an Arch-papist, being sent for to come to Innocentius the third,
The brag of Innocent the third.
beholding diverse heaps of gould in the Popes gallerie, and being amazed at
the sight thereof; the Pope said to Aquinas, neither the primative Church of
Rome, neither Peter could show so much gold, when he said, Aurum and argentum
non est mihi.

Then said Aquinas, beatissime pater, the Church of Rome at this time, Aquinas
answer.
nor your Holiness can say, Surge and ambula, as Peter could.

Aquinas then should not have wondered to see so much gold in the Popes
gallerie, sithence his tribute, his pension, his revenues by merchandise, by
any kind of sale, Ignis, thura, coronae, praeces, caera and coelum, venale
Romae, as Mantuan says.

They forgot what Peter (their founder as they say) said to Simon Magus, Act.
cap. 8.
that would have bought of Peter, Simon Magus.
that which the Popes of Rome sell to others, namely the gifts of the holy
Ghost, Pereas cum pecunia tua.

They forgot also what Paul said to Elimas the sorcerer, Act. 13.
who would have persuaded Sergius Paulus from the faith of Paul, Elimas the
Sorcerer.
O thou Son of the Devil, and enemy of mankind, behold the hand of the
Lord is upon thee, and thou shall be blind for a season.

But these vents or sales of offices, of Magistrates, and of merchandise, was
ever as common in Rome, as the sale of ecclesiastical promotions, Bishoprics,
and of the Popedom it self, and being Popes, made sale of Crowns and
Kingdoms.

So Hildebrand that made himself a Pope, Hildebrand
and made Rodulphus an Emperor, to whom he sent a very rich Diadem with
this sentence written about it, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodolpho.

The pope looks for pensions of all Kings, and specially of Christian Kings,
yea, rather a tribute due unto him, per legem post liminij in great Britane.

The Turk would have claymed a pension or tribute due unto him of the
Emperors of Germany.

The Kings of Persia under color of pensions, would have their forces in many
places of Asia, but they were resisted.

And Philip of Macedon first by pension, after by policy, Plut. in Lysand.
got Greece unto Macedonia.

But it was by Paulus Ematius gotten from Macedonia to the Romans.

These be stratagemes of foreign states one against another: but this should
not be in the Bishops of Rome, Palauor. in vita Alphons.
as they say of Peter's successors: they rather should do as Alphonsus King of
Arragon, being asked what he left to himself, saying, that he gave all his
wealth to his learned poor friends and to such godly men? Even that which I
gave (said Alphonsus) I leave to my self in store.

Clemens the 5 a little before he died, being in a great agony, In speculo.
Pontif.
said to his friends, Now I shall know that, of which I long doubted; whether
there were another life after this.

I would rather prefer Adrian the heathen Emperor before these two Christian
Popes, El. Spart.
who in the like ecstasy spoke to his soul trembling, Tremula and vagula quae
nunc abibis in loca? Now poor soul whether will thou go? we are not to
wonder at Adrian the Emperor so to say and do, when Pope Clemens so doubted,
and where his soul should go.

Scen. lib. 3. de gest. Alphons.
And Zisca Imperator Hussitarum, being moved of his soldiers how he would be
buried, commanded them to flay and take his skin off him being dead, and to
give his body to wild beasts, and to make of his skin a military drum,
that his enemies that feared his sight alive, might fear the sound of his
skin being dead.

This Emperors burial was much like to resolute Pope Siluester, Polyd. lib. 5
de rerum invent.
who sought by oracles of diverse, how long he should live? was answered, Diu,
si cauer et Jerusalem (if he kept from Jerusalem in Judah) yet he happened to
say a Mass upon an Altar called Jerusalem, confessed his fault, and
commanded his body to be drawn by two horses, and where the horses stayed,
there to be buried.

Many happen to die by chance, whose cause is doubtful, Hugo de anim. clas.
unknown, and hidden; many die by infirmities, whose causes are apparent; and
many by age, whose causes are present, so does an old writer set down; but
some die neither by chance, nor by infirmities, nor by age, but die for want
of grace to live longer, that now if Theophrastus had lived, he would not have
accused nature, for the short time of a man's life, for that he said, Men died
when men began to be wise, Theophrastus.
cum incipimus sapere, morimur: but now Theophrastus would have said, Men die
before they begin to live well.

These be like Physicians, who after they kill many in many Countries, yet are
they free, and at their liberty to go every where without punishment. These
may laugh and sing at burials for their gains, when others weep and mourn
for their losses.

I remember a history in Pliny, Plin. lib 28 cap. 3.
that an Ambassador came from Cypris to Rome, his name was Exagon, who among
other monuments, he saw the Consuls bring certain vessels full of Serpents:
Exagon.
Exagon thinking that the Romans thought him to be fearful, willed the
Consuls to throw him among those Serpents, which so lickt and winded round
about this Exagon, that he came laughing from the Serpents to the Consuls.

This was a great terror to the Romans, and yet was a stratageme, that
Haniball taught the Romans, and to all the Kings of Asia against the Romans.

But the Romans like the Cappadocian, who after the Viper bit him, A
Cappadocian.
they looked as they did at Paul for the like, when the Cappadocian would die,
but the Cappadocian lived, and the Viper died; such haps sometime happen.

But as I said of Roman Marcellus, and Fabius: so likewise I pray unto God,
that there be not many such Exagons in great Britane, that these Serpents and
Vipers may lick and wind about them, to the destruction of their Country.

These be not like Lazarus dogs that licked their Masters soars for love;
Lazarus dogs.
but like Acteons dogs that devoured their Master.

Like Ioab that killed Abner embracing him in his arms.

And like Judas the Traitor, that kissed his Master, and straight betrayed him.
There were never so many dumb dogs, as now be biting, and not barking.

These be Lemures nocturni, and always conversant with us in our houses, like
Lares domestici, that can and may deceive us, because we trust them, are now
become Tortuosi Serpents, which came after long lurking in their secret
Labyrinths, Per mill Maeandros, to plague their Country.

But yet now they are much frighted with Jeroboam, who doubting least the
Kingdom of Israel should return to the house of David, by means of the
multitude of people which went to offer sacrifice at Jerusalem, builded Rama^,
and other strong holds, and made two golden Calves to entice Israel to
Idolatry.

These Jesuits and Seminaries have horns ready made, and they promise their
Master the Pope, as Zedechia did to Achab victory, and say, Hijs ventilabis
Britanniam donec deleas eam. And if that fail, Balacke shall cause Balaam for
reward, to curse Britane with Books and Bells.

So did Golias curse David in the name of his Gods. 1. Reg. 17.


The Bishop of Rome did use to baptize, and name Bells, Heidfield. de tempore.
and anoint the same; by the sound of which Bells, they conjure Devils from
their houses, terrify their enemies, purify the air, curse and excommunicate
whom they list.

Raimerus the 5 King of Arragon published, that he would make such a great
Bell, that all Spain should hear the sound of it.

Some of his noblemen jesting and scoffing at this Bell, lest it should be
like the cursing Bell of Rome, despised the same speech. But they were
apprehended and commanded by Raimerus to be put to the sword, saying, Nescit
vulpecula cum quo laudat.

The like punishment had many that spoke against the Bells and Bulls of Rome.

Surely we shall never be able to end this quarrel, or make a law, as Elias
did with Achabs Prophets, and as Daniel did with Nabuchadnezars priests, and so
execute the law according to their composition, which was effected by the
commandment of these two great idolatrous Kings, the one at the brook Kyson,
the other at Babylon.

Illustrissimo principi Christiano regi Daciae, etc. Ludouici Lloid gratulatio.
QVis potest tanta (illustrissime Princeps) hodierno die co^ticere gaudia, aut
hos halcyoneos poterit silere dies, in quibus rex Daciae relicto regni
scaeptro, ac regijs insignijs depositis, quasi vna inter duos reges diuisa
fuisset anima, pluris aestimans de suo dimidio in Britania, quam de roto in
Dacia. O quantus amor! qui nec in coelo vinci, nec in terra obliuisci, nec vllo
vnquam fortunae fulmine subuerti potest, de cuius fama, fama mentiri veretur.

Quiescat Maro suu^laudare Aeneam, sileat Homerus de suo magno Achille,
erubescat Graecia de suo Vlisse, qui insaniam dissimulauit, ne ex Ithaca and de
Penelope vxore dissederet in Ilion. At Christianus rex Daciae, nec matter, nec
regina, nec regnum potuit a magna detinere Britania, a rege, a regina sorore, a
principe, and a caeteris regijs liberis, quasi artibus and neruis huius
imperij, vbi rex Daciae tanquam sydus aquilonis coronatum hoc coelum nostru^
corruscans, multo magis potest laetari de regia progenia sua in Britania, quam
Philippus de Heraclea stirpe in Macedonia, quae in Alexandro desinit, quam
Caesar Augustus, qui multum de gente Iulia iactauit quae in Nerone extincta
fuit, itanunc Romani dicant fuimus Tr^es, ita nunc dicant Macedones fuimus
Heraclides.

At magnae Britania ita sicut aquila renouatur aetas, nunquam enim mayor, nec
tam magna, magna Britania fuit, sub Bruto primo, quam hodterno die sub Bruto
secundo nostro Iacobo, vt in cunis adhuc vagientes de cunis clamitant iubilate
Britani.

O quanta nostri in nos numinis beneficentia, si nostri numinis no^
obliuiscamur, aut de nostra ingratitudine in Dacia^ obruamur, quae si ta^ta
potest muta Angerona silere, ligna and lapides loquentur. Cum nec Syracusa, cu^
suis Comeatibus ad cladem Thrasimeni Romany, nec Tyrus cum Caedris Libani
Hierosolyme paratior, quam Dacia in nostram Angliam.

Quanto magis hodierno die, qui vt Masinissa vnum ait esse in terris populu^
Romanum, and in illo vno populo vnu^ esse Scipionem, cui animum and animam
deuouebat, ita rex Daciae vnam ait esse in terris gentem Britaniam, and in illa
vna gente vnum esse Iacobum, cui nec Hira cum suis Sydonijs paratior fuit
Salomoni, nec Masinissa cum suis numidicis magis beneuolus suo Scipioni, quam
rex Daciae cum suis Dacis regi Iacobo. Sit par noster amor, si par potest esse
cum Dacis, non cum argenteis gladijs Philippi, nec cum aureis Artaxerxis
sagittarijs, sed cum Pythagoreis armis vna anima ac animo in eadem lance
trutinari, sic amor amore compensatur. O amor! quem nec ensis Alexandri
dissecare, nec delphicus gladius enodare poterit.

Quid opus est inire foedus cum vestibus sanguine imbutis vt Armenij, aut cum
Lydis and Medis ex humeris and brachijs sanguine^ inuicem propinare, cum nostra
foedera ex cruore cordiu^ confirmata, and ex visceribus pare^tum sint
consecrata, hoc tam validu^ naturae vinculum, vt citius duos soles in coelo
concordes esse videris, qua^ duos hos reges in terra discordes inueneris, ita
fatu^ voluit, ita natura annu it, ita virtus praesagit, ita Deus ipse esse
statuit: Hinc publica nostra Scaenopegia digna coronis tegi: Hinc per petuus
Britanorum triumphus, qui faecile Caesaris contemnat triumphos: Hinc Britani
cum Dacis, vt Romani olim cum Sabinis sua sacra semper Consualia decantabunt.

FINIS.

