WITS MISERY, and the Worlds Madness: Discovering the Devils Incarnat of
this Age.

LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip, and are to be sold by Cutbert Burby, at his
shop by the Roiall-Exchange. 1596.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful brothers, Nicholas Hare of Stow Bardolfe Esquire and
Recorder of Lyn, Hugh Hare Esquire, Bencher of the inward Temple, and John Hare
Esquire, Clarke of her Majesty's Court of Wards, Tho. Lodge Gentleman, wishes
health, wealth, and heaven.
RIght Worshipful, understanding how like Scilirus the Scythians faggot you are
all so tied together with the brotherly bond of amity, that no division or
dissension can depart you; In memory of your rare and united loves (the like
whereof this barren age scarsely affords any) and in regard you are three
ornaments in this Honorable City, whereof I esteem my self a member: To
consecrate your virtues with my fame, I have boldly made you the pa^rons of
this my work, which both becomes your grauities to read, and your devotions
to think upon. Accept (I most humbly entreat you) this deserving kindness
from a gentleman, whose labors and courtesies being well construed, shall
embolden him hereafter to adventure on far greater. Till when, I most humbly
commend me: Written in have, from my house at Low-Laiton, this 5. of November.
1596.

Your Worships in all kindness, T. L.

To the Reader of either sort.
REaders whatsoever (courteous I desire it, if otherwise I care not) I present
you as subtle vintners are wont, with my quart at the end of a large
reckoning, wherein though I strive to delight your taste, you must hold your
self assured to pay for your pleasures; for books crave labor, and labor
deserves money, pay therefore the Printer for his pains, and if you meet not
Carpes in your dish, you may hap have Gogins if you angle: You run sweating to
a play though there want a spirit of wit, I mean meriment in it, then stick
not to give freely for this, for my Commedie is pleasure, the world is my sta^e
and stage, and mine actors so well trained, that without a fool and a Devil I
pass nothing, (and that's no small credit in a country town where hornd beasts
yield most pleasure and profit) Kind heart shall not show you so many teeth
tipped with silver in his Sunday hat, as I Devils incarnate in clokes of the new
fashion, But what Devils say you? (for if Plato lie not, they are in the air
like Atomi in sole, mothes in the son.) Faith, earthly Devils in humane
habits, whereof some sit on your pillows when you sleep, wait on your tasters
when you drink, dress ladies heads when they attire them, perfume courteours
when they trim them, and become Panders if you hire them: and if you know them
not rightly, they may hap to leave their horns behind them among some of you.
Buy therefore this Crystal, and you shall see them in their common appearance;
and read these exorcismes advisedly, and you may be sure to conjure them
without crossings: but if any man long for a familiar for false dice, a spirit
to tell fortunes, a charm to heal diseased, this only book can best fit him,
let him but buy it, read it, and remember it, and if he be not well instructed
when he has ended it, he shall be a Devil himself on my conscience without
ending. Farewell and thank him that has studied thee so much profit; if thou
do not I pardon thee because thou do as the world teaches thee. Farewell.

Thine in charity and love: T. L.

THE DEVILS INCARnate of this age.
LOoking lately into the customs of these times, and coniecturing men's inward
affections by their outward actions; I gather with Jerome, that this world is
the house of confusion, and that the old Proverb in these days has greatest
probability and truth, that Homo est homini doemon, Man unto man is a devil.
For who considers wis^ly what he sees, and compares that which should be,
with that which is; may rightly say, that the Epicure conceited not so many
Imaginary worlds, as this world contains Incarnate devils. Incarnate devils,
quoth you? why there are none such: then are there no men, say I, that delight
to be vicious; and that true sentence is frustrate, Totus mundus in maligno
positus est, The whole world is set on mischief. Come, come, let us take the
painting from this foul face, pull off the cover from this cup of poison, rip
up the covert of this bed of serpents, and we shall discover that palpably,
which has long time been hidden cunningly: How? say you: Mary thus if you
please: Compare things past, and you shall conceit harms present.

When that old serpent the devil (who with his tail, drew Apoc. 12.
unto him the third part of the stars, and with his seven heads and ten
horns, combated with Michael and his Angels) was overcome: knowing (like a
wily fox as he is) that his power was limited by a greater, and himself
restrained by the mighty: yet willing to become Gods Ape (whom in envy he
could not overcome) he sent out seven devils to draw the world to capital
sin, as God had appointed seven capital Angels (who continually minister
before him) to infuse virtues into men, and reduce souls to his service. And
as the seven good are Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, Ariel, Euchudiel, Barchiel,
and Salthiel: So of Satan's ministers, Leuiathan is the first, that tempts
with Pride; Mammon the second, that attempteth by Avarice; Asmodeus the third,
that seduceth by Lechery: Beelzebub the fourth, that inciteth to Envy:
Baalberith the fist, that provoke to Ire: Beelphogor the sixth, that moves
Gluttony: Astaroth the seventh, that induces Sloth and Iolenes.

These seven capital sins sent out into the world, wanted no allurements to
bewitch the eye; no oratory, to seduce the ear; no subtilty, to affect the
senses: so that finally, seazing on the hearts of men, and wedded to their
thoughts, they have brought forth many and pernicious children, to the
general mischief of all nature. Some like Centaures, begotten of clouds, (as
Ambition:) some like Serpents, nourished in corrupt dunghils, (as Sensuality:)
some like vapors, raised up to be consumed, (as Flattery.) Generally all so
dangerous, that as rust deuonreth the iron, and the moth the garment, so do
these sins our souls.

The fearful race of Leuiathan, with the generation of his Incarnate breed.
LEuiathan the eldest, after that (in the former ages and infancy of the
world) he had perverted Nembrod, brought Nious to confusion, begun tyranny in
the first, and monarchy in the next; when in the kingdoms of the East he had
left no regal seat unstained with blood; and in the West, the true faith
affronted by many herefies: at last waxing old (and more fruitful and subtle
in doing mischief) he raised up these contentious spirits to pervert our
world (which retaining now a days and that very scarsely the only memory of
the temperance of their forefathers, are wholly diuerted and turned from the
mean, and accustomed for the most part in the extremes of all virtue and
godliness.) His first son is Vainglory, who seeing his father waxen old in
complotting villainies, broken by fatal contentions, spent by many poisons, and
impouer^hed by meere-excesse, has preferred him to the mastership of an
hospital, where he now teaches new paintings, to cover ages wrinkles;
strange policies, to supplant zealous proceedings; and subtle heresies, to
infect the hearts of the simple. This lusty yonker (taught to play the
Protheus by his old Grandsire the devil) appears in diverse shapes to men,
applying himself to all natures and humors. To Eve he appeared (...). 16.
like a Serpent, Et eritis sicut d^, And you shall be as gods, said he: but in
this world he is Incarnate, meeting gentlemen commonly at their ordinaries,
scholars in their schools, handicrafts men in their shops, soldiers in their
exploits, shrouding (...) (...). 1.
himself always in the shadow of virtue, whereas in truth he is but the
effect of vice: he is backed with Boasting his familiar brother; grounded in
Discord, a branch of his nature; attended by Inobedience, the fruit of
presumpti^. In chief places he appears not but in the coat of Singularity,
reioicing vainly in those stratagemes, which at last are determined in his own
ruin: witness Alcibiades, who (as Plutarch reports) nourished in his vain
felicities, perished unhappily by inconsideration and incontinencie. Of late
days knowing that his grandfather determines to keep graund Christmasses in
hell, he has insinuated himself into the city in these kind of furnitures and
apparitions, to provide him store of fuel to furnish Satan's house of
Distress, and common place of Confusion. In Powls he walks like a gallant
Courtier, where, if he meet some rich chuffes worth the gulling, at every word
he speaks, he makes a mouse of an elephant, he tells them of wonders done
in Spain by his ancestors: where, if the matter were well examined, his father
was but Swabber in the ship where Civil Oranges were the best merchandise:
draw him into the line of history, you shall hear as many lies at a breath, as
would breed scruple in a good conscience for an age: talk with him of travels,
ware thirty thousand crowns in eggeshels at a Venetian banquet: if any worthy
exploit, rare stratageme, plausible policy, has ever past his hearing, he
makes it his own by an oath: nay, to speak the whole pith of his
commendations, truths are as rare in his mouth, as adulteries in Sparta. Touch
me his hat, it was given him by Henry the second of France, when he kissed the
Reintgraues wife at his going into Almaine: commend the fashion of his beard,
he tells you it is the work of a Turkish barber: his band was a prize gotten
in Transiluania; where the truth is, he bought it in the Exchange for his money:
Charles the Emperor gave his cloak: his sword was Mountdragons, all that he
has if you believe him, are but gifts in reward of his virtue: where (poor
ass as he is) were he examined in his own nature, his courage is boasting,
his learning ignorance, his ability weakness, and his end beggary: yet is his
smooth tongue a fit bait to catch Gudgeons; and such as sail by the wind of
his good fortune, become Camelions like Alcibiades, feeding on the vanity of
his tongue with the foolish credulity of their ears. Sometime like a Merchant
he haunteth the Exchange; there iets he in the dispo^ls of a Brokers shop,
grave in looks, courtly in behavior, magnificent to the simple sort, affable
to the wiser, now enquiring of news from Tripoly, straight boasting of his
commodities from Ozante, filling all men's ears with so great opinion of his
wealth, that every one holds him happy that trust him, till in the end, hoth
he and they, prove bankrupts. In his hood and habit he will prove Ramus, to
be a deeper Philosopher then Aristotle, and presume to read the Mathematiques
to the studious, when he knows not what either Axis, Equator, or Circulus is:
draw him to Geometry, he will protest that Dodochedron is not a figure of
twelve angles: urge him in Music, he will swear to it, that he is A per s^ in
it, where he is skillesse in Proportion, ignorant in Discord, negligent in
Time, unapt for Harmony, being both in soul and body a mere adversary to all
Science. For he that delights to challenge all things to himself, defraudeth
his reason of Light, and his mind of Judgment. Beware of this Devil friends,
for if you make him a soldier, you shall find a false heart, or howsoever you
think him, a very idiot. A Father speaking of him, says, Et seipsum perdit,
and alium i^sicit, He loses himself, and infecteth others. Those only that
have calculated his nativity, say this of him, that if ever he be attached by
good counsel, he will hang himself: or if he be crossed in his opinion, kill
himself in despair, that all the wiser sort may have cause to laugh at him.

The next son Leuiathan presents, is Ambition, catching at nothing but
stars, climing for nothing but crowns. This gallant Devil moving at the
first (before his Incarnation) a mutiny in heaven among the Angels, has now
assumed a body to raise tumults on the earth, and break sacrum societatis
vinculum, the sacred bond of society. In former times it was he only that
perverted laws, neglected affinity, invented conspiracy, circumuented
authority, giving those pens occasion to report his exceeding tragedies, who
were resolved to ground their eternity on the happy peace earnestly affected
among all civil policies. It was Ambition at first that of Deioces a just
Judge, made an unjust Mede, and a tyrant. It was he that brought Tarquinius in
hate amongst the Romans: it was he that corrupted Nero, seduced* Chabades of
Persia, incensed Tiberius and Maximinus, provoked Policrates to assault the
Samians: and not content to work these troubles on the Continent; Sicilie
stands amazed at the murders contrived by him, and the waves were an
ins^fficient wall for the Isles of the midland sea, to keep out adulteries,
murders, and ambitions. Phalaris and Agathocles groan under his burdens: and
Greede, (...) yet in memory, that he alone made Athanaeus murder his son,
and Ajax through envy and emulation assault his friends: neither has his
sinister influence had working only in men's hearts, but it in^amed women also,
as Semiramis; Athalia, Agrippina in Neros time, Brunechild in France: so that
whosoever reads the ancient and modern Chronicles, shall scarsely find any
memorable act, except it be either grounded, seconded, c^tinued, or ended in
Ambition. But since the object of the sense is a help to the memory, I will
show him particularly in his right coat, discover him by his due circumstances,
so that whosoever considerately weyeth how I describe him, shall be able to
know him if he meets him. If he arise from obscurity, (as Changuis a smith,
who as Lewis Regius witnesses became Emperor of the Tarters) or from the
potters furnace, as Agathocles:) he labors tooth and nail to be skillful
in those things which are most plausible to the greater sort, and tolerable
among the commons: his study is for ostentation, not virtues sake: his books
like Mansolus tomb, are comely without, but within nothing but rotten bones,
corrupt practices* his apparel increases with his fortune, and as the
inconstancy of worldly affairs direct him, so suteth he both fashions and
affections: and as vainly he desires all things, so miserably fears he all
men. In his study he affects singularity, and is more proud in being the
author of some new sect or heresy, then a good man is humble in the fullness
of his knowledge: come he into the eye of the world, he creeps into service
with men of good credit, in feeding whose humors (having perhaps for want of
some issue, made intrusion into some heritage) he matcheth not according to his
birth, but the increase of his fortune: and by hook or creek so st^reth in
the world, that not only he attaineth pre-eminence in the city, but some place
in Court: there begins he with gifts to win hearts, by fained humility to
avoid emulation, by offices of friendship to bind his equals, by subtle
insinuations to work his superiors, that he is both held worthy to be a
statesman, or a state himself. Grown this step higher, the authority likes
him not without the style, wherein if any cross him, look for poison in his
cup, or conspiracy in his walks, or detractions among his equals: yea, so
pestilent is his nature, that (like fire in the embers) he never shows but to
consume both himself and others: if he perceive any that by ripe judgment
c^nteiteth his courses, with him he ioineth as if he sought his only protection
under the wing of his glory: but the very truth is, he has no other intent but
this, to impe the wings of his renown for fear he fly beyond him. Will you
know his method? mary this it is: if the nature of the noble man whom he
enuieth be flexible, he brings him in fear either of his faithful servants
in his private family, or his trusty familiars that love his honor, or (if he
has but some inckling of suspect, or some mislike betwixt his Prince and him,)
he plaieth Lucian in lying, leaving no means unsought, but (as the Orator
says, Omnem moltens lapidem) either to enforce fear or move hatred: this
done, he works on the contrary side, incensing the Prince by some probable
surmises (sworn and confirmed by his flatterers and intelligencers,) till the
Noble loses either his land, authority, or place, and he attain both his
style and promotion. Then at his burial who mourns chiefest but he? yet
play he never so cun^ngly, as Cornelius Gallus says:

Certe difficile est abscondere pectoris oectus, Panditur and clauso saepius
ore furor. If he endeavor to strengthen himself, he does but avoid his own
danger, that after his own assurance, he may be more able in others
mischiefs: to those he favors, and such as further his proceedings, he is
a Patron to protect their writings, and a Judge to dissemble their escapes:
yea, if any of his train has offended the law, he writes as Agesilaus did to
Hidrieus Cares in the behalf of Nicias, Niciam si nihil peccaui^, dimitte; sin
peccauit, nostri causa dimitte: omnino autem dimitte. If Nicias (says he) has
offended nothing, dismiss him; if he be faulty, release him for my sake:
howsoever it be, set him at liberty. If (according to Machiauels doctrine) he
have a great State opposed against him to prevent his increase, with him he
plaieth as the Ape with his young ones, he kills him with coaksing him, he gives
aim to his error, shows patience if he thwart him, encourages him to
dangers, urges on his rashness, and thus like a little worm, eats through a
great tree, and by observing times, wins his triumph: of all things a likes
not to hear of Theophrastus lesson, that cum viuere incipimus, tune morimur:
when we begin to live, then we die: for of all his suspects this is the
greatest, that his actions in this world can not work felicity in another: yet
with Alexander in his life time he longs to be flattered: and though in soul
he knows himself to be a Devil; yet to the world forsooth he would be
deified. Alas, how many are shipwrackt on this rock? (as that Atheist Julian
the Apostata) how many of these sorts (as Caesar, Phocas) in their age, Caesar
Borgia (otherwise called Duke Valentinian) Corradine in Naples, Christierne of
Denmark, Ericus of Swethland, have unhappily drowned themselves in this puddle?

But leave we him as sufficiently discovered, and let us see the third Devil
incarnate, which Leuiathan has brought forth to corrupt and haunt this world:
and who is he think you? Forsooth no beggar, but a gallant of the first head,
called Bosting, who has an impure Cleon flattering at his heels (as had
Alexander) or a lascivious Martial (as Domitian.) He with Nabuchodonoser will
bost that he has builded Babylon, with the King of Ti^e vaunt that he is God,
and with the proud Pharisie accuse the Publican, and justify himself. This is
a lusty bruit amongst all other Devils, his beard is cut like the spier of
Grantham ^eeple, his eyes turn in his head like the Puppets in a motion, he
draws his mouth continually awry in disdain, and what day soever you meet
him, he has a sundry apparel: Among Sectaries he walks poorly, dawbing
his face with the white of Spain to look pale; fixing his eyes still on
heaven, as if in continual contemplation; demeaning himself like an
Anabaptist, (as Sleidan disciphereth Sleid. lib. 10. de stat. relig.
them) to the end he may be reputed as mortified, and a contemner of the world:
then backbiteth he the Clergy, commending the simplicity of his conscience,
and getting Presumption, Pertinacitie and Contention, his sworn brothers, into
his company, he maligneth all men that commend him not, swears that Gospeller
to be a dronckard whom he never knew, protests this Bishop to be a Nestorian,
who notwithstanding with Cirile and the Counsel of Ephesus condemns his
saying, Ego ^imestrem and trimestrem haud quoquam confiteor deum. He condemns
all men's knowledge but his own, raising up a Method of experience with (
mirabile, miraculoso, stupendo, and such faburthen words: as Fierouanti does)
above all the learned Galienists of Italy, or Europe. Bring him to counsel,
he disturbeth the fathers: make him a Lawier, he nourishes contentions: thwart
him in his opinion, he will swear that Capicanu Muscio the Spaniard, was a
moderate soldier, where in the expedition against the Turk (when Sebastiana
Venero was General of the Army of the Uenetians, and Marco Antonio Colbuno
General for the Pope, and Leiutenant of Don John D'Austria) he and two of his
companions, were hanged for sedition and insolence. Though he look with a
counterfeit eye, none must see further then he, and whatsoever he says, must
he held an Aphorism, or he flings house out of the window with his boastings.
If he hear any man praised, he either obscureth his fame by condemning him of
dissoluteness, or detracteth from his credit by urging some report of
intemperance. So that he wholly ascribes desert to himself, and lays the
burden of imperfection on all others men's backs. In the Stationers shop he
sits daily, Iibing and flearing over every pamphlet with Ironicall ieasts; yet
hear him but talk ten lines, and you may score up twenty absurdities: I am
not as this man is is his common protestation, yet a more aranter Devil is
there not betwixt S. Dauis and London. Make him a schoolemaister and let him
liu^ on his Accidence, no man passes the same foord with him but he drownes
him; Perseus is a fool in his style, and an obscure Poet. Statius, nim^um
tumidus, too swelling. He has an oar in every man's boat; but turn him loose
to write any Poem, God amercie on the soul of his numbers: they are dead,
dull, harsh, sottish, unpleasant, yea Eldertons nose would grin at them if they
should but equal the worst of his Ballads. But soft who comes here with a
lean face; and hollow eyes, biting in his lips for fear his tongue should
leap out of his mouth, studying over the reuertions of an ordinary, how to
play the ape of his age? I know him well, it is Derision, a pretty Devil I
promise you, at his heels waits Rash Judgment in a cloak of Absurdities: Ho
Apelles look to your pictures, for these Devils will reprove them; Sirrah, cut
not your meat with the left hand, spit not without the comely carriage of your
head, speak not an accent amiss I charge you; for if Derision catch you in
one trip, Rash Judgment shall condemn you, and he will execute you. But how I
pray you? Marry he will run over all his variety of filthy faces, till he
light on yours: beat over all the antique conceits he has gathered, til he
second your defect, and never leave to deride you, till he fall drunk in a
Tavern while some grow sick with laughing at him, or consult with Rash
Judgment how to delude others, that at the length he proves deformity
himself. This cursed Came cares not to mock his father; and as the Rabin Hanany
says, He never sits but in the chair of Pestilence, his meerest profession
is Atheism: and as Job says, To mock at the simplicity of the just: to be
brief Job. 12.
with Seneca in Medea.

Nullum ad nocendum tempus angustum est malis.
No time too sho^ for bad men to do hurt.
It is meat and drink to him when he is mocking another man: Christ his Savior
is a Carpenters son: Christians, Galileans in contempt: Nay such blasphemy
utters he betwixt the Holy ghost and the blessed and Immaculate Uirgine
Marie, as my heart trembles to think them, and my tongue abhoreth to speak
them.

Next him marches Hypocrisy in a long gown like a scholar; how like his
father Leuiatha^ he looks? But that his horns are not yet budded, because he
moulted them very lately, in the lap of an Harlot. Oh how ancient a Gentleman
would he be! he claims from Simon Magus his petigree, and by descent tells of
Silene the Harlot his first by the mothers side, the^ comes he to Menander the
coniurer, from him reckons he to the Nicola^ts, who held y^ a^ome of Aristotle
in a sinister sense, Bonum qu^ communius e^ melius, A good fair wench the
commoner she were, the better she were: Then Cherinthus, Ebion, the one
confirming that circumcision was necessary, the other, that Christ was not
before his mother: next these the year 109 Marcion, denying God the creator to
be the father of Christ: then Valentinian, alleging that Christ participated
nothing with the Uirgine Marie: From them to the Cataphrigi, Tatiani and
Seuerians; after these to Florus and Blastus in the time of Eleutherius the
first. It were too long to reckon the whole of them, but this I am sure of, the
last sectarie of his kin now alive (as he says) is a Brownist, and an
Heretic he is I warrant him. This Devil (as most coniured by the constant and
ghostly writings of our fathers and schoolmen,) I leave to discover, only this
much of him as a true mark to know him by; he begins his innouations, because
he is crossed in his requests, as Blastus; neither is he favored but by the
ignorant and unlettered, as by Theodotus Niceph^r. lib. 3. cap. 7. Augustine
Psalm. 67. verse congregatio.
a cobbler: to be short, as Augustine says, Ad hoc haereses sinuntur esse vt
probati manifesti fiant, Therefore (says he) are heresies suffered to flourish,
to the end that being proved they may be made manifest.

Another son has he, and his name is Curiosity, who not content with the
studies of profit and the practice of commendable sciences, sets his mind
wholly on Astrology, Negromancie, and Magic. This Di^l prefers an
Ephimerides before a Bible; and his Ptolomey and Hali before Ambrose, golden
Chrysostom, or S. Augustine: Promise him a familier, and he will take a fly
in a box for good payment: if you long to know this slave, you shall never take
him without a book of characters in his bosom. Promise to bring him to
treasure-troue, he will sell his land for it, but he will be cousened: bring
him but a table of lead, with crosses (and Adonai, or Elohim written in it) he
thinks it will heal the ague, and he is so busy in finding out the houses of
the planets, that at last he is either feign to house himself in an Hospital,
or take up his Inn in a prison: he will not eat his dinner before he has
looked in his Almanake: nor pair his nails while Monday, to be fortunat in his
love: if he loose any thing, he has ready a sieve and a key; and by S. Peter
and S. Paul the fool rides him: he will show you the Devil in a Crystal,
calculate the nativity of his gelding, talk of nothing but gold and silver,
Elixer, calcination, augmentation, citrination, commentation; and swearing to
enrich the world in a month, he is not able to buy himself a new cloak in a
whole year: such a Devil I knew in my days, that having sold all his land in
England to the benefit of the coosener, went to Antwerpe with protestation to
enrich Monsieur the Kings brother of France, Le feu Roy Harie I mean; and
missing his purpose, died miserably in spite of Hermes in Flushing. Of this
kind of Devil there was one of late days flourishing in Lions (a famous
city in France) who was so much besotted with star gazing, that he credibly
believed that there was a certain Divinity in the Sun, the Moon, and other
Planets, saying that the Son was true God, which he termed the chiefest
light and Supremum genus, above all the Categories of Aristotle, but after a
little Eleborus had purged him, and reason convicted him, he recanted. This
Devil if he fall acquainted with you (as he did with the Arians) he ties you
to Martinet their familiar, makes you honor Satan in form of a Bull,
binding you to horrible and abominable crimes, as first to adore the Devil as
God, then to disauow your Baptism, next to blaspheame your creator, fourthly,
to sacrifice to the Devil, fifthly, to vow and dedicate your own children to
his service, sixthly, to consecrate those that are unborn, seventhly, to seduce
others to your power, eighthly to swear by the name of the Devil, ninthly, to
procure abortion to prevent Baptism, tenthly, to eat your children before
birth as Horace writes and partly insinuates.

Neu pransalameae viuum puerum extra^at alu^.
Then teaches he you to kill and poison, again to rot eattell by charms,
then to raise storms and tempests by invocation of Devils: what need more
horror? Blasting of corn, inducing of famine, prodigious incests, the son
with the mother, the daughter with the father, Magical ingendrings ^etwixt the
sorcerer and the Devil, called by the Hebrews Titeth; all this (as Barkly
C^prian in his Recantation confesses, Malleus maleficorum: and Prieras in his
Book De demonum mirandis witness) are the fruits of Curiosity, and the
working of sorceries, and the instructions of the Devil. There are many in
London now adays that are besotted with this sin, one of whom I saw on a
white horse in Fleets^reet, a tanner knave I never looked on, who with one
figure (cast out of a scholars study for a necessary servant at Bocardo)
promised to find any man's oxen were they lost, restore any man's goods if they
were stolen, and win any man love, where, or howsoever he settled it; but his
Iugling knacks were quickly discovered, and now men that in their opinions held
him for a right coniurer, dare boldly swear that he is a rank cousener.

Another son Luiathan has that deserves disceuering, for of all the children
his father has, he is most befriended and least suspected: his name is
Superfluous Invention, or as some term him Nouel-monger or Fashions.
Sometimes he is a cook, inuenting new sauces and banquets, sometimes devising
strange confections to besot an idolater of his belly, sometimes for an
irefull man he deuiseth strange reuenges, sometime for a fearful, strong
towers to keep him in: he is excellent at billiment laces to devise new, and
for pouders to break the cannon, and poisons to kill lingeringlie, he yields
neither place to Fierouanti nor any Italian. If Ladies lack paintings and
Bele^ze, Uenice affoords not the like; and if your mastership lack a fashion,
commend me to none but him. This is he who first found out the inventions to
curle, and to him it is ascribed the changing and dying of hair: For he could
be no less then a Devil in my opinin, that durst falsify Gods words, where
he says, Non potes vnum capillum facere album aut nigrum, Yet dare he
adventure Matthew. 5.
to know all. Cleopatra in her time was his dear friend, and in our age he is
sought too both in Town and Country. The chines of Beef in great houses are
scantled to buie chains of gold; and the alms that was wont to relieve the
poor, is husbanded better to buy new Rebatoes: it is monstrous in our opinion
to see an old man become effeminate, but is it not more monstrous to see the
old woman made young again! the Elephant is admired for bearing a little castle
on his back, but what say you to a tender, fair, young, nay a weakling of
womankind, to wear whole Lordships and manor houses on her back without
sweating? Vestium luxum (says Tully) arguit animum parum sobrium, Alas
sobriety where shall thou now be sought, where all men affect pomp? The
Plowman that in times past was contented in Russet, must now adays have his
doublet of the fashion with wide cuts, his garters of fine silk of Granado to
meet his Sis on Sunday: the farmer that was contented in times past with his
Russet Frocke and Mockado sleeves, now sels a Cow against Easter to buy him
silken geere for his credit. Is not this Fashions a jolly fellow that works
this? Con^it. Apo^. lib. 1. ca. 4. and 9.
Urge the constitution of the Apostles to our gallants, O hom^ mors aeterna
^ibi parata est, quoniam propter ornatum tuum illaqueasti mulierem vt amore tui
flagraret, Man eternal death is prepared for thee, because thou have allured
women to sin by thy dissolute garments. Tut say they, we stand not on credit
nor on conscience; and yet they lie too, for so long they stand on their
credites that they utterly fall by them. Cry out with them to the woman, and
will her not paint her visage; now I faith Sir fool (will she say) help of
nature is no sin, to please my husband: Nay, whispers Fashion in her ears, if
you be Gods works, you had the more reason to be adorned because his. Impiety
thus always attending on this Devil, he forgeth excuses to dispense with
conscience. It is a great matter says Tertulian to see the vanity of women in
these days, who are so trimd and trickt, that you would rather say they bear
great forests on their necks, then modest and civil furnitures: Tut answers
Fashion, it keeps their faces in compass; To wear wiers and great ruffes, is
a comely cops to bide a long wrinckled face in. Boulsters for crookt shoulders,
who but Fashions first sold them in Uenice? and since busks came in request,
horn (...) grown to such a scarcity, that Leuiathan has cast his own
beakers of late to serve the market. There are boulsters likewise for the
buttocks as well as the breast, and why forsooth? The smaller in the wast, the
better handled. Believe me, I think in no time Jerome had better cause to cry
out on pride then in this, for painting now adays is grown to such a custom,
that from the swartfaste Devil in the Kitchen to the fairest Damsel in the
city, the most part look like Uizards for a Momerie, rather then Christians
trained in sobriety: O poor woman (cried the Father) can thou lift up thy
face to heaven, considering God knows thee not? Tut all this moves not (quoth
Invention of Novelties) we must have more new Fashions: well be it so master
Devil, yet let your dames take this verse of Martials for a conclusion:

Omnia cum fecit Thaida Thais olet. Lib. 6. 1 page

When Thais has done all, yet Thais smells.
But let us leave this Devil at his cutting board intentive for new fashions
against next Christmas, and see what Devil and son of pride marches next,
forsooth Ingratitude, careless both in apparel and looks: This is a
general fellow, and thinks scorn to be unseen in all the sins of the
world. If he receive graces from God, it not his mercy that gives them, but
his own industry; he is a right Pelagian, presuming by natural virtue
(without the grace of God) to attain Paradise: Give him what you can, he
condemns you for your labor: he calls his master old dunce that taught him
learning; and to his father that brought him up, he protests he knows him not
poor groom, nay if he beg he scorns to relieve him: his benefactors might
have kept their money with a vengeance: and for his Lord (if he serve at any
time) none but Ingratitude if he decay, will soonest sell him to a sergeant,
he is the fittest instrument to hang his Master, so that of Plautus is very
aptly applied unto them.

Si quid benefacias lenior pluma gratias.
Si quid peccatum est plumbe as iras gerunt.
Lighter then feather, thanks if thou befriendest.
But leaden wrath they bear if thou offendest.
To be short with Ieuenal in his Satires.

Ingratis ante omnia pone sodales.
Of all men fly ungrateful friends.
Nihil augetur ingrato (says Barnard) sed quod accipit, vertitur ^i in
perniciem, To an ungrateful man nothing is increased, and that which he
receives, turns to his destruction. Pliny in the Prologue of his natural
History calls them fures and infelices, Thieves, and unhappy, that
acknowledge no benefits: and Seneca the Philosopher counts them worser then
Serpents, for Serpents (says he) cast out their poison to other men's
destruction, but ungrateful men without their own disgrace cannot be
unthankful. Hermes Trimegestus counts the best sacrifice to God to be
Thankfulness, it follows then a contrarijs that the worst thing in his sight
is Ingratitude. The commenter upon Aristotle's Book De animalibus tells a
story to this purpose: A certain husbandman nourished an Aspis in his house,
feeding him daily at his own table, and chearing him with his own meat; it
fortuned a little while after that he brought forth two young ones, the one of
which poisoned the husbandmans son, and brought sorrow to his household: The
old breeder considering this (in the sight of the father) murdered the
offender, and as if ashamed of his ingratitude, departed the house with the
other. Behold sense of benefit in a Serpent, and will man be unthankful? The
Lion that was healed by Andronicus in the wood, did he not save his life in the
Theator? Man consider this, and to bring thee the more in hatred with this
fiend, weigh this one example of Seneca written in his fourth Book De
beneficijs: A certain sold for endangered by shipwreck, and floating (for
the space of twenty days) on a broken mast in a sore tempest, was at last
cast a shore in a Noblemans Lordship, by whom he was relieved with meat,
clothes, and money: This Nobleman coming to Philip of Macedon his King, and
encountering a little after with this unthankful soldier, was by him accused
of false Treason: and so much for the time did iniquity prevail, that not
only he endangered the Noblemans life, but possessed his goods likewise, by the
benevolence of the King: notwithstanding truth (which according to Seneca in
Oedipus, adit moras, hates delay) being at last discovered, and the king
assertained of the wretched soldiers ingratitude, he branded him in the face
with a burning iron, and dispoiling him of his ill gotten goods, restored the
other: so deal you by this Devil of our age, and beware of his subtilties,
for if once he prove an intelligencer, he will help to hang you.

The next Harpie of this breed is Scandale and Detraction, This is a right
malecontent Devil, You shall always find him his hat without a band, his hose
vngartered, his Rapier punto r'enuerso, his looks suspicious and heavy, his
left hand continually on his dagger: if he walk Poules, he sculks in the back
Isles, and of all things loves no societies: if at any time he put on the
habit of gravity, it is either to backbite his neighbor, or to work
mischief: well spoken he is, and has some languages, and has red over the
coniuration of Machiauel: In belief he is an Atheist, or a counterfeit
Catholic; hating his country wherein he was bred, his gracious Prince under
whom he lives, those grave counsailors under whom the state is directed, not
for default either in government, or policy, but of mere innated and corrupt
villainy; and vain desire of Innovation. He has been a long Traveler, and
seen many countries, but as it is said of the toad, that he sucketh up the
corrupt humors of the garden where he keeps; so this wretch from al those
Provinces he has visited, brings home nothing but the corruptions, to
disturb the peace of his country, and destroy his own body and soul. If he
study, it is how to dispense and frustrate statutes, and (being grounded by
ill counsel, and prepared for mischief) he labors (as the Legist says) not
to avoid the sin, but the penalty. This fellow spares neither Nobility,
Clergy, nor Laietie, but (like that Roman Emperor, unworthy the naming)
desires that the whole people and comminaltie had but one head, that he might
cut it off at one stroke. Let him have no cause, he wishes Vitellius misery
to majesty, and swears by no small bugs, that all the world is imprudent that
imploies him not: This is he that in priute Conuenticles draws discontented
Gentlemen to conspiracies, and having brought the^ past the ^ercie of the law,
he bewra^es them first; bringing them to a violent end, and binding himself to
perpetual prison: But woe be unto him (says Christ) by whom the scandale and
offense comes, it were better for him that a millstone hung about his neck,
and that he were cast into the bottom of the sea: It is a position in the
Apophthegmes of the Rabms, that he that draws many men to sin, can hardly
settle himself to repentance; then in what miserable estate is this wretch
that delights in naught else but traitorous and deuillish stratagems? his
daily companion in walk, bed, and board, is rebellion and disobedience; and of
the seed of this Serpent are raised so many monsters, that no city in Italy
has been unstained with them, and no Kingdom in Europe vnmolested by them.
Ill would they observe that golden sentence of Cornelius Tacitus registered by
Machiauel, who says, That men ought to honor things past, and obey the
present, desiring and wishing for good Princes, and howsoever they prove to
endure 3.
the^: I but (answers Scandale) I never respect how things be, but how I wish
them to be: notwithstanding (sir Devil) let this be your looking glass, That
never scandale or conspiracy has been raised, ^ut the practiser has at last
rewd it. The little Spaniard that assailed Ferdinando the wise king with a
knife; Deruis the Turkish Priest that assaulted Baiazeth, what end came they
to? Either their envy (to their shame) was discovered by their fear, or
drowned in their bloods. The schoolemaister that betrayed the P^alerians
children, was he not whipped home by Camillus? Antigonius, Caesar, and all these
Monarchs, have they not loved the Treason, but hated the Traitor? Read all the
annals and observations of antiquity, and there has nothing begun in
corruption, but has ended in mischief. But for your detraction, Scandale,
blush you not to use it? No, say you, the Devil delights in mischief^, yet
will I give your Mastership short horns since you are so (...) a beast, that
you may hurt no man: your course is you say to backebite superiors, to scandale
the fathers and governors of the church, to bring Christians and Catholic
Religion in hatred; but wretch as thou art, know this, that he that touches
the credit of the Clergy, touches the apple of Gods e^e; and who so loves
(...) 2 (...) ^ Prou. 24. Da^. ^.
to detract, is hateful to God: the wise man says, that the detractor is
abhominatio hominum, the abomination of men: and Gerson says, that detraction
is greeuouser then theft. This Devil is fitly figured in that beast which
Daniel saw having three rancks of teeth, to whom it was said, Arise and eat
much flesh: These three orders of teeth are three manners of detraction: The
first is to deminish or misinterprete the action of a man, as if done under
corrupt intention; or comparing one desert with another, to show that the
action was not done so virtuously as it ought, neither so perfectly as it might
have been: The second manner, is (under an intent of de^amation) to publish a
man's hidden defects, which by the law of charity should be hidden, and in
reason may be wincked at: The third manner is the most mischievous, which is to
imagine treasons and impose them on innocents. These teeth Peter teaches al
Christians 1. Pet. 2.
to beat out when he says, Laying apart all malice, and deceit, simulation,
enuse, and detraction, desire milk: And what milk is this? Truly sweet, and
charitable words, for it is the nature of the tongue to speak good and
virtuous things; what otherwise it utters, it is but the corruptions of the
heart. A detractor (as a father says) may rightly be compared to Cadmus of
Greece, who sowed Serpents teeth on the Ovid 4. (...).
earth, out of which arose men who slew one another: so the Detractor spreddeth
nothing but corrupt and venomous seed, out of which spring contentions, wars,
and discentions among men. A Detractor likewise (says Holgot) is like a
stinking sepulcher, for as out of the one issues foul and Holg^* (...) sapi.
poisonous savors, so out of the others mouth comes sedious, and pernicious
conspiraces. It is a conclusion of Austines, that Qui negligit famam crudelis
est, He that neglects his fame is cruel; and another Philosopher witnesses,
that he that loses his credit, has naught else to loose. Beware therefore
of this devilish Scandale, Rebellion, and Detraction, and cross you from this
Devil, least he cross you in your walks.

Another Devil of this age (and the son of Leuiathan) is Adulation, who goes
generally ietting in Noblemens cast aparrell, he has all the Sonnets and
wanton rimes the world of our wit can afford him, he can dance, leap, sing,
drink vp-se-Frise, attend his friend to a baudie house, court a Harlot for
him, take him up commodities, feed him in humors; to be short, second and
serve him in any villainy: If he meet with a wealthy young heir worth the
clawing, Oh rare cries he, do he never so filthily, he pulls feathers from his
cloak if he walk in the street, kisseth his hand with a courtesy at every
nod of the yonker, bringing him into a fools Paradise by applauding him; If he
be a martial man or employed in some Courtly tilt or Tourney, Mark my Lord
(quoth he) with how good a grace he sat his horse, how bravely he brake his
lance: If he be a little bookish, let him write but the commendation of a
flea, straight begs he the coppie, kissing, hugging, grinning, and smiling,
till he make the young Princocks as proud as a Pecocke. This Damocles amongst
the retinue caries always the Tobacco Pipe, and his best living is carrying
tidings from one Gentleman's house to another: some think him to be a bastard
intelligencer but that they suspect his wit is too shallow. This is as courtly
an Aristippus as ever begd a Pension of Dionisius, and to speak the only best
of him, he has an apt and pleasing discourse, were it not too often sanced
with Hiperboles and lies: and in his apparel he is courtly, for what fool
would not be brave that may flourish with begging? The sword of a persecutor
wounds (...). Psalm. 6. 9.
not so deeply as he does with his tongue. Neither does the voice of a Syrene
draw so soon to ship wrack as his words: yet (as Aristotle and Cicero think)
he is but a servile fellow, and ^icero lib. 2. Tuscul. quest.
according to Theophrastus, he is an ant to the grain of good nature: Of al
things he cannot abide a scholar, and his chiefest delight is to keep down a
Poet, as Mantuan testifies in these verses: Mant. in (...).


Est and apud reges rudis, inuida, rustica turba.
Mimus, adula^or, leno, assentator, adulter,
Histrio, scurra quibus virtu^ odiosa poetas.
Mill m^dis abigunt: vt quande cadauera cer^i.
Inuenere, fugant alias volucresque ferasque.
There is in Princes and great men's courts (says he) a rude, envious, and
rusticke troop of men, ieasters, flatterers, bauds, soothers, adulterers,
plaiers, and scoffers, who hating all virtue find a thousand inventions to
drive Poets thence, like to ^arrion crows, that having found a carkas, drive
all other birds from it: and as the Culuer (as Ovid says) always seeks and
Aspicis v^ veniant ad (...) (...) columb^?
haunteth the cleanest Douecoat, so this flattering Devil is still conversant in
the house of the mighty: and as in the fattest ground grows the ranckest
grass, so with the men of greatest ability dwells the chiefest flattery (S.
Jerome calls him a Domestical Herome in Pro. 1. s^er illud si ^e lac^auerit.
Call. Ro^. lib. 11. Er^s. (...). 4. chap. 33.
enemy.) This (...) as the Greek ^earmes it, has but little difference from
ravening, for if we believe Caeleius Rodeginus, and Erasmus in his
Apophthegmes, the only changing of a letter, will make Corachas and Colachas
crows and flatterers all one. Alexander meeting with this Devil in the person
of Aristobulus, coniured him quickly, for as Politian writes on Suetonius, he
not only scorned his flatteries, but cast his Chronicles into the river of
Hidaspes, telling him that he deserved no less, who had so fabulously handled
his victories: had Herod done no less when the Tyrians called him God, his pride
had not been notified to the world; neither strooken by an Angel, should he
have been devoured by worms. This feind is continually attended and
accompanied with four of his brethren, Lightness of mind, Vain Joy,
Singularity, and Defense of a man's sins: Lightness of mind teaches him to
presume, Vain Joy swells him with temporal prosperities, Singularity makes
him affect innouations to please, Defense of his sins groundeth him in his
own mischiefs; This sin is the only peruerter of friendship, and disturber of
society, and unhappily says Tully is that possession good, Cicer. (...). 3.
which is purchased by simulation and flattery: so that great cause had both
the fathers and Philosophers to detest this sin, because they knew that man is
naturally apt to flatter himself, and is best pleased to hear his
imperfections dissembled. The ancient Emperors desirous to avoid this error,
and to banish this poison from their palaces, sought out the wisest men to be
their Counsailers, who most of all detested this vice, as Solomon who was
advised by Nathan and Sadoch: Carolus P^us the Emperor, by learned Alcuinus:
Traian the just, by learned Plutarch: Nero the unjust, by grave Seneca:
Alexander (though a conqueror) by ingenious Aristotle: Prolomey of Egypt, bp
the 70 interpreters. To conclude therefore the discourse of this Devil, I will
end with two notable actions of the Romans, whereby you may perceive by them,
to make estimation of truth, and to grow in detestation of Flattery and
Falsehood: The Emperor Augustus in his triump^ ^er Anthony and Cleopatra, led
to Room (amongst his other spoils) Second. sell de Messia lib. 2. cap. 117.
a grave Egyptian Priest of sixty years old, whose life was so full of
continence, and words so stored with truth, that it was never heard of him in
all his life time that he had told untruth, or used flattery; for which cause
it was concluded by the Senate, that he should presently be set free, and
made chief Priest, commanding (that among the statues of famous and renowned
men) one in especial should be reared for him. Spartianus on the contrary
side, shows an example quite opposite to this, and this it was: during the
Empire of Claudius, there died a certain Roman called Pamphilus, who as was
clearly proved, had not in all his life time spoke one true word, but wholly
delighted in lying and flattery: for which cause the Emperor commanded that
his body should be left unburied, his goods should be confiscate, his house
ouerthrown, and his wife and children banished Room, to the end that the
memory of a creature so venomous, should not live and have residence in his
Commonweal. In which two things Messia uses this observation, that in the
time that these first effects happened, the Romans were mortal enemies of the
Egyptians, for which cause it may easily be seen how powerful the force of
truth is, since the Romans raised a statue to their Enemy, and deprived their
homeborne son and Citizen of burial for being a flattering lier: Hitherto
he, and here conclude I the description of this fiend.

Behold next I see Contempt marching forth, giving me the Fico with this
thombe in his mouth, for concealing him so long from your eye sight: He was
first nursed by his own sister, Custom to sin, and therefore according to
Thomas Aquine, Magis peccat peccans ex habitu, quam aliter, He sins more,
sinning in habitude then otherwise: Contumacie has steeld his looks, so that
he disdaines his superiors, and Rashness so confounds him with will and
passion, that he is wholly subject to headlong Precipitation: Arrogancy
makes him sumptuous in apparel, lofty in gate, affecting in speech, and
thus marches forth thi^ ^ncarnate Devil, God bless your eye sight. This is
he dare break statutes, bl^b the lip a^ superiors, Mock Preachers, beat
Constables, and resist Writs, nay, which is the sin of the Devils, contemn
God. If a poor man salute him, he looks as if he scorned him, and if he give
him but a beck with his finger, he must take it as an alms from an Emperor:
The wisest man is a fool in his tongue, and there is no Philosophy (says he)
but in my Method and carriage: he never speaks but he first wags his head
twice or thrice like a wanton mare over hirbit, and after he has twinckled
with his eyes (as he would read his destiny in the heavens) and chewed the
words between his lips (as if naught but the flower of his Phrase could
delight or become him) out braies he forth so simple a discourse as would
make a ma^s heart burst with laughing to hear it: To the cobbler he says, set
me two semicircles on my suppeditaries; and he answers him, his shoes shall
cost him two pence: to his servant he chops the fragments of Lattin in every
feast of his phrase, My deminitiue and defective slave (quoth he) give me the
couerture of my corpse to ensconse my person from frigiditie; (and all this
while he calls but for his cloak.) Get him write letters to his friend, and
mark me his Method: Sien of my Science in the Catadupe of my knowledge, I
nourish the Crocodile of thy conceit; my wrath-venger (he means his sword)
shall annichilate their identities, and separate the pure of their spirits from
the filthy of their flesh, that shall frustrate thy forwardness, or put out
the candel of thy good conceit toward me. Should I register the whole, it
would rather wax tedious then delightful: and as his speech is extremely
affected and fond, his writing ridiculous and childish, so is his life so far
out of square, that nothing can reform him: Talk to him of obedience, he
says itis the seal of a bace mind: Tell him of good government, it is the
gift of fortune, not the fruit of consideration: Rip up the success of
battles, he says they were not well followed. In brief, nothing can please
him, who despises all things. If you say that (as Publius Mimus says) the
smallest hair has his shadow (and with Rabin Ben-Aza^) that no man living is
to be contemned, for every man shall have his hour, and every thing has
his place; He will answer aquila non capit muscas, Every bace groom is not
for my company. Beware of this Doemon, for though he be the last of
Leuiathans race, yet is he the arrantest and subtillest Atheist of all these
Devils. Hitherto have I discovered pride and his children; now having taught
you to know them, let me instruct you to avoid them.

As every mischief is best avoided by opposing against him his contrary, so
arm your selves with Humility against Pride and his faction, and he shall not
confound you: For as Augustine says, Pride sinketh to Hell, and Humility
August. Epist. 38.
leads to Heaven: Pride is the step to Appostasie, and being opposed against
God, is the greatest sin in man. All other vices (says Augustine) are to be
taken heed of in August. ad Di^scor.
sins, but this, in good doings, least those things that are laudably done,
be lost in the desire of praise. Follow Christ quia mitis est, and hear a
Father crying to you, Ecce habes humilitatis exemplum superbiae medicamentum,
Behold thou have an example of Humility, and a medicine against Pride: Why
swellest thou therefore Oh man? Thou loathsome and carrion skin, why art thou
stretched? Thou filthy matter, why art thou inflamed? Thy Prince is humble and
thou proud; Caput humile, and membra superba, The head humble, the members
lofty, thus far he. Let us resemble the Pecocke (according to the counsel
of Jerome) which no longer delights in the brightness and beauty of his
feathers, but whilst ^he beholds them, and seeing the deformity of his feet,
is confounded and ashamed: so let us, considering our infirmi^ies, be ashamed
of our lostinesse, remembering daily that of Seneca:

Sequitur superbos victor a tergo Deus.
Revenging God attends upon the proud.
Amongst many other plagues of a proud man this is one, that Dominus deridebit
eos, as the Psalmist says, Our Lord shall laugh them to scorn: where, of the
just and humble man it is said, Laetabitur cum viderit vindictam, He shall
rejoice when he Prou 1. Et ego quoque in interi^u vestro ridebo.
sees the revenge. Uery rightly is a proud man compared to smoke, the which
the more it ascends, the more it vanishes* so the lofty and proud minds of
this world, the more they are mounted, the more suddenly are they consumed. To
be short, (and in a small lesson to shut a true remedy against Pride and all
his followers) use this: first, consider how God has grievously punished that
sin: next, call to thy consideration man's mortal weakness and infirmity:
thirdly, keep in memory the reward of Humility, and the heinousness of
Pride, expressed in Boethius by these words, Cum^mnia vicia fugiant a Deo, sola
superbia se ei opponit, Whereas all vices fly from God, only Pride opposes
herself against him. And let this serve for a due conclusion set down by
Solomon, that Vbi supe^rbia, ibi and contumelia est; vbi autem humilitas, ibi
sapientia cum gloria, Where pride is, there contumely is also; but where
humility is, there is wisdom with glory.

Tut preachers can better teach this (say you) return you to your devils: I
confess it my friends, absolve me therefore, and you shall hear me tell of
strange devils raised by Avarice and cursed Mammon: your silence says, Do,
and therefore thus make I an entrance to my second discourse.

Of strange and msraculous Devils engendered by Mammon.
AVarice which (as Augustine defines it) is an insatiable and dishonest desire
of enjoying euerything (our second Etynnis and Mammon, the son of Satan)
tormented and waxen old with intolerable desire, finding the world
insufficient to satisfy his affections, by cold cathars of jealousy feeling
his senses choked, and with a Paralisis of fear, shaken almost one joint from
another; betook himself at last to his ca^e of suspicion, where he suffers
his evidences to be worm-eaten for want of opening, and his gold and silver to
rust for want of use. Yet being loath the world should lack members to supply
his office, or Sata^n want ministers to conduct souls to hell, in like sort as
Pallas is fained by the Poets to be begotten in the brain of Jupiter without
mother, so did Avarice in ye concanity of his codshed, beget seven Devils,
which after a belke of surfeit having breathed into the world, it is necessary
you knew them, ye you might the better a^oid them. The first of them is Usury
(a Deuil^ of good credit in ye city) who having primly stolen a sufficient
stock foom the old miser his father, has lately set up for himself, and has
four of his brothers his apprentices. The first of them is Hardness of heart,
who bringing into his bank contempt of the poor, is set by him to beat
beggars from his door, and arrest his debtors by Latitats. The second is,
Unmeasurable care, and Trouble of mind, who has brought this portion to be
imploid; destruction of the mind, neglect of Gods service, want of faith, and
jealousy of loss: he keeps the cash, and suffers not a mouse to enter, but
he scores him. The third is Violence, and for him he has bought a Sargeants
office, who has so many eyes like Argus to watch, that no poor creditour can
escape him* His stock is a bunch of writs, and a hanger, and ordinarily h^
wears his mace at his back in stead of a dagger. The fourth is (...) and he
iets about the streets to steal for him, he is a passing good hooker and
picklock; and for a short knife and a horn thimble, turn him loose to all the
fraternity: his stock is false keys, engines, and sword and bookler: Him he
imploses to rob from them he has lent moneyto, to the end they may be the
fitter to commit a forfaiture. This Usury is iumpt of the complexion of the
Baboun his father; he is haired like a great Ape, and swart like a tawny
Indian, his horns are sometime hidden in a button cap (as Th. N. described
him) but now he is fallen to his flat cap, because he is chief warden of his
company: he is narrow browd, and Squirril eied, and the chiefest ornament of
his face is, that his nose sticks in the midst like an embosment in Tarrace
work, here and there embelished and decked with veruca for want of purging
with Agarick; some Authors have compared it to a Kutters codpiece, but I like
not the allusion so well, by reason the tyings have no correspondence: his
mouth is always mumbling, as if he were at his mattens: and his beard is
bristled here and there like a sow that had the lousy: double chinned he is,
and over h^s throat hangs a bunch of skin like a money bag: band wears he
none, but a welt of course Holland, and if you see it stitcht with blew thread,
it is no workiday wearing: his trusse is the piece of an old packcloth, the
mark washtout; and if you spy a pair of Bridges satin sleeves to it, you
may be assured it is a holy day: his points are the edging of some cast
packsaddle, cut out sparingly (I warrant you) to serve him and his household for
trussing leather: his tacket for sooth is faced with moth-eaten budge, and it
is no less then Lisle Grogeram of the worst: it is bound to his body with a
Cordeliers girdle; died black for comelines sake: and in his bosom he bears
his handkerchiefe made of the reuersion of his old tablecloth: his spectacles
hang beating over his codpiece like the flag in the top of a maypole: his
breeches and stockings are of one piece I warrant you, which having served him
in pure ^ersie for y^ tester of a bed some twenty years, is by the frugality
of a dier and the courtesy of a Tailer for this present made a sconse for his
buttocks: his shoes of the old cut, broad at the toes and crosse-buckled with
brass, and have loop-holes like a sconse for his toes to shoot out at: his
gown is suitable, and as seemly as the (...), full of threeds I warrant you,
wheresoever the wool is employed, welted on the back with the clipping of a
bare cast velvet hood, and faced with foines that had kept a widows tail warm
twenty winters before his time. Thus attired, he walks Powls, coughing at
every step as if he were broken winded, grunting sometime for the pain of the
stone and strangury: and continually thus old, and seeming ready to die, he
notwithstanding lives to confound many families. If you come to borrow money,
he will take no usury, no mary will he not; but if you require ten pound, you
shall pay him forty shillings for an old cap, and the rest is yours in ready
many; the man loves good dealing. If you desire commodities at his hand, why
sir you shall have them, but how? not (as the caterpillars wont to sell) at
high prises, but as the best and easiest penyworth, as in conscience you can
desire them: only this, at the insealing of the assurance, if you help him
away with a chest of glass for ten pound of ten shillings price, you shall
command his warehouse another time. Tut he is for you at casual marts,
commodities of Proclamations, and hobby-horses, you shall have all that you
please, so he receive what he desires. It is a common custom of his to buy up
cracked angels at nine shillings the piece. Now sir if a gentleman (on good
assurance of land) request him of money, Good sir, (says he, with a
counterfeit sigh) I would be glad to please your worship, but my good money is
abroad, and that I have, I dare not put in your hands. The gentleman thinking
this conscience, where it is subtilty, and being beside that, in some
necessity, ventures on the cracked angels, some of which can not fly for
soldering, and paies double interest to the miser, under the cloak of honesty.
If he fails his day, God forbid he should take the forfaiture, he will not
thrive by other men's curses, but because men must live, and we are Infidels if
we provide not for our families, he is content with this his own; only a
lease, a toy, of this or that manor, worth both his principal and ten times
the interest, this is easy for the gentleman to pay, and reasonable in him to
receive. If a citizen come to borrow, my friend, quoth he, you must keep day,
I am glad to help young men without harming my self: then paying him out the
money and receiving his assurance, he casts Jolly Robbins in his head how to
cousin the simple fellow. If he have a shop well furnished, a stock to
receive out of the Chamber, possibility after the death of his father, all this
he hearkens after: and if he fatle of his day, Well, says he, for charity
sake I will forbear you, mine interest paid: mean while (unknown to the
wretch) he sues him upon the original to an outlawry, and if the second time
he fail (as by some flight encouragement he causes him to do) he turns him
out a doors like a careless young man, yet for christianity sake, he lets him
at liberty, and will in charity content him with his goods, and as Plautus
says in Trinummo:

Sapiens quidem pol, ipse fing it fortunam sibt.
A right Achab, he will not loose Naboths vineyard for the catching after: and
if an office falls, he buies it to raise more profit in the sale thereof: He
has false weights to sell all the wares he retaleth: and if the reuersion of
an heritage fall in his laps, he will not let to poison him that is in
possession. He is the only friend to a prison house, enriching it by his
prisoners. As for his door, there are more staves in hand to beat the beggars
thence, then morcels* sent out to relieve their necessity* Ask him why he
hoords up many, forsooth says he, against age; and yet for every tooth he
can show me at these years, I will promise him a kingdom. Ask him why he
marries not? Oh, says he, I am of Bias opinion, In youth it is too soon, and
in age too late: promise him a great dowry, his answer is, The saurum volo, non
foeminam: The money (man) for me, the wench likes me not. Let the learned
counsel him to forsake the world and fall to rest, O says he, with Periander,
Bon^res est quies, sed periculosa est temeritas: Rest is good, but rashness is
dangerous. Urge him to hospitality, O says he, Quam suauis parcimonia? How
sweet is f^ugality? On my conscience he had rather die lousy with Phaer^cides,
Di^g. Iae^s, lib. 1. in vit^ Phaerecid.
then buy a shirt to shift him with. At his repasts, he weies the meat his
mouth deuoureth, and has more mercy of his money then his body, for he keeps
the one locked up safely from sun and wind, but for his body he suffers it to
be pinched with famine and winter, nay, to be subject to all the inconveniences
and tyranies of nature. To conclude with Claudian:

-- T^tumque exhau serit Hermu^,
Ardebi^ maiore siti.
And though all Hermus he drink up at first,
Yet will he bu^ne with far more greater thirst.
Neither ought we to marvel her (...), if we consider the reason: for (as
Chri^ostome says) Usury may be compared to the ^.
venime of a (...) serpent* whose biting at the first is so sweet, that it
ingendreth a desire to sleep, and in sleep* kills. So* he that is
delighted with usury, or intang^ed in the nets of those that practice it; the
one is ^laine by the poison thereof, in the sleep of his desire and insatiate
affection; and the other thinking in the beginning to receive some profit,
slumbreth and dreameth of his profit, and in the end (not acquitting himself
of the principal) he is wholly consumed and confounded. Oh beware ^ald. lib.
3. (...). 449.
of this Devil, for (as Baldus says) he resembles a worm, which having made
a hole in a tree where in she may turn her self, she ingendreth another
worm of the same malice, until all be consumed* Some compares it to that
^ulture which Ho^. odys. 11.
gnawes on Titius liver. Some compare it to fire, which is so active and
insatiate an element^ that it (...) all things it Lib. 2. lib. 3 (...).
touches. Ca^o (as Cice^o reports) compares an (...) to a Homi^ide: and
Pausanius says:

Et* velox (...) vsurd trucidat.
And speedy usury does kill the poor.
But to show the villainy of this Devil more fitly, I will not only prove that
usury is against the law of nature, but also against the law of God. That in
the law of nature Usury was hateful, it appears in this, that Plato in his
laws has forbidden (...). (...) 2. de ^egib.
the use thereof; and Plutarch in a whole treatise has purposely disprooued
it: The Turk, the Moore, the Saracene, and Tartar, all these Enemies of the
policied world of Christendom, ^.
do with horror detest it. It is contrary to nature, you know, for a barten
thing to yield fruit: How can it then be possible, that money (being a barren
thing) should e^gender money. Another reason is this, He that sells one
thing twice, commits (...) and larceny: but the Usurer does so (for in
receiving the sum, he recei^eth silver for silver in the same equality, and
then in exacting the surplusage, he seileth the use, ^.
which is to sell twice) and the reason is (as Ba^t. Medina wr^teth) that the
use can not be separated from the thing.

That Usury is against the law of God, it appears in the old Testament, Exodus*
^2, Leuit. 25. and in another place, Thou ^.
shall ^end neither gold^, fruit, nor any other thing in usury do thy brother,
David Ezechiel, and Luke, all conclude in this: so that by Gods law how
coutemptible it is, it manifestly appears. General councils have condemned
it, as the Council of U^enna: the law Gabinium amongst the Romans taxed them: ^.
the Canon and Civil laws disable them of (...) and dignities, debar them of
communicating, deny them Christ^an burial, permit them not to make Testaments.
A (...) more penalties may you find in Panormitane and others, to long for me
to write, only fit for the curious, not the simple. For mine own part, Master
Usury, I hope I have indifferently handled you: if there grow any s^ruple or
doubt in any man's mind to know him better, let him but give me warning against
the next Impression, I will make the old moule warye hang himself in his own
garters to see his villainies opened.

By your leave, my masters, here mar^heth forth another Devil* by my faith if a
man knew him not inwardly, he would take him for a handsome citizen: Would you
know how I call him? Mary shall you: This is Brocage, a crafty Devil is he if
you mark him: he likewise has three brothers to attend him, which be his
apprentises: Craft, to keep his shop, and corrupt his commodities: Deceit, to
take up upon trust, and never pay the principal: and Perjury, to swear to the
prises of every commodity. Grase never returns him less then a suit of Satin
for a Capon: and Deceit (a pretty Scriuener) has great commings in* for making
false conueiances for him: only Perjury has of late days ill fortune, for of
mere good will (a sew Terms ago) swearing for his masters credit in y^ Star
chamber, he was committed to the pillery ^ay, this year 96 has bin very fatal
for all of them* for not so much as the whip but has had a ierke at some of
their back parts. This devil at his first coming from his father was a poor
knave in a white coat, and some have known him sell broomes for cony skins,
though now he be a gentleman. See you his hat with the brooch in it? he never
paid for it: and all these gay garments which attire him, are but the fruits of
one forfaiture. This dapper slave when I knew him first, had neither credit nor
beard, but well fare a woman for the first, and often shauing for the next: do
you wonder how he grows so fat? why it is by eating on other men's charges:
and what if his house be well furnished, and he pay not for it? Tibul. lib. 1.
Eleg. 1.


Parcite, demagno prada petenda gr^ge.
Tut the wealthy citizen may well spare it: he laughs at Pyttacus if he bid
him pay that he was trusted with: and his reason is, because the world is
mistrustfull, he will keep them in a lively faith, and a stirring hope: Creed
quod habes and habes (quoth the Clarke to the Bishop) and it is his ordinary
motto, though scarce formal. This is he that keeps a Catalogue or Calendar
of all the bawdy houses in a city, that is acquainted with all the usurers in a
country, that can command any knight of the post for a crown and a breakfast,
that revels it in all companies to grow acquainted with gentlemen. At Powls you
shall see him in the mid Isle, ready to discourse with all comers, and no
sooner can a sufficient man let slip a word of want, but forth he steps and
says, I am for you sir: Will you borrow upon pawnes? Its done for you (quoth
he) because I love you: and if he get fifty shillings on a fair cloak, the
gentleman is content with forty, and I thank you: but come the day of
redeeming, if the money be tendered him, Faith my friend is not at home, quoth
he, but your cloak is safe. The gentleman thinking him to be a man of his
word, trusts him, and lets it run upon interest; and in the mean time the
Broker and Usurer consult, the cloak is forfaited, the money shared, and the
poor gentleman made a woodcock: if he seem agrieued and discontented at the
loss, Alas^e si^ (quoth my companion) it is not my act, I Will bring you to the
principal, and let him answer you. The gentleman thinking all good faith,
accompanies him, where Master Usurer assures him that the first interest was
paid him, and for default of the last he made seasure of the pawn, so that the
Broker is not to be blamed: but sir (quoth he) if I have done you one wrong one
way, I will right you another? And how, think you? Marry he lets him have a
new upon trust, on his own bond and the Brokers, and of such a price as he
may well cry fie on the winnings: now if money comes with this commiditie,
what follows then? The Broker for his pains has his part of it, a part of
the good cheer at the insealing, a part of the gains with the Usurer, a part
of the fees with the Scriuener, and the Gentleman himself has only left him
the whole sum of misery. This thief in society (as I Diog. (...)* lib. 8
de (...) (...)* (...).
may rightly term him) has as many shifts in his head, as Chrisippus has
written volumes, (and yet has he written of the parts of Logic no less then
three hundredth and eleven volumes, besides many of other kinds:) He can sell
walnut leaves for Tobacco, artificial Balsamo and Rubarbe for the right; and
if any Merchant has commodities scarce Marchandable by reason of wetting,
master Broker will fit him with his price and a chapman. If he lack money
himself, he takes it up on another man's name, and to the Merchant he protests
he does it of charity to help his friend, where in deed he does it to
relieve his own necessity: you shall never find him without a counterfeit
chain about him; Bristow Diamonds set in gold in steed of right, and these
puts he away at what rate he list to men that are in extremity. Alas I had
almost forgot my self; why sirs there is this covenant between his brother
Devil the Usurer and he, that whatsoever bond he enters into it shall never be
exacted at his hands. This is an only fellow to train a man to an arrest, and
bidding him to breakfast, to thrust him into the hands of a sergeant: or to
toule a yoncker to an harlot, and so help him to be conniecatch: truly
Campania has not so many vices as this companion has villainies: He is dog at
recognisances and statutes, and let him but get the^ sealed by a sufficient
man, a hundredth pound to a penny if they escape without forfeiture, for what
with winding him into bonds for more money paiable on the same day, or false
surmised assumpfits betwixt the Scriuener and him, he is as sure to be
entangled as (...) at Minturnum (...) in vita (...).
to be imprisoned. Rightly therefore said Demosthenes in his first Oration
against Aristogiton, that Impr^bitas ^st audax and alieni cupida, and more
rightly may a Gentleman say that has been entangled in a Brokers lurches with
him in Eunucho: Mal^ ego nos prospicere quam vlcisci accept^ iniuri^.
I had rather we should foresee, then revenge our injuries.
I have a whole Legend to write of this devil, but that I am distracted
otherwise: well master Broker let this suffice you, you are known for a
deuillish companion, grumble not at this assault, for the next will be the
breach of your credit.

Cross your selves my masters more Devils are abroad, and Mammons sons begin
to muster: what! a fiend in a square cap, a Scholars gown! nay, more, in his
hands a Testament! Eh^ miracul^m dicis; by my sooth sir it is Simony This
fellow is a buier and seller of benefices, a follower of Balaam, that iold the
gift of Prophecy to Baalac, and of Giezi that sold the gift of Numb. 22. 23.
2. 4. Reg. 5.
health to the prince of Siria, Naaman Sirus: nay, to speak more plainly, he
is a right Judas that sold Christ for money; Simony the purchaser is of the
race of Simon Magus, that would bu^ the gift of the Holyghost from Peter, to
whom he said, Pecuni tua tibi Act. 8.
si^ in perditionem, Fie upon thee and thy money. This fellow though he can
scant reed, will be a Noblemans chapleine, and at chopping and changing
benefices there is none like him. This ^iend has twenty pound to give the
Chancelors man to nominate him for a parsonage: and for a little money and a
written Lattine sermon, can purchase to be a Batcheler of Divinity: he is
practiced to covenant with his Patron, and to suffer him to reserve some
pencion. And in election of Scholars he 2. (...). 2. (...) (...) (...).
has gold to pay for the preserment of his kinsman. In the Chapter house he
takes order that any Cannon shall be admitted for money. To be brief, the
Mystery of iniquity now breaks out in him: This is the only dispenser with
laws, and corrupter of the purity of the Clergy. But I leave this Devil to
be coniured by the Bishops and the Preachers, and only end with this curse of
them published in the scripture: Ve illis q^i (...) Balaam mercede effusi sunt,
which is as much to say, I pray God mend all that is amiss among the Clergy
men. How say you my masters do I not conster pretily?

Who is this with the Spanish hat, the Italian ruff, the French doublet, the
(...) cloak, the Toledo rapier, the Germane hose, the English stocking, and the
Flemish shoe? For (...) a son of Mammons that has of long time ben a
tra^ailer, his name is Lying, a Devil at your commandment: if you talk with
him of strange countries, why you bring him a bed, he will hold you prattle from
morningsberie to candle lighting; he will tell you of monsters that have faces
in their breasts, and men that cover their bodies with their feet in steed of a
Penthouse, he will tell you that a league from Poiti^rs (...) to Crontelles,
there is a family, that by a special grace from the father to the son, can
heal the biting of mad dogs: and that there is another company and sort of
people called Sauueurs, that have Saint Catherines Wheel in the palate of
their mouths, that can heal the stinging of Serpents* He will tell you near
Naples of miraculo^s wels, and of a stone in Calabria that fell from heaven,
and no sooner touched the ^arth, but it became a fair chapel: if you put him
to it, he will swear he has taken Saint Thomas by the hand in his tomb:
nay, he will offer you the earth which our Lady sat on when Christ was borne,
he has oil of Saint James, Saint Peter's ^orefinger, Saint Annes skirt of her
neckerchiefe, Saint Dunstons walking staff, The stone the Devil ^ffered
Christ to make bread on, the top of Lunges spear, the bark of the tree of
life in Paradise, a stone of Traians Tomb, a piece of Caesar's chair where in
he was slain in the Senate house. Tell him of battles, it was he that first
pulled off Francis the first his spur, when he was taken by the Emperor, and in
the battle of Lepante, he only gave Don John De Austria encouragement to
charge a fresh after the wind turned; at Bullaine he thrust three Switzers
through the belly at one time with one Partizan, and was at the hanging of that
sellow that could drink up a whole barrel of beer without a breathing: At the
battle of Serisoles he will only tell you that he lent Marquis Guasto a
h^rse when he fled from the Duke of Aniou, and retired to Alst; and that he
healed his shot in the knee, with only three dressings of his Balsamo. There is
no end of his falsehood except his tongue be cut out of his head, he will lie
against God, and misinterprete the scriptures, he will falcifie history, and
verify false miracles, he will swear to any inconvenience to further his
profit, and ascribe honor to any man, let him but pay him for his
commendations: he will testify a falsehood marvelous cunningly, and excuse a
sin as smoothly as is possible: This is the likest Devil to his father as
any of his kindred, for Mammon mendax est, and so is he. If Solon say to him
menti^i noli, lie not, he will answer him in a sentence, Veritas odium parat:
Truth procures hatred: Quid plura? He is as perfideous and forsworn as
Tisaphernes: and if he were hanged for it, it were no matter. Soft swift (quoth.
master Lie-monger) you are too hasty, you are too passionate, hear a little
reason: May not a man dissemble to save his life, use fraud for Gods honor,
and practi^e subtle stratagems for the behalf of his country? is not an
obsequions lie lawful, according to Origin, Chrysostom, Ierom, Origin. lib.
6. (...). Chrisost. de sacerd. Hieron in Epist. ad Gal. Cas. lib. 16. coll.
(...). R^m. 3.
and Cassian, his Disciple (especially to avoid a greater evil, or to conceal
a man's graces and virtues, to the end to avoid vaineglorie) and like as
Eleborus is wholesome to those that are attainted with the falling sickness,
and hurtful to those that are healthful, so is not a lie profitable to avoid
the danger that there is in speaking truth, and pernicious when there is no
present necessity? Sir, sir, you shall be a^swered and that quickly: Auant
Satan thou can not tempt us, Paul shall answer thee, Non sunt facienda mala
vt inde veniant bona, Evil is not to be done that good may come of it; and
Aristotle assures thee (though an E^hnicke) that a lie (both according to
essence and form) is a sin, and that it admits no circumstances: beware
therefore of this Devil my friends, for he is a right Priscillianist, who held
it lawful to forswear and lie for profit or secrecy sake.

Iura, periura, secretum, prodere noli.
Swear and forswear, disclose no secret thing.
Nay this favors of the Elchesaits heresy, who said it was lawful to deny
the faith by tongue, but not in heart; to avoid torments. Touching Origin,
since he was known to be superstitiously addicted to the opinion of Plato,
Herodotus, and Menander, we leave him as a Cabalist condemned by Gelasius, and
a general counsel: and touching Chrysostom, Jerome and Cassian, as men they
may, and did err: for though they have scripture that seems in part to favor
their opinion (That a man may let slip an untruth to the end that good may come
of it;) yet it is to be marked that they erred in this, in consturing those
things literally which should have been taken figuratively: for whereas Jacob
told his father that he was Esau the first borne, he lied not; for in truth
according to the disposition of the Divine providence he was such, and
destinate to enjoy the right of the primogeniture or first begotten: and
touching al other places of scripture, to answer with Augustine in a word,
Ueritie in the^ was concealed, and no lie committed; as in Abraham calling Sara
his sister, etc. But Master Lie-monger you shall not so escape, I have a new
fling for you, a rope is well bestowed to hang a thief that is past all
reformation: Hark what an army of authorities are brought to condemn thee, Os
quod mentitur (says the wise (...). 1.
man) occidit animam, The mouth that lies, slaieth the soul: and Homer says,
That he that has one thing in his heart, and another in his mouth, was more
hateful unto him then the gates of Hell: Phocilides he says, Ne celes, Hide
not one thing in thy heart, and speak another by thy tongue. And touching
Cleobulus and Menander, the one tells thee that a lie is abominable, the other
that false report is a plague of life. What says Sophocles? Lying hasteneth
age. Aristotle, Plato in his Timae^, and 2. De Repub. Caietanus, and Aquinas,
all condemn it. Get thee back therefore to Hell, thou fiend, for the world is
too full of thee already.

The next of this progeny is Unlawful lucre, look what a handsome Mumpsimus
she is, will you know her profession? Forsooth she keeps a baudie house, and
her tapster that tendes the score is a shag^heard slave called Cousenag^: This
i^ she that lays wait at all the carriers, for wenches (...) come up to
London: and you shall know her dwelling by a dish of stewd pruins in the
window, and two or three fleering wenches sit knitting or sowing in her shop:
She is the excellent of her age at a ring and a basket: and for a baudie
bargain, I dare turn her loose to Chaucers Pa^dace. She served first as a
servant in the house with Lais four year, and Flora five more, and after she
had learnt all the subtilties of painting, dying, and surfling, some three
years in Uenice, she was brought hither in an Argosie: and left behind by
Italians, fell at last to set up for her self in Shorditch. This old featherbed
driuer can weep when she list, and is so deuo^t in outward appearance, that
she will not swear, no truly will she not; and she will do as she would
be done unto, by Gods grace, in observation of the commandments. Say you are a
stranger, and pray her to be your cater for the provision of a mooneshine
bancket, Now fie upon you merry man (says she) your wife shall know it I
warrant you, I will not crack my credit with my neighbors for more then I
speak on, go seek your flurts sir jack, I am not for your mowing. Trust me,
if it were not that she fumbls because her teeth are rotted out with eating
sweet meats, it would be a passing pleasure to hear her talk: She will
reckon you up the story of Mistress Sanders, and weep at it, and turn you to
the Ballad over her chimney, and bid you look there, there is a goodly sample:
I wenches (says she, turning hirselfe to her maidens of y^ second scise) look
to it, trust not these dissimulation men, there are few good of the^, y^ there
are not. But touch me her with a pint a sack, and a French crown, if you like
any of her fry; Well (says she) you seem to be an honest gentleman, go
pretty maid and show him a chamber; now maux you were best be unmannerly and
not use him well: There may you go to hell with a vengeance if you please, so
you pay for your mou^ting. But if you hire her to seduce some merchants wife,
Lord how cunning she is! her new wosted kirtle goes on I warrant you, and she
has as many rings on her finger, as kindheart has teeth in his hat. If she
find her opportunity, she is a sure hound to lay holdfast: and if y^ modest wife
stand on terms of her honesty, she has this kind of speech to entice and
allure her, Now in faith mistress (but you must presuppos^ y^ she has delivered
the gentleman's ring before she speaks) you must needs take it, a sin unseen
is half quitted: I know you are fair and young, fresh, and full as a pullet,
and this is not to be lost and laid up niggardly; prove, prove the pleasures of
love, o^ my conscience you will blame your self for deferring so long to enjoy
the^: I pray you sweet heart why was beauty made? what for copwebs to ouergrow
it? Come, come, believe me for I have experince, y^ gentleman is trusty and
rich, and my house shall be at both your commandments. This is her manner of
Dratory in beating bargains, and if she win her purpose, Lancelot gloried not
so much in his conquests, as she to her neighbors of her exploit. If she meet a
young maid in the street she has lodging forher, and God forbid a Christian
should want her help: but will you know the mischief? the wench is fair and
for her turn, and that knows she before y^ next morning, for some ruffian or
other is sure y^ night to board her. If some rich young merchant fall in her
laps, and seeks game to his disadvantage, she welcoms him in at first with, What
does it please your worship to have for breakfast? If he call for a capon she
dresses two, and he has sour sauce to his raw flesh I warrant him: y^ feast
past and he heated with wine, if he strive to co^sture Glicerium vitiate,
Pamphilus y^ wench gives him a watchword, the^ up starts Cousenage with a bum
dagger, she with a hot spit, and out she cries, villain slander my house, ravish
my maid; nay, they put y^ poor fellow into such a passion, y^ they rifle him
ere he part of cloak, rings, and money; so that he may cry wothe pie of his
winning. If a married man fall into her hell of cofusion, she turns him loose to
a trull y^ has new quickened, and finding him at his filthiness, with some of
her society, she works out money at that time, and when the harlot is brought a
bed, she sends her to his door, makes her ruffians threate^ him, so y^ poor
fornicator though he never deserve it, and another got it, he (least his wise
know thereof) both fathers the basterd, and finds the whore, fees the baud, and
feasts the villain, besides all other charges soap and candle: were I not
afraid that Julius Scaliger should have cause to check me of teaching sin
in discoursing and discovering it, it were impossible for you to think what
practices of hers I could di^couer: but since you know her ^welling and have
her picture so publickely showed you, I doom you to Cornelius Tub if you trust
him, and her to hell as she desernes it.

They say likewise there is a Plaier Devil, a handsome son of Mammons, but
yet I have not seen him, because he skulks in the country, if I chance to
meet him against the next impression, he shall shift very cunningly, but I Will
pleasantly con^ure him, and though he has a high hat to hide his huge
horns, I Will have a wind of Wit to blow it off speedily: For all of that sect I
say thus much, If they use no other mirth bu^t Eutrapelian vrbanitie, and
pleasure mixed with honesty, it is to be borne withal; but filthy speaking,
Scurrilitie, unfit for chaste ears, that I wish (...). 4. Eth. Eph^s. 5.
with the Apostle, that it should not be named amongst Christians. Again in
stage plays to make use of Hystoricall Scripture, I hold it with the Legists
odious, and as the Council of Trent did, Sess. 4. Fin. I condemn it. The
conclusion shall be Tullies, and good fellows mark it: Nihil est tam tetrum,
nihil tam aspernandum, nihil homine indignius, quam turpitud^, There is nothing
more vild, nothing more to be despised, nothing more unworthy a man, then
villainy and filthiness, and if you will follow my counsel therefore, write
this over your Theators:

Nil dictu foedum visuque, hae. limina tangat. Iuuenal sa^ir. 5.

Let naught unfit to see or to be said,
Be touched, or in these houses be bewraid.
The last son of Mammon, and breed of Avarice, is a Devil called Dicing, and
Dishonest sport, he like a gallant haunts the cockpits, like a Gentleman
follows the ordinaries; he is at Bedlam once a day I dare assure you, and if
he escape the bowling allie one day, he will not come at the Church a Month
after for pure anger. This fellow is excellent at a Bum Card, and without the
help of Bomelius dog, he can burn the knave of clubs, and find him in the
stock, or in his bosom, he has cards for the nonce for Prima vista, others
for Sant, other for Primero; and he is so cunning in shuffling and conueying
his thumb, that whenever he deals, you shall be sure of no good dealing: As
for Dice, he has all kind of sorts, Fullams, Langrets, hard quater traies,
hie men, low men, some stopped with quick ^iluer, some with gold, some ground; so
that if you seek for hominem quadratum amongst them, you may hap to loose your
labor. This Devil is well seen in blasphemy, and banqueting, in watching,
and drunkenness; and ere he will want money for Come-on-^iue, he will have it by
five and a reach, or hang for it. He stabs if you touch his stake; and stop me
his dice, you are a villain. At bowls if he see you ouermatcht, he will
wager with you, being assured to win; which kind of betting (by the Italian
called Scomesse, and the Spaniard Apuestas) is both forbidden by the laws and
taxed to restitution: wife, children, all shall want, but this humor must be
satisfied; lands, goods, and all must go, but fortune must be followed; hell,
sudden death, and plagues will be had, if this be not considered.

You men that are endued with reason and profess Christianity, Matthiol. lib.
6. cap. 11.
considering the force of this poison, touch it not: beware of this Caerastis,
for his sting is mortal, and banish him from your companies, by reason of
these inconveniences he breeds. Dicing causes avarice in a man to desire
his neighbors goods; next a corrupt will, to carry them away; thirdly lying,
to deceive the believer; fourthly perjury, to maintain a wrong; fifthly, the
corruption of youth, leading to prodigality; sixthly, contempt of love, which
utterly forbids it; seventhly, loss of time, which is a precious treasure;
eighthly, a world of fraud and deceit; ninthly, wrath and debate; tenthly, it
nourishes and Arist. 4. Eth. Alcator est illiber alis.
breeds idleness; eleuenthly, it causes illiberality and niggardize, for
(as Aristotle says) the gainester Au^rus est tenax, Co^etous and a boldfast:
twelfthly, it gives example of negligence, corrupts a family, seduceth
children, making them set light by substance, which God by his providence has
imparted to man, not to nourish his passions, affections, and desires vainly,
but to succor and relieve his neighbor mercifully: thirteenthly, it prou^keth
murders and homicides, deep wounds, and bitter strokes, causing an
improuident gamester to discharge the venime of his choler, on his wife,
children, and servants. How many blasphemies and periuries (eternal God)
proceed from hence? how many thefts, frauds, and deceits? how many are they
that after they have lost their wealth, do desperately hang themselves like
Judas or Achitophel? Who can hear this without grief? or conceit it without
admiration? that a man formed according to the Image of God, and endued with
reason, should so far forget himself, that after he had consumed himself
even unto his shirt in gaming, was not ashamed to hazard his own wife, and had
not failed to have prostituted and yielded her to a lechers lust, had she not
bin hidden by her neighbors, as John Benedicti in his Sum de Pesches
witnesses. Nay, shall I tell you a true and certain story, not reported as an
act done in times past, but a thing fresh in memory, which happened within
these twenty years in the city of Lions in France; a matter worthy the noting,
and not more worthy then certain?

A certain gamester and drunkard, drowned in prodigality and sensuality, (more
unthrifty then Epicharides the dwarf, who in five days spent all his
patrimony in Athens; and like Ethiopus the Corinthian, who sold all his
possessions to Archias, that he might follow dishonest drinking) having
consumed his whole estate: One day (being vehemently incensed by loss and
misthiefe) in so bitter and terrible sort beat his poor wife, (who came to
seek relief from his hands, for her and her poor children) in y^ sight of
his ruffianly companions, that as he thought (and happily it had so fallen out)
he left her dead, and past recovery. This desolate wretch at last returning to
her self, and repairing back again to her household, behold, two her young
babes, who grievously oppressed with hunger, with tears in their eyes (taught
not to speak by age, but misery) required and desired her of sustenance;
Mother, says one, Meat, or I die: Mam, says the other, and with signs
speaks the rest. Alas, poor babes, says the mother with bitter sighs, Where
shall I get it? your father has lost his patience, with his wealth; and we our
hope, with his mishap: Alas, alas, what shall become of me? or who shall succor
you my children? better it is to die with one stroke, then to languish in
continual famine. Pressed by these miseries, and brought to this despair,
she took a knife in her hand, and cut her childrens throats, setting her
self down purposely to die, and perish in her sorows. Her husband the same
evening returning laden with wine, and more fit to take rest then examine these
tragedies, cast himself on his bed, neither dreaming on his losses, nor her
miseries: She urged on by Satan, y^ ever watches opportunities, seeing him
asleep, y^ regarded not her sorrow, with the same knife where with she had killed
her children, she cut his throat, the cause of her confusion; speaking thus
boldly during ye time of her execution: Thou shall die thou negligent man,
since thy ill government has been the ruin of me and my children. Day and
time discovering these murders, the woman was apprehended; and examined by the
Justice, confessed the fact. Finally, she was condemned, and dying with much
constancy, left examples to wives to beware of too much fury, and admonitions
to husbands to be more circumspect. See here how this cursed invention of the
Lydians has been the occasion of the murder of four persons: In reading
therefore this history, be provident to avoid and shun this Devil.

Having thus described the children of Mammon, let these motives draw you in
hatred both with them and their father, consider y^ this Avarice is a burning
fever, exceeding the flames of Aet^a, nay likewise that it burns the souls
of miserable usurers incessantly; wey this, that the covetous man has as much
need of that he has, as of that he has not, according to that of Jerome,
Hieron. ad Paul^. Polit. lib. 1. Iuuen. (...). 14.
Tam de est auar^ quod habet, qua quod non habet. Aristotle for this cause
says, that the desire of riches has no end: and Iuuenal the Poet sings thus:

Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsapecunia crescit,
Et minus hunc optat qui non habet --
The more we have the more we do require,
And who possesses least does least desire.
It were too long to reckon up all other authorities of Cicero, Virgil, Ovid,
and Horace, for this were but to heap up reading and moon no affection, I
only urge to consideration, and by it to hatred of the sin. Let us therefore
leave foolish carking in this world, and remember we are made men to behold
heaven, and not mowles to dig in the earth. Denounce (says Paul to Timothy) to
them that are rich in this world that they be not proud, neither fix their
hope on the incertenty of riches, but in the living God, who gives us all
things abundantly whatsoever we need. Let the Magistrate consider this, that
as when the Moon appears in the spring time, the one horn spotted and
hidden with a black and great cloud, from the first day of his apparition to
the fourth day after, it is some sign of tempests and troubles in the air the
Summer after: so if Secular and temporal Magistrates (who according to
Ecclesiastes are changed like the Moon) shall have their minds Eccles. 27.
spotted with the clouds of Avarice and earthly desires, it is a sign of
subsequent trouble amongst the people: For the Sovereigns covetousness is the
oppression of the subject. O worldling, look as the interposition of the earth
betwixt the Sun and the Moon, is the cause of the Eclipse of the same; so
the interposition of worldly goods betwixt our minds and God, is the cause of
our blindness in understanding. Hear Augustine what Aug. lib. de doctr. Christ.
he says, Amas pecuniam quam nunquam videbis, caecus possides, caecus
moriturus es, quod possides hic relicturus es: Thou love money which thou
shall never see, blind thou possessest it, blind thou must die, and that which
thou enioyest, thou must leave behind thee. A covetous man is like him that is
sick of the dropsy, who the more he abounds in disordinate humors, the more
exceedingly he desires and thirsts; and the more he thirsts, the more he
drinks, till at last he dies: So the more stored a covetous man is with
riches, which he uses not, the more ardently desires he the possession of
more.

The Covetous man likewise is very rightly compared to hell, for with
possessing in excess, he is still insatiate. The covetous man buyeth earth,
and sells his soul made for heaven: and look as water (says Augustine) is
poured on the earth, so thirst they after the blood of their neighbors. All
beasts of rauine do never prey on other till they be a hungry, and being fully
satisfied, they refrain from further spoil: but the cou^tous man does ever
desire and is never satisfied, he neither fears God, nor regards man; he
neither obeieth father, nor respects mother; to his friend he is untrusty,
to the widow injurious, the fatherless he despises, the free he brings in
bondage, he corrupts false witnesses, and occupies the goods of the dead as
if he should never die. Oh what madness is this for man to get gold, and to
loose heaven? The cure hereof is gotten by alms deed, according to that of
Esaias, Frange efurienti panem t^um: (...). ^.
Break thy bread to the hungry: and it follows, Tunc erumpet quasimane lumen
tuum, and sanitas tua citius orietur: Then shall thy light break forth like
the morning, and thy health shall quickly rise. I will trouble you no further:
I fear me I preach too tediously, only let me end with this of Manilius:
(...). (...).


Pudeat tanto bona velle caduca.
O be ashamd so much your hearts to (...),
On things so frail that swiftly pass away.
The discovery of Asmodeus, and his lecherous race of Devils Incarnate in our
age.
NO sooner came Asmodeus into the world by Satan's direction, but presently
procured he Lothes incest with his daughters, Semiramis unlawful whordome with
her own son, and Dinas unhappy and fatal rauishment; he made Thamar be
enforced by her own brother, and forced David to commit murder on Vrias, and
adultery with Bersabe: Pasiphae he brought enamoured with a Bull, and Xerxes
with a Plantaine tree: he caused a young Athenian to fall in love with the
liuelesse picture of Fortune standing near the Pritaneum, and to offer a great
quantity of money to the Senate to buy it from their hands; of which being
denied, and for which wholly enraged, after embracing, kissing, (and such other
ceremonies) he crowned the statue, and lamenting, slew himself: he made Glauca
of Cythera to love a dog, a young Spartan to be besotted on a bird, Xenophon to
affect a hound, nay the better part of the Philosophers to be Sodomites: read
Plutarchs book of Love, and he will testify for me: yet thinking these
gains too little in expression of his envy, watching Sardanapalus one night,
he practiced this monstrous villainy: He assembled his hainousest thoughts,
and compacted them together, he chained his loosest desires, to the inward
workings and motions of the same; and after he had drunk of Letheo, which (as
the Poet says) causes forgetfulness,

Laetheos potat latices obliuia mentis. Sil. Itall. 13.

He drinks Laethean springs which moon forget.
He slumbred awhile, and during sleep, presented them to his Imagination; and
Imagination forming them, he no sooner al^oke, but from his eyes (like corrupt
rays which from menstrual women infect glasses) out start these devils, and
made impression in men's hearts, and ever since have been incarnate, and now in
our world are most pratchant and busy. The first of them is Fornication (a
notorious ^ocher) he goes daily apparelled like a lord though he be but a
devil, his hair frisled and perfumed, y^ should Vespasian but smell him (as
once he did a knight in Rome, as Suetonius reports) he would banish him his
court for his labor: By day he walks y^ streets and the Erchange, to spy out
fair women; by night he courts them with maskes, consorts, and music; he
will sigh like a dog that has lost his master, if his miseres refuse him, and
weep like a Crocadile till he have won himself credit: if his mistres says,
It is against her conscience, Tut (says he) lechery is no sin, find me one
Philosopher that held simple fornication for offensive. This is he that
corrupts maidens to vnlawsull desires for money, and calls Adultery by another
name, A fit of good fellowship: This is the lord of all bawdy houses, and
patron of Peticote-lane, one that would build an hospital for decayed whores,
but yt he is loath to be at the charges. If he take up commodities, it is
Cock-sparrows, Potatos, and Herringes, and the hottest wines are his ordinary
drink to increase his courage: his table talk is but of how many wenches he
has courted that week, and ( Blindness of heart waiting like a page on his
trencher) you shall hear him laugh at his greatest villani^s most heartily:
when he rides you shall know him by his fan; and if he walk abroad, and miss
his mistres favor about his neck, arm, or thigh, he hangs the head like ye
soldier in the field y^ is disarmed: put him to a sonnet, Du Ports cannot
equal him; nay in y^ nice terms of lechery he exceeds him: at Riddles, he is
good; at Purposes, better; but at Tales he has no equal, for Bandello is more
perfect with him then his Paternoster. Tell him ye Turks and Jews severely punish
such sin, and admit no stews: I, (says he, like a cursed Atheist) that
proves the^ stocks and no men. His care is for nothing but perfumes and
Elixar, y^ one to make him smell sweet, y^ other to lengthen life, for of all
things he will not hear of death. A fit companion is this man for such as be
idle: and if any ask, what shall we do to pass the time after the end of an
Ordinary: Faith (says he) lets search whorehouses, for that's y^ best exercise.
If you talk to him of God, Hardness of heart says it concerns him not: If you
counsel him to fast, he commands his cook to make ready a fat capon for his
supper: he is wholly y^ devils, of whom he is begotten. Tell him he has y^
pox, tut it is a gentlemen's disease: and the cause of purging corrupt humors,
are the effects of health. Such is this Devil incarnate, who both deserves to
be known and avoided, and the rather, by reason of his page, blindness of heart,
for he it was y^ first made the Sodomites inwardly and outwardly blind: and he
it was y^ corrupted y^ false Judges to seduce Susanna: this is he y^
distracteth our eyes lest we should see heaven, and blinds our hearts, least
we should behold Gods just Judgments. And therefore Antiquity in painting y^
god of love, have made him blind, because affection is blind, and makes them
blind that follow it. As therefore y^ eye of the soul (by which as Plato
witnesses, we behold y^ essence of God) is a great blessing of y^ Holy ghost;
so blindness of understanding his Lib. 7. de (...)
opposite (whereby we are tied to carnal desires) is ye worst of many
infirmities. Plato in his Dialogues co^pares this co^cupisce^se to a sieue,
into which y^ more water you pour, ye more it spils, and yet in y^ end it is
never filled. In like sort a man y^ thinks to satisfy himself in this
Fornication, demeaneth himself like him C^r. Par. ^ (...). d^ diuer^. temp.
that strives to fill a sleue with water. The Doctor Gerson speaking to this
purpose, brings an example of him y^ is seized with a burning fever, who if he
drink a glass of fresh water, thinks himself sufficiently cooled, but in
less then a quarter of an hour after he is more distempered then ever: As
likewise one that is troubled with the Itch, the more he scratcheth the more
his flesh tingleth; so the more a man seeks to assuage Lust, the more it
increases. The only conquest of this Devil, is to fly him; and for that
cause this is a Maxim held amongst the Fathers, that Facilius vincitur luxuria
fugiendo, quam pugnando: Lechery is better conquered in flying it, then
resisting it. Tullie (though an Ethnicke) entering into the confideration of
Fornication Cl^. l. 2. Offic.
and Lust, says thus, that It closes up the eyes of our souls, and hinders
Judgment. And Plutarch reporting Hannibals follies at Cannas, holds Lust and
effeminate pleasure to be the downfall of his fortunes. Why stand I so long on
this Devil, when a greater preaseth forth, and presents himself? And who is
that but Adultery, an arranter knave then his brother: Look upon his lips, the
one is single, the other double: and though he be apparelled like a Citizen,
he has doings in all countries: This is he will let his wife want, to
maintain a harlot; and laugh at his childrens misery, so his lust be
satisfied: This fiend has a concubine in every corner, and ordinarily a whore
in his household: he has two of his own kindred continually attending him,
Precipitation, and Inconsideration; the one hinders his providence and
counsel, and without regard transports him with amorous passions: for where
Blindness of heart marches before, Precipitation must needs follow to make
him careless in his actions: For (as Plato says) Voluptas omnium
insolentissima est, Pleasure and Lust is the most insotent of all things: for
it perturbeth our spirits, and takes away ^he empire of liberty. This fellow
peruerts memory, hurts consideration, kills providence, and treads down
advice: The other, called Inconsideration, hinders both reason and judgment,
by fleshly delights; dulleth the memory in respect of God, breeds an
Apoplexy and benumming of the soul. Furnished with these two followers, what
impiety leaves Adultery undone? his neighbor is made jealous, his wife a
strumpet, his door is hourly haunted with a Sumner, and catch him out of the
Arches one term, he will forseit his upper garment for default, his own
house is hell to him, a baudie house his heaven; and for his companions he
chooses none but the arrantest dronckards in a country. He has no spirit to
goodness, neither is he moved to godliness: his felicity is the surfets of
his flesh, and pain with him is no more thought of then it is felt: he is
ready at a jar to set strife betwixt man and wife, and to this intent
forsooth, that he may take possession of another man's free hold, and make a
common of his neighbors enclosure. He spights him most that examines his
proceedings, and will chafe till he sweat again, if a man touch him with his
infirmities. Speak ought that breeds a hate of sin, it is a very Hell to
him: bless your self out of this fiends company, for these certain and
exampler respects, that follow, First because adultery is a greater sin, and
more hateful (as some schoolmen say, in the sight of God) then perjury.
Lenit. 20. Deuteronomy. 21.
Next, because Gods law forbids it, and example dissuades it. By the law
adulterers were stoned to death. Before the law they were punished by death; as
appears by Judas justice on Thamar: examples of the heinousness of this
sin appears in many places; thousands of men died in the fields of Moab for
this fault, and sixty thousand of the children of Israel were put to the
sword for the only rauishing of a Levites wife. Thirdly, for these respects
is this adultery to be eschewed, first because it impugneth the law of
nature, Next the law of countries; and last, for that it has been the ruin
of many Cities and kingdoms. If in the law of nature it had not been
odious, Pharaoh and Abimelech had not answered Abraham, That had they supposed
Sara for his wife, they had not taken her. Touching the laws of countries,
Solon in his, adjudged Genesis 12. Pano^mit.
the adulterer to die: the Locrensians, Persians, Arabians, and Egyptians most
cruelly punished it: Plato consents with Solon, the law of the twelve tables
with both: By the Civil laws, the husband adulterer loses his marriage, and
the adulteress his wife the thirds of the goods of her husband. And as
concerning the exemplarie miseries it has fatally wrought, Sodom and Gomorra
were consumed with fire for adultery and Sodomie: Troy a proud city made a
plowd land.

Nune seges est vbi Troia fuit.
And corn now grows where Troy once stood.
Agamemnon for refusing to keep to Clitemnestra, and defiling himself with
Briseis, was prosecuted by deadly hatred by his wife, and slain in Treason by
her adulterous paramour Egistus. Ulysses rather refused immortality at
Calipsos hand, then to consent to this sin; and Lewis of France as the
Hystorian says, Maluit mori quam violare fidem sues centhorali, He had rather
die then break his faith to his espoused wife: it was the only adulteries of
the French that caused a Massacre of 8000 upon Fulgos. lib. 6.
the ringing of one Bell in the Isle of Sicilie, Nectabanus and Olimpus love,
the miseries of unhappy Dalida, of Tereus, and many others, might be here
alleged, but I will end with that in Horace, touching the punishments of
adulterers, and the rather to Horace lib. 1. s^t 2.
bring men in horror of the sin:

Hic se praecipitem tecto dedit, ille flagellis
Ad mortem caesus, fugiens hic decidit acren^
Proedonum in turbam, dedit hic pro corpore nummos,
Hunc perminxerant calones, quin etiam illud
Accidit, vt quidamtestes, caudamque saluce^.
Demeteret ferro.
This lecher from a window headlong skipt,
This, till he suffered death was soundly whipped;
He flying, fell in cursed fellons hands.
This, money gave to ransom him from bands.
Him, clownes bepist; and this does often hap,
That some leaud lechers caughtin cunning trap,
Scornd and disdaind (and worthy of the scoff)*
Have both their saltie tail and stones cut off.
But herein some man perhaps will take occasion to reprove me, that describing
adultery with a double lip, I discover not the cause why I present him so: to
him let this reason suffice, which wants not his authority, I therefore give
adultery a single and double lip, because there is a single and a double
adultery; that adultery which is called single, is when as one of the two
that commits the sin is married, and the other is not; and the double, wherein
man commits Bigamy* or both the offenders are coupled in marriage: touching two
of these, I have sufficiently discoursed (as I hope) before this* only of
Bigamy and Poligamie this much and so an end: both these (as against nature)
the Ethnicks and Pagans despised: and that they are Genes^* ^*
condemned by God it appears by his own words, Erunt duo in carne vna, They
shall be two in one flesh: he says not, three or four: by this place
shameless Lamech of the cursed race of Came is condemned for beginning the
plurality of wives, and the lascivious and sensual Emperor Valentinian, who
coupled with his wife Seneca, a young maiden called Iustine, whom he espoused as
Socrates witnesses.

Too long am I on this, behold another more hainons spirit incarnate in the
body of a youthly and brave gallant, who comes freshly from the Tailers in a
new suit of crimson Satin, and must to Poules presently to meet with his
Pandare: this fellow is called Rauishment, an unnatural fiend, he wears a
feather in his beuer hat which is called the plume of Inconstancy, and
howsoever that waueth, his wit wandreth: this is he will give a baud ten pound
for the breaking up of a wench, nay which is most horrible, before that nature
enable her: he never walks without a full purse, nor sleeps before a
mischief, nor weeps but for pure envy: he may not smile nor laugh, but at
the despoiles of chastity. He holds this ariome, That there is no pleasure
sweet that is not accompanied with resist; and that no flowers are pleasant but
those of the first gathering. He it was that ravished Danae in a golden shewer,
and Mica the chaste Uirgine in the days of Aristotimus. All wordly delights he
has to entangle innocence with, and his grandsir Satan has given it him from
the cradle, to attempt the chastest: intertaine him to your guest, your
Uirgines are corrupted, your kindred desamed, your children pointed at, and
that which is a great misery in these miseries, he only publishes your shame,
and reioiceth at it: he is excellent at Italian, and I think he be one by y^
mothers side: be not of his fraternity if you be afraid of a general counsel,
for the Elibertine Sinode co^demus and excommunicates him. If you would know a
baud male, or female, you shall find the^ by him: for with none else is he
acquainted: one mark he has, his beard is cut after y^ Turkish fashion, and
he is lame of one leg like Agesilaus, and that he brake leaping in Florence out
of a window. These tokens being sufficient to know him by, let these reasons
serve to bring him in hate: Things they say the more rarer they be, the more
dearer they be, Now then since that Uirginitie and chastity is rare, and by
that reason dear, how great reason have we to hate him that despoileth us of
y^ orname^t? unworthy is he ye name of a man yt does ye work of a beast, nay
most detestable of al men is y^ rauisher, who destroieth y^ which God can not
repair. According to y^ opinion of Aristotle in his Ethics, and Ierom upon
Amos, fly therefore this Hidra, this hateful to God Eth. 3.
and man: and since according to Chrisost: Pudicitia and virginit as imbecillis
est, Modesty and virginity is weak, let us banish y^ sin from our societies
Chrisost. des virg. cap. 80.
y^ is likest to disturb and attempt it. Another spirit there is incorporated
very cu^ningly whichin al apparitio^s I ever could see him in, has his face
covered with a veil and in it is written Incest, and he it was y^ made Herod
abuse his sisters wife, and I fear me plays ye devil covertly in our
country, if I may chance to know it, he may be sure I will unmask him. Another
fiend there is, but he hants not our country, but trauaileth Flanders and ye
low countries like a souldior, this devil robs churches, rauisheth religious
women, scorns the Clergy, beats down bells and steeple, and commits filthy
absurdities in ye churches, whom I only name in this place because I wish the
ports might be laid if he attempt to arrive here, for of al chaffare he sels
best a challice, cope, and communion cup; and if he be permitted to enter among
us, no minister shall save him a surples to say service on sunday in. But what
visio is this, enough to affright the world? Self-love, the idolater of his
body, an infernal and master angel; accompanied with Love of this world, y^
loathes to hear of piety: Hate of God (in y^ he prohibits sin) and horror of the
world to come, in y^ he fears judgment: these four loathsome ministers,
bring in a three headed and ugly mo^ster; nature walks apart and hides her face
in her hands for fear to behold him, ye first head is Mollities inuenting
voluntary pollution: the second Sodomy, perverting the order of nature: y^
third Bestiality, called by ye schoolmen ( crimen pessimu^:) this monsters eyes
are still hanging down, as if ashamed to behold y^ light, and in his brows are
written, signu^ reprobrationis, the mark of reprobatio^; the first ^.
head whispers in mine ear ye Her and Onan were slain by an angel through his
corruption. The second tells me y^ Italy can best teach me if I would know his
qualities; alas chaste ears, I dare not name it, though I fear it is to much
used, I dare not think it, Pedrastia, Socrates sin. The third tells me he is a
monster getter, and has followers amongst men are unworthy naming: wretches
auant, you brood of hell, you causes of the general Cataclisme and deluge, fly
from these bounds of Christ endome, I am afraid to name you, I c^ure you by my
prayers from my country, ye infernal poures themselves in their copy of sin,
hate you* and have oftentimes slain those y^ have been exercised in your
villainies. That very night Christ was born, al your sodomitical crew perished,
and depart you to darkness whilst I discover your fathers villainies. God be
thanked y^ monsters are vanished, saw you not one of the^ kissing a sow,
another dallying with a boy, another using voluntary pollutio^, fie away with the^
they are damned villains* come lets examine the workings of their father, and
arm our selves against him, stand forth you pocky devil Asmodius for I mean to
swinge you.

Augustine discoursing upon ye effects of lechery and lust, has this Lib. de
da^ christ.
notable saying, Luxuria est inimica deo, inimica virtutibus, perdit
substantiam, and ad tempus voluptatem diligens, futuram non sciunt cogitare
paupertatem, Lust (says he) is an enemy to God, an enemy to virtue, it
consumes wealth, and loving pleasure for a while, it suffers us not to think
of our future poverty: approving hereby in a few words, and they effectual,
that he who is entangled in the snares of desires, is distracted from God,
forsaken by virtue, drowned in sensualtie, and besotted with inconsideration.
This spiritual infirmite is compared to the disease of leprosy, which
proceeedeth from corrupt and disordinate heat; and as the leprosy 3. Reg. 8.
is an incurable disease, even so is lust an irremediable mischief: With this
infirmity was Solomon infected, who had seventy Quienes and three hundredth
concubines, so that even in his age his heart was depraved: and whereas in all
other sins their venom is not contracted by society, in lust a man by
conversation may be corrupted: so that neither the wise man's wit, neither the
strong man's arms, nor the holy man's meditation is defenced against lust, but
as Jerome says, ad Paulum and Eus^ochaim, Ferreas mentes libido domat,

Lust conquereth the most untamed minds. As soon says Gregory, as lust has
possession of the mind, it scarsly suffers it to conceive any good desires,
and in that the desires thereof are vicious by the suggestion thereof rises
corrupt thought, and of thought the like affection, and of affection
delectation, and of delight consent, and of consent operation, and of operation
custom, and of custom desperation, and of desperation, defense of sin and
glorieng therein, and of glorying in sin, damnation. Lururious men have
outwardly the Devil suggesting them; and inwardly concupiscence incensing
them; and of these two, al carnal sinn^es are begotten. It is likewise to be
noted, that the word of God, is two ways indemnified by lascivious men, the
one way is conculcator a transeuntibus, It is trodden down by them as they
pass by it: This treading down and oppression of the word of God, is the
custom of evil thoughts, whereby the Gospel is oppressed: The second is,
that it is devoured of birds; which devouring is the suggestion of the Devil.
Against these defects there are likewise two remedies, the first is, that we
fence in the enclosure of our hearts, with the thorns of the memory of the
passion of Christ, according to that of the wise man, Popule sepi aures Eccles.
28.
tuas spinis. For there is no greater remedy says Origin, nor better means
against evil cogitations, then the remembrance of Christ's passion. The second
remedy is, to fatten this enclosure of our hearts with the virtue of charity;
for of it it is said, That it covers the multitude of sins. To conclude a
sea of matter in a short circle of admonition, refrain lust and her progeny
for these causes, First it destroieth the infused graces of God, and the gifts
of the holy ghost: Secondly, it consumes the four cardinal virtues:
Thirdly, it weakeneth the body, infeebleth the spirit, and hardens the heart
against all devotion. The armor against this envy, is, The consideration of
his deformity, The auoidance of occasions and motions of desire, The tempering
and moderation of our corrupt bodies, The continual thought of impendent
death, The imagination of Gods continual presence, The consideration of those
infirmities wherewith it cloieth the spirit: Lastly in assaults, The office of
prayer; which as Cassianus says, is a sufficient buckler against all the ^.
assaults of the world. I have discovered the sore, and given a plaster, I
beshrow those that are wounded if they make not use of it.

Of the great Devil Beelzebub, and what monstrous and strange Devils he has
bred in our age.
Beelzebub the envious, grand God of flies, Archduke of Grecian fantasies, and
patron of the Pharisees, thou Prince of Devils, I must strain your patience a
little to reckon up your pedigree: and though your infecting (...).
Cain, perverting Esau, seducing Saul, incensing Absolon, and gathering all the
heresies in the church were enough to condemn your horns to be sawed off of
your head for villainy: yet it shall suffice me to find out the beginning of
your sinful progeny. Your wife I trow was Iealosie the daughter of a corrupt
spirit, who could never find in her heart to dress her self, for fear a pin
should kill her; nor look into the air, for fear she should be blasted* nor
drink of water, in doubt she should be poisoned: God amercy for that nod hornd
beast for it shows thy confession. Well then, Jealousy thy wife, how were thy
children gotten? for sooth it fortuned (as some poetical humor inspires me)
that being vexed with a sever and passion of the spleen, thou were by the
advice of Wrath (the Physician in ordinary in thy household) let blood on the
back of thy hand, in that vain which is next the little finger, out of which
having gathered much blood, Jealousy (that was still afraid of thee, and
shunned thy company for fear in lubberlepping her thou should press her to
death) drunk up this corrupt excrement fasting, and after one stolen kiss
from thy mouth, fell in such sort a swelling, that within the space of one
month at one birth (now the devil bless them) brought thee forth these sons as
I orderly describe the^. The first by Satan (his grandsire) was called
Hate-Vertue, or (in words of more circumstance) Sorrow for another man's good
success) who after he had learnt to lie of Lucian, to flatter with Aristippus,
and conjure of Zoroastes, wandered a while in France, Germany, and Italy, to
learn languages and fashions, and now of late days is stolen into England to
deprave all good deserving. And though this fiend be begotten of his fathers
own blood, yet is he different from his nature, and were he not sure y^
Jealousy could not make him a cuckold, he had long since published him for a
bastard: you shall know him by this, he is a soul lu^ber, his tongue tipped with
lying, his heart steeld against charity, he walks for the most part in black
under color of gravity, and looks as pale as the Uisard of y^ ghost which
cried so miserally at ye Theator like anoisterwife, Hamlet, revenge: he is full
of infamy and slander, insomuch as if he ease not his stomach in detracting
somewhat or some man before noontide, he falls into a fever that holds him while
supper time* he is always devising of Epigrams or scoffs, and grumbles,
murmures continually, although nothing cross him, he never laughes but at
other men's harms, briefly in being a tyrant over men's fames, he is a very
Titius (as Virgil says) to his own thoughts.

Titijque vultur intus
Qui semper lacerat comestque mentem.
The mischief is that by grave demeanure, and news bearing, he has got some
credit with the greater sort, and many fools there be that because he can
pen prettily, hold it Gospel what ever he writes or speaks: his custom is
to prefer a fool to credit, to despite a wise man, and no Poet lives by
him that has not a flout of him. Let him spy a man of wit in a Tavern, he is
an arrant dronckard; or but hear that he parted a fray, he is a harebraind
guarreller: Let a scholar write, Tush (says he) I like not these common
fellows: let him write well, he has stolen it out of some note book: let
him translate, Tut, it is not of his own: let him be named for preferment, he
is insufficient, because poor: no man shall rise in his world, except to feed
his envy: no man can continue in his friendship, who hates all men. Divine
wits, for many things as sufficient as all antiquity (I speak it not on slight
surmise, but considerate judgment) to you belongs the death that does nourish
this poisen: to you the pain, that endure the reproof. Lilly, the famous for
facility in discourse: Spencer, best read in ancient Poetry: Daniel, choice in
word, and invention: Draiton, diligent and formal: Th. Nash, true English
Aretine. All you unnamed professors, or friends of Poetry, (but by me inwardly
honored) knit your industries in private, to unite your fames in public: let
the strong stay up the weak, and the weak march under conduct of the strong;
and all so imbattell your selves, that hate of virtue may not imbase you. But
if besotted with foolish vain glory, emulation, and contempt, you fall to
neglect one another, Quod Deus omen auertat, Doubtless it will be as infamous a
thing shortly, to present any book whatsoever learned to any Maecenas in
England, as it is to be headsman in any free city in Germany: Claudite iam
riuos pueri sat prata viuerunt.
The mean has discoursed, let the mighty prevent the mischief. But to our
Devil, by his leave, we can not yet shake him off: hark what Martial says
to thee, thou deprauer: Omnibus inuideas, inuide nemo tibi.
Envy thou all men, let none envy thee.
And why think thou, wishes he thus? Mary to the end thou may be the
more tormented. Thou vice of nature; thou error without excusation: though it
nothing profits me to speak truth against thee, yet shall it hinder thy
venime to molest and poison many. Know thou (scum of imperfections) that
howsoever thou defraut est other of praise, thou be wraiest thine own
infirmities: and although I am past hope to reform thee by my just reasen, yet
(false devil as thou art) I leave thee to the martyrdom of thy thoughts, and
since example expresses imperfection, I Will tell the world a story wherein with
Lira I will prettily discover thy nature.

A great and mighty Lord desirous to know the difference betwixt an envious and
covetous man commanded a servant of his to bring one of both sorts to his
presence: to whom (after some courtly salutations) he made this offer, that
ask what they would he would grant it them, on that condition, that he might
give the second the double of that the first demanded: these two understanding
the sum of the Noblemans intent, fell at debate betwixt themselves which of
them should wish first; the covetous, desiring to wish last, by reason of the
commodity depending thereon, and the envious disdaining the other should have
more then he. At last the Nobleman seeing their contention without end, and
desirous to see the issue of his expectation, commanded the envious to begin,
reserving the covetous the latter choice; But what desired he think you, being
preferred to this election? Forsooth, naught else but that one of his eyes might
be pulled out, to the end the other might loose both his, choosing rather the
loss then the profit, to the end that he whom he envied might have mischief
with the advantage: whereby we may easily understand, in what blindness and
error that miserable man is, that suffers himself to be conquered by this
cursed humor: to conclude with Job, this sort Job. 5.
of maligning envy kills a fool, I wish therefore that all wise men should
fly it.

The next Devil incarnate of this breed is Malicious hatred, whose
fouedelicity is to rejoice at other men's harms, giving affliation ^oh. ^.
to those y^ are troubled with affliction. This fellow still walks with his hat
over his eyes, confirming that of John, He y^ hates his brother lives in
darkness. If a man offend him, he admits no reconcilement. He was a persecutor
in the primitive Church, when blindness of heart was executioner of the saints:
and to cause any man's confusion is his chiefest felicity. It was he drew the
French king to invade Cicilie, Italy, and Naples: and some say his council
ma^e the Spaniard enter into Nauar. It was he that flesht the Turk upon the
Christians, and wrought that deadly debate betwixt the Tarter and Muscouite:
when he hears of peace, then is he pensive, and if he want credit with y^
mighty, he falls at working among the comminalty: he never coulors with anyman,
but to betray him; nor lends any man money but to undo him, nor contriues any
stratagem without murder, or dwells by any neighbor, but to hurt him: he has a
cause at law in every court, and prefer him conditions of accord, he will fret
himself to death. His enuies the older they be, the better they please him*
for inueterate wrath still ^oileth in his breast: if he counsel any man in his
own humor, he laboreth him to mistake all courtesies, to misconsture all
reconcilements: if a man salute him, it is in mockery; if a man salute him
not, he is proud and shall be pulled lower: if a man advise him in worldly
affairs, he infinuates; to be brief, nothing can please him but to hear of
other men's perdition. Fly this fiend and his humor, you that love peace or
look for selicitie, for he y^ loves not (says John) remains in death:
follow the course of the Hermit Agathon, who never slept in anger, nor to his*
power suffered any displeased man to part from him without reconciliation:
rather make thine enemy ashamed by thy courtesies, the^ incensed by thy
hatreds; and being thy self mortal, let not thy hate be immortal. The last
devil of this race (for Jealousy is barren, but in increasing her own
mischiefs) is Worldly fear, he never walks abroad but in suspicion, if a
butchers hook do but catch him by the sleeue, he cries out, At whose suit? he
is still in jealousy that every man will exceed him, and atte^preth nothing in
virtue, through y^ suspect of his corrupt nature: because he wants charity,
he is still in dread, and the only fee of his fortune is the suspect of his
ability: he has courage enough to adventure on any sin, but touching the
domages of his body, there is not an arranter coward. He trusts no man for
fear he deceive him, if he hear of any of his equals in election of an office,
he trembles like an aspen leaf, in doubt that his advancement should be a
hinderance to him: according to that in Claudian,

Est malus inter pres rerum metus, omne trahebat
Augurum peiore vid. --
Fear misseinterprets things, each Augury
The worser way he fondly does imply.
And that of Tullie in his Epistle to Torquatus, Plus in metuendo est mali,
quam in eo ipso quod timetur: There is more evil in fearing, then in that
which is feared. This fiend was he that possessed Dionysius the elder, giving
him a greater hell by his suspicion, then danger by his enemies hatred. Of all
other devils let good men bless them from this; for though he seem
contemptible in his own abiectiues, yet whatsoever mind he seazeth upon, (as
Granatensis says) he shows himself to be a powerful perturbation, making
of little things, great; and of great, monstrous. The children of Beelzebub thus
briefly brought in knowledge, let us with some consideration examine the
workings, and give remedy against the assaults of the father. Envy in his
nature is agrieued at the prosperity of another man; he enuieth y^ great, since
he can not equal them: he enuieth the weak, dreading they should compare
themselves with him: finally, he enuieth his equals, because he were very loath
they should be his companions. In Kingdoms, Commonweals, Princes courts, and
private families, he is still working; no man hunteth after honor, but he
affronts him: only the miserable man he maligneth not, because he suspects not
his risings; yet has he a scorn for him, such as Phalaris had to hear
Perillus groaning and roaring in his brazen Bull. This capital sin of all other
is of most antiquity, and shall be of longest continuance. Grievous were the
wars raised by this fiend betwixt the Romans and Carthaginians, and as fatal
those betwixt Caesar and Pompey, who contended not upon injuries but upon
enuies. He it was that poisoned Socrates, slew Crassus, destroyed Darius,
overthrew Pyrrhus, brought Cyrus to his end, made Cataline infamous, and
Sophomy be unfortunate. Hermocrates the tyrant of Cicely knowing the venim of
this vice, gave his son this last, and not the least instruction: That he
should not be envious, (adding thereunto this consequence) But do thou (says
he) such deeds, that others may envy thee: for to be euuied is the token of
good deserts; but to be envious, the sign of a corrupt nature. It is Tullius
in his Orator; that the most flourishing fortune is always envied: agreeing
with that in Quid,

Summa petit liuor, perflant altissima venti:
Hate climes unto the head: winds force the tallest towers.
This infirmity is compared to a simple fever, that is now hot, straight cold;
for now does the envious man rejoice at the adversity of the good, now wax
sad at the prosperity of the righteous. Cain was sick of this disease,
envying the prosperity of Abel: Rachel envied the fecunditie and fruitfulness
of Lea; Saul, the felicity of David. To conclude, the fall of y^ world, and the
death of Christ, was wrought by this sin. Wisely says Cassiodorus, Quicquid
ex inu^dia dicitur, veritasnon reputatur: For who has envy in his heart, is
never without lying in his tongue. There is no man rightly enuieth another man's
knowledge, but he that suspecteth his own. The remedy of this vice (as
Albertanus says). Is the love of God, and of our neighbor: and in ascribing
all things to the goodness of God, we shall have nothing to malign at, which is
good in his creatures. Besides, if we hate death (as a thing most contrary and
grievous to nature) we must needly hate Envy, that first brought it into the
world. The blessed souls (says Gregory) do as much rejoice at the felicity
of others, as their own. It is then consequently an act of the cursed, to be
agrieued at any man's prosperity. Not to detain you long, with this I end with
Tully, Est buius seculi Ci^. pr^ L. Cornel. O^a. 24. li. 3
labes quaedam and macula virtuti inuidere, It is a certain infirmity and
deformity of this world, to envy virtue. And not to forget Horace,

Virtutem incolumen odimus,
Sublatum ex oculis quaerimus inuidi.
Virtue assignd we envy cursedly,
But rest from us, we seek for greedily.
The incarnate monsters begotten by the Arch-Deuill Baalberith.
AMongst all the monstrous ingendrings, and wonders of nature, (set down by
Pliny, Aristotle, and Elian in his histories) the begetting of Baalberiths
children is the most miraculous: for touching procreation by mouth, by ears,
and by other parts, they are confirmed by knowledge and experience; but for y^
heart to be a place of conception, I held it a thing impossible, except it be
in a Devil. Yet as impossible as it is, true it is, and in a Devil it was;
and thus Baalberith became a father: When by those tirannies that ranged in the
Primitive Church from Aurelius to Valerian, this cursed spirit of wrath, rather
augmented then dismembered the faithful, he sat him down in a mere agony,
and began to imagine in his thoughts how to destroy Patience in men's hearts,
which is an opposed enemy to all his proceedings. Hereon inflaming his heart
(by the hot choleric and swift blood which he sent out of his veins by Caua
vena to it) there rose certain speedy and vehement spirits encountering with
his sinister thoughts, that (forced out by his beating and heavy lungs) took
passage with his breath* and no sooner entered the air but attained bodies, in
which they work, and by which they are known. Tec first of them became a
Ruffian, a Swashbuckler, and a Bragart, they call him Brawling contention; his
common gate is as proud as a Spaniards, his ordinary apparel is a little low
crowned hat with a fether in it like a forehorse; his hairs are curld, and full
of elues locks, and nitty for want of kembing; his eyes are still staring, and
he never looks on a man but as if he would eat him: his doublet is of cast
Satin, cut sometime upon Taffata, but that the bumbast has eaten through it,
and spotted here and there with pure fat, to testify that he is a good
trencher man: his common course is to go always untrust, except when his shirt
is a washing, and then he goes woolward: and his breeches are as desperate as
himself, for they are past mending: his weapons are a basket hilted sword, and
a bu^ dagger; and if he keep these from pawn, he is sure of a living: his
prayers in the morning are, Gogs wounds hostess one pot more: and his daily
exercise is to be champion in a bawdy house: you shall have him for tweluepence
to brave and brawle with any men living: and let any men fall together by the
ears; to the field (cries he) I Will see fair play* he has a Punck (as the
Pleasant Singer calls her) that finds him spending money; and if she provide not
his drinking penny, she is sure of the bas^inado: give him the lie* he
strikes you suddenly; and call him less then a gentleman soldier, Zown^s you
are a villain. He is a passing good railer, specially if an old bawd anger
him; and let him but look into a vawting house, he shall play his tricks
without charges. In Term time he is a Setter, to further horse stealers; and
to cunnyeatch a countreyman, he shall give place to none in Newgate. In a ^ray
in Fleetstreet you shall daily see him foremost, for but in fighting, chiding,
and scolding, he has no countenance. You shall hire him fo^r a special baily
if you come off with an angel; and sometimes he may carry a ring in his mouth,
if he have a cast livery for his labor. He is the only man living to bring
you where the best licour is, and it is his hat to a half penny but he will
be drunk for company. Then let the host cross him, out goes his dagger; let
the hostess entreat him, she is a whore for her labor, and though he drink
beyond his stock, that's but a custom. ^ut (mine host, cries he) skore it up,
it is the credit of your ale house. Bring a Sargeant and him together, you
shall hear villainy with a vengeance: and if they conspire any man's arrest,
gogs wounds he will haulse him. This is a chief caterpiller in a city, and
too much winckt at: he has already insected the most part of the suburbs, it
were great pity to grant him harbor in the city. Isidorus says of this
Devil that he is subject to three evil conditions of a dog: ^
First, he is always ready to Quarrel: secondly, he takes his best pleasure
in Strife and Debate: thirdly, he provoke others unto Discord. Of all
Baalberiths breed, there can not be an arranter or more currish villain, and
peruerter of peace; and his impatience in injury, comes of his carnal mind.
Of all companions there is none that more deserves the avoiding then he; for
whosoever falls into his humor of impatience, he presently becomes the
disciple of the Devil, and fit and apt for all evil things. Nay, whosoever
delights in contentions and debates, seems wholly to contradict his
natural inclination (...). sup. A^ath. 8. cap.
and being: for (as Chrysostom says) Non est creatus cum cornibus, vt Ceruus,
Tygris, aut Centaurus, etc. He is not created with horns, as the Heart, Tiger,
and Centaure, that with them he should gore another man; neither with a hard
and hornie hoof, like a horse, to kick at another man: neither with a sharp
fang, as the Woolfe, Dog, and Lion, to bite any man; neither with a sharp
bill, or crooked and strong nails, to the end he should tear, or prey upon
another man; as the Falcon, the Herne, the Hawke, and the Eagle: but be is
created with all his members, very competent and humble, to the end he should
behave himself justly and humbly in all things toward his neighbor:
whereupon it is to be inferred, that a brauling and contentious fellow, is a
beast amongst men. Comparatus est minent^s insipientibus similis factus est
illis, He is compared to bruit beasts, and is made like unto them: and not only
is the contentious quarreller like the sauadge beast, but he resembles
likewise the devil himself. For as the one sows cockle among Matthew. 13.
the corn, so the other ingendreth contentions among societies. The Wise man
calls him an Apostata, and unprofitable; Proverb. 6.
adding this, In omni tempore iurgium seminat, He continually sows debate.
Herupon Gregory says, That if they be the sons of God, that seek peace and
ensue it; they truly are the sons of Satan, that pervert peace, and destroy
society. Let not therefore this devil have any title among you, for he is
beneficial to none but four: to the U^ttailer, for ridding his drink; to the
Surgean, for curing his wounds; to the Physician for purging his disease, and
the earth for feeding it with dead bodies. As this Devil only haunteth the
suburbs, and ^ildome but skulkingly and in company enters the city; so is
there another Devil of his race that haunts both court, city, and country,
nay there is none so private meeting, none so sollemne disport, but he is there
for a stickler to increase the multitude of sins: this Devil is called
Blasphemy, that is continually clamorous, ready to swell in envy, prone and
forward in indignation, he cares not to swear God his maker and governor from
top to ^oe like the French man, and curse al his creatures in dishonor of their
creator; his delight is hourly to make idols of every vain thing he sees
sretting* ^hafing and perplexing himself if he want oaths to difiest his
displeasure. He haunts ordinaries, and places of exercise, schools and houses
of learning, nay I fear me (would God it were a lie) there are more oaths sworn
in Poules in a day, th^n devout prayers said in it in a month: every shop has
one at least, beside the master, to swear to the price, and without an oath
now adays there is no buieng or chaffare: faith and troth are the least
hazard; yea and nay is a puritan. This fiend accounts it an impeach of his
honor if any outsweare him, and a token of cowardice, if he want oaths to
reply with* he is a man that day he coins some loathsome jest out of the
s^ipture; and is never so little crossed, but (if he wants a fit English oath to
put in) he will up with Can^re, vie^ne la bosie, la peste ^estrangle, la ^able,
le ragete puisso em^rter: if he want French blaspheamy, Pota d'i^dio, putana
d'iddi^, cties he with the Italian Atheist: if you talk of Divine justice, he
says there is no God: if he by sickness and plagues be forced to confess
him; he calls him tyrant, unjust, and without equity: if another man be
preferred before him, he says God does wrong to his honor: if he fling the
dice (after the loss of two or three hazards,) In spite of God he will now
cast in: and though he be justly accused of an offense, I forsake God (says
he) and I did it. Let any man promise him a familiar to surther him in gaming,
he will vow that Devils know all things, that the thoughts of men's hearts are
open unto them, that they may save and give man Paradise. Hire him to write a
comedy, he is as arrant an A theift as Rabelais in his Pantag^uel, so that it
is wonder y^ (with Theodectus the Poet) he is not stroke^ blind, and by divine
justice loose his ences as Theopompus did for many months: and not only in this
habit breaks forth Blasphemy in our age and nation; but amongst the Jews
and Rabins he has been more impious: saying that God roareth three times a
day like a lion, Alas, alas, alas, woe is me, that I have destroyed my
people: and in their Peruchines and expositions upon the sixth chapter of
Genesio they say that God has reproved himself for creating five things;
First, the Chaldeans; secondly, the Ismalites; thirtly, Original sin and
concupiscence; fourthly, Idolatry; fifthly, that he suffered the captivity of
the children of Israel in Babylon. It was he that taught them in their Talmud
to excommunicate God for taking R. Ehezers part against them: and incensed that
cursed lim of their sinagogue to say, That entering Paradise by subtilty, he
deceived both God and the Devil. I dare not write further of those impieties I
have read, not only in these reprobates, but also in the lives of many
Christians in profession, Devils in deed, who led by this spirit, have like
Julian, Blastus, and Florinus, and many others, filled their times with
impieties: Only let me persuade you by these examples to gather the
lothsomenesse of this sin, and fly it in all your speeches and conversation.
Among the Grecian gods and Idolatrous Dracles, contempt had his punishment, as
it appeared in Daphides. And Misoeue, for threatening the gods with war, was
utterly subverted: Sena cherib for blaspeaming the true Immortal god, had
eight hundredth thousand men defa^ted in one night by the Angels: Antiochu^,
Nicanor, and Holophernes, the one was devoured with worms, the next had his
tongue plucked out and cast unto the fowls; the third had his head cut off by a
woman, and all for blaspheamie: Himinaeus, and Alexander, were possessed ^y the
Devil: Olimpius the Arrian, was slain by lightning: Pheraecides was consumed
with (...): nay a young child (as Cir^le reports) was fech^ away by the
Devils, for blaspheaming the name of God. Let all sorts consider on this, and
govern that little member their tongue, least Justice that has forborne long
time, stri^e home at last to their confusion. What malecontent is this that
follows him; Looking suspitiouslie, as fearing to ^ee apprehended; scattering
Li^els in Court, Westminster, and London? By his apparel he should be a
Frenchman, but his language shows him to be English. Oh I know him now, it is
Sedition the Trouble world; This Devil de^ected for some notable villainy in
his country, or after the lewd and prodigal expense of his living, flying
under color of Religion beyond the seas, is lately come over with seditious
books, false intelligences, and defamatorie Libels, to disgrace his Prince,
detract her honorable c^unsell, and seduce the common sort: This fellow in
Poules takes up all the malcontents, telling them wonders of the
entertainment of good wi^s in other countries, and calls them fools for living
so long hear, where men of good wits are most neglected. In the country, he
storms, and railes, against enclosures, telling the husbandmen that the
pleasure of their Lords, eats away the fat from their fingers; and these rackt
rents (which in good sooth authority might wisely look into) are the utter
ruin of the yeomanrie of England: the conclusion of his talk always is
insurrection, and commotion; for says he the world will never be mended with
the poor whilst these carm^rants be hanged higher. This is he that says
that war is a good tree, and brings forth good fruit, namely store of good
crowns: and it is a paradox of his, That it is better live a Rebel then die a
beggar. If any mis^ke his talk, and threaten to bring him in question, My
friend (quoth he) I do but try the natures of men how they are inclined,
that they may be looked into by the better sort, whose intelligencer I am. This
is a pestilent ^iend, and the more secret he lurketh, the more harm he
works, the whole scope of his discourse is the cause of much inconvenience,
for there, through on every side grows hate, and of hate says Machiauell
come deuisions, and of deuisions sects, and of sects ruin. Another method of
Sedition is this, to innouate in religion, to detract the policy of the
Clergy, to disgrace the reverend fathers and eyes of religion, our Bishops,
obiecting against them these corruptions, which as they never thought, so they
never practiced. Of this race was Martine Marprelat, who had he been attached
with a writ of C^pias Hangvillaine, he had not troubled the world, nor left
such fraternities of his sect in England. D^acos laws written in blood were
fit for them, who only stir up seditions to spill innocent blood. Biesius in
his book De Repub. (setting down the difference betwixt good and evil) says,
That such things as maintain us in evil, or change our goodness to wickedness,
are rightly called evil; but such as maintain or increase our felicities are
rightly termed good: this considered what shall we account these seditious
libertines but wicked, who maintain the inferiors in evil thoughts toward
their superiors, and alter the simplicity and good affection of the subject
toward his Prince, to the subversion of themselves, and the hate both of their
country, and ruin of their kingdom? Constantinus the Emperor (seeing the
inconveniences that arise by these sort of men) in his Epistle to the
Alexandrians, causes them to be punished severely. And one of the hastners on
of the destruction of Jerusalem was the seditions and factions within (...). 4.
(...). (...). (...). 32.
the city: as Josephus witnesses. The nobility amongst the Jews listening
to whisperers, and detractors of their equals, would subscribe to no election
or superiority, so that (in the time that Antiochus Epiphanes fought with
P^olomey for Siria) the whole country had like to be subverted, (as Nicephorus
witnesses.) (...) E^cles. (...). ^. cap. 6.
Princes in authority, nobles, and counsels of Commonweales, Citizens and
subjects in each country, beware of these seditions; for they deserve trust on
neither fide. For how can a foreign king in reason trust those who are false
to their country? or suppose them faithful, who (only serving for profit and
maintenance with them) will more willing (upon assurance of life and
liuelihood) discover your practices to their natural Prince? And how can their
lawful and rightful Prince trust them, who having once past the limits of
honesty are in Tullies opinion past recovery?

Having thus far brought you in knowledge of the fatal ene my of societies,
called Sedition, now look upon this other side a little, and mark what Devil
marches there: For sooth it is War, in one hand bearing a brand to set cities
on fire, in y^ other a sword bathed and embrued with blood; This fiend sows a
spice of tyranny wheresoever he marches, having Fear, Clamor, Sorrow*
Mourning, Crying, Groaning, continually attending his chariot; of whose effects
Lucan most heroically sings in his second book of civil wars, in these
verses:

Nobilitas cum plebe perit, luteque vagatur
Ensis, and ^nullo reuocatum est pectore ferrum.
Stat cruor in templis, multaque rubentia cord
Lubrica saxamadent, nulli sua profuit aetas
Non senis extremum pigint feruen^ibus annis
Praecipitusse diem, nec primo in limine vitio
Infantis miseri nascentiam rumpere fat^:
Crimene quo parui caede^ potuere mereri?
Sed satis est vani posse mori.
The nobles with the common sort are slain,
Each where the conquering sword unsheathed smites*
And from no breast his fury does contain:
The temples stream with gore by bloody fights.
The slipperie stones are moist and crimson red,
No age was spared, nor took the sword remorse,
These troublous times, of old man's silver head;
Ne left he late borne infants to enforce,
How could young babes deserve this cruelty?
But now it is well to have the power to die.
This fiend is the boulster of Ambition, and serves only the crowned sort to
disiest their mislikes and perturbations: and not only with his entrance, but
also with his fear brings he calamity, for no sooner draws he his forces
into any place, but before any assault or violence be offered, the fields are
forsaken, husbandry is given over, merchandise cease, and fear triumphs: the
expectation of his intent, is the perturbation of those that expect him, and
whosoever serves him, is bound to obey his necessities: the laws of justice are
perverted by him, and vaineglorie that be got him is oftentimes the cause of
his overthrow, This devil is the scourge of God, the son of wrath, the plague
of nations, the p^ison of peace, and Bartas thus learnedly describes him in his
effects,

La guerre vient apres, casse-loix, casse-meurs
Raze-fortes, verse-sang, brufle-hostels, aime-pleurs,
Desus ses pieds d'arrain croulle toute la terre, etc.
Next marches war, breake-law, and custome-breaker,
Race-fort, spil-bloud, burne-hostry, louing-teares.
Under her brason feet stoops all the earth,
His mouth a flaming brand, his voice a thunder:
Each finger of his hand a canon is,
And each regard of his a flaming lightning flash.
Disorder, fear, despair, and speedy flight,
Do raged march before his mu^thering host:
As likewise, burning, pride, impiety,
Rage, discord, saccage, and impunitie,
Horror, and spoil, ruin, and cruelty,
Each where attends, where barbarous he walks,
Moan, solitude, with fear, do still accost
The bloody steps of his undaunted host.
Wonderful are the mischiefs that this fiend has raised in the world, in
leaving countries desolate, cities dispoiled, and flourishing Realms utterly
wasted: many are the examples and woeful the histories that entreat hereof, and
nature has received ye greatest wounds by this envy: let us therefore fly it
with prudence. For then proud wretch y^ desire change for thy profit as thou
supposest; know this, that war is blind in his cruel^y, and respects not what
thou will, but where thou art: all sorts perish by his sword, he regards not
religion, affection, desert, al is one to him in intending execution; let us
therefore love peace and pursue it, for as Ovid says,

Candi^a par homines trux decit ira fera, Lib. 3. de art^. (...).

Peace is for men, and wrath for fellon beasts.
Augustine speaking in commendation of peace says, that ^
it is so good a thing that amongst all created things nothing is heard of,
with more delight; nothing desired for, with greater affection, and nothing
possessed with more profit. Christ knowing the commodities and perfection of
this peace, not only in word but also in example, not only in life and
death, but also after death, taught us to embrace it. In life he taught it
(...) 2.
us, for at his birth the Angels soong, Peace be to men on earth. (...). 10.
In life he taught his Disciples to preach it, saying, Into what house soever
you come, say first of all, Peace be unto this house. He commended it in his
death, when he suffered himself to be taken, whipped, crucified, and slain,
that he might reduce us to Peace with God. He commended peace unto us after
his death; For after his resurrection (and in his visiting the Apostles) his
first salucation was, Peace be among you: who therefore is an enemy of peace,
is an enemy of God, who lived, suffered, and arose from death to life, to
establish and form our peace. Nihil est tam (...) (says Tully) quampax, etc.
Nothing is so popular as peace, for not only they to whom nature has given
sense, but eue^ y^ houses and sields seem to me to revive thereat. And to
conclude, not only let al men ^schew this fatal Devil of war, and entertain
the sweet benefit of Civil peace in their societies, but let them get them the
true peace also, which (as Leo says) is not divided from Gods will, but only
delighted in those things which are of God: for when sensuality tesisteth not
our will, and our will in no part contradicts reason, then have we the
clearness, s^renitie, and peace of mind, and then is the kingdom of God.

Next War follows a froward fury called Vengeance: if you long to know him
he has these marks his face pale his eyes inflamed, his brows bent, his hand
shaking, his (...) yawing, his passion expressed with oaths, and satisfied with
blood; he will not stand lawing to dis^est his injuries, but a word and a blow
with him; no man must a^use him, no m^n contreule him: he is generally blind
in his own affairs, and (...) in all his actions, his custom is either to
purchase the gallows by murders, or to be beggered by the law: Be not
acquamted with him in any case, for he that feeds on Revenge, respects not
reason; Plato knowing the force of this infirmity, being displeased with his
servant who had grievously offended him, would not punish him himself, but
gave him to be corrected by his friend Tenocrates with these words; Chastise
me this boy (says he) for in that I am angry I cannot punish him: Seneca
reports the same of Socrates, and Saint lerome of Architas Tarentinus, and
all such like actions of memory are worthy to be registered. For (to accord
with Philosophy and Poesy) Revenge is but an (...) thing, an infirmity of
the spirit, a default in judgment, which becomes not Thales or Chrisippus, (as
Iuuenal says) but rather an intemporate and dissolute Thais: where (...)
Sat^r. 13.
contrariwise clemency, and remission, and forgiveness of injury, it is an
act of piety; wherein Caesar (though otherwise an usurper) gloried, telling
one (and swearing it by the immortal gods) that in no act of his he more
justly deserved glory, or more perfectly delighted himself, then in pardoning
those who had offended him, and in gratifieng those who had served him. To make
short, whosoever Reuengeth, is sure of Gods vengeance, for the law of God
especially interdicted and forbids it, in these words, Seek not revenge;
neither Leuit. 19.
remember thou the injuries which thy neighbors have done unto thee. The
Philosophers likewise accorded herein, as appears by Socrates and P^ato, who
in his first of his Common weal says thus, that Reterr^ inturiam, est
infer, To render and do injury is all one.

But leave we this fiend to the tyrany of his own thought, for here marches
forward the spirit of Impatience now incarnate, a fleshly fiend I warrant him:
This is he will beat his wise, lame his children, break his servants backs,
upon every light occasion; he will not dine for anger if his napkin have a
spot on it, nor pray if he have not that granted him which at the first he
requires: he will not stay to heart an answer whilst a man may excuse
himself, nor endure any reading if it fit not his purpose, nor affect any
learning that ^eedes not his humor: he will bea^ his Physician if his purge
work not presently; and kill his horse, if he gallop not when he commands him:
he is like captain Cloux fool of Lions that would needs die of the sullens,
because his master would entertain a new fool besides himself: this devil
is an arrant swearer, a swift striker, a short liver, three good marks to know
him by, and of all his imperfections this is not the least, that if he be
detracted he stormeth, be it either justly or unjustly, not considering what an
honor it was for Zerxes, Caesar, Domitian, Titus, Traian, and Tiberius, who
being certified that a certain man had spoken ill of him, answered, That
tongues are free in a city. For to hear a man's fault is wisdom, but to be
flattered is mere misery. A certain Emperor confirming the laws of
Theodosius, Arcadius, and of Homer, said thus: If any one not knowing the law
of modesty, so far forth forget himself to speak ill of us, our will is, that
he be not punished for the same, for if it proceed of lightness of spirit, and
readiness of tongue, it is to be neglected: if it proceed of folly or choler,
it is to be pitied: and if it proceed of injury, it is to be pardoned: A golden
saying, and worthy an Emperor, which if you follow my friends, you have a
sufficient spell about you, to conjure the spirit of Impatience from you. Thus
have I briefly showed you the whelps of Wrathes litter: now for a conclusion,
let us a little canuase this cursed fiend Baalberith. To discourse therefore of
this immoderate passion (proceeding from the sensetiue appetite, as Aquine
says) it is the increase of the gall (according to the Physicians) but the
decrease of all modesty, by the law of reason: for he that is affected with
this short madness (according to Seneca) is angry with his quill if it deliver
not ink; with his dice, if he play and loose, and then he bites them: his
gesture is inconstant, he looks red in the gils like a Turkey cock, his eye
lids are deprest, his lips tremble, his tongue stutters, and he is unquiet in
all his body. Sometimes from words he breaks into cries, from cries into
slanders, from slanders into contumely, from contumelies into cursings, from
cursing into blasphemies. Sometime like an ague it seaseth the whole body, and
sometimes like a fre^sie, peruerteth the mind: sometime it lifts by the hand
to hurt another man, sometimes himself: sometimes sometimes he hears not,
eats not, speaks not, but is his own plague. What shall I say? this Devil
in all men darkeneth reason, and confounds memory: and as smoke drweth a man
out of his house, so wrath erpelleth the Holy Ghost from our hearts. Those that
write of Ire, dissuade and debar men from the use thereof for three causes:
First, because it iniureth God; next, their neighbors; and lastly themselves.
For from God it takes the effect of his power; from our neighbor it takes
the affect of due benevolence; and from men's selves it takes the aspect of
reason and use of intelligence. For first of all, it behooves God in respect
of his power, iudicially to revenge and punish sin, spiritually to inhabit
the good, and liberally to bestow his benefits on them. But the Irefull man is
contrarious to God in all these things: first, he takes from God his revenge,
because Ire is a disordinate appetite of revenge: and God says, To me
belongs revenge, Et ipse retribuum, For God Romans 13.
has reserved two things unto himself, glory, and revenge; and the proud man
robs him of the one, and the irefull man of the other: secondly, an Irefull
man iniureth God, because he expels him from the rest of his habitation: In
pace factus est locus eius, His place is made in peace: but according to the
Proverbs, An Irefull man provoke brawles, erga he displaceth God of that
habitation wherein he would dwell, by corrupting his heart with contentions:
thirdly, God is iniuried, in that the peace he sent into the world, is by the
^refull man disturbed. Secondly, Ire takes from our neighbor the affect of due
beneuolened, for we are bound to defend him in substance, fame, and person: and
contrariwise this Ire compels vsto hurt him in raui^ing his substance,
impe^ching his forne, and killing his person. Arist. lib 3. de animal.
Ariltoile (a great searches into nature) says, that as soon as the Be
loses her sting, she dies: and so fares it (if we morrally allude) with
the Irefull and revenging man; for whilst ^ther in deed or word he exercises
his malice on his neighbor, hurting him in his substance, person, or fame, he
first of all spiritually Job. 5.
kills himself, according to that of Job, Virum stul^ ^terficit iracundia^:
Ire kills the foolishman* Thirdly, wrath drewneth and destroieth in a man's
own self three kind of goods: For first of all, it subuerteth the honestly of
corporal disposition: secondly, it hinders reason: and thirdly, shorteneth
life. That it destroieth the honesty and comeliness of man's disposition, it
appears, because how fair soever a man be, it deformeth his looks, it
disco^lours his face, it alters his gesture, it transporteth his tongue, and
every way disgraceth him. And therefore Seneca faith* Nothing more profits an
Irefull man then to behold his own deformity: and therefore another
Philosopher said, that it was requisite for a wrathful man to see his own
face in a myrrour, to the end, that by the reflection thereof, he might behold
his unnatural alteration. It is said of Minerua, that being delighted in the
music of a cornet, she once played by a transparant and crystal fountains
side, wherein spying her cheeks mightily puffed and swollen with winding, she
cast away her instrument, and repined the further use of it: As it happened to
Minerua the goddess of wit, so fortuneth it often times to many wise men
subject to indignation, who sometimes distracted with Ire, and perceiving in the
clear fountain of their judgment, the vndecencie and error thereof, utterly
disclaim^: secondly wrath hinders the power of reason, according to Catos
saying: Impedit ingenium ne possit cernere verum,
It hinders the judgment and understanding, least it should discern truth:
and for that cause the Devil behaueth himself like a cunning fisherman, who
purposing to catch and insuare the fish more cunningly, troubles the waters,
to the end, that blinding their sight, they may the sooner fall in his net. In
like manner does the Devil demean himself, who striving to draw men to
sin, he stirs perturbation, strife, and dissentious among them, to the
end they may the sooner fall into sin, and be seduced by his malice.
Aristotle in the first of his Topiques says, that Ire never subuerteth reason,
but when the mind and soul is perverse and froward: and even as it is the
craft of the 1. (...)
Sophister (as the same Philosopher says) to provoke his adversary to Ire, to
the end he may hinder his judgment, so it is the pollicte of the Devil to
blind our understanding with wrath, least we would discern his villainy:
thirdly, Ire shorteneth life, as may appear in beasts, which being naturally
chollericke, have but short time of continuance; as namely, in the dog, and
that in Ecclesiastes it is approved, where it is said, Zelus and iracundia
minuent dies, and ante tempus senectam adducent, Zeal and wrath shorten life,
end hasten age. It is said of the Duyr (a stone gathered in India and Arabia)
that it ^ieth spirits, presents doleful visions, multiplieth strife, and
causes brawles: The like may be said of Wrath, for it banisheth all good
thoughts from the heart, ^lleth the imagination with untoward visions, and
increases envy, wrong, and contention: and as the stone Sardius hinders the
properties thereof, so does Patience mollify and pacify trouble: according to
that of the Wise man, Responsio mollis frangit iram, A soft answer puts
down strife. Seneca in his third book de Ira faith, If it be a friend that
offended, he did that he would not: if an enemy, he did as he ought: So
howsoever displeasures come, if they be wisely construed, they are easily
digested. Wrath by the Schoolmen likewise is compared to a burning fever,
which as it has two accidents (according to Constantine) continual heat, and
great thirst; so a wrathful Lib. 7. crat. cap. de cause.
man upon every froward word in gesture, words, and looks, is drawn into a
great heat, and afterward is seized with a great thirst of revenge. A wrathful
man likewise is compared to a beast called Abbane, which being a creature of
the bigness of a Heart, yet (against the custom of all other beasts) has her
Axist. 2. de Animal.
gall in her ear: so a wrathful man (although he be kindly spoken to) yet
takes he all things in bitterness: and according as be interprets words, so
gives he short and cross answers. Thus far have I drawn a line, to square
the foundation against Gal. de cogn^scendis curandisque animi affectibus. Ber.
Don^o incorp.
the assaults and battery of Baalberith. Now with Gallen I will mortify some
chief stones of the building, and leave the rest to your finishing: and thus
says he in a certain treatise of his, That from our tender youth we ought to
tame this passion of choler, and not attend till our years be ripened; at
which time having taken root, it is the harder to be weeded out: for if we
yield this head strong fury one foot, it will take two, and by little: and little
will in such sort creep and attain to the feiguurie of the heart, that by no
means or medicine it will be vuseated therefrom. The heaven (said Gallen) has
so much favored me, that I had a just, good, and courteous father, and no
ways oppressed with passion and choler; whose good precepts and instructions,
I have ever retained: for at no time, in what choler soever he has been,
have I seen him transported so far, as to strike any man, but (which more
is) he had always a custom to reprehend those, that beat and stroke their
subjects and servants. But if I were fortunate in a father (said he) I was
less fortunate in a mother, for I had one the most chollericke and troublesome
woman living upon the earth, she was always at the staffes end with my
father, to whom she was no less troublesome, then was erst Xantippe to her
Socrates: she never ceased to rail against him, continually filling the house
with tumult, yea, choler had such power in her from her youth, that when she
entered into any discontents, she finng, stamped, struck, yea so far forgot her
self, that she struck her chambermaids. The same author says like wise, that
the first time he began to detest that vice, was, that being a young lad he
beheld a man seized with this passion, who was so far disguised by choler,
that he seemed rather a monster then a man, for he had his countenance
changed, his eyes staring, his hairs bristling on his head, his looks
furious, and all the rest of his body trembling, and agitated with fury; he
cried, he stamped, he threatened, he fomed at the mouth like a bore, and to
conclude, he showed such strange, insolent, and prodigious countenauces, that
he gave manifest evidence that this brutall passion, brings a man besides
himself, and makes him like unto beasts. Thus far Gallen, by whose counsel
if we propose unto our selves the image and picture of a distempered and
wrathful man, no doubt but the obscene, filthy, and loathsome behavior which
he uses, will bring us in detestation of his vice, and determination to avoid
and conquer such like perturbations and affections.

The intemperate and unnatural Devils raised by Beelphogor, Prince of belly
cheer.
IN that time that Gera the Emperor had made his festival of three days
long, and his messes were served in according to the order of an Alphabet;
Beelphogor gorged with multitude of dishes, and dead drunk with variety of
wines, at last fell fatally sick of an extreme surfeit. Sleep his Physician
was sent for, but he could not digest it; Manna, Rubarb, and the best easy
and pure drugs were ministered, but they wrought nothing in his gorged stomach.
His brother Devils loath to loose so kind a friend, and necessary member of the
commonweal of confusion, sent to Persia for the high priest of Bell who was
held a great Magitian and a Physician. This holy father, faced like the North
wind of a map, mounted on a horned. Devil instead of a Spanish Gen^et,
speedily posted to his court* and was atdast admitted to his presence, where
after sight of his urine and feeling of his pulse* with a bitter sigh (as
terrible as a Tarnado on the coast of Spain) he began in these words to tell
his opinion: Palsgraue of the pipes of wine, Grand disposer of delicates, it is
no receipt of the Hipocratists, nor potion of the Galtenists, can dissolve the
trudities and surcharging hu^rs of your stoi^atke: but as among the Barbarians
and Cannibuls the priests are physicians and never fail of their c^re, so the
patient think their able, and the thing possible; so I, the priest in your
rights and sacrifi^s, (if so your great Bellyship have a good opinion of my
experience) am both able, and (...)* rid you of your surset without pain or
trouble Beelphogor. glad of this, poured ^ tun of Greek wine down his throat
for his good counsel, and assuring him that he considently trusted in his
cunning, our cure-deuill at last began his Incantation. Long had he not mubled
in a great cane, which he had brought in his wide sleeue, and washed the
patients temples in a Fat ^: unpurged Malmsey, but Beelphogor began to cast or
discharge, (let it please chaste ears to let slip this vnreuerent word) and in
stead of voiding corrupt fle^me, Adust choler, and other indigested
excrements, he sent forth (oh procreation incredible to be thought of) five
fiends, dull winged like Bats, spirits of the elements next neighboring the
earth, whoin clouds of fogges and mists, having haunted Asia, Africa, and
Europe: for the most part have by a Southern wind of late days been blown
into England, and become incarnate after this manner following (yet reserving
those names to themselves which their grandsire Satan gave them.) The first is
D^este of spirit, and he dwells in an English man late come out of Germany, who
having been an apprentise to drunkenness since the years of his discretion,
is lately arrived, to make a dearth of S^ks in England. If you mark his gate
in the streets, it is sausages and neats tongues: he shawn^es like a cow had
broke her forelegs: you shall ever see him sweating, and his landresse, I know,
has a good master of him, for the very pure grease of his handkerchiefe, is
sufficient to find her candles for a winter time: his eyes are full of cathars,
and had he not a vent by them to discharge his head, his brains long since had
sunk in a ^uagmire: he has cheeks dropsy proof, and a nose, such a nose as
never nose was greater: from the wast to the foot of equal proportion: his
neck drowned in his head and shoulders, his body in his buttocks, and his
buttocks in his calfes: all pure beef of twenty pence a stone, a dog would not
eat it. This Devil of a drunkard has no felicity but in a tavern, and for
every day if he make not a man drunk, he has spent much idle tune: he has
all the terms of art set down by T. N. in his Supplication to the Devil,
Primum ad fund^m, secundum his medium, tertium v^ primum, sic debes bibere
vinum. He has a sausage always in his pocket to drive down drink, and in
stead of the stories of the nine worthies, he has painted in a book in their
antiques all the faithful drunkards of his age: he the k^ himself with ^uita,
another with Ke^h win^ an^ ^sters, another with Heringes and pickeld h^rings:
he (...) (...) their names (and Epigrams to them) of the best maker of this
age. Of all nations and citizens he can not abide a Roman: ask him why, Fie
on them (quoth he) the slaves kill their wives for drunkenness. Draw him but
into the common place of wine, he will weary the whole company (with one quart
and a morcell more, and so God be at your sport M. Tatlton:) first he says
that it is vitis, quasi vita, a man were as good miss his life as wine:
again, that (in Almaine and France) wine is the most honorable present to
strangers: he alleges you these verses out of Ralblais (but with this
breathing poing, One pottle more of that next the door Ned,)

Furiena est de bon sens ne iouist,
Quibeit ben vin and ne s'en reiouist.
Mad is the knave and his wits have the collicke,
That drinks good wine and is not frollicke.
After the company has drunk carouse about, and sung Chorobent, and Gaude
plurimum, forward goes he, By gots hundred towsand ton a deuels, all Caesar's
army had been lost without wine: and the only medicine for the phlegm is (in
his knowledge) three cups of Charnico fasting: he has the Proverb of the old
Physicians ( post crudum purum) a gallon of wine to an apple is pure simetry
and proportion in drinking: fill his cup again of Madera wine, and let him
wipe his eyes after his fashion, you shall have stories too, as true as the
voyage of Pantagruel. I was (will he say) sometime in a Tavern, and it was with
some of my neighbors that it was (this drinks too flat John, fill better,
says he, and carousing in stead of a full point he prosecutes his matter,) and
it chanced as we were a drinking I saw mine host carry two pitchers full of
water into his wine seller, having two other carried after by his apprentice
full of good wine (as I supposed:) now Sir, (suspecting same knavery) I thrust
my head out of the window, and cried mainly with a full throat, Fire, fire,
fire; By reason it was somewhat toward night (now a bit, and then a cup more)
I was quickly heard, so that at the last, the Tavern was full of all sorts of
people, some bringing water, (as the contrary to fire,) others oil, (good to
quench lightning,) some ladders to clime the house top, some vinegar to lay on
scalding: The people entering into the chamber where I was, and seeing neither
fird, nor sinoake, fearfully ask me where the fire was? I also hoarse with
crying, at last answered them that it was in the seller, and I was sure of it,
and for proof thereof (quoth I) I saw the host very now carry down store of
water. They hearing this, suddenly ran down into the seller, where they found
the Tauerner with his prentice mingling wine and water together, all the
company detesting his knauerie, one cast his paile of water at his head,
another his oil, another his vinegar, another broke a stick out of his
lather, and all to bebeat him: the host souced in souce like a pickled herring,
ran away to save himself, the people fell a drinking til they left him never a
drop in his seller, and I (a pottle more of Charnico, Edward) without paying
penny for my Wine, went away with the goblet, (and I drink to you good man
Pouling) this last period is a pottle at least, and how say you by my
taleteller? Will you have yet more? Take him from this his daily exercise, he
is as dead as a door nail, he has no more sense then a shoat in pickle: Get
him to church, he sleeps out the sermon: persuade him to abstinence, tut
says he it ingenders Cathars, and nourishes the Megrim; examine him in his
worldly affairs, talk of that to morrow: the only means to wake him is to
tell him the Uintage is come home, for against that time he makes him a
doublet a quarter wider in the wast then the first, because he will walk and
drink easelie. It would make a good wit druncke to dream^ of his qualities, I
will therefore here leave him, and as I have painted him out to the eye, so
will I convict his detestable course by reason. First makes he that which was
ordained to be the temple of the Holy Ghost a den of Devils, next drowneth he
that spirit which was created for heavenly contemplations, in earthly and
transitory pleasures then by his Gast imargia and Epicurisme, he dulleth his
conscience with an apoplery and nombnes, so that it has no power to
distinguish mortal sins, from heavenly and intelectuall delights; lastly by
detesting continency, he suffers the plagues of excess, and loses the
benefits of abstinence, which maintain the soul in his harmony, and the
body in health and temperature, and as Horace says,

-- Quin corpus ^nustum Satura. 2. lib. 2.

Hesternis vitijs animum quoque pergrauat vna,
Atque adfigit humi diuinae particulam aurae.
A body laden with the nights excess,
At once the mind with dullness does oppress.
Affixing to the earth by dull desire,
The heauenbread soul that should to heaven aspire.
Of all detestable sins drunkenness is most vildest, for it breeds
lothsomenesse in those that most delight in it; It is a a luxurious thing as
the wise man says, and the immoderate Proverb. 20.
use of wine hurts a man four kind of ways: first it is the cause of
thraldom, secondly the confusion of honesty, thirdly, the complement of vice
and vol^ptuousnesse, fourthly* the sign of folly: The first is manifest in
this, because the original root and occasion of disgrace was in wine, whereby
Noe Gene. 6.
became the slave of drunkenness, and the scorn of his son Came: That it is
the confusion of honesty it appears, because whosoever is accustomed
therein, he is banished the society of good men, and subject to mighty
discredits; What is more filthy then a droncken man, says Innocentius? who
has stench in his mouth, trembling in his body, folly in his tongue, and
want of secrecy in his heart: his mind is alienated, his face is deformed, and
no secret can be had where ^brietie is sovereign. And Seneca says, That the
mind entangled by dronckennesse, has no power of it self; and if it be
rightly considered of, it is but a voluntary madness. Alexander transported
with this sin, slew Chtus his faithful friend at a banquet, and after he
had recovered himself, he would have murdered and stabd himself for sorrow.
The Romans figuring out the image of Ebrietie, painted it in this sort; First,
they set down the image of a boy, and next they painted a horn in his hand,
and on his head they set a crown of glass: A child they painted him, in sign
that it makes a man childish and past his sense or government: They ga^ him a
horn in his hand, in token that he alwairs sounds and publishes secrets
whatsoever, and they crowned him with glass, because the dronckard reports
himself a glorious and rich man, where he is as poor as Irus: Paup^rior Iro,
as the Poet says. Valerius in his ^ixt Book and second Chapter reports this
History: A certain innocent and guiltless woman, was condemned by Philip
King of Macedon in his drunkenness, who confident and affuted of her own
Innocence, cried out, I appeal from Philip drunken, to Philip sober. The King
ashamed at this reprehension, shakt of sleep, recovered his senses, and gave
more diligent regard to the cause, and at last finding right on her side,
reuersed the Judgment, and acquitted the woman. By which it appears, that the
shaking off of drunkenness, is the establishing of reason, and the custom
thereof the destruction of honesty: That it is the complement of
voluptuousness and pleasure it appears likewise, for modesty restrains
many men from sin, and where it is taken away and subdued by wine, the
pleasure that lies hidden in the heart, is discovered without shame. Whereupon
Seneca says, Plures pudere peccana^ qu^m bou^ voluntate prohibiti sunt a
peccato and scelere, More men are prohibited from offense and wickedness by
the shame of sin, then by good intention and will; but where the mind is
possessed with too much force of wine, whatsoever evil lurked in the heart, is
discovered by the tongue. That Wine likewise is the experiment and sign of
folly it is manifest, because if a man be inclined to any evil whatsoever, a
trial and experience of the same must be made in his drunkenness, and
therefore the Germans never consult before they drink, perhaps alluding and
relying on that of Ecclesiastes, Vinum corda superb^rum Eccles. c^. 31.
arguit, Wine opens and argues the secrets of proud men: upon all which
premises I infer, that drunkenness and all disordinate riot, is hurtful to
all estates, for if it seize the poor man, he shall not be rich, if it
deprive the rich man, his substance shall be consumed; if it distraught the young
man, he will not be instructed; if it take hold on the old man, it makes him
a fool: For this cause Origin upon Genesis speaking of Lot says, Ebri et as
peior fuit quam Sodoma, qui^ quem Orig. hom 5. ^n Genesis
Sodoma nondecepit illa caepit. Drunkenness was worse then Sodom, for when
Sodom could not deceive, he ouertooke: These considered, let this fiend be
avoided, if not in regard that he defameth us in this world, yet in respect
that he keeps and excludes us out of heaven.

The second fiend of this race is Immoderate and Disordinate Joy, and he became
incorporate in the body of a ^easter, this fellow in person is comely, in
apparel courtly, but in behavior a very ape, and no man: his study is to
coin bitter ieasts, or to show antique motions, or to sing baudie sonnets and
ballads: give him a little wine in his head, he is continually flearing and
making of mouths: he laughes intemperately at every little occasion, and dances
about the house, leaps over tables, out-skips men's heads, trips up his
companions heels, burns Sack with a candle, and has all the feats of a Lord
of misrule in the country: feed him in his humor, you shall have his heart, in
mere kindness he will hug you in his arms, kiss you on the cheek, and
rapping out an horrible oath, cry Gods Soul Tum, I love you, you know my poor
heart, come to my chamber for a pipe of Tobacco, there lives not a man in this
world that I more honor; In these ceremonies you shall know his courting, and
it is a special mark of him at the table, he sits and makes faces: keep not
this fellow company, for in iugling with him, your Wardropes shall be wasted,
your credits cracked* your crowns consumed, and time (the most precious riches
of the world) utterly lost. Nemo sal: at sobrius, says the Proverb, A wise
man never danceth: fli^ therefore this Devil, except you long to be fools
with him, and unfortunately end in your dancing (like Lewis Archbishop of
Magde^burge) who in treading his lauo^tos and corrant^s with his mistress, in
trying the horsetrick broke his neck: remember your selves likewise of this
verse in the old Poet,

Post flores fructus post maxima gaudia luctus,
Fruits follows flowers, and sorrow greatest joy.
Beside consider what Seneca writes of worldly joy, where he says it is the
messenger of future misery; Fly it therefore, for it is always seconded by
some sorrow or mischief. Another son of this race is Multiplication of
words, and he first incarnated himself in the body of an Intelligencer, this
is a notable knauish fiend to entangle any man; for he never cease to give
occasion in his cups for men to ouershoot themselves, he will of purpose cast
out suspicious words of his Prince, to see how men are affected, and talk of
forbidden books to get some man confess if he conceal any of them: I would
you should well know he has been a trauailer, and can play the Nullifidian
as well as any of Satan's succession: whittle him a little (like the King of
France his Switzer when he had drunk up the bottle of Greek wine) he will tell
you the secrets of all the Commonweales of Christendom, he is an inward man in
the Emperors estate, and dare assure you that he has nothing of the Empire
but certain sums of money which he receives annually of the imperial towns,
and of certain Gentlemen that hold their lands immediately of the Empire; and
if you draw him to computation, he says it is about some 200 thousand Florins
by year; As for that in Boheme and Mora^a, and places appertaining to the said
Realm, he gathers no more in them then 700 thousand Florins annually:
Touching Silesia, Lausatia and Hungary, he says they hold all in fee of the
Empire. He can assure you that Denmark, Sue^ia, Hungary, and Boheme, are
electiues; and that in Wallachia the Turk ordains the governors, yet
Christians necessarily, because all the nation follow the Greek church. Bring
him into Poland, he is able to say thus much of that kingdom, that the King
has for revenue but six or seven hundredth thousand Dollers for the
intertainement of his house, and that when he makes war, it is upon the
expense of the country, without the consent of whom he can otherwise do
nothing. And if you inquire of his forces, he thinks the country may well
bring 140 thousand furnished horse into the field upon occasion of service. If
you fall in question of the Turk his knowledge is this that he has always in
pressed for the war 130 thousand Timariste, (who are waged by lands which the
Turk has given them, to the end they should entertain so many horse at his
command) he has beside them 14 thousand Ianisaries, and 36 thousand Spaies,
continually waged by money: Besides all those that go into the war or have any
place or dignity under him, are either Apostataes, or the sons of Renegados;
as for the Turks by race, they are always kept in servitude and poverty,
either exercised in Merchandise or serving in the Temples. Touching his revenue
he has nine millions of gold, (besides the presents which his officers send
him, and the lands of his own demeasne,) besides he has Daces or taxes of the
Jews and Christians every one paying him a Shikin a year. And touching his
governors, he says they are Basshawes, and that the continuance of their
authorities is but from three years to three years. Bring the Pope in
question, he can tell you this (for perhaps he has known his benevolence)
that he built the Seminary of the Jesuits of an hospital, contrary to the will
of the dead; and how he has taken three hundredth crowns of pencion lately
from them, so that now they have but six hundredth to maintain themselves: he
is seen in many other things likewise which I must not speak of, but beware of
multiplying words with him, for though he butt not with his horns because he
will not be thought a cuckold, he will give a shroud wound with his tongue,
that may bring a man to his neckeverse: he has continually a warrant in his
pocket, and under color of attaching Traitors, troubles and spoils many
honest men. Bless your selves from him Masters, for though he has a smooth
tongue, his heart is deceitful. Of his race was Sinon that betrayed Troy, and
of his faction be all such most to be feared and fled from.

Qui Curi^s simulant and Bacchanalia viuunt,
That seem grave men but are lascivious knaves.
Wonderful it is to see his course, he is general and open in discourse, but
under intent to deceive, he will play the good fellow but to make (...) profit
of any man, he will speak in serious matter, though he show himself a fool,
and conclude upon any thing though it be without reason: and though the course
of intelligence (according to Machiauell) be necessary in an estate, and worthy
the execution of a considerate and good man (for his countries sake) yet the
Sparta being laid on his shoulders that has no honesty, makes that estate
odious, which otherwise would be honest: Thus much in description of a
disordinate babbler, now let us hear somewhat against the incontinencie of
language, and the unbounded babble of the tongue. He that keeps his tongue
(says Solomon) keeps his soul, and Proverb 13. Lac. 3.
he that is inconsiderate in his speech shall find mischief: he that has not
offended in his words is a wise and perfect man, and according to Cato it is
the chiefest virtue to set a hatch before the door of our tongues, Solon,
S^onides, and Zenocrates, being ^.
demanded why they spoke so little, answered that they never repented
themselves that they had held their peace, but contrariwise in speaking and
returning answers. It was noted by Aeschilus the Tragedian, that God in our
bodies has planted two eyes, two ears, two nosthrils, and the brain above
the tongue, to gives us to understand, that we ought rather see, hear, and
conceive, then speak: Jeremy in his Lamentations written in verse; has
(contrary to the order of the Hebrew Alphabet put the Letter Pe, before Ghain,
(as Rabbi Solomon says) to advertise us to speak nothing which we have not
heard, (for Pe in Hebrew signifies the month, and Ghain signifies the eyes.)
It is written of the Philosopher Anacharsis, that he said that two members of
the body ought carefully to be kept, namely the tongue, and the parts
indecent to be named, for nearest (says he) approach they to God that can
moderate them both; and Horace says, ^


Sed tacitus pascisi posset coruus, haberet
Plus dapis and rixae multo min^, inuidiaeque.
If so the crow could feast him without prate,
More meat he should receive, less braule, and hate.
Let therefore this fiend and fury of the tongue be banished from us, for as
Barnard says, Non est capillu^ de capit^, ^ec momentum de tempore, de quo
rationem non reddemus: There is not a hair of our heads nor a moment of time,
of which we shall not yield account: and as Augustine says, Exigetur a nobis
omne tempus impensum, qualiter fuerit expensum, We shall have an account
exacted at our hands how we bestowed the time, which has been granted us to
live in. And as the Rabine says, The eye of God sees, and his ear hears,
and al our works are written in his book: let therefore loquacitie be banished,
and let Catos words be considered, that Proximus ille deo est qui scit ratione
tacere,
The man is wise can wisely hold his peace.
For the vanity of words shows the slightnes of wit; and inconsideration,
breaks no ways out sooner then by the tongue; by it hates are increased,
blasphemies published, and (being but the least member) it is the only key
that opens the doors of hell. By it we wrong our neighbor, break
commandments, deprave Magistrates, accuse innocents, seduce Uirgines, corrupt
young men, mock age: briefly, if it be not governed in man (I mean his tongue)
it is able to kindle a greater fire (as the Philosopher says) then the whole
world shall be able to quench.

Let this suffice for babbling, for here marches forth Scurilitie, (as untoward
a Devil as any of the rest) the first time he looked out of Italy into England,
it was in the habit of a Zani: This is an only fellow for making faces,
showing lascivious gestures, singing like the Great Organ pipe in Poules,
counterfaiting any deformity you can devise, and perfect in the most
unchristian abominations of Priapisme: he has ieasts to set an edge on lust,
and such bitter Iibes, as might drive a Cato to impatience; if he see an old
man march in the street, he returns him a nichil habet; by a light huswife he
dare say, y^ she is as rotten as an openarse: he that longs to know more of
him let him read Bouch^ts Ser^s, and if he find a leaf without a gross jest
he may burn the Book I warrant him. And if he require further insight into
the filthy nature of this fiend, in Artine in his mother N^na, Rab^ais in his
Legend of Ribaudrie, and Bonauenture de Perriers in his Nouels, he shall be
sure to loose his time, and no doubt, corrupt his soul. I could amplify this
title as largely as any, and point out with the finger many Epicures of this
age, that are excellent in this abomination; but I fear me to corrupt in
reporting corruptions, and to infect good and chaste ears, with that which many
of this godles world earnestly affect. Pity it is that toward wits should be
enchanted with such wickedness, or that great men's studies should entertain
that, which Philosophers schools shamefully hist away. In a word, let the
Apostles counsel be entertained amongst them, where he says, Fornicatio autem
and omnis immunditia, Ephesians. 5.
aut auaritia, etc. Fornication, and all uncleanness or avarice, let it not so
much as be named among you, as it becomes saints, or filthiness, or foolish
talk, or scurrilitie, being to no purpose: but let men so season their
behauiours and discourses, that Menanders words may be falsified in them, That
the vanity of the tongue has been the ruin of many men.

The last Erinnis of this line, is Slouenlin^s and Vnclean^es: this spirit at
first became incorporate in the person of an Italian, who, banished Padua for
buggery, trauelleth here and there in England to meet with more of his
fraternity: he is a mere enemy to the Sopemakers, for he washes not a shirt
in a tweluemonth, and at that time for frugality sake, he buies not another,
but lies in bed till y^ first be washed: he never washes his hands and face,
because he faith that Sol vrit pur^ora, The sun burns and tanneth the
purest: neither wears he apparel, except it come of benevolence; for (says
he) Been venit, qu^d gratis venit, It comes well, that comes of free cost. In
wearing his apparel he is a Cinicke, for brushing (says he) wears away the
wool; beating drives the dust in a man's eyes, and the heavier the garment is,
the better it wears: he is as free as the king in a baudy house, and so his
belly be full and lust satisfied, Cuc^llus non facit monachum, A man of worth
is not known by his good apparel: he shifts his lodging every month, partly
for necessity sake, partly for his pleasure: and his whole delight is to have a
well faced boy in his company: he is a great acquaintance of the Brokers, and
will not stick to bring a man to a harlot: he has a heavy look, a thread
bare cloak, a long fore colored hair, and his mouth is like a Barbary purse
full of wrinkles; he is the secretary to the spittle whores, and a mortal
enemy to all that disdain an Alehouse: he wild scold pretily, but a very boy
may swinge him; but for lying, cogging, surfeiting, whordome, blasphemy,
scurrilitie, gluttony, and more then these, the Epicure is a continent man in
comparison. Of all men let a scholar beware of this infecting spirit, for if a
man of good parts be bewitched with this beastliness, no man will wax more
deformed then he, especially let him fly dishonest and filthy women, that are
able to infect nature by their society: otherwise I may say as Martial said to
Oppian: Mart. lib. 6. Epigram. 42.


Illotus meri^ris Oppiane.
Sir you shall die a filthy slouen.
It rests now (according to course) that I speak somewhat of the deformity
of Beelphogor the father, since I have in part scored out the uncleanness of
his children. Gluttony (as the Schoolmen write) is (both according to the
habitude and act) a disordinate delight in eating and drinking, a mortal enemy
of the virtue of temperance; offending both in quantity, quality, time, and
manner. It was first introduced from Asia into Rome, where (corruptions
commonly being the swiftest in springing) it became from a servile thing, the
delight of the sovereigns: so that Apicius (an abject cook that professed the
art of cookery in the kitchen) was not ashamed afterward to step into the
school, and declaime in praise of it, whom for his insatiable abuses and
inventions, Pliny (and that rightly) called the Gulf of prodigality. To this
sin Milo Crotoniates and Tagon (the belly-ged) were so addicted, that the one
bare an Ox on his shoulders, and after denoured it; and the other (at the
table of Autelian the Emperor) eat a Goat, a Hog, and drunk a Tierse of wine,
and far more in boast of his intemperance. A^boinus and Maximinus Emperors,
yielding nothing in sensuality to this; for ye one devoured at a supper an
hundred Peaches, ten Pepins, five hundred figs, beside diverse other things: the
other, in one day eat forty pound of flesh, and drunk a whole vessel of nine
gallons of wine, to digest it. And now a days our world rather superior then
inferior to other ages, in these kind of infirmities, neglects nothing in
sensuality: our bankets are sauced with surfets, so that Beelphogor may (I
fear me) claim as many followers and fautors in our age, as either he had in
Persia, Rome, or Media: for our bankets exceed nature, and where our fathers
were content with bread and water, which at first nourished man's life after the
creation of the world: now neither the fruit of trees, nor the variety of
corn, nor the roots of herbs, nor the fishes of Lib. de ^ (...)* con^t.
the sea, nor the beast of the earth, nor the fowls of the air, can satisfy
our intemperance: but (as Innocentius says) paintings are sought for, spices
are bought, fowls are nourished, and cooks hired, to please appetite: one
stampes and strains, another infuseth and makes confections; turning the
substance into the accident, and nature into art. For which cause Seneca
(deriding the variety of banquets) says, Vna s^lua pluribus Elephantibus
sufficit, Epist. 8.
homo vero pascitur terra and mari. One wood sussiseth to nourish diverse
Elephants, but man feeds both on sea and earth. And in his tenth book of his
Declamations, he says, Whatsoever bird flies, whatsoever fish swimmeth,
whatsoever beast runs, is buried in our bodies: all which in the truth of
things is both against nature and Art: for both Art and nature, forbids that
contraries should be mixed together: which not withstanding in our festiuals are
often done. But if we consider how hurtful it is to our bodies, and damnable
for our souls, doubtless except we be blinded in heart, we shall quickly
detest it. In many meats (says Ecclesiastes) there is much infirmity; and
(according to Seneca) we therefore die suddenly, because we live upon dead
things. Why then should we delight Lib. (...). 10. (...). 8. cap. 6.
in that which causes our detriment? Policrates says, that the intemperancy
of meat subuerteth manners, and preiudizeth man's health: and Hippocrates
maintains this, that gross and fat bodies, grown beyond measure, except by
letting blood, they be somewhat abated, become numme and insensible, and fall
into most dangerous diseases. Chrysostom says, that excess of meat consumes
and rotteth man's body by continual sickness, and at last brings cruel death.
Galen (the interpreter of Hypocrates) says, That they that are grossesed, can
not be long time healthful: concluding, that those souls can not meditate or
conceive celestial things, whose bodies are ouergrowen with blood, flesh, and
fat. It is reported of Dionysius the tirant, that being too much swallowed up
by surfeit and drunkenness, he lost his eye sight; for there is nothing sooner
dulleth the eye, then excess: because (as Portuminus says) Edacitas cibos
terit, sed oculos v^rat, Gluttony spends meat, but deuoureth the eyes.
Macrobius in his Saturnals, proposes a very pretty and disputable question;
namely, whether uniform and simple meat, be better and easier of digestion,
then diverse and different? and to this a certain Philosopher answers, that
diverse and different meat is the hardest of digestion for these causes: first
it appears in beasts, which because they feed on a simple and pure nutriment,
are most helthfull; and if any of them be diseased, it is when by variety of
medicine and man's folly, they are nourished against the course of their nature:
secondly, because all simple meat is more easily digested, in sign whereof,
every Physician recouereth and ministers to his patient in one kind of food,
that nature may more easily convert the simple meat into her self: thirdly,
because as the variety of wine, hurts more then one sort of wine in the same
quantity, in like sort does the variety of meat: fourthly, because he that
observes one kind of simple diet, may more easily judge and guess at the cause
of his infirmity (if at any time he feel himself distempered) and
consequently can more easily avoid such kind of food: whereas if he should
have used diverse, he should utterly be ignorant, to which of many he should
impute the cause of his sickness: fistly, because in the stomach, the nature
of diverse meats is very different, therefore (nature working uniformity for
her own part) certain are sooner digested then other, (the rest remaining in
the stomach being crude) and consequently that r^ts which is afterward to be
digested: by which reasons it follows, that these rich men using diverse kind
of dishes, do by that means shorten their own lives. But perhaps to
particularize diseases will be held more forcible argumenes, I will therefore
tell you what infirmities surfeit breeds. First (as Auicen says) it hinders
the brain, the liver, and the nerves, it causes conuulsions, sowndings,
Epilepsies, the falling sickness, and the palsy: it ingenders the lamenesse
in the legs, the gout, the Sciatica, the Apoplexy, and a thousand
defluxions, cathars, and crudities of the stomach, which proceed from naught
else, but from the insatiable desire of drinking and eating. All philosophy
will confess unto me, that the more a man stuffes and charge his stomach,
the more he greeueth it; for first of all it is necessary that he surmount and
exceed the nutriment and meat, and digest it also; and in the surmounting he
must strive, and in striving he wearieth himself, and in wearying himself he
waxes feeble, and in waxing feeble he finally consumes, and then his cook (I
mean his stomach) unable to work or boil, it follows of necessity that he
must die. But leave we this to Physicians to decide, and like Christians let us
learn to say with Seneca (though a Pagan) Maius sum, and ad maiora natus sum,
quam vt fiam mancipium corporis mei, I am greater, and borne to greater things,
then to become the bondslaue of mine own body. Briefly, (since according to
Augustine) Gluttony marches never Lib. 4. de b^i. (...). (...).
but accompanied with other vices: and (in his fourth book ad Sacras virgins)
since Ebrietie is the mother of all vice, the trouble of the head, the
subversion of the sense, the tempest of the tongue, the storm of the body, the
shipwreck of sanctity, and the soul; let us conquer this monster by our
abstinence, living according to the examples of Paul, the first Hermit
Hilarious, Macharius, and others; that that saying may be truly verified in us,
that In carne esse, etc. To be in the flesh and not to live after the flesh, is
rather the life of Angels then men. And thus far for Gluttony and Beelphogor,
whom (I hope) I have so coniured, as he shall have little welcome to those
that have any spark of piety: the vantgard and battle are already
discoinsited, now Astaroth look to your rereward, for I assure my self to
discomfit you.

The lumpish and heavy fiends begotten by the Arch-Deuill Astaroth.
INdustrious Labor, that have thus long kept me from Idleness, guiding the
sails of my conceit through the Seas of reason; now help to arange my
squadrons, to describe and confound him: lead me a path vntracted by courser
spirits, that I may bear down envy by desert, and puzle detraction in his
deprauing knowledge. It is not unknown to men of reading, how Astaroth after
he had received many sacrifices by the Israelites (as appears in the book
of Judges) and persuaded Solomon (the wisest of Kings) in his old and retired
years to build him an Altar, was (by the prayers and persuasions of many
Prophets) at last banished from the chosen nations: so that enforced to live in
exile, he ranged up and down Media, Persia, and Arinenia, and at last spread
his renown in Rome: whence banished by the busy affairs of Princes from
their Courts, and from other places of Spain, France, and Italy; he at last
retired himself to the Northren parts: Amongst whom finding contentions in the
Clergy, and affectation of glory and arms in Prince and subject; he took his
Idle wings and flew to the Southern and lately discovered land, where honored
by the Brasilians, that greatly delighted in Idleness, he has yet a sufficient
segniory and dominion to maintain himself: Yet willing that the Civil world
(which he deadly hates) should be infected with his humor, he has lately
upon an Indian Negro be gotten five sons at one clap: and (the sooner to
practice his malice) has procured their abortion and untimely birth, to the
end they might with the more speed be sent into Europe. The first is,
Desperation, the second Pusillanimity, the third Dullness of the spirit, the
fourth Negligence, the ^sto Sleepiness. These five well instructed and better
provided for, he shipped in a Brasile man for Civil, but the ship being
unfortunately taken by an English man, they were brought into England, and no
sooner set foot on land, but ran away from their Captain. Now sir, having all
languages perfectly, they follow strange directions, not tying their spirits to
one determinate body, but flying here and there, and infecting all places, and
exempting themselves from no persons: yet as subtle as they are, I have
sounded them out; and that I know them, I will resolve you if you please to
read their descriptions. The eldest of them Desperation (a peculiar vice
proceeding from Idleness, but not y^ which is the sin against the Holy Ghost,)
is such a sin, that if he meet with a rich man, he makes him distrust himself
for getting up on his horse without help; he causes him forbear the reading
of books in suspect of his understanding, he drives him to be dainty of his
meats, telling him his stomach is squeasie; he feeds him in his dreams with
terrible visions, he drives him to mistrust himself in whatsoever he
pretends, enforcing such a diffidence in himself, that both he makes him an
enemy to his body, and the ruin of his own soul. He persuades the Merchant
not to traffic, because it is given him in his nativity to have loss by sea;
and not to lend, least he never receive again. He makes the Scholar loath to
read books if they be long, careless to hear lectures, because he
understands not at the first. He causes a lover to lie sighing in his bed, and
rather die sick of the sullens then tell his grief. The poor man he teaches
to curse his birth, and desperately to give over labor, where otherwise if he
would show diligence, he might be relieved. He tells a Lady it is best keeping
her bed, when the Physicians assure her the disease is cured with exercise: and
let him but light on a seeble heart, he will die first before he take a
medicine. If a friend entreats his friend to speak in his behalf, out steps
he, and counsels him to forbear the demand, for fear he be denied: and if a
husband man have a good crop, in the midst of his harvest he teaches him this
tetch of unthankfulness, I would I were a beast, so I were rid of this
trouble. How say you by this spirit of darkness? Is he not cunning and
subtle? Are not his treasons colored and plausible? Is not his persuasion
conformable to weak nature? If you say nay, you err; if you confess it, then
learn thus to prevent him: First, remember that Volenti nihil difficile, A
good will wins all things: and to condemn our own ability in good things,
is to suspect Gods merciful providence in furtherance of justice and virtue:
observe that lesson in Seneca, Qui nihil potest sperare, desperet nihil.
Who nothing hopes, let him despair in naught.
Let the rich know this, that he that fears a little frost of infirmity, shall
have a great snow fall upon him: let him consider, that to help nature,
wins ease; and that to endeavor willingly, is half the mean to attain
happily: let him remember this, that God opens the understanding, if we offer
the endeavor; and commanding us temperance, kills the fear of ercesse; and
being all in all things, is defective in nothing that is virtuous. Let the
superstitious Merchant trust the creator, and he shall not superstitiously be
tied to creatures; and succor his neighbors necessities with good intent, and
God shall ^eward him. Let the scholar know, that the harder he is to conceive,
the surer he is to retain: and as no way is too long to him that seeks a
place desired; so no book can be too tedious that le^s any path to knowledge.
Let the poor labor to prevent need, and he may be assured to find no cause to
suspect necessities. Let the Lady fast in continence, she shall not languish in
excess: and let all men build on God, and desperation shall not hurt them. Let
us draw nearer this fiend, and conjure him more cunningly: he has more motives
in man, and let us therefore examine them. Says he, fasting kills worldly
comfort, and therefore it is to be fled. Answer him boldly, that it is
transitory, and momentary which delights, but eternal that mortifieth. If he
say, thy sins are great; tell him, Gods mercy is greater: If he induce
desperation by thy often fall, oppose Christ's words against his suspect, Non
dico ^bi vsque septies, sed Mat. 18.
vsque septuagies septies, I say not to thee, seven times, but seventy times
seven times. And remember that of Leo, Misericordiae Domini nec mensuras
possum^s pouere, ^c tempora definire, We can neither measure the mercies of
God, nor define the time: and (to give a sword utterly to confound this fury)
use hope, which (though every ways thou be assaulted) will maintain thy
constancy; And conclude thus (when troubles or doubts distraught thee,) with
Ovid,

Magna tamen spes est in bonitate dei,
Yet in Gods goodness is our hope increast.
The second fury (now adays ranging up and down our country, and infecting
frail and inconstant hearts) is Pusailanimitie and Worldly fear, who
(wheresoever he lurketh,) is known by these tokens; he makes the eye
inconstant, the color come and go, the heart beat, the thought suspicious, he
kills weak desire, by suspicious fears; and as a little water (as Aristotle
says) is sooner corrupted then a great deal; so with this abastardizing
spirit, the weaker minds are sooner attainted the^ the great. This fiend makes
easy things impossible by mistrust, and so transporteth affections that they
can claim no title in their own natures. This is a temporal and foolish kind
of fear, rising either from the love of transitory things, or the supposed
difficulties of life. The ordinary seat of this humor is in the sensuality
of the heart: With this weakness of spirit was Anthony the Roman seasd, who
seeing the increases of Caesar, when his means of resist were sufficient,
retired himself to his Timoneum, leaving both Cleopatra and his business, as
destitute of all hope, before the assurance of his danger: mortal is this
sin if it be accompanied with the consent of the will, the Apostle writing
to the Colossians says, Fathers provoke not your children unto indignation,
least they become weak in mind, and loose their courage, (according to the
Syriak:) noting hereby, that this infirmity accompanies for the most part
those that are of the weakest ability and Judgment. This deiection of spirit
likewise is an effeminate and womanish disease, expressed often by foolish
huswifes in those words, Good God what shall I do? How shall I dress my house?
Make ready my children? Do this, and do that? being things easy and
rediculons to be forced. Against this infirmity, and inue noming spirit of
fear, I will apply that of Doctor Gerson, where he says, That there are
diverse that think they offend by despair, which offend not: For this
proceeds from a certain Pusillanunitie of their hearts, or of emotiue or
feeling of despair, which they esteem to be a consent, but it is not. For
whatsoever feeling they may have, (yea, although it press so far as that
they think themselves almost attainted with this temptation) they lose not
charity, as long as they are sorrowful, and the reason is contrary and
consents not thereto: So that the spirit of a man is overcome by the enemy,
except there be consent of the will: For the seuce makes not the sin, but
the consent. You that are or may happen to be entangled in these briars, and
assailed by this temptation, make your general recourse to God, saying with
the Apostle, Omnia possum in co qui me (...): I can do al things by the grace
of him that comfort me. To conclude, let no man hide his Talent whatsoever,
which God has bestowed on him to traffic and profit his neighbor, least
he incur this vice of Pusillanimitie; but let us all cleave unto
Magnanimity his opposite, considering this of Tullies, Qui magno animo est and
forti; omnia quae cadore in hominem possunt desp^cit, and pro nihiloputas. He
that has a noble and resolute mind, despises all miisfortunes that are
incident to man, holding them of no reckoning. And that of Lucans,

-- Fortissimus ille est,
Qui promptus metuenda pati si cominus instent.
Most strong is he when dangers are at hand,
That lives prepared their fury to withstand.
Dullness of spirit (the next borne to Pusillanimitie) has great conformity
with him, for Pusillanimitie hinders the beginning and enterprise of a good
work, and this fiend lets the performance of it when it is begun, and makes
a man give over in the midst of his business. This monster has three heads
whersoeuer he seaseth one body: the first is Idleness, (slack to perform any
thing, and a poison that confounds many men;) the second is Slownesse, that
deserreth to follow virtue, or conversion from sin: the third is Tepiditie,
which causes a man do his work coldly, without courage or feruor in his
business. This fiend haunteth most commonly among those sort of men, that are
too much subject to their flesh, and being bondslaues to their sensual lusts,
have their reasons obscured, and their desires dulled: they hate Music,
despise Arts, accounting their excellence to be in ignorance; if they speak,
it is so abruptly and lothsomly, as it moves not; and if they be silent, they
rather look like some blind statues of marble, then living and moving men. If
they write, it is Inuita Minerua, so coldly and without conceit, as they (like
the untunable ring of Bells) rather fill the ears with iarring and noise, then
delight or reason. Many and too many are possessed with this spirit, and this
spirit is incarnate in them. For they only like beasts respect present things,
having no care of that which is to come: you shall see a slouen sleeping in his
bed, that for want of rising loses the commodity of preferment: another so
cold in his enterprises, that he is unfortunate in all business. Whatsoever
comes from such men, seems to be enforced, (so is the eye of their
judgments blinded in perceiving that which best behooves them.) I knew one of
this faction in Oxford, who (after he had studied seven years, and often beaten
over the Predicables,) at last thanked God y^ he had a little sight in Genus:
This was as slouenly a lout as ever I looked upon, who often found in his heart
to loose his breakfast for want of fetching: come into his study, you should
still see him sleeping over his book. In all exercises he was always the
last: and in all disputations so cold, and duncicall, that neither any man
understood him, nor he, himself. With this spirit was those two Serving men
seized, the first of which being asked by his master sitting at dinner, what
he had brought from the Sermon? In faith Sir, (said he) your hat and cloak,
and nothing else. The second examined in the like manner, answered thus: Faith I
marked not the beginning, I was asleep in the midst, and came away before the
end. This is a dangerous fiend wheresoever he gets footing, causing men to
make shipwreck of their time, which being short and swift once past is
irrecouerable, and which lost (says Bias and Theophrastus) a great treasure is
lost. This made certain discontented (as Timon and Apermantus) wax Plutarch
careless of body and soul, fretting themselves at the worlds ingratitude, and
giving over all diligent endeavor, to serve the fury of their unbridled minds.
The stories registered by learned men are full of men thus affected, and who so
considers the most pollices and Common weals of Christians, shall I fear me
(and let me write it with grief) find more opportunity lost by coldness,
slacknes, and delay, then consideration can remedy with many years heart break
and study. By delay and protraction, enemies wax strong, and lingering hate
gives prevention a diligenter eye; and though Affricanus admits not
officious diligence, yet am I so contrary to him, that I dare boldly auow,
that the most stratagems that are done happily, are done suddenly: yet desire
I not to be misconstrued in this, for before action, I admit counsel, and
secrecy: But matters once intended, I hold all time lost till they be
executed; for delay gives the enemy opportunity of intelligence, weakeneth
the heart of the souldior, generally more fervent in the first exploits; and
afflicts the heart of the governor till the issue be discovered. To conclude,
as waters without stirring and moving, wax corrupt; so without diligence all
affairs are either lost or weakened.

But leave we this (yet not as impertinent to this place, but as such a thing
if well looked into, deserves a whole volume) and let us now have an eye to the
next ftend of this breed, which Satan first named Negligence. Negligence
incarnate in our world, has generally a running head, he is full of rancor,
and replenished with idleness; Instability, and Mutabilitie, continually
attend upon him; so that he begins many things, but ends nothing: he will
execute no office by reason of trouble, keep no house least he take too much
care for his family: put him in trust with a message, he forgets it: and
commit your affairs to his handling, all comes to naught: reading good books
troubles his wits, but for Palmerine, that's a pretrie story, and why, because
it teaches him no wit: This fiend lets his books be covered with dust for
want of looking too, his garments fall in pieces for want of amending, his
hair ouergrow his shoulders, for want of barbing, his face covered with dirt
for want of washing, and he walks generally untrust, not for exercise sake, but
for idleness: he is still thinking and devising on things, but he executes
nothing, and (like a lunaticke person) runs into strange imaginations, and only
speaks them without effecting them: he defers in all that he does, and thereby
loses the most of his thrift; and in neglecting to solicit his friends, he
loses and smothereth his fortunes; so that Occasion may rightly say and cry
to him out of Ausonius, (...) lib. (...).


Tu quoque dum recitas dum perc^ntando moraris,
Elap sam dices me quoque de manibus.
And whilst thou ask and asking do delay,
Thou will confesle that I am slipped away.
Isodore (in his book of Etimologies, writing of this sin) says ^.
that the negligent man is called negligens, quasi nec eligens; that is,
negligence, because he has no choice in any thing: for who so is subject to
this infirmity, is void of all election, by reason that he wants
consideration: for a considerate man in foreseeing preuenteth, which prevention
is the death of negligence. This fiend my friends must be earnestly avoided,
for by him Anthony dallying in delights with Cleopatra, gave Caesar opportunity
in many victories; And Hannibal lying idle at Cannas, corrupted Diogen. Lacr^us.
both his soldiers, and strengthened his enemies. It is a Cinicks life not a
Christians, which is ouerpast in negligence, and nothing worse becomes a man,
then to be careless and improuident: For as fruits unlooked unto, are for want
of turning soon rotten, so minds for lack of virtuous meditation, become
corrupt and polluted: memory without use decai^th, and the body without
exercise becomes loathsome, negligence therefore is fitly compared to a
sleep, for as in it man rests and is deprived of all that he has, so in the
sleep of negligence and sin, al virtues are dispoiled: which is very
prettily figured in the sleep of Jonas, of whom it is said, That he fled from
the face of our Lord in Tharsis, and entering into a ship fell into a profound
sleep, and there arose a great wind, and the tempest increased, and the ship
was in danger; Finally, Jonas was cast into the sea, where falling into the
belly of a Whale, he lost his hairs of his head, ^ud became bald. On which
place the gloss says, That the great and heavy sleep of the Prophet
signifies a man laden and drowsied in the sleep of error, for whom, it
suffices not to fly from our Lord, but furthermore (overwhelmed with a
certain carelessness) he is ignorant of Gods wrath and securely sleeps,
and at last is cast into the Whales belly, which is the bosom of hell. For as
the Whale dwells in the deepest floods, and profoundest seas; so Hell is said
to be in great obscurity, and in the depth of the earth. Whereupon in the
Gospel it is said, To be in the heart of the earth: For as the heart is in the
midst of a creature, so is Hell in the midst of the earth. At the last he
is made bald and spoild of his hair, that is, deprived of his virtues and
graces. And where it is said, Jonas sleeping the winds arose; it implies thus
much, that a man sleeping in idleness, negligence, and carelessness, the winds
and storms of temptations suddenly and vehemently arise: For then are we
most suddenly surprised with error, when we are most entangled with
improuidence and negligence. And as Caesar in his Senate house was assailed
when he least suspected, by his conspirators, so men in their securities are
soonest subdued by the assaults of wickedness; which conspireth the death of
the soul. The Poets feign thus of the Syrenes which haunt about Sicily (and of
late days have appeared in the Sea in India) That with their sweet tunes they
draw the Mariners asleep, that whilst they sleep soundly, they may sincke
their ship. The like may be said of the Devil, who lulleth us in the lap of
inconsiderate security, and sings us asleep with the notes of Negligence,
till he sincke the ship of our soul, which is our body, in the bottomless
seas of confusion, which is Hell.

Let us fly from Negligence therefore, as being the first cause of the
downfall both of men and Angels, let us be forward in curing our corrupt
natures, let us not resemble the foolish bussard in Horace, who because he
could not see as clear as Linx, would not anoint his eyes with Collirium; but
let us seek out of celestial heritages, not negligently (as those of the
tribe of D^n, sent out to search the promise land,) but diligently, like those
that brought back the fat thereof, that we may be worthy the heritage. Fi^
how far have I wandered when Sleepiness the last Devil of this breed has
ouertooke me to interat of his nature: Sit down drowsy fiend, I will dispatch
thee presently.

Somnolence and Sleepiness lurketh continually with unfortunate persons, and
the excess thereof shows the spirit has small working: he is a fiend that
(wheresoever he inhabiteth) dulleth the senses, makes the head heavy, the
eyes swollen, the blood hot, corrupt, and excessive, the face pufft, the
members unlusty, the stomach irksome, the feet feeble: Look in a morning
when you see a fellow stretching himself at his window, yawing, and starting,
there be assured this Devil has some working: This is a shroud spirit
wheresoever he gets seasure, for he lives by the expense of life, and he
that entertaines him, has rhewms, cathars, defluxions, repletions, and
opilations, as ordinarily about him, as every substance has his shadow. This
fiend and his brother Negligence are of one nature, and where Duloesle of
spirit, and these meet, God, nature, law, counsel, profit, soul, body, and
all are neglected.

This considered, let this Devil incarnate (too ordinary a guest in this
country) be banished from our society, least being corrupted by his example,
we fall into the same sin wherewith he is entangled: for as Plato says,
Dormieus est nullius praetis, A sleepie man is of no worth; and in the seventh
of his laws, he thus writes, Somnus multus, nec animis, nec corporibus* nec
rebus preclare gerendis, aptus est a natura, Excessive sleep is neither good
for the soul or body, or auailable in any virtuous or laudable action: For
he that sleeps, is no more accounted of then he that is dead: and truly I
am of this opinion, that he took this custom and law from Homer, and no
other, who says, That sleep is the brother of death: The same allusion also
used Diogenes, who when he had slept said, Frater fratem inuisit, The brother
has visited his brother, that is, sleep has visited death: the same likewise
intimates Ovid in this verse,

Stulte quid est somnus gelidaenisi mortis imago?
Fool what is sleep but image of chil death?
The like consideration likewise had the Doctors of Israel: so that one amongst
them (called Rabi-Dosa the son of Harkinas) writes, The mornings sleep, and
the euenings drunkenness, shorten a man's life: corporal sleep likewise
oftentimes ingendreth the sleep of the soul, which spiritual sleep is far
more dangerous then the other, and therefore Cato dissuadeth youth from it.

-- Somno ne deditus esto,
Nam diuturna quies vitijs alimenta ministrat.
Be not addict to sleep, for daily rest
Yields food to vice and nurseth sin in feast.
And that divine Petrarch most wittily sings,

La gola il somno, and Potiose piume,
Hanno dol mundo ^gni virtusbandita.
Incontinence, dull sleep, and idle bed,
All virtue from the world have banished.
So that humane nature is wandered from his scope, and overcome by evil
custom. Thexe is another Poet (as I remember it is Ovid) that says it is
sufficient for children to sleep seven hours: and another contemplative
father says, that to repose five hours, is the life of saints; to sleep
six, is the life of men; but to slug seven, is the life of beasts: Say thou
thus O father? Oh that thou could have lived to have seen this age, wherein
if thy words sound truth, thou should find (whatsoever way thou seek) as
many reasonable beasts as there be motes in the Sun, thinking eight, ten,
twelve hours, but a Method of Moderation. These are they that sleep in their
beds of Iuorie, and play the Ames 6.
the wantons on their soft couches: Pauca verba, this is a subject for a
Preacher. Let me therefore draw to my conclusion, and finish both my book, and
the discovery of further wretchedness, in she wing the detestable effects of
Astaroth, adding certain disswasions to the same.

Damascene (defining this sin) says, That it is a spiritual Damas. lib. 2.
Ortho. ca. 14.
heaviness, which depresseth and weighs down the soul so much, that it
takes no delight or taste in executing goodness. Tully he defines it to be a
wearines and tediousnes of the spirit, by which a man grows in lothing of
that good he has begun. So that by them it is to be gathered that Sloth is a
languishing infirmity of the spirit, a dulnes of the mind, a diffidence of Gods
help, a distrust of our own strength. The sins it makes those subject too
that are entangled therewith, are forgetfulness of God, carelesnes of our
estates, obscurity of our souls, loathsomeness of our bodies, and
irrecuperable loss of time. This sin (by the Fathers) is compared to the
disease (called by the Physicians) Paralisis, with which, whosoever is seized,
his members are dissolved* his vital powers and natural faculties are
weakened, and he himself is wholly not himself, neither being able to move,
nor master his own lims. So fares it by a slothful man, who loses by this
sickness the light of his mind, the use of his understanding, y^ good affections
that are the props and pillars of the same, and becomes but the image of that
which in effect he is not: and as this infirmity is healed by ver^ hot
Pultesies and inward potions, so except the heat of charity, and the
remembrance of hell fire, be applied to the wounds and dulnes hereof it
remains wholly incurable. Besides, this sin is against nature, for as the
bird to fly, the fish to swim, the flower to grow, the beast to feed, so man
was ordained to labor; which if he do not, he wrongs nature, wrongs his body,
and which worse is, dams his-soule. N^li esse piger, (says Augustine) Sermon. 2.
de tim. lib. 6.
Be not slow, labor earnestly and God will give thee eternal life. Helinandus
in his Chronicies reports, that when a certain Bishop (called Philippus
Beluacensis) was for a night lodged in their Monastery, he slept so long, that
he was neither present at Gods service, neither ashamed to let the sun (it
being then Winter time) to behold him sleeping, which when Helinandus
perceived, and saw no man ready or bold enough to tell him of his fault, he
confidentlie stepped near unto his bed, and in brief spoke thus unto him, Sir
the Sparrows have long since forsaken their nests to salute God, and will a
Bishop yet lie sleeping in his chamber? Consider (father) what the Psalmist
says, Mine eyes have prevented the day; and that of Ambrose, It is uncomely
for a Christian that the beam of the Sun should behold him idle; and let
this persuade you to cast off your slugginesse: The Bishop (rowsed with these
words all in rage) said unto him, go wretch as thou art and louse thy self,
I disdain thy counsels: to whom the Moncke answered in a pleasant manner,
Take heed father least your worms kill you, for mine are already slain: he
meant the worm of conscience, which shall at last bite them, who are given
over to their sensualities. I have read also a pretty story in an old dunce
called Petrus de Lapiaria, which because of the pithie allusion I will not
stick to tell you. A certain King (says he) having three sons, and being
well kept in years, resolved to make his Testament, certifying his children,
that which of them was most slothful, on him he would bestow his kingdom; to
whom the first said, to me belongs the kingdom, for I am so sluggish, that as
I sit by the fire I rather suffer my shinnes to be burnt, then to draw them
from the flame: the second he said, the crown in all reason belongs to me,
since I am far more slothful then thou art, for having a rope about my
neck, and being ready to be hanged, and a sword in my hand, suficient to cut
the same, yet am I so slothful, that I will not stretch out my hand to save my
life: after him the third stepped up, and in these words m^e his claim, nay
says he I alone ought to reign, for I excel you all in flothfulnesse, For
lying continually on my back, water stilleth upon mine eyes, yet I for sloth
sake forsake not my bed, neither turn to the right nor to the left hand: and
on this son the King bestowed his Crown and kingdom. To yield this a
Morrall interpretation, these three sons are three sorts of idle persons; The
first that cares not for fire, signifies him, that being in the company of
evil and luxurious men, will not forsake them: The second, (knowing himself
hanged in the snaro of the Devil, as the covetous man) yet having and knowing
the sword of Prayer sufficient to cut the rope, neuerlesse he will not use it:
The third (that will neither turn his eye to the right or to the left hand)
signifies him that neither considers the pains of Hell, nor the rewards of
Heaven, So that neither for fear of punishment, nor hope of reward, he will
rise again from sin: On him the Devil his father (who as Job says, is the
King ever the children of pride) bestows the kingdom of Hell, where no order
but continual horror inhabiteth. And truly to the iole and slothful person
Hell does most justly appertain, because having eyes to see his infirmity he
blinds them; a mind to understand his remedy, he disdaineth it; and times
made for labor, yet refuses it: but as Solomon says, Omnis piger in egestate
erit, The slothful man shall live in poverty, and Hell justly shall be his
inheritage that negligently forbeareth to labor for heaven. Oh thou slothful
man if this persuade thee not, look further; the male storke senteth the
adulteries of the female, except she wash her self, does not God then both
see and will punish thy sin except thou mend thy self? The Lion smells the
filthiness of his adulteress, and will not he think you look into the
offenses of his creatures, yet assuredly he that sees all things beholds thy
wickedness, and except thou repent thee, will do justice on thy negligence.

Having already heard the deformities of this monster, now at the last let us
consider the ren edies against him. First, let us intentiuely ponder and weigh
how much our Savior has labored and travailed for the salvation of mankind:
It is said that he past the nights in prayer, after whose example if we
desire to be his, we must (with the holy Martyrs of the Primitive Church)
mortify our earthly members, and follow him in the like exercise: secondly,
(in that this sin of Idleness hinders both soul and body, and by that means
is the occasion of many mischiefs, as well corporal as spiritual.) It has
been as well detested both in holy scriptures, as in fathers of the Primitive
Church, as appears by Johannes Clymachus, where he says, Idleness is a
dissolution of the spirit, an abject fear in all good exercises, an hatred and
grief of any godly profession. He says likewise that worldly men are happy,
he speaks til of God, accounting him cruel, and without humanity; he makes
a man astonished in heart, and weak in prayer; more hard then iron in the
service of God, and both slothful and rebellious to travel with his hands, or
to do obedience. Behold the right effects of deuilish Astaroth: consider
likewise what fruits spring from this cursed fiend. Thirdly, one of the best
means to resist the craft of this fiend, is to travel and to be always doing
somewhat, to the end we be not surprised suddenly, as Saint Jerome counsels.
To this purpose, the ancient monks of Egypt, had always these words in their
mouths* That he Cass lib. 10. cap. 23.
which occupies himself in any good exercise, is not tempted by the Devil;
but he that does nothing, but lives Idly, is tormented and possessed with
diverse. And if the Heavens, the Sun, the Moon, and other planets, the birds,
beasts, and fishes. are in continual motion, and without ceasing apply those
offices for which they were created; what ought man to do, who is created for
travel, and whose soul is defined by the Philosopher to be a perpetual
motion? Let the Idle go (...). ^b. de an^mal. Proverb. 6.
to school to the Ant (as says Solomon) and learn of her to behave him
self: and let him take heed that he prove not that unfruitful tree, which
must be cast into eternal fire, and that barren figtree which Christ cursed.
Let him always remember y^ Idleness is the nurse of all evils, and that it is
and has bin the overthrow of many millions of souls. Let him consider y^ by
labor we obtain reward; by negligence, loose our selves. It is reported of
Cyrus the King of the Persians, that being willing to inkindle the hearts of
the common sort to war against the Medes, Ba^. S^x. lib. ^stra. a 41.
he used this policy and stratageme: He led his army to a certain wood,
where, for the whole day, he occupied the people in cutting down the wood, and
in continual toil in lopping the trees. But the next day, he caused very
sumptuous feasts to be prepared, and commanded his host to feast, sport, and
make holy day with gladness; and going to every company in the midst of their
sports, he asked them which of those two days best liked them: who answered,
that the second was more pleasant then the first. To whom he replied in this
sort: As by yesterdaies labor you came together and were assembled to this
days banquet, so can you not be happy and blessed, till first of all you
overcome the Medes. So (in alluding to this after a morrall meaning) we can not
attain to blessedness, except we overcome in this world the Medes, which are
the devils, by virtuous actions; neither can we be admitted to the banquet,
except by labor in this life time. Agamemnon, Ulysses, and Hercules, the one
besieged and raced Troy; the other, subdued and overcame Polyphemus; the third
achieved twelve incredible labors for glories sake: Let not us therefore
refuse labor for heavens sake. The Angels are not idle, but sing praises; the
celestial bodies (as I say) are not Idle, but observe their motions; all
airie, earthly, and watery creatures, are in continual exercise: air is
continually tossed by the wind; water continually ebbes and flows. If
therefore all creatures detest Sloth, and embrace Labor, to give man example;
let us forsake loathsome Idleness, for many foretold and these set down by Ovid:

Add quod ingenium longa rubigine laesum
Torpet, and est multo quam fuit ante minus:
Fertilis assi^uo si non remouetur aratr^
Nil nisi cum spinis gramen habebit ager,
Tempore qui l^ngo steterit malecurrit, and inter
Carceribas missus vltimus ibit equus:
Vertitur in teneram Cariem rimisque dehiscet,
Siquae aiusolitis cymba vacabit aquis.
Which coursly and hastily I have thus translated,

The wit long hurt because not used more,
Grows dull, and far less toward then before.
Except the plow prepare the field for come,
In time it is oregrowen with grass or thorn.
Who long has rested can not run apace:
The fettered horse is hindmost in the race.
The boat consumes and riues in every rim,
If on long beaten seas he cease to swim.
As therefore all things ware worse for want of exercise and use, and study
refineth both Arts and all manner knowledge whatsoever, let us detest Astaroth,
flee his breed, tie our selves to exercises both of mind and body, use the
practice of Themistocles, occupy our heads when we walk solitary, and so
dispose of all our actions, that the Enemy of all virtue find us not Idle, who
thinks that fort easily won, where the watchman sleeps; and that mind
quickly overcome, that entertaineth Idleness. Let us follow Paul, who wrought
with his hands, least he should be troublesome to his brethren. Let exercise
never forsake us, either of mind or of body: for the Devil (as Jerome says)
is like a thief, who finding a horse idle in the fields, gets upon the back
of him, where contrary of those that labor, he can catch no holdfast.
Idleness (says Bernard) Est matter nugarum, nouerca virtutum, Is the mother of
toies, and the stepdame of virtue: for it casts the strong man headlong into
offense, and choking virtue, nourishes pride, and squareth out the path to
hell. If the castle be unwalled, the Enemy enters; if the earth be unmanured,
it brings forth thorns; if the vine be neglected, it grows fruitless: So
if our bodies and mind^ be unexercised, they are the sooner seduced and
distracted.

The conclusion of this book to the courteous Reader.
THus far with regard to profit, and desire to please, I have drawn my
discourse and employed my readings: what my pain has been, you may
recompense with your acceptance. For as to the traveler the hope of rest
makes his iourny seem light; so to the studious, the expectation of profit
and good respect, lesseneth the tediousness of labor, and long watchings. It
fares now with me as with shipwrackt sailers that esyie their port, and weary
pilgrims that are in sight of Jerusalem; for my present Joy drowneth my passed
Travel, and after I have finished my journey, I hang up my offerings at the
shrine of your courtesies: If you accept them, it satisfies my labor, and
shows your thankfulness. I am not of Caius Lucillius opinion, That no man
should read my writings; for I had rather he misinterpreted then thought
negligent. Accept my good intent (I pray you) and it shall encourage my
endeavor; for a Father says, The giving of thanks, is an augmentation of
desert. The desire is tedious that has no end, and the labor loathsome that
is misconstrued. You buy that cheap, which cost me dear; and read that with
pleasure, which I have written with travel: Only if you pay me with the seed
of acceptance, you make me forward toward another harvest: and in giving me
thanks, you shall loose nothing. For (as Tully says) he that gives it has
it, and he that has it, in that that he has, restores it. You have the
advantage of my goods, they are already in your hands: if you pay me that you
owe me, I may hap trust you with a greater sum of Science. Farewell, and wish
me no worse, then I am careful to increase thy knowledge.

FINIS.

