A TRVE CHRONOLOGY OF THE TIMES OF THE PERSIAN Monarchy, and after to the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans.

WHEREIN BY THE WAY briefly is handled the day of Christ his birth: with a
declaration of the Angel Gabriels message to Daniel in the end of his 9. chap.
against the frivolous conceits of Matthew Beroald.

Written by EDWARD LIVELIE, Reader of the holy tongue in Cambridge.

AT LONDON, Printed by Felix Kingston for Thomas Man, John Porter, and Rafe
Iacson. 1597.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, MY VERY HOnorable good Lord, my Lord the
Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace.
THE knowledge of former times (most reverend) by profane authors recorded,
for the great profit and delight thereof, has not without cause been always
highly esteemed of the best and wisest men in Heathen common wealths; guided
only by natures law, the word of life not known amongst them. This keeps the
memory of things done of old, and in spite of death, preserves still in some
sort, as it were the life of Noble ancestors, who by their prowess and
wisdom, for guiding the course of man's life aright, have left most worthy
examples, and notable patterns of virtue behind them. To Christians it has
this more to commend it self: that it brings much light to the understanding
of God his word, and greatly avails to the advancement of that truth
whereby souls are won to the Lord: wherefore I cannot but marvel at the
(shall I term it folly or rather madness?) of those men, which for the
continuance of the Persian Monarchy, and the reign of the several kings
therein: are bold to reject the true histories of ancient writers, who living in
the times thereof, have set forth the same for the ages to come. The cause and
maine ground whereof, is nothing else but their own error in misunderstanding
holy Scripture; by wrested interpretation, making flat contradiction between
the spirit of God, and profane truth: So not only wrong is done to those
excellent men, who by their pains have deserved well: but also even the
certainty of Gods word it self, by this means is weakened, and made
doubtful, and called into question. For it is not possible that one truth
should be repugnant to another. Now because truth (as Augustine writes in his
second book de doctrina Christiana) is the Lords wheresoever it is found, and
therefore every Christian in duty bound to stand for the maintaining thereof,
against all adversaries, so far forth as his strength will serve: I have
according to my pore talent, undertaken the defense of the true History and
Chronology of the Persian times against the adversaries thereof: and withal
an exposition of the Angel Gabriels message to Daniel agreeable thereunto. The
one, that is my account of the times in fast persuasion I hold so sure: as that
I steadfastly believe scarce 2. years under or over, if any at all will be
easily disprooued: which in so great a number, were a small matter in regard of
those men's conceit, who are bold at one dash to chop off no less then a
hundred years. For the other, I mean my exposition; by reason of interpreters
disagreement among themselves, having not like evidence: I refer my self to
learnings skill, the judgment of cunning Linguists, and sound Divines. In
English rather then in Latin I have chosen to set forth this treatise: for no
other cause in the world but one. That as my own Countriemen in their native
language, by reason of Matthew Beroald the first brocher of the new
Chronologicall History of the Persian Empire, translated into English, and some
other books, do read the wrong, in danger thereby to be seduced: So likewise
in the same their mother tongue, by this my pains they may see the right, and
so hold themselves therein from going astray. This my labor I am bold to
present unto your Grace, sundry reasons moving me thereunto. For having in
intent sought herein the upholding of truth, to the good of my Country, and
the benefitte of Christ his Church amongst us (the chief care whereof for these
matters appertains unto your Grace.) I feared not the check of unseemly
boldness, if by the honor of your Graces name, I should seek to commend the
same. Your great love of learning, and kind good will to Students, hartned me
on: But above all, my especial motive hereunto, was the earnest desire of my
heart, to show some token of my dutiful remembrance of your great kindness
heretofore so many ways showed unto me. That I was first scholar, and after
fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge, it proceeded of your loving mind,
and favorable good will unto me, besides other benefits many, some greater then
the form, which were too long to recite. In regard whereof if it may please
your Grace to accept of this acknowledgement of my duty: I shall account the
same my duty doubled. Thus with my hearty desire of your Graces happy estate
long to continue, to the glory of God, and the good of his Church, and the
wealth of this land, and your own sound comfort, I most humbly take my leave
of your Grace: this 24. day of November in the 1597. year of Christ our Lord.

Your Graces most bounden. EDWARD LIVELIE.

A TRVE CHRONOLOGY OF THE TIMES OF THE PERSIAN MONARCHY.
CIcero, if ever any other was one which verified that doctrine of the blessed
Apostle Paul, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians: that the wisdom of
God, of the wisest of the world was accounted foolishnes. The learning of the
Grecians, all arts pertaining to humanity, being held together to use his
own term in a certain kindred between themselves he had in great price.
The knowledge thereof he admired, the professors he honored, and by quick
conceit and sharp wit, together with earnest travail and diligent study
therein: he grew to that ripenes of deep knowledge and sweet speech, and wise
counsel, whereby he became the rare ornament of his country, the precious
jewel of his age, and the great glory of the world, far beyond al before him,
never ouertooke of any after him. But touching true divinity, and the people of
God, with the word of life amongst them: they were no better esteemed of him,
then Paul and his preaching was of the learned Philosophers of Athens; being
mocked for his labor, and acounted a babbling tool. Let his own mouth make
proof hereof, in an Oration which he made for Lucius Flaccus, being at that
time accused amongst other matters, for detayning great sums of gold, sent
yearly upon devotion by an usual custom out of Italy, and some other
provinces of Rome to Jerusalem. This action of his client, withstanding the
Jews herein; he greatly commends. Jerusalem, the holy and glorious seat of
God his service, he calls a suspicious and backebyting City. The devout
worship of God, and the holy religion of the Jews, he terms barbarous
superstition, by great contempt, in regard of the glory and ancient customs
of the Roman Empire, and in the end he concludes them a people not accepted of
God: because they had been overcome by the enemy and put to their tribute.
This was the reckoning which Tullie made of them, who by divine knowledge of
God his word, were the only wise people in the world: Deuteronomy 4.
whereby it appears that in his eyes the profane learning of men was deemed
more excellent then the wisdom of God. Amongst his sciences no place was left
for divinity. The knowledge of God his word, was too base for that company.
Much better was the doom of the ancient Fathers of the primitive Church, by
the light of God his spirit, who used all other arts and learning, as helps
and handmaids to the understanding of divine scripture, being Lady and
Mistress of all: to the which all humane wisdom owes duty and service.
Augustine a rare instrument for the benefit of GOD his Church, came notably
furnished with much other reading to the study of divinity. His skill therein
he proved not only by writing of the liberal sciences: but also alleging
of Poets and other Authors, and fitting their sayings to the phrase of holy
scripture to make it more plain; whereof one comes now to my mind, in his
books of speeches, taken out of a secular Author as he terms him. Et scuta
Latentia condunt. They hide the privy or secret lying shieldes, meaning such
as not before, but after the hyding, lay secret and hid. This he makes serve
for the understanding of a like speech, in the 25. chapter of Genesis in the
Greek bible, of Esaias, and Jacob, whose birth a little before was mentioned.
(...) the young men grew. They were newborn babes, far from that ripenes of
years, to be called young men, and therefore the action of growing in this
place, goes before the young men's age: to signify that being little children.
At the length after much growing up in age, they became young men. In his
second book De doctrina Christiana, he declares at large, that humane
sciences, and the learning of the gentiles, and profane histories, are very
helpful and profitable to the understanding of holy scripture. The learned
father Hierom also in many places brings much light, and great service, from
diverse and sundry profane writers, to the understanding of God his word. In
his commentaries on Esaias the thirteenth chapter, declaring the true meaning of
the prophets words there uttered concerning the desolation of Babylon, which
other leaving the truth of history expounded allegorically: has these
words. Audiuimus Medos, audiuimus Babylonem, and inclytam in superbia
Chaldaeorum: nolumus intelligere quod fuit, and quaerimus audire quod non fuit.
Et haec dicimus non quod tropologicam intelligentiam condemnemus; sed quod
spiritualis interpretatio, sequi debeat ordinem historiae. Quod plaerique
ignorantes, lymphatico in scripturis vagantur errore. We have heard says he of
the Medes, we have heard of Babylon the glorious city of the Chaldeans; we
will not understand that which has bin; but we seek to hear that which has
not been. Neither say I this to condemn tropologicall understanding, but that
spiritual interpretation ought to follow order of history: which the most
part being ignorante of by mad wandering do range about in the scriptures. The
same father being by some blamed, as too much addict to ye study of Secular
knowledge; in an epistle of his to on Magnus a Roman Orator, takes upon him
the defense and commendation thereof, by the examples of the best and most
excellent christian fathers before him. I must needs therefore greatly commend
the wisdom of our forefathers, in ordering our universities. Where young
scholars are first trained up in the studies of humanity, before they enter
into God his school: that by that means coming furnished, and ready stored
with many helps from their former learning, they may find a more easy way
and speedy course in that most grave race of divine knowledge, which is yet
behind for them to run. And surely so it is; and every one shall find the
experience hereof in himself. It is not to be spoken, how much and how clear
light, the diligent study and reading of Latin and Greek writers; yield to the
knowledge of holy scripture. Which by some few examples I will let the reader
understand. The Eleans, in time of pestilence brought upon them by exceeding
great abundance of flies; call upon their God Myiagrus: which being by
sacrifice once appeased, all those flies forthwith perish. This Pline reports
in his tenth book the eight and twentieth chapter. Whereunto for confirmation
may be added, that which is recorded by Pausanias in the first book of his
Eliaca: that Hercules sacrificing in Olympia, was mightily troubled with a huge
multitude of flies; till such time as he had done sacrifice to Jupiter
apomytos, by whose power all those flies were soon after dispersed. And hereof
he says, that the Eleans use to sacrifice (...): that is to Jupiter Apomytos
which drives away flies. Sotinus also in his Polyhistor the second chapter,
makes mention of Hercules his chapel in the beef market at Rome; into the
which after sacrifice and prayer made to the God Myiagrus, he entered by divine
power without flies. All these testimonies serve to understand the reason of
the name Baalzebub, in scripture given to the God of Ecron, in the first
chapter of the second book of the Kings: signifying the god of flies, or the
flies Jupiter (If it be true that Augustine affirms in his questions upon
the book of judges, that Baal is Jupiter) so called as should seem by those
reports of Pliny, Pausanias, and Solinus: of the power which was attributed
unto him in driving away flies whereof he is termed Myiagrus, that is a chaser
of flies, and Apomyius, as it were a defender, or preserver from flies.
Horatius in his last Satyr, tells of one Rufus Nasidienus, who had invited
to a great supper, Mecaenas a chief Lord in the Emperor Augustus Caesar's
Court; with many other noble men of Rome: that whenas in the midst of supper,
the daintiest dishes being now set upon the board, the hangings aloft by chance
suddenly brake, and daubed that honorable company with cobwebs, and powdered the
costly meats and wines with filth, and filled all full of choking dust:
Posito capite, vt si filius immaturus obisset, flere: Holding down his head,
he wept bitterly, as it had been for the untimely death of a dear son. So
then the casting down of Cain his countenance in the fourth of Genesis, argued
sorrow. And the virgins of Jerusalem, at the destruction of their city,
hanging down their heads to the ground, in the Lamentations of Jeremy the
second chapter, thereby declared their conceived grief. The prophet David at
such time as he fled from his son Absolon, and likewise all the men that were
with him; every one covered his head and wept. Haman also being made an
instrument to honor Mardochaeus, whom he hated to the death: for sorrow
hasted home with his head covered, whereby some have understood nothing else
but dust and ashes laid thereon, which is a cerimonie indeed of sorrow; but not
meant in those places. The custom in those times was, not only to lay dust on
the head in token of grief; but also to enclose and shut up as it were the
head and face, with some cloth or veil from men's eyes. As many examples out
of the Heathen Authors may easily show.

Ulysses as Homer declares, having heard one Demodicus sing of the glorious
and worthy acts of the Grecians at Troy: covered his head and face with a
cloth and wept. The soldiers of Ajax in Sophocles, hearing of the woeful case
of their Captain, for grief of Ulysses preferme^t before him, being
bestraught of mind; covered their heads with vailes. Demaratus a King of
Sparta by the subtle practicing of his enemies, was deposed of his kingdom,
as not of the Royal blood: who after bearing Office in the City, and
opprobriously in way of scorn, and derision, being asked, what it was to be
first a King and then an Officer; took it to the heart, and with these words
uttered, that that question should be the cause either of much joy, or much
woe to the Lacedaemonians, covered his head and got him home. This is recorded
by Herodotus in Erato.

Xenophon in his Symposio^ tells of a certain iester called Phillip: who at
a seast where Socrates with other grave company was present, assaying once or
twice by his ridiculous iestes to move them to laughter, but all in vain:
mufled up himself for sorrow and left his supper.

Demosthenes the famous Orator of Athens, as Plutarch writes in his life, in a
certain Oration of his before the people being hissed at; hied him home in
great heaviness with his head covered. In his 4. book.
It is recorded by Q. Curtius of Darius King of Persia; that hearing of his
wives death; Capite velato diu fleuit. He wept a great while having his head
covered. That the cover was a cloth hiding the face as well as the head,
appears immediatlye after in these words:

Manantibus adhuc lachrimis, vesteque ab ore reiecta, the tears yet trickling
down, and the cloth being cast away from his mouth, he lift up his hands to
heaven. Sisigambis that Kings mother, was a spectacle of rare misery. She
lost her Father and four score brethren, all in one day most cruelly killed by
Artaxerxes Ochus. Her own child a mighty King the last Monarch of Persia,
she saw twice overcome by Alexander, and in the end traitorously slain by his
own servants; the kingdom of Persia a overthrown, her self Captive: yet all
these crosses she bare in some tolerable manner, so long as Alexander lived,
who honored her exceedingly as his own mother. But after his death, bereaved
of all comfort, she tare her hair, cast her body on the ground, refused
succor, and wrapping up her head with a veil, ever after abstained from meat
and light, till welcome death made an end of her woes.

Thus David and Hamans covered heads, by so many examples, of such as for
extreme sorrow or shame of themselves, not abiding men's sight, muffled their
faces, are cleared of doubt. And herby the understanding of another place in
the 53. Chapter of Esaias not a little helped: where our blessed Savior is
compared to one hiding his face. For this, as has been proved, being an
argument of an heart oppressed with grief, is effectual and notable, to
declare that which immediately before was spoken of Christ: despised and refused
of men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: whereunto the next words
are these: (...): That is, to interpret it aright, and as it were hiding the
face from us.

This here I may not pretermit: that this ceremony of the covered head is used
sometimes in scripture, and other where in another sense. As in the 7. Chapter
of Ester: where we read of Hamans head covered by other against his will, to
signify that now in the kings wrath he was appointed to death. For this
likewise was an ancient custom used of diverse Nations, to muffell up the heads
of men condemned to die: or guilty of some grievous crime deserving death.
Polixena king Priamus his daughter, by the sentence of Agamemnon and other
Princes of Greece adjudged to die, was led to the slaughter of Ulysses, with
a veil over her head. As we read in the tragedy of Euripides, called Hecuba.
Philotas the son of Parmenio one of the chief Princes of Alexander the
great, found guilty of high treason against the king: was brought before him
to his answer, Capite velato having his head covered says Q. Curtius in his 6.
book. Festus Pompeius, in the word Nuptias says, that the Law commanded his
head to be covered, who had killed his Parente. Lastly Cicero in his Oration
for C. Rabirius, brings the very sentence of judgment it self, or verses,
as he terms them, used of Tarquinius superbus, the last and most cruel king
of Room. Caput obnubito, arbori infaelici suspendito. Cover his head, hang him
up on a woeful tree.

Let me by thy patience (gentle Reader) proceed to one argument more in this
kind, and so an end. That which is told by the Evangelist of Saint John Baptist
eating Locusts seemed incredible to some, greatly doubting of that kind of
meat: and therefore supposing the place to have been corrupted by the writers
fault, by some slip setting down (...) for (...), as though his meat had not
bin locusts, but choke pears.

Thus in their own conceit they were wiser than God, by ignorance of truth
witnessed in diverse profane Authors. Galen upon Hipocrates his Aphorisms the
2. book, the 18. Chapter is one, declaring there the force, which locustes
being eaten have to nourish. Pliny in the 28 chap. of his 11. book says, that
among ye Parthians they were counted a pleasant meat. Strabo in his 16. book
of Geographie, makes mention of a certain people which lived of them.
Bellonius in the 2. book of his observations, the 88. chapter, testifies from
the report of some Authors, that in Africa they were eaten as dainties: not for
Physic, but even for nourishment. Thereby proouing it a thing not incredible,
that John Baptist should eat locusts. But Diodorus Siculus most fully of all
other declares this in his, 4. book: where he tells of certain Aethiopians
called (...), that is locust eaters, who neither eat fish, nor cattle, but
only locusts continually: which at the spring time of the year they get in
great abundance, and salt them up to preserve them for meat.

Thus I have given as it were a taste by this little, out of Pliny, Pausanias,
Solinus, Horatius, Homer, Sophocles, Herodotus, Euripudes, Xenophon, Plutarch,
Quintus Curtius, Festus, Pompeius, Cicero, Galen, Strabo: how great service
Heathen writers do to the word of God, for opening the true meaning thereof. A
taste I call it in regard of all that which for declaration of other matters
might be said herein, which were the work of a huge volume, and great toil.

These writers then for many parts of Scripture are diligently to be sought
into, and not as some rash brains imagine, to be cast away as unprofitable in
the Lords school house: but especially for Daniell above all. In other places
they may seem profitable: but here they are necessary: even by Hieroms
judgment, who in a preface to his commentaries on this book affirms, the
manifold Histories of Greek and Latin Authors, to be necessary for the
understanding of Daniels Prophesies.

These helps therefore I mind to use for unfolding the 4. last verses of the
9. Chapter of Daniell, containing an entire prophecy of the estate of the holy
City after the Jews return, from the building thereof, unto the utter
destruction of the same by Vespasian the Emperor of Rome: and therein of the
coming of Jesus Christ the Lord of life, above 500. years before. Which is a
most certain argument of Divine wisdom in Daniell from heaven, and a proof
of that which Balthazar had heard, that the spirit of the holy Gods was in him:
whereby also he foreshewed many years before the destruction of the Babylonian
Empire by the Medes and Persians, and the Persians overthrow by Alexander; and
the great troubles, which long after that time the Jews suffered under
Antiochus Epiphanes. All this skill came from God: for the knowledge and
foretelling of things to come, is that which God only has left in his own
power, and challenges to himself in the Prophet Esaias. I make known those
things says, God, which have not yet happened. The Heathen Poet Sophocles could
see this, thus writing in the Tragedy of Ajax the whip bearer. (...). Many
things says he may be known of men, when they see them come to pass: but
of things to come yet unseen, there is no prophet.

I am not ignorant that Porphyrius a Tyrian Philosopher, a wicked and ungodly
Jew, of the kindred and sect of the Sadduces, an Infidel, an enemy of Christ,
a hater of God and his word: who wrote fifteen books against the Christians,
to weaken and extenuate the truth and authority of Daniels Prophecy, devised
this shift to say, that the Jews long before Daniels time (seeing these things
done,) committed them to writing under Daniels name, thereby to win credit to
their books.

This fine devise of Porphyrie is nothing else but a vain cavil: For it is
well known, that the coming of Christ is spoken of by Daniell in diverse
places: which can not be said to have been written by the Jews, who first
had seen the coming of Christ, seeing that they neither at that time when he
came, acknowledged him, and ever since have been so far from believing in
him, that usually to this day they even curse his memory. Porphyrius herein
has been answered at large by the learned Fathers Methodius, Eusebius,
Caesariensis, and Apolinarius, withstanding his blasphemy. And Hierome for
learning as noble as any, in one short sentence most wittily and pithilie,
turns all his reasoning against Daniell, for Daniell against himself.
Porphirii impugnatio testimonium veritatis est. Tanta enim in hoc Propheta
dictorum fides inuenta est; vt propterea incredulis hominibus videatur non
futura dixisse: sed praeterita narrasse. Porphyrie his impugning of Daniell
(says Hierome) is a testimony of his truth: because the sayings of this
Prophet have been found so certain, and of so great credit, that therefore
unbelievers have judged him rather to tell things past, the^ to speak of things
to come. But if there were nothing else at all to be said: yet even this one
prophecy of Daniell which I have in hand, touching the desolation of
Jerusalem, the truth and certainty whereof was at the length verified by the
event it self, at such time as Titus destroyed the Temple, and City: were
enough to stop the adversaries mouths. Yea though all the Infidel
Porphyries in the world, with all their cunning shifting stand together, they
shall never be able to avoid the force of this prophecy: but that it must
needs argue a divine spirit in Daniell. For they cannot here say, that the
Jews after they had seen the Temple destroyed by the Romans, forged a
prophecy thereof in Daniell his name. Because even Christ himself, in the 24.
of Matthew, alleges this prophecy of Daniel concerning the desolation of
the holy City, in the flourishing time thereof, about 37. years before it was
fulfilled. Whereby it is evident, that this prophecy was commonly known and
read in the Church of God among the Jews, as written by Daniell long before
the event had showed the truth thereof: So Daniell yet stands a divine
prophet of the Lord, inspired with heavenly knowledge of things to come from
above; and seeing that in one thing truly foretold this is proved of him,
there is no cause at all to doubt of the rest.

This is a sure foundation of divinity, a sound stay of religion, a strong
prop of faith to be reposed in the undoubted truth of GOD his word, a mighty
vpholder of the providence of God against all the Atheistes and Epicures of the
world: Which Josephus very well perceiving, and in the end of his 10. book of
antiquities, disputing against this kind of men, fetches his reason from the
sure truth of Daniels Prophesies. The error says he of the Epicureans hereby
is reproved, which take Gods providence in governing things out of this life,
believing the world to be carried by his own force without a guide or
ouerseer. Wherefore considering Daniels prophesies, I cannot but condemn the
foolishnes of those men, which deny that God has any care of men's affairs.
For how could it come to pass, that the event should answer his prophecies,
if all things in the world were done by chance. Calvin also in the first book
of his institutions: Does not Daniell says he, so prophecy of things to come
by the space of 600. years, as though he wrote an History of things already
done, and commonly known? Good men by the diligent meditation hereof shall be
abundantly furnished to quiet the barking of the ungodly: for this evidence is
clearer, then that it can be subject to any cauils.

This was the judgment of Josephus and Calvin against Atheists and profane
Epicures, to their shame and overthrow: taken from the certainty of Daniels
foreshewing things to come. Even this one prophecy of Daniels weeks, is a
very hammer to beat them down to the ground, and a wier scourge as it were
to tear them all in pieces: And therefore of all true Christians to be had in
great reverence, and the understanding thereof to be desired as pearls, and
diligently sought for, as hid treasure. To the finding out hereof two things
are most requisite: the one is a just account of the times: the other, a true
interpretation of the words in the original tongue. If we fail in either of
these, there is no hope to known what Daniell meant by his weeks: For neither
good interpretation alone is enough without exact chronology; nor this without
the other serves much to purpose. The sundring of these two things, which must
needs stand together, has been the cause of such turning and tossing this
excellent piece of Scripture in so many men's heads, so many ways: therefore
in these two things especially shall be the employment of my pains; if
happily thereby this noble text of Scripture may receive some light to the
clearer perceauing thereof.

Marcus Varro a learned Roman, as Censorinus tells in his book De die
natali, measured all time by three spaces: whereof one was from the beginning
of men, to the first flud: for the ignorance of the things which happened
therein called (...), unknown. The second from that flood to the first
Olympiad; for many fables and tales therein reported, termed (...), fabulous.
The third and last, from the first Olympiad to his age, containing more
certain truth of history, and therefore called (...), historical.

This was Varro his judgment commended by Cicero also in his first book of
Academicall questions: where speaking to Varro he uses these words: Thou
haste opened the age of thy country and ordering of times. Unto Varro herein
agreed Julius Affricanus in his third book of Chronicles, (As Eusebius
witnesses in his tenth book De praeparatione Euangelica) until the time of
the Olimpiads, says Affricanus, there is no sure knowledge in the Greek
History, all things being confusedly written without agreement between
themselves: But the Olimpicke times have been exactly handled of the Grecians,
by reason of regestring their acts and records therein, of no longer time then
every four years space. Censorinus after him speaking of the time from the
first Olimpiad; In this space, says he, was never any great dissentio^ or
controversy among writers for computation of time: except in some six or
seven years at the most. And even this little that was, Varro himself by his
great skill and diligent pains, at the length discussed, and found out the
truth, and showed clear light: by which the certain number not of years
only, but even of days might be perceived.

The Grecians, says Chitraeus in his Chronicle, have no certain computation
of times, and order of years before the Olimpiads. This was the judgment of
the best learned in all times, in all countries, for all kind of skill,
concerning the certain, account of time by Olimpiads used of the Grecians,
received of the Romans, followed and commended of Christians, even the flower
of the^, the most ancient Fathers, Clemens Alexandrinus. Eusebius, Hierome,
Orosius, and other for knowledge of Gods word most famous and renowned:
continued and kept from age to age, not contradicted with reason of any.
Except peradventure some to show the finenesse of their wit by Sophistry,
might cavil against it. For the better understanding of that which has bin,
and shall hereafter be said of Olympiads; it shall not be amiss here to show
what is meant thereby.

Olympia was a certain place of Greece, where games of running, wrestling,
leaping and such like were instituted by Hercules in honor of Jupiter Olympius,
whereof the place was called Olympia, and the games Olympiads, and Olimpiac
games, and the sports of Olympia, which after Hercules for a long time being
discontinued, were at the length renewed again by Iphitus King of that
country, about seven hundred seauentie and five years before the birth of
our Savior Christ. Being so revived, they were from that time forward
continued, by the space of a thousand years and more after, every four years
in summer, about the month of July solemnized. This four years space was
called Olympias. By these Olympiads the Grecians numbered their years, counting
from that time wherein they were begun again by Iphitus. As appears by
Velleius Paterculus, Solinus, Phlegon, Pausanius, Censorinus: who all refer
the beginning thereof to Iphitus: neither for this matter that I know of
amongst writers, is there any doubt at all. Beyond Iphitus I cannot warrant any
certain account of years among the heathen, greatly meruailing at the folly
of those men, who busy themselves in searching for sure knowledge by ordered
times, many ages before.

A Christian Prince not long ago standing much upon his parentage, by this
kind of men was seduced. A trifling Courtier perceiving his humor, made him
believe that his petigree in ancient race of royal blood, might be fetched
from Noa his Arc: wherewith being greatly delighted, forthwith he laid all
business aside, and gave himself wholly to the search of this thing so
earnestly, that he suffered none to interrupt him whosoever, no not
Ambassadors themselves, which were sent to him about most weighty affairs.
Many meruailed heereat, but none durst speak their mind: till at the length
his Cook, who^ he used sometime in stead of a fool, told him that the thing
which he went about, was nothing for his honor: for now says he, I worship
your Majesty as a God; but if we go once to Noas Arc, we must there your
self and I both be a kin.

This saying of his foolish Cook cast him in a dumpe, and stayed the heat of
his earnest studdy, and brought him to a better mind, from his vain error in
deceivable times, far beyond the compass of truth: which, as before has
bin showed, was limited from the first Olimpiad downward, within these limits
of time by the testimony of Varro, Affricanus, Censorinus, and the Judgments
of many other learned men in all ages, being certain and void of error, is
the reach of Daniels weeks: yea to come nearer home by 200, years and more,
within that part thereof, which by the learning, wisdom, and knowledge of
excellent men, has been made most famous: that is to say from the Persian
Monarchy, in the first year of Cyrus, to the second of Vespasian Emperor of
Room; wherein the City of Jerusalem was destroyed, and the Jews common
wealth overthrown, within the lists and compass whereof, the fulfilling of
this Prophecy is contained, even Beroaldus himself, though an adversary of
the received Grecians Chronology, in his 2. book, and 2. chapter: where he
says, that before the times of Cyrus the Greek Histories have no certainty:
seems to acknowledge some truth of History afterward: whereof he gives this
reason, because in Cyrus his age, were the 7. sages of Greece living together,
one of them being Colon the Athenian, acquainted with Croesus King of Lydia,
who fought against Cyrus. This whole space from the beginning of Cyrus his
reign, to the destruction of the holy City by Titus, contains 629. years
from the Olimpiad, wherein Cyrus began, to the same season of that year,
wherein Jerusalem, Temple, and City was set on fire. For the Persian kings
reigned by the space of 230. years. From the death of the last King of Persia
to the birth of Christ, were about 328. years and a half. And thence to the
desolation of Jerusalem set on fire 70. and a half with two months, or there
about.

The proof of these three parts, in this order I mind to follow. But before
I come to the right path, as it were of the Persian times: It shall be
requisite, first to take certain stumbling blocks out of the readers way:
whereof one is the opinion of the Hebrewe writers, who by great reason should
have been skillful in these matters, in regard of their deliverance from
slavish captivity, and many other benefits granted unto them by the Persian
Kings. Some of these writers reading in the 11. of Daniell of a fourth king to
reign in Persia; and presently after a prophecy of the overthrow of that
Empire by Alexander the great: thought there could not possibly be any more
than four in all. The names forsooth of these four they gather from Esdras,
making mention in his fourth chapter of Cyrus, Assuerus, Artaxerxes, Darius,
and then after in his seventh chapter of another Artaxerxes. Now lest that
Esdras should seem by five names, to dissent from Daniell, speaking only of
four kings, they make the first Artaxerxes to be all one with Assuerus, and
because the last king of Persia, overcome by Alexander, in the Histories of
diverse nations was known by the name Darius: to make all good, they say he had
likewise two names, one Artaxerxes, the other Darius. This was Aben Ezras
opinion, one of the wittiest and best learned amongst them. R. Moses a Spaniard
and Priest, came somewhat nearer to the truth, parting these two names
Assuerus, and Artaxerxes mentioned in the 4. of Ezra, betwixt two several
Kings, and so by his judgment they were five in number. Others, as R. Sadiah,
and Abraham Dauison, counting Daniels fourth king not from Cyrus, but from
Darius the Mede inclusiuely, leave only three kings for the Persian Monarchy
to run out under them: that is, first Cyrus, and after him Assuerus, the
third and last Darius, the supposed Son of Ester by Assuerus. But how can
this agree with Esdras in whom five names of the Persian Emperors are
recorded? Well enough say they, for Assuerus and the first Artaxerxes were one
and the same. And likewise Darius and the second Artaxerxes by Abraham Dauisons
opinion. Now concerning the years of their reign. Aben Ezra makes this
reckoning of his three former kings years. Cyrus to have continued three
years, Assuerus fourteen, Darius twelve, the rest of that Monarchy expired
in Artaxerxes, whose 32. is mentioned in scripture: but Dauison gives to Cyrus
three, to Assuerus sixteen, to Darius 32. In whose second (as he says) the
Temple was builded, and himself slain 30. years after by Alexander: But the
most general and received opinion seems to be that which is declared in
their Hebrew Chronicles Rabba and Zota: that the whole time of the Persian
kingdom was 52. years, counted from the first of Darius the Mede: whereof 18.
were spent before the building of the Temple, and 34. after.

This is the Rabbinicall stuff of the chief Masters of the Hebrews, being at
ods betwixt themselves, and dissenting from others, and therefore not without
cause does Pererius in his commentaries upon Daniell (speaking of this
chronology of theirs) say, that it is false, fained, full of faults, toys,
ignorance, absurdity, and inconstancy, and altogether ridiculous, as it is
indeed. Temporarius is more sharp and bitter against them. The Thalmudists,
Cabbalists, and Rabbines (says he) are blind in the Persian times, and the
writings of the Jews herein plain proofs of pitiful ignorance in them:
who can read the chronologies of the Rabbines, their Seder Olam Rabba, their
Seder Olam Zota, their Historical Cabbala, without laughing? Therefore the
knowledge of times is not to be fetched from the dotings of these men being
more blind than moules. All this which they say is true I confess: The Church
of God for other matters is much beholding to the Hebrew Rabbines, being great
helps unto us for understanding holy scripture in many places, as well of the
new testament as the old: but touching the knowledge of the Persian Empire,
wherein they should have bin most cunning, they were as blind as beetles, no
light herein amongst them for knowledge to be seen, but darkness for ignorance
enough and too much. The reason whereof is, that they wanted the key as it were
of profane Histories, and secular learning, to unlock the shut and hid
meaning of Daniels oracles. Without the which by scripture alone it ca^ never
be opened. Some of them not disdaining to read the Latin and Greek histories,
by the direction of these guides went not so far astray. Josephus in his
Antiquities proves it. This may suffice to clear the right way from the
first stumbling block.

Annius Viterbiensis has been another to the downfall of many, setting forth
certain ancient chronicles, under the names of Berosus, Manetho, and Philo;
and together with them, one other of the Persian Monarchy, fathered upon
Metasthenes an ancient Persian: Wherein he reckons the kings of the Persian
Monarchy, eight in number, in this order: First Cyrus, then ancient Artaxerxes
Assuerus: After him Darius with the long hand, the fourth Darius Nothus, the
fifth great Artaxerxes Darius Meneon: the sixth Artaxerxes Ochus: the seventh
Arses: the eight and last an other Darius. The whole time of these kings he
makes 190 years. These books thus commended with such glorious titles of noble
and ancient Historiographers, were in great request and much followed of many
learned men, and excellent Divines, for a long time embracing the^ as the only
true Chronology of all other, and alleging their authorities as oracles from
heaven undoubted and sure: being indeed nothing else but masking
counterfaites, covered with the glorious titles of ancient and famous writers.
At the length they were found out and detected by the cunning of diverse
skillful men: who searched unto them and sifted them nearely. Volaterranus in
his fourteenth book, gives no credit unto them. Jews Viues in his preface to
the eighteenth book of Augustine de ciuitate dei, calls them monsters, and
dregs, and frivolous books of uncertain Authors. Gerardus Mercator counts
of them no better than Fables, and false and forged writings. Joseph Scaliger
inueyeth sharply against them in many places, terming them lies, dreams,
forged and fained stuff. And the Author thereof himself he calls unlearned
and shameless. Johannes Vargara, Beatus Rhenanus, Functius, Beroaldus, Pererius,
and Temporarius.

All these have uncased these counterfeit Authors, and taken the visardes from
their faces: But especially above all the rest, the two last named Pererius
and Temporarius, have laid the^ open to the wide world, to appear that which
in very deed they were. That is not ye true Berosus, Mauetho, Metasthenes, and
Philo themselves: But all false, and forged out of Annius his shop of lies:
Whom Temporarius therefore calls a triffeler, a iugler, a deceauer, and the
books so set forth by him, toys, lies, legerdemaine, witcherie, bastards,
changelinges. Pererius reprooueth Annius his childish ignorance, folly,
rashness, arrogancy, and the writings themselves he terms false,
erroneous, fained, lies, deceits, with this conclusion in the end. Valeat
igitur, and in perpetuu^ valeat haec Anniana Chronologia, and quae toties a
viris doctis profligata and iugulata est, iaceat in posterum, sempiterna
hominum obliuione sepulta: nec sit post hac qui eam exhumare, and ad fidem
aliquam atque authoritatem, quasi ad vitam reuocare audeat. Sat sit adhuc eam,
cum non erat been nota, imposuisse multis, nunc detectis atque in apertum
prolatis fucatis eius mendaciis, and fallaciis, si quem circumuenerit, ac
deceperit: nimis profecto stupidu^ and vecordemeum fore necesse est. That is,
Let this Chronology therefore of Annius farewell, yea for ever let it farewell;
and that which has often bin cast down, and the throat thereof cut, let it
hereafter lie buried in everlasting forgetfulness: neither let any take it out
of the grave, and call it back again into credit and authority, as it were
to life. Let this be sufficient, that it has already deceived many, whilst
it was not thoroughlie known: but now the colored lies and deceits thereof
being detected and brought to light, If hereafter any be deceived thereby, he
must needs be too too blockish and witless.

This is Pererius his censure, no otherwise in my judgment then such forgerie
and falsehood has deserved: whereof take this as a manifest argument. Josephus
in the tenth book of his Antiquities the 11. Chapter writes, yt Megasthenes
(...), that is in the fourth book of his Indian affairs, making mention of
Nabugodonosor: went about to prove him, (...); to have passed Hercules in
prowess, and greatness of acts: which place Peter Comestor in his Scholastical
History upon Daniel, using to prove Nabugodonoserum fortitudine and actuum
magnitudine Herculem transcendisse: that Nabugodonosor went beyond Hercules in
valor and great acts, cites Megasthenes for it in his book of Judgments,
reading Iudiciorum by some corruption in the translation of Josephus, crept in
for Indicorum. Hereupon Annius transforming first Megasthenes into Metasthenes:
and then Indica, that is Indian affairs, into Iudicia which signifies
judgments: made this the title of his forged stuff, Metasthenes his book of
the judgment of times. This I hope is enough, if any thing can be enough, to
keep men which have eyes, from taking hurt at this block.

An other much like unto it has bin the conceited fancy of Matthew Beroald in
the third book of his Chronology the eight Chapter, setting down the
Persian Kings in this order. The first Cyrus, the next Assuerus Artaxerxes,
the third Darius Assirius, the fourth Artaxerxes Pius, the fifth Xerxes: And
then after him the other six in order, as they have been declared and named
by other. Of these eleven Kings how many years particularly every one
reigned, it is uncertain says Beroaldus; but generally the whole time of all
was 130. years, beginning with Cyrus in the 3. year of the 80. Olympiad, and
the 295 of Rome. This is Beroaldus his opinion, for the kings and time of that
Empire: much like that of Annius. In manner it is more honest, being not
fathered on other: in matter as absurd and ridiculous, if not more; making
more kings, and fewer years: thrusting in such as never were known, and
fayning names which never were heard of. For where was Assuerus Artaxerxes,
Darius Assirius, and Artaxerxes Pius, ever spoken of by any Author of credit
divine or profane? Who ever besides himself, once dreamed of an Artaxerxes
Pius to be Father to Xerxes? Or that Xerxes made war against Greece before
his Fathers death? Aeschilus a learned Poet, who flourished even in those very
times, in his Tragedy called Persa, might soon have taught him a better
lesson: raising his father Darius long before dead, out of his grave to tell
news. Does not such stuff as this deserve the terms of monsters, dregs,
dreams, lies, toys, as well as that opinion of Annius, which even Beroaldus
himself reprooueth? Is it not worthy of such a farewell, as that wherewith
Pererius bids Annius his Chronology adieu?

These be the opinions, which in the course of Chronology, have to diverse
learned men, been occasions of error. The vanity whereof shall yet better
appear by that which follows, being laid unto them. For as diverse sorts of
cloth compared together, and held to the light, are quickly by the eye
discerned, the course from the fine: So the approved true history of ancient
time, being laid to these latter conceits, will leave an easy view for
reason, and the eyesight as it were of the mind, to judge which is best.

First for the kings of Persia who they were that reigned therein. The name of
the first to be Cyrus, is agreed of all. The second was Cambyses, heir
thereunto as well by birth as his fathers will. The next lawful king after him
was Darius: whose father Histaspis, as Seuerus Sulpitius in his second book of
the holy History writes, was cosen German to Cyrus. The fourth king
succeeding to the imperial Crown of Persia, was Xerxes the son of the same
Darius. Then the other six in order; of whom amongst writers, that I know of,
there is no controversy at all. The first four kings here named, in that
order succeeding one another, have been so recorded by those names unto us, of
most ancient Poets, and noble Historiographers, which either lived in the days
of the said kings, or else came very near unto them, and so have bin delivered
from hand to hand, and from age to age, to this day continued by a long
succession of the most skillful men for learning, that ever have been: whether
rightly or no let reason scan. First the dominion of the Persians was large and
wide, and contained many countries. A great part of India, all Medea, Parthia,
Babilonia, Chaldea, Hyrcania, Armenia, Arabia, Mesopotamia, Phaenicia, all the
land of Israel and Judah, all Egypt, and much of Lybia, all Syria, and the
less Asia; wherein also they had their imperial seat at Sardes a City of
Lydia, the kings of Persia oftentimes making their abode therein. And
continually their deputies in their absence, most of the Kings blood or
alliance. Besides Cyprus, and many other Islands. To be short, it reached from
Persia all a long, so near Greece and Europe, that there was no land left to
part them, but the Sea called Aegeum. And that in some place so narrow, as a
bridge has been made over it from brinke to brinke, not a mile long, with
continual recourse and traffic between them. These were the places of this
Monarchy, of all other for wisdom and prowess most famous.

The times thereof, by the singular knowledge and virtues of excellent me^, were
no less noble. The seven wise men of Greece so renowned, Thales of Miletus,
Solon the Athenian, Chilon the Lacedaemonian, Pittacus of Mytilene, Bias of
Priene, Cleobulus of Lindia or Caria, and Periander the Corinthian, all much of
one standing, about the time of Cyrus. Besides them Pherecides the Syrian, and
Pythagoras both for deep knowledge wondered at, Zenophanes, Anaximander,
Heraclitus, Anaximines, Philosophers. Aeschilus, Anacreo^, Pindarus, Simonides
Poets. Theagines, Hecataeus, Dionisius, Herodotus, Story writers. Partly in
the days of Cambyses and Darius: partly in the time of Xerxes: Then Socrates,
Thucidides, Euripides, Sophocles, Democritus, Hippocrates, under Artaxerxes,
and his son Darius Nochus, about the times of the Peloponesian war. Plato and
Xenophon, were Socrates his scholars, who continued toward the end of ye
Persia^ Monarchy, with Isocrates, whose scholars were Theopompus and Ephorus,
both historiographers, so contrary one to another by their masters censure,
that the one needed a spur to set him on; the other a bridle to hold him in.
Aristotle and Demosthenes saw the end. Many of these were borne, and dwelling
in those places which were under the Persian government; and paid tribute unto
them.

In these places and times so furnished, and bewtified with these worthy
ornaments, mark the ways and means, whereby the kings of Persian made their
names known and preserved their memory. By proclamation whereof we have an
example in the first of Esra. Thus says Cyrus king of Persia and so forth. By
letters to and fro, whereof are to be seen in the same book and Thucidides, and
other: making mention by name who sent them, and to whom. By immunities and
privileges as in the seventh of Esra. By embassage whereof many examples are
read in Herodotus. Cambyses sent to the Ethiopian king, and Darius to the
Grecians: By leagues and covenants of peace, as we read in Thucidides. By
coins, as the pieces of gold coined by Darius Histaspis, thereof called
Darikes. By erected monumentes. The same king going to war against Scithia,
erected at Bosphorus two pillars with two inscriptions, one in Greek, the
other in the Assyrian language, thereon engraued; declaring the Nations which
went with him: And at the river Toarus in Thracia, an other with this
inscription: HITHER CAME DARIUS THE SON OF HYSTASPES KING OF THE PERSIANS,
LEADING HIS ARMY AGAINST THE SCYTHIANS, as Herodotus declares in Melpomine.
By Cities and Rivers called of their names Cyropolis of Cyrus, Cambysene of
Cambyses, Xerxene of Xerxes; Cyrus a river in Scythia, and Cambyses an other.
In Volaterranus, Pomponius, Mela, Pliny, Strabo, by their pictures. Mandrocles
painted Darius sitting in a thorn, after the manner of the Medes: and
conueying over his Army, which he dedicated to the Temple of Juno, with
mention of Darius his name. By their Images: and those remaining many ages
after. Plutarch in Alexanders life, tells that Alexander seeing the Image of
Xerxes thrown down by the company pressing into the kings Palace of Persia;
stayed at it, and spoke unto it, as it had been alive. Lastly, by their
Tombs, testifying their names to the world after their death: being a thing
desired of al even of mean account, and willingly yielded of kind
posterity, that the memory of their name may endure, and not die with
themselves. Strabo in the fifteenth book of his Geographie from Aristobulus,
and Onesicritus, records that the toombe of Cyrus was found by Alexander, so
many years after his death preserved, with an inscription testifying who he
was. And that Darius also had the like memorial.

The names then of the Persian kings could not possibly be hid, by so many
means being made known in flourishing times, and learned ages, and places of
knowledge, and withal their Courts frequented with many noble Grecians, for
virtue and birth. Hippias, and Demaratus, whereof the one had been king of
Sparta; the other tyrant of Athens: Metiochus the eldest son of Miltiades,
Democedes a famous Physician of Croton in Italy, who healed king Darius and
his wife Atossa of grievous pains, and diverse other which were too long to
rehearse, to omit many brave soldiers of Greece serving them in their wars.

Now let the Reader use his skill for choice of the names, and number of the
kings betwixt Cyrus and Xerxes. Whether with Beroaldus he will have these
three; Assuerus Artaxerxes, Darius Assyrius, and Artaxerxes Pius, in so many
ages never known or read of in any author of reckoning: or only these two;
Cambyses, and Darius Histaspis from Theagines of Rhegium, and Hecateus of
Miletus, story writers: the one under Cambyses, the other under Darius,
delivered unto us by continual succession, from age to age, by the space of two
thousand years and more, by the careful diligence of the best
historiographers, that ever have bin in the world, without any disagreement or
controversy amongst them. Thus much for the kings now concerning their years.

That the beginning of Cyrus was the first year of the 55. Olympiad, is agreed
of all: the first year of Cyrus, says Codomon in his chronicles; of all
writers is applied to the first of the 55. Olympiad. Joseph Scaliger proves
it by two testimonies in his fifth book de emendatione temporum. How many
ancient and learned writers so ever says Scaliger, have accounted times, every
one of them has cast the first of Cyrus, to the first of the 55. Olympiad.
Diodorus Siculus, Thallus, Castor, Polybius, Phlegon; as the most ancient and
learned Author Tatianus writes. Africanus also in Eusebius testifies the same
in these words. After the 70. years of captivity, Cyrus reigned over the
Persians that year wherein the 55. Olympiad was celebrated, as may appear by
the Libraries of Diodorus, and the Histories of Thallus and Castor, and besides
of Polybius and Phlegon, yea of other also who regarded Olympiads, for the time
is agreed upon of all. This therefore for the beginning of the Persian
Monarchy being so generally testified, may suffice. If any here do ask in
what part of that year Cyrus began to reign, it is gathered from the same
Africanus probably in the third book of his Chronicles: where, as Eusebius
testifies of him, in his tenth book de praeparat. Euang. he reckoned from
the first Olympiad to Cyrus, 217. years. Which is not otherwise true, except
Cyrus begin toward the end of that year. Again, in the fifth book of his
Chronicles, making the fourth year of the 83. Olympiad, the fifteenth of the
Persian Monarchy; as we read in the same Eusebius his eight book de
demonstrat. Euang. he leaves the beginning of Cyrus to the first year of the
55. Olympiad, nere the end thereof: as every one may easily perceive.

The beginning thus made manifest, we are now further to search the end of
that Empire: Which being once likewise found makes known the continuance
thereof. Alexander the great was the man which overthrew that Empire: whose
death by the testimonies of Diodorus Siculus in the seventeenth book of his
Historical Liberarie, Arrhianus in his seventh book, and Eusebius in his
Chronicles, is set in the hundred and fourteenth Olympiad. What say I Diodorus,
Arrhiamus, Eusebius, when as all, whosoever wrote of those times, agree herein,
by Gerardus Mercator his report in his Chronicles? The death of Alexander,
says he, of all writers is noted to have happened in the hundred and
fourteenth Olympiad, when Hegesias was chief ruler at Athens. If this
testimony of Mercator be of less importance, in regard of the late time
wherein he lived; Josephus an ancient Author of credit and skill, in his first
book against Appian bears him record, very constantly affirming this to be
verified by the universal consent of all writers; yt Alexander died in the
hundred and fourteenth Olympiad. This is somewhat, but not altogether enough,
except we can learn in what part of that first year of the same Olympiad he
died. For the knowledge of this we are beholding to Eusebius. Whose words are
these in his eight book de demonstratione Euangelij. (...). That is in English
thus much, Alexander ended his life in the beginning of the hundred and
fourteenth Olympiad.

Making then our account from the five and fiftieth Olympiad, to the beginning
of the hundred and fourteenth, wherein the light of Macedonia was put out; we
find the space of two hundred thirty and six years between approved not by
weak conjectures, frivolous conceits, or trifling toys, but a strong consent
of writers, which as Josephus in his 1. book against Appian, is a sure token of
undoubted truth; when they all agree. Six years and about three quarters
before Alexanders death, the Persians had been by him subdued, receiving as
great a blow, as ever before other Nations had received from them; their power
now being brought to an end. How is this proved? The year is declared by
Diodorus, the second of the hundred and twelfth Olympiad, the month by
Arrhi^mes, October, the day by Plutarch is found the first of that month. This
was the unhappy year of the Persian overthrow, the woeful month of their
fall, and the sorrowful day of king Darius his undoing, who after this victory
was contemned of his men, forsaken of his soldiers, betrayed by his servants,
made a slave to his Captains, in most base manner shut up within a vile
wagge^, covered with filthy skins, as it were in a prison, and so carried
about at their pleasure. In the end they stabbed him with many wounds, and
left him for dead, slew the waggener, thrust the beasts through with darts,
which wanting a guide strayed from the high way about half a mile. Where one
of Alexanders soldiers going to drink, by chance espied the waggen, and
coming unto it found the king now drawing on; who first craved of him a little
water. After he had drunk, acknowledging this for the last misery of his
wretched estate, that he was not able to requite his kindness, and withal
wishing well to Alexander for the great honor which he had done to his wife
and children, he ended his life in the third year of the hundred and twelfth
Olympiad, as appears by Diodorus Siculus, and Arrhiames; who further has set
down the month Hecatombeon, being the season of the Olympic sports, and
answering partly to our June, and partly Iulie: This was the tragical end of
that mighty king, making proof of the brickle estate of Princely pomp, and
the unstayed stay of worldly glory, wherein he lived near six years.

These limits thus bounded of the Persian Empire, that is to say, the five and
fiftieth Olympicke exercise for the beginning, and the entry of the third year
of the hundred and twelfth for the end, give sure evidence of the whole
continuance to be two hundred and thirty years, if we begin from the fifty
and five Olympiad; if from the end about nine or ten months after in the
spring of the year, when Cyrus began to reign as is probable and likely, by
that which before has been declared, two hundred and nine and twenty years
with two or three months. And thus they are divided among the Persian kings.

Cyrus reigned thirty years, recorded by two ancient Historiographers living
in the Persian times, in their Persian Histories; Dionisius and Ctesias; Cicero
also in his first book De diuinatione, Justin, Clemens Alexandrinus 1. Strom.
Eusebius in his Chronicle, Hierom on the seventh of Daniel, Beda in his book
De sex aetatibus confirm the same: and Orosius in his second book against the
Heathen, brings Tomyris the Queen of Scythia, after she had slain Cyrus in
battle and thrown his head into a vessel of blood, insulting over him with
this speech: Now fill thy self with blood, which could never yet satsifie thee
this thirty years. This had been foreshewed to Cyrus by a dream, as Cicero
from Dionisius reports. Wherein the sun appearing at his feet, and Cyrus
catching at it thrice with his hands, every time it trowled it self away.
Which the skillful Magi of Persia interpreted of thrice ten years reign.

Cambyses succeeded him, the time of whose reign was seven years and five
months: which together with the seven months more of Smerdis the usurper,
and counterfeit brother of Cambyses, made up eight years, as Herodotus
declares in Thalia.

Darius Histaspis ruled by the space of full six and thirty years, as
Herodotus writes, and Eusebius in his Chronicles, and Seuerus in his second
book. Xerxes in the second year of his reign subdued the Egyptians, and in
the sixth invaded Greece with an innumerable army, yet driven to fly by a few.
In the 16 year after, and one and twentieth of his reign, being the last year
of the seauentie and eighth Olympiad, as Diodorus Siculus declares by his
cowardice and corrupt life, he growing into contempt with his Nobles was
slain: Many writers give him one and twenty years. Seuerus, Beda, Eusebius,
Clemens Alexandrinus, 1. Stromatum has (...) for (...) twenty six for twenty
one: an easy slip in writing far from the enditers mind.

Artaxerxes the long handed was his son, who held that Monarchy by the space
of forty years; witnessed by Diodorus Siculus in his eleventh and twelfth
books; Eusebius, Hierom, Isidorus, Beda, with other.

Xerxes and Sogdianus after him enjoyed the Empire one year between them both.

The next was Darius Nothus, holding the imperial crown ninteene years, as
Diodorus Siculus, Tertullianus against the Jews, Eusebius, Isidorus, Seuerus,
Beda and other declare.

Artaxerxes Mnemon succeeded him, and continued in his government the longest
of all other; even three and forty years, my Author is Diodorus in two
places: first in the end of his thirteenth book, and again in his fifteenth;
who likewise witnesses that Artaxerxes Ochus his successor ruled three and
twenty years: which is confirmed by the testimony of Sulpitius in his second
book.

The last but one was Arses, continuing three years in his Empire by
Sulpitius. In whose death the blood Royal from Cyrus, was extinguished; all
his brethren and children by cruel treason being made away. A just reward of
his father Ochus, his Tigerlike, and Woluish cruelty in murdering his
Princess.

The last of all was Darius Codomanus, an usurper rather than a lawful heir,
who of all the rest had the hardest hap in his imperial state, received by
wrong, continued in toil, ended in woe, after six years, which by Eusebius,
Isidorus, Hierom and others, was the time of his reign.

The whole number and general sum of all from first to last, is two hundred
and thirty years; so by this reckoning of every several kings reign, is
found nine or ten months in the whole above the Olympic account, from the
end of the first year of the 55. Olympiad. These months must be taken partly
from the one and twentieth of Xerxes being not fully expired, as appears by
Diodorus Siculus, giving him not full one and twenty: yet (...) more than
twenty. And partlye from Arses; whom Bagous a faithles Eunuche poisoned,
(...). that is, now reigning the third year, says Diodorus about the
beginning of his seventeenth book, thereby signifying that it was not fully
complete; and partly also from the sixth of the last Darius which was not
wholly and perfectly finished. For Artaxerxes Mnemon begun his reign in the
end of the Peloponnesian war, or a little after in the month of April, as
may be gathered by Diodorus Siculus, in the end of his thirteenth book,
compared with Thucidides. Thucidides says it begun in the beginning of the
spring two months before the years end: which time by Codoman and others
skill, fell to the first of April. It lasted (says Thucidides) seven and
twenty years, and some few days more. Darius died after the peace made
between the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians, says Diodorus Siculus, meaning
that peace which made an end of the war.

Giving therefore him three and forty, and Ochus three and twenty, and Arses
three, all perfect; they must end about that season in the first year of the
hundred and eleventh Olympiad. Arses I grant reached to that year, yet not to
that month of April by a good while. For Philip king of Macedonia, was slain
by Pausanias in that hundred and eleventh Olympiad the first year thereof,
witnesses Arrhiames and Diodorus, and that in winter about the four and
twenty of January, as Chitraeus affirms in his Chronology. But Arses was
poisoned, and Darius had succeeded him, while Philip was yet a live; and had
purposed to have made war against him, as Diodorus writes. Hereby it is
evident that neither Arses his three years, nor Codomans six years could be
fully ended, seeing that he was slain in summer, about the beginning of the
third year of the hundred and twelfth Olympiad, as appears by Arrhiames.

Thus are found from the beginning of the five and fiftieth Olympiad, to the
death of the last Monarch of Persia, two hundred and thirty years. And from
Cyrus thither two hundred and nine and twenty years, and more by guess about
two or three months. And lastly from Cyrus to Darius, now the second time by
Alexander vanquished, in which conquest many make an end of the Persian
Empire, two hundred and eight and twenty years and a half.

These times of the Persian Monarchy, being I know not by what mishap brought
into question and great controversy among the learned, and withal of great
importance for the understanding of God his word; have need to be
strengthened with all force that may be. And therefore I will yet make further
search for stays and props as it were to uphold them.

Eusebius in his tenth book, de Preparatione Euangelica says, that the second
year of Darius Hystaspis, was the first of the threescore and fifth Olympiad,
so found just by the former reckoning. The war of Xerxes, that Darius his
son, and Nephew to Cyrus, of all other was the most famous. Who led against
Greece the greatest army that ever was heard of before or after, of twenty
hundred thousand fighting soldiers; for the huge multitude thereof drinking
running rivers dry, and as Cicero says, walking upon the Seas, and sailing on
the land: because that he dug through great mountains, to make the seas
meet for his navy to pass. And in other places of the sea, made bridges to
go over a foot. Leonides a valiant king of Sparta, to the wonder of all ages
following, only with four thousand men, encountered, resisted, and fought with
that powerful host, at the straights of Thermopylae. Xerxes at the first sent
fifteen thousand, then twenty thousand, and last of all fifty thousand
against them. At every time making choice of better men then before. First
begun the Medes, bearing hateful minds against the Grecians with desire of
revenge; for the slaughter of their kinsemen a little before at Marathon. Next
after them fought the Persian soldiers themselves, in whom the Persian king of
all other nations under him reposed most confidence. Yea of these Persians were
chosen the most valiant men amongst them all, called the immortals; because
their number never decayed. Last of all was a choice company of the chiefest
men of all the whole host, for stoutenes, valor and courage, picked out from
the rest. And they also stirred up by great promises of rich rewards. All these
fighting against that handful of the Grecians had like success: a great
number was slain; many wounded, the rest put to flight. Xerxes maugred, thus
stayed by a few from passing further into Greece, was at his wits end, till
such time as one of that country had informed him of another way, by which
some of the army came upon the back of Leonides, and so enclosed him on both
sides, which Leonides having intelligence of by a secret friend a little
before, sent all the rest of his company home saving five hundred. These he
encouraged, and the more to enable them for battle, exhorted them to dine
before, with resolved minds to take their supper among the dead. Which done,
and night come, they invaded the Persian camp, came to the kings Pauilion,
slew all that were in it, wandered to and fro seeking the king, who a little
before had got himself away, and killing on both sides as they went. The
Persians in the dark not discerning the matter, were greatly amazed, ran out
of their tents they wist not whether, fearing nothing so much as this, that the
whole power of Greece had set upon them. In this hurly burly they slew one
another, till the day light bewrayed the truth, when Leonides with his
soldiers fought still. At the length wearied with ouercomming, and oppressed
on every side with main force of that powerful number; they dyed in the
midst of their enemies with glory, having slain to the number of twenty
thousand.

The battles wherein Xerxes had this welcome into Greece, many old writers
with great agreement refer to the beginning of the seventy and five Olympiad.
Diodorus in his eleventh book writes, that Xerxes warred against Greece in
the first year of the seventy and five Olympiad, Callias then being Mayor of
Athens. Dyonisius Halicarnassaeus in the beginning of his ninth book agrees
hereunto; naming that very year of the same Olympiad, and the same Mayor of
Athens, for the time of Xerxes fighting against Greece. Eusebius also in his
Chronicles has a plain confirmation hereof, referring to the first year of
this seventy and five Olympiad, that battle wherein Xerxes his power by sea
fought against the Athenians, and took a most shameful overthrow. Diogenes
Laertius in the life of Socrates writes, that in the time of Callias his
government at Athens, in the first year of the seventy five Olympiad, the
Poet Euripides was borne; Suidas names the very day of his birth, even that
wherein Xerxes his navy was overcome by the Grecians at Salamis. The same
Laertius reports from ancient Historiographers, that Anaxagoras being borne
in the seventy Olympiad, was twenty years old when Xerxes passed into Greece,
and Callias ruled at Athens: thereby giving us to understand that by the
received opinion of former ages, Xerxes inuading Greece, and Callias his
Maioraltie at Athens, fell to the first year of the 75. Olympiad. In like
manner Pindarus, borne in the 65. Olympiad, and at Xerxes his war forty
year old by Suidas record, approves the truth of that account. Who so list
to make trial shall easily see an exact agreement betwixt this Olympiad and
the years of Xerxes before rehearsed. Africanus in the fifth book of his
Chronicles, affirming that the fourth of the 83. Olympiad, was the 20. of
Artaxerxes Longimanus, and the 115. of the Persian kingdom, makes all good.

The Athenians after the Persians overthrow, and Xerxes his flight out of
Grecia grew mighty, having by their great navy obtained the rule of the sea,
and subdued many people of Greece. Whereupon the Lacedaemonians, who dwelt in
that part of Greece which was called Peloponnesus, suspecting their power, and
fled unto for aid, took part against them; which in the end was the
occasion of that long and fierce war between the Athenians and the
Lacedaemonians, called the Peloponnesian war. The one people spoiling by sea,
the other by land: so that by this means the Grecians which most gloriously
had triumphed in many battles over the mighty Monarchs of the world, were
now brought low, and pitifully wasted in most lamentable manner, turning
their forces from the common enemy to their ruin against themselves: the
continuance, beginning, and end of this war is most exactly described by
Thucidides an Athenian Gentleman, the penner thereof, who flourished in that
time and saw the war with his eyes, from the beginning to the end; yea was a
chief captain therein, a writer for certain truth of history, and perfect
reckoning of time most excellent, and of such account in the ages following,
that even the best followed him, and gave credit unto him. Demosthenes the
famous Orator of Athens took pains to coppie out his books eight times with
his own hand, as Lucian reports. This exact historiographer, in the entry
of his second book, tells that this war begun in the fifteenth year of
the league, which after the taking of Eubaea was made for thirty years to
come, Aenesias being then Mayor of Sparta, and Pythodorus of Athens, and the
year of their Maioraltie now within two months expired, in the beginning of
the spring. For the better understanding of these words, concerning the taking
of Eubaea, and the thirty years league, I will briefly touch the history.

Eubaea was an Island near unto Greece, in the Aegean sea, which having been
subject and tributarie to the Athenians; at the length spying their
opportunity, by reason of a great overthrow of the Athenians in Baeotia, and
the Lacedaemonians holding against them; by which their power was greatly
weakened, fell from them, refusing to serve them, or pay them tribute any
longer. For this cause Pericles a noble man of Athens, was sent against them
with a great host, who once again subdued them. And a little after their
return from Eubaea, now the second time by Pericles so conquered; a league was
made between the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians, to endure for thirty years
following. The articles and covenants of this league were graven in a pillar of
brass set in Olympia, as Pausanias records in the first of his Eliacx, where
he also declares the time thereof to be the third year of that Olympiad,
wherein Criso of Himaera won the race. Now that that Olympiad wherein Criso of
Himaera won the race, was the 83. we have the testimony of Dionysius
Halicarnassaeus in the end of his tenth of Roman antiquities, and the
beginning of the eleventh. Hereof it follows by Thucidides compared with
other writers; that the Peloponnesian sturres began in the first year of the
87. Olympiad; for that is just the 15. year from the third of the 83. wherein
the thirty years league was made. Again, for cleerer confirmation hereof,
Diodorus Siculus in his twelfth book has left in record, that the year of
Pythodorus his Maioraltie at Athens, in the end whereof Thucidides begins
that war, was the first of the 87. Olympiad.

This therefore I hold for a certain truth, that the beginning of the
Peloponnesian war happened in the first year of the 87. Olympiad, toward the
end thereof, about the beginning of April, so as the Olympicke exercises of
that year, were solemnized the summer before going: and the 4. 8. 12. 16. 20.
24. 28. summers of that war were Olympicke years; which of the fourth and the
twelfth is plainly testified by Thucidides himself in the third and fifth
books of his history. In the seventh year of this war Thucidides tells,
that Artaxerxes died in winter; which for the certain knowledge of the Persian
times, is a most excellent place, a sure fort, a sound argument, a clear
testimony, a strong proof from him, which lived at that time, was as old as
the thing it self which he tells, saw the effect with his eyes, studied from
his heart to set forth the truth. If the former account be agreeable to this
testimony of Thucidides, as it is most precisely, I see no cause why it may
not triumph over all adversaries, how powerful and how well learned soever.
Mark then the agreement.

Xerxes his 21. wherein he dyed, was said to be the fourth of the 78.
Olympiad. Artaxerxes reigned 40. which being numbered from that year of his
fathers death, bring us just to the fourth of the Olympian, and the seventh of
the Peloponnesian war; the set time of Artaxerxes his death by Thucidides: who
best of all other writers now extant in the world, knew the certain truth of
it, and for credit in this matter, he has none comparable unto him. The same
Thucidides making the 20. of the Peloponnesian war, to be the thirteenth of
Darius Nothus, confirms it once again. For adding thirteen of that war
under Darius, to seven under Artaxerxes, that number is made up. The
continuance and end of this war, by the same Thucidides is showed in his fifth
book: where he declares the whole time of that war to have been 27. years,
to the overthrow of the Athenian Empire, and the taking of their haven Pyreus
by the Lacedaemonians, and their associates. Of this had gone a Prophecy long
before in many men's mouths: which himself with his own ears many times had
heard; that it should endure thrice nine years: which is confirmed by Diodorus
Siculus, very plainly affirming that war to have lasted 27. years, in two
places: first in his twelfth book, treating of the beginning of that war, and
after in his thirteenth book, speaking of the last year thereof, which he
says was the last of the 93. Olympiad, as in deed it was: for 27. years
added to the first of the 87. Olympiad, wherein it began, make an end of it in
the fourth of the 93.

After Thucidides followed Xenophon, who from the one and twenty year of that
war where Thucidides left, continued in writing the course of that History
to the end: a man living in those days careful of the truth, and skillful in
History, commended even by Beroaldus himself, though otherwise an adversary
of the true ancient Chronology, and History of those times: In the fifth
Chapter of his fourth book, Xenophon says Beroaldus, writes that the
government of Athens was committed to a few in that Olympic year, wherein
Crocinus the Thessalian won the race, but which Olympiad it was in number he
declares not: Which if he who then lived, and prepared himself for service
had done; he had rid us of much trouble. Let us see therefore what help is
given by this excellent writer to ease us herein.

In his first book of Greek affairs, this first he sets down very
flatly, that the year wherein Enarchippus at Sparta, and Enctemo at Athens
were Majors, was the first of the 43. Olympiad, wherein Eubotas the Cyrenian
won the race, and a new game of yoaked horses called Synoris was first
ordained, at that time won by Enagoras of Elis, where lest any might think
Xenophon to have bin deceived, we have for further warrant, the testimony of
Pausanias in the first book of Eliacx. The running (says he) of two horses
of ripe age called Synoris, was instituted in the 93. Olympiad, wherein Euagoras
the Elian got the victory. Now this being made plain by Xenophon, that
Enarchippus was governor of Sparta in the first year of the 93. Olympiad; if
it can be further showed by him, in what year of the Peloponnesian war the
same Enarchippus ruled at Sparta; we shall easily perceive by evident
direction from this worthy Author, to what year of every Olympiad, the
beginning, midst, and ending, and every particular year of that war
appertains.

To show this we have a Catalogue of all the chief Spartan Magistrates, which
bare Office in every year of that war called Ephori, set down by Xenophon
in order by their names, in the second book of his Greek History in these
words. The first (says Xenophon) was Aenesias under whom the war began in
the 15. year of the 30. years league, made after the taking of Eubaea. After
him succeeded these, Borasidas, Isanor, Sostratidas, Exarchus, Agesistratus,
Agenidas, Onomacles, Zeuxippus, Pityas, Pleistolas, Cleiomachus, Ilarchus,
Leon, Chaeridas, Patesiades, Cleosthenes, Lycarius, Exeratus, Onomantius,
Alexippidas, Misgolaidas, Isias, Aracus, Enarchippus, Pantacles, Piteas,
Archytas, Endius. In whose time Lysander having done the exploits before
rehearsed sailed home. By this Catalogue of the Lacedemonian Majors, it is
manifest that Xenophon for account of time, in this war agrees most exactly
with Thucidides. The war began in the nine months end of Aenesias the first
Ephorus, and ended at the pulling down the walls of Pyreus, 27. years after,
which reach to the nine months end of the 28. Ephorus; so that from the
beginning of the second Ephorus, near three months after the beginning of the
war, to the end of the 28. Ephorus, nere three months after the end of that
war; are likewise just 27. years, perfectly and fully complete.

And is it not even so by Xenophon? does not he declare the throwing down the
walls in the haven Pyraeus to have happened toward the end of Archytas his
government at Sparta? And are there not full and even 27. years from the
beginning of Brasidas, the second Ephorus to the end of Architas, who by
Xenophons number in that Catalogue was the 28? Is there any beetle so blind,
which cannot perceive this exact agreement betwixt Xenophon and Thucidides, for
the account of those years?

The Peloponnesian war as may be gathethered by Thucidides, begun with the
spring about the first of April toward the end of Aenesias his year. Brasidas
succeeding him begun his year about the beginning of the next summer, being
the first of that war. The second summer fell to the third Ephorus, and so in
order with the rest. The eleventh Ephorus by Xenophons beadroule was
Pleistolas, for the tenth summer: which is verified also by Thucidides, in his
fifth book, speaking of a league made betwixt the Athenians and the
Lacedaemonians in the end of Pleistolas his Maioraltie at Sparta before the
summer of the eleventh year. The 21. Ephorus recited by Xenophon for the 20.
summer, is Alexippidas. The truth whereof is witnessed and confirmed by
Thucidides likewise in his eight book, wherein he tells that in the
twentieth year of the Peloponnesian war a peace was concluded between
Tissaphernes Lieutenant of Asia, and the Lacedaemonians in the plain of
Meander, Alexippidas then being Ephorus of Sparta. The next after Alexippidas,
for the 21. year there named, is Misgolaidas, for the 22. Isias, for the 23.
Aracus. Then after them follows Enarchippus the five and twentieth Ephorus
for the 24. years summer. This Enarchippus being first placed in the beginning
of the 93. Olympiad, and after by his Catalogue found in the 24. year of the
Peloponnesian war; leaves this clear by Xenophons meaning, that the 24. year
of that war beginning with summer, was the first of the 93. Olympiad. The three
Ephori after Enarchippus, succeeding in the other three years of that Olympiad
set down by Xenophon in order, not only in his table, but even in the context
of his History, for three several years are these. Pantacles, Pyteas, and
Archytas, in whose time the Athenians being conquered by Lysander, were driven
to yield. The next year after was the first of a new Olimpiad, so acknowledged
most truly, and very orderly by Xenophon himself, in his second book; where
having declared the things done under Archytas. In the year following (says
he) was that Olympiad wherein Crocinus the Thessalian won the race, Endius then
bearing office at Sparta, and Pythodorus ruling at Athens. Now if any ask
which Olympiad this was in number; that most manifestly appears by the
former, namely expressed to have been the 93, so that it needed not again for
the next expressly to say yt it was the 94. which had bin nothing else but
recocta crambe, according to the proverb, Colworts sodden again. Furthermore
Xenophon not far from the beginning of the 2. book writes, that the navy of
the Lacedemonia^s was delivered to Lysander. When 25. years of the war were
past and gone, which must needs be in the 29. year. Immediately after he
adds that in that year Cyrus killed two of his kinsemen, for not holding
their hands within a muffe when they met him, as was used to be done to kings,
in token of honor and loyal duty for their greater security, that they
might be void of all suspicion and fear of harm. And then follows that the
next year after which must needs be the 27. and last, Archytas was Ephorus
of Sparta.

Thus from Xenophon we learn, that which Beroaldus wished, the 24. and 27.
years of the Peloponnesian war yoaked the one with the first, the other with
the last of the 93. Olympiad, which for sound knowledge of the Persian times,
to discern them a right is very material, and a sure bulwark for defense of
my former Chronology. Whereby was proved that Cyrus begun in the first of the
55. Olympiad toward the end, from which time to the fourth of the 93 nere
ended are 155. years. That is to say. 30 of Cyrus, 8 of Cambyses, 36 of his
successor, of Xerxes 21. of Artaxerxes 40. and with that of Xerxes, and
Sogdianus included 20. of Darius Nothus; whose reign ended almost together
with the Peloponnesian war, as before has been declared by the testimony
of Diodorus Siculus, and appears by Thucidides making his thirteenth, the
twentieth of the war.

Erastosthenes an ancient writer in the time of Ptolomeus Euergetes (a man to
use Pliny his term) cunning in the subtlety of all learning and approved of
all (so Pliny testifies of him in his second book) set forth certain rules
of Chronology; which Dionisius Halicarnasseus for the truth thereof, and exact
reckoning greatly commends in his first book of Roman antiquities. These
rules have been preserved unto this age by the careful diligence of the
ancient learned father Clemens Alexandrinus. 1. Strom. From the first Olympiad
to Xerxes passing into Greece, he accounted 297. years: thence to the
beginning of the Peloponnesian war 48. and after to the end and dissolution
of the Athenians common wealth 27. all these gathered together are 372. from
the first Olympiad, so says Eratosthenes, agreeing with Xenophons reckoning
to Archytas his Maioraltie at Sparta ended with that war and the fourth of
the 93. Olympiad. For 93. Olympiads are fourscore and thirteen times four
years, that is the number of Eratosthenes 372. From which sum 54. Olympiads,
containing 216. before that wherein Cyrus begun, being taken away; with almost
one year more from the beginning of it to Cyrus, there remains for the
Persian Monarchy to the end of the Peloponnesian war 155. years before
spoken of.

Diodorus Siculus was a man of wonderful pains, and exceedingly precise in
exact computation. He spent thirty years in making his History, from Sicilie
his native country he travailed into Egypt, and the greatest part of Asia,
and Europe to search the truth of those things which he wrote. A diligent
reader of all the ancient writers before him from Herodotus, and other before
and after succeding in order, whom he has followed in the matters which he
tells. And therefore not unfitly the title of his work is called, not a
History but a Library. Justinius Martyr called him the most famous
Historiographer of the Grecians. Eusebius commends him by the name of a
notable man, in great request among the learned. But Henry Stephen above all
other praises him exceedingly, giving him that place and degree amongst the
learned Historiographers, which the sun has amongst the stars; in regard
of exact defining those things which he writes of by ordered times. This
writer therefore confirming all those things before spoken of touching the
kings of Persia, and the time of their reign may be in steed of many: so as in
him alone we may see the judgment not only of Herodotus, Thucidides,
Xenophon; but also of Callisthenes, Duris, Timaeus, Philiscus, Theopompus,
Ephorus, and other by him diligently read, perused and cyted, which at this
day are not any where found.

It were infinite to bring all that might be said out of Authors for the
verefying of this Chronology: tedious to be read, and toylesome to be written.
Therefore passing over many testimonies of diverse writers, I will now come to
the Roman Story, to see if it likewise by agreement of time, may avail any
thing to fortify those limits and bounds, which have been set for the Persian
kings.

The Romans in continuance of time became Lords of Greece, where the
Olympicke sports were celebrated. And therefore it could not otherwise be, but
that they knew well enough how the years of their City were answerable to the
Olympic reckoning of the Grecians. Polybius of Megalopolis a City in
Arcadia, near as ancient as Eratosthenes, by Cicero accounted amongst the
best authors, for worthiness and credit commended by Josephus, by Velleius
Paterculus honored with this testimony, that he was a man excelling in wit,
had in great estimation, and followed by Liuie and other: in the third book of
his history affirms, that the first Consuls of Rome were 28. years before
the passage of Xerxes into Greece, which was in the end of the last year of
the 74. Olympiad, as appears by that which before has bin declared. Hereof
it follows, that the first of the 68. Olympiad being the 14. of Darius
Histaspis, was that wherein the new government of that City by Consuls was
established. Whereas before it had bin governed by kings for the space of 244.
years from the first building thereof, unto this time adding 28. years, or
seven Olympiads more. We come toward the end of the last year of the 74.
Olympiad, and being the 272. of Rome, wherein Xerxes passed into Greece, as
Polybius testifies; the next year after was the first of the 75. wherein
Xerxes with his great army was overcome, as before has bin proved.

The truth hereof is verified by A. Gellius in the last chapter of his
seventeenth book, where he writes that Xerxes was overcome by Themistocles at
Salamis four years before the consulship of Menenius Agrippa, and Horatius
Puluillus, wherein a great kindred of noble Romans called Fabij, to the number
of 306. having taken upon them at their own charge to fight against a certain
people, were slain by the subtlety of their enemies, circumuented at the
river Cremera: for this is declared by the Roman histories, to have fallen out
in the 277 year of Rome, and the 33. from the banishment of the kings.

Dionysius of Halicarnassus in his fifth book of Roman antiquities, reckons
sixteen years betwixt Brutus one of the first Consuls death in the end of his
year, and the Marathon fight, referring the battle at Marathon to the
seventeenth year after Brutus his burial, and the eighteenth after the kings
driven out of the City, wherein Gegainus, Macerinus, and Minutius Augurinus
were Consuls. In his 7. Book.
Which by constant agreement of almost all authors, he says was in the
second year of the 72. Olympiad. So he makes the 31. of Darius Histaspis, and
the 262. of Rome, and the second of the 72. Olimp. all one year: as it was
indeed most exactly agreeing to the testimony of Polybius before rehearsed,
and the Greek Chronology of the Persian kings and the Olympic reckoning. A.
Gellius in the place aforenamed says, that the Marathon battle happened in
the 260. year of Rome: which is likewise true according to his beginning of
the years of that City, as afterward shall appear.

Liuie the famous Latin writer of the Roman history, in the end of his fifth
book tells, that the Frenchmen and Swichers having invaded a certain people
of Italy, were by a noble embassage from Rome entreated to depart, without
hurting their friends and associats having no cause offered to do it. This
very stoutly they refused to do, except they might have part of that country
granted unto them to dwell in: a thing thought unreasonable, that by force of
arms and dint of sword they should go about to take that which pertained
nothing unto them. Whereupon they fell to a fierce and sharp battle,
wherein the Roman Ambassadors contrary to the law of arms, took part with
their associate neighbors against them: yea killed one of their chief
captains. At the first the French by their legates complained, and receiving
no amends for the wrong done unto them; their hearts were so stirred, that
presently without any more ado they turned their force against Rome, going in
all haste to invade it. About eleven mile from the City, they were met withal
by the Romans, who being put to flight, fled the greatest part to other places,
a few to Rome; which was so interpreted by the Citizens, as though all the rest
had been slain; being astonished with fear, they had no regard to shut their
gates. At the length they sent a certain number of the stoutest and strongest
me^ into their Castle called the Capitol, well appointed with victuals and
weapons to defend it. The aged Senators being resolved to hazard their lives,
and to bequeath themselves to the sword, went home, sat down in their robes
at the entry of their houses in open sight of their enemies, who meruailed
thereat: yet using no cruelty, till one of them for stroaking M. Papirius an
old Senator, his beard was rapt on the pate for his labor with an iuorie
staff. Then began the slaughter, first of him, after of the rest; the City
they sacked and burned, all but the Capitol, which had bin taken also by them
in the night climing up, had not the keaking of Geese in time bewrayed their
intent. This calamity happened to the Romans in the 365. year of Rome, as we
read in Liuie: which by ancient registers and records of the Censors, of
long time preserved in their posterity, from father to child by many ages,
was testified to be the 121. year from the last kings reign. These records
Dionysius Halicarnassaus read and saw with his eyes. This 121. after the
Consuls, with 244. before them, make up Liuies number 365.

Now that Rome was taken of the Swichers in the beginning of the 98. Olympiad,
is proved by great agreement of learned writers in the first book of the same
Dionysius, which from the 68. wherein the Consuls began, is just the 121.
year. Adding hereunto the years before the 68. Olympiad, to the beginning of
the Persian Monarchy in the 55. and those after the 98. Olympiad, to the end
thereof in the third of the 112. all agree. The Olympic reckoning of the
Persian times is justified by the Roman History.

Polybius in his third book tells, that L. Aemylius being Consul of Rome, was
sent into Illyrium with an army in the first year of the 140. Olympiad. At
what time Annibal set forward in Spain to besiege Sagunt, which by the Roman
history is found the 533. of ye city. Of these 533. one hundred and eleven
were between the death of the last king of Persia and that setting forth of L.
Aemylius. And 192. of them were from the beginning of Rome, with the seventh
Olympiad to Cyrus. There remains for the Persian Empire 230. years, which
space for it before has been declared, and now once again proved by the
years of Rome.

One proof more of the testimony from Heaven, and so an end: Time is of the
Philosophers defined to be the measure of the heavenly motion; the course and
moving whereof being always certain and uniform, without disorder or going
astray, how so ever it is with men, there can be no error in it. By that
measure is known the length from one Solstitium to another, from eclips to
eclips, exactlie without missing a day or an hour. Astronomy, says
Temporarius, teaches what space of Heaven, the Sun, the Moon, and other
Stars, run out in an hour, a day, a month, a year, yea many thousand
years, and defines the spaces from one eclips to another most perfectly; so
as one of them being once found, we cannot after for the times following be
deceived in a day. Ptolomie a learned Egyptian, of a deep and long reach in
the knowledge of Astronomy, and other Mathematical sciences, in his Almagest
has recorded diverse eclipses of the Moon of ancient time preserved amongst
them, from the beginning of Nabonasars reign, long before the Jews captivity
in Babylon: which Censorinus in his book, de die natali, speaking of, says.
Vt a nostris ita ab Aegyptijs, quidam aenni in literas relati sunt, quos
Nabonozaru nominant; quod a primo eius imperij anno consurgant As (says he) of
our men, so of the Egyptians, certain years have been committed to writing,
which they call Nabonasars, because they rise together with the beginning of
this Empire. One of these eclipses there by him so registered, happened in the
seventh year of Cambyses, about the 16. day of Iulie, 224. years, and 140.
days after the beginning of Nabonasar, which was the six and twenty day of
February, in the first year of the eight Olympiad, and the fifth year of
Rome. Another by the same Ptolomie recorded, was in the year wherein
Phanostratus was Mayor of Athens, 365. years, with 112. days after Nabonasars
coronation, which lead us to the eyghteenth day of June, in that year of
Phanostratus now very near spent. The distance of these ecclipses, by
examination is found full a hundred one and forty years within one month. So
much time by the course of Heaven ran out, from the sixeteenth day of Iulie,
in the seventh of Cambyses, being the second year of the 64. Olympiad; to the
eight day of June, in the year of Phanostratus, which Diodorus Siculus very
truly sets in the second of the 99. Olympiad, yet blamed for it by
Temporarius in his third book of Chronologicall demonstrations: who strives
for that year of Phanostratus to be the third of the named Olympiad but all in
vain. Heaven it self gives sentence against him, and verifieth the
testimony of Diodorus, making the very same number neither more nor less.

Meto, a skillful and learned Astronomer, as Ptolomie in the third book of his
Almagest declares in the 316. year of Nabonasar, the 21. day of the
Egyptian month Phamenoth, answerable by our computation to the 28. day of
June, Apsendes then ruling at Athens, observed the Astronomicall point of
summers beginning, called Solstitium, which in this our age is about the
eleventh of that month, the Sun then entering into the tropicke of Cancer. So
great alteration in the space of 2020. years is bred betwixt our time and
theirs, for want of exact appoynting and right ordering of the leap year.
From that time to the end of the 50. year of Calippus his first period:
Hipparchus an excellent Mathematician, a man whom nature made partaker of her
secrets, as Pliny writes of him; gathered a perfect sum of 152. years.
That this period of Calippus began with the third year of the 112. Olympiad,
it is agreed by clear consent of many writers. For about that time Darius was
slain, and thereby this period of Calippus began together with Alexanders
Monarchy, now by the death of Darius established in his hands, without claim
of any. In memory whereof this period was ordained, and the account of years
after taken from that head.

The 50. years then of this period being taken from the former sum, there
remaynes 102. years from the end of Apsendes his government, to the death of
the last king of Persia: which by the record of ancient writers is so
acknowledged and verified, placing Apsendes in the last of the 86. Olympiad
(which was the 32. year of Artaxerxes the long handed) and the slaughter of
Darius in the third of the 112. These 102. with 127. and some odd months from
Cyrus to the 32. of that Artaxerxes included, contain the received time of the
Persian kings, 229. years with some few months more to the beginning of
Alexanders Monarchy, at the last Persian kings death. Which even that most
famous eclipse of the very next year before, wherewith Alexanders soldiers
were scared, eleven days before his last battle against Darius; puts out
of doubt. For from that in the seventh of Cambyses before spoken of, to this
Astronomical coming by exact calculation, finds 192. years and 66. days.
Which with the time following from the last eclipse to Darius his death, and
the years of Cambyses and Cyrus before the first Eclips, make up that full
reckoning.

Thus the glorious servant of all the world the Sun, which among other
services to the use and behoof of men (whereof he took his name in the holy
tongue to be called (...), which signifies a minister or servant (according to
that in the fourth of Esdras: God commanded the Sun, the Moon and Stars,
that they should serve man) has this for one appointed unto him, to be for
times, and years, and days. Even this Chronologer I say, of all other without
exception most true and sure, witnesses for Herodotus, Thucidides, Xenophon,
Eratosthenes, Polybius, Diodorus, and other writers of ancient time; if they
be not for credit sufficient of themselves, that their Chronology of the
Persian years is good; the mouth of Heaven which cannot lie has approved it.

The truth for this point being thus opened; it now remains to see what may
be brought against it, and to remove some doubts, as it were mists from the
readers eyes.

Dionysius Halicarnassaeus in the preface to his first book of antiquities,
affirms that the Persians continued not above 200. years in their
sovereignty. It is true being accounted from the death of Cyrus, who by the
space of thirty years was occupied in winning that Empire; and being once
won, they kept it near 200. years after.

Joseph Scaliger a man of rare gifts, a great light of this age; one whom the
Church of GOD for his pains, is much beholding to, in his fifth book de
emendatione temporum, speaking of Xerxes his passage into Greece, is so
uncertain and wavering in this point, that it is hard to find in what
judgment he rested. For first he makes it a thing undoubted, that Xerxes
passed into Europe in the end of the fourth year of the 47. Olympiad: and in
the beginning of the 75. fought at Thermopylae: then a little after he
thinks that passage of Xerxes to have happened the year before, that is to
say, in the end of the third year of the 47. Olympiad, being moved thereunto
by the authority of Herodotus and Thucidides. The one even Herodotus in
Polymnia, making mention of an eclipse of the Sun, at such time as Xerxes
marched forward with his host from Sardes toward Europe in the spring time of
the year: which by Scaligers calculation fell to the third year of the 74.
Olympiad, and so Xerxes his battles in Greece to the fourth year of it. The
other, that is Thucidides in his first book, writing that the Persians once
again invaded Greece in the tenth year after the Marothon field, which being
fought in the second year of the 72. Olympiad, the tenth after it, is the
fourth of the 74. Again, contrary to both these sentences, he yet alleges
another from Eratosthenes, Diodorus Siculus, and Plutarch, three worthy men for
skill, who referred Xerxes his passage into Greece to the first year of the 75.
Olympiad: and this he approves most of al in the chapter of the first Consuls.
Thus Joseph Scaliger (...), that is, dissoluing one doubt by another as one
says, leaves his reader in the briers; which I will assaye to help him out
of either all or some, if happily I can.

First therefore concerning Herodotus, it is evident and plain by his
testimony, that Xerxes fought his battles in Greece, in the first year of
the 75. Olympiad; because he makes account of 80. years from the first of
Cyrus thither: and if this be not enough, the same Author in plain words
declares, that the games of Olympia were celebrated about that very time,
wherein Leonides resisted his huge host, and stopped their passage. First in
Polymnia speaking of this matter, he says, that the time of the Olympiad fell
out together with that business. Again in Urania he confirms it, telling that
as Xerxes marched forward from Thermopylae, certain Grecians came unto him
offering their service, who being asked what the Grecians then were about,
answered that they kept and beheld the Olympian games, the winners whereof
received an Olive crown: which one Tigranes a noble Lord of Persia hearing,
presently burst forth into this speech: What worthy men are we brought to
fight against; which strive not for money, but virtue and prowess. This then
by Herodotus his own mouth being thus made clear, that the year of Xerxes
fighting in Greece, was an Olympicke year, it could not possibly be in
Herodotus judgment, as Scaliger would have it, the fourth year of the 74.
Olympiad. Moreover, Herodotus writes in Urania, that Callias was then Mayor of
Athens, when Xerxes took that City and burned it, which year of Callias his
Maioraltie at Athens, being the first of the 75. Olympiad, as has been
sufficiently already declared by the testimonies of Diodorus Siculus,
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, Diogenes Laertius, and Suidas, what does it else but
make further proof of the same Herodotus his meaning against Scaliger? But
what shall we then say to the eclipse of the Sun, mentioned by Herodotus,
which as Scaliger writes, proves that war to have been sooner by one
year? H. Bunting dissolueth this doubt, by acknowledging that eclips to have
happened in the spring time of that year, wherein Xerxes went to Sardes, which
Herodotus by some error as he thinks, transposed to the year following, when
Xerxes went from Sardes into Greece, an easy slip in History.

Now to come to Thucidides, whereas he writes that the tenth year after the
Persians overthrow at Marathon, they came again with a huge army to subdue
Greece; he means that year to be the tenth, wherein Xerxes having gathered
his army together, marched to Sardes: which was the very beginning of that
war, for that was the first leading of his army against the Grecians: and in
that year he made a bridge from Asia to Europe, for the passage of his army
over, and dug down the hill Atho, to make the seas meet for his Ships to
pass through, and sent his Ambassadors into Greece, to demand land and
water; which was a kind of proclayming war against such as refused to be
subject unto him. These things all were done in the tenth year after the
Marathon fight: and in the next which was the first of the 75. Olympiad, were
Xerxes his battles fought at Thermopylae, and other places of Greece, being
the eleventh from that Marathon war, even so acknowledged by Scaliger
himself in that book, in the chapter of the Persians overthrow at Marathon;
howsoever after he seems to be of another opinion, and to make it the tenth,
not understanding Thucidides aright.

Yea but Eratosthenes, Diodorus Siculus, and Plutarch, three excellent writers,
referred the passage of Xerxes into Greece, to the first year of the 75.
Olympiad, and so his battle at Thermopylae, to the second year thereof.
Eratosthenes indeed I grant, reckoning from the first Olympiad to Xerxes
passing into Greece 297. years, reaches to the beginning of the second year
of the 75. Olympiad, and goes a year further then other. Yet so as if any
thing be here amiss, it is mended in his next account, from Xerxes to the
Peloponnesian war, the distance whereof he makes 48. years; which with the
former 297. are in all 345. from the first Olympiad, to the first summer of the
Peloponnesian war: which is a most perfect reckoning received and agreed on,
so there is no great matter of difference.

Now touching Diodorus Siculus, his words are so manifest against that
assertion of Scaliger, as makes me marvel that he should be so deceived in
mistaking them. First the word which he uses is (...), he warred, or led his
army, being much more large then he passed over. Again having described the
year by the number of the Olympiad 75. the first year thereof, and the chief
officer of Athens Callias, and the Roman Consuls: he sets down for that
year so described, the battles of Xerxes at Thermopylae, at Artemysium, at
Salamis, and his flying out of Greece, and the leaving of Mardonius there with
a great host. And in the second year of that Olympiad, being the year of
Xantippus his Maioraltie at Athens; he places the victory of Pausanias against
Mardonius at Plateae, and the departure of Xerxes from Sardes to Susa, after
the overthrow of his forces by sea and by land: so that there is no doubt at
all by Diodorus Siculus, but that Xerxes his fighting at Thermopylae, happened
in the first year of the 75. Olympiad, according to the testimonies and consent
of ancient Historiographers before declared.

As for Plutarch, howsoever that is gathered of his words in one place there
cited by Scaliger: yet otherwhere he shows himself of another mind: For in
the life of Aristides, the battle at Plateae which happened the very next
year after Xerxes his discomfiture, he refers to the second of that Olymp.
that by the judgment of Scaliger himself so expounding the place, in his
first book treating of the Theban period. If then the next year after Xerxes
inuading Greece be the second of the 75. Olympiad by Plutarch; needs must the
year of Xerxes fighting in Greece, by him be the first, which is agreeable to
others Chronology and the very truth.

The same Plutarch in the life of Numa makes some doubt of the Olympic
reckoning, being committed to writing in regard of the beginning thereof very
late, by Hyppias of Elis, without any sure ground, whereunto of necessity we
must yield credit. This objection is answered by Temporarius in his
Chronology, that though it were granted that Hyppias erred in setting down
the true and exact time of the first Olympiad, yet that hinders the true
Chronology and order of times following nothing at all, which is very true:
for set the case, that that Olympiad which Hyppias made the 40. in number, was
not so much, but only the 30. and so the first, 40. years short at the least
of his account. It is not a pin matter. The order and account of the times
coming after for all that, may be most perfect and sure without missing one
minute, which I will declare by a familiar example. The year wherein our
gracious Queen began her happy reign, according to the computation of the
Church of England, was the 1558. of our Lord, but in truth the 1558. and this
year by our account 1597. is in very indeed by exact reckoning 1598. The cause
whereof was the error of Dionysius, called Paruus Abbas, who was the first
inuenter of this account, supposing Christ's birth to have been later by one
year then indeed it was: and so making that the first of our Lord, which was
the second; as is confessed and acknowledged of the best learned and most
skillful Chronologers of our age. This error in the first year of Christ, is
no let at all to the exact reckoning of all the years following. For there is
the same distance of years, from the 1558. to the 1597. by the usual account:
which is from the 1559, to the 1598. by the true account. Yet to speak my
mind, howsoever Dionysius missed in the reckoning of the years of Christ; I
hold it out of controversy that Hippias erred not, unto whose time the memory
of the Olympiads had been preserved, from four years to four years, from
the beginning thereof, in times of knowledge, and places of fame, where was
great concourse of people keeping the account thereof, not in their minds
only, but also in writings as is most like. And whether he erred or no; for
the Persian times and after it is no matter, as I have declared before, seeing
the error in the first is constant in all the rest, if any error have been.

Therefore Plutarchs doubt for any thing that I can see, had no reason at all,
but seems to savor of an usual custom of the Academicall sect, which was
always ready furnished to dispute on either side, pro or contra, either for
the truth or against it. For this is most certain that he follows that
reckoning by Olympiads himself in many places, as giving credit thereunto and
making no doubt thereof. In his treatise of the ten Orators he says, that
Andocides was borne in the 78. Olympiad, when Theogenides was governor of
Athens. And that Callias was governor in the 92. Olympiad, and that Isocrates
was borne under Lysimachus in the 86. Olymp. 22. years after Lysias, whose
birth he sets in the second of the 80. Olympiad, in the year of Philocles:
all which reckonings agree very perfectly to the ancient Olympic account, and
the Histories of Thucidides, Xenophon, and Diodorus Siculus. Pliny in the
fourth Chapter of his 36. book has these words; Marmore scalpendo primi
omnium inclaruerunt Dipoenus and Scyllis, geniti in Creta insula etiamnum Medis
imperitantibus: Priusquam Cyrus in Persis regnare inciperet, hoc est Olympiade
circiter quinquagesima. The first of all other for grauing of marble were
famous Dipoenus and Scyllis, born in the Island of Creta, whilst yet the Medes
bare rule; before Cyrus began to reign in Persia, that is about the 50.
Olympiad. Hereof Matthew Beroald in the second Chapter of his book of
Chronology gathers, that Cyrus began in the 50. Olympiad by Plinies
testimony, herein dissenting from other, who placed his beginning in the 55
but whosoever comes with an even mind to the truth, may easily perceive
another meaning in Pliny, and that the words hoc est Olympiade circiter 50,
ought not to be referred to that which is said of Cyrus, priusquam regnare
inciperet, before he began to reign; but the former part of the sentence
giving us this to understand the time wherein Dipoenus and Scyllis were famous
engrauers in Marble, to have been about the 50. Olympiad in the days of the
Medes Sovereignty before Cyrus had got it away from them to the Persians. Thus
no dissension at all between Pliny and other, but great agreement is found.

Much other such like stuff is brought of Beroaldus from diverse authors, by
cold conjectures, not any sure knowledge: all for the most part in that kind as
makes either against himself, or nothing for him. Pericles being a young man,
was of some of the aged sort in Athens thought to favor Pisistratus the tirant
in countinance and speech, as Plutarch tells in his life, which could not be
as Beroaldus supposed, except the old men who had known Pisistratus, had at
that time been a hundred years old. A thing in his judgment unlike to be
true. It is not so unlike, as strange that a man of his learning and reading
should judge so of it; seeing that we read of many examples of men of those
years. Valerius Corninus, who was Consul of Rome six times, lived full out a
hundred years, and likewise Metellus Pontifex. Solinus in his Polihistor
tells, that Masinissa begot his Son Methymnus at 86. years age. In the time
of Claudius Caesar, one T. Fullonius of Bononia, was found to be 150. years of
age, which in Lydia was a common thing, as by Mutianus is reported. Terentia
the wife of Cicero lived 107. Clodia 115. Many other by Pliny are recorded in
his seventh book the 48 49, 50, Chapters, in diverse countries between a
hundred, and a hundred and 50. years old. But of all other one Xenophilus
living 105. years without any disease or hurt of his body, was wondered at.
That Gorgias Leontinus a famous Orator much about that time with Pericles,
lived 109. years, we have the testimony of Appolodorus his Chronicles in
Diogenes Laertius, within one year acknowledged also by Pliny. Even in this
our age at home in our own country, it is no strange thing to find examples of
such as lived out that time, which Beroaldus accounted so incredible, that he
could not persuade himself of it to be true: but his incredulity is no proof
to weaken the credit of credible writers. But I will not strike with him for
this to grant it a thing incredible, let us examine his reckoning.

Pericles died in the third year of the 87. Olimpiad (not the 88. as Beroaldus
says) before his death he had been one of the chief governors of the
Athenian common wealth forty years. This Cicero teaches in his third book
de oratore: so the beginning of his authority falls to the three years (not
of the 78. as Beroaldus would) but the 77. Olympiad. About that time some old
men gave this judgment of him, that he was like Pisistratus: and might not
that be done but of such as were then a 100 years old? surely yes; for
Pisistratus died not past threescore years before: whereof 22. had passed from
the Marathon battle, and 20. more from the expelling of Hippias out of
Athens, declared by Thucidides, and 18. before from the beginning of Hippias
who succeeded Pisistratus. Yet some more besides these must be added to the old
men's age to have knowledge of Pisistratus in his life time to deal liberally,
let that time be twenty years before the death of Pisistratus: so their age is
left four score years very usual at this day in diverse lusty men, although I
would have this observed which Plutarch writes, that judgment to have bin
given of Pericles when he was a young man, whereby some advantage yet might
farther be taken if it were a matter worth the standing upon. Aelianus in his
third book, the 21. chapter (says Beroaldus) tells of Themistocles, that
being a child, and as he came from School meeting Pisistratus the tyrant,
was willed by his ouerseer attending upon him to go out of the way: which he
refused to do, and asked if there were not room enough for him besides.
Whereunto is repugnant that which Justin tells in his second book, that
Themistocles was a young man at the Marathon war, when he must needs be at the
least 66. years old, if Aelianus say true: for the sons of Pisistratus
after their fathers death reigned 36. years, witnessed by Herodotus in his
fifth book, then after were twenty more to the Marathon fight; and before
Themistocles could in such an answer show so stout a mind against the tirant,
it is like he was ten years of age.

Beroaldus here also in his account is deceived, mistaking Herodotus, who in
Terpsichore indeed affirms, that the Pisistratan stock reigned 36. years:
yet not meaning thereby as Beroaldus would feign have it, that Pisistratus his
children reigned so long after their fathers death; but that the whole time of
father and son was in all so much. This appears by Aristotle, an author for
credit very sufficicient, in the fifth book of his politickes the twelft
chapter, making the whole reign of the Pisistratan stock 35. years, that is
17. of Pisistratus himself, and 18. after of his children. And so is Herodotus
to be understood, giving them 36. in all, only differing from Aristotle in a
year. Whereby it may be thought that Pisistratus reigned some few months more
above 17. years: so his reckoning comes short by almost twenty years.
Again, there was another Pisistratus the son of Hippias, and Grand child to
the elder Pisistratus before spoken of, who in the year of his Maioraltie,
dedicated in the market place at Athens, the Altar of the twelve Gods, as
Thucidides writes of him in his sixth book. And this in my judgment is the
man, to whom that History in Aelianus may be fitly applied, and stand very
well with that which Justin has concerning Themistocles fighting at Marathon.

Yea but Pliny in his 34. book writes, that the Athenians the same year
wherein the kings of Rome were driven out, being the fourth of the 67.
Olympiad, set up ye images of Harmodius and Aristogiton, who had killed
Hipparchus the tyrant: far wide from that which Dionysius tells in his sixth
book, that Hipparchus was ruler at Athens in the 71. Olympiad. What say you to
that? Nothing, but that Beroaldus being belike ashamed of his folly in
bringing such an argument, calls it in again as it were, by answering that
it was another Hipparchus which Dionysius speaks of. Another argument he
takes from Dionysius Halicarnassaeus in his fifth book, making the war at
Marathon later by sixteen years then the death of Brutus; thereby referring
the year to the fourth of the 71. Olympiad, which by Cicero seems cast to
the 73. wherein Coriolanus a Senator of Rome made war against it. Here we
have nothing but untruth upon untruth, fit grounds for such a rotten
building: for sixteen years after that of the first Consuls, which was by
Dionysius the first of the 68. Olympiad, in the end whereof Brutus was slain,
reach not to the fourth of the 71. but to the second of the 72. Olympiad:
wherein the same Dionysius in plain words places that war. As for that of
Coriolanus against Rome, it happened in deed in the first of the 73. Olympiad,
only three years after the other. And therefore Cicero in his Brutus
affirming, not that this of Coriolanus was at the same time, with that other of
the Persians, but almost at that time, speaks a truth, dissenting nothing at
all from Dionysius.

It follows in Beroaldus: the same Dionysius in his ninth book, Diodorus
Siculus agreeing unto him says, that Xerxes went to war against Greece in
the 75. Olympiad, when Callias governed Athens: that is twelve years after the
Marathon fight being past, to that of Xerxes at Salamis: Glossa corrumpit
textum, the gloss here marreth the text with a manifest untruth: for neither
Dionysius nor Diodorus makes above eleauen years distance betwixt those
battles, the one placed in the second of the 72. Olympiad, the other in the
first of the 75, almost in the beginning thereof. Now let any man count the
distance between, on his fingers ends, and see if he can find twelve years.
But to omit this and come to the purpose: Gelo was at the time of Xerxes his
war by Pausanias and Herodotus tyrant of Syracusae. And Gelo tyrant of
Syracusae, by Plutarch in the life of Lysias the Orator, in the second of the
82. Olympiad. So the war of Xerxes must by this reckoning come back near 30.
years after the 75. Olympic sport. Plutarchs words are these, (...). That is
in English thus much, Lysias an exceeding rich man, was the son of Cephales,
grand child of Lysanias, the son of Cephales: his father Cephales was a
Syracusian borne, and flitted to Athens for love, partly of the city, and
partly of Pericles the son of Xanthippus, who persuaded him thereto being his
friend and host: or as some say, for that he was driven from Syracusae, at
such time as it was subject to the tyranny of Gelo. He means that Lysias was
borne.
Being borne at Athens under Philocles, the next ruler after Phrasicles, he
was first brought up with the noblest children of the Athenians, about the
second year of the 83. Olympiad. Afterward being fifteen years old, he went
to Thuriae, a city of Italy, Praxiteles then being Mayor of Athens, as
follows there in Plutarch. Philocles was Mayor at Athens in the second year
of the 80. Olympiad, as Diodorus declares. Then was Lysias borne, and being
about eight years old in the second year of the 82. Olympiad, he was brought
up with other noble men's children in Athens: and therein continued till the
year of Praxiteles his government, which was the first of the 84. Olympiad, as
we read in the same Diodorus, and the fifteenth of Lysias his birth. Where can
Beroaldus now find in this place of Plutarch, that Gelo was tyrant of
Syracusae, in the second year of the 82. Olympiad? What meant he so
co^fidently to burst forth into this complaint? Tam incerta sunt apud aut hores
rerum istarum tempora: So uncertain are the times of these matters: what
reason had he for it? For he that understands Greek, and compares
Plutarchs own words, with that which Beroaldus gathers by them, will be
ashamed (I believe) of such an interpreter, being so blinded with conceited
affection that he sees not what is written, and cares not what he says.
Plutarch does notably in this place confirm the received ancient Chronology
of the Greeks: so far he is by any disagreement from weakening their credit.

Let us now examine one or two other places of Beroaldus concerning the time of
Xerxes fighting in Greece. In the eight chapter of his third book, Pausanias,
says Beroaldus, tells in his Arcadikes, that Xerxes then passed into Greece
when Gelo governed at Syracuse, which is likewise witnessed by Herodotus in his
seventh book. But that same Pausanias in his Eliaca affirms, that Gelo held
the government of that city in the second year of the 72. Olympiad. Except it
be a strange thing that one king should continue his reign by the space of
twelve years. This argument of Beroaldus is not worth a rush to prove
disagreement between ancient writers, referring Gelo his tiranie some to the
second of the 72. Olympiad, other to the first of the 75. when Xerxes passed
into Europe, for the beginning of his dominion was about the second of the 72.
Olympiad, as Dionisius Halicarnassaeus declares in the seventh book of his
Roman Antiquities. And the end thereof in the 75. Olympiad the third year
thereof, as Diodorus witnesses in the eleauenth book of his Historical
library: So both might stand together well enough.

Beroaldus has yet more matter from Pausanias in his Eliaca, who refers the
overthrow of Mardonius at Plateae, the next year after Xerxes invaded Greece,
to the 75. Olympiad: whereas Diodorus Siculus says, that Xerxes in that
Olympiad invaded Greece, both can not be true. The word Olympias pertains
sometime to the game itself celebrated every first year of the four, as
where Solinus tells that the 207. Olympias was in the public acts recorded
to be in the 801. year of Rome, wherein Pompeius Gallus and Q. Veranius were
Consuls, and Eratosthenes in Clemens Alexandrinus accounts from the first
Olympiad to the passage of Xerxes into Greece 297. years. Xenophon also in his
History of the Greek affairs writes, that the next year after Dionysius
had got the kingdom of Syracusae, happened that Olympias wherein Pythodorus
was Mayor at Athens. In all these places Olympias is taken for one year only,
and that the first of the four: in which sense Diodorus used it, where he
says that Xerxes invaded Greece in the 75. Olympiad. Now, because that from
one Olympias to another were four years complete; the word is also usually
taken for that whole space of four years, betwixt one and another, not much
unlike that which we read in blessed Lukes gospel of the proud Pharisie,
boasting of his fasting twice in a sabbath, taking one day of the week for all
the week, from the beginning to the end. So it is used of Solinus, writing
that Rome was builded in the first year of the seventh Olympiad, and when the
seventh Olympiad began, and Josephus in the last chapter of his fourteenth
book of Antiquities, says that Herod took Jerusalem in the 185. Olympiad,
he means the whole four years space of that Olympiad, for that was done in
the last year thereof. In this sense that saying of Pausanias is true
concerning Mardonius his overthrow at Plateae in the 75 Olympiad, and so no
discord proved.

As for Polybius, from whom he gathers the war of Xerxes to have been in
the third year of the 74. Olympiad; there is no such matter. Beroaldus was
deceived in his reckoning, I have brought the place of Polybius before, and
declared his meaning.

Oebotas, a man of Achaea won the race in the sixth Olympiad, who for so
glorious a victory receiving not that honor of his countriemen which he
looked for at their hands, and in his own judgment had deserved; conceived
such coffeehouse thereat, that he even cursed them, praying that never any
of the Achaeans more might win any Olympicke game again: which so fell out for
a long time, till at the length by the council of Apollo his Oracle, they had
in honor of Oebotas erected a pillar for an eternal monument of his virtue,
with an inscription testifying the same; which was performed unto him in the
80. Olympiad, as Pausanias tells in his Achaica and Eliaca: who for that
cause meruaileth at the report of some Grecians, who said that Oebotas fought
against Mardonius in the 75. Olympiad, and thinks it incredible, as he might
well enough, that a man having won the race in the sixth Olympiad, should be
a fighting Soldier near two hundred and fourscore years after. What is here
now in Pausanias to be seen, which in his own persuasion does not confirm
the truth of the Olympicke Chronology, rather then make against it any way?
For the great credit which he put therein, nothing doubting of the true
reckoning of so many years between, bred that meruailing in him, and made him
think that Oebotas which fought against Mardonius in the 75. Olympiad, to have
been some other of that name, rather then the ancient race winner in the sixth
Olympiad. It was true, that by some they were supposed one and the same, but by
such as Pausanias judged fools for their labor. Their folly stirred him never
a whit from the true received account of Olympicke years. Of the certainty
whereof, what a settled and grounded persuasion he had may appear by this, that
in diverse places he makes mention of Olympicke records and registers which
himself saw and read, wherein he testifies the memory of the Olympiads to
have been preserved by the Eleans, in whose country those games were kept, and
that with such care and diligence, that from the first in Iphitus his time, to
the Emperor Nero, not one of them all was missing: this he witnesses in his
Phocica, much auayling to the credit of that account.

Another objection in Beroaldus is concerning the time of the Peloponnesian
war, of which says he, both beginning and end is uncertain, by the
dissension of authors between themselves. Pliny refers the time of it to
the fourth of the 81. Olympiad, and A. Gellius to the first of the 89. and
Diodorus Siculus to the third of the 87. So says Beroaldus. If truly, there
is great ods between them. Plinies words in the thirty book and first chapter
are these: Plenumque miraculi and hoc, pariter vtrasque arts effloruisse,
medicinam dico magicenque: eadem aetate illam Hipocrate, hanc Democrito
illustrantibus circa Peloponnesiacum Graeciae bellum, quod gestum est a 300.
vrbis nostrae anno. This also says Pliny is much to be meruailed at, that
both the arts flourished together; I mean Physic and Magic, in the same age
Hippocrates teaching the one, and Democritus the other about the Peloponnesian
war in Greece, which was made since the 300. year of the City. That war
began about the 32. year of Rome, and therefore Pliny saying that it was
after the 300. says, that which is true, not purposing there to set down by a
straight and exact account, the very just year wherein it began: but to guess
much about the time by an even and ready number keeping within the compass of
truth.

In A. Gellius the 21. chapter of his seventeenth book we read. Bellum inde
in terra Graeciae maximu^ Peloponnensiacum, quod Thucidides memoriae mandauit,
caeptum est circa annum fere post conditam Romans trecentesimum vigesimum
nonum. That is, Afterward the great war of the Peloponnesians, in the land of
Greece, which Thucidides committed to memory, began here about the 329. years
after the building of Rome. What is the cause of this difference betwixt
Gellius and other? Surely not any fault of the authors judgment, but only a
slip of the writers pen, putting vigesimum nonum in stead of decimum nonum.
29. for 19. as may be proved by two reasons: First because immediately after
those words, Gellius together with the beginning of that war yoketh the
year wherein A. Posthumous was Dictator of Rome, who killed his own son, for
that with great courage he went somewhat further in fighting against the enemy
tha^ his father had appointed. This year of A. Posthumous his Dictatorship, by
Liuie is the 323. of Rome: but by A. Gellius and some other setting the
building of that City in the second year of the seventh Olympiad, and the
first Consuls in the 242. of Rome, it is the 320. running together with the
first year of the Peloponnesian war for the greatest part of it, though not
wholly, because the war began somewhat before in the 319. Another reason may
be taken from that which follows a little after in the same chapter,
concerning the time of the new government of the Athenian common wealth by 30.
tyrants, being as we are taught by Xenophon the 28. year of the Peloponnesian
war, which A. Gellius refers to the 347. of Rome, from which sum 28.
according to Xenophons reckoning, being taken away there remains the 319. of
the City for the beginning of that war. As for Diodorus Siculus, it is
untrue that he referred the beginning of that war to the third of the 87.
Olympiad: for in flat words he acknowledges Thucidides the chief of all
other authors for it, to refer it to the first of that Olympiad: neither is
there against it in Diodorus any thing to be found.

As the beginning of that war is uncertain, so the end has as much
controversy. I think even so, that is just none at all, if Authors may be
suffered to speak for themselves, to open their meaning, and declare their
mind: but let us see this great controversy. The greatest part of authors,
says Beroaldus, taught that war to have continued 27. years. Yet Aemilius
Probus says, it lasted but 26. And Xenophon gives it 28. and a half, here is
great ods. The words of Aemilius probus are these in the life of Lysander:
Lysander Lacedaemonius magnam reliquit sui famam, magis foelicitate quam
virtutem partam. Athenienses enim in Peloponnesios sexto and vicessimo anno
bellum gerentes confecisse apparet. Id qua ratione consequutus sit latet. Non
enim virtute sui exercitus, sed immodestia factum est aduersariorum. Quid quod
dicto audientes suis imperatoribus non erant, dispalati in agris relictis
nauibus in hostium peruenerunt potestate^? Quo facto Athenienses se
Lacedaemoniis dediderunt. Lysander the Lacedemonian (says he) left a great
fame of himself, which he got rather by good luck then prowess: for it is
well known that he subdued the Athenians, having made war against the
Peloponnesians six and twenty years, but how he obtained, this is not so
apparent: for this happened not by the manhood of his own army: but the
disorder of the Athenians, who not ruled by their captains, but scattered
abroad from their ships, came into their enemies power; which being done the
Athenians yielded themselves. There are three several times set down by good
Authors for the end of this war. One was Lysanders victory by sea against
the Athenians at a town in Hellespont called Aegos Potamoi, that is, Gotes
flood, where Lysander espying his opportunity, when the Athenians leaving their
ships had gone to the towns there about for provision of victuals, suddenly
set upon them, and took to the number of a hundred and four score, every
one except eight or nine, which by flight escaped away. He took also 3000.
men with their Captains, besides a great number slain, which thing being done
and the spoil taken, he returned with minstrelsie and great mirth; having as
Plutarch says, achieved a great matter with a little labor, and in an hour
space made an end of a long war. From the beginning of the war to this
overthrow, whereby the Athenians power was now so weakened, that they could not
hold out any longer, and so an end made of that war as Plutarch writes:
where about 26. years, and therefore Aemilius Probus respecting that time, as
by his own words manifestly appears, his account is true.

Thucidides with the greatest part of writers for the end of that war go
about a year further, to the peace concluded with the Athenians, and the
pulling down of their walls: so making the continuance 27. as before is
proved. So there is as much disagreement between these two times set for the
Peloponnesian war, the one by Thucidides, the other by Aemilius Probus: as
there is difference betwixt these two ways, the one from London to Ware, the
other from London to Hodsdon, and thence to Ware.

If meaning may be taken without cauelling at words, the like may be said of
Xenophon: not withstanding what soever Beroaldus brings against ye credit of
his history before spoken of, in regard of some coruptio^, which in his pinion
has happened in the notes and numbers of Olympiads and years. Xenophon (says
he) refers the 93. Olympiad to that year wherein Enarchippus was Ephorus
at Sparta. After whom in the same history the next is named Pantaeles,
ordained Ephorus in ye 22. year of the Peloponnesian war: which being so the
year of Enarchippus, that is Pantacles, Pyteas, Archytas, Endicus: in whose
year Lysander, the war being ended, and the walls of Athens thrown down,
returned home; by this means it must expire at the 25. years end. Contrary
whereunto Xenophon affirms in plain words, that Lysander went home after
28. years and six months, an end being made of that war in the 29. year
thereof: for which cause he also numbereth 29. Spartan Magistrates under whom
the war continued.

Thus far Beroaldus, for answer whereunto I will first set down the words of
Xenophon as they lie: whereby it may appear what Xenophons meaning was. In the
first place speaking of Enarchippus his year, he uses these words. (...)
etc. And this year says Xenophon expired, wherein the Medes also rebelling
against Darius king of the Persians became his subjects again. In the year
following the temple of Minerua in Phocaea by the fall of a thunderbolt was set
on fire. After winter was ended Pantacles being Ephorus, and Antigenes bearing
rule at Athens. In the beginning of the spring, when 22. years of the war
were past, the Athenians sailed to Proconesus with all their Army. Thence
moving to Chalcedon and Byzantium, etc. In their words are contained the acts
of three diverse years. One of the Medes rebellion against Darius, which was the
24. Another of Mineruas temple burning when Pantacles was Ephorus; being the
year following, that is the 25. The third of the Athenians sailing to
Proconnesus after 22. years past of the Peloponnesian war, which was the 23.
and therefore before these words. In the beginning of the spring, etc. I have
set a full point to distinguish them from the former, as pertaining to a diverse
year: for here Xenophon goes back again to that which had happened two
years before. A thing usual enough in writers, when they will make their
history with more consequence and coherence the better hang together, to go
back from one matter to another before omitted, and so to prosecute it on an
end without interruption. I need not go far for examples in Xenophon
himself, if it were a thing to be stood upon.

This for Xenophons meaning after some diligent reading and perusing the place
was my judgment, wherein afterward I was more confirmed by Diodorus Siculus and
Codoman. For Codoman in the fourth book of his Chronology, very flatly
affirms that these words in Xenophon; In the beginning of the spring, etc.
begin the 23. years of the Peloponnesian war: yea he is so far from thinking
with Beroaldus the year of Pantacles governing, though immediately before
mentioned to be all one with this: that he remooueth it two years off, placing
one whole year betwixt them as I do: yet differing herein that he places
Pantacles in the 21. year, which was his error, as more plainly by God his
assistance shall appear hereafter. But the testimony of Diodorus Siculus an
ancient Historiographer, is much more notable, who in his thirteenth book
refers these acts which here in Xenophon begin after the 22. year of the
war, to the 23. of the same two years before the Magistracy of Pantacles,
which by Diodorus is set down in the 25. year thereof, which without all
question is most undoubtedly true; and showed by Xenophons table of the Spartan
governors evidently and plainly, as every one whose sight is not dim with a
cauelling affection and wilful wrangling may very clearly see it.

If any thing in the writing of Xenophons history by corruption of numbers be
amiss, as for my part, I think there is none at all, if he be well
understood: yet for one thing amiss, another which is true must not be
forsaken. Let that which is right be so still, and not cast away for that which
is wrong. Xenophons table is sure, and has the consent of excellent Authors to
approve it.

Thucidides from the Marathon war, which by the learned is set in the second
summer of the 72. Olympiad, to the end of the Peloponnesian war, makes
account of 87. years, that is to say, 10. to Xerxes inuading Greece, and 50.
thence to the Peloponnesian war, with 27. more to the end thereof, which from
the second of 72. fill up Xenophons number of 93. Olympiads. In the last
whereof by Xenophon were governors of Athens; first, Enctemo, then Antigones,
next Callias, the fourth and last Alexias.

Let us here a little examine how Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, in the seventh
book of his Roman Antiquities agrees to these, there he writes that Callias
ruled at Athens, in the third year of that 93. Olympiad, which is so by
Xenophon. Moreover that the next before Callias for the second year of that
Olympiad, was Antigenes, found true in the like manner by Xenophon, and lastly
from the second year of the 72 Olympiad, wherein the Marathon battle was
fought, to that year of Callias he gathers 85. years: which with that year
of Callias, and the other following of Alexias, make up exactly the just
reckoning of Thucidides his 87.

Diodorus Siculus for Xenophons meaning may take all doubt away, and end the
controversy, who agreeing with Xenophon in the number as well of Olympiads, as
years of the Peloponnesian war, refers the 24. of that war to the first
of the 93. Olympiad, as Xenophon does, and in all the other years thereof
writes accordingly: wherefore the opinion of Beroaldus concerning the
corruption of Xenophons numbers, I hold as true as his interpretation of 22.
years for the next after 22. being past.

Now touching the second place of Xenophon, making the war of longer
continuance then Thucidides does: it no way hinders the agreement of the
Chronology of those times, if his words be well waied in the second book of
his Greek History: where after he had declared in the last year of that
war, the glorious victory of Lysander against the Athenians at Gotes flood,
and the besiege of that City by sea and by land, whereby they were driven to
yield and give up their ships to the Lacedaemonians, and to throw down their
long walls in the haven Pyreus; he adds that the next year after happened
that Olympiad, wherein Crocinas the Thessalian won the race, and Endius in
Sparta, Pythodorus in Athens were chief officers: In which the fame of the
Athenian common wealth was changed, and the government of the City committed
to thirty, who by their cruel tyrranie in the space of eight months, killed
more than before by war had died in ten years. This being done says
Xenophon, Lysander sailed to Samus, and took it, and restored the old
inhabitants and drive out the new, and after returned home to Lacedemonia with
a great booty in the end of summer, 28. years and six months of that war
being then expired: In which time were 29. Magistrates called Ephori: The first
of them being Aenesias, under who^ the war began, and the last Endius, in whose
time Lysander sailed home. Here Xenophon fetches the beginning of that war
further than Thucidides, even from the beginning of the first Ephorus, and for
the end most apparently goes likewise beyond him to Lysanders winning of
Samus, and setting order in it in the year of the 29. Ephorus: yea further yet
he stretches it, even to Lysanders coming home; unto which time reckoning
from the beginning of Aenesias we find 28. years and a half.

Again Beroaldus obiecteth dissension of Authors touching the beginning of
Dionysius his tyrranie; some referring it to the third of the 93. Olympiad,
some to the fourth. A weighty reason sure for a little difference of one year
in Xenophon from other in one thing to overthrow the credit of all ancient
writers in an other by universal consent established and agreed upon, and yet
this little difference may be rather in show then indeed; seeing it is a
thing well known and confessed, that diverse writers begin their years
diversely: some half a year, some very nere three quarters before other; as
Gerardus Mercator proves in his Chronology: but howsoever it were granted
that here in one year, there were flat contradiction between them: yet it
is a ridiculous toy by one years difference to cut off a hundred from the
Persian Monarchy.

I but A. Gellius has yet a contrary opinion to both the former, laying the
government of Dionysius on the 346. year of Rome, which was the second of that
Olympiad. In Gellius we read not 346. but 347. so that if the 346. of Rome be
the second of the 93. Olympiad, then the 347. is the third thereof, and
therefore good agreement between the Story writer of Halicarnassus and him.
The Attick nights were belike too dark for Beroaldus his eyes, to see what the
enditer laid up in that place, whereunto I have given light before to perceive
his mind.

It follows in Beroaldus. It is reported of Euripides and Sophocles, that
they both died in one year, that is the fourth of the 92. Olympiad: whereof
may be gathered, the 30. tyrants set over Athens by Lysander, and the end of
the Peloponnesian war to have been in the first of the 93. because the death
of Sophocles is known to have happened about that time. By whom is this
reported? It were to be wished that he had been named. Many I am sure they
cannot be, and I think no one ancient Author at all can be found, who plainly
has said it: so as it may appear to have proceeded of judgment in him, and
again if any can be found, who of judgment set them both together so high:
yet that might be well enough without misplacing the thirty tyrants, from the
first of the 94. Olympiad, to the first of the 93. Let us go on to the rest.

Solinus tells that Pythagoras came into Italy in the time of the first
Consuls. Gellius in the time of Tarquinius superbus, which might be the year
before. Dionysius says that he taught in Italy after the 50. Olympiad, which
dissenteth neither from that former saying of Solinus, nor the other of
Gellius, because the times by them named, were both after the 50. Olympiad.
Diogenes Laertius writes, that he flourished in the 60. Olympiad. All this
touching the time of Pythagoras wherein he lived and taught, may stand well
enough without disagreement. Pliny puts him back from the time named by
Solinus an hundred years and more. And Beroaldus brings him as many or more
forward even to the Peloponnesian war, by his opinion begun about the 94.
Olympiad: which being so, needs must Cyrus also be pulled forward in some
proportion from the 55. Olympiad to the 80.

Between these two extreamities of opinion concerning the age of Pythagoras,
the one of Pliny, the other of Beroaldus; in my judgment medium tenuere
beati, the merry mean is best as we see, especially being approved by a
far greater number of the learned.

But let us examine his proof that Pythagoras was so late. His first reason is
brought from the authority of Eusebius, who in his tenth book De praeparatione
Euangelica, writes that Xenophons and Pythagoras were in the same times with
Anaxagoras, who came within the compass of the Peloponnesian war. If an old
man may live at the same time with a young man, this is no good proof to bring
Pythagoras to the Peloponnesian war, because Eusebius said that Anaxagoras,
in whose time Pythagoras lived was in it. Let Eusebius be his own interpreter
in his Chronicles, where he puts the matter out of doubt, setting the death
of Pythagoras threescore and four years at the least before the beginning of
the Peloponnesian war, and yet withal, making Anaxagorus who saw that war to
flourish in his days. Another reason of his much like to the former is this.
Pythagoras with diverse of his acquaintance being in the house of Milo:
certain enemies in desire of revenge upon some conceived grief, burned it
over their heads, where Lysis and Archytas, two of Pythagoras his scholars at
that time escaped. This Lysis after became teacher of Epaminondas the valiant
Theban Captain, who fighting at Mantine in the second year of the 104.
Olympiad above 40. years after the Peloponnesian war was slain.

And what of all this? I know his conclusion, that this being so late an age
wherein Epaminondas died, whose master was Lysis one of Pythagoras his
scholars: It must needs be that Pythagoras himself reached to the time of
the Peloponnesian war somewhat nere to Epaminondas, and when was that war?
the end of it, if we may believe Beroaldus, was about the 100. Olympiad, and by
that means Pythagoras must be brought to the 94. at the least wherein it
began, not much above 40. years before the reign of king Phillip of
Macedonia, the Father of Alexander the great.

If I should stand to number all the absurdities which would follow of this
position (according to that which Aristotle says, that one absurd thing
granted, many other follow upon it) it were a tedious thing to write or read;
except peradventure that being so ridiculous in themselves, the moving of
laughter might some way ease the readers toil.

But leaving this I will declare that the distance of time made by ancient
writers, between Pythagoras his teaching, and Epaminondas his learning of
Lysis; can no way hinder, but that Pythagoras may stand well enough still in
that place, where they have set him. His death by Eusebius is put in the last
year of the 70. Olympiad. At which time Lysis his scholar might be 16. years
of age, and live fourscore and eight years after, till he was 104. years
old in the beginning of the 93. Olympiad. When Epaminondas might be of the age
of sixteen years, instructed before of Lysis in his old age. What one thing
is there here incredible, or not usual in those times? Gorgias Leontinus much
about the same times with Lysis, lived a hundred and nine years, which before
has been showed with diverse other like examples, and Aemilius Probus in the
life of Epaminondas testifies of him, that being a young man, he was
instructed in Philosophy by Lysis in the time of his grave and severe old age.
Philosophiae praeceptorem habuit Lysim Tarentinum, Pythagoreum: cui quidem sic
fuit deditus, vt adolescens tristem and seuerum senem omnibus aequalibus suis
in familiaritate anteposuerit, says Aemilius. Thus Beroaldus his sharp
assault against the Chronologicall forte of the Grecians account, has not so
prevailed to batter it, but that it can defend it self against the enemy.

Let us now see with what success he has oppugned the Latin Story, against
this he fights with two weapons, one taken from the Roman Decemuirs, the
other borrowed of the Frenchmen at their sacking of Rome, in the 302. year of
Rome, wherein L. Menenius, and P. Sestius were Consuls, toward the end of
their COnsulship, certain Commissioners called Decemuiri, were chosen by the
people to the government of the City and the making of Laws, against the next
year now approaching, being the 303. of the City. Hereof is that difference
and dissension of some Authors between themselves alleged by Beroaldus: some
referring the Decemuirs to the 302. year of Rome, respecting the time wherein
they were elected, as Solinus and Liuie, some to the 303. because that was the
year wherein they first executed that new authority, being appointed and
chosen unto it in the end of the former year. As Dionysius Halicarnassaeus in
his eleventh book declares. Besides Varro and Onuphrius As for A. Gellius and
some other, naming the 300. year of Rome for the Decemuirs, the cause thereof
is manifest; that some make the time of the kings of Rome not 244. but only
241. years, and those began from the second of the seventh Olympiad, not the
first, that is from the end of the building of Rome, when Romulus took upon
him to be king. By their opinion there are two years fewer than other account
of; so that their 300. is the 302. of other, whereof I have spoken before, by
reason of some like examples in Gellius, who followed that reckoning: so there
is no difference between these indeed, but only in show and diverse respects.
These ten Commissioners held that authority by the space of two whole years. In
the latter whereof being the 304. of the City, Virginia a beautiful maid of
Rome was slain by her own Father, with a butchers knife taken from his stall
in the open street, rather then that she should satisfy the filthy lust of
Appius Claudius one of the ten, who by great violence and open wrong went about
it. Cicero in his second book de finibus, writes that this happened in the
threescore year after the beginning of the first Consuls, which was not the
301. of Rome as Beroaldus says, making dissension between Authors where there
is none at all, but the 304. for adding threescore to the 244. wherein the last
king was expelled, the sum is 304.

But what shall we say then to Dionysius Haelicarnassaeus, who is contrary to
himself in his second book, affirming those ten Commisioners to have been in
the 300. year of Rome? Even this, that it is an increase of Beroaldus his
untruths: for there speaking of the Laws which Romulus the first king
ordained, and namely of that whereby it was made lawful for a father to sell
his own child: that this Law says he, was not made by the Decemuirs, who
three hundred years after were appointed to that business, it is gathered by
this ordinance of Numa. Patri post hac nullum ius esto vendendi filium; let it
not be lawful hereafter for the father to sell his son. It is manifest in
this place that the 300. year is accounted, not from the building of the
City: but from the time wherein Romulus established the common wealth with
laws, which was after the foundation of the City laid. Otherwise this
historiographer most undoubtedly, perfectly, and exactly declares the year of
their authority to be the 303 of the City.

Thus there is no cause at all for Beroaldus so earnestly, and with such heat,
to complain of great ignorance, and disagreement in these Authors one from an
other, being in truth at great concord between themselves, and dissenting
only in show, and yet all the dissension which he names, if it were so
indeed, consists within the space of three or four years betwixt 300. and
303.

But that all these are wide from the true time of the Decemuirs, in his
opinion above threescore years: he can prove both by profane story, and
holy scripture.

If Beroaldus can do this, I will say he is a cunning iugler, let us see how.
Hermodorus the Ephesian, the interpreter of the Decemuirs laws, was acquainted
with Heraclitus, and flourished in his days, and Heraclitus citing the
writings of Pythagoras, must needs be after Pythagoras. Again Pythagoras
reached to the times of the Peloponnesian war, as may be proved by this,
that Lysis one of his familiar friends, instructed Epaminondas in Philosophy,
who died long after that war. Hereof we may conclude that Heraclitus, and
Hermodorus his friend with him flourished in the time of the Peloponnesian
war, and that the Decemuirs laws are there to be placed.

The fingering of this feate is too grosie to deceive any man's eyesight, who is
but careful to mark somewhat nerelie. First this is an vnprouing proof, that
Heraclitus was later than Pythagoras, because he alleges some sentence out
of his works, for it is an usual thing for those which are of one standing,
as we say, and equal in time, to read the books one of another. Cicero lived
in the same age with Varro, yet notwithstanding he had recourse to his
writings, and alleged upon occasion the contents thereof.

The other argument touching Pythagoras his reaching to the Peloponnesian
war, by Lysis and Epaminondas, being the main reason of all, is as vain as
that; which a little before I have made plain.

Lastly though it were granted, that Heraclitus and Hermodorus were in the
time of the Peloponnesian war: yet for all that the Decemuirs laws might be
before that time interpreted by the same Hermodorus; as well as Master Beza his
first interpretation of the new Testament, was many years before the late
taking of Calis by the Spaniards; and yet the same light of God his Church at
those days still shining therein. This is such a sorry Sorites, as makes me
marvel what conceit came in Beroaldus his head to bring it. As likewise that
cold conjecture out of Liuie which follows concerning the twelve tables of
the Decemuirs laws, to be in the 370. year of Rome, is as far and further
from Liuies mind, in plain words otherwhere declared, as threescore is from
three.

The second weapon wherewith Beroaldus fights against the Latin history, is
some doubt concerning the time of the French men's taking Rome, in ye 365. year
from the building of that city, and the first of the 98. Olympiad. For
Plutarch in the life of Camillus, having declared the received opinion
concerning the time thereof, that it happened a few more then 360. years after
Rome was builded, adds this doubting speech: If it seem credible, that an
exact account of these times had been so long preserved; seeing that even the
confusion of that time, has brought some doubt and controversy to other later.

Plutarch least he should seem without cause to have made that doubt,
brings this reason: that the fame and rumor of that war wherein Rome by the
French was taken, presently was spread abroad in Greece, and came to the ears
of Heraclides Ponticus, and Aristotle: whereby may be gathered that it
happened in the time of king Phillip of Macedonia, in whose days those authors
lived says Beroaldus. The reign of this king began about the 105. Olympiad,
seven and twenty years after the common received time of that taking of Rome
set by other, and endured full four and twenty years.

For answer to this doubt, I am to let the reader understand, that the French
men discontented, and unquiet in mind for their ill success at their taking
of Rome, being driven out again, and all their pray taken from them by Marcus
Furius Camillus, came diverse times after into Italy, and namely in the 406.
year of Rome, being the fourteenth of Philip the Macedonian King; when
Aristotle was about four and thirty years old. In this year Lucius Furius
Camillus being Consul, and he alone Consul after his fellows death: the
French invaded Italy with a mighty power. Amongst them one at that time for
stature of body passing other, chalenging any one of the Roman host
whosoever durst fight with him, was with the Consuls leave set upon by M.
Valerius, a valiant Captain. In this combat a raven came suddenly to the
Roman champion, and sat upon his Helmet, and flew upon the French man, against
his face with bill and talents fighting, till at the length being greatly
amazed thereat, he was slain by Valerius. Who thereof took name to be called
Coruinus, in memory of the ravens fighting for him; which was interpreted to
have come from God. The French men after the death of their champion so
miraculouslie slain, were discomfited and fled, and durst not of a long time
after come against the Romans. And this was the battle by all likeliehoode,
which Aristotle and Heraclides Ponticus spoke of. For it is confessed by
Plutarch himself, that the conqueror of the French at that time was called
Lucius in Aristotle; which agrees to this time wherein Lucius Camillus was
Consul alone, and conqueror: not to the taking of Rome, when Marcus Camillus,
father to this man had given them the overthrow.

As for the taking of Rome then mentioned by Heraclides and Aristotle, which
was by a rumor and uncertain report noysed abroad: the cause thereof might
be, that they were the same people then vanquished, who before had taken it.
So it is true in regard of the men.

One argument more is yet behind, reserved as may seem to the last place, as
of all the rest most forcible to disturb the set bounds of the Peloponnesian
war, and thereby those of the Persian Empire. The force of this argument in
the conceit of Beroaldus is so strong and pythie, as that it cannot possibly
suffer the ancient accounte of those times to stand. Let us (says Beroaldus)
first set down, that which is reported by Polybius a grave author in his first
book: that the Lacedaemonians having gotten the sovereign Empire of Greece, by
their victory against the Athenians, in the end of the Peloponnesian war,
scarce held it by the space of twelve years after. In the next place this we
are to know, that the same Lacedaemonians were spoiled of that their Empire by
the Thebans, in the famous battle fought between them at Leanctra, in the
second year of the 102. Olympiad: whereof this for a certainty follows;
that the Peloponnesian war ended about the time of the 100. Olympiad. For it
is manifest by Xenophon, that the end of it was in an Olympicke year.

This is the reason of all other so sure, undoubted, and strong, in the opinion
of Beroaldus: but in very deed as frivolous, ridiculous, and childish, as ever
any was framed. To make good my saying, let the author himself speak with his
own words: which be these, not far from the beginning of his first book.
(...). The Lacedaemonians (says Polybius) striving many years for the
soueraignetie of Greece, after they had once gotten it, kept it scarcely
twelve years entire without trouble and loss. Indeed if Polybius had said,
that the Lacedaemonians had quite and clean lost their whole dominion, within
twelve years after they had obtained it, as Beroaldus makes him say, the
reason which he uses had been good, to bring the end of the Peloponnesian
war within three years of his reckoning: (so much he is wide after his
wonted manner) for they were wholly spoiled of that cheeftie, by Epaminondas,
general of the Theban army, in the second of the 102. Olympiad. From which
the twelfth year backward, is the third before the 100. Olympiad, and the
second of the 99.

But there is as much difference betwixt the authors word (...), and the
interpretation of Beroaldus: as between breaking a man's head and killing him
out right. It is true, and that which Polybius meant, that the Lacedaemonians,
about twelve years after Lysanders victory against the Athenians at Aegos
Potamoi, whereby they became Lords of Greece, lost much of their dominion by
the valor of Conon an Athenian Captain, who overcame the Lacedaemonians in a
battle by sea, and took fifty of their ships, and 500 of their men, whereby
diverse Cities fell from the Lacedaemonians unto him as Diodorus Siculus
declares in his fourteenth book, yet for all this they stood still, and
recovered much again afterward, til at ye length they were utterly dispossessed
of all by the Thebans, who gave them a deadly blow. Hereby it appears that
it was no part of Polybius his meaning, to make only twelve years from the end
of the Peloponnesian war, to the Lacedaemonians utter overthrow: but to that
conquest of Conon over them by sea fight before spoken of.

And if this be not enough to make that appear sufficiently, Polybius
himself yet once again shall make it manifest, and all gainesayers as dumb
as a fish, which would gather by his testimony, that the field at Leuctra was
fought within 12. years after the Peloponnesian war: for within one leaf
after the former sentence, he declares that the battle at Leuctra was nor
twelve, but 34. years after that other at Aegos Potamoi, whereby they won the
sovereignty of Greece that is to say, 18. to the Frenchmens taking of Rome,
and sixteen more afterward to the fight at Leuctra, and that not obscurely or
in a riddle: but very flatly in plain words, though not understood by the
Bishop of Sipontu^, who for these words of Polybius, (...) that is after the
battle by sea at Aegos Potamoi, translated Post Xerxem a Cymone superatum.
After Xerxes was overcome by Cymon, which was long before the time spoken of by
Polybius, and no part of his meaning at all.

By this one place may be seen what intolerable shifting has been used of
Beroaldus to make his matter good, affirming Authors to say that which they
never meaned, yea which they are as flat and plain in manifest words against,
as may be. But every vain color, and deceivable show is good enough for such
as are disposed to wrangle out new devises by cauelling Sophistry.

As for that which follows out of Xenophon to prove that assertion of
Beroaldus, it has neither head nor foot, and is unworthy of an answer, and
therefore I purpose not to trouble the reader with my confuting such paltrie
stuff, except peradventure some will profess to frame it into an argument of
some show or color at the least, then will I also profess my skill to answer
it, and to turn all against him for the truth; as knowing Xenophon to have
nothing for his conceited opinion, but much against it.

Hitherto I have particularly answered all the Sophistical elcnchs, and
reasonlesse reasons, and vnproouing proofs of Beroaldus out of profane
Histories, one by one, wherewith to the trouble of God his Church, and the
darkening of his word, he has stuffed so many papers, without leaving any
one to my knowledge unanswered, except the last out of Xenophon for the cause
before declared. Touching his scripture proof so often urged against the
ancient Chronologers of the Persian times, it shall by God his assistance
appear hereafter how vain it is. And thus much touching the first part
concerning the chronology of the Persian Monarchy.

Now follows the second, containing 328. years and a half, not much under
or over from the death of the last king of Persia, to our Savior Jesus Christ,
the proof hereof is good: for that Christ our blessed Redeemer was borne in
the third year of the 194. Olympiad, Eusebius, to omit the testimonies of
other Fathers, declares in his Chronicles, at this year and Olympiad writing
thus. Jesus Christ the son of God was borne in Bethleem of Judah, in which
year the salvation of Christians began: which therefore is also counted the
first year of the Christians salvation. Darius the last king of the Persians
was slain, near the beginning of the third year of the 112. Olympiad. The
distance is the number before declared. The same is proved by the
Chronologicall History of the years of Rome; the building whereof by Solinus,
Dionysius, Eratost henes, and other learned Authors, is set in the first year
of the seventh Olympiad, the truth whereof is testified by old marble
monuments dug out of the ground, and as Solinus writes, was confirmed even
by the public acts and registers of Rome: wherein the 207. Olympiad was
recorded to be in the 801. year of Rome, when Pompeius Gallus, and Q. Veranius
were Cousuls: this Beroaldus himself acknowledges, and brings reason for
it. By this account then the third of the 194. Olympiad, wherein the birth of
Christ is put, should be the 751. of Rome, let us now examaine whether this be
so or no.

The year after Caesar's death, wherein Hersius and Pansa were Consuls, and
Augustus began his reign, as Eusebius in his Chronicles, and Joseph Scaliger
in his fifth book De emendatione temporum declare, was the 710. of Rome, so
witnessed, not only by Solinus in his Polyhistor, but even the very ancient
Marble monuments also, wherein was engraven his record, at the 710 year of the
City. In Pansae occisi locum factus est C. Julius. C.F.C.N. Caesar. Qui postea
imperator Caesar Augustus appellatus est. That is, in the place of Pansa being
slain, Caius Julius Caesar, the son of Caius, the grandchild of Caius, was
made Consul, who after was called the Emperor Caesar Augustus. In the 42.
year of Augustus his reign, the first thereof being that 710. of Rome, was
our Savior borne. This we are taught by Eusebius, not only in his
Chronicles, but also very plainly in the second chapter of the first book of
his Ecclesiastical history. It is verified also by Epiphanius, and Onuphrius,
51. Haeresi.
setting the time of Christ his birth, in the thirteenth Consulship of Augustus
with M. Plantius Silanus, which was just the 42. year from the beginning of
that, wherein Hersius and Pansa were Consuls, and Augustus began his reign; as
the Roman histories with great agreement declare, adding then these 42. of
Augustus, to 709. more past before to the building of Rome: we have that which
by examination we sought, that is, the birth of Christ in the 751. year of
Rome, agreeably to the Olympicke reckoning, from which 423. before Darius his
death, being deducted, there remains 328. years from the Persian Monarchy to
Jesus Christ, with some five or six months more, betwixt the summer season
wherein Darius died, and the time of winter wherein Christ was borne.

An other proof we have from learned writers in Clemens Alexandrinus, 1.
Strom. accounting 294. years from the death of Alexander, to the victory of
Augustus Caesar against Antonius; when he slew himself, and Augustus now the
fourth time was Consul: which words by them are there added for distinctions
sake, to make it known what victory they spoke of: For when as now a long
time Augustus and Antonius had together governed the Roman Empire: at the
length falling at variance, they made open war one against another, and
fought between them by sea, that famous battle at Actium a promontorie of
Epirus nere Greece, the second day of September from five of the clock in the
morning to seven at night; wherein Antonius with his glorious wife Cleopatra
Queen of Egypt, was discomfited and fled. This was done in the 722 year of
Rome, and the second of the 187. Olympiad, and the time of Augustus Caesar's
third Consulship with Valerius Messala Coruinus. The next year after, Caesar
now the fourth time being Consul with M. Licinius Crassus, went against
Antonius and Cleopatra into Egypt: where with happy success he won from him a
City of Egypt nere Lybia, called Paraetonium, and again a little after,
overcame him at Pharus, and once again even in that fight, wherein he put
great confidence of his goodly horses he was put to a shameful foil. His
only refuge now left, whereby he hoped to stand, was his navy, which when
Antonius the first day of August betimes in the morning was now preparing to
battle, all fell away from him to Caesar: whereat Antonius conceauing deadly
grief, hasted to his Palace, and a little after seeing Caesar coming flat
against him, and the city troubled, slew himself. Cleopatra also not
obtaining so much favor of Augustus, as she either looked for, or desired;
opened her left arm to the biting of a poysonfull Serpent, and so ended her
life.

Augustus (his enemies now being slain) got Alexandria and the rest of Egypt
with no great ado, and thenceforth had the whole government of all the Roman
Sovereignty, before the end of the same month, which thereof was named
Augustus, being before that time called Sextilis of the number, being the
sixth from March. Augustus Caesar, (says Xiphilinus) called the month Sextilis
by the new name of Augustus, because he was first made Consul, and got many
victories therein: But in Macrobius more plainly, and especially amongst other
causes of that month so to be termed in the honor of Augustus, this is one set
down, that therein Egypt was first subdued to the Romans. These be the
victories then, which those ancient Chronologists in Clemens Alexandrinus, make
the end of 294. years, from the death of Alexander, respecting their beginning
with the month of August, and somewhat before: For Alexander died toward the
end of Iulie, in the very entry of the 114. Olympiad: So that to and fro the
same season of the year, the distance being reckoned, was just so much, that
is to say 294. years, which is likewise verified by an eye witness of those
times, whereof he writes, and flourishing in them, that is, Dionysius
Halicarnassaeus, who in the Preface to his Roman antiquities, tells not by
hearesay, but of knowledge, that he came into Italy when Augustus Caesar had
made an end of civil wars, about the midst of the 187. Olympiad. The time
which he means, was that before declared of Augustus Caesar's conquest over
Antonius in Egypt, in the month of August, not far from the beginning of the
third year of that Olimpiad which he names: being indeed (as he says) near
the midst of that four years Olympic space, unto which accounting from the
first year of the 114. wherein Alexander died, we find that number of the
former Authors in Clemens even 294. years.

The truth hereof is yet further confirmed by Ptolomie, for exact account of
times exceeding skillful, who in the third book of his Almagest, makes the
distance between the death of Alexander and the Monarchy of Augustus 294.
Egyptian years. The account whereof began with the beginning of their first
month called Toth, as Censorinus declares in his book de die natali, and
Joseph Scaliger in diverse places, which at that time fell about the twelfth day
of our November. So long after the summer season wherein Alexander died, the
Egyptians began their account of years after his death. These 294. Egyptian
years from the twelfth of November, expire not in the twelfth of November
again, but in the 29. day of August before, and reach just as far as the
same number of Roman years does, being begun from the 29. day of August before
going. The cause whereof is this, that the Egyptian year is shorter then the
Roman by six hours, or one fourth part of a day, which in so many years
breeds the loss and difference of threescore and thirty days and a half.

So there is no disagreement between the old writers in Clemens reckoning
after the Roman manner, and Dionysius following the Greek account, and
Ptolomie numbering by the usual custom of the Egyptians: except this, that
Ptolomie respected the very end of that war, in the taking of Alexandria and
Egypt in theende of that month after Antonius was slain, the other go
somewhat hier to the beginning of it, wherein Antonius by the falling away of
his navy was quite undone, and not able to stand out any longer. Unto these
294. years between the Monarchies of Alexander and Augustus, six more being
added, which had passed before Alexanders death, to the end of Darius, the
number is made 300. years.

For the truths sake I may not here omit one error of Joseph Scaliger,
notwithstanding the reverence and love which I bear him, in regard of his
fruitful pains employed to the benefit of learning, and advancement of
knowledge, whereby he has well deserved of God his Church; in his fifth book
de emendatione temporu^, speaking of that victory of Augustus Caesar at
Actium, which as (he says) happened in the third Consulship of Augustus Caesar,
with Valerius Messala Coruinus, he affirms that Ptolomie counts unto it
from Nabonasars coronation 718. years fully complete, which comes short of
my reckoning by a year: Ptolomie indeed counts from Nabonasars coronation
to the death of Alexander 424. years, and thence to Augustus his Monarchy
294, which in all make 718. yet not naming the conquest at Actium for the end
of those years; for that was obtained in September, as Dio testifies, beyond
the compass of Ptolomies precise reckoning, by four or five days in regard
of the month. But to let that pass, it is plain even by his own testimony
a little before in the same book, in the chapter where he treats of the
first Thoth of the years of Alexanders death, that he was deceived here in
his reckoning. His words there be these, Alexander decessit anno 424. diebus
aestiuis. Thoth vero sequens est initium annoru^ a morte eius Nouemb. 12. feria
prima, anno periodi Iulianae 4389. anno primo Olymp. 114. that is, Alexander
departed in the 424. year, meaning of Nabonasar, in the summer time. But the
Thoth following, is the beginning of the years from his death, in the twelft
of November, the first day of the week, in the 4389. year of the Julian
period, in the first year of the 114. Olympiad. Let any now make the reckoning
of 294. Egyptian years, from the twelft of November, in the first year of the
114. Olympiad, and he shall stay and make his rest toward the end of August,
in the third year of the 187. Olympiad: which was the year of Augustus
Caesar's fourth Consulship, wherein he got the sole Empire of Rome into his
hands, by the death of Antonius, as before is showed, and not of his third
Consulship wherein he got the victory against Antonius at Actium, as Scaliger
would have it. Ptolomie therefore counts from Alexanders death, not to the
victory at Actium, as Scaliger says, but to Augustus his Monarchy, or to use
Ptolomies own word, (...), that is, his kingdom; which he had not entire till
such time as Antonius was dispossessed of all.

Likewise whereas Scaliger says, that the Egyptian navy was overcome at
Actium by Augustus, in the time of his third Consulship with Coruinus, and that
in the sixteenth Julian year: it cannot possibly be so, because the sixteenth
Julian year began together with the fourth Consulship of Augustus. The first
Julian year was the very next before Caesar's death, beginning at January, in
the 708. of Rome, and the third year of the 183. Olympiad, as Censorinus
teaches. Four Olympiads, that is, sixteen years thence continued, bring us
to the third of the 187. Olympiad: wherein Augustus was Consul the fourth
time, and his fellow Consul with him was Licinius Crassus, so as no part of it
could fall to that battle at Actium, except we will make it twice fought, once
in the third Consulship of Augustus, and again in his fourth the year after.

The ground of this error of Scaliger, was misunderstanding of Censorinus, as
may be evidently seen in his third book, in the chapter of the Egyptian
Actiac year, where his words are these: Censorinus ait annum Augustorum
Actiacum 267. esse 1014. Iphiti and 986. Nabonosari: that is, Censorinus says,
that the 267 Actiac year of the Augusts, was the 1014. of Iphitus, and the
986. of Nabonasar. Censorinus neither said it nor thought it: he makes no
mention of any Actiac year at all, but only affirms that the 986. of
Nabonasar was the 265. of the years called Augusts: the beginning whereof was
taken from Augustus his seventh, and Vipsanius his third Consulship accounted
of the Egyptians the 267. Quia biennio ante in potestatem ditionemque populi
Romani venerunt, because they became subject to the power and dominion of the
people of Rome two years before (says Censorinus) speaking not of the
victory at Actium, but of the subduing of Egypt: which after the death of
Antonius, was conquered to the Roman Empire, and made a province a year after
that overthrow of Antonius at Actium.

Therefore I see no cause why my former reckoning ought not to be received as
undoubtedly true (whatsoever Scaliger may seem to have to the contrary or any
other:) that is to say, that from the death of Alexander to the Monarchy of
Augustus, in the year of his fourth Consulship, were 294. years: and from the
slaughter of the last king of Persia, in the third year of the 112. Olympiad,
which made Alexander an undoubted Monarch, to the third of the 187, wherein the
death of Antonius did the like to Augustus, were 300. years.

Now that Jesus Christ was borne in the 28. year of the Monarchy of Augustus,
wherein after Antonius his death, he ruled alone without the part taking or
fellowship of any other with him therein, we have the testimony of Clemens
Alexandrinus. 1. Stromat. Eusebius in the first book of his Ecclesiastical
History, in plain words confirming it., In the 42. year says he, of the
reign of Augustus, and the 28. after the subdewing of Egypt, and the death of
Antonius and Cleopatra, in whom the reign of the Egyptian kings, called
Ptolomies was extinct; our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ was borne in Bethleem
of Judah, Cyreneus being governor of Syria, and so forth.

The 42. year of Augustus his parted reign was all one with the 28. of his
lone reign. That began in the 710. of Rome: these 14. years after in the 724.
of Rome; being the fifteenth of Augustus from his first beginning. For though
the civil wars were ended by the death of Antonius, and the subdewing of
Egypt, in the fourteenth year of Augustus, in the month of August: yet the
years of his Monarchy after the manner of the Romans, began to be reckoned
from January following, in the beginning of the next year, being his
fifteenth. (...). Augustus the king of the Romans attayning the fifteenth
year of his reign, got Egypt and the rest of the world, says Eusebius in his
eight book, de demonstratione Euangelij. And in his Chronicles likewise he
begins the Monarchy of Augustus from the same his fifteenth year. For
fourteen years then past, being added to 28. following, the number is 42.

The same beginning of Augustus his Monarchy from that year, is confirmed by
Paulus Orosius in the sixth book of his History against the Gentiles. Where
having declared in the nineteenth chapter of that book, that Antonius and
Cleopatra now forsaken of their navy, which in the beginning of August, had
turned to Caesar, for grief slew themselves: And that Caesar after passed from
thence into Syria by land, and then into Asia, and at length by Greece into
Italy: in the next chapter immediately he adds that Augustus Caesar in the
year following, wherein himself now the fifth time and L. Apuleius were
Consuls, the sixth day of January, entered into Rome with three triumphs.
Atque ex eo die summa rerum ac potestatem penes vnum caepit esse and mansit,
quod Graeci Monarchiam vocant. And from that day says Orosius, the
sovereignty and chief power called of the Grecians, a Monarchy begun to be
in one man's hand, and so remained.

Joseph Scaliger I can but marvel at, in his sixth book de emendatione
temporum, affirming that Christ our Lord was borne in the seven and twenty
year after the victory at Actium, which is short of the time by me set for
his birth in the 42. of Augustus, by two years and more. For the year of
Christ's birth was the 30. at the least after the Actiac victory 29. full
years being past and almost four months.

Now touching the month and day of our Saviors birth: I see no cause why we
ought to refer that constant opinion of ancient Fathers, that it was the 25.
of December, received of Augustine, Orosius, Chrysostom, and other, from them
continued now by many ages to this day, except direct proof can be brought
to the contrary. Which Beroaldus after his wonted manner goes about, in the
second chapter of his fourth book of Chronicles affirming in plain words,
that our Lord Jesus Christ was borne in the midst of the month September,
when the day and night is of one length.

His reason to prove that assertion of his, is in this manner. Christ preached
three years and a half before his death, this is proved by the words of
Daniel in his ninth chapter. He shall confirm ye covenant to many one week,
and half that week shall abolish sacrifice and offering: which says
Beroaldus, is to be understood of Christ, preaching three years and a half
from his baptizing to his death. Now that his baptism begun together with the
30. year of his age, is testified by Luke in his third chapter the 23. verse
where Christ is said to have entered the 30. year of his age when he was
baptized. The end of the last half year wherein Christ dyed, being the 14.
day of the Jews Nisan and of our March: Leave as well the beginning thereof, as
consequently the birth of Christ, to the 14. of September.

In deed if those his interpretations of Daniel and Luke in these places, were
both of them certain and clear, as he says they are, his proof were good:
but if either of them fail, his reason is not worth a straw. And so far
they are from being both certain, that neither of them both is sure: Scaliger
makes it an undoubted thing, that they are otherwise to be understood,
referring the words of Daniell to the beseging and war against Jerusalem by
the Romans, and making the time of Christ's preaching, not three years and a
half but full four. Beda and Ignatius made it only three years after his
baptism. And Apollinaris with diverse other either on or two at the most. And
as for the words of Luke, a precise and exact beginning of the thirty year
of Christ's age can not be gathered of them. Seeing he uses the word (...),
importing a doubtful and imperfect number, whereunto somewhat, more or less,
may be added or taken away, and signifying that Christ begun to be about
thirty years of age at the time of his baptism: As in our English bible it
is well translated, and so understood by Epiphanius, and Justinius Martyr, and
Augustine, with some other of the ancient fathers.

Wherefore this his best reason is too weak to pull back the received time of
Christ's birth, from the 25. day of December, to the 14. of September.

An other argument of his is taken from the custom of the Greek and the
Egyptian churches, beginning their year from September. Whence also the
indictions have their beginning. This (says Beroaldus) they did because they
knew that Christ was borne in the midst of September. And how proves he
that? Beroaldus for sooth says so. The man's bare yea was enough belike to
persuade the simple and unskillful. Other reason he brings none at all,
either from authority or otherwise. Neither in deed do I see how he could
possibly bring any. For it is a thing held without controversy, that the cause
of the years beginning in the midst of September, was the memory not of
Christ's birth, but of the glorious conquest of Alexander against Darius at
Gaugamela, retained long after even in the Greek church. Which Scaliger out of
Epiphanius declares in his second book, De emendatione temporum; the chapter
of Calippus his period beginning in Autumn; and also in his fifth book, the
chapter of the council of Nice which by Socrates was set down to have been in
the 636. year of Alexander.

But what shall we need go further then to Beroaldus himself for confirmation
hereof, who even in the very next Chapter before going, had proved by the
Greek Canons, and the first Tome of councels printed at Paris, that the Greek
church counted their years from Alexander. If the Greek church counted from
Alexander, and that account of Alexanders years begun in the Equinoctiu^ of
Autumn, as Scaliger teaches, about mid September; how can the cause and
custom of this reckoning be referred to Christ's nativity? as for the
Egyptians, the first month of their year called Thoth, before they were
subdewed by Augustus, went through all the months and seasons of the year some
times in February, after in January, and so in order to February again. But
after Antonius and Cleopatra were overthrown, and Egypt made one of the Roman
provinces, won by Augustus Caesar in the month of August; the first of their
Thoth was not the 14. of September, nor any part of it, but the 29. of August;
and that in memory not of Christ his birth being yet unborn, but of Augustus
his victory therein against the Egyptians. Whereof also as before has been
showed the month Sextilis, took a new name to be called August.

Now follow the indictions, which begun about the 24. of September, and
therefore by Beroaldus made likewise an argument of Christ's birth in that
month. Constantine after the death of his father Constantius, who died here in
England at York, obtained the empire of Rome in the year of Christ 312. The
time of his coronation being the 24. of September, was celebrated with much
joy, and great solemnity, and many sportes and games against that time
proclaimed: thereof called an Indiction, that is, a proclaming. And from that
day in memory thereof, a new account of years begun by that term of
Indiction. This account the church also observed. Yet beginning it later with
the month January following, to make it agree with the years of Christ.
Therefore this argument of all other is most forcible against that, which
Beroaldus being blinded with a new fangled conceit brought it for; as every
one may see which will open but indifferent eyes. For the 24. of September, was
11. or 12. days after the aequinoctium: wherein he sets Christ his birth;
and the cause thereof Constantine crowned, not Christ borne. And because the
time of Christ his birth was in those days celebrated and kept in winter and
the beginning of the yerae of Christ in the first of January, as now at this
day it is with us: the holy and zealous Christian fathers of that age in honor
of Christ, changed the time of that Indiction from the 24. of September to the
first of January. Thus it pleases the God of truth to blind the adversaries
thereof, that they may fight against themselves which strive against it.

His last proof is fetched from the course of Abiah, whereof Zachary John
Baptists father was, as the Evangelist Luke testifies in the fifth verse of his
first chapter. There were 24. courses of the Priests, serving in the Temple at
Jerusalem, two families or courses appointed for every month, in the first of
Chronicles the 24 Chapter, (says Beroaldus) the first of these courses began
most like in March, as other holy things pertaining to the temple did: so the
course of Abiah being the eight, falls to June. In that month unto Zachary
serving in the Temple, was foretold the birth of John Baptist by an Angel.
About that time then his wife Elizabeth conceived, and six months after the
blessed virgin Marie, as is gathered by the 26. and the 36. verses of the first
chapter of Luke: So the time of Christ conceived falls to December, and the
ninth month after for his birth is September. All these linkes hang together
but upon bare likelyhoods. One that the Priests courses of service began in
March: the other, that two courses were appointed for every month, neither of
them both is certain, Beroaldus himself in that chapter witness. Zacharias
quidem ad Abiae familiam pertinebat, cui forte octauo loco ministerium obeundum
erat in sacrario: Sed quando aut quamdiu non intelligitur a nobis. Zacharias
(says he) pertained to the course of Abiah, to whose lotte the eight course of
serving in the Temple fell, but when and how long we know not. That which he
says of the uncertainty of these things is most true: for it may be that
the courses began presently at that time, wherein they were first appointed,
which is unknown to us. And if they did begin at the first with March, yet the
next beginning must needs be changed if the times of their service were
equal, because twelve months of the sun are not even all alike in days. It
may be also, that every course had his wecke of service, which in my judgment
is most like to be true.

But to take all doubt away concerning the beginning of the first course of
Iehoiarib, and his posterity: we have a plain testimony in the Hebrews
ancient Chronicle called (...) seder olam rabba, in the last chapter thereof,
against that coniecturall likelihood of Beroaldus, for the beginning of those
courses in March, in this manner: (...): That is, when the first temple was
destroyed. That day was the next after the sabbath, and the next after the
weeks end, and the course of Iehoiarib, and the ninth of Ab, and in like
manner was it at the destruction of the second temple. If Iehoiaribs course as
there it is witnessed, being the first of all the 24. fell about the ninth day
of the Jews fifth month called Ab, which in some part is answerable to our
Iulie: then by no means could the eight course of Abiah, in that order fall to
June, being the fourth month.

Thus all Beroaldus his coursing of Abiahs course, yields him no more help,
nor makes any whit more for his purpose, then the rest of his wise reasons, as
children say, and therefore by them no let, but that the received opinion of
ancient fathers so long continued in God his Church, touching the birth of
Christ in the 25. day of December, may be still retained for any thing that
yet is proved to the contrary.

Wherefore I conclude that our glorious Lord and Redeemer Christ Jesus, blessed
be his name and his memory for ever, was borne in the third year of the 194.
Olympiad, and the 751. of Rome, now within six days or there about expired,
wherein Augustus Caesar the 13 time was Consul, and M. Plautius Silanus with
him, 328. years and almost a half after the Persian Monarchy, and so end the
second part of the compass and bounds which have bin set for Daniels weeks.

The third and last part thereof only remains from Christ his birth, to the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans: which some of the ancient Fathers, 1.
Stroae.
as Clemens Alexandrinus, and Eusebius in his Chronicles, and P. Eberus in his
history of the Jews refer to the 73. year of Christ, and the third year
of the 212. Olympiad, going further than the true acount permits almost by
two years: As Functius in the fifth book of his commentaries upon his
chronology declares, and Joseph Scaliger in his fifth book de emendatione
temporum, where they show the cause of this error, to be the confused
reigning of diverse Emperors together at one time, Galba with Nero, Otho with
Galba, Vitellius with Otho, and Vespasian with Vitellius: So that whereas
Vitellius is said to have reigned in all seven months, two of them and more
were spent in the Sovereignty of Otho, and four at the least in the reign of
Vespasian. Hence came that ouershooting by sundring those times, which were
confounded in themselves, and so reckoning the same years twice or thrice over
in the several reigns of diverse Emperors.

Functius himself came somewhat nearer the mark, in placing that overthrow of
the holy City, in the second year of that Olympiad, which is true: yet making
it the 72. of Christ's birth; he therein erreth, and is at strife with himself;
for how can this possibly stand, that the second summer of the 212. Olympiad,
should be the 72. year from the third winter of the 194 Olympiad wherein Christ
was borne.

H. Bunting in his Chronology did hit the mark right, affirming that
Jerusalem was destroyed in the 71. year of Christ, the 822. of Rome, Vespasian
the second time, and his Son Titus being Consul the second year of the 212
Olympiad. The day wherein the Temple was set on fire by Josephus is observed
even the 10. of August. Conflagrante nouissimo templo numerabantur a nauitate
Christi 70. anni cum diebus 221. From the nativity of Christ to the burning of
the last Temple were 70. years and 200. and one and twenty days, says
Laurence Codoman in his Chronicles of holy scripture, which is most certainly
true, and confirmed of him again in the fourth book of his chronology toward
the end of the 29. chapter: where notwithstanding he also has his error, in
numbering 105. years to that time from the beginning of Herod's reign at his
taking of Jerusalem, being at the least 106. full years, with three weeks
over: For Jerusalem was taken of him about the beginning of the fourth year of
the 185. Olympiad. Wherein M. Agrippa and Canidius Gallus were Consuls, the
seventeenth day of the Jews fourth month called Tamuz, answering in part to
our June and partly to Iulie, as appears by Josephus in the end of his
fourteenth book of antiquities, compared with Ben Gorion his fourth book the
23. chapter. The Temple by Titus his soldiers was fired the ninth day of their
next month called Ab, as we read in the end of his seder olam rabba, and the
eight day of the next month following, the City it self was set on fire by
them. Unto which time Josephus from Herod's beginning before mentioned, counts
107. years in his 20. book of Antiquities the eight chapter, being no more
but 106. years with seven weeks more: Therefore according to the usual
custom of Historiographers, he reckons a part of the last year for the
whole, and his meaning is, that the burning of the city happened in the 107.
year after Herod's beginning to reign, and that the distance betwixt the one
and the other was 107. years running on, so as the last of them was not yet
complete.

By that which hitherto has been proved, it appears that from the
beginning of the Persian Monarchy, and the first year of Cyrus, to the end of
the Jews common wealth in the second of Vespasian; were 628. years, and so
much time more as had past, partly before the second year of the 55. Olympiad
to the beginning of Cyrus, and partly after the end of the first year of the
112. Olympiad, to the eight of September following: wherein the holy City of
God (Jerusalem) was set on fire, and that if account be made from the entry of
that 55. Olympiad to the time wherein the City was burned, the whole space is
even 629. years with some two months more or there abouts.

Thus I end my reckoning of the times within the compass, whereof Daniels
weeks have run out their course, which is the first help requisite to the
understanding of Daniels meaning.

The second now follows, that is a true interpretation of his words: for
though the fulfilling of those weeks, is contained within the reach of those
629. years and odd months before spoken of: yet in what time thereof they
began or ended, that is a controversy, to the discussing whereof this second
help may happily bring some light.

THE NINTH CHAPTER OF DANIEL, THE 24. verse.
Verse. 24. Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy
City, to sinish wickedness and to end sin, and to make reconciliation for
iniquity, and to bring righteousness everlasting, and to seal up vision and
Prophet, and to annoint the holy of holies.

Verse. 25. Know then and understand from the going forth of the word, to
build again Jerusalem unto Messiah the Governor, shall be seven weeks: and
threescore and two weeks it shall be builded again street and wall, and in
troublesome times.

Verse. 26. And after those threescore and two weeks, shall Messiah be cut off
and he shall have no being: and the city and sanctuary shall the people of the
come governor destroy, and the end thereof shall be with a flood, and unto the
end of the war shall be a precise judgment of desolations.

Verse. 27. And he shall make a sure covenant to many one week, and half that
week he shall cause sacrifice, and offering to cease, and for the
ouerspreading of abominations shall be desolation, which to utter and precise
destruction shall be powered upon the desolate.

FOr the plainer understanding and proof of this interpretation I have thought
good to set down cerraine annotations thereon where need shall require.

In the 24. verse. weeks.] The Hebrew word (...) signifies a week, or as we
also term it a sennet or seuenet, which better fitteth the Hebrew, having that
force, as likewise (...) in Greek, and septimana in Latin, all so called of
the number of seven: but it is to be observed that the Hebrew word here used,
signifies sometime the space of seven days; as here in this prophecy the
tenth chapter, and second verse: where Daniel says that he mourned (...)
three weeks or seuenets of days, and in the sixteenth of Deuteronomie the
ninth verse: where commandment is given from Easter to Whitsontide to number
seven weeks or seuenets, (...): And sometime it contains seven years, as in
the 29. chapter the 27 verse of Genesis, (...) fulfill her seuenet, and then
she also shall be given unto thee for the service which thou shall serve me
yet seven years more. The Greek word (...) in approved Authors is in like
manner used not only for seven days, but also even for seven years space,
and namely in the end of the seventh book of Aristotle's politikes, where
mention is made of such as divided ages by seuenets of years. (...). M. Varro
also in his first book of Images writing, se iam duodecimam annorum hebdomadam
ingressum esse. That he had now entered into the 12. sennet of years,
expresses it more plainly and fully. In this signification I take the word
in this place, understanding by 70. seuenets 490. years, having proof thereof
from holy Scripture and profane writer. As for those which stretch the word
further to a seuenet of tents or Iubilies or hundreds of years as some have
done: their opinion has neither warrant from God his word nor any likelihood
of truth.

Are determined,] The word (...) signifies properly to cut, and by a metaphor
from thence borrowed to determine as hereafter I shall have occasion to declare.

The Reader is here to know that in the Hebrew we have word for word. Seventy
weeks is determened: A verb singular being joined with a nowne plural, by an
usual custom of the holy tongue, when a thing spoken in general is to be
applied to every part. As in the twelft chapter of Job the seventh verse: Ask
the beasts and it shall teach thee, that is, every one of them shall teach
thee. And in the Proverbs of Solomon the third chapter, the 18. verse, in
their original tongue. They which hold wisdom, is made blessed, that is to
say, they are made blessed every one of them. So here the same kind of speech
being used, 70. weeks is determined, imports thus much, that every one of
those weeks particularly from the first to the last shall be precisely and
absolutely complet. Which force contained in these words I might not omit.
In English thus it may be expressed. Seventy weeks every one are determined
upon thy people.

Thy people] that is thy countrymen the Jews for this is a common speech
often used in the hebrew tongue, to call that people mine of which I am one. As
in the first chapter of Ruth the 15. verse. the Moabites are called the people
of Orpha a woman of Moab: Thy sister is gone back to her people. So in the 10.
verse of that chapter the Jews are called Naomies people. We will return to
thy people with thee. And the same Ieremies people in the lamentations the 3.
chapter and 14. verse where he complains, that he was a laughing stock to
all his people. Here then in like manner by Daniels people are understood the
Jews whereof he was.

And upon thy holy citie] The holy city is Jerusalem mentioned in the next
verse so called, because it was the place consecrate to the holy worship of
God. Esa the 52. chapter and 1. verse put on thy bewtifull garments O
Jerusalem holy city. And in the 4. chapter of Math. the 5. verse, the devil
carried him to the holy city, and set him upon a pinnacle of the temple. But why
is it called Daniels city? was it because God had forsaken it, as though it
were now to be called any others rather then Gods city? So the learned father
Hierom thought, but herein deceived. For being a holy city it must needs be
also Gods city. It was rather called Daniels city, either of his birth or
bringing up therein. As in the ninth chapter of Matthew Capernaum is called
Christ's city because he dwelt in it. And Rama in the first book of Samuel the
first chapter is called the city of Elcana and the city of Samuel in the 28.
chap. of that book. And Rogelim the city of Barzillai, in the second of
Samuel the 19. the 38. verse. Let me die (says he) in my own city.

By this which I have said of Daniels people and Daniels city, it may appear
how wide Hierom shot from the mark, with some other of the ancient fathers
interpreting it as though God had forsaken both: and given them over as well
the Jews as Jerusalem.

To end sinne] (...) being as the Masorites term it the (...), keri, of these
words that is the true reading thereof; signifies properly to consume finish
or end sin. And therefore Hieroms interpretation, Vt finem accipiat peccatum
that sin may have an end, is good. Neither do I se how that other of sealing
up sins can here be warranted.

This abolishing and finishing of sin, was wrought and fulfilled by our
blessed Lord and redeemer Christ Jesus. He was that unspotted lamb of God
which took away the sins of the world, the first of John, the 29. verse. In
the end of the world he once appeared to put away sin, by the sacrifice of
himself. He was once offered to take away the sins of many. Heb. 9.26.28.
He washed us from our sins in his blood. In the first of the Revelation the
3. ver. He delivered us from sin. By him the body of sin is destroyed, we
are dead to sin, that it should not have dominion over us. See the 6.
chapter. to the Romans 6.11.14.18. verses. He condemned sin in the flesh.
Whosoever is borne of God can not sin. Christ therefore fulfilled this here
spoken of by Daniell, that is to say, Rom 8.3. 1. Ioh. 3.9.
made an end of sin two ways, first in justifying us from sins past, and
quitting us from the guilte thereof. And secondly in sanctifying us from sins
to come, so as though we afterward sin: yet we cannot be servants unto it.
Neither of them was or could be performed by the law. For the law causes
wrath. Romans 4. Heb. 10.1. Heb. 10.4.11.
It could never sanctify the comers thereunto. The sacrifices thereof could
not take away sins. Jesus Christ only was the fulfiller hereof according to
the saying of Ezechiel the prophet in his 36. chapter the 35. verse: I will
power clean water upon you and cleanse you from all your filthynesse. A new
heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: and J will
take away the stony heart out of your body, and I will give you a heart of
flesh. And I will cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my
judgments and do them

And to make reconciliation for iniquitie] by appeasing and pacifiyng God his
wrath against sin. Which was the effect of Christ his death offering up him
self an acceptable sacrifice to God for the sins of the world. ^om. 5.10.
^om. 5.1.
By his death we are reconciled to God. We have peace toward God through
Christ.

To bring everlasting righteousness.] The declaration hereof we have in the
epistle to the Hebrews from the 12. ver. of the 10. chap. unto the end of the
18. verse of the same. There we are taught that by the sacrifice of Christ
Jesus once offered, remission of sins is obtained for ever: so as after there
can be no other propitiatory oblation for them.

Here therefore the everlasting righteousness of Christ, is opposed to the
righteousness of the law, to the obtaining whereof daily sacrifices were
offered. But Christ having once made reconciliation for our sins by his
blood: thereby purchased unto us everlasting salvation and righteousness, which
in the 9. chapter and 12. ver. of that Epistle is called everlasting
redemption. The priesthood of christ is everlasting. Heb. 7.24. Heb. 9.11. Heb.
8.2. and 9.11.12.
And of good things to come everlasting. His sacrifice once for all
everlasting. And the sanctuary into which he entered everlasting. And lastly
the salvation, redemption, and righteousness, which he purchased for us is
everlasting. So there is great difference between the Leuiticall priests and
Christ, and between their oblations and his sacrifice. Of this effect in
bringing righteousness, he has this name to be called the Lord our
righteousness in the 23. chapter of the prophet Jeremy: the reason whereof is
given by the blessed Apostle in the first epistle to the Corinthians the first
chapter and 30. verse; where he says, that Christ was made righteousness
unto us.

To seal up vision and prophet.] A testament or covenant in writing is never
sure before the seal be set unto it. That makes all good. That confirms and
gives strength. And therefore by a metaphor or borrowed speech; to seal up
vision and prophecy, is as much as to confirm the same. So the word is taken
in the 3. chapter of John's gospel and 33. verse. He which receaueth his
testimony has sealed up, that God is true, that is confirmed.

Whatsoever in the old testament had been foretold and promised by the holy
prophets of God concerning Christ his birth, his redeeming the elect from
thrall, and saving from sin, his forerunner, his preaching, his miracles, his
humility, betraying for money, death, resurrection, ascnceon, and glorious
kingdom, were all most certainly performed by him in their dew time. The
verifying and fulfilling whereof, was as it were a seal for sure confirmation
of the undoubted truth thereof. And for this cause the time of vision and
prophet, is limited to the coming of Christ and the clear preaching of the
gospel in his kingdom, whereby he was to verify, confirm and fulfill the
same. This we are taught in the beginning of the epistle to the Hebrews in
these words. God in times past spoke often and many ways to the fatheres by
the prophets. But in these last days he has spoken to us by his son.

And to anoint] This interpretation of the word (...) I dare commend upon my
knowledge to the Church of GOD for good: if ever any has been good. It is sure
as heaven and earth, no syllable amiss. Which I speak to this end that no
man doubt to receive and hold fast this for the undoubted truth of God in this
place concerning the anointing of Christ being an excellent point of
divinity, whereof he even took his name to be called Messiah or Christ that
is anointed. Ioh. 1.42.


For the better understanding whereof we are to know that in time of the law
the holy priests, prophets and kings, when they first took their offices
upon them, were anointed with holy oil. And this was the ceremony of
consecrating them to the service of God in those callinges. For the anointing
of priests we have the commandment of God in the last chapter of Exodus the
13. verse where speaking to Moses of Aaron. Thou shall (says God) anoint him
and sanctify him, that he may minister unto me in the priests office. For
the prophets anointing; we have the example of Elizeus anointed by Elias to
be a prophet his stead. And for kings many testimonies. in Whereof I will
bring only 2. one of David anointed king over the house of Judah. The other of
Solomon anointed king by Tsadoc the priest and Nathan the prophet. 2. Sam.
2.4.


Now Christ was the true high priest enduring for ever, 1. Reg. 45.
much more excellent then the priests of the law. Heb. 7.24. and 8.6. Act. 3.22.
He was also that excellent prophet commanded to be heard in all things. Lastly
he is the eternal king to whom God gave the throne of his father David, Luke
1.32.33.
to reign over the house of Jacob for ever, of whose kingdom shall be no end.

Christ then having in himself alone al those dignities of King, Priest, and
Prophet at once together, to the which other were anointed, severally,
someone, some another, was therefore by a certain kind of excellency called
(...), that is the anointed. The Law, Priests, Prophets, and Kings were
anointed with material holy oil, but Christ with the spiritual oil of the
holy Ghost, which in the 45. Psalm, is called the oil of gladness. God has
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows: that is with the
holy Ghost: which therefore in the first Epistle of John the second chapter,
the 20. and 22. verses, is called an ointment, by a translation taken from the
annoyntings of the Law. Ye have an ointment from him that is holy.

This spiritual annoynting of Christ is spoken of by Esaias in his 61. chapter
the first verse. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, therefore has he
anointed me: He has sent me to preach good tydinges unto the poor. Clemens
Alexandrinus hereof touching Christ his annoynting has this saying. 1. Strom.
Our Lord Christ the holy of holies, who came and fulfilled Vision and Prophet,
was anointed in the flesh with the spirit of his father. Therefore those
material annoyntings of the law, were nothing else but tipes and figures of
this spiritual annoynting of Christ.

The holy of holies]. That is, the most holy; Christ was endued with the
holy Ghost without measure. John. 3.34. Even a very fountain of holiness,
of whose fullness we are all made holy. Christ Jesus says Paul, is made unto
us sanctification. Hereof in the first of Luke, 1. Cor. 1 30.
the 35. verse, he is called (...): that holy one. Chapter 7. v. 26.
He is in the Epistle to the Hebrews said to be an high Priest, holy,
innocent, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens,
and therefore not without cause in this place called most holy. The Popes
holiness strives with Christ about this tittle, at least to be equal with him,
challenging to himself the name not to be called holy, which were enough for
a spotted man; but that is not enough for him, he will be as good as Christ,
even most holy, yea holiness it self, or nothing at all. Well if he can say
so much for himself to have that title, as Gods word says for Christ, let
him take it: otherwise let him see how he can avoid Antichristian pride.

Thus the generality of Daniels weeks is declared, so plainly pointing out
the coming of Christ and the effects thereof, as though he had read the
writings of the Evangelists and the Apostles, or had been an eye-witnes in the
time of Christ to the verifying and fulfilling of these things.

Now follows a more special and particular handling of them, divided into
three parts in the other three verses.

The 25. verse. The going forth of the word.] Moses in Deuteronomy. the fourth
chapter, and thirteenth verse says, That God declared unto Israel his
covenant, even the ten words, and wrote them upon two Tables of stone, meaning
thereby the ten commandments. Assuerus commanded his servants to bring Vashti
the Queen before him, Hest. 1.12.
but she would not come at his word, that is at his commandment. When the same
king had decreed that all the Jews in his dominion should be destroyed: For
publishing thereof the Posts went out in all haste by the kings word, which
was nothing else but his commandment: So here by the word going forth, is to be
understood a commandment which then is said to go forth when it is first
sent to be published and proclaimed, as in the first of Ester the ninteenth
verse. If it seem good to the king, let a royal word go forth from him: that
is; Let a commandment by the kings authority be published. In the second
chapter of this Prophet the twelfth verse. The decree went forth, and the wise
men were slain. In the second book of the Machabies the sixth chapter, and
eight verse. Thorough the counsel of Ptolomie there went out a commandment
into the next cities of the heathen against the Jews, to put such to death as
were not conformable to the manners of the Gentiles. In the second chapter of
Luke the first verse, there went out a decree from Augustus Caesar, that all
the world should be taxed.

To build again Jerusalem.] In Hebrew to return and build Jerusalem. Of this
a little after toward the end of this verse.

Unto Messiah the Governor.] The word Messiah in Hebrew (...) is as much as
(...) in Greek, and with us anointed: So these three in signification are all
one, Messiah, Christ, Anointed. The Hebrew word in the holy Scripture,
attributed sometime specially to the person of Christ Jesus our Lord, as in the
first of John the 42. ver. we have found the Messiah. And in the second Psalm
the second verse. The Rulers took counsel together against the Lord, (...)
and against his Messiah or Christ, that is, against Christ Jesus our Lord, as
the place is expounded in the fourth chapter of the Acts of the Apostles.
Sometime more generally to any anointed Priest, as in the fourth chapter and
fifth verse of Leuit. (...) that is, the Anointed Priest shall take off the
bullockes blood, or to the anointed Prophets. Touch not mine anointed and do
my Prophets no harm. Psa. 105.15
Or lastly to the kings and chief governors of the people. Thus Saul in the
first of Samuel the 24. chapter and 7. verse, and David in the 2. of Samuel the
19. chapter and 22. verse, is called the anointed of the Lord.

The word (...) signifying any Ruler or Governor, is used sometime of kings,
as in the first of Samuel the tenth chapter, the second verse, where Saul is
called the Governor of the Lords inheritance, and in the second of Samuel the
seventh chapter, David is called the ruler of Gods people, and Ezechias in the
second book of the Kings the 20. chapter and fifth verse. In all those places
this word (...) is used: Sometime it is given to other inferior rulers, or
governors: as in the 2. of Chronicles the 11. chapter and 11. verse. He
repaired the strong holds, and set (...) that is Governors therein, and in the
19. chapter and last verse of the same book. (...)
Zebadias the Ruler of the house of Judah, shall be for the kings affairs, and
in the 11. chapter of this Prophet Daniel the 22 verse, the Prince and chief
governor of the Jews is called (...). So there is no let by the force and
signification of the word, but that it may be well referred to the chief
ruler of the Jews common wealth in Jerusalem after the building thereof.

Seven weeks:] It is great pity that this message of the holy Angel
containing a most excellent Prophecy from Gods own mouth, should be so
perverted and depraved, as it has been by those which pick out this sense,
as though he said, there should be from the outgoing of the commandment to
Messiah 69. weeks in all. A strange interpretation and such (I dare boldly say
it) as by the Hebrew text can never be vpheld. That interpretation which I
have made leaving a stay or rest at seven weeks: as the half sentence being
past, and continuing the 62. weeks with the other part of the sentence
following to the end of the verse, and not referred to the former, as part of
one whole number with them, by the Hebrew text is most sure and undoubted and
justifiable against all the world: containing that which God himself in his
own words has uttered, neither more nor less, but the very same which Gods
Angel delivered to Daniel by word, and Daniel to the Church by writing in the
holy tongue, and this once again it is; From the going forth of the word, to
build again Jerusalem unto Messiah the governor shall be seven weeks, and
threescore and two weeks it shall be builded again street and wall, and in
trouble some times. Mark the words, consider their order, and weigh well the
rests. As I find in the Hebrew so I have Englished, that is, the truth of
interpretation, be it understood as it may.

It shall be builded again.] Word for word in the original tongue is written.
It shall return and be builded: which learned Hierome very learned lie
translated thus. Iterum aedificabitur. It shall be builded again. This is a
familiar phrase in the Hebrew peoples mouth: For proof whereof take a view of
these places.

First of that in Malachie the first chapter and fourth verse. We will return
and build the desolate places. It is as much to say, as we will build them
again, also in the 26. chapter 18. verse of Genesis. Isaak returned and dug
the wels of water: which being dug in the days of Abraham, the Philistians
after his death had stopped.

The meaning is therefore that he dug them again, rightly understood by the
Greek interpreters called the 70. thus tra^slating it. (...) He dug again,
Hierome agreeing thereunto, rursus fodit. In the sixth chapter of Zachary the
first verse. I returned and lifted up my eyes and saw, which Tremellius very
well translated thus. Rursus attollens occulos meos vidi. Again lifting up my
eyes I saw: That therefore which some interpreters here have imagined,
concerning the return of the people from the captivity of Babylon, is to use
the old proverb nothing to Bacchus; an interpretation far from Daniels
purpose.

The like reason is of that before written in this verse to return and build
Jerusalem, being in sense the same which there I have translated, and Hierome
long before me: to build again Jerusalem. Moreover it shall be builded,
imports as much as if he had said it shall continue builded, or being once
builded it shall so remain by the space of 434. years before the desolation
thereof come, as Saadias and Gershoms son expounded the meaning of the word.

The 26. verse, Shall Messiah be cut off.] The signification of the word (...)
is much more large then to slay, as by the most part of interpreters it is here
taken, and reaches to any cutting off, either by death, or banishment, or any
other kind of abolishing, whereby a thing before in use, afterward cease.
Joel. 1.8. The new wine is cut off from your mouth. (...) Amos. 1.5. (...) I
will cut off the inhabitant of Bikeathauen, and him that holds the Scepter
out of Betheden, and the people of Aram shall go into captivity unto Kir,
says the Lord.

And he shall have no being.] (...) And there shall not be unto him: that
is, he shall not be: He shall have no being: he shall be extinct and gone.
Much like hereunto is that in the 42. of Genesis the 36. verse. Simeon is not:
Joseph is not: where the meaning is, that neither of them was remaining alive
or had any being. Jeremy 31. Rachel mourned for her children because they were
not. Genesis 5.24. Enoch was not because the Lord took him away. That is he
had no longer being among the living, a speech used in profane authors.
Homer. 2. Iliad. (...)
(...). that is,
For the sons of valiant Oeneus were not any longer, neither was he himself
yet. And more plainly in the Tragedy of Euripides called Hecuba: where she
bewailing the death of her son Polydorus. I understand now (says she) the
dream, (...)
(...)
(...)
which I saw touching thee my child, not being any longer in the light of
heaven: Therefore the Hebrew scholiast Solomon Iarchi, thinking (...) here to
be alone with (...) in other places, of all other interpreters judged best, and
the same which my self approved before ever I read it in him or any other: As
likewise master Fox in a sermon of his, entitled De Oliua Euangelica
understands it so (...) says he, is an Hebrew phrase, whereby is signified
man's life taken away, and therefore he gives this interpretation thereof. Et
vita priuabitur. He shall be deprived of life. His judgment touching the
force of the word to be all one with (...), he shall not be, is all one with
mine and that of Rabbi Solomon: yet as I understand the word of cutting off
somewhat more largely of things abolished otherwise then by death: So this
not being may be referred to the government ceasing and extinguished of the
governor taken away, though not dead.

Of the come Governor.] A come governor, I call Presidem aduenam a deputy
stranger, called here in the original (...) a ruler which is come: for in the
times before the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, there were two rulers
of the City, one of their own people, a Jew by profession or birth, after
their manner anointed to the government of the common wealth amongst them,
here named in the verse before going (...) the anointed Prince, the other a
stranger appointed Deputy by the Roman Emperor called (...) a ruler not borne
in the country, or one of the same Nation, but a stranger come from another
place. In which sense the same word seems sometime otherwhere to be used. In
the 42. of Genesis the fifth verse. The sons of Israel came to buy food
(...) among the comers, meaning other strangers which were come to Egypt. In
the second book of Chronicles the 30. chapter and 25. verse, (...) strangers
which were come from the Isralites are opposed to the inhabitants of Judea.
Also in the fifth of Nehemias the 17. verse, (...) comers of the gentiles are
set against such as were Jews borne.

With a flood.] Vespasians host, the mighty power of the Roman enemies with
great force invaded and went through the whole land of Israel and Judah, and as
it were ouerflowing waters overwhelmed all. A metaphor taken from floods, as in
the 11. of this prophecy the 40 verse. The king of the north shall come
against him with Chariots and Horsemen, and ouerflow, and pass through.

Unto the end of the war shall be a precise judgment of desolations.] In
the time and continuance of that war, partly by the foreign enemies, partly
by the civil dissentions within the city, a great desolation of Jerusalem and
Judah was made: many of the Jews for the intolerable misery of those times,
leaving their City and flying as far as their legs could bear them, from
their own native country into strange lands: which likewise happened in the
former destruction of that land and City by Nabugodonosor and the Chaldeans.
Ierem. 42.14. We will go into Egypt that we may see no more war, nor hear
the sound of the Trumpet, nor have hunger of bread and there will we dwell. This
is it which the same Prophet bewaileth in his Lamentations the first chapter,
and third verse. Judah went away because of affliction and great servitude.
Besides these which fled, many were slain, a great number perished by famine.
All the places about the Temple were burnt up, and the City was made a
Wilderness, and a solitary floor, as Josephus writes, who knew it so well
as no man living better.

The same Author testifies, that the land which before had been beautified
with goodly trees, and pleasant gardens and orchards, became so desolate, that
none which had seen Judea before with the fair buildings therein, at the
sight of such a woeful change thereof could have contained himself from
weeping and lamenting: For all the beautiful ornaments had been destroyed by
war: so that if any which had known the place before, coming then again
unto it on a sudden, could not have known it, but would have asked where
Jerusalem was though present in it. This we read in Josephus his seventh book
of the Jews war, the first chapter: and the sixth book the first chapter, and
some other places: therefore the speaking of desolations in the plural number,
here wants not his force to note the multitude thereof. They were manifold,
coming fast one upon an other: first in one place, then in another, till all
was wasted.

The 27. verse. One week.] This seems to pertain not only to the covenant
confirming next before in this verse mentioned, but also to all the things
spoken of in the former verse touching Messiah to be cut off, and the enemies
wasting of the City by continual war to the utter desolation and ruin
thereof: All these things came to pass in the last week of the 70.

Half of that week.] That is, of that last week mentioned in the next words
before going, and not a new half of an other week besides the 70. For this
cause the demonstratiue Article (...) ha is set before the word (...) to
signify no other but the same week spoken of before, according to the
Hebrews custom, and manner of speaking, observed also and retained in the
Greek tongue as the learned know. A like example we had in the beginning of
the next verse before going in the word (...), having the same Article, and
referring us to those same 62. weeks before spoken of and no other. Touching
this covenant and sacrifices abolished, I will by God his help in that which
follows declare what I think.

Shall be desolation.] So I interpret the word (...) substantiuelie as the
Greek and Latin interpreters here, and the 31. verse of the 11. chapter, have
taken it, though otherwise it seems to have the form of a Participle. We
have like examples in the fifth chapter of this book and twelft verse where
(...) signifies an exposition, and (...) a loosing or dissoluing: so that this
need not seem strange.

Utter and precise destruction.] (...). There is in propriety of signification
some difference between these two words, (...) signifies a perfect desolation
of that which is utterly and wholly destroyed, (...) is referred to the
resolute and precise determination of that utter destruction to come. When it
is precisely and certainly decreed, all hope of recalling the same being quite
cut off. One respects the greatness, the other the certainty of God his
vengeance to come. Esa. 10.22. The Lord in the midst of the land shall make
(...) utter desolation and precise waste past all calling back.

Having thus made first a true account and reckoning of the times wherein the
fulfilling of Daniels prophecy is contained, by the help of profane writers
testifying the certain truth thereof, and secondly a true interpretation of
Daniels words, according to the original tongue: It now remains by applying
the one to the other, to search and examine, where the beginning and end of
those 70. weeks may be found.

The greatest part of those who have labored for the understanding of this
Prophecy: have understood the Messiah here spoken of to be Jesus Christ, and
first seven weeks, then 62. that is 69. in all to be the distance betwixt
the commandment and him, referring the end of those years either to his
birth, or his baptism, or his death, and the beginning either to Cyrus, who
first gave leave for the return of the people and the building of the temple,
or to Darius Hystaspis, who confirmed the same by a new decree, in the second
year of his reign, as they take it, mentioned in the sixth of Esdras: or
lastly to Artaxerxes the long handed, supposing him to be the Artaxerxes
mentioned in the seventh of Esdras, and the second of Nehemias; who in the
twenty year of his reign gave a new commandment for the building of the
walls of the City, and sent Nehemias about it. Though some recko^ from his
seventh year, wherein Esdras was sent to Jerusalem by the Kings authority
with great privileges granted.

Touching their opinion which bring the time of their years from Cyrus to
Christ: it is with good reason confuted by Julius Affricanus in the fifth book
of his Chronicles, because that from Cyrus to Christ are many years above that
time, that the compass of Daniels weeks can reach to, which may be likewise
objected against Darius Histaspis his second year: from which to Christ's birth
are above 500. years.

But all this reasoning of Africanus touches Beroaldus no whit at all,
bringing Cyrus down from the 55. Olympiad to the 80. within the reach of these
weeks, and so Darius Hystaspis in proportion; if ever there were any such
Darius among the Persian kings: For Beroaldus reckoning them al by their names,
has no one of this name amongst the^ to be found; but other in his stead I
know not who, such as were never heard of before.

If these fancies had been broched before the days of Africanus: his answer
I believe would have been, as is used amongst the learned contra negantes
principia, against such as deny principles and grounds, not with words, but
either with silence or hissing: as Aristo and Pyrrho were served for making no
difference betwixt riches and poverty. Either of these answers is good enough
for him, who going against the stream of al antiquity and learning, neither
acknowledges any Cyrus before the 80. Olympiad, nor any king of Persia by the
name of Xerxes in proper person as king to have invaded Greece, and so for me
it shall rest. The true time of Cyrus his age and the Persian Monarchy, which
the Reader may safely lean to, is already declared.

The last opinion is of such as refer the beginning of the 490. years of
Daniels Prophecy to Artaxerxes the longhanded, some reckning them from his
seau^enth year, to the death and passion of Christ Jesus; as Functius and some
other. The seventh of that Artaxerxes was the second year of the 80. Olympiad,
and our Savior suffered in the last of the 202. The distance between is 490.
years; so that in regard of the time and space of years, this opinion would
in some sort agree: if other things were answerable: but this is certain that
Esdras was in that seventh year of Artaxerxes sent to Jerusalem by the kings
authority, with letters and many priueledges granted unto him, and great
sums of money for offerings and uses of the Temple: yet no decree made for
the building of the City, either Temple, which had bin finished before, or
walls which were made up after by Nehemias, by special commandment.

Moreover if the decree to build the City had been then published in the
seventh year of Artaxerxes, we must from thence to Messiah only account
seven years, and sixty two as the Angel in plain words declares, which
expire seven years, before the death of Christ.

Lastly this opinion disagreeth from the History of Ezra, where we read of an
other Artaxerxes before this, under whom Ezra came to Jerusalem, which had
forbidden the Jews to proceed in the building of God his Temple, and therefore
this could not be the long handed Artaxerxes, before whom there was no king
of Persia called by that name. Which reason likewise serves to improve the
next opinion here following: for many go somewhat lower to the 20. year of
the same Artaxerxes, wherein a new decree went out for the building of the
walls of Jerusalem, as we read in the second chapter of Nehemias. This
twentieth year of Artaxerxes, was for the most part of it answerable to the 4.
of the 83. Olympiad, and the commandment given in the first month in the
beginning of the spring: as we read in the second of Nehemias. From which
time to the death and passion of our Savior in the spring time of the last
year of the 202. Olympiad, were 477. years full and no more. So there wants
of Daniels number thirteen years.

To supply this want, two ways have bin devised. One by Julius Africanus,
Beda, Rupertus, Comestor, Pererius, and other, who thought the years of the
Moon to be understood in this place. Which opinion, as of all other most
fitly agreeing to the true interpretation of this place, Pererius on the 9. of
Daniel embraces, and brings reason for it; because it is said in the Latin
translation 70. Hebdomadae abbreuiatae sunt: that is, 70. weeks are shortened;
Quo significatur annos earu^ hebdomadaru^ non esse ad longitudinem annorum
solarium exigendos, sed ad breuitatem lunarium coarctandos. Whereby is
signified that the years of those weeks are not to be driven out to the
length of the Sun years: but to be drawn into the shortness of the Moon
years, says Pererius.

I would it were the worst that might be said of this reason, to call it
absurd, frivolous, foolish. It is all that and more: even derogatorie from God
and his word: which by this means is defaced and thrust out of doors, and
caused to give place to the folly and error of a silly man. For the ground of
it is a decree from the Council of Trent, establishing the authority of the
old Latin vulgar translation, as the very authentical word of God, not to be
rejected or refused of any, upon any pretense whatsoever. Hereof the Papists in
their expositions allege that translation, preferring it before the original
text it self received from heaven. And hereof it is that Pererius in his
exposition on this place, stands so much upon the word abbreuiatae shortened:
urging it greatly for proof of his short Moon years. It is a proof indeed
from the bad interpretation of a man: not warrantable from the mouth of GOD:
whose word in this place is (...): which in the holy tongue signifies
properly to cut. In that sense it is often used by the Hebrew writers thereof,
calling a piece of a thing (...) and (...), as Camius in the second part of his
Miclol, and Elias in his Tishbi testify: where he declares the true
signification thereof by the Dutch and Italian tongues. Wherein the words to
those Hebrew answerable, are in Dutch, ein schint, or ein stuck: in Italian
Pez, or talio, signifying any piece of a thing cut off. It is so also expounded
by the Greek interpreter: who here to express the Hebrew (...), has (...),
signifying to cut.

The meaning is, that so many years were determined and decreed, by a speech
borrowed from things cut out: because that in determining and decreeing things,
the reason of man's mind, sundring truth from falsehood, and good from bad,
does by judgment as it were cut out that which is convenient and fit to be
done. Whereunto a like example in the same word is read in the Chaldie
paraphrasis of Ester the 4. chapter and 5. verse, (...): which in English is
thus much: And Ester called for Daniel, whose name was Hathac, by the word of
whose mouth the matters pertaining to the kingdom were cut out: that is,
determined and appointed. And in other words of the same signification we
have like examples. In the second chapter of Ester the first verse, King
Assuerus remembered Vashti, (...) and that which was cut out upon her: that is
decreed and by judgment determined to come upon her. Also in the first book
of the Kings, the 20. chapter and 40. verse (...) So is thy judgment, thy
self has cut it out: that is, thou have by thy own sentence determined it. A
phrase in Latin Authors usual enough, as when Cicero in his 4. plea against
Verres says, Res ad eum defertur istiusque mere deciditur. The matter is
referred to him and cut off after his manner: that is, determined. Theodoretus
in his exposition of this place, takes the Greek word in the same sense, they
are cut: that is, appointed and decreed.

Hereby it is clear that Pererius his reason being taken from man's
interpretation, and not Gods word, can be no good ground for the Moon years
to stand upon. Let the Pope and twice so many Bishops more, in their Council
set it up as sure as they can, God his word is more powerful then they, to
pull it down.

Furthermore, though this were granted unto him, that the Latin edition by the
Councels decree has divine authority, and therefore force sufficient to prove
the years of the moon to be understood in this place by the word abbreuiatae
shortened: yet for all that, such was the man's blindness, even those his short
years are yet too short to fill up the want before spoken of, and to reach to
the passion of Christ. For 490. years of the Moon make but 475. of the Sun:
which expire two full years at the least before Christ dyed.

I am not ignorant that Pererius would help out this matter by a distinction of
inclusiue, and exclusive computation. Jnclusiue he terms when the first and
last are included in the number. Exclusive when they are left out; and thinks
that the whole number in all should be 490. Moon years or 477. of the Sun,
with the first and last included: and without them two only 488. of the Moon
and 475. of the Sun between to be reckoned.

This is a ridiculous shift. For the Prophet does not namely speak of 490.
years or 477. (that is, gathered by interpreters, and not without some
controversy among them) but of 70. weeks. So that if the extremes, first and
last, were to be excluded, they should be weeks, rather then years. Indeed
if the Prophet had said that there were 490. or 477. years, from the year of
the commandment to the year of Christ's death: it might peradventure have made
some cause of wra^gling about this, whether the first and last years should be
excluded or no. But here is no such matter. The extremes here expressed, are
the commandment to build Jerusalem for one: and the other, as it is
understood, the death of Christ. Now then, if the Prophet say, that from one of
these extremes to the other, are 490. or 477. years exclusiuely: two days
only must be excluded, rather then two years. For the commandment was given
in a day, and the death of Christ happened in a day. It were strange to make
each of them of one whole years continuance: and far from that exact
reckoning which Daniel makes of his 70. weeks: first seven: then sixty and
two: and last of all one.

Therefore Julius Africanus, who as the chief author of these Moon years, is
alleged by Pererius, never once dreamed of any such exclusive computation. I
must acknowledge that he takes indeed this place to be understood of 490.
Moon years: which kind of years the Hebrews used, as he says. But he
could not stretch them any further then to the 16. year of Tiberius the
Emperor of Rome: which is short by two whole years of the time set by
Pererius for the passion of our Lord, in the 18. year of Tiberius. And as they
are short of his passion: so they go further then his baptism. For which
cause that opinion of Africanus can no way stand, making an end of Daniels
weeks, neither in the birth, nor the baptism, nor the death of Jesus Christ.

Neither can that conceit of Africanus touching the Moon years hereto be
understood, by that reason which he brings for it, that is, by the custom of
the Hebrews, be approved. Their months, I grant, were in some sort taken by
the course of the Moon. But the continuance of their years was ever directed
by the Sun: and that as well before the captivity of Babylon, as after: as
may by good arguments out of holy Scripture be proved.

They were commanded to celebrate their feast of unleavened bread, yearly
from the 14. day of the first month to the 21. thereof, answerable to our
April in part (This was according to the course of the Moon.) And withal, to
keep it yearly in that season of the year, wherein their barlie harvest
begun: as is evidently to be seen in the 23. chapter of Leuit. the 10. verse.
When ye be come into the land which I give unto you, and reap the harvest
thereof: then ye shall bring a sheafe of the first fruits of your harvest unto
the Priest. Which could not be but by the course of the Sun. Likewise seven
weeks after that feast ended, was appointed the celebration of Whitsontide, at
the end of their harvest: which for that cause is named the Harvest feast, and
the feast of first fruits, whereof an offering was brought to the Lord, Exodus
23.16. Lastly, their feast of Tabernacles every year was kept in the 15. day
of the 7. month: and withal in the end of the year, after their vintage in
Autumn, when all their grapes and other fruits of that season were gathered,
Exodus 23.16. Deuteronomy. 16. verse. 13. It could not possibly be, that the end of
their harvest should be every year 7. weeks after Easter: and the end of their
vintage, called the end of the year, always from time to time in the 15. day
of the 7. month, but by the year of the Sun: whose course being finished
brought it to pass.

Now that it seem not strange which I have brought concerning the Jews harvest
beginning in April, and ending seven weeks after toward the end of May, or
not long after the beginning of June, because in our countries it is much
latter about August: we are to know that Iewrie being a hotter country, as
nearer to the equinoctial line, and the summer tropic then ours by 20.
degrees, has the harvest by reason thereof much sooner then with us is
accustomed, even in their first month and the spring of the year. The
Isralites went over Jorden the 10. day of the first month, being the time of
harvest, and four days before their passe-ouer. The disciples of Christ in ye
6. of Luke the first verse, Ios. 3.15. and 4.19. and 5.10.
a little after Easter walking through the corn plucked the ears of corn,
and rubbed them in their hands and did eat them. Which argued the ripeness
of corn at that season. Pliny in his 18. book and 18. chapter, speaking of
the Egiptians, which are near unto Judea; tells that they go into their
fields with the sicle a little before April, and finish their harvest in May.

These feasts then every year falling to the time of harvest, bring manifest
proof for the year of the Hebrews, that it was ordained by the course of the
Sun. The time of the children of Isreal's eating Manna, in scripture is
accounted 40. years: in the end of the 16. chapter of Exodus, reckoned from
their departure out of Egypt, Nombres the 33. chapter the 38. verse. Which
number from the same season of the year to the same, by the years of the
sun is most exact. For they came forth of Egypt the 15. day of the first
month, in the beginning of barley harvest. And the very same day of the same
month, in barley harvest their Manna ceased. Ios. 5.12. In the 25. chapter of
Leuiticus, the Isralites are commanded to sow their feeld, and cut their
vineyardes, and gather the fruits thereof 6. years: and to let the 7. rest as
a sabbath year to the Lord. And 7. of those sabbaths are accounted 49. years,
at the end whereof in the 10. day of the 7. month began the Iubelie. These
years most manifestly were years of the sun. Otherwise all the fruits of
those years could not have been gathered in harvest and vintage, as God
appointed. For 49. years of the moon would very near have cut off one and a
half, the last expiring in winter before any corn or other fruit were ready
to be gathered therein.

Daniell himself toward the beginning of this chapter, made mention of the 70.
years of captivity. Where no one, that ever I heard of, understood other
years then of the sun. It were a strange thing, if in one chapter first
speaking of 70. years, and after of 70. weeks of years, he should understand
diverse sorts of years one of the sun, and an other of the moon. Augustine
in his 15. book de ciuitate Dei the 14. chapter, disputing against the opinion
of some, who were persuaded that the years of the ancient fathers, which lived
in the first age, were not of the Sun: uses these words: Tantus tunc dies
fuit, quantus and nunc est. Tantus tunc me^sis, quantus and nu^c est: quem luna
caepta and finita conclusit. Tantus annus, quantus and nunc est, quem 12.
menses lunares, additis propter cursum solis 5. diebus and quadrante,
consummant. The day was as great then (says Augustine) as it is now. The
month as great then as now, contained within the compass of the Moons course
from the beginning to the end. The year was then as great as now, perfected by
twelve months of the Moon, with five days and a quarter added. Twelve
months of the Moon with five days and a quatter more, make up the Suns
year, the same which we now use at this day. For every month in old time, by
Augustines judgment, contained just thirty days: as is to be seen in his
fourth book De Trinitate the fourth chapter, where he writes thus: Si 12.
menses integri considerentur, quos triceni dies complent, talem quippe mensem
veteres obseruauerunt quem circuitus lunaris ostendit. That is, if the twelve
months whole be considered which contain thirty days a piece. Such was the
month by men of old time observed, eue^ that which the course of the moon
showed. This is manifest by the history of Noes flood in the seven and eight
chapters of Genesis, where we are taught that the flood begun the seventeenth
day of the second month: and the Arc rested on a mountain of Ararat in the
seventeenth day of the seventh month. Which space there by Gods holy spirit is
counted 150. days: which reckoning gives to every month thirty days a
piece, neither more nor less.

I might bring other testimonies to confirm this custom of the Hebrews year,
ordered by the compass of the Suns moving, if it were needful: but I hope
that which has been said already, is sufficient to improoue the first shift
of Africanus and other, devised by 490. short Moon years to cut short the time
of Daniels prophecy by 13. years: that is, two whole weeks of the 70. within
a year. Seeing that they can neither serve to fill up the distance from
Artaxerxes his 20. year, to the suffering of Christ, for which they are
brought, nor yet the custom of the Hebrews reckoning in holy Scripture will
bear them.

The other shift is as bad and silly as that, if not more. For some who could
not abide that forced wresting of Moon years, where there is no likelihood of
such to be meant, went another way to work, making two beginnings, and thence
two twentieth years of Artaxerxes his reign. One beginning was immediately
after the death of his father Xerxes in the 4. year of the 78. Olympiad. The
other nine years before in the 4. of the 76. Olympiad: wherein he was
appointed king by his father yet living, nine years before his death: from
which the 20. is the 3. of the 81. Olympiad for the beginning of Daniels
weeks, says Gerardus Mercator. Wherein notwithstanding he was greatly
deceived, by what error I know not. For reckoning from the third of the 81.
Olympiad, to the last of the 202. wherein Christ dyed: we shall find no more
but 486. years at the most. And therefore I see not by what reason he says,
that the 70. weeks containing 490. years, beginning at that twentieth of
Artaxerxes, expired in the death of Christ.

Temporarius therefore making two beginnings, and two 20. years of Artaxerxes,
as he does, accounts from the first twentieth 483. years to Christ his
baptism; which was above three years before his passion, and so ends the
death of Christ, three years and more before the end of Daniels weeks. But
what reason had Mercator and Temporarius to think, that Artaxerxes begun to
reign whilst his father was yet alive, so long before his death? This is a
matter worth the examination, being the ground of a great error. The reason
which they bring is in this manner. Themistocles the Athenian in the second
year of the 77. Olympiad, being expelled out of Athens by his unthankful
country men and citizens, notwithstanding the great and wonderful deliverance
of all Greece from the power of Xerxes king of Persia, by his wisdom and
prowess especially wrought: fled to the same Xerxes; as Ephorus, Deino,
Cleitarchus, Heraclides, Diodorus Siculus, and other story writers declare.

Again, that Artaxerxes the son of Xerxes reigned in Persia, at such time as
Themistocles fled to the king thereof for succor, it is testified by an
ancient author of credit, even Thucidides himself in his first book of the
Pelopo^nesian war, writing that Themistocles flying by sea to Ephesus, and
after going higher into Asia with a certain Persian, (...): that is, sent
letters to king Artaxerxes the son of Xerxes, who a little before begun to
reign. If Themistocles flying, came to Xerxes king of Persia, and sent letters
to Artaxerxes his son then reigning also in Persia: it must needs be that
Artaxerxes had been made king a good while before his fathers death: for that
happened about six or seven years after the banishment of Themistocles. This
is the force of their argument. I have heard it reported of one Doctor
Medcalfe, who sometime was master of Saint John's College in Cambridge, a man
of no great learning himself: but for care and earnest endeavor every way to
advance learning, giving place to none. Whereby it may be thought that that
famous College has by his means the better prospered and flourished ever
since, with so great a company of excellent Divines and skillful men in other
knowledge. I have (I say) heard it reported of him, that having on a certain
day at supper with him some of the chief Seniors of the College, he sent for
two Sophisters to dispute before them. The one took upon him to prove that his
fellows black gown was green; requiring this only first to be granted unto
him, that if there were any green gown in that chamber, it was on his back.
Which was not thought unreasonable: because it was evident, that there was none
else had any. This then being once granted, he framed the rest of his proof in
this manner. That (says he) poynting to a green carpet on the table, there is
a green in this chamber all our eyes witness: and that there is gown in it,
your own upper garment on your backs proves: whereof it follows, that here
amongst us in this chamber there is a green gown. Doctor Medcalfe hearing
this was greatly delighted, and affirmed in good sadness that it was a good
reason: and withal asked the judgment of the Seniors there present: who
smiling, commended the scholars wit.

Such a sophistication is here brought, by joining things together which ought
to be sundred. For neither they which tell of Themistocles flying to Xerxes,
once ever dreamed of Artaxerxes reigning at the same time: nor Thucidides
speaking of his coming to Artaxerxes, had this in his mind to think that
Xerxes should be then alive: which I will prove by good witness. For
Plutarch in the life of Themistocles writes thus: (...). Thucidides, says
Plutarch, and Charon Lampsacenus tell that after Xerxes was dead, Themistocles
came to his son. Aemilius Probus confirms it in these words: Scio
plaerosque ita scripsisse, Themistoclem Xerxe regnante in Asiam transiisse: sed
ego potissimu^ Thucididi credo, quod aetate proximus crat. I know, says
Probus, that many writers report, Themistocles to have passed into Asia whilst
Xerxes was yet alive: but I rather believe Thucidides, who was near those
times. Lastly, Lawrence Codoman in the second book of his Chronology, is as
plain for it as may be. That (says he) which Thucidides testifies in his
first book, that Themistocles fled to Artaxerxes, of late having begun to
reign: must be understood of the Monarchy of Artaxerxes, begun after his
fathers death.

There was some difference between them I grant, in regard of the persons to
whom, and the time when Themistocles came: some thinking it to be done when
Xerxes was king, before the reign of his son. Other, when Artaxerxes reigned
after the death of his father. But all agreed in this, that at such time as
Themistocles fled out of Greece, there was not two, but only one king of
Persia: which is most certainly true.

Let the record of all histories be sought, for the whole time of the Persian
Monarchy from the beginning to the end: it shall never be found that the
father and his son reigned together. Herodotus indeed in Polymnia, not far
from the beginning, tells of a custom and law of the Persians, that their
king going to war, first appointed an heir who was to succeed him in the
Empire. And that Xerxes was so appointed by his father Darius, having prepared
all things ready for his voyage against Egypt, to be next king after him. Yet
he never reigned till his father was dead. (...): when Darius was dead, says
Herodotus, the kingdom came to his son Xerxes. So that if Artaxerxes, as
they say, were appointed king by his father Xerxes in his life time, it was but
for the next place after his fathers death, to be an heir apparent and
successor. Far from that imperial majesty which Thucidides gives to him,
calling him (...), a king newly come to his kingdom.

But for my part, weighing all circumstances, I see not any color that
Artaxerxes should be chosen so much as heir apparent by his father yet living:
much less king. He had three sons by his chief wife Queen Amestris: first of
all Darius: then two years after another called Hystaspes: and last of all
this Artaxerxes: besides two daughters, as Ctesias declares. By the custom of
the Persians it must needs be, that he named his next heir and successor to
the crown, before his famous voyage into Greece. And who was then to be named
before his eldest son Darius? For Gerardus Mercator in his Chronology makes
it a thing past doubt, that Artaxerxes was at that time unborn. Whereunto
agrees that which we read in Justin, in the beginning of his third book
concerning the age of Artaxerxes at his fathers death: which happened about 16.
years after his going forth against Greece. For there by Justin he is termed
admodum puer, a very child. If he had then been borne: yet there is no
likelihood that he should have been preferred either before Darius the eldest
of all; or the next, that is Hystaspes, being elder then he. This devise
therefore of two beginnings and two 20. years of Artaxerxes, to help out the
want of so many years betwixt the twentieth year of Artaxerxes and the death
of Christ, is a very poor shift and altogether frivolous.

If plain proof had been brought by the testimony of ancient writers, that
the kingdom and monarchy of Artaxerxes begun whilst his father lived, and
that they reigned both at once many years together; they had said somewhat to
the purpose. But that is not done: It is fetched about I know not how, by vain
conjectures, and gessing, and childish wrangling and sophistry. The reasons to
work it are deceitful, and have nothing at all in them but a colorable show
without substance.

That therefore which Julius Africanus writes in his Chronology the 5. book,
that if we begin to number Daniels 70. weeks from any other beginning then the
20. of Artaxerxes: (...): neither the time will accord, and many absurdities
follow; is true as well in that year which he excepteth, as any of the rest.
Neither do I see, how by just chronology of the times, either the year of
Christ his birth, or his baptism, or his death, may serve for the 490. years
of Daniels 70. weeks to be accounted unto, from any commandment and decree
given out by the Persian kings to build Jerusalem; or how the word Messiah in
this place can be applied to our Savior Jesus, even by their own exposition,
for if the 70. weeks expire in the death of Christ, as Beroaldus with the most
part and best learned think, why does Daniel reckon only threescore and nine
to Messiah, except they will say that Messiah is here taken for the seventh
year before the death of Messiah, which were a strange kind of
interpretation. And as Chronology here fitteth not for Messiah to be
understood of Christ our Lord: so the very text it self is against it, which
makes only seven weeks, that is 49. years distance from the commandment to
Messiah in plain speech; so that it cannot be applied to our blessed Savior
without strayning and wresting, which they who so understand it of Christ Jesus
are driven unto. They are feign to use chopping and changing, adding and taking
away, contrary to the express commandment of God: For first, whereas the
original text after these words seven weeks has a rest, yea that rest which
is usual in the midst of a sentence, to signify a pause after half the
verse now already ended: this pause by them is taken away, and the words
without any rest at all continued with the next following, and the pause or
stay made at 62. weeks in this manner: From the out going of the word to build
again Jerusalem unto Messiah the governor, shall be seven weeks, and 62.
weeks. Again because in that interpretation of theirs, the words, and 62.
weeks are severed from the other following, wherewith they should be joined,
as in my interpretation before delivered may appear, and by that means the
sense so darkened, that of it self in any plain construction of sense it
cannot stand: To make somewhat of it they are feign to thruste in words of
their own invention, as for that which God says, it shall be builded again,
they say, and it shall be builded again, thrusting in the conjunction more than
ought to be. Some put in other words, some change verbes into Participles,
and all to make 483. years distance betwixt the decree and the Messiah here
spoken of, in steed of only 49.

Here is great ods, what is this else but to make Gods word a wax nose to turn
which way a man list at his pleasure? How is it possible that by such kind of
dealing divine scripture should be rightly understood? How shall the Jews by
such wresting of texts, be made Christians and brought to believe that Christ
is come? Here it may be, some will say unto me, you make more a do about
distinctions and pauses and points then is need: those are small matters and
not so streightlie and preciselie to be looked into. I may give men leave to
think as they list: but the truth is, that even these small matters of
distinctions and rests, are of great weight and importance to the true
understanding of God his holy word: yet be it granted, that as small matters
they may be neglected. Is that also a small matter to put in words of their
own, which the custom of the original tongue will not bear? Well let that
be yielded to, be it a trifle not to be stood upon.

Though all this were granted, and though there were no vowels nor points at
all, yet even the very manner of the speech it self were enough to reprove
their interpretation: for who ever read in the Hebrew Bible this kind of
speech; Seven and threescore, and two for threescore and nine? It is not the
custom of the holy Ghost to speak after that manner. If all the Hebrew
scripture from the beginning of Genesis, to the end of Malachie be sought
throughout, no one clear example of the like can be found.

As for that which Pererius brings from the twelfth verse of the 45. chapter
of Ezechiell: Tremellius will soon teach him, that it is in another kind.

If therefore neither agreement of time, nor text of holy scripture permit the
name Messiah in this place to be referred to Jesus Christ: we are to examine
what other signification of this word is more agreeable to both. It is used
sometimes of our Savior Christ, and sometimes more generally taken, as before
is showed, for any anointed Priest, Prophet, Prince, or chief Governor of
the common wealth, and this is the signification, which in my judgment best
fitteth this place. And of Christian interpreters Eusebius is the man, which
has either taught me it, or guided me to it, or confirmed me in it: who in
his eight book de demonstratione Euangelica having brought the exposition of
Africanus, understanding here Christ Jesus by the name of Messiah or Christ,
adds these words. (...). That is; I say that the Governor Christ here
spoken of in this text of scripture, by an other signification or acception is
no other but a succession of high Priests, which after this prophecy, and the
Jews return from Babylon governed the people, which the scripture usually
calls Christ's or annoynteds.

In this number he reckons Judas Machabaeus and his brethren, and their
posterity, who exercised a kingly government over the Jews, and a little
after expounding these words in the 26. verse. Christ shall be cut off: who
(says he) is this Christ, but the governor which by succession of the Priests
kindred ruled the people? This Christ therefore endured all the time wherein
these weeks were to be fulfilled: but so soon as they once were ended
according to this prophecy, the chief ruler of the people of that succeeding
kindred was cut off, says Eusebius.

This is a notable saying of Eusebius to declare the true meaning of the word
Messiah; which may direct us to understand this most excellent prophecy
aright, Theodoretus herein agrees unto him.

I take it somewhat more largely then Eusebius and Theodoretus does, not of
the Machabies only, but of other chief rulers and kings of the Jews common
wealth, within the compass of these weeks, as the Hebrew scholiasts Saadias,
Aben, Ezra, Iarchi, and some other expound it. Not one Hebrew writer that ever
I read, vndestood their Messiah by this word, but a succession of anointed,
either Priests, or Governors.

The decree to build Jerusalem, I take to be that which was made by Darius for
the building of the temple, which was the chiefest part of the city. In the
second year of that Darius, and the 6. month the first day toward the end of
our August, they were commanded in the Lords name by his prophet Aggie, to
build the holy temple of Jerusalem: as we read in the first chapter and first
verse of the prophet. After they had begun to build, the governors of the
countries beyond Euphrates came unto them to know by whose authority they
took that work upon them, Ezra chap. 5. and 6.
who answered that Cyrus had given them leave to do it long before in the
first year of his reign. Of this answer they certified king Darius. By whose
commandment search was made: first in the records at Babylon: after at
Ecbataua the chief city of Medes, where a record touching that matter was
found. Hereupon Darius made a new decree for building thereof; and sent it to
the governors of his countries beyond Euphrates, charging them to permit and
help forward the building thereof.

All these things were not done in a little time, from the prophets sending by
God about that matter, to the time wherein Darius sent his decree. It asked
some time to begin the work after the prophets warning. And then for the
governors in other provinces to be certified. And after themselves to come and
examine the matter. At what time it is said that they found the work in good
forwardness, the beams being laid in the walls. Ezra the 5 chapter 8.
verse: and after to certify Darius: and then to search the records, and that
in those far places of Babylon and Ecbataua. And lastly to send forth the new
decree.

So far as we may guess, this time might be about some 8. or 9. months, and
bring us to the month of April or May in the 3. year of Darius. And who was
this Darius? In my judgment no other but the surnamed Nothus, who was son to
Artaxerxes Longimanus. This Artaxerxes (as Thucidides then living testifies)
died in the 7. year of the Peloponnesian war in winter which was the 4. of
the 88. Olympiad. After him Xerxes and Sogdianus reigned 1. year. And after
them this Darius whose 3. year at that season wherein the decree to build the
temple went out, falls toward the end of the 3. year of the 89. Olymp.

For the publishing of that decree to Messiah, that is the first governor of
the new builded city, are accounted here by Daniel 7. weeks, containing 49.
years. Whereof 17. pertained to Darius after the decree: for he reigned 19.
in all. The other 32. were of Artaxerxes Mnemon his successor. In whose 20.
year Nehemias was sent to build the walls of Jerusalem, and 12. years after,
the building of the walls being finished and the Messiah or governor
appointed, and the common wealth every way set in order: he returned to
Artaxerxes in the 32. year of his reign.

The proof hereof is clear by scripture. In the 5. chapter of Nehemias the
14. verse. From the time says Nehemias, that the king commanded me to be
governor in the land of Judea, from the 20. to the 32. year of king
Artaxerxes, that is 12. years: I and my brethren have not eaten the bread of
the governor. For the governors before me had been chargeable to the
people, and so forth. Also in the 13. chapter of the same book the sixth verse.
All this while (says he) was not I at Jerusalem, for in the 32. year of
Artaxerxes king of Babell I returned to the king.

Joseph Scaliger in his sixth book de emendatione temporum, gives his voice
with this exposition, affirming that Darius Nothus was the king under whom the
decree was made to build the City, and that from it to the streets and walls
of Jerusalem finished, were nine and forty years. After which time, Nehemias
directis platais vrbis and vicis exaedificatis, atque omnibus rebus compositis
reuersus est in Persidem anno Artaxerxis altero and tricesimo. Nehemias (says
Scaliger) so soon as the streets of the city were directed, and the lanes
builded, and all things set in order, returned into Persia in the two and
thirtieth year of Artaxerxes.

It is here to be observed yt the Prophet speaks of the Messiah, and the
building up of the City, as beginning both at one time: For having foretold
that there should be to Messiah seven weeks: it follows immediately after
how long the City was to continue. The reason whereof is this, that there
could not be conveniently any Princely government of the common wealth before
the building of the City, wherein the Princes Court and Palace should be:
which Palace for the Prince was builded by Nehemias also, as appears in the
second of Nehemias, verse eight. Hereof it is that Sanballat in a letter to
Nehemias, joins these two together: the building of the walls, and a king
set over the Jews. It is reported (says Sanballat) among the heathen, that
thou and the Jews think to rebel: for which cause thou buildest the wall
that thou may be their king according to their words. Thou have also
ordained Prophets to preach of thee in Jerusalem, saying there is a king in
Judah.

These two things then begun together, the City builded, and the anointed
Governor thereof, as also the end of both was at one time, declared in the 26.
verse. After those 62. weeks shall Messiah be cut off, and the City and
Temple shall the people of the come Governor destroy.

Thus whereas Daniel has divided his 70. weeks into three parts: The first of
them has his true meaning by text and time approved, from the decree to build
Jerusalem, to the same building finished, and the established government in it,
being the space of 49. years: The second part contains 62. weeks, wherein
Jerusalem so builded with the common wealth, and state, and princely government
thereof was to continue, that is to say, from the building of the City
finished, and the Prince or ruler appointed in the 32. of Artaxerxes Mnemon:
unto such time as the ruin and fall of the same City began, which was about
the nine year of Nero: For about that time Albinus the Roman Governor of
Judea and Jerusalem, by his great covetousness and cruelty in most woeful
manner oppressed the Jews, for bribes, even selling them to be spoiled and
robbed of their goods, at the will and pleasure of most lewd ruffins and bad
persons. As Josephus declares in his second book of the Jews war the
thirteenth Chapter, inferring thereof that (...). the seeds of Ierusalems
captivity approaching, was from that time sown, meaning that those troubles
under Albinus were the beginnings of the Jews thraldom and undoing, as
indeed they were, which in the twentieth book of antiquities the eight
chapter, he declares more plainly: where having spoken of the great misery
of the Jews, which they suffered by the merciless cruelty of Albinus, he
uses these words. (...). From that time forward says Iosphus, especially our
City began to be sick, and all things going then more and more to decay. The
woeful calamities of Jerusalem every day falling more and more to wrack after
the government of Albinus, by a borrowed speech he terms sickness.

In the beginning of that year, at the feast of the Tabernacle it was, that a
certain man of the common sort brought up in the country, called Jesus the
son of Anani, as a messenger by divine motion from God, to foreshew the utter
ruin and desolation of Jerusalem to come in that last week of the 70. which
was yet behind, in the streets of the City cried day and night; a voice from
the East, a voice from the West, a voice from the four winds, a voice against
Jerusalem and the Temple, a voice against Bridegroomes and Brides, a voice
against all the people. The Magistrates and Nobles of the City not abiding his
outcries brought him before Albinus: who caused him with scourges to be torn
to the bones, when the silly wretch neither wept nor craved any mercy, but
at every stroke answered woe, woe, to Jerusalem. In this manner crying he
continued seven years and more without any hoarsnes or wearines: neither
cursing them that hurt him, nor thanking them that relieved him. At the length
going on the walls with this cry woe, woe, to the City, and the Temple, and
the people, he added these words, woe also to my self, and was presently
slain with a stone hurled by an Engine at him from the enemy beseeging the
City.

Thus the second part of this Prophecy, foreshewing how long the Jews common
wealth after the ordering thereof should continue before it began to decay,
contained 62. weeks, that is, 434. years: for the 32. of Artaxerxes Mnemon
was the fourth year of the 101. Olympiad, toward the end whereof the building
of Jerusalem was finished, and the Jews common wealth appointed, and the first
year of the last week, was the second year of the 210. Olympiad, beginning
toward the end of it in the spring time of the year. The space included
contains the full number before declared.

The third and last part is one week, even the last of all the 70. wherein
after the former 62. weeks expired, Messiah, that is the last Ruler was cut
off, and the government of the City quite extinct, for when their last king
Agrippa in the twelfth year of Nero, four years before the destruction of
the City, went about to persuade the people to obey Florus the Roman deputy,
by whose tyranny they had been incomparably more vexed and oppressed, then in
the time of Albinus his predecessor: The people were so stirred against him,
that they could not contain themselves any longer, but threw stones at him,
and drove him out of the City, as Josephus declares in the sixteen chapter
of the second book of the Jews war.

If any here object, that Caius Caesar the Emperor of Rome after the death of
this Agrippas father, made Judea a province to be governed by a Roman Deputy,
and bestowed on this Agrippa the kingdom of Chalcis, which pertained to his
uncle Herod; I answer that this Herod had his kingly Palace in Jerusalem, and
obtained of C. Caesar for himself and his successors, not only the rule and
power over the Temple, and whole treasury: but also authority of choosing the
high Priests, and deposing them at his pleasure, and the calling of the judges
together, and other matters pertaining to the service of the Levites and
Priests in Gods Temple; All which his Sovereignty dyed in this last week
about four years before the destruction of the City, yea before in the time
of Albinus, in the beginning of this last week: anarchie and unruly disorder
begun to rise, and good government to fall: which Josephus immediately before
the word concerning the seeds of Ierusalems thraldom sown, in the second
book of the Jews war the thirteenth chapter before by me cited, seems in
this short speech to signify (...). Tyrranie or usurped government was
exercised by many. This beginning of misrule by little and little grew to
further increase, till at the length the king was driven out, and not long
after al other magistracy of Jerusalem was likewise abolished, all good
government ceased, as Josephus in plain words declares in the fourth book
and fifth chapter of the Jews war, that the city was without a ruler to
guide it. And in the second chapter of the fifth book: that all law of man was
trodden under foot, and the law of God made a scorn, and the laws of nature it
self disturbed. All things were ordered by the will of lawless ruffians,
their pleasure stood for law. A most pitiful disorder and tumultuous anarchie
reigned amongst them by the wilful malice of graceless rebels, appoynting
judges of their own choice for their turn, and creating hie priests whom they
list, vile and unworthy men: and those of such tribes, as by Gods
commandment were forbidden that holy service.

Thus was it fulfilled and verified which Daniel here foretold of Messiah, to
be cut off after 62. weeks in the last of the 70. Whereunto he also adds
this more; that in the same week the city and Temple should be destroyed by
the come governors people: meaning the Roman army which wasted Jerusalem and
Judea by the space of four years together continually, from the 12. year of
Nero to the end of the war. First, Florus the Roman deputy begun by his
intolerable covetousness and merciles oppression, turning the peoples hearts
against him to complain of their wrongs by him sustained. Which so stirred
him, that forthwith he sought a new quarrel of greater revenge, and sent unto
Jerusalem for 17. talents of silver to be given him forth of the holy
treasury. Which being denied, he made no more ado, but came against Jerusalem
with an host of horsemen and footmen, by force and arms to obtain his will,
and revenge himself of such as had spoken against him. Being entered within the
city into the Deputies palace, he cried to his soldiers, commanding them to
spoil the city and slay whomsoever they met.

Thus Jerusalem was given for a prey, and the inhabitants slain, man, woman
and child, to the number of 630. and many of the Nobles whipped and torn with
scourges and crucified. And not herewith content, a little after he sent for
new soldiers, who once again killed the poor Jews in peaceable manner,
going forth of their city to meet and receive them with a friendly welcome.
Some were beaten down with clubs, some trodden under the horses feet, some
choked in the great prease at the gates, many slain with the sword. And after
that, by the same Florus, was a new slaughter made of the Jews in Caesarea.
After all these troubles, Florus not yet contented, made a great complaint of
the Jews to Cestius the governor of Syria: who for that cause brought a great
army against Judea, and destroyed many towns and villages therein, giving the
spoil thereof to his soldiers. At the last he brought his army in battle
array into Jerusalem, and burned diverse streets thereof, and made havoc of the
Jews.

Thus was the Lords inheritance consumed and destroyed by the cruel Romans,
til at the length Vespasian and Titus, sent by the Emperor Nero, wasted all
the whole land, and brought utter desolation upon the Temple and city, both
burnt with fire: thereby fulfilling Daniels prophecy, and making an end of
his 70. weeks, being years 490. From the third of Darius Nothus, wherein the
decree went out to build Jerusalem, to the overthrow thereof, that was the
third of the 89. Olympiad, this the first of the 112. both almost expired: the
space between is 490. years.

Yet for all this cruelty and hot war of the Romans against the Jews,
diverse of the deputies and generals in most friendly manner were content to
make covenants of peace with many of the Jews: who being quietly minded in
favor to the Romans, and detesting the disorder and lewd doings of the
seditious rebels, sought their friendship. Cestius Gallus in the beginning of
that war, offered a league of friendship to the citizens of Jerusalem: which
many (leaving that rebellious rout) embraced, and fled out of the city unto
him. Likewise, Vespasian and Titus diverse and sundry times received many into
their friendship coming unto them, and most lovingly offered a faithful
league of sure peace to any whosoever were desirous of it, in love and good
meaning to the Roman government, and hatred of the rebels. Of which sort
desiring peace, and parties of that league, was a great number not only in
Jerusalem, but diverse other places.

All this is faithfully recorded by Josephus an eyewitness of those times:
Dauisons history also confirming the same. And this it is which the Prophet
Daniel seems to mean, where he speaks of a covenant to be established to
many one week: as some expositors have understood it, and namely R. Solomon,
surnamed Iarchi, Rabbi Leui the son of Gershom, Aben Ezra, and R. Abraham in
his Cabbala. But for my own part, I think rather that it is to be referred
to the new covenant of the Gospel of Christ, by the preaching whereof in this
last week, the believing Jews were especially at that time above al other,
when so great misery of woeful destruction was now at hand, to be confirmed
more and more in the true faith. And many also thereby then called and won
anew unto it, whom it pleased the Lord of life by offering that gracious league
of salvation unto them, not only to rid from those (horrible indeed, yet
temporal) troubles approaching; but also to save everlastingly. For there was
(no doubt) at that time a great company of holy Saints in Jerusalem and
Iewrie which believed in Christ: of whose deliverance at that time the Lord had
especial care.

Although this is a thing not to be doubted of: yet by the providence of God,
that thereby his providence over his church may be known; we have a notable
record thereof in Eusebius the third book of his Ecclesiastical history the
fifth chapter. The Church (says Eusebius) which was gathered together at
Jerusalem, was commanded by an oracle from God to flit out of it to a certain
town beyond Jorden called Pella: to the intent that those good and holy men
being taken out of the city, place thereby might be given to the vengeance of
GOD against it and the wicked Jews, by the destruction and overthrow thereof.

If any here ask who there is before mentioned to whom these words, he shall
make a sure covenant, may be referred but the Roman general. I answer, that
it is no new thing in the Hebrew tongue for the person of the doer to be
understood, though not expressly spoken of before: when the transitiue verb
has an impersonall notion. A hundred such examples might be brought, some out
of the old Testament, some out of the new, some out of profane authors, which
I will not stand upon, being a thing well known and taught, even in the
Grammar rules of the holy tongue. The meaning is, that before the utter
destruction of Jerusalem, a holy and sure covenant should be made unto the
faithful number of the Jews, chosen to salvation by such ministers and
instruments as it should please God to use for that work in that last week of
Jerusalem: in the one half or midst whereof the sacrifices appointed in the
law of God and accustomed, begun to be neglected and cease.

First they rejected al sacrifices and oblations for any stranger which was not
a Jew, being before usually from time to time wont to be offered. And a little
after in the 13. year of Nero, when Vespasian was come into Judea and wasted
the country: then the unruly rebels in Jerusalem abolished the lawful
custom of sacrificing, appoynting priests of the common people and country
clownes, a thing forbidden by Gods law. They held the Temple and holy places,
keeping themselves therein as a castle of defense: and at the length partly by
the sedition within, and partly sharp war without, it came to pass that the
priests in time of their sacrificing were slain by darts and stones hurled
from the rebels: and in the end for want of men there was no daily oblation
any more offered. This Josephus declares in the 2. book the 17. chapter, the
4. book the 5. chapter, the 5. book the 9. chapter, the 6. book the first
and fourth chapters, the seventh book the fourth chapter of the Jews war.
Wherefore not without cause in my judgment may those words of Daniel, touching
the sacrifices ceasing in the midst of the last week, be referred unto
these times of this war: wherein by means thereof the sacrifices of the
Lords house were hindered so many ways: some were quite abolished, and others
done either not by those to whom they pertained: or not so safely and freely as
they ought. Yea I see not how any at all many days could be offered, by
reason of the seditious hurly burlies in the city, and the war without, the
sacrificers themselves oftentimes being slain or wounded in the midst of
their offering.

Master Iunius though he think Christ Jesus to be the agent and worker of
these abolished sacrifices: yet for all that partly he refers the working
thereof to the time of Ierusalems besieging. Impijs sacrificium and munus
abolebit ex facto, quia premente obsidione vrbis destituentur commoditatibus
sacrificiorum. He shall abolish (says Iunius, speaking of Christ) sacrifice
and offering in regard of the wicked by deed, because that the besieging of
the city pressing them, they shall be bereaved of the profits of sacrifices.

This exposition is not strayned, it is plain, without any wresting, turning,
adding, or taking away: the course of Heaven, and holy Scripture, and profane
story, all make one account, they all agree in the same reckoning: if it be
not new, all is well. For this is well said of an Hebrew writer, and worth the
bearing in mind. (...) Better is the grape gleaning of the ancient, then the
gathering of the later. Neither is it lightly to be regarded, which Josephus in
his second book against Apion affirms: that length of time is a most sure
proof.

For my own part, I reverence antiquities gray hears as much as any other,
who bears but this indifferency to think that good reason is above all. For
without it I would not have her contradicted.

Wherefore least this opinion of newness discredit my judgment: I am to let
the reader understand, that though it be not so rife as other: yet it is more
ancient then peradventure may be thought. Tertullian was one of the Latin
Fathers most ancient, and very near the Apostles, flourishing in the reign
of Seuerus the Emperor, about 200. years after Christ's birth, and not past
one hundred after the death of John the Evangelist. Who in a book of his,
written against the Jews, expounding this prophecy of Daniels weeks,
begins the reckoning thereof from a Darius, which reigned nineteen years,
after whom these four succeeded one after another to the end of the Persian
Monarchy. First Artaxerxes, then Ochus, after him Arses, and last of all
another Darius, who was overcome by Alexander. Whereby it is manifest that he
means the same Darius that I do: for the beginning of this 490. years.
Only herein he was deceived, that he supposed this Darius to be the same which
is mentioned in the ninth of Daniel, and reigned over the Medes, when this
message was brought unto him by the Angel Gabriell. And for the end thereof
he brings it to the first year of Vespasian making this conclusion of all
his account: Ita in diem expugnationis suae Iudaei impleuerunt hebdomadas 70.
praedictas in Daniele. So the Jews (says Tertullian) at the day of their
subdewing fulfilled the 70. weeks foretold by Daniel.

Thus for the Persian king, under whom Daniels weeks begun, there is no great
difference between Tertullian and me: and for the time wherein they ended none
at all.

After Tertullian Seuerus Sulpitius, of the same standing with Augustine,
Epiphanius, and Chrysostom, a writer for skill in the Persian story deserving
great commendation, and to the true understanding of Ezra, and Nehemias, and
Daniels weeks brings such light, as is not in any ancient writer that ever I
read to be found the like.

This Father in the second book of his holy history speaking of Cyrus, says
that he gave the Jews leave in the beginning of his reign to build the
Temple, wherein they went a little forward, till such time as they were
hindered by their enemies nere a hundred years after, in the reign of
Artaxerxes, who forbad them to meddle any more in that work, which by that
means ceased till the second year of Darius. The same Author after Cyrus
having spoken of Cambyses, Darius Hystaspis, and Xerxes, places next him that
Artaxerxes; Qui templi aedificatione^ inhibuit, which forbad the building of
the Temple, and then having set another Xerxes with his brother Sogdianus
between, comes to that Darius under whom the temple was restored, and the
building thereof perfected in the sixth year of his reign: From which time to
the destruction of the City by Vespasian, he numbreth 483. years. His words
be these, Caeterum a restitutione templi vsque in euersionem quae sub
Vespasiano Consule Augusto per Titum Caesarem consummata est, anni 483.
Praedictum id olim est a Daniele, qui ab instauratione templi ad euersionem
eius 69. hebdomadas futuras pronunciauerat: But from the restoring of the
Temple, (says Seuerus) to the overthrow of it, which by Titus Caesar was
finished under Vespasian then being imperial Consul, were 483. years.

That was by Daniel long ago foretold, who had before declared that from the
restoring of the Temple, to the overthrow of it should be 69. weeks, whereas
he says that Daniel foretold 69. weeks to be from the restoring of the
Temple to the destruction thereof: it is true being understood from the
commandment going out concerning that restoring, to the time wherein the
desolation of the City, and the overthrow of the Jews common wealth begun:
for Daniel in plain words foreshewed that after 69. weeks counted from that
commandment, Messiah should be cut off, and the City and Temple destroyed,
leaving the last week of the seventy, for the accomplishing thereof: wherein by
certain degrees by little and little it was wrought by the Romans.

The ruin begun under Albinus his government strait after the 69. weeks, as
before has been proved by one or two evident testimonies of Josephus. It
continued and increased more and more under Florus, till at the length Titus
under his father Vespasian made a final end and utter undoing of all.

Thus Seuerus Sulpitius, most manifestly declares his judgment for the
beginning of Daniels weeks, to be referred to the reign of Darius Nothus, and
the end of them to be made in the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, not seeing
how the Prophecy of Daniel might otherwise be understood or applied,
beginning and end to any other kings.

Joseph Scaliger in his 6 book de emendatione temporum, acknowledges Darius
Nothus to be the Persian king, by whose decree the building of the temple was
restored. And that from that time the account of Daniels weeks begins. The
end he refers to the destruction of Jerusalem. Ab instaurandis Hierosolymis
incipiunt hebdomades, in Hierosolymorum excidium terminantur. Neque enim
frustra caput hebdomadum ad Herosolymorium incolumitatem pertinet, cum earum
finis ad eiusdem vrbis casum et deletionem pertineat. The weeks begin, says
Scaliger, at the restoring of Jerusalem, and end in the overthrow of it.
Neither is it without cause that their beginning pertayneth to the safety of
Jerusalem, seeing that the end thereof belongs to the fall and destruction of
the same city. Understanding the time wherein the war against the Jews
begun their desolation.

Lastly Iunius in the last edition of his bible, in his notes upon the 9. of
Daniell numbreth these 70. weeks, from the second of Darius Nothus, to the
second of Vespasian wherein Titus destroyed Jerusalem.

Moreover for the end of these weeks Clemens Alexa^drinus was of the same
judgment, a man for great knowledge rare, and as ancient, if not more then
Tertullian, whose near age to the apostles I have spoken of before. He thought
them to expire in the destruction of the city by Titus.

Also Origin in his 29. treatise upon Matthew was of the same opinion, and
Chrysostom in his 2. oration against the Jews: To say nothing of the Hebrew
writers houlding the same, Aben Ezra, Iarchi and R. Leui Gershoms son in
their commentaries and R. Abraham in his historical cabbala.

And surely whosoever reads the place of Daniell with an even mind, not
prevented with prejudice, or blinded with affection: shall hardly find any
other end wherein those seuenets of years can settle their feet to rest, for
having divided the whole 70. into 3. parts: first he shows what was to be
done in seven weeks, and then in 62. and lastly in that one which was left
after the 62. before the end whereof, he makes mention of Messiah to be cut
off, and the city destroyed. If Daniel having propounded to himself an exact
and straight order of weeks, should first tell of Messiah his cutting off in
one week, and then of the destruction and desolation of Jerusalem about 37
years after it, and then presently come back again to the sacrifices
abolished in the same week which he had spoken of before, and immediately after
go yet once again to that desolation which happened 40. years after very
near: it were a strange kind of ridling, and far more confuse then the vain
oracles of Delphos; especially seeing that these clauses and parts, are joined
and knit together by no other but copulative conjunctions. And therefore it is
no marvel that those excellent and worthy fathers, as well as the Hebrew
scholiastes could find no place by Daniels text for his weeks to stay in, but
the overthrow of the Jews common wealth by the Romans.

The end thus appearing by their testimony, the beginning cannot be hid. It
must needs fall to the reign of Darius Nothus where I set it.

Hereby it appears, that this exposition of Daniels weeks by me brought, is
neither new nor any singular devise of my own. I have Eusebius, and
Theodoretus and Aben Ezra, and, R. Abraham in his cabbala, with other hebrew
writers befornamed with me for the Messiah cut off, to be understood of the
gouenor of Jerusalem, R. Leui also very near agreeing thereunto: and differing
only in this, that in stead of the anointed princes understood of them by the
name of Messiah, he rather takes the anointed priests to be meant. Yea and
that which is of far greater force then all their authorities, the plain
testimony of God his word which nu^breth 7. weeks only to Messiah and no
more: as before I have already proved by the original text which if Eusebius
and Theodoretus had thoroughly known, as the Hebrews their partners in that
judgment did, they would have stoutly stood for it against all the world.

For the end of the weeks in the desolation of the city, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Origin, Crysostom, Sulpitius, Scaliger, Iunius,
testify with me. And 4. of them for both beginning and end agreeing or very
little differing.

I am not ignorant that though Joseph Scaliger refer the end of these weeks
to the desolation of the temple: yet he understands by the name of Messiah in
the 26 verse, Christ Jesus our redeemer to be killed after 62. weeks,
containing years 434. And that these 434. years ended in the death of Christ,
and begun in the 5. year of Artaxerxes Mnemon, wherein by a new decree, leave
was given to Esdras the priest to return with such of his countriemen as would
go with him to Jerusalem.

I am loath to speak any thing without reverence and love of so excellent a
man, who has brought much light to the true understanding of this prophecy.
This is all which I will say, that his opinion for this matter, wandreth far
astray out of reasons path. For how can this be proved that Artaxerxes Mnemon
gave out any decree for Esdras in the 5. of his reign, either by profane
learning or divine scripture? It is said in Esdras, that he went to Jerusalem
in the 7. year of that king. And therefore by the authority of that place
skillful men have laid the foundation of Daniels seuenets in the 7. year of
Artaxerxes. How then is his fifth year brought in for a new decree? Ab eo
edicto ad perfectionem Esdrae annus solidus interest. There was one whole
year, says Scaliger, between the decree and Esdras his going. And what
reason has he for this? Surely none at all but this bare conjecture. Eo
interuallo opus fuit Esdrae ad reliquias Iudaeorum per Babiloniam, Mediam, ac
Persidem sparsas colligendas. That space, says he, was needful for Esdras to
gather together such Jews as were left scattered abroad, through Babylonia,
Media, and Persia.

This is nothing else but a proofles conceit: a fancy unfit to build any
credit or faith upon. If such kind of gessing might stand for reason, it were a
hundred fould more prone to be gathered that the decree was made presently
upon his going in the very same year, as Functius and other of the learned by
view of that scripture have judged. For what matter was it for so great a man of
that estimation and honor that Esdras was in, to gather 1500. speedily
together. Could it possibly take a years preparation in such a willing people
of themselves so ready to go? Or if it were so great a matter and a work of
so long time, could so Godly and so zealous a priest be so negligent in the
Lords business, that having a years warning to gather a little company
together, he should forget the Levites, which of al other were most necessary
in regard of Gods service in the temple of Jerusalem? For when al were come
together, no Leuit was found among them: the chiefest of all, in a whole years
space, were never thought upon, till he was in some forwardness on his way:
then on a sudden he sent to seek for them. Read the 8. chapter of Esdras the
15. verse, and see how that which is there told can bear any such conjecture.

But to let that pass, it is not a years matter that can serve Joseph
Scaligers turn, to help out his devise, and to bring this gear about. For by
the judgment almost of all the best writers, by the space of this twelve
hundred years, our blessed Savior suffered toward the end of the last year
of the 202. Olympiad: at which time was observed, even by profane Authors, the
strange eclipse of the Sun, which happened at the passion of Christ. Phlegon,
by the judgment of Eusebius, an excellent accounter of Olympiads, in his
foureteenth book writes thus. In the fourth year of the 202. Olympiad was an
exceeding great eclipse of the Sun, above all other that ever happened
before. The day at the 6. hour, that is, high noone, was so turned into dark
night, that the stars were seen in heaven: and an Earthquake overthrew many
houses in Nice, a city of Bythinia.

This Eusebius testifies of Phlegon: and it agrees notably to the testimony
of the Evangelists, touching the Suns darkening from the 6. hour to the 9.
when Christ was crucified. Thence therefore numbering backward 434. years, from
the 202. Olympiad almost at an end, we come to the second year of the 94
Olympiad drawing to an end: at which time, even by Scaligers own opinion, the
third year of Artaxerxes Memor begun. By this means not one, as Scaliger
says, but four full years at the least: that is, the third, fourth, fifth,
and sixth years of Artaxerxes should have been between the decree and the
going of Esdras to Jerusalem.

I know that Scaliger puts off the time of Christ's passion a year further
then other. But if that were granted him, yet should the decree go full three
years before Esdras his coming to Jerusalem. A thing incredible and beyond
all sense of reason, that leave should be given Esdras to go to the house of
God, and a solemn decree by the kings authority published for it, and he
linger and protract the time of his going three years after.

Besides, even the Prophets own words are altogether against this
interpretation of Scaliger, and will no ways suffer it. For first having
expounded the general sum of 70. weeks for the state of Jerusalem, he
deuideth them so into three parts, as that the first should be to the building
of the walls and city finished, and then 62. for the continuing thereof so
builded, and after all them one more.

Who having the reason of a man in him, can gather any other thing by Daniels
words, but that those 62. weeks spoken of, should immediately follow after the
first seven, and go next before the last one? Which being so, needs must they
begin after the 32. of Artaxerxes, and end seven years before the utter ruin
of Jerusalem, brought upon it by Titus.

Moreover, it is to be observed, that after the first seven, set for the
restoring and building of the city, he says, that the city should be builded
62. weeks street and wall, and that after, not some other, but even these
very same 62. weeks before spoken of, should Messiah be cut off and the city
made desolate. For the demonstratiue article in (...), has this force, to
refer us to a known thing spoken of: which is likewise usual in the Greek
tongue. What the^ can Scaliger make of this, that Christ should be killed after
those 62. weeks, wherein the city of Jerusalem continued builded street and
wall? For it is well known that Jerusalem continued so builded street and
wall above thirty years after the passion of Christ, before it begun to be
made desolate, and in all that time greatly flourished. This interpretation
therefore of Scaliger has no success for probability.

Another thing in Scaliger troubled me more then this: by reason of the
excellency of the man, not making any doubt of his account: Hebdomades
incipientes ab edicto instaurandi templi desinunt in initio abominationis, hoc
est, circa initia belli Iudaici, quo primum caedes in vrbe patrari coeptae ac
templum pollui: quod tempus incurrit in finem vndecimi and initium duodecimi
anni Neronis. The weeks (says Scaliger) beginning from the decree to restore
the temple, do end in the beginning of the abomination: that is, about the
beginnings of the Jews war, when slaughters first begun to be committed in
the city, and the Temple to be polluted: which time met with the end of the
eleventh and beginning of the twelfth year of Nero.

This saying of Scaliger made me marvel, till such time as I made some doubt
of his reckoning, and called it into question. For if the 70. weeks of Daniel
were (as he says) ended in the beginning of Nero his twelfth year; my
account cannot possibly stand, drawing them on further to the utter
destruction of the holy city by Titus, which happened four years after.
This therefore is to be examined. Darius Nothus died a little before the end of
the 93. Olympiad. This is agreed between us, that from the decree to his
death, had passed seventeen years, it is likewise agreed. For Scaliger
numbering the first seven weeks, says, that after the second year of Darius,
seventeen years are left to the beginning of Artaxerxes Memor: whereunto 32.
being added, the sum is 49. years, being the distance from the decree to the
streets ordered.

By this means the decree being made 17. years before the death of Darius,
and that by his own judgment, must needs fall toward the end of the third
year of the 89. Olympiad: from which time to the first year of the 212.
Olympiad almost expired, when Titus destroyed the suburbs of the city, and
battered the walls with his iron rams about the 22. day of April, as Paulus
Eberus writes in his Jewish story: about a fortnight after which time in the
beginning of May, one of their walls was broken, and part of the city entered
and won, were full 490. years, and not 494. as Scaligers deceitful account
would make it. Scaliger therefore rather prepared a way for others to come to
the truth, then came himself unto it: and gave some light to other to see the
right meaning of Daniels prophecy, which himself never perfectly saw. By his
help Junius saw somewhat more, and came nearer unto it then he: yet so as he
has likewise done that for other which Scaliger did for him: that is, left
somewhat behind to be understood of other, which himself never attained.
Especially in the 26. verse, where it is said, that after those 62. weeks
Messiah shall be cut off. Where Master Iunius uses some wresting by turning
the future tence into the preterperfect, and leaving out some conjunctions, and
changing other: thereby making the accusative case of the nominative, rejecting
the ancient interpretations Greek and Latin, without any cause.

These inconveniences they are of force driven unto, who by the word Messiah,
do not with Eusebius and the Hebrew expositors understand the anointed
governors. Some may here say unto me: Is it not plain by the 24. verse, that
Daniel in this prophecy speaks of Jesus Christ the redeemer of the world,
of whose death so many singular and notable effects are declared therein: of
abolishing sin, of reconciling sinners unto the favor of God, and bringing
everlasting righteousness, and fulfilling whatsoever had been foretold by the
former Prophets of him? I answer to this, that of all other places in the old
Testament touching the coming of Christ, whereof there is great store, that
verse of Daniel is most excellent and clear: yet withal I deny that by the
name of Messiah in the verses following, Christ our Savior is understood. For
neither the true account of years will suffer it, nor the text of holy
Scripture bear it.

But how then is it here said, that 70. weeks were decreed for abolishing
sin and making atonement, if Christ came not in the end of those 70.
weeks? The meaning is, that within the space of those 70. weeks, Christ by
his passion should work that redemption and salvation from sin and wrath to
the world. As Tertullian speaks in his book against the Jews: where writing
of the passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, he says that it was perfected in
the time of Tiberius Caesar, Intra tempora septuaginta hebdomadarum, within the
times of the seventy weeks.

I am not ignorant that by the Hebrew writers, it is a thing acknowledged and
granted, that Christ came in the very end of those weeks. For they held that
their Messiah should begin to reign at the destruction of Jerusalem. And
therefore Rabbi Leui ben Gershom expounding those words of this text, to bring
everlasting righteousness, and to seal up vision and prophet, refers the
fulfilling thereof to the kingdom of Christ, which he calls the fifth
kingdom, because it was to succeed the other four spoken of before in the
second and seventh chapters of this prophecy.

It was an old tradition amongst the Hebrews of ancient time, received from
the school of Elias, declared in their Talmud, in the treatise Sanhedrim the
eleventh chapter, and diverse other places, that the world should endure six
thousand years: whereof two thousand should be void without the law, two
thousand under the law, and two thousand the time of Christ. Whereby the
judgment appears concerning the coming of Christ, that it should be at the
desolation of the holy city immediately after the ceasing of the law. For the
law then ceased, and all the ceremonies thereof ended, when Jerusalem, the seat
of God his worship, according to that law, was destroyed by Titus, and neither
place nor people there left any longer for the law-seruice of God. Diverse such
testimonies of the ancient Hebrews are recorded by Philip of Morney Lord of
Plessie in his book of the truth of Christian Religion, the 29. and 30.
chapters: whereby he gathers that it was a common opinion among them, that the
Messiah should come about the destruction of the Temple. R. Hama the son of
Hauina in the same chapter of the Talmudicall treatise before alleged, said,
that the son of David should not come, so long as any sovereign authority
(were it never so small) remained in Israel. Also R. Mili alleging Rabbi
Eliezer the son of Simeon, said, that Christ should not come until there
were a clean riddance of all Judges and Magistrates in Israel. And R. Moses
Haddarsan upon the 49. of Genesis, gave this judgment of the Jews Senate,
consisting of seventy Elders or Judges called Sanhedrim; that they were not to
cease before the coming of the Messiah. Let us then examine when the
authority of those Judges and all government ceased in Jerusalem, that thereby
we may know the time of Christ his coming by the Hebrew writers opinion. That
honorable Lord of Plessie in his book before mentioned, having cited the
testimony of Philo in his book of Times, to prove that Herod slew all the
Sanhedrim about the 30. year of his reign, affirms that to be the time
wherein the sovereignty and jurisdiction of Judah did cease: not for a few
days or years, but for a continual time. How this may stand for truth I
cannot perceive. For to say nothing of that fained Philo, an author forged in
the shop of Annius his toying brain: it is well known that the commonwealth
of Jerusalem and Iewrie flourished with princely rule and other government of
Magistrates, yea of the very Sanhedrim themselves, above three score and ten
years after that time, even to Ierusalems desolation. Christ in the 30. year
of Herod was yet unborn: who about the 33. year of his age, in the sixteenth
of Matthew, foretold to his Disciples, what he was to suffer of the Elders and
chief Priests and Scribes. All these were governors and rulers of the city;
and by the name of Elders, the best interpreters have especially understood
those Sanhedrim, having great reason for it. For these Sanhedrim were nothing
else but (...) that is, 70. Elders of the great Consistory or iudgemeat place
in Jerusalem. As by Elias Leuita they are described in his Tishbi. The old
Rabbis in their Talmud have borrowed from the Greek tongue many words: whereof
this word (...) Sanhedrim is one, signifying a sitting of Judges or Senators
together in council or judgment. So it is taken in the 107. Psalm the 32.
verse, by the Chaldie interpreter: where for these Hebrew words there used,
(...). Let the^ praise him in the sitting, that is, the assembly of the
Elders. The Targum has (...), that is, Let them praise him in the sitting
together of the wise: expressing the word of sitting by Sanhedrim, as Synedrion
in Greek is taken. Christ therefore in the fifth of Matthew, saying, Whosoever
calls his brother Raca, (...), shall be bound over to a sessions or sitting:
means the sitting in judgment of the Sanhedrim; applying his speech to the
manner of the civil judgments in Jerusalem. Josephus in his 20. book of
Antiquities the eight chapter, tells, that when Festus the Roman governor
was dead, Ananus the high priest, (...), made the assembly of the Judges to
sit, by whom James the brother of Christ, was adjudged to be stoned. This
happened under the governor Albinus, not long before the destruction of the
city. Whereby may be gathered, that magistracy, judgment, and government,
yea the authority of the 70. Judges called Sanhedrim; continued long after
Herod's 30. year, and was not cut off, till the desolation of Jerusalem brought
it to an end. For when the wars begun to work the desolation thereof then
king Agrippa, by seditious rakehels, was driven out of it: then were the
Sanhedrim deposed at the rebels will, and other base men set up in their stead:
as Josephus tells in the fifth book of the Jews war the first chapter. Then
was the Priesthood and all good order made a mockery. The rebellious cutters
did what they list, no laws to restrain them, no magistracy to punish them,
no authority to bridle them. They ruled al at their own pleasures themselves
as they would: good government was turned into anarchie and disorder, and
Jerusalem became, as Josephus terms it, (...), a city without a guide.

And this it is that Daniel says touching Messiah to be cut off in the last
week of the seventy: meaning the rule and authority of the anointed
governor, as before I have expounded the place. Thus by the judgment of the
Hebrew writers in their ancient monuments, the coming of Christ falls to
the fall of the Jews commonwealth, in the overthrow of Jerusalem, when
government and authority ceased therein: which long before had been foretold
by the Patriarch Jacob in the 49. of Genesis, in that old prophecy of his
concerning the coming of Christ: The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a
law giver from between his feet till Shiloh come: and him shall the people
gather themselves unto. For together with this divine oracle of Daniel, that
other most ancient and excellent prophecy of Jacob, hitherto not perfectly and
clearly, according to the true meaning thereof, declared of any that I know of,
may receive light.

Many have sought the fulfilling of that prophecy in the first coming of
Christ at his birth: but without straying it could never yet be there found.
For the meaning of it was, that in the tribe of Judah should be royal
supremacy and government of Magistrates, for the good of the Jews, and
upholding of their Commonwealth, till the coming of Christ: whose new
spiritual reign, by the preaching of the Gospel, should abolish their old
earthly kingdom and outward policy. So was the place understood by the Hebrew
Doctors aforenamed, R. Hama, R. Mili, R. Eliezer.

The Chaldie paraphrasts both of them most excellently expound the place, which
themselves understood not: being like therein unto Virgils Bees, which make
honey for other, and not themselves. First Onchelos interprets it in this
manner; A Magistrate exercising authority of the house of Judah shall not
depart, nor a Scribe of his posterity for ever, till Christ come, to whom the
kingdom pertains, and him shall the people obey. The other called the
interpreter of Jerusalem, thus: Kings of the house of Judah shall not fail,
neither skilful law-teachers of his posterity, unto the time wherein the king
Christ shall come: unto whom the kingdom pertains, and all the kingdoms of
the earth shall be subdued unto him. If Christ came when authority was gone,
and authority went away at Ierusalems fall: needs must one coming of Christ
be referred to the overthrow of that city.

R. Moses of Tyroll and Bioces looked for the coming of Christ toward the end
of the second Temple: being led thereunto partly by their own reckoning upon
Daniel, and partly by a text in the last chapter of the prophet Esaias the
seventh verse: where it is said, Before her throws came upon her she was
delivered of a manchilde. Some of the Rabbines said, Messiah was borne the very
same day that the second temple was destroyed in: supposing that scripture of
Esaias to be therein fulfilled. In their book called Bereshith Rabba, is read
this parable: As a certain Jew was at plow, an Arabian passing by hearing one
of his oxen low, bad him unyoke, because the destruction of the Temple was at
hand. And by and by hearing also the other low, bad him unyoke out of hand,
because the Messiah was already come. R. Abon in another place telling the
same: What need we (says he) to learn it of the Arabians, seeing the text it
self declares it?

Josephus in the seventh book of the Jews war, the twelfth chapter,
writes, that in the holy Scripture was found an old prophecy, that at the
time of the overthrow of Jerusalem, a king should come out of Iewrie, who
should reign over all the world: which he by flattering falsehood, interpreted
of Vespasian. This prophecy in those days was bruted abroad in many men's
mouths every where: yea, some write that it was engraven in an open place of
the castle at Jerusalem: which (as Josephus writes) made the Jews at that
time so ready to rebel. And this was the cause that so many fained themselves
to be the Messiah about that time of the destruction of the Temple. Under
Cuspius Fadus, one Theudas a iugler made the people believe that he was a
prophet, and would divide the waters of Jordan that they should go over dry,
as they had done long before miraculously, in the time of Joshua by the power
of God. And when Felix was the Roman governor of Judea, one coming out of
Egypt, fayning himself to be a prophet, persuaded the people if they would
follow him to mount Oliuet, they should see the walls of Jerusalem fall down.
And afterward one Barcozba, so called of his lying, took upon him to be the
Messiah, and seduced many: but in the end performing not the deliverance looked
for at his hands, he was knocked on the head for his lying and slain.

All these took advantage of the time, being answerable to their intent, and
of the peoples disposition, then looking for their promised Christ. Moreover,
there was yet another prophecy bruted amongst them, that Doctor Hillels
scholars should never fail till Christ were come. The youngest of them was R.
Iochaman the son of Zacheus, who lived to see the destruction of the Temple:
and also the miracle of a great gate thereof, a little before opening of it
self: which Josephus speaks of in his seventh book and twelfth chapter of
the Jews war: Whereat this R. Iochaman being amazed, remembered this saying
of the Prophet Zachary in the beginning of his 11. chapter: Open thy gates O
Libanus, and let fire consume thy cedars: applying the place to the coming of
Christ.

Furthermore they had amongst them these old traditions touching the tokens of
Christ's coming. When Christ the son of David comes, says R. Judas, there
shall be few wise men in Israel, and the wisdom of the scribes shall stink,
and the schools of divinity shall become brothelhouses. R. Nehorai said that
good men in Israel should be abhorred, and men's countenaunces past shame at
Christ's coming. And R. Nehemias said, that wickkednesse should be multiplied
without measure, and nothing but unto wardnesse and Epicurisme amongst them.
What is this else but that ouerspreading of abominations which Daniell
foretells should be in those times of the desolation of Jerusalem? which is
declared as large by Josephus, pointing out the abominable doings of the Jews
at that time committed against nature, and all law of God and man. The
religious and holy places (says Josephus) were defiled by the unclean feet
of wicked men: The temple of God was held and kept as a tower of defense
against the people by the seditious rebels: the holy ground was sprinkled with
the blood of wounded men, contrary to Gods law entering thereunto: strangers
and towne-borne, profane and holy were mingled together: and the blood of
diverse men being slain, made a poole in the courts of the Lords house. They
abused the divine vessels, anointed themselves with the holy oil, drunk of
the consecrate wine. In every place of the city was spoiling and robbery.
Burning with lust they forced women in most filthy and abominable manner for
their pleasure, living in Jerusalem as a stews or brothelhouse. At this their
extreme wickedness God was offended: and abhorred his city, and detested his
temple.

All this Josephus testifies in diverse places. And in the 2. chapter of his 5.
book of the Jews war. All law of God and man (says he) was trodden under
foot and derided. The holy oracles of the prophets were counted no better then
common fables and tales. And contemning of the decrees their forfathers
touching vice and virtue, by the event they verified those things which long
before had been foretold of their country. For an old prophecy, as Josephus
witnesses, went abroad, that then the city should be taken, and the temple
burnt: when sedition should arise amongst them, and their own hands first
defile God his sanctuary.

Thus do Josephus and Daniel refer the reigning and ouerflowing abominations
of the Jews, to the destruction of Jerusalem, which the Hebrew Rabbines
applied to the coming of Christ: So that is proved true which the Lord of
Plessie in his book aforenamed affirms, that it was a common opinion among
the Jews for their Messiah to come about the destruction of the Temple, which
for any thing that I can see to the contrary, may in some sort not without
reason be yielded unto: For two commings of Christ are declared in holy
scripture. The first in humility spoken of by Zachary in his ninth Chapter.
Rejoice greatly Oh daughter of Sion, be glad O daughter of Jerusalem, for lo
thy king comes unto thee, even the righteous and Savior, lowly and simple
ryding upon an Ass and a coult the fool of an Ass. The other in glory
wherein Christ came in his kingdom: whereof we read in the sixteen chapter of
Matthew the last verse. Verily I say unto you, there be some of them that stand
here, which shall not taste of death till they have seen the son of man
come in his kingdom, and before in the tenth chapter of the some Evangelist.
You shall not finish all the Cities of Israel till the son of man be come.
And in the twenty one chapter of John. If I will that he tarry till I come,
what is that to thee? whereof this word went abroad that this Disciple should
not die.

All these speeches our Savior Christ uttered being once come already, and
after his first coming: wherefore that an other second coming of his therein
is to be understood, is so clear and manifest, that it need not be stood
upon: which in my judgment can not to any time more fitly agree, then that
wherein the city of Jerusalem with the holy Temple of God therein was
destroyed, according to the opinion of the Hebrews before declared. Then
Christ our Lord first begun to appear a revenging judge against the wicked and
stubborn Jews, in punishing them for their malice against him at his death,
and cruel persecution of his Church afterward, as Eusebius declares in the
third book of his ecclesiastical history, the fifth chapter.

Master Iunius, in his annotations on this ninth Chapter of Daniel expounding
those words: From the going forth of the commandment to restore and build
Jerusalem unto Christ, shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks;
refers them to the coming of Christ, and that coming of Christ, to the
last of Daniels weeks, wherein the desolation of Jerusalem began, yielding
this reason: because then Christ declared himself a Lord by a most severe
judgment against Jerusalem and the Jews, and by the benefit of the Gospel a
Prince and head of the Church, which reigns in the house of David for ever.

Master Calvin in his harmony acknowledges that by the judgment of some
expositors, that place in the tenth of Matthew, was referred to the desolation
of the holy City made by the Romans. In the 24. chapter of Matthew, when
Christ upon the Disciples praising of the glorious building of the Temple, had
spoken of the destruction thereof to come, wherein one stone should not be
left upon another. They asked him when those things should be, and what sign
should be of his coming, and of the end of the world, joining these three
things together, the desolation of the Temple, the coming of Christ, and the
end of the world, as it were all pertaining to one time, and therefore for that
which is asked in Matthew touching the sign of Christ's coming, and the end of
the world: in the other two Evangelists Mark and Luke, this only is
demanded, what sign should be of the destruction of Gods holy Temple in
Jerusalem: whereby may be gathered that the Apostles of Christ held the opinion
of the old Hebrews concerning the coming of Christ at the desolation of the
Temple, and therein a change of the world: for after that the state of the old
Church should be once overthrown, the ancient Hebrews looked for a new
world, as it were by the new reign of their Messiah, which in their writings
they called (...) that is, the world to come, understanding thereby the time of
Christ's kingdom.

This appears in the Chaldie paraphrasis of Ionathas the son of Vzziell in
the first of kings the fourth chapter and 32. verse, where he calls the
days of Christ (...) the world to come of Messiah: for the Authors of the
Jews law called Talmud, treating of sacrifices in the chapter (...) that is,
the bullock of the sin offering contained the whole time of this life, from
Adam the first man to the last that ever shall be borne, in two worlds, which
in Hebrew they call (...) The first from the beginning of things created to
the coming of Christ. The second from that time to the resurrection of the
dead. This tradition of the Hebrews made an end of the old world in the
coming of Christ. The Disciples then asking what should be the sign of
Christ's coming and the end of the world, may seem to have thought the very
same, and understood the same world which ended at the coming of Messiah to
reign in a new world by the Gospel, and for this cause those times between
the preaching of Christ and Jerusalem destroyed, were called the last days in
the second chapter of the Acts of the Apostles the 17. verse. In the last
days says God, I will power of my spirit upon all flesh, and in the beginning
of the Epistle to the Hebrews. In these last days God has spoken unto us by
his son. These last days are all one with the end of the world, spoken of by
the blessed Apostle Paul, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, the tenth
Chapter, eleventh verse, calling that time the ends of the world. These things
(says he) were written to admonish us, upon whom the ends of the world are
come, and in the Epistle to the Hebrews the ninth chapter, and twenty six
verse. Now in the end of the world has Christ appeared once to put away sin
by the sacrifice of himself. That which R. Nehemias said of wickedness to be
multiplied against the coming of Christ, is it not in plain words verified
by Christ himself in the very same twenty four Chapter of Matthew the twelft
verse, giving this for one token of his coming and the desolation of Jerusalem
to be at hand, that iniquity should abound and charity wax cold? If any here
demand, how the second coming of Christ can be with any reason referred to
the destruction of Jerusalem, seeing that it is evident by that very same
twenty four chapter of Matthew, that the coming of Christ to judgment at the
latter day is there described, by ye suddennes thereof, by his appearing in the
clouds, the gathering of the elect with the sound of a trumpet, by the doom of
the judge declared in the next chapter, where the same argument is continued.
Come ye blessed of my father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the world: depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is
prepared for the devil and his angels. I answer that the second coming of
Christ contains his whole reign, jurisdiction, and judgment, in the City
of God the heavenly Jerusalem by the gospel preached, from the desolation of ye
outward and earthly Jerusalem when it begun, to the end of the world at the
resurrection of all flesh: so that the destruction of Jerusalem, and the latter
doom, being both included within the time of Christ's second coming: there is
no let but that the coming of Christ may be referred to both: to one in regard
of the beginning, to the other in regard of the end and consummation thereof.
And this is the cause that Christ there speaking of his second coming,
blendeth these two together, the desolation of Jerusalem and his last
judgment, because both pertained to one and the same kingdom of Christ. And
hereof it is that respecting the beginning of that kingdom, in the destruction
of Jerusalem, wherein he first appeared a rauenging judge, he says, that
that generation should not pass till all those things were fulfilled. All one
with that in the end of the sixteen chapter of the same Gospel. Verily I say
unto you, some of them that stand here shall not taste of death, till they have
seen the son of man come in his kingdom. What time was there more fit for
an other coming of Christ to fall unto within one generation from those words
by him uttered a little before his death then this? what time more agreeable to
that, which after his resurrection he spoke of John's tarrying till he came,
then the downfall of the Jews estate and the utter desolation of their City,
and common wealth, which that Evangelist lived to see? It is not unlike or
disagreeing to reason, that then should begin the spiritual reign of Christ
over all Nations by the preaching of the Gospel; when the doctrine of the law
with all the ceremonies thereof were utterly abolished. That then should begin
the heavenly kingdom of Christ, when ye earthly kingdom of the Jews, and all
their law government was first extinct. That then should begin the inward
subjection of Gods new people the elect amongst the Gentiles, and the
spiritual service of GOD, when the Jews outward worship had ceased. That then
should begin the spiritual Sion and new Jerusalem from heaven, when the
earthly Sion and old Jerusalem had no more being. According to the saying of
Esaias the Prophet in his second chapter: It shall come to pass in the last
days, that the mountain of the Lords house shall be prepared in the top of
the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations shall flow
unto it. And many people shall go, and say, Come, let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us
his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the Law shall go forth of Sion,
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Where, by the high mountain of the
Lords house, and the names of Sion and Jerusalem, is understood not any
certain earthly place, or material city: but the Church of Christ ruled and
guided by the preaching of the Gospel. Which the Apostle in the fourth chapter
of the epistle to the Galathians, calls (...): that is, high Jerusalem, or
Jerusalem which is above. Alluding to the former prophecy of Esaias, and
opposing the high Jerusalem to the earthly and material Jerusalem, which begot
children of bondage by the law like Agar, and mount Sinai there called the new
Jerusalem, or Jerusalem that now is. For as there were two kinds of Jews,
spoken of by Paul in his Epistle to the Romans the second chapter, one
visible, the other secret: so there were two Ierusalems, one outward by the
visible ceremonies of the Law: the other in ward by the spiritual graces of
the Gospel, which is Christ his Church termed the heavenly Jerusalem in the
Epistle to the Hebrews the twelfth chapter and 22. verse. This heavenly
Jerusalem then begun when the earthly Jerusalem was brought to an end, being
destroyed by the Roman army and consumed by fire, and the Jews led captive
and dispersed abroad.

The preaching of the gospel begun long before the destruction of Jerusalem I
confess, even by Christ himself while he lived: and continewed after by the
apostles for the space of 40. years. All this is true. Yet so as withal the
outward and civil government of the Jews common wealth with their
ceremonial service and law worship remained still all that while in the holy
city and temple of God. And therefore that preaching of Christ and his
apostles so long before, seemed rather a preparation to this kingdom of
Christ, then any perfect beginning thereof. According to that manner of
preaching used by Christ and followed of his apostles: Mat. 4.17. Mat. 10.7.
repent for the kingdom of God is at hand. Meaning that Christ in his kingdom
was shortly to come, even before they should have gone preaching throughout all
the cities of Israel: as he tells them after in the same chapter. Then was
the full and clear beginning of the new spiritual reign of Christ over God
his people: when the old government and outward service had wholly given
place unto it: when Christ reigned alone in God his church by his gospel
without any fellowship or part taking with the law therein. For those 2. at one
time could not stand together to be both of force. In this respect that which
was said touching Christ in the 24. ver. of ending sin and making atonement,
may be applied to this time: because that although those things were performed
before: yet then especially, and by a kind of excellency Christ sanctified his
church from sin, and reconciled sinners into God his favor: when he did it
alone, all the parts of the law therein being ended. When Christ by his
gospel without any more law-purifyings and oblations was himself all in all.
When the shadow was gone and the body come into the place of it. That also of
the coming of everlasting righteousness, which may be understood of Christ
Jesus himself, being called our righteousness in the prophecy of Jeremy the
23. chapter, and the first epistle to the Corinth. the first chap. does well
agree to the beginning of his reign, whereunto his coming by the Hebrew
writers especially it is referred. And the sealing of vision and prophet so
agreeable likewise unto it, as I se not how it could be fulfilled before. For
amongst many other things foretold of Christ by the prophets in former ages:
his glorious kingdom was one. The time whereof even by Christ him self in
many speeches is set within one generation after his death: and therefore
vision and prophecy was not fully and absolutely before that time performed.
Lastly the anointing of the holy of holies being a ceremony of consecrating
kings to their reign of all other for the beginning of Christ's kingdom is
most fit. Thus we see that opinion of the Hebrews, concerning the fulfilling
of this prophecy in the coming of Christ to reign, referred to the end of
Daniels weeks in the desolation of Jerusalem not to be altogether strange or
absurd, having some motives from holy scripture to persuade us thereto. But it
is not my mind to urge or press any man further for the receiving or holding
thereof then it shall seem good in his own judgment to approve. If any think
rather that other coming of Christ in this place to be understood: that is,
some part of the time wherein he was conversant with men upon earth, from his
birth to his death, it may stand well enough in that sense which before I have
declared.

Thus by God his mercy I have, according to my poor talent, declared my
judgment for the true understanding of Daniels weeks by interpretation of his
words, and account of the times. The beginning of the 55. Olympiad and the
eight day of September, in the second year of Vespasia^, wherein the City of
Jerusalem was fired, by the learned have bin made the extreme years for the
fulfilling of that Prophecy. The space between contained, is 629. years and
two months. Within this compass some have gone hier, some lower, for the
beginning and end thereof. Of that space 230. were of the Persian Monarchies,
and from the end of that (...)

The Olympiads. A Cronologicall Table of the Greek Olympiads from the first
restoring of them by Iphitus, to the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans:
with the years of the city of Rome, of the Persian Monarchy, of Christ his
birth, so many as fell within that space, referred thereunto for the better
understanding of the account of Daniels weeks. The years of Romans 1 The first
Olympiad renewed by Iphitus king of Elis began in the 775 year before the birth
of Christ, in the summer season about the first of July. 2 The second Olympiad
containing four years as all the rest of these spaces. 3 4 5 6 7 About the
beginning of this Olympiad was the city of Rome builded, as Eratosthenes,
Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Solinus, and some other in their writings have
testified. 4 8 In the first year of the 8. Olympiad was Nabonassar crowned
king of the Chaldeans the 26. day of February. 8 9 12 10 16 11 20 12 24 13 28

Olymp. 1 2 3 4 Years of R. 14 32 15 36 16 Romulus the first king of Rome died
in the 37. year of his reign. In this year Rome had no king. Numa the second
king of Rome begun in the 39. year thereof. The 2. year of Numa. 40 17 3 4 5 6
44 18 7 8 9 10 48 19 11 12 13 14 52 20 15 16 17 18 56 21 19 20 21 22 60 22 23
24 25 26 64 23 27 28 29 30 68 24 31 32 33 34 72 25 35 36 37 38 76 26 39 40 41
42 80 27 Numa died in the 43. year of his reign. Tullus Hostilius succeeding
reigned 32. years. 2 3 84 28 4 5 6 7 88 29 8 9 10 11 92 30 12 13 14 15 96 31
16 17 18 19 100 32 The 20. year of Tullus Hostilius. 21 22 23 104 33 24 25 26
27 108 34 28 29 30 31 112 35 32 Ancus Martius begun: who reigned 24. years. 2
3 116 36 4 5 6 7 120 37 8 9 10 11 124 38 12 13 14 15 128 39 16 17 18 19 132 40
20 21 22 23 136 41 24 Tarquinius Priscus reigned 38. y. 1 2 3 140 42 4 5 6 7
144 43 8 9 10 11 148 44 12 13 14 15 152 45 16 17 18 19 156 46 20 21 22 23 160
47 24 25 26 27 164 48 28 29 30 31 168 49 32 33 34 35 172 50 36 37 38 Seruius
Tullius reigned 42. years. 1 176 51 2 3 4 5 180 52 6 7 8 9 184 53 10 11 12 13
188 54 14 15 16 17 192

Olymp. Persian Kings. Kings of Rome. Years of Rome. 55 1 This year Cyrus
began his reign over the Persians, about the Spring time, toward the end of
the year. The 18. year of Seruius Tullius. 193 2 2 19 194 3 3 20 195 4 4 21
196 56 1 5 22 197 2 6 23 198 3 7 24 199 4 8 25 200

Olymp. Persian Kings. Kings of Rome. Years of Rome. 57 1 The 9. year of
Cyrus. The 26. of Seruius Tullius. 201 2 10 27 202 3 11 28 203 4 12 29 204 58 1
13 30 205 2 14 31 206 3 15 32 207 4 16 33 208

Olymp. Persian Kings. Kings of Rome. Years of Rome. 59 1 The 17. year of
Cyrus. The 34. of Seruius Tullius. 209 2 18 35 210 3 19 36 211 4 20 37 212 60 1
21 38 213 2 22 39 214 3 23 40 215 4 24 41 216

Olymp. Persian Kings. Kings of Rome. Years of Rome. 61 1 The 25. year of
Cyrus. The 42. year of Seruius Tullius. 217 2 26 43 218 3 27 44 219 4 28
Tarquinius Superbus reigned 1 in Rome. 220 62 1 29 2 221 2 30 3 222 3 Cyrus
slain by Tomyris in the end of his 30. year, which expired in the spring time
of this Olympic year. 4 223 4 Combyses succeeded Cyrus in the end of the
former year, so that this was his first for the most part of it. 5 224

Olymp. Persian Kings. Kings of Rome. Years of Rome. 63 In this Olym.
Parmenides of Camarina wu^ the raze, as Diod. writes. 1 The 3. of Cambyses
began toward the end of this year. The 6. year of Tarquinius. 225 2 4 7 226 3
5 Cambyses subdued Egypt: Diodorus Sic. 8 227 4 6 9 228 64 1 7 The 7. of
Cambyses began about the end of this Olymp. year. 10 229 2 8 The 16. day of
Iulie, about the beginning of this Olymp. year, happened the Eclipse of the
Moon, recorded by Ptolomie in the 7. year of Cambyses 11 230 3 1 Cambyses
wounded by the fall of his sword out of his sheath, dyed thereon, and Smerdis
his his counterfeit brother usurped the kingdom seven months. After whom
Darius Hystaspis was chosen king. 12 231 4 2 Darius began with the spring of
the year before going: by which means his first ran out for the most part of it
together with this year. 13 232

Olymp. Persian Kings. Kings of Rome. Years of Rome. 65 1 3 The second year
of Darius for the most part: yet so as his 3. began toward the end of it. The
14. year of Tarquinius 233 2 4 15 234 3 5 16 355 4 6 17 236 66 1 7 18 237 2 8
19 338 3 9 20 239 4 10 21 240

(...) Olymp. Persian Kings. Consuls of Rome. years of Rome. 69 1 19 M.
Valerius. P. Posthumous Tubertus. 249 2 20 The 20. of Darius began toward the
end of this year, and ran out most of it with the next. P. Valerius. T.
Lucretius. 250 3 In the 20. day of November happened 21 the eclips of the
Moon, recorded by Ptolomie to have been the 20. year of Darius Hyst. P.
Posthumous. Agrippa Meuenius. 251 4 22 Opiter Virginius. Spurius Cassius. 252
70 1 23 Posthumus Cominus. T. Lartius. 253 2 24 Ser. Sulpitius. Marcus Tullius.
254 3 25 P. Veturius. T. Ebutius. 255 4 26 T. Lartius. Q. Cloelius. 256

Olymp. Persian Kings. Consuls of Rome. years of Rome. 71 1 The 27. year of
Darius Hyst. A. Sempronius Atratinus. M. Minutius Augurinus. 257 2 28 A.
Posthumous. T. Virginius. 258 3 29 M. Claudius. P. Seruilius. 259 4 30 A.
Virginius. T. Veturius. 260 72 1 31 Toward the end of this Olympic year was
the eclips of the moon, spoken of by Ptol. for the 31. year of Darius His. a
little after the beginning of his year. Sp. Cassius. Posthumous Cominus. 261 2
32 The Marathon Battle, wherein the Persians had a great overthrow by the
Athenians. T. Gegauius Macerinus. P. Minutius Auguriuus. 262 3 33 A.
Sempronius. M. Minutius. 263 4 34 Q. Sulpitius. Sp. Lartius. 264

Olymp. Persian Kings. Consuls of Rome. Years of Rome. 73 1 The 35. year of
Darius. C. Julius. P. Pinarius. 265 2 This 36. of Darius began near with
April, toward the end of this year, and expired about the same month of the
next year following. Sp. Nautius. Sex. Furius. 266 3 1 Darius died, and Xerxes
his son succeeded about the end of this year. C. Aquilius. T. Sicinius. 267 4
2 Sp. Cassius. Proculus Virginius. 268 74 1 3 Q. Fabius. Ser. Cornelius. 269 2
4 L. Aemilius. Caeso Fabius. 270 3 5 M. Fabius. L. Valerius. 271 4 6 Q. Fabius.
C. Julius. 272

Olymp. Persian Kings. Consuls of Rome. Years of Rome. 75 1 7 Xerxes in the 6.
year of his reign invaded Greece with his huge army, and was put to flight.
Caeso Fabius. Sp. Furius. 273 2 8 Mardonius, whom Xerxes left general of his
forces in Greece, was slain at Plataeae. M. Fabius. Cn. Manlius. 274 3 9 Caeso
Fabius. T. Virginius. 275 4 10 L. Aemilius. C. Seruilius. 276 76 1 11 Q.
Horatius. T. Menenius. The Fabian kindred of Noble Romans slain. 277 2 12 A.
Virginius. Sp. Seruilius. 278 3 13 P. Valerius. C. Nantius. 279 4 14 L. Furius.
C. Manilius. 280

Olymp. Persian Kings. Consuls of Rome. Years of Rome. 77 1 The 15. year of
Xerxes. L. Aemilius. Julius Tullius. 281 2 16 P. Furius. L. Pinarius. 282 3 17
T. Quintius. Ap. Claudius. 283 4 18 L. Valerius. T. Aemilius. 284 78 1 19 A.
Virginius. T. Numicius. 285 2 20 T. Quintius. Q. Seruilius. 286 3 21 This 21.
of Xerxes he reigned not full out: it began about the end of this year. T.
Aemilius. Q. Fabius. 287 4 1 Xerxes slain by Artabanus, one of his chief
Lords: whom Artaxerxes the long handed succeeded. Q. Seruilius. Sp. Posthumous.
288

Olymp. Persian Kings. Consuls of Rome. Years of Rome. 79 1 The second year
of Artaxerxes, under whom the building of the temple was inhibited. T.
Quintius. Q. Fabius. 289 2 3 A. Posthumous. Sp. Furius. 290 3 4 P. Seruilius.
L. Ebutius. 291 4 5 L. Lucretius. T. Veturius. 292 80 1 6 P. Voluminous. Ser.
Sulpitius. 293 2 7 P. Valerius. C. Claudius. 294 3 8 Q. Fabius. L. Cornelius.
295 4 9 Q. Nautius. L. Minutius. 296

Olymp. Persian Kings. Roman Governors. Years of Rome. 81 1 The 10. of
lo^gha^ded Artaxerxes. C. Horatius. Q. Minutius. 297 2 11 M. Valerius. Sp.
Virginius. 298 3 12 T. Romilius. C. Veturius. 299 4 13 Sp. Tarpeius. A.
Aterius. 300 82 1 14 Sex. Quintilius. P. Horatius. 301 2 15 P. Sextius. L.
Menenius. 302 3 16 In stead of Consuls this year 10. magistrates called
Decemuiri ruled the City. 303 4 17 The Decemuirs governed again. 304

Olymp. Persian Kings. Roman Governors. Years of Rome. 83 1 The 18. of
longha^ded Artaxerxes. L. Valerius. M. Horatius. 305 2 19 Lar. Herminius. T.
Virginius. 306 3 20 Euboea taken by Pericles. The 30. years league begin. M.
Geganius. C. Julius. 307 4 21 T. Quintius. Agrippa Furius. 308 84 1 22 M.
Genutius. C. Curtius. 309 2 23 L. Sempronius. L. Papirius. 310 3 24 M.
Geganius. T. Quintius. 311 4 25 M. Fabius. Posthumous Albutius. 312

(...) Olymp. Persian Kings. Governors of Rome. years of Rome. 87 1 34 The
Pelopo^nesian war began toward the end of this year. Three Tribunes governed
Rome. 321 2 35 T. Quintius. C. Julius. 322 3 36 L. Papirius. L. Julius. 323 4
37 L. Sergius. Hostius Lucretius. 324 88 1 38 T. Quintius. A. Cornelius. 325 2
39 C. Seruilius. L. Papirius. 326 3 40 Tribunes. 327 4 Artaxerxes having
reigned 40. years, dyed in winter in the 7. year of the Peloponnesian war.
Another Xerxes succeeded. Tribunes. 328

Olymp. Persian Kings. Magistrates of Rome. Years of Rome. 89 1 1 Sogdianus
after Xerxes held the Persia^ Empire the rest of the year. After whom Darius
Nothus was Monarch toward the end of the year. Tribunes. 329 2 2 The first of
Darius Nothus for the most part of it ran with this year. C. Sempronius. Q.
Fabius. 330 3 3 The Jews went forward with the building of the Temple by the
commandment of Darius. Here Daniels weeks begin. Tribunes. 331 4 1 The 4. of
Darius begun in the end of this year. Tribunes. 332 90 1 2 5 T. Quintius. N.
Fabius. 333 2 3 6 Tribunes. 334 3 4 7 Tribunes. 335 4 5 8 Tribunes. 336

Olymp. we Persian Kings. Magistrates of Rome. Years of Rome. 91 1 6 The 9. of
Darius. Tribunes. 337 2 7 10 Tribunes. 338 3 The 2. we^. 1 11 Tribunes. 339 4 2
12 Tribunes. 340 92 1 3 13 Cornelius Cossus. L. Furius. 341 2 4 14 Q. Fabius.
C. Furius. 342 3 5 15 M. Papirius. C. Nautius. 343 4 6 16 M. Aemilius. C.
Valerius. 344

(...) Olymp. we. Persian Kings. Governors of Rome. Years of Rome. 95 1 The
4. we. 1 The 6. of Artaxerxes. Tribunes. 353 2 2 7 Tribunes. 354 3 3 8
Tribunes. 355 4 4 9 Tribunes. 356 96 1 5 10 Tribunes. 357 2 6 11 Tribunes. 358
3 7 12 Tribunes. 359 4 The 5. we. 1 13 Tribunes. 360

Olymp. we. Persian Kings. Roman Magistrates. Years of Rome. 97 1 2 The 14.
of Artaxerxes. L. Lucretius. Ser. Sulpitius. 361 2 3 15 L. Valerius Potitus. M.
Manlius Capitolinus 362 3 4 16 Tribunes. 363 4 5 17 Tribunes. 364 98 1 6 18
Camillus Dictator of Rome, delivered it, being taken by the French men and
Swissers. 365 2 7 19 Tribunes. 366 3 The 6. we. 1 20 Tribunes. 367 4 2 21
Toward the end of this year, Nehemias by the kings leave went to Jerusalem to
build the walls of it. Tribunes. 368

Olymp. Persian Kings. Roman Magistrates. Years of Rome. 99 1 3 22 Tribunes.
369 2 4 23 An eclips of the moon recorded by Ptolomie the 18. day of June,
Phanostratus being Mayor of Athens. Tribunes. 370 3 5 24 Tribunes. 371 4 6 25
Tribunes. 372 100 1 7 26 Tribunes. 373 2 The 7 we. 1 26 Tribunes. 374 3 2 27
Tribunes. 375 4 3 29 Tribunes. 376

Olymp. Persian Kings. Magistrates of Rome. years of Rome. 101 1 4 30 Tribunes.
377 2 5 31 Tribunes. 378 3 6 32 2 Five years was Rome governed by two chief
Officers of the common people, without Consuls or Tribunes authority. 379 4 7
33 Nehemias finished the walls of Jerusalem. Here ends the first part of
Daniels weeks, containing 49. years. 2 380 102 1 The 8 we. 1 34 3 381 2 2 35
4 382 3 3 36 5 383 4 4 37 Tribunes. 384

Olymp. we. Persian Kings. Magistrates of Rome. years of Rome. 103 1 5 38
Tribunes. 385 2 6 39 Tribunes. 386 3 7 40 Tribunes. 387 4 The 9. we. 1 41 L.
Aemilius. L. Sextius. 388 104 1 2 42 L. Genutius. Q. Seruilius. 389 2 3 43
Spanimondas slain. C. Sulpitius. C. Licinius. 390 3 4 1 Artaxerxes Memor died,
his son Artaxerxes Ochus succeeded L Aemilius. Cn. Genutius. 391 4 5 2 Q.
Seruilius. L. Genutius. 392

Olymp. we. Persian Kings. Magistrates of Rome. Years of Rome. 105 1 6 The 3.
of Artax. Ochus. C. Licinius. C. Sulpitius. 393 2 7 4 M. Fabius. C. Petaelius.
394 3 The 10. we. 1 5 M. Popilius. Cn. Manlius. 395 4 2 6 C. Fabius. C.
Plautius. 396 106 1 3 7 C. Martius. Cn. Maulius. 397 2 4 8 M. Fabius. M.
Popilius. 398 3 5 9 C. Sulpitius. M. Valerius. 399 4 6 10 M. Fabius. T.
Quintius. 400

Olymp. we Persian Kings. Magistrates of Rome. Years of Rome. 107 1 7 The 11.
of Artax. Othus. C. Sulpitius. M. Valerius. 401 2 The 11. we. 1 12 P.
Valerius. C. Martius. 402 3 2 13 C. Sulpitius. T. Quintius. 403 4 3 14 M.
Popilius. L. Cornelius. 404 108 1 4 15 L. Furius. P. Claudius. 405 2 5 16 M.
Valerius. M. Popilius. 406 3 6 17 T. Manlius. C. Plautius. 407 4 7 18 M.
Valerius. C. Petaelius. 408

Olymp. we Persian Kings. Consuls of Rome. Years of Rome. 109 1 The 12. w^e. 1
The 19. of Artax. Ochus. M. Fabius. Ser. Sulpitius. 409 2 2 20 C. Martius. T.
Manlius. 410 3 3 21 M. Valerius. A. Cornelius. 411 4 4 22 C. Martius. Q.
Seruilius. 412 110 1 5 23 L. Aemilius. C. Plautius. 413 2 6 1 Artaxerxes Ochus
died, and his son Arses succeeded. T. Manlius. P. Decius. 414 3 7 2 T.
Aemilius. Q. Publilius. 415 4 The 13. we. 1 3 L. Furius. C. Maenius. 416

Olymp. we. Persian Kings. Consuls of Rome. Years of Rome. 111 1 2 1 Arses
died, and the last Darius called Codoman was made king in his stead. About that
time was Philip king of Macedonia slain, and Alexander began his reign. C.
Sulpitius. P. Aelius. 417 2 3 2 L. Papirius. C. Duilius. 418 3 4 3 M. Valerius.
M. Atilius. 419 4 5 4 T. Veturius. Sp. Posthumous. 420 112 1 6 5 A. Cornelius.
Cn. Domitius. 421 2 7 6 Darius the second time overcome by Alexander at
Gangamela. M. Claudius. C. Valerius. 422 3 The 14. we. 1 Darius slain in the
beginning of this year by one of his Nobles called Bessus, whereby Alexander
had the Monarchy. L. Papirius. L. Plautius. 423 4 2 L. Aemilius. C. Plautius.
424

Olymp. we. Persian Kings. Consuls of Rome. Years of R. 113 1 3 P. Cornelius.
P. Plautius. 425 2 4 L. Cornelius. Q. Publilius. 426 3 5 L. Papirius. C.
Paetelius. 427 4 6 L. Furius. Iunius Brutus. 428 114 1 7 About the beginning of
the Olympic year Alexander diee. L. Papirius, was this year Dictator without
Consuls. 429 2 The 15. we. 1 C. Sulpitius. Q. Aelius. 430 3 2 Q. Fabius. L.
Fuluius. 431 4 3 T. Veturius. Sp. Posthumous. 432

Olymp. we. Consuls of Rome. Years of R. 115 1 4 L. Papirius. Q. Publilius. 433
2 5 L. Papirius. Q. Aelius 434 3 6 L. Plautius. M. Flossius. 435 4 7 Q.
Aemilius. C. Iunius. 436 116 1 The 16 we. 1 S. Nautius. M. Popilius. 437 2 2
L. Papirius. Q. Publilius. 438 3 3 M. Petaelius. C. Sulpitius. 439 4 4 L.
Papirius. C. Iunius. 440 117 1 5 M. Valerius. P. Decius. 441 2 6 C. Iunius. Q.
Aemilius. 442 3 7 Q. Fabius. C. Martius. 443 4 The 17. we. 1 L. Papirius,
Dictator without Consuls. 444 118 1 2 P. Decius. Q. Fabius. 445 2 3 Ap.
Claudius. L. Voluminous. 446 3 4 Q. Martius. P. Cornelius. 447 4 5 L.
Posthumous. T. Minutius. 448 119 1 6 P. Sempronius. P. Sulpitius. 449 2 7 Ser.
Cornelius. L. Genutius. 450 3 The 18 we. 1 M. Liuius. M. Aemilius. 451 4 2 A
Dictator without Consuls. 452 120 1 3 Q. Apuleius. Marcus Valerius. 453 2 4 M.
Fuluius. T. Manlius. 454 3 5 L. Cornelius. Cn. Fuluius. 455 4 6 Q. Fabius P.
Decius. 456 121 1 7 Ap. Claudius. L. Voluminous. 457 2 The 19 we 1 Q. Fabius.
P. Decius. 458 3 2 L. Posthumous. M. Atilius. 459 4 3 L. Papirius. Sp.
Caruilius. 460 122 1 4 Q. Fabius. D. Iunius. 461 2 5 L. Posthumous. C. Iunius.
462 3 6 Pub. Cornelius. M. Curious. 463 4 7 M. Valerius. Q. Caeditius. 464 (...)
127 1 3 L. Papirius. S. Caruilius. 481 2 4 C. Quintius. L. Genutius. 482 3 5 C.
Genutius. Cn. Cornelius. 483 4 6 C. Fabius. Q. Ogulnius. 484 128 1 7 P.
Sempronius. Ap. Claudius. 485 2 The 23. we. 1 M. Atilius. L. Julius. 486 3 2
N. Fabius. D. Iunius. 487 4 3 Q. Fabius. L. Mamilius. 488 129 1 4 Ap. Claudius.
M. Fuluius. 489 2 5 M. Valerius. M. Otacilius. 490 3 6 L. Posthumous. Q.
Mamilius. 491 4 7 L. Valerius. T. Otacilius. 492 130 1 The 24. we. 1 Cn.
Cornelius. C. Duilius. 493 2 2 L. Cornelius. C. Aquilius. 494 3 3 M. Atilius.
C. Sulpitius. 495 4 4 C. Atilius. Cn. Cornelius. 496 131 1 5 L. Manilius. Q.
Caeditius. 497 2 6 Ser. Nobilior. M. Aemilius. 498 3 7 Cn. Cornelius. A.
Atilius. 499 4 The 25. we. 1 Cn. Seruilius. C. Sempronius. 500 132 1 2 C.
Aurelius. P. Seruilius. 501 2 3 L. Caecilius. C. Furius. 502 3 4 C. Atilius. L.
Manlius. 503 4 5 P. Claudius. L. Iunius. 504 133 1 6 C. Aurelius. P. Seruilius.
505 2 7 L. Caecilius. Number. Fabius. 506 3 The 26. we. 1 M. Otacilius. M.
Fabius. 507 4 2 M. Fabius. C. Atilius. 508 134 1 3 A. Manlius. C. Sempronius.
509 2 4 C. Fundanius. C. Sulpitius. 510 3 5 C. Lutatius. A. Posthumous. 511 4 6
A. Manlius. Q. Lutatius. 512 135 1 7 C. Claudius. M. Sempronius. 513 2 The 27.
we. 1 C. Manilius. Q. Valerius. 514 3 2 T. Sempronius. P. Valerius. 515 4 3 L.
Cornelius. Q. Fuluius. 516 136 1 4 P. Cornelius. C. Licinius. 517 2 5 T.
Manlius. C. Atilius. 518 3 6 L. Posthumous. Sp. Caruilius. 519 4 7 Q. Fabius.
M. Pomponius. 520 137 1 The 28. we. 1 M. Aemilius. M. Publicius. 521 2 2 M.
Pomponius. C. Papirius. 522 3 3 M. Aemilius. M. Iunius. 523 4 4 L. Posthumous.
Cn. Fuluius. 524 138 1 5 Sp. Caruilius. Q. Fabius. 525 2 6 P. Valerius. M.
Atilius. 526 3 7 M. Valerius. L. Apustius. 527 4 The 29. we. 1 L. Aemilius. C.
Atilius. 528 (...) 143 1 4 M. Marcellus. T. Quintius. 545 2 5 C. Claudius. M.
Liuius. 546 3 6 Q. Cacilius. L. Veturius. 547 4 7 P. Cornelius. P. Licinius.
548 144 1 The 32. we. 1 M. Cornelius. P. Sempronius. 549 2 2 Cn. Seruilius. C.
Seruilius. 550 3 3 T. Claudius. M. Seruilius. 551 4 4 Cn. Cornelius. P. Aelius.
552 145 1 5 C. Sulpitius. C. Aurelius. 553 2 6 L. Cornelius. P. Villius. 554 3
7 T. Quinctius. Sex. Aelius. 555 4 The 33. we. 1 C. Cornelius. Q. Minutius.
556 146 1 2 L. Furius. M. Marcellus. 557 2 3 Porcius Cato. Valerius Flaccus.
558 3 4 P. Cornelius. T. Sempronius. 559 4 5 L. Cornelius. Q. Minutiur. 560 147
1 6 L. Quintius. Cn. Domitius. 561 2 7 M. Acilius. P. Cornelius. 562 3 The 34
we 1 L. Cornelius. C. Lalius. 563 4 2 Cn. Manlius. M. Fuluius. 564 148 1 3 C.
Liuius. M. Valerius. 565 2 4 M. Aemilius. C. Flaminius. 566 3 5 Sp. Posthumous.
Q. Martius. 567 4 6 Ap. Claudius. M. Sempronius. 568 149 1 7 P. Claudius. L.
Porcius. 569 2 The 35. we. 1 Q. Fabius. M. Claudius. 570 3 2 L. Aemilius. Cn.
Babius. 571 4 3 P. Cornelius. M. Baebius. 572 150 1 4 Posthumous. Calphurnius.
573 2 5 Q. Fuluius. L. Manlius. 574 3 6 M. Iunius. A. Manlius. 575 4 7 C.
Claudius. T. Sempronius. 576 151 1 The 36 we. 1 Cor. Scipio. Q. Petilius. 577
2 2 P. Mutius. M. Aemilius. 578 3 3 Sp. Posthumous. M. Mutius. 579 4 4 L.
Posthumous. M. Popilius. 580 152 1 5 C. Popilius. P. Aelius. 581 2 6 P.
Licinius. C. Cassius. 582 3 7 A. Hostilius. A. Aulius. 583 4 The 37 we. 1 Q.
Martius. Cn. Seruilius. 584 153 1 2 L. Aemilius. C. Licinius. 585 2 3 Q.
Aelius. M. Iunius. 586 3 4 C Sulpitius. M. Claudius 587 4 5 T. Manlius. Cn.
Octauius. 588 154 1 6 A. Manlius. C. Cassius. 589 2 7 T. Sempronius. M.
Iuuentius. 590 3 The 38 we. 1 Pub. Cornelius. C. Martius. 591 4 2 M. Valerius.
C. Faunius. 592 155 1 3 L. Anicius. M. Cornelius. 593 2 4 Cn. Cornelius. M.
Fuluius. 594 3 5 M. Aemilius. C. Popilius. 595 4 6 Sex. Julius. L. Aurelius.
596 156 1 7 L. Cornelius. C. Martius. 597 2 The 39 we 1 Scipio Nasica Claudius
Marcellus. 598 3 2 Q. Opimius. L. Posthumous. These two ended their Consulships
the first of January. Q. Fulius. T. Annius. Begun with January in the same
Olympic year. 599 4 3 Q. Fulius. T. Annius. From Iulie to January. M.
Marcellius. L. Valerius. From January to Iulie. 600

Olymp. we. Consuls in the Olympic years. Years of R. 157 1 4 From Iulie to
January. From January to Iulie. 601 M. Marcellius. L. Valerius L. Licinius.
A. Posthumous. 2 5 L. Licinius. A. Posthumous. T. Quintius. M. Acilius. 602 3 6
T. Quintius. M. Acilius. L. Marcius. M. Manilius. 603 4 7 L. Marcius. M.
Manilius. Sp. Posthumous. L. Calphurnius. 604 158 1 The 40. we. 1 Sp.
Posthumous. L. Calphurnius. P. Cornelius. C. Liuius. 605 2 2 P. Cornelius. C.
Liuius. Cn. Cornelius. L. Mummius. 606 3 3 Cn. Cornelius. L. Mummius. Q. Fabius
L. Hostilius. 607 4 4 Q. Fabius. L. Hostilius. Ser. Sulpitius. L. Aurelius. 608

Olymp. we. Consuls in the Olympic years. Years of R. 159 1 5 From Iulie to
January. From January to Iulie. 609 Ser. Sulpitius. L. Aurelius. Ap.
Claudius. Q. Caecilius. 2 6 Ap. Claudius. Q. Caecilius. L. Caecilius. Q.
Fabius. 610 3 7 L. Caecilius. Q. Fabius. Cn. Seruilius. Q. Pompeius. 611 4 The
41. we. 1 Cn. Seruilius. Q. Pompeius. C. Laelius. Q. Seruilius. 612 160 1 2 C.
Laelius. Q. Seruilius. Cn. Calphurnius. M. Popilius. 613 2 3 Cn. Calphurnius.
M. Popilius. P. Cornelius. D. Iunius. 614 3 4 P. Cornelius. D. Iunius. M.
Aemilius. C. Hostilius. 615 4 5 M. Aemilius. C. Hostilius. P. Furius. Sex.
Atilius. 616

Olymp. we. Consuls. Consuls. years of R. 161 1 6 From Iulie to January. From
January to Iulie. 617 P. Furius. Sex. Atilius. Fuluius. Calphurnius. 2 7
Fuluius. Calphurnius. Cornelius. Fuluius. 618 3 The 42. we. 1 Cornelius.
Fuluius. Mutius Scaeuola. Calphurnius Piso. 619 4 2 Mutius Scaeuola. Calph.
Piso. Popilius. Rupilius. 620 162 1 3 Popilius. Rupilius. Crassus. Flaccus. 621
2 4 Crassus. Flaccus. Perperua. Lentulus. 622 3 5 Perperua. Lentulus. C.
Sempronius. M. Aquilius. 623 4 6 C. Sempronius. M. Aquilius. Cn. Octauius. T.
Annius. 624

Olymp. we. Consuls. Consuls. years of R. 163 1 7 From Iulie to January. From
January to Iulie. 625 C. Octauius. T. Annius. L. Cassius. Cornelius Cinna. 2
The 43. we. 1 L. Cassius. Corn Cina. Aemilius Lepidus. L. Aurelius. 626 3 2
Aemilius Lepidus. L. Aurelius. M. Plautius. M. Fuluius. 627 4 3 M. Plantius. M.
Fuluius. C. Cassius. C. Sextius. 628 164 1 4 C. Cassius. C. Sextius. Q.
Caecilius. T. Quinctius. 629 2 5 Q. Caecilius. T. Quintius. Cn. Domitius. C.
Fannius. 630 3 6 Cn. Domitius. C. Fannius. Q. Fabius. L. Opimius. 631 4 7 Q.
Fabius. L. Opimius. P. Manilius. C. Papirius. 632

Olymp. we. Consuls. Consuls of R. Years of R From January to Iulie. 633 165 1
The 44. we. 1 P. Manilius. C. Papirius. Caeclius. Aurelius. 2 2 Caecilius.
Aurelius. M. Cato. Q. Martius. 634 3 3 M. Cato. Q. Martius. Caecilius. Mutius.
635 4 4 Caecilius. Mutius. C. Licinius. Q. Fabius. 636 166 1 5 C. Licinius. Q.
Fabius. M. Aemilius. M. Caecilius. 637 2 6 M. Aemilius. M. Caecilius. M.
Balbus. C. Cato. 638 3 7 M. Balbus. C. Cato. C. Caecilius. Cn. Papirius. 639 4
The 45. we. 1 C. Caecilius. Cn. Papirius. Liuius Drusus. Calphur. Piso. 640

Olymp. we. Consuls of Rome. Consuls of R. Years of R. 167 1 2 From Iulie to
January. From January to Iulie. 641 Liu. Drusus. Calph. Piso. P. Cornelius.
L. Calphurnius. 2 3 P. Cornelius. L. Calphurnius. M. Minutius. Sp. Posthumous.
642 3 4 M. Minutius. Sp. Posthumous. Q. Caecilius. M. Iunius. 643 4 5 Q.
Caecilius. M. Iunius. Sulpitius Galba. M. Scaurus. 644 168 1 6 Sulp. Galba. M.
Scaurus. L. Cassius. C. Marius. 645 2 7 L. Cassius. C. Marius. C. Atilius. Q.
Seruilius. 646 3 The 46 we 1 C. Atilius. Q. Seruilius. P. Rutilius Cn.
Mallius. 647 4 2 P. Rutilius. Cn. Mallius. C. Marius. C. Flauius. 648

Olymp. we. Consuls of Rome. Consuls. years of R. 169 1 3 From Iulie to
January. From January to Iulie. 649 C. Marius. Cn. Flauius. C. Marius. L.
Aurelius. 2 4 C. Marius. L. Aurelius. C. Marius. Q. Lutatius. 650 3 5 C.
Marius. Q. Lutatius. C. Marius. M. Aquilius. 651 4 6 C. Marius. M. Aquilius. C.
Marius. L. Valerius. 652 170 1 7 C. Marius. L. Valerius. M. Antonius. A.
Posthumous. 653 2 The 47 we 1 M. Antonius. A. Posthumous. Q. Caecilius. L.
Didius. 654 3 2 Q. Caecilius. T. Didius. Corn. Lentulus. Licin. Crassus. 655 4
3 Cor. Lentulus. Licin. Crassus. Cn. Domitius. C. Cassius. 656

Olymp. we. Consuls. years of R. Consuls. yea^s of R. 171 1 4 From Iulie to
January. From January to Iulie. 657 Cn. Domitius. C. Cassius. Licinius
Crassus. Mutius Scaeuola. 2 5 L. Crassus. M. Scaeuola. C. Caelius. L. Domitius.
658 3 6 C. Caelius. L. Domitius. Flaccus. Herennius. 659 4 7 Flaccus.
Herennius. Claud. Plucher. M. Perperna. 560 172 1 The 48. we. 1 Claudius
Pulcher. M. Perperna. L. Martius. Sex. Julius. 661 2 2 L. Martius. Sex. Julius.
L. Julius. P. Rutilius. 662 3 3 L. Julius. P. Rutilius. C. Pompeius. L.
Porcius. 663 4 4 Cn. Pompeius. L. Porcius. Cornel. Sylla. Q. Pompeius. 664

Olymp. we. Consuls. Consuls. Years of R. 173 1 5 From Iulie to January. From
January to Iulie. 665 Corn. Sylla. Q. Pompeius. Octauius. Cinna. 2 6 Octauius.
Cinna Cinna. Marius. 666 3 7 Cinna. Marius. Cinna. Carbo. 667 4 The 49. we 1
Cinna. Carbo. Cinna. Carbo. 668 174 1 2 Cinna. Carbo. Scipio. Norbanus. 669 2 3
Scipio. Norbanus. Marius. Carbo. 670 3 4 Marius. Carbo. Tul. Decula. Corn.
Dolabella. 671 4 5 Tul. Decula. Corn. Dolabella. L. Cornel. Sylla. Metellus
Pius. 672

(...) Olymp. we. Consuls. Consuls. years of R. 177 1 7 From Iulie to
January. From January to Iulie. ^81 L. Gellius. Cor. Lentulus. Aufidius.
Lentulus. 2 The 51. we. 1 Aufidius. Lentulus. Cn. Pompeius. M. Crassus. 682 3
2 Cn. Pompeius. M. Crassus. Hortensius. Metellus. 683 4 3 Hortensius. Metellus.
Metellus. Martius. 684 178 1 4 Metellus. Martius. Piso. Glabrio. 685 2 5 Piso.
Glabrio. Lepidus. Volcatius. 686 3 6 Lepidus. Volcatius. Sylla. Antronius. 687
4 7 Sylla. Antronius. L. Casar. C. Martius. 688

Olymp. we. Consuls. Consuls. years of R. 179 1 The 52. we. 1 From Iulie to
January. From January to Iulie. 689 L. Caesar. C. Martius. M. Tullius Cicero.
Antonius. 2 2 M. Tullius Cicero. Antonius. Silanus. Murena. 690 3 3 Silanus.
Murena. Pupius. Messala. 691 4 4 Pupius. Messala. Afranius. Metellus. 692 180 1
5 Afranius. Metellus. C. Julius Caesar. M. Calphurnius Bibulus. 693 2 6 Caesar.
Bibulus. Piso. Gabinius. 694 3 7 Piso. Gabinius. Cor. Lentulus. Metellus. 695 4
The 53. we. 1 Lentulus. Metellus. Cor. Lentulus. L. Martius. 696

Olymp. we. Consuls. Consuls. Years of R. 181 1 2 From Iulie to January. From
January to Iulie. 697 Cor. Lentulus. L. Martius. Cn. Pompeius. M. Crassus 2 3
Cn. Pompeius. M. Crassus. Ap. Claudius. L. Domitius. 698 3 4 Ap. Claudius. L.
Domitius. Cn. Domitius Valerius Messala. 699 4 5 Cn. Domitius. Val. Messala.
Pompeius. Metellus. These began in March by reason of great contention in the
common wealth. 700 182 1 6 Pompeius. Matellus. Ser. Sulpitius. Mar. Marcellus.
701 2 7 S. Sulpitius. M. Marcellus. Aemilius Paulus. C. Marcellus. 702 3 The
54. we. 1 Aem. Paulus. C. Marcellus. C. Marcellus. Cor. Lentulus. 703 4 2 C.
Marcellus. Cor. Lentulus. C. Julius Caesar. P. Seruilius. Caesar this year got
the lone sovereignty of Rome. 704

Olymp. we. Consuls Consuls Years of R. 183 1 3 From Iulie to January. From
January to Iulie. 705 C. I. Caesar. P. Seruilius. Calenus. Vatinius. 2 4
Calenus. Vatinius. Iul. Caesar. Lepidus. 706 3 5 I. Caesar. Lepidus. Julius
Caesar made Dictator ordered the year anew. This was the first Julian year.
707 4 6 I. Caesar Dictator without any fellow Co^sul. The first Julian year.
Caesar the 5. time Co^sul with Antonius. Caesar being slain the 15. of March,
Dolabelia succeeded. 708 184 1 7 Antonius. Dolabella. Hirtius. Pansa. 709 2 The
55 we 1 Hirtius. Pansa. He being slain, Augustus succeeded. Lepidus. Plancus.
710 3 2 Lepidus. Plancus. Seruilius. L. Antonius. 711 4 3 Seruilius. Antonius.
Cn. Domitius Caluinus. C. Asinius. 712

Olymp. we. Consuls Consuls. years of R. 185 1 4 From Iulie to January. From
January to Iulie. 713 Domitius Calu. Asinius. Martius. Caluisius. 2 5 Martius
Caluisius. Ap. Claudius. C. Norbanus. 714 3 6 Ap. Claudius. C. Norbanus. M.
Agrippa. L. Canidius. 715 4 7 M. Agrippa. L. Canidius. L. Gellius. M. Cocceius.
716 186 1 The 56. we 1 L. Gellius. M. Cocceius. L. Cornificius. Sex. Pompeius.
717 2 2 L. Cornificius. Sex. Pompeius. Libo. Sempronius. 718 3 3 Libo.
Sempronius. Augustus Caesar the second time Consul with Cicero. 719 4 4 Caesar's
second Consulship Domitius. Sossius. 720

Olymp. we. Consuls. Consuls. years of R 187 1 5 From Iulie to January. From
January to Iulie. 721 Domitius. Sossius. Caesar the 3. time. M. Val. Messala.
2 6 Caesar the third time. M. Valerius Messala. Antonius overcome at Actium in
Septe^. Caesar the 4. time. M. Li. Crassus. 722 3 7 Caesar the 4. time.
Crassus. This year in August Antonius and Cleopatra by many battles overcome,
slew themselves. August. Caesar the 5. time. Sex. Apulcius. This year with
January began the account of Augustus his love reign. 723 4 The 57. we 1
Caesar the 5. time. Apuleius. Caesar the 6. time. M. Vipsanius Agrippa 724 188
1 2 Caesar the 6. time. Vipsanius. Caesar the 7. time. Vipsanius again. 725 2
3 Caesar the 7. time. Vipsanius. Caesar the 8. time. T. Statilius Taurus. 726 3
4 Caesar the 8. time. Statilius. Caesar the 9. time. M. Iunius Syllanus. 727 4
5 Caesar the 9. time. Syllanus. Caesar the 10. time. Norbanus. 728

Olymp. we. Consuls. Consuls. Years of R. 189 1 6 From Iulie to January. From
January to Iulie. 729 Caesar the 10. time. Norbanus. Caesar the 11. time. Cn.
Calph. Piso. 2 7 Caesar the 11 time. Piso. M. Marcellus. L. Aruntius. 730 3 The
57. we. 1 Marcellus. Aruntius. M. Lollius. Q. Lepidus. 731 4 2 Lollius.
Lepidus. M. Apuleius. P. Silius Nerua. 732 190 1 3 Apuleius. Nerua. Saturninus.
Cinna. 733 2 4 Saturnius Cinna. Cn. Lentulus. P. Lentulus. 734 3 5 Cn.
Lentulus. P. Lentulus. T. Furnius. C. Iunius. 735 4 6 T. Furnius. C. Iunius. L.
Domitius. P. Scipio. 736

Olymp. we. Consuls Consuls. Years of R. 191 1 7 From Iulie to January. From
January to Iulie. 737 Domitius. Scipio. Liuius. Piso. 2 The 59. we 1 Liuius.
Piso. M. Crassus. Cn. Lentulus. 738 3 2 Crassus. Lentulus. Tiberius Nero.
Quintilius Varus. 739 4 3 Tiberius. Quintilius. M. Messala. P. Sulpitius. 740
192 1 4 Messala. Sulpitius. Q. Aelius. Paulus Fabius. 741 2 5 Aelius. Fabius.
Julius Antonius. Q. Max. Fabius. 742 3 6 Antonius. Fabius. Drusus Nero. L.
Quinctius Crispinus. 743 4 7 Drusus. Quinctius. C. Martius. C. Asinius. 744

(...) Olymp. we. Consuls. Consuls. years of R. 195 1 2 From Iulie to
January. From January to Iulie. 753 Julius. Paulus. Asinius. Vinicius. 2 3
Asinius. Vinicius. L. Aelius. M. Seruilius. 754 3 4 Aelius. Seruilius. Sex.
Aelius. M. Sentius. 755 4 5 Sex. Aelius. C. Sentius. Corn. Cinna. L. Valerius.
756 196 1 6 Cor. Cinna. L. Valerius. L. Aruntius. M. Lepidus. 757 2 7 L.
Aruntius. M. Lepidus. A. Licinius. Q. Caecilius. 758 3 The 62. we. 1 Licinius.
Caecilius. M. Furius. Sex. Nonius. 759 4 2 Furius. Nonius. Q. Sulpitius. C.
Poppaeus. 760

Olymp. we. Consuls. Consuls. years of R. 197 1 3 From Iulie to January. From
January to Iulie. 761 Sulpitius. Poppaeus. Dolabella. Syllanus. 2 4 Dolabella.
Syllanus. T. Satilius. M. Lepidus. 762 3 5 Statilius. Lepidus. Germanicus.
Fonteius. 763 4 6 Germanicus. Fonteius. C. Silius. Munatius Plancus. 764 198 1
7 Silius. Plancus. Sex. Pompeius. Sex. Apuleius. 765 2 The 63. we. 1 Pompeius.
Apuleius. Augustus died in August. Drusus. Norbanus. 766 3 2 Drusus. Norbanus.
Statilius. Scribonius. 767 4 3 Statilius. Scribonius. C. Caecilius. L.
Pomponius. 768

Olymp. we. Consuls. Consuls. years of R. 199 1 4 From Iulie to January. From
January to Iulie. 769 Caecilius. Pomponius. Tib. Caesar. Germanicus. 2 5 Tib.
Caesar. Germanicus. M. Iunius. L. Norbanus. 770 3 6 M. Iunius. L. Norbanus. M.
Messala. Aurelius Cotta. 771 4 7 Messala. Cotta. Tiberius Caesar. Drusus. 772 1
The 64. we 1 Tib. Caesar. Drusus. D. Haterius. C. Sulpitius. 773 200 2 2
Haterius. Sulpitius. C. Asinius. C. Antistius. 774 3 3 Asinius. Antistius. Ser.
Cornelius. Varro. 775 4 4 Cornelius, Varro. Asinius. Lentulus. 776

Olymp. we. Consuls. Consuls. years of R. 201 1 5 From Iulie to January. From
January to Iulie. 777 Asinius. Lentulus. Corn. Lentulus. C. Caluisius. 2 6
Lentulus. Caluisius. M. Crassus. C. Piso. 778 3 7 Crassus. Piso. Ap. Iunius.
Pub. Silius. 779 4 The 65. we. 1 Iunius. Silius. C. Rubellius Geminus. C.
Fusius Geminus. Christ baptized. 780 202 1 2 Rubellius. Fusius. Gemini. M.
Vinicius. L. Cassius. 781 2 3 Vincius. Cassius. Tib. Caesar. Aelius. 782 3 4
Tib. Caesar. Aelius. Cn. Domitius. M. Furius. 783 4 5 Cn. Domitius. M. Furius.
Ser. Sulpitius Galba. Corn. Sylla. In this part of their year Christ suffered.
784

Olymp. we. Consuls. Consuls. years of R. 203 1 6 From Iulie to January. From
January to Iulie. 785 Galba. Sylla. P. Fabius. L. Vitellius. 2 7 Fabius.
Vitellius. C. Sestius. M. Seruilius. 786 3 The 66. we 1 Sestius. Seruilius.
Plantius. Papienus. 787 4 2 Plautius. Papienus. Acerronius. Portius. Tiberius
died. 788 204 1 3 Acerronius. Portius. Germanicus Caesar. Apronius. 789 2 4
Germanicus Caesar. Apronius. M. Aquilius. P. Nonius. 790 3 5 Aquilius. Nonius.
C. Julius Caligula Germanicus. Augustus the thtrd time. 791 4 6 C. Caesar
Caligula the third time. C. Caesar Caligula the fourth time. Saturninus.
Caligula slain. 792

Olymp. we. Consuls. Consuls. years of R. 205 1 7 From Iulie to January. From
January to Iulie. 793 Claudius Caesar. Saturninus. Tib. Claudius Caesar the
second time. C. Licinius. 2 The 67. we 1 Claudius Casar the second time.
Licinius. Claudius Caesar the third time. L. Vittellius. 794 3 2 Claudius
Caesar the third time. L. Vitellius. C. Quinctius. T. Statilius. 795 4 3
Quinctius. Statilius. M. Vinicius. M. Statilius. 796 206 1 4 Vinicius.
Statilius. C. Valerius. M. Messala. 797 2 5 Valerius. Messala. Claudius Caesar
the fourth time. L. Vitellius. 798 3 6 Claud. Caesar. Vitellius. A. Vitellius.
L. Vipsanius. 799 4 7 A. Vitellius. L. Vipsanius. Q. Veranius. C. Pompeius
Gallus. 800

Olymp. we. Consuls. Consuls. years of R. 207 1 The 68 we 1 From Iulie to
January. From January to Iulie. 801 Qu. Veranius. Pompeius Gallus. C.
Antistius. M. Suilius. 2 2 Antistius. Suilius. Claudius Caesar the fifth time.
Cor. Scipio. 802 3 3 Caesar. Scipio. Cor. Sylla. L. Otho. 803 4 4 Sylla. Otho.
D. Junius. Q. Haterius. 804 208 1 5 D. Iunius. Q. Haterius. Marcellus. Auiola.
805 2 6 Marcellus. Auiola. Nero Caesar. Antistius. 806 3 7 Claud. Caesar
poisoned by his wife. Nero. Antistius. Saturninus. Caepio. 807 4 The 69. we 1
Saturninus. Caepio. Nero again. Piso. 808

Olymp. we. Consuls. Consuls. years of R. 209 1 2 From Iulie to ^anuarie. From
January to Iulie. 809 Nero. Piso. Nero the third time. Messala. 2 3 Nero.
Messala. C. Vipsanius. L. Fonteius. 810 3 4 Vipsanius. Fonteius. Nero the
fourth time. Cor. Lentulus. 811 4 5 Nero. Lentulus. C. Caesonius. C. Petronius.
812 210 1 6 Caesonius. Petronius. P. Marius. L. Asinius. 813 2 7 Marius.
Asinius. L. Memmius. P. Virginius. In this part of their year ends the
second part of Daniels weeks. 814 3 The 70. and last we 1 L. Memmius. P.
Virginius. C. Laecanius. M. Crassus. 815 4 2 Laecanius. Crassus. P. Silius. C.
Julius. 816

Olymp. we. Consuls. Consuls. years of R. 211 1 3 From Iulie to January. From
January to Iulie. 817 P. Silius. C. Julius. C. Suetonius. L. Pontius. 2 4
Suetonius. Pontius. Fonteius Capito. Julius Rufus. 818 3 5 Capito. Rufus. C.
Silius. M. Galerius. 819 4 6 Silius. Galerius. Sir. Galba. T. Iunius. And other
after them in their places. 820 212 1 7 A. Vitellius Emperor. Vespasian
Emperor. Titus. 821

To the gentle Reader.
Gentle Reader, I am to desire thee to amend with thy pen these escapes, which
in my absence, and through the Printers haste have happened, which I have here
under set down, being such as do pervert the sense: as for other of less
moment in the letters omitted, or changed in proper names, or otherwise, I
remit to thy favorable correction.

Page 21. lin. 1. read, by. p. 24. l. 18. after. p. 45. l. 14. throne. p. 48.
l. 8. hundred and fifteenth. p. 64. l. 3. of the 88. Olympiad. p. 65. l. 26.
read, 93. p. 69. l. 28. read, 26. p. 79. l. 26. read, 18. day. p. 81. l. 26.
to this, Astronomical cunning p. 83. l. 10, and l. 14. read 74. p. 89. l. 19.
read 1559. p. 93. l. 27. third year. p. 104. l. 18. read 321. p. 109. l. 5.
after Euarchippus, read, going before must needs be the 21. the war
continued only under 4. Ephori more, etc. page 117. l. 16. Xenophanes. p. 144.
l. 11. refuse. In the Chronologicall table, p. 1. l. 15. read, about the
month.


