EUPHUES SHADOW, THE Battle of the Senses.

Wherein youthful folly is set down in his right figure, and vain fancies
are proved to produce many offenses.

Hereunto is annexed the Deaf man's Dialogue, containing Philamis Athanatos:
fit for all sorts to peruse, and the better sort to practice.

By T. L. Gent.



LONDON

Printed by Abell Ieffes, for John Busbie, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, near to the West door of Paul's. 1592.

To the right Honorable, Robert Ratcliffe, Viscount Fitzwaters: Robert Green;
wishes increase of honor and virtue.
EVer desirous (right honorable) to show my affectionate duty to your Lordship,
as well for the general report of your virtue universally conceipted in the
opinion of all men, as for the native place o^ my birth, whereby I am bound to
affect your honorable father and you for him above others, in suspense of this
dutiful desire, it fortuned that one M. Thomas Lodge, who now is gone to sea
with Master Candish, had bestowed some serious labor, in penning of a book
called Euphues Shadow: and by his last letters gave straight charge, that I
should not only have the care for his sake of the impression thereof, but also
in his absence to bes^owe it on some man of Honor, whose worthy virtues might
be apatronage to his work, where upon taking advice with my self, I thought
none more fit then your Honor, seeing your Lordships disposition was wholly
given to the study of good letters, to be a Mecenas to the well employed
labors of the absent Gentleman: may therefore your lordship favorably censure
of my good meaning, in presenting your honor with this Pamphlet, and
courteouslye grant acceptance of his works and my good will, his labor has
his end, and my desire in duty rests satisfied, and so humbly praying for your
Lordships health and welfare I take my leave.

Your honors humbly to command. Rob. Green. Norfolciensis.

To the Gentlemen Readers, Health.
GEntlemen, after many of mine own labors that you have courteously
accepted, I present you with Euphues shadow, in the behalf of my absent
friend M. Thomas Lodge, who at his departure to sea upon a long voyage, was
willing, as a general farewell to all courteous Gentlemen, to leave this his
work to the view, which if you grace with your favors either as his affected
meaning, or the worth of the work requires, not only I for him shall rest
yours, but what labors his sea studies affords, shall be I dare promise,
offered to your sight, to gratify your courtesies, and his pen as himself,
every way yours for ever Farewell.

Yours to command, Rob. Green.

Philautus, to his Sons living at the Court.
Now my good Sons, that the ripeness of your years makes you ready for
fortune, and the place of your present aboade, is the Theater of her tragedies,
least by making a simpathie between Will and Wit, your rashness in youth might
breed repentance in age, I have amidst the fatherless cares of your welfare,
shapen out Euphues Shadow, by the substance of his first youth, limming out
under the figure of Philamis, the fortunes of Euphues, wherein yon shall see,
that young men's first wits are like April dewes which breed more unwholesome
weeds then profitable flowers: Euphues was my friend in his life, and kind to
you by his legacy at his death: but he took more pains to write it, then you
pleasure to follow it, else had I heard you had b^ene more mise and less
wanton. Sons the Conrt is full of delights, but they be dangerous, there you
may cheapen beauty, and buy it to dear, Love there is as busy as a Be, and
co^ts to make his Hiue in every Gentleman's head, but stop you your eyes and
your ears, least while she is making her Hunnie Comb, you repent and prove a
Cockscombe: there be many flatterers, but few friends, much show of virtue,
but great practice of vanity, which made Euphues repent the prime of his youth
misspent in folly, and virtuously end the winter of his age in Solexedra.
Therefore I send you his Shadow, containing the substance of his young desire,
read it, and follow it, and then I hope you will say, the shadow of my dead
friend, bred you the substance of many honorable virtues. Farewell.

Philautus.

Euphues his Shadow.
AT such time as Octauius possessed the mouarchy of the whole world, and Rome
the majesty of all wealth and wisdom: there dwelt at Rauenna (a famous City
in Italy) a young Gentleman, who had as great reach in wit as riches, and as
many perfections, as possessions, beautiful he was, and this was natures
benefit: rich he was, and that Fortunes bequest, in brief: Nature and Fortune
(striving to exceed each other) strained so far, as Fortune could impart no
more wealth, nor Nature no more worth. But as the Beast Varius has a rich
skin, but a rank flesh, and the bird Struchio a big body, but weak wings, so
Philamis having a ripe wit had a running head, placing his felicity in
travail, not in temperance, in seeking foreign countries, not hearing
fruitful counsels, for which cause, gathering together much wealth, and
neglecting his welfare, forsaking his friends to trust to forrainers, after he
had travailed many countries, he entered into Austria: This province (among
all other) is pleasant and plentiful, inritched with fruitful mould, and
replen^shed with fortunate men, having every part thereof divided after this
proportion: what so is situate betwirt the river of Laite, and the beautiful
flood of Anasus was subject to Hungaria, and what so is contained betwixt
Anasus, and the river Enno was wont to be under the jurisdiction of (...):
Enno is a great river, springing from the mountains of Italy, which passing
by the populous City of Pasan, enters into Danubius: Laite is a little river
which also with ^der floatings yeeldes his waterie homage to the mighty (...):
This country is bounded to the Northward by Bohe^, and Morauia, to the
westward by Bauaria, to the southward, by the mountai^es of Sticia, and to the
Estward, by Hungari^, and notwithstanding the spacious length, and long
spatiousnesse of the country, yet Danubius (seeming as though he were in a
mored with the same) with resistles mightiness runs through the midst of the
soil in this province, and that pompious city of Passan, did Philamis make
his stay, invited thereunto by the salubritie of the air, and the
sumpt^ousnesse of the buildings, finding there both courtlye companions to
conu^rse withal, and comlie ladies to disport with all, it was wonderful to
see, how instead of Philosophy, he subdued fancy, reposing his worldly
felicity in prodigality and fashions: but as the hungry sparrow flies to
the full barn, the diligent Be, to the delightful flower, as the raging
Woolfe seeks out the ritchest fould, and the careful Ante the greatest
harvest, so Philamis having much money, had many attendants, who with Aristippus
could flatt^r for profit, with Batillus dissemble for substance: yea many there
were that carried vermin in their toongues to open secrecy, many that bare
(...) in their hearts to abuse his (...), but the young Raue^noes having his
hand on his halfepenny, had day looks, for quaint ladies, cunning delays, for
crafty deceivers, he had a finger to cover his scar with Alexander: a fair
word, to coulont his suspect with Antimachus, yielding such lips, such (...),
(...) that as Acteon was de^oured by his own Dogs whom he nourished, so
credulous manners are ouet thrown by those (...) whom they have cherrished,
and surely not without occasion was he provident h^erein: for flatterers are
like rich tombs, on which the only name of amity is written: or worse then
ravenous Crows, who (as Antisenes was wont to say) do (...) feed on dead
bodies, wh^re flatterers corrupt the living (...): they are Summer Birds, who
endure no storm, (...) about young Princes in their glory, flying from them
in their disgrace, in brief, like the Partridge they steal others eggs, and
with the Bird (...) hatch other Chickins, so that the words of Virgil may be
applied to their (...):

Sic vos non vobis veller a fertis oues.
Sic vos non vobis (...) atis aues.
But leaving this, retur^e we to Philamis, who living in Passan and loving his
pleasure, was commended of the most for his pleasant discourse: of the wisest
for his ripe wit and knowledge: among the rest, Anthenor (a man ^uergrowne with
years, but grave in discourse) knowing that as the horn of Cerastes purges
venom, the herb Rue prevails against the poison of serpents, as Abrotamum
(...) out thor^es, and Mirtus heals deadly maladies, so counsalles molifie
youthlie courage, giumg reason the rain, when will has the spur: called
young Philamis a part, where with fatherly regard and friendly reasons, he thus
scholed him. Gentleman, since a man may better persuade by counsel, then
dissuade by correction, since discipline reformeth manners, and advice
suppress^th youthlie motions, I will though a stranger rather be presumptuous
to draw thee from mischiefs, then in forbearing to show thy maimes, I should be
an agent in thy misery. Oh Philamis thy behavior shows thy bringing up,
which if it were l^sse courtly and more constant, the flatterer should be
further of, the friend nearer at hand: thou have learnd to show outward
courtesy, but art lame in true courtesy, which rather thanketh the better
sort for a just reproof, then commends the worser sort for an vnde served
praise: is not he a poor Uintner (and not so poor as fo^d) that sets out a
rich Iuie bush where there is no wine? Is not he a vain man, who praises the
person wh^re there is no virtue ^ Is not he most ignorant, that (...) to know
all things, yet is ignorant of himself? If thou confess the Uintner fond my
Philamis, how more fond art thou, who have beautified the outward parts with
silks, and blemished the inward with great sins, shutting thy (...) body in
strange coulors, but shunning to inritch thy h^auenlye mind and soul with
good counsels, if thou blame (...) that commends the person, not the
virtue: how blam^ (...) is Philamis: who choosest the flatterer for thy (...),
the taunter for thy Table guest: the incontinent for thy (...), the inconstant
for thy counsauers. If his ignorance be great who presumes the notice of all
things, but knows not himself, oh how hapless is Philamis? whose
presumption is his imperfection, and who is only miserable in this, that he
knows not his misery: If thou p^ce thy felicity in goods, even the
felicity thou seek^st is gale, which is fell my Philamis, if in pomp, oh vain
pomp, where the opinion glories over his truth, prodigality over
frugalitie, the shadow over his shape, and the imperfections of the flesh, over
the perfection of the soul: what art thou (young man) wherein thou art not
poor? what have thou (young man) wherein thou may not be rich? thou art
fashioned like thy maker, but mortal, thou art wealthy, but may want, thou
art strong, but may be weak, thou art fair, but shall have furrows, and as
the bud perishes in the flower, so shall thou finish in thy fullness: what is
then thy riches? that of the mind Philamis, which is plentiful, when the body
is poor, thou have a reason to discern error, a will to follow virtue, a
soul to contemplate heaven, a thought to imagine happiness. But why wade I so
far, where the black Ox has not trodden on the foot? Why wrest I to teach
experience, where the thoughts are peremptory? Thou art here in Passan a
stranger, a Lamb among Woolues, a weakling among wicked ones, so that either
thou must learn Pithagorus silence, or Socrates fifty years subtlety, yet
was Pithagoras taunted houlding his peace, and Socrates poisoned for all his
science. Hear are they that makes their guts their Genius, their gorge, their
God: their perfumes, their perfection: their dalliance, their devotion: either
living as though there were no God, or loathing (as if it were not lawful to
know God, and among these lives Philamis: and with these (...) Philamis live
without folly? To speak liberally Gentleman, but how without lament may I
speak it? our Catoes now a days want moderation, our Ciceroes conscience:
Fools are held rich, because rich: poor, ignorant because poor, a worldly
reason, a wretched reason, here our quadrati homines, are become rotundi,
wearing so much of the world on their heads, that they forget God in their
hearts: there are Ladies, that have maskes to cover maimes, who are fair by
Esculapius sirrups, and have been foul by Bacchus surf^its: here are Epicures
which counterfeit fast, when they most feast, carrying the User^rs decipe in
their possessions, and the Apothecaries recipe in their pursses: here glosing
is glory, and Thraso held for Thesene, in brief, in this country Irix an
ordinary beast lives many years without sickness, and few men are there
amongst us, that pass one year without their feauour through beastlines,
among these can thou live without loosnes? I but thou will say, that as the
cle^rest Crystal has his crack, the fairest day his cloud, the tallest
Cedar his worm, the greenest Cicuta his poysen, so C^ttyes cannot be without
sins, nor monarchies without mischiefs, many spots in the Leopard makes the
white more purer, so many defaults in any estate make the virtues more famous.
Oh that virtue might want his shadow, in seeing all like her self, none loser
then he should be: I but Alexander had a finger to cover his scar, I but had
Alexander no sc^rre what need he so use his finger? I but Cicero had eloquence
to cover his vain glory, I but had Cicero no vain glory, how sweet were
his cloquence. O Philamis who so lives in Passan, must bear the stone
Smaragdus with the Griphon against the stinging of Serpents, carry Garlike to
conquer the Leopard, learn of the bird Laurus to fly like an Egle, and
floate like a fish he must be fit for all times, and have foresight against all
treason, for hear with us men intend much but amend nothing, being singular in
sin and simple in science: live therefore with friends, as if thou may lack
friends, Lions a great city has been consumed with a light fire, Hemus a
huge river has been dryes with a little drought, wealth will fail, and
followers will be faulce, learn therefore to prevent occasions, least thou be
enforced to cry with had I wist:

Heu quam miserum est d. scere seruire, vbi sis doctus dominari. Let thy attire
be come without prodigality thy behaui^ur courtly without peremptorines, let
thy companions hau^ more wit then words, let thy diet savor more of Philosophy
the^ superfluity, let thy reason be thine eyes master, thy God the governor
of thy reason: so shall thou work according to his will, and will no less
then I wish. No sooner had Anthenor ended in these terms, but Philamis feeling
where his shoe most wrong him, being stoong with a Nettle, thought to cure it
with this Item. Great Lord and learned Citizen (your estate requires no
more, your studdie shows no less) as I perceive your c^unsailes proceed of
love, so shall my replies be seasoned with duty, being as well taught to
reverence Caesar for his dominions, as Seneca for his disciplines: whereas you
condempue me for mistaking courtesy, I am not curious to amend that, since the
Cap pleads not reconcilement, and a man were better reform himself indeed,
then perform more mischief under the color of duti^: you have used many
reasons to diswade retchlesnesse, choice figures to disprooue fancies, tying
vanitic in the gin, attyring ^rtue with the Garland: whereby you have proved
your self eloquent, my self ignorant: wherein I neither cross you, neither
consent with you: knowing that virtue is not discerned without vanity, and
contraries being opposed are the sooner perceived: should I not try sour,
how should I trust sweet? should I not converse with bad, how should I know
good? compare not Heridmi with the Eagle that is a fair bird? join not the
Lilly with the Rose that is a sweet Flower, allude not the blackness of the
P^rpuse, to the beauty of the Dolphin that is a fair Fish: Oh ^ather the
knowledge of si^e is a mighty step to virtue? Cato continually living among
severe men, became more severe, where if he had borrowed somewhat of the
Epicure, he had not been so impatient in his end: Alexander a great Monarch,
talked with Diogenes a poor Cinick, whose precepts had he followed in his
exploits, he had ^in more constant, and less incontinent? you condemn
youthlie company, so did the woolfe in his age, who seeing his whelps
forward in the spoil, reprehended them for their have and speedy
footmanship: you blame bravery, so did Laertis who seeing his shoulders unable
to bear rich arms, began to discommend Ulysses when he was armed: you mislike
love, because you lack power, being loath we should perform that in act,
which you daily practice in will. Though you delight with the (...) to be
solitary, yet give us leave with St^rla to take out sollace. The Agate has
spots and yet precious: the Ermine spots and yet precious, the blew sapphire,
has a white cres^, and yet precious, only precise thoughts alude all things
to their own purpose, and despise most things in that they may not practice
any thing, and this thing, and this thing is their principal practice to
reprehend, which being seasoned with an envy of others happiness, is very
pernicious, you sorrow for the defaults of your citizens, and the corruptions,
urging the deserts of our forefathers, to condemn our follies: but shall I
^nswer with Cleander, they in times past which were not overmuch studious of
Philosophy, became most brave and renowmedmen by their actions, and more
famous then we be, because they practiced virtue indeed, and we in these days
only use it in word, by which means they are more happy then (...) be. The
fish Mirenula hates the Crocodile, yet both poison: so oulde men hate the
young in that they execute, and themselves cannot inact. It were tedious to
measure the sea by a line, to shut the heavens, in a compass, to number the
Honey combs of Hibla, to count the sauors of Africa, and no less troublesome
to allege the reasons, which approve the conuersing with ill, and the
commodity to know error: the envy of old men is as common as they are
crooked, and as they have furrows in their faces, so have they frowardness in
their fancies. I must end with Tully (Anthenor) and bouldly tell you this, that
your opin^on is not only full of lightness, but also fraught with folly. It Is
better to be Ulysses then Ciclopes: Prometheus then Epimetheus: Argus then
Cepidus, let me therefore c^unsaile you good Father, learn more and speak
less, graye hair should have grauer behavior, good persuasions, or no
speech: for as a moth is soonest spyed in the sun, a spot in the whitest
Lawne, a moule on the fairest face, and ^ier in the cle^rest fountain: so
ignorance is most apparent in an oulde man, in that his discourse ought to be
most perfect: with this abrupt conclusion Philamis departed his company either
loathing to answer the r^st: or l^cking judgment to co^eiue the right: but
Authenor who had sounded the ^reame, and knew the shallowe, sailed the Sea,
and seen the danger, sorrowing at the y^ng man's inconstancy, and woondering
at his discourtesie repaired to his ^udy, where he wrote this Item to all yo^ge
Gentlemen.

Anthenors Item, to all young Gentlemen.
THe retchlesse race of youths inconstant course,
(Which weeping age with sorowing tears behoulds)
Their wretched will (their woeful sorrows source)
Their wanton wits, their errors manifoldes
Has reard my muse, whose springs wan care had dried,
To name them fly the dangers I have tried.
From Cradles rock, when childish I had crept,
And May-like young, of pleasure began to taste,
Seeing my fatal course my reason wept,
Toys were my triumphs, will my worth did waste,
And in the seas of pleasure whilst I sayld,
Small were my fruits, and yet my youth was quailde.
And now began manlike vigor fill wine arm,
My heart was warmde with courage fit for love:
Like wanton bird exempt from fowlers charm,
I soard aloft but looking from above.
I saw on earth a Fowler heavenly fair,
That made her nets the trammels of her hair.
Then lo my pompuous plumes were laid a part,
Her eyes were loadestars in this worldly way,
My thoughts her thraule, her prisoner was my heart,
But for my pains, what payment but delay.
A lingering life I liude to sorrow soulde,
A foe to wit through follies waxing oulde.
When chillie age had seasure of this earth,
I felt a wound of sorrow in my breast,
I saw how judgment quite was spoild by dearth.
How virtues seeds by errors was suppressed.
I cast the count, and see what I have gotten:
Timelost, wits wast, and limbs with surfets rotten.
Now see I well that travel is misspent,
Except in virtue it be well employed,
What I in love had I in learning spent,
Oh what a joy had we arie age enjoyed?
Had I foreseen the wastfull course of time,
I then had made my harvest in my prime.
But now when feeble footsteps are allied,
Unto the grave this sinful bodies hold:
I cannot practice though I have espied.
The way of worth, the grace exceeding gould.
What only rests sweet young men that shall follow,
I know the sourse and now will teach the shallow.
Prevent the time the days are full of danger,
Whilst youthful vigor yields you furtherance,
Make reason guide, let folly be a stranger,
Virtue is perfected by art and vsance.
Enritch your minds with skill, for why they must,
Remain eterne when boddie is but dust.
Let not your eyes infeebled be by sin,
Cut short presumption for it will aspire:
Who takes advice, amendment does begin,
Sub due your wills, and master your desir^.
A modest coat, chaste thoughts, and studious arts,
A dorne the boddie, mind, and inward parts.
These lines are lines like Ariadnes clewe,
To lead thee through the Laborinth of grief:
Who so thou be that virtue wilt ensew,
More sweet in sooth then show in true relief,
Good Countrymen still prone what I have told,
Least you repent with me when you are old.
In this sort Anthenor councelled his country meu warning them by his
experience to prevent their youthlie negligence, but Philamis not perceiving,
that the rotten wood which glistereth in the night is gray and dry in the day
time: that delights which are fair in show, are foul in substance, that
things which are best in appearance are woorst in proof, followed his ^uld
course, and defaulted in his youthful inconstancy, thinking that the tide
would have no ebb, the time would have no end. Among all such as conuersed
with him, there was a young Gentleman of the same years, and no less
substance, called Philamour, who cyther for that he agreed in nature with
Philamis, or for that necessity would have it so: entered an inviolable league
of amity with the brave Rauennois, these couple counited by vows, and united
by love, lived together in such manner, that if Philamis sighed, Philamour was
sorry, if Philamour was pleasant, Philamis was not pensive: if Phllamis would
mourn, Philamour was melancholy: if Philamour passionate for love, Philamis
was loves patient: what Philamis said, Philamour would sooth: what Philamour
intended, Philamis ended: so that neither Eurialus was more dear to his Nisus,
nor Caesar to Cicero: nor Ephestion to Alexander: nor Lucilius to Seneca, then
Phil^mour to Philamis.

In this sort passed they their time in Passan, so that there seemed to be one
soul in two bodies, one heart in two harboures, neither separated at boorde,
nor severed at bed: but as idle minds have yielding motions, and such as are
entangled with liberty, are soonest thrauled by love, so Philamour, like the
light Fether in the strong wind, the slender skiffe in the greatest storm:
the weak Willowe in the wastefull over ouerflo^e, tra^ersing the streets with
his fr^nds, and seeking how to satisfy his fantasse: at last beheld the
daughter of Nicrosion a Noble man of that Cittye, w^ ^d no other heir but
Harpaste, nor other hope, but hit good ^ortune: this Lady was beautiful
beyond woonder', and more witty then wealthy: her body was adorned with the
guiftes of nature, (having eyes as fair as the Carbuncle, but more cleerer:
Cheeks more crimson then the Rose, but sweeter: Lips Cherrieripe: limbs
choicely framed,) her mind with stayed judgment: reddy thoughts, pleasant
conceits, perfect constancy: treasure enough to entangle the eye, riches
sufficient to rauishe the soul. These perfections had so much power over
Philamour, that he took no other comfort but in her company, her eye was his
Idol, her words were his Oracles, so that he seemed to confess with Alexis,
that love was the infallible mistress of men, killing all former pleasures in
them, planting their delight on one only object, which the more a man sees,
the more he seeks, neither was young Philamis unattained. (But in contrary
sort) for Harpaste behoulding his hautye looks, his honorable learning, his
brave discourse, his boulde demeanor, his Socraticall questions, his Judicial
aunswers: began to catch houlde where there was no handle, to kindle Fuel
where there was no Fire, and to begin her love where there was no lyking.
This entrance made Fortune to manifest troubles, making this her induction to
most tyrannical cruelties: for the more Philamour courted Harpaste, the more
she contemned him: the more Harpaste labored to allure Philamis, the more
Philamis neglected the love of Harpaste.

Many were the presents on both sides, many the perswations, many the privy
sighs to importe fancy: many the apparent shows of unfeigned favor, if
Philamour complained he found no comfort, if Harpaste bemooned her, she fo^e
no medicine. But Fortune which is accustomed with great Art (as Garimbert
wrighteth) to take fear from those over whom she most means to tyranise, in
midst of Philamis security, showed her greatest severity, for he chaunsed (oh
unfortunate chance) to behold Eurinome the disdainef^ll, the paragon of
comeliness, but the pattern of (...): (...) had a (...) to (...), a Circes
(...) to enchaunt, Phillis beauty, but Amarillis pride. Oh too fair (...):
she was eloquent to (...), learned (...) contempue, she was wilye to (...) men
wretched, she (...) smile to see men sighe ((...) Eurinome) this the aim of
his conceit, this the end of his comfort. Amidst the passionate estate of
these lovers, Philamour that was first caught in the (...), was most of all
tormented in his love, confessing with Aristotle, that only beauties eyes were
eloquent, protesting with Plato that love was a sage Poet, and made other
(...), for his only comfort was to contemplate one Harpaste, and his mind
(altogether before time addicted to pleasure) was wholly given over to painte
out her praises in Poetry. One especial day among the rest, Harpaste desirous
to discover (...) discontents, persuaded her father Nicrotion to make a solemn
feast: whereunto among the rest, Philamis for love, and Philamour for fashion
sake were invited. Thither also repaired Eurimone the (...), bearing a browe of
Iuorie, a breast of Adamant. Great was the assembly on that day, sumptuous the
Banquet. These lovers observed Ouids observations at the Table, making such
prittye combats with their longing eyes, that their hearts through impatience
were well nigh consumed with pashion. The Dinner (...), and Table taken up,
according to the custom of Austria, the Gentlemen first daunced their
Courranto, some (...) their Temples with wreaths of Mirtill, other with
Garlands of Roses, each one presenting their (...) with a several Flower:
Philamis among the rest, with due reverence gave Eurinome a Marigoulde:
Philamour bestowed a (...) on Harpaste, hearing their Corronets of (...) in
their hands: when being desired by the Ladies and Gentlemen to discover the
secret of their presents: Philamis being most forward, commanded the Cornets
to sound this Barginet, when taking Eurinome by the hand, he began the
dance, and tuned his delightful voice, warbling out this Song.

Philamis (...).
Happy Phoebus in thy flower,
On thy tears so sweetly feeding:
When she spyeth thy heart bleeding,
Sorrow does her heart devour.
Oh that I might Phoebus be,
So my Clitia loved me.
When with glory thou do rise,
Forth his fair to show she putteth^
When in west thy glory shuts,
Clitia shuts, her beauty dies.
Were my mistress such as she,
Oh that I might Phoebus be.
Phoebus beauty did allure
His fair flower at first to love him:
And till time from heaven remove him,
Clitias glory shall endure.
Oh that I might Phoebus be,
So my Clitia loved me.
Thou that houldest in thy hand,
Natures glory, Phoebus treasure:
Now observe the self same measure,
For I burn in self same band.
Were my mistres such as she,
Oh that I might Phoebus be.
This conclusion was shut up with a long look and a (...) sighe, when Philamis
conducted Eurinome to her place, from whom he received this crabbed courtesy.
Sir in that you are to silly to be the Sun, and I nothing so fond to be
your flower, twere good you sought a more kinder (...), for I like no such
false hearted Phoebus, with this smiling answer and sorrowful reput^e, Philamis
nipped on the head, rubd there where it itched not, and drawing himself a
part gave himself wholye ^uer to penstuenesse, whilst Philamour reddye to
satisfy the expectation of the Ladies, after the Music had sounded his
Madrigale, took Harpaste by the hand, and in this manner applied his Song to
the melody.

Philamours Madrigale.
Ungrateful Greeks when on the sandy shore,
Wronged by contempt, strong Ajax stoutly stood,
He sighth, and therewithal
Since good deserts were wronged, in irefull mood
He drew his sword, and straight his breast did gore, and fainting down did
fall.
Ye gods he cried (if any gods) he cried,
Sincecountrie yields toward, not good desert,
Be you propitious now,
These lukewarm streams that issue from my heart,
Since Greeks my right with rigor have entied.
Bear witness of my vow.
I vow (oh fruitles vow) that I have serud,
For countries cause, and not for servile gain,
And yet Laertes son
Must haught Achilles mangled arms maintain,
Who never once in combat has deserud
As I full often have done.
Since therefore Virtue has no recompense
Among my Grecian peers, oh gentle mould
Receive my sacrifice:
The heavens can tell for Greece my blood was sold,
The heavens can tell I die for no offense,
Thus closd his eyes.
And when the Ghost was ready to depart,
These later words with tears he forth did power,
Both gods and earth relieve me:
His blood the earth transformd into a flower,
The heavens were moved at the warriors smart,
Sweet Nymph believe me.
Long with Ulysses (but with greater right)
For more then Pirrhus Fathers arms I strive,
But since repulsed still,
I living dye, naught rests now alive,
But joy, but hope, thus still with feeble might,
I feed upon mine ill.
The heavens behold how I am firm and true,
The earth my tears to flowers has transformd,
my wound still bleeding flows.
Without some grace my grief is not reformd,
Oh were my griefs, wounds, flowers, so fresh in view,
You then would end my woes.
Every one in the company was delighted with this dittie, only Harpaste
counted all stringes out of tune, since her heart stringes were out of temper,
notwithstanding to show her self courtelie, though somewhat discontented, she
answered expectation with action, not speech: vouchsafing him a Basolos manos,
for his melody and martyrdom. After all these Bargincts and Madrigales were
daunced, according to the custom of Austria, the Ladies called for a Basket,
wherein every Gentleman and Gentlewoman casting their Gloves, there was
election made who should be Kings and Queens, the lottes cast: Philamis was
appointed King, and Harpaste Queen, who by order ought to prefer some
question whereon the company should dispute: and which they should decide, the
Rauennois therefore vouchsafing the place, and incited to the performance,
began thus, When Midas was made Judge fair Ladies, Apollo had the woorst:
homlie wits cannot decide heavenly doubts, and better were it to give over with
ignorance, then to be presumptuo^ in error: but since I have a Cibilla to
assist me, who if my words be ridiculous, can answer you with Oracles, I will
speak that you may condemn me, to the end she may sprake, and all may commend
her. The Lapidarie lays the foil before he sets the stone: The Dier
washes the cloth before he stayneth the color, the Mason squareth his plot
before he lays his foundation: so am I but the entrance to judgment, she the
essence, she the substance I the cipher, having this only happiness to speak
with her, which of her self only speaks well: Harpaste blushed at this
praise, taking the commendation most kindly at his hands, from whom she
expected most comfort, and suddenly had she yielded him replye, but that
Philamis fearing least the wound should be stung with too many Nettles, began
thus. Since I am to propone the question, and you to decide the quarrel,
(fair Ladies and brave Gentlemen) let it be this: Whether it be better to
deserve and have no friendship, or offend and find favor: A matter incident
to the time, and accordant to the persons: and since Eurinome is cheifest in
worth, and choicest in wisddme, I will if so my Queen condescend, that she
begin the controversy, Harpaste that liked the clawse, quicklye subscribed:
Whereupon after some attention: disdainful Eurinome began thus. Since I am
charged by those who may command, and peremptorinesse is greater offense then
ignorance, I will utter my opinion meo Iure, yet conclude all things with
reverence, and salua authoritate. The question is not so doubfull as
dangerous, for either shall I war^e against my self, in wresting somewhat, or
lay my hand on my heart, and wish I had said nothing: B^t since I must say
something, to observe Decorum. I will with Apelles draw a line to show my
level, giving reasons rather of likelihood then opinion, since I meant my
words shall be no nets to entangle me, and my desire is to please in speech, to
prevent offense, not to perform what I plead, for that is against my
conscience: I say, that offense to find favor is a fond course, for that
were to catch the moon with a trammell, to charm the hair with a tabor, to
couple the Cinick with the Stoic, or the Snayle with the Storke, for women are
like quails not charmed without a sweet call, like Dolphins not allured but
by music, and show of obsernance toward them, is the best means to be
sovereigns over them: but ^nce this difference stands upon election, which is
best, and the choice is either desert or offense, which are contrary: let us
examine the fruits of both, so shall we find the success of favor: desert
proceeds rather of hope and will to please them by service, whom we honor,
then to displease: desert has many branches, duty, service, loyalty,
forwardnes to exemplify our loves, either by adventure of life, expense of
living, endangering our bodies, or endeavoring our wits: contempt or offense,
depends on detraction, (...) consisting on more branches of injustice, then
the other has respect unto equi^ie. Since therefore to deserve well proceeds
from virtue: to offend, from injustice: here is a deep Dilemma to be
discovered, why the one should find favor, the other have no friendship: and
how may this be decided but by a woman's reason, who since she borrows of the
(...) to many infirmities, may bouldly with the blind man take a pillar for
her paramour: and determine all controversies at her pleasure, Vulcan deserved
well, yet Mars was befreended, and the God of war offended much, yet was
fancied most: see here an instance to destroy all propositions, women admit
no proportion, they are peremptory, their choice is as their change, and their
change as the moon, if any ask why so: the answer is, the Moon does so: if
any has the power to mend her, we will give them leave to amend us: Thus have
I made my spoke, which if you admit in sport, and take as I mean, the wisest
shall be incertaine of my meaning. Philamour secing how voluntary she sought
to obscure her thoughts, shortened her talk by the ^st, and in this sort
leueled at his love: Lady Eurinome I (...) you auowe much but allow nothing:
giving us a taste, but no trial, using the policy of cunning embroderers who
when they have exceeded themselves and other men's conceit, leave somewhat
imperfect to color their own wants, and move admiration in those which
cannot follow the work, you neither condemn the one cause, nor commend the
other, but I that have a wound by Achilles sword, must seek my weal by the
same. Applying my reasons to that purpose, I may persuade, and to that end
she may take pity: which she (said Harpaste) you speak to doubtful? That
(she replied) Philamour that examines me in this different: why I examine you
Philamour (said she) as your Queen, whose favor exceeds your fortune. But I
(replied Philamour) plead pity at Harpastes hand, not as she is a Queen:
why said she, but being Harpaste she is too bare for such a Lord, but said he
Philamour were blessed in having such a Lady. Soft madame replied Philamis,
suffer suppliants to offer at your shrine. I will Philamis (said she) so you
will hold the candle. Lord said Eurimone how Queens forget themselves and
lovers loose themselves, for our king is become a private Gentleman by this
plea, and Philamour has so forgot himself in the entrance, as I fear me he
will be to feeble to make an end: Philamour galled with a sharp spur,
pricked with a stiff thorn, after a smiling modesty began in this sort to
prosecute his pretended discourse. Though it be a common fault (Ladies) yet is
it commendable, (the heart to be where the treasure is, the eye to be fixed on
that which is most fancied) yet is it an honest (...) (at least wise honest in
women's opinion) w^o yield most thanks to their lovers when they are most
thoughton, and greatest praise when they are (...) played withal, pardon me
therefore Eurimone. if I have answered Harpastes doubts, since I am curious,
least she should suspect my duty ((...) neglect it said Harpaste in secret,
yielding that period to his pause) whereupon he thus proceeded.

It is a certain and practiced rule among the Phisitio^, (...) Serpents have
least venom in their teeth, because their often chewing auoydeth the same,
which rudiment is most certain in love, which the more it is exercised with
troubles, the more constant it is, and less feigned, and what greater troubles
in love then to deserve: the strange rigors, the rude repulses, suffered with
content, sustained without contempt, is not this desert? To be rewarded with
cruelty for courtesy, to return favors for frumpes, praises for displeasures,
is not this desert: To esteem all dangers duty, all torments trifles, all
penance pleasure, is not this desert: and are not all these troubles: being
rewarded with undeserved torment: which though among living men they are
counted vain, among loving men are held for virtuous: for as the Pecocke has
fairest coulors about the crest, the Dove choicest feath^rs about her neck, so
Lovers have deepest sorrows in the heart, which since they suffer to deserve,
they accoumpt their misfortunes felicity.

Tullie complaining him of all his miseries in exile, annexeth this: At vbi pro
aris and socis agitur nullis, ego malorum tempestatibus impellor, and as
Tullie, so true Lovers, when the cause concerns love for which they endure,
their discontents sort unto delights, and it is unto them felicity to suffer
misserie. For as without the mixture of light nothing is clear, and nothing
dark but that which has darkness: as without the aid of fire nothing is
hot, nor without the assistance of air could, so without trouble in love there
is no triumph, without repulses no pleasures, without sower (...) sweet,
without danger no desert, which like the pure gould in the hot fire, the bright
Sapphire in the black foil, the clear Moon in the winter night, the more it
is frowned at, the more it is refined: Since then desert is such, and exercised
with such sorrows, how unkind are they that regard it not: (...) how happy
are they that are unregarded? This is the bent of the question, this the
benefit of my quarrel: who auowe that it is better to deserve and have no
favor, then offend and find friendship: for hear the indignity follows
the desert, and they are iustlye convicted, who value not the force of virtue:
and who are they? Truly Ladies your selves, imitating the Saints in
Churches, who smile as well on those that deface them, as they that defye them,
resembling the woonderous root (...), which being touched, (...) out fire,
and plucked up procures death: the more you are praised, the more you
repine: the more men scrue you, the more you scorn them, resembling the
Camamell, which the more it is trodden the more it springs, and the more you
are courted, the more are you coy: to be brief then, as they that walk in the
Sun are still accompanied with shadow, so those that follow fancy must
weight on sorrow: for as there are no limits in Ladies beauty, so are there no
limits in their affections, all their works are of supererogation, which we
may see to be so, but must not say so. To be brief, I so glory in my
deserts, which show the constancy of my mind, that though I have no
friendship, yet I rejoice that I deserve friendship. Since the one shows my
^euotion, the other her doubleness, the one is my best, the other her
brutishness, Philamour spoke this with a vehement sighe, which I suppose he
set down for his period. When at last Hirpaste firing her eyes on Philamis,
with blushing modesty began thus.

How likes your Majesty of this Orator? has he not preached well? Yes Madame
said he, and would have pleaded better had he chosen his own pulpet: oh said
she quid Graculo cum fidibus? play upon them if he had cunning replied
Philamour. Stop the fludgates said Eurimone, we abound in to much folly, all
are follies in them madam, answered Philamis, whose best desert is but
offenses: I but how blessed is he that offends and finds favor said Harpaste?
as blessed quoth he as he that angleth without a bait, and catches a Breame, why
not beauty replied Eurmome pointing at Harpaste: yes beauty if you please said
he, pointing at Eurinome. Thus tossed they the discourse too and fro, till at
such time as Harpaste was ready to speak her opinion there entered the hall a
fair and beautiful Lady, nearly allied to Nicrosion the Lord of that
place: attyred all in mourn full colors of black ^ir goulden hair scattered
along her goodly shoulders, in the o^e hand she bare a light Taper, in the
other a naked Sw^de: who after she had amassed the whole assembly with her
(...), having attained silence, began thus.

The lamentable and pitiful torments of a constant lover, serving a cruel
Lady, with the strange and woeful penance and death she endured.
NOble Princes, and renowned Ladies, could tears discover tragedies, and
sighs report sorrows, I would weep more and speak less, and groan with
such vehemen^ie, as you should gre^ue to behold my heaviness: but since the
cause requires terms not tears, discourse and not sighs (if so you shall
vouchsafe me favorable attention) I will open that unto you, which will make
the marble heart melt to hear it, and move the (...) thoughts to lament my
estate, when he under stands it. I am hapless Claetia you Nobles, Niece to
Nicrosion, allied to Harpaste, wh^me the pride of Passan for beauty, now the
byword of the world for barbarous cruelty. It is not unknown unto you, and too
well known by me, how Rabinius was a brave Gentleman of this City, of high
reputation among the wisest, of greatest regard among the warriors: he had
Caesar's fortune in arms, Ciceroes forwardnes in arts, having the benefits of
nature, accompanied with such bounty of the mind, that his perfection
exceeded all report. In brief I may bouldly say with Tully, that this man
has not only surmounted the glory of the best deseruers of this time, by his
virtue, but also all the memories of antiquity by his value: But why praise I
him, who perished by me? and why in reporting his excellence, rip I up my own
insolence? ah Claetia this is naught else but to rub on the gall, to kick
against the prick. The sent of Basil draws Scorpions unto it, the herb
Squilla charmeth Sorceries, Ros Laurel kills Dogs, and the memory of
griefs being renewed, reuiueth more sorrows, kills all joys, and
confounds all solace. But I must tell my Tragedy, since I mean to enact an
other (here making a melancholy pawse, she hanged down her head along time:
at last be^ing awaked as it were out of a dream, she in these terms
prosecuted her purpose: Alas, whether am I transported your Nobles, who had
need, d^ting Senecios hot troop of staves to put me in remembrance? But you
may pardon the imperfection if you please, to hear the passion. This noble
Rabinus unhappily beheld me, and more unfortunately loved me, leaving no
practice unattempted, no service unperformed, whereby he might manifest his
humility, or I be notified by humanity. But as Eleborus heals some
madness, and makes some more moodie: so his submission which might have
mortified the hearts of other, and molified the minds of the floutest, made me
more severe: for like the steal hardened by much melting. I grew hard hearted
by his many wecpings, carrying in my looks the poysen of Sardania, which
makes show of smiling, when there is shrouded greatest severity. Five years
and more with importunate suits did he solicit me, haunting continually the
place of my habitation, thinking himself happy to kiss the Couslip whereon his
Venus had trodden, forced at last by his importunity, and egged forward by mine
own pride, I vouchsafed him the opportunity to discover his affections, where
after many lamentable complaints, with little compassion, he at last required
this only favor, to kiss my hand, protesting any service to attain to so
great felicity: wretched that I was, I wholly inclined to severity, returned
him this answer: that at such time as he had achieved three combats in honor
of my name, slain three monsters in Libia, and brought me three heads, and
finally rid him of life that most troubled my delights, he should enjoy his
wish, and show his worth: cruel that I was, over cruel that I was I not only
tied him by words, but bound him by oaths: and he more constant then advised,
preferring my love before his own life, prosecuted his pretense, neither
agreeued at the impossibility of my demands, nor grut^hing at the perrill of
his estate: ^o be brief. I repaired to my fathers grange bounding upon
Danubie, he taking his horse, and locked in his arms, wholly intended his
determinations. Long and tedious were his iourneys: and travailing continually
by vn^racted ways, he took no other comfort then to think on (...) often in
his solitary walks, when travel had weakened his (...), and trouble wounded
his thoughts, he alighted from his (...), and turning him into convenient
pasture began to renew his penciuenesse, often when he saw a barren Oak dried up
by age deprived of leaves, with many bitter sighs he thus cried out. Oh happy
plant that suffrest this waste in thy waine, where I perrish in my prime, thou
art dispoyled of thy leaves, I of my loves, eld has reft thee of thy pith,
envy has robbed me of my pleasure, thou have calm after storms, I storms
without calm. thou art strong in thy root, though disturbed in thy bows, I
stung at the heart root, and despised by beau^ie, oh happy tree, or haples
man. Often (...) he beheld a sweet spring, he thus sighed, and thus sighing said:
fair fireame without disturbance, thou art fruitful in thy waters, I
frustrate in my weepings, t^y sun plays with thee, my sun plagueth me, no
winds afflict thee, much wretchedness follows me: thou Crystal, I I
comfortles. Thus applied Rabinius al things according to his own cogitations,
feeding only on the roots of the deserts: and stanching his thrust with
fountain water, at last after he had passed through a thick wood, he entered a
shady plot of ground, in midst whereof there was placed a tomb of white marbel,
on which sat a knight armed at assaye all save his head, who espying Rabinus so
mounted and addressed, betoke him to his horse? buckled his helm and drew near
him, saluting him in this sort. Knight, Lord, traveling prince, or whatsoever,
unfortunately have thou entered this desert, for either must thou combat with
me in honor of thy mistres, eue^ ^o the (...), or lose thy right hand, which I
must fix on yonder sepulcher. Knight replied Rabinius let me know the cause
before we enter controversy, why thou keep this tomb, why thou requirest
the combat, that either I may with reason yield thee my right hand, or else
with courage enter conflict. Sir said he, in this tomb lies buried the fairest
lady that lived, who renowned through Bohemia by her beauty, was sought unto by
diverse princes among the rest, Charondas a duke of this country, preferred hi^
service, and prosecuted his sinte, making so many courtly (...) and sending so
many courteous presents, that at last Seruatia consented, ordering her desires
every ways to occasion his delights, but he most traiterous Prince smothering
deep conspiracies under a smooth countenance: one day under color of
solemnizing the marriage, invited her with me and my two other brothers (her
near allies) to his Castle, where after many gracious entertainements, and
agreeable triumphs, the night being far spent, he conducted her to her
Chamber: the Northren Waineman had already mounted in his course, fixing his
steedes between the arms of Aquarius, when every eye was closed, and each
Lord silent, Seruatia betook her self to rest, little fearing to be
ravished, when sodainlye by a trap daore Charondas entered her Chamber, charging
her either to take care to satisfy his pleasure, or to finish her life: the
poor Lady knowing the Lark was to weak for the Eagle, the Lamb for the
Lion, that Astroites stirs in wine, and sturdie natures are moved by
perswations, with maidenlye modesty, and matronlike constancy, she thus
reasoned for her liberty.

Ah Charondas, if honor have more power over thee then dishonestie, if thy
vows have been virtuous and not vain, what need these encountries to
enforce favor, where thou have conquered fancy? thine eyes have power like
the Fish Stella, they have subdued wh^t they hane seen: it only re^ that
thou observe mean in thy conquest with Alexander who could forbear his
bondwoman till her br^dall. The Limace stays what she touches: the Adamant
draws where it neereth, and shall I not touching this hand for my peace,
escape my pretended peril: all beasts when they see their dangers, fly them,
and flying them befreend themselves. It is but Catoes constancy may make thee
a conqueror, and a little forbearance a Lord in felicity. Charondas not able
to endute delays, playde at fast and loose for a fall, knowing that
opportunity was a good plea, and that Venus counted Silemis for an Ass, for
his Nestor like sobriety: but Seruatia like the Bull made fierce by seeing red
coulors, so perceiving the rude cruelty of Charondas, resisted according to
her power till at last impatient of her wrong, and he (...) of his will, the
Duke forsook hi^ Chamber, and sh^e (...) comfort, when faring like Hecuba
robbed of her son (...) Priamor bereft of his signorie, she seemed rather a
sweet stature of Iuorie without life, then a sacred and living saint quite
dishonored: feign would she had pleaded, that Charondas was not not falce: but
casting down her looks on the charactor of his looseness: alas she said
would he had not, or rather fond less would I were not, and as the signs of
distemperature come before the tempest, so the tears of poor Seruatia, were
the commets of her fat all sorrow: and as the Uipers teeth are most venomous,
when the serpent is most yoongest, so this sorrow in the entrance was most
severe, her speech was closed up with dispight (and that her tongue wanted power
to cry revenge, yet her angry blush pretended a revenge, to be short,
seeing her honor lost, her lovers lewdnes, she loathed to breath that air
wherein she was betrayed, and snatching up his weapon, the witness of his
wickedness, which through have he had left behind, and through horror she was
bent to use, she sheathed it in her body, leaving the earth to enjoy the
sinful parts, to the end the heavens might partake her celestial
pertections. Charondas hearing of this her hapless departure, ashamed at his
sin, and lamenting his lust, fled presently, living as it is reported a
miserable life in the mountains Lirenei: when the rumor of this outrage,
sounded in the ears of us three brethren, her near allies, finding no fit
occasion of revenge, yet willing to auow her right, we inclosd her body in this
Ma^ble grave, vowing one of us each day to attend here, till a tweluemoneth
were expired, resolving to try against all comers, that Seruatia was only
fair, only constant, the paragon of chastity, the pattern of constancy. If
any gainsaye our reasons, and adventure an others right, if he be subdued he
loses his right hand: but if we after three days combat be conquered, lo
here ^he honor reserved him said the Knight, (when drawing a Curtain) he
discovered the picture of this Paragon.

Rabinus r^uished with her sight, stood a long time amassed, till at last
revived with the thought of me most haples Claetia, he replied thus.

S^r the cause of your quarrel is reasonable, and the reward of the conquest
honorable: but what if I auowe my Mistress more fair, what shall then
follow? That thou art fond said the Knight, and unfortunate. Fortune or
misfortune answered Rabinus I force not, Claetia I say was more fair, more
constant, more famous then Seruatia. If thou like not my sentence, gaine-saye
me with thy Sword: whereupon without any further discourse, they entered
fight: great and dangerous was the combat, till at last Rabinus attained the
better, and drawing of the Helmet of him that was conquered, he rather gave him
time to breath, then sought to shed his blood. The stcar^e Bohemian, that saw
the strange and admirable bounty of the Austrian, humbling hi^ on his knees,
began in this manner.

Though I have fallen by thy Sword, I have not failed in my desire (courteous
Knight) who have encountered a Gentleman, who is as well skilled to conquer by
affibilitie, as by force, command me therefore according to the prefixed
covenants, and I will verefie what thou auerrest, in that thou art the victor.

Knight said Rabinus, it is not revenge that I seek, but renown: nor thy
harm, but my honor. If therefore thou confess that my Mistress Claetia is
fairer then Seruatia, thou art free: only tied to this, to attend me into
Austria, where in her presence, in whom depends my delight, thou must
confess that in courtesy, which I have achieved by combat. The vanquished
quickly condiscended to the victor: desiring him in sign of their
reconcilement, to sleep with him in his pauilion for that night, the better to
be able to perform the combat the next day. Rabinus not able to fo^et his
oulde grief, yet somewhat satisfied by his re^ewed glory, easily
condiscended. Whereupon they both together ^tered the pauilion, delyuering
their horses to their attendants, who dillig^lye trimmed them. Supper was
served in with great solemp^tie, and the two other brothers (in whom remained
the pursuit of the Combat) (...) Table guests at that present, who behoulding
the (...) person of Rabinus, but his discontented (...), his broken sighs, a
great sickness of nature, began to find his imperfection, without feeling
his pulse: whereupon the youngest which was both wise and eloquent, pi^ng that
such prowess should be accompanied with (...) began thus.

Gentle Knight, I wonder, that having woone the honor of the field, you are
thus sollempne after your good success, I fear me this your sickness
proceeds rather of your dangers to come, then your fortunes that are paste.
Sir said Rabinus (as if awaked out of a slumber,) it is ill judging by the eye
what the heart ayleth, or the inwa^de harms of the mind by the outward
habitude of the body, the Crocodile weepeth when she will ^uoure, the Sirens
smyleth when she would betraye: the Cat plays before she persecute, the
Lion dallyeth ear she devour, Since therefore dispositions are so diverse in
Beasts, be not you so addicted to censure of men, least triumphing with the
Elephant, you be terrifyed with the Mowse, and like the fell and fiercest
Tigar, be affrayd and dismaide at a shadow.

The young Gentleman seeing that Rabinus was discontent, in that he was
driven out of his dumpes, followed Alexanders pollycie, who spying the
sickness wherewith Apelles was payned and consumed, rather conclud^d with
himself to leave Campaspe, then to loose such a Painter: whereupon, ceasing to
urge that whereon he^ ^we that his euyil depended, he kept a loofe, observing
the same course he pretended, but running more at randon. Sir (said he)
mistaking is no argument, neither should you think I argued you of (...), but
honor you for (...): only because I see you passionate, where our desire is
you shoule be pleasa^nte. I will ^yme ^rowdlye at all sorrows, and perhaps
touch yours, thing that ^s one Nail dryueth out another, so one (...) in you
shall overcome an other: all sorts of griefs noble knight have but two
workings: the one in the mind, the other in the body, if thy discontent grow
by worldly change, thou art fond, for (...) is more certain on earth then
alteration: if thou grieve at Fortune, thou art blame worthy, where thou may
conquer her by constancy: she is like the fish Torpedo ^eing of her self
sinful, and driving all those that touch her to sensuality: have thou lost
friends? seek other if one friend: be ashamed thou have no more: if thy only
^riend, oh frail man be agreeued, who in so many worldly tempests and
calamities, had but one trust and constant anchor: have thou lost thy wealth?
rejoice it has not lost thee. The fewer pence the lesser p^rrill, now fortune
has showed her worst. Signify thou thy wisdom. Art thou greeucd: if thy
grief be small, suffer it: i^ great, patience can salve it. Art thou poor? it
is but thy opinion: use continence, and thou art a conqueror. Thou art hated?
if of no descrt, thou art happy: if deservedly, amend thy self. Learn of
Euripides, that no mind is so imperfect, which virtue cannot make pure? art
thou scorned in love, leave it, it is a Canker in the Rose, a Drone in the
hiue, a spot in the Crystal, a crase in the ^uorie, art thou contemned by
love? condemn it: Glass is clear in substance, but poisen in taste: the
Torquile delights the eye of the Fisherman, but benummeth his hands: the
frosen Serpent is full of poysen, and the fa^rest face the falsest heart.
Aristides being asked what caused greatest report, the eye (said he) which
sucketh more poysen then the tongue or heart can enacuate: master the desires of
love, and thou art loves master: look on L^dyes as on fair Sepulchers, which
as Diogenes held opi^ion, the richer they are without, the rottenner they are
within. The Geese that p^sse the (...) Taurus, carry pibbl^s in their mouths,
least (...) by their cackling, they should be murdered by the (...) ^es: and
wilt not thou be more provident then birds who c^t their imperfection to
prevent their perils? Thy Prince d^uoureth thee? if bad, happy art thou without
favor: if good, the sooner reconciled. Thou art banished, why Omne solum vi^o
forti patria, learn of Socrates with the good Sail^r, so to have all
necessary instruments in a readiness, that in fair weather and foul
storms, thou may be (...) for all changes, since the world consists by
change: mark what Euripides says, even as all air is penetrable to the eyes
of the Eagle, so all towns and Cities are a valiant man's country: here
Epictetus counseled: even as (says he) it is better in health to be laid on
a mean matteris, then to be sickly on a magnificent and rich bed: so is it
better to live happily in poor estate, then to be unhappy in prosperity. But
leaving these worldly infirmities, let us have recourse to the deserts of the
mind, which the more noble it is, the more dangerous are the diseases thereof.
Is thy mind weak? strengthen it with good counsels, the best physic is
Philosophy, which seeks no Viaticum: in brief, no trouble of the body, no
torment of the mind, tempts him who entertayneth all chances as if they
should have happened, and endures all crosses with constancy when they happen.
Rab^us hearing his pregnant wit, and pleasant persuasions, discharged some
furrows from his forhead, returning this short answer. Sir you have showed
your learning, and moved my delight, following the custom of many idle
artistes, that can speak well ear they taste the dispight, but when they are
a little broken with care, they loose their brain and conceit. Cicero in
prosperity could talk of constancy, yet in adversity show pusillan^tie but
he that is exercised in mischief, most knows the martyrdom, and he that
has the wound, feels more then he that cures it, is not ^e a witless
Gardner that planteth the sallowe on the hill, and the Cedar in the vale, the
Pine in the plain, and the Popler in the mountain? Is not he a worse
husbandman, that sets his Uine n^ere Babylon, or sows his corn in
Mus^ouie? and of all this is not he most simple, that seeks torid that by
counsel, which is rooted by care: to plant gladness, where springs griese. To
apply comforts, where the wounds are incurable? Oh sir, since you neither con^
what I suffer, nor can deceive my sorrow, the pam^s so^nite, the grief so
indefinite, suffer me only to view that, w^ch you cannot redress, and endure
that which you cannot d^ upon, and bouchsafe a hearty thanks for your travel,
whilst I continually persist in my helpless torment. By this time the night
was far spent, and the supper time expired, so that after order was taken for
the next days combat, the Gentlemen conuayed Rabinus to his lodging, wh^re
with broken sleeps he beguiled his days forepassed travel. No sooner did the
sun illuminate our hemispheare, and Aurora in her yellow beauties drive
forth her dewie Chariot adorned with Roses, but both the champions arose, and
having armed themselves entered the lists, ^o determine their appointed
combat, but Rabinus courage was so great, and exercise in arms so famous,
that he quickly after many wounds, weakened his adversary, and before the
sun had fully attained the noonesteed, he had brought him under subjection.
The third brother impatient of delay, moved with the misfortune of his elders,
suddenly armed himself, resolving before the shutting up of the evening, to
reduce Rabinus to a hard estate, but he like the sturdle tree, which the more
it is shaken with the wind the surer is it fastened in the root, was rather
embouldned therewith then abashed, and calling to mind my vnfortune name, he
so valiantly behaved himself, that ere the third hour was expired, the last
champion was his prisoner: whereupon with mild countenance, signifieng his
mercy, he embraced them, commending their virtue in the honorable
enterprise, they had undertaken, enioyning them only that day tweluemonth, to
meet him at Passan, where they might be discharged of their vows, and my
self assured of his valor, not forgetting to charge them to bring her picture
with them: for that night stayde he with them, signifieng unto them all the
sequel of his love, where at the Gentlemen were so moved, that the youngest of
them in vehemency cried out with the P^et:

Faemina blanditur laqueos parat arma ministrat,
Faemina cerberium digua fouere canent.
No sooner did the bright morning discover it self, and Phoebus disc^ouding
his watrie locks, began to leave the dewie bed of the Ocean, ^ut Rabinus
arose, and taking leave of the Knights, departed forward toward his journey,
many soyles crossed he, and ouerpassed many cities, seeing with Ulysses, and
getting science with Ulysses, as he

Qui mores hominum multorum vidit and vrbes. But at last with much travel, he
^tered Libia, this country is more fruitful in sands, then in seeds, in
incomodious monsters, then commendable commodities: the people of the country
being valiant, but subtle, leading idle lives, but having adle brains: not
long had he travailed, feeding upon his ^uld trouble, but amidst a parched
plain, dried up with the furious beams of the frowning sun, he saw an
angry Rinocerotes pursuing a tender and young infant, which fled to be
undertook, and faintlie e^deuoured to eschew death, which he had already made
choice of. The pitiless monster still following his pray, which though he
were slow in race, yet was he severe in rigor) had welnie overtaken him, when
valiant Rabinus couching his Spear in his rest, so forciblie assailed her,
that he pierced her body, and left her liuelesse. Then dismounting him from
his Steed, and awaking the Child from his amazedness, he cut of the head of
the horrible monster, conuaying the tender infant to his mother, who
trauayling over the plains with that infant, had forgotten her young son to
save her oulde life. No sooner perceived she the Child delivered from
danger, her self from detriment, but humbling her on her knees, she
heartilye thanked Rabinus for his succors, conuaying him to her Castle near
at hand, where for that night with royal entertainment, he deluded the time
with delights: among other Table talk, Rabinus inquisitiue of news, was
thus answered to his question.

Noble Sir, as Libia our Country is full of waste, so wants it no woonders,
and though our nation be woonderfullye addicted to arms and chiualrye, yet
have we such strange and dangerous attemptes hear amongst us, that the
bouldest warrior either f^areth or fails to bring them to ^rigent. Sir
leagues from hence, by mar^ilous industry of a Magitian, the Princes daughter
of this province is kept prisoner, who (in that she condiscended not to the
love of Farasius, nephew to Hermagoras the cursed Inchaunter, but suffered him
rather to perish, then vouchsafe him pity) is enclosed in a strong tower,
situate on the top of a high hill round about which lies a dark and hideous
grove, over shadowed with huge Trees, herein as gardaines of the maid, he has
placed many monsters, who with horrible cries, and fearful howlings, drive
terror to all the inhabitants: neither is there any so valiant, or else so
venturous, who either dare seek her freedom, or subdue their fury. Among the
rest Tarpeia poor maid, is most miserable: for living in continual fear,
she is hourelie affrighted with visions, sometimes with Tigers renting her
garments, in the night time with ghostes threatening Tragedies, so that never
was there any since nature had power, that deserved less plague, or endures
more punishment: it were vain for me noble Signior, to tell all troubles, the
tears of her parents, the lament of the Peers, how for her all the Lords are
disconsolate, all the land desolate, only I annex this, that who so sets
her at liberty (which cannot be effected without great felicity) may if he
please be possessor of her love, and master of her living.

Rabinus gave diligent attention to the tragical discourse of the Labian,
vowing without further, delay to adventure the danger, and either the next day
to give Tarpeia her liberty, or loose his own life. The night by this time
has attyred the heavens with her sable Curtains, softly pouring her dew upon
the drooping eyes of every creature, when Rabinus was conducted to his lodging,
where he drowned sorrow in the suddes of sweet sleep, and appeased his
passions with sweece slumbers: the sun had no sooner on the next morrow,
after the maidenly blushes of Aurora, showed forth her shining glory in the
East, but Rabinus arose, and calling for his horse and arms, curteous^ie
took his leave of the Lady, craving only a conducter, who might guide him to
the Castle. The freendly Lady presently app^inted him one, commending him to
the mercy of the Almighty, who never fails them that succor such as are in
misery: and in this sor^ road he forth, wishing a desired end of her lament,
or of his life. At last about noonesteed, he beheld the stately fortress, and
saw the huge forest, wherein he heard on every side the howling of Woolues,
the hissing of Serpents: here sounded the shrill belowing of Bulls, here the
roaring of Lions, so that it was sufficient to amase any man, to behold and
hear the horror and terrible threatenings of these ravenous beasts.

The guide having conducted him to the entrance of the wood, being wan with
fear, soddainlie fled: but Rabinus whose meditation was on me unhappy
Claetia, set life at naught, despised all dangers, having no other desire but
to accomplish my decree. Long had not he trauayled in this thick and shadowie
plot, but soddainlie he heard a great crack of thunder: a mistie fog
ouerclowded the whole country: then might he behold in the midst of the
desert, and by the means of the lightnings, an old man vnchaning two Lions,
which both at once seized upon his Shield, plucking it by maine force from his
arm, then renting his Steed with terrible rigor, they renewed their fight with
him, wounding him in sundry places: but he who was awayted with courage, and
woondered at for constancy, so valiantly behaved himself that he s^ew them
both: which when the old man perceived, he speedily fled, and Rabinus hastily
followed. At last, drawing near the foot of the mountaiue, the old man
opened a Cave, from whence (after there had been euacuated a vast and huge
flame of fire) there issued out a horrible and deformed monster, headed like
unto Hidra, whose locks were (...) Serpents, in height about nine Cubits,
having the back parts of him like a Centaure.

Rabinus behoulding this diuilish enemy, was at the first some what
astonished: notwithstanding at last recovering courage he bouldly encountered
him, but the hydeous for cast forth such foyson of poison, that wheresoever it
attainted the armor of the Austrian, it pres^ntly burst off from his body.

Rabinus seeing the eminent danger, thought good to use no (...), but buckled
himself with such boldness to the Monster, that he parted two of his heads
from the venomous body. The beast heerewith enradged began soddainly to practice
revenge, and seized upon Rabinus with such (...), that he cast him headlong to
the ground: but he who was both (...) and hardy, soddainlie arose, loading his
enemy (...) such rude strokes, that at last he severed life from the (...)
carcass, and perceiving that all the weight of the (...) depended on the
surprisall of Hermagoras, ((...) the death of his champion, fled toward the
Castle) ^e speedily pursued him, and (fearing least he should ente^ the forte
before he might apprehend him) he suddenly stroke the inchanters head from
his shoulders, when lo the cloudines was ouercast, and with a thundering noyce
the Castle vanished, and the huge mountain became an humble plain: wherein
Rabinus beheld a fair and amiable Lady, who delivered from her affright,
humbled her self at his feet, ascribing the bene^ite of her life to his
bounty, and the cause of her happiness to his hardiness. Rabinus who was not
vntought in courtesy, nor untrained up in intertainment, began in this sort to
comfort her. Lady, if my indeuoures have prevented your dangers, or my
service has procured your security, I r^ioyce thereat, since I only live to
honor your sex, and desire only to serve them. Whilst in this manner he was
following hi^ discourse, the Princes father approached, who behculding Rabinus
with admiration, (...) embraced him, publishing in these terms hi^ (...).

(...), might my words discou^r my will, or my (...) my wants, you should then
hear how much I (...) you, and perceive how I would reward you, but since I
neither may express what I would^ nor perform what I wish, accept what I
may, which is this Lady and my liuelihood, who (...) my (...), to depend on
you, who have delivered my (...) from danger, and restored a desolate father ^o
his daughter. Rabinus no less virtuous then valiant, as well tried in
humanity, as trained up in honor, returned him this answer.

As my unworthiness great prince, deserves no such grace, so my willingness
to do you further service, may exemplify how much I honor you for your
offers, as they exceed my deserts to enjoy them: so I beseech your highness
better to bestow them, since neither my baseness vouchsafes me to clime so
high, nor my fortunes concenteth I should be so happy: and were it your (...)
would exceed my demerite, yet my former vows, prevented this virtue: so that I
beseech you to imploye those graces on your noble Subjects, and suffer me to
live in my obscurity.

The noble Libian seeing his level, and knowing the Moore by his color, the
Erimme by his spot, the Basilisk by his eye: left often to incinuate that which
he could not entreat, and embracing Tarpeia, demeaned such joy, as all his
Nobles doated with joy to see his delights: and now began they to regard the
huge body of the monster, the deep wounds, the desperate adventure: and every
one in common opinion praised Rabinus prowess, who cutting of the heads of the
Lions, and gathering this hideous monsters serpently shape together, after he
had made some stay in Libia for a while, with great honor, returned home into
Austria. And having finished and effected two of my demands, he earnestly
intended the third, but I careless, but not so careless as cruel, and not so
cruel as inconstant, feeding on pride, a cock of mine own doonghill, a bird
of mine own breeding, hearing of his return, became more rigorous, abusing
his (...) with severity. O vain course of us Women, who are more coye, when
we are most courted: who have our frumpes at our fingers ends, our follies
written in our forheads: we are froward when men are forward, (...) when they
court us: we are like Apes who kill their young with too much fopperie,
measuring our Lovers fortunes by our own follies, we are loves devils to
fear men, and Fortunes euels to infeeble them: we are woe men, because women,
feeding them with toying, and foyling them with coying, and are to fine in
love, and too foolish to define love: having our scorns linked to our toongs
ends, our scuses locked at our aperne stringes, able to make fools of
Philosophers, and idiots of Doctors: oh that we were less, so we were not so
loose: or that we had less bewty and more bounty: but knew Ladies what I can
acknowledge, and would they see more, and sin less: we should have more
bridals then burials, and men would court more and complain less:

Qui flos mane fuit vespere puluis erit. If the fairest bud must be blasted, if
the cleerest day may be clowded, if the strongest limbs may grow lither, what
are we wantons, who are so irefull to become shrowes when we should be saints,
pittifullones, as we are prittie ones, kind Lambs, as we are sweet tambes,
gentle lasses, as we are goodly Ladies. But to return the there where I left,
and report that which now I lament. Rabinus haueing no other felicity but my
favor, not being able to know whom I most (...), but by mine own censure, so
wrought with Celidonia my handmaide and attendant, that she so coulerablie
enquired of me, that at last I carelessly and cruelly confessed, that only
Rabinus was (...) whom I hated, and whose death might make me happy.
Celidonia understanding my secrets, and corrupted by lucre, certified Rabinus
of my (...), who seeing cruelty was the reward of his courtesy, began to
think which way he might end his misfortune, and publish my infamy: for which
cause, the year prefixed being fully expired, he caused a rich Chariot to be
made, fra^ed of black Ebonie on the top whereof with curious Imagerie, he
caused death to be engraven after a triumphant manner: from the back whereof as
if it were a (...) sprouting out diverse branches: thereon issued certain fine
and curious bows, at the end whereof he hanged a several sign of (...)
victories, and the tokens of his virtue: the foot thereof was after the manner
of a Chauldron, wherein with cunning Imagerie Cupids triumphs were cut, and
with great workmanship cunningly wrought, which being effected in deepest of
his melancholy, his three Champions appeared, ready to perform their
promise: whom after he had freendly entertained, he so wrought with them, that
they vouch safed to draw him in this Chariot the next day, to my fathers
grange, where only I, Celidonia, and some small retinew of household servants,
being informed of his forwardnes, expected his coming, when entering the
place, only covered with a (...), he presented his presents, surrendered his
prisoners, enforcing though no mercy, yet admiration in me. At last when I
required the third dutie^ (oh duty full of damage, with a stearne countenance,
and a stout courage) he thus began. O cruel Claetia, oh my recurelesse
discontents, since my damage is thy delight, and my martyrdom thy melody, as
thou (...) satisfied in two things^ so now surfeit on the third. I have served
long with great loyalty, aduenturing mine own prejudice to enlarge thy
praise, behold the scarres of my many wounds, which are the signs of my
truth, but the seals of thy tyraunie: behold Rabinus grown oulde with much
grief, given over to too much disgrace, oh tokens of my truth, oh titles of
thy tyranny: behold Rabinus who has made thee famous in his life, and will
satisfy thy fancies in his death: see here my third vow performed, behold
the death of him thou hate, the date of all my horror: ah Claetia, (...)
Claetia, my heart (...) shall give thee hearts (...), my lyfes term, shall
yield thee (...) eternity, and though I please thee not in my life, oh let me
pacify thee in my death. ^erevpon with a sharp Raser, he soddainly cut all
his veins, leaving no vain untouched that might protract life, and whilst life
and death combated together, and his tongue had liberty of speech to prosecute
her lamentable purpose he thus renewed his complaints. Ah Claetia, thy favor
is too high prised, that for the kiss of thy hand, crauest the blood of my
heart, yet let me kiss it Claetia, that I may spend my last breath on thy
least beutie. Oh you Nobles, now began I bow, but without benefit, my mind was
to pity when I had no means: the behoulders exclaimed, I cried, and
approaching the chariot, sought all means possible to recover his comfort: now
bestowed I kisses on his wan cheeks, now employed I wishes to restore his lost
life. But ah the fruits of my folly, I pyned to see him perrish, who perrished
through my peremptorines. But he (oh kind Rabinus, sealing his love with sweet
sighs, opening his conceits with amiable kisses, since liberty of speech was
reft him, bestowed that was left him, kind looks for my unkind looseness,
and when I was most tired with love, he expired his last. The Knights
behoulding his mishap, fled for horror, leaving me to lament him, whom my pride
had lost.

Lord how comfortless lay I on his course, how embraced I him, whom I had
imbaced, and having killed him with unkindness in love, how gladly would I
with kindness have kissed him alive. But oh we weakelings of nature, but too
waspish: not so waspish as wretched, nor so wretched as wicked, we melt not in
desire, till men merit by death: and are kind when we cannot possess, and
cruel when we should pleasure, his woorst was past, my wickedness was
apparent. To be brief (for my breuity is now my benefit) who must heryte
nothing but mine own shame, I caused his dead body to be conuayed into my
Chamber, wherein I enclosed my self, acknowledging and unworthy of comfort,
still seeking counsel of the gods how I might satisfy his ghost: till at last
this later night, in my deepest sleeps I beheld this vision. Me thought my
Rabinus bearing new bloody wounds, stood by my bed side, and soddainly
awaking, cried out in this manner. Haste thee Claetia, blood requires blood,
my ghost will be satisfied, when thy life is finished: as thou have wronged me
in the sight of the world, so satisfy me in the presence of many witnesses.
This said he vanished, and I arose: where taking the Sword wherewith he was
guirded, and this Lamp whereby I was watched, I caused my train of Damsels to
draw forth his Coache, and hearing of your solemn assembly this day: I thought
good to make you eye witnesses of my penitence: this said, she caused the
damsels to draw in the chariot, driving all the assistance into a maze, when
extinguishing hit lamp, and casting her self upon the dead body of Rabinus,
she pierced her breast with his sword, and finished her life with this answer.
Ah kind friend, since I may not satisfy thee with my life, I will sacrifice
unto thee in my death. (...) Rabinus, though thou art bloudlesse, yet art thou
beautiful, receive sweet friend with the warm vigor of my blood, that with
the rivers of thine eyes thou may rid me of the rigors of thine enuic. My
speech ^yleth Rabinus, I will follow thee: ladies learn, learncladies by my
death to avoid lewdnes: by my cross to fly cruelty:

thus said, she gave up the ghost: and her handmaids drew both him and her out
of presence: conuaying both the bodies according as Nicrosian commanded into a
private chamber, inuiting all the assistance to these haples lovers funerals.
Eurinomes heart throbbed to consider on their thraldom: and Harpaste taking
Philamis by the hand, asked if the chance were not pitiful? But this
noueltye and the night parted the whole company: so that Philamis had no
means to solicit his mistress, nor Philamour to b^ay his misery: for every
one in steed of opening love, was enforced to take leave: but among all the
rest, Harpas^ was most moved, who behoulding the haples death of Claetia, was
so discomforted, that no speech can discover the half of her sorrow.
Philamour as a body without soul, seeing his mistress without sollace,
departed to his lodging and fell a languishing: Philamis both comforted him,
and sought to content her, and taking pen in hand, presented her with this
letter consolatorie.

Philamis to Harpaste.
MIght I prove as fortunate to confirm thee (my Harpaste) as I am forward to
counsel thee, believe me thy affections should not war against fortune, and
this accident should not move melancholy, in that all things are mortal.
Thou art sorry that Claetia is dead, but remembrest not sh^e was borne to dye,
and art sick, for that which happened to her, which will happen to thee and all
men, know thou not that things suddenly grown great, are soonest in the
grave? that sprouting ripenes is a sign of speedy rottenness? why then
greeueth Harpaste to loose her Claetia, who was too fair beyond expectation,
and cruel above conceit, too ruthlesse in her life, to retchlesse in her love,
thou art sorry she is dead, but why sighest thou not for that she dyed not
better: were thou grieved to see her live badlie, and wilt not suffer her to
die beast^e? what is more certain, then that a lose life will have a lucklesse
end, and that those that live in impiety, sildome die with repentance? oh
Harpaste, as in all things enough is as good as a feast, so in the d^cease of
our friends, our excess of tears are our surfets of folly. Thou will say
that each things according to nature is good, for so said Tullie: since then
nothing is more natural then to die, why mourns Harpaste for the loss of
Claetia? caust thou recover her by thy tears? that is impossible: if thou
can not, as I am sure thou may not, believe me this grief is superfluous,
fondness not zealous piety? she was not borne in vain, in that she dyed, but
in that she lived improfitably, she died vnh^ppily. Oh my Harpaste discharge
these furrows, dismiss these follies, death is the port, life the sea of
trouble, life the storm, death the security, life the corrisiue, death the
comfort, death the end of sorrow, life the beginning. Socrates devising among
his familiars, news was brought him that his son Sophriniscus was dead, and
what followed? he covered not his face with a veil, but confirmed his heart
with virtue, and in steed of bewayling him, he said come let us bury him: will thou mourn, because thy friend has out gone thee in thy journey? or for that
he has attained the end for which he lived? oh Harpaste this were mcere
ignorance, this is immoderate folly: for, even as they are worse then Idiots,
that beat the sun in that it shines, so are they over simple, that lament
th at for a maime, which is the aim of nature: nature thou say has robbed
thee of a Niece, and did she not give her thee? thou have lost her in her
prime, she was to loose to be pyttied, who greeueth to see the Rose blasted in
the bud? when he knows the Rose is but a days tasting? who greeueth to see
that weakened, that was borne to waine? Fabianus says, that those who lament
the dead, are like such as weep because they waxeould, and Philimon that such
as are sorry for the deceased, seem to condempe nature, which bringing many
things to a prime, must needly have some thing perish. If thou will needly
weep Harpaste, for that thy Claetia is to be buried, why waylest thou not in
that she was borne? for had she not lived, she had not been so lewd, and had
she not been so lewd, she were not to be lamented? and good Lord in dying how
much detriment has she escaped? since death is every man's end, manies remedy,
some men's vow, and wretched men's welfare: she has now no cause to beweepe her
inconstancy, to wayle her loss of friends, to sigh her change of fortune: in
brief, in one storm she has escaped all tempests: for as nothing is more
severe in show (...) death, so (...) nothing more sweet in substance, death
sets the (...) at liberty, in dispight of his master: death delivers the
Captive from his Chain, the Prisoner from his pen^ie, the condemned from his
dungeon: Death teaches the exile, to forget his country: Death makes all
things common: in brief, Death leaves nothing careful: and death is that
which C^aetia has tasted, and for her death it is that Harpaste lamenteth. Oh
ignorant of evil, thou make houey gall: thou accomptest Antimony, Egrimonie:
the Be an^, Ba^ll: the Hearbegrace, Hemlock, the pleasure, poison: consider
Harpaste, and considering counsel thy self, that opinion makes misery, and
that if thou were not peremptory in thy weeping, thou ca^t yield no proof of
wretchedness. Liuia lost her son, yet lamented not, for seeing the father was
gone before, she knew the son must follow after: then grieve thou not, since
Claetia is seized by that which thou must ^uffer, neither sigh thee for fear
the wiser sort accuse thee of envy, who sorrowest in that she has ouergone
thee in happiness: in brief Harpaste, die to these toys, and dry by thy
tears, strive thee to amend that wherein she lived misgouerned, so shall I
rejoice at thy virtue, and then inioye the fruits of my counsel.

Thine in all virtue, PHILAMIS,


Philamis having finished his letter, both signed, sealed it, and sent it away,
spending all his other endeavors in meditation of his mistres, and comforting
his Philamour, who poor Gentleman tossed in the s^as of sorrow, like a ship
without a helm, grew so wan with weakness, and pale with pensiveness, that
every one who beheld him, thought him more fit for his funerals, then meet for
his marriage, Philamis who preferred the safety of his friend, before his own
sollace, in midst of his dumpes, assailed him with this advice. How now my
Philamour? what will thou be so spent with grief, as to be past government,
and so given over to moan, that thou will forget thou art a man? ^oderate
tears, are like immesurable showers, which in steed of feeding the plants with
forwardnes, ouerflow the^ with fury: these weeping assuage not, but incite
g^iefe, which with the Aspis pricking but the arm, pierces the heart: thy
disease is not sickness, but want of foresight, neither any favor but fancy: a
graft of thine own eyes planting, a grief proceeding from thy own idleness.
The Tortuse ^eping in the sun, is soonest surprised: the Mullet strained by the
gill is sonest betrayed: in brief your (...) beuers are like ye trouts: fish,
caught with tickling, consumed by fancy, because you will be foolish. Fie my
Philamour, let reason teach thee, that love is but a sightly sweet, not a
substantial, shadowed in the shape of a woman to show her wantonness, painted
in the figure of a flying Child, to show his fleeting inconstancy. If thy
reason had as great power as it ought, and were thy opinions restrained by good
persuasions, thou shall confess, that time spent in love, is time lost in
life: then which (before God) there is nothing more foolish, then which (the
more grief) there is not any thing more followed. There is nothing can be
virtuous, that ends in repent: and what then love, is more repented when it
is possessed? the joys are no sooner attempted, then ended, and a little
kindness maks him who was as hot as a tossed as cool as a clock. But say thou
love a Penelope, even in this chaste love thou shall have some cross, a woman
to kill thee with weepings, Laertes to trouble thee with his lothed age,
Telemachus to try thee with his childish tears, riuals to tempt thy wife, if
she will be wanton, roisters to revel in thy hall: in brief, this one wife is
the occasion of many woes: this one Penelope the cause of much prejudice: say
she be a Helena, oh thou ^happy, that must wear Vulcans badge on thy browe,
and bear the seals of her shame, and thy scant foresight. Be^? Philamour, as
there is no shadow without a substance, no Leopard without his spot, no Liz^d
without his stain: no sweet without his sower: so is there no Woman without
her fault, no Lady without her imperfections. ^ may be faulse, say she (...)
wise, she will be wilful, say she (...) an idiot, she is a burden: how so
ever she be, she (...) choose but be a woman, which from their in fancy follow
new fanglenesse: say thy wise be fruitful and bring thee infants, even herein
may thou be unfortunate, when loofe heirs shall l^ish out thy heritage: say
she he barrame, thou will loath her, what so ever she be, believe me she has
a longing tooth, and a long tongue, two ill neighbors in one body, the one will
weaken thy purse if it be still pleased, the other waken thee from thy sleeps,
if it be not justly charmed. Believe me it was worthily said of Tully, and not
fo worthily as wisely, that it is extreme folly to delight our selves in
those things, in which there is more excessing pleasure, then exceeding profit.
The baits of lovers (says Ruben) the art they use, the snares they set, the
(...) they show, are not all these fruits of Uanitie. It is (...) ^aith (...)
to behold fair things, but not to be too bold with them, for as Zenophon
^aith, the fire burns, and a fair face inflameth: hark what Seneca
alleges, there was never fair woman whose beauty was not accompanied either
with cruelty, or whose heart was not thrauled by ingratitude. To be brief my
Philamour, since nothing is more curssed, then curious folly, nor any thing
more vncomlie, then for a man to disclaim liberty, good friend be good to thy
self, and leave grief, otherwise in languis^ing as thou do, and living
thus desolate, thou will kill me in being cruel to thy self, and end my days
by eternizing thy discontents. Philamour finding that as the fire cannot be
oppressed, nor the air be indomaged by strokes, so the mind afflicted by love,
cannot be drawn from affection, returned (...) this answer. Dear friend as
no tyrant in Scithia is so cruel as to forbid the miserable to weep: so no
man's heart can be so incensed, to draw them from distress, who wholly are
devoured in heau^nesse: have thou not read of Socrates? who being ^, by only
death said he, for (...) dateth ^ut (...) ^eath, and calamity finisheth with
life: Thou art sorry to (...) sad, and this is kindness, but were thou settled
to (...) my s^ccors, how palpable were thy courtesy. Well said Menander, that
he that is sick in body had need of the (...), but he that is crucified in
spit it, had need of a friend, I have heard thee speak well Philamis, but
would have thee do well: thou perceiu^st I love, thou then perceiuest a deep
wound Philamis, a lingering passion, but divine in possession: love is like
Darius Uine, rich in show, like Architas Dove, cunning in flight, which thou
may catch with thine eye, but not cast of without thine end, your proud
Philosophers for all their precepts, have sacrificed Roses to this Venus, borne
a Candle before this Saint, being Lords of their sayings, but not of their
senses. Plato commended by Augustine for his heavenly policies, had his
paramoure, who in his deepest studdies, had rather see Archanaesse naked, then
discourse upon nature, who being a block in every letchers way in her youth
when the Crows foot had caught her eye, was Platoes dearest pigsney, and he
who before time was famous in many wrightings, became in his best time
in^amous, being besotted on many wrinckles, Socrates though he were patient,
was entangled by Aspatia: Demosthenes the eloquent, a lover: Leocrates, though
a great Philosopher, loved the flesh: Pericles though famous for wit, loved a
fair Woman: Aristotle for all his Metaphiskes was love sick, making his
happiness of none but Hermia, in brief it is a common rule: these learned men
have ye lightest mistresses, and do penance before the world for their
peremptorines of wit. O Philamis, if it be possible to charm love, why were
these enchanted: if they were touched in their excelence, why should I grieve to
be tried in my ignorance? who washes the Asses ears, loses both his Soap
and his labor: who endeuoreth impossible things, mispendeth his cost and his
candle: in dissuading love. Then sweet friend, thou followest the nature of
Hiosciames, which has a black grain, but a gross fruit, and under shadow
of enforcing sleep ^ereaueth the senses: Make me Caucasus a plain, Danubie
dry, Ripheus without snow, drive the Pilat fish from the Sharke, the Iron
from the Loadstone, then take love from a liberal mind. Oh Philamis, Love is
the bond that linketh the heavens, and should I loath it? Love the sweet that
makes the Gods insaciate, and should I leave it? But to proceed and prosecute
reason.

Thou condemnest Love, seeking by a few shadows of imperfection to extinguish
the sweetness of pleasure. Oh my Philamis, thou can not have the effect,
but the defect follows, neither the honny in the Be, but the prick in the
bum: believe me, as it is rashness to condemn that which thou can not
determine. So in some things it is better to be deceived, than to distrust.
You blame all for one, making all skins foul, in that some are scard, all
bodies without beauty, in that some have blottes, attyring all natures in one
necessity, as if all (...) should be blasted, because some bloome not: all
waters should be deadly, in that some indaunger: and all women wicked, in
that some are wanton. Oh Philamis, though there was a lew^ Phillis, there was a
lovely Philacides: and though a loose Lais, yet a loving Iphias.

Parcite paucarum diffundere crime^ in omnes.Spectetur meritis quaeque puella
suis. Hear Ovid, for he was ominous: Saepe viri fallunt, else Jason had used
less jest, and Medea possessed more joy: Theseus had deserved more, Ariadne
had served less: Demophon had kept his promise, Phyllis scapther penance.

You judge women by colors, and tie divinity to conceits, where Aristotle
never wrote surer Axiom t^an this, that as when the Rainbow shows, then
there forepasseth a show^r: So when Ladies show freshest coulo^s of coustancie,
then men do^ most color: b^shrow their painting, women owe them penance. But
to draw nearer to catch occasion by the fore-locke, and curtall my Philamis in
his folly: if nature had done nothing in vain, as the philosopher affirms,
then the bond wherewith she tyeth things cannot be in vain, the harmony of
the heavens consists on love, yea such force and effect has love in all
things, that the Uine imbraceth the (...), the Iui^ the Oak, seeming to
delight in the bark, when the body is dead: in stones the (...) loves iron: in
metals, gold quicksilver: among mortal which are saints, man would not be
besotted with these sweet saints. Prove that Venus have a yellow color, yet
Mars will follow Venus: good men's pleasures, depend not upon bad men's
precisenes.

But to leave long discourse, since words have no power to express true
worthiness, (my Philamis) know thou that I love, neither can I discharge me
of that thraldom, but by mine own overthrow: It behooves thee therefore in
loving me, to stir up Harpastes love toward me, otherwise, as thou
understand not the least of my ieopardies, so shall thou behold the last of
my joys.

Philamis, that knew the cloth by the list, the Lion by his clawe, and the
danger by his discourse, replied thus: Philamour, if thou were counseled by
Democritus, more surer were thy comfort: for if thou desire not much, a
little would seem unto thee sufficient, but this thy longing appetyte beyond
custom, threateneth thee with a danger above conceit, which I see it were
better to lament than amend in thee. But since the law of nature tyeth me,
and the league of amity enioyneth me, I will rather fail my self than loose
thy wel^are. Rise therefore and write, let me be the messenger to present, and
the instrument to persuade, whereby thou shall bring all things to such
conformity, that thou may be assured of comfort: to sit lingering thus in thy
bed, and lament thus against beauty, is rather the means to waste thy life,
then win thy love. Philamour in this sort being comforted by his dear friend
Philamis, gathered his spirits together, and taking pen in hand began this
perswasiue letter.

Philamour the forlorn, to the fair est Harpaste.
SInce I know that no great thing may be acquired without travail, nor any
loving saint without long service, I have wasted many years to win thy love,
and spent many services to prevent thy severity. But (oh thou mild in
behavior, and Marble in heart: comely in demeanor, but careless of my duties)
as the balm tree shunneth the stresse of the Iron, so thy breast shakes of the
sting of amity: and like the retchlesse patient, the more thou art medicined,
the less art thou mortified. Among all the gods in Rome Pity had a temple,
either for that she is of great might, or wonderful mercy: then since thou art
one of her sex, be one of her saints, requiting my good devotion with some
sign of humanity. It is Philamour (H^rpaste) that desires thy favor, who
has deserved it, bearing as loyal affection toward thee, as ever any one that
attempted thee: neither incite I thee unto lawless lust, but unto loyal love,
nor to be my wanton friend, but my wedded ph^ere: if therefore as thou art the
fairest of women, thou will not prove fiercer then beasts, daine me love, or
deny me life, for among the vast woods the Elephant is amorous, which as
Plutarch witnesses, was as pliant to persuade by signs, as Aristophanes
eloquent to allure by sentences. It is a custom in India among the (...), that
if any young man be (...) with his mistress, he takes a woollen cloth and
(...) it in Oil, and touching it with f^re, coucheth it on his arm, enduring
the flame (whilst the cloth be consumed) with such constancy, (wit^t showing
any sign of discontent) that he testifies his love to be of such force, that
it exceeds all the injuries of Fortune. But I Harpaste, in (...) of (...)
fire in my flesh, bear the (...) in my heart: not for a season ^ill a cloth
be consumed, but during life, till my days be determined: and will thou be
more tyrant then the Indian Ladies, who are attainted with less trial? oh
fair Lady, would God so merciful as f^ire: oh comely Harpaste, would God so
courteous as comely, I have endured long penance, and shall I not at last have
peac^? I have tasted that woe, and shall I not try the weal? But why suspect
I, (...) I be rejected? the sun has most force over sweetest waters, the
mean plain sooner springs, then the barraine mountain: and women will be
wax, if they be well wrought: knowi^g that it is better to be plyant on earth,
then to play with, and lead Apes in hell. Our suite requires not long
ceremony, I love Harpa^e, and either weight the sentence of death, or the
acceptance of my duty, if I seem unworthy to deserve, then yield me sentence
of my death, which without thy fauout will as surely follow me, as I have
sincearelye favored thee.

Thine most assured, (...).


This Letter watered with many tears, and clos^d (...) with kind kisses, was
commended to the (...) of ^mis, who wholly addicted to procure his friend (...),
(...) expedition to find out Harpaste, and at such time entered he her fathers
house, as she had perused and pawsed on his ^ast persuasions, who no sooner was
certified of his (...), but expecting that which he suspected least: she gave
h^ (...) courteous welcome. Sir Philamis, were we not enforced to straw
Flowers for our last burial, we would straw rushes for you, you are such a
stranger: but you I fear me, are so much given over to Philosophy, as you
forget your friends. Madame replied Philamis, unless you soon leave your
strangeness, I believe we shall have more cause to straw flowers, then you to
syred Rushes. Harpaste touched at the quick, could forbear no longer: but
drawing him a part into a baye window which over looked the Garden, she began
thus.

Why what news Sir Philamis? or what cause of discontent. Oh Harpaste said
Philamis, and therewith ga^e such a sigh, as made her heart sick: here is a
secret depending on your sentence, which if you answer not with courtesy, you
may hap to lament with Claetia: whereupon he delivered her the letter, who
supposing it to be an arrowe of his own Quiver, a plea of his own penning,
replied thus. Sir I will peruse the text, that I may interpret the mea^, and
if I find no error, your Maistership may hap have kind judgment: whereupon
leaving him in a mase, she soddainly locked her self in her closet, where with
a trembling hand, and a troubled heart, she brake up the s^ale and perused the
scqueale: but when she perceived the stream ran the wrong way, her Cake was
dowe, her courage was dampe: and in steed of replye, she rent the paper. But
when she remembered him who brought the Letter, and considered his (...), in
that he brought the message, she gathered her wits together, and wrote this
replye.

Harpaste the advised, to Philamour the (...).
_(...) Am as sorrye Philamour to think upon thy rudeness, as I am assured
thou art careless of my rigor, and as resolute to repulse thee, as thou were
ready to provoke me: fond man, expectest thou that I can respect truth there,
where there is no trust? or friendship from him who has no faith, or
si^ceritye in him, who is a ver^e Sinon? can thou be true in the sequel of
thy love, who art trothlesse in the entrance, pleading thou have served long,
where thou have solicited never, courting me only with Aesops dish, wherein
were more meats of subtiltye then to satisfy.

I tell thee I am not so blind, but I know the (...) from the counterfeit,
the Damon from the (...) the friend from the flatterer. Thou desire me to
love thee, it I wish thy life: believe me Philamour, twere better thou were
buried then I betrayed, and that I gathered a garland on thy (...), then thou
should triumph in my disgrace. Socrates said, that he meriteth most
credit, who is most constant. If therefore thou deserve, or desire any
countenance, be more constant then, and less incont^ent: I had rather answer,
in faith I will not, then I would I had not, and refuse thy friendship then
displease my father. Oh Philamour, thy temptations are in force like the stoane
of Archadie, which laid on orye sticks kindles sire, the which I had rather
quench in Hamon, then comfort in Athanians.

The short is, I cannot love thee, nay more I will not like thee, desiring
rather to lead Apes in hell, then marrye a crooked Apostle on earth: yet for
Philamis sake, I vouchsafe thee this favor, to let thee know he is the ^fest
in my grace, and none but he shall be Lord of my ^cie: so wishing thee to
leave thy persuasions, and learn more patience, I bid thee farewell.

Harpaste.


No sooner had she dispatched this pertmptorie reply, but she returned to
Philamis, who seeing her coul^r changed, and her courtesy waxen could, began
thus. How now Harpastes, how like you my plea: not so well as your person
said she, which if I should set light by, it were a slight matter, in that you
are so sly a messenger. Why Madame replied Philamis, have you found any error?
I would I had not, said Harpaste, so you had lost your labor: houlde take this
Libell and carry it to your Lawyer: wherein he shall find I except so much,
that I accept nothing. Philamis troubled with this gleeke, began in this sort
once again to rub upon the gall: Why my Harpaste, I had well hoped that
Philamours desert should deserve more pity then impatience: what he deserves
said she, he may divine by my sentence, as for your self, if you have suits of
your own, you were best follow them, for believe me his is non suited. I but
madame replied Philamis, shall he not be welcome to the burial? Welcome said
Harpaste? belecue me none better, I had rather weight on his burials then
bridals, and so tell him. Herewith all with a disdainful blushe, she
soddainlye forsook his company, and Philamis departed thence wholye
discontent. And as wretched fortune would, he passed by Eurimones door, at
such time as in her greatest triumph she sat to show her self, expecting to
give some due to some one of her L^uers: who espying Philamis, soddenly called
him unto her girding at him in this sort. Now fares our gallant stranger? what
has not any goodly lasses as yet (...) you honor Venus? Yes fair Eurimone
(quoth he) I have with the Athenian long time played with Venus shadow: and
were you as forward in favor, as I could deserve in fancy: what then said
Eurimone? I would then replied Philamis, play with (...) (...) your person: you
would hurt (...) I fear me said she: (...) her Madame (quoth Philamis)
whereupon setching (...) sigh, he in this sort discovered his fancy. Oh (...)
your (...) has granted me a clew to trace loves (...), (...) your goodness
vouchsafes me to speak to (...) who^ I most serve: I will (...) my passions by
your patience, which if they may (...) you, as they have mated me, believe me,
I shall enjoy the fulness of my joy, and you (...) my faithfulness and loyalty.
Truth it is ((...)) that I love you, and Venus has past such judgment on my
paint, as it cannot be reuersed but by your pity: since therefore my
affections are firm, and you fit for fancy: you young, and I youthful: you
fair, and I faithful: vouchsafe the opportunity, and salve my impatient
sorrow, since cruelty is y^ stain of your credit, and pity the greatest of
your perfections.

Eurimone like a cunning fowler, seeing the bird already pend in the snare,
began in this sort to play with his feathers. Why Philamis I am sure you are
too learned to love, which is a sickness of the mind, a surfeit of idlenessc.
Believe nice I know you mock Love, for you cannot mean not Love. May it be
thought that a man who writes so well, should doat so soone^ Or he who can
square out the quadrant, be so far out of square. Alas Philamis, I am too
young to be married, and too old to be mocked. I pray you therefore exercise
your gibes on other, for my nose loves no jesting.

Philamis seeing her impatience replied thus. If my sunplicitie should be
taken for subtlety, and my devotion for doublenes: believe me Eurimone, I had
rather die than speak any thing, and perish ere I would persuade: but since
Love (as Garimbert says) surmounteth the fortress of the spirit, carueth the
hard Diamonds, warmeth the cold I sicles that often lie hidden in the breasts
of delicate Ladies: I will speak in that hope, and vow that I auow nothing but
truth. Plato having long time lead a chaste life, finally in his latter days
made his sacrifice to satisfy and appease nature, in that he seemed greatly to
have offended her, by his severe chastity: time lost in love is the lame time
of our life, and Ladies that loath when they arc wished, are soonest left when
they would. Ah Eurimone, thou art young, and must be yielding: thou art a saire
rose, and must be gathered: a pretty bud, and must be plucked: thou art fit
for man's meat, and meet for marriage: which (since in a^l honorable (...) I
(...) unto you) repay me not with (...) for my (...), nor wi^h (...) for my
good deserts. Believe me Eurimone, as salt sauoreth, so it fretteth: as Salsa
parilla dries, so it decays: as lingering is sweet in love, so too long
lingering breeds languishing. Oh seek not thou my grief, least I prove thee
ungrateful: these m^yst tears trickling from my mournful eyes, since they are
my witness^s in love, crave that thy chaste thoughts may prevent thy wilfulnes
in love. Eurimone, like the faulcon seeing the foul stoop, began to strike,
and the fly entangled, left not to follow him, but gave Philamis this gillop
to cool his hot stomach.

Oh sir, they that go a marrying, run a madding, who are enforced to make those
who now would (...) their heels, then to be their heads. Philamis, in faith
you are too wise to persuade me, and I wise enough to repulse you: it is a
principle in Phisike, yt the knowledge of sickness is to some men the occasion
of death: therefore (gentle friend) complain not of this love sickness, least
in stead of bedding you, we bury you, and it were mere pity, when so hot a
Gentleman who will carry no coa^es, must be borne like a coarse: possession
they say is in love the strongest point, I will therefore (...) my love, though
you demand it: and I promise you when I mean next to learn huswifery, you
shall be the last that shall husband me. In this scoffing (...) r left she
Philamis, who seeing himself forsaken, and his friend forlorn, departed in
such discontent to his lodging, that neither imagining how to consort or
converse with Philamour, he cast him the reply of Harpaste, resolving ever
afterward to shun the presence of so pestilent a mynion: and in this sort
entering his chamber he cast him on his bed, spending his time in such
languishing lamentes, that the report thereof must needely move pity.

Alas (he said) injurious sex, given over to subtlety, who with the veil of
honest occasion cover the dishonestie of your spirits, I cannot lament your
follyes so much, as be discontented with your falsehood: you are plyant when you
are not not pursued, and fawn when you are most flattered: Oh viperous brood
full of vices, who in your greatest calmes like Dolphins threaten storms: they
like the Crab are crabbed, the one having a crooked walk, the other a cursed
wit: they are as full of despights as the Ermine of spots: they are the foormes
of sin, and the fiendes of Satan: the gate of the Devil, and the Serpents
venom: their beauties are like burning swords. But whither now Philamis? Shall
men condenm them in their wickedness, when they are themselves wretched? What is
man but a mind incarnate? a fantasy of time? a beholder of life? a manciple
of death? a walker going? a dweller of place? a laborious mind subject to
passion, being as subject to be seduced, as women are sub^ill to seduce? Shall
we blame the fire because it burns us? or our selves that thrust our fingers
in the fire? The potion that poysoneth is not to be blamed, but he that
presents it: and our defaults are not to be ascribed to them, but our own
follyes. Thy Idleness Philamis, I there is the nurse of this same, and the seal
of thine incontinence: Study is the preseruanue of such vnstaiednes, where the
eye beholding good things is not besotted with evil, and the ear that
harbors science, is stopped to the Siren. Blame not them therefore who are
the weaker creatures, but thy self which was so ill councelled. In this manner
ceased Philamis to complain, and began to contemplate, resolving with
himself wholly to intend the succor of h^s friend, and otherwise every way to
give over fancy.

During this troubled estate wherein Philamis stormed, Claetia and her lover
were buried and richly intombed, to the great sorrow of all the beholders. But
leave we these tragedies, and return we to Philamour, who seeing Philamis
sudden depart, began to suspect somewhat, and now changed he his color, and
straight ways swelled in choler, making much of the shadow of grief, before
he knew the substance: but considering with himself that it is mere vanity
to (...), before there appear some cause to conde^e, be opened his letters,
and saw the cause of more lamente: and whylest he canuased each sentence, and
cons^rued every line, he at last unluckily beheld that doubt decyded, which
he most (...), the love of Harpaste toward Philamis, and hereon grew he into
desperate rage, suspecting doublenes in his friend, who detested all falsehood,
so that with out any opinion of excuse, he resolved to revenge himself cruelly:
whereupon apparelling himself, and taking his weapons, he suddenly knocked at
Philamis chamber door: who little suspecting hatred from him whom he loved
with his heart, was thus insolently assaulted.

Traitor as thou art, and rival in my love, who have learned of the Cretan to
lie, of thy countrymen to dissemble: did I not measure my dishonor more than I
make account of thy life, I would draw thy perjured heart from thy panting
breast, who since thou have robbed me of my Love, can no way satisfy my revenge
but by thy death. If thou therefore be no crauen cock, or have desire to
perform as thou can prate, arm thy self and follow me, otherwise, wh^re
ever I meet thee, I Will teach thee how to mock me: So saying (after he had
cast down Harpastes letter) he suddenly flung out of the doors. Philamis
grieved in soul to see this alteration, pretended a reply, but it would not
be (...): whereupon taking his weapons and gathering up the letter, he
perused it as he passed on, where he saw Philamours mistaking was the only
breach of their amity: notwithstanding stirred up with his inciuilitie, and
instigated with contempt, he followed his enemy: hoping by counsel to digest
his choler, or decide the difference by combat. Thus parting both of them out
of the City, and walking along the banks of Danubius, Philamis knowing with
Menander that the envious is enemy to himself, in that his spirit combats
continually in contrary passions, having the greater judgment, showed the more
moderation, and taking Philamour by the (...), sought to persuade him: when he
altogether given over to his own fury, more enraged than Celius the Senator of
whom sully makes mention (who being angry with one of his servants and bond
men, who was always most ^bseruant and dutiful, full of disdain said unto
him: why do thou not contradict me in some thing, because we may be enemies
in all things?) drew his sword, not suffering Philamis to shape defense, and
wounding him to the death, fled with all expedition, vnscene and unperceived,
into the City. Philamis in his fall declared his friendship, and in stead of
wishing hi^ prejudice, said, I pardon thee Philamour. See here Gentlemen the
effects of fury, which is neither tempered with desert, nor extenuate by
advise: Enen as (says Aristotle) the smoke offending the eyes, hinders us
from seeing those things which are before our feet: so anger assailing the mind
and judgment, blemisheth reason. Naucrates a man of great wisdom, was wont to
say, that the cholorike men resembled lamps, which the more oil they have,
the more they are inflamed: for as the more the one gathers fire, the more the
other grows furious. It is therefore wisdom to temper this violent passion of
the mind, which in Caius Caesar had such superiority, that he was incensed
against a city, and in Cirus, that he waxed wroth with a river: least herein
we show our selves bruter tha^ beasts who are by nature taught to temper their
fury, when they have aslaked their hunger, following the lenity of Antigonus,
of whom Seneca makes mention, who rather relieved than grieved his rebellious
bondmen, pulling them out of the dirt, not casting them in the dust. Oh how the
very fury of Alexander was a blemish to his fortune? and the (...) of Scilla a
scarre in his victories. But let me here by way of digression prosecute this
purpose a little further (Gentlemen) for that now a days forbearance is
accounted want of forwardnes, and moderation, pusillanimitie: prescribing by
your patience three remedies, whereby the impati^nt may (...), and the willing
may be warned. The first is not to be angry: the second, to restrain the same:
the third, to advise coun^ail, and heal the furious infirmities of anger in
other men: We shall not be angry if we consider all the errors of anger, and
considering them, rightly judge of them. Anger is first of all worse than all
vices, where covetousness gathers, (...) destroys: anger breeds grief
in the father, divorce to the husband, hate to the magistrate, repulse to him
that reaches at honor: It is worse than let, for that (...) his p^liar
pleasure, this rejoices in another harm, it is worse than malignitie and
envy, for they wish a man unhappy, these make him vnfor: ^ate. In brief, he
has no noble mind, neither is magnanimous indeed, who is broken with injury:

But to leave this and prosecute our purpose, Philamis being in this sort
fallen, l^y long time amazed weltering in his blood, and awaiting his death,
when Clorius a shepherd, who kept the grange of Nicrosion, situate near at
hand, secking out some stray lambs, at last bcheld this lamentable spectacle,
when moved by compassion, he with a blood stone which he carried about him
stopped ye issue, applying such comfortable salues that there was some hope of
the Gentleman's succor: Philamis more dead with unkindness, than daunted with
his wounds, s^king to shun the consort of all men, being demanded what he
was, shrouded his name, laboring by all means possible to recover such a
course of li^, as might be free from the fury of fortune, or the inconstancy
of friends. Whereupon remaining in Niciosions grange with old Clorius, till such
time as his wounds were healed, he wrought such priuye means by posts that
he had some supplies out of his own Country charging his dearest friends to
conceal the course of his safety, he sought out the mountains, ^here buying
through the assistance of Clorius a desolate and sweet seat on the top of a
pleasant hill, compassed with a fair grove, having a sweet river murmering
along it resembling Petrarchs seat near Sorga, among the thickest of the
mountains of Stiria: he betook himself to his study, earnestly intending
natural Magic, wherein in short space he became so ski^full, that he not
only grew famous in Austria, but through all Bohemia, where I will leave him
for a while, having recourse to Philamour: who entering his chamber unsuspected,
caused a rumor to be spread of Philamis sudden depart out of Passan, seeming to
take ye unkindness heavily, where in sooth his soul groned actually to remember
his ungraciousness: he changed his youthful colors to ruthful discontent, and in
all ^riumphs called himself the Knight of despair, never may heart imagine
what moan he conceived, if in private conference Philamis were named (in that
having a few days after searched for him to give him secret sepulture, he was
suddenly carried away) often when he was solitary, and had liberty to lament,
he watering his wan cheeks with weeping moisture, began in this manner to
express his complaints.

Woe is me, whose anger is the beginning of my folly, and the fall of my
fortune, who seeking my Philamis torture, have tormented my self. Even as the
rust consumes the Iron, the moth the cloth, the worm the wood: So envy the
worst of all vices, and rage the direst of all furies, has re^te me of my
friend, has ro^d me of my delights. Oh that with delight and my friend I might
loose my life, too small a plague for my over hasty perverseness. Oh fury the
surfeit of Fortune, that robbedst Alexander of his Clitus, Dionisius of his
Plato, and me of my Philamis. Oh beauty, thou deuourer of my delights, and
death the possessor of my pleasure, I would I had shunned the one, and slept
with the other, or that my heart blood might recover his lost life: but why
bewail I his fatal loss, and forget my living torment. Thou love (
Philamour) but art lothed, oh fruitless comfort for faithful service:
Harpaste is too fair to be dispraised, but thou too unkind to be pittyed:
Philamis dyed by thy rage, and disdainest thou to die by her rigor? The
Marcians live amongst serpents in peace without stinging: the Phelii amongst
vipers and not sti^d: oh fortunate they, who among the h^rs of nature find
grace, where I among the glories o^ nature die for gri^fe. In this sort passed
Philamour his life, seeking all m^anes to conquer the love of Harpaste, who
after many repulses, at last being wearyed with s^tes, (...) him this pe^ce,
that unless he could bring the body of (...) alive, and make Laite as big
as Da^by for two days, he should never enjoy her favor, or be enter^ned in
her thoughts. Philamour enjoined to these (...), thought it never p^ssible to
enjoy her favor, (...) conquering his hard fortune with a (...), hoping that
inundations might effect the one of her requests, and fortune present him with
the other, he set forwards: in quest of which his purpose let me leave him,
to laugh with you fair ladies, (or at least wise to lament the follyes of some
fine fillie follies among you, who are like vipers in your ^ings, and for all
your ven^mes, you carry means to ^ale men's harms) and recount unto you the
story of Eurimone, who during the presence of Philamis could pr^ it, and in
his absence repented her: for whether it were femeni^ fear, or dissembled
^ffection, or some such folly or fancy, that haunteth that sweet kind of
cattle, no sooner did she hear of Philamis departure, but (suspecting that her
coy answer had been the occasion of his concealed depart) she suddenly ^led
the whole house with her fond complaints, renting her hair, and beating her
breast, showing such apparent signs of repent, that every man pitied her
pensiveness: in brief, the (...) of her grief was so great, and her
imperfections so many, her body being weak, her mind weaker, that suddenly
she loft her wits, continually exclaiming on the name of Philamis, neither did
the nobility of her birth, nor the reprehensions of her friends, nor ought else
cause her to forbear, but her only thought was on Philamis. In this raging
madness continued she for the space of a whole year, at which time, after much
penury, and many miseries, she ended her youthful days, and being ri^hly
intombed, was honored with this Epitaph.

The Epitaph of Eurimone.
Here lies ingraude in prime of tender age,
Eurimone, too pearlesse in disdain:
Whose proud contempt no reason might assuage,
till love to quite all wronged lovers pain,
Bereft her ^ts when as her friend was gone,
Who now (...), tombed in this marble stone.
Let Ladies learn her lewdnes to eschew,
and whilst they live in freedom of delight:
To take remorse, and lovers sorrows rue,
For why contempt is answered with dispight,
Remembering still this sentence sage and old:
Who will not young, they may not when they would.
Contrariwise Harpaste with more moderation; kept Philamis in remembrance,
governing bir affections with such a reign, that though inwardly she felt the
wound, yet outwardly no one could perceive the scar or show of scath. Such
government had she over her fancies, as Curio had in entertaining temporal
fortunes, who being presented by the Samnits with great sums of gould, laughed
heartily, returning this constant answer. Go you ambassadors and tell the
Samnites that Curio desires rather to rule them that have possession of gould,
then to have gould: and that neither money shall corrupt me, nor dread of mine
enemies confound me. So was Harpaste as Curio, moderate, but not with like
mean: for as the one fancied not wealth, so the other was fond of love: yet in
that Harpaste being a woman colored so well, she may be compared with Curio
for constancy.

But leaving these in Passan, return we to Philamour: many and emment dangers
passed he, being subject to the mercy of the seas, and fury of the wind: now
undertook he travel through unknown deserts, fearing leaft P^ilamis should
live there desolate, often and many were his complaints exclaiming on Harpastes
cruelty, so that sometime he in secret would cry out, unkind, but durst not
name Harpaste, fearing the winds, and being ielious of Echo, least the one by
their virtue, the other by her voice, should accuse him to his come mistress.
Strange were it to rip up his discontented passions, for fear to move Ladies
patience, who are never more sweeter then when they smile, and when they are
moved none more mournful, resembling the quality of Euphrates, which is
never more comely then when it is calm: nor no ways so terrible as when it
is troubled, for as the one is tossed with the least wind: so is the other
tempted by the least word. In short he arrived in Rauenna, making such
inquisitiue search after his friend, that the most part who resolved on
Philamis death, accused him of folly, and entering his house, which was of no
small accoumpt, he used the same ceremony which the Indian Princes have in
their pillars, who honor the bodies and pictures of their dead parents, for
finding the portrature of Philamis drawn, hanging at his bed chamber, he fell
down before it, making such pitiful lamentation, as neither the tears of
Niobe nor Michaoes moan, may compare with the half of his melancholy.

Now embraced he the shadow like Pigmalions image, pouring such store of
tears over the senseless image, that if any gods of compassion had beheld
him in that perplexity, assuredly his moan would have moved a soddaine
miracle, there was no place wherein Philamis was (...) to disport wherein he
sat not: and never parted he thence without sighing. But seeing no similitude
of hope, or appearance of good hap to be found in that city, he speedily
departed, seeking Italy over, and inquiring in every Acadamy if happilye he
might hear of his friend, or else happily encounter him.

In some countries happily he met with many so named, who happy in tijeyr
Christendom and name, were with such ceremony entertained by him, as if he
imagned by those friendly offices to inuit this absent Philamis to favor him.
But when in no Country, nor in no place, he could attain any certain notice
of his Philamis residence, he returned into Austria, resolving with himself
to forsake the world, wholye discharge him of worldly hopes, and arm himself
unto the death.

For which cause without returning to Passan, he travailed up toward the
Mountains, by the very same way wherein he had vnhappylye left the wounded
body of his (...): where coniecturing as (...) as he could, the place of the
Combat, and loathing the cruelty of fortune, and (...) the loss of his
friend: he unbridled his steed, and took of the Saddle, hanging them up in a
Pine tree^ and with pitteous tears (...) out in this sort, he discharged the
dombe creature.

Go faithful companion, and help of forlorn ^mour, and (...) out thy
pasture, thou have Danuby to quench thy thirst, and these meadows to yield
thee meat, live thou at liberty, though my life be los^, but of (...) beast
straye far from society, least (...) unhappy sight ^ee the cause of my
speedye search: And when the (...) with nimble footing fled out of sight, he
thus followed his discourse.

Happy art thou in flight, that may not behold my fall: and now Fortune spit
thy venom, spite at (...), execute the will of (...), and crucify poor
Philamour: (...) thou blind wanton, all thy detriments are well (...), neither
will I fly the stripe, though I dye by the (...). And thou insaciate Venus,
behoulde I forsake Society, and since thy followers are so froward, I will
contemplate on them in my discontentes, and dye for them in these deserts.

By this time the silver Tapers of the night, over spread the heavenly
circumference, and (...) in (...) Coatch, began smile on all the attendants of
the night. when Philamour wearyed with toil, and attainted with (...), entered
a cloase (...), and in the mydst of his meditations fell a sleep.

No sooner did the day begin to discover, but certain Robbers who were
(...) to (...) those woods, espying Philamour brauelye appointed, ganne (...)
assail him. The young (...) d. (...) nothing but death, was glad of this
occasion: and betaking himself to his weapons, he tought so desperatelye that
(...) slew three of them, but being at last over come (...) the (...) of
assailants, he fainted and fell soddainly, having many dangerous gashes in
most part of his body. (...) deeming the conquest won, and their (...),
(...) of coat (...) ^ls, leaning him no furniture, (...) taking with them each
(...) that could (...) found, they left Philamour weltring in his (...), who
lifting up his heavy eyes, being somewhat awaked from a long sound, and seeing
the place all to be de^d in his blo^d, tombled himself as near as possibly
he could imagine, in that his feet failed him to the place where (...) left
his wounded Philamis, when drawing as many (...) from his eyes, (...) there
issued drops of blood from his woun^es, with fee^ voice he thus concluded his
tragedy.

You are pitiful, ye heavens said he, who envy me not to die; who in life
time was continually endangered by disdame, now shall I encounter him whom I
slew with cruelty, and content her who delights in my dangers, but oh thou
cruel, be thou now pacified, for my days are expyred: and gentle ghost (if
Philamis ghost haunt this desert) let us be at union and embrace: echo at this
word, seeing as though she could not content hit self without speaking,
returned the last word embrace, which gave such heart to Philamour that
fainting through loss of blood, he closed his arms, as of yielding consent,
and waighted for death with willing constancte: but fortune who after she has
tripped up the heel, houldeth up by the hand, and cast down to the depth,
lifts up to dignity, altered his expectation, and prevented his death: for
Clorius the good shepherd and guide of old Nicrosians grange, who was
continuasly accustomed to ouerpasse those grounds, had by fortune that day
good occasion to search the grove, in that he had lost a Kid: who following his
narrow sea^ch, encountered this dying body, sprawling and weltring in his
own blood: and being mooned with fatherly compassion, he staunched the same,
and bound up the wounds: bearing gasping Philamour on his back to the grange
which was near at hand, where laying him in a warm bed and giving him
wholesome brothes, he restored him: in such sort (continually plying his
wounds with the balm and sweet medecines he most used) that Philamour
recovered hope of life, and began often times to walk, but so disconted every
way, as bett^r had it been for him to have perished, then to have endured such
perplexiti^: often times did Cloreus enquire his name, but he would not
confess, he only told him this: that he was a Gentleman, who travailing the
country was assayl^d by theeu^s, and robbed of his substance, for the rest he
craved pardon, terming himself the Unfortunate and Unworthie, and having
borrowed some poor clothes of the old man, he offered to leave him, promising
within two months to make him that recompense, as both should show his
nobility, and requite the others good nature. Cloreus at such ti^e as he took
him up, found a Jewel of great value (being s^auen Diamonds set in gould,
after the manner of a heart) fast tied under his right arm, which for want of
search escaped the su^ of the robbers, yet had they stripped him into his shirt,
which Jewel (when he saw Philamour would needs part from him) he freendly
presented him with: which being a gift bestowed on him in times past by
Philamis, Philamour received with such joy, as upon Cloreus earnest entreat he
resolved for that day to spend the time with him (for that was the sheapheards
holydaye in that country) great was the glee among the pastoral troops of
Shepherds, and Clorius as an ancient, was a chief at the feast, the there
came every lover in his best sheeyes Russet, wearing stathe green laces on
their strawne hattes, with a great Nosgaye before like the fether of a
forehorse: gartered they were under the knee, upon their cloth stocks, some
white, some gree^e, s^ party couleured, with great Cruel garters of Val^, and
happy was he that could crossegd lean most lobb^rlie (lovingly I should say)
on his staff, and cast a she^pes eye on his sweet heart, the young fry of
the foulde, the p^ maids, s^d it marvelously, and Sib would (...) the bag
pipe play naught but heigh ho, my heart is gon^, so^ she was stoong with a
nettle or needle, or some such weap^n, about the wast with a wan^ion. It
greeueth me to ty^ (...) with the country lays, or trouble your ears ^h
(...) loves, who having tasted of (...), are to lil^ to ^ peneiue. (...) the
rest, a mountain (...) Celio, a (...) of (...) capacity, though a (...) of
the countr^, sat ^rest our des^late Philamour: and seeing ^o (...) to (...),
enquired of Cloreus what cause he h^ of (...), (...) into those deserts, with
all other circum^ces, who ^ing the (...) man's imperfecti^ns who was deaffe:
resolved him in a loud voice, which was the occasion that Philamour blushed,
on whom Celio flxed his eyes with great severity, and at last, after he had
made a learned c^cture, he began (foreseeing where Philaniours shoo wrong him)
to board him in this manner.

Sir if a swain may be bold to discourse with a Sig^r, and an old man reason
with his young master, may it please you to suffer me to enquire your cause of
care, who in our public mir^h are so pensi^e and melancholy. I have read good
si^ of diverse, who sought their quiet in the cities, yet have found it in the
deserts: where although there be no rich coats, yet may you meet reasonable
good counsailers. I know sir you are learned, and your education has been
courtly, so that it cannot be but you have read Ariosto (a discourse fit for
dainty cares) and there shall you find, that Medor in the des^rts found no
small cause of mirth. Besides Tassoes Frminia finding no faf^tie in court, was
succored in a cot. Tully was quiet in his Tusculano, but troubled in Room, he
are the peace; and hear the pleasure: if therefore we may merit such grace to
know your grief, let an old man hear it, who among all the trials of this world
can coniccture somewhat of the ^ranies of a woman. It was no need to bid
Philamour ^sh, for he was sou^dly bitten, and though he had used no speech, his
griefs had been discovered by his sighs; notwithstanding to cover his
imperfections as much as he could he replied in this manner (straning his voice
on high, that Celio might better hear him.) Father (said he) though the Eagles
fether pr^uaile against thunder, and the leaves of the Lamrell preserve from
lightning, though the Ostrich skin drive out ache, yet there are some wounds
that ad^ no weal, some diseases that are desperate: among which sort since
mine is vnrecurable, I grieve to discover it, knowing this, that all the
Eloborus of Anticira, all the drugs, of India, all the gold in Ganges, cannot
purge one dram of my melancholy, pacify one fit of my feuor, nor buy me one
ownce of content? what then profit th it you to hear that which you cannot
help? or me to tell yt which makes me tremble to think it. Celio that had
already winded him, in this manner ceased not to work on him. When Venus (good
sit) was wounded with Cupids venom, she found a ^ecipe in his quiver: there is
no sore but may be salued, no dead flesh which Sublimatum sercheth not, no body
poisned in Sydmis, but may be cared by Philips potion: yea the heavens are so
favorable in all casualties, that the Coural comfort against Epilesia, and
Alexanders vision betokens the care that God has over every creature, who in
his victory against the Brachmani, finding no remedy to to cure his soldiers,
who were wounded by the Indian poisned weapons: nor to cure Ptolomeus his dear
page, whilst full of care he took rest in his pauilion, he beheld this strange
vision. Him thought he saw a great Dragon houering over his head, which carried
a herb in his throat, which taught him the virtue of the same herb, and
the place likewise where it grew, and he awaking, went and found the herb,
saved Ptolomey, and releiued his soldiers: the examples are innumerable in
this cause: but vouchsafe me the hearing of a history, which though it he
short will yield you some solace. There dwelled here in these deserts, more
nearly bounding yonder mountains, a young shepherd called Calimander, who fell
inamoured with a young nymph of this country named Ruthenia, many country
courtesies used he toward her, showing such signs of observance and duty, as
had coy Amarillis bin so courted, she had long since bin co^tracted with
Coridon, but she vain maid, being more fair then fortunat: and more precise
then pretty, conceiving pleasure in Calimanders sufferance, like ye peacock,
gasing, only on her fair plumes, not her foul feet: supposing what she
was, not what she might be: at such time as with great devotion the Sheapheard
sought her favor, she to try his constancy, or else to defer him from
further fancy, enjoined him this impossible matter, to endure a seven years
penance in the woods of Saracon, without tasting any sustenance but roots, to
swim over Laite seven days every one of these winters in these seven years:
and lastly to change all her young Lambs to lusty Heighfors. Calimander
(coniecturing her cruelty by these impossibilities) desisted not to accomplish
her desires, enduring all this seven years penance with such peremptory
resolution, that all the whole country Swains pittyed him, and exclaimed on
Ruthenias cruelty, but as time makes the stiff Oak want pith: the proud
steed a poor Jade, the lusty young man a thr^e footed old man, so after
long endeavor, and more danger, Calimander was fortunate in persecuting the
two least of her commands, but dispaired on the last: where upon coming with
sorry sheapheards about the mountains, and hearing of one Climachus a cunning
man, who has forsaken the world to follow his studdies, he imparted his
cause of trouble to this scholar, and reported the whole circumstance of
Ruthenias tyranny: who being naturally borne to virtue, and in that he was
virtuous; was inclined to pity: sought over his books to work the shepherds
benefit, and as science would and his skill sorted out, on the next day when
Ruthenia should drive forth her lambs, she found Heyfers. Calimander assured
by Climachus, and confirmed by the assurance of his friends, gave thanks to
the scholar, approved his vows to be accomplished, and Ruthenia had her
will, and these wars ended in a wedding, and as the poet says so say I sir:

And such success will follow happy hope. By that time the table was taken up,
the tale was done, when Philamis impatient of delay (after he had given a
sollemne (...) for his intertaine) desired to talk a part with oulde (...),
where discoueryng every sorrow of his secret, he besought him in way of
friendship, to certyfye him of Climachus a^ode: (this Climachus was his
friendly Philamis, (...) (as you have heard) (...) y^ world, had taken himself
to this Cell, where (...) ^heards and gote-heards for recreation sake, and
applying his study for to attain knowledge, he became so excellent, that he
seemed rather framed to learning, than to love: to matchless knowledge, than
to (...).) Celio, as courteous as wise, quickly satisfied his request, not
only offering himself as companion, but as guide in his journey, whereon
Philamour gathered heart, parting from the company with such a pleasant look,
that each man esteemed Celio a good surgeon, who could heal his patient of
such a passion so ^ly. Clorius was iocund to see him rejoice: in brief, every
one departed from the feast to their foulds, whilst Philamour and Celio
followed their way.

At (...) the mountains which discovered themselves a far off, presented
themselves more near. Laite was heard how along her pleasant banks she
prettily murmured, and now beheld Celio the solitary (...) of Climachus, (...)
by age more meet to take rest than to endure toil, was glad to behold the end
of his ra^e, and the end of both their travels: oftentimes by the way
discoursed they of diverse accedentes, and deluded the time with words, least
they should have been tired with their walks. Celio drawing near his own
cottage, commended Philamour to good fortune, pomting to the top of the hill,
and speaking to Philamour after this manner.

You know my Courtly friend (said he) that in the ^pian games the wrastlers
suffered (...) before they tasted the sweet: and Alexander seeking out the
Temple of lupiter was enforced to travail through deserts, ere he (...) his
desires: so then though thou have (...) pain, (...) the pleasure, and have
thee to the top of yond (...) where thou shall meet with (...), and (...)
the (...): for my self, were not my (...) weak, I (...) thee. But since I
know the only n^me of (...) is able to conjure the scholar, use it, commend
me (...) him out (...) a^sured of success, and so far^wel. Whereupon (...) ous
conge he entered his cottage.

Philamour that saw but ^opes picture, not her person, deferred no ti^e, but
took a thankful leave, and about the (...). in of the Evening atta^ned the
top of the mountain. Now heard he the falling streams of Laite which in
their rushing made him remember Harpastes rigor: ^owe beheld he the solitary
Cell, and with admiration cried out: (...) place of content, the very Court of
my Paradise, where lives my joy, and the sage of science. Every way as he cast
his eyes, he beheld fair meades, sweet shades, and living fountains: so that
him seemed that Passan was a prison to this solitary place. At last he beheld
entering through a thick grove a m^ of try^e proportion, attyred in homely
russet: his hair was scattered ou^r his shoulders, and beard unkempt or uncut,
after the manner of that retchles Philosopher, whom Seneca describes in his
book De vita beata, who^ sooner espied Philamour, but changed his purpose,
and sodamly encountered him. But he that had beheld this meeting, might show
matchless admiration: For as Cleopatra in hit waine stood am^zed to see her
Anthony weeping: and Arthemesus seeing M^usolus sack did ^rfet in sorrow. So
fared it with these two couple, but with the o^e more forcibly: for Philamis
knew Philamour, but he knew not Philamis. After long admiration, a secret
opinion entered the heart of Philamour, him thought this solitary man should
be no stranger, and in looking on the H^rmit, he was so distraught with
passion, that he had no li^erty to speak^. But Philamis more stayed, in whom
Philosophy had wrought an ^quabilitie of mind, forgetting all injuries, began
to (...) for company, and breaking off the m^ditation that detained Philamour
he began thus.

Si^ what seek you? if succor for your grief, dry up your tears: I know
what you ^re Philamour, a G^ntleman of Passan, you love H^rpaste, she is too
cruel, I know your penance, and weigh each possibility: you come from Celio,
and you seek my help, is not all this true Gentleman? Philamonr standing like
a statue of stone, as if lately transformed with Medusa, began to admire, and
casting him at the seete of Climachus his approved Philamis, he embraced his
knees, weeping such store of tears, as was pitiful to behold: Now came into
his mind the unkind cruelty toward his friend, and the thought thereof was so
forcible, that never looked Hecuba more ruthful in the loss of her Polidoce,
than Philamour did in thinking on his Philamis. The wise Rauennois knowing both
the cause of his grief, and his hearty repentance, as having fore seen them
long before in his pryuate intellectual science, comforted him in this sort.

Arise Philamour, there was never so great an offense among friends but will
have a pardon: thy Philamis lives, and has forgiven thee: virtue in him has
overcome all thy disgraces, neither can thou be so unkind as he is wylling
to pardon. The infirmities of youth (young G^ntleman) are many, and hatred once
sprung, is more great amongst friends than forrayners. Come enter my hermitage
and repose you: you shall have time to weep less shortly, when you have
attained your wish.

Philamour, as if before the Oracle of Delphos, or having received a courtesy
from Sibilla o^ Cuma, with humble reverence returned this answer.

Good sir, and reverend Scholar, could I express what I imagine, or define my
joy, as I divine your judgment, I would in good words witness my great
thanks. Sooth it is, I am miserable Philamour, the abi^ct of fortune, the
object of Harpastes cruelty: It Is I (O my seule thou kno^st I sorrow it) that
have injured my friend, wounded my friend, and lost my fr^nd: whom might I
see, to breath out my repentance in his bosom, to sigh at mine own shame, to
find that with my heart bl^ud, which I have defaulted in by my hairebrayne
heedlessenes, I were satisfied in soul, and (...) should see I was sorrowful.

Philamis not able to endure any longer, to see the yo^g Gentleman so p^nsiue
and passionate, cut off his continued discourse with this short answer.

Philamour grieve no more, even for Philamis sake art thou welcome: I embrace
thee as if I were himself, and will love no less than Philamis. Cast off
therefore this dis^onted heaviness, and frolike it in this solitary seat: for if
thou carry belief, which is a help at maw, as the Physician says to such as
will be cured: assure thy self the day is thine, and the danger is past.
Hereupon taking Philamour by the hand, this disguised Climachus brought him
into his solitary Cel, where from a fair window he showed him all the
vallyes, and smilingly beholding Laite, said thus: Here is some of your
penance (...), Laite must be beholding to you for an ouerflow: I believe
Harpaste knew she should drive you hither, she enjoined you so happily.
Philamour sighed to hear her named, but see a wonder, Philamis altered this
sorrow: for taking a book in hand, and turning toward the East, there
suddenly fell a thunder-clappe, the heavens were disturbed, and the waters came
down with such vehemency from the mountains, that Laite sadainly of a little
River, began to exceed Danuby. ^eere might you see the poor shepherds,
leading their flocks to the higher places, and the (...) that fled in the
plains were driven into the mountains: many streets in Passan were troubled
with thi^ inundation, and Harpaste hearing of these waters, with blushing
modesty diuined in her heart, that she must shortly have a husband.

All this while Philamour lay looking of the window, weeping for joy, and
oftentimes embraced he the bar of the window, as if it had been the dead
body of his Harpaste: till suddenly Philamis smiling made him surfeit at another
wonder: for enioyning him by no means to move at whatsoever he saw, he
caused him to sit down by him, when suddenly there entered two in rich attire,
resembling Harpaste and Philamis, the one proffering him kindness, the other
courting him with amiable looks: good Lord how feign would Philamour have
moved? But fear withheld him, and care of his friends content, yet kneeled
he to Philamis, crying o^t in great agony: Ah dear friend, I have offended.
But to draw him from this passion, Philamis practiced an other secret: for
dainly they vanished, when as he saw in a mirror which stood opposite
against him the whole course of his travels, his dangers, Clorius comfort, and
Celios friendly travel with him: whereon while he meditated, him thought the
Tables were spread with great delicates, the music and melody revived his
spirits, the Eunuchs served him in bowls of Saphir, and his entertainment
was so sumptuous, that although he had a good stomach to his meat, yet fed
^ee only on admyration, till Philamis cheared him after this manner.

Behold (said he) Gentleman, the one half of your danger past, Laite is
increased, your Philamis is living, Harpaste will be kind, now ^all to feed
and welcome: assure your self that he who found out your friend, will bring
him you, eat therefore and rejoice, young men must not fast which are toward
marriage.

Philamour invited thus kindly, fell to his victuals well fauoredly, and both of
them took the repast more pleasantly, in that the one beheld, and the other
hoped to see his friend. At last the tables were taken up, the attendants
vanished, and the night being far spent, Climachus conveyed his Philamour
into a sumptuous chamber, where he was entertained with such delicates,
music, and delights, as the like was neuerimagined by Cleopatra for her
Anthony. In brief, after long discourse, and Philamours many vows, his secret
sighs, his repentant hearts grief, his humble suite to see Philamis, his
prayers to enjoy Harpaste, the grave scholar left him fully resolved,
promising him the next day so to further his desires, that he should not only
enjoy her whom he sought, but see him whom he wished for: and thus with a
friendly Adios he left him to his rest.

No so^ner did the fair morrow with blushing beauty incite the sun to enter
his chariot, and golden Phoebus with radiant beauties gilded the mountain
tops with his fiery beams, but Philamis arose: and now began the spark of
affection long smothered in cinders to discover it self, the coals became
quick fire, and Philamis forgetting all (...) defaults, began to revive the
image of his Philamour, which absence and vnkindne^ had defaced in his heart:
so that he resolved suddenly to seek his discovery. For ^s many (...)
showers, and infinite living springs, as the force of many mediterranean
fountain, and the fury of raging rivers, alter not the saltnes of the sea:
Soneyther destruction of bodies, alteration of place, or any casualtie of
unkindness, can change his affections in whom perfect amity is placed:
whereupon attyring himself after his courtly manner, trimming his locks and
^eard after their accustomed beauty, he provided althings necessary for the
journey, causing a servant to present Philamour with rich ra^nents, and all
other necessaries, who newly awaked, wondered very much at this stra^ngers
courtesy, and the rather in that whatsoever was sent him, the messenger was
wont to say that Philamis presented it. At last when Philamis had ordered all
things by his Art, and provided horses for their journey, he suddenly entered
the chamber of Philamour: who beholding the old countenance, and ancient
courtly habit of his friend was ravished with joy, and falling down before
the feet of Philamis, he thus expostulated.

Ah dear friend Philamis, what air has divided our bodies? or country has
detained my ^riend? whom I have injuriously wronged, and cannot but unworthily
speak unto. Ah gentle heart, thou mirror of virtue, my souls peace, my minds
content, my court^ous Philamis: behold my tears the testimonies of my
sorrows, and accept my vows the tokens of my true devotion, who repent my
rashness, and if I may merit reconcilement, promise such affectionate love, as
neither time, nor the tyronny of fortune, neither many dangers, nor mortal
detriment shall ever alter.

Philamis not able to endure further delays, casting his arms about the neck
of his Philamour, began thus.

My dear friend, though Venus had a moule, it was no mayme: and Alexander a
scarre, it was no s^ath: Ciceroes wen was no disgrace: and Philips crooked
lymme lamed not his fortune. The Rose is not to be contemned for one canker:
the Cambricke, for one stain: the sword for one flawe: the silk for one
fret: neither all friends to be forsaken for one falling out. Alpheus being
fresh, cannot alter the sweet water of Arethusa: neither is Mithridates
poisoned with one potion: we esteem our cloth by the wearing, as well as the
wool: our wines by the taste, as well as the col^ur: and our friends as well in
their faults, as in their favors. The (...) that have fairest gloss, soonest
loose their glory: (...) minds are soonest moved: Though the Taylers goose
(...) the finger, it smootheth the hemme: though the Diers (...) weaken his
arm, it washes the cleth: though unkindness fall among friends, yet kindles
it affection. Wherefore content thee my Philamour, the wrong is remitted:
behold now no more disguised Philamour, but thy dear Philamis: behold the
wound I received, and assure thee the wrong is forgiven: being left by thee,
Clorius relieved me, who saved thy life, sustained me in necessities, since
when I have here lived in study in this solitary plac^, reserved to do thee
good, who have long be galled with grief: Come therefore and haste thee, our
horses are in readiness, and I will ride with thee, assuring my Philamour,
that ear night Harpaste will she we some courtesy.

It is unspeakable to declare the many cour^ngs, the often courtiags the kind
pleas, the courteous replies, which past (...) Philamis and Philamour. But to
be short, they broke their fast and mounted on their horses, beguyling the
weary ^ourney with kind words. No sooner were they entered the City, which
was about noone stead, but the rumor was sodai^ly spread of their arryuall:
each one rejoiced to behold Philamis, who hering of the death of (...),
s^lingly said thus. Qualis vita, (...) it a:

Amongst the rest Nicrosion being a Gentleman of noble nature, hearing of t^s
good hap, the union of friends, and their happy return, as one always
delighted to entertayne strangers, inuyted Phil^is and his fri^nd to Supper,
making a royal (...) to many rich (...) to the end to receive them with more
honor. Amo^st the test, I doubt not but you think this (Ladies) that (...) ^
in his love: but when she thought on the (...) of (...) alas she said, has not
Philamour des^rued my love he (...) of noble birth, ofliber all nature, a
(...) well (...), and my professed servant.

Thus as the Diamond which (...) not the (...), but is mollyfyed in vinegar,
like the h^lme which (...) the (...) but is cut with the bone, her affections
began to y^ld: and after some deliberation resolved on his lout. In (...)
lovely contemplations passed she the time till supper drew on, when suddenly
Philamis and Philamour as invited (...) the house of Nicrosion, who with great
humanity and (...) courtesy entertained them both: neither was there any
citizen who seemed not highly contented to behold the (...) of this friendly
couple. Amongst the rest fair (...), with blushing modeslie demeaned her self
so (...) as both caused Philamis to rejoice, and Philamour to (...) who
assisted by the advice of Philamis, whilst the (...) was making ready, took
Harpaste apart, and with a trembling tongue and troubled countenance courted
her after this manner.

Madame, if faithful thraldom deserve favorable acceptance, and hard
adventures happy auailes: I doubt not but your heart will be accompanied with
favor, as mine has been occupied in for wardnes: and since I have effected
your demands, you will not neglect my love. Behold my vows performed, and
your requests accomplished: See Laite with raging waters raunging through the
vallyes, seeming rather a huge Sea, than a little River: behold my Philamis
alive, whom you supposed dead, whom Ipresent as apresent to entreat you to
take pity.

Here with Philamis, who still had an eye that way, drew near unto them, and
willing to make up the contract, brake off Philamours discourse, and began
thus. These were strange ^owes Harpaste, which show your strictnes to revive ye
dead, and command the waters, which show you are a right woman in your will,
who can step over, where you will not ^umble, and command impossibility when
you will not be plyant: but Philamours virtue has prevented your folly, and
(...) reason, since you have caused him to make Laite rise, you must now
content him with a kind fall. A cipher by it self is nothing^ but joined to
one makes ten: there m^st be a bond where there has been a breach, and
kindness owed where cruelty has been showed: reward therefore your true
servant good Lady for my sake, who has endured so much in pursuit of your
demaundes, that it would pittye you to fear, and it perplexeth me to report.
Harpaste moved with these reasons: like the Marbell tamed with many strokes:
the gould tried with whote fire, the steel formed by many heats, at last
relented: and behoulding Philamour with a kind look, and taking Philamis by
the hand, returned them both this short and sweet answer.

Things attained with long labor (Gentlemen) at the last breed most delight,
and when the trial is past, the truth is more accepted: since therefore
Philamour has endured, I will reward his duty: and for your sake Philamis
vouchsafe him such kindness, as my honor regarded, and my fathers consent
procured, I rest his in all love, and yours to command, who have travailed for
him as his friend, and I shall ere long see him the Lord of my favors.
Philamis was not a little iocund to see this end: nor Philamour solemn to
hear this sentence: to be short, after the feast was finished, and the guests
ready to rise, by the consent of both parties, Philamis brake the matter to
Nicrosion: who knowing Philamours birth, bringing up, and great riches,
heartily condiscended: Whereupon in the assemblye of the Nobles they were both
bethrothed, and happily in short space married: at which solemnity Caelio was
a bidden guest, and Clorius was highly entertained, and for his many curt^sies
made Lord of the grange, upon the friendly request of Philamis. Long time in
great joy lived these lovers, entertayning Philamis in hearty affection, who
wholly delighted in his solitary life, and contemning the vanities of the
world, having regard to the well ending of his life, and the intending of his
study, with hearty affection took his leave of his Philamon^: the one desired
the other to continue company: yet Philamour must not leave his new wife,
neither will Philamis be drawn (...) contemplation: in brief, after many
promises of continual intercourse by letters, they took their friendly
farewell: only Philamis in that he knew his friend was too much besotted with
the world, and might forget himself soonest through security, to (...) the
(...) enormities of his life, he left him in his study this grave admonition,
which he termed The deaf man's dialogue, which I have here under inserted, and
leave unto your censure.

Philamis and his Athanatos, containing, the Deaf man's Dialogue.
Philamis. GOd morrow father, and well met.


Celio. Sir if you like the Kid lay down the price, it is fat and tidie,
having tasted the sweet waters of Danuby, and the wholesome herbage of Austria.


Phi. Why I salute thee Celio, but cheapen not thy kid?


Ce. Oh sir that which I will take at your (...) shall be but half the worth,
half a Bohemian crown or no money.


Phi. I believe be (...), I will speak louder: (...) Celio I come not to
cheapen thy Kids, but to have thy company, for eld having many euels has much
experience, hearst thou me, or art thou deaffe?


Celio. I hear you and yet am deaffe: deaffe if you talk as you did first,
quick of hearing if you speak hie, as you did last, pardon me good Philamis in
my imperfection, it is not of will that I offend, but by reason of (...): if
therefore thou (...) keep thy last key in speaking out, sit thou near me and
partake my shade, and prefer what question thou list, and I will (...) thee.


Phi. I would I had Stentors voice for thee Celio, truly I should then need no
strayning, but so as (...) I may; and so long as you list, I will ^rye out my
words before I loose this company.


Celio. I but there is a mean in all things Master, a difference betwixt
staring and stark mad: speak therefore so as you may not hurt your self, and
I may hear you what news?


Philamis. Hear is a vain world Celio.


Celio. Thou tellest me no news Philamis, neither may we mend it till God end
it, I ask no tidings of it but of thee: how thou spendest the day here in
these mountains? what are thy studdies? what thy method?


Philamis. I studdy the Mathematiques.


Celio Thy studdie is then superficial, In alieno aedificat Mathematica, it
borrows his principles from an other; by means where of it attaineth to
matters of higher perfection, if by it self it comprehended truth, and (...)
to attain the same, if by it self it could decide and manifest the nature of
the whole world, it would profit our minds, and help our memories: but in that
it does not so, doat not on it so.


Phi. I wonder Celio you dispraise that so generaly, which is so perfect in his
parts. I have red Aristotle, who in his Elenchs says, that they who are unready
in number, are incapable of the secrets of nature: beside Augustine a
catholic doctor concludes this. Nemo (says he) ad diuinarum (...) rerum
cognitionem accedat, insiprius artem numerandi discat. If therefore
Arithmatique being but the entrance to the Mathematiques be so beneficial,
what shall we think of the rest, but as of things exceeding singular.


Ce. I condemn them not as unnecessary, but would teach and train thee in
studies more necessary: numeration teaches thee how to count thy sheep, but
not how to amend thy sins. Arithmatique schooleth thee to apply thy fingers
to avarice, but I would have thee instructed how to draw thy mind from
covetousness: the candle is a fair light till thou behouldest the sun, and
these (...) blocks of wit are sweets, till thou perfectly see wisdom.


Phi. What think you of Geometry.


Ce. Geometry lerneth thee how to mesure thy fields, but not master thy
fancies: what profits thee to know an (...) of land, and not the anchor of
life? It teaches thee how to observe the ^tting of thy la^s: but how much
better were it for thee to learn how thou might willing loose them? It
instructs thee to know the round from the square, the distances of the
Planets: but broughtest thou thy mind in proportion were it not better?
Alexander of Macedon began to learn this Science to his sorrow: for finding by
dimension how little the world was, and how small a part he possessed, he found
himself great in too little. I tell thee Philamis, had Philips son sought
out true science, as he studdied this silly secret, he had seemed greater to
himself in contemning the world, then in conquering it.


Phi. What think you of Music.


Celio. It is the darling of lost time: it teaches thee to know sharp and
flat, high and low, Diapente and Diapason: but could it teach thee consonance
of the mind, and constancy in counsels, this were better Music, this
instructs thee in unity, but makes thee not as one. I have read that
Zenophantus Harp could move affections, but never master them: these are
trifles that ask much toil and yield little treasure.


Phi. What think you of Astrology?


Celio. The kaye of presumption is Astrology, where men ascribe to the
oposition of Planets the cause of alterations, which are only to be applied to
Gods providence, who is he that dare claim the knowledge of things to come,
unless he have the seal of a Prophet? these are vain things young Philamis,
and lets in our way, which hinder us from the attainment of true blessedness.
Beware therefore, and bind not thy self to the things thou know not: but
learn thou to seek out such things as thou should know.


Phi. And what are they?


Celio. Not trifling Philosophy, but true: learn to know thy self how weak
thou art: learn to know thy life how wretched: learn to know thy death how
certain: thou shall then find, that al things in this earth are the fruits
of error: that heaven is the haven of felicity, death the harbor of worldly
miserye.


Phi. And what is death?


Celio. The law of nature, the tribute of the flesh, the remedy of evils, the
path either to heavenly felicity or eternal misery.


Phi. How is the fruit thereof known.


Celio. By the in^rmities of life.


Phi. Why is it possible that life should be in^rine, which may attain the
title of blessedness? or may it be thought there is hea^nes therein, wherein men
have lived so happily? had not Caesar lived where had his fame been, which in
the epicures opinion being spent in delight, contains true felicity.


Ce. He had need be an epicure that so speaks, yt only councelleth himself
by his sense not by science: he has a fleshly understanding, which as Paul
says is the enemy of the spirit. I will tell thee what life is, and thereby
show thee the commodities of death: life is a pilgrimage Philamis, a shadow of
joy, a glass of infyrmitie, the pathway to death, wherein whilst we travail,
the most of us loose time, but prevent it not, and as s^raungers from our
infancy, by many paths we travel to one end, by many functions to one fate,
yet is there no estate so certain in life, no stay so steady, that complayneth
not his wantes ere he come unto his waine, begin in degrees, what think thou
of princes lives?


Phi. I deem the^ hapy, so they be virtuous.


Celio. Thine exception then shows they may default, and in that they may
want, see thou that there is no worldly felicity, true felicity. Say princes
grow great, they fear the ungracious, if virtuous, they are odious to the
wicked: if temperate, they escape not contempt: say zealous, they are held
severe: if they wink at faults they are thought retchlesse: in brief, if they
borrowe their happiness from life, which lies in the estimate of worldly eye,
they are only wretched in being happy in worldly judgment. Dionisius a tyrant
let him speak, there is no princely happynes says he, but in death.


Phi. What deemest thou of nobility?


Ce. As of the ^nowes of the body, they are the linkes of the state, yet have
they flatterers to seduce them, ambition to deprive them, desires is corrupt
them, in brief they do daily but begin to live, in that they fear to dye


Phi. What of Lawyers?


Celio. They are miserable, for they get with care, they thrive by contention,
they are all in the quantity not in quality, you know the predicaments
Philamis, I may not preach further, they are good members of a weak body, who
if they spend as much s^uddie in learning God as they do in the lives of the
kings, thou would amend some qualities, and leave some quidities.


Philamis. What of Merchants.


Celio. They are studious to loose their wealth, and weep when they have lost
it, careful to get good, but ready to forget God. It is easier for a Camel to
pass through a needles eye, then for a ritche man to enter the kingdom of
God: if this be true as it is most true, what is their life? misery: what is
their felicit^e? misery: what is their end? misery. Is it not strange that
these men should be miserable livers, yet hate misery, all is vanity says the
wiseman, and Solons words are true, Ante obitum nemo foelix.


Phi. Have they not charity?


Celio. Yes charity painted in their walls, not in their hearts, Quilibet
quippe, every Dog his loaf, though we may be liberal at his funerals.


Phi. I see you then make no life but full of languishing, as there is no night
without darkness: what deem you of Poets?


Celio. To run on the letter they are pennilesse, studious to make all men
learned, and themselves beggars: and whilst they lament al men's want of
science, they are supplanted by all men in substance: they wright good tales,
and reap much taunts, and are answered with, oh it is a proper man: but never
a rag of money.


Philamis. And why is that, is it not for their corrupt life?


Celio. See thou that pad in the straw, truly Philamis thou say well: some
are excellent, of good capicitie, of great learning, whose paster all
pleasance, includes much wit, and merits much reward, but for the rest I would
they might shift more and shif^t less.


Philam. How mean you this shift, me thinks it needs some syfting?


Celio. I would they had more shift in shirts, and less shift in subtilti^: in
brief Philamis their lives is miserable, look on every man's way; it is either
wickedness or wretchedness.


Phila. What think you of the divine?


Celio. Why this is Husteron Proteron, the Cart before the horse: this figure
was not appointed by Susenbrotus in this place, this is a ^euerend profession,
wherein the infirmities of life are most healed, a happy course in this
worldly wilderness, where men's thoughts are thorns to wound their
conscience, these seek their benefits in Gods book, yet have they their
maimes in life, their days and years are but misery, for in that they long
after a further joy, their comfort is imperfect: leave we to descend to
perticulars Philamis: the end is, there is no content in earth, but this world
is the only pageant of inconstancy, neither has man any thing whereof he may
truly boast, or wherein only he d^oth excel: if he have gnifts of the body,
they are blemished by sickness, they are determined by death, if of the mind,
they are weakened by the wantonness of the flesh: descend we in to those
perticulars which are in our selves, and rippe we up our originals, ground we
not upon the benefit of reason the beauty of our soul (where^y we learn to
know God, and discern good from evil) what goods have we that beasts partake
not with us? We have health, so have Lions: we are fair, so are Peacocks: we
are swyft, so are Horses, yea and in all these well nigh are we overcome by
unreasonable creatures. Let us now see what is greatest in us: we have boddyes,
so have trees, we have forces and voluntary motions, so have beasts and
woormes: we have voices, but how shriller have Dogs? how sharper, Eagles? how
deeper, Bulls? how sweeter and deliver Nightingales, why boaste we then of
that wherein we are overcome? and is not this misery of life to be by them in
these things overcome?


Philamis. But by your patience Celio here is confusion grown in this
discourse, else are many learned men deceived: I have read in Epictetus, that a
life joined with virtue is felicity, so all life by this means cannot be
miserable.


Celio. I will rid thee of all these doubts, clear thee of al these clouds,
confirm thee in all these controversies: There is good in appearance, and good
in deed, felicity in shadow, and felicity in substanc^: the only intermedium
of which is death, which kylleth the corruption of the one, and furthereth us
to the frui^ion of the other, he only good is God, for he is only good as
the Scripture teastifieth: the good in: shelve is this virtuous uniting of life
and ^arning, which taken by it self is a sollace, and compared with GOD, is
but a shadow, the true felicity is to know God, the fained is that which was
Platoes Idea, Aristotle's summum bonum, the (...) Virtus: the Epicures, sensual
telicitie: the one the invention of man: the other an inspiration from God. As
touching a life led in virtue, if it be taken morrally according to the
meaning of the E thnicks, it may be termed felicity, who had not light in the
darkness: that door, that vine, we have to illuminate: let us in, and
refresh us in our worldly travel: Cicero d^emed Catoes (...) life Virtue, his
end happy: so did Seneca, so Caesar his enemy, yet knew we it was myserie:
his life irreligious, his end desperate. Seneca himself talking gravely in his
life time, wrighting constantlye of death, and touched somewhat with the
thought of immortalitle, made a sickness of a sigh, and in his end showed some
over stoic all resolution, but we that have attained the clear day, and are in
the sunny light of the Gospel, what shall we term this virtuous life? naught
else (my Philamis) but a combat of the flesh with the spirit, our time of
temptation, where we war to have victory, and by faith attain the crown of
immortality. This is the path, and our flesh the hinderance: Death the haven
where wearied we rest us, and being dissolved, attain the direct fullness of
our joy: Oh joy without compare, oh little danger, oh great crown, or way
to true life. Now see thou Philamis what thou soughtest, these doubts are
decided, and the conclusion that follows of all this controversy, is that
life is miserable every ways, but most miserable to them that live ill, whose
hope is dead, whose faith is falsified, who have forsaken the true Sheapheard,
to follow Satan, betrayed their soul, to serve their bodies, who are become
the bondeslaues of sin, and the servants of unrighteousness, who serve
(...), and refuse God, whose portion after death is the bottomless pit,
where in steed of laughing they shall lament, instead of solacing they shall
sigh, and whilst the righteous shall clap their hands for joy in heaven, they
shall foulde their arms for sorrow in hell: oh their horror, oh their
misery, oh that men can be so perverse, and God so propitious, who calls
all, and will succor sinners, who will ease the heavy laden, comfort the
comfortless, give (...) even to the murmurers: oh whither am I carried with
these contemplations? into what Oceans of delight? wherein I behold as it were
in a mirror the indignity of man, and the mercies of God: the miseries of
this life, and the fruits of death: of which when I begin to to think (my
Philamis) I behold these writhen lims, as sailors do their bruised bark at
the entrance of the haven, rejoicing that I have past my perils to enjoy my
paradise. Oh happy death of those (says Cicero) who being borne mortal, have
so well lived as to enjoy eternity. This is the last medicine of all evils
(says Sophocles) and the way that leads us to al beatitude (as witnesses
Leonidas.) This brings us through the stony way to the pleasant path: this
heals us in all infirmities: to this were we borne, being by nature sent
abroad to learn experience, like young sons, to the end we may with
judgment entertayne happy death as our best heritage.


Phil. Why pauseth Celio? or what holds thee in suspense?


Ce. Oh Philamis, I contemplate the true life: and as travelers by the beauty
of the coast conjecture the benefits of the country: so in describing the
commodities of death, and weighing the fruit thereof, I gather the happiness of
heaven, to which the spirit would fly, were it not hindered by fleshly
infirmities.


Phi. Leave these contemplations (good Celio) and prosecute your discourse: It
were pittle your studies should prevent mine instructions: I pray you let us
know why some men, since death is so sweet, account it so sower, and why other
men take that for pleasure, which some esteem to be their utter perdition.


Ce. Truly Philamis, thou have propounded a quaint question, which avails
much to knowledge of death, and causes the better sort to rejoice thereat, the
worser to prepare them in worthiness to receive it. That sort of men which fear
death, are they that li^e in darkness, whose lives are worldly, who consider
not the judgments of God, but are like Ox and Mule in whom there is no
understanding: these are not touched with (...) ^owledge of God, but are very
hypocrites in his church: these proceed from evil to worse, and their practices
are often frustrate: these seize upon the widows gleanings, and persevere in
their wickedness: these are happy in serving the devil, and hardened against
the service of GOD: these are they that think their sins are unseen, and
who perseuering in their wickedness shall perish: these are they against whom
Micah cries out, whose just condemnation is death: these shall sigh in the day
of judgment, whose blindness is more tha^ Cimar^an, w^o shall have portion with
Sodom: these are they whose company is to be eschewed, who make tears dwell on
the widows cheeks, and devour the fatherless and desolate: these are they
who in stead of prayers, make purchases, whose indentures are their devotions,
whose privy seals be their prayer books: these are they that spend in wast
what poor men want, and bestow that on hounds they should give to the hungry,
and employ that on bravery, they should vouchsafe the beggar: these are they
(as Bernard says) that are made rich by poor men's farms, whose sin shall be
revenged in hell fire: these fear death, because they hope no better life, and
fly the grave, in that they are fallen from grace: And this sort of sinners
have many swarms of attendants: some more vehement, some more desperate, all
damnable: as are they who encounter violent death, after their wicked lives:
and such as being adjudged for offense, make the separation of soul and body
adesperate laughing game. These are they of whom Ezechiel speaks, the soul
that sins shall die. Examples of these sorts of men are infinite, among
which Saul may first exemplify, who being rent from his kingdom, reft
himself of life. Judas who having betrayed his Savior, hung him self in
despair. Brutus who having murdered Caesar, slew himself miserably with his
own sword. Carundius Tirius, w^o having made a Bedlam law, endured a bloody
end.

Oh too many, too marvelous are the examples of such men, who in their
desperatenes have made death damnable, and in their dissolutenes fearful.
What are they that take pleasure in death? oh blessed men, oh happy pleasure.
Such as shine like the Sun in their sincerity, such as ack^wledge their
deliverance from God, such as are f^ythfull in afflictions, and humble them in
persecutions: such as a^e godly in patience, and patient in godliness: such as
are obedient in duty, and steadfast in doctrine: such as have faith with the
leaper, confidence with the blind-men, zeal with the woman of Canaan,
acknowledge them ^infull with the sick of the palsy, proving rather
Cornelius, a soldier to believe, than Simon Magus an inchaunter to lie: such
as look for the promises of God, and thirst after righteousness: such whom
the zeal of the Lords house swalloweth up: such as suffer for persecution
sake: such whose faith is not wavering, and whose vows are in heaven, though
the body be on the earth: such as are faithful and not fearful, that trust in
^od, and mistrust not his promises: such as are persecuted with Paul, and
believe with Paul: such as desire to endure for the truth, not to be indurate
against the truth: the number is too many to tell them, yet would my numbering
might breed more, so that with Mo^s I might pray, O blot me out of the book of
life so they may live; so they may increase, so they may flourish: and these
also have folowers, who thoe they deserve not to sit on the throne with the
elders, may wait upon the lamb as their shepherd: for my fathers house has
many dwelling places. But let us now consider of death, for he craves
constructio^: there is a diffe^ence to die with Socrates in innocence, and Ovid
in exile: there is a death to die for ever, there is a death to live for ever;
the one pertains to the nocent, the other to the innocent; the one to the
impugner, the other to the penitent; the one to the merciles, the other to the
merciful; the one to the blasphemer, the other to the righteous: and among the
righteous sort, some may fall to arise; for the righteous sins seven times a
day: some fall to perish, the examples are manifest, and let the learned dilate
them. Among the wicked, some from Saul becomes Paul; another from an Apostle,
does grow to be an ^oistata: for such as may and will not be, let their sins
light on their heads; for the righteous, blessed be the Lord, that has chosen
them into his fould; for such as fall and may rise, I will (...) somewhat
Philamis, for it is my custom: but I would (...) that were all our (...).
(...) thou (...), and (...) thou (...) thy fault? (...) leave (O mortal man) to
persevere in thy follyes. For (...). Augustine says: As the love of God is the
well of virtue: so is the love of the world the well of vices. Come unto me
(says Christ) all such as are laden, and I will ease (...). Bernard says, the
perfect servant of Christ loves nothing but him. If then (...) man, thou
(...) doted on thy riches, reconcile thy self, take thy cross and follow
Christ. He that sets his ^and to the plough, and looks (...)? he that
would follow him, and will straight bury his father, he is unworthy of the
harvest, unmeet of such a master. Has the Devil tempted (...) lay hold on
Christ. Hear Hierome: The power of the Devil is of no force being resisted
by a strong faith: And Augustine, who says: That the Devil can deceive no
man, excepthe confidently put his trust in him, (...) thou (...) through
contention with thy brother, amend thy self: Learn of Paul to the Galathians
the sixth chap. Let every one (says he) among you ^eare the burden of
another. ^eare Tully: There is nothing (says he) but may be suffered by him
that perfectly loves his neighbor. I have read in the Ecclesiastical
history, that Antipater Idumeus, which was Father of Herod the great, in
diverse battayls received diverse wounds, bearing such perfect love to the
Emperor his master, that he endured them patiently: notwithstanding
afterward being falsely accused before the Emperor, and brought unto him, not
relying on his accusers complaints, but guided by his own innocence, he
spoke in this sort to his Majesty.

Mighty Sovereign, I will use no great words for my excuse, but these green
wounds, which I have suffered for your love, and adventured in your service,
which are evidences of my devotion toward you, and not of any doublenes: let
them speak for me and express my love, condemn my accusers, commend my
constancy.

The Emperor being of judgment, received him into grace, and in stead of
punishing him, plagued his accusers: a lesson to reconcile friends, and having
(...) them, (...) arm them to die well. For true friendship (...) but amongst
good men (as Tully (...)) neither (...) a good man that truly trusts in the
ever living God, ever fail of a good end. But leave we offenses toward man,
and cast we our eyes up to heaven: there sits a Savior, who has suffered
for all our sins, has been buffeted for our benefit, has borne the burden
to lighten us, has been cruci^ed for our comfort, has had wounds, to heal
our weakness, has suffered shame to subdue our sin, has swet blood, to
grant us sweet blessings, has been plagued for our peace, has groned to end
our grief: his mild hands has been wounded for (...): he has suffered for us
that did sin, in his body which had no sin: who endured that which we deserved:
and compare we our (...) in offending him, with his righteousness in pardoning
us: (...) offended him? (as thou can not but sin in this flesh) lift up thy
heart, and be (...) sorry, then see how (...) calls from the heavens: I am
come to destroy says he, be thou therefore steadfast. I will lock the penitent
man in my (...): I will love thee, if thou but lean toward me. Pour my
repentance in thy lap my brother, and I will save thee, I have compassion on
thee, and will gather thee though a straying lamb, and call thee home tho a
lost sheep, and kiss thee though a (...) son, and pray for thee in that I am
thine advocate. Oh unspeakable mercy, who would not cleave to this anchor to
leave the world? Who would not be reconciled to this God for a little calami
tie? who would not be heartily penitent for such a patron'?


Phi. Oh divine spirit in a deaf man, good Celio proceed, for thou comfortest
my soul.


Ce. Trouble me not to conclude Philamis, but hear thou, can the pilat in the
storm refuse a good (...) can the condemned in his danger contemn his pardon?
unless either the (...) be desperate, or ye other deuilish: it is impossible,
it is inconvenient, among men it is incredible: how then should we refuse
Christ, when he calls us, who through the narrow seas of death, calls us to
the haven of heaven? who would (...) embrace these waves though they embowell
them: and kiss (...) though they ouerflowe him, and bless this death for
(...).


Phil. I but Celio, this wealth is a great foe of (...), this is a deep thorn
(as Gregory (...)) that (...) in all (...), to leave rich possessions, kind
friends, to dwell in the grave, is not this a grief?


Ce. What grief Philamis, what grief can it be? Barnard says, your (...) be
bayne, for they (...) Lordshippe, and cause (...): they (...), but make payment
of fear: And Paul writes to Timothy, they that will be rich, fall into great
temptations, and snares of the Devil, and into diverse (...) desires, (...), and
noisome, which bring men to death and perdition: are not these even reasons
enough unto reasonable men to forsake wealth? What is a rich man but the flower
of the grass? A poor man in his good heart, is better than a gay man with his
gold ring: God (...) the hungry, and sends the rich empty away. The poor
widow in Luke was commended above the great rich men: for (...) is as great in
a poor widows inyte, as in a rich man's Miriade.

Say thou (...) riches, will they not wast? and are they not subject to rust?
betrayed by fire? But gather not riches (my son) the wealth that will perish,
but that which will endure: all pomp is vain, all pleasure but a shadow,
see thou not them die daily before thine eyes? and will thou live to them?
They are the foes of men ( Philamis) they bring traitors to thy bed, work
murders (...) father and son, twixt mother and daughter: Oh vanity of
vanities, which men call riches. Art thou rich? know that the things which are
at fulness must have a fall: will thou say unto thy self, come let me rejoice
in my possessions, my barns are full, my bags stuffet? (...) the sentence
sounding in thine ear, Thou fool thy soul shall be taken from thee. Crates the
Theban, a man of great fortunes, and a grave Philosopher, threw great substance
into the Sea, and said thus: (...) you from me ye fruits of (...), for (...) in
detayning you I drown with you. Saint (...) alleges the example of an other
(...), who (...) a great (...) of gold with him in his tranaile, and
considering in his mind that he could not possess riches and virtue together,
(...) threw his wealth from (...), and said thus: O vain riches (...) me, the
Gods grant me that I may ever loose you.

Thus did Ethnickes seeking but their chiefest good, and shall not we leave
worldly trash, to live with our good (...)? Who had not rather be a blessed
Nathan, than a cursed Nabal? though the wicked live and grow in wealth, it is
his forbearance: for what hope has the Hypocrite (says Toby) if when (...)
has (...) up his riches, (...) take away his Soul? Chrysostom says, God
gives benefits both to the worthy and unworthy: thou may then be rich in
unworthiness, and triumph in thine own wretchedness. Draw near my (...)
(says Athanatos) I will make your (...) kingly, though you be caytiues: I
govern both the royal Crown, and the humble Cradle. Come unto me (says
Athanatos) I will with drawing one sigh, end al thy sorrows: with one groan end
al griese, make your souls fit. I will set you forward.


Phila. Here stay good Celio, thou have long time discoursed here of the
benefits of life everlasting, but give no assurance of the same. Says not
the Philosopher, Post mortem nulla voluptas? how can then this life be eternal
wherein there is no pleasure. If it be true that Apollonius Tianeus aledgeth,
and the Pythagorists persuade, that the souls have passage from one body to
another, me thinks this separation should be rather cause of molest, than mirth
to the spirit. Homer besides a great Poet says, that death is full of horror:
satissie me herein (good Celio) that every way thou may say sufficient.


Celio. If it be true ( Philamis) as Tully testifies, that there is no nation
so (...), that stands not in some religious awe of God, whose seat is the
heaven, whose footestoole is the earth: If it be undoubted in thee, that Christ
his Son is the propitiation for our sins, as each true Christian must
confess, thou needs not doubt, the scripture shall satisfy thee: hark what John
the Apostle says of our savior, nay (...) himself speaks of himself, Jesus
said to Thomas I (...) the way, the truth, and the life: no man comes unto
the (...) but by me? will thou have life everlasting? ke^pe the commandments.
Christ has swalowed up death, that we might be heirs of everlasting life.
Christ is the bread of lyse: the life eternal is to know God, and Christ whom
he has sent his son. Beleeuest thou Gods book? why art thou then besotted?
why bringst thou in this blind instance of the Epicurt? Does not Seneca the
grave Philosopher condemn hi^, proving by assured reasons that there is no
felicity but in death? If there be no pleasure after the soul is departed,
what becomes of the righteous? deemest thou who has run his race, has not
his garland? and that he who has finished his course, has not his quiet? For
Apollonius Tianeus since the Fathers condemn him, commend him not: for as one
swallow makes not a summer, so a few instances subvert not an universal
certainty. Eusebius (with other learned) examining the cause of fear,
especially in death, reasons thus: If there be any evil in death, it is the
fear of the same that increases it, and if there be no evil, the fear it
self is a great evil: fond then is he that fears death, for that he
augmenteth his evil, or rather causes it himself. Base is the spirit of
every man, says Sabellicus, which fears death: for fearing it in his own
respect, in that he is in soul immortal, he ought not to fear, if he lose his
body: for what folly is it to be afraid of that which is at enmity with us? If
desire of gain has made death but a trifle, among the men of no heavenly
capacity: If it has encouraged some to stop a swallowing gulf with ye
Roman, to die for their master, as the slave of Anthony, what should death be
to us, which expect not a momentary, but an immortal glory? nor raised among
men, but registered in immortality? The sweetness of death was manifest in the
persecutions of the Primitive Church, where infantes with great constancy
endured much cruelty: sweet is the pain in expectation of the (...). Believe
me Philamis, there is nothing so accordant ^o nature as death, and nothing
more enemy to the soul, than mortal life, which is a Sea so tempestuous,
that none but a constant mind ((...) by (...) grace) (...) avoid the shipwreck,
mark the hard penance of (...) is life assigned to our grandsire Adam: Because
(says the Lord) thou have obeyed the voice of thy wife, and have (...) of the
(...) whereof I commanded thee, saying. Thou shall not eat of it, cursed is
the earth for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it, all the days of thy
life: Thorns also and thi^les shall it bring forth unto thee, and thou shall
eat the herb of the field. (...) the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread
till you return to the earth, etc. (...) how Job cursseth that life which thou
commendest. Let the day perrish wherein I was borne, and the night when it was
said, there is a man child conceived: here have we no continuing city says
Paul to the Hebrews, I am wearied with speaking Philamis, and the sun
inclines to the West. Thus time passes like a shadow, and life as Barnard
says, consumes away like a bubble: scorn therefore to be in prison, when
thou may have liberty: to be a bondsman, when thou may be fre^: ^o ^e
captive in the flesh, when thou may live in the spirit; cast of thy old
ways, and thy wonted vanities, forsake unprofitable studdies, and search out
the Scriptures, there is the living fountain, the other are muddy puddles:
there the truth, the other men's traditions: there the strong anchor, y^ other
but a weak grapple, oh look on Gods book, and leuel at Gods blessings, his
words are perfection, the others the fruits of earthly opinion: ca^t of vain
loves, and put on the love of virtue: learn of Octauius to be continent, trust
nothing that sauoreth not to righteousness: believe not every fable, for folly
has many fine shadows: beware flatterers, they are the snares of the
innocent: be wary like Esops Mowse, for there be many cats stirring, who will
clawe thee where it does not itch, and catch thee in their gripe, if thou have
no good regard: in brief, live thou well, and thou art wealthy. Senecat ather
liked learned Senetios slave Dipaostes, then his obliuious master the Senator:
choose thy friends not by their coat but by knowledge, and among all things
loose no time, it is thy best treasure: in thy writings ascribe all good things
to God, (...) to thy wit, in thy reading medi^ate often, it is Senicaes lesson,
Nulla dies (...), if thou be passionate, (...) thee of thy (...): if merry,
(...) the mean, the humble cot has quiet, when lofty towers have greatest
assaults: finally (...) all earthly things in comparison of heavenly joys,
where is joy without ceasing, where the saints sing Os^ma seated about the
throane, and the Angels minister to his divine man, who give thee grace to
follow my counsel, and grant me constancy in mine end, I am weary Philamis,
and these old bones and crused carkas would have rest: farewell, God bless
thee, and as thou likest this days labor, come visit me often.


Phi. Fatherly are thy words Celio, and thy counsels conformable, which I
will lock up in this b^est, and think on to mine benefit, beseeching God to
send many such shepherds, to counsel such as I, who are youthful sinners.


Philamis to Anthenor, to comfort him in his exile.
SInce there is no remedy (as Euripides says) more appropriate to men in
perplexity, then the exhortation of good and faithful friends, I have taken
upon me the liberty if not to please, yet to persuade thee Anthenor, who
having known worloly affairs, may more easily digest afflictions. Thou art
grieved in that thou art banished thy country, despised of thy prince, exiled
from the court, beguiled of thy contents, as if to a wiseman all countries are
not one? and Anacharsis should not as well flourish in Athens, as he was
fauour^d in Sirria: Why my Anthenor, all exile is but opinion, and good (...)
thrive as well in America as in Asia: (...) thou not that Liuerwoort is bitter,
and yet healthful? where Basil is sweet and infectious? the wandering travels
of Ulysses made him wise, where had he still lived in Greece, he had got less
glory: what so is offenciue in appearance, is not faulty in proof, neither is
misery any thing but thine own opinion, assure thy self that that only is
thy country wherein thou live content, and that to live in Austria disgraced,
is (...) less then to be an exile in Hungaria, what will thou make change
(...) to thy self, (...) it is (...) to many? whole cities have changed their
seat, (...) many (...) daily suffer that which has chanced to thee, the only
difference, they wander like banished men in a coloney, thou without company,
they not knowing how to quel sorrow, but thou how to conquer it. The Lapidaries
choose their stones by sustance and touch, Stelon unless it encounter the
Coade is of no proof, and without adversity what knowledge of (...). The
Pilate knows the goodness of his ship in a wrought sea, not in a weak wind:
and such as will not bear fortunes touch, are unworthy Uertues temper: coulors
that are not in grain, are soonest disgraced, and such as have not tasted
changes, cannot boast of constancy: every country (says Democritus) is free
and open to a wise man: and the world is but every valiant man's walk: what is
exile but that which may be every man's fortune? if banishment were so bitter,
why did Scipio make it voluntary? say thou want in exile, so did Scipio
maintenants, Regulus mercinaries, and Menenio funeral, I tell thee Anthenor
calamity is the occasion of virtue, and no grief is long that is great,
Anathagoras neither grieved to dye a forrainer, neither fainted to perish in
poverty since he knew the earth rich enough to give him grave, the world small
enough to be his country. But examine we the causes which may move discontents:
thou will say thy princes disgrace is the greatest grief, weep not at this
cross my Anthenor, for thy tears will convict thee, for if thou suffer with
out desert, how vain art thou to sorrow at thy virtue? if worthily, assure thy
self the absence heals the half of the wou^d: seek not thou (...) friend to
imitate the ignorant physician of whom Cicero speaks, who in other malidies
profess themselves to have art, and in their own infirmities prove themselves
asses, thou art driven from the court, happy art thou if thou (...) driven the
customs thereof from thee, assure thy self thou have attained suffic^ent
satisfaction, in that thou have avoided that infection: believe me a wise man
ought not to loose himself in vain laments, especially he whom Philosophy
has long time lived withal. What is the balm of Egypt better then that of
Judea? (...) that of Judea, sweeter then that of Inde? the prope^es are one,
the sweetness one: if tha^ trees are one, though carried into many places, how
vain are men to be changed: that only Caelum mutant non animum: o^ Anthenor
thou have gotten much by this grief, thou have escaped vanity, and virtue
clothed in poverty, begins now to hail thee, now may thou tread fortune
under foot, in that she has done her worst, and triumph like a conqueror,
since thou contemnest her wiliness: even as the loss of leaves is small in
that the next spring renueth them, so the want of delights are of no weight,
since a reconciled mind does soon restore them. Beware least Democritus laugh
at thee, and Heraclitus weep for thee: the one to see the passionate, who have
tried the worlds inconstancy: the other to think thy brain should be so
addle, and thou so aged. But why travail I to teach that which the meanest
mind does imagine: truly Anthenor since each storm will have a calm, since
in Tigris the Minow has as great liberty as ye Mullet, since the Loate
thriueth as well in Tibris as Tanais, and the poorest constant mind in the
straungest country: dry thou up thy tears, and shake of these trifles, let the
equity of thy cause confirm thy quiet, thy fruitful constancy exceed
fortunes contempt, so shall thou prove thy self well stayed and better
studied. Vale.

Epilogus.
LAdies and Gentlemen, I have posted Philamis from Passan, to apply his studies
in the mountains of Stiria: if his courting has wrought you any content, I
doubt not but his contemplations shall yield good conceit, he has laid a line
for lofty building, and has vowed himself to great studdie and labor, it
only l^es in your favorable good likings, to make him a forward workman, or
to give over in the foundation: the r^ard he seeks is your acceptance, the
fruit you may reap may perhaps prove science: since therefore all that he
requires is but a good word for a great work, vouchsafe him that which lies
in you to bestow, and in him to deserve, and till that time, farewell.

FINIS.

