Come and see. THE BLISS OF BRIGHTEST BEAVTIE: SHINING OVT OF SION IN PERFECT
GLORY. Being the sum of four sermons preached in the Cathedral Church of
Gloucester at commandment of superiors.

BY WILLIAM LO.

Imprinted at London by Richard Field for Matthew Law. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, AND RIGHT WORTHY GENTLEman Sir William Sandis
Knight, and to that weldisposed, and very Christian Lady, the Lady Margaret
Sandis his virtuous wife, and joyful consort, grace and glory be multiplied
in Christ's kingdoms of grace and glory.
MVch honored. The Christian neighborhood, and kind commerce both of bountiful
liberality, and gracious respect, which my self, and mine received from you
and yours this time tweluemoneth by our contiguous vicinitie, has occasioned
me to be thus bold in saluting you after long silence with a paper token, the
only miniment, and memorial of a Scholar in this last, and worst age, that
has nothing for us but books amongst the best, and by-words amongst the
worst, as her only bequest, and our legacy. Howsoever, notwithstanding it is
the hearty joy of Israel, and the unspeakable comfort of Jacob, that still
some of the precious balm of Gilead that falls upon Aarons head, does distill
down even unto the skirts of his priestly clothing. And whereas others may
have spices, and balmes to preserve their bodies for a time, and monuments of
brass, and stone to continue a future glory to their memorials: yet ever
those have been most enobled, whose remembrances the tokens of virtue, and
godliness have endeavored to eternize, and keep from the rottenness of
corrupted baserie, and obscure oblivion. And albeit the purport of this whole
project is but the turning of my tongue into my pen, and the matter it self is
but a preaching again (as it were) the same words another saboth day, Act. 13.
as the Gentiles besought Paul in the Acts: yet I pray you entertain them as
the presence of my spirit, the pledge of mine heart, and the earnest of that
affection, and love which I justly bear unto you. And whereas before I spoke
in a great auditory in the presence and countenance of a living man, am now
content in this my pains to bury my self in a dead letter of less effectual
persuasion: But principally I protest to this only end and purpose, that God
might be magnified (if it be his holy will) in me the weakest, and meanest of
his servants both by the meditations of mine heart, and in the endeavors of
mine hand. The Treatise is of the love of God devoted unto your selves in whom
I have observed much love toward God, toward your brethren without, and amongst
your selves at home. Go on then (blessed in the Lord Jesus) in this sacred
vettue that disposes you to God so amiablie, and you Ioh. 20.
shall find these holy increases in you 1. You shall ever desire to think on
him that made Luke 2.
you. 2. Gladly, and willingly to frequent his house the palace of prayer 3.
Duly to speak, 1. Pet 4.
and talk of him. 4. Often to hear of him by Io. 14.
his messengers, and to meditate of that you hear. 5. Ready will you be to
give for his 1. Io. 3.
sake. 6. Joyful that you suffer whatsoever it Io. 18. 1. Io. 5.
be for Gods honor. 7. Duly to bow your hearts to the obedience of his holy
laws, 8. Yea you will love them that love the Lord, Mat. 12.
and despise and hate them that hate him. 9. Neither will you love this world,
nor anything therein, unless it be for the Lords cause. 10. Yea in a word, you
will love your friend in the Lord, and your enemy for the Lord.

Long may the blessing of this divine love which is the beautiful Idea of your
souls, sparkle and flame in you. Let the God of heaven grant that the
distempered humors of misperswasion may never quench it within you, nor the
ouerflowings of ungodliness in the world ever put it out, but let the light of
Gods own most blessed countenance for ever and ever shine upon you, and cause
it to be enflamed eternally. I beseech the God of heaven and of earth to
multiply his richest blessings upon your self, your Lady, and your children
for evermore. Even so Lord Jesus be it.

The College of Glou. Febru. 20. 1611. Yours, because you are of Christ.
WILLIAM LO.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, BUT ESPECIALLY TO E. B. HIS VERY much respected
friend, Grace, and Glory
LEt God arise, and let his enemies Psalm. 68. 1.
be scattered, let them that hate him, fly before him. As the smoke vanishes,
so let them perish at thy presence (o Lord) that have evil will at Sion. But
let them that love and seek the Lord, be ever joyful and glad in him, let
them be telling his praises from day to day. And if there be any man so
brutish, that loves not the Lord Jesus, let him be had in execration
Maranatha. 1. Cor. 16. 22.


Seeing man being fallen is raised by Christ only, man is returned to God,
having turned away from all good. The Angels that fell are damned, man that
sinned is pardoned. To man God has given a motion never to Picus Mira^d.
Hexapl.
cease until he rest in him, grace to guide him, goodness to embrace him,
messengers of glad tidings to instruct him, faith to furnish him with the
fullness of persuasion, sanctimony to dignifie him in this life, glory to
deifie him in the other life. Seeing with Jesus Christ also is the fullness of
joy, whose name is salvation, whose passion Zan^h. in Euchirid.
redemption, whose sacrifice satisfaction, whose blood purgation, whose
resurrection sanctification, whose ascension eternal glorification. And seeing
that the Lord Jesus Christ is love substantially, having nothing Bern. de am.
dei.
in him self but himself, being love it self essentially, not accidentally,
he is also love causally, causing it in others, as in the Elements, in the
creatures, in the sweet symphonie of the whole universe, and in the bitter
iarres of man's corrupted nature, making men to be of one mind in an house, and
of one heart in a commonwealth. He is love actiuely loving all things he has
made, man more particularly, his redeemed most especially, with a love to the
end, in the end, without end.

Loving them in their election, when they could not love him; loving them in
their redemption when they would not love him; loving them externally, for they
have a promise to enjoy their outward blessings; loving them internally, for
their hearts shall be comforted; loving them eternally, for they shall ever be
blessed with him in heavenly things. He is love passiuely most worthy to be
beloved, being loving every day in multiplying his blessings, being loving
every way in magnifying his mercies, loving us first in preventing us
mercifully, loving us in continuance in guiding us powerfully, loving us last
in perfecting us eternally. Yea so loving that if he go to punish, he walks a
soft pace, he comes in the cool of the day: but to show mercy he runs; for
he is gracious, righteous, yea our God is merciful, punishing three, or four
of the generation of the godless; but showing mercy to thousands that love
him, and live in his fear. Taste then, and see how gracious the Lord Jesus is,
and how plentiful is his goodness, which he has laid up for them that fear
him, and prepared for them that trust in him, even before the sons of men. He
being the perfection of Priesthood and prophecy, of sacrifice and sacrament,
so that now who so sets his heart upon any thing but upon the Lord Jesus, is
liable to the extreme curse of Gods desertion. Set not then your hearts on
beauty, beloved, it is but a forward blossom soon nipt; nor on pleasure, it
is but a bitter pill lapt in sugar; nor on your belly, it is but the pantrie
for the draft house; nor on riches, they are but guiles, and baits to ensnare
us, which while they are in getting weary us, while they are possessed,
befoole us; and when Picus Mirand. in Apolog.
we lose them, they crucify us. Set not your hearts on the favor of Princes
or Potentates, for they are but the sons of men; nor on ambition, it is but a
feather tossed with the wind; nor on gay apparel, it is but rags; nor on
goodly houses, they are but so many bonefiers against the day of doom; nor on
any thing under the sun: but only like, and love them in and for the Lord
Jesus sake, as they are either remedies for sin, or directions in ordine ad
Deum for our useful necessities, and furtherances to further our future
happiness. But as for those who despite the spirit of grace, and trample the
blessed blood of the new Testament under their feet, as do all sycophantizing
Papists, schismatizing Puritans, neutralizing Atheists, satanizing scorners of
all godliness, truth, and honesty: I will ever pray against their
wickedness, Psalm. 69. Let their table be their snare, their eyes dimmed, their
habitation void, their backs bowed down, let them heap up iniquity upon
iniquity, and let their names be razed out of the book of life. Let them be
unto us as paganish Ethnicks, and Publicans, as unclean leapers put out of the
camp of Israel, as rotten members, cut off from the body of the Church, as
dead branches, broken off from the true vine, as unclean dogs, put out of
the holy City, and as those of the Concision, of whom we must beware, Phil. 3.
2. Yea let all that is about them be hateful unto us. Let the Iosu. 6. Dan 3.
goods of such be as the cursed things of Jericho, their houses as odious as a
iakes, their possessions as direful as Acheldama, their gains as vile as the
Pharisees Corban, their name as branded and as infamous as was Ieroboams, their
posterity as obscure as the untimely fruit of a woman which never sees the
sun. If they be honorable, and do not honor Christ, o Lord lay their honor
in the dust. If noble, let them be accounted base, unless they be ennobled in
Jesus Christ. If learned, let their learning be a byword, and a fable among
the vulgar, that study not to be students in Christ's school. If they be a
whole nation, let their portion be as the men of Ashdod, 1. Sam. 5. If a king,
let him be made as Nebuchadnezzar that he may know the Almighty. If a
Courtier, let him be despised in the sight of the king: yea let all them be
delivered over that love not the Lord Jesus but despise him, unto Satan by
excommunication, that confession at least may be wrested from them as it was
from Simon Magus, and Elimas the Bariesu, who craved aid of the Church which
formerly they desperately despised; that if it be the will of the Lord, they may
be saved by repentance in this day of grace, before that fatal and final
divorce from the Lord of their souls and bodies be denounced, before the
curses of separation, Depart from me; of indignation, Mat. 25.
ye cursed; of dolor, into fire; of desperatio^, into hell fire; of confusion,
prepared for the devil and his angels, be in the last judgment awarded against
them, for their contempt of the Lord Jesus Christ. But to them that seek the
Lord Jesus, mella fluant illis, and all the beatitudes of mount Gerazim, let
their ears never hear the horrors of the vale of the children of Hinnon, but
let Sions rays shine upon them all their life, and let the Lord Jesus appear
unto them in his second coming to salvation, who love him, and look for him
from heaven, Heb. 9. 28.
and long for him from the bottom of their hearts, crying come Lord Jesus. Let
them hear o Lord thy perfect Apoc. 22.
blessings of association, Come; of benediction, ye blessed; of inheritance,
possess; of glory, the kingdom; of election, prepared for you, before the
foundations of Mat. 25.
the world were laid. And God persuade Iaphet to dwell in the tents of blessed
Sem. Even so (o Lord) be it.

Amen.
My well-beloved is white, and ruddie, the chiefest of ten thousand. Cant. 5. 10.
YOu may justly demand of me (blessed, and beloved in the Lord Jesus) as the
daughters or faithful people of Jerusalem do here of the spouse in the
Canticles, concerning her beloved, saying: What is thy Cant. 5. 9.
beloved more then other beloved? what is thy beloved more then another lover,
that thou do so charge us? because of late I denounced from this place before
you (not against you, for I am persuaded better things of you my brethren, and
such as accompany salvation) Paul his fearful curse of Anathema Maranatha,
to wit, If any man love not the 1. Cor. 16. 22.
Lord Jesus, let him be accursed when the Lord shall come: And my reply unto
you must be my text, which the spouse here makes to the like demand, that is,
My Cant. 5. 10.
beloved is white, and ruddie, the chiefest of ten thousand. The words are few,
the matter manifold.

Out of Sion (says David) has God appeared in Psalm. 50. 2.
perfect beauty; for what higher, and more heavenly perfection can be
imagined, or was ever hard of then Sions sacred rays, which give bright
splendour, and most glorious luster to the whole Christian world? The rigor of
the law from Sinay is satisfied in the righteousness of the Gospel from mount
Sion. If any the^ be affectionate, let him come hither, here is love; and if he
have grace, here is his well-beloved also, and this commencement and commerce of
sweet love, will be the whetstone of true, perfect and perpetual love.

If any be curious, here is amiable beauty white and ruddie: white, answering
the pureness he would have, and ruddie corresponding the zealous hartines he
would crave. And further if he shall be curious, and be elegans formarum
spectator, here is choice, even the chiefest of ten thousand. For here he may
behold the spouse, first showing her dear affection, then her true loves
description: her affection she utters by appellation of unfeigned love,
well-beloved: and also by application, thus, My well-beloved: she then describes
him generally, as thus, is white, and ruddie, the chiefest of ten thousand. And
then particularly in his parts as in the verses following of this Chapter.

In her general description she sets him down in The division.
orient colors of heavenly perfection, as first his purity, is white, both
essentially ( is) and especially to, white. Secondly his purity, and zeal both
Zeraphical, and also Cherubical, wholly passible, wholly amiable, even in these
words ( and ruddie) which is a sweet, and seemly co^mixture of white, and
red. Then the choice, above thousands, and the chief of choice the chiefest of
ten thousand. In love then you see he is matchless, in purity spotless, in
zeal pricelesse, in choice peerless.

Come hither then thou passionate lover, and repent thee of thine inordinate,
and immoderate love to alluring, and deceiptfull beauty, that vain vermillion
die mingled with white, (like blood in snow) both vanishing with the Suns
beams, with sickness, old age, and many other casualties; and whereof thou thy
self art suspicious, even while thou do enjoy it, and art inlie tormented,
lest an other should partake with thee: come hither I say, and sit down at
these pure waters a while, and let thy soul see, and be ravished with the
sight of celestial beauty, and grace shining unto thee (miserable, and
wretched man) even from heaven; and yet thou never did vouchsafe so much as
once to cast thine eye upon it.

No man I confess can pourtray or delineate this love unto thee as it is in
deed, therefore I could wish that my soul had consulted with the Lord Jesus
his Ioh. 13. 23.
Paranymph the beloved disciple, who leaned upon his sacred breast at supper,
and felt the breathes of blessed love that breathed out of his tender bowels,
or had been rapt up with Paul into the third heaven, to 2. Cor. 12. 4.
be lift up above my self, or had seen that glimpse of glory which Peter saw
in mount Tabor, or had conferred Mat. 17. Aquinas.
with him who died meditating on this love, and saying at his last gasp, Love
is as strong as death: Cant. 8. 6.
or had been with Philip Melancthon who departed this life saying Egrediamur,
egrediamur, or at least had Cant. 3 11.
heard sweet Bernard preach thereof, or learned Theodar Beze, both purposing
to write their meditations thereon, and to go through this song, but both dying
before they could finish it, as being surprised (as I conceive) with the
singular love of the Lord Jesus pourtrayed herein most mystically, and divinely.

But how shall I then dare to adventure, or take upon me to open my mouth to
set forth this love? seeing as S. Bernard says, None can understand Paul's
Bern. de consyd. ad Euge nium. l. 3. c. 4
meaning, but they that are endued with Paul's mind, so none can conceive the
spouses affection, but they that are touched with the like love. How shall we
either speak of the spouses tender affection, or you hear accordingly? seeing
we are all carnal, sold under sin, and these things are mystically, and
spiritually discerned. This only comforts me, that God has granted two means
to know these sacred mysteries, the one infused and extraordinary, only
proper and peculiar to the men of God in the former ages; the other attained by
study, and industry joined with invocation to God for illumination and grace,
the only sacred relics of Jesus Christ left to his servants in these last
ages. The Gospel being the foundation of all our sacred skill, out of the which
whosoever preaches Christ crucified, has the mind of Christ. And having his
mind, we may with reverend boldness auerre, that we also know the true
Churches meaning.

Hearken then to the Church here styling Christ, her well-beloved, for he is
hers, and she is his: first, she by way of petition entreats saying, Show me
(o thou whom my soul loves) when thou feedest, where thou lie at noone? And
then he by way of replication answers, My love, my dove, mine undefiled,
Cant. 5. 2.
open unto me, for my head is full of dew, and my hair of the drops of the
morning: whereupon the Church does in eight Chapters in this divine song, nine
and twenty times style him (her best beloved) as if she could never too often
remember his unspeakable love toward her his well-beloved. Saint Paul also a
son of this sacred mother has in his Epistles five hundred times the name of
his Lord Jesus, as acco^pting Cenebrards observation.
himself most happy, when that most sacred name of love and life sounded in
his lips, or was written with his pen. If therefore we of the last and worst
generation be transported, and out of our wits as you think (being ravished
with the surpassing love of God, it being shed in our hearts by the holy 2 Cor.
5. 13. 14.
Ghost) wear it to God: or if we be modest, and in our right mind, we are it
unto you, for the love of Christ constrains us.

S. John the beloved disciple, now being old, writes of nothing else but of
this love, as appears in his canonical Epistles, choosing now to die, and
depart in beholding the surpassing beauty thereof, insomuch that he summons
all degrees, children, young men and 1. Ioh. 2. 14.
the aged to the view thereof, as being indeed their heaven upon earth. For who
so abides in this love, 1. Ioh. 4. 8.
dwells in God.

If we shall descend lower to other lights of the Church, we shall also see
that this was the earnest, and most certain pledge that their souls had here,
even to be swayed, and transported with this divine love. Every thing is carried
with his weight: Love is my weight (says S. Augustine) by it am I carried,
whither soever Aug. in Soliloqui Bern. de 2. more Dei. Cyprian. de me ^o dilig.
Dei Eusebius. Emiss.
I am tra^sported. S. Bernard admireth this love, that God being so great, so
greatly should love us wretched miscreants, and that freely. Cyprian advises
us to prefer nothing before the love of Christ, forasmuch as he preferred
nothing before our love. Eusebius Emiss. epitomiseth our service thus, Be not
distracted with many circumstances, for what God requires of thee, is in thee,
to wit, the service of thy mouth by confession, and the affection of thine
heart in faithfulness. In thy heart then has God set the souls city of refuge,
that whence the sin came, the medicine might thence also issue. How nigh then
is this remedy? How sweet is this counsel? Of this doubtless spoke Moses: It
is near even in thy Deuteronomy. 30. 14.
mouth, and in thine heart: miserable therefore is our condition (says Jerome)
not to be with him, without whom we cannot be. Be with God we cannot otherwise
(while we are here) then by affection. What (o love) can be sufficiently said
in thy praise? says Hugo de S. Victore, seeing through thee God should humble
himself to descend from heaven, and man should be exalted from earth to
heaven; great is thy power, that thus God should be abased, and sinful man so
advanced.

Thus have the sacred sons of the true Churches generation expressed their
affectionate rauishments in this divine love, showing that nothing can be more
pious, nothing is more precious. And this heavenly affection also is not only
general in the whole Church, but also particularly in every religious soul,
which applies it soundly, certainly, and sweetly to it self, and says as
the spouse here, He is my beloved, by way of appropriation, whereby we may
discern a twofold certainety of our Certitudo objecti.
faith, the one of the object; as that there is a life everlasting, that Christ
died for the sins of the world. Both certain by the promise of God. Yet this
is small comfort, unless the other certainety of the subject also be assured
unto us. To wit, that this everlasting Certitudo subiecti.
life is prepared for me, and that Christ died for my sins. This indeed is
the undoubted work of faith. David could say, Blessed is the man whose sins
Psalm. 32. 1.
are forgiven. Yet this is but Christ in the whole cloth, (as we may say) but
Paul had learned to turn David's quorum into his own ego, and say, whereof I
am 1. Tim. 1. 15.
chief, and so cut himself a garment thereof to cover his own wretchedness:
For he well knew that as many Gal. 3. 27.
as were baptized into Christ, had put on Christ. So you see, he is fitted as a
garment to wear, and not to gaze upon.

The reason of this certainty, is this. Because faith makes that present which
is absent. Therefore by the Heb. 11. 1.
Spirit of God faith is called The evidence of things not seen. Neither is
this certainety of hope, but of knowledge. For S. John says, We know that when
he shall appear, we also shall appear in glory. And S. Paul testifies Romans
8. 16.
that the Spirit assures our spirits that we are the sons of God. Doubtless
therefore most restless, and most unquiet is the mind of that man which
doubts of Gods love. For what avails it thee, be thy estate never so
happy, if it be miserable to thy self? What comfort is it to a king to wear
a crown of gold, albeit in great happiness of estate, if he be not persuaded
of the enioyment thereof? What sound solace is it to any Christian to know, that
there is a life everlasting, and yet knows not whether he shall hear Come ye
blessed, or go ye cursed? it being a very dictate of nature, Mat. 25. Seneca.
That no man is happy, but he that so thinks himself. The felicity thereof
consisting not in the happy expectation, but in the present persuasion.

Thus then you see the appropriation of this love, how necessary it is, and
not only herein, but in all other inducements of godliness. S. Augustine
records that he was converted by reading that of S. Aug. lib. confess. 8. cap.
12. Romans 13. 13.
Paul, Romans 13. Not in chambering, and wantonness, strife, and envying, but
put on the Lord Jesus. So S. Augustine applied the Scripture to the particular
reformation of his own life. And Alipius S. Augustines loving consort applied
the beginning of the 14. Chapter to the Romans to the end that S. Augustine might
thereby recover and confirm him that wauered, and staggered in the holy faith
of Christ Jesus. So the spouse here appropriateth Gods dear love to her own
affections, whereby we may learn, That to a devoted and truly religious soul,
Christ Jesus applied The lesson.
is the only love, and life.

O hear a godly soul speak in her divine phrases to Christ Jesus, applying
him to every part, to her mouth, saying, Let him kiss me with the kisses of
his Cant. 11.
mouth, that her words might be gracious, and seasoned by the salt of the
spirit of God. 2. To her breasts, My beloved is as a bundle of myrrh unto me,
he shall lie between my breasts, that by always meditating on him, she might
not be drawn aside to the bypath of folly, and vanity. 3. To her
affections, Set me as a Cant. 8 6.
seal upon thine heart, that she might never be without his impression. 4. To
her actions, And as a signet upon thine arm, that she might never be destitute
of his directions. The reason is, For love is as strong as 7.
death, jealousy as cruel as the grave: Much water cannot quench it, neither
can the flood drown it; whence ensues a whole resignation. Therefore I am my
beloueds, Cant. 7.
and he is mine. Thus the true spouse. David likewise in Psalm. 1 19.
the same case, I am thine o Lord, hide not thy commandments from me. David
was now neither for sin, nor for Satan, nor for the world, nor for the
flesh, nor for his own self, but for the Lord totally by resignation, fully
by affection. And verily how can it be otherwise, but that a religious soul
should thus wholly deuote it self to God in all sacred affection, if it call to
mind but these motives following?

First what Jeremy says, how the Lord speaks, when he considered whereof
the sons of men were made, and weighed, that they were but dust, and
therefore in his mercy to them he said it, and not to the Angels that fell,
Shall they fall, And not Ier. 8. 4.
arise? shall they turn away, and not turn again? Here is rising from the
gulf of hell, and returning from the bondage, and captivity of the devil,
assured unto us by promise in Gods preventing mercy. Secondly when we shall
remember that God has omitted all his other creatures of heaven and of earth,
and as it were neglected them, and has set his love only upon us, yea the
Angels that fell he has reserved in chains of darkness for the judgment of
the great day, and yet saved a remnant of the sons of men. Thirdly, when it
shall call to mind, that to all other creatures God has given a direct Picus
Mirand. in Heptapl. sup. Genesis
motion to content themselves in their now being, but to man a circular motion,
that we should only seek our felicity in him, in whom we had our beginning.
Fourthly, that forasmuch as Gods grace is given us for our guide, in this
dangerous world, which ouercometh infallibly the world, the devil, and the
flesh, holds the truth inseparably against all heresy and schism, and
leads indeclinably into the Paradise of God, we should with all devoted
thankfulness entertain this holy blessedness. Fifthly, seeing that we may by
holy faith (as in a crystal mirror) behold the whole holy and undivided
Trinity in this work of loving, saving and sanctifiing grace, we should as
those that had newly received their eye sight, after a long blindness, be
ravished with joy, and comfort. For see, God the father so loved us, that he
gave his only begotten son, Ioh 3.
etc. that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but should have
everlasting life. God the son so loved us that he would die for us, God the
holy ghost so loved us, that he makes request for us with Romans 8.
sighs unutterable in our souls.

Who would not then gather hence divine affections according to the measure of
grace given unto us? calling to mind the precept of Christ which is the sum
of all: Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, and with all
thy soul, and with all thy mind, that is, says S. Augustine, Love him with
all thy right Aug. in locum.
reason, with all thy earnest affection, and with all thy strongest powers,
love him with all thy understanding, with all thy will, and with all thy
memory; love him wisely, that thou be not deceived by the devil in an angel
of light. Love him sweetly that thou be not allured by the wicked and
bewitching world. Love him valiantly, that thou be not danted with the
devilish proiects, and practices of Gods enemies. See the sparks of this
divine, and seraphical fire in Daniel who is styled vir desideriorum, a man
never satisfied here, but still desiring to be replenished with the full sight
of God. Behold them in Esaias Esaias 26.
the Evangelical Prophet, whose soul desired God in the night season when his
eyes were bereft of the distractions of the day: In David also whose soul
thirsted for the living Lord; and in S. Paul who was straitted for want of
this enioyment and cried, Who Romans 7.
shall deliver me wretched man that I am from this body of death?

Doubtless these holy souls knew that this love was all love unto them, for
even in natural love Christ can be all things unto thee; whereas thy gold
cannot be thy clothing, thy silver cannot be thy drink, thy bread cannot be
thy light, Christ alone is all this unto thee. If thou need necessary love,
he is thy protector, and bulwark. If thou would be happy in love, with him
is the fountain of living life for ever. These considerations, and the like
caused Gods children never to admit any thing near their hearts, contrary to
this love, as is the affection inordinate to the creature, but loved the
creature only for the Lords sake. They ever removed far from their holy
affections all carking care, and over much toyling in the business, and
negociations of this world, as being the deceitful bane of this love: using
indeed the world necessarily, but so as if they used it not, which caused their
love to be continual, not flashes of passion rather then true affection,
enduring for a moment, but resembling the love of the blessed Saints who see
God, and love him for evermore. Again, they knew that if we would be covetous,
and sell our love, none could buy it dearer, for he will give us a kingdom for
it: if we would be liberal and give it, none more worthy of it, for he is
absolutely the sovereign good. But if we would have our love strained from us
by violence, he also will vnsheath the sword of the Spirit, and with the blade
thereof divide asunder the soul and spirit, even with this one stroke, If any
man love not the Lord 1. Cor. 16. ^2.
Jesus, let him be accursed Anathema Maranatha.

Furthermore the faithful souls will hence gather good degrees and steps of
grace, as first, considering even in nature, that if one had lost an eye, or
were distracted of his wit, or were condemned to execution, how would we tender
him that could and would heal our eye sight, restore us to our right mind,
and redeem us from the dreadful horror of death? But Christ has illuminated
us with the light of grace, that were in the power of darkness and shadow of
death, has given us repentance unto life, and regeneration, that were sold to
sin and Satan, and has purchased for us a pardon, that were condemned to
everlasting torments; was made poor that we might be enriched, gave himself
for me, Bern. in Solil.
(says Bernard) that I might be given to my self: yea we owe him now more for
redeeming us, then for making us. For in the creation he spoke the word, and it
was done, but in our redemption it cost him his dearest blood. In this life he
has promised, That Romans 8. 28.
all things whatsoever, shall work together for the best to them that love
him: and in the other life the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, nor the
heart can conceive, what is his displaied glory, in seeing him as he is seen,
and knowing him as he is known. And to purchase this inheritance for us, see
how vilely he esteems himself, being sold for thirty pence, and prizeth us,
us (I say) wretches at so high a rate, as his own most peerless, and
precious blood.

O insensible, indurate, and intolerable unthankfulness of the sons of
Adam, who do not totally resign themselves, and their affections to this love!
But yet for all this, behold I pray you, and see whether Christ be the beloved
of ourage, and the Helena of our country, as we would bear the world in hand
he is; and be you your selves witnesses in this case. Do we diligently seek
him (when we have lost him by our preuarication) as we use to do those whom
our soul loves? and as did that much loving soul Mary Magdalen when she
sought him at the fearful sepulcher, and abode there, though a weak woman,
and would not be satisfied with looking, but asked Jesus, (then risen)
(supposing he had been a gardener) If thou have taken away my Lord, tell Ioh.
20 15.
me, where thou have put him, that I may fetch him. O happy soul that so
sought, that she found. Are we often frequenters of his house, and lovers of
the place where his honor dwells; as Anna did, who Luke 2 37.
departed not from the Temple, but served God day and night with prayers, and
fasting? Do we talk of him in our iourneying, as did the disciples that
traveled to Emaus? Do we willingly hear of him, and Luke 24
in hearing lay up the things in our hearts, as did the blessed Virgin? Do we
restore and give for his sake Luke 2. Act. 10.
as Zacheus, and Cornelius did? Do we suffer reproach gladly for his glory, and
rejoice in it as the Apostles Act 5. Psalm. 1.
did? Do we love his commandments as David did? whose study was in them day,
and night. Do we decline from the love of this world, and as Jacob who Genesis 32.
wresting with the angel, fell lame; so we in the business with God prevail,
but in the affairs of this world grow cold, and remiss? Do we honor them that
serve God as the Galathians did, that would have pulled out their own eyes
(had not the law of God, and nature forbad them) to do Paul their Preacher good?

O how far different are the affections of our times! If we look the Lord
Jesus among some governors, they say he is not here, many of us have something
else to do then to attend preaching* If among some of the rude people, they
seldom or never think of him. If among the giddie hearers, with Peter they
answer, we know not the man. If among Math. 26.
the worldly rich, with Demas they have forsaken the love of Christ, and have
embraced this present world. If among the loud, but leude professors, they have
a show of godliness, but have denied the power thereof. If among the couerous,
there is linsey wolsey, as far as will make for their profit, so far, and
no longer they love God, nor any of his servants. If among the ahabaptistical
zealous, they say we are not justified by works, and therefore we will do
none at all. As if their faith, or any faith were available with God, but that
which works by love. For without love was never any man saved, and with love
never any damned. If of the worldlings, they are so busy in dividing Christ
his coat, that they cannot awhile to love. They are of king Ro^us mind that
used to say, That the bread of Christ was sweet, meaning thereby the revenues
of the Church. Not unlike the refined, and quaint illuminates of our time, who
think, and say the Church has to much, yea and do what they can to profane
into their own wicked hands* the holy goods of Gods Church, which their
forfathers bountifully bestowed upon her. O good Lord Jesus come quickly, else
thou will not have one foot of ground left at thy second coming, to take
possession of this earth that is thine own, and all things therein by natural
right of inheritance, by merit of redemption, and Bero. sup. Cant.
gift of thine eternal Father.

Beloved, do we thus reward the Lords love? foolish people that we are, our
affections then are worse then we imagine: for if we give all we have, the
diuelll offers the whole world, and says, All this will I Math. 4.
give thee. Do we fist? the devil eats nothing. Do we watch? the devil
sleeps not. If then we excel him not in holy love, he far exceeds and
excels us, both in bounty, temperance, and watchfulness. What, are we
become lame of both legs as was Mephibosheth, both in our love to God, and in
our affections to men? Let us then become Ishbosheths the sons of shame for
it. Let us be abashed, and confounded at this our ingratitude and neglect, and
let us henceforth express in our actions the true conditions of unfeigned, and
hearty love.

Let us (brethren) love God only, and all things for him, as did Paul, who
accounted all things dung Phil. 3. ^.
that he might gain the Lord Jesus. 2. Let us account our selves unhappy that
we be not where he is, as did the said Paul, who desired to be dissolved and
to be with Christ Jesus. 3. Let us suffer al things for him, yea death it
self, that as Paul said to the Elders of Ephesus at Miletum, that we may
finish our course Act. 20.
with joy. 4. Let us be with him as we may, to wit, in affection, seeing (while
we live here) we cannot be with him as we would to enjoy his blessed presence:
which is indeed apostolical counsel, Set Col. 3. 2.
your affection on heaven and heavenly things, says Saint Paul, and not on
earth and earthly things. Let us love all things, both persons, and places that
belong unto Psalm. 16. 6.
him, for our goodness extends not to him, but to his that are on earth: and
to such as excel in virtue. Let us deck our selves to please him in our
wedding garment, the robe of the faith of Jesus. Let us seek his glory, and
not endure his dishonor; and let us weep when he is absent from us by his
grace, as did Peter; and joy when he is present with us in his goodness, as
did David, who rejoiced when it was said unto him, Let us go into the house of
the Lord. Psalm. 122. 1.


Then shall we there see what an one our Love is, and discern, yea and he
ravished both with our loves essential beauty, and especial purity; for the
true Church is white, not seeming so, nor painted, but native, and natural
shining white. The purity of this bright beauty consists in the essentialnes
( ^) and especialnesse thereof, white. The essentialitie discerns it from all
hypocritical, painted, and seeming shows of goodly luster, which are for
naught but to deceive: and the especialnesse distinguishes it in excellency
from all other glories, albeit essential and true; for this beauty is both
essentially especial, and especially essential above all others without all
compare.

Consult with the wise man (that you be not deceived with shows) but in two
oracles, and he will show you of a glorying generation, and of a painted path*
from which prosapie or generation a true Christian descends not, and in which
way the faithful believers walk not; for in neither of these shall you find
Christ Jesus in his perfect beauty. There is a generation, says Solomon, that
is wise in their Pro. 30. 11.
own conceit: yet are not cleansed from their filthiness. This is painted
whitenes, or conceited pureness. And There is a way that seems just to a man,
but the issues Pro. 16. 25.
thereof are the issues of death. This is seeming holiness, and pretended
righteousness. Neither this generation, nor this way is essential; for the
one is in conceit, and the other in show, both deceitful, both dangerous, yea
and (unless repentance come in time) both damnably erroneous. Therein the more
fearful, the less those (that content themselves in the one, and proceed^ in
the other) see, and know their sinful erring, but are led on, and deluded with
a conceiptfull, headie, and specious glittering of their own ouerloued, and
ouerweened Helena.

Of this conceiptfull pure generation comes the devil, and appears to the
witch at Endor in the habit of holy Samuel only to deceive. The spies also 1.
Sam. 28. Luke 20. 20.
that were sent to entrap our Savior must receive their descent from this
generation, and feign themselves just men, and demand questions of purity, and
professed holiness; but the intendment was to turn the tail and sting like a
serpentine, surrepent generation. Herod is another impe of this cursed brood,
for he pretends worship to the Son of God, Mat. 2. 7.
whom he like a savage bear intends to worrie. Judas Mat. 2. 6.
had the impudent and shameless face to say, Is it I? as well as the innocent
Apostles: And Julian the apostate wrote a book entitled Ad Christianos, which
altogether intended to pervert, and to undo the Christians. All this
hypocrisy and painted purity is wrought out by the strength of imagination,
and Romans 15. 1.
conceit, which S. Paul mannerly terms flattering of our selves; but the
Naturalists show it to be mere melancholy, frenzy and madness, upon which
humors the devil chiefly works, and into which he does most cunningly and
subtly insinuate himself to ensnare the simple. The instance of Ananias
makes this evident, to whom Peter says, Why has Acts 5.
Satan tempted thine heart that thou should belie the holy Ghost? That is, See
now O Ananias how strangely the devil has stirred up thy fond imaginations,
and suggested slily into thy false conceit, that thou should sell thy land
in pretended purity, and holy perfection, and yet keep back part, and belie
the holy Ghost.

This vnpure generation, and all the tribes thereof have four principal
characters, that as coate-armors demonstrate the pedigree, and deceit thereof,
which are, First an inward conceit. Secondly a vanting utterance thereof.
Thirdly an affectation of public applause: and fourthly an admiration of it
self, joined with contempt of all others. All these four being the waiting
maids of lady self love. By the inward conceit, they are sure, that their
breasts be not transparent like a glass to be seen through, be their inward
parts never so wretched, and therefore they rest contented to be specious in
specie, and superficie tantum, that is, outwardly, to the worlds view; and to
God they have said inwardly in their hearts, Depart from us, we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways. Job 21. 14.
2. Then lest that this inward conceit should be too private, and none take
notice of their hypocritical, and hyperbolicall integrity, like an old bottle
they must vent it, or else they would burst, and utter they must, yea slauer
out (rather then fail) their own fooleries, be they never so gross, or never
so grievous to be endured. So that they may be then taken for great ones (they
think) and have the names of None such, or the great outcrie of vain glory
Leuiculus noster Demosthenes. Tull. lib. 5. Tusc. Act. 19.
and popularity, and hear others say of them, as the Ephesians doting on their
Idol Diana, cried, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. And then do they beyond all
mean, and measure admire themselves, and their own beauties, as did
Narcissus, and lift up their plumes with the peacocke, contemning all other in
the basest manner, and crying out to their brethren, (whom they most
contemptuously despise) like the Elizean spirits to the Tartarian, and say,
Procul, o proculite Vir. lib. 6. Ae. nead.
profani.

But yet for all this the whole rank of them, in the sound judgment of true
and essential wisdom, is but a rout of foolish dottards, and dizzie
drunkards, doting on their own conceitfull beauty, and transgressing in the
pride of their own hearts. See thou a man wise in his own conceit, more
hope is of Pro. 26. 12.
a fool then of him. See the dottard. The reason is, because a fool is wiser
in his own conceit, then seven Pro. 26. 16.
men that can render a reason. See thou a man that is Abac. 2.
proud in his heart, he is as one that transgresses with wine, as did drunken
Zebul taking trees for men, and as did mad Ajax taking rams for lambs, and
taking carts for castles, as they do Qui concipiunt aethera mente. The way also
that this generation walks in, is like them, to wit, a seeming just, and
imagined straight way.

For whereas all skill in divinity is either opinion, faith, or knowledge;
these dizzie dottards are only guided by opinion, the very fountain of
Atheism, and the high way to heresy and schism grounded upon uncertainties,
and seeming truths, but are not guided by the direction of Jesus faith, which
has holy increasings, and does suscipere maius, Romans 1.
and minus, there being a progress a fide ad fidem, according to the prayer of
the young believer, O Lord increase my faith. These contrariwise take upon them
to know suddenly all reason, all rule, all resolutions, and like ignorant
idiots control even their learned Priests.

Certainly they might notwithstanding do well to call to mind Saules way,
which seemed just unto 1. Sam. 15.
him, when he spared Agag, and the best things for sacrifice, yet the issue
thereof was the ouerrhrow of him, and his estate. They might also remember the
fiery zeal of James and John, that would fire should come from heaven upon
the Samaritans. But the Lord Jesus told them, that they wotted not of what
spirit they were, and sent them to learn a new lesson, even this, I will
mercy, and not sacrifice. There is a way therefore that seems right, but the
issues thereof are the issues of death. So S. Peter likewise in the tenderness
of his heart would not the Lord should suffer at Jerusalem, as he prophesied to
his Apostles, Math. 16. saying, Master spare thy self: But the Lord called him
an adversary, and told him that he sauored not of the things of God. In the
singularity also of his good manners, Peter said unto the Lord, Thou shall not
wash my feet: but when Ioh. 13.
he understood better, that if he were not washed, he had no part with him, he
suddenly changed his mind, and then would have his head, and all his body
bathed by him. And yet again in the singularity of his sincerity above all
his fellows, he told his Master, that if all forsook him, he would not* and
see his sinful defect immediately following, as a punishment of that
presumptuous singularity, for he first, and only denied him, and that most
strangely being Mat. 26.
vanquished with very slight prouocations. There is a way then that seems
right to a man, but the issues thereof are the issues of death. In this
conceitfull generation then and in this seeming way there is no essential
worth, much less any especial virtue to be found.

Look up then to your Lord Jesus your souls beloved, and in him, and by him
you shall see a beautiful generation, regenerated by grace, who are of his
own generation, and partake of his divine graces by the measure of
sanctification given them: they are also a choice generation set apart for
himself, and for his service, which are styled, The generation of them that
seek the Lord. The way that they insist in is a right way, not of opinion, but
of judgment; For all the ways of God are so many judgments, Deuteronomy. 9.
says Gods secretary Moses. These turn neither to the right hand too
superciliously, nor to the Nicolaus de* Lyra sup. 5. cap. Exodus
left hand too superstitiously, but keep the old, ancient and perfect way to
God; Christ himself being their direction in this blessed way, for he is
verbum genitum, the begotten word; and the way to him is by verbum scriptum,
the written word. If therefore I should have my wish, I would rather choose to
be a doorekeeper to this generation of essential goodness, then to dwell in
the glorious tents of seeming holiness; and I shall rather be at sea, tossed
with a tempestuous storm in the ship with those that humbly profess
themselves sinners, then on the shore in the table of those Pharisees that
justify themselves with their hideous haughtiness.

Now as this bright beauty is essential in the substance: so also it is
especial in the brightness, and excellency thereof. For there are four
sorts of whitenes: First fanatically fantastical whitenes. Secondly
superficial whitenes. Thirdly natural whitenes; but changeable in the
subject. Fourthly native whitenes, and not changeable in the subject. The first
is the devil transformed into an Angel of light, for he is fanatically
fantastical white. The man that had a blemish of white in his eye was
debarred from the priesthood, and was resembled to the owl, of whom the
Naturalists yield the reason, that she cannot see in the day time, because of
the exceeding great whitenes she has in her eyes, which scatters so the
sight, that the optiques thereof cannot discern perfectly the objects. Such
are all those that conceive themselves pure, and yet are not washed and
cleansed from their evil conscience, who say they see, and therefore their
sins remain; for had they been blind, they might pretend some excuse, but
now all excuse is taken from them, because they say that they see. The
superficial white are painted sepulchers, and whited walls, loathsome within,
and the best is but wooden without, like the gilded potsheard Solomon speaks
of, that the next shower of rain discovers to be but an outcast for the
potters field, how gloriously soever it glister. The natural white, but
changeable, are they that are borne fair, but afterward by the Sun and
soil they become black and Aethiopian-like. Semblable are those that begin in
the spirit of grace, and bright beauty, and end in the frail and filthy
flesh. The native and unchangeable whitenes is that of pearelesse, and
pricelesse diamonds, whose least sparkle will shine, and give true luster,
albeit it be severed from the whole.

Such was, and is this special Candor in our well-beloved Lord Jesus, and his
chosen, who even in this life have these white robes in part put on them
mentioned in the Revelation, not their own conceited Apoc. 3.
attire of the righteousness of works, but Gods own righteousness; and they
have also the white stone given them, which is sanctification in some measure
as an earnest penny, and pledge of further favor, and future beauty, to be
perfected in glory. Behold then with milk white, and pure eyes of holy faith
your Lord Jesus especial and perfect whiteness, your precious diamond in
especialnesse, by whom all we, and as many as have gone before us being his
holy servants, have been beautified, and graced.

First as he is Emanuel, that is, God with us: His conception pure, he was
conceived by the holy Ghost. 2. His birth pure, he was borne of an undefiled
virgin. 3. His life the perfection of sanctimony, for there was no guile found,
no not in his mouth: And he is perfect, that offends not in his tongue. Iam 3.
4. His doctrine pure, correcting all the vnpure glosses of the reformalizing
Pharisees; as in old time it was said, Thou shall not kill, but Christ taught
true Mat. 5.
purity, that we should not be angry with our brother unadvisedly. Teaching
thereby, that fury and wrath does often transport us to fell and desperate
actions, and therefore his holy doctrine as an axe struck at the root.
Again, it was said of old time Thou shall not commit Adultery in act. But
Christ taught us not to look on a woman to lust after her, and so in turning
away our eyes, we should not behold vanity: Likewise it has been said, Thou
shall not forswear thy self. But Christ taught that we should not swear at
all; for be doubtless that uses to swear much, must needs sometime forget,
and forswear himself. And it has been said of old, Thou shall love thy
neighbor, and hate thine enemy. But Christ taught, Thou shall love thine
enemy; for that is the exaltation of Christian charity above all other loves.
Nay, of every idle word he told us that we must render an account. Oh holy
lessons, o sacred discipline! how pure is the beauty hereof, how precious the
sincerity? In his death therefore, neither death nor he that had the power of
death could find any part whereon to fasten their intended fury, but in spite
of death, and the devil, and the wicked world, he was declared mightily to be
the Son of God, by Romans 1. 2.
the spirit of sanctification, by the resurrection from the dead.

We may learn then out of this which has been already said, That the purity
of a sincere conscience The lesson.
consists in essential and sanctified actions, and not in seeming holiness of
froward and dottish factions. The blessing being promised to the pure in heart,
and not Mat. 5.
to the wordy pure, but to the worthy, of whom it is also said, That to such
all things are pure: but of Tit. 1.
the other, That their very consciences are defiled, and they themselves
(howsoever reputed holy for some good works) yet reproved to every good work.

The reason, because God requires truth in the inward parts, and the searcher
of the heart knows what is in man. Likewise because no vnpure thing Apoc. 22.
shall enter into the kingdom of God, and therefore surely no party propale
Christian that deals hypocritically shall there have entrance: I wonder
therefore that any will be so foolish as to make themselves odious every way by
their seeming holiness. First to the world, for the world hates even those
that are Christians but in show. For it can discern no further. Secondly they
are abominable to God who hates them because they are but in show. And lastly
they are traitors to themselves, in deceiving their own souls and consciences
with deceitful dreams of sanctity.

But let us a little lanch forth, and ken the devil transforming himself into
an Angel of light and brightness, and boasting both of purity, and
pre-eminence above, and before all others, both in Iudaisme, and also in
Christianisme, as he even yet works with too too many in this our age. In
Iudaisme we will take a view but of the Pharisees, Sadduces, Essens, and
Hemerobaptists. The Pharisees were men separate from others in respect of their
pretended perfection, they were pure in their garments, pure in their devotion,
pure in their laundring. Pharisees.


Their vestures must be environed, and the borders made broad with the
commandments of God embrodered thereon. Luc. 11. Mat. 15. Their devotion such
that they would not cure on the Sabbath were the sickness never so desperate,
nor pluck an ear of corn in the extremity of hunger. Their washings diverse,
both of hands, pots, boords, and what not? Yet for all this outward pretended
pureness, Christ the true Doctor, and teacher of perfection tells them seven
times in one Chapter, Mat. 23.
that they were mere hypocrites and dissemblers.

The Sadduces so pure in their own conceit, that Sadduces.
they only, and no other were the true Iustitiaries: yet were they so sottish
that they neither knew Angel, nor spirit; and then judge how brutish, how
bestiall, and how carnal they were.

The Essens thought themselves both essential, Essen^.
and especially pure above all others in the world. They wore white robes at
all their refections, they observed so strictly and precisely the Sabbath, that
in that day they would not make a fire, nor stop a running Joseph. antiquit.
lib. 18. cap. 2. Item de bello Iudaico. lib. 2. cap. 7.
vessel, nor lay an apple in the fire, nor knock upon a table to still a
child, nor quench a burning, nor spit, nor do the requisits of nature; yet
Epiphanius ranks them in the rank of branded heretics.

The Hemerobaptists every day did baptize and Hemerobaptists.
drench themselves in water, imagining that all their sins were thereby
washed away, for ^asse ex opere operato; whereas Epiphanius says, that the
whole ocean, Epiph. de haeres.
and all the floods in the world cannot purge one sin.

These were the seemings of Iudaisme, all dying in their dreaming divinity. In
Christendom what should I recall from hell the old Cathari, that pretended
Epiph de haeres.
the only purity of life? the Gnostiques that had (as they deemed) the
impropriation of all divine knowledge; or Manes that only boasted of the
Paraclete: seeing our later age of fresher memory has heard of, yea and seen
fanaticall Anabaptists, dreaming Euthusiasts of revelation, and hideous
visions, rebaptizations, and new pretended policy of Church, and common
wealth? And we see many are daily misled, and misperswaded by Jesuits, the
rare illuminates accounted of the world, who pretend above all the rest of
their fry to be the most perfect in respect of their direction in all
negociations, in ordine ad Deum; and most sacred in that holy exercise which
they obtrude upon their nouices, that subject and deuote themselves unto them;
yet are they no other indeed but the Chimeraes, and Gorgons heads of ridiculous
and fanaticall fopperie.

From out all these impious and impure routes of pretended purity and
perfection, the view of the sacred beauty of the true purity, and perfection of
Christ Jesus does deliver us; and teaches us that men are deceived most with
shows, and that the devil when he means most mischief then does he (as
Iezabel did) paint and set out himself to show. Let us therefore hence learn
important considerations, and wise judgments, and let us try the spirits
whether they be of God, or no; for all is not gold that glittereth, says the
old, and true English Adage.

Is there one that can cunningly expound the Scriptures? Do not suddenly
believe him, for so could the caytiffe Caiphas. Is an other skillful in all
divine, and humane hearing? so was Julian, yet an apostate. Has an other
received gracious, and principal gifts of Gods spirit? So had Saul the
reprobate. Do others know the mysteries of faith, of Moses, and of the
Prophets? So knew King Agrippa, yet (...).
his best was but almost a Christian. Can others foretell, and presage things
to come? So could bawling Balaam, being a base hireling. Can they cite the
Scriptures? So could the damned devil. Are they ready in the Fathers of the
Church, and in the Councels? so were the ancient heretics Faustus, Arrius,
Manichaeus. Especially note them if they pretend holy and pure names, as do the
mahumeticall Saracens at this day, boasting that they came of Sara the free
woman, when as indeed they are Agarens of Agar, as Zosomen a thousand years
ago observed; Sozomen. 6. 38. Joseph. de antiquit. Iud. lib. 18 cap. 2. Act. 5.
And as the Iudaites did call themselves of Judas the Gaulonite or Galilean,
who would not endure the name of Lord to be attributed to any creature. They
themselves being a rabble (as the book of God tells us) of desperate
cutthroates.

Beware then of false prophets, and be assured that as many as partake of this
beauty are essentially sincere, not in words only but in deeds, not in conceit
or opinion, but in understanding and verity; for whatsoever they believe, it is
either of nature, grace, or glory. The things of nature they see, touch, and
feel. The blessings of grace they read, they perceive, they enjoy, and joy in
the certain expectation of glory which even now they have a taste of and
earnestly long after. The things they hope for are not Absolons pillar, set up
in the kings dale, nor the flower of the poppie, the hypocrites hypothesis. But
those beatitudes which they expect are sure, certain, and even in this life by
faith evident. The things they ought to do they acknowledge to be the mandates
of the highest God. Therefore to be performed. They know they are judgments,
not opinions, therefore to be subscribed unto. They are statutes like these of
the Medes and Persians, therefore not to be repealed: they are testimonies, and
therefore bind the consciences. We pray therefore That this name may be
sanctified by goodness, not dishonored by seeming godliness. That his will may
be done in sincerity, not neglected with pretense of purity, and that his
kingdom may come unto us in verity, and not we put it from us in deceitful
integrity.

For the life of an hypocrite is (...), a masked mummery, not (...) a known
verity. His faith is (...); of things imaginary, not (...), of soliditie. His
memorial as a post that hastneth by, his good deeds as the trace of a ship in
the waters, no where to be seen; and his glory as the waffing of a birds wings
in the air, but her passage appears not. Let the Atheist then tremble hereat,
for he is indeed the devils vizard. Let the Libertines fear that arose from
Coppin and Quintan in the Low countries, being the basery of baseness. Let the
begetters and hatchers of new opinions be amazed, who more trust their private
spirit then the stream of judgment, who had rather be the head of a fox then
the tail of a lion, and choose rather with imperious Caesar to be the first
and chief of mean and beggarly Tarentum, then the second of imperial and
triumphant Rome.

And let us (men and brethren) be ravished with the true, and matchless
beauty of our Lord Jesus Gods best beloved, our well-beloved; and let us be
Reals, not Nominals only, knowing that we look not for an imaginary heaven,
but for the heaven of heavens, the coelum coelorum; being always mindful of
that of our Savior: Unless your righteousness Mat. 5. 20.
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, (that is, of all
hypocritical and seeming professors) you cannot enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

Come then ye faithful souls unto this pure and bright fountain of grace,
and his blood shall purge you from all sins past, present, and to come: Come
to this pure fountain, for here is the clean water that Ezechiel speaks of,
powered out upon you Ezech* 36.
to purify you in Gods sight by the invisible hand of the sacred Trinity.
Call upon God that he may wash you with hysope of grace here, that you may be
truly clean as all his people are, and that in the end he may present you
beautiful and blameless in his displaied glory, in the bright and white
eminent robes of his own righteousness in Christ, our only mediator, and
perfecter.

And then doubtless our souls shall yet further see, even in this life,
another glimpse of this surpassing beauty; for our beloved is not only white,
but ruddie also; white in pureness, ruddy in zealous love toward us, both
seraphicall, and cherubicall, herein both wholly passible, and wholly amiable.
Let us reuiew then this his zealous love in the mystery of the color
prefiguring his passion; and in the history of the substance, performing the
forespoken prophecies.

There is a threefold red. 1. a skarlet red. 2. a roseall red. 3. a purple red:
all prefiguring this our well-beloved in his sufferings, and really performed in
him. Who is this that comes from Edome (that is, from this cursed earth) says
Esaias, with red-coloured clothes of Bozrah, that is, with trophies of victory
and triumph? etc. There is skarlet red, Esaias 63. 1. I am the rose of the field,
and the lilly of the valleys, says Christ of himself: there is roseall red,
Cant. 2. 1. And in the Gospel we read, that his enemies put a purple garment
upon him, to portend his purple death. This color was also prefigured in the
red sea that saved Israel; in the red cow in the sacrifices; in the red cord
in Reahabs window, the secure hostage Ios. 1.
of war; in the red thread about Zarahs arm in his Genesis 38. 27. Mat 1. 3.
Be^. sup. Cant.
birth, of whose pedigree Christ descended. Oh, our well-beloved is a violet in
humility, a lilly in purity, a rose in suauity.

You see the color, behold also the substance, and performance of this zealous
love; which to display unto you, I shall be bold to take up Ieremies
proclamation used in his Lamentations, and say unto you as if Christ himself
spoke in person, and showing you his sufferings, should cry: Have ye no regard
all ye Ier. Lament. 1 12.
that pass by this way? Behold, and see if there be any sorrow like unto my
sorrow which is done unto me, and wherewith the Lord has afflicted me, in the
day of his fierce wrath. For what could he have suffered that he did not
suffer? He was most lamentably afflicted by all sorts of men for whom he
suffered. Despised he was of Jews. 2. Scorned of Gentiles; Princes of the
Psalm. 2.
earth stood up, and kings banded themselves against the Lord, and against his
Christ. 4. Priests conspire in Mat. 26.
counsel, and choose a murderer rather then the Lord of life. Soldiers
divide his vestures. 6. His own servants fly from him, Judas betraies him,
Peter denies him. Thus we may on all sides see Jews and Gentiles, Princes and
Priests, soldiers and servants, Act. 3.
doing whatsoever the Lord of heaven had determined before to be done.

Look upon him again, and see him perplexed in all his members, with
loathsome spittings in his blessed face, with piercing thorns upon his sacred
head, with buffets upon his comely cheeks, with stripes upon his manly back,
and with the transverse part of the cross upon his glorious shoulders. 3.
Impeached in his estate with scornful reproaches, his good name wronged with
blasphemies, his honor trampled upon with shameless obloquies, his holy
garments shared with profane lottery, and his reputation stained with the
association of thieves* 4. Tormented in his senses, his touch with the piercing
nails, his sent with the loathsomeness of Caluarie, the place of dead sculs;
his hearing with wicked detractions, his sight with the sorrow of his blessed
mother, and with the moan of his beloved disciple: his taste with gall, and
vinegar. Inwardly also distressed; for his soul is heavy even unto the death:
so that he cries, Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me; and
sweateth clots of blood that trikle down Luke 22.
to the earth, to bless it that was accursed: At which time an Angel is sent
from heaven to comfort him. Yea in the extremity of this his unspeakable
passion he cries with a loud voice, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Yet none of this, nor all this could suffice until he had yielded up his
sacred soul into the hands of his heavenly Father.

Blessed, and beloved men, fathers, and brethren in this our Beloved, is not
this his zealous love the roseall beauty of our benediction? 1. Is not this
that blood that purges us from all our sins? 2. that speaks better things
for us then the blood of Abel? for that called for vengeance, but this craves
for us mercy. 3. Is not this the sacrifice whereby we have remission of our
sin? 4. Is not this the reconciliation whereby we do partake of the divine
nature, this sacred blood being shed into our hearts by the Spirit of God? 1.
Is not this red sea the bath for all sinners, to cure us of our leprosies of
incontinency, of our lethargies of ingratitude, of our dropsies of
covetousness, and of our palsies of inconstancy, and strayings aside from God?
3. Is not this the oblation that makes God propitious, and a loving father
unto us? opens the kingdom of heaven that was shut, and seals unto us all
the holy promises of God?

Let then a believing soul say, O Lord Jesus what shall I repay unto thee for
this thy love? I owed the debt, and thou did pay it: I have sinned, and thou
art punished; this whole work of thine is singular patience, the performance
of it wonderful humility, the cause unspeakable charity. I have circuited the
whole earth, and can find no where any such love, as in thy glorious passion,
the breadth whereof is Charity diffused, dilating it self into the four parts
of the world. The length is long suffering, for thou have borne man's
iniquities; the height is the hope of heaven, and a certain assurance of the
same. The depth of it, is deliverance from the lowest deep the pit of fatal
and final destruction. If any should persuade me to come down from the high
meditation of this sacred mystery, I should greatly refuse it: for it shall
ever be a bundle of Myrrh between my breasts; yea here will I die, and not
descend until the Lord stretch his hand from heaven, and take me into his holy
sanctuary.

But to the retchlesse and respectlesse soul which regards none of this, our
well-beloved says farther, See what I suffer; these pains, these groans, these
moanes, these nails, these thorns, this spear; this profusion, and red sea
of crimson blood: yet am I much more inly tormented, that thy wilful soul
should yet be unthankful for this so unspeakable love, for this so unutterable
and grievous passion, sustained for thy sake, to make thee a wretched son of
man by nature, to become a blessed son of God by grace.

Let us beloved, and believing brethren take yet a reuiew of this blessed
beauty in the sacred mixture of white and red, for he is ruddy both in
himself, and in his mystical members. 1. In himself his beauty appears
ruddie; for in the sacrament he is white in the bread, and red in the wine:
therefore in the Scripture styled sometime Manna, which was white, like the
crystal dew; and sometime a Vine which yields red grapes to glad the heart
of man. The grapes of this sacred vine were the parts of his body, the cross
the wine press, his blood the holy liquor thereof, making glad both God, and
man: God in the holy obedience of his sacred Son, purchasing himself a
glorious kingdom; and man in the salvation of his sinful soul. These sacred
seals of bread and wine show the Lords death until he come again. Joseph's
coat besprinkled with blood, portended him to old Israel as dead, but not
actually; but these show our true Joseph to be crucified, and done to death in
deed; and yet he like Sanpsons lion sends forth even in, and after his death,
sweet honey combs, and most redolent graces. For his death abateth the sting
of death, abandoneth sin, despoileth satan the strong man of his weapons,
and procures for us that die in him the land of the living.

This holy mixture of white and red appeared in the opening of his side, whence
flowed water and blood, this blessed opening being much more powerful then
Moses rod; for that caused water only to come out of the rock, but this both
water and blood. The Fathers therefore observe, that as out of the side of the
first Adam the woman was taken by whom came sin: so out of the side of the
second Adam the Church should be framed, to save (as Noah's arc) the sons of
men from the general and fearful deluge of sin, and shame. Let then now
all Histories tell, or historiographers of the world show if in any age they
have seen or read, how that a man's limbs did shower down streams of blood,
or that in any agony the face of man should stand beset with drops of crimson
blood. Neither does this content the holy wisdom of God, but that also we
should see this love of Christ resembled, yea testified unto us again in
reference, even in his mystical members, that is, in the believers, by
forgiving whose sins he has made them pure and white in his fight, and
giving also many of them grace, and honoring them so far, that they
willingly suffered as martyrs, whereby they also became purple red. Of the
first white this is understood: Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean;
Psalm. 51.
wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow. This is the perfect beauty indeed to
be purged from sin. Of the second it is said of his beloved martyrs, That
they Apoc. 12.
were prodigal of their lives even unto the death, for the testimony of the
Lord Jesus. Such were James, Antipas, Ignatius, Polycarpus in the former ages;
and all other even those thousands (in hose Mariana tempora) whom fire and
faggot devoured, and all other exquisite torments that could be devised by the
wicked, bloody, butcherlike minds of Gods enemies. All which blessed souls
were translated to God whom they loved, in fiery chariots of persecution, and
were rapt up with Elias to the vision of the eternal God. This being indeed
their matchless felicity, that they were so greatly honored of their God,
that they should shadow out unto him his Christ whipped, stocked, stricken,
stoned, tormented, tortured, and bloudily butchered.

Let not then the vain and gallant minions of the world boast of their
venereous ladies, or of their bright curtizans, or Helenaes, on whom they dote,
which are but as the dunghils and unsavory salt of the earth; for behold here
is a lilly and a rose from heaven, even our Lord Jesus, a white lilly deuoide
of sin, and a damask rose in his pure and crimson passion. And let them
again behold his martyrs as pure lillies clothed with his righteousness, and
as red roses in their sacred martyrdomes, into whose calendar every believing
soul should desire rather to be registered, then in the catalogue of all the
worlds misbeleeuing or misperswaded Magnificoes.

And seeing beloved that we are come to blood, let us pause a little, and stand
still awhile as the people did when in the wars they came, and saw Azael lie
weltring in his blood; and let us see the godly suffer for the godles, the
guiltless for the guilty. Let us look up to the cross, and see our Savior
lie weltring, gasping, crying, bathing, struggling, and dying in his blood.
David could say, when he saw the Angel of the Lord kill the people with the
plague of pestilence: I have sinned, what have these sheep done? But Christ
might have said otherwise; These sheep have sinned, what have I done? I am
constrained to pay the things I never took. What more (blessed brethren) could
he have done for his vineyard? what greater love can be showed, then for a man
to die for his friends? yet our well-beloved died for us his enemies. But what
does the Lord require at our hands in retribution for all these blessings?
Surely only faith, and feruency of zeal, by which we also shall become white
and ruddie by his sanctifying and by his saving grace. Faith is as Jacobs hand,
which will not let the Angel go until he have the blessing. It is also as
Jacobs robe put on to gain our elder brother Christ Jesus his blessings; and
it is the wedding garment wherewith we must enter into the wedding house of our
spouse. And feruency of zeal is an effect of our love, and is an heroical,
and magnanimious virtue shed in our hearts by the holy Ghost, whereby we are
moved to holy anger when either the glory of God, his truth, or his honor is
violated. Behold the zealous, and ruddy beautified Christians in this kind: Who
will rise with me against the wicked? or who will take my part against the
evil doers? says David the Lords worthy; And in another Psalm. 119.
Psalm, I fainted because men kept not thy law. And again, The zeal of thine
house has even eaten me up.

The zeal of God does eat one up, when God gives such courage and
magnanimity of heart unto some one man, that he withstands many mighty and
malicious transgressors; and yet is not removed from his holy valor and
resolution, though the earth be moved, and the mountains carried into the midst
of the sea. Such an one was Elias against all Baals false prophets, and Micheas
against the four hundred false prophets of Ahab: and of late years Martin
Luther against the Pope and all his accomplices. But we in our last, and worst
age eat up the zeal of God, because we do not resist the evil wherein totus
mundus ponitur, the whole world lies; nor the arrogancy of the presumptuous,
nor the malice of the mighty, nor the haughtines of the proud, nor the tyranny
of the oppressors: but like bastards, and not children, declaring to our own
selves that we have not one drop of the good blood of our heavenly Father in
us; for bonus sanguis non mentitur: honorable blood cannot dissemble, we suffer
God to be blasphemed in our hearing, Christ to be scorned, his sacred Ministry
to be despised; and we in the mean while either assent thereunto, or neglect
to rebuke it; which shows that we partake not at all of this divine and
roselike beauty.

O that the Seraphicall zeal of God had inflamed the Princes, the Prelates,
and people of the Christian world, as it did David: not a martial zeal which
is a fervor without discretion, but a zeal according to knowledge; not anger
per vitium, but holy anger by zeal; not private grudge, but zeal appertaining
to the vocation and calling we are of, which has both a good root, and a good
end. Such as was Elias zeal for the Lord of hoastes against idolatry: Such as
was Phineas zeal against the beastliness of Zmiri the son of Sale, and
Cozbi: Such as was Ezechias zeal for the peoples revolt; Such as was good king
Josias zeal, for the Lords dishonor among the Priests: Such as was Nehemiahs
zeal when he heard the people speak half Hebrew, half Ashdod, half Sur,
half Sion, half Christ, half Belial.

Oh, to these holy Cherubicall zeales I exhort you (beloved) in the name of the
Lord. Be you angry with those that are angry with God, when tribulation
befalls them, or if their hearts be not glutted with all the delights they
desire, or if God do not fill their bellies with onions, and garlike, and other
such like grosnesse. Be angry with preachers that lie as Jonah did under the
gourd, and preach not. Be angry with the dogs that return to their vomit, and
with hogs that wallow in the mire, albeit they have been ten times purged. Be
angry with vice that rules, with the devil that rages, with vanity that
reigns, with lies that sway almost every where. It remains that I only
acquaint you with a safe station (while you are here) to stand in, and a
powerful supplication (while we are here) to pray with.

Let your station be like that of Elias in mount Horeb, who stood in the clifts
of the rocks entrance, until the strong wind, the earthquake, and the fire
(in all which God was not) were passed by; but when he heard a soft, and still
voice, he came out, and stood before the Lord: so let us be continually
meditating the passion and rents of our rock Christ Jesus, and hiding our
selves therein, while the winds of wickedness, the earthquakes of changings
and chances, the fire of might and malice, and while all the works of
darkness (wherein God is not) pass by; until we hear a soft, and sweet
voice of the Lord to call us forth of our station to rest: Then let us go forth
willingly unto our well-beloved, and love him, and live with him for ever. Let
our prayers and supplications in the mean while be the words of the
hard-hearted and misbeleeuing Jews, but not their Mat. 26.
spirit; for they cried, His blood be upon us, and upon our children: and it
was, and is so to their utter ruin, and desolation, even until this day, as a
just judgment of God, for their crucifying the Lord of life. But we will pray,
and say in the spirit of the faith of Jesus in whom we believe: His holy blood
be upon us, and upon our children to our salvation, according to Gods blessed
promise made to the Patriarks, Prophets, and to all the faithful.

For he is the chiefest of ten thousand, etc. or as some read it, the chiefest
of twelve thousand; where in we may see the mystery of the number, both of ten
and twelve; as also the excellency of the party, that he is the chiefest in
heaven, and the choicest on earth, together with the perfection of both heaven
and earth in himself, and imparted to his chosen the Church of the redeemed.
The Papists, imitating the Platonists, are very superstitious in numbers, the
one putting a fatal necessity in them in the period of estates and kingdoms;
the other affirming a certain secret efficacy to be in many numbers, but in
the septenary number especially. Hence have they their canonical hours for
prayer, and sacrifice. But Bodin in his book de Repub. justly taxes Plato for
that dream. And the schools conclude against them both, that Numeri, qua
numerus, nulla vis, nulla efficacia. We therefore will content our selves with
the holy and mystical use, which the book of God makes of them. The
mystical numbers of sacred text are these, to wit, three, four, five, six,
seven, eight, ten, twelve. Ten and twelve meet us in this text by variation
of readings, both signifying perfection. Ten is the highest of simple numbers,
all nations after ten begin to number again. The tenths was consecrated to the
Priests, Gods servants. In the tenth month the waters of Noah's flood abated.
Sem a father of the faithful sees the tenth age: Ten words for the Creation
of the world, and ten words for the government thereof, as the Talmudists
observe.

For twelve, we read of twelve Patriarchs the sons of Jacob, twelve stones
set up in Jordan, twelve precious stones in the breast plate of Aaron. At
twelve years Solomon decideth the plea of the dead child. Christ the true
Solomon at twelve years disputes with the Doctors. Twelve Apostles are sent
to perfect the kingdom of grace. Twelve foundations, twelve gates, twelve
Angels the porters; a tree that bears twelve manner of fruits medicinable
all the twelve months of the year, describe the perfection of the kingdom of
glory in the celestial Jerusalem.

Thus we see, that the mystery of the number shows only the excellency of
the perfection of the party, being the chiefest in heaven and earth, so
described by John the Divine, Apoc. 5. A throne is seen in heaven, one sitting
thereon having a book in his hand written within and without, sealed with
seven seals. But none was found neither in heaven, nor in earth, nor under
the earth worthy to open the book, no nor once to look into it. Then wept
the Divine because none was found worthy to open the book; or once to look
therein. But one of the Elders said, Weep not: Behold the Lion of the tribe of
Judah, the stock of David, has so prevailed, that he may open the book, and
loose the seals thereof.

This book is Gods will, these seven seals are loosed, and made known unto
us by the declaration Romans 1.
of Jesus Christ. The first seal is his Nativity opened, Mal. 4. 2. But unto
you that fear my name, shall the Sun of righteousness arise, and health
shall be under his wings, and ye shall go forth, and grow up as fat calves.

The second his Baptism, Zach. 13. 1. In that day there shall be a fountain
opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin
and for uncleanness.

The third his Passion, poutrayed by Esaias 53. chap. throughout.

The fourth his Descent deciphered Hosh. 13. 14. I will redeem them from the
power of the grave, I will deliver them from death: O death, I will be thy
death: O grave, I will be thy destruction.

The fifth is his Resurrection, recorded Psalm. 16. 10. For thou will not leave
my soul in the grave, neither will thou suffer thine holy one to see
corruption.

The sixth his Ascension, described Psalm. 68. 18. Thou art gone up on high, thou
have led captivity captive, and received gifts for men, yea even the rebellious
bast thou led, that the Lord might dwell there.

The seventh is the sending of the holy Ghost, pointed out unto unto us, Joel
2. 28. And afterward will I power out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons
and your daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, and your
young men shall see visions.

By the opening of the first seal, to wit, his Nativity, whereby he became
flesh, he has redeemed us from being worse then very brute beasts. For man
being in honor understood it not, and therefore was compared to the beasts that
perish. S. Augustine speaking of the grace of the new Testament comfort us
thus saying: Let no man despair, but conceive hope unspeakable, for by
participation of the word, we become the sons of God, seeing that Jesus
Christ by incarnation is become the son of man. Ask your forefathers, says
Moses, and the days of old, even since the day that God created man upon the
earth, and ask from the one end of heaven unto the other, if there come to
pass such a great thing as this. Did ever people hear the voice of God
speaking out of the midst of a fire, as thou have heard, and lived? If Moses
spoke thus of the voice of an Angel (for the law was given by the ministry of
Angels) what may we say of the gracious words of eternal life, uttered by the
Lord of life? Indeed the cloud that led the people of God in the wilderness,
was dark toward the Egyptians, but bright and lightsome toward the Israelits:
So if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, for now the book is
opened, and the seals loosed.

By Baptism the second seal we put on Christ, Gal. 3. 2. For as many as are
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, and are engraffed into him by the
Spirit, Romans 6. For if we be graffed into him by the similitude of his death:
even so shall we be in the similitude of his resurrection. It being the lauacre
of regeneration both priuatiuely, and positiuely; priuatiuely in forgiving our
sinfulness, and positiuely in conferring his own righteousness upon us,
begun by sanctification, perfected by glorification. This blessed seal of
sacred baptism being unto us (...), as Clemens Alexandrinus calls it, the
counterpoise of all deadly venime of corruption, being also the diluuium
peccati, as Nazianzen cleapes it, the deluge of sin; the water of adoption,
so Basil; and the purgatory of life, so Chrysostom. These virtues being not in
the element, nor in the weight of the work, nor in the intention of the
Baptizer, but only in the blood of Christ, which purges us from sin and
shame.

By the third seal, to wit, his Passion we are reconciled to God the Father,
and sealed to everlasting life. Behold the wounds of Christ hanging upon the
cross, his precious blood shed in his agony of death, the price of our
redemption. Behold again his head on the cross inclined to hear us pray, his
heart opened that we might see his dear love, his arms stretched forth to
embrace us, his whole body exposed to shame, scorn, and torture, to redeem us.

His descent the fourth seal was the death of death, and the death of the
devil who had the power of death, the ruin of the gates of hell, that they
might never prevail against his people, the triumph over darkness, and the
defiance of all hellish power, and principalities.

By his resurrection the fifth seal, our corruption puts on incorruption,
the bands of death are broken, the horror of the grave is turned to sweet
repose and sacred rest in the Lord.

By his ascension the sixth seal revealed, is opened an entrance to heaven for
us, from whence before we were exiled. He is entered himself not in his own
name, but in ours, according as he himself says, I go to provide you a place.
Ioh. 14. In a word, he ascended to fulfill all things, the earth with his
mercy, hell with his justice, and the heavens with his glory.

The mission of the holy Ghost being the seventh seal, has furnished the
Christian Church of the redeemed with the seauenfold graces of his glorious
spirit. Gregory upon Ezech. says, that seven ascents or steps were to go up
into Jerusalem the holy city, mystically signifying the seven graces of Gods
spirit tending to the perfection of Christian glory.

The first of these gifts is filial fear, making us humble.

The second, Christian piety, making us merciful.

The third, divine knowledge, making us discreet.

The fourth, sacred intelligence, causing us to be provident.

The fifth is the wisdom of God, making us prudent.

The sixth, fortitude, setting us free.

The seventh, counsel, making us wise to salvation in every occurrence.

These graces of Gods Spirit are also signs unto our brethren, and seals unto
our selves, of our heavenly perfection. For by his revealed Nativity we as newborn babes in the second birth must desire the sincere milk of the word, to
feed our souls thereby up to eternal life

By baptism we learn to confess our sins to God, and turn our misdeeds
outward, as the Scolapendra does her entrals to wash them.

By his passion, only to rejoice in the cross of Christ, whereby the world is
crucified unto us, and we unto the world.

By his descent into hell, to remember that we covet not, lest we fall into
temptation and snares of the devil.

By his resurrection, to strive that we may have part in the first
resurrection, so shall not the second death touch us.

By his ascension, to seek the things that are above where now Christ our
treasure is, and not the things beneath.

And by the sending of his graces, whereby the love of God is shed abroad in
our hearts by the Spirit Romans 5. 5.
which is given unto us, that all things may be consecrated to Gods glory.

Which things that we may perform, behold Christ the chiefest in heaven has
opened the book, that we might know them, and loosed the seals that we might
do them. Woe therefore be unto them to whom his book is yet shut, and those
seals yet unloosed, for our Gospel is hid to none but to them that are lost.
Christ Jesus is also the chiefest to be found on earth. In the Revelation of S.
Ioh. Chap. 7. there are 144000 sealed by twelues; Christ is sealed in the tribe
of Judah, in whom also the rest are sealed, to be the associats of the Lamb,
according to that ancient prophecy of Jacob, Genesis 49. saying, that the Scepter
should not depart from Judah until Silo come. And against Dan he prophecieth
thus; O Lord* I have waited for thy salvation, meaning Christ. Thus the
Chaldaean paraphrasts.

I will not here mention the pourtraiture which Pub. Lentul. sent unto the
Senate of Rome, describing the lineaments of our Savior, as he was upon earth:
That he was gracious in aspect, of a smooth brow, of an aburne hair, long, and
wauing at his back like a Nazarite, with a parted beard, and the whole frame
of his blessed body being incomparably beyond all men that ever were, both in
feature and favor. For I am not ignorant how apocriphall that relation is in
sacred history, and how grossly the Papists abuse themselves, and others in the
table painting, and limming of that Lord of life, according to the rude hand of
many an idle lozel, that dares adventure to pourtray that sacred beauty. But
what a one the Scripture mystically has decyphered, and described him to be,
that willingly will we look upon, and behold with awful eyes of fear, and
divine reverence. And therein also we shall see him the chiefest of ten
thousand.

The Psalmographer in the 45. Psalm. sets him out in the person of Solomon to
be of surpassing beauty, in the dignity of his form. For he was fairer then
the sons of men. Gracious in his speech, for grace was powered from his lips:
valiant in his acts, for he was mighty in renown: powerful in his facts, for
his arrows pierced the hearts of his enemies: splendent in his royalty, his
throne being for ever, and his scepter, a scepter of righteousness it self.
Magnificent in his whole deportment, for all his garments smell of Myrrh,
Aloes, and Cassia.

The beauty of Joseph, David, and Absolon are recommended in Scripture, but the
first had an alluring beauty, the father, and the son goodly to be looked on;
but in Christ it was the beauty of perfection, and not of defection: Nullus in
egregio corpore naeuus erat. The Jews indeed saw no beauty, form, or feature
in his face, Esaias 53* yet was he peerless, being void of all stain, either
of sin or shame; the most absolute perfection of beauty. For his eloquence,
what eloquence may declare it? The Grecian Demosthenes, and the Roman Cicero,
are herein but rudesbies. Hercules that was conceived to draw multitudes after
him with golden chains, si ad illum co^paretur, nihil est. The Queen of the
South comes to hear the wisdom of Solomon, matchless in his time: but behold
our true Salomons eloquence, who^ being yet but a child of twelve years, the
grand Doctors are amazed to hear, Luke 2. Being a man his very enemies said,
No man spoke like this man. John 7. His own that knew his worth said; Thou
have the Ioh. 6. 68.
words of eternal life. When he disputed he put his adversaries to silence, as
we may see in his discourse with the Sadduces: and when he preached, he taught
with authority, and not as the Scribes. Mat. 7. 29. Yet this gracious
eloquence, and heavenly charming was folly to the Pharisees, who thrust him
out, Lu. 4. 29. and to the unbelievers madness, and therefore they cry, He has
a devil. So even at this day, the spirit Ioh. 8.
of prophecy (which indeed is the savor of life unto life) becomes to some
misperswaded misbeleeuers the favor of death unto death. Neither is this
eloquence of this chiefest the delicacy of words, but the efficacy of power;
for out of his mouth goes a two edged sword, Apoc. 1. 16. By the eloquence of
his word he leads the facile, with the terror of his Volentes ducit,
nolentes trahit.
sword he enforces the stubborn, and unwilling: for if his word prevail not,
which deuides and discernes; deuides between the soul and the spirit, the
marrow and the joints, and discerns the very intentions of the heart; then
his sword, the rod of his manly mouth shall plague them, and the breath of his
mouth shall kill them. Esaias 11. 4.

As for his power, who was ever able to resist it? either Heroique, or
Heretic? Let the fatal destructions, and fearful downfalls of Herod
Ascalonita, that murdered the infants of Bethlem, and died disconsolatly; of
Herod Archelaus, who died ingloriously at Vienna in Austria, being but a terror
only to Christ; of Herod Antipas, who beheaded John Baptist Christ's servant,
and perished with his dancing minion in Spain; and of Herod Agrippa a
persecuter of Christ's preachers, who was eaten up of worms in the sight of
thousands at Cesarea Philippi, Act. 12. be exemplary warnings to all
posterities how they dare resist the Lord Jesus. Among the rank of heretics,
let the wretched ends of Arrius, Nestorius, and Euty ches be presidents of his
power and puissant renown. And besides all this, the glorious increase, and
godly perfection of his Church, maugre the proiects of all his open, and secret
enemies. The splendour whereof is so eminent, that it remains firm and
steadfast, when other powers have yielded thereunto: For his kingdom shall have
no end. Esaias 9. 7. The zeal of the Lord of hosts shall bring it to pass. And
God the Father has given him a kingdom that shall not be taken away, Dan. 7.
14. As the Angel told the blessed Virgin, That Christ should rule over the
house of Jacob for ever, Luke 2. 33. His equity sustaining his throne, For he
judges not by the sight of the eyes, nor by the hearing of the ears* but
according to judgment, and equity. Esaias 11. 4.

His magnificence is boundless mercy, All about Psalm 45.
him smell of Myrrh, Aloes and Cassia. For he abhorred not the confessing
thief: he despised not the sinful woman that wept unto him: he rejected not
the suppliant Canaanite: he judged not the adulteress apprehended in the fact*
he called Matthew sitting at the receipt of custom; he had respect unto the
disciple that denied him: yea he prayed for them that crucified him. And
therefore the spouse representing the Church of the redeemed, says in the Cant.
We Cant. 1.
will run after thee in the sweet odors of these thine ointments, and
fragrant perfumes, the sacred confections of thy most perfect nature.

Thus we see our well-beloved to be the chiefest in heaven, and the choicest on
earth, yea the perfection both of heaven and earth, both in himself, and also
in his redeemed Church. For he is the (...), by which the heavens and the earth
were perfected. The Elohim by whom al things in the great universe receive
special perfection in particular; he is (...) all sufficient for himself and
others, rightly resembled to the glorious Sun, that has light sufficient for
it self, and for both the superior, and this inferior world also.

He is Ens simplicissimum, and things the more simple, and deuoide of
commixture, the more pure and perfect they are, as heat is the more it self
the less it is intermingled with cold; and wine the less it is alayed with
water, and gold the less dross is in it, the more refined. But our well-beloved
is most pure and perfect without any the least dram of blending or commixture.

In a word, he is the perfection of life, motion, and being. Ioh. 3.


Of life; for who so lives not in him is dead already, albeit he has a name
that he lives.

Of motion; for who so moves not in him is distracted, and does peregrinaria
Domino vitae, estrange himself from the Lord of life.

Of being; for who so is not in him by his Spirit, is subject to be lost by an
eternal privation.

In his Church of the redeemed he is also of most absolute perfection, which
Church consists both of men and Angels, he being the perfection of both: who
albeit he was made man, yet was he God from everlasting, laid in a cratch, yet
adored by Angels from heaven, and worshipped by sages on earth. The Jews saw
no beauty, nor comeliness in him, yet believing eyes saw in the mount a glimpse
of that glory which ravished them with exceeding great joy. He was baptized as
man, yet forgiueth sins as God; he hungered, yet fills a thousand hungry
souls with the bread of life, the Angels food. He prayed as man, yet hears
our prayers as God: he wept as man, yet wipeth all tears from our eyes.

In a word, he is the perfection of prophecy and priesthood, of sacrifice and
sacrament.

I exhort you therefore beloved and blessed in the Lord Jesus; seeing that the
chiefest, and choicest man and woman among us is more then a little imperfect,
let us fly and hasten to our perfection, to be perfect men and women in Christ
Jesus, and to rest and abide with him, that we may be beautiful, and perfect,
as surely all those shall be that abide steadfast, and are found in Jesus Christ,
according to his effectual prayer, John 17. I in them, and thou in me, that
they may be made perfect in one. For by him was our creation, in him is our
preservation, and of him shall be our eternal felicity, and perfection.

Let us then (men, fathers and brethren) return unto him with steadfast eyes
lift up to heaven, where our perfection is; with bowed knees of humility, and
grace, and with pure hands lifted up to the throne of God, without wrath, or
envying, even to him that was, and is, and is to come; that he would grant us
continuance of that we are to be his, and give us supply of that we want, and
that we resolve that it is our chiefest grace, and choicest beauty, to have the
least resemblance of his divine perfection in us. Even so Lord Jesus. To whom
with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be rendered all praise, perfection, power,
majesty, and glory, throughout all ages, for evermore.

Amen.
Errata.
Page 4 lin. 28. for when, read where. p. 17. l. 12. Goodesse, read
goodness. p. 23. l. 19. shall, read had. p. 30. l. 4. hearing, read
learning. p. 27. l. 4. propale, read perpale.


