HILARIA: OR THE TRIVMPHANT Feast for the fifth of August.

Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford, dwelling near the Red Lion, in the
Cloth-Fayre. 1607.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
THE great Kings of Persia, (most noble Prince) before they would sit at any
Feast, they would talk of Temperance; before they would do any sacrific: to
their Gods, they would speak of Justice; and before they would commence any
war with the enemies, they would discourse of Fortitude; three principal
great virtues, proceeding all from Prudence: without which, Temperance is
slothfulness; Fortitude is rashness; and Justice mere injury: for Vnica and
sola virtus Principis, prudentia.

I have presumed therefore (under your Majesty's favor) to write these few
Verses, to honor this our Tryumphant and sacred Feast, Hilaria, the fifth of
August: not as the Greeks, in their Feast Taurilia; nor as the Romans, in
their Feast Hecatombaeon: but as Israel, with Music, mirth and Feasts, and to
sing Hymns and Psalms for our Triumphs, Feasts, and often victories: so did
Israel for the victories of Moses over the Egyptians; of Saul over the
Philistims; and of David over the Chananites, with their feast Phase, at
Jerusalem; and their Feast Phurim, in Persia.

And since Angels feasted with men, ministered unto men, and commanded Feasts to
be kept of men, to put us in remembrance of Gods benefits to men, we should not
omit to give thanks for it. For the old Lacedaemonians, in their Feast Phiditia,
where was more music and mirth, then meat or drink, had their military
dancing, and their Songs, Scholia; to commend the renowned worthiness of such
famous men, as defended and saved their Cities and Country, from the Persians
and Macedonians.

So the Athenians, in their Feast Sisisia, where they observed such Temperance,
that they would not exceed five Dishes (by Platoes laws) in private Feasts;
called, Bellaria Attica: with such care, that they allowed but five Ghests. Yet
Homer allowed the whole number of Pithagoras, which was ten: but in public
victorious Feasts, Plato allowed 28. which was called Symposium Platonis: but
when Greece began their first draught to Jupiter, and their last draught to
Mercurius, then their law was, Aut biberent, aut abirent.

Among the ancient Romans, in private Feasts, it was decreed, there should not
be above seven: for it was a common speech with the Romans, Septem conuiuium,
nouem conuicium facere, then Rome by Temperance, being inferior to Spain, in
number; to the Africanes in subtlety; to the Grecians, in wit and Stratagems:
yet the, Victrix and Domina gentium. But when the late Emperors contended, who
should excel in ryotous Feasts, Geta would have as many dishes in his Feasts,
as could be found upon the name of every Letter in the Alphabet. Lucullus would
have so many dishes in his Feast, as were Gods in Rome worshipped.
Heliogabulus, so many dishes in his Feast, as could be found in Summer colors
out of the earth, and upon the earth; that they sought to exceed Vitellius
feast: which was such (for the number of his dishes) that his became a Byword
(for a long time) in Rome, Vitellianae patinae. This Feast, Vitellius himself
named, Clypeum Mineruae; which might have bin better called, Praeludium Veneris.

But God grant us, that we in great Britain may, in perpetual memory of so
great a blessing, give thanks to God, for this our Tryumphant, Regal, and
Crowned Feast.

Your Majesty's most humble and dutiful Servant, Lod: Lloyd.

THE TRYVMPHANT FEAST for the fifth of August.
I. Temperancia
NO Gemme, no Jewel, no gold I give,
No pearls from Pactolus, so:
No Persian, Gaze, no Indian
Nor Tagus sands I show.
Far greater gifts, I give, O King,
if Poets may credit bear;
Four Virtues great, all linked in chain,
a chain for Kings to wear.
If Poets of force or fear be dumb,
Dodoaean trees must speak:
If Angerona still be mute, Angerona, the Goddess of silence.

then stones will silence break.
If men may virtue not advance,
Memnos Image shall:
And the Olive on Corebus grave,
these Halcyon days shall call. Halcyo^s days, days of solace and mirth.

Let Thracians brag of Mars his sword:
let Greece, of Phoebus shield:
Let Romans boast Quirinus spear:
to Ione great thanks we yield.
For Trophies just and Triumphs due,
for Feast to King of Kings:
Osanna in sky, Alleluiabs on earth,
both men and Angels sings.
In Mambre, Abraham's Feast was best, The Oak of Mambre, wber Abraham dwelt.

where Angels three were Ghests:
The like did Lot in Sodom keep,
where Angels two did feast.
With Music, mirth, with Hebrew songs,
the Jews kept Phases Feast,
And Jews in Persia Phurim kept,
but not for Persian ghests.
The Indians feast at Ganges crowned,
the Greeks with Crownets on:
In Persian feast with Tyra on, Tiara, or Sydaris which the kings of Persia
wore on their beads. Due commendation of some Noblemen in Court. Curtius, and
Decius same.

Their kings to tend upon.
Of all such crowns as Kings were crowned,
who best should crowned be:
They that conquered Kingdoms six,
or saved Kingdoms three?
Whose names and fame ought famous be,
e'ne from the Isles of Orchades:
Through lands, through seas; and Kingdoms great,
to the furthest part of Gades.
The cause why Curtius should be in steel,
or Decius wrought in brass:
Or both Phileny in Iuorie set,
to save their country, it was.
Were Dion, Hermodius in silver set,
who saved two Cities free:
Their names should sure be in silver set,
that saved Kingdoms three.
For Justice yelds, and Countries claim
a Laurel Crown for such,
Before such bloody Conquerours Crowns,
like Scythian Tamberlaine much.
Shake Morpheus off, take Moroes pen,
in Homers verse indite:
Of Fame, of Virtue and virtuous men,
a second Illiad write.
Not of Antonius lust in Rome,
Cleopatras love to please,
Nor Tarquins fame with fancies fond,
on Lucres* haste to seize.
Though valiant Greeks for Priams Town, Priams Town was Troy.

have filled the world with fame:
Yet Helens rape, by Priams son,
did Priams Town defame.
The fault unchaste Aeneas did,
made Didoes brood rebel:
That Hanibals more for Dido did,
then Rome could Scipios tell.
The bower which stout Bellona holds,
the Fort where Vesta breeds:
Mars could never shake that Fort,
where Temperance chaste does feed.
Xerxes, that could eat up Greece, Temperance much commended.

and drink the Grecian seas:
E'ne Xerxes, that would be Tytan called,
could not Dame Temperance please.
Had strong Alcides conquered lust,
that conquered what he would.
By conquering lust, he had conquered more,
then strong Alcides could.
Could be that gained the world with fame,
gain greater fame in life;
Then Sysigambis honor save,
great King Darius wife?
For Champions chaste more guerdon gained, Chastity commended.

than gained Achilles force,
By slaughter great of Phrigian Knights,
of spoil of Hectors corse.
One Phineas chaste staid Judas plague:
one Joseph to Egypt sold,
By Temperance chaste, in Egypt did,
what he in Egypt would.
Let Scipio serve Saturnus Tomb,
let Silla Apollo tend;
Let Numa wait the Egerian Nymph.
To Jove our knees we bend.
Shall Temperance drink of Cyrses Cup,
by Sirens thereto trained?
Shall Mars in Phoebus Chariot sit,
through Vulcanes Forge being stained? By Vulcans Forge is meant, the adultery
of Mars with Venus.

Virtues then thus coupled fast,
and linked like Homers chain:
On Jacobs Ladder scale the Skies,
and Crowns of glory gain.
II. Fortitudo.
MIght Romans of Camillus brag?
might Greece of Theseus boast?
Might Perseus vaunt of Perseus Fame,
had Perseus Fame been lost?
Had Kingdoms heard of Cyrus Name?
Had worlds known Caesar's Fame?
Had Fame it self been spoken of,
had Pen not writ the same?
Milciades Fame and Tryumphs great, Milicades fame*

Themistocles moved so much:
Themistocles said, he could not sleep,
Milciades Fame was such.
So Caesar said of Philips son:
so Philips son dismayed,
To hear what fame Achilles had,
Oh happy Achilles, said.
But Envy still on Virtue tends,
even hard at Phocions heel,
And feign would clippe Timoleons wings,
Timoleons wings being steel.
Could Caesar brook great Pompeyes fame,
whose fame the world embraced?
Or could Octauius well digest,
Antonius name so graced?
But who can square the wind with Line,
or fire in Balance wey?
Who back can call the day that is past,
or can man's mind display?
Apelles thought no colors could
paint shining Phoebus face:
Pithagoras, for Mercurius shape,
all Timber judged too base.
Not one might play on Hermes Pipe,
save only Orpheus could:
Neither one might ride Bucephalus on, Bucephalus, Alexanders horse.

but only one might bold.
What need I name the Prince that can,
if Justice do him right:
Or seek another Caesar out,
since Fame has named the Knight?
The knot which Gordius knit so fast,
that could Philippides break:
The net which Vulcan made so strong,
it was for Mars too weak.
On, noble Prince, to Martius field,
among the Roman Crew:
Make challenge in Olimpian games,
Pentatlon claim for due.
Sound Trumpets for Clitoneus out, Pentatlon the five Exercises in Greece, in
the Games of Olympia.

Eurialus call to field:
C^^^^e combat for Theagenes crowns,
else he his Crowns must yield.
Sail thence, and seek Palladium out,
bring Peplon proud from Greece;
From Greece to Colchos, sail on, Prince,
attempt the Golden Fleece,
With Ajax claim, and challenge make
to Achilles Armor brave:
Let Paris seek for Giges ring,
Menelaus Harp to have.
Seek Myrmidons out; seek Pirrhus Mates, Mermidons. Achilles soldiers*
Knights of Dolops, Pirrhus Soldiers. The lively Image of Fortitude.

the Knights of Dolops Land:
Lead on your Knights, and claim the field,
from Argiraspides band.
Sit on Roman Scipios seat,
seek out some Carthage new:
Let India be the vp-shot mark,
claim Affricke for thy due.
One Scipio made Numantia smoke;
One Brennus, Rome could shake:
One Noble Britayne may as well,
make great Toledo quake.
A branch of Noble Brutus brood,
on Caesar's fame to feed:
A bough of ancient Dardan stock,
to honor Hectors seed.
Marcellus for his prowess great,
The sword of Rome was called:
All Rome have said, old Fabius was,
the Roman Target stal'd.
Thebes made Pelopidas for their walls, Pelopidas. Lisanders praise. Pericles.

Pericles Athens hand:
Still was Lisander, Spartas legs,
for Sparta on to stand.
One Lion thought Leonidas best,
before three handred Deeres:
Then one poor fearful Dear, before
three hundred Lions peers.
We have Leonidas on before,
with Marcellus sword in hand;
In him we have Lisanders legs,
For Britains on to stand.
The Lodestone of great Britain soil,
the Lamp that shines so bright:
The Fort where Fame and Manhood lodge,
and Conntreyes Candlelight.
The Persian Knights, Mellophori called, The kings of Persias old soldiers.
Calasiries, the king of Egypts chiese band.

on whom did Persia rest:
They ware but Cyrus name on sleeue:
Yours wear the George on breast.
The noble Bands of Egypt Kings,
Calasiries sometime called:
They had but Pharaohs Colors on:
Yours are with Garters stal'd.
(...) These Scorpions like Altenian Snakes,
whose natures strange are such:
That they do sting their neighbors by,
but strangers never touch.
They seek with Pharton, Phoebus charge,
with Pharton down they shall:
They think to fly with Icarus wings,
they must with Icarus fall.
Their Magike Ring their Salomons Key, Superstitious Papistrie.

their star of Rempha failed:
Their Figure mist, their Dagon sell,
Their Planets quite are quaii'd.
No fire can hurt the Diamond pure,
no rust the Emerauld touch:
No dung hill can infect the Sun,
their virtues rare are such.
Could hungry Lions on Daniel prey?
could fire on Sidrach seize:
Might fish in Sea on Jonas feed,
when these their God did please?
This King has Eclus at command,
this, Neptune great can check:
This has the Sun, the Moon, the Stars,
and heavens all at a beck.
Could Pharaos force on Moses fall?
could Saul work David's woe?
Could Esaus wrath on Jacob feed,
when Jacobs God said, No?
Shall Spanish bragges, or Romish pride,
whom Goths so conquer could:
Whom Vandales brood, and Agars seed,
as servile slaves have sold,
Such Scythian tokens send to Rome, The Scythians Embassage to Darius king of
Persia.

as was to Persia sent?
A Mouse, a Frogge, a Sparrow, a Shaft,
whereby the Scythians meant;
They should run like Mise, or swim like Frogs,
or Sparrowes like should flee:
Else Scythians shafts should Persians daunt,
which Persians straight should see.
IIII. Prudentia.
NOW Atlas heavy laden comes,
with world of Globes on back,
Says, Fortitude is that famous King,
which Kingdoms keeps from wrack.
Simandius comes with Justice in,
and Justice most commends,
And says that Justice is that King,
which Kingdoms all defends.
More force, says Temperance, in Samgars goade,
then in Philistian swords:
More strength in little David's sling,
then great Golias words.
Then Prudence said, and Sentence gave;
Be wise as Serpents be:
For wisdom binds such Serpents fast,
lest Serpents such go free.
As fire in Flint is found by sleight,
and oil in Iette by heat:
So wisdom most, by virtue sought,
and not by forces great.
In midst of Peace, and quiet rest,
in Arms would Cecrops he:
Th'euents of war, in time of Peace, Cecrops.

great Ianus would forsee. Ianus double faced.

When Sun does shine most bright in sky,
the Crab the Oysters snatch.
When Cyrces sang most sweet to sense,
then was Ulysses caught.
Think how the Olinthians town was taken,
by trust to Lasthenes leares.
Forget not Babel great was won,
by false Sopyrus tears.
Think on Troy, and Trojan horse,
by Synon bought and sold. The Trojan horse.

Think none might yield Troy-nouant up:
but false Androgeus could.
Since secret cankers hidden lie
in Damask Rose unknown,
Till storms do come, and Tempests rise,
and Rose it self be blown.
Had Croesus thought on Solons saying,
who iudgde himself so strong,
Then nothing could king Croesus harm,
nor do king Croesus wrong.
One that lurkt in Egypt long,
whom Apres trusted most,
Such treason Apres found in trust, Treason often found on trust.

that Apres Egypt lost.
The swords, the shields, the hands, the eyes,
the legs that Kings stand on,
Antigonus said, were faithful friends,
for Kings to stand upon.
The Stars keep rank, the Pole about,
some march, some watch, some ward:
Some range abroad, some turn about,
Some tends the Pole to guard.
Have hands abroad, have eyes at home,
Search where these Serpentsbe, Jesuits and Seminaries.

Who feign would build, and make their nests,
in some sacred Cedar Tree.
These Serpents sought this famous I Will,
the I Will of Bryttaine called:
Should now the I Will of Serpents be,
or the I Will of Satyrs stal'd?
So many Ajax fit for war,
to please a Prince at list,
As were Ulysses like for peace,
a Theban Captain wished.
In Rome grew many Captains great,
few Captains Rome did good:
And Greece had many valiant Greeks,
few Greeks with Greece long stood.
When Envy grew in Greece so great, Envy the enemy of great States.

could Greece on Grecians look?
When Rome with Romans fought in Rome,
could Rome a Roman brook?
Oh happy Athens, had Athens more
Aristides like in store:
And twice happy Rome had been,
had Rome Fabritius more. Darius wish.

Darius wished so many friends,
Zopirus like in store;
As one Pomegranat curnels had,
Darius wished no more.
Ten Nestor-like Agamemnon wished,
Agamemnon wished but so:
Ten like Aeacida in field with Prince:
what need a Prince have mo?
By such we sleep in quiet peace,
and live full safe at rest:
And crave of God, which Chaanan kept,
that Britain so be blessed:
Where second Brutus sits on Throne;
Where Brutus third excel:
And Bryttaine Great, revived again,
which world far off can tell.
Most liberal gifts I gave, O King,
If King will credit Pen:
My Heart, my Life, my Love, my self,
my Books and children ten.
But Caesar may, if Caesar will,
on me like Caesar look,
Make me to sing more sweeter Notes,
then Swanne, in Seuerne Brook.
FINIS.

