The Triplicitie of Triumphs.

Containing, The order, solempnitie and pomp, of the Feasts, Sacrifices,
Vows, Games, and Triumphs: used upon the Natiuities of Emperors, kings,
Princes, Dukes, Popes, and Consuls, with the custom, order and manners of their
Inaugurations, Coronations and anointing.

Wherein is also mentioned, the three most happy, joyful and triumphant days,
in September, November and January, by the name of, Triplicia Festa.

With a brief rehearsal of the Funeral Solempnities at some Emperors, Kings,
and Princes burials.

By Lodowike LLoyd, Esquier.

Imprinted at London, by Richard Ihones, at the Rose and Crown, near Holborne
Bridge. January. 1591. Liber minimus, labor maximus.

To the most high and mighty Prince, Elizabeth, by the grace of God, Queen of
England, France and Ireland. etc.
ALexander the great (most noble and virtuous Queen) rebuked Aristotle the
Philosopher, for that he read in Athens co^monto his Peripatetians, which was
peculiar to Princes: such is the state and dignity of a king, that the same
Alex. commanded, that none should set him in colors but Apelles, nor in
metals but Lysippus,

I had not attempted (most sovereign Lady) to entreat of sacred Princes, to
write of their natiuities, inaugurations, coronations and annointings: of their
feasts, triumphs, vows, sacrifices, with other pomp and solempnitie thereunto
belonging, things far beyond my reach, had not 3. several most just causes
moved me thereunto.

The first, the day of your May. birth The 2. the day of your Highness
coming to the kingdom, And the 3. the day that your Highness was crowned
Queen of England, three most happy, joyful and triumphant days to England:
through the which; we triumphed 2029^. days with triumphs of Ouation: the
ioies whereof forced me most hu^blyto present this to your Majesty, trusting
that your Highness will so accept of a Britane for Brutus sake, as Artaxerxes
the great, accepted of the poor Persean Sinaetes, a glass of water of the
river Cyrus, for Cyrus sake, In maximis enim voluisse sat est.

Your Majesty's most humble and obedient servant

Lod. LLoyd,

To the Reader.
IF the Greeks labored so much, that they brought fifty of the most
beautiful Virgins in all Greece before Apelles, to draw the picture of Venus
thereby, and to be put up in Ceramicus. If the Romans traueiled as much, to
bring fifty of the fairest Ladies of old Italy, to set Juno in colors, to
stand in the Capitol, what may we in England say of such a sacred Prince, whose
virtues, were they painted (which Plato says cannot be) should far excel fifty
Venus, or fifty Iunos, were all their profane worthiness in one picture
painted: But all kind of tymbers serve not to frame Mercurius image, and every
color serves not to paint Phoebus: How be it, I will imitate poor Tymantes,
who when he could not lively express in collors the majesty of Agame^nons
countenance, he threw a veil over his picture, to shadow his faults to escape
the reprehension of the lookers on.

I leave Athens to honor their Minerua in the feast of Panathenaea, with the
triumph of Peplon: Rome to worship Juno in her feast Quinquatria, with the
triumphs of Epinicion: the Jews to solemnize their feast Neomenia, and the
Perseans to magnify their Kings with sacrifices and songs of Theogonia: we
will Ca^tare Domino, and solempnize Triplicia Festa for the seventh of
September, the 17 of November, and the 15 of January, which God grant us long
to enjoy for Christ his sake our savior.

The Triplicitie of Triumphs.
Of the pomp and solempnitie of Triumphs, games, and plays in Natalitia,
upon the natiuities of Emperors, kings and princes throughout the whole world.
THe nativity of Emperors and Kings in old time were had in such honor and
reverence, as all Kingdoms and countries of the world, devised by all means
possible to observe those great and victorious days by feasts, triumphs,
vows, sacrifices, games and plays to celebrate the memory of a good Prince
borne, and to make mention of victories, peace, quietness, justice, and other
infinite good things and great felicity which Vows made in the feast
Natalitia.
is held by the birth of a virtuous prince: and therefore the Romans vowed in
this feast Natalitia, to build temples, and to erect up Altars, to solemnize
games, to set up Images and statues in the Capitol, in the market place, and
in the Orators court: as in Athens they were wont to magnify and set forth
the dignity of kings and princes natiuities, with the triumphant Arches and
Pillars in Ceramicus, in the Temple of the Muses, and in the Castle of Minerua:
for the birth of a good Prince is as the nativity of a kingdom, and the second
birth of every good particular subject within the kingdom: and therefore it
was not lawful in these joyful feasts Natalitia, by Lycurgus law in Greece,
and by Numa Pomp: law in Rome, to offer any sacrifice of blood unto the Gods,
but with corn, honey, milk, cakes, with all flowers and fruits of the earth,
frankensence and Myrrh and other sweet odours: so Pythagoras says, Nihil
animatum Diis censuit immolandum in Natalitiis. So it was in the feast of
Palilia decreed that no beast should be slain upon that day, for it was the
byrth-day of Romulus, the first founder and king of Rome, which the old
Romans with all feasts and mirth observed, for that was the day of Romulus
birth, who after was cannonized a God, and named Quirinus: Upon the which day
the Romans used three solemn feasts, games and plays, The one, a natiuall
feast in memory of kings and princes birth. The second, a triumphant feast in
remembrance of victories and triumphs. The third, the great vowed feast which
was the most magnificent, and the most regal feast of al celebrated in Circo
Max. instituted by Tarquinius the proud, the seventh and last king of Rome,
continued by the Consuls and Dictators: but fully enlarged and set forth with
greater glory by Augustus Caesar. Vota pro salute principum. So that all
countries held the natiuities of their kings and princes, as the sound Anchor
and sure stay of their states. For it was lawful as well to the vestals
Uirgins to be present at the feast Natalitia among the Romans, as it was for
the Nuns of Ceres to come to the games of Olympia among the Grecians, for it
was a free and a joyful feast. And therefore, we sing and say in honor of
September.

Sing we IO PAEAN glad, and say,
our triumph now is such,
That Perseans yield, and Greeks give place,
and Romans triumphs couch.
Of the Vows which the Romans used to make for the health and good estate of
their kings, Dictators, Consuls and Emperors.
IT was a custom among the Romans upon the third of The Romans Vows.
January to make Uowes, and to sacrifice for the preservation and healthof
their Kings, Dictators or Emperors: upon the which day they erected an hundred
Altars, whereon the priests called Flamines sacrificed an hundred or\d\e, an
hundred sheep and an hundred Swine, with supplication to the Gods for their
Prince, their country, and their children. This sacrifice was among the
Grecians in old time, called Hecatombaea, and used after of the Romans in the
feast Natalitia.

Of the vows of the Grecians for their Princes, Governors, and Magistrates.
The Grecians vowed for their Governors and Princes The Grecians Vows.
health and long life, to dedicate Statues and Images of Marble, Copper,
Iuorie, Silver and Gold, to stand in Ceramicus, in their Castle of Minerua,
and in their Temples, and to represent the majesty of their Gods with
chains, jewels, crowns, garlands, with all solemn sacrifice, singing Poeana
to Jupiter the Savior, and to Juno the Song Herea, for the Princes of Greece,
all the Priests and sacrificers being crowned with Garla^ds of Dliue leaves.

A vow yearly made of the Egyptians for the prosperous estate of the Kings
of A Egypt.
AMong the Egyptians a straight law was made by the Priests of Memphis, that
they should assemble into one place once a year, and shave their heads and
their beards, and to dedicate the hairs thereof with solemn The Egyptians
Vows.
vows to their God Serapis at Memphis, to defend their Kings from all
harms, dangers and death.

The manner and order of the Perseans in making their Vows for their kings.
THe ancient Perseans had their Kings in such reverence The Persians Vows.
and honor, that the Wisemen, called Magi, for that they had neither Temples
nor Images, would clime up to an high hill, and there make a pile of wood, and
upon the wood they poured wine, milk, and honney and after sprinkled all kind
of sweet flowers, as pawnes and pledges of their vows, which they made for
their kings with supplication and sacrifice to the Sun, whose temple (said
they) was the whole world, then to the Moon, the stars, and the Wind, for
the health and safeguard of their kings, all crowned with garlandes of green
boughs: and so other Kingdoms and countries, they vowed sacrifices, serving
their Gods for their kings and Governors. Then England, Quid nisi vota
supersunt.

For het that sucked Melissas milk, and sat on Pallas lap,
Who can with sacred Sibils slight Calypsos wiles entrap.
Of the Nativity of King Cyrus and of the Persean feasts or joy thereof.
THe great king Cyrus (for so the Perseans named their Kings after Cyrus time)
upon the very day that he was borne, had victory over the Scythians and
Saceans, The Persean feasts upon Cyrus nativity.
he so honored and magnified that day, that Cyrus commanded that they should
be called the great Kings and appointed that it should be so solemnized
yearly with a regal noble feast, called Sacaea, after the name of that nation
conquered: in the which feast was celebrated diverse strange The great kings of
Persia.
kinds of ceremonies: as, the masters to attend upon the servants, the
mistresses upon their maids, imitating the orders and manners in the feast
Saturnalia, wherein also were Bachanalia used, in the which feast were men,
women, and children, which disguised themselves like Faunes, with Iauelings
wrenthed about with Iuie in their hands, and with Iuie crowns on their
heads, dancing and skipping after Psalters and Howboies, singing sacred songs
unto Bacchus, called Herodot and Ctesias.
Orgya and Dithyrambos: this feast Cyrus commandad to be yearly solemnized in
Babylon upon the sixteenth day of the Month Loys, on the which day Cyrus (as
some simpose) was borne: which day among the old Perseans was highly honored,
for of all the feasts and sacrifires of all solemn great days, the days of
their Kings natiuities were must in honor esteemed. This was the only and
greatest feast of the Perseans, for the rich men would celebrate the feast of
their Kings birth with sacrificing of whole Camels, horses, Oxen, and Asses,
sparing no cost in this feast: the poorer sort strained themselves with all
charges to set forth the feast of their Kings natiuities: at what time the
Magistrates used to sing the song Magophonia at their feast, and the song
Theogonia Theogonia.
at their sacrifice. For this feast Sacaea was called among the Thessalians
Peloria, in C^eete called Hermea, in some Hermea.
place called Penagria. In another place called Saturnalia, but in all places
used and celebrated with great solemnities at the natiuities of Kings and
princes, and here in England for September and November, Nil nisi dicimus Io.

Your Dythirambion songs and Orgyes tricks,
your Bacchus dance is done,
Your Iuie crowns and crowned Nymphs,
Your sacred Thyrsus's won.
Of the birth of Alexander and of the Macedonian feasts.
THe Macedonians likewise upon the byrthday of the great Alexander by the
decree and commandment, first of Philip, Alexanders father, who during his
life kept solempnly a most royal feast for three several days. The first and
the greatest feast was for his son Alexanders birth: The second cause was, for
that his Lieutenant general Parmenio had gotten a noble triumphant victory
over the Acaians. The third cause was, for that his horses and chariots wan the
garla^ds at the games of Olympia: This happened all in one day, on which day
Alexander the great was borne. The same very day the monstrous great Temple of
Diana was burnt by Herostratus to become thereby famous, at what time the
Priests of Diana cried out, Magnum Asiae malum nasci. This feast Triplicia was
long time after Alexander observed by the Macedonians, and yearly solemnized
in memory of Alexanders nativity, with great triumph and pomp, upon the day
of his birth, called Laeta and fortunata Macedonum dies: on which day the
Macedonians used to wear the picture of Alexander about their necks in
jewels, and on these fingers in ringes.

This day they used sacrifice, and celebrated plays and diverse kinds of
games. Argiraspides, Alexanders chief soldiers celebrated the feast of
Alexanders nativity as long as they lived, and disdained to serve under King
Antigonus, or any other King after Alexander died: Even so, Homotimi chief
soldiers under Cyrus, refused to serve under Cambises: and so of Achilles
Myrmidones: and of Pyrrhus Dolopes. I may speak of others who refused (after
renowned and valiant kings) to serve wicked princes and cruel Tyrants.

If the Macedonians solemnized so great a feast, in memory of Alexander, upon
the eight of February, who lived but 12. years King, and that with such
blood, that he left scant a King upon the earth to succeed him, what may be
said for September, and that for 32. Septembers past which we, sine caede and
sanguine have enjoyed, Dux foemina factum* This we may well say and sing.

Your stately dance Enoplia called,
your pomp of Peplon fell:
To your solemn Epenician song,
you Greeks, must say, farewell.
The manner and order of the Indians in celebrating the nativity of their
kings.
THe Indians so honored the byrth-day of their King, at what time the days
began to lengthen, that the king with all his Nobles went to the river Ganges
to wash and bathe themselves, where they offered in sacrifice to the Sun a
number of black bulls, for that color among the Indians, is most esteemed.

After sacrifice done to the Sun, the King held a feast, which the Romans
called Hylaria, which was wont to be celebrated upon the eight Calend of
April, at what time the Romain Matrones, and the young women of Rome crowned
with Myrtle, bathed themselves before they sacrificed unto Venus.

This very time, the young men of Athens kept festiual days with mirth and
pastime, to honor the Moon for the like cause as the Indians had for the
Sun, This feast Hylaria had all public and solemn plays, with all kind
of triumphs, for joy that the Sun began to turn his face, Hylaria.
and to lengthen their days, tanquam patriae solatium and initium laetitiae:
But what may we in England, de Sole and solatio nostro, for this 33. year
Nonne canemus Io:

To sacred CYNTHIA sing we loud,
aloud HYPINGOS sing: Hypingos.

And sound IULOS CERES song,
ELIZAS birth to ring. Ivla.

Of the birth of Xerxes and of the solemn feast thereof.
THe great Xerxes king of Persea upon the very day that he succeeded his father
Darius H^daspis as king, he yearly most solempnly used to celebrate such a
princely noble feast in memory of that day, which the Perseans so honored,
tanquam imperii natalem, as he would command all the Nobles of Persea to come
in the greatest pomp they Xerxe first day to his kingdom, called Titan.
could, and he himself in his most sumptuous Persean robes with his Diadem
upon his head, solemnized the feast with all pomp and glory. Upon the which
day Xerxes was called of all the Peers, Nobles, and all his people Titan. This
day was so celebrated among the Perseans in remembrance of Xerxes first day to
his kingdom, so the Siracusianes honored Timolion for his great victories, in
memory whereof they yearly upon the day of his birth decreed, that plates and
Timolions birth.
games of music, with running, wrestling, throwing of darts swimming, running
of horses, with other exercises of the body should be celebrated.

In like sort, the Parthians observed that day, that Arsaces their King had
subdued Seleucus with all kind of ioies, mirth and triumphs that the
Parthians could invent: they maegnified that day with all games and plays, and
kept a great solemn feast in remembrance of their liberty and deliverance
from their bondage and thraldom under Seleucus by Arsaces. If therefore they
honored that day, Tanquam imtium libertatis with songs Theogonia, shall we
not Canere Paean, that have long inioted peace and quietness of liberty by the
nativity of Eliza.

Let Magi for their Persean states,
sound their Theogonian song: Theogonia.

Let Egypt of their Isis brag.
we sing ELIZA, long,
Of the solempnitie on the byrth-day of prince Aratus by the Achaians, with
feasts and sacrifice.
IN like manner the Achaians solemnized the nativity of Aratus nativity.
Aratus with a royal feast and sacrifice, yearly upon the grave of Aratus,
which was called Aratium: The priests were gyrded about with a purple cloth,
the Senate in white robes with garlands of flowers on their heads, the
Magistrates and chief Officers of all Achaia with great pomp crowned with
Laurel and Myrtle, with hymns and songs made a solemn procession round
about Aratium upon the byrth-day of Aratus: such was his love among the
Grecians, that he was chosen seventeen times General of the Achaians: and
therefore such was the memory of his nativity.

The Trophies and triumphs that were invented to honor the natiuities af
Kings and princes were such, that some Cities builded to honor kings.
builded Cities, as Alexandria, to honor Alexanders name: Caesarea to honor
Caesar, and Antiochia to magnify the name of Antiochus the great. Yea, such
were the dignities and honors of princes, that the Senators and Patricians of
Rome, by common consent of all the Magistrates, changed the name of the month
Quintilis to be called the month of Quintil is cha^ ged to July and Sextilis
into August.
July, to honor the name of Julius Caesar, and the month Sextilis to be called
August, in memory of Augustus birth, which to this day stands.

Yet Domitianus the Emperor, though he had commanded by a decree, that the
month October should be called Domitianus after his own name, in
remembrance of his nativity: and Germanicus, father to Caligula, commanded the
month September to be called Germanicus, to hold his birthday, yet took no
effect: such is the continuance and long memory of a good Prince, and such is
the decay and short remembrance of a wicked prince.

Of the feasts and triumphs in Julius Caesar's nativity.
THe nativity of Julius Caesar upon the I Would of July, was by himself so
observed, that among all imperial and triumphant feasts, he only celebrated
games and plays, feasts and sacrifices upon that day, that far exceeded al
other feasts and games: and after Caesar's death, his Nephew Augustus observed
the like course in remembrance of his Iu. Caesar's nativity.
Uncle, for he within his own Palace in Rotundo Templo kept yearly a
solemn feast with all pomp and mirth, to set forth the remembrance of
Caesar's nativity: which feast continued for six days, during which time, the
plays called Ludi palatini were celebrated with Epinician songs of Greece.

Thus, if the Perseans in remembrance of Cyrus birth, the Macedonians in
remembrance of Alexanders birth, the Siracusians of Tymoleon, the Parthians of
Arsaces, the Athaians of Aratus, and the Romans in remembrance of Romulus
nativity celebrated feasts, games and plays, with all solemn pomp, mirth,
joy and all kind of triumphs, singing out loud with songs of joy, called
Talassius: Then, O quam t^ memoremus Eliza.

Let Romans sing Mamurius song,
And sound Talasius fame:
We laugh aloud, and clap our hands,
And found Elizas name.
Upon the twentieth day of the month Munichion, the young knights and lusty
Gallants of Athens in most solemn order with the pomp of Peplon, went in
procession-wise, crowned with Laurel, from the Castle of Minerua to the wood
Aricinum to do sacrifice unto Diana, with torches, Lamps, and sundry kind of
lights in the night time to honor the nativity of Diana, which is set forth
in the feast Elaphoboelea in February, with music, mirth and Elaphoboelea
the song Hypingos.

The nativity of Juno.
THe nativity of Juno is set forth in Liuii to the full in this sort. Two
white Oxen were led from the Temple Juno.
of Apollo through the gate Carmentalis unto the City, after were carried two
Images of Juno crowned with garlandes made of Cypress, after that went 27.
young delicate Uirgins apparelled all in white long Garments, plaieng on
instruments, and singing sacred himnes in verses in the praise of Juno upon the
day of her birth: after these Uirgins followed ten men crowned with Laurel,
marching forward in procession-wise with great solempnity, until Apulcus de
aureo asino.
they came to the market place, where the Uirgins used some kind of stately
dancing: after dancing, they went to the Temple of Juno to sacrifice, and
after sacrifice, solemnized a great feast in memory of Iunos birth.

The birth of Minerua.
IN like manner, upon the Calendes of March, the feast of Minerua was celebrated
in Mount Celio at Rome, where Quinquatria,
the plays called Quinquatria were sumptuously solemnized, continuing five
days: at what time they presented Minerua with presents and rewards: On the
which day, the young knights and lusty youths of Rome, entered in arms on
horse back and on foot into Martius field, to honor Mineruas nativity with
feats of Arms.

This feast was in Athens solemnized by the name of Panathenaea, their Poets,
Orators and Musicians contended for victories on the day of Pallas birth, as
they did in the games called Scoenici: The prize and reward of the Uictor, was
to wear a long precious garment called Palladium, wrought over with gold, and
to wear a crown of Laurel, and to sit in the chair of Pallas.

Of the birth of Ceres.
THe birth of Ceres is solempnely celebrated with a royal feast called
Cerealia, with all games thereunto belonging with hymns and songs named
Iulos. Iulos.


Of the birth of Venus.
THe nativity of Venus is kept in memory among the The feast Adonia.
Grecians and the Romans, that yearly upon the very day of Venus birth, the
feast Adonia is celebrated and the songs Eroticos, with music and mirth
round about her Altar in procession-wise, al crowned with Myrtle, dancing,
feasting, and sacrificing to honor Venus: may we not then say, O Dea certa
nostra, and after sing of Eliza.

How pale in Ida Pallas plead, how fond craved Juno doom,
how vain had Venus Paris pressed, had then ELIZA come,
Descend Calysto should from Sky, fly skies should Hebe fro,
Urania should from skies depart, there should EIIZA go.
Homers Birth,
SO Homers day was observed, that upon the day of his birth they coined money
in Chios with Homers image and his name written about the image, so that when
he died, seven cities of Asia contended for his funeral.

Smyrna, Athens, Rhodes. etc.

Epicurus birth,
EPicurus Scholars on the twentieth day of every month celebrated a great
feast, called Ichada, in remembrance of their masters birth: for upon that
day they Ichada.
carry their Masters Image to this feast, and lay it in a chair, crowned with
Laurel and trimmed with chames and Jewels, with great solempnitie, and with
sacrifice to the Gods for Epicurus birth.

BEfore Rome had grown to any greatness, the first Kings triumphed on foot
into the city, as Romulus, who, though he triumphed over king Acron, whom he
Acron.
slew in a combat challenged, yet he carried upon his shoulders the rich spoils
of the same King, being set in order upon a young green Oak, as Trophies of
Triumphs. So did Cor. Cossus, who slew fighting in field hand to hand)
Tolumnius, General of the Tuscans: and so did Marcellus, who likewise slew
with his own hand Britomarus,, King of the Britomarus.
old Gauls, before they were called Frenchmen: This honor happened to none of
the Romans beside, for Rome yet was scant heard of: but in continuance of time
their triumphs grew vit to such a pomp, that some were carried in triumphant
chariots drawn with huge Elephants, as Pompey the great in his triumphs over
Africa: Julius Caesar in his triumphs over t^ Frenchmen. Some were carried
with their triumphant Chario^, ^rawen with tamed Lions: others drawn with
strong tamed hearts, as Aurelianus: others drawn with The strange triumphs of
the Romans.
great Tigers, as Heliogabalus: others drawn with monstrous Mares,
Hermaphrodits, and others drawn with huge large dogs: so that the Romans far
excelled all Kingdoms in their triumphs, especially in the time of their last
Dictators and Consuls before their Emperors time: for Pompey the great in his
three triumphs over Africa, Asia and Europe, carried captives 339. Kings
children, princes, peers and noble men as prisoners, to stand pledges in Rome:
among this number, he brought Aristobulus, king of Judea, and Tigranes, King of
Armenia, five sons and two daughters of King Mythridates.

Others brought in their triumphs the Images and Statues of the kings which
were slain, or otherwise died before they could be taken Captives, as Lucullus
brought the Statue or picture of Mithridates, set out and painted very lively
in Ensigns.

Scipio carried in his triumph at Carthage, the image of Asdrubal, Hanibals
brother.

So Augustus brought the image of Cleopatra to Rome in his triumph, after she
slew her self to bear compaine with her friend Marcus Antonius.

Others brought in their triumphs Kings alive, as Julius Caesar brought King
Iuba and his son, with all their treasures of Mauritania in great triumphs and
pomp into Iuba King of Mauritania. Iugurth K of Numidia.
Rome.

Marius, brought in his triumph Iugurth with all spoils and wealth of Numidia,
with all the solempnity that could be.

Paulus Emilius triumphed over Perseus, king of Macedonia and his children,
whom he conquered and brought captives and prisoners into Rome.

Others brought in their triumphs, with all pomp and solempnitie, crowned
with Laurel and with Olive garlands the forms, liknesses and pictures of
mountains hills, woods, cities towns, rivers, situated in those regions
whom they conquered.

Lu. Cornelius Scipio after he had put Antiochus the great to flight, he carried
in his triumph into Rome, the likeness and Alex. lib. 6. Cap. 6
form of 130 Cities and towns which he conquered in Asia, and therefore was
surnamed Asiaticus. Scipio Asiaticus.


Lu. Silla in like manner carried all the Cities of Greece, set out very lively
on large Ensigns, and painted bravely on banners and flagges.

So did Marcellus carry the picture of the city Siracusia in his triumph, set
out on long Tables.

So did Caesar carry the likeness and form of the River Nilus, and the river
of Rien in long Tables painted, with the Pictures of Scipio and Cato: So that
nothing escaped the Romans in their triumphs, for the greatness of the Empire
grew such: But all these triumphs of Alexander, of Caesar, and of others were
gotten with blood, and after lost with blood: therefore sing we of Eliza, the
prince of peace.

Rue Rome in Noenian verse thy loss,
sing Greece your Ialemon song:
Cease Persea your Theogonian Odes,
sing we ELIZA long.
The triumph of Alexander the great over Darius, king of Persea was such, that
from Arbela unto the great city of Babylon, the ways were so spread with all
kind offlowers, and sweet spices: on the one side of the way were Altars thick
builded of silver, gold, and precious stones, where the Persian Magi stood in
their Persean weeds with all the glory and pomp that could be devised to do
sacrifice to the Gods, singing their songs Theogonia, with sacred verses and
himnes in praise of the Conqueror: On the other side of the way, were such
sumptuous tables, sull of wine, set up with fine cheer to solace the weary
soldiers, every table having his banquet equal to the greatness of the
victory: Alexander made his triumph into Babylon this way, with his Tigers,
Elephants The greatness of Alexand. triumphe^.
and Camels, with a world of triumph s after him: his soldiers alcrowned with
Laurel, and with Epinician songs in the praise of the Gods and the Conqueror,
in such sort, that infinite it were to set down in particulars the pomp of
that triumph, how Darius wife, his daughters, his Nobles, his treasures: In
fine, the glory and greatness of Persea was led in that triumph, whereby was
Alexander slattered by the Magi Pyramides and Obelisks are Egyptian triumphs.
of Persea, and the priests of Amon calling him the son of Jupiter.

After he had triumphed with pomp and great solemnity into Babylon, he married
ninety of the Macedonian Peers unto so many Persean Ladies: and Alexander
himself married Statira, daughter to king Darius. This feast continued five
days with all the r^yalty and magnificence of the world.

I will omit his triumph over Porus, king of India, which seemed equal, or
rather greater, than any his other Triumphs in Greece. In Macedonia were
Pillars and Arches triumphant made, and set up as monuments and Trephees of
triumphs, as the Egyptians had their Obeliskes and Pyramides triumphant, as
the only ornaments and remembrance of their kings.

THe Roman Emperors were wont, upon the eight of August to celebrate
festiua^l games with all pomp and shows: in which feast Ludi Votiu^ were
solemnly played: Ludi votiui
which continued as many days, as the Emperor, reigned years in the Empire:
for the number of the days in Votiuis ludis should answer the number of the
years of the Emperors reign. So Adrianus honored the first day of his
adoption into the Empire, by his Uncle Traiane, with the plays Ludi votiui, as
he celebrated the feast of his nativity with the games called ludi Natalitii,
for these three days: the birth day, the imperial day, and the dieng day were
every where with great honor and pomp solempnised: for the Romans mused
nothing more than one to excel another in pomp and in solempnity of triumphs:
as Galienus had an hundred white fair Oxen with their horns gilded, and their
backs Galie^
covered with all kind of changeable silk, ten Elephants, with other wild
beasts: to the number of 200. strange Pageants, and diverse games and plays,
some representing the manner and form of Cyclops, some of Satyrs and Faunes:
Others trampling and dancing, and fencing before the triumphant Chariot: Women
and maids carieng torches, lamps and al kind of lights to celebrate the
feast Hecatombaeon, and after to play the games Circenses, in memory of his
nativity.

The Emperor Probus, among other solempnitie and pomp of triumphs, caused
his soldiers to pluck up young green trees by the Roots, and set them so
thick round about Probus triumphs.
the place Circus maximus, that it seemed rather like a great park, or a
green forest (than a Theater to play on) wherein were a thousand wild
Boares, a thousand Hearts, a thousand Deares, a thousand wild Goats, and a
thousand Estriges.

The next day were brought an hundred terrible Lions, three hundred Leopardes,
brought out of Siria and Libia, three hundred mighty hugh Bears, an hundred
Lionesses, with many other wild beasts: at what time they used hunting with
Alex. lib. 6. Cap 6.
all kind of weapons and darts, with all devices and pollices for the killing
of those beasts.

In like sort Aurelianus triumphed over king Ode^atus and over Zenobia, Queen
of Palmeria, the pomp whereof was such, that three triumphant imperial
chariots, one of silver, the second chariot all of gold, the third, all of
precious stones, in the which Queen Zenobia was carried, a Queen of passing
virtues and singular learning. In this triumph, the Emperor Aurelianus
followed in the fourth chariot, Aurelianus triumph.
which was drawn with eight fair strong Hearts.

In this triumph were Elephantes, Tigers, Alces, Camels, Leopardes, beside
infinite number of wild and tame beasts.

In the triumph of Seuerus were four hundred wild beasts and three hundred
tame beasts, in all seven hundred wild and tame beasts let loose in the
Amphitheators in Rome: as Lions, Panthers, Elephants, and Bears, wild Asses,
wild Oxen, and wild Bears, which after long, terrible and dangerous fight,
were slain by polliticke stratagems, and the feast thereof was celebrated for
seven days, an hundred beasts every day consumed in feasts, with all
solempnity pomp, magnificence and glory.

Titus celebrated two feasts: one in memory of his father Vespasianus, in
Beritto, a city in Siria, and the other in remembrance of his brother
Domitianus nativity in Caesarea: Who after great games and royalty, caused
diverse Jews, Titus triumph.
taken Captive at the sacking of Jerusalem, to fight with terrible wild
beasts, and so to be devoured.

And so of the rest of the Romans triumphs, which were in number 320. from
Romulus, the first triumpha^t King, unto Probus, the last triumphant Emperor:
which continued 260 Olympiads, so long the Romans state continued.

The Romans triumphed but 320 in 1200. years: O ten times more happy England,
since her Majesty was crowned Queen until this day, 20295 triumphs of
Ouation without blood, which neither Romans, Grecians, Perseans could never
boast of, for their triumphs were bloody: and therefore, bless we her birth,
and say,

Here Jove Pandora staid in state, here Mars Pamphila stal'd,
Here Phoebus points Pansophias seat, divine Eliza called:
With Olives dect, with Palm attyr'd, with Laurel crowned is she,
With Myrtle branch triumphant like, a prince of Peace to be.
Of the birth of Mahomet.
THe nativity of Mahomet, which was upon Friday, is unto this day among the
Saraceas solempnly celebrated with diverse ceremonies and sacrifices in
remembrance of his birth, every Friday through the year, but specially upon
good Friday, in contempt of our Savior Christ, the Saracens have such a royal
feast, that the charges of that one days feast far surmounteth all the other
51. feasts. The Arrabians honor the nativity of their Mahomet so much, that
they begin the year, and make their computation of time from the byrthday of
Mahomet by the name of this word Hegyra, as the Hispaniards were wcont of long
time after they were subdued by the Romans, to number their years from
Augustus Caesar's reign, by these four letters, A, er, a: which is, Annus erat
Augusti. If these infidels and Paganes observe a memorial for the natiuities
of their kings and princes throughout the whole world: as,

In Persea, the birth of Cyrus upon the 16. day of the month Lois. August


In Macedonia the nativity of Alexander the great, upon the I Would of February.

And in Rome the nativity of Romulus upon the 21. of Sept.

In like sort, the nativity of Iu. Caesar upon the 4. I Would of July.

The nativity of Nerua upon the 4. Calend of December.

The nativity of Adrian upon the 6. Calend of Nouemb.

Of Antonius pius upon the first of April.

Of Gordianus upon the 1^. of January.

Of Constantine the great, upon the 4. Calend of February.

And so of Traiane, Vespatian, and others, whose natiuities were with great
honor observed, and with great dignity of triumphs, feasts, sacrifices, games
and plays, with all pomp and glory in remembrance of good kings natiuities,
solemnized: For Beata respub. cui pinceps Philosophus.

If all the kingdoms of the world in their feast Natalitia in memory of the
most happy state of a good King used al kind of strange inventions to magnify
their kings: The Egyptians in their Pyramides and Obeliskes: The Grecians in
their triumphant Arches and Pillars: the Perseans with feasts and banstets,
solemnized the natiuities of their kings, and the Romans excelled with sundry
pompes of triumphs to set forth The variety of triumphs
the dignities of their kings, Dictators, and Consuls. Others in the sacred
wood Aricinum, do sacrifice to Diana with their pomp of Peplon. etc. Beside
such magnificent and triumphant games and plays to set forth the dignities of
the feast Natalitia in memory of good princes natiuities. As, at Athens Magna
Panathenaea, first instituted by Ericthonius to honor Minerua every fifth year.
In like manner as the games of Olympia was by Hereules, celebrated to honor
Jupiter, or Isthmia was by Thesaeus made to honor Neptune: So Isthmia,
in Rome the great plays and games, called Ludi triumphales: Ludi Natalitii
were only to that effect invented, to magnify good princes, and to record
their worthiness with feasts, triumphs and plays in memory of their
natiuities. For at Natalitia.
this feast of Natalitia, the common people assembled together with sweet
flowers, green herbs: some made them booths with oken boughs, and some
tents, covered with long reeds with great banquets, and much mirth, to honor
the natiuities of kings. The Roman shepherds dressed upon that day their
sheep-folde with green rushes, sweet flowers with branches and boughs: they,
their wives and families with nosegaies and gatlands, with bagpipes and stddles
celebrated their feast Palilia at the birth of any king, Dictator or Consul of
Rome.

In other places they celebrated the games Saturnalia in Saturnalia.
Sigillaria. Lupercalia.
December: their games Sigillaria in January: the games Lupercalia in February.
But in Athens their Bacchanalia is solemnized in November: where the Ministers
and priests of Bacchus and Diana, by the names of M^mallones, S^leni,
Bacchanalia.
Menades Bacchae, Satyri, etc. al crowned with Iuy garlands The names of
Bacchus prists
and with Iuy Spears in their hands, singing the song of Dithirambos, dancing
Enoplia with the pomp of Peplen to honor Bacchus. But our Bacchanalia in
England is otherwise in November than in Athens: wherefore, we may Ca^ere
Paean, and say, Io, for our Eliza: For,

With Graces three, with Muses nine,
with Sibils ten can she,
With three the fourth, with nine the tenth,
With ten the eleventh be.
The nativity of our Savior Christ.
The nativity of our Savior Christ seemed so simple, his life so poor, and
his death so ignominious, that he was a stombling block to the Jews, and a
laughing stock to the Gentiles: they so thought, for that he was borne in
Bethelem a little village in Judea, and that he lived and was conversant among
simple people, without pomp and glory, and that he died the death of the
cross with reproach and shame: supposing him to be a Carpenters son, but
they were deceived, his birth was most glorious, the appearing of the Star
proved it, the discending of Angels singing Gloria in excelsis, did manifest
it, the coming of Magi from the East, did confirm it: his life was most
imperial, commanding water into wine, the blind to see, the lame to go, the
sick to health, and the dead to rise. His death was most triumphant: with the
song of Hosanna he vanquished devils, subdued hell, and conquered the world,
and said, Cousumatum est. Therefore his nativity is to be solemnized of all
Christians, his life to be worshipped, and death to be glorified with
Alleluiah, Osanna, and Gloria in excelsis, songs triumphant and sit for Jesus
Christ our savior.

Of the happy nativity of our gracious Queen Elizabeth.
WHat shall we write further of triumphs and of natiuities: But our day began
the seventh of September, the most happy and blessed day of Queen Elizas
nativity, of whom we have triumphed 20295 days, every day being a
triumphant day, sithence her Majesty's birth unto this present time.

With whom, neither Romulus, though cannonized, and after called God Quirinus:
neither Cyrus, though named the Great King: neither Xerxes. called Titan:
neither Alexander the great, though called the son of Jupiter: neither Caesar
though called perpetual Dictator. In fine, neither Assure, nor Pharao: neither
Jew or Gentle can with their Triumphs and pomp of natiuities, match Elizas
birth. The reason is plain, because her God is the God of Abraham, in whose
seed the children of God possess eternity, and for whose sake, we in England
enjoy peace and quietness.

Thus ends the feasts Natalitia, concerning the Natiuities of kings and
princes.
Of the ancient order and manner of the inaugurations and coronations of diverse
Em perors, Kings, Princes and high Priests: with their several ceremonies and
solemnities: and first, of the sacred anointing of Aaron the high Priest, by
Moses: of his glorious garments of consecration, sacrifice, and sacred
anointing of the high priest, to be observed in Israel for ever.
AFter that the Tabernacle was made, which was long before the Temple, God
commanded Moses to call Aaron, and first, before he should be anointed high
Priest, Aarons anointing.
to make such sumptuous and glorious garments, as the excellency of his calling
might be known, and the dignity of his Office present the Majesty of the
highest. Hence all the anointed christian kings of the world took their
platform, as an example to be followed in the inauguration, anointing, and
crowning, by God warranted, and by his spirit particularly set down to Moses:
all the cunning and skillful workmen in Judea were appointed to make Aarons
holy garments: which were these,

1 A Robe, 2 An Ephod. 3 An embrodered Coat. 4 A breast Plate. 5 A Myter. 6 A
Gyrdle. 7 An holy crown.
These were called holy garments, and be consecrated before the high Priest
should be anointed.

First, a breast plate and an Ephod, and upon the Ephod two Onix stones, on
the which were graven the 12. Tribes of Israel, six upon the one, and six upon
the other, which was made of pure gold, blew silk and purple Scarlet, and
fine twined lumen of imbrodered work.

Then had the high Priest an embrodered coat, wrought very curiously, and a
curious robe wrought unto the ground, upon whose skirts were Pomgranets in
gold wrought with purple silk and scarlet.

Then did Moses set a Miter upon Aarons head, and upon the Miter a plate made
of pure gold; called the holy crown, on which was written this sentence,
Holiness unto the Lord.

For the high Priest could not give sentence without that on his breast, upon
the which were written these words, Vrim and Thumin.

A breast plate of Judgment with the like work as the Ephod was, and made four
square, an the which were set four rows of stones, in this sort.

The 1. row. A Rubie A Topaze. A Carbu^cle. (...) stones.


The 3. row A Turkey. An Achate. An ^ematit

The 2. row. An Emerald. A Saphir. A Diamond.

The 4. row. a Chrysolit. An Onix. A Jasper.

These 12. stones, according to the names of the 12. Tribes of Israel were
wrought with gold, and set in embosment.

After these holy Garments were made, the high Priest was brought unto the
door of the Tabernacle, which was covered with blew silk, purple and scarlet,
twined and wrought with needle work over, and there he was anointed, to be
high priest and his posterity after him, putting on his coat first, and after
the coat, the tunicle of the Ephod, the^ the Ephod it self, the^ the breast
plate after he had put on a Myter upon his head, and upon the Myter an holy
crown, and then was the high Priest anointed with the holy oil, and his
Garments hallowed with Exodus, 29
sprinkling of the oil upon them, and these holy garments were reserved for
the successor of the high Priest, to be therein anointed, and to minister in
the holy place, for the sacrifices and solemn ceremonies which were commanded
to be done at the consecration of the Priest.

Of the sacred anointing of the kings of Irsaell.
The anointing of the first king of Israel, was by Samuel the Prophet, who was
commanded to anoint Saul, the Saul annoi^ ted k. of Isra^
first king of the world that was anointed: he poured oil upon his head, he
kissed him, and said, the Lord has anointed thee king over his inheritance:
and the people shooted, and said, God save the King: at this time began first
the use of oil in anointing of Kings: After this manner were Saul and David
anointed Kings of Israel, and after David, his son Solomon.

The order and ceremonies, were to ride upon the Kings beast, and to sit upon
the kings throane, where the Prophet (being called the Seer) poured the oil
upon his head, to signify the gift of the holy Ghost: then the Prophet kissed
the king upon the cheek, and turned his face to the people, and said, God save
the King: Then they sounded the trumpets, and brought him to his dinner with
all mirth and music. Thus were Saul and David anointed by Samuel, and after
them Solomon anointed king.

Of the manner and order of the inauguration and the making of the kings of
Rome.
IT was not lawful by the Law of Romulus, to elect any king in Rome, without
divination, which during the first kings in Rome continued at the election of
any King in Rome before the Consuls time, at what time the Soothsaiers should
ascend up to the top of an hill, or clime upto an high tower, where the
Soothsaier sat upon a stone with his face toward Halycar. lib. 1
the South, with his Auguring staff called Lituus in his left hand, with the
which he divided, and marked out the Lituus.
quarters of the heaven, the four coasts of the South upon the right hand,
and the North upon the left: having done sacrifice, and offered oblations with
sacred vows made, he laid his hand upon the new elected kings head, heauing
up the other hand unto heaven, looking as far as he could to the south, prays
in this sort unto the Gods. Jupiter Pater, si fas est, Numam Pom. cuius ego
caput teneo, regem Romae esse, vti nobis signa certa ac clara sint inter cos
sines quos feci: He earnestly looking into the South parts, either for
lightening or thundering, or some flieng of birds or some strange motion of
stars, at the sight of which things, the Soothsaier The inauguration of the
first kings of Rome.
openly pronounces him to be king elected by the Gods, if no sign had
appeared, yet one ex Collegio Augurorum, standing upon the left hand of the
Soothsaier should openly pronounce him king, lawfully elected, and appointed by
the consent of Jupiter and Mars, which were the two chief Gods, to whom the old
Romans sacrificed: Then the king should be brought into the company of the
sacred Priests called Flamines, and Feciales: there the high Bishop, called
Pontifex maximus should bring him ad Forum, to the Market place, ministering
unto the king his oath.

1 Vt teneret sacra Deorum pie and sincere, 2 Vt Iura sanciret patriae cum cura
and industria. The oath of the Kings of Rome.
3 Vt vrbem Roman defenderet co^stantia and fortitudine 4 Vt Populum tueretur
cum studio and prudentia, 5 Vt debitum honorem and obsequium Pontifici max. to
the Priests, Flamines and Feciales.
Then the Priests Flamines, brought him in a coat of Purple in grain, and
upon that, a long robe of purple color, which Romulus appointed to set forth
the majesty of a king, with twelve Seriea^ts carteng Maces before him, and
twelve Typctaues before the Serieants, to make room, and to keep the people
back: three hundred of the kings guarde called Celeres, and an hundred
Senators attending upon the new King to Jupiters Temple, to offer sacrifice,
and from Jupiters Temple after sacrifice, to his Palace, to mount Palatine.

Of the order of the inauguration and Coronation of the kings of Persea.
IN Persea after great King Cyrus death, for so were the kings of Persea
called, Great kings: his Successors used Cyrus orders, with the like
ceremonies as was solemnized The inaug^tions of the kings of Persia from Cyrus
time.
at the inauguration of King Cyrus: for then there was no anointing of any
king in the whole world but of the kings of Israel: other nations used such
ceremonies as their countries observed in their electing of Kings.

In some countries they made choice of the most likeliest man in sight, as
among the Ethiopians.

Among the Meads, he that excelled in comeliness and tallness of person and
strength of body, should be elected king.

In Libia, he that was most swift in running should be King.

In Persea, then a Kingdom under the Meades, until Cyrus time, whose
greatness grew such, as he became the only Monarch by whom all the East
kingdoms were subdued: his successors, the great Kings of Persea were with
these ceremonies made kings. They should sit in Cyrus chair, they should put on
those garments that Cyrus first ware, which were kept as monuments and
relics for the Kings of Persea. The new King sitting so in Cyrus chair,
three of the greatest Peeresin Persea brought unto him three dishes, in the one
were five dry Figs: in the second a little Turpentine: the third Milk. These
ceremonies being finished, after that the new King had eaten of the dry
figs, and had tasted of the Turpentine, and drank of the milk, he rose from
The ceremonies at the in auguratio^ of the kings of Persea.
Cyrus chair, and was thence brought unto the next hill: for the Perseans had
no Temples, nor Altars there. After supplications done, they sacrificed unto
the Sun, whose Temple (say they) is the whole world. Thence the King is
brought to Persepolis, where the new King again puts on the twelve sundry
robes of Cyrus one after another by several ceremonies to be done, while they
don sacrifice unto the whole host of heaven, the Sun, the Moon and the
Stars, whom the Perseans call in one name Jupiter. Magi there having Tiara
on their heads, and crowned with Tira.
Myrtle, sang their sacred songs Theogonia, while the new King is putting on
of these twelve robes.

After this, the King went to Cyrus chair, and read the laws of Persea: for
as the old Kings of Rome were only by Magi.
the deuination of the Augurers made kings: and instructed in their kingdoms,
so the kings of Persea were by their Magi instructed in their sacrifice, and
taught in their religion, without whom neither was it lawful to the Romans to
do sacrifice Augurer^
without their Augurer stood by, or to the Perseans without their Magi being in
place.

Of the ancient order and ma ner of the inauguration and coronation of the
Emperors of Rome.
THe Romans in the latter time, were wont at the Coronation The first
emperors of Rome were not crowned, 3. crowns be longed to the Roman empire.
of their Emperors, to have three several crowns, the first of silver, which
was kept in Aquisgrane, a city in Ger many, this crown belonged to the states
of Germany, where the late Caesar's were by consent of the whole peers of
Germany crowned first. The 2. was Iron, which was kept in Millaine, a city in
Italy, where likewise he should be crowned with that Iron crown, which
belonged to the kingdom of Lon^barde. The third crown was the imperial
Diadent of the Romans Empire, kept by the Popes of Rome, and before the Popes,
by the Bishops of Rome, which continued after Christ 600, years and od: Two
days before the Emperor should be crowned with the third and last Diadem, he
should come unto the Chapel of the Emperors palace, the Bishop (after
sacrifice and service done) should anoint the Emperor, having on his head the
Iron Crown of Longobard, The ceremonies at the coronation of the Emperors of
Rome
where before he was crowned.

Now before him was brought by a Marquess, a golden scepter, and by a Duke a
sword of gold: the 3, a sphere of gold with a cross, full of precious stones:
the 4, the imperial Diadem of the Romans: From thence the Emperor was brought
to Vaticanum by a Cardinal, where, after he had read many Roman ceremonies and
customs ex libris Pontificiis before Caesar, he held him a book, whereon the
Emperor should swear to defend and maintain the Pontifical dignity of Rome.
From thence two other Cardinals should lead the Emperor into S. Gregory's
chapel, where he should wear the imperial robe, with certain weeds and robes of
rich garments of Damatia The orders of the coronatio^
for that time appointed: there also certain ceremonies were read to him,
concerning his care and diligence in the administration of the Roman Empire.
Omitting the particular celebration of sundry ceremonies, he was with the holy
oil anointed upon his shoulders, and upon his right arm by the ancient
Cardinal, and after, by the Bishop of Rome stald in his imperial seat, where
the Pope delivers unto him a golden scepter, signifieng thereby he should
godly rule his people: after, he delivered him a naked sword to persecute the
enemies of Christ: thirdly, a golden apple: and fourthly, a Crown, called
rather Tiara, for few Emperors of Rome used to be crowned at their inauguration
at their first coming to the Empire.

These were Insignia Romani imperii: the Emperor after these ceremonies being
thus finished, kneeling down with great reverence kissed the popes foot, and
took his seat upon the left hand of the Pope, which was very richly appointed,
and then was called Emperor: then the Bishop and the Emperor received both
the Communion: and after, the Trompettes sounded, the belles rang, the people
shouted, they brought the Pope unto his horse, the Emperor standing on the
left side of the Popes horse, gave the styrrop to the Popes foot, and then (the
Emperor mounted on horse) took still the left hand of the Pope, before whom
were carried three Ensigns. The first was the Ensign of the Church of Rome:
the second was the Popes peculiar Ensign. The third, was the Emperors.

This briefly was the manner and order at the coronation of the Emperor Charles
the fifth, the only Emperor of Rome since the time of Charles the great. 6.
Call. Martii


Of the Coronation and anointing of the late kings of Rome: in this sort.
THe king that should be elected King of the Romans, was apparelled in a robe
of Red silk, straight gyrded about him, upon the which he ware another
Italicall gown, his cloak was wrought with gold over, and his hat in like
sort, as the seven Electors hattes of Germany were: in this apparel he is
brought under a canapie, who^ some of the kings peers did carry over the kings
head into the temple. The Electors do carry the imperial Ensigns before the
King, which were before, at the coronation of Emperors, (...) golden Apple, a
type of the whole world, which County Palatine, one of the Electors, carries
on the right hand before the King: The Scepter was carried on the left hand
before him by him that is Elector in Brandenburge: The Sword is carried in the
middle before the King by the Duke of Saxony: and the King himself led between
two Bishops.

Where, after the King was placed in his seat, and the rest of the States and
Peers of Germany, with foreign Ambassadors being likewise placed, some
prayers and ceremonies ended, and they brought unto the Altar between sour
Bishops, the Bishop of Treuire, the Bishop of Vnizheburge on the right hand,
the Bishop of Collen and the Bishop of Spire upon the left hand of the king,
the Archbishop of Moguntia solemnizing the sacred service at the Altar, which
was also to anoint him king.

Before the Altar the King kneeled, being demanded publicly by the
Archbishop, whether he would observe the christian The inauguration of the
latter Kings of Rome.
faith, defend the Church of Rome, administer justice unto the people, augment
and increase the Roman Empire, protect widows, Orphans and the poor: And
last of all, whethee he would yield due reverence and obedience to the Bishop
of Rome: To these demandes the king affirmatively answered, that he would. Then
after some prayers done, the Archbishop anointed the former part of his head
and his shoulders, also, his breast, his right arm, and the palm of his right
hand. After, the County Pallatine, with these sour before named Bishops,
leads him into a secret place, where the king puts on certain hallowed
Garments, which Charles the great was wont to wear at his coronation.

From thence the King again was lead unto the Altar, where the Archbishop of
Moguntia delivered unto his hand a naked sword, with some ceremonies and words
in commending the regal seat and kingdom of Italy into his hand, the Sigon.
lib 4. Cap. 24.
king put the sword into the sheath, and the Elector of Saxonia lay the sword
on the kings side. After, the Archbishop did put a Ring on his finger, and
laid a cloak upon him, which were for the coronation of the kings of Rome,
by Charles the great appointed 700. years past and more. Then was the king
brought and stalde in Charles the great his seat, as a full possession of the
kingdom: where then the Scepter and the Apple were delivered unto him: and the
Crown was put on his head: then the Archbishop pronounced him King of Rome,
commending the king unto the people, and committing the people unto the King,
at what time the Trompets sounded, and all kind of mirth and melody
solemnized, which I omit to write. In this order was Maximilian crowned King
of Rome. Cigo. lib. 4. Cap. 24


Of the election of the Emperors and of the kings of Germany.
THe election of the late kings of Rome are in this sort, Septemuiri.
the seven Princes Electors called Septemviri meet early, about six of the
clock in Romanaeo, there they consult until nine: from thence they go in
solemn order into S. Bartholmewes. First goes before, the Archbishop The
manner and order at the election of the late kings of Rome and Emperors of
Germany, by the 7. electors
of Moguntia and the Bishop of Treuire: Next went the Bishop of Collen and the
King of Bohemia: Then last went County Pallatine, the Elector of Saxon. and the
Elector of Brandenburge, and so in order sat in the Church: and after some
prayers done, they came from their seats with great pomp and solempnity unto
the Altar: where every one of the seven princes Electors take there a solemn
oath one after another, in these words.

I do swear upon this Evangelist before me, that with all my faith which I owe
unto God, my diligence and care which I owe unto the Empire, without reward, or
hope of greater honor that I will choose with all faith and truth, a just and
The oath of the Electors in choosing both kings and Empetors of Rome.
a fit man for the Kingdom of Rome, as much as in me lies.

After this oath is ministered unto the seven Princes Electors severally one
after another, they return into their seats: then they sing most solempnly with
Organes, Shalmes and other music, Veni Creator.

After this, they withdraw themselves into the Council house, where they stay
half an hour (the door locked upon the^) they call the chief Peers of
Germany unto their Council house, as Messengers unto the Emperor, to signify
their election, and to desire the Emperor in name of the Electors of his good
will herein, and if his Majesty would vouchsafe to come to the Church of Saint
Bartholmewes at Frankford, a place as Westminster is in England, or S. Dennis
in France.

If the Emperor come, he is received by the Archbishop of Moguntia and the
Duke of Bauaria, and the rest of the Electors meet him at the Church door
according to their custom, and there with solemnity and pomp, they bring him
into the Council house in his imperial robe, and his Diadem on his head to
accept of this election: and from thence (after the election is signified unto
him by the Archbishop of Moguntia) in order they come forth into the church:
the Emperor unto his imperial seat: the new elected King lead between the
aforesaid four Bishops unto the Altar, according to the woonted rites and
ceremonies of their elections, they set the King, and there he is crowned King
by the Electors.

Te Deum etc. is sung, then the trumpets, belles, gunnes, and all kind of
sounding is there, and after all this is done, they lead the King unto his
royal seat, provided in the midst of the Church, and there proclaimed King
of the Romans, and Kings of Rome heirs of Augustus.
heir of Augustus.

Thus shortly have I laid down the manner of the election of the latter kings
of Rome.

They have their several ceremonies in crowning of their Kings and Emperors:
In Aquisgrane with silver: In Millaine with Iron, and in Rome, with a Crown of
gold: For these three Crowns belonged proper to the Empire of Rome.

Of the manner and form of the inauguration and anointing of the kings of
France at their coronations with all other ancient ceremonies and solemnities.
FOr the inauguration and anointing of the Kings of France: First, a regal
throane is made in the body of the Church at S. Denis, the night before the
king of France is crowned, the keys and custody of the Church is committed to
the kings guard: the King that night enters into the church very devoutly to
pray, and there continues a while: in the morning the kings watch with his
guard; lock all the doors of the church: morning prayers being ended, the King
with all his barons, nobles and peers, with all archbishops and Bishops early in
the morning come to the church, where the archbishop of Rhemes does most richly
attire himself to celebrate service. In the mean time, the Abbot and the
Monks of Rhemes bring Ampullam to S. Dennis with great reverence, the
Archbishop coming to the Altar in his Pontifical robes, and speaks to the
king in this wise.

We request thee, and require thee, that thou defend the canonical privilege
of the Church committed to our charge, and that thou will observe justice and
the law of France, as that The charge given to the K. of France at their
coronation.
thou will keep us and save us, as a King ought in his Kingdom preserve and
maintain any that puts confidence unto him, whether he be of the Clergy,
or of the Laiety: To this the King does promise; and voweth, that he will
defend, maintain, and keep with all his power both the state of the Clergy,
and the Laiety, saying, Promitto and ^ro me vnicuique vestrum, lege^ and ius
debitum Ecclesiae seruaturum.

This does, the king of France promise and swear with a solemn oath before
all the states of France: After the kings The Kings oath.
oath is ended, two Archb. take the king by the hand, and lead him before the
high Altar, where he kneeleth until some certain songs and prayers be ended,
Upon the Altar is set most so lempnly the imperial Diadem of France, with
another lesser crown beside the regal sword in his scabberd: there are also
laid upon the Altar a pair of golden spurs, a Scepter of pure gold, with a
golden rod, springingforth (as it were) out of an Iuory hand: also a pair of
hose, called Sandanali of purple collor The ancient monuments at the corons
tion of the K. of France.
wrought ouet cum floribus Lirints of pure gold, a coat which is called
Dalmatica, and a regal cloak: these were ancient monumentes and orders of
France, instituted by Charles the great, and left as relics and monuments
after him to his successors, the kings of France. These ought the Abbat of S.
Dennis to bring to Rhemes from his own Monastry, the K. standing before the
Altar, vnlaceth himself unto his shirt, the great Chamberlain of France
receives at the Abbat of S. Dennis the sandals, which the king wears: After,
the Duke of Burgundy puts the kings spurs on, and presently takes them off
again, then the Archbishop girdeth the sword to the kings side, and straight
takes it off, and draws it out of the scabberd, and delivers it into the
kings hand: saying Accipe gla dium tibi datum, quo possis repellere omnes
inimicos sanctae Ecclesiae, regnu^ sibi commissum defendere. etc. Take this
sacred Sword which is delivered unto thee from above, whereby thou may resist
and banish all the enemies of God, and the adversaries of his Church, defend
the kingdom committed unto thee. Then the Chore sang this Antheme, Confortare,
and esto v^hs, and obserua legem domini Dei tui. etc. The words of the
ceremonies.
Be strong and corragious, and observe the laws of thy Lord God, that thou
may walk in his wales and keep his commandments, as testimonies of his
love, and God shall strengthen thee, and save thee wheresoever thou be.

The king takes the sword out of the Archbishopes hand and delivers it to
the Constable of France to be carried before the King, then the king is
anointed with the holy and most sacred oil. which was brought by the Abbot
of Rhemes, but before that the K. is anointed, the Archbishop reads 3. short
collects for the grace and blessing of God, whereby the king might the better
govern his people with wisdom and virtue. Then the King kneeling is ready
for the holy oil, and by the Archbishop is anointed in five places of his
body. First, upon his head, then upon his breast, thirdly in the at me holes:
fourthly, on his elbowes, and fifthly, and upon both his shoulders, saying
these words at every several anointing. Vnguo te oleo sanctificato. etc. I
anoint thee with this sanctified Oil in the name of the Father. etc. and all
the Bishops and States say, Amen.

While the Archbishop annointeth the King, they in the Chore sang this Antheme.
Sadoke the high priest, and Nathan the prophet came to Solomon at Jerusalem,
merrily The Anthem at the annoin ting of the King.
saying, God save king Salomo^ for ever. The^ the Archbishop recites a
Collect, desiring God to anoint this King, as he had anointed his Priests,
Prophets, and his Martires, which ouely through faith subdued Kingdoms. etc.

When the Archbishop had ended some prayers after the an nointing of the King,
and being lead up again by the Archbishop and Bishops, the great Chamberlain
of France puts upon the King that rich garment, called Dalmaticus Cereleus,
like a coat, and upon that he puts a most sumptuous Princely cloak, called
Regale pallium. Then the Archbishop delivers unto the King the ring, and
puts it upon the middle finger of the right hand, saying, Accipe anulum.
etc, Take this ring in token of thy holy faith, the firmness and soundness of
the Kingdom, whereby thou art to banquish thy enemies through triumphant
power, banish all heresies, and to bring thy subjects to continue faithful to
God through Christ. Then the Archbishop delivers the Scepter in the Kings
right hand, saying also: Accipe Sceptrum in signum regalis potentiae. etc. Take
this Scepter of thy Kingdom, in token of regal power to govern the kingdom
truly and faithfully and to protect the Church, and the people of God.

After the King and the Scepter are in this sort deliue red to the king, he
puts into the left hand of the king, the golden rod, in like manner saying,
Accipe Virgam virtutis aequitatis. etc. Take this rod of equity and virtue,
whereby thou may instruct the ignorant, and raise them that fall, to comfort
the good men, and to fear the evil through him that is the rod of Iesse, the
key of David, and the scepter of Israel.

After this, the Lord Chancellor of France (if he be in place present, if he be
absent, the Archbishop with all the Peers of France, as well of the Clergy, as
of the Laiety, do solemply bring the Regal Crown of France from the Altar
unto the Archbishop, who sets it upon the Kings head, all the states of
France laieng their hands upon the Diadem, and there hold their hands, while the
Archbishop pronounces these words, Deus coronet te Corona gloriae, and
honoris, and iusticiae. etc God crown thee with the crown of glory and
honor, with the crown of Justice and constancy, that thou by strong faith and
fruits of good works, may come to the kingdom of glory.

After that the King is crowned, the Archbishop recyteth certain short
prayers, and at the end of every prayer, the Bishops, Peers and the states
say, Amen. When these prayers be ended, the Archbishop turns his face to the
King, and says, Stabilis esto, and retine statum. etc. Be strong and constant,
and keep thy state, which thou have by succession from thy Father by the law
of heritage.

These ceremonies being ended, the Archbishop with the rest of the States, lead
the king in most solemn and triumphant manner unto a high throane, made and
provided purposely for the King, that he might be seen of all sitting in his
chair, where the Archbishop that does solemnize this coronation, comes unto
the King and kisseth him on the cheeks, saying, Viuat Rex in eternum. Let the
King live for ever. In like sort, the chiefest Peers and states of Laiety and
Clergy use the like crremonies, and sateng the like words: the Gospel being
read, the King stands up of his chair, takes off the Crown from his head
until the Gospel be ended: Two chief Archbyshops do bring the Evangelist
from the Altar unto the King in his throane, and there kisseth the book, and
after is brought by the states to the Altar, to offer oblation, service. etc.
Bring ended, the Archbishop takes the imperial Diadem of the King, and those
ceremonial robes and holy garments, provided for the coronation of any King
in France, and puts on the Kings head a lesser Crown with other princely
rich apparel, and so the king is brought into his palace with all solemn
pomp and triumph: The Barons of France do bring Ampullam sanctam very
honorably Ampulla, a sa ^ed relic.
again into Rhemes. These are the whole ceremonies at the coronation of the
Kings of France, even from Charles the great his tune, and by him first
appointed, as a general inauguration of all the kings of France.

Philippus, surnamed the Fair, being ready to die, called his eldest son,
named Jews Hutinus, whom he taught to Phillippus Pulcher, his charge to his
son at his death.
heal the evil sickness, called Strumae, instructed his son to use the words
which at this day are used, commending chastity and holiness of life to be a
great cause in curing of this disease.

Of the inauguration and anointing of the kings of Hungaria at their
coronation.
AT the inaugurat^ and coronation of the kings of Hu^garia (...) the peers and
nobility of Hungaria and Bohemia are present with all the pomp and sole^pnity
that maybe thought of, the which I will not write, but only of their ceremonies
in Vladislaus.
their coronation, for at the inauguration of Vladislaus, king of Hungary,
upon the eleventh of the Kalends of October. he was brought into Saint Mary's
Church, between two bishops. Before the king 3. of the chiefest peers of
Hungary carried, one the Diadem, the 2. carried the royal Scepter, and the 3
carried the golden Aple, which is (as I said before) a (...) figure of the
world: before the Diadem, the scepter and the Aple were carried by two bishops,
two other royal Ensigns belonging to these ceremonies, a silver cross by the
Pr^r of Laurena, and a golden Par by the Bishop of Syrmia, before these again
were carried two swords, the one naked, the other in a golden scabberd: before
these was the kings banner Regale vexillu^ royally displased, with other great
solempnities: when the King was brought into his royal seat into S. Ma. all the
ensigns of the K. were laid before the Altar, the Metropolitan of Hungary
celebrating service, the King is brought from his seat unto the Altar, having
upon the one side, all the Bishops and cleagy of his kingdom, on the other
side all the Princes and peers of the country. When the king is brought unto
the Altar before the Metropolitan, one of the Bishops that leads the king,
utters these words unto the Metropolitan.

Most reverend father, the holy Church does require, that this noble knight
should be advanced unto the regal dignity of a king. The Metropolitan
demands, whether he be worthy of such honor and dignity? unto the which, all the bishops and princes present affirm, that for wisdom, virtue and manhood he
was thereunto elected: then the Metropolitan charge the K. with The charge
given to the K of Hungary at his coronation.
the laws and customs of the Kings of Hungary, his predecessors, gives him
his oath in this sort. That he should siri^, with a pure sound religion defend
the Church of Christ, and the catholic faith therein received unto his death.
2. To defend the common wealth from foreign invasion. 3. To maintain peace
with all care and diligence. 4. That he would do nothing unfit or unseemly for
a King to do. 5. To use justice and equity to his people. These with many
others, the King is sworn by the Metropolitan at his coronation. After the oath,
the Metropolitan be^etheth God to send this new elected K. the blessings that
was given to Abraham, Moses, David, in vanquishing their enemies: the K
kneeling upon the left hand of the Metropolitan before the Altar at these
prayers, which being finished, the K. is anointed on his right arm, and upon
his right shoulder, with the sacred oil, called Arcanu^. After the ancient
customs and manners of the kings of Hungaria: Then was the King by the Bishops
and Princes brought into his seat, and from thence he was lead into a secret
chancel, Stephen, the first king anointed in Hungary.
putting off his princely robes, and putting on the old ancient and regal
weeds of K. Stephen, which were left there for monuments from Steven for the
coronation of the Kings of Hungary his successors; as France do of Charles
the great wrought over with silk and gold, where the pictures of the twelve
Apostles before the throne of God upon their knees, cum auris cothurnis on his
feet. He was in this habit lead again to his seat, and from thence brought
unto the Altar, where the Metropolitan deliuerth into his hand the naked
sword, sa^g unto the king in this sort.

Take this sacred sword by the authority of the Apostles, to thee it is given,
to exercise justice, to maintain truth, to reward virtue, and to punish vice:
With this sword protect The crowning of the Kings of Hungary.
thy people, defend the Church, persecute heretics, save widows and Orphans
from wrongs. These with many other good words being spoken by the
Metropolitan, the King flourishes the naked sword upon the right hand, and
then upon the left hand, in token that he will execute the laws of Hungary
justly and truly every where, and then puts the Sword into the scabbetd, and
girdeth it to his side: Then the Bishops do bring unto the Metropolitan the
crown, which he takes from the Bishops, and sets it upon the Kings head,
saying these words.

Take this holy and sacred Diadem in honor and glory of the Trinity, and
know that thereby thou art called to be also a spiritual Pastor in the
mysteries of the Church, and hoc creed opus fortitudinis esse, against the
enemies of God.

Then the Metropolitan takes the Scepter, and delivers it into the Kings
hand, and says these words, Virtutis and veritatis virgam accipe: receive
here the rod of virtue and truth, whereby thou must put down the wicked proud
man, exalt the good and godly man, direct the ignorant, remember that this
Scepter is virga aequitatis, and virga regni, and therefore use justice, and
love truth: for that purpose God has anointed thee king of Hungary.

This being finished, the king is lead by the Metropolitan, the Bishops and the
Peers from the Altar unto his seat with his crown upon his head, with his
Scepter in his hand, and with the rest of the Ensigns carried before him.

When he is placed in his seat by the Metropolitan, he says unto the King,
Stet hic inclite Rex ac regna. Then the Metropolitan does make his prayer for
the King, in the latter end of which prayer he says, Firme^tur manus tuae,
exaltetur dextra tua, and iudicium praeparatio sedis tuae.

After this, he is brought again by the Metropolitan unto the Altar, where
both the Metropolitan and the King receive the Communica. After service done,
the King and the Metropolitan go together, until the king come to a sumptuous
regal seat, provided for him, where the Laws and customs of Hungaria are
read unto him: where the King (taking the Crown from his head) swears upon
the Crown to perform all the laws and customs of Hungaria as nigh as he
Vladislaus was crowned and anointed King of Hungary
can: and with that, the people shout and cry aloud, with all mirth and melody
they can.

This is the ancient order of the coronation of the Kings of Hungaria. This
inauguration was solemnized upon the eleventh day of the Kalends of October,
at the coronation of Vladislaus, King of Hungaria.

The ceremonies and solemnities at the inauguration of the kings of Polonia, at
their crowning, and at their anointing.
FIrst, all the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats and Suffragans, with all the Peers
of Polonia, shall meet together in the cathedral Church of Graconia, the
Bishops in their pontifical weeds, Cum stolis albis, Mitris infulis super
pellices. In like sort, the Knights, Barons, and all the Nobles of Polonia
meet in the cathedral Church: The Archbyshops, Bishops, and chief peers with
great pomp go in order to bring the new eleted King to his coronation: The
King was apparelled by the Lord Marshall of Poland, and by the chief Master
of Ceremonies, whose Office is always to attend the ceremonial Order, Ensigns
and Monumentes.

The king had Sandals on his feet, Gloves on his hands, a Coat, a Cloak
painted and figured with alba Dalmatica, in these ceremonial weeds appointed
for the kings of Polonja to come from the Palace to the Cathedral Church:
where the king is lead between two Bishops, the rest before him and behind
him, in most solemn order from the Church into his seat: where standing in
his royal Seat, the Archbish. The ceremonies used at the coronatio^ of the King
of Poland.
recites certain short Collects, the Crown, the Scepter, the golden Apple,
and a naked Sword were carried before the king: the Bishops, Abbots, with the
Archbishops, had their Crosses carried in solempn order before the king
(likewise) until they came to the Church door: there the Ambassadors and
Legates of foreign kings, receive from these Noble men, the crown, the
Scepter, the Apple and the Sword: and they carried them from the Porch of the
Cathedral church unto the high Altar, upon the which Altar, these Regal Ensigns
are laid: this being done, one of the Bishops, after a few ceremonial prayers,
The admoni tio^ and charge given to the K. of Poland at his coronation.
comes unto the kings seat, and standing before the king, he admonishes the
king of the great dignity that he was to receive at the hands of the Bishops,
the Ministers of God and the (...) of Christ, for that day, to anoint and to
crown him king of Polonia: giving the king to understand, of the faith, pictie
and virtue that belong to Princes: reciting to him the care and diligence that
should be in a king: considering all powers and authoryties to come from God,
by whom kings do rule and govern, These, with many the like words as are
spoken to the kings of Hungaria: for that diverse of the ceremonies and crowning
of the kings of Hungaria and of the kings of Polonia, do agree in many things.
Then, the new elected king, is brought from his seat unto the Altar, where the
Archbysh. is at service: After Prayers done, then he turns unto the new
king, and demands these questions of him. Will thou hold and maintain the
holy Apostolic faith, from the Catholic Church received. The king affirms
and says, I will. The Archbishop The demands to the Kings of Poland, with
their answer to the same.
demands again: Will thou be a Defender, to guard the Church and the
Ministers thereof: The king answers: I will. The third time, the Archb. asks
the king: Will thou maintain, rule and defend the kingdom which God commits
into thy hand, according to the laws and customs of Polonia. To this the K.
answers and says, that he will perform by the help of God al these things
faithfully and truly with all care and diligence to the uttermost of his power.
And then the king kneeling before the Archbishop, baraheaded, with both his
hands upon a book, utters these words, I N. (naming his own name, that shall
be King of Polonia) do profess and promise before God and his Angels, that I
will with all faith and truth keep the laws, exercise justice, maintain the
peace and quietetnesse of the church, and yield due obedience reverence and
canonical honor to the Pope of Rome, and to his Bishops pro posse and nosce
as Emperors and other The oath of the K. of Poland at his coronation.
Kings do, and will observe due honor and love to the states of Polonia, so
God help me and the contents of this sacred book.

Then the Archbishop recites a collect that it would please God to bless him,
as he did bless Abraham and Moses, and to send him victories and triumphs as
he did send to Joshua and to David, and to teach him with wisdom, as Solomon:
with the mildnes of Moses, with the fortitude of Joshua, with the humility of
David, and with the faith of Abraham. etc

Then the Archbishop kneeling on his knees, and the king flat on his face upon
the ground, sings aloud from the high Altar this verse, that it would please
God to accept of this service as a reasonable sacrifice: the Quire answering,
We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

Then the Archbishop standing, turns unto the King, holding the cross upon
him, being upon the ground, goes forward with his prayers, saying Hunc in
Regem coronandum benedicere digneris, that it would please God to bless this
new elected King: the Chore answering, as before.

Then the Bishops, the Abbats, and the Chore, sing the L^tany Supra Regem, over
the king, which all this while lies flat on his face upon the ground.

When the Letany is ended, the Archbishop sits down, the King before him
kneeling, the Archbishop annointeth him, with the thumb of his right hand, he
annointeth the king in the palm of his right hand, and from thence unto his
elbow, Their King is anointed.
and between his two shoulders, saying, I anoint thee king with this holy and
sacred oil, in the name of the Father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghost.

Then the Archbishop prays unto God to bless this anointed king by him, as
he did bless Iehu and Azachiel, being anointed by the hands of Helias, the
one K. of Israel, and the other King of Siria: As David and Saul by the handsof
Samuel.

After many of these godly Collects and prayers for the inauguration and
anointing of kings published, the Archbishop does again attire the King with
his Dalmatical robe, saying Dalmatical robe.
Take this robe, formed and framed quadrant four square, that thou may
know, that the four coasts of all the whole world are subjects to the divine
power of God, and that there is no power nor authority but from God.

From the high Altar the King is lead into his royal seat, where the
Archbishop delivers unto the King (kneeling up* his knees) a Sword, saying,
Accipe Gladium de super Altar, The words and ceremonies at the coronatiof the
king of Polonia.
etc. Ta^e this Sword taken from the Altar, and consecrated by the authority of
the Apostles, to revenge evil, to press iniquity, and to destroy the enemies
of God. In like sort he sets the Diadem upon the Kings head, with like
words and ceremonies as the Hungarians do. Then the Archbishop delivers the
scepter into his right hand, and the Apple into his left hand, and utters
these words, Accipe virga^, etc. Take this scepter, the scepter of equity and
virtue, the scepter of thy Kingdom. And so the Apple, the figure and type of
the world, with the like words as before.

At that time the new anointed king does offer bread and wine for sacrifice,
which being ended, he is lead into the midst of the Cathedral Church into a
regal throane made for that purpose, whereof by the Archbysh, the king is put
in possession of his kingdom, saying these words, Sede and retine locu^ tibi a
Deo delegatum. Sit and keep that place, given unto thee from God. Then he
says, Firmetur manus tuae, and exaltetur dextra tua, as before.

After this, the Archbishop standing upon the right hand of the King, he
prays unto God to visit this King, as he did visit Moses in the bush, Joshua
in his tents, Gedion in the fields, and Samuel in the Temple. This being thus
finished, the King is brought into his Palace with all the pomp and
solempnity that may be.

These are the ceremonies and solempnities at the coronation of any of the
kings of Poland.

Of the anointing and coronation of the kings of Bohemia, and of the
ceremonies and solempnities thereof.
AT the very day that the Kings of Bohemia should be anointed and crowned,
all the knights, Barons, and chief Nobles of Bohemia, meet at the palace of
the new elected king about six of the clock in the morning From thence with
all pomp he is most rotally brought to the Cathedral Church at Praga.

The Metropolitan of Bohemia, before whom went four of the principal Peers
of Bohemia, two of the four carried either of them a loaf of bread of some
round bigness, the Vincenslaus the first anointed king of Bohemia, by whom
all their relics and ceremonies were first instituted.
one on a golden standing cup, the other on a silver cup, for that gold and
silver are fit for Sacrifice. The other two carried two golden pots full of
white wine. Before the king are carried a rich precious Diadem, the Scepter and
the Apple. The Sword, which was a monument that Vincenslaus left to his
Successors, was carried by the Chancellor of Bohemia in a scabberd of red
Holoserico. Thus the King was lead out of Holoserico, a kind of preci ous
costly silk.
the Chapel of S Vinceslaus, being by the Chamberlain of Bohemia attyred
after the manners and ancient custom of the Bohemians, to the high (...), where
the Archbishop of Praga attended and expected the (...).

As Soon as he that carried the Diadem before the King came in sight of the
people, the troop of Trompeters sounded and a number of brazen harnes were
with all triumphant The solempn music and melody, used at the corona tion of
the K. of Bohemia.
mirth likewise sounded the (...) and other music^ instrumets (...) also to
sing with the (...). (...) those melodies were (...) the (...) instruments
(...) brought from Vinceslaus Chapel, and laid upon the high Altar: all other
regal Ensigns called Insignia regia symbola, were also laid upon the Altar,
except the (...) ^ies of bread and the pots of wine, which were laid upon a
side table.

When this musical noise ended, the King was solempn^ load into the Altar, and
(...) by all the Bishopp^ of Bohemia before the Archbishop, of whom they
require in the name of the holy Church, their mother, that this new elected
Prince should be King of Bohemia: the (...) the Archyshop The dema^ds of the
Archb. to the Nobility of Bohemia concerning their new elected King.
demands of the Bishops, whether they thought him fit and worthy for so
high a dignity. They all with one voice affirmed the woorthenesse of the man.
Then all they kneeling down with the Archbishop and the King, fell to prayers.
(...) prayers, the Archbyshop^ blesses the King three several times, wishing
unto him (...) most happy and fortunate reign: to the which the Bishops
answer, Terogamus audi nos.

From hence the King was lead by the Bishops to his seat being set in the
midst of the Quire, under a ca^apy of great marvelous rich state, the
bishops cum suo quisq Episcopali pedo on the one side of the King, with the
rest of the Peers and Nobles of Bohemia on the other side, and also they that
carried the Diadem, the Scepter, the Sword and the Apple.

From his seat again the King was brought unto the high Altar, (...) the
Archbishop ^ead before the King ex libro rituali, the customs, Ceremonies and
orders of his Predecessors.

After he had anointed the new King with his right thump with the sacred oil
upon his arm in the manner and for^ue ^f The anointing of the (...). of
Bohemia.
a cross: Likewise he anointed him on his breast, and on both his shoulders.

This being ended, the Noblemen brought to the Archbishop the Diadem, the
Scepter, the Sword, the Apple and the Ring: the receiving the same, does first
sanctify and (...) them before he delivers them to the king: After, in this
order, he does deliver the sword into the Kings hand naked: and The ceremonies
at the coronation of the King of Bohemia.
after, the Archbishop takes the naked Sword out of the Kings hand and
puts it in the Scabberd, and girdeth it to the Kings side. Secondly, he
puts the ring upon that ^nger of the right hand which is called An^laris
digitus.

Thirdly, he delivers into the left hand the Apple, and the Scepter into the
right hand of the King.

These Ceremonies being once ended, the Archbyshoppe does ask the King
certain questions on this manner, as the Polonians use at the coronation of
their Kings.

Will thou maintain the faith: Will thou defend the Church, and be a buckler
and shield unto the Ministers thereof. Will thou (...) and defend this Kingdom
committed The charge gi uen to the K. of Bohemia at his corona tion.
to thy charge: Will thou observe the laws and customs of Bohemia.

To al these the King answers and says, I will: and thereupon takes hie
solempn oath. Then is there also a nobleman in the name of the King, that
demands also of the people, whether they be contented to be subject to this
new elected The oath of the King.
King, and whether they confirm the Kingdom unto him with all obedience and
faith due unto him to be performed and yielded.

This being consented unto by the states and the people, certain of the chief
men come before the King in the name of all the whole Kingdom, laying their
hands upon the imperial Diadem, as the manner is of Bohemia, do swear
solempnly with their faith and truth, in the name of all the people of
Bohemia, to serve the King, and to obey him as their sovereign Lord and
master.

This being ended, the Archbishop pronounces out, and says. Thanks be unto
God, and therewith the Trompets, gunnes, belles, altogether sounds, with such
noise and triumph, until the King be brought again with all pomp and
solempnitie unto his palace.

This is the manner and ceremonies of the anointing and inauguration of the
Kings of Bohemia at their coronation.

Of the inauguration and anointing of the great Duke of Muscouia, with the
ceremonies at their coronation.
AT the coronation of the great Duke of Muscouia, all the states of Muscouia,
which they call Camesi, assemble together at S Michaell, their chief Temple,
the day appointed for the coronation: the City is so strawed with flowers and
sweet odours, and set forth with boughs that their triumph is great, feasting
according to the custom of the Muscouites. The great men meet the Duke, or
the Emperor, and bring him into the Temple: who at his coming into the
Temple, an old fatherly man meets him, having on a long garment down to the
ground, Bo^bycina vest. This embraced the Emperor most courteously, for he was
the Metropolitan of Muscouia, or the chief priest, which they Muscouian
Ceremonies
call Princeps sacrorum, whose authority in that country is great.

In the midst of the Temple, was made a Theator with seats to sit on, and with
stairs to pass to every place of the Theator, being set forth with most
sumptuous shows: The seat of the Emperors was made must royal, and with
great A seat or a chair.
magnificence sitting in Scamno with a rich purple cap on his head beset with
gold and precious stones: a precious garment wrought with gold and ^aced cloase
at his breast, called Bombyeina vestis, his hands so beset with Jewels, that
only the Emperors hands and his head were to be woondred at.

Now, the Emperor being in his Palace, the States and the great men in their
seats, the chief Priest or the Metropolitan (...) his face, and looks upon
the Emperor, saying, My most loving Son, and great Duke of Muscouia now the
Gods have placed thee in the highest tower of Fortune, and in the great state
of dignity, not to harm or hurt thy people, but to help and to guide them^ot
to devour them but to relieve them, ministering laws and justice to every man
alike, saying before thine eyes, the noble examples of the best Emperors: thy
father brought much calamity, and brought many dangers to this Empire.

Will thou defend thy country with Justice, and with The Metropolitans
questions to the Emperor.
Arms, make much of good men and subdue the wicked. If thou do this, we thy
Citizens here will pray unto the regal Gods of supernall and infernal power
to bless thee with much felicity, that in thee we may see our Country
flourish.

This being done, the people make great joy and triumph from the highest to the
lowest: and therewithal much money is thrown among the vulgar people.

I could not read of any crown, nor of any other monuments among the
Muscouites, for it seemed by the tyranny of the Emperors, that they use very
few godly ceremonies.

I should have set down, at the coming of the great Duke through the street,
the peoples throug was such, that many were with naked swords to make way for
the Emperor to pass by, who commanded by all rig^ur and extremity to keep
the people off.

Of the inauguration of the great Duke of Hetruria, Cosmus Medices, by pope
Pius the first, at Rome, with the ceremonies and solempnities thereunto
belonging.
THe Pope, prepared to go to the Chapel of Sixtus, where the Cardinals and
the States of the most part of Italy expected his coming, having his triple
crown and his Pontifical robes on, as is the manner at such solemn
inaugurations: Cosmus, Duke of Florence, which was to be made the great Duke of
Hetrucia, appareled with his princely attire, carried the Popes train into the
Chapel of Sixtus: The Duke was placed between two Priest-Cardinals: for you
must understand that there were degrees of Three degrees of Cardinals.
Cardinals. The first Degree, were Deacon-Cardinals, the second, were
Priest-Cardinals, the third were Bishop-Cardinalles. At these Cermonies, the
Duke has that woonted place, between two priest-Cardinals, being apparelled,
not as the Duke of Florence, but as the great duke of Hetruria.

This word (Great) was among the Jews, Chief, as the high Priest. Among the
Perseans, the Grecians and Romans, How this word Magnus was esteemed.
they used it as the greatest title and dignity of name that might be given.
For among the Assirians was but one called Belus magnus the great. Among the
Chaldeans, but one Nabuchadnezzar the great. Among the Perseans, one Xerxes the
great: and so in Macedonia one Alexander the Belus. Xerxes. Alexander.
great: and in Asia, but one Antiochus the great. In Rome, because their
Emperors were great, were three, as Pompey the great, Constantine the great.
So now the great Duke of Hetruria, a fellow to any Emperor being created.

Unto the Pope were brought a Crown of gold, and a silver Scepter: after the
Epistle of the Mass was read, and the The great pomp at the D. of Hetruria his
coronatio^
great Duke was lead in solemn order between two Dukes from his seat unto the
high Altar, where the Pope after a few prayers for the Duke, blessed the
Crown and the Scepter, being received by the Cardinal, and the^ he takes the
Dukes Cap off and puts the Crown upon his head, saying: Accipe Corona^. etc.
And the Scepter into his hand, saying: Accipe The cere^nies at the coronation
of the great Duke of Hetruria.
Virgam amoris. This being done, the Duke of Hetruria kisseth the Popes foot,
and is brought again between two Cardinals to his seat, and from his seat,
within a while, he is lead between two Cardinals to the Altar to offer his
oblation, which is, a Goulden Chalice with a Cover and a golden Basin: upon the
Chalice was wrought (by curious Art) three pictures of Faith, Hope and
Charity: which three, held the Chalice with their hands, having under their
feet the four Evangelists: There was added also very curiously on the Chalice,
the Arms and Ensigns of the pope, and of the great Duke.

The service being ended, the great Duke was solempnly again to take his oath,
which was in this sort.

I Cosmus Medices great Duke of Hetruria, do promise and swear to the holy
Churce of Rome and Sea Apostolic, all woonted obedience, reverence, and
warship, which The oath of Cos. Medice^ D. of Florence, when he was made Duke
of Hetruria.
I by my Legates have hitherto performed.

Also, I promise, and here I vow to be most studious and careful of the
Catholic religion, and to obey the Popes Holiness, as Gods Uicar, so help me
God, and the contents of this Evangelist.

After this, the Pope used a few prayers, and so the solempnitie was done.

Of the ancient and strange ceremonies at the Election of the Prince of
Corynthia.
CORINTHIA, is a Province where the Sclauonians speech is spoken, where manners
and customs are most strange, and the like Ceremonies not read of. When any
new elected Prince enters into his government, he is brought into a fair
large valley, where was wo^nt to be an ancient city, where some monumentes are
lest as relics, The P. of Ca rynthia created in a Meadow, on a Marble stone
so that time ware out the name of it. In a wide fair medowe hard by, a Marble
stone is erected, upon the which stone (...) Rusticall fellow stands, which
by succession of blood, that place and Office by haritage death possess. There
he has hard by him a deformed lean Mare and an old lean Ox, and the
Rusticall country people in heaps about him.

On the farther side of the medowe is the new Prince with his Barons and
States about him, with great pomp and solempnytie, very richly Attyred, all
in Purple, having the Princes Ensigns and his Arms, and twelve Banners, The
Prince of Carynthia created in an old beggars weed.
carried salempnlye before him, the Prince being apparayled very poor like a
simple Countreyman in old broken Garments, his Cappe bare, and his shoes
worn: with a Country Staff in his hand, seeming rather more like a
Sheaphearde then a Prince: Who, when he comes nigh to the Clown that
stands upon the Stoane, he cries out in the Sclauonian tongue, and asks,
who is this that is coming here so proud? The Barons and the States,
answer and say: he is Prince of the Country: then the Country man from the
Marble stone demaundes again.

Is this man a right and just Judge? Does he seek Questions demanded by a
simple Clown, of the States of Carynthia
the benefit and wealth of this Country? Is he of honest and virtuous
condition? Is he a found Christian in religion? Will he defend the true faith?
And is he worthy of this honor?

To whom all the States and Barons answer, he is, and shall be. Again he
says, I ask you by what law and right should I be removed from this seat.
The County of Goritia answers and says: For money this place is bought:
then this Ox and this Mare shall be thine, and all the Garments which last the
Prince did put off, and thy house shall be A Clown strikes the Prince on the
cheek.
free without any Tribute. Then, the Countreyman discendeth, and meets the
Prince, and strikes him a little on the cheek, saying: I command thee to be a
good just Prince: then he takes his Mare and his Ox, and gives the place to
the Prince, who straight stands upon the Marble stone, taking a naked Sword
into his hand: First, he does floorish it one way^, then he does floorish it
another way, promising thereby equal Justice to the people: there they bring
water in a country man's Cappe, to drink, to signify unto the Prince, that
The Prince drinks water out of ^ Country man's cap.
he should abstain from Wine. After these Ceremonies, the Prince comes down
from the Marble stone, and is brought to the Temple, called, our Ladies
Chapel, which was (as some do write) the Seat (sometime) of a Bishop: then,
from thence, after some Sacrifice which was to be used, all things done and
performed, the Prince puts off the Rusticall Garments that he put on
before to perform the custom The Prince sits in judgment on a stone in a
me dow, to hear causes pleaded.
and ceremonies of the Country, and wears his Princely wonted Attire, and
after he had feasted with his Barons and his Nobilytie, he returned to the
Medowe again, where the Marble stoane was, and sits there on his Tribunal
Seat to hear causes pleaded, and to give Judgment according to Justice: this
is the manner and strange custom of the election of any Prince in Carynthia.

So strange were the customs and manners in old time, as well at the election and
coronation of Princes, as also in their The strange Scepters used by kings and
Princes in times past.
ceremonies and Scepters.

For the first kings of the world used for their Scepters, long gilded Spears.

The old kings of Rome used a crooked staff, called Lituus,

Tarquinius Priscus the fifth king of Rome, had his Scepter of Iuorie.

The Kings of India had their Scepters of Ebany.

The Liddians carried before their Kings great Axes.

The kings of Scicily used a silver staff for their Scepter.

The Babylonians used diverse kinds of Scepters, with sundry figures, as of
Lions, Eagles, etc.

The great pomp and Solemnytie at the Inauguration of the Pope of Rome.
THE Pope of Rome at his Inauguration excelled all other princes in solempnitie
and pomp, for after that the Pope is new elected by the whole College of
Cardinals, he comes from his Palace of S. Angelo, with great glory, toward
S. Peter's Church: first the Officers, The order and manner of the inauguration
of Pope Gregory the tenth.
as Stewards, Comptrollers, Tresurers and chief rulers, apparelled all in red
long gowns. Secondly the knights of Rome. Thirdly, the Barons, Counties, and
Marquesses: Then the Abbats: Then followed the Bishops: after the bishops, the
Archbyshops in their long Pontifical garments, with rich and sumptuous white
silver Myters beset with stones. After, followed three degrees of Cardinals:
Deacon-Cardinals, Priest-Cardinals, and Byshop-Cardinals. The Pope with passing
pomp is carried above the ground upon men's shoulders in Cella gestatoria, with
his triple Crown on his head, full of precious stones, and with a most
sumptuous and precious robe, wrought over very artificially with gold, and set
with diverse stones, and so carried to Saint Peter's Church upon Kings Ambassadors
shoulders.

After some prayers and sacrifice done, he is hossed again Kings Ambassadors
carries the pope to his coronation.
upon men's backs, and carried from Saint Peter's into Saint Andrews Chapel,
where, after many rites and ceremonies there finished, which was there provided
for his inauguration, he is taken up again into his golden chair from Saint
Andrews Chapel, where Andrew the Apostles head is presented: thence he is
carried to the Chapel of S. Peter and S. Paul: thence carried from place to
place by the Legates and Ambassadors of all the Kings of Christendom, then
being in Rome, representing the states of Kings and Emperors,

Oh, Superbum Animal: for between golden and silver Crosses, the Myters of
Bishops, and Cardinals hats, shining as stars, with diverse kinds of
precious stones, with Jewels: the Popes triumpaunt carriage under such a regal
Canapie, with his triple Crown, his rich and Pontifical garments, blessing
the people, passed far the pomp of great Xerxes in his voyage into Greece:
or the Triumphs of great The Popes dinner, and his banquets after dinner.
Pompey over all Africa and Asia at Rome: Hos iudos et iocos diceres, prout
rabies Papae: with such peales of ^es, ringyng af Belles, sounding Trumpets:
with such clan^urs and noise of other brazen Instruments, that it far
surmounted the besieging of Carthage, or the assaulting of Munantia In the like
triumph and pomp he is again carried into his Palace of S. Angelo, blessing
the people from place to place and in every place as he is carried: the people
again crieng out, wishing him the felicity of Augustus, and the love of
Traian, using several solemn ceremonies, with the greatest pomp innented.

His dinner that day exceeded Ca. Caesar, who in his triumph over Africa,
prepared 22000 tables most royally furnish^d: and his banquets after dinner far
excelled the banquets of L. Lucullus, or Marcus Antonius. His mirth and music
passed the feast Hyacynthia.

Of the most happy, joyful and triumphant day of her Majesty's coronation,
upon the 15, of January.
I Need not particularly set down the solemnity of that day, neither can I (if
I would) declare the joys and triumphs of that day: For, whereas her Majesty's
predecessors studied how one might excel another with roialty, pomp and
solemnity of ceremonies: as Richard the second, and after him, Richard the (...)
Henry the fourth, at whose coronation, John, king of Castles and Legions, then
being Duke of Lancaster, Earl of Leicester and Lincoln: who as Duke of
Lancaster challenged to bear the chief Sword before the King: called Cortana:
as Earl of Lincoln, he challenged to be Caruer at the Kings table, and as
Earl of Leicester, he challenged to be L. high Steward of England. Steward.


Thomas de Woodstocke the Kings Uncle was admitted to be Constable of England.
Constable.


Robert Earl of Oxford was admitted to the office of a Chamberlain.
Chamberlain


Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick was admitted to bear the third Sword, for
there were three Swords assigned to be borne before the King at his
coronation, but I find but two Swords in Modius Pandectes, Ensis politicus and
Ensis Ecclesiasticus.

Upon the day of the Kings coronation, the L. Mayor and the Citizens of London
(by the Recorder) made petition to the King, that the Mayor might serve the
King at his dinner in the hall at his coronation.

The Barons of the five Ports were admitted to the Office to bear over the
Kings head a Canapie of cloth of gold, The order and manner of the coronation
of the kings of England.
upon four Spears covered with beaten Silver in most solemn order and great
solempnitie from the Tower, through the City of London, with such magnificent
pomp and triumphs, as were (full) equal to the Emperors of Rome or the
kings of France. And in these two things, passed France, Rome, Persea, or
any other Kingdom of the world.

The first, the noble and general challenge of Monomachia in Combat with any
Knight of the world, by the Kings Champion Sir John Dymmocke Knight, upon the
day of coronation, armed and mounted on horsbacke, ready to perform the
challenge in the behalf of the King.

In the second ceremony they excelled, for that at the coronation of Henry the
fourth, nine several Conduites ran for two days of Claret wine and white
wine, in nine several places of the city of London as plenty as water to all
passers by.

But the most happy, joyful, and triumphant day of her Majesty's Coronation,
not only excelled all her predecessors, the Kings of England, but all other
foreign Kings, as far as heaven surmounteth the earth, or as the glory of
God excels the pomp of man, so far her Majesty passes other Kings in
virtue, religion, goodness, justice, truth and peace it self, which she
brought with her upon the day of her Highness coronation to England: which,
since her coronation, she planted in England, that England may say, Haec est
dies quam fecit Dominus exultemus and laetemur in ea.

The triumph whereof is such, that Angels do triumph in Heaven, and good
godly men clap their hands on earth, and say, A Domino factum est istud.

And though the Kings of England received the Christian faith before any other
in the world, even from Lucius The faith received into England before any other
kingdom.
time, An. Dom. 177. before Clodouaeus the first Christestened King of France
300. years. Before Marcus Julius Philippus, the first Christened Emperor of
Rome 76. years. and before Palladius was sent from Rome to Scotland by
Celestinus, then Bishop of Rome: and before Patricius was by the same
Celestinus sent to Ireland, 197. years, and before Suintilla, who brought
Hispaine to a Monarchy again, for Hispaine was subject under the Saracens
800. years. Before that, under the Goths, the Uandals and the Romans, that
they used to make their Computation, per era Augusti, until John the first,
1372. who then commanded Anno Dom. to be used.

The Longobards, the Goths, the Uandols and the Huns The Christened kings of
the Goths, Long obards, Vandals, and Hunnes.
by reason of their wars between themselves were made Provinces under the
Romans, and so continued until the Em pire decayed. After they had revolted,
they elected Kings to govern them, whose names are these underwritten.

Agelmundus the first K. of the Longobards. 394.

Alaricus the first King of the Goths, after the reuolting from the Romans
404. years.

Gundericus the first K. of the Uandals, 413.

Atrila the first K. of the Hunnes. 430.

Now after these Kingdoms 600 years, began the Kingdom of Polonia, where the
first crowned christened King was Miezlaus. An. Dom. 963.

In Hungaria the first crowned King was beatus Stephanus. 1003.

In Bohemia, the first crowned K. was Vratislaus* 1080.

So in antiquity of Christianity, the kings of England are most ancient, and
so laid down before Rome, France, Spain, Scotland, Ireland, Poland, Hungary,
Bohemia, and the rest: For it is allowed of all, and written of Functus and
others, that Josephus of Aramathia, who buried the body of our Lord and
Savior, came to Britain twelve years after Lucius the Brita^, the first K.
christened in the world,
the death of Christ, and converted many unto the Faith. But let it be from
King Lucius time, the first christened King of the world. 177. For Cassianus
says, there were but four anointed christian Kings: the Kings of Jerusalem,
the kings Four christian Kings only anointed.
of England, the Kings of France, and the kings of Scicily.

The funeral pomp of the Roman Emperors.
THe pomp and solemn state of the Funerals of the Roman Emperors were such,
as being set forth, the sole^pnity of the dead Emperor were such, as the
Senators, Dictators, Consuls, and chief Magistrates of Rome, being in their
appointed funeral garments, attending to carry the coffin: with one before the
Hearse plaieng upon a Shalme or a Fluite with a mournful funeral Song,
called Naenia, which in like manner, the Grecians used at the funeral (...).
of their Kings, the songs which they called Ialemos.

Then the Patricians and Senators carried before the Statues and images of the
dead.
dead Emperor, his Statues and Images: and after that, the statues and Images
of his predecessors, to set forth the dignity of his stock, as Ca. Caesar
did at the funeral of his Aunt, mother unto Marius, whose Statues Caesar
caused to be carried before the Coffyn, with all the Sarieants carieng their
Ares and rods, with all the Ensigns, Crowns, rich spoils and Trophies which
Marius had gotten in his victories.

In like manner Tiberius Caesar the third Emperor of Rome, caused at the
funeral of his Father Drusus, that the ^he pomp of Drusus funeral.
statue of Aeneas, and all the statues of the Kings of Alba, until Romulus
time, the 17. after Aeneas: and the Statue of Romulus, and of the whole family
of Gens Iulia, from Romulus time to Julius Caesar, ^eally.

The like pomp was before Silla and others by the Patricians and Senators. Yet
Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, Pomponius Atticus, with some others, commanded that
they should not be brought into the Field of Mars with any solempnitie of
Jupiters coat, of triumphant garments, Purple robes, and such other pomp:
But, specially if any died in the field, the rare sight of the solempnitie
excelled: The General, and chief Captains, and every Officer with his band,
trailyng their Pikes after the^ on the ground, with the points of their Swords
downward: their Ensigns foulded together: their Horses sheearde and clipped,
their dumb Music, with all the rufull sightes that might be invented. etc.

The manner of the funeral Pomp of the Grecians.
IN other parts of Greece, they used more solempn mournful ceremonies, at the
funeral of their kings and Princes: they took down their Bulwarks and
Fortr^sses of wars, The rusul funerals of the Macedoni^ and Grecians.
they until their Temples, they subvert their Altars, they reject and depose
their Idols, they put out their fire, and the men shave both their heads and
beards, and they clip their horses and left nothing undone that seemed
mournful: Then all the priests, Maiestrats, young Gentlemen and children, carried
Trophies and Monumentes of the dead king, with his Ensigns and Arms crowned
with Garlands, according to the custom of Greece. The Noble women carried
diverse great Cups or Bowls: some, full of wine, others full of milk, and some
full of blood, all in white Garments: others carried honey and cakes, which
should be sprinkled, and cast upon the s^ral fire: at what time they sang
Hymns, Odes and songs, called Ialemos, in the praise of the dead Prince: and
lastly, when the King is solemply thus burned, the Princes and great men of his
blood (...).
should carry his a^es in golden pots, crowned over with all kind of sweet
flowers, which should be as a memory or Trophee of the dead King.

The Grecians had also these customs at the funeral of their dear friends, as
Parents, Brethren, Sisters: both the men and women should shave their long
hair, and offer it upon the hearse of the dead: So Achilles solemnized the
funeral of his dear friend Patroclus cutting the fore Iockes of his hair,
Patroclus lamented by Achilles
to set it among many other of Patroclus friends upon his Hearse or tomb.

Euripides funeral was of Archelaus King of Macedonia so ho^rred, that he
lamented Euripides death with mourning Euripides death lamented by King
Archelaus.
apparel, and with a shaven head and beard, according to the use and custom
of the Macedonians.

Of the funeral pomp of the Egyptians.
THe Kings of Egypt were most sumptuously reserved in this order: Their bodies
were opened, and were in such sort used, as the Egyptians use, with Myrrh,
Aloes, honey, salt, ware, and many other sweet odours, being feared up and
anointed with all precious oils, and so they reserved the ha^es S^ ^he
funeral in pomp of the d^ K. of Egypt.
of their kings in high buildinges made for the purpose, far from the gro^, as
in their Pyramides and Labirinth, before spoken. The funeral was so lamented,
that al Egypt mourned in this sort: the men would clap dung and dyrt upon their
heads, beat their bodies, strike their breasts, knocking their heads to every
post, howling and crying for their king: their women bare breasted, ^ermear'd
with all kind of filth, running up and down in furious manner, fasting and
mourning 72. days from wine or any other meat, saving bread and the water of
Nilus.

Of the funeral pomp of the Thracians.
THe Thracians Funeral is full of mirth and melody, for when they bring their
friends to the grave, they use to sing Thracian Songs, with all sweet
music, only this ceremony they reserved: when any man of great calling
dies, his wife must be brought the same day to the grave of her husband in
her richest orname^t and best apparel, a^panied The pomp of the Thracians
Funeral.
with her parents and next in blood with great solempnitie, which after
sacrfice done upon the grave of her husband, she must make sacrifice of her
self: The Priest must bring her to the Altar, where she is sacrificed with a
veil over her face, and after oblations and prayers done, she is slain upon
her husbands grave for sacrifice.

Thus have I laid down the Natiuities, Inaugurations, Coronations and
anointing of Emperors, Kings and Princes, as well Paganes as Christians.

FINIS.

