CHRIST'S COMMUNION WITH HIS Church Militant. First preached, and now published,
for the good of Gods Church in general.

By. Nicholas Lockyer, Mr. of Arts.

Cant. 1.13. A bundle of Myrrh is my well-beloved unto me, he shall lie all
night betwixt my breasts.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for John Rot^w^ll, at the Sun in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1640.

TO The virtuous Lady, Aunt SUSAN CECILL, Grace and peace be multiplied, by
Jesus Christ.
MAdam: The sweet taste I have had, of your Ladyships love to the best things,
has encouraged me, humbly to present this little tract unto you. What Solomon
speaks from experience, that you upon trial have found true, That the most
promising contents of this life, are vanity and vexation of Spirit. Our wise
and merciful Father, does usually thus imbitter the sweetest things of this
world to us, that we may the more cordially relish, and fervently seek after,
that full satisfying and everlasting sweetness and comfort, which is in
communion with Christ our heavenly Husband, in whom all fullness of consolation
dwells. A drop of this transcendant fullness, your Ladyship (I hope) shall
find, distilled into your soul, by reading this little work now come to your
hands, which like Aqua Vitae, shall cheer and revive your sad spirit, when
ready to faint. Fainting persons, carry little bottles of reviving liquids,
always about them; if your Ladyship shall think fit, to make this little Tract,
your pocket-companion, and peruse a little of it still, when you feel
soule-qualmes to seize upon you, you shall find (I trust) through the blessing
of Christ, much ease and comfort; and so spend and end your aged days, in more
true solace of heart, then you have done your primest days of flourishing
youth. The accomplishing of this, is the sincere and holy aim of your much
obliged Nephew, in this his first offering to public view. Which simple aim,
that the Lord may graciously answer, to your Ladyships comfort here, and
eternal happiness hereafter, I shall still continue my prayer, (though here I
end my Epistle) that the Lord will still attend this my poor endeavor with
his rich blessing, to all the partakers thereof, and in special to you.

Your much obliged Nephew, Nicholas Lockyer.

Christian Reader.
COmmunion with Christ, is our happiness in this world, and in the world to
come: that which makes every bitter thing sweet, and every sweet thing sweeter.
With this sweet subject is this little tract, now come to thy hand, taken up.
Poor fallen man is still complaining of one want or other; and when the thing
is given which he longed for, yet his soul is as far from content, as before;
like to a child that cries for this and that, and yet when he has what he
cried for, continues crying still, and cannot tell well what he would have. All
our want is this, the want of Communion with Christ: this is the cause of all
complaints; the infelicity of the soul; the sum of man's misery, here and
hereafter; but poor blindman sees it not, and therefore complains of twenty
things, twenty miles a this side his disease; and so spends his days in labor
and sorrow, and yet loses happiness, both here and hereafter too. A full
fruition of Christ, is full felicity: a full fruition of any thing below
Christ, without Christ, is but vanity and vexation of spirit. The more then, O
fallen man, thou can get into communion with thy God, the more will thy great
loss be repaired, thy complaining soul satisfied, and thy tranquillity
settled upon thee again. Hunt not then after riches, honors, pleasures, and
suchlike low delights of the sons of men, with this deluded mistaken world,
which lies in wickedness; for felicity is not in these: but study and strive
after a nearer communion with Christ: the next way to get most in with him, is
the speedy way unto all happiness: so much as thou can get of his company,
so much art thou in Heaven. How precious are thy thoughts unto me, O God,
(says David?) how great is the sum of them? If I should count them, they are
more in number then the sand: when I awake I am still with thee. Psalm.
139.17,18.
This is Heaven upon Earth; and that true nobility and honor, which we should
all be ambitious after; to lose our spirits in God. What an unspeakable
felicity is it, to be still with God in our thoughts? This ennobles the spirit
of man, and makes it a companion to the King of Kings: this gives evennesse and
steadiness to a man's course; and makes him walk in all the ways of God
blameless: this gives transcendant peace and tranquillity to a man's spirit; and
makes him unmovable in the midst of fears: this gives bread, in famine; drink
in drought; peace, in war; health, in sickness; life, in death. Devote thy
self therefore to Christ, that he may devote himself to thee: and as a poor
medium of communion, make use (if you please) of this ensuing Treatise. If thou
get any good, give glory to God; and make the poor Penman, a constant sharer
in thy prayers.

Thine in Christ. Theophilus Philanthropus.

The Principal Heads handled in this Tract.
THat the Church of Christ Militant, shall not be left comfortless, because
Christ will come to her, Page 9 That Christ does come to his Church Milit. page,
10, 11. How Christ does come to his Church Militant, to comfort her in all
conditions, p. 18, 19 When Christ comes to his disconsolate Church, as a
Comforter, page 41, 42, etc. Why Christ will come to his Church upon earth, as
Comforter, page 51, 52, etc. Wicked men shall live and dye comfortless, because
Christ as a Comforter will never come to them, p. 57, 58, etc. Laughter is one
thing, and spiritual consolation another, p. 59 How Christ does come to the
wicked in this life, p. 61 Christ will come to the wicked, neither in
prosperity nor in adversity, as a Comforter, p. 62, 63, etc. How wicked men may
get Christ as a Comforter, to come to them, p. 66, 67, etc. Useful
instructions to strong men, and to babes in Christ, p. 68 Strong men in Christ
that say Christ as a Comforter is come to them, should make it sure to
themselves, that they are not deluded, p. 65. The great need of this, p 69 How
a man may know that it is Christ indeed, and no spirit of delusion, which is
come to him with consolation, p. 73, 74 Strong men in Christ, after they have
made it sure to themselves, that the true Comforter is come to them, should so
walk that they may ever enjoy his sweet company, p. 80 How Christians may so
walk as to enjoy Christ as a Comforter continually, p. 81, 82, etc. Babes in
Christ which never found Christ as a Comforter to come to them, should believe
that Christ will come to them, p. 93 Their objections against Christ coming to
them as a Comforter, answered, p. 93, 94 Babes in Christ that never found
Christ as a Comforter come to them, should patiently wait till Christ thus come
to them, p. 98 Several considerations very powerful, to make the soul to
wait patiently, till Christ as a Comforter come to him, p. 98, 99, etc. Babes
in Christ, which never yet found Christ as a Comforter come to them, should
observe how Christ comes with comfort to the soul, and not put him off, p.
109, 110 Babes in Christ, which have found Christ as a Comforter to come to
them, but now have lost him, should labor to be sensible of their loss, p.
112, 113, etc. Such should not blame Christ for departing as a Comforter from
them, p. 116, 117, etc. Means how such babes in Christ, may get their
Comforter to return again to them, p. 118, 119, etc.
2 Timothy 4. Verse. 22. The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit.


To have the Lord Jesus Christ with our spirits, is a prime and principal
blessing, p. 126 There is a double presence of Christ with man, corporal and
spiritual jointly, or merely spiritual, p. 127, 128, etc. The spiritual
presence of Christ with man upon earth, is commune or special, p. 129, 130,
etc. To have Christ specially present with our spirits, is the ready way to all
temporal good, p. 134 Objections to the contrary, answered, p. 135, 136, etc.
To have Christ specially present with our spirits, is the ready way to all
spiritual good, p. 143, 144, etc. To have Christ after a special manner with
our spirits is the ready way to eternal good, p. 147 Not to have Christ
specially present with our spirits is a great evil, p. 149 Wherein this grand
evil does principally consist, p. 149, 150, etc. How to know whether Christ be
specially present with our spirits, p. 164, 165, etc. How to get Christ to be
specially present with our spirits, p. 171, 172, etc. Men that find Christ
specially present with their spirits, should thankfully acknowledge this great
favor p. 176, 177, etc. Such should labor to keep Christ with their spirits,
p. 180 According to what operations, a man may lose the presence of Christ, p.
181, 182, etc. Christians should labor to get Christ as much present with
their spirits as may be: and how this may be done: see page, 188, 189, etc.
Comfort against the sword, plague, famine, persecution, and the like, arises
to them which have Christ specially present with their spirits, p. 191, 192,
etc.
CHRIST'S COMMUNION with his Church Militant.
John 14. verse. 18. I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you.


CHRIST and his Church are dear each to other: the truth of this is at large
manifest in this Chapter. Christ as a heavenly Husband, being to leave his
earthly Spouse, to wit, his Church Militant, and to live with his Father at his
right hand in glory, with his Church Triumphant; endeavors in various Verses
of this Chapter, to comfort the sad Spirit of his beloved Spouse, which he
perceived was much dejected. The Verse which I have chosen to insist on, is one
of them: I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you. In more words
let me repeat this Verse again. Thou O my Love, my Dove, my fair one, art
sad I see and disconsolate at my departure! As a Lily in the valley; nay, as a
Lily (indeed) among thorns I shall leave thee: the Prince of darkness
dwelling in the children of darkness, will endeavor to devour thee; Sons of
Belial will beset thee, persecute and torment thee, as they have done me before
thee: but be not at this, O fairest of women! dejected, as one without all
consolation: for I will not leave thee comfortless, I will come to thee.

What difference is there between a Prisonhouse and mine own house, if sweet
friends continually come to me there? It Is a Prison and no better, we abide in
whilst we dwell in the body: fettered we are with many lusts; and groan we
do, under the tyranny and oppression of a body of death; and O! wretched men
that we are dwelling in these dungeons of Clay, if no friend from Heaven come
to us? It Is true, O my Spouse, what thou say; and therefore that thy dweling
in the body may not be comfortless, I will come to thee. I will not leave thee
comfortless, I will come to thee.

The body is a Prison to the soul, and the World is a Hell to both. The God of
this world is a Devil, and the children of this world Devils, to the Spouse of
Christ. The Father torments her spirit, and the Children torment her flesh:
neither in body nor soul, whilst in this world, can the Spouse of Christ be
quiet. We that are thus in Hell upon Earth, shall quickly be comfortless, if
no friend from Heaven come to us. True, O my Spouse: but to prevent this, I
will come to thee. From Heaven to Earth (indeed) is a long journey; but yet
this I Will not stand on, rather then thou shall be left comfortless, in any
condition upon Earth, I will from Heaven come to thee. Let it be what weather
'twill; at what time 'twill; and be at midnight thou need'st me, I will come to
thee. I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you.

Affliction has made many friends upon Earth forsake me, O my Savior! wilt
not thou my heavenly friend so serve me? What if the Devil cast me into
Prison? will thou come to me there? will thou visit me when I lie in a nasty
room, amongst nasty wretches, that curse and swear, which thou can not
endure to hear? Yea, O fairest of Women! rather then thou shall be
comfortless in such a condition, I will come to thee.

Thou will come to me O my Savior one day; but what if the Devil keep me in
such a Prison ten days? a long time? till the iron enter into my soul? will thou not wax weary at last, and leave coming to me? No my love, I am resolved
to the contrary. [I will not] leave thee comfortless [I will] come to thee.

Why, but what if Satan winnow me as wheat, and cast me into sin, which is
more odious to thee then any prison; then any place, or any thing: will thou
not then shake me off for ever, and never come to me more? This O fairest of
Women, may make me cease coming to thee for a moment, but no longer; for I am
resolved not to [leave] thee comfortless in any condition, either of sin or
punishment. I will not [leave] thee comfortless, [I will] come to thee.

My Text you see, is Christ's conjugall promise to his Spouse, of all kindness,
during the time of his personal absence. The matter of this promise is
consolatory; the form according to which our Savior expresses this
consolatory language, is first negative, I will not leave you comfortless.
Secondly affirmative, I will come to you. These latter words contain the
reason of what is delivered in the former. We cannot be comfortless;
[because] Christ still comes to us. And thus taking the words, you may read
them thus, viz. I will not leave you comfortless, [for] I will come to you. No
condition can be comfortless, if Christ come to us.

I will not leave you comfortless,] (...), I will not leave you fatherless
and motherlesse, I will not leave you Orphants, says the Original, (...), the
word comes from, that is here translated comfortless, which signifies, to be
made fatherless and motherless; which because it is usually a condition very
comfortless, therefore is the word thus rendered (...) comfortless. Thus the
children of Christ shall not be left. They are no Orphans which have Christ for
their Father. They are never totally bereft of all comfort, to whom Christ
comes: and thus he will still do to his Church Millitant Christ will never
leave coming from Heaven to Earth, although it be a very long journey, as
long as he has any one child upon Earth. I will not leave you comfortless.

I will come to you,] (...), I return to you says the Original; spoken in
the Present tense, and not in the Future, [I will] return to you, as we have
it translated. Ac si diceret Christus (says one) se licet nondum profectum,
jam esse inreditu As if Christ had said, although I am not yet gone from you,
yet am I returning to you. Christ though not actually in person departed, yet
was ready in Spirit to be present with his Spouse to the end of the world.

Thus having Paraphrastically gone over these words, I will put the plain
meaning of them into this Thesis in divinity. That the Church of Christ
Militant, shall not be left comfortless, because Christ will come to her. Or
thus, No Child of Christ upon Earth, shall be left comfortless, for Christ
will come to him. What Christ spoke at his departure to his Disciples, was not
for them only, but for the comfort of all his people to the end of the world.
In his Disciples he spoke thus to all his children, that are or ever shall be
upon the face of the Earth, I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to
you.

This comfortable doctrine, that I may fully and methodically handle, I will
lay open unto you these four things: First, that Christ does come to his
children upon Earth. Secondly, how Christ does come to his children upon Earth.
Thirdly, when Christ does come to his children upon Earth. Lastly, why Christ
will take so much pains, as to come to his children on Earth? I begin with the
first of these, to wit, that Christ does come to his Church and children upon
Earth. The truth of this is evident by our Saviors own language, and by each
godly man's evidence.

Our Savior not only in my Text, but in many other places promised to come to
his Church Militant, and therefore surely he does come to his people on Earth:
for Christ is God, and God cannot lie nor repent. What Christ has said, he
will do, that he will faithfully perform to a tittle: for faithful is he that
has promised, says the Apostle. Go therefore and teach all Nations, etc.
Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you; and lo I
am with you always, even to the end of the world, Amen. Matthew. 28.19,10.
This place shows plainly that Christ does come to his children upon Earth;
and that he will do this to the end of the world. For Ministers (of all men) to
walk faithfully in their places, teaching their flock to observe [all] things,
that Christ has given them in charge, will cost them hot water, especially
living in corrupt places. This our Savior tenderly considered; and therefore
that his Disciples might not be disheartn'd, he assures them of his company
unto the last, to support and comfort them. Lo I am with you to the end of the
world Christ by this phrase of speech, does hint us, that what he then spoke,
should reach further then unto those to whom he then appeared: namely, to all
Ministers and people to the end of the world, that shall faithfully discharge
their places and callings to his honor.

I might here tell you, that not only Christ's word, but also Christ's name sets
forth the truth of this, that Christ is with his Church Militant, and so
consequently, that he does come to her. He was called Emmanuel, which being
interpreted, Is God with us. Mat. 1.23.
Which name was not only to note Christ, as then corporally present with his
Church, but to note Christ as one having actually assumed our nature, and so to
be more gloriously present with his Church to the end of the world, then ever
before from the beginning after Adams fall. Now as she said of her Husband, as
his name is, so is he; Nabal is his name, and folly is with him: so may the
Spouse speak of her Husband Christ; as his name is, so is he. Emmanuel is his
name; which signifies God with us, and so indeed, is Christ. He is continually
with us. What David said of himself, in respect of Christ, that may we truly
say of Christ, in respect of us. Nevertheless (says he) I am continually with
thee; thou have holden me by my right hand. Though Christ dwell in Heaven, and
we on Earth, yet nevertheless he is continually coming to us, and abiding
with us.

The godly have and do find the truth of this by blessed experience, which is
the second thing; and that which I rather insist on, for the confirmation of
the truth in hand: because against experience there is no disputation. Peter
found the truth of this, that Christ comes to his children upon Earth, that
their condition may not be comfortless. Herod cast Peter into Prison, and
thought to have made him comfortless; but Christ came to him, as you may see.
And behold (says the Text) the Angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light
shined in the Prison, and he smote Peter on the side, and raised him up,
saying, Arise up quickly, and his chains fell off from his hands. Acts 12.7.
The Jews by a storm of Stones, thought to have made Steven comfortless, but
Christ's coming to him prevented. Christ so gloriously came to him in that
deadly storm, that he found more comfort then (I believe) then ever he did
before in his life: for he looked up steadfastly into Heaven, and saw the glory
of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God: he saw the Heavens opened
ready to receive him, which transcendantly revived him which glorious vision he
could never have seen, had not Christ come to him. Paul likewise found the
truth of this point, when he had left Athens, and came to preach to the
Gentiles at Corinth. He was very fearful, what success he should find in his
Ministry, amongst the barbarous Gentiles. Now our tender Savior, that Paul
might not be overborne with fear, and made heartlesse and comfortless,
graciously comes to him in a vision, as you may read. Then spoke the Lord to
Paul by night in a vision, Be not afraid, but speak and hold not thy peace; for
I am with thee; and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee, for I have much
people in this City. Acts 18.9
Thus at another time Christ came to Paul, that he might not be left
comfortless, when he was pleading his cause before Anomias, and like to be
pulled in pieces. And the night following (says the Text) the Lord stood by
him, and said, be of good cheer Paul, for as thou have testified of me in
Jerusalem so must thou also bear witness at Rome. Acts 23.11
At another time Paul and Silas together had experience of this truth, that
Christ comes to his Church Militant. As they were pouring out their souls
together in prayer, Christ wonderfully came to them: he came in an Earthquake,
and made the foundations of the prison shake, and so opened all the prison
doors, and loosed every prisoners bonds. Comfortable was Christ's coming to
Paul and Silas, but terrible to the Jailer; for he seeing in what manner Christ
broke in and rescued his servant, would have killed himself; but Christ came
graciously to his soul also, and rescued it out of the hands of the Devil.
Happy was it for this man, that Christ did finish two works in one journey; to
wit, come to Paul and Silas and deliver their bodies out of Prison, and withal
come to their Jailer and deliver his soul out of Prison too. In an Earthquake
Christ came both to Prisoners and Jailer: for the Jailer came trembling to the
Prisoners of hope, as a man in despair; and fell down, says the Text, before
Paul and Silas. It Is no matter how Christ come to us, so he comfort us before
he leave us. Thus I have showed to you, that Christ does come to his Church
Militant.

The second thing that I am to show you, for the opening of the point, is, how
Christ does come to his Church Militant. To this I will answer, First, more
generally, and briefly: Secondly, more particularly and fully. More generally
and briefly, I answer thus; Christ visits his Church Militant, as David visited
and comforted Hanun, to wit, mediately by his spirit, as David did mediately by
his servants. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever; even the [Spirit of truth,]
etc. John 14.16,17.
Peter found the truth of this, that Christ by his Spirit comes now to his
Church Militant. While Peter thought on the vision, [the Spirit] said unto him,
behold three men seek thee.

But in the second place, that I may more particularly and fully answer to this
question, to wit, how Christ does come to his Church Militant to comfort her in
all conditions; I will lay before you the general conditions of mankind, and
show you how Christ by his Spirit, as a Comforter, comes to us in them. The
general conditions of mankind are two, prosperity and adversity.

Prosperity would soon bring the souls of Gods people, to a comfortless
condition, did not Christ by his Spirit come to them. Satan, that evil Spirit
is so busy, coming to the children of God, when in prosperity, that did not
Christ also come to them by his Almighty Spirit, to quench all his fiery darts,
their souls would soon be comfortless, the Lord knows. When Peter was warm
in the High Priests Hall, then the Devil by a Damsel came to him, and so far
he prevailed on him, that had not Christ looked back upon him, and by his Spirit
come to him, he had been in a comfortless condition indeed. And thus would
the condition of good men now be, which are warm in their nests with outward
things, did not Christ come to them: when the sons of God be honorable, and
great amongst the sons of men, as David and Solomon, Job* Jacob, and Abraham
were; then the Devil in point of polity, though not out of love, visits them
often; and by often coming to them then, draws their precious souls into
many sins, as pride, ambition, malice, sensuality, and the like; which like
Cankers, quickly fret and eat out all divine consolation in the soul, and
leave it like the Prodigal feeding upon husks; solacing it self with no other
joy and content, then what the bare creature dipped in sin, will afford the
sense; which you must needs say, is of all comfortless conditions, the most
and worst comfortless. Now that these may not be left in this comfortless
state, to perish eternally, Christ by his Spirit, thus comes to them. First in
a sweet still voice behind them, as the Prophet speaks, saying, sometimes, in
the midst of their sensuality; this is not the way to eternal joy: no, this is
the way, O sensual soul! walk in it. This still voice strikes a damp in the
merry sensual foul of a Christian, and makes his heart, in the midst of vain
laughter, sad. If this be not prevalent enough to turn him, but on again he
will in his sinful way; then Christ comes with a witness, in thundering and
lightning, to convince and sting the conscience, as he did to the Israelites,
to bring them to see their wickedness in choosing a King. Until God thundered
and lightened from Heaven fearfully, they laid not to heart their rejecting God
as their King, but went on strongly and unaffectedly in their way. And just
thus often times it is, with many of the Sons of God in prosperity: the still
voice of Christ sweetly suggesting, and mildely checking for fin, is not strong
enough to stop and turn them; until the Angel of the Covenant come down
into the conscience, and stand with a flaming Sword, threatening nothing but
Hell and Death, if they make on a step further, they stop nor turn not;
which though not Christ's natural carriage to his children, yet he will in
tender love, deny himself thus far, as to put on an affrighting Vizard upon
his smiling countenance, and come terribly, and save violently, by plucking his
children out of the fire, rather then he will leave any of his so
comfortless, as to perish remediless. Christ will speak out and speak plain,
as he did to David by Nathan, when a still voice, and secret silent hints and
becks will not do. He will come and lay his mouth to a man's ear and cry aloud,
when he perceives that the pleasure or profit of sin, has made him very deaf:
he will never leave crying and calling, striking and knocking, till he has
made the deaf soul hear, and humble himself with Peter and David, and then
he pulls off the terrible Vizard from his countenance, and looks upon the
mourning penitent, with a countenance like Lebanon, and his lips drop sweet
smelling myrrh, into his broken spirit, and so is not left co^fortlesse,
according to Christ's promise, I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to
you.

But suppose Satan should not be busy, coming to the sons of God in
prosperity; yet would worldly prosperity be a comfortless condition, should
not Christ by his Spirit come to them. Riches and honors, together with all
other delights of the Sons of Men, they are as the white of an Egg, things
without savor, unless Christ come along with them to us: they tire and weary,
prick, distract and vex a man: they rob him of his sleep, and many times of
his wits, nay, of his precious life: they drown men's souls in pride,
voluptuousness, security, and so set them in the next way to Hell. This snare
waits at every ungodly man's table, which makes prosperity to him comfortless.
This Snare that it may not catch the godly, Christ comes to them by his Spirit,
and sanctifies prosperity to them; he teaches them how to a bound; that is, how
so to use the creature, as to enjoy service and comfort from it, and to bring
honor and glory to God by it.

The creature is empty of what it promises; and entising with what it has:
and this makes prosperity to every carnal man, a comfortless condition. Now
to take off both these, Christ comes to his children which enjoy the creature
plenteously: he comes in the creature, and so cures the emptiness of it: that
is, by his blessing he makes it satisfiable and contentfull to the enjoyer,
which it is not of it self: this is the peculiar gain that attends the godly;
Christ comes in the creature to them, and so cures the emptiness of it, and
puts such a supernatural virtue and sweetness in it, that they are therewith
contented. And as Christ comes [in] the creature to cure the emptiness of it,
so he comes [with] the creature, to cure the entising of it. He does by the
creature lead the souls of his children to the Creator: by the sweet of the
one, he lifts up their souls to Heaven, to admire the sweetness of the other:
so that, that which others are entised and besotted with, and rest in, that
they take wing from to flee to Heaven, from whence comes every good and perfect
gift, which is that indeed that makes prosperity a comfortable condition; which
otherwise is comfortless enough, the Lord knows.

Secondly, adversity would be a comfortless condition to the godly, if Christ
by his Spirit did not come to them: This I suppose none will deny; for no
affliction in it self is comfortable or joyful, but comfort less, if Christ
by his Spirit do not come to us. Corporal affliction is a comfortless
condition, unless Christ come to us, and be our Physician. Spiritual
affliction is a more comfortless condition, if Christ do not come to us.

Here these two questions are necessary to be answered: First, how does Christ
come to us in corporal affliction? Secondly, how does Christ come to us in
spiritual affliction?

To these questions both together I thus answer: Christ the Physician of soul
and body, comes to both with comfort in one way; and that is by helping the
soul to apply the promises of God, which are suitable to his distress. If a
child of God be sad and sorrowful, because of corporal affliction, Christ
comes to him by his Spirit, with this comfortable language, I am
all-sufficient. Christ by his Spirit, spreads abroad this Cardinal promise
before the sad soul, and shows him what a depth of mercy is foulded up in it.
There is a sufficiency of wisdom in me, to find out ways and means to deliver
thee, though never so low brought. There is likewise a sufficiency of power, to
prosecute right means to accomplish their right end. Nay, there is a
sufficiency of power in me, to work about good for thee, O sad soul, without
means. There Is a sufficiency of affection and will, to declare power and
wisdom, with every Attribute else, for thy good. If for all this application
and amplification of a general promise, the soul still droope under some
corporal calamity; Christ does then in such a soul, as Jacobs sons and
daughters did for him, They all rose up (says the Text) and comforted him:
Genesis 37.35.
so Christ by his Spirit after a lively manner indeed, rises up in such a soul
to comfort him: and now he leads this mourning Christian, to some particular
promise; that is, such a promise as speaks not of deliverance in general, but
of deliverance in particular, out of this or that kind of distress, which he
groans under. As to give you an instance, suppose a Christian be sad and take
thought as Christ says, what he shall eat, what he shall drink, and
wherewithal he shall be clothed: then the Comforter comes with this
particular promise, which speaks of deliverance out of this particular
distress. First, seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness and all
these things shall be added unto you: take therefore no thought for to morrow,
for to morrow shall take thought for the things of it self. Mat. 6.33,34.
If yet for all this, the spirit of a Christian still complain, as one fearing
he shall want daily bread for him and his; then the Comforter comes, and
persuades the soul to rest quietly upon the promise of God. He speaks now to
the complaining Christian, as the Levits father in law did to him, Comfort thy
self I pray thee, with a morsel of bread. Judges 19.
Comfort thy self O mourning soul, I pray thee, with this particular promise,
which is but a morsel of that bread, which came down from Heaven, one of the
least favors that Christ has procured for thee, to wit, a right and interest
in the creature: with this persuasive language, does Christ follow the
complaining soul, until he has persuaded him, to own his own mercy and so he
keeps his children in poverty, from being comfortless.

As Christ in corporal afflictions comes to his children, and keeps them from
being comfortless; so likewise he comes to them in spiritual afflictions,
that they may not be left comfortless. If a child of God be sad and
sorrowful, because of this or that strong temptation, the Comforter then comes
to him with this sweet language, My grace is sufficient for thee. Thou prayest,
and Satan tempts thee; thou do fast and pray, and yet Satan and thy lusts
are more violent upon thee: thou do all this with bitter tears, and Satan
is the more bitterly bent against thee, and thou art foiled every moment. By
this, O winnowed soul! Christ would show thee, that thou will be
comfortless, in the midst of all thy sore soule-labour, unless he come to
thee. This same shall comfort us, concerning the work and toil of our hands,
said Lamech of Noah: so may we say of Christ; this same must comfort us,
concerning the labor and toil of our souls with any temptation, or else we
shall be comfortless, though we labor never so much: and this Christ does and
will do, I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you.

If a Christian lie languishing, because of Satan's prevailing upon him by
temptation; that he may not be comfortless in this condition, Christ by his
Spirit comes to him, and shows him the fountain of his blood, how deep it is,
and how free it is. 1 Ioh. 1.7.
How deep it is, that it will drown all sin. 1 John 1.7.
Sins after conversion, as well as before: sins often repeated, as well as
sins once only committed. And then he shows the wounded soul, how free this
fountain is, for any that hunger and thirst for it, for any that are weary and
heavy laden, and desire to be eased by it; and so by degrees draws the
wounded soul, to wash his wounds in it by faith, and so Christ heales and
comforts him. As the brethren of Ephraim comforted him, when he mourned because
the men of Gath had slain his sons. I Chro. 7.22.
So Christ comes to us, and comforts us, when the Devil by his temptations
has almost slain our souls, he like the good Samaritan, powers in oil and
wine into our wounds, and cures us. Though Satan pass by, and his limbs pass
by, and leave us comfortless, in the day of our wounds and bleeding, yet
Christ cannot, so full of bowels is he, nor will not, I will not leave you
comfortless, etc.

If a Christian lie languishing, because of often and frequent relapses, after
promises and purposes to do better; If this Christian in the anguish of his
spirit speak to every godly friend, as the Prophet did to his, Therefore said
I, look away from me, I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, because
of the spoiling of the Daughter of my people; Isay 12.4.
Look away from me O ye my Christian friends! yea, and you my faithful
Minister; for I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, because of the
spoiling of my soul, by so often sinning, against vows and promises, favors
and blessings: Christ comes to this soul, and will not leave him comfortless
in this condition, (though it be indeed a very desperate condition.) The
Comforter usually takes this course, with this comfortless soul, to power in
some oil into his deep wounds: he reasons with him from the mercy of man,
to the mercy of God; from a drop to the Ocean; and it may be, fastens upon his
own language once delivered to Peter. Peter came to our Savior and said, Lord,
how often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven times?
Jesus says unto him, I say not unto thee until seven times, but until
seventy times seven. Matthew. 18.21,22,
From this speech, the Comforter thus reasons, with this said and sore
wounded soul, viz If Christ would have Peter, a sinful man, show so much
mercy to one, so often offending him; surely Christ a holy God, and infinite in
love, is ready to show much more compassion himself, to those that are
penitent, though they have sinned times without number against him. Thus the
Comforter leads this desperate Christian, as a weak wounded man by the hand,
from the mercy of man, to the mercy of God, and enables him this way, after
some space of time, to take in comfort: for Christ is resolved, he will not
leave this Christian comfortless. Christ will never leave coming to this
comfort less soul, with this speech of his to Peter, and others of like
nature (as Christ is well furnished for a Comforter) until he has brought him
to drink willingly (for Christ forces no Physic upon any Patient) of the cup
of consolation more or less; and the longer sick souls turn away their heads
from this cup, the more (many times) he persuades them to drink, at last.

If Christ tentandi gratia for trials sake, hide himself from a Christian, and
so set him a mourning. I shall show you by and by, how he comes to him. This is
a condition (though of all deserted conditions, the best) which will make a
Christian heart comfortless indeed. Thou did hide thy face, and I was
troubled. Psalm. 30.7.
Gods hiding his face, though but for trials sake, will so trouble a Christian,
that he will quickly be a burden to himself, and fear round about, as it is
said of Pashur. 'Twill make him weary of the night, and weary of the day; weary
of his own house, and weary of Gods house; weary of mirth, and account it
madness; weary of riches, honors, yea life it self, and wish for death. O
that I might have my request, and that God would grant me the thing that I long
for, even that it would please God to destroy me, that he would let his hand
loose and cut me off, then should I ^et have comfort: then should I see the
face of God, which I long like Moses to see; then would he lift up the light of
his loving countenance, and cause his face to shine gloriously upon me, whereas
now I walk in the valley and shadow of death; dark days are all that go over
my head; the glorious Sun of righteousness shines not upon my soul, from
morning to night. To this sad soul thus bemoaning himself for want of his
beloved, Christ his well beloved thus comfortably comes. There has no
temptation taken hold on thee yet, O mourning soul, but that which is common
to man: and be assured of this, that God is faithful by whom thou art tempted,
and will not try thee above that which thou art able: but with the temptation
also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. 1 Cor. 10.19.
For a moment O fairest of Women; I say, just cause to hide my face from thee,
to try the truth of thy love to me; but know, that with everlasting kindness
will I have mercy on thee. Thy dullness also in my serice, and thy low-prising
my company, did something trouble me; but know, that the mountains shall
depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall never depart from
thee: for this is as the waters of Noah unto me; as I have sworn that the
waters of Noah, should no more go over the Earth; so have I sworn that I will
not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee. O thou afflicted, and tossed with
tempest, and not comforted, behold I will lay thy stones with fair colors,
and lay thy foundations with Saphirs, and I will make thy windows of Agats,
and thy gates of Carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant Saphirs. Isay
45.8,9.
Out of this sweet language of the Prophet to the natural branch, the
Comforter will fetch such precious water of life, to revive this deserted
soul: with these kisses of his lips will he so comfort him, that he shall be
constrained to say with David, Thou which have showed me great troubles, have
quickened me again, and have brought me up again from the depths of the Earth;
thou have increased my joy and comforted me on every side. Psalm. 71.6.
I could hitherto O my God, see thy back-parts; some sad attributes of power
and justice, which did terrify my soul to look on; but lo now I see thy
glory, thou have caused it gloriously to pass by me, nay, to shine upon me: I
see thy face like Lebanon, comely as the Cedars; and herewith is my longing
soul satisfied, as with marrow and fatness. This is my comfort, in mine
affliction, for thy Spirit O Christ, by thy word has revived me. So that this
soul, though very sorrowful, yet is not left comfortless, neither. Thus I
have answered the second Quaere to wit, how Christ comes to us.

The third thing that I am to show you, is, when Christ comes to us. I will not
leave you comfortless, I will come to you. But when, O my Savior, will thou
come to us? To this I answer first more generally, then more particularly and
determinately. More generally and briefly, I answer thus, Christ is already
come, and is present with his Church Militant, and will be to the end of the
world, as has been already proved. I am come into my garden, my Sister, my
Spouse, I have gathered my Mirrh with my Spice; I have eaten my honey comb
with my honey: I have drunk my wine with my milk. Cant. 5.1.
Christ we see by this sweet language, is come, and is with us already. I am
come, etc.

But when will he come to me in particular, as a Comforter? this is the
question. To this I answer first negatively, then positively. Negatively I
answer thus: viz. Christ does not come to us in this valley of tears, as Aaron
was commanded to come into the holy place: Let him not come at all times, says
the Lord, lest he die. Levit. 16.2
If Christ should not come to us at all times of our distress, we should die
under our burden, so comfortless would be our condition. When my body is
afflicted, I shall be comfortless, if Christ do not come to me. When my soul
is afflicted, I shall be more comfortless, if Christ do not graciously come
to me. When my head aches, teeth aches, back aches, or belly aches: yea, when my
least finger, or joint in my body aches, I shall be comfortless, unless Christ
come to me, so dolorous and comfortless a creature is man.

Wherefore as a positive answer, to the question ere-while proposed, know, that
Christ comes to his Church militant, at all times: as long as his people live
in this valley of tears, and are in any distress of soul or body. He comes
to them in prosperity, to sweeten that, or else there would be but a little
comfort and sweetness in it: but he comes to them in all adversity, after a
more special manner to sweeten that, being of it self very bitter;
bitterness in the abstract: my meaning is, altogether bitter, without the
least sweetness or pleasure in it, to soul or body: for no affliction is in
the least manner or measure joyous, but as Christ, by his kind coming to us
then, makes it so.

But here I shall be thus questioned: viz, if Christ as a Comforter comes to
his Church Militant, in every distress of soul and body; how is it that many
of Gods children, in corporal and spiritual afflictions, utter comfortless
and hopeless language, as those that find no Comforter come to them? Is thy
mercy clean gone, and have thou forgotten to be gracious, says David, have
thou shut up thy loving kindness in displeasure, and will thou be no more
entreated, etc. Many such like sad and dolorous complaints are still uttered by
some of Gods dear children: now if Christ as a Comforter, come to his in every
distress, why is it thus with these?

To this I will give answer first more indirectly thus. Possibly that soul
which thus complains, cannot but confess that Christ has come and tendered
comfort to him, though he through anguish and unbelief refused it. Now if our
soule-Physitian come from Heaven to us and brings Cordials for us, and we will
not take them, but cast them behind ourbacks; shall our Physician be blamed
for unfaithfulness and negligence toward his Patients, as one that did not
visit them?

Again, possibly too, this soul which thus complains, must confess that
Christ came to him, at the very beginning of his untractablenes toward God,
and told him that this would quickly bring him into a comfortless condition,
if not timely looked unto; and bid him again and again, by a sweet still voice
behind him, to be more pliable to God, as he tendered his favor, and his
own comfort. Christ came to his Spouse, saying, Open to me my Sister, my Love,
my Dove, my fair one, for my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the
drops of the night. But though Christ thus kindly came to his Spouse, yet she
unkindly put him off, and upon the matter no better then slighted him. I have
put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I
defile them? etc. Because of this untractable carriage, Christ departed from
his Spouse, and then she made many complaints: I opened to my Beloved, but he
had withdrawn himself and was gone. The Spouse could not now truly say, that
Christ had not come to her; but she might truly say, that he did come to her,
but she slighted him, and therefore he was forced to leave her. Thus it is with
many now. They mourn like Rachel in their misery, and are not comforted,
because none from Heaven comes to them: such as these, cannot challenge Christ,
for not making good his promise, to come to them, if formerly he have come to
them, and they have slighted him. If my Physician, observing my intemperancy in
this or that, come to me and tell me, unless you refrain such and such
things, you will certainly fall into such and such diseases, which are very
dangerous; if I slight him in this, and afterward fall into those diseases, and
lie groaning under them, I cannot blame my Physician, for not coming to me,
but blame my self that did so slight him. So it is between Christ and many a
mourning soul. Christ has come to them and told them, that if they go on in
this sinful course and that, that it will rob them quite of their heavenly
comforts; but he in this friendly way has been slighted, the soul has been
so far taken with the sweetness of something below Christ, and so at last has
found the evil of his own way, according to Christ's prediction, and yet
complains of Christ not coming to him; but how justly, judge you.

Again, as this soul possibly cannot justly complain, that Christ has not
come to him: so possibly he cannot justly complain, that Christ is not come
to him. That soul which complains after Christ, cannot truly say, that Christ
is not come to him: for we can never truly desire to come to Christ, or that
Christ should come to us, unless he were already with us, and we with him.
Christ I conclude then is come to this complaining soul, though not in that
manner and measure as he desires him. The thought of that I long for, if I
have the least hope of attaining it, is a degree of consolation.

Finally and more directly, I answer to this complaining soul thus, Christ as a
sensible and satisfactory Comforter, comes to us at his time, and not at ours.
Now Christ's time to come to comfort mourners, is then, when mourners will make
him most welcome; and that is usually when the soul is brought to the greatest
extremity, that it is capable of, and not utterly miscarry. When Peter was
ready to sink on the Sea, and cried out, Master save me or I perish, then
Christ came to him, and caught him by the hand: thus does Christ usually come
with sensible and satisfactory consolations, when poor souls are almost quite
spent with temptations, and soul anguish, and look every hour when they shall
die and drop into Hell. He shall come to us, as the latter and former rain
unto the Earth, says the Prophet. Hos. 6.3.
That is, at the seasonablest time, when the soul will make him most welcome;
and that is, when burnt and scorcht with Satan's fiery darts, as the Earth with
the fervent heat of the Sun; when parcht and chapt, gaping for some heavenly
showers: then Christ's visits will be kindness indeed: and Christ's
consolations, sweet indeed. This still remember, O mourning soul, that Christ
keeps his word, if he do not leave us comfortless: and this be assured he
will not do, I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you.

But why will thou come to me O my Savior? To this I answer first thus, viz.
Christ will come to his Church Militant to be a Comforter to fulfill his
Fathers will. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, says Christ, because the Lord
has anointed me, to preach good tidings to the meek, he has sent me to
bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the Captive, and the
opening of Prison to them that are bound, to proclaim the acceptable year of
the Lord, to comfort all that mourn, etc. Esaias 61.1,2,3.
By this Text we see, that Christ is anointed for this end, to come to us and
be our Comforter, whilst we live here below mourning in Zion. What is said of
the three friends of Job, that may I say of the blessed Trinity. They made an
appointment together, to come to comfort him. So the blessed Trinity, have made
an appointment together to come to us by Christ, and in all distresses, sweetly
to comfort us.

Secondly Christ will come as a Comforter to his Church Militant, because he
has promised it. As Christ promised this in my Text, so in many other Texts.
John. 2.11.
And if I go away, I will prepare a place for you, and will come again: and I
will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that may abide
with you for ever. By these promises Christ has obliged himself, to come as a
Comforter to us: let therefore our deservings of comfort be what they will,
Christ will come to us, because he has promised he will. Christ stands much
upon his word: Christ is God, and God cannot lie. Tit. 1.2.
Though we believe not, yet he abides faithful, and cannot deny himself. 2 Timothy 2
A Christian is ready to say to Christ as Iephtha to the Elders of Gilead: did
not ye hate me? and expel me out of my Fathers house? and why are ye come to
me now, when ye are in distress? said Iephtha. So says a Christian, did not
I hate thee O my Savior, and did not I do what in me lay to expel thee from
my soul, by my sinning again and again against thy Spirit? And why art thou
come to me now, to comfort me in my distress? Why, this that was foresad,
said, may suffice, O sinful soul, as an answer* Christ looks not at what thou
have done, but at what he has promised; and his word he will keep, though we
change as the Heavens: Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not one jot of
his word shall fall to the ground. I will not leave you comfortless, I will
come to you.

These I conceive are the principal grounds, why Christ comes as a Comforter
to his Church Militant: two grounds more may be alleged, as Causae minus
principales, less principal causes; the first whereof is this, Christ comes
to us in our distresses as a Comforter, that we may not stretch out our hands
unto iniquity. Man in distress is so desirous of ease, that if Christ do not
come to him and comfort him, he will go to Sin and Satan for ease. Cain was
disconsolate, and because Christ did not come to him as a Comforter, he ran
like a vagabond up and down the world, to find ease in any thing. Judas was
disconsolate, and because Christ as a Comforter did not come to him, he made a
halter his Comforter. Saul being in distress by the Philistines, because
Christ did not come to him by Urim, nor by Vision, nor by Prophets, he went to
the Devil for comfort. Now that Christ's children may not thus do, Christ will
not leave them comfortless, but will come to them.

The second ground why Christ will come to his Church Militant as a Comforter,
is this, That he may stop the mouths of all ungodly wretches, who say of the
godly when in great distresses, Persecute and ^ak^ them for there is none to
deliver them, A wicked man looking upon a wounded soul with a carnal eye,
breaks cut into some such language as Achish did concerning David, Lo you see
the man is mad, 1 Samuel 21.14.
This man is a distracted person, fitter for Bedlam, then for Gods house: an
idle crackt-braine fellow, unfit to come into solemn assemblies. Now that
Christ may silence such black mouthed men as these, he graciously comes to such
wounded souls, and heales their broken hearts, and binds up their wounds; he
powers the Spirit of consolation upon such as went mourning all the day long,
and makes them walk with joy and strong consolation, so that such as censured
them for this and that, are forced to lay their hand upon their mouth, and to
condemn themselves as blind Bats, and not able to discern the ways of God
toward his children.

Having thus opened the point in hand, I will in the next place show you how
useful it is, to the wicked and to the godly. Will not Christ leave any of his
children upon Earth comfortless, but still as a Comforter come to them? Then
you which live in your sins, and so consequently none of Christ's children may
collect the unhappiness of your condition from this point. You shall live and
dye comfortless, for Christ will not come to you as a Comforter; thus he comes
only to his children. Christ will not come to you in prosperity as a Comforter;
and therefore in the midst of sensual laughter, your hearts will be sad: in the
midst of all thy worldly contents, thy spirit will at times gnaw and beat
within thee, and never will all thou enjoyest give any complacency of comfort
to thee, because Christ as a Comforter comes not to thee. All outward comforts,
without the inward consolations of Christ, they are as good broth unseasoned,
which rather cloys then contents the appetite; they weary, distract, and vex,
and not revive the owner. Be it, that thou art as wise as Achitophel, as
eloquent as Herod, as learned as Gamaliel, as rich as Nabal, as honorable as
Haman, as great in the Church as Judas; why, yet shall thou live comfortless;
that is, utterly destitute of Celestial consolation, one drop whereof has
more soule-reviving sweetness in it, then all the things of this life can
afford. Alas! what is learning? what is wit, wealth, honor, or any other
worldly thing to comfort me, if Christ do not come to me? A man may have all
that this world can afford, and yet hang himself for want of comfort, if
Christ come not to him, as Achitophel, Judas, and others have done.

Ob.
No men laugh louder, nor laugh oftener then wicked men in prosperity: no man
merrier in an Alehouse, Playhouse, Tavern, Fair, or Market, then they: and
are not these then the only comfortable men in this world?

Sol.
To this I answer first thus; laughter is one thing, and spiritual consolation
another thing. Every one that laughs has not a cheerful spirit within: for
in the midst of laughter a man's heart may be sad, says Solomon. And so on the
other hand, every one who has a comfortable spirit, has not a laughing face:
we do not read that Christ ever and yet had more comfort in his Spirit, then
all the merry men of this world.

Secondly I answer thus, some men's spirits are so left of God to levity and
vanity, that they will laugh at the wagging of a straw (as we say.) This is a
great judgment of God upon the spirit, and not to be accounted a comfortable
and happy condition? It Is a pastime to fools to do wickedly, says Solomon.
This is not properly called mirth (says he) but madness. You shall see mad
men laugh sometimes exceedingly, and hoope and hallow, as if their spirits were
as full of joy as they could hold: what shall we conclude now, that these
forlorn creatures are in a comfortable condition? Alas! say we, if they were
but sensible of their condition, they would soon cease laughing, and begin
lamenting. And so may I say to you of all that laugh and rejoice, and yet live
in their sins, and so consequently have no Comforter from Heaven come to them,
they are mad men: were their eyes open to see their forlorn condition, they
would quickly change their note, and turn their mirth into mourning as James
says.

Quest.
Why, but does not Christ come to the wicked in prosperity?

Answ.
Yes, no doubt to be made of of it. Christ came to Belshazzar whilst he was
quaffing in the golden vessels of the Temple, and wrote down his wickedness
in the wall. And thus he comes to all ungodly persons in prosperity, to write
down all their ungodly deeds, that so he may exactly judge them at the great
day of account.

Quest.
Why, but does not Christ come as a Comforter, to wicked men that are great and
wealthy?

Answ.
Christ regards no man for his wealth, or for any external greatness. If a man
be never so rich, or never so honorable, yet if he have not denied his lusts,
and given up himself to Christ, to be ruled by him, Christ will never come to
comfort him, if he would give him all he has for his pains; he will not
step a foot out a doors to a Prince, if he be wicked.

Ob.
Why, but though he will not come to ungodly men as a Comforter in prosperity,
when they can make some shift without him, yet he will come to them as a
Comforter in adversity, when all other comforters fail.

Sol.
No he will not. Christ will not know thy soul in adversity, which art a
disobeyer of him. As he would not let Dives have a drop of water to cool his
tongue, though in unutterable torments, where many oceans would not in the
least measure have quenched the flames; so neither will he afford thee the
least drop of consolation in thy greatest extremity; though thou cry Lord,
Lord, and cut thy flesh in the fervency of thy spirit, like Baals Priests to
prevail, yet shall thou be sent empty away. Nay Christ will be so far from
being a Comforter to ungodly men when in misery, that he will add to their
outward misery, inward misery. When thy body is in distress, Christ will
awaken thy soul, that now lies asleep, and set thy conscience a gnawing
within thee, which will be greater torture then if thou were rackt in every
limb. Thou may send for godly Ministers and godly friends to comfort thee
then, and they possibly may deliver very comfortable things, but they shall be
of no more savor to thy soul, then the white of an Egg, because Christ as a
Comforter will not speak those sweet things to thy soul, which thy friends do
to thy ears. As the Lord bewailes the miserable condition of Jerusalem, so may
I bewail the miserable condition of all ungodly men. These two things are come
unto thee, who shall be sorry for thee? desolation and destruction, and the
famine, and the sword: by whom shall I comfort thee? Isay. 51.19
So say I to all ungodly persons, misery upon misery will first or last seize
upon you, and who then will be sorry for you? Famine, and sword, and
pestilence; sickness, and death, and judgment; and by whom will you be
comforted? your honors cannot comfort you: your riches and friends cannot
comfort you: your father the Devil he will not then comfort you: your
conscience which you have often sinned against, shall not comfort you, but
torture you, because Christ will not come to you, to sprinkle it with his
blood, and pacify it. So that I conclude all thus: you will live comfortless,
dye comfortless, and abide in Hell after death everlastingly comfortless.

It Is true all that you say Sir: man is a comfortless Creature indeed, unless
Christ come to him, I find it by woeful experience. I have much wealth in my
purse, and yet but little peace in my spirit. I see the Devil (me thinks)
now and then sit a stride upon top of my money-bags waiting for me, when I come
to comfort my self in the beholding of them; and to what this will come at the
last, I cannot tell. Sin I am sure I do; and comfortless because of sin I
am; and more comfortless every day I look to be, unless Christ come to me;
and yet how to get him to come to me, I know not.

Would thou, O comfortless creature, have Christ to come to thee? Do then
to Christ as Lydia did to Paul, lovingly invite him to come to thee. Make
known thy comfortless condition to Christ, and then earnestly entreat him to
visit thy poor soul. The ground why I exhort thee O sinner thus to do, is,
because God has promised to give his holy Spirit to them that ask it. Luke
11.13.
If therefore thou would have Christ by his Spirit to come to thee, invite
him, ask him, beg, and entreat him to come and dwell in thy soul; and tell
him that he shall have every room in thy heart at command. As Rebeckahs
brother said to Abraham's servant, So do thou say to Christ. Come in thou
blessed of the Lord, wherefore stand thou without? for I have prepared the
house, and room for the Camels, etc. Genesis 24.31
Come in thou blessed of the Lord, wherefore stand thou without? here is
room for thee and all thy glorious train. Here Is an understanding, will,
memory, affections, they shall be all at thy use and service O Christ,
wherefore come in thou blessed of the Lord, and make thy aboade with me. Thus
continue crying to Christ, and longing for him, and by this thou will declare
thy great love unto him, and so make thy self capable of that sweet promise,
which says, If a man love me, the Father loves him, and we will come unto
him, and make our aboade with him. John 14.12
Then will thy condition be comfortable indeed, when thou have got such
glorious in-mates as these to dwell with thee.

Having thus spoken what I thought fit to the wicked, by way of application
from this point, I will now address my self to speak unto the godly, and
show them how useful this point may be unto them. I shall first speak to
strong men, and then unto Babes in Christ: to such as can tell me, that Christ
as a Comforter is come to them. Secondly to such as can tell me they never yet
found Christ as a Comforter come to them: and lastly to such who can tell me
that they have found Christ as a Comforter come to them, but now they have lost
him. To you that tell me you find the truth of this doctrine by blessed
experience, that Christ is come to you; I have only two things to say: first
this, Make it sure to thy self that Christ indeed as a Comforter is come to
thee, and that thy soul is not deluded in thy joy and consolation. Secondly,
strive so to walk, that thy Comforter which is come to thee may never depart
from thee. First strive to make it sure that Christ is indeed come to thee:
that the comfort which thou have is from the Comforter, to wit, the Spirit of
Christ, and not from the spirit of delusion.

There is great need that I should press this instruction upon you, because
the spirit of delusion is plentifully powered out in these latter days. The
hypocrite has his joy; and he judges that this his joy, is the joy of the Holy
Ghost, and as good as need to be, whereas it is a joy that shall perish (says
the Scripture) a joy that will end in desperate sorrow. He thinks that Christ
as a Comforter is come to him, whereas it is only the Devil transformed into
an Angel of light. And thus indeed are many thousands gulled and cheated in
their comfort. Sadness would overshadow the smiling face of many a man, if he
did but discern how groundless his joy and comfort is; and what a vain
shadow instead of a true substance, his poor soul is deluded withal.
Wherefore my brethren it concerns you, that tell me, you are sensible that the
Comforter is come to you, to take pains to make it sure to your selves, that
your souls are not deluded.

When the Spirit of God came upon Saul that he prophesied, the people that
knew him before said, What is come to the Son of Kish? is Saul amongst the
Prophets? 1 Samuel 10.11.
Thus do thou say to thy soul who art so merry and comfortable, viz. What is
come to thee O my soul! that thou art now so joyful and cheerful? Once I am
sure thou went mourning all the day long: is Christ as a Comforter come to
thee? If Christ by his Spirit have brought glad tidings to thee, why then O my
glory, continue in thy mirth: but if not, why art thou so merry O my soul? thy
mirth is but madness. As David questioned his soul for sadness, saying, Why
art thou so sad O my soul? and why art thou so cast down within me? So may
thou do well to question thy mirth, saying, why art thou so merry O my soul?
and why art thou so much lifted up within me? Is thy Comforter our Lord Jesus
Christ indeed come to thee? O then my glory cease not to declare thy comfort,
by any comely posture and gesture: but if not, a house of mourning, O my soul,
is fitter for thee then a house of mirth; garments of Sackcloth and sadness,
would better become thee, then garments of joy and gladness. You know how
Isaac once spoke to his son, Art thou (said he) my very Son Esau? Genesis 27.24
So do thou humbly question thy Comforter. Art thou my very Comforter indeed?
Art thou the very Christ the Son of God, which speak consolation to my
soul? You know how John questioned Christ much after this manner, that he
might not be deceived concerning him. Mat. 11.3
Art thou he that should come, or do we not look for another? So do thou say,
Art thou he that should come and comfort my soul? or should not I look for
another? There be many false Christ's, and false comforters now in the world,
and they deceive many: wherefore I beseech thee speak out, and speak plainly to
my soul, whether thou be he that should come and comfort me yea or not,
that if I have obtained the true Comforter, I may give God the glory of his
great kindness; if not, I may seek out for another.

How should I know (may the strong man in Christ say to me) whether he that is
come to my soul with consolation, be he that should come, or not? How should
I be able to make it sure to my soul, that the consolation which I have is
from the Spirit of Christ, and not from a spirit of delusion?

To this I thus answer, viz. If he that is come to thy soul be he that
should come, to wit, Christ; thou shall find that he does more works then
one in thy soul: he does not only comfort thee, but he does many great works
besides this. Christ does many great works in a man's soul before he comforts
him; and he does many great works in his soul, after he has comforted him.
Christ does many great works in the soul of man, before he comforts him: he
does break the heart before he binds it up: he first wounds the heart, before
he will heal it: he casts down the soul for sin, before he will raise it
up. Now to break the heart of man, which the Scripture compares to an Adamant
for hardness, Zech. 7.12.
is a great work; and yet this does Christ thoroughly, before he comforts
thoroughly. The breaking of the hard heart of man, has many great works about
it, ere it be effected. The convincing the soul of sin, which
selfe-conceited man is not easily brought unto. The making of sin out of
measure sinful, in the souls apprehension, which blind man is not easily
brought to see. The making of man to loathe himself, for the evils which he
has committed against God, which man full of self-love is not easily wrought
unto. The making of man to long for peace and reconciliation with God, as the
greatest happiness in the world, and to beg this blessing with tears, as a
soul that sees he shall dye and perish eternally without it; which man that
naturally hates God, is not easily won unto. Yet all these difficult works
does Christ do in the soul of man, before he comes as a Comforter to him.
Which Christ confirms where he says, Blessed are they that mourn, for they
shall be comforted.

Now would thou know whether he that is come to thy soul, be he that
should come or not? why then tell me, What did precede thy comfort which now
thou have? Did Christ lead thee to the Wels of Consolation by the waters of
Marah? Did he bring thee to sow in tears, ere he gave thee to reap thy
great harvest of joy? Wast thou ever in the house of mourning? Did the spirit
of heaviness for sin ever take hold on thee? Was thy hard heart first broken,
and after this bound up? First wounded, and after this healed? Did thou go
mourning for dishonouring God all the day long, and after many dolorous days
thus spent, did thy Comforter come to thee? Surely then he that is come, is he
that should come, and do not look for another: but if otherwise, thou have
just cause to be jealous of thy joy.

Again, Christ as he does great works in the soul before he comforts it, so
he does great works in the soul after he has comforted it. That soul which
Christ comforts, he makes a very fruitful soul in all grace to his glory. No
waters make the soul of a Christian grow in grace, like the waters of
consolation. The comforting Spirit of Christ is to a Christian in the ways of
obedience, as wind and tide to a Ship: that which makes him run the ways of
Gods Commandments. That Christian which is comforted by Christ, prays
fervently, and prays frequently. Consolation gives wings to supplication.
That Christian which is comforted by Christ, prayseth God with strong
affection. A soul comforted by Christ, is as an instrument well tuned by a
skillful Musician: he will, upon every occasion, make sweet me lody in the
ears of the Almighty. True consolation is from Heaven, and it carries that
soul strongly to Heaven, in which it is. True consolation is from Christ, and
it will make a Christian live wholly to Christ. To whom much is forgiven they
love much: and this love constraines them to deny themselves, and to follow
Christ unto death.

Would thou know then for certain O strong man in Christ, that he which is
come to thy soul, is he which should come? Why then look what activity is in
thy soul to duty. Is thy soul as a Giant refreshed after wine? strong and
vigorous to the practice of all good duties? Art thou abundant in the work of
the Lord? Art thou a sweet Singer in Israel of the praises of the Lord? Is thy
heart at thy mouth leaping within thee, like the Babe in Elizabeth's womb when
thou art telling what God has done for thy soul? Art thou (in a word) a holy
and heavenly man, as one comforted by a holy and heavenly God? Does thy joy
transcend the joys that this world affords, in sweetness? Does it raise thy
spirit to admire the love of God? and does it make thee dead to secular
delights? and to account naked carnal mirth madness? empty husks for brutes
to feed on? Then may thou comfortably conclude, that he which is come to thy
soul, is he which should come, and do not look for another: but if thou art
merry and cheerful, but not holy and heavenly, he that is come to thy soul,
is not he that should come, wherefore I beseech thee to look for another.

A second instruction which I would commend to strong men in Christ is this:
after thou have made it sure to thy soul, that Christ as a Comforter is indeed
come to thee, then strive so to walk, that he may never depart from thee. So a
man may walk, that Christ as a Comforter may forsake his soul. David had
woeful experience of this truth, and so doubtless have many else of the godly.
So a man may walk that Christ as a Comforter never depart from him. But how
should I thus walk, says the comforted soul, that I might enjoy this heaven
below, till I come to that above, and so go from joy to joy; from joy
unspeakable and full of glory, to joy that cannot enter into any mortal heart
to conceive of?

To this I thus answer, Do not grieve Christ that is come to thee: Secondly, do
all that thou can to delight him, if thou would have him continually abide
with thee. Do not sit down and rest, as one that has a license to be lazy,
and as if all thy work were done, now thy Comforter is come to thee; this will
grieve him, and quickly make him leave thee. Thou have obtained Christ to come
a Comforter to thee, well: yet let me tell thee as Moses did the Israelites,
You are not (said he) as yet come to the rest, and to the inheritance which the
Lord your God gives you. So say I to thee O comforted soul, thou art not yet
come to those degrees of consolation, which thou may attain unto in this
life, if thou continue to be thrifty. The joy of the Holy Ghost is a
bottomless Well, which thou can never draw dry: and the more thou drawest,
the fresher and sweeter still shall thou find it. The joy of the Holy Ghost is
no surfeting thing, as some earthly sweets are: and therefore thou may
safely say, Lord ever more give me of this bread: fill my soul with Flagons of
this precious liquour: let thy love be shead abroad in my heart by the Holy
Ghost: let my soul delight her self in this fatness.

Secondly, now Christ as a Comforter is come to thee, do not wax wanton
against him, this also will grieve him, and make him quickly forsake thy soul
as a Comforter Let all the manifestations of thy comfort be suitable to thy
Comforter; holy as he is holy; spiritual and heavenly, as he is. When ye are
come into the good land, take heed that ye do not forget the Lord (said Moses
to Israel.) So say I to you that find Christ with you as a Comforter, which
are come to the fellowship of the Spirit, and to the participation of that
transcendant comfort which is by him: take heed that you grow not giddy headed,
and forget God and your selves. The waters of consolation are strong waters,
and man's weak head and heart cannot bear much of them steadily, but are ready
to reele to one side or other. When the clouds of heaven have well watered the
Earth, then do weeds as well as good herbs spring apace: so when Christ by
his Spirit, sweetly waters the soul with consolation, then levity and vanity, as
well as Christian mirth and cheerfulness spring amain; If a Christian be not
very watchful over his soul, to pluck up such weeds by the roots, as soon
as they begin to show themselves. I conclude this thus: thou that art comforted
by the Spirit, let not the manifestations of thy comfort grieve the Spirit.
This remember, that Satan has an art to bring evil out of the greatest good,
as God has an art to bring good out of the greatest evil: and therefore beg
that thou may not be ignorant of any of his devices, nor unable to resist
them, if thou would not loose thy Comforter.

Secondly, if thou would have thy Comforter to abide still with thee; as
thou must not grieve him, so thou must do all that thou can to delight him.
Let it be thy meat and drink to follow all the motions of the Spirit of Christ:
whithersoever Christ would have thee go, or whatsoever Christ would have thee
do, cheerfully obey him; this will delight thy Comforter exceedingly, and make
him to rejoice to continue with thee. If Christ say unto thee as to the
Fishermen, Follow me: Mat. 4 19.
do thou readily reply as the Scribe, Master, I will follow thee whithersoever
thou go. Mat. 8 19.
This is to declare the genuine disposition of Christ's people, which Christ is
exceedingly taken withal. Christ's people are a willing people in their
obedience, Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, etc. Psalm. 110 3


2 Humbly and compassionately tell disconsolate souls, what Christ has done
for thy soul: this will delight thy Comforter much, and make him rejoice to
continue with thee. Christ delights to see his children communicative of the
sweet meats which he gives them. And therefore as Iael said to Barak, so do
thou O comforted soul, to such as yet go mourning all the day long: Come (said
she) and I will show thee the man whom thou seek. Judge. 4.22.
Come O sad soul, that can not find him whom thy soul loves, I will show
thee the man whom thou seek; the manner of his coming to my poor soul;
and how long he made me wait upon him, ere he would come to me; and how well
he has now made me amends for all his staying. And therefore Although thou
say thou shall not see him, yet judgment is before him, therefore trust
thou in him. Job 35.14.
For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and
not lie: though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not
tarry. Hab. 2.3.
The more imparting of experiments of love we are, to the glory of Christ, the
more still will Christ graciously give us to our further comfort. And this
indeed is Gods end in comforting some of his children, that they may be able
to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith they
themselves are comforted of God: 2 Cor. 1.4.
as the Apostle sweetly affirms.

3 Thank Christ humbly and heartily for his coming to thee; if thou would^st
have him abide still with thee. The Israelites when they came into the promised
Land which flowed with milk and honey, they were to take the first of all the
fruits of the Earth, and put them in a basket, and so present them to the
Priest saying, viz. And now behold, I have brought the first fruits of the
Land, which thou the Lord have given me: thus were they to set their first
fruits before the Lord, and to worship before him, as you may see at large.
Deuteronomy. 26.
Why you that enjoy Christ as a Comforter, you have received the first fruits
of that good land, which Canaan typified, which flows with Milk and Honey.
Bring therefore these first fruits, and set them before God and worship: bring
the sweet comforts of the Holy Ghost in your hearts, before the Lord and say,
Behold o Christ, these and these are the sweet consolations of thy spirit: and
lo for them all I humbly render praise to thy name. Such mighty enemies of my
peace, have thou conquered: such doubts which so long troubled me, have thou
answered: such wants which so long time kept me exceeding low, have thou
supplied: to thee O God be the glory of thine own goodness.

You have great cause thus to magnify the Lord for his mercy, which find
Christ as a Comforter come to you. You enjoy that blessing which exceeds all
outward blessings. The light of Gods countenance lifted up, upon a poor
mourning soul, it is of far greater value then Corn, Wine, Oil; then
Corrall, Rubies, or any choice thing that this world can afford. The naked
revelation of Christ in the soul of man, is of more worth then all these,
says Solomon: the most glorious revelation of Christ then to the soul, which
the soul of man is capable of in this life, must needs be of much more
transcendant worth. You enjoy that blessing which exceeds many inward
blessings. It exceeds knowledge: for what is knowledge in the head, to the
joy of the Holy Ghost in the heart? One beam of light in the understanding, is
of more worth then all the Silver and Gold, Gemmes, and Jewels in the world;
and yet one beam of the light of Gods countenance, shining upon the heart,
though but by reflection from the face of Jesus Christ, is of more worth then
all knowledge which humane study can attain unto. I cannot say that this
blessing, exceeds the least saving grace in the soul: but this I can safely
say, that consolation it is the gloss and glory of every grace: every grace
shines in its full luster where the Comforter dwells. This I can further say,
that you enjoy that blessing which makes Heaven a Heaven, and which makes Earth
a Heaven to you: and therefore you have great reason to magnify the Lord for
his mercy. The more of Heaven we enjoy upon Earth, the more should we set our
selves to do the work of them which are in Heaven, whilst on Earth.

4 Finally let Christ's mediate coming to thee by his Spirit, make thee long
earnestly for his immediate coming to thee in his own person: this delights
Christ, that his Spouse should say, Come, as the Spirit does. Rev. 22.17
That she should long for the wedding day, as he does. When good old Simeon
had embraced the consolation of Israel, for which he so long waited, he then
desired presently to be dissolved: so thou that have embraced the consolation
of Israel, should in a holy manner with Simeon, Job, and Paul, desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ which is best of all. You whom Christ has
kissed with the kisses of his lips, should long earnestly to lie between his
breasts all night; my meaning is, to have a full enjoyment of Christ. Thus have
I done speaking to such, who can tell me that Christ as a Comforter is come to
them.

In the next place I address my self to speak to such of the godly, who can
tell me that they never yet found Christ as a Comforter come to them. Two or
three things I have to say to you from this sweet doctrine. 1.
First, I would have you to labor to believe this doctrine, that Christ will
not leave you comfortless, but will certainly (at last) come to you. Christ
has repeated his promise, which is as a bond with many seals; and therefore
thou have just ground to believe, o comfortless soul, that Christ will not
leave thee comfortless, but will come to thee.

Object.
What just ground have I to believe, that Christ will come to me, seeing he is
holy, and I am unholy: he is glorious in holiness, and I am abominable in sin
and wickedness, says the weak comfortless soul.

Sol.
Art thou more vile then Manasseh? Christ came to him and comforted him. Art
thou more muddie and earthy then Zacheus? Christ came to him and comforted him.
Art thou more divelish then Mary Magdalen, out of whom were cast seven Devils?
Christ came to her, and filled her soul with strong consolation. Why should
not thou believe, that Christ will come to thee too, and quiet and comfort thy
mourning spirit?

Sol.
But secondly I answer thus: viz. Christ does not so much lock how thou art
qualified, as at what he has promised: Christ has promised he will come to
thee, and he is faithful and will do it. If thy soul were never so poor,
never so blind, never so wretched, never so naked, yet Christ having promised
to come to thee, he will make good his word; though he come backward, with a
mantle to cover thy nakednesie, as Shem and Iaphet did to Noah. If thy soul
were full of wounds; if thy soul were full of running putrefying sores; if
thou were as black with sin as an Ethiopian; if thou were as spotted with sin
as a Leopard; nay, if thy soul did stink within thee, as Lazarus body after
taken out of the Earth again, yet Christ having promised to come to thee and
comfort thee, he will do it, though he hold his nose while he be comforting
thy stinking nasty soul. Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not a jot or
tittle of Christ's promise shall fail. The voice of my Beloved, behold he
comes leaping upon the Mountains, and skipping upon the Hills. Cant. 2.8.
Though there be mountains and hills of sin in thy soul, yet Christ will come
skipping over all these with comfort to thy soul, rather then thou shall be
left comfortless.

Wherefore, O weak, comfortless soul, say not of thy Savior and Comforter
as Balaam did, I shall see him, but not now; I shall behold him, but not nigh.
Number. 24.17.
I shall see Christ come with a witness: nay with many thousand witnesses, at
the great day, when every eye shall see him: but I shall not see him come to me
now, in this soul dolor, as a Comforter. I shall behold him peradventure, as
Moses beheld the Holy Land, afar off: he will never come nigh my poor soul,
to stay it with those comforts which it needs. Cease, O weak soul, this
incredulous language; and strive to believe, and this sweet promise I treat of
shall be made good unto thee. No sin so mighty to keep thy Comforter from
thee, as unbelief. Say then O mourning Christian to thy comfortless soul.
Yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. Heb.
10.37
He that has said he will come as a Comforter to thee, will come, and will
satisfy thy soul with consolation, as with marrow and fatness. Say to thy
sad soul, with the Psalmist, My God will come, and will not keep silence: he
will speak consolation so plainly, that my ignorant soul shall understand; so
powerfully, that my incredulous soul shall believe, and own her own mercies.
Thou art now tossed and almost drowned, O my soul, with restless waves of
misery; but the Spirit will move upon these waters; thou shall see Christ
coming toward thee, upon these troublesome waves anon, and say, be not
afraid, it is I: I that have loved thee, and given my self for thee, and none
shall pluck thee out of my hand.

Secondly, as I would have thee to strive firmly to believe this truth, so I
would have thee endeavor patiently to wait the accomplishment of it. Believe
that Christ will come to thee, and wait patiently until he do come. There
is good ground why every soul should patiently wait for Christ, coming to
him, whither we consider our selves which are to be visited, or Christ our
visitour. If thou O comfortless soul consider thy self which art to be
visited, there is great reason thou should wait patiently till Christ come
to thee, how long soever he stay. First, thou art a creature, and Christ is thy
Creator; and should not a creature wait on his Creator? Thou art a servant, and
Christ is thy Lord: and should not a servant wait on his Lord? Consider thee
in thy highest relations, and they all call for waiting. Thou art a Son, and
Christ is thy Father: and should not a Son wait on his Father? Thou art a
Wife, and Christ is thy Husband: and should not a Wife wait on her Husband?

Secondly, consider that thou have deserved, that Christ should never come to
thee, and yet for ^ll this, seeing he will come to ^hee, have not thou just
cause ^o wait patiently till he do come, how long so ever it be first?
Before thy calling thou did reject Christ; and since ^hy calling, thou have
often grieved Christ; and have not thou ^hen deserved that Christ should never
come to thee? Thou have quenched many a sweet motion of the Spirit of Christ:
thou have ^urned the deaf ear, to the sweet still voice that has spoken
behind thee, times without out number, and so slighted the Spirit of Christ;
and have not thou then justly deserved, that Christ as a Comforter should never
come to thee? yet seeing he will come, for all this unkindnesse; have not thou
just cause to wait patiently for him, how long soever he stay? Thou have many
weeks, many months, nay many years, gone along in a course of grieving
Christ; and do thou think much of waiting a few weeks, a few months, a few
years, for Christ to come to comfort thee?

Take this in another form: thou did make Christ wait a long time upon thee,
ere thou would let him abide with thee as a spirit of reformation: and is
there not just cause then, that thou should wait patiently a long time upon
him, if he will have it so, ere he abide with thee as a Spirit of consolation?
how many knocks did Christ give at thy stubborn heart, ere thou would open
to him? how much dew of the night distilled upon his locks, ere thou would
give him house room in thy heart? how many mercies? how many corrections, were
all spilt upon thee, ere Christ could win thee to respect him? can thou tell?
if thou can not, think not much, if Christ make thee shed a few tears, and
breathe out a few groans, ere he bring glad tidings of peace unto thee.

Secondly, if thou consider Christ thy visitour, there is all the reason that
can be, that thou should wait patiently, till he come to thee. Christ will
certainly come to thee: Christ will come to thee at the fittest time: Christ
will come richly when he does come; which are all special grounds of patience.
Christ will certainly come to thee, O comfortless soul, though it may seem
to thee, something long first. Thou do not wait for one that will not come
at all, as the Turk waits for Mahomet: nay, thou do not wait for one that
will frivolously delay the time of his coming. Thou do not wait for one
that will deceive thee. Christ has promised to come to thee, and he is
faithful, and cannot deny himself. There is two things in faithfulness:
first, that a man should own what he has said; and then secondly, that he
should make it good. Now both these will Christ do: Christ will not eat his
words, as we say: what he has promised he will confess, and will make good;
whatsoever labor or loss he be at to do it. Christ is not mutable as we are,
to promise one thing to day, and recall it again to morrow: he is immutable
and changes not, therefore we are not consumed.

Thou do not wait for one that will frivolously delay the time of his
coming. Christ will not deal with thy comfortless soul, as those sorry
ghests dealt with Christ, make excuses: one had bought a yoke of Oxen, and
therefore could not come: an other a Farm, etc. Christ will not tell thee, as
Abraham Dives in hell, between thy soul and him is a great gulf, so that there
can be no intercourse between them. Nor, that from Heaven to Earth, is too long
a journey for him to make: He will not tell thee, that the place where thy sick
comfortless soul lies, is filthy, and altogether unfit for him to come to.
He will not tell thee that thy soul is so far gone in grief and desperate
sorrow, that it is in vain for him to come to thee. Christ puts none of these
delays upon any of his patients.

No, the ground why Christ stays is, that he may come at the fittest time;
and then he will come with healing in his wings, if all the Devils in Hell
should oppose him, which me thinks should be a satisfactory ground of patience,
to any disconsolate soul. If a Physician yet apply this and that for further
evacuation, rather then cordials, as knowing the body not yet fit for cordials,
will not any wise man submit patiently to his way? so if Christ for bear giving
thy sick soul cordials, as he that well knows thy soul not fit yet, for
such luscious things, wilt not thou with much thankfulness acknowledge his
great care over thy soul, and with all patience wait his leisure? I patiently
undergo the pain of drawing plasters, when I know my sore is not fit for
healing: thus should it be in spiritual distresses: we should patiently
undergo grief and sorrow, until our souls be fit for consolation, and then
we shall be sure to have it.

Finally, be sure of this, O mourning soul, that Christ will come richly,
when he does come; and therefore methinkes thou should wait patiently for
him: what Merchant but would wait patiently, the return of his Ship in the
longest voyage, if he were sure that it would richly return at last, Christ
will come very richly furnished, with the comforts of the Holy Ghost, which are
unspeakable and glorious, to your souls that mourn after him, and wait for
him. What the Apostle once spoke of himself in relation to the Romans, that
may I truly say of Christ, in relation to all that mourn after him And I am
sure that when I come unto you, I shall come (says he) in the fullness of the
blessing of the Gospel of Christ. Rom 15.29.
Christ I am sure O mourning soul, when he does come unto thee, he wilt come
in the fullness of the blessing of the Holy Ghost: thou shall have joy in the
Holy Ghost unspeakable and glorious. Thou by long waiting art made a more vast
Vessel, to hold the precious waters of consolation; and Christ by long staying
does (as I may say) the more furnish himself, with these waters of life, to
refresh, fill, and satisfy thy thirsty soul, when he comes to thee. Christ
will heal thoroughly thy broken heart, and bind up all thy wounds: he will
answer all thy doubts, and clear all thy scruples: he will quiet thy
quarrelling conscience, and still thy complaining Spirit: he will fill thy
sad soul with joy and gladness, and thy dejected spirit with Songs of
thanks giving.

If these things, O mourning soul, will not make thee wait patiently, till
thy Comforter come to thee, but thou will murmr and repine, and fall upon
indirect ways to get consolation, know that by this practice thou will make
thy condition more miserable, then at present it is. Thou will grieve him that
should come as a comforter to thee: and if thou by sin make Christ grieve,
how can Christ by his Spirit make thee rejoice? and if thou set him a mourning
that can only comfort thee, by whom will thou be comforted? Do thou think
to win Christ to thee, by a dogged disposition? Christ may pity, and cure
thy humors, but it will never be by consolation. He will bring thee to be
lowly and meek ere thou shall find rest to thy soul; he will make thee
willing to lie under his Feet; glad of crummes of comfort; and willing to
wait for them till Christ has dined, and every Child served.

If thy corrupt soul hanker after the pleasure of sin again, because Christ
as a comforter does not come to thee, and thou be resolved to pick and choose,
amongst all the sins thy soul knows, to find out one that thy soul most
loves, to make a comforter to thee, as the Israelites in their dogged humor
made them a Captain to return to Egypt again, know this, that what sin
thou pitchest upon to make a comforter, that sin will Christ make a Devil to
torture thee: Christ will make thee know by woeful experience that the
sweetest sin, is a bitter and miserable comforter: that the least sin, is
too great an evil, truly to comfort the soul: that to go to the Devil for
consolation, is to make faster have for comfort, then good speed: that neither
sin, nor any thing in the world beside sin shall comfort thy soul, when he
himself will not.

The last Instruction that I have to commend to thee, O comfortless soul,
that did never yet find Christ as a comforter come to thee, is this,
observe how Christ comes, and do not put him off. Christ comes to comfortless
souls with comfort, in a promise; as I have at large showed you. It Is with many
Christians in their minority, as it was with Samuel, the^ do not know the voice
of the Lord, speaking ^n a promise, and therefore I thought good to note this
last instruction.
The promise Christ opens before the soul, that he may see the blessing wrapped
up in it, which he needs: and then often repeates it to the soul, that he may
rely upon it: instances to illustrate this way of Christ, I have given you,
things must not be here again repeated. That which here I would press by way
of application, is, that you which are comfortless souls, would observe this
secret way of the comforter, and meet him. Art thou tempted? and do thou now
hear a sweet still voice, as it were behind thee saying, My grace shall be
sufficient for thee? Why this is the voice of thy beloved, that is come to
thee, embrace what he says, rest upon it, turn not thy comforter away now,
by unbelief, and peevish pettish humors. Have thou fallen into sin, by the
strength of temptation, and thine own corruption? and do thou hear such a
sweet voice behind thee as this, The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from
all sin? 1 Ioh 1.7.
Why this is the language of thy beloved, he is come to comfort thee, O
mourning soul, do not thrust him away by unkind language of unbelief and
passion. Hear what he says, for it is sweet: strive to believe what he
says, for it is sure. As Isaac said unto Jacob his Son, after he had had
some discourse at a distance with him, Come near now and kiss me my Son:
Genesis 27.26.
So should such comfortless souls say to Christ, when they hear Christ
speaking, as it were at a distance, softly and coldly to them, the sweet
promises of his word; come here now, O my beloved, and kiss me with these
kisses of thy lips for thy love is better then Wine: what thou say to my
soul, say it with such life, that my heart may no longer be faithless, but
believe, and give glory to thee. I have now done speaking to you, who never yet
had the comforter come to you.

I come now in the last place to speak a word or two particularly, to such of
GODS people, who can tell me that they have found Christ as a comforter come
to them, but now have lost Him. Three things I have to say to these. First,
labor to be sensible of thy loss. Secondly, blame not Christ for departing
from thee. Thirdly, use all holy means to get him to return to thee again.
First I would have thee, O deserted soul, to labor to be truly sensible of
thy loss Though it be that some are deeply sensible of this great loss, yet
others are as deeply stupid, which moves me to note this instruction. For a
man to be stupid and senseless under corporal afflictions, argues a very ill
temper of spirit; but for a man to be stupid and senseless under spiritual
affliction, under such a spiritual affliction as this, the loss of the Sun,
the loss of Christ as a comforter, argues a very ill temper of spirit indeed.
Strive therefore, O deserted stupid soul, to affect thine heart thoroughly with
thy loss. Thou have lost more then Job: when he had lost Children; substance,
health, honors, and friends: nay thou have lost more, then if thou had lost
this World; nay, thou have lost more then if thou had lost thy life, which is
of more worth then the World: thou have lost Christ, which is richer then this
World, and sweeter then thy life. What an infinite loss were it to this World,
to lose the Sun? 'twere at once to loose all: Pereunte solep, ereunt omnia.
for all things serviceable for the use of man, depend upon the motion and
influence of that glorious Body. What a loss then is it to the lesser World,
to loose Christ the Sun of Righteousness? It Is to loose all good at once,
for soul and body. All graces close and wither when Christ departs, as all
fragrant flowers when the Sun withdrawes his influence. And when these
flowers wither in the soul, a man is a moving Dunghill, that stinkes in the
Nostrils of God and man, where ever he comes. A man that has lost Christ, may
truly say as she when the Arc was lost, that his glory is departed. As the
Sun is the glory of the greater World: so Christ the Sun of righteousness,
is the glory of the lesser World, to wit, man.

Thou have lost that in the world, that is more worth then the world, and which
all the world can never help thee to. Thou have lost that which would have
made the worst condition in this life, a Heaven; whereas the best without it,
is but a hell. Thou have lost that which would have been to thy soul, a
continual feast; whereas now thy soul is in a continual famine and leanness.
Thou have lost thy spirits, and thy soul is in a dead Palsy, so that thou art
a living dead man, fit for no spiritual service. Thou have lost thy head, thou
have lost thy eyes, thou have lost thy hands, thou have lost thy feet, thou
have lost thy bread, thou have lost thy clothing; nay, thou have lost thy best
father, thy best husband, thy best friend; all this and much more comfort is
Christ to man. Thou have great reason then O deserted soul, to lay to heart
thy loss.

2.
Lay to heart thy loss, this is comely, but do not blame Christ for departing
from thee, this is uncomely, and unrighteous. Uncomely; for it does not suit
with wisdoms children, to lay folly to their Maker. Unrighteous, for thou
constrainst him to depart from thee, otherwise he had never left thee: thou
did sin again and again of weakness, and yet Christ as a Comforter did not
depart from thee: until thou beganst to take pleasure in unrighteousness, and
to make sin a custom, a right eye, a very serviceable thing unto thee, Christ
did not leave thee. Thou beganst to wax wanton against Christ, and then Christ
cast thee off. Thou beganst to play the Apostate, and to backslide in heart
from Christ; and then he fell off from thee, and filled thee with thine own
ways. Now these things seriously considered, have thou any cause to blame
Christ for departing from thee? It is a comely and a very righteous thing for
Wisdoms children to justify wisdom in all his ways, as to others, so to our
selves. Wherefore thus do, O deserted soul; say, righteous art thou, O Christ
in departing from me, and righteous may thou be, if thou never return to me,
so unkindly have I dealt with thee.

3.
Then set thy self seriously to the use of all holy means, whereby thou may
get thy Comforter to return to thee. Examine thy soul thoroughly thou must, to
find out what evil deprived thee of so great a good; and in serious soul
searching, God will speak to thy conscience, and conscience will speak plainly
to thee, and tell thee wherein thou did give distaste to thy Comforter, and
what was the cause he forsook thy soul.

And when thou have found out that evil, which conscience tells thee, deprived
thee of so great a good, thou must fall very foul with it, how sweet soever it
has been unto thee. Thy great work must be, to bring thy heart to a holy
revenge upon this sin: to abhor it, and thy self because of it: and to
become very vile, as Job says, and very low in thine own eyes. Bring thy
heart to admire the infinite patience and mercy of God, that things are no
worse with thy soul. That God had not cut thee off, in the acting of that
sin for which he deserted thee: that he has left any place for repentance,
and given the least desire to set about this work.

And when thou art come thus far, possibly the light of Gods countenance may
begin now and then, to glance into thy soul, as at some little cranny: or at
least some more then ordinary lightsomnesse, may appear in thy dark dull soul,
as there does in the dark morning, some space of time before the Sun appears,
that had left this Horizon. Now this beam of light, or this little
lightsomenesse of soul, thou must much admire; and acknowledge an unfathomed
depth of love in it; that God should so much as once stoop, to cast an eye
after thee more, to give thy soul the least refreshing, that did abuse flagons
of love.

By this glimpse of light, or glimmering light, you are to strengthen your
faith, in the belief of this, that light will more and more appear, as the
light of the morning unto the perfect day: and so consequently to follow God
with so much the more fervency of prayer, for the return of his wonted
kindness. Toseph, you know, carried himself very roughly to his brethren
which had abused him, for some space of time; and put them in great fear of
the loss of their lives; told them they were Spies, and many harsh words he
gave them, and harsh looks: but at last, when his Brethren had brought to him
Benjamin, and discoursed a while, Joseph's bowels began to work, and he could no
longer withold his brotherly love, Come near to me. I pray you, I am Joseph
your brother, etc. Genesis 45.4.
Thus Christ our elder Brother deals with us, who do unkindly and unbrotherly
use him: he will handle us very roughly, and put us in fear of the loss of our
best lives: he will make our consciences speak bitter things against us; and
let loose the Devil to tell us that we are Spies, hypocrites, and false
friends to Christ: in this distracted, affrighted, perplexed state, he may
hold us many days, many weeks, many months; but he cannot hold in his
brotherly love always, if we patiently bear his frowns, and kindly entreat
him, and bring Benjamin to him, his own blood and merits; this will make his
bowels work, and make him unmask himself and say, come near to me, O
mourning souls, tossed and not comforted; I am Christ your elder brother, whom
ye unkindly used: in a little wrath I hid my face from you, but now with
everlasting kindness will I embrace you.

Trinuni Deo gloria.
FINIS.
CHRIST'S COMMUNION with his Church Militant.
2. Tim. 4. verse 22. The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit.


THis Text is Paul's sweet affectionate farewell to Timothy. Many grave and
gracious instructions Paul had given Timothy; but it is not so much what man
says to the ear, as as what Christ says to the heart that works
effectually, to set man about his duty; and therefore does Paul in the
conclusion of all his Christian counsel to Timothy pathetically pray, That the
Lord Jesus Christ would be with his Spirit.

The best teaching of man, is but as water spilt on the ground, unless Christ
inwardly teach the spirit. If I am taught my duty by a Paul, one in gifts not
inferior to the chiefest Apostles, yet unless Christ be with my spirit, to
make things take root there; all will die and wither, like good seed cast into
bad ground. And therefore Paul saw it but needful, as to teach the ear, so to
entreat the Lord to teach and strengthen the spirit. The Lord Jesus Christ be
with thy Spirit.

There is a great distance (you know) between the ear and the heart: it is an
easy thing for man to bring home things unto the one, but no less then the
Al-mighty power of Christ, will bring home things unto the other. There is an
incomparable hardness, upon the heart of man naturally: it is harder then an
Adamant: now though a child with his little finger, may make a dint upon dow,
yet a Giant with all his strength, cannot make dints upon an Adamant; much
less can all created strength, make divine impressions upon the spirit of man;
and therefore it is, that Paul does implore an Almighty strength to do this,
The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy Spirit.

Why does not Paul here, wish riches and honors and pleasures unto Timothy? Is
the bare presence of Christ with a man's spirit such a blessing?

To this I answer, riches and honors, etc. they are bona, but not optima: good
things, but not the best things. Earthly things though good in themselves, yet
are no further forth good to me, then as the Lord Jesus Christ is with my
spirit, to guide it to use them; and therefore Paul as one truly wise, prayed
for the prime good for Timothy; for that good which makes all other things
work together for good, to wit, That the Lord Jesus Christ would be with his
Spirit. The point I intend to stand on, is this, That to have the Lord Jesus
Christ with our spirits, is a prime and principal blessing. Paul here wishes
it to Timothy, as a cardinal blessing, The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy
spirit.

Enucleatio propositionis
To have Christ with our spirits, etc. How can Christ be present with man upon
Earth, who is now ascended, and sits at the right Hand of his Father in
Heaven?

The Apostle does hint an answer to this question, in the form of his Prayer,
if you observe it. The Lord Jesus Christ says he, be with thy spirit. He
speaks of such a presence, as will fitly yield Communion and fellowship, to
the spirit of man. There is a double presence of Christ with man, corporal and
spiritual jointly; or merely spiritual. With just men made perfect in glory,
Christ is corporally present; they behold his wounded Body made a glorious
Body, as a continual assurance of the Resurrection of their own vile bodies,
unto the same similitude. And with them Christ is present, spiritually filling
them with those joys, the taste of which upon Earth, is called unspeakable and
full of glory. Of this communion speaks Christ himself. I in them, and thou
in me, that they may be made perfect in one. John 17.23
As the soul is tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part: according to the
whole, in that whole which is less noble then it self: according to the
whole, that is, according to that full force and energy which the soul has,
it actuates and organizeth, every member of the body, the least as well as the
greatest; So Christ in the mystical body of Saints glorified, is as I may say,
Totus in toto, and totus in qualibet part. Whole Christ, does wholly exercise
dominion in every glorified soul; hence it is, that all such souls, are wholly
holy, and wholly happy; that is perfectly holy, and perfectly happy, for as much
as Christ who is the fullness of his Fathers glory, is fully present with them.

Secondly, there is a presence of Christ with man, merely spiritual; that is,
such a presence, as whereby not the person, but the providence of Christ may
be seen. Such a presence as superiora have with inferiora, not a contiguall,
but a vertuall presence; a presence of influence and governance, as the Sun
has with us, by his rays and beams. And this presence is either commune or
special.

The Commune presence of Christ with man, is that whereby man is upheld and
guided, according to the being of a rational creature. Of this presence of
Christ with man, speaks the Apostle, that they should seek the Lord, if
happily they might feel after him and sinde him, though he be not far from
every one of us, for in him we live, move, and have our being. Acts 17.27.28.
Christ as an upholder of each creature, is not far from every one of us; that
is, he is still present with us thus, and with all Nations of men, which he
has made of one blood, to dwell upon the face of the Earth. This presence of
Christ with man therefore, cannot properly be called a prime and principal
blessing, a choice and special favor, because it is Commune to mankind in
general; yea Commune to all Creatures below man; for God is with all the
works of his Hands, to uphold every Creature according to its proper species.

Secondly, there is a special presence of Christ with man which is that
efficacious working, of the Spirit of Christ in the spirit of man, whereby it
is made one spirit, with the Spirit of Christ, in willing and nilling,
according to that of the Apostle, He that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit.

There is a special presence of Christ, with the bodies of men, for the good
of them; which the Psalmist intimates where he says, that he knows our
frame, and remembers that we are but dust: and that the Angels of the Lord
pitch their Tents about the righteous. And Jacob found the truth of this by
experience, when he fled before Esan, and slept so sweetly upon a stone. But
this tender and special presence and providence of Christ, respecting the
outward man, is comprehended under the other, which respects the inward man, as
quid minus sub majori, a less blessing under a greater. For if God be in a
special manner present with my spirit, to guide and order that unto all Holy
ways, my spirit will command my body to walk in them too; and so consequently
Christ cannot choose, but be tenderly present with my body also, for the good of
that, whilst every member thereof, is actuated by a spirit of his own
ordering, to his own honor, as weapons of Righteousness. And therefore does
Paul (pithily to speak much in few) silently pass over that, which is
necessarily presupposed, praying that Christ would be with Timothies spirit,
and then he was sure, Christ would be after a special manner present, with
his body too, for the good of that. The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit.
That is, the Lord Jesus Christ exercise a special dominion in thy spirit, for
the guiding and ordering of it, unto the avoiding of all evil, and to the
performing of all good, whereby Christ may have all the glory, due to his Name.

Now that thus to have Christ present with a man's spirit, is a prime and
principal blessing, I will plainly demonstrate to you, by a triple argument
ab effectu.

Thus to have Christ present with our spirits, is the ready way to all
temporal, spiritual, and eternal good: and therefore must needs be a prime
and principal blessing. Thus to have Christ present with a man's spirit, is the
ready way unto all temporal good. Men whose spirits, Christ does after a
special manner order, to avoid sin, and to keep themselves pure, as Paul
here uses the expression to Timothy, all temporal good things, so far forth
as may be good for them, belong unto them by promise; For godliness has the
promise of this life. It shall come to pass says the Lord, if you walk in my
ways, that I will bless you in the fruit of the Womb, in the fruit of the
Field, in the basket and store, etc. If you walk in my ways I will do this,
etc. Why, they with whose spirits Christ is after a special manner present,
this is their high way (as Solomon says) to depart from evil: that is, this
is their daily endeavor, to walk in all the ways of the Lord; and so
consequently, all temporal good of right belongs unto them.

But you will say, how is it then, that those with whose spirits Christ is most
present, to make most tender for his honor, have usually least of all
temporal good things?

To this the answer is easy and manifold. Men with whose spirits Christ is
most present, to make them most tender to avoid sin, and to keep themselves
pure^, these the Devil does most of all malign, and sets his limbs to spoil
them of their goods, as the Author to the Hebrews says, to keep them from
that, which Christ would have them advanced to, or else to strip them of that,
which Christ has conferred on them, by imprisonment, banishment and the like;
and so make such live in Dens, and Holes, and Caves of the Earth; to wander in
Deserts and Wildernesses, wearing Sheeps-skins, and Goates-skins, of whom the
World is not worthy. Where a spirit of malice and confusion rules, it is no
marvel to see servants set on horseback, and Princes go on foot.

Secondly, men with whose spirit Christ is after a special manner present, he
takes special notice to what evil the spirit is most inclined, and so
answerably gives of these outward things unto them. A wise Father has his eye
upon the disposition of his child, and to what exorbitancy he finds him
inclined, he labors to prevent all occasions to it, and so keeps his child
short of what he could otherwise liberally allow him. And thus it is with our
heavenly Father, respecting his children: he eyes strictly their spirits, and
if he see them inclined to pride, covetousness, or any other scandalous vice,
he shortens them in that, which may foment these. At this (I think) James may
point, where he says, Let the rich rejoice in that he is made low. James 1.10
God out of tender love to his children, often times makes them poor in purse,
that they may become poor in spirit, and so capable of the Kingdom of Heaven.
Which rightly weighed, is not matter of sorrow, but matter of joy, as James
says.

Thirdly, those with whose spirits Christ is after a special manner present,
to guide them to walk in his ways, and to keep themselves pure, Christ does
prove them by poverty, as by other things; and hence it may come to pass, that
Christians very holy, may yet notwithstanding be very destitute of the things
of this life. Thus you know the Lord dealt with Job. Christ was after a
special manner present with his Spirit, to guide him to walk uprightly above
many in his time; now to make known this to the world, to his own glory, and
Jobs eternal honor, he stripped Job of all, and set him upon a dunghill, who
before sat with the chiefest in seats of honor. God will have the world know,
that those with whose spirits he is after a special manner present, to guide
and order them, are not as those with whose spirits the devil is in a special
manner present, to guide and order; to wit, such as will wind and turn every
way when put to it.

Lastly, those with whose spirits Christ is after a special manner present,
they desire but little of the things of this life; and therefore it is no
marvel, to see Christians very holy, yet not very wealthy. Christians with
whose spirit Christ is after a special manner present, they only desire daily
bread; Agurs portion, food convenient; and this the Lord gives them, and with
this they are contented, which is the only wealthy estate. Christians, with
whose spirit Christ is after a special manner present, they hunger and thirst
after righteousness, not after riches in the world: they covet the best gifts,
the unsearchable riches of Christ, and not the fading riches of this life. Now
Christ applies himself, to be most liberal in the distribution of that, which
the spirits of men most bend after; in mercy, or in justice. Christians whose
spirits most strongly bend after grace, to these Christ in mercy does most
bountifully apply himself, to give grace; according to that of Christ, Blessed
are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be
filled. Christians whose spirits most strongly bend after worldly riches, to
these often times Christ in justice most liberally applies himself to give
those, according to that of the Psalmist, Whose belly thou fillest with thy hid
treasure. Psalm. 17.14
According likewise to that of Solomon, There is a sore evil which I have
seen under the Sun, namely, riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt.
Eccl. 5.13.
The objection being thus answered, the argument is still of force. That to
have Christ with our spirits, is the way to all temporal good, and so
consequently, a prime and principal blessing.

But that I may yet more fully speak in this argument, note that temporal
good, is either positive, or privative; (if I may for illustrations sake so
distinguish.) Temporal good in a positive sense, is that secular thing, which
is in it self good; as bread and clothing, and the like, of which we have
already spoken.

Temporal good privatively so called, is affliction ordered to a man's good,
which in it self is not so. Now all those with whose spirits Christ is
present, are partakers of this temporal good. All outward losses and crosses,
tend to their inward gain, because Christ is with their spirits. For all
outward troubles, are heavier or lighter, more hurtful or more profitable
still to a man, as Christ is pleased to order his Spirit under them. A little
outward trouble, if Christ let it seize upon a man's spirit, he quickly sinks
and dies under his burden, according to that of the Apostle, worldly sorrow
causes death. The loss of a wife or husband; nay the loss of a child or
friend; nay the loss of the least outward content, if Christ stand aloof from
a man's spirit, and let it fasten upon him, he will soon languish, and bleed
inwardly to death; whereas all outward afflictions, meeting together upon the
outward man, if Christ be with the spirit, to support and bear up that, a
Christian sweetly submits, and keeps on his way, according to that of the
Apostle, Rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation, continuing instant in
prayer. Romans 12.12
Now Christ tenderly watches, when outward troubles begin to take hold of that
Spirit, with whom he is specially present, and then he quickly releeves and
eases it; and not only so, but sanctifies it, to the drawing of such a spirit
nearer to God in love; according to that of David, I love the Lord, because he
has heard my voice, and my supplications, because he has inclined his ear
unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live. Psalm. 116.1,2.
Add this to the former, that to have Christ with our spirits, is the ready
way to all temporal good, whether positive, or privative; and you must needs
grant it to be a prime and principal blessing.

Secondly, those with whose spirits Christ is specially present, are in the
ready way to all spiritual good; and therefore thus to have Christ present
with our spirits, must needs be counted a prime and principal blessing. Christ
is the Author and worker of all grace; and therefore such spirits must needs be
very gracious with whom Christ is. The places are holy whereunto the Ark of the
Lord has come, says Solomon. 2 Chronicles. 8.11.
I may truly say it of Christ, which the Ark typified. The Spirits are holy
with whom Christ is, and where holy Christ comes. They are at the Wellhead for
holiness, which have holy Christ with their spirits.

They that have Christ with their spirits, are in the ready way to the very
height of heavenly wisdom; for there is no such teacher of wisdom as Christ
is. With him are all the treasures of wisdom. He that lies in thy bosom,
teaching thee wisdom secretly, came out of the very bosom of the Almighty,
and knows all things; and he gives such an unction to that Spirit which he
teaches, that he makes it know and discern all things too.

They that have Christ with their spirits, are in the ready way to the very
height of love, which is the glory of all graces, in the sight of God and man;
for there is no such worker and winner of love, as Christ is. If he do but put
in his finger by the hole of the door, he will make a man's bowels melt after
him. If he do but reveal his love to our spirits a little, our spirits grow
sick of love unto him. He will wound us with one of his eyes; so full of beauty
is he. Let a man's spirit be never so cold, yet if Christ be with it, he is in
the ready way to burn with love to Christ, as strong as death, which many
waters cannot quench.

They that have Christ with their spirits, are in the ready way to the very
height of joy and consolation: they are in the ready way to joy unspeakable and
full of glory. These things have I spoken unto you, that your joy may be full,
said Christ to his Disciples. Christ speaks such things to the spirits of those
with whom he is present, as fills their spirits with joy, to the very brim; and
this often times in the very depth of all outward extremity. The Church does
darkly hint this. The Comforter which should relieve my soul is far from me.
Lam. 1.16.
As if the Church had said, though my outward misery be exceeding great, yet
if the Comforter did but keep close to my spirit, I should have as much
consolation as my heart could hold, in the midst of all my misery; but this is
my misery of miseries, that the Comforter which should relieve my soul is far
from me: out of the hearing of sighs and groans: nay out of the hearing of
strong cries; he is angry against my prayers. In a word a Christian which has
Christ with his spirit, is in the ready way to excel in virtue, as David
says: to excel in all virtue; to be wiser then his teachers; more excellent
in all grace, then his neighbors. And therefore, to have Christ present with
our spirits, must needs be counted and called, A prime and principal blessing.

Lastly, to have Christ with our spirits, is the ready way unto eternal good;
and therefore a prime and principal blessing. As a stone carries with it,
whatsoever light thing be fastened to it, unto its own center; so Christ whose
proper place of residence is Heaven, carries with him thither, all such spirits
as to whom he is united on earth. If we have a special friend at Court, we
count that we are in a ready way to see all the pomp of the Prince. Christ
has the Keys of Heaven and Hell; he opens and no man shuts; shuts, and no
man can open: all with whose spirits he has dwelt, and been kindly used upon
earth, he knows; and when they shall knock at those everlasting gates, he
will open and let them in to every room in his royal dwelling, and show them
all the glory which he had with his Father before the world was. It Is between
Christ and that spirit with whom he lives, as between Naomi and Ruth: where the
one lives the other will. Whilst such spirits live in the body, Christ will
live with them there; when they remove out of the body, Christ will not leave
them (death cannot separate) but commands his Angels, to bring them to eternal
mansions, with himself. Christ which is lifted up to glory himself, will draw
all such unto him, as in whose spirits he dwells, and no strength shall be able
to withstand him; none shall pluck such out of his hand. Vnio cum Christo, est
unio inunibilis.

If to have Christ with our spirits be a grand favor, not to have him with
our spirits, must needs be a grand evil. A spirit without Christ is naked, as
a body without clothes. Many things may make clothing and defense for the
body, but only Christ that best garment, as the Father of the Prodigal calls
him, can make clothing and munition for the soul. A man's spirit without
Christ is as a naked body amongst thorns, every thorn pierces, and every
bryer scratcheth, and fetches blood from such a body; so worldly cares and
worldly fears, when strong, will pierce such a naked spirit through and through,
and make him run mad, if God (unsought) do not seasonably step in and bridle
the Bedlam. A man's spirit without Christ, is as a naked body amongst Serpents;
every Serpent stings and venomes such a naked body to death; so every seed of
the Serpent stings and poisons to death, such naked souls, by their
threatenings, flatteries, examples, and the like. A man's spirit without Christ,
is as a naked body in great blasts of lightning; such bodies are suddenly
scorcht and consumed; so such naked souls are suddenly blasted, by the fiery
darts of the Devil, and so suddenly often times go from burning to burning;
from burning in sin, to burning in hell.

A man's spirit without Christ is not only naked, but blind too. A naked man
having his sight, may make some shift, but a man naked and blind too, is in a
miserable helpelesse state indeed: and just such is the state and condition of
every man's spirit, that has not Christ with it: for as the Sun in the
Heavens, is the eye and light of the greater World; so the Sun of
righteousness Christ, is the eye and light of the lesser world, man. Now do
but imagine what a dark dolorous condition we should all be in, if the Sun
were darkened, or had utterly forsaken our Horizon; or do but think of that
darkness, which was upon the Egyptians for a little time, when no man could
stir out of his place; and such and much worse is the dark dolorous
condition, of a spirit without Christ; not able to see the least beam of
saving light; not able to stir a step out of his place, in the way that leads
to life.

A man's spirit without Christ is not only blind, but dumme too. A man that is
blind, yet if he can speak, can beg for that which he cannot see to work.
But when a man is blind, and dumme too; that he can neither help himself,
nor beg others, he is in a doleful condition indeed; and just such is the
condition of every man's spirit, that has not Christ with it. For as Christ is
Eyes to the soul, so he is a Mouth and Tongue, enabling it to cry Abba
Father. Unless the spirit of Christ be with our spirits, helping our
infirmities, who are godly; we are dumme, and not able to speak to our own
Father, as adopted children, for daily Bread; much more unable to beg for
life, to the dreadful Judge of all the World, must all ungodly persons needs
be, whose spirits are altogether without Christ, as an helper. I would have
all men that live in their sins, think seriously of this; when Christ as the
dreadful Judge of all the World, at the great day shall ask you, what you
have to say for your selves, that you should not eternally die for your sins,
in which you have lived, you will be like that man which was without his
wedding garment, dumme and not able to say a word for your selves, because
Christ is not with your spirits. It Is impossible that a man's own guilty spirit,
should be able to look the terrible judge of men and devils in the face,
much less speak a word for mercy, unless the Al-mighty spirit of Christ be
with it, to aid it. Many ignorant wretches, sooth themselves with this, that
they will at last cry, Lord Lord, and so prevail quickly for pardon, with him
who is infinite in mercy. Why, but think on this O ignorant soul! No man can
call Jesus Lord but by the Holy Ghost. Thou will not in thy greatest need, be
able to cry Lord Lord, unless the Lord be with thy spirit. Death will sting
thee, conscience will gnaw thee, Christ will condemn thee, Devils will tear
thee; and yet wilt not thou be able to cry, Lord, Lord, have mercy on me,
unless the Lord be with thy spirit: but instead of crying Lord, Lord, for
mercy, thou will burn in malice against the Lord, and curse and blaspheme as
Devils and damned wretches do. Have thou never seen condemned wretches, not
only dumme, but withal desperate too, and leap off the ladder themselves,
without either asking God or man forgiveness? thus in a spiritual sense, and
much worse, will thou do in the great day of judgment, for as much as Christ
is not with thy spirit.

Fourthly, a man's spirit without Christ, is not only blind and dumme, but
deaf too. And if a man be blind and dumme, yet if he can hear, he may make
some shift to help himself: we follow a thing (you know) sometimes by the
sound, when we cannot see it, nor speak what it is: but when a man is naked,
blind, dumme, and deaf too, he is in a helpless condition indeed; and just
such is the state of a man's spirit without Christ. For Christ as he is Eyes
and Tongue, so he is ears also to the soul of man. Hence it is that John
speaks so frequently of spiritual hearing, after a Hypotheticall manner: He
that has an ear, etc. That is, if any man have spiritual discerning, let him
hear what the spirit says to the Churches. Intimating that a spiritual ear,
is a very rare thing to be found; that which no man has, but he which has
Christ with his Spirit; that has had his ears boared by the Spirit of Christ,
as the Scripture speaks; all others are as deaf as Adders, and cannot hear
the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely. I would have all that
live in their sins, seriously consider this too, as a further degree of
unhappiness. You tell us that you will turn from your sins hereafter, and
obey the call of God in the Ministry of his Word: but let me ask you this;
have you not hither unto turned the deaf ear upon God? yes: I and so you will
do for the time to come; and the reason of both, the same; because Christ is
not with your spirits. Let mercies call, corrections call; let friends call,
father call, mother call; husband call, wife call; let Ministers call,
conscience call; nay let Christ himself call, in what voice he will, still
voice, or loud voice, in words never so pleasing, or never so piercing, yet
wilt not thou hear; because Christ is not with thy spirit; but with Salomons
fool, wilt on in thy sins, and be eternally punished.

Fifthly, a man's spirit without Christ, is without feeling; in a dead Palsy
all over, which how dolorous such a state is, in a corporal sense, you know;
much more dolorous in a spiritual sense, I am sure. As the spirit of man can
neither see, speak nor hear, so neither can it feel, without the spirit of
Christ. The spirit of man without the spirit of God, is dead. Christ is to our
spirits, as our spirits are unto our bodies, their life; and life is the
principle of feeling: for the dead feel nothing. When Christ which is our
[life] shall appear, etc. Where there is no Christ, there is no life; and
where there is no life, there is no feeling. You know the Apostle speaks of
some that were past feeling, having given themselves over to lasciviousness,
to work all uncleanness with greediness. Ephesians. 4.9.
There the Apostle speaks of such a senselessenesse, as lies upon the soul by
a second act of divine justice. All humane spirits by the first act of divine
justice upon Adam, are naturally past feeling, and would give up themselves
unto all wickedness with greediness, did not God restrain. To be past
feeling in this latter sense, notes principally a want of divine affection;
when sin does not kindly affect the soul with sorrow; as in the former
sense, when sin does not at all affect the soul with sorrow: when holy ways
and works do not kindly affect the soul with joy; as in the other sense, when
they do not affect the soul with joy at all; but rather disturb and provoke to
passion and malice.

I would have all that live in their sins, seriously think on this also, as a
further degree of unhappiness. You have heard many powerful Sermons, which you
have seen work admirably upon others, and yet they have made no impressions
upon your spirits; and many hundred more may you hear, and no divine
impression at last be made; and the reason of both, one and the same; because
Christ is not with your spirits; and by reason of this, your hearts are as
Adamants, which every stroke hardens, but not breaks it. Let the master smite
and the man smite; let God smite, and his Ministers smite, and conscience
smite; nay, let every member of the body be smitten with punishment, to affect
the soul with sin, yet will it not stir and complain, unless Christ be with
it.

Finally a man's spirit without Christ, is without tasting or smelling: to these
senses also (you know) the Scripture does allude, and therefore fitly here may,
I to set forth fully, the unhappy condition of every spirit without Christ. You
know the Apostle speaks of some, that savoured not the things of God; which is
a term applied in Scripture, to the sense of smelling as well as to the sense
of tasting, and therefore for brevity sake do I here join both senses
together, in a spiritull way of allusion. Why all that have not Christ with
their spirits, are such as cannot rightly savor spiritual things; such put
bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter.

I would have all you that live in your sins, seriously think on this too, as
a further degree of unhappiness. You come often times to Wisdoms house, and
though she prepare you all spiritual dainties, yet you can relish nothing,
but some by things, that lie about the dish, rather for ornament, the^ for
food. And would you know the reason of this? it is because Christ is not with
your spirits. If Christ were with you, you would feed on every dish at wisdoms
table, on promises, yea and on threatenings too: To the hungry soul, every
bitter thing is sweet, says Solomon. All that is good and wholesome goes down
well, where Christ is with the Spirit. You come frequently to Wisdoms house,
who keeps a Table here and 'twere for a King, and yet you have lean shrivel'd
souls, like men in a Consumption: every one tells you, that you look as if you
were starved, speak and live, as if you never heard a good Sermon from years
end, to years end: they tell you that you are so lean and feeble, that you
need the benefit of all the spirits, that every dish at wisdoms table can
yield, to strengthen you, and recover you, and yet every dish almost goes
against your stomachs; and that you do eat, is without savor or any other
virtue, and so you languish with all dainties before you; and thus you will go
on languishing, until you quite consume and perish eternally, unless Christ
be with your spirits.

You see (I suppose) plainly by this time, that as it is a prime and principal
happiness to have Christ with our spirits, so it is a prime and principal
evil and unhappines, not to have Christ with our spirits. Wherefore having
laid open both before you, let me entreat you all to look in upon your
spirits, and see who keeps company with them, Christ or the devil; one of
these two is with all our spirits. If Christ be not with our spirits, the
divellis and will be. If Christ be with your spirits, according to the sense and
meaning of the Apostle in my text, you shall find it by these two things, the
body is dead because of sin; and the spirit is life because of righteousness.
It Is Paul's Character of Christ's special presence in the soul of man upon
earth, and therefore of strong authority. And if Christ be in you, the body is
dead because of sin, but the spirit is life because of Righteousness. Romans
8.10
The body is dead because of sin: that is, the body of corruption is
destroyed, as in respect of the guilt of it, so in respect of the dominion of
it. And the spirit is life because of righteousness: that is, the regenerate
part is vigerous, in reference to all righteous ways.

And if therefore you would know whether Christ be with your spirits, see
whether your bodies be dead because of sin: whether you labor to bring every
thought into subjection to Christ; or whether you do not allow your selves
liberty to some evil, out of love to some pleasure or profit; which is that
principally, wherein the dominion of sin consists; as Paul hints unto us,
where he says, the evil which I do, I allow not. That is, I do not approve
of it in my heart, nor plead for it with my tongue; but strive against it with
all my strength; and it would be more joy to me, to be rid of it, then if I had
a Kingdom conferred on me. This is the language right, of one that has Christ
with his spirit.

Secondly, see whether your spirits be alive because of righteousness, if you
would know whether Christ be with your spirits, or not. See whether holy ways
do heartily affect you. I rejoiced when they said, come let us go to the
house of the Lord, says the Psalmist. He spoke like a man, having Christ
indeed with his spirit: his spirit leapt within him, like the Babe in
Elizabeth's Womb, when they spoke of drawing near to God, in the duties of his
worship. A Christian that has Christ with his spirit, sees a taking
transcendant beauty in all wisdoms ways; they are all ways of pleasure, and
paths of peace; which is spoken in reference to such as have Christ with their
spirits: for others find no such thing in them. And his spirit opens in them
like flowers in the Sun, and smelles fragrantly: he bends and cleaves to
them, in love to that soul sweetness, which he finds in them. And if you
find these things in you, I think I may safely tell you to your comfort, that
Christ is with your spirits.

I may turn this Character into another form, as Paul does, and tell you in
his words, that he which is joined to the Lord is one spirit. 1 Cor. 6.17.
They that have Christ with their spirits, are one spirit with Christ. This
expression (I conceive) is something explained by these following words; And
the multitude of them that believed, were of one heart and one soul: 4 Acts v.
32.
or as the original has it (...) heart and soul one. They that have Christ
with their spirits, are heart and soul one with Christ. They do idem velle
and idem nolle. What Christ loves, they love; and what Christ hates they hate.
Christ loves righteousness, and hates iniquity: Thou have loved righteousness
and hated iniquity, etc. Psalm. 45.7.
They that have Christ with their spirits, are heart and soul one with Christ
in this. They love righteousness, that is, all righteous ways: and hate
iniquity; that is all that Gods Word condemns. 'Twas Christ's meat and drink,
to do his Fathers Will; they that have Christ with their spirits, are one
spirit with Christ in this: It Is joy to the just to do judgment, says
Solomon. Christ was tender about keeping the least Commandment,, as well as
about keeping the greatest. Whosoever shall break one of these least
Commandments, and teach men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom
of Heaven. Mat. 5.19
They that have Christ with their spirits, are heart and soul one with Christ
in this; they are tender to keep all Gods Commandments, least, as well as
greatest. So shall I not be confounded, whilst I have refpect unto all thy
Commandments, says David. I do conceive the place forecited so, as if Christ
did account of one part of his Fathers will above another: I rather think that
he there speaks Pharisaeorum more, in the Pharisees dialect, who would make
the world believe, that they mightily labored to keep some precepts, but
others they thought, as many of us now do, that they need not to be so strict
about. Now Christ's tender Spirit for his Fathers honor, could not brook this
halting in religion; and they that have Christ with their spirits, are heart
and soul one with Christ in this. That Commandment which the most say is one
of the least, and may be dispensed with all; or at least need not be so
strictly looked unto; that, as well as any other, whilst a precious part of
Christ's will, a man that has Christ with his spirit, will be tender to
observe. David's spirit smote him, for cutting off the lap of Saul's garment, as
well as for cutting off the life of Vrijah: which plainly shows, that men which
have Christ with their spirits, are tender about the avoiding of small sins, as
well as great.

Now possibly some of you by what has been said, may see, that as yet you
have not Christ with your spirits; I shall address my self in the first
place, particularly to speak to you; and then in the second place, I shall
address my self, particularly to speak to such of you, as have by what has
been said discerned, that Christ is indeed with your spirits. To you which by
what has been said, see, that as yet Christ is not with your spirits, I have
only these two things to say, labor to bewail your great want, as persons
deeply sensible of it; and then labor to get this grant speedily supplied.

First, labor to bewail your great want, as persons deeply affected with it.
It Is the greatest want in the World, to want Christ to be with a man's spirit.
Other wants may be afflicting wants, but this is a damning want. Other wants
may make thee despised of men, but this want will make thee for ever to be
abhorred of God. Thou were better want riches, thou were better want honors;
nay, thou were better want bread to put in thy head, then want Christ to be in
thy heart. Thou were better want thy dear Husband, thy sweet Wife, to lie in
thy besome, then want Christ to lie there. Nay, thy soul were better to be
without thy body, them without Christ. If there be any want under Heaven, that
makes a hell to a man, upon Earth, it is this, to want Christ to be with his
spirit. For what is it that makes hell, (...) place full of sin, and full of
misery but this, that Christ is not with those spirits: they are spirits
everlastingly excluded, from all communion with Christ. Now whereas great
wanes, make you complain heavily, and mourn bitterly, beg the Lord to make
these things sink into your spirits, that you may be sensible of this great
want of wants, that your spirits are without Christ, and so without God in this
world; that so all sorrow for other wants, may meet and run in one channel,
to bewa^e this great want. Saul's speech to his servant, I may here ^ly allude
to, Come let us return (said he) least my Father lea^ caring for the Asses,
and take thought for us. 1 Samuel 1 5
If you that mourn for this want, and that want, did but feel the want of
Christ with your spirits, you would with Kish quickly leave mourning for
trifles and begin to mourn for things of weight. Come, O my soul! cease
mourning for Father, and Mother; cease mourning for Husband and Wife, for
Children and substance; and begin to mourn for this, that thou yet live
Christlesse, and art in the ready way to die and perish remediless.

When you have got your hearts to bleed inwardly, under your great want; the^
cry mightily to the Lord, to supply it. And to make your prayers prevalent,
urge the promise of God, wherein he has engaged himself to do good in Christ,
to them that are afar off. Thy soul thou find far off from Christ: why, the
promise (says the Apostle) of Christ, and salvation by him, is to such. For
the promise is to you and to your children, and to all that are [afar off.]
Acts 2.39.
This Peter spoke by way of comfort, as now I do, to such as felt their spirits
without Christ; without grace and hope of glory. Christ you see is under
promise, under a general promise, and therefore no soul should despair of
obtaining him. He is promised to the Jews, and not only to them, but to us
Gentiles, who sometimes were afar off; not to this Gentile or that, but to all
that are pricked in heart for the want of him. For the promise is to you and to
your children, and to all that are afar off. Let every one therefore upon this
ground, that feels his spirit pricked and wounded, for want of Christ, take
words to himself, and go unto God, and say. O God, my soul is a poor
Christlesse soul. I sinde by woeful experience, that the Lord Jesus is not
with my spirit, by reason of which I live wickedly to thy dishonor, and shall,
I know not how soon, die miserably, to mine own eternal undoing, if thou do
not show mercy upon me, according to thy promise. Thou have said that thou will
bestow Christ, grace and salvation, upon them that are afar off; make good thy
gracious promise to me, whose spirit is far from Christ, grace and all good;
so shall thou oblige me for ever unto thee; and I shall tell of thy goodness
as long as I live.

Having thus spoken what I thought fit, to such as find by what was formerly
delivered, that Christ is not with their spirits; I shall in the next place
speak unto you, that by what was formerly delivered, find, that Christ is
indeed with your spirits. Something by way of counsel, and some thing by way
of consolation, I have to deliver unto you. Three things by way of counsel, I
would commend unto you: thankefully acknowledge this great favor; carefully
preserve it; and industriously labor to augment it.

First, thankfully acknowledge this great favor. It Is a pearl of great price,
that God has cast into thy bosom, to give Christ to be with thy spirit: and
for great favors, every one will acknowledge it very fit, and just, that they
should be thankful. It Is a Jewel that Christ scarce gives to one of
ten-thousand: and for rare gifts, every one will readily confess it to be
great ingratitude, not thankefully to acknowledge them. Do thou not hear
some swear, some curse, some lie, like their father the Devil? Why thou
would have been such an one, had not God given Christ to be with thy spirit.
Do thou not see some drunkards, some whoremasters, some murderers, some
persecutors of the Saints? Why thou would have been such in one, if God had
not given Christ to be with thy spirit. Do thou not see some make a God of
their belly, some make a God of their wealth, some proud, some mad, some
putting far from them the evil day, living as if they should never dye? Why,
thou would have been such an one, had not God given Christ to be with thy
spirit. Do thou not see some Nabals, some Iezabels, some Caines, some
Demases, some Iudases? Why, amongst the number of these would thou have
been, had not God given Christ to be with thy spirit. Wherefore magnify the
Lord with all thy might, and let all that is within thee praise his holy Name.
Think but how it was with thee, when thy spirit was without Christ. How foolish
thou wast serving diverse lusts: how the God of this world which rules mightily
in the children of disobedience, did rule mightily in thee. How weak thy spirit
was, and easily overcome and carried captive of every lust. How drunken thy
spirit was, and reeld from one opinion to another; one day thou thoughtst thus,
and thus, and another day thou thoughtst quite contrary. I say, do but think of
these things, and how the Lord might justly have left thee still, to have gone
on thus, until thou had perished, as he has done many thousands; and then
be unthankful, for the communion of Christ with thy spirit, if thou can. It
was this consideration that set Paul a wondering at the goodness of the Lord. I
was a blasphemer, a persecutor, etc. yet I obtained mercy. He circumflexes this
term [I] yet [I] obtained mercy, etc. It was wonderful in his eye, that God
should give Christ, to dwell with such a bloody blaspheming spirit, as he had.
In this way let us go to work, to raise our dull spirits, to magnify the free
goodness of the Lord: for it is a work of all works, that God loves. I was a
man of a very proud, passionate, malicious, unclean spirit; and yet I obtained
mercy. God has given Christ to be with this depraved spirit, and in a little
time he has done very much, and made a manifest change in my spirit; of very
proud, he has made it in some measure humble; of very passionate, in some
measure patient; of very malicious, in some measure loving; of very unclean,
in some measure continent. O! the riches of his love; how unsearchable is his
mercy, and his love past finding out.

Secondly, as I would have you thankfully acknowledge this great favor, so I
would have you carefully labor to preserve it. You find that you have Christ
with your spirits, take heed you do not lose him. Thou were better lose thy
life, then lose the special presence of Christ with thy spirit. It Is a prime
and prinpall blessing, as thou have heard; a blessing of more worth then this
world; nay of more worth then thy soul, which Christ values above the world.
Now choice things, we are usually very careful of, and keep them choicely.
Christ totally (I know) can no man lose, which has him after a special
manner, present with his spirit: but according to some prime and principal
operations, he may: according to others, very far, though not totally. A man
may lose the presence of Christ with his spirit totally, as a Comforter. The
Comforter, which should relieve my soul is far from me, says Jeremiah, in the
person of the afflicted Church. Lam. 1.16
It Is probable enough, that David's spirit, was thus stripped of Christ, by his
dolorous complaints, which frequently we read of. Is his mercy clean gone
for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? Has God forgotten to be
gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? Will the Lord cast off
for ever? and will he be favorable no more? Psalm. 77.7,8,9.
Some carriages in Christians toward Christ, make Christ totally alter his
carriage toward the^; though for his promise sake, he will never totally
remove himself from them.

As when Christians do not keep their watch strictly against sin, in all the
occasions of it; then Christ instead of being a Comforter, becomes a convincer;
and instead of speaking sweet things, he speaks very bitter unto the soul.
This was the case of David and Peter. Or when Christians are careless, and
sluggish, to maintain and increase their sweet Communion with Christ;
unyeelding to the sweet motions of the spirit of Christ, and turning often times
the deaf ear, against the still voice behind them, which says, this is the
way, walk in it. Then Christ draws a curtain between the spirit of man, and
himself, and leaves the spirit of man in the dark, and full of fears. This
is notably illustrated, by that language of the Spouse, It is the voice of my
beloved that knocks, saying, open to me, my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my
underfiled: for my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the
night. The Church was convinced of this, that it was her beloved, seeking
nearer communion with her, and yet observe how she replies. I have put off my
coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? I
opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself and was gone; my
soul failed when he spoke; I sought him, but I could not find him: I called
him, but he gave me no answer. Cant. 5.
You that find the presence of Christ with your spirits, as a Comforter, make
Christian use of what I have said, that you may still enjoy so great a mercy.
And if you lose the Lord Jesus Christ, as a Comforter to your spirits,
miserable comforters will all other things prove unto you. You will mourn, and
none will be able to comfort you, if Christ as a Comforter forsake your
spirits.

Secondly, as a leader, a man may very far lose the communion of Christ with
his spirit. As if a Christian take liberty to sin against that light, which
Christ has set up in his spirit; this will make Christ first or last (if not
timely looked unto) leave a man to his own understanding, to steare his course;
and then will such a man declare himself quickly, to be a fool, and a beast,
in many points, as David says. Have you not seen Christians of great light,
err injudgement, and err in practice? Whence comes this weakness, but from
hence, that Christ as a leader stands aloof from their spirits? which is a
plain demonstration that a man may lose the presence of Christ with his
spirit, as a leader. David (I believe) found the truth of this, as well as of
the former, by woeful experience. A man may collect so much clearly, from his
own words. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit
from me. Psalm. 51.11
The Spirit of God is therefore called by David a holy Spirit, because holy in
himself (the Spirit of the holy God, as he said to Daniel) but principally
here, as I conceive, Abofficio: because the worker of holiness in us. David
doubtless by his fall, found an exceeding weakness in his Spirit, unto all
good, over what formerly he did; and a strong propensity again to err; as
every act of sin leaves seed and spawn upon the spirit, to bring forth more, to
cover the first, or to commit the like again. But more then all this, he found
Christ to stand aloof from his spirit; not exercising that special dominion
in his spirit, as before, for the subduing of lust, and suggesting of holy
motions and desires, but leaving him as it were to himself, as one with whom
he would have no more to do. And therefore does David so dolefully complain,
Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy [holy] Spirit from me: you
therefore which find Christ with your spirits, as a tender leader, take heed
of sinning against any part of that light, which he sets up in your
understandings, or against any motions of his spirit, which he suggests unto
you; lest he leave you to your own light, and to your own strength, and then
will you run from less sins to greater, from one sin to another, like David
and Peter, to the scandalizing of the Gospel, and the desperate wounding of
your own souls.

The third and last thing that I would commend unto you, by way of counsel, is
this, labor to augment this great favor. You find Christ with your spirits,
labor industriously, to have Christ more and more with your spirits. It Is a
prime and principal blessing, as you have heard, to have Christ with your
spirits; therefore labor to get as much of this favor and happiness as
possibly you can. Thou have Christ with thy spirit as a teacher; why thou may
have him yet more intimate with thee, and open unto thee, in imparting divine
mysteries, if thou follow on to know, as the Prophet speaks, if thou humbly
forget, and look over all thou have, and press hard after more: the things
thou know not, Christ will teach thy spirit, morning by morning, as by the
learned. Christ has taught thy spirit many truths; why, he will lead thy
spirit into all truth, if thou urge his promise and believe. He will fill thee
with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, If
thou pray for it as Paul did for the Colossians.

Thou find Christ with thy spirit as a Comforter; why thou may have yet
much more consolation from him, if thou study to be more pliable to him. Thou
have Christ distilling drops of consolation into thy spirit, now and then; why
thou may have Christ pouring in flagons of love into thy soul, filling thee
with joy unspeakable and full of glory, if thou bring thy spirit to be more
lowly and meek; for such find most rest to their souls: if thou carefully keep
coming to Christ still, in every pressure of spirit; for such find most ease:
that is renewing faith still, as thou renewest thy sins.

Thou find Christ with thy spirit, as a quickner and strengthner to duty;
why thou may find him yet more mighty with thy spirit this way, if thou power
out thy spirit often with David for quickening grace; and if thou more deny
thine own strength, and cast thy self more upon his. Could we but attain Paul's
height in selfe-denyall, to be nothing in our selves ( though I am nothing,
says he) 2 Cor. 12.11.
we should find Christ gloriously present still with our spirits, and be more
constant in zeal and strength to every good work, then we are. I conclude this
thus, be so tractable to Christ, that thou may with Mary, win upon Christ
still; and think that thou can never be near enough to him, nor intimate
enough with him; and this is the ready way, to have a heaven upon earth: for
the more we get Christ to be with our spirits, the more truly may we be said
to be in Heaven.

The last thing that I have to say to you, that find Christ with your spirits,
is matter of consolation. Here is comfort for you against famine. When thy body
wants food, Christ that is with thy spirit, will give that meat to eat, which
the world knows not off; so that when others repine, and curse God and their
King in their extremity, as the Prophet speaks; thou shall be patient in this
tribulation, and instant in prayer to him, who can command Ravens to bring thee
bread and flesh to feed on; and will, rather then thou shall starve, if thy
life may be more to his glory, then thy death.

Here Is comfort for you against the sword. In the midst of all troubles and
fears, Christ that is with thy spirit will bear thee up admirably. What is the
face of an enemy to terrify, if Christ be with thy spirit. What is the
spoiling of thy goods? nay what is the spoiling of thy body? if Christ be with
thy soul. A Mountain of misery, is but as a Molehill, if Christ support the
spirit. To think of the Sword is a naked reference to flesh and blood, and so
nothing is more terrible: but let us that fear the Loro think of it, in
reference to Christ that is with our spirits, and then we shall not be
troubled, though we hear of wars and rumors of wars, no more then at the
rumors of any other calamity.

Here is comfort for you against the Plague, which is here and there scatterd
in the Kingdom. What is any disease to the body, if Christ be with thy soul?
As the outward man decays, the inward man shall be renewed daily, because
Christ is with thy spirit. When thy body is full of pain, thy soul shall be
full of comfort, because Christ is with thy spirit. When thy body is sealed
with spots for death, thy soul shall be sealed with the Holy Ghost unto
eternal life, because Christ is with thy spirit. The plague of the body is
nothing, if this plague of plagues be not upon the spirit, to wit, destitute
of Christ.

Here is comfort for you against persecution. When men frown upon thee
without, Christ will smile upon thy spirit within: when men lade thy outward
man with reproaches, Christ will fill thy inward man with comforts: when men
shut up thy body from the communion of Saints, Christ will give thy spirit a
large freedom of communion with himself. When men strike thy body, Christ will
stroke thy soul: when men kill thy body, Christ will save thy soul. In a
word, as the afflictions of Christ abound in thy body, so the consolations of
Christ shall abound in thy soul, because Christ is with thy spirit. Name any
misery that is incident to man, and here is comfort to be sucked out of this
point, to oppose unto it. Finally in life, in death, and eternally after death,
Christ that is with thy spirit will be gain unto thee. Thy life he will make
comfortable; thy death hopeful; and thy being after death eternally joyful.
Wherefore I will conclude my Sermon for the good of you, as S. Paul does his
Epistle for the good of Timothy, The Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirits.

Trinuni Deo gloria.
Errata.
Pro (...), leg. (...). page 7. For say, read saw, p. 39. l. 6. pro pereunte
solep, e^nt omnia, lege, pereunte sole pereunt omnia. p. 114. Marg. For I do
conceive, r. I do not conceive. p. 169. l. 7.

FINIS.

