THE MERCHANT REAL.

PREACHED BY WILLIAM LO Doctor of Divinity Chaplain to the kings sacred
majesty, and Pastor of the English church of Merchants Adventurers residing
at Hamboroughe in Saxony.

MATTHEW. 16.26. What is a man profited, if he shall purchase the whole world,
and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

Printed at Hamboroughe by PAUL LANG.

ANNO DOMINI 1620

To the right Worshipful. SR. THOMAS LOW KNIGHT GOVERNOR, THE DEPUTIES,
ASSISTANTS, AND GENERALITY of that ancient, much famous, and most worthy
Company of Merchants Adventurers residing at London, Hamboroughe
Middleborough, and else vvheresouer in the world, that trade for the other
world.
Grace, Peace, and all prosperous success in all their adventures both by sea,
and land in CHRIST.
RIGHT worshipful, and much endeered in the lord. Promise is debt, and debt
is due. The duty of my service, and the debt of my promise I now make bold
to tender unto you all. The promise which I made unto you at London where I
began this task, by gods permission I have finished at Hamboroughe, and now
tender performance. Doct. Wilkenson.
It is not many years since that a learned Doctor of Divinity who is now
which god preaching in court at an honorable marriage out of the proverbs, The
lord Hay his marriage.
She is like a Merchant ship that brings her merchandise from a far.
Prove. 31.14. called his sermon The merchant royal: I have the termed this.
THE MERCHANT REAL. For that royalty is vpheld by Realtie. And wise men
vvishe ever rather to be Realls, then Nominalls. I could not conceive in all
the book of god, where a merchant could bestow his best thoughts better,
then upon his own character so lightsome for Edification, so delightsome and
so lively set out by Christ himself for consolation. Wherein every tittle is
precious, every word a fullnes of matter, every point pressing tovvard the
mark, and the Period not only pointing to, but putting you into possession of
an eternal purchase. In this purchase there is noe want but a vvonderfull
fullnes of all royalty, and realty. It is a man's greatness to be greater then
himself, and it is happiness enough for a man to attain his perfection at
last. Were I a merchant, and did see, and hear Christ resembling his kingdom
to my vocation. I should conceive veary high thoughts, and purposes of
resolution to attain this pearl, and should believe that text punctually to
concern me For what do we see here belovve, but toyling, turmoyling,
greeving, vvishing, hoping, fearing, weariness, yea vvretchednes in all.

What does the world but besott us with the love of our own trouble, The
godly know it is better to be wise to god, then happy in the world. And
the real Christian is ever limited, and ever avved with fear of excess. I
know noe condition of me^ more happy then Merchants Their veary youth is
accompanied with many, and many fold experie^ced trialls both by sea, and
land, which may make them prudent. Their mature age is blessed with a
plentiful portion which may make them thankful, and their old age affords
a very surplusage of marveilous fulness which may satisfy them. In all this.
If they should build up their tabernacle, here, and sing a Requie^ to
themselves, and to their souls, and not to remember their eternal purchase
what can any man implead god for? Solomon's navy fetched the gold of Ophir
with the peril of a whole three years voyage, but it was to build god an
house a glorious house. A blessed end. Some that travailed in that voyage
brought home apes, and Peacockes. A ridiculous Merchantdizing. What gain we
for all our travail and labor if we find not this Pearl, but derision from
god, danger in our lives, and noe good memorial after we are gone hence.
Who is so foolish to love the world that breeds nothing but sorrovve? Let
them tell me that have experience of manyfold occurrences in the world, what
find they in it but a smyling deceit? Not unlike to the be that have honey in
the mouth, and a sting in the tail. But why do we desire so much? Only to
keep it? That is a most base thing. If we will Lay up, where can we repose
our treasure more secure then in CHRIST treasury What richer purchase then a
kingdom? The attaynement whereof I have endeavored in this treatise. The
Pearl is Christ in heaven, and Charity on earth, The one the object, the other
the effect of faith The one the practice of this life. The other the full
possession of eternal life. If ever you will unite minds in unity, you must
take away all discord in Religion. Then the which nothing is so strong to
unite, nothing so forcible to disseuer, and disvnite, if it be in discord. The
distraction of minds causes destruction of estates. Can you look for true
service of your Appre^tices, or for careful trust of your factors who that
love not your order IN ORDINE AD DEUM. No assure your selves. You hear not
what they do, Neither shall you know Their hearts are alienated, so are
their actions, their intendments, their purposes. Unite them once in Religion
They are yours absolute, present, or absent; sleeping or waking, by sea, or by
land. Oh what miserable distractions have fallen out by disasters in religion?
Nay about the robes, and apparel of the same? How can you think god should
bless Your negotiations with success? when the minds of yours of whom you
have a tender care are rent a sunder.

Believe me I have ever conceived that the trade of Marchantdizing requires a
whole man. And this man must be a merchant. Shall he not be real? Real he
cannot be to man that is not so to god. How can he be a faithful servant to
his earthly master in his account, that cares not what audite he makes to his
heavenly master. Assuredly as he believes not in the one, so he sleights the
other. There is a brood of fools who like Shemei while they seek their
servants, that is Riches, lose their souls. What are else all false hearted
servants, and factors, who care not to lose this pearl, with the price of
their souls so they may attain pealse, It is a thousand pitties to see so
many honest hearts so miserably distressed in foreign parts with more the^
lamentable disagreements of folly, and faction. Either part stryving, and
struggling by all manner of means they can devise to offend, and infest the
other vvhiles in the Interim they neglecte their trades, their trusts, and
spend their days in miserable garboyles. All that I can say for my self
wherefore I have made this treatise speak now in a dead letter that, which
before was delivered by the voice of a lyving man is only a desire of doing
good.

If I do seem to any man Prodigal of my little yet this honest ambition (you
see) will not suffer my one talent or if it be but a part of one to rust in
the earth. If this Discourse of Merchants, and Merchandising be not so
curiously handled as the fulness of the subject requires yet let my endeered
affections unto you all make amends for the manifold defectes hereof. It is
that my weakness could afford: It is the issue of noe curious brain, but I
hope the symptom of an honest heart. If from hence you would be pleased to
dravve a Parallel of the cares, travails, perils, and adventures you make here
not for an earthly kingdom, but for to attain some model of moderate lively
hoode. And compare those labors with these you take for heaven, you would
easily see what defecte there is. I leave that to your own practice and
purpose, and shall ever pray to almighty god to make you all most happy in
your selves by being real Merchants for your own souls; happy in your
servants, and factors that may be real in your trades, and trusts, and god
make you prosperous in all your legal adventures both by sea, and land. To
whose blessed guydance, and saving mercies I recommend you all. resting

Yours all, in all respectfull duty, and observance. VV. LO.

Matthew. 13. verse 45.46. Again the Kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant
man seeking, goodly pearls, who when he had found one pearl of great price he
went, and sold all that he had, and bought it.
The Proeme.
BLessed and beloved in the Lord JESUS. Mine entrance into this text I made at
London before those of your most worthy company, that are your careful
masters, Creditors of your trusts, and your loving brethren. Masters to
servants, creditors of trusts to factors, and brethren both of company, and of
communion. Of company, as you are all merchants Adventurers, of communion as
you are all orthodoxe Christians.

Mine entrance unto you here, is, and was, both civil, and honest. First by
free election of your own fellovvshipe. Secondly by approbation of the state
whence I came. Thirdly by recommendation of his sacred majesty under his
own hand, who pleased to grace me his unworthy servant with his Royal
letters, and of the most reverend Archebishope of Canterbury, who patriarchally
tendered your peace. Fourthly with attestatio^ from the famous University of
Oxford under their seal, and from the Cathedral Church, where I have been a
member two and twenty years, and one of the masters seventeen years. Thus
from others had I entrance, of whose recomme^dations I acknovvledge my self
most unworthy. Concerning my self I demurred after mine election a whole
year, and half, and begged of god to resolve me touching my coming unto you;
and now being come I do protest in the sight of god, and his holy angels
that I come not unto you with any Italionated heart of implacabillity that
cannot be appeased, nor with any Hispaniolized heart of Iesuited nouelty, nor
with a Frenchified heart of singularity, nor yet with a Dutchified heart of
neutrality (all which I speak not as of any national disgrace for the finest
cambrick may have many fretts, and frayes) but I am come with a good, and an
honest English heart of Orrthodoxe, and Catholic syncerity. Of the professors
whereof there are two main sorts, which I have observed in the Christian
world, both of them striving, and struggling for purity, but in a different,
and dissonant manner. The one are seeming Puritans altogether led by faction.
Puritans in Actio^ Puritans in Faction
The other are real Puritans to whom all things are pure, altogether busy in
honest Actio^. Puritans in faction are all Papists Anabaptists, Brovvnists,
Separatists, and all singularists whatsoever, Tit. 1.15.
and sectaries whosoever, that are merely nominalls. Puritans in Action are
all the pure in heart, Matthew. 5.8.
who see god in his word, in his works (while they are in this world) and
shall see him in the other world in his displayed glory in the beatificall
vision of Jesus Christ our blessed savior. Into this blessed vision do I
desire to bring you (Masters, mortals, and my loving countrymen (blessed, and
beloved in the lord Jesus.) And this text does seem punctually, and praecisely
to point you Merchants out. Wherein you may First see the Object of your pure
faith, Division.
which S. Peter Calls the end of faith, and the end of every thing wise men
do respect in all things, and this maine Object, or end is the Kingdom of
heaven, even everlasting life the Catastrophe of your Apostolic Creed.
Secondly the resemblance specified in the text is the Word of your pure faith,
or the manner how you may be vvorded unto this blessed end of your faith the
Kingdom of heaven. It only remains both for you, and me to beg of our god
the spirit of faith, which will lead us to this end, and guide us into all
truth by this means to the atchiuement of our blessed end.

If therefore there be here amongst you any one present of a regal, and royal
disposition, 1. (...).
here is a kingdom for him, or if there be any of a celestial co^ceipte, here
is the kingdom of heaven for him which is more. If any be curious to know
what this kingdom is like, I will tell him, It is like (says my text to a
Man. 2. (...) 3. (...). 4. (...).
Indeed for man it was prepared by the merritts of the life, and death of a
true man, although not a mere man Jesus Christ both god, and man. And it is
like to a merchant man which word you ought to liste^ unto, for albeit every
Merchant is a man yet every man is not a Marcha^t. Howbeit real Marcha^ts
principally in all their negotiations and affairs do not only attend, but
inte^d this, that so by any means they may attain unto it. 5. (...).
And not only to a Merchant man is this kingdom resembled, but to a Merchant
man that is a Ievveller. For it is the most precious Marchant-dizing in the
world to trade for this kingdom. Moreover it is not resembled only to a
Marchant-man that is a Ievveller, but to such a Merchant Ievveller that has
endovvments of grace. As first diligence to seek, 6. (...). 7. (...) 8. (...)
9. (...). 10. (...). 11. (...). 12. (...). 13. (...).
secondly Judgment to chose, thirdly Constancy to persevere seeking until he
find, fouerthly skill to know when he has found, and Lastly resolution,
both of readiness to prosecute, then contempt of the world to abandon, thirdly
of full persvvasion to settle his heart and Lastly of purchase to enjoy that
one, and only Jewel of peareles, and priceles vvorth to wit, Christ in
heaven, and Charity on earth, the one apprehended by the act of pure faith,
the other comprehended by the pure effect of the same. In comparison whereof
ten thousand millions of worlds, and all the pearls that might be therein are
not of any esteem, or valuation in a real, and religious Merchants account.
These are the several passages chouched in this text of the which severally,
and in order.

1. The first lesson.
Out of these premises you may in the general observe this point of learning.
That It is the most prudent, the most precious, and most gainful
Marchant-dizing in the world to resolve to perform our earthly vocation with
a heavenly mind.

Mat. 7.24. Mat. 6.20. Mat. 10.16. Mat. 25.4. Mat. 25.21.
This light appears from gods lamp. For wise men build upon the rock.
Treasure up for heaven, Expose their bodies to save their heads, as does the
wise serpent, Have alvvaies this oil in their lamps with the wise Virgins,
Trade with the good, and faithful servant on this manner until Christ does
come, and so these wise, Mat. 16.26.
and faithful servants enter into their masters joy. This is this royal
vvisdome of this Merchant real. It is also most gainful Marchant-dizing
Christ says so, asking. What does it advantage a man to vvinn the whole
world, and to lose his own soul? 1. Tim. 6.6
Paul preaches so. Godliness is the great riches both for the price thereof,
rarenes, and continuance.

Insomuch that for the price thereof, Christ didnot only say, but pray, and
pay; Said when he spoke unto the people, prayed with tears, and strong
cries, and paid his dearest blood.

The rarenes great for fevve find it, The continuance constant, and fixed, for
once a Christian, and ever a Christian.

And also it is most precious trading for the precious stones in the
breastplate of Aaron, and those many, Exodus 28.10.
and manifold ievvells that the blessed divine setts out the heavenly Jerusalem
vvithal in the Revelation, Apoc. 21.19.20. Apoc. 2.17
and the vvhitestone which was promised to the church of Pergamus wherein
was a nevve name written (which noe man knevve but he which received it)
may in some sort resemble, but in noe wise equalize any part, or parcel
thereof noe not in the least.

The right of this appears in reason, for it is the better part Maryes choice,
Luc. 10.42 Mat. 5.6. Mat. 23.23.
And blessed are they that thirst after this righteousness. But vvoe belongs to
them that tith mint, and commin, and annyse, and neglecte the principal parts
of the law, as Judgment, righteousness, and mercy

Again I shevve it further, That a kingdom divided against it self cannot
stand. A divided heart. Hosh. 10.2
is not for god. To speak Ashdod, and Hebrvve is a harshe language in the
ears of the lord, Iam. 1.8.
a man of two souls is unconstant in all his vvayes, a double tongued man is
reproved, and a mere impossibility it is to serve two masters God, and
Mammon. For so the Philistimes had God, and Dagon, The Jews had God, and
Chemosh, Israel had God, and Baal, Solomon God, and Ashtaroth, Which sin of
theirs Philo a learned Jew brandeth with the note of Double iniquity. (...)
Philo. Act. 4.32. 1. Cor. 1.10 Matthew. 13. Psalm. 27.4.
Gods light does punctually, require this of all his children, to have one heart
for one god, one tongue to speak in the name of one mediator, one principal
master to serve in heaven, one spirit to giude us, and one rule the word of
god to lead us. This was that one thing that David required One thing have I
desired of the lord that will I seek after: that I may dwell in in the house
of the lord, all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the lord, and to
enquire in his temple. Phil. 3.13.14.
This is that One thing that Paul pressed so hard for. Brethren, I account not
my self to have apprehended: but this One thing I do, forgetting those things
which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before I
press tovvard the mark, for the price of the high calling of god in Christ
Jesus.

Now tell me what good, what gain, what price, what prudence is
comparable to this heavenly trading, and real Marchandizing.

Genesis 2.16.
and ours to god, I am my vvelbeloueds, and he is mine says the spouse in the
Canticles. Psa. 119.125
I am thine o lord hid not thy commandment from me says David in the psalms.
Gal. 2.20.
Now I live not, but Christ lives in me says Paul the Apostle. Who is in
there in heaven that I desire but thee? Psalm. 72.
and who is there on earth that Irequire, but thee o lord says the svveet
finger of Israel? All which oracles of gods saints shevve that we should be
wholy gods in all our businesses that we may attain at the last, to be one
with Christ, Ioh. 17.21.22.
as he is one with god.



For pleasures are but bitter pills lapt in sugar, and gains without this
godly Marchan-dizing are but giules of Corban, and gieues of Satan to manacle
us.



Psalm. 32.1.
If Satan reply, and say thou have failed in keeping of gods laws. Answer
him All the law is kept, when that which is not kept, is forgiven. If
Satan be instant, and reioyne with thee, and say an evil father has sold
thee (Meaning Adam) say thou again, but the good son of god has redeemed
me. Thus shall a good man in the goodness of his conscience taking care of all
his ways pacify, and appease the conflicts of his own tempted conscience.







Can any one amongst you implead this Learning? Is there a wise man amongst
you? I hope he is not vviser then Solomon yet he accounted all things in the
world vexation, and vanity when he had once learned this lesson. Is there
any amongst you that makes an high account of himself, and his? let not this
stout heart of his stoop to vile, and vain things of the world. Is there a
frugall, and thrifty man amongst you? that would enrich himself let him trad
for this true gold of Ophir, and not with the shippers of king Ochasias trade
for peacockes, parrats, parachitoes, and popiniayes for so they may chance to
have their ships broken at Esiongeber, and all their proud peacokes be they
vviues, or vva^tons, and all their paultrie popiniays be they giules, or
practices may suffer a fearful vvrack with them.

In a word, all of you are men, civil men, and Merchant men, and that which
is more then all Christian men. Will you know the best of all, and the only
good for you, and yours? then know that guiles are noe gains for you to live
by in a godly conscience. Nor noe good groundwork, for your posterity to live
on, when you are gone, for the goodness of god is extended to the thousand
generation of the^ that love him, and endevoure to keep his commandments.
Thus much of the whole text in general.

The second lesson.
From the particular passages arise diverse lessons The first is drawn from
the Object which is a kingdom. For from hence we learn, That it is the mind
of Christ Jesus, that all his should be of a Royal mind, and therefore a
kingdom is set before them, as a reward of mercy for their service.

Psalm. 13 (...)
and in earth, and in the seas, and in all deep places. And of him, Romans 11.36
and through him, and to him, are all things. For the Lord is the Greatness. The
Power, and The Glory, and the victory, and the majesty, for all are his in
heaven, and in earth, his is the Kingdom, and he is exalted as head over all
so preaches David in the book of the Chronicles, 1. Chapter 29.11 Dan. 6.26.
and Darius the king of Babilo^ proclaymeth in his kingdom that all men should
tremble, and fear before, the god of Daniell, for he is the living god, and
steadfast forever and his kingdom That which shall not be destroyed, And his
dominion shall be eue^ to the end. All his works shevve this, for they all
speak of his glory of his kingdom, and talk of his power. Thus you see here
is a kingdom of Power that the vveake may fly unto it as unto a city of
refuge.

Matthew. 3.2.
and Christ him self tells his Apostles that it is given unto them to know
the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, Luc. 8.10.
and Christ's follovver says, the kingdom of heaven, Romans 14.17
is not meat, and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy
ghost.

Luc. 12.32. Mat. 25.34 Mat. 13.43.
and they shall shine therein as the sun in the firmament.

Apo. 16.20
The kingdom of the beast the Revelation mentions, Matthew. 26.
and against both by way of disclayme Christ says directly, My kingdom is
not of this world.

The might of this kingdom of Christ appears that he should rule over the
house of Jacob for ever, Luc. 1.33.
and he should reign till his enemies are put under his feet yea his very
members by his grace shall reign, 1. Co. 15.23.
For if by one man's offense death reigned, by one man much more they which
receive abundance of grace, Romans 5.17.
and of the gift of righteousness shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ, and
he it is that has made us unto our god kings, and Preests, and we shall reign
on the earth by santificatio^. Apoc. 5.10
Yea we shall judge the collapsed angels.

Thus much for the probat of the learning hereof. 1. Cor. 6.3.


Matthew. 4.8
misled Chyliasts, Origenists, or Millinaries (for all these last three are
one.)

3. Ioh. 1.9. Lucae 16.
or give it away as Diotrephes did for pre-eminence, as the Glutton for
delight, as the vvanton for pleasure, as the envious for nothing, but for
vexatio^ of mind, and as the desperate only for horror of conscience, who
destroy their bodies that the devil may have their souls.

Romans 6.12.
but that finally we resolve that sin may not reign in our mortal bodies as
in a kingdom, that we should obey it in the lust thereof, Romans 5.21.
but that as sin has reigned unto death, even so grace might reign through
righteousness unto eternal life by JESUS CHRIST our lord.

The third lesson.
The former was a kingdom, but now a kingdom of heaven is set before us
wherein we may learn That God has prepared a kingdom of heaven for those
that in hope thereof purge themselves in the kingdom of grace.

By heaven we understand not that place betwixt the earth, Genesis 1.28.
and the Moon, for that's the heaven of fowls for they are called the fowls
heaven, Genes. 1.
nor yet the firmament wherein are placed the sun, the moon, 2. Cor. 12.2
and stars, but that third heaven into which Paul was taken up, where
Christ sits at the right hand of god the father, where the souls departed
are in rest, where all the elect in the end of the world shall be as the
angels, and shall shine as the sun in brightness, and glory of god the father.
Of which kingdom of heaven if you ask me what it is I answer it is a
creature made of god in the beginning when he created the earth. Genesis 1.1.
If you ask me where it is, I answer it is above these visible heavens. If
you ask me why god made it? I answer for to shevve his glory unto his
saints, and therefore it is called a paradise of all delectable, and
desirable things in the presence of god. The house of god wherein all the
elect are gathered. A kingdom wherein god is king, and Christ is the prince,
and the church the queen, and the subjects all the angels, and saints. Luc.
6.38.
And it is called the kingdom of glory wherein not only we receive glory in
good measure, but pressed down, and heaped up, and running over. In hope
whereof all gods children purge, and prune themselves that they may bring
forth much fruit. 1. Ioh. 2.3.
For what will not a Christian soul do, and labor, and strive, and
struggle while he is here, that here after he may sit in heavenly places
with Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 2.6.


The right of this learning the reason of scripture shows. Apoc. 21.8.
For noe unclean thing enters into this holy city, nor any abomination. The
means is therefore offered, 1. Ioh. 1.7.
even the blood of Jesus Christ whereby we may be purged from all our sins,
that we may be clean. And gracious is the conversation of all gods children,
for their conversation is in heaven allbeit they be in earth. Phil. 1.20.


Matt. 6.21.
Secondly in affection for their heart is in heaven where their treasure is.

Gorranus in locum.
Or as our contryman says the conversation of Christians on earth is in
heaven, 1. By meditation in the strength whereof they fly daily into heaven,
2. By daily conference for they speak continually of those things that belong
to the kingdom of heaven, 3. By holy admiration for who knovveth the order of
the visible heavens, therefore much less can we understand the glory of the
invisible. 4. By speaking to our souls in holy soliloquies saying. Who is, or
what is there in heaven, or in earth that we desire, but thee o, lord god.
Lastly by attending gods leisure, and as the Patriarchs did, Genesis 49.18
so do they daily wait for their salvation.

The life of this learning consists in practice. Job. 4.19. 2. Pet. 1.14. 1.
Pet. 2.11.
or of the Bermuthaes where they never mean to go. And for as much as we
know, that we dwell here in houses of clay, and in tabernacles of earth, and
are but strangers, and pilgrims, yet that we should have noe more desire to
go to our mansions, to repair to our tabernacle made without hands, and to
reside in our own country is a strain of extreme madness. Heb. 9.10.
yet still to have an eye to the land of promise or with Paul not to look on
the things that are seen, 2. Co. 5.1.2
but to know that if this earthly tabernacle be destroyed, we shall be sure of
a better made without hands.

Hosh. 5.4.
yea if Hoshea preach never so earnestly, yet the Spirit of vvhordome will be
in the midst of some. Exodus 16.5.


If Moses, and Aaron preach of this kingdom, and shevve. Signs and wonders,
2. Ti. 4.10.
yet the spirit of gluttony will desire the flesh potts of Egipte, and if
Paul preach never so povverfully, yet the spirit of coueteousnes will cause
Demas to forsake him, Matt. 5.22.
and embrace this present world and the spirit of wrath will call his
brother Racha though he be in dainger of a counsel, Ephesians. 4.29.30.
the spirit of envy will sell innocent Joseph, and the spirit of lying, of
perverseness, and peeuishnes will grieve the spirit of god with rebellion what
soever can be said to the contrary. Aquinas.
by grace which purges us from all our sin, and by doctrine which cleereth
us from ignorance.

Lilia terrae Ilia terrae. Ludibria venti.
Yea those souls ouerlooke, Baca, and Basan that is all crosses, and losses
accompting the pleasures thereof to be but the lillies of the earth, and gold,
and silver but the garbage of the earth, and the favors of great ones to be but
as the turnings of the unconstant vveather cocks.





Psalm. 84.10
Secondly to love the congregation of gods people, and to chose rather to be a
door keeper with David, then to be out of the congregation with Miriam the
sister of Moses, or to complain in the great misery of Cain that we are cast
out from the face, and favor of god. Genesis 4.14.




And lastly to dispose our selves for death, that when the lord calls we
may say as Samuel said here I am lord, and as the spouse says Come lord Jesus
Come quickly, and being thus disposed, and fitted, and made meet for this
kingdom of heaven we shall neither much fear our own death, whensoever it
comes, or wheresoever, nor overmuch lament the death of others, for we shall
meet in this kingdom of heaven, and be blessed for ever in Christ our lord.

The fourth lesson.
If you ask me where unto this kingdom may be resembled my text tells you It
is like unto a man, A kingdom resembled to a man. There is reason for both, A
man is a little kingdom, yea a little world, and the kingdom of heaven is
prepared for man through the mercies of god, and by the merritts of the life,
and death of one that was truly man, albeit not a mere man even by Jesus
Christ both god, and man who is blessed for ever. This very resemblance that
the kingdom of heaven should be resembled to a man shows me this light. That
man, in his Creation of God, and regeneration by the grace of God is the most
perfect modle of all Creatures, but in his degeneration, and falling from God
is a most prodigious, and portentous monster and even as hell it self. Eccles.
7.31
The preacher preaches so, and shows it in one vewe saying God made man
righteous but he has sought out many inventions. The creation of man shows
it. For he was created in the image of god, both in the dignity of his
soueraingty, in the proprieties of his person, and also in the entitie of his
subsistence. Genes. 1.
In his soueraingty. For as god is lord of all whatsoever, so god made man the
souerainge of all corporal things. And as God is wholy in the universe and in
every part thereof, so man's soul quickneth, guides, moves the whole body
and every part and parcel thereof. Man indede is the Epitome, and sum of all
things, having being, life, sense, and intellectual faculties. To noe other
creature all those but to him only. In the proprieties of personage a very
resemblance of the diety. For man is spiritual as he is a regenerate person.
The spiritual man discerns all things says Paul. Invisible in his soul,
and impassible in the same by any outvvard things. In a word there are three
men in one man, a carnal man, a natural man, a spiritual man, and all truly
one man. In his entitie a very perfect resemblance of the trinity. The trinity
is three persons in one essence. Man's chief entity has three faculties in one
soul Memory, Understanding, Will. In which we may take a view of this
perfect modle in his state of regeneration, In the Memory dvvells god the
father. Psalm. 100.3. Psa. 104.27
For we record him to have given us our first being Indeed he made us, and
not we our selves. Secondly he gives us temporallties to maintain our being.
He gives us our meat in due season. Thirdly he gives us his son for our
better being. In whom we have measures of grace, in this life, and assurances
of glory in the other life for our best being. God the son dwells in our
understanding by the knowledge of our god, and of our selves. Psalm. 9.
Of our god his majesty to fear, of god his mercy to adore, of our selves
that we might know our selves to be but men, frail men, every day ready to
be dissolved, vain men lighter then vanity it self, vile men worthy to be
abhorred, vvretched men every way despicable, wicked men every day to become
penetentiaries. God the holy ghost dvvells in the Will, by bowing it to the
obedience of god laws so affecting, and cleansing it by the word, that a
regenerate man does not only contemn all earthly things which are combersome,
but also all delectable things, yea and a man's own self that he may enjoy
god. The privileges of this regenerat man who can declare? Does he believe?
he has eternal life. Is he merciful? he is gods dear son. Does he hear
the word? he is the cozen, the sister, the mother of Christ. Does he pray? he
surpriseth gods majesty as did Moses. Ioh. 5.24. Matthew. 5.7. Matthew. 12.49.50.
Does he give a cup of cold water? he shall not lose his revvard. In a word
all other creatures move in a right line, but a man moves in a circular. Mat.
10.42.
Other creatures have taken that perfection they have in themselves, man has
his perfection in god, he came of one, in that one he has his being, and to
that one he must return in his best, and most happy being for ever. Act.
17.22.
Thus have we all this while been joyous in vevving the delectable things of
paradise, in seeing the light of the land of Goshen in telling the bulvvarkes,
the cittadles, and towers of the heavenly Jerusalem, in arriving at the fair
havens, and considering man in his perfection, but now we must descend in to
the valley of the children of hinnon to consider, the darkness of Egipte to look
on the ruins of the holy city, and to see our vveather beaten bark shaken,
and ready to sink with the boisterous blasts of Furoclydon, yea now we
must consider man in his degeneration, as he is become a prodigious, and
portentous monster even as hell it self.





Genes. 3.
which god never spoke.









Lastly by the invention of shutting their ears and hardening their hearts
against what soever they should hear from god or be persuaded by good me^
for their good, and resolving desperately to live in the world with an iorn
arm to do any violence for advantage, with an ants belly to live never so
basely for their profitt, and with a dogs souls to do any exployt never so
deuelishly so they may have their own will.

torments to destroy his Species as did Bertholdus Schuuartz the Franciscan
Friar, Genes. 4.8
To become a man of death to cause his own hands to murder his own
brother, as did Cain, to become a son of Belial to sell himself to do evil
as did Ahab, and to become a man of sin as that great Archimandrites the Pope
of Rome is.

Psalm. 49.12. Psalm. 59.20
For twice in one Psalm it is said Man being in honor understood it not, and
is compared unto the beasts that perish. To beasts in general. Paul fought
with beasts at Ephesus, Iere. 51.17.
and Jeremy says that every man in his own knowledge is a veary beast. To
beasts in particular as to vipers, Maith. 3.7. Matt. 10.16 Luc. 13.32. Marc.
7.27 Matt. 16.12 Act. 13.10. 1. Tim. 4.1.
wolves, foxes, hogs, dogs. Yea compared to devils. Have not I chosen you
twelve, and one of you is a devil, says Christ, And Paul tells Elimas the
sorcerer, that he was the child of the devil, yea and we read of doctrines
of devils, and deepenes of Satan. The fathers have resembled men to beasts. A
man of goodly parts without discretion to the Estridge, that has goodly
feathers, and cannot fly as Job speaks, a man of envy, and despite studying
reueng to a camel, that forgets all things saving a shrevvd turn, a man
that is apt for evil to a Dromedary that is swift to batell. Oh how
lamentable a thing it is to consider, that a man that was made in the image of
god, should now be worse then the men with whom he lives running to that
excess of royot which other men do not. Worse then bird which praise their
creator in their kind, worse then beasts which vvil drink no more, but what
suffices, worse then devils that believe and tremble.

should not set in so dark a cloud, seeing god has said to man, which he
said not to the angels that fell. Shall man fall, and shall not he rise? shall
man turn away and shall nothe return again? Let us, therefore as the
Apostell says quitt our selves like men, we are all of us Ishbosheths sonns
of shame. When we come into the world our friends cover our shame with rags,
and in the end when we go out of the world they do the like. All of us,
are Mephibosheths, lame on both legs both in our love to god, and in our
charity one to another. We are all Lazarusses full of sores, and lie begging at
the gate of gods rich mercy. Let us therefore remember our creator, that as
we are men so by gods grace we may become civil men, and Christian men, and
the men of god by the mediation of the man JESUS CHRIST our lord god blessed
for ever, and by his, merritts may obtain this kingdom which is resembled to
man, prepared for man, merited by that man, which kingdom he shall render up
in the end of all (when there shall be noe man lyving on the earth) to god the
father that god may be all in all. Even so lord Jesus.

The fifth lesson.
But this kingdom is not resembled to every man but unto a merchant man. The
lesson then is, That Merchants and Marcha^dizing are of god. Marcha^ts not only
in their creation but also in their vocation. In their creation as they are
men, and in their christian vocation, as they are Merchant me^. It is noe
small comfort for a man to be assured, and assertayned that his calling is of
god. It remains therefore that you merchants use this calling legally, that
god may bless you, and it, and that you may be traders for this heavenly
kingdom which is resembled unto you, as you are merchant men.

The light of this appears that merchants dizing is pretions with god.







For the first the kingdom of Solomon is recommended 2. Chron. 8.17.18. 1.
Reg. 10.22. Es. 23.18.
That he sent ships to Esion geber, to Elod, and joined him self with Hiram
king of Tire, and with his merchants who brought gold from Ophir once in
three year.

world, as the Canarie Islands. Another the orchard of the world as Lombardy
in Ittaly so acompted, Another the Arcenall of the world as Russia, and
Norvvay are esteemed, espetially for cordage and materials of shipping. In all
which and the like is employed a necessity of marchantdizing for the
distraction of commodities from one nation to another, for furnishing the
necessities of each country, and for the upholding, and norishing of commerce,
peace, and amity, among the people, and inhabitants of the earth. Lastly it is
plain by divine dispensation of gods all ruling providence, and vvisdome in
opening the secrets of all things as belongs to Merchants. As first god
himself that made the sea was author of shipping, and navigations on the sea.
For the first model of a shipp was the arc of Noah that after the flood, and
cataclysme of waters was found upon the mountains of Armenia. Again god
has opened the use of the needle, card, and compass as the abstruse secrets
of navigations that are only for their use. And has caused nature in general
as the stars of heaven, the winds, the seas, and the art of man in the skill
of navigations to be as the attendants upon their Marchantdizing, Prove. 31.14
Therefore the Merchants shipp which brings her commodities from a far to
which a good wife is resembled in the proverbs is indeed the good husvvife of
a common wealth. Can we then think the abyss of waters for so the
scripture calls the Ocean was made for another use, Psa. 104.26
but for sight, and vvondermente? when as David tells you there go the ships
and describes gods marveilous perseruation of his servants in those great
waves. There also is fish in great abundance which by shipping is had thence
for the use of man, yea the gospel of Christ Jesus had been unknown unto
remote nations, unless by marchantdizing they had hard thereof yea and it
pleased god to exte^d, and enlarge the territories of his sons dominion by
Paul's traveling, Act. 13.
and voyages made by sea in the ships of Merchants. All this shows that
Merchants and their marchandizings are of god. It remains that the men to
whom this glorious kingdom of heaven is resembled do use their vocation
legally that god may bless them and it, and that they may at the last become
Merchants of that kingdom of heaven. To perform their vocation legally they
must do it first conscionably, then constantly, and in so doing they shall be
sure to end it comfortably.

To do their vocation conscionably they must remember that it is not enough
for a man to be in a lavvull calling, but he must follow it lavvfully. Luc.
18.10.
For god loves aduerbs better then adjectives. That is, god loves that his
children should do all things lavvfully, Luc. 5.5.
and that to do it by direction of his word, that whether they trade day, or
night, by sea, or land the word of god must be their loadstone, compass, and
Pilote (as the pillar of fire, and pillar of a cloud were the guids of gods
people in the wilderness.) Avoiding in all their tradings all base covetousness,
Genes. 6. Galat. 5.13 Psalm. 107. Act. 21.5.
and unjust dealing When they build a shipp they must build her in faith as
Noah did the arc, and when she it built they must serve one another with
her in love, and in all things using prayer. For Paul before he went on ship
board prayed upon the sea shore.

For in vain else do we build ships unless god do give the blessing.

Secondly they must use it constantly, and not be as the manner of some is to
be constant only in vnconstantcie. But rather by removing all hindrances, in
your trading, as namely Absolons foolish ambition Matchiuills devilish policy
all deluing, trenching and undermining one another in their gains, and
commodities, but constantly using the holy means of honest recreation, and
helps of devotion to further one another in their holy calling. Act. 20.24.
So undoubtedly you shall finish your course comfortably, and end it with joy
that when the ancient of days shall sit down, and death, and the sea,
Revel. 20.13. Matthew. 25.21.
and the grave shall give up her dead you shall be sure of a comfortable Euge
well done good, and faithful servants enter into your masters joy which have
continued trading as I bad you until I came, and now I will be your
everlasting great revvard for ever, which revvard of mercy you did always
trade for in all your negotiations, and business.

Es. 23.1. Ezech. 27.2.
Hovvle o ye ships of Tharsis for your destruction, and shipvvrackes (says
the prophet) And albeit they were come to perfect beauty in their
Marchantdizing. That their plankes were of the fine trees of Shenir, their
masts of the ceders of Lebanon, their oars of the oaks of Bashan, their
banks vvhereon they rovved of yuorie brought from Greece, and Italy. Their
sails were of fine linen with broydered work brought from Egipte. Blevv
silk, and purple, was their clothing, and vvast clothes. Their mariners, men
of Zidon, and Aruad, Their pilottes were prudent, Their kalkers the skillful
men of Geball, The Persians, the men of Lud, of Phut, of Aruad, and the
Gammadimes were their men of war, their sailors, and their soldiers. From
Tharsis they traded in silver, tinn, iorn, and lead, The men of Iauan, Tubal,
and Mesech, were their undertakers. From Togarmah they had horses, horsemen,
and mules. They dealt from Dedan with Elephants teeth, and Peacokes. They
occupied with the Aramites in Emrauds, coral, and pearl. They dealt with
the men of Judah, and Israel in wheat, honny, oil, and balm, With them of
Damascus in wine, and vvoole. With them of Dan in Cassia Calemus, and in what
not? So large was their marchantdizing so increased was their trade, and the
merchants in all this unthankful, and grown intolerable proud. Therefore
lamentation is taken up for the^, heir city distroyed, their ships broken at
sea, they shipvvracked, other Merchants hissed at them, yea they became a
terror to themselves, to others, and to this day were never any more in that
glory, and reputation as they were before. Take heed therefore of pride, and
if you be lifted up with riches, let not your hearts be lifted up against god.
For kings the principal among the sons of men are borne naked, and every
thing is an helper to our being. The heavens gives us light, The air beath,
the earth her fruits, the bees their ho^ny, the veins their wine, the sheep
their woole, the worms our silk why then should Merchants be proud. Have thou
gold, and silver? Hag. 2.8. Psalm. 50.10. Psalm. 24.1. Eccles. 1.7.
it is the lords says Haggai. Have thou cattle? they are the lords upon a
thousand hills. Have thou plate, and household stuff? why? the earth is the
lords, and all that therein is. Have thou had much, and now have not? Genesis
33.11. Psalm. 78.70
he is the Ocean to which all rivers run, and return. Have thou health? he
has the keys of life and death. Let every one learn therefore to confess
with Jacob, that the lord has dealt graciously with them, 1. Chro. 29.14.
and with David that records his follovving the sheep, and the evves great
with young, as for the regal state, crown, and septer he attributes all to
god. For says he of thee is all o lord. Why, then should Merchants be proud?
Let them record their prentiships, their mean estate, and give god the glory
for the better.

breeches, and such like trash. Christian merchants sell one thing to one man,
but these Antichristian Montebankes sell the sight of one thing to a thousand.
Christian merchants have certain specificall kinds of Marchantdizing, but
these Antichristian Montebankes sell heaven, and earth, and hell, sell tovvling
of bells, places of sepulture, dispensation for eating of meats, marying of
vviues, false promise of heaven, Friars coules, and what not. Christian
Merchants compel none to buy their Merchandise, but these Antichristian
Montibankes do curse with bell book, and candle, and account all such as
Athists, and Achrists that do not buy up their trash, and popish trumpery.
Christian Merchants do make holiday sometimes, but these Antichristian
Montebankes do trade most on such days as are consecrated to gods service.
Christian Merchants have set places for their marts, but these Antichristian
Montebankes have vvalls, and vvoods, and hollovve trees, and stocks, and
stones, and miracles, and maruels at Sichem, at Halas, Bruxells, compostella,
Loretto, and where not, and what not to increase their popish trading, and
Iesuitticall Marchantdizings.



First in this shopp of profitt you shall see that huge commodity of the year
of Iubile, The shopp of profitt.
wherein you have remission of sins in all the degrees of comparison. Which
year of Iubile was wont to be every fiftith year, but now in the popes
Ephod (Vtilitatis gratia) it is thought meet to be every five, and tvventith
year, and every centenary year, though the five and tvventith year in their
account was the year imediatly before the centenary. And that noe man might
be ignorant of this year there are Siquisss. set up on every post to be
remembrancers thereof unto you. And if any man hinder any manner of person that
is vvilling, and desirous to travel to Rome in this Iubile it is a reserved
case, and can be remitted by none, but by the popes novvne self. But there is
some cause of envy in all this, that the Italians should be so near their
remission, and the Pollender, the English, Scot, and Irish should be so far of
from so great a favor. Their second great commodity is their
Archiepiscopall, and Episcopal, pall which they make with great cost for
sooth. For the Nuns of the order of S. Agnes do offer two white lambs
upon the alter of S. Peter, and S. Paul at Rome just at the time that Agnus
Dei is singing. Of the vvoll of the which lambs these palls are made, and noe
bishope can have a pall, but he must be a petitioner in all the degrees of
comparison, and if he be Archbishope, or bishope he pays pro rato twenty, or
thirty thousand Duccatts, and yet for all this his successor shall not be the
better for it, for he must buy a nevve one albeit his predecessor should die
the vearie next day after he has bought it. I should be to much injurious unto
you if I should desire you to view a corner of their shop, vvherin are
anniuersary masses, private masses, privileged alters, and papal bulls which
they send over even unto Amerrica, where they compel the poor Indians to
receive them Insomuch that some shipes of Holland have taken whole Cariques
full laden with such trash for the misled Americans. And that which is vvorth
the observations none may vent these commodities or buy, or sell, but he that
has the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name. But I
fear me I should be over much teadious unto you if I should desire your
patience to cast your eyes into an other corner of their shop of profitt
wherein you may see their taxations Apostolical (as they call them) in which
there are set down the prices of ordinations, dispensations, absolutions,
reuocations, legittimations and the like stuff. Insomuch that if a great king
of Christendom were now alive he might call a great duke that yet lives his
brother, cosen, nephew, and son. And you know it is noe less a virtue to
keep, then to get. Therefore these Antichristian Merchants have tricks to
keep, and to bring all the water to their own mill.





Thirdly to get the favor of great personages they have their several trikes,
and devises as to make their younger Sons Cardinals, Abbots, and Priors, and
their collapsed daughters Abbesses, Prioresses, and Recluses.

Fourthly they can curriefauor with kings in presenting them with pretty
presents as with a rose in the time of year consecrated by the popes novvne
self at the first coming. A holy svvord, a millitary belt, a vvaxe^ Agnus Dei,
and such like trash vvherevvith those pretty white sons, and misled novices
conceive that they may drive a way disasters, diseases, tempests, and mortal
sins. Moreover what is a gentelman but his pleasure? For this shopp of profitt
were nothing vvorth unless they had a shopp of pleasure vvithall. For profitt
without pleasure is sordid, and base. Therefore these cunning merchants have
devises to make their greatness merry.

Their shopp of pleasure.
For first they take great pleasure in the peoples ignorance And to this purpose
they set it down positiuely for an heinous offense to have a bible, or
leturgie, and prayers in a known tongue. And noemareuell when they have a
professed sort of friars, who term themselves Foliain, or friars ignorant.
And when Bellarmine their Attlas shall evidently affirm, that the faith of a
Christian may better be defined by ignorance, then by knovveldge.

Secondly they take great pleasure in traducing the scriptures. For they render
the word Repent that is say they whip your selves, or go a pilgrimage to
Loretto in Italy, or to Sickem, and Hallas in Flandres. To bear the cross of
Christ, is as they tell the people to carry a silver, or golden cross in their
capes. You are the light of the world says the scripture, that is say they,
we must light tapers in churches in the day time. And PATER NOSTER in popery
is latin for a pair of beads. And because Christ said Be like unto children.
Therefore say they our friars do wear covvles like unto childrens first
biggins.

Thirdly they sport themselves to see how they can serve all comers, all
customers, and please every humor. If they be stately minded, what is more
pompous then the papacy. If they be of a base humor, what is more sordid then
the Capucini, and Foliani. If they be melancholy who more retired then the
Hermits, and Anachorits. If they be Epicures, Abbots shall entertayne them. If
they be vvanton, some fevve days before the Carniuall it is lavvfull in Rome
for a man to use his pleasure any way without control. And that which I
admire above all, the mix composition of their doings. And for the Pope to
take upon him to vvash the feet of the poor in humility, and yet to cause the
kings of the earth to kiss his feet in extreme arrogancy, and with one,
and the same bull to give, and take away kingdoms. And to call himself the
servant of servants, and yet to suffer books to come out with this title to
gods viceroy Paul the fist that now is pope. And add to these the power
that they challenge to remitt sins, the opinion of Transubstantiation
whereof Bessaeus the French kings Almoner said unto the Prince of Condie thus
Joshua commanded the creature to stand still in the firmament, but the popish
preests command the creator in the sacrament. As also add hereunto auricular
confession with the punishment, and absolutio^ thereof, espetially that of
Robert the Norma^d duke surpasses all ciuillty, and humanity.

Lastly the works of supererogatio^, or rather the works of
superarrogation, where in they say the Ethnickes meritt of congruity, The
faithful Layiques of condignity but the Cleriques are of an extrordinary
strain, for they meritt for themselus, and their neighbors. A thing not hard
of of the patriarchies, Prophets, and Apostels. O the wit of man among
popelings, Papists, and Jesuits. Tell me now dear (...) contrymen, masters,
(...) and mortals. Is it not a lamentable thing for us in this glorious
suneshine of the word, to see the spirit of god so grieved, the pure light of
the gospel so obscured, and may not we cry out with David? It is time for
thee lord to set to thy hand for they have destroyed thy law. But leaving
these antichristian Merchants I return to you with a charge even to every one
of you, that if any of you have a robe, a diamo^d, a horse, acknowledge it to
be the kings as Mordicai did, Est. 6.8.
that is the king of kings, and not yours. And let no^e of you enquire
curiously, as did the Israelits of the Manna saying Man hu what is this?
Neither let any of you sacrifice to your own nett, Habac. 1.16 1. Reg. 3.26
or burn in cense to your own yearne, or be of a vvhorish disposition, as
the harlot spoke to Solomon let it be divided meaning the live child, so you
must take care not to share with god in your wealth as partly attributing the
increase thereof to gods blessing, and your pains taking. But learn to speak
as the man after gods own heart does, and absolutely disclayming your own
selves, and say Not unto us lord, not unto us but to thee, and thy name be
rendered the praise, the honor, the glory for ever.

The fifth lesson.
For this kingdom of heaven is not resembled to every merchant, but to a
marcha^t Ievveller so says my text. (...).
The kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant man that sought goodly pearls.
The learning whereof is this, That Marchandizing for precious vvares is
lawful, and he that seeks the kingdom of heaven is rightly resembled to
such a Marcha^t that seeks precious, not vile things, that indeed is a
Merchant Ieweller.

The light of this appears from paradise. For there was the Bdelium, Genesis
2.12.
and the onix stone for man's delight before his fall, even in his inocency. In
the breastplate of Aron there was six precious sto^es on the one side, Exo.
28.10.
and six on the other. God shevving herein the precious acco^pte he made of
his people, And for the fabrique of the Temple David prepared with all his
power for the house of god, gold for vessels of gold, 1. Chr. 29.2
and silver for vessels of silver, and brass for things of brass, iron for
things of yorn, and vvood for things of vvood, and onix stones, and stones to
be set, and carbuncle stones, and of diverse colors, and all precious stones,
and marble stones in abundance. 2. Chro. 32.27.
The right of this appears from a regal state Hezekiah also had exceeding much
riches, and honor, and he gate him treasures of silver, and of gold, and of
precious stones. From a regal banquet. The hangings were of white, Est. 1.6.
green, and blevv clothes fastened with cords of fine linen, and purple, in
silver rings, and pillars of marble: The beds were of gold, and of silver upon
a pauement of porphyre, and marble, and alabaster, and blevv color. And from a
patriarchall marriage, Genesis 24.53*
Then the servant of Abraham took forth silver and jewels of gold, and
raiment, and gave to Rebekah. Moreover the kingdom of heaven is rightly
resembled to a Ievveller, seeing god himself will have is own, and those
things that he have prepared for his own to be signified by precious stones.
His own in the breastplate of iugdment. Exo. 28.17.
There must be four rovves consisting of threes. In the first row a
sardius, a topaze, a carbuncle, in the second an em^raud a saphir, and a
diamond, in the third a ligure, an achate, an hematite* in the fourth a
Chrisolite an Onix, and a Jasper. And all this to shevve how precious his
children are both in life, and death in his sight. Right dear in the sight of
the lord is the death of his saints says the Psalmist. Psalm. 116.
If their death be precious, their life much more.

The things prepared for his are resembled to precious stones. For in the
description of the heavenly Jerusalem in the Revelation by the Devine, Apoc.
21.21
it is said that the foundation of the wall was of all manner of precious
stones, as of Jasper, Saphir Calcedon, of the* Emeraude, Sardoinx, Sardius, of
the Chrisolite, Beryl, Topas, of the Chrisoprasus, Iacinth, Amathyst.

The right of reason shows this. For god has put more power and beauty in
stones that have only being, then in other Creatures, that have being, sense,
and reason. Whereby he shows to us his power to snib, and control our
pride. For what beauty is so bright as the diamo^d? what roseall hevve so
amiable as the Coral? what skill have any phisitia^ so powerful in medicine
to cure as are many precious stones.

Secondly god confirms herein the doctrine of election, and reprobation for
as of stones, so of mankind some are vile, some are precious And on the other
side the rarest ievvells have not that virtue, as the loadsto^e which for
luster in respect of other stones is, but vile, and despicable. Wherein we
may see that when the most vile, and meanest things are taken into the hand of
god, what rare, and vvonderfull effects he can bring to pass by them. In a
word all precious stones proceed from one and the selfsame matter which is
the earth, and yet see what great difference there it betvveene the vile, and
the precious, betvveene the current, and counterfaite; Even so among the sons
of men, all are made of the one, and the same matter; Yett what difference
there is betwixt man, and man of the same mould, betvveene brother, and
brother of the same blood, even as much as betvveene Simon Magus, and Simon
Peter, Cephas, and Caiphas, Judas the traitor, and Jude the apostle, yea what
difference is in one man when god takes him into his hand, as of a persecuting
Saul to make him a preaching Paull.

1. Cor. 3.12.
Those therefore that are true builders are real Merchant ievvellers. For the
grace of god does so much prevail with them, Psalm. 1. 1. Ioh. 3.3.
that they become Jaspers, green and flourishing in good works. Saphires
purging themselves of Epidemicall diseases for the hope of heaven. Calcedons
curing fantastical delusions, all Enthusiasmes, Anabaptismes, and the like
fancies. Carbu^cles healing the falling sickness, of falling into the waters of
coueteousnes, Zanch. de oper. Dei.
and fires of contention. Sardonixes as composed of two natures, mortal,
spiritual, by the one humbled, by the other lifted up, Sardiusses in rejoicing
the heart, for who can be more merry, the^ he that serves god? Chrisolits
driving away agues both hott, and cold, for the fear of god is the bath of
sinners, curing them of chilling cold, of base idelnes, and the flaming heat of
intemperat Zeal. Beryls, by kindling fire against the sun, the Zeal of the
son of god even eating them up; Apoc. 12.1.
Topasses curing Lunacies, trampling all sublunary things under their feet.
Chrysoprases shyning more in the night then in the light, holding out the light
of the truth against all the darkness of this world. Hyacinths having armore of
proof against lightning for they are as innocent as doves and therefore god
will not hurt them, and Lastly Amatysts enjoying quiet sleep. For god gives
his beloved sleep in this life, and their death is as a very svveet repose,
and rest in sleep.





precious from out all their contagion, and evil, and in the end shall suffer
noe loss in their trial. For they as precious stones are built upon the
everlasting foundation Jesus Christ, by whom they are conveyed to the heavenly
building, and shall remain in the heavenly Jerusalem with god for ever.

The sixth lesson.
Moreover the Merchant to whom this kingdom is rese^bled is not a Ievveller
of ordinary Ievvells, but one that seeks goodly pearls so that hence we
learn. That the high way to this kingdom of heaven is goodness, and the
study of Goodness is the Christian, and real Merchants practice.

(...).
The light of this appears in the word of the text which signifies
beautiful, commodious, amiable, and superexcellent pearls.

Beautiful is goodness in it self, for if it could be portrayed in orient
colors, and set out to the life* vvonderfull would be the love that men
would be stirred up to bear unto it. Commodious, for godline* is the
goodliest riches. Phil. 4.8.9
Amiable in effect, making them amiable that are good, superexcelle^t, so
says the Apostle whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest.
Whatsouer things are just, whatsoever things pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if
there be any praise, think on these things: Those which ye have both learned,
and received, and hard, and seen in me, do, and the god of peace shall be
with you. The feet of them amiable, that bring us the means that makes us to
be good. The promise that god would be present with it. 2. Chro. 19 11.
For Jehosaphat told his judges that they should be of good courage, and do
it, and god would be with the good. Mich. 6.8.
And the declaration of this shows it to be good. For god has shevved thee o
man what is good, and what the lord requires of thee: surely to do justly,
to love mercy, and to humble thy self to walk with thy god.

Secondly this appears by the distinction of goodness Natural, Moral, and
Divine. Just. Mar.
For Christian Merchants do not only desire accidental good things, as a good
wife, good children, good servants, Titus 2.12.
and such like which are all gods good gifts. And Moral goodness in
themselves, but also Divine goodness which leads them to this kingdom. Heb.
10.24 2. Pet. 1.10.
And these things do so near touch us that we by goodness, and the effect
thereof do sign to others, ^. Tim. 1.7.
and seal to our selves the certainty of our election. Wherein also our faith
does not only shevve it self, but exercise, Ephesians. 4.^0.
and inflame us to a godly seal.

Thirdly it abandoneth us from sin. For as by evils we grieve the holy
ghost, that seals us unto god, so by goodness we joy our conscience in the
holy ghost.

Fouerthly as by doing evil we call to our selves many miseries, Deuteronomy. 28.
so by doing the good we shall avoid many evils of punishment, and see the
goodness of god in the land of the living.

Lastly goodness is the way wherein gods children ordinarily trade, Ephesians. 2.10.
for they are his vvorkma^shipe created for that purpose. Thirdly there is a
necessity of being good in gods children. Not a necessity of coaction, for gods
children do the good Cheerfully. Not of cause, for goodness is but the way,
and gods children walk therein, but it is of necessary duty that we should
be good. For that's the will of god even your santification. 1. These. 4.3
It is the commandment of god. Let your lights so shine before men that they
may see your good works, Matt. 5.16.
and glorify your father which is in heaven, Tit. 2.12.
and it is the end of all preaching. Noe good actio^ can be done but by a good
man who does it out of a pure heart, otherwise it is base, and sordid, out of
a true faith which else is a glittering sin, and to the glory of god, Vae
justitiae nostrae siremota justitia Christi judicetur; Nam qu^equid in te est
sine Christo Satan est. August.
which otherwise is but hiprocrisie, And this is the cause why it is
accepted of god for Christ his sake otherwise all our goodness were menstruous
and monstrous. The right of this appears, forasmuch, as real Christians
know that god regards goodness more then greatness. Nay there is nothing but
foolish man regards greatness. Nature does not for the sons of royalty are
borne naked, and the god of nature is noe accepter of persons, nor the
destroyer of nature, for death visits the crown, as soon as the clovvne.

^. Petr. ^.10




Thirdly good examples of good men do encite gods children to goodness. For
albeit none are absolutely good, but god only. 2. Chro. 32 32 2. Chro. 35 26.
Yet the scripture styles Hezekias, and Josias to be good kings. The goodness of
gods children has a threefold power. Of Preservation, Union, Communication.
It is a preservatiue to pull some out of the fire. Iud. Epist. 23.
Of union to make peace. Of communication by extending their goodness to the
saints on earth. Thy Christians faith is a proper, and a peculiar good
betwixt god, and thine own soul, but a Christians goodness; is extensiue and
delated to all demensions of goodness. The very profession of a Christian is
goodness. See in the rule of addition in Christian arythmetike that S. Peter
sets down for says he. Add to your faith virtue, 2. Pet. 1^.5.6.7.8.
and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge, temperance, and to temperance,
patience, and to patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to
brotherly kindness charity. For if these things be in you, and abound they make
you that ye shall neither be barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our
lord Jesus. Lastly let us reason from the power of Christ blood, was it shed
that we should be vile still? far should any such thought be from us that
we should profess religion and deny the power thereof. By this then that
has bine spoken both from the light of Illumination in gods word, and by the
right of Demonstration in reasoning from the word: It is plain that the high
way to heaven is to consult, and resolve to do all the good we can while
we are here trading tovvard heaven. The use of this is manifold.



Ambrose iuditious, Origin allegorical, Chrysostom excellent to move, passion
all diuersified. The goodness of our will is of god. My goods of mind are thy
gifts. Bona mea. Dona tua. August. Conf. 10. lib. 4. cap.
If any man think otherwise, if he were as good as an angel, and his meat
that he eats as good as Ma^na, and his garment as good as the Ephod of Aaron,
let that man know that he must attribute all to god, and be thankful for all
gods goodness toward him either natural, or civil, or spiritual, or
external, internal, eternal, for all our good is either god himself, or
from god himself, and it is his goodness that has follovved us all our life.



therefore directed to recompense noe man evil for evil, as Joab did Abner,
for that's a poor spirit, much less evil for good as Judas did to Christ for
that's a devils spirit: Nay if you do recompense good with good as Ahasuerosh
did Mordicai it is but common justice, but to overcome evil with goodness, is
more then to preach, Romans 12. vlt.
or to do a miracle, or to cast out a devil.

Tit. 1.
ill beasts, slovve bellies. For tell me what do they mean that lay waste
their consciences by doing evil, and trading for counterfeits, coralls,
paultry ieat, or for evil.

Does any hard hearted Pharoh, imperious Nebuchanezer, cruel Adonibezek,
profane Passhur, false hearted Zidkiah, foolish Ahab, incestuous Ammon,
mispersvvaded Magus, sorcerous Elymas, unmerciful Gluton, Prodigal,
Prodigious, wicked miscreant think who here does run out his time with
evil of sin, that there will not come a time when the evil of punishment
shall be avvarded seven fold into his bosom? Nothing more sure. For he that
had not so much goodness as extended to a crumme of bread had not afforded him
a drop of the water of mercy. Luc. 16.
Look to it therefore Masters, and mortals. For the apostasy of faith was in
the later times, 1. Tim. 4.1
but now for ought that I can see there is an apostasy of goodness in the
world of both which Paul prophecieth. 2. Tim. 3.1.
Look therefore to every case of your conscience. Do you fear the wrath of
god for the guilt of your sin? fall to doing of goodness, 2. Chro. 19.3.
and god will turn away his wrath from you for Christ sake as he did from
Iehosophat. Is thy soul almost dead in sin? Incline to goodness, Act. 9.36.
and god will raise thee from death as he did Tabitha that is from the death
of sin to the life of righteousness. Will thou be certified of thine election?
make it sure by good works. 2. Pet. 1.10.
Will thou be secured from the devil? god will check him, if thou be doing of
good, and will say unto all the powers of darkness, as Christ said unto those
that hindered Mary Magdalen why trouble ye the woman? Matthew. 26.
Will thou spend thy time well? Gal. 6.10.
Do good while thou have time. Will thou be crowned? continue in doing good,
and thou shall have honor, and glory, Roman. 2.
and immortallity, and everlasting life. In a word good works do not go
before one that is to be justified, but they follow him that is already
justified. Conceive not therefore that thou art justified by faith unless thou
see good works follow thy faith. If thou do imagine otherwise, Christ
was not conceived in thee by faith, nor borne by love, nor suffered, nor arose
from the dead, nor ascended for thee. And remember this that in the end of the
world, and in the day of judgment as the form is set down in Matthew's
gospel there is noe question made of faith, Matthew. 25.
but of fact, what we have done, or not done. For he that believes not, Ioh.
3.
is condemned already says Christ. Be therefore advised, and do the good
here, and you shall see the goodness of god in the land of the living.

The seventh lesson.
The gracious endovvme^ts of this real Merchant, to whom the kingdom of
heaven is resembled are rare. For first he is noe Lythersbye, or idle
companion, but one that Seeks goodly pearls. So then the learning of this
is, That The life of a real christian Marchandizing soul, that trads for
heaven is not secure, and sluggish, but full of dillegence, search, and service.

The light of this appears from gods lamp. First in seeking him by the
contemplation of his works. The invisible things of him that is, Romans 1.20.
his eternal power, and godhead are seen by the creation of the world,
being considered in his works, to the intent that they should be without
excuse. In the mirror of his word for so we are enjoined. Io. 5.39.40
Search the scriptures, for in them yea think ye have eternal life, and they
are they which testify of me, And ye will not come to me that ye might have
life. yea in this life to seek a glimpse of his glory that is to seek his
face. Psalm. 24.6.
This is the generation of them that seek him: even of them that seek thy
face o Jacob.

Secondly by questioning how, and what we may do to find him, as did the
young prince in the gosple. Good master what good thing shall I do, Matt.
19.16
that I may have eternal life? As the people, publica^, ^ouldiers did. The
people asked him saying what shall we do then? The publicans came, and said
what shall we do? Luc. 3.10. ibid. 12. ibid. 14.
The soldiers likewise demanded of him saying and what shall we do? As
the Jews did. What shall we do that we might work the works of god?
Io. 6.28. Act 16.30.
And as the Iaylor did. Sirs what must I do to be saved.

Thirdly in requiring Christ Jesus the prince of this kingdom of heaven, if
we have lost him at any time by our negligence, and evil. We must seek him
in our beds, in the streets, we must ask after him of the watchmen yea of
all rather then not find him as the spouse did. Gant. 3.1.2 3.4.
For a lively conscience will not be at quiett, until it has found her
beloved. Therefore the godly will Seek him in the first place according to
the direction of Christ Seek ye first the kingdom of god, and his
righteousness, and all things shall be added unto you. Seek him with sorrovve,
if need be as Joseph, and the virgen did Christ. Mat. 6.3^.
Seek him in the grave with Mary Magdalen. Seek him above as Paul
exhorts. Seek him in distresses as David. Luc. 2.48. Ioh. 20.15. Col.
3.1.2.3 Psalm. 32.3. Psalm. 38.8. Romans 8.36
Seek him in faintings, sighings, roarings. Yea, and in utmost extremities,
and torments, though we are killed all the day long. Yea albeit shame cover
us, albeit we turn our backs upon our enemies, and become as sheep for the
slaughter, and are made a byvvord of them that are round about us, Psalm. 44.10
yea albeit we are smitte^ into the place of dragons, and into the shadovve of
death, yet we will never forgett to seek after thee o god says David. Psalm.
119.25
In a word* albeit our bovvells clean eue^ unto the grave, and our vearie
souls unto the dust, as David speaks, and that we were made the filth, and
ofscouring of all things, 1. C^. 4.9.
(...) become a galing stock to men and angels as Paul says. Yet a real
Christian soul has resolved with Job to Seek god in trust, though god kill
him. And a real christian soul has reason for it. First from gods promise,
Matthew. 7.^ Matt. 18 11.
that he that thus Seeks god in Christ shall assuredly find him.

Secondly when we seek him in weakness, he seeks, and saves us in
power. And how should not a religious soul Seek him, who vvipes away all
tears from our eyes, who putts an end to all our troubles, How can we
chose but seek him, whose face, and favor turns all sorrovves of this
world to solace, Yea whom to seek is to live says Amos. Amos. 5.4




Luc. 15.20.
For gods majesty stoopeth down herein to our misery. Psalm. 34.15.
of paradise, and the appurtenances of happiness with the testimonies of his
love in quieting their consciences, with assurances of remission of their
sins in this life, as the pledge, and earnest of his spirit, and with the
assured rest of glory in the world to tome. With principalles or paradise, as
namely with the continual banquet of a good conscience, and with the joy of
the spirit. Lastly with the appurtenances of happiness as having a proportion
of estate or contentment in this life, as a parcel of that eternal portion in
the other life.

his glittering sword, and his hand take hold on judgment, he vvil render
vengance to his enemies, and vvil revvard them that hate him. He vvil make his
arrows drunk with blood, Deu. 32.40.41.42.
and his svvord, shall devour flesh, and that with the blood of the slain,
and of the captives from the beginning of the reuenges upon the enemy. Nay
says the Psalmist he has bent his bow, whet his svvord, and made it ready
against the faces of them that seek him not. Take heed therefore that in noe
case you give, and sell your selves over as Ahab did to seek the world. For
the world is but a pharisee promising much performing nothing, nor yet seek
after the flesh to fulfill the lucts thereof, for it is but a familiar Judas
while he kisseth he kills, nor seek ye to the powers of darkness for the
devil is but a crafty Herod, a fox who when he cannot tyrannize, will
subtilize. If you vvil not be advised S. Paul will pose you in all your
proiects in one word what fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are
now ashamed? for the end of those things is death.



The curious conscience may find a Moses who with his rod vvil satisfy him
by MTRIS if not by MIRACULIS. The afflicted conscience may find an Aaron who
with his bells will qualify all distresses. A co^trite, and broken heart may
find a David Israells svveete finger who with his divine harp will cure him
of the venemons biting of the beast TARANTULA, which is his sin. The hard
conscience may find a Jeremy who with the hammer of gods judgments vvil
work him. The sleepie conscience may find an Esaias who with his trumpet vvil
awake him* The vvearie conscience a Peter who with his keys of heaven may
open unto him co^forts that may refresh him. And the tender conscience may find
Barnabassas sonns of consolation who may help to bind up the vvounds, and
pour in wine, and oil.

Phil. 3.14.
as Paul resolves I press tovvard the mark for the price of the high calling
of god in Christ Jesus, and the reason is upon record. For if we forgett what
we have done for gods sake as thinking all is to little what ever it be, then
god will record it, as he did the courtesy of the woman which Christ calls
a good work. But if we record, Math. 26.
and commemorate our good deeds, god will slight them.

Secondly we must resolve in every case, Lu^. 7.32.
and condition to seek him. Out of the veary deepes, and early in the morning,
yea though we grovell in our own dust, and stuck fast as it were in our
own dirt, yet as Jeremy we must cry unto him out of the dungeon. For when
the spirit of man does groan to god for help. The blessed spirit of god for
the love of Christ will breath unspeakable comfort unto man.

David yealds the reason. For there will come a time that in the great waters
we shall not, we cannot come nigh him. Psalm. 32.
There were, and yet are certain foolish philosophers, and pratlers in the
world called Sceptiques in deed mere Scoptiques, who use to question all
things (even the Magnificat,) but asseuere, and rosolue on nothing. So there
are certain who seek god daily as says Esaias, Esai 58. 2. Tim. 3.7.
and as Paul's women did were ever learning, and never earning. And these are
such who flatter their own souls, that they seek god aright when as they
only prattle, and prate of god, and deny indeed the power, and price of their
redemption. But being persuaded better things of you my brethren Remember
(...) beseech you by the mercifulnes of god that we all live for a day, for an
hour, for a minute. Seek Your god therefore this day, this hour, this
minute and harden not your hearts. For even now is the axe laid to to the
root of the tree, every tree therefore that brings not forth good fruit is
hevven down, and cast into the fire, Matthew. ^.
From which fearful, fatal, and final destruction god deliver us all in the
saving mercies of his son CHRIST JESUS.

The eight lesson.
You have seen this our real merchants Diligence. Now behold his
constancy. For he seeks god not by fitts, and flashes, but resolves to
seek this Pearl until he find it. So does the fullnes of the greek word in
the text signify, and by the fittnes of it is taken from the sagacitie of
hounds, that earnestly seek, and never give over until they find their game.
Whereof the learning is. That if ever we desire to find favor in the sight of
god we must continue in our suits unto him, and in our service for him most
constantly until we obtain the blessing.

The light of this appears Mat. 10.22
Ye shall be hated of all men for my name, but he that endures to the end he
shall be saved. Mat. 15.32.
Miraculously Then JESUS called his disciples unto him, and said I have
compassion on this multitude, because they have continued with me already
three days, and have nothing to eat, and I will not let them depart fasting
least they faint in the way. So by their constant-staying they beheld a
miracle. Mat. 24.13.
Prophettically But he that endures to the end he shall be saved And
pyrobalically Abide in me, Io. 13.4.
and I in you as the branch cannot bear fruit of it self except it abide in
the vine, no more ca^ ye except ye abide in me.

Genesis 5.24. Genesis 18.23.
Of Abraham who earnestly sued for Sodom. Of Jacob who vvrestled all night
with the angel, and nevver lest of until he had obtained the blessing, and
vvayted unto his end for his salvation. Genesis 19.
And of Moses who continued with god forty days in the mount, and received
the law.

Ier. 2.5.
cause what iniquity have your fathers found in me (says the lord) that they
are gone far from me, Ier. ^.5.
and have vvalked after vanity, Hos. 6.4.
and are become vain? Hosea lame^ts it saying O Ephraim what shall I do unto
thee? O Judah what shall I do unto thee? for your goodness is as the morning
dew and as the early cloud it goes away, and further shows the reason
why they did not continue with god Because they were like a cake on the
harth not turned, Hos. 7.8.10
like a silly dove without heart, and were fed with the vvind.

Act. 1.14. Act. 2.4^.
and supplication with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his
brethren. Also they continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine, and
fellovvshipe, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. Heb. 4.16.
Moreover Let us therefore go boldly unto the throne of grace that we may
find mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.

Luc. 8.6. and 13.
Fifthly from parables First of the seed which fell on the stones, and when it
was spru^g up, it withered away* because it lacked moystnes. The stones are
they which when they have hard, receive the word with joy: but they have noe
roots, which for a while believe, but in the time of temptation go^ away.
Secondly of the house built upon the sand upon which the rain fell, Matt.
7.27 1. Cor. 9.24
and the floods came, and the winds blevv, ^ beat upon that house, and it
fell, and the fall thereof was great. Thirdly from a race. Know ye not
(says the apostle) that they which run in a race, run all* yet one
receives the price? so ru^ne that ye may obtain. There are three sorts of
races, Italian, Pythian, and Olympian.

There are three sorts of places, Heaven a place of joy, hell of dolor, the
earth of labor. It is as natural therefore as it is to the bird to fly, or
for the ox to labor, or the sparks of fire to fly vpvvards, so it is for
the sons of men to take pains, and labor. For they that do not partake
with the sons of men in labor here, shall partake of the pains of hell
with the devil here after.

Genesis 6.8. Genesis 19.19.
because he continued in his service. Lot because he held it out, even amongst
the unclean Sodamites.

To. 10.20.
because he preuents them with his grace. For they are merely passive in their
first conversion, and he is the only agent. For he prevented us Englishmen,
now the Israel of god, but heretofore the abomination of Idolatry. Apo. 20.15
But he that is not found written in the book of life shall be cast into the
lake of fire, and brimstone. And we must take our time. For Esau found not
place for repentance, though he sought it with tears, Psalm. 21.8.
and the right hand of god vvil find out all the^ that hate him. Thus you see
the ^ight hereof. The right is also most plain for first we must not be
discouraged with vveake* and small beginnings, for god will help, Neh. 2.20.
and assist them that endeavor. For the people in the time of Nehemiah
continued building albeit they held the svvord in one hand, and a trevvell in
the other, Neh. 4.17.
and the lord god of heaven did prosper their resolutions. But if we look
back, it is to despise god, and therefore we have a caveat Remember
Lottsvvife, and our vnfittnes so heaven is shevved. For says Christ he that
puts his hand to the plough, Luc. 9.62.
and looks back is not apt for the kingdom of heaven* And not to go
forvvard, is to go backwards says a father, Luc. 14.30
and herein we make our selves ridiculous, and it will be be said of us, this
people began to build, Heb. 13.8.
but were not able to make an end. Secondly Christ is the same yesterday, and
today, and for ever. The same objectiuely in this word. Subjectiuely in his
attributes of tender mercy as he is a father, and our god, and Effectually in
his goodness, grace, and preventing mercy.

Thirdly the example of Christ who seeks us till he find us, as the good
shepherd sought his vvandring sheep, so Christ seeks us till we become
godly Christians, carries us on his shoulders in our death, and rejoices to
bring us to our home in the resurrection of the just. Lastly the promise of
eternal life is made to none, but to those that continue in well doing, Romans
^.7.
and the case is plain in the prophecy of the prophet Ezekiel in the
eighteen chapter there it is set down at large to which I referr^ the
reader.

Act. 26.28. Apoc. 2.5.
but care not to live their life. Or with Agrippa are almost persuaded to be
Christians, Or to forsake their first faith as the church of Ephesus did. Or
stand still at one stay in a Saturnicall humor as the earth does, or like, a
mill horse go in a round from thirty to sixty, and never the better, or envy
others that persevere, and go on, as Cain did Abell, or like those. (Whom
Paul speaks of) with Phygellus, 2. Tim. 1.15
and Hermogenes turn away, or with Hymeneus, 2. Tim. 1.15
and Philetus fret as a cancer, Or with Demas forsake Paul, and embrace this
present world. 2 Timothy 2.17
For what will it profitt a prentice to serve half his time, 2. Tim. 4.10.
and lose his freedom in the end? What did it profitt Lotts wife to go out
of Sodom, and to go tovvard Zoar when she looked back again to Sodom? What
did it profitt Judas to preach the gospel, to do miracles as is probable, to
be in compaine with Christ, and to sit at meat with him, and in the end to
have a treacherous heart? What would it have profitted Christophorus Columbus,
or Vesputius Americus to have sailed many days, and nights if they had not
continued their course. The one then had surely never bine lord Admiral of
Spain, nor the other could ever have given the name of America to the nevve
found land.

Psalm. 92 13.14. Matt. 20.8.
The sun never stands still, nor goes backwards but by miracle, so we
that are the sons of god should neither stand still, nor go back in gods
service, but we should be a marvel unto our selves to recall our courses. Are
not we all plants inoculated, into the true vine. Then certainly we shall
grovve, increase, and bring forth. Are we not all servants, and receive
wages, shall we be idle? Are we not all faithful ones. If it be but the
least ingredience of faith though it be no bigger then a grain of mustard
seed, It will grovve to a great tree, Matt. 31.31.
and a little leaven which a woman takes and hides in three pecckes of
meal will leaven the whole lump.

In our service have not we made a strong covenant with god, as Elisha did
with Eliah saying, as the lord lives, ^. Reg, 2.6.
and my soul lives I will not leave thee.

Ioh. 1.
EURICA, I have found him. I have found him whom my soul loves. And John the
divine told Nathaniel I have found the Messiah. If we vvil not seek him to
find him, he vvil find us, and our impiety, and will cry against our
unthankfulness. Psalm. 107.8.
O that men would praise the lord for his goodness, and for his vvonderfull
works to the children of men. Psalm. 50.22.
Our sleighting of him O consider this ye that forgett god lest I tear you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver you. Galat. 3.1.
Our stupidity O Foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you that you should
not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set
forth, Esai. 1.2.
crucified among you? Our insensibility Hear o heavens, and give ear o earth
for the lord has spoken (says Esayh) I have norished, and brought up
children, and they have rebelled against me. The heavy burden of our sins Ah
sinnfull nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers children
that are corrupters: they have forsaken the lord, Esa. 1.4.
they have provoked the holy one of Israel unto anger, they are gone away
backwards* Deu.
and our extreme folly Ah foolish people do you thus revvard the lord?

Why then do we not search, and try our selves. First our vvayes, and works
O that my ways vv^re directed that I might keep thy statutes Our sins that
lay vvast our consciences Jeremy laments saying. Ier. 9.3, ^.
Oh that mine head were full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears
that I might weep day, and night for the slain of the daughter of my people,
Es. 64.1
and our judgment. Oh, that thou would break the heavens, and come down,
and that the mountains might melt at thy presence. That we might cry out
with David O that I had vvings like unto a dove that I might fly hence and be
at rest. How many Iudaits are there amongst us, who like the dew in the
morning (as Hosea says) glitter, and gaster, but before noone vanish away to
nothing, so we are here in the morning, but a fore night we vanish away,
and become like the mildevve that smutteth the corn. You are here in the
morning, and the dew of Hermon falls upon you, before night you shake it of.
Yea with Manna the angels food are ye fed vvithall in the morning, but
before night ye do as nice gentell women with their flowers, put them in
their bosoms in the morning, but ere night straw them at their feet.

that men persevere not? I answer it is because they are like the tribe of
Ephraim a cake on the harth not turned (says Hoshea) which must needs be
burnt on the on side, Hos. 7.8.
and dovve on the other, That is dovvnvvard earnest to the world, but vpvvard
key cold tovvard god, like a dove with our heart deceived, because they are fed
with the vvind, that is with vain things, and their iniquity is bound up.
Hos. 13.12.
Again their hearts are poisoned with the venime of sin which the zeal of
gods truth cannot melt. Suetonius in vita Caligulae.
For the naturalists say that the heart of a man that is poisoned cannot be
consumed with fire.

Romans 8.30.
That who^ he predestinate the^ also he called, and who^ he called, them also
he justified, and vvho^ he justified, the^ he also glorifieth. For it is not in
him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in god that shows mercy, and
gods mercy acompanieth his own. The youth of gods children brings forth,
their middle age increases their growth, and in their old age they are
complete, and full of fruit. For such as be planted in the house of the lord
shall ever flourish in the courts of our god, in the utter, and inward courts
here in this world, whether they they be Layiques, or Cleriques, and in the
world to come they shall be admitted into the holy of holiest for ever.

In the ninth place is shevved what this real merchant found in his
perseverance of search. The text says, ONE PEARL OF GREAT PRICE. In seeking
good things a man shall be sure to find the best at last. What this one pearl of
great price is, both ancient, and late deuines diuersifie.

The ancient as Chrysostom, and Origin say, It is the Gospel found among the
goodly pearls of the law, for the law is the gospel concealed, and the
gosple is the law revealed. Hillarie, Augustine, and Ambrose say, It is
Christ in heaven, far fairer then the sonns of men, and Charity on earth the
chief, and choice of the goodly theological virtues. The late devines say, It
is sanctification so Beza, and Melanchton. Another the Observation of the
Commandments, as Zinglius. A third Charity, as Feuerdentius. Other say, It is
grace, or faith the gift of grace, as Fran: Zuares. All level at this, that
this one pearl of great price is Christ in heaven, and Charity on earth, of
both in order.

The ninth lesson.
First of Christ that he is One. Secondly that he is the only pearl peareles,
pricles. And then of charity. Of Christ his Oneness this is the learning.
CHRIST Jesus is most one in the unity of divine essence, truly one in the unity
with his elect, yea wholly, and only One in the mediation for his elect.

The light of this appears thus, He is one with the father in essence I and
the father are one. Job. 10.30.
One in substance coessentiall with the father. One in nature by eternal
generation, one in name, For he has a name above all names, and one in number
of existence, as one in the unity of the essence. Where upon the Orthodoxe
faith is in Athanasius Creed, The diety is all one, The glory equal, the
majesty coeternall.

1. Tim 2.5.
Secondly he is one in union with his elect by one spirit, and he alone does
mediate, for his elect. For there is one god, and one Mediator betvveene god,
and man which is them a Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2.13.
And now in Jesus Christ, ye which once were far off, are made near by
the blood of Christ. He is one in essence, but in the subsistence differing,
yet in actio^ the same. The father does things AUTHORITATIVE the son
SUBAUTHORITATIVE to whom the father has deligated all the judgment. But Christ
is wholy his elects, Ioh. 5.22.
so that whether it be Paul, 1. Cor. 3.22.23.
or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death: whether they be
things present, or things to come, even all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and
Christ is gods.

The right of this appears that he is one in the divine essence.





Dan. 6.4.
is one. Therefore we have the same god which the Israelits had. For our god
is one says Moses. Secondly that he is one in union with his chosen it must
also follow of necessity.









In a word he is one in the office of mediation for the elect, and there is
reason for it, For they had all one beginning even the father, Ioh. 6.44.
Noe man comes to me says Christ except the father dravve him. Matthew. 20.
Ephesians. 4.24. 1. Cor. 12.4.
They have one end the revvard of mercy. They have all one means One god, one
faith, one baptism. One spirit whereby they are animated, or quickened, one
head Christ allbeit the giuds under him be many yet all lead to one head.
Lastly one connextion of Members, Romans 12.
vvherin thy subsist in the communion of saints here, and shall by his wholy,
and only mediation be possessed of the full and perfitt fruition thereof in the
church triumphant hereafter.

2. Reg. 17.30.
First from the multiplicity of heathen gods to this only. For the men of
Babell had Succoth Benoth which was a hen, and chickins. The men of Cu^ had
Nergall which was a continued fire, the men of Hamah had Ashima which was a
goat, the Auites had Nibhaz, and Tartack which was an ass, and a doge, and
the Sepharuites, had Adrammelech and Anammelech that was a mule, and a horse;
To these did the heathen consecrate divine vvorshipe, but god has delivered us
from them, yea, and from heretical pravity. From Ebion, Cerinthus, Photinus,
the Marcioni^, the Arrians, the Apollinarians the Eutichians, Nestorians, and
the like all which endeavored to impeach this doctrine, But the sacred
counsels of Nice, Chalcedon, Ephesus, and Constantinople has concluded
against that damnable doctrine of theirs, and has concluded in sound doctrine
thus. That Christ Jesus our lord, was truly god, perfictly man, of both one,
and continuing in that one both. What should I cite unto you The Sydonians
Ashteroth, or the Moabites Chemosh, or the Ammonites Milchom or Chiun, Act. 7.
and Remphan that Stephen mentions with that abomination of Moloch wherein
as unto devils they offered their sons, and daughters as the Psalmist
speaks. Which abomination as Paulus Fagius observes upon the Caldaean
paraphrase had seven receptacles, and was set up in the vale of the children
of Hinnon nere Jerusalem. In the first receptable, they offered their meal, in
the second turtle doves, in the third a sheep, in the fourth a ram, in the
fifth a calfe, in the sixth an ox, in the seventh which was his arms folden
together, and made fire hott, in the hollovvnes thereof they offered their
sons, and daughers naked, and there they spravled, and cried until they
died. In the mean while the parents playing on timbrells that they might not
hear the cry of their children. So with this confusion of noise of the
skreiching of the children, and the parents playing on trimbrelles our Savior
in the nevve testament calls hell gehenna, alluding unto this confusion in
the vale of the children of Hinnon.

1. Cor. 1.30 Ephesians. 5 30.
that the whole trinity does assist us, for one man cannot live by the soul
of another, but all of us live by the spirit of Christ. Hence it is also that
we die to sin, and live to righteousness, that as flies, and worms die in
the winter, but reviue in the summer, so we die in our selves, but live in
Christ.

And lastly hence it is that angels attend, us for they attend Christ, Heb.
1.14.
and so consequently us by reason of this mystical union Are not they all
(says the apostle) ministering spirits (meaning the angels) sent forth to
minister for their sakes which shall be heirs of salvation.

1. Joh. ^.3.
every man that has this hope in him purges himself, even as he is pure. For
we must be conformable to him, and partake of his devine nature. For those
which he knevve before, Romans 8.29
he also predestinate to be conformable to the image of his son that he might
be the first borne among many brethren. Ioh. 15.4.
We must be full of good works I am the vine, and you are the branches, he
that abides in me and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit, for with
out me ye can do nothing. We must be comforted in our miseries. Job. 19.25.
For I am sure (says Job) that my redeemer lives, Ioh. 17.3.
and he shall stand the last on the earth. We must meditate on heavenly things
And this is eternal life that they know thee and whom thou have sent Jesus
Christ. And above all things we must have unity amongst our selves keeping the
unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.

Psalm. 11.
as he is a king coming to destroy his emmies, and to render vengance to them
that hate him what comfort have you I say in these things. But if we consider
him personally as he is One with us. Psalm. 31.5. Act. 7.56. 1. Pet. 4.19.
Then with David we recommend our our souls into his hands. Then with
Stephen we see heaven open. Then with Peter we committ our souls unto him
as unto a faithful creator. Apoc. 21.
And with the spouse we love, we look, we long for him, and cry out come
lord Jesus come quickly.

1. Cor. 5.20
says he, and as Paul to the Corinthians For says he we are ambassadors of
Christ: as though god did beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ's
stead, that ye would be reconciled to god. As they, so I cast myself down at
every man's foot beseeching him to remember that Mat. 5.18.
as Christ is one so not one jot of his word shall perish That it is an
impossibility to serve two masters. Mat. 6.24.
It is a hard matter, masters, Mat. 26.46
and mortals If we cannot to find this One pearl spare One hour seeing he
rejoices more over One sinner that repents then over ninty, Luc. 15.7.
and nine that need noe repentance. Let therefore all of us cast our selves
down, as the prodigal son did, and cry to our heavenly father make us as
one of thy household servants, and it suffices for we are not worthy to be
called thy sons.

Mat. 26.21.
but remember the time will come that two shall be in one bed together, and one
shall be received, and the other left alone. Iam. 2.19.
If you say that you believe that there is one god, the devil does so, and
trembles How far are you from the faith of devils? but unless you believe
as the doctrine is that god is one with you in the vnio^ of the spirit, and
most one in himself in divine essence with the father, and soly, Apo. 18.10
and wholy one in his mediation to god for you It will be said of you as of
Babell alas their judgment is come in one hour. 1. Cor. 15.51*
But behold I shevve you a mystery we shall not all dye, but we shall be
changed in a moment for we live not in certainty one day, one hour, one
minuit. If therefore this one hour be granted unto you seek this one in this
one hour that you may be one with god in him for ever.

The tenth lesson.
In the former place we have hard his Onenes. Now let us see his
pearelesnes, and pretiousnes. For Christ is not only one, but a pearl also of
great price. So then the doctrine is this. That Christ Jesus our Savior is the
one, and only pearl both peareles, and priceles which was given as a ransom
to redeem us from hell.

1. Cor. 6.29
The Apostle Paul says so speaking indefinitly you are bought with a price,
but the price was priceles. So Peter also, ye are not bought with gold, or
silver, or precious stones, but with the blood of Jesus Christ which is
invaluable, and matchles, and so says my text in the resemblance of the
pearl, and in the Hebraisme of great price. The resembla^ce very apposite both
in Name, Nature, Generation, Quantity, and Quality.

Phil. 2.9.
For the first a pearl is rare in Name. So Christ for god has exalted him
highly, and given him a name above every name.

Psalm. 45.2.7.
thou have loved righteousness, and hate wickedness, because God, even thy god
has anointed thee with oil of gladness above thy fellows.



Ioh. 14.28.
So he ten degrees beneath his father The father is greater then I. Ten degrees
beneath the angels For he made him lovver then the angels. Psalm. 8.5.
Ten degrees beneath men I am worm and noe man, yea ten degrees beneath
worms. for a live doge is better then a dead lion. Living Barrabas the
murderer acompted better then the dying lord Jesus.

Math. 4.23.24.
and the sinners bathe to cure our burning feauers of incontinencie, The fear
of the lord is clean, and endures for ever: the judgments of the lord are
truth, they are righteous altogether. Psalm. 19.9.
Our phlethorie of pride to become little children. Our lethargy of
forgetfulness Remember thy creator in the days of thy youth whiles the evil
days come not, Marc. 10.15
nor the years approach, wherein thou shall say. Eccl. 1^.1.
I have noe pleasure in them. Our staggers of inconstancy. For we shall not
be afraid of evil tidings for our hearts will be fixed in the lord. Psa. 112.7.
And our apoplexy of coueteousnes For this real merchant sells all, and
buyeth it says this present text. Thus you see the sutablenes of the
resemblance.

Secondly this appears unto us from the Hebraisme which says that this one
pearl was of great price. There are three states of singular eminency in the
world, a priest, a prophet a king In all these our Christ is supereminent
Illoque TENUS SUPEREMINET OMNES Christ was a priest after the order of
Melchisedec who was king of righteousness for there was noe guile found in
his mouth. King of Salem for he made both one. Without father on earth,
without mother in heaven, without beginning without ending. Who was the
temple, August. 4. li. de trin. cap. 24.
and alter, the priest, the sacrifice, and him to whom it was offered. A
prophet of infallibility a voice from heaven spoke it Hear him, and the soul
that does not hear him must be cut of from the people who by his power sends
forth the prophetts, Math. 17.5. Deu. 18. Mat. 23.34. Apo. 19.10. Psalm. 24.10.
Psalm. 45.6.
and whose testimony is the spirit of prophecy. A king of regal dignity even
the king of glory, whose scepter is only righteousness, the extent whereof is
over the whole world, and the continuance beyond all time, who after all
time shall deliver up a kingdom purchased with his blood that god, 1. Cor. 15.
may be all in all.

The right of reason thevves this also unto us. For there is valuation in
pearl wherein consists their dignity, their luster, and power. What
valuation is comperable to Christ's dignity which surpasses that of gold, and
silver. Ye were not redeemed with corruptible, things as gold, and silver,
from your vain conversation received by the traditions of the fathers. 1. Pet.
1.28.29.
But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled, and without
spot. That of beasts, and cattle. For thou desire noe sacrifice, Psalm. 51.16.
though I would give it: thou delightest not in burnt offering. That of
angels. Unto which of the angels said he at any time sit at my right hand
till I make thine enemies thy footestoole. Heb. 1.13. Ps. 116.11.
That of men for all men are liars. Far above the value of the offense. For
if through the offense of one, many are dead, much more the grace of god, To.
5.15.16
and the gift by grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto
many.

For if by the offense of one, death reigned through one, much more Shall they
which receive the abundance of grace, and the gift of righteousness reign in
life through one, that is, Jesus Christ.

Secondly there is luster in pearl, but in our Christ in his light we shall
see light. Yea the devils, and the reprobate see so much to make them
inexcusable.

Thirdly pearls are powerful in their effects* Genesis 49.8.
Christ has excellency above Juda, pre-eminence over diseases, power of the
influence of the sun, moon, and stars, yea over the grave, and death, and
hell.

1. Cor. 12. Ioh. 14. Can. 1.
they are such that cannot be expressed by words. Yet is he gone to prepare
them for you It remains that you have an affection to seek, and run after
this your jewel that you may at the last attain him. Come blessed souls
that have hope in CHRIST though your sins be as red as scarlet he has made
them of a pearl color. Let every religious soul see his savior, this
precious pearl how vile he has accounted of himself being sold for thirty
pieces of silver, and how precious he has esteemed of us that shed his
precious blood for us, one drop whereof was vvorth ten thousand worlds. And
let the languishing soul come hither, and see how god has given us his only
jewel to be our JESUS. What then will he deny us with him? For he made him
of noe reputation, and vile in the sight of the world, that we might be
precious pearls in the sight of god.

is in his passion, of absolution in his condemnation, of remission of sins
in his cross, of satisfaction in his sacrifice, of n^vvnes of life in his
resurrection, of immortallity in the kingdom prepared for you, and of
purgation in his blood. For he that was a diamond has made himself a ruby
all red in his own blood, that we might be diamond^ in the sight of his
father.

What would you have? One pearl without pea^e. He is this one. For he is One
god in the essence of the diety, Ioh. 11.
One creator that made heaven, and earth. One man who died for us. One lord
paramount who has the pre-eminence, Matt. 23. Ioh. 10. Hebr. 10.
One master not many. One father, One sheephard. One sacrifice for our sins.

Mat. 7.6.
and pearls must not be cast before swine, and the devil desires to go into
such kind of creatures, Matt 8 31. Ibidem.
and has permission so to do. But our case is as the case of Aaron which had
a robe, bells, a tunacle, an Ephod, the Vrim, and Thumim, and blevv silk, and
fine linen, yet all these were none of his own, but ornaments ordained by
god to be put upon him. So we have noe pretiousnes in our selves, but all our
luster comes from this pearl. Ephesians. 5.8. Ie. 14. Ecc. 1.2. Matt. 7. Matt. 25.
Genesis 8.21.
For we are in ourselves darkness in the abstract, Folly, Vanity, dogs, and
hogs, death, and damned. If you will not believe me. Moses will tell you that
the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth, and Job will assertaine
you, for says he. If I vvash my self with snow water, Job. 9.30.31
and make my hands never so clean: yet thou shall plung me in the ditch, and
mine own cloths shall abhor me.

says if any man love not the lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema,
Maranatha, 1. Cor. 16.22.
that is accursed when the lord shall come. Yea surely they shall be accursed in
their goods, as the cursed things of Jericho, their specious mansio^s made a
iakes, their possession a bloody. Dan. 3.19.
Acheldama, their gains as the cursed guiles of Corban, their name as branded
as Ieroboams, their fame rotten. Jf they be honerable, god will lay their
honor in the dust, if noble, they shall be vile, and base in his sight, if
learned their learning shall be a byvvord, and a hissing. If he be a king he
shall be made a beast with Nebuchadnezzer If a minion, or favorite he shall be
hanged as wicked Haman that loves not the lord.

Heb. 10.29
and counts the blood of the nevve Testament as an unholy thing, and does
despite the spirit of grace. But let every one of us be of Paul's resolution to
account all things doung, and dress that we may obtain this pearl. Ephesians.
3.14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
And for this cause I bow my knees for you all unto god the father of our
lord Jesus Christ, (Of whom is named the whole family in heaven, and in
earth.) That he might grant you according to the riches of his glory, that ye
may be strengthened in the inner man by his spirit. That Christ may dvvell in
your hearts by faith: that ye being rooted, and grounded by love, may be able to
comprehend vvithall saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height: And to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge, that ye may
be filled with all fullness of god. Unto him therefore that is able to do
exceeding abundantly above all that we ask, or think according to the power
that works in us, be praise in the church by Christ Jesus throvvout all
generation for ever. Amen.

The eleventh lesson.
Thus you have hard what is meant by that One pearl of great price in heaven.
Now see what is that One pearl of great price on earth which this real
merchant finds here. The former interpreters have expounded it to our hand
shevving that it is Charity. The learning then is. That Christian Charity is
that one, and only pearl in earth both peareles, and priceles which is found
only among the children of god.

The light of this appears most evidently from S. Paul's words. 1. Cor.
12.31. 1. Cor. 13. per tout.
Wherein first S. Paul says. That he would shevve a more excellent way, and
in the chapter follovving does make it demonstrable. The Analysis whereof is
thus breefly. First it callengeth the best things. Secondly it combateth with
the vvorst things, and Thirdly it conquereth the last things. Christian Charity
callengeth the best things, For angellical, euangellicall eloquence without
Charity is as sounding brass, or as a tinckling cymball. The gift of
prophecy, all knowledge, all faith, yea miraculous faith in comparison of
this is nothing* Alms deeds, and martyrdom without Charity profitteth
nothing. In the second place it combateth with the vvorst things. In wrath it
suffers long* base couteousnes it cannot endure, for it is bountiful, it is
void of spite for it enuies not, it is not froward for it does not beast it
self, it is noe sovvlen bladder of pride, for it is not puffed up, it is far
from reproach that it will do noe uncomely thing, it is so far from injury
that it seeks not its own, in it is noe bitterness at all for it cannot be
provoked to wrath, noe surmises of evil, for it thinks none, noe injustice
for it rejoices not in inquity, but rejoices in the truth, believes the
good, hops the best, and endures all. In the third place it conquereth the
last things. For when the world has done it shall endure, and when faith
which believes all things of god, and hope which expects all, do cease,
yet shall Charity vvhervvith we love god, and man endure for all eterinty.

It is also one, Io. 13.34.
for it is that one commandment from mount Sion which is the complement of
the other ten from mount Sinai which Christ calls the nevve commandment, and
affirms that it is the mark of his chosen. It is also a pearl of perfection
for the Christians house which he builds to god has faith for its foundation
where upon it is grounded, and hope the vvalls whereby it is erected, but
Charity is the roof which perfecteth, and covers all. It is of all price
whether we respect the nearenes of it unto us It is not in heaven that thou
should say who shall go up for us, and bring it unto us that we may bear
it, and do it. Neither is it beyond the sea that thou should say who shall
go over the sea, and bring it us that we may hear it, and do it? But the
word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may
do it. Or the breefnes. The commandment is shortened that every man might be
inexcusable, and that noe man in the day of judgment as says S. Augustine
might implead god, or complain that he could not retain this lesson in his
memory Therefore says that father the word is this. If ye love me you will
love one another.

Mat^. 11.30
Or if we respect the easines of this lesson. It is an easy yoke. For both
old, and young, rich, and poor, vveake, and whole may perform this duty. Or
if we respect the pre^iousnes of it. It is the bond of perfection, yea
precious it is in all dimensions. In lenght it endures ever. In breath it is
dilated to all, to the good of duty, to the bad of pity. In deepenes it
fails never, it will not forsake a friend in misery, noe nor in extremity,
noe not in death it self. Cant. 8.6.7.
For love is as strong as death, jealousy is as cruel as the grave: the coals
thereof are fiery coals, and a vehement flame. Much water cannot quench
love, neither can the floods drown it: if a man should give all the substance
of his house for love, they would greatly contemn it. Or in height, it is of
a noble disposition, it loves our friends in the lord, and our enemies for the
lord. In a word it is precious in extension. In this world universal, it
does good to all. In the other world it is eternal. Precious in this world
for use, for a man's faith is his own proper good, but Charity is profitable,
and useful to others. In the other world it is precious, for continuance, for
it endures to the end, in the end, after the end; without end. Ignatius
Christ's martyr shall conclude who says, that faith is the beginning of our
Christianity, Charity the end, and best pillovve vvhereon to repose our head at
the last gasp.

The right of this appears in the subject of Charity, for it svvimmes not in
the brain with fancifull, and imaginary opinions, but setleth in the heart by
divine, and Christian affections. It is not conceitfull, but truly cordial. In
the object it is precious, for god is the object thereof, and whatsoever god
will have beloved, as men; all men, yea our enemies for that's the exaltatio^
thereof, Angels, saints, Christ himself according to his humane nature
whereby he does not disdain to call us brethren. Lastly in the effects
precious, for it brings unto us the joy of the spirit, peace of our
conscience, patience, mercy, bounty, and the like.

Galat. 5.6.
For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision aueileth any thing, neither
uncircumcision, but faith which works by love. It is the victory vvherby
we overcome the world. 1. Ioh. 5.4.
It is the renovation of the nevve birth in the children of god. It is that
alone which justifies us, Ephesians. 3.17.
yea without faith Charity is sin But in the mean while let us not spoil
Charity of her privileges, as do the Solifidia^s, Romans 14.23
and Nullifidia^s. For charity is the end of the commandment. 1. Tim. 1.5.
The bond of perfection. Col. 3.14. Romans 13.10 Ioh. 13. Gal. 5.6.
The complement of the law, The supplement of the gospel; and without which
Faith does nothing.





Romans 5.8.
In case of injury It says I will pray for mine enemies by the example of
Stephen. In case of necessity It supplieth wants. Act. 7.60. Prove. 25. Pro.
24.17. Luc. 17.4.
In case of misery It condoleth, and in case of penetencie It does willingly
forgive, and that full often.

Matt. 22.12
For without this garment to that holy marriage we cannot be admitted. Our
Savior wonders how a fellow came to a wedding not having a wedding
garment. Now every garment has the commendations from the matter whereof
it, is made, from the color, and from the sweetness. The matter of this
garment is the tender bovvells of Jesus Christ. The color is the tincture of
CHRIST'S blood, And the sweetness is of Mirh, Aloes, and Cassia. Psalm. 45.
Noe man came into the court of Ahasuerosh with sackcloth, Act. 9.
and noe man can come into the court of heaven unless as Dorcas friends at her
death shevved the garments that she had wrought before she was restored to
life by Peter. So in the last day we must shevve our garments made of this
Charity before we shall be possessed of life everlasting. Matthew. 25*


Romans 13.10. Ioh. 13.34.
He has commanded you to do ten things. This commandment does them. Seven
things are to be desired, in a sort this desires them, ^ay absolutely does
them. Twelve things are to be believed, To which of these does this not
extend it self either of nature, grace, or glory.

Psalm. 39.2. 1. These. 5. Mat. 7.
In case of casualty I will not rejoice (says she) if it be evil, I will
not grudg (says she) if it be good. In a word she says of all I will
despise noe brother, I will contemn noe sister, for where I find one fault
in them I can find ten in my self, if I look upon my self with the fame
prying, and curious eye wherevvith I look upon them. Mark her reasonings to
maintain this. You think it a burden says she, but I know the yoke is
easy. If Jacob could serve seven years for Rachell, and say that it seemed
fevve days unto him for the love that he bare unto Rachel, if natural love
can work this, what shall not divine Charity effect. Secondly her reason
tells her that if she endures any thing for the love of god. God himself
will bear a part, and that she shall be delivered from the grievous yoke of
malice, from the devil the father thereof, and from hell the den thereof. From
which miserable, and diabolical mischief of malice, and sin of Satan good
lord deliver us.

Noe sooner has this real Merchant found this pearl but ^e straightvvaies is
become another man For the text says. He went, and sold all that he had and
bought it. Resolution therefore is the remarkable note of a true Christian,
which consists in four things couched in these last words of my text.

The first is readiness He went.

Secondly contempt of the world And sold.

Thirdly a full persvvasion He sold all.

And Lastly The enioyement He bought it. His readiness is couched is these
words He went That is as the original word signifies He went from himself
in denying himself, and all his own strength For as the prodigal son is
said to return to himself when he bethought himself to return to his
father having not bine with himself all the while of his prodigallity; So
this merchant is said to go from himself when he endeuoreth to purchase that
without himself which he in himself could never find. So that the learning
then is this.

The twelfth lesson. Suos, Sua, se negare.
Our Christian readiness is to deny our own friends, our own goods, our own
selves, and as strangers and pilgrims we must continue constantly to hold on
our course toward this kingdom of heaven.

The light of this appears That as Abraham the grandfather must forsake his
own country, Genesis 12.1.
and go to a land that god should shevve him; And as Jacob the grandchild must
travel to Padan Aram from his fathers house to live with his uncle Laban in
Mesopotamia, and there to be enriched, So must every Christian soul forsake
his own friends here as does the kings daughter which is a figure of he
church, and of every true soul in the church. Forsake her own people, Psalm.
45.10
and her own father house, so shall the king of heaven have great delight in
her beauty, and he will become her lord. In the second place we see James,
Mat. 4.2^.
and John left the ship, and their father to follow Christ. Mat. 19.27
The apostles, and disciples left, and forsook all to follow him in the
regeneration; Act. 4.34.
And the primitive church in the time of the apostles cast down their goods
at the apostles feet.

In the third place we see Paul denies himself for albeit Agabus had
foretold his death, yet he was resolute to go on, and told the Elders of
Ephesus, and others at Miletum that they should not vex, and trouble him with
weeping for him. For he was resolved that albeit he knevve that in every city
evil did abide him, yet he would not only suffer, but die for the lord Jesus.
Act. 10 and 11
He had learned this lesson of his master who had taught him That if any man
would come after him he must deny himself take up his cross, Matthew. 16.24.
and follow him. What other things then denying our own friends, our own
goods, our own selves does that myrhe and mortification, that dying, and
burying with Christ signify whereof so often is made, mention in scripture.
For we are but strangers, and pilgrims like the children of Israel, in whose
two and forty stations is figured, and resembled the race of a Christian. For
they came to Rameses the store house of the Egiptians, and from thence to
Succoth, and so to Etham in the edge of the wilderness. From thence to Pihiroth
at the red sea before Migdoll So on to Marah where they were three days
without water, and there they murmur. From thence to Elim where they found
twelve fountains, and seauenty palm trees. Thence to the red sea in the
desert of Syn where they had quails, and Manna, and so on till they had
finished forty two stations, a cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night
being their pilotts to guide them. Matthew. 1.
And as Christ had in his generation three fourteenes From Abraham to David,
from David to the captivity, from the Captivity to Christ, which in all make
forty two. So if we have so many fleetings as David calls them in the psalms
in our regeneration yet must we go on, and continue until we have finished
our course. We see it was so in Christ. For being yet an infant he must fly
into Egipte, back again into the land of Israel, and turn a side into the
parts of Galilee for fear of Archelaus the the son of Herod. In all his
life, from the crach to the Cross what see we, but stations of vvoe, and
sorrovve? He that shall but cast his eye to see Paul's peregrination from
place, to place, to Cyprus, to Iconium, Lystra, Der be, Antioch, to
Thesolonica, Beraea, Athens, Ephesus, Miletu^, Jerusalem* tovvard Rome,
suffered shipwreck at Mileta now called Malta, and Lastly was beheaded at
Rome. What sees a man I say in all this his peregrination, but a sea of
sorrovve, and sobbs, and sighs, a perfect resemblance of the travail of
regeneration.

The right of this appears to gods children. For they know that here they
are but pilgrims in respect of their stay, pay, and way. Noe stay. Job. 14.
Thou shall seek me to morrow, and I shall not be. In respect of pay, Noe
penny, noe PATER NOSTER, Poor is the entertaynement that a traueler shall find
that has noe money. Lastly in respect of our way for every day we go
forwards. Secondly gods children know that they must not be here always,
1. Cor. 15.
in respect of their sin which causes death, For the angel of paradise
must with his svvord cut the tvvine of this life before we can taste the tree
of the other life. Thirdly in respect of the place wherein they live, which
Job calls cottages of clay. Job. 4.
God calls the land of the curse, Genes. 3.
David calls the land of the dead, The philosophers termed the sublunary
region where we enquire still what state the moon is in; And Barnard calls
it the place wherein we live by deaths; for whatsoever flies in heaven, or
goes upon the earth, or glides in the waters that is eateable we bury in our
stomachs, so we live by their deaths. Again right reason shows this that
there must needs be a dissolution, and we must go from our selves. First
because our bodies are composed of diverse qualityes which cannot endure.

For a kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. Secondly from the moral
cause, which is sin, and sin causes death. Thirdly from the counselor to
sin, which was the devil, by whose envy sin entered, and death by
sin. Lastly by the decree, and sentance upon that sin. For as there went a
decree from Augustus Caesar that all the world should be taxed, Luc. 2.1.
So there is a statute in heaven concluded by the great Caesar of heaven, and
earth that all men must once die. Heb. 9.
Fourthly gods children know that when they go from themselves they go to
their holy burgeshipe, Phil 3.20. Ephe. 2.19. 2. Cor. 5. Ioh. 14.
to their sacred service, to their heavenly entertaynment, and to their abiding
place.

In a word this light of the scripture, and right of reason shows this
conclusion. That if we vvil not by denying our own friends, our own goods,
and our own selves in respect of Christ, be buried with CHRIST, be
crucified with him, suffer with him, and be made conformable unto him, we
shall never live with him, reign with him, or be glorified by him.

Luc. 16. Matthew. 7.
Noe going on in a broad way, CHRIST directs it and says If ye were of the
world the world would love his own, but because ye are not of the world,
but I have chosen you out of the world, Ioh. 15.19.
therefore the world hates you, but a real Christian must cast away all
that hinders his race, as the blind man cast away his cloak* Heb. 12.1. Man.
10.
and follovved Christ, For every child of god must know that this a rule
case, that every citizen of heaven is a stranger on earth so Jacob speaks to
Pharoh. So David to god. Genesis 4^.9.
And Peter exhorts thereunto that we should pass the time of our dwelling
in fear, 1. Chro. 29 15. 1. Pet. 1.17. 1. Pet. 2.11.12.
and again he says Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers, and pilgrims,
abstain from fleshly lusts which fight against the soul, and have your
conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they which speak evil of you as
evil doers may by your good works which they shall see glorify your father
in the day of your visitation.



It appears evidently that god who knovves us, knovves what is best for us,
and therefore preuenteth our peeuishnes with his pity. For how unwilling
have gods dearest children bine to enter into his service, and to go from
themselves. Moses excuses himself that he is not elequent. Jeremy says that
he is a child. Lot lingereth to get out of Sodom, Confess. lib 8.1, 2, 7.
and S Augustine having a long conflicte at Rome goes to Millain to hear S.
Ambrose, and yet being not satisfied for resolution. He complains, and says
How long lord? how long? shall I still say, as the crovv says CRAS, CRAS,
shall I still say MODO, and M^DO QUAE NON HABENT ^ODUM, But the lord at last
hard him, and shevved him a scripture, Romans 13.14
Not in chambering, and wantonness not in striffe, and envying, but put on
the lord Jesus, which scripture converted him, and made him an orthodxe
christian.

Ier. 15.6.
That is noe way for us. The evil servant went also, Mat. 25.18.
but he went, and diggd in the earth, and hid his talent, that was noe good
merchant. The young man whom Christ bid go, Mat. 27.5.
and sell all, went to, but he went his way sorrovving for he had great
revennevves. Judas went also but it was to hang himself. Thus we must have
a care vvhither we go. 2. Corint. 5
For vvhiles we are in the flesh we are pilgrims from the lord.



Genes. 19. Luc. 24.
Secondly let us go on the right way seeking Christ in heaven, and Charity on
earth. Thirdly let us be sparing as trauelers are, and not to ru^ne to excess
of riott in spending our masters, and creditors goods, and ^uinating our own
creditts, and Lastly let us not be detayned by trifles, and gevvgavves, but let
us so run on the race that we may obtain the goal, and shevve our readiness
to come to Christ, and he will be most ready to receive us to immortallity, and
glory for ever.

The thirteenth lesson.
It follovveth, that this real Merchant is so ready to purchase this pearl,
that he makes away all that he has to have it. The text says HE SOLD. There
is an evil sale, as buying and selling in the church of god, Matthew. 21.12.
which Christ whips out. There is an unnatural sale when brother sells
brother, as the patriarchs did Joseph. Genesis 37.28
And there is a profane sale when a man sells divinity for vanity, as Esau
sold his birthright for pottage. But there is a good, Genesis 25.33.
and godly sale when we sell earth for heaven, the world for god, the cursed
corban for Christ, so did the apostollicall church when they sold their
possessions, and brought the price, and laid it down at the apostles feet.
The collection, Act. 4.45.
or learning from this interpretation is this. They that once have tasted of
god, of Christ, and of the blessings of the other life do easily renounce,
contemn, and despise all things which hinder them that they may not obtain
heaven, and make away with all such things that help the^ on thither to
procure, and purchase this pearl.

This is made clear by revelation and by reason. Matthew. 6.33
Secondly by parable. Luc. 8.7.
The seed that fell among thorns was choked. Thirdly by mystery, Luc. 10.22
2. Tim. 2.4
Mary made the best choice. Fourthly by rese^blance. Noe man marches well on
in the spiritual warfare; which entangleth himself with the things of this
world.

1. Ioh. 2.13.
If any man love the world, the love of the father is not in him. Secondly it
is clear by an impossibillity. Matt. 6.24
For noe man can serve two masters God, and Mammon. Apoc. ^.
Thirdly from the judgment. For the luke vvarme, god will speve out of his
mouth. Lastly they that svvere by god, Zeph. 1.5.
and M^lchom are abomination to the lord.

August. ad Bon^faciu^ Epist. 70.
but as they are used, or abused, and these are given to good, and bad. To the
good least these things should be thought to be evil, and so they were given
to Abraham, and they are given to the bad least these things should be thought
to be the cheifest good things, Luc. 16.
and so they were given to the rich glutton. Romans 12.1.
This is also clear by reason. For if we must offer our bodies sacrifices to
god, much more our goods. For the body is better them raiment. Matt. 6.25. Job
2.4.
And a man would give his skin for his life. Besides the godly know, Heb.
12. 2. Cor. 7. Psalm. 102. 1. Ioh. 5.
that by the contempt of the world, they are delivered from the worlds
holdfast From the worlds nothing. From the worlds uncertainty, and from the
world iniquity.

desperate that set to sale their own souls. The coueteous Merchant for
money as did Demas. Ecce. 10.9. Hebr. 1^.
The vvanton for pleasure, as did Esau. The imperious for ambition, as
Alexander the sixth sold his soul for the popedom, and Absolon for a kingdom.
And the wicked man for is own hearts lust, as did Ahab that sold himself to
do evil in the sight of the lord. Is it not lamentable to behold other
daingerous Merchant Adventurers who paune their souls as did Noah David, and
Peter. But let these take heed that they be as good husbands as they were by
repentance or else they may paune them so, that they may never redeem them.
Again is it not also lamentable that some careless merchants will lose their
souls; as carnal gospellers, do, and the like, Oh what a foolish thing is
it to be careful to keep the chickin from the kite, the lamb from the
wolf, and the dove from the vermin, and to be careless to keep our souls
from the devil. O vvretched condition of the sons of men.

Luc. 16.9. Coll. 3.6.
children of disobedience, and children of iniquity who will sell the
righteous for silver, Am. 2.6. Hosh. 10.9. Ioh. 12.36. Romans 9.8. Matthew. 8.1^
and the poor for shoues, yea they will transgress for a crust of bread. But
there are children of light, children of promise, and children of the kingdom,
and these having god to their father CHRIST to their brother, the angels to
their guard, the creaturs to their servants, the holy ghost to their assurer,
enjoy all things, 1. Cor. 3.22
for all things are theirs, and they are CHRIST'S, and CHRIST is gods.

^am. 4.13.14.15.16.17
or to morrow we will go into such a city, and continue there a year, and
buy, and sell, and get gain: whereas ye know not what shall be on the
morrow: For what is your life? It is even a vapor that appears for a
little time, and then vanishes away. For that ye ought to say ^if the lord
will, we shall live, or do this or that. But now ye rejoice in your
boastings: all such rejoicing is evil. Therefore to him that knovveth to do
good, and does it not, to him it is sin. And further that blessed apostle
says to the secure vvordlings. Go to now ye rich men, weep, and hovvle
for your miseries that shall come upon you. Iam. 5.1.2.3.
Your riches are corrupted, and your garments motheaten: your silver, and gold
is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall
eat your flesh as it were fire: ye have heaped treasures together for the
last days.

Deuteronomy. 32.30.
or give any thing, then know, that god will sell you. How else should one
chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except their Rock had
sold them, and the lord had shut them up? Esai. 50.1.
Therefore says the lord, where is the bill of your mothers diuorcement,
whom I have put away? or which of my creditors is it to whom I have sold
you? Behold for your iniquity have you sold your selves, and for your
transgressions is your mother put away. Psalm. 44.1^.
And David complains that when god is angry with a people he sells them for
naught, Joel. 3.1.
and takes noe money for them. And Joel says that they have cast lots for my
people, and have given a boy for a harlot, and sold a girl for wine that
they might drink.

Thus you see this noble merchant real chooses rather to sell, then to be
sold, that so he might purchase the price of his redemption.

The fourtenth lesson.
Yea this merchant is so resolute that he is not only ready to go with
Christ, and contemn the world, but also is fully persuaded to sell ALL. He
is noe Agrippa to be persuaded almost to become a Christian. He is noe Athan
to ^oord up a wedge of gold, and a Babylonish garment. Nor a Saul to spare
Agag, and the best things But he being come to the full persvvasion of his
faith sells all. Whence the doctrine is That they which once come to the
full persvvasion of their faith do willingly consecrate themselves, and all
they have, as holy, and heavenly, reasonable, and seasonable whole burnt
offerings to god in Christ Jesus.

This is clear first by the degrees of saving faith. For the first degree of
faith is a ground work, upon which we build a trust, and confident
affiance. Hebr. 11.1.
Then we proceed to a reverend boldness having an advocate with the father
Jesus Christ our lord, 2. Cor. 3.12 Phil. 3.3.
who is our master of requests in heaven. And upon these premises we come to
a full persvvasion at the last, 1. Ioh. 2.1.
and conclude with Abraham in a full, and absolute persvvasion of faith that
god is able of stones to raise up children. Hence is our hearts filled with
solace, our minds with rest, and our mouths with praise, how soever the
lord deals with us. Exo. ^9.18
Secondly this appears from the mystery or figure of the whole burnt
sacrifice. For whether it were a ram or a lamb it must be tendered ALL.
When Abraham was to offer up Isaac it was not a leg, or a limme, an eye, or
a hand could serve the turn but ALL. Thirdly from euangellicall righteousness
which must exceed, Mat. 5.20.
and surpass pharisaicall, or else we shall never enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Which righteousness is seen First in contrition of humility, by
forsaking our selves, Matthew. 26.24. ^. Cor. 7.31 Mar. 10.25.
even all our selves, by using the world as if we used it not, even all the
world, and by vntvvyning the cable, even ALL the cable that so it may go
through the eye of a needle. Matthew. 3. Fides fiduciae.
Secondly this euangellicall rightiousnes issues from faith of assurance that
god is able to raise up children of stones, and they that have him for their
assuerer are assured by their trust in the lord to stand fast as mount Sion for
ever. Psalm. 125.1.
Thirdly this righteousness produces invocation in holy devotion. Reu. 3.17.
Not as the church of Laodicea does in the Revelation saying I am rich, and
want nothing, but as Christ has taught us to pray how rich soever we are
Give us our bread for the day. Mat. 6.
For what is our ALL, if god give not a blessing to every piece, and parcel
thereof? upon which premises we conclude First by questioning what shall
separate us from the love of god? and resolve at at last that nothing shall be
able to do it howsoever we are assalted either with things above us, Romans
8.35. and 39.
or with us, or beneath us to withdraw us from it.

The reason of this appears first from an apostollical question. 1. Cor. 4.7
What have thou that thou have not received? Have thou gold, and silver? Haggai
tells thee It is none of thine. Have thou herds of cattle in thousands? Hag.
2.^.
the Psalmist will tell thee they are the lords? Psalm. 50.10
Have thou had riches, and now have not? The preacher will tell thee that
god is the ocean from whence they ebe, Ecc. 1.7.
and flow. Secondly from a diabollicall suggestion. For the devil could say
ALL this will I give then when he had nothing to give. But gods children
acknovvledge no such donor. Neither do they conceal the author of their
wealth with Esau, nor the physician of their health with the nine
unthankful leapers, nor gase, and gape upon what they have as the Israelits
did upon their Manna asking Man-hu what is this? not enquiring who gave it,
neither do they arrogate to themselves part, and divide stackes with god, or
challenge the whole, but do acknovvledge their all to come from the author,
and Ocean of ALL, and to it they return their ALL again.

Thirdly this appears from the selling of Christ for he was sold ALL that he
might redeem ALL his. Suffered in ALL. In ALL his body, yea in ALL his humane
soul. It was ALL heavy even unto the death. Yea the Jews sought it in ALL
his parts to find it. In his brains by the crown of thorns, in his blood,
in his heart, thus was he made an ALL burnt offering for us ALL. Shall not we
render to him then our ALL? Especially when he requires ALL, saying Son give
me thy heart which if thou give, thou give ALL for that will dravve ALL.
Indeed if Satan has tempted our hearts to keep back part of the price as he
did the hearts of Ananias, and Sapphire then have we noe part nor portion in
this business. But gods children do assuredly know that ALL their being* and
well being even ALL their best being is in the creator of ALL things. To whom
they tender, not part (...) ^^^butaries, but ALL as votaries to their heavenly
master.

like. Affirmativae Christi leges obligant semper, non ad semper. Semper velle,
non ad semper agere. Tho: Aq. Gulielmus de Sancto amore.
I answer First that all the affirmative laws of CHRIST do bind us
always, but not at all times, Alvvaies to be vvilling, but not alvvaies to
do it. As for example sell all, and follow me; That is with a preparation,
of mind to leave all, and follow him, and in case aforenamed actually to do
it. Again it is said, he that will lose his life shall save it. The meaning
is not actually to lose it all times, but habitually always to be vvilling
to do it in case of gods dishonor, and mayntaining the integrity of faith.

Thirdly it is said if any man comes to me, and hates not father, and
mother, and his own life is not worthy to be my disciple. The meaning is not
actually to hate, but habitually to be vvilling in a sober, and disposed
moderation of mind to forsake the love of father, and mother, yea of a man's
own life in case that they stand against the glory of god, and the good of
his church.

2. Cor. 6.10


greatest Idolater in the world? Injurious to the whole trinity. For money is
his maker. He speaks so. If I may attain to such a sum I am made, he makes
it his redeemer to rid him of trouble, his sanctifier for if he have goods
enough he thinks he is good enough. He is also injurious to man. To his
superiors for he sleights them, to his equals for he scorns them, to his
inferiors for he tramples upon them. Injurious to himself in his natural life
not affording himself diet, and apparel beseeming his place, nor sleep, and
recreation meet for his person. Injurious to himself in his ciuell life,
beloved heartily of none, truly hated of all, and most of all injurious to
himself in his spiritual life never attayning to the knowledge of a true
justifying faith, and the comfort of the full resolution thereof. In a word he
is like unto a hog, and a medler never good till he is dead, Esaias. 30.14
and rotten, nor until the worms have his carcass, and an unthrift have his
capcase. And as he was unsatiable to have the devil, and all, so shall he
meet with two insatiable things as himself, the grave, and hell.

If I should reason the case with the prodigal that spends all in excess of
royott both in drunkenness, and leavvdnes what could he answer? Heretofore
the proverb was he is as drunk as a beggar, but now the gallants, and
gentery take it up. Heretofore boys would cry out at them in the streets as
at some monster, but now it is cause of boasting. Heretofore they used to
bow their knees in prayer, but now to drink healths till they are out of
health. In leaudnes also he has spent his all, upon his whore, or harlott.
All his body full of rottennes, All his wealth exhausted, and he himself
brought to a crust of bread. All the powers of his soul corrupted, his
strenght weakened, his eiesight dimmed, his voice harsh, and pox, and penury
his coat of arms. In a word he becomes a vvitch to all his wit, a thief
to all his wealth, and a devil to his whole man.

Mat. 18.32.
and impute it unto us in what woeful estate were we? shall we serve him
by halfes? shall we not give him all? If a man would give all the substance
of his house for love it would utterly be contemned says the Spouse in the
Canticles, Cant. 8*7.
and without doubt if we love god with all our heart we will deny him
nothing of all. Paul tells us that we are all concluded under sin, for we
have all of us sinned Let us therefore make our peace with our all, that we
may obtain all, then have we made the best bargain that ever we made in the
world. For then we shall be delivered up in the kingdom by CHRIST to god the
father that he may be all in all which god grant unto us all AMEN.

Now are we come unto the last which is this Merchants purchase. Blessed
was his deligence, choice, constancy, skill, readiness, contempt of the
world, and full persvvasion to obtain so great a purchase for the text says
he bought it The learning whereof is this.

The fiftenth lesson.
That it is the greatest purchase of the world so to buy, and sell in the
world that we may purchase at the last the inheritance of the other world.

Mat. 16.26
The truth of this appears First by Christ's question, For what is a man
profited, if he should purchase the whole world, and lose his own soul? Or
what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? This question poseth all
worldly purchasers, all subtle exchangers. Secondly this appears by
parable what did all those recusa^ts gain which would not come unto the
supper, Luc. 14.16
whereunto they were so kindly invited? One had purchased a farm another
bought five yoke of oxen, even this they gained that they should not taste of
that heavenly supper. 1. Cor. 7.29.3^.31.
Thirdly it is plain by apostolical exposition of that supper. But this I say
brethren, the time is short. It remains, that both they that have vviues, be
as though they had none, and they that weep, as though they wept not. And
they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not, and they that buy, as though
they possessed not, and they that use this world as not abusing it, for the
fashion of this world passes away.

Romans 3.
We all want the grace of god, and who would not buy it, if he sold all.
Secondly buyers desire to have what they want for their money. But this
purchase is offered without money, Esai 55.1. Phil. 3.8.
or moneys vvorth. Thirdly they buy for a great price what they would have
yea we must account all things as doung to win Christ. Fourthly buying, and
selling is by exchange. Properly in this, there is noe exchange as is shevved
before out of Esaias. 55. and 1. And Simon Magus was rebuked, that thought the
grace of god was to be bought with money. Was it not a blessed exchange for
us, when the ram was taken for Isaac, 2. Cor. ^.21
that is when he that knevve noe sin, was made sin for us that we might
be the righteousness of god in him? which caused Martin Luther oftimes to say
in his prayers O god thou art my sin, and I am thy righteousness. If you shall
ask of me how this exchange is made. I answer in a word. By faith, and
the friuts thereof, prayer, and good works. For albeit we have nothing of
our selves to give, yet it has pleased god to give himself in his son for
us. By which free, and voluntary gift we purchase pure gold that enricheth us
royal robes that cover our nakedness, and precious eye salve that makes us
see. The gold is our faith which is much more precious then gold that
perishes, both in brightness, price, and profitt, as S. Peter speaks? 1. Pet.
1.7.
The garments where with we are covered, are the rich robes of our
sanctification. Gal. 3.27.
For as many of us as have bine baptized have put on Christ. Yea all the elect
of god have put on the tender bovvells of mercy, kindness, humblenes of mind,
meekenes, long suffering. Coll. 3.12.
For if we are not thus clothed with the robes of grace, our filthiness will
appear to god, and we shall become abominable. The eye salve vvherby we see
what is it but the illumination of gods spirit vvherby we see with Stephen
heaven opened, Hear with Paul things that cannot be uttered by words, and
at the last enjoy eternal rest with Lazarus in Abraham bosom. The reason of
this appears from Solomon's Counsel. Prove. 23.23
Buy the truth, Apoc. 3.18
and sell it not, also vvisdome and instruction. and understanding. Secondly
from the counsel of an angel I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the
fire, that thou may be rich, and white raiment that thou may be clothed,
and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear, and anoint thine eyes with
eyes salve, that thou may see. Mark what is said, he counsels you, and
that you may not distrust this counsel. Esaias. 9.6.
The prophet Esaias tells you he is the vvonderfull counselor. Thirdly from the
observation of all the godly in all the ages of the world. Some have stolen
this purchase by doing good deeds secretly, and are revvarded openly. Matt.
11.12
Some have taken it by violence. For the kingdom of heaven suffers violence
by such as are importunate with god day, and night for it. Others barter for
it by leaving friends, favors, all to have this purchase. Let all the great men
of the world that think of nothing else, but of their purchasing rents, and
reuennevvs tell me what purchase can be compared to this The light whereof
the word has shevved them, and the right whereof reason has directed them
in.

of Christ Jesus, which gardeth us with protection of angels, and turns all
our crosses, and curses into blessings, gives us his spirit to be our life,
makes our prayers incense in the nostrills of god, makes his own flesh which
he took of us to be a pavvne for us in heaven. Tell me o you purchasers of the
earth what royalties of any earthly purchase can be compared to these? But
this is not all It continues in death. For death is noe death to such a
purchase, but by a blessed exchange is made the way to heaven, yea, and after
death it continues for by this purchase our bodies arise again to life, Phil.
3.10.
and we have a royalty to judge the world, yea the evil angels, and at the
last to fit together in heavenly places with Christ Jesus. The word of it
incomparable. For no less then all Christ is our purchase, and that also
according to both natures. It is a fearful thing we know to fall into the
hands of the living god, but now to fall into the hand of a god that died for
us. It is comfort vnspeakeble. Behold now the^ with the eyes of your precious
faith your Christ in his humilitatio^ redeeming you from hell, and the powers
of darkness, and by his exaltatio^ has put you in possession of the kingdom of
heaven by livery, and seisen in our own nature. Io. 14.2.
For he is go^e to prepare you a place



Thirdly we must detest that foolish fullnes which the papists dream of, to
be in the chest of the church, where in not only they conceive to be an over
plus of Christ meritts, but also of Martyrs, and saints, from, which treasure
of the church the pope deriueth his plenary indulgences, and sells those
goodly purchases to the bewitched slaves of his Romish captivity But we
know in Christ dwells all the fullnes of the godhead bodily, and that noe
Romish miscreant has any power to dispose of any of this fullnes, but only
the spirit of our god who is Christ's viceroy, and disposes of this purchase a
plentiful portion to save our souls.

Lastly there must be an heavenly desire in us to be svvallovved up of the love
of god in Christ, and this is the means to obtain this purchase.

Esaias. 50.8.
Tell me ye that spoil others, Esaias. 33.
and are not spoiled your selves the while, shall not others spoil you or
yours, that the broken titles you have entered into, the morgages you have
received, and the forfeitures, that you have taken may bring vvoe unto you,
that are at ease in Sion, and rich in the mount of Samaria. That your
depopulations of countries, improuements of lands, rackings of rents, grindings
of the faces of the poor, and other such like Jesuitical practices (which
you blanch with this saying) It is lavvfull for us to make the most of our
own, though thereby you make the least of all men else that deal with you.
That these things I say may be as bane, and bitterness, wrath, and vvormevvood
to you, and yours, and that the old world of the Jews both in their
tabernacle and temple may utterly condemn you in their zeal, and earnestnes
for god.

Seph. 1.8.
yet such is the world that betrays us with a kiss as did Judas, or that
serves such a master that cannot help him. For noe purchase but this of
heaven can deliver us. Is not he a madman that provides snares to entangle
himself, and goes to drown himself, and endeuoreth to quench fire, not by
casting on water, but oil; So do all the mad men of the world that covet to
be rich with vvorldly purchases, and not with this. So Paul teaches his
scholar Timothy. 1. Tim. 6.9
Yea is not a man possessed as it were with a lunaticke devil which does
often cast him into the waters of affliction, Matthew. 17.
when he meets with many troubles in the world by reason of his purchases,
and many unnecessary, and tedious suits in law which do miserably distract,
and drown him, and ploung him into many, manifold, and manifest garboyles,
and turmoyles both of mind, and body, goods, and good name. Is he not as it
were possessed with a spirit of infirmity that bovves him down still to the
earth as the poor woman in the gosple? Luc. ^8.
Yea doubtless the spirit of blindness, darkness, and doomenes have possessed all
such worldlings that mind only earth, and earthly things, and never think of
this heavenly purchase.

Genesis 23.
It was the cave in Machpelah, and it cost him four hundred sycles which is
33. h 6. s 8. d sterling. This was a blessed purchase It was the dormitory
for the bodies of his tribe to sleep in, until the last trumpet should call
them to heaven.

Judas purchased to for thirty pieces of silver but it was a miserable purchase
even an Acheldema a field of blood. Mat. 27.
But you (masters, and mortals) I hope now after all this that has bine
said, will resolve, even all of you like real Merchants to remember that
whereas god has purchased you from the earth to be heirs of heaven, Apoc.
14.3.4. 1. Cor. 6.20.
and have purchased you from among men to be a choice people unto himself, and
in a word has purchased, and bought you with a price priceles, and peareles,
as you have hard. See that you glorify god, both in your bodies, and in your
souls, and think noe price to dear to obtain so rich a purchase as this,
even the pearl of bliss everlasting life through Jesus Christ our lord,
which god grant unto you for his mercies sake, and the merritts of his son
into whose saving mercies I recommend you, and committ you to the giudance of
the holy ghost who may build further. To whom with the father, and the son
be ascribed all praise, and all power, and all glory of us here, and of the
universal church for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

