THE CONFESSION AND CONVERSION OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MOST ILLUSTRIOUS, AND
ELECT LADY, MY LADY, C. OF L.

MATH. 22. Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures. 1. JOHN. 4. Dearly beloved,
believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whither they be of GOD, for
many false Prophets are gone out into this World. EDINBVRGH Printed by John
Wreittoun. 1629.

A CONFESSION.
AS it was rare, unexpected, and long wished for, of all that honored and
loved her, so is it to be as seriously to be read, and conscienciouslie to be
considered of all, or ignorant and wilful Papists of this land: Not so much in
regard of her rank, person, and place, but rather in so far, as that in that
faith much beyond her sex, she exceeded in knowledge more than many others who
yet wilfully and most ignorantly still continue in their error.

PSALM. 77.
MY voice came to GOD when I cried; my voice came to GOD and he heard me. In
the day of my trouble I sought the Lord, etc. my soul refused comfort. I did
think upon GOD, and was troubled. I prayed, and my spirit was full of anguish.
Thou keept mine eyes waking. I was astonished, and could not speak. Psalm.
119.81. My soul fainted for thy salvation; Yet will I wait for thy word. 82.
Mine eyes fail for thy promise, saying, when will thou comfort me? 92. Except
thy law had been my delight, I should now have perished in my affliction. I
will never forget thy precepts, for by them thou have quickened me. I am thine,
save me, for I have sought thy precepts. 15. I will meditate therein, and
consider thy ways. 59. I have considered my own ways, and turned (...) feate
to thy testimonies. 67. Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I keep
thy Word. 71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn
thy statuts. 58. By thy Commandment thou have made me wiser than mine enemies.
I have had more understanding than all my teachers, for thy testimonies are my
meditations. I understood more than the ancient, because I delighted in thy
precepts. 104. By thy precepts have I gotten understanding, therefore I hate
all the ways of falsehood. 29 Now, take from me the way of lying, and grant me
graciously thy law. 30. I have chosen the way of truth, and thy judgment have
I laid before me. 173. O Lord let thine hand help me, for I have chosen thy
precepts. 176. I have gone astray like a lost sheep: seek thy servant, etc.
103. The entrance to thy words shows light, and gives understanding to the
simple. 124. Deal with thy servant according to thy mercy, and teach me thy
statuts. 74. So they that fear thee, seeing me, shall rejoice, because I have
trusted in thy Word.

AMEN.
THE CONVERSION AND CONFESSION OF THE RIGHT NOBLE C. OF L.
O send out thy light, and thy truth let them lead me, let them bring me unto
thine holy hill, and to thy Tabernacles. PSALM. 43. I will hear what GOD the
LORD will speak, for he will speak peace unto his people, and to his Saints;
but let them not turn again unto folly. PSALM. 85.8.
I Perfitlie knowing, and fullelie assuring my soul, that there is no
possibility of salvation to me, but allanerly in the free mercy of GOD, and
precious satisfaction of his Son my only Savior, who is able to save them to
the uttermost that come unto GOD by him, seeing he ever lives to make
interc^ssion for them, Heb. 7.25. neither is there salvation in any other, Act.
4.12.

2. I renounce and condemn all worshipping, or praying to Angels, he or she
Saints, not now excepting the blessed Virgin Marie, and conform to the
express direction of the Angel to John. Revel. I take me to worship GOD; and
as CHRIST, Math. 4.10. commands him only to serve, and to pray to my father.
Math. 8.9. who is in Heaven, to whom only belongs religious worship, both of
prayer and praise.

3. I renounce and condemn all prayers in Latin, or any unknown tongue to
me, taking me hereafter, by the grace of GOD to pray with the Spirit, and
with understanding also, 1. Cor. 14.15. and not to mumble and number my prayers
according to the order and distinction of beads, which I have caused break and
destroy, with present and perpetual thank^-giving to GOD therefore

4. I acknowledge with Jeremy 10.14. that a molten image is falsehood, they are
vanity and the works of errors: and therefore casting away all those
abominations of images, pictures, medalles, and pretended relics: I take me
wholly to the pure and plain Gospel of JESUS CHRIST, and his holy
Sacraments, wherein the lyuelie picture of CHRIST is, and the most hallowed
Crucifixe that I can set before mine eyes, handle with mine hands, or carry
upon my breast; wherein I rejoice, and ever shall do, by GODS help and
assistance, and finds great comfort in the conference and prayers of GODS
Ministers, who now resort unto me frequently: resolving by the grace of GOD
never thereafter to crave, nor admit the company and conference of Priests, and
other teachers of lies, guides of idolatry; which all now I have forsaken by
the light and force of GODS Spirit: and woes me that I hearkened so long to
these seducers.

5. I acknowldge that the bowing down before images is forbidden by GODS Law,
Exodus 20.5. as well as worshipping of them. That images are altogether bruttish
and foolish. Ierem. 10.3. I fear them not, for they can do no evil, neither
is it in them to do good: but forasmuch as there is none like to thee O LORD,
thou art great, and thy Name is great in might: Who would not fear thee, O
KING of Nations? Ierem. 10.5.6.7.

6. I embrace the holy Scriptures of the old and new Testament, wherein is the
perfect rule of faith and manners, acknowledging that the writs and judgments
of all men should be tried thereby, and reduced thereunto, or else altogether
rejected. And therefore I will curse and reject and cast from me all
blasphemous books in write or print, (whereof alace I had so many too long)
contrare to GODS truth in these holy Scriptures.

7. I confess and profess that the Scriptures are plain and pure, being a
lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path, Psalm. 119.105. in all things
necessare for me to know my salvation. And seeing CHRISS commands us Ioh.
5.39. to search the Scriptures, and the Bereans are commended for searching the
Scriptures daily, Act. 17.11. I condemn the forbidding of their translations
in vulgar languages, and the reading of them by the people. And from my heart
I detest that saying, that ignorance is the mother of devotion; bewailing my
former ignorance and stryving more and more to incresse in all spiritual
understanding.

8. With Paul. 1 Timothy 4.3. I acknowledge the commanding to abstain from meats
for conscience sake, to be from seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils, for
the Kingdom of GOD is not meat and drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy
in the holy Ghost. Romans 14.17. Neither does that which enters in at the mouth
defile a man, but that which proceeds out of the mouth that defiles a man.

9. I acknowledge and believe, Romans 3.24. that I am justified freely by GODS
grace, through the redemption that is in CHRIST JESUS, without any respect to
my works; whereof I neither can, nor should boast with the proud Pharisee, but
with the penitent Publican. I cry to God continually to be merciful to me,
who am a miserable sinner, and with St. Paul. the chief of sinners, and so I
believe not the satisfaction made by me, but the free remission of sins,
persuading my self that the wages of sin is death, Rom 6.23. but the gift of
GOD is eternal life, through CHRIST JESUS our LORD, and we his little floke
should not fear, seeing as our Savior says, Luke 12.32. It is our Fathers
pleasure to give us a Kingdom, which we could never merit by our selves, or
any other creature for us.

10. I acknowledge no fire after this life that purges us from our sins, and
temporal punishments, but as in Ioh. 1.7. the blood of JESUS CHRIST his Son
purges us from all our sins, without any exception or destruction of sin
what-soever, and as the souls of the wicked immediately after death go to
hell, so the souls of the godly go to Heaven.

11. I acknowledge and believe with St. Paul. 1 Cor. 10.16. that the Cup in the
Lords Supper is not the blood, but figuratively the communion of his body. And
with Ioh. 6.30. The way how to eat and drink of this body is to believe in
him, and the Doctors, and Cannons of the Roman Church affirms the same with
us, for the holy Scripture is full of such manner of speeches; and our Savior
himself in this same place says that whosoever beleiveth in him shall not
thirst, plainly making us to understand that this thirst is quenched only by
beleiving, and not by the drinking at the mouth: and in Ioh. 6.56. he says,
Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, abides in me and I in him:
and in verse 35. Who comes unto me shall not hunger, and who beleiveth in me
shall never thirst: So he eats and drinks, who comes unto me, who
beleiveth in me, and abides in me. and alitle after, having said, Who
beleiveth in me has eternal life, infers thereby that he is the bread of
life. He is then meat indeed, but for our souls, not for our bodies; which
is to be had by beleiving, not by swallowing. And so expondeth Origin an
ancient father, in his Hom. 12. in Math. this same place. According to the
Apostle his exhortation, I am heartly desirous after trial of my self, 1.
Cor. 11.18. often to eat of that bread, and drink of that Cup, and so (as
praised be GOD) I lately did rrceaue that holy Sacrament, publicly in GODS
Sanctuary, under both the kynds, for the food of my soul, whereby now I find
great peace and comfort.

12. I acknowledge also, and believe, that the Mass is not a propitiatory
sacrifice, but a blasphemous, and idolatrous abomination, altogether
derogatorie to CHRIST'S propitiatory sacrifice, who once in the end of the
world to appear, came to put away sin, by that only one sacrifice of
himself, and who once was offered to bear the sins of many, Heb. 9.26.28.
and by that one offering, for ever he has perfited all them that are
sanctified, Heb. 10. v. 14.15.

13. I acknowledge, and believe, that the Pope is not CHRIST'S Viccare, nor
Peter's successor, but he is that man of sin, the son of perdition, and
that ver^e great Antichrist described by St. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Who will judge
all men, whether they be Kings or subjects, and be judged of none, and will
have all men under pain of damnation to be subject to him, as their own
supreme Lord, both in spiritual and temporal things.

I did also before my conversion after long trial find some great odds, and
very remarkable differences between the Pastors of the reformed Kirk, and
that of the Roman Kirk: And first that the Pastors of the reformed Kirk would
be judged by the word of GOD; but the Pastors of the Roman Kirk would be
judges of the word of GOD.

2 The reformed Pastors would be ruled; but the Roman Kirk would be the rule
themselves, saying, that the Kirk is sovereign judge of all doubts of faith,
and that it can not err. And so I perceive in this question: If the Roman Kirk
may err; or if it be sovereign and infallible judge, it must be that the
Roman Kirk shall be judge, and so consequently she shall be both judge and
party.

I have also observed this difference between the two religions, which is,
that the reformed Kirk has no rules that teaches vices: but the Roman Kirk
has sundry rules that teaches men to do evil, and to disobey GOD. Such is
the rule of the council of Constance, that a man is not bound to keep any
faith and truth to Heretics. Such is the doctrine, that the Pope may dispense
with the express Commandment of GOD, by dispensing with the Cup in the
Sacrament, by dispensing with oaths and vows, in granting permission to a man
to man-sweare himself, neither yet to perform any ways that which we have
promised to GOD. Such are the disobedience of young infants toward their
fathers and mothers, maintained and authorized by the Roman Kirk, when a young
child is entered into a closter contrare the will of his father.

Such are also the foundations of public Bordels, whereby the Pope himself
draws great tribute.

Such are also the revolt of subjects from their Prince, and against them, when
it shall please the people to dispense with their Oath of alledgeance, which
they have sworn to their King.

I have found also the plain text of Scripture in many places most pitifully
corrupted, and wrongously perverted by the Roman Kirk, and some I remarked most
carefully, as follows.

It is said in the 2 Epist. to the Hebrews verse 21. That Iakob worshipped GOD
leaning upon the end of his staff; but the Bible of the Roman Kirk has, Iakob
worshipped the end of his staff, thereby to establish the adoration of
Creatures.

The like ^orruption is in the Psalm. 99. v. 5. Where David says Worship
toward his footstool: the Roman Bible has, Worship his footstool: and in
Genes. 3. v. 15. GOD said, The seed of the woman should tread down the head
of the Serpent: the Roman Kirk has, the woman shall bruise the head of the
Serpent; that is the Virgin Marie shall bruise down the head, etc.

Again in St. Paul's Epist. Romans 11 6. is cutted off, two lines being omitted:
For these are the words of the Apostle, But if it be of works it is no more
of grace, or else were works no more works, which are left out in the vulgar
translation.

And where St. Peter says, Here are two swords: the Roman Kirk most
ridicoulouslie expondeth thus, that the Pope has power over the spiritual and
temporal.

And where the Evangelist says, Do this in rememberance of me: the Romish
Church expounds thus, sacrifice my body in a sacrifice propitiatory for the
quick and the dead.

And another falsehood I remember, is, where our Savior speaking of the Cup
in the Sacrament, says, This Cup is the new Covenant in my blood which is
shed for you: But the Bible of the Romish Church has into it, This Cup is
the new Covenant in my blood, which shall be shed for you, least a man should
perceive that JESUS CHRIST spoke of a sacramental shedding of his blood: For
as yet he had not then really shed his blood which he had begun to shed in
his passion.

These and many other falsehoods did I many times remarke, as they were objected
unto me, yet did I ever misregard them, being ever discontented that any should
speak to me of such heretical opinions, (as I called them) because my
ghostly fathers assured me continually that it was a deadly sin any ways to
doubt, or to let it so much as once enter into my thought, that ever the Church
might or could err, continually dinging in my ears a warrant out of the
Prophet Malachie; cap. 2, verse 8. that the Priests cannot err, where it is
thus read, The Priests lips shall keep knowledge, and they shall seek the law
at his mouth.

This many years contented me, till at last in my old days GOD so happily
moved my heart to hear the truth of better and sounder instructers, and their
warrant, (I praise GOD for it) who shows to me that the words of the Prophet
are, and ought to be translated thus, yet men that are led with an opinion
that the Kirk can not err will never consider this: The Priests lips should
keep knowledge: For they that translate thus the words, and that they shall
seek the law at his mouth, they did never intend to show thereby, that GOD did
make here a promise that so it shall be for ever, but only to show that this
it the law and commaadement of GOD, teaching what the Priests and people should
do, and ought to do, even as in the Commandment, Thou shall have no other
GODS but me: Now I find that the words do not promise that the Israelites
should always acknowledge and worship IEHOVA the true GOD alone, (for as may
be seen in the text within forty days the event showed the contrary) but
show what they ought to do, but the words are a Commandment recited, not a
promise made: For the words of the fourth verse did show it: Therefore men not
partially led may easily perceive that the translation of the reformed Kirk is
most perfect of all, showing not only the sense and meaning of the law, but
also how it did bind the people and Priest, and how they ought to obey it.

By this I think it no heresy, and I believe with the reformed Kirk that it
is GODS holy truth, that Priests succeeding in the place and office of Aaron
and Moses may err, and have erred: yea, I think it the greatest error of all
errors to think that a man can not err, were he never so holy. I perceive
now Moses Chair in the which the Scribes and Pharisees did sit, was the seat
wherein they were wont to read the law of Moses, and the expositions thereof to
the people, for what they there did teach was true, and therefore CHRIST
commanded them to obey it. To sit in Moses Chair, I understand, is to teach
Moses doctrine, but (as the Jews made GODS law void by their own glosses and
traditions) they erred most damnablie, and were no more in Moses Chair, and so
the people were no more bound to obey it. For at that time CHRIST himself
called their doctrine sour leaven, and warned his Disciples to beware of it.

I know also, and fimelie now believe, that it was never the purpose of GODS
Spirit in that place, or by these words to teach, that the Law should always
be taught truly and infallablie by the Priests and Pastors, who succeed
Moses or the Apostles in the Church by a continued succession: For that is a
falshoode contrare to experience in all ages: That this is most certain, I
desire but any of a contrare opinion to read but the same very place with an
indifferent and vnprejudged mind, which confutes it most evidently: For in
reading the same attentively, I find the Priests unto whom the Prophet there
speaks in these places, were Levits, and directly succeeded Aaron in the
Preisthood: And yet ye see by the plain text they were departed out of the
way: they caused many fall in the law by their corrupt gloss, and their abuse
of the Covenant of Levi, as it appears most clearly into the next words
following immediately: Yea, some of them (ye see) had sacrificed to Idolles,
which I have read my self in Josephus history of these times, and therefore
the LORD threatens to corrupt their seed by cutting off the male progeny,
and to cast the dung of their sacrifices in their faces.

Finally I hope now in the mercy of GOD yet before I die, to hear a hundredth
sermons in GODS true Kirk: for now my only joy is my new birth, that by the
mercy of my GOD I am regenerate, and of a daughter of darkness and death,
that have been from my natural birth, am now made a daughter of light and
life in my old age, and my settled peace and comfort is my spiritual marriage
with my head and husband the LORD JESUS CHRIST, who has married me to
himself in truth and everlasting compassion, and will take from me my old
corrupt garment, and clothe me with the white robe of his righteousness, so
that my nakedness shall never appear any more.

Now O LORD my GOD, and gracious Father in thy CHRIST, my sweet SAVIOR, let
thy Spirit quicken me more and more, thy wisdom guide me, thy grace
sanctify me, and thy Word instruct me: Let the holy Ghost of whom thy Son
my SAVIOR was conceived, beget in me, and me in thee, by the immortal seed
of thy Word: Let my faith conceive, my repentance honor thee, my love embrace
thee, my zeal continually keep thee with me, till the coming again of thy
Son for my ever hoped glorification: So come unto me LORD JESUS, come
quickly, Amen.

Blessed be the LORD, for he has showed me his merciful kindness. Psalm
31.21. Why art thou cast down my soul, and why art thou disquyeted within
me? hope in GOD, for I shall yet praise him, who is the hope of my Salvation,
and my GOD. Psalm. 42.11.

PSALM. XLI.I. I Waited patiently upon the LORD, and he inclyned unto me,
and heard my cry. He brought me also out of the horrible pit, out of the
myrie clay, and set my feet upon the Rock, and ordered my goings. And he
has put into my mouth a new song of Praise unto our God. Many shall see it,
and fear, and shall trust into the LORD. Blessed is the man that makes the
LORD his trust, and regards not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies.

7. Then said I, lo, I come, for in the roll of thy book it is written of
me, I desire to do thy good will, O my GOD. Yea, thy law is within my heart,
I have declared thy righteousness in the great congregation: Lo, I will not
refrain my lips, O LORD, thou know.

PSALM 86.11. Teach me thy way, O LORD, and I will walk in thy truth, knit
my heart unto thee, that I may fear thy Name.

17. Show a token of thy goodness toward me, that they which hate me, may
see it, and be ashamed, because thou LORD has helped me, and conforted me.

PSALM 116.6. The LORD preserves the simple, I was in misery, and he saved
me. Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the LORD has been beneficial
unto thee. PSALM 109.26. Help me O LORD my GOD, save me according to thy
mercy, and they shall know that this is thy hand, and that thou LORD have done
it. If the LORD had not helped me, my soul had almost dwelt in silence.
PSALM 101. Mine eyes shall be unto the faithful of the Land, that they may
dwell with me: He that walks in a perfect way shall serve me, there shall
no deceatfull person dwell in mine house, neither shall he that tells lies
remain in my sight. PSALM. 56.12. I will now render praise unto thee, 13 For
thou have delyvered my soul from death, and my feet frm falling, that I may
walk before GOD in the light of the living. PSALM 103. Blessed be the Name
of the LORD from henceforth and for ever, AMEN.
A PRAYER.
PSALM. 45. 10 Hearken (O daughter) and consider, incline thine ear, forget
also thine own people, and fathers house.
AS thou O LORD art great and wonderful in all thy works: yet thy mercy
shines above all things: Albeit I forsook thee O LORD, yet thou have not
forsaken me: I have turned my back to thee, yet thou call me thy Child:
All that thou requirest at mine hands is, that I would hearken unto thee. And
why should I not hearken unto thee, since that all our destruction came from
thence, that our fathers turned their ears from thee, to listen unto the voice
of the sly and subtle Serpent? Grant me grace that I may have a willing and
obedient heart, that by the means of good food, that I shall receive in thy
Word, which alace too long I have forsaken, I may forget my wicked nature,
original sin, and all the vices which I did bring with me from my mothers
womb; that I forget the world, to give my self wholly unto thee, and thy
service; that I forget mine own works, and mine own opinions, to depend
wholly on thy grace. And if the Bride, and new married woman forsake, and leave
her fathers house to follow her husband: if she leave the sport and pastime of
her youth, to go about her houswifrie, and to conform her self unto her
husband: why should not I alas! forsake that which displeases thee, to be
agreeable unto thy Son JESUS CHRIST, which in so great mercy has wedded me?
And albeit I was a stranger from his league, and promises of everlasting life,
notwithstanding he has joined himself unto me in hearty love, and ratified
his league with his precious blood. Let me therefore O Lord be as his chaste and
faithful spouse, and let me be obedient unto the will of our good LORD, which
does me this honor to place me by his side, and to take me not only for his
servant, but also for his child, his friend, his dear and welbeloved Spouse,
Ioh. 15. Grant me O LORD that I follow no more strange Gods to delight in them,
but that my love and affection be wholly set on him. I will therefore endeavor
my self to please him. I will love him, and love that which he loves. I will
honor him, since he has so much honored me. I will forsake all things to
follow him, seeing he forsook the Heavens to save me on earth. O happy
marriage! Of the marriage of Adam and Eve came so many unthrifts, so many
wretches, and miserable catiues, bond-slaues to Satan, and of their own
nature, detestable and abominable before the face of GOD. But of this holy
marriage, are newborn, the elect, the vessels of glory, the children of GOD,
the heirs of everlasting life: whom GOD so loves and esteems, taking
pleasure in their beauty, wherewith he does adorn and deck them through his
Son CHRIST JESUS: which gifts LORD make me partaker thereof, and let the praise
be ascribed unto thee, for that great and glorious light of thy Word, shown
unto me, from henceforth and for ever,

AMEN.
THis profession of faith, meditations, prayers, and praises, as they were most
joyfullie; and constantly uttered, and declared before many honorable men and
women: So were they most heartily sealed and subscryved by the right
religious, most noble, and truly wise Lady, the 25. of Maij.

FINIS.

