PRotogenes can know Apelles by his line though he se him not, and wise men can
consider by the Penn the authority of the writer though they know him not.
the Rubie is discerned by his pale rednes, and who has not hard that the Lion
is known by his claws. though Aesopes crafty crow be never so defil^e
decked, yet is his double dealing esely desiphered: and though men never so
perfectly pollish there wrytings with others sentences, yet the simple truth
will discover the shadow of there follies: and bestowing every fether in the
body of the right M. turn out the naked dissembler into his owen cote, as a
spectacle of follye to all those which can rightlye Judge what imperfections
be. There came to my hands lately a little (would God a wittye) pamphelet,
baring a fair face as though it were the scoole of a buse but being by me
advisedly wayed I find it the oftscome of imperfections, the writer fuller of
words then judgment, the matter certaiuely as ridiculus as serius. asuredly
his mother wit wrought this wonder, the child to disprayse his father the
dog to byte his master for his dainty morcell. but I se (with Seneca) y^ the
wrong is to be suffered, since he disprayseth, who by costome has left to
speak well. but I mean to be short: and teach the Master what he knows
not, partly that he may se his own folly, and partly that I may discharge my
promise, both bind me. therefore I would wish the good scholmayster to over
look his abuses again with me, so shall he see an ocean of inormities which
begin in his first prinsiple in the disprayse of poetry. And first let me
familiarly consider with this find fault what the learned have always
esteemed of poetry. Seneca theughe a stoike would have a poetical son, and
amongst the auncientest Homer was no les accounted then Humanus deus. what made
Alexander I pray you esteem of him so much? why allotted he for his works so
curious a closset? was there no fitter vnter prop for his pillow the^ a simple
pamphelet? in all Darius cofers was there no Jewel so costly? forsooth my
thinks these two (the one the father of Philosophers, the other the cheftaine
of chivalry) were both deceived if all were as a Gosson would wish them, if
poets paynt naught but palterie toys in vearse, their studies tended to
folishnesse, and in all their endeavors they did naught else but agendo nihil
agere. Lord how Virgils poor gnatt pricketh him, and how Ouids fley byteth
him, he can bear no bourde, he has raised up a new sect of serius stoikes,
that can abide naught but their owen shadow, and allow nothing worthy, but
what they conceive. Did you never read (my over witty friend) that under the
persons of beasts many abuses were dissiphered? have you not reason to way?
that whatsoever either Virgil did write of his gnatt, or Ovid of his fley: was
all covertly to declare abuse? but you are (homo literatus) a man of the letter
little savoring of learning, your giddy brain made you leave your thrift, and
your abuses in London some part of your honesty. You say that Ports are
subtle, if so, you have learned that point of them, you can well gloss on a
trifleling text. but you have drunk perhaps of Lethe, your gramer learning is
out of your head, you forget your Accidence, you remember not, that under the
person of Aeneas in Virgil the practice of a dilligent captain is discribed
under y^ shadow of byrds, beasts and trees, the follies of the world were
disiphered, you know not, that the creation is signified in the Image of
Prometbeus, the fall of pride in the person of Narcissus, these are toys
because they sa uor of wisdom which you want. Mark what Campanus says, Mira
fabularum vanitas sed quae si introspiciantur videri possunt non vanoe. The
vanity of tales is wonderful, yet if we advisedly look into them they will
seem and prove wise, how wonderful are the pithie poemes of Cato? the curious
comidies of Plautus? how bravely discovers Terence our imperfection in his
Eunuch? how neatly dissiphereth he Danus? how plea sauntly paynteth he out
Gnatho? whom if we should seek in our days, I suppose he would not be far
from your parson. But I see you would seem to be that which you are not, and
as the proverb says Nodum in Cirpo quaerere: Poets you say use coullors to
cover there incouiences, and witty sentences to burnish their bawdery, and you
divinity to cover your knauerye. But tell me truth Gosson speak thou as
thou think? what coelers find thou in a Poet not to be admitted? are his
speeches imperfect? sanor they of inscience. I think if thou have any shame
thou can not but like and approve the^, are there gods displesant unto thee?
both Saturn in his majesty move thee? does Juno with her riches displease
thee? does Minerua with her weapon discomfort thee? does Apollo with his
harping harm thee? thou may say nothing les then harm thee because they are
not, and I think so to because thou know them not. For wot thou that in the
person of Saturn our decaying years are signified, in the picture of angry
Juno, our affections are dissiphered, in yt person of Minerua is our
understanding signified, both in respect of war, as policy. when they feign
that Pallas was begotten of the brain of Jupiter their meaning is none other,
but that al wisdom (as the learned say) is from above, and comes from the
father of Lights: in the portrature of Apollo all knowledge is denocated. so
that, what so they wrote, it was to this purpose, in the way of pleasure to draw
men to wisdom: for seeing the world in those days was imperfect, yt was
necessary that they like good Phisions: should so frame their potions, that
they might be appliable to the quesie stomaks of their werish patients. but our
studientes by your means have made shipwreck of their labors, our
schoolemaisters have so offended that by your judgment they shall subire pae
nam capitis for teaching poetry, the university is little beholding to you, al
their practices in teaching are friuolus. Wit has wrought that in you, that
years and study never settled in the heads of our sagest doctors. No meruel
though you disprayse poetrye, when you know not what it means. Erasmus will
make that the path way to to knowledge which you disprayse, and no mean
fathers vouchsafe in their seriouse questions of deuinitie, to inserte
poetical sensures. I think if we shall well ouerloke ye Philosophers, we shall
find their judgments not half perfect, Poets you say fail in their fables,
Philosophers in the very secrets of Nature. Though Plato could wish the
expulsion of Poets from his well publiques, which he might do with reason,
yet the wisest had not all that same opinion, it had been better for him to
have sercht more narowly what the soul was, for his difinition was very
friuolus, when he would make it naught else but Substantiam intelectu predictam.
if you say that Poets did labor about nothing, tell me (I beseech you) what
wonders wroughte those your dunce Doctors in there reasons de ente et non ente?
in their definition of no force, and les wit? how sweat they power souls in
making more things then cold be? that I may use your own phrase, did not they
spend one candle by seeking another. Democritus, Epicurus, with there scholar
Metrodorus how labored they in finding out more worlds the^ one? your Plato in
midst of his presisnes wrought that absurdite that never may be redd in Poets,
to make a yearthly creature to be are the person of the creator, and a
corruptible substance, an incomprehensible God: for determining of the
principal causes of all things, a made them naught else but an Idea which if
it be conferred with the truth, his sentence will savor of Inscience. but I
speak for Poets, I answer your abuse, therefore I will disprove, or
disprayse naught, but wish you with the wise Plato, to disprayse that thing you
offend not in. Seneca says that the studdie of Poets, is to make children
ready to the understanding of wisdom, and ye our auneients did teach arts
Eleutberias. i. liberales, because the inst ructed children by the instrument
of knowledge in time became homines liberi. i. Philosophye. it may be that in
reding of poetry, it hap ned to you as it is with the Oyster, for she in her
swimming receives no ayrs, and you in your reeding less instruction it is
reported that the sheep of Enboia want there gale, and one the contrary side
that the beasts of Naxus have distentum fell. Men hope that scollers should
have wit brought up in the Uniuersite, but your sweet self with the cattle
of Enboia, since you left your College have lost your learning. you disprayle
Max iminns Tirius pollicey, and that thing that that he wrott to manifest
learned Poets me ning, you atribute to follye. O holy hedded man, why may not
Juno resemble the air? why not Alexander valor? why not Ulysses pollice? will
you have all for you own tothe? must men write that you may know their
meaning? as though your wytt were to wrest all things? Alas simple Irus. beg
at knowledge gate awhile, thou haste not won the mastery of learning. weane
thy self to wisdom, and use thy tallant in zeal not for envy, abuse not
thy knowledge in dispraysing that which is pereles: I should blush from a
player, to become an enuiouse preacher, if thou had zeal to preach, if for
Sions sake thou coldst not hold thy tougue, thy true dealing were praise
worthy, thy reuolting would counsel me to reverence thee. pity wear it,
that poetrye should be displaced, full little could we want Buchannans works,
and Boethius comfortes may not be banish^d. what made Erasmus labor in Euripides
tragedies? did he endeavor by painting them out of Greek into Latin to
manifest sin unto us? or to confirm us in goodues? Labor (I pray thee) in
Pamphelets more praise worthy, thou haste not saved a Senator, therefore not
worthy a Laurel wreth, thou have not (in disprouing poetry) reproved an
abuse, and therefore not worthy commendation. Seneca says that Magna vitae pars
elabitur male agentibus, maxima nihill agentibus, tota alind agentibus, the
most of our life (said he) is spent either in doing evil, or nothing, or that
we should not, and I would wish you wear exempted from this sensure, give
ear but a little more what may be said for poetry, for I must be brief, you
have made so great matter that I may not stay on one thing to long, lest I
leave an other untouched. And first whereas you say, y^ Tullie in his years of
more judgment despised Poets, hark (I pray you) what he works for them in
his oration pro Archia poeta (but before you hear him least you fail in the
encounter, I would wysh you to to follow the advice of the dasterdlye I^neumon
of Aegipt, who when she beholds the Aspis her enemy to draw nighe, calls
her fellows together, bismering her self with claye, against the biting and
stroke of the serpent, arm your self, call your wits together: want not your
wepons, lest your inperfect judgment be rewardede with Midas ears. you had
need play the night burd now, for you day Owl has misconned his part, and
for to who now a days he cries fool you: which has brought such a sort of
wondering birds about your ears, as I fear me will chatter you out of your
Iuey bush. the world shames to see you, or else you are afraid to show your
self. you thought poetrye should want a patron (I think) when you first
published this inuectiue, but yet you find al to many eue^ preter
expectatione^, yea though it can speak for it self, yet her patron Tullie now
shall tell her tale, Haec studia (says he) adolescentiam alunt, Senectutem
oblectant, secundas, res ornant, aduersis perfugium ac Solatium prebent,
delectant domi, non impediunt foris, peruoctant nobiscum, peregriantur, rustic
antur. then will you disprayse yt which all men commend? you look only up on
ye refuse of ye abuse, nether respecting the importance of ye matter nor the
weight of ye writer. Solon can feign himself mad, to further the Athenians.
Chaucer in pleasant vain can rebuke sin uncontrolled, and though he be lavish in
the letter, his sense is serious. who in Rome lamented noc Roscius death? and
can thou suck no pleasure out of thy M. Clau dians writings? hark, what
Cellarius a lear: ned father attributes to it. acuit memoriam (says he) it
profits y^ memory. yea and Tully atributeth it for prais to Archias y^ upon
any theme he cold versify exte^pory. who likes not of the promptnes of Ovid?
who not unworthily cold bost of himself thus Quicquid conabar dicere versus
erat. who then doothe not wonder at poetry? who thinks not y^ it proceeds
from above? what made y^ Chians and Colophonians fall to such controversy? Why
seek y^ Smirnians, to recover from y^ Salamini ans the prais of Homer? al would
have him to be of there city, I hope not for harm, but because of his knoledge.
Themistocles desires to be acquainted with those with could best discipher his
praises. even Marius himself, tho never so cruel, accounted of Plotinus poems.
what made Aphricanus esteem Eunius? why did Alexander give prais to Achilles
but for y^ praises which he found written of him by Homer? Why esteemed Pompie
so much of Theophanes Mitilet^s or Brutus so greatly the wrytinges (...)
Accius? Fuluius was so great a fauorer of poetry, that after the Aetolian
wars, he attributed to the Muses those spoils that belonged to Mars, in all
the Roman conquest, hardest thou ever of a slain Poet? nay rather the
Emperors honored them, beautified them with benefits, and decked their
sanctuaries which sacrifice. Pindarus college is not fit for spoil of Alexander
overcome, nether fears poetry y^ persecutors sword. what made Austin so much
affectate y^ heavenly fury? not folly, for if I must needs speak, illnd non
ausim affirmare, his zeal was, in setting up of the house of God, not in
affectate eloquence, he wrote not, he accounted not, he honored not, so much
that (famous poetry) which we praise, without cause, for if it be true that
Horace reports in his book de art poetica, all the answeares of the Oracles
wear in verse. among the precise Jews, you shall find Poets, and for more
majesty Sibilla will prophecy in verse. Hiroaldus can witness with me, that
David was a poet, and that his vain was in imitating (as S. Ierom witnesses)
Horace, Flaccus, and Pinda rus, sometimes his verse runs in an I am bus
foot, anon he has recourse to a Saphi er vain, aliquando, semipede
ingreditur. ask Josephus, and he will tell you that Esaias, Job and Solomon,
voutsafed poetical practices, for (if Origin and he fault) not their verse was
Hexameter, and pentameter. Enquire of Cassiodorus, he will say that all the
beginning of Poetrye proceeded from the Scripture. Paulinus tho the bishop of
Nolanum yet voutsafe the name of a Poet, and Ambrose tho he be a patriarch in
mediolan^ loves versifing Beda shameth not y^ science that shameless Gosson
misliketh read over Lactantius, his proof is by poetry. and Paul voutsafeth
to ouerlooke Epimenides let the Apostle preach at Athens he disdaineth not of
Aratus authorite. it is a pretye sentence yet not so pretty as pithy. Poetana
scitur or ator fit as who should say, Poetrye comes from above from a
heavenly seat of a glorious God unto an excellent creature man, an orator is
but made by exercise. for if we examine well what befell Ennius among the
Romans, and Hesiodus among his contrimen the Gretians, how they came by their
knowledge whence they receued their heavenly furye, the first will tell us that
sleping upon the Mount of Parnassus he dreamed that he received the soul of
Homer into him, after the which he became a Poet, the next will assure you
that it comes not by labor, nether that night watchings brings it, but y^
we must have it thence whence he fetched it with was (he says) from a well of y^
Muses with Cabelimus calls Poru^, a draught whereof drew him to his
perfection, so of a shephard he becam an eloque^t poet. well the^ you see y^ it
comes not by exercise of play making, nether insertio^ of gawds, but from
nature, and from above: and I hope y^ Aristotle has sufficiently taught you:
that Natura nihil fecit frustra. Perseus was made a poet diuino furore
percitus and whereas the poets were said to call for the Muses help
thermening was no other as Iodocus Badius reports, but to call for heavenly
in spiration from above to direct their endedeuors. nether were it good for you
to set light by the name of a port since y^ oftspring from whence he comes
is so heavenly. Sibil la in her answers to Aeneas against her will as the poet
tells us was possessed with this fury, ye wey consideratly but of the writing
of poets, and you shall se that when there matter is most heavenly, their style
is most lo^tye. a strange token of the wonderful efficacy of the same. I would
make a long discourse un to you of Platoes 4. furies but I leave them it pitieth
me to bring a rodd of your own making to beat you wythal. But mithinks while
you hear this I see you swallowe down your own spittle for revenge, where
(God wot) my writing sauoreth not of envy. in this case I could wyshe you
fare far otherwise from your foe if you please I will become your friend and
see what a potion or receypt I can frame fytt for your diet. and herein I will
prove my self a prac tiser, before I purdge you, you shall take a preparatiue
to dis burden your heavy hedde of those gross follis you have conceued: but the
receipt is bitter, therefore I would wysh you first to tasteu your mouth with
the Sugar of perseuera^ce: for there is a cold collop y^ must down your throat
yet such a one as shall change your complexion quit. I will have you
therefore to taste first of y^ cold river Phricus, in Thratia which as Aristotle
reports changes black into white, or of Scamandar, which makes gray yalow
y^ is of an e^ous man a well minded person, re prehending of zeal y^ wherein he
has sinned by folly, and so being prepared, thy purgation will work more easy,
thy understanding will be more persit, thou shall blush at thy abuse, and
reclaim thy self by force of argument so will thou prove of clean recovered
patient, and I a perfect practiser in framing so good a potion. this brought
to pass I with the will seek out some abuse in poetry, which I will seek for
to disprove by reason first pronounced by no small bird even Aristotle himself
Poetae (says he) multa mentiuntur and to further his opin^on sever Cato
puts in his cencure.

Admiranda canunt sed non credenda poetae. these were sore blemishes if
objected rightly and hear you may say the streme runues a wrong, but if it be
so by you leave. I will bring him shortly in his right chanel. My answer shall
not be my own, but a learned father shall tell my tale, if you will know his
name men call him Lactantius: who in his book de diuinis institutionibus
reesoneth thus. I suppose (says he) Poets are full of credit, and yet it is
requesite for those that will understand them to be admonished, that among them,
not only the name but the matter bears a show of that it is not: forlif
says he we examine the Scriptures litter allye nothing will seem more falls,
and if we way Poets words and not there meaning, our learning in them will be
very mean you see now that your Catoes judgment as of no force and that all
your objections you make against poetrye be of no valor yet lest you should be
altogether discoraged I will help you forward a little more, it pities me to
consider the weakness of your cause I will therefore make your strongest reason,
more strong and after I have builded it up destroy it again. Poets you confess
are eloquent but you reprove them in their wantonness, they write of no
wisdom, you may say their tales are friuolus, they profane holy things, they
seek nothing to the perfection of our souls. their practice is in other
things, of less force: to this objection I answer no otherwise then Horace
does in his book de art poetica where he writes thus.

Siluestres homines sacer interpresque deorum
Sedibus, et victu faedo deterruit orpheus.
Dictus ob hoc lenire Tigres rabidosque leones.
Dictus et Amphion Thebanae condit vrbis
Saxa mouere sono, testudius et prece bland^
Ducere quo vellet fuit hoc sapientia quondam,
Publica priuatis secemere sacra prophanis.
Concubitu prohibere vago, dare Iura maritis,
O pida moliri leges, niscidere ligno.
The holy spokesman of the Gods
With heauely Orpheus hight:
Did drive the savage men from wods.
And made them live aright.
And therefore is said the Tigers fierce,
And Lions full of might
To overcome: Amphion, he
Was said of Theabs the founder,
Who by his force of Lute did cause,
The stones to part a sonder.
And by his speech them did derect.
Where he would have them stay:
This wisdom this was it of old
All strife for to allay.
To give to every man his own,
To make the Gods be known
To drive each lecher from the bed,
That never was his own.
To teach the law of marriage,
The way to build a town,
For to engraue these laws in woods
This was these men's renown.
I cannot leave Tirtheus policy untouched, who by force of his pen could
incite men to the defense of their country. if you require of ye Oracle of
Apollo what success you shall have: respondet bellicoso numine lo now you see
your objections my answers, you behold or may perceive manifestlye, that Poets
were the first raysors of cities, prescribers of good laws, mayntayners of
religion, disturbors of the wicked, aduancers of the well disposed, inue^tors of
laws, and lastly the very fot paths to knowledge. and understanding ye if we
should believe Herome he will make Platos ex isles honest me^, and his pestiferous
poets good preachers: for he accounts Orpheus Museus, and Linus, Christians,
therefore Virgil (in his 6. book of Aeneiados where he lernedly de scribeth y^
iourny of Aeneas to Elisum) asserteneth us, y^ among them y^ were there for the
zeal they bear toward there country, there were found Quinque pij vates et
Phaebo digna loquti but I must answer al obiectio^s, I must fill every nooke. I
must arm my self now, for here is the greatest bob I can gather out of your
book forsooth Ouids abuses, in descrybing whereof you labor very vehementlye
termig him letcher, and in his person dispraise all poems, but shall on man's
follye destroy a vniuerlsal commodity? what gift what perfect knowledge has
there bin, among y^ professors of with there has not bin a bad, on the Angels have
sinned in heaven, Ada and Eve in earthly pa radise, among y^ holy apostles
ungracious Iu das. I reason not y^ al poets are holy but I af firm y^ poetry is
a heavenly gift, a perfect gift then with I know not greater pleasure. and surely
if I may speak my mind I thik we shall find but few poets if it were exactly
wayd what they ought to be your Muscouian strangers, your Scithian monsters
wonderful by one Eurus brought upon one stage in ships made of Sheepeskins,
will not prove you a poet nether your life allow you to be of that learning if
you had wisely wayed y^ abuse of poetry if you had reprehended y^ foolish
fantasies of our poets nomine non re which they bring forth on stage, my self
would have liked of you and allowed your labor. but I perceive now y^ all red
colloured stones are not Rubies, nether is every one Alexandar y^ has a stare
in his cheke, al lame men are not Vulcans, nor hook nosed men. Ciceroes nether
each professer a poet, I abhore those poets that savor of ribaldry, I will with
the zealous admit the expullcion of such enormities poetry is dispraised not
for the folly that is in it, but for the abuse which many ill Writers couller
by it. Believe me the magestrats may take advise, (as I know wisely can) to
root out those odd rymes which runs in every rascales mouth. Savoring of
rybaldry, those foolish ballets, that are admitted, Make poets good and godly
practices to be refused. I like not of a wicked Nero that will expel Lucan,
yet admit I of a zealous governor that will seek to take away the abuse of
poetry. I like not of an angrye Augustus which will banishe Ovid for envy, I
love a wise Senator, which in wisdom will correct him and with advise burn
his follyes: unhappy were we if like poor Scaurus we should find Tiberius
that will put us to death for a tragedy making but most blessed were we, if we
might find a judge that severely would amend the abuses of Tragedies, but I
leave the reformation thereof to more wyser than my self, And return to
Gosson whom I wyshe to be fully persuaded in this cause, and therefore I will
tell him a pretty story, which Justin writes in the praise of poetrye. The
Lacedaemonians when they had lost many men in diverse incountryes with their
enemies sought to the Oracles of Apollo requiring how they might recover their
losses, it was answered that they might overcome if so be that they could get
an Athenian governor, whereupon they sent Orators unto the Athenians humbly
requesting them that they would appoint them out one of their best captains:
the Athenians owinge them old malice, sent them in steed of a soldado vechio a
scholar of the Muses. in steed of a worthy warrior a poor poet, for a
courageous Themistocles a silly Tirthetus, a man of great eloquence and
singular wit, yet was he but a lame lymde captain more fit for the coche
then the field, the Lacedaemonians trusting the Oracle, receued the cham pion,
and fearing the government of a stranger, made him there Citizen. which once don
and he obteining the Dukdome, he assended the theater, and there very learnedly,
wyshing them to forget their folly, and to think on victory they being acuate
by his eloquence waging battle won the field. Lo now you see that the framing
of common welthes, and defense thereof, proceeds from poets, how dare you
therefore open your mouth against them? how can you disprayse the preserver of a
country? you compare Homer to Methecus, cooks to Poets, you shame your self
in your vnreueren similituds, you may see your follyes verbum sapienti sat.
where as Homar was an ancient poet, you disalow him, and account of those of
lesser judgment. Strabo calls poetry, primam sapientiam. Cicero in his
first of his Tusculans attributcth y^ inuencion of philosophy, to poets. God
keep us from a Plato that should expel such men. pity were it that the
memory of these valiant victours should be hidden, which have dyed in the
behalf of there countries: miserable were our state if we wanted those worthy
volumes of poetry could the learned bear the loss of Homer? or our younglings
the wrytings of Mantuan? or you your volumes of historyes? believe me if you had
wanted your Mysteries of nature, and your stately stories, your book would
have scarce been fed with matter. if therefore you will deal in things of
wisdom, correct the abuse, honor the science, re new your school, cry out
over Jerusalem with the prophet, the woe that he pro nounced, wish the teacher
to reform his life, that his weak fcholler may prove the wyser, cry out
against insatiable desire in rich men, tell the house of Jacob their iniqui
ties, lament with the Apostle the want of laborers in the Lords vineyards, cry
out on those dume dogs that will not bark, will the mighty that they
ouermayster not the poor, and put down the beggars proud heart by thy
persuasions. Thunder out with the Prophet Micha the mesage of the LORD, and
with him desire the Judges to hear thee, the Princes of Jacob to hearken to
thee, and those of the house of Israel to understand then tell them that they
abhor judgment, and prevent equity, that they judge for rewards, and that
their priests teach for hyre, and the prophets thereof prophecy for money, and
yet that they say the Lord is with them, and that no evil can befall them,
breath out the sweet promises to the good, the cursses to the badde, tell them
that a peeace must needs have a war, and that God can raise up another
Zenacharib, show the^ that Salamons kingdom was but for a season and that
adversity comes ere we espy it. these be the songs of Sion, these be those
rebukes which you ought to add to abuses recover the body, for it is sore, the
appedices thereof will easily be reformed, if that wear at a stay, but other
matter call me and I must not stay upon this only, there is an easier task in
hand for me, and that which if I may speak my conscience, fitteth my vain best,
your second abuse Gosson, your second abuse your disprayses of Musik, which you
unadvisedly term pyping: that is it will most byte you, what so is a ouerstay
of life, is displesant to your person, musik may not stand in your presence,
whereas all the lear ned Philosophers have always had it in reverence. Homar
commends it highly, referring to the praises of the Gods which Gosson
accompteth folishnesse, look upon the harmony of the Heavens? hang they not
by Music? do not the Spheres move? the primus motor govern. be not they
inferiora corpora affected quadam sumpathia and agreement? how can we measure
the debilitie of the patient but by the disordered motion of the pulse? is not
man worse accounted of when he is most out of time? is there any thing that
more affects the sense? does there any pleasure more acuat our understanding.
can the wonders y^ has wroughte and which you your self confess no more move
you? it fitteth well now that the learned have said, musica requirit generosum
animu^ which since it is fat from you, no marvel though you favor not that
profession. it is reported of the Camelion that she can change her self unto
all coollors save white, and you can account of all things save such as have
honesty. Plutarch your good Master may bare me witness, that the end whereto
Music was, will prove it prays worthy, O Lord how makes it a man to
remember heavenly things. to wonder at the works of the creator, Eloquence can
stay the souldiars sword from slayinge an Orator, and shall not music be
magnified which not only saves the body but is a comfort to the soul? David
reioyseth sings and prayseth the Lord by the Harp, the Simbale is not
removed from his sanc tuary, the Angels sing gloria in excelsis. Surely the
imagination in this present instant, calls me to a deep consideration of my
God. look for wonders where music works, and where harmony is there follows
increcible delectation. the bowels of the earth yield. where the instrument
sounds and Pluto cannot keep Proserpina if Orphe us record. The Seas shall
not swallowe Arion whilst he sings, nether shall he perish while he harpeth,
a doleful tuner if a di ing musition can move a Monster of y^ sea. to mourn. a
Dolphin respectet a heavenly record. call your self home therefore and
reclayme this follye, it is to foul to be admitted, you may not mayntaine it.
I hadd well hoped you would in all these things have wiselye admytted the
thing, and disalowe naught but the abuse, but I see your mind in your
wrytinge was to penn somewaht you know not what, and to confyrme it I wot not
how, so that your self has hatched us an Egg yet so that it has blessed us
with a monsterus chickin, both without hedde, and also tail, like the Father,
full of imperfection and less zeal. well mark yet a little more, bear with
me though I be bitter, my love is never the less for that I have learned of
Tullye, that Nulla remedia tam faciunt dolorem quam quae sunt salutaria, the
sharper medycine the better it cures, the more you see your follye, the sooner
may you amend it. Are not the strains in Music to tickle and delyght the
ear? are not our warlike instruments to move men to valor? You confess they
move us, but yet they delight not our ears, I pray you whence grew that point
of Philosophy? it is more then ever my Master taught me, that a thing of
sound should not delyghte the ear. belyke ye suppose that men are monsters,
without ears, or else I thyake you will say they hear with their heels,
it may be so, for indeed when we are are delighted with Music, it makes
our heart to scypp for joy, and it may be perhaps by assending from the
heel to the higher parts, it may move us, good policy in sooth, this was of
your own coining your mother never taught it you, but I will not deal by
reason of philosophye with you for that confound your senses, but I can asure
you this one thing, that this principle will make the wiser to mislike your
invention, it had been a fitter jest for your howlet in your play, then an
orname^t in your book. but since you wrote of abuses we may license you to lie
a little, so y^ abuse will be more manifest. lord with how goodly a cote have
you clothed your conceiptes, you abound in stories but impertinent, they bewray
your reeding but not your wisdom would God they had bin well aplyed. But now I
must play the musician right nolesse buggs now come in place but pauions and
mesures, dumps and fancies and here grows a great question, what music Homer
used in curing y^ diseased gretians, it was no dump you say, and so think I,
for y^ is not apliable to sick men, for it favors Melancholy. I am sure, it
was no mesure, for in those days they were not such good da^sers for soth the^
what was it? if you require me. if you name me the instrument, I will tell you
what was y^ musik, mean while a gods name let us both dout, y^ it is no part of
our salvation to know what it was nor how it went? when I speak with Homer next
you shall know his answer. But you can not be content to err but you must
maintain it to. Pithagoras you say alowes not that musik is decerned by ears,
but he wishes us to assend unto the sky and mark that harmony. surely this
is but one doctors opinion (yet I dislike not of it) but to speak my
conscience my thinks music best pleases me when I hear it, for otherwise
the catter walling of Cats, were it not for harmony: should more delight mine
eyes then the tunable voices of men. but these things are not the chiefest
points you shote at, there is somewhat else sticks in your stomak God grant it
hurt you not, from the dance you runn to the pype, from 7. to 3. which if I
should add I believe I could wrest out half a score inco^ueniences more out
of your book. our pleasant consortes do discomfort you much, and because you
like not thereof, they arr discomendable, I have heard it is good to take sure
fotinge when we travel unknown countries, for when we wade above our shoe
latchet Appelles will reprehende us for cobblers, if you had been a father in
music and could have decerned of tunes I would perhaps have like your opinion
sumwhat where now I abhor it, if you wear a professor of that practice. I would
quickly persuade you, that the adding of strings to our instrument make the
sound more hermonious, and that the mixture of Music makes a better concent.
but to preach to vns killfull is to perswad y^ brut beasts, I will not stand
long in this point although the dignitye thereof require a volume, but how
learned men have esteemed this heavenly gift, if you please to read you shall
see. Socrates in his old age will not disdain to learn y^ science of Musik
among child ren, he can abide their correctio^s to, so much accounted he that,
with you contemn, so profitable thought he y^, with you mislik. Solon will esteem so
much of y^ knowledge of singing, y^ he will sooner forget to dye the^ to sing.
Pithagoras liks it so well y^ he will place it in Grease. and Aristoxenus will
say y^ the soul is musik. Plato (in his book de legibus) will affirm that
it can not be handled without all sciences, the Lacedaemonians and Cretensis were
sturred to war by Anapestus foot, and Timotheus with the same incensed king
Alexander to batel, ye if Boetyus fitten not, on Tauromitanus (by this Phrigian
sound) hastened to burn a house where a stru^pet was hidden, so little abides
this heavenly harmony our humane filthiness, y^ it works wonders as you may
perceue most manifestly by the history of Agamemnon who going to ye Trojan war,
left at home a musician y^ playde the Do^ian tune, who with the foot Spondeus
preserved his wife Clitemnestra in chastity and ho nesty, wherefore she cold not
be deflowred by Aegistus, before he had wickedly slain the musician. so yt as
the magnetes draws Ior ne, and the Theamides (with grows in Aegipt) drives
it away: so musik calls to it self al honest plesures, and dispelleth from
it all vain misdemanors. yt matter is so ple^tiful that I cannot find where to
end, as for beginnings they be infinite, but these shall suffice. I like not to
long circumstances where les do serve. only I wish you to account well of this
heavenly concent, with is full of perfettio^, proceeding from above, drawing his
original from the motion of yt stars, from the agreement of the planets, from
the whisteling winds and from al those celestial circles, where is either perfect
agreement or any Sumphonia. but as I like musik so admit I not of those that
deprave the same your pipers are as odius to me as your self, nether allow I
your harpinge merye beggars: although I knew you my self a professed play
maker, and a paltry actor. since which yt windmil of your wit has bin tornd so
long with the wind of folly, that I fear me we-shall see the dog return to
his vomit, and the cleansed sow to her mire, and the reformed scholemayster to
his old teaching of follye. beware it be not so, let not your book be a
blemish to your own profession. Correct not musik therefore when it is prays
worthy, least your worthless misliking bewray your madness. way the abuse and
that is matter sufficient to serve a magistrates animaduersion. here may you
advise well, and if you have any stale rethorik flourish upon this text, the
abuse is, when that is a pplyed to wantonness, which was created to show Gods
worthiness. When yt shameful resorts of shameless curtezanes in sinful
sonnets, shall profane virtue these are no light sins, these make many
goodmen lament, this cauleth parents hate there right borne children, if this
were refor med by your policy I should esteem of you as you wysh. I fear me
it fares far other wise, latet anguis in herba, under your fare show of
conscience take heed you cloak not your abuse, it were pity the learned
should be ouerseene in your simpleness, I fear me you will be politic with
Machanel not zealous as a prophet. Well I will not stay long upon the abuse,
for that I see it is to manifest, the remembrance thereof is discommendable
among the godly, and I my self am very loath to bring it in memory. to the wise
advised reader these may suffice, to flee the Crocodel before he comes, lest
we be bitten, and to avoid the abuse of musik, since we se it, lest our-misery
be more When we fall into folly. ^ctus piscaror sapit, you hear open
confession, these abuses are disclaimed by our Gosson, he is sorry that he has
so leudlye lived, and spent the oil of his perfection in unsavory Lamps he
has Argus eyes to watch him now, I would wish him beware of his Iflington, and
such like resorts, if now he return from his repentedlye to his old folly,
Lord how fo^e will be his fall, men know more then they speak if they be w^e, I
fear me some will (...) that reads this, if he be bitten, would God Gosson at
that instant might have a watchman. but I see it were needelesse; perhaps (...)
(...) (...) (...), and then what avails (...) (...). (...), I (...) this
point (...) I know further of your mind, mean while I must talk a little with
you about y^, third abuse, ^or the ^ater co^ens of pypers, their (...) (as you
term them) be players, and I think as you do, for your experience is suf
ficient to inform me. but here I must look about me, quacunque te tig^ris
vlcus est, here is a task that requires a long treatis, and what my opinion is
of players ye now shall plainly perceue. I must now lerch my wits, I see this
shall pass through many severe sensors handling, I must advise me what I
write, and write that I would wysh. I way well the seriousnes of the cause, and
regard verymuch the Judges of my endeavor, whom if I could I would persuade,
that I would not nourish abuse, nether mayntaine that which should be an
universal discomoditye. I hope they will not judge before they read, nether
condemn without occasion The wisest will alwais carry to ears, in yt they are
to diserue two indifferent causes, I mean not to hold you in suspe^c, (severe
Judges) if you gredely expect my verdit brefely this it is.

Demostines thought not that Phillip should overcome when he reproved him,
nether feared Cicera Anthonies force, when in the Senate he rebuked him. To
the ignorant each thing that is unknown semes unprofitable, but a wise man can
foresee and praise by proof. Pythagoras could spy out in women's eyes two kind
of tears, the one of grefe the other of disceit: and those of judge meant can
from the same flower suck honey with the be, from whence the Spyder (I mean
the ignorant) take their poison. men yt have knowledge what comedies and
tragedis be, will comend the^, but it is sufferable in the folish to reprove
that they know not, because there mouths will hardly be stopped. First therefore
if it be not tedious to Gosson to har ken to the learned, the reder shall
perceive the antiq uity of playmaking, the inuentors of comedies, and
therewithal the use and comoditye of the^. So that in yt end I hope my labor
shall be liked, and the learned will sooner coneeue his folly. For tragedies and
comedies Donate the gramarian says, they were inuen ted by learned fathers of
the old time to no other purpose, but to yield praise unto God for a happy
harvest, or plentiful year. and that this is (...) the name of Tragedye does
importe, for if you consider whence it came, you shall perceive (as Iodocus
Badius reports) that it drew his original of Tragos, Hircus, and Ode,
Cantus, (so called) for that the actors thereof had in reward for their
labor, a Gotes skin filled with wine. You see then that the first matter of
Tragedies was to give thanks and praises to GOD, and a grateful prayer of the
countrymen for a happy harvest* and this I hope was not discom^ mendable. I
know you will judge is farth^ from a^use but to wave farther, this form of
in^ention being found out, as the days wherein it was used did decay, and the
world grew to more perfection, so y^ wi^t of the younger sort became more
riper, for they leaving this form, invented an other, in the which they
altered the nature but not y^ name: for for sonnets in praise of y^ gods, they
did set ^orth the ^ower fortune of many ^es, the miserable fall of haples
princes, The reuino^s decay of many (...), yet not content with this, they
presented the lives of S^rs, So that they ^ight wisely^ under the abuse of that
na^ discover (...) (...) lies of (...) their ^sh fellow (...) (...) those
monsters were the^ (...) part ar^ now aday^: such, as wi^ pleasure (...)
pr^hended abuse as for (...) because they bear a more pl^santer vain, I will
leave the other to speak of them. Tully defines them thus* ^omedia (says he)
is Imitatio^ (...), ^peculum consu^tudinis, and imago veritatis, and it is
said to be termed of Coma^, (emongste the Greeks) which (...) Pagos. (...)
(...). Cantus* for that they were exercised in the field they had they
beginning with tragedies, but their matter was more plessaunt, for they were
such as did reprehend, yet quodam lepore. These first very rudly were invented
by Susarion Bullus, and Mag nes, to ancient poets, yet so, that they were
marvelous profitable to the reclamynge of abuse: whereupon Eupolis with
Cartinus, and Aristophanes, began to write, and with there eloquenter vain and
perfection of still, did more severely speak against the abuses the^ they: which
Horace himself witnesses. For says he there was no abuse but these men
reprehended it. a thief was loath to be seen one there spectacle. a coward was
never present at their assemblies. a backbiter abhord that company. and I my
self could not have bla med your (Gosson) for exempting your self from this
theater, of troth I should have lykt your policy. These therefore, these were
they that kept men in awe, these restrained the unbridled cominaltie, whereupon
Horace wisely says.

Oderunt peccare boni, virtu^is amore.
Oderunt peccare mali, formidinepenae.
The good did hate al sin for virtues love
The bad for fear of shame did sin remove.
Yea would God our realm could light upon a Lucillius, then should the wicked
be poynted out from the good, a harlot would seek no harbor at stage plais,
lest she should here her own name grow in question: and the discourse of her
honesty cause her to be hated of the godly. as for you I am sure of this one
thing, he would paint you in your players ornaments, for they best becam you.
But as these sharp corrections were disanulde in Rome when they grew to more
licenciousnes: So I fear me if we should prac tise it in our days, the same
intertainmente would follow. But in ill reformed Rome what comedies now? a
poets wit can correct, yet not offend. Philemon will mitigate the corrections
of sin, by reproving them covertly in shadows. Menandar dare not offend y^
Senate openly, yet wants he not a parasite to touch them prinely. Terence will
not report the abuse of harlots under there proper style, but he can finely
girde the^ under the person of Thais. he dare not openly tell the Rich of
their covetousness and severity rewards their children, but he can control
them under the person of Durus Demeas. he must not show the abuse of noble young
gentilmen under their own title, but he will warn them in the person of
Pamphilus. will you learn to know a parasite? Look upon his Dauus. will you
seek the abuse of courtly flatterers? behold Gnato. and if we had some
Satericall Poets now a days to penn ou^ commedies, that might be admitted of
zeal, to discypher the abuses of the world in the person of notorious
offenders. I know we should wisely ryd our assemblyes of many of your
brotherhod. but because you may have a full scope to reprehende, I will (...)
up a rablem^t of playmakers, whose wrightinges I would wish you ouerlooke, and
seek out their abuses. can you mislike of Cecillius? or despise Plinius? or
amend Neuius? or find fault with Licinius? where in offended Actilius? I am
sure you can not but wonder at Terrence? will it please you to like of
Turpelius? or allow of Trabea? you must needs make much of Ennius for ouerloke
al these, and you shall find there volums full of wit if you examine the^: so y^ if
you had no other mas ters, you might deserve to be a doctor, where now you are
but a folishe scholemaister. but I will deal with you very freendlye, I will
resolve eueri doubt that you find, those instruments which you mislike in
plays grow of ancient custom, for when Rossius was an Actor, ^e sure that as
with his tears he moved affections, so the Musician in the Theater before the
entrance, did mornefully record it in melody (as Seruius reports.) Theactors
in Rome had also gay clothing and every ma^s apar^l was apliable to his part
and person. The old men in white, y^ rich men in purple, the parasite
disguisedly, the young men in gorgeous colors, there wanted no devise nor good
judgment of y^ comedy, whe^c I suppose our players, both drew there plays and
^ourme of garments. as for the appoin ted days wherein comedies were showen, I
reed that the Romans appointed them on the festiual days, in such
repu^ation were they had at that time. Also Iodocus Badius will assertain you
that the actors for showing pleasure receued some profit. but let me apply
those days to ours, their actors to our players, their autors to ours* surely
we want not a R^ssius, nether ar there great scarsity of Terrences prosessio^
but yet ^ur men dare not now a days presume so much, as the old Poets might.
and therefore they apply there writing to the peoples v^in whereas, if in the
beginning they had ruled, we should now adays have found small spec tacles of
folly. but (of truth) I must confess with Aristotle, that men are greatly
delighted with imitation, and that it were good to bring those things on stage,
that were al together tending to virtue: all this I admit, and heartily wysh,
but you say unless the thing be taken away the vice wili continue, nay I say
if the style were changed the practice would profit and sure I think our
theaters fit, that Ennius seeing our wa^^on Glicerium may rebuke her, if our
poets will now become severe, and for prophaue things write of virtue: you I
hope should s^e a reformed state in those things, which I fear me if they
were not, the idle hedded commones would work more mischief. I wish as zea
lously as the best that all abuse of playinge wear abolished, but far the
thing, the antiquity causes me to allow it, so it be used as it should be. I
cannot allow the profaning of the Sabbath, I praise your reprehension in that,
you did well in discommen^ing the abuse, and surely I wysh that that folly were
disclaymed, it is not to be admitted, it maks those sin, which perhaps if it
were not, would have ^inne present at a good sermon. it is in the Magistrate to
take away that or der, and appoint it otherwise. but sure it were pity to
abolish yt which has so great virtue in it. because it is abused. The Germans
when the use of preaching was forbidden them, what help had they I pray you?
forsooth the learned were feign covertly in comodies to declare abuses, and by
playing to incite the people to virtues, when they might hear no preaching.
Those were lamentable days you will say, and so think I, but was not this I
pray you a good help in reforming the decaying Gospel? you see then how
comedies (my severe judges) are requesit both for there antiquity, and for there
commoditye. for the dignity of the wrighters, and the pleasure of the hearers.
But after your discrediting of playmaking, you salve upon the sore somewhat,
and among many wise works there be some that fit your vain: the practice of
parasites is one, which I meruel it likes you so well since it bites you so
sore. but sure in that I like your judgment, and for the rest to, I approve
your wit, but for the pigg of your own sow, (as you term it) assuredly I must
discommend your verdit, tell me Gosson was all your own you wrote there: did
you borow nothing of your neighbors? out of what book patched you out Ciceros
oration? whence fet you Catulins inuectiue. This is one thing, aliena^ olet
lucerni non tuam, so that your helper may wisely reply upon you with Virgil.

Hos ego versiculos feci tulit alter bonores.

I made these verses other bear the name. believe me I should prefer Wilsons.
short and sweet if I were judge, a piece surely worthy praise, the practice
of a good scholar, would the wiser would ouerlooke that, they may perhaps cull
some wisdom. out of a players toye. Well, as it is wisdom to commend where
the cause requires, so it is a point of folly to praise without deserte. you
dislike players very much, their dealings be not for your commodity. whom if I
might advise they should learn this of I^enal.

Viuendum est recte, cum propter plurima, tum bis
Praecipue causis: vt linguas mancipiorum
Conte^nas. Na lingua mali pars pessima serui.
We ought to lead our lives aright,
For any causes move.
Especially for this same cause,
Wisdom does us behone.
That we may set at nough those blames,
which servants to us lay,
For why the tongue of euel slave,
Is worst as wisemen ever say.
Methinks I hear some of them veri^ing these verses upon you, if it be so that
I hear them, I will concele it, as for the statute of apparel and the abuses
thereof, I see it manifestly broken. and if I should seek for example, you
cannot but offend my eyes. For if you examine the statuts exactly, a simple
cote should be fitted to your back. we should bereue you of your brauerye, and
examine your au^cestry, and by profession in respect of ye statute, we should
find you catercosens with a, (but hush) you know my meaning, I must for pity
favor your credit in that you wear once a scholar. you run farther to
Carders, dicers, fencers, bowlers, daunsers, and tomblers. whose abuses I would
rebuke with you, had not your self moved other matters. but to each I say thus,
for dicing I wyshe those that know it not to leave to learn it, and let the
fall of others make them wiser. If they had an Alexander to govern they should
be punished, and I could wish them not to a buse the ^euitie of their prince.
Cicero for a great ^nish reputeth that which our gentilmen use for bravery, but
sufficit ista leuiter attigisse, a word against fencers, and so an* end. whom I
wish to beware with Demonax lest admitting their fencing delights, they
destroy (with the Athenians) the alters of peace, by raising quarrellous
causes, they work vprores: but you and I reprove the^ in abuse, yet I (for my
part) cannot but allow the practice so it be well used. as for the filling of
our gracious princes cofers with peace, as it pertains not to me, because I
am none of her receiuors, so men think unless it has vine lately you have not
been of her majesty's counsel. But now here as you begin ^shly, so surely you
end vnlernedly (...) (...) before peace? the sword be (...) (...)? the rule of
a Tyrant, befo^ (...) happy days of our gracious Queens you (...) (...)
^sophers are against you, yet (...) you stand in handy grips with Cic^ you know
that for^e is but an instrument when counsel fails, and if wisdom win n^,
fa^ war. Ask Alphonsus what counselors he lyketh of? he will say his
books. and has not I pray you policy alwais ouermastered force? who subdued
Hanibal in his great royalty? he yt durst knock at Rome gates to have the^
opened is now become a pray to a sylly senator. Appius Claudius et senex et
caecus a father full of wisdom can releue the state of decaying Rome and was
it force that subdued Marius? or arms that discovered Catulins conspiracies?
was it rash reuendg in punishing Cethegus? or want of wit in the discouerye of
treason? Cato can correct himself for traueling by Sea, when the land
profereth passage, or to be fool hardy in over mutch hazard. Aristotle
accompteth counsel holy, and Socrates can term it the key of certentye. what
shall we count of war but wrath, of battle but hastines, and if I did rule (with
Augustus Caesar) I would refuse these counselers. what made yt oracle I pray
you account of Calchas so much? was it not for his wisdom? who does not like
of the gouerner that had rather meet with V^m Nestorem then december Aiaces? you
cannot tame a Lion but in time, neither a Tigres in few days. Counsel in
Regulus will preferring the liberty of his country before his life, not remit
the delivery of Carthaginian captives, Hanibal shall flesh himself on an old
man's carkas, whose wisdom preserved his ^ye. Adrian with letters can govern
his legions, and rule peasablye his provinces by policye. ask Siluius Italicus
what peace is and he will say?

Pax optima rerum quas homini nouisse. datum est, pax vna triumphis
Innumeris potior, pax custodire salutem,
Et ciues ^quare potens.
No better thing to man did nature
Ever give then peace,
Then which to know no greater joy,
Can come to our increase.
To foster peace is stay of health,
And keeps the land in ease.
Take counsel of Ovid what says he?
Candida pax homines, trux decet atra feras.
To men does heavenly peace pertain,
And currish anger fitteth brutish vain?
Well as I wish it to have continuance, so I pray God with the Prophet it be
not a buled. and because I think my self to have sufficiently answered that I
supposed, I conclude with this. God preserve our peacable princes, and confound
her enemies. God enlarge her wisdom, that like Saba she may seek after a
Solomon: God confound the imaginations of her enemies, and perfect (...) graces
in her, that the days of her rule may be continued in the bonds of peace, that
the house of the chosen Isralites may be maynteyned in happiness: lastly I
friendly bid Gosson fa^well, wyshinge him to ^per his (...) with more discretion.

FINIS.

