A Divine Discovery OF SINCERITY, According to its proper and peculiar nature:
very profitable for an sorts of persons to peruse. First preached, and now
published, for the good of Gods Church in general.

By NICHOLAS LOCKYER Master of Arts.

PSALM. 78.37. For their heart was not right with him; neither were they
steadfast in hi^ covenant.

PSALM. 119.80. Let my heart be sound in thy s^tutes, that I be not ashamed.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for John Rotwell, at the Sun in Paul's Churchyard.
1640.

TO THE VIRTUOUS LADY BRIDGET LYDDELL, My much Honored Aunt: Grace and peace
be multiplied by Jesus Christ.
MAdam: It Is Gods command to Abraham, and in him to us, That we should walk
before him, and be perfect. Absolute perfection God does not there mean, but
intentionall: which is, when we desire and endeavor with David, to have all
our ways conformed to all Gods Statutes. Intentionall perfection, is no other
but sincere walking; and what this is, this tract now humbly presented to your
Ladyship, will plainly make known unto you. A sincere heart, is a heart after
Gods own heart; which of all jewels which the Gentry, and Nobility wear, is
the most resplendent, in the breast and bosom to be worn. The richest
jeweller, Christ, proffers this pearl of great price, without money, or
money-worth, and the multitude slight it, as a low prised thing, not worth the
seeking after; but your Ladyship has otherwise learned Christ: Many things
Madam, may be convenient, but one is necessary; to wit, a sincere heart. The
acquiring of this, is the work of our whole life: the setting forth of this,
in its nature and luster, is the work of Christ's Ministers; the least, and
unworthiest of all which, is your Nephew, which has in this tract, done
something to this effect; from which, if your Ladyship shall reap an increase
of good, to that sweet stock you have, I shall humbly bless God. To whose
blessing I commend your self and worthy Family; this work, and the unworthy
Author,

Your much obliged Nephew, NICHOLAS LOCKYER.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, Two things should be the principal matter of thy study;
Christ and thine own heart. The latter; to know thine own misery; the former,
to know Gods rich mercy, and how thou may be made partaker of it. So
deceitful is the heart of man naturally, that he thinks himself rich, and
increased in goods, and knows not that he is poor, and blind miserable,
wretched, and naked. And until this deceit and unsoundnesse be discovered, men
will never seek out for Christ, which is that Gold tried in the fire, which
indeed makes poor man rich; and that white raiment, John speaks of, which
indeed makes naked man comely, and covers all his deformity, from the
all-seeing eye of him, which is perfect purity. The true knowledge of thine
own heart, this little tract will help thee to, by the blessing of God; if
thou seriously peruse it, and humbly seek to him, who is the searcher and
discoverer of all hearts, to go along with thee, in the reading of it. Which
when once thou have gotten, thou will be capable of the saving knowledge of
Christ, and restless till thou have obtained it. And this when acquired, will
resolve thy doubting, comfort thy mourning, and stablish thy staggering soul:
'twill give thee peace and joy unspeakablo here, and bring thee to glory and
joy incomprehensible hereafter. To which, the Lord bring thee, and me.

Nicholas Lockyer.

A Table of the chief heads handled in this Tract.
I. Proposition.
THat in simplicity, and godly sincerity, we ought to have our conversation in
this world, p. 10 The various acceptance of the word Simplicity, p. 10, 11
Sincerity distinguished into Moral and Theological, p. 11 What Moral
sincerity is, p. 11, 12 What godly sincerity is, p. 13, 14, etc. Why we ought
in simplicity and godly sincerity to have our conversation in this world, p.
33, 34, etc.
The application of this first Doctrine.
We should examine our selves by the description of sincerity, whether we walk
as Paul did, to wit, sincerely, in this hypocritical age. p. 40, 41, etc. What
we should do, if upon examination we find our selves hypocrites, p. 34 The
cheating properties of hypocrisy, p. 54, 55, etc. Considerations to move the
heart, to be deeply and duly affected with hypocrisy. p. 57, 58, etc.
Holy instructions to such, as upon examination find themselves to be as Paul
in this present world, to wit, sincere.
I. To be humble, p 60 II. To hold fast our integrity, p. 61, 62 The several
ways which there are, within us and without as, to corrupt us from that
simplicity which is in Christ, p. 61, 62, 63, etc. Sweet encouragements to
persevere in our sincere conversation, what ever miseries we meet withal. p.
65, 66
II. Proposition.
That conscience can give testimony, concerning the simplicity or hypocrisy of
a man's conversation, p. 67, 68 What conscience is, p. 69, 70 etc. The grounds
why God has given this power to conscience, to give testimony concerning the
simpicity or hypocrisy of a man's conversation, p. 87, 88, etc. The application
of this second point, p. 95 Seeing conscience can give testimony, concerning
the simplicity or hypocrisy of our conversation, we ought all, to take heed
how we order our conversation, p. 96, 97 Multitudes live as if there were no
conscience, God, nor Devil; the dreadful condition of such, p. 97, 98
Conscience should not be suspended, 99, 100 It Is crying wickedness; and it is
incurable wickedness, to offer violence to conscience, p. 101 We should not
slight conscience in his place, p. 102, 103 God will account the sleighting of
conscience, a contempt of his prime Court of Justice here below, and those that
sit chief there, p. 104 What secret soul mischief comes by sleighting
conscience, p. 105 We ought diligently to hearken to the voice of conscience,
and why, p. 105, 106 We ought to take consciences part, with or against our
selves, p. 107, 108
III. Proposition.
That consciousnesse to our selves, of the simplicity and sincerity of our
conversation, will yield us joy in the midst of troubles. p. 111, 112 Troubles
distinguished into natural and accidental, p. 114 What natural troubles are;
and how sweetened by conscience, p. 114, 115 What accidental troubles are; and
how conscience makes a man rejoice in the midst of them, p. 116, 117 Joy
distinguished into sensual and spiritual, p. 118 What sensual joy is, ibid.
What spiritual joy is, p, 118, 119, 120, etc. Why divine joy is called
spiritual, p. 119, 120, 121, etc. What joy it is that conscience causes in
troubles, to him that walks sincerely, p. 130, 131 The grounds why, the
testimony of conscience concerning a man's simplicity must needs cause joy in
the midst of troubles, p. 131, 132, etc. The application of this third point,
p. 137 This Doctrine unfolds a riddle to blind worldlings, which wonder to see
a man go rejoicing to prison. p. 137 This Doctrine likewise shows, that the
great design of the wicked against the godly is frustrate: which is, to
deprive them of all comfort, if they could, p. 139, 140. etc. If consciousnesse
to our selves of the sincerity of our conversation will lessen and sweeten
troubles, consciousnesse of hypocrisy must needs imbitter all troubles, p.
142, 143 Man that is borne to troubles as the sparks fly upward, exhorted to
get an upright heart, and so an excusing conscience, to comfort him in all
troubles, p. 144, 145 What kind of joy it is that conscience raises in the
soul, in times of trouble for righteousness sake, p. 147, 148, etc. What we
should do if walking sincerely, we do not for all this, find our consciences
raising sweet joy within us, in all our bitter troubles for righteousness
sake, p. 155 What we ought to do, if we do find the joy of our sincere
course, p, 156, 157 The sweet joy which arises to us from conscience testifying
our sincerity, should cause us to keep on in our sincere way, p. 160 What
sorrow it is, which conscience as an accuser for hypocrisy, causes in the
soul, p. 162, 163, etc.
IV. Proposition.
That there be special times and occasions, for the declaration of sincerity,
which ought to be observed, and answerably to declare and show our selves, p.
177 Personal occasions for the declaration of sincerity, p. 181 Personal
occasions from the world, for the declaration of sincerity, p. 181, 182
Personal occasions from the flesh, for the declaration of sincerity, p. 183
Personal occasions, for the declaration of sincerity, from the Devil, p. 185
Domestical occasions for the declaration of sincerity, 186, 187 Sociall or
symmachicall occasions, for the declaration of sincerity, p. 189, 190 National
occasions for the declaration of sincerity, p. 191, 192 The reasons why God in
the course of his providence, brings about special occasions, for the
declaration of sincerity, p. 196 I. That the world and the devil may see that
Gods people are indeed sincere, p. 196, 197 II. That God may hereby admirably
advance his own glory, p. 199 III. That God may admirably add to the torture
of the devil and his children, p. 201 IIII. That the joy of the upright may be
augmented in this life, and in the life to come. p. 202 The application of this
fourth and last point. 203 Men which through wilfulness, and such as of
weakness pass by special occasions, for the declaration of sincerity,
blamed, p. 203, 204 When men wilfully pass ly special occasions, for the
declaration of sincerity, p. 204, 205 The causes why men wilfully pass by
special occasions for the declaration of sincerity, p. 206 Their sin is very
great, which wilfully shun special occasions for the declaration of sincerity;
and how this appears. p. 207, 208 Such as pass by special occasions for the
declaration of sincerity out of weakness, are to be blamed, of which see 4
sorts, p. 209, 210 Some ignorant of what is right; others of the time when that
which is right, should be stood for, p. 210, 211 The dangers which ensue, by
being ignorant of time or judgment. p. 211, 212 Some through carnal fear,
pass by special occasions for the declaration of sincerity p. 213 What such
should do for the cure of this evil, p. 214 Some through carnal persuasion,
pass by special occasions for the declaration of sincerity; and how this
evil may be cured, p. 215 216 Some out of carnal pity, pass by special
occasions for the declaration of sincerity, and how this evil may be cured, p.
216, 217 Seeing there be special times for the declaration of sincerity, we
should diligently observe them; and how they may be known, p. 218, 219 As we
are to take notice of special time and occasions, for the declaration of
sincerity, so we are to take hold of them, and how we may do this aright, p.
221, 222 Encitements to take hold of special times and occasions for the
declaration of sincerity, p. 224 God calls for it, p. 224 Conscience calls for
it, p. 227 Church and State calls for it, ibid. Soul and body will else
severely smart for p 228
2 COR. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that
in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace
of God, we have had our conversation in the World, and more abundantly to
you-wards.


NO grace, how glorious soever in the eye of man, goes for good weight in the
eye of God, without sincerity: The greatest man in the world, weighed in the
Balance of the Sanctuary, without this, will be accounted too light for
Heaven. It Is a very needful subject then, that this Text plainly profers to
our consideration. And as excellent in it self, as needful to us, is
sincerity. It Is the precious extract, of all graces; and to call this a grace,
is too little. It Is that which gives to every grace its due luster, in the eye
of God; and to call any thing a grace in man, without this, is too much. It Is
the glory of all graces, as the Sun is the glory of all the Stars: it is the
vital blood of the soul; which that it may run in the veins of you all,
unto your eternal happiness, have I chosen this Text to insist on: For our
rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have
had our conversation in the world, etc.

No condition is trucly joyous without, and no condition is truly dolorous
with sincerity. If a man be never so rich, never so honorable, yet if not
withal sincere, there is no true joy in such a man: he laughes, but in the
midst of laughter, his heart is often times sad, and his conscience spoils his
sport. On the other hand; if a man be never so poor, never so much oppressed,
which is the deadliest, and the most opposite enemy to joy of all, yet if that
man be sincere, his heart may be as full of joy, as it can hold, for all this,
as you may see in these words read, For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of
our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, etc. Paul and Timothy
have been sincere servants of Jesus Christ, for the good of his Church amongst
the Gentiles, and in this they had transcendant comfort in the midst of all the
misery they met withal.

It Is not misery, but sin, that robs the soul of joy. Let a man labor to
live sincerely, and then let men and devils do what they can, or will, such a
man shall never be bereaft of joy: he shall have joy in poverty, joy in
disgrace, he shall have joy in prison, as much as in liberty, and much more; So
had Paul and Timothy, which made them thus bravely break out in the midst of
misery, For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the World, and more abundantly to
you-wards.

These words are the Apostles divine narration, of their happy condition in
misery. And they contain two principal things, useful for all men to be well
acquainted withal, to wit, true joy, and the true ground of this desirable
grace; which the Apostle here makes, sincerity, and that testimony which
conscience gives thereof to the Soul. For our rejoicing is this, what? why,
the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, that
is, in integrity and uprightness, not with fleshly wisdom, that is, not with
humane policy and eloquence, as men proudly depending upon our own parts, and
subtly seeking our own ends, in our preaching and living, but by the grace
of God, (...), but in the grace of God, says the original: that is, in the
strength and assistance of God, which is a special fruit of his grace and
favor, We have had our conversation in the World; that is, we have carried our
selves in life and doctrine amongst all, and more abundantly to you-wards;
(...), but specially amongst you, says the Original.

Divine joy is set forth unto us in this Text, according to its proper subject,
and according to its proper rise. The proper subject of divine joy, is the
righteous man, as the Psalmist frequently notes: And this man is made the
subject of Divine joy in my Text, For [our] rejoicing, etc. that is, we which
are sincere: hypocrites have nothing to do with divine joy; Their joy is
suiteable to their spirits, deceit-full; that which will flee from them, and
not stand by them, as this joy of the Apostles did, when trials come.

For our (...), boasting is this, so the word in the original strictly taken,
signifies. Divine boasting, notes divine joy in the conspicuous act thereof: It
notes joy, as it has strongly seized upon the heart within; and it notes joy
as it has strongly seized upon the tongue, and face, and hands, without; so
that it is all one as if the Apostle had said, the cause of our strong and open
rejoicing is this.

What? That they had made provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it?
No: divine joy has not such a Diabolical rise: The proper rise of divine joy,
is the testimony of a pure conscience, concerning the uprightness of a man's
conversation; and this was the rise of Paul's and Timothies joy, in affliction.
Their conscience bore witness with them, that in integrity and uprightness,
not in flattery, policy, and subtilty, they had preached and lived amongst all
men, as those that depended upon the strength and aid of Christin everything,
and not upon any abilities of their own, though they were endowed with greater
humane gifts then any the false Apostles had. Thus, they carried themselves in
a plain, downright, faithful way, where ever they came to publish the Gospel
of Christ, but specially amongst the Corinthians. To other Churches Paul used a
more insinuating way of preaching; but to this Church of the Corinthians, all
plainness, and homeliness; sparing no expressions, that might fully set forth
their wicked ways, and thoroughly awaken their drousie consciences, as
hereafter in due place (God willing) I shall show unto you. The Church of the
Corinthians, of all the Churches which Paul or other of the Apostles had
planted, was most loose every way; and therefore Paul did not content himself
with hints, and overtures; and wrap up bitter Pills, in sugared, glib-goe-down
words; but with all godly boldness and plainness, beyond what he did to other
Churches, he reproved them for, and upbraided them with their wickedness;
which is that he would have us apprehend, in this last clause of my Text. But
specially amongst you.

Doctrinae deductie.
Several propositions are to be noted, in this verse thus opened: as first
this, That in simplicity and godly sincerity, we ought to have our conversation
in this World. This truth is plainly intimated, by the Apostle; for he rejoiced
that he had so ordered his conversation, as Christ required; not flattering and
fauning, with fleshly wisdom in his preaching, to sooth men in their sins
and to bring about his own ends, as false Apostles did; but faithfully
reproving every vice, sparing no plainness of speech, to such as otherwise
would not be brought to see and bewail their sins. Whether this way of
preaching were pleasing or displeasing, to the World; whether it brought honor
or disgrace to himself from the world, he heeded not, whilst he knew 'twas
suitable walking to the Will of God.

Doct. 2.
A second proposition is this, That conscience can give testimony, concerning
the simplicity or hypocrisy, of a man's conversation. This truth is also
plainly intimated, in that the Apostle makes the testimony of his conscience
concerning his integrity, the ground of his joy. For our rejoicing is this, the
testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with
fleshly wisdom, (which had been hypocritical) but by the grace of God, we
have had our conversation in the World, etc.

Doct. 3.
A third proposition is this, That consciousnesse to our selves, of the
simplicity and sineerity of our conversation, will yield us joy in the midst of
troubles. This truth is also intimated by the Apostle; for in the midst of all
his troubles and miseries, he rejoyed in this, that his conscience could bear
witness with him, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, he had ordered his
conversation in this world.

Doct. 4.
A fourth and last point observable is this, That there be special times and
occasions, for the declaration of sincerity, which ought to be observed, and
answerably to declare and show our selves in our places. This truth is also
plainly set forth unto us in the Text; for Paul and Timothy thus carried
themselves in their places, toward the Church of Corinth, which became very
openly and grossly wicked, (...), but specially amongst you. They had declared
sincerity and uprightness in their ministry, amongst other Churches, by a
faithful reproving of them, as occasion required, but no Church so
scandalously carried themselves, as this Church, and therefore this Church
needed, above all others, to be more thoroughly dealth withal; which the
Apostles, as sincere men, considered, and answerably carried themselves.

Doct. 1.
I begin with the first of these, to wit, That in simplicity and godly
sincority, we ought to have our conversation in this World. Paul could not
justly have joyed in the simplicity and sincerity of his conversation, had not
his conscience told him, that so to walk, was to walk as Christ had commanded
him. Christ's charge to his Apostles (when he sent them forth) was, that they
should be (...), Simple as Doves: Mat. 10.16
that they should teach men to observe all things whatsoever he commanded them:
Mat. 28.20
now, Paul's conscience and Timothies both, bore witness with them, that thus
they had walked in their places, and this made them to rejoice, in the midst of
all the hardship they underwent. As they had this charge in particular, so they
had this charge in general, with all the seed of Abraham, in these words,
Walk before me, and be thou persect: that is, sincere, Genesis 17.1. So that they
had broken a double ^ond, had they not simply and sincerely ordered their
conversation.

Simplicity] is a term which sometimes notes folly. How long ye simple ones,
will ye love simplicity, and fools hate knowledge? Prove. 1.22. In my Text,
this term is opposed to double-mindednesse, and such men have usually more
with then they use well; and signifies a unity and identity, between the heart
and tongue; what the tongue says, the heart really intends: and so taken, it
sounds the same with sincerity, and therefore are coupled together here by the
Apostle, as Synonyma's, contermini, words of the same signification.

Sincerity is either Moral or Theological. Moral sincerity, I call such a
qualification of spirit, as leads a man to do to others, as he would be done
to himself. A rectitude of spirit in relation to men. Such a sincere man ('it is
probable) was Abimelech King of Gerar. He took Abraham's wife unto him, she
being very beautiful, but this he would not have done, had he known her to
have been Abraham's wife; for Abraham had told him; that she was his sister;
and therefore God bore witness with Abimelech concerning his integrity. In the
integrity of my heart, and innocence of my hands have I done this, said
Abimelech; and God said unto him, yea I know that thou did this in the
integrity of thy heart, Genesis 20.6. Such a sincere man, was that young man which
came to our Savior, and told him, that he had kept all the Commandments from
his youth. He gave to every man his due, and lived orderly amongst his
neighbors, and therefore he judged himself as good as needed to be.

Moral sincerity, is close hypocrisy. Moral sincerity is like some
counterfeit Pearls, which make a fair show to look upon, but deceive both
buyer and beholder. Multitudes think that because their spirits are so
overruled by God, that they do no injury to man, that therefore they are
endowed with godly sincerity, (...), the sincerity of God, as the original
here calls it. The truth is, Moral sincerity, is the sincerity of God too; for
it is his restraining corrupt man, which otherwise would be as profane toward
man outwardly, as he is toward God inwardly. I withheld thee from sinning
against me, said God to Abimclech, Genesis 20.6. A moral sincere man, is but an
outside holy man, but observes it not; and therefore (I think) called by some,
a close hypocrit. But this is not that sincerity of God, which my Text speaks
of.

Godly sincerity, or, the sincerity of God, which my Text speaks of, is a
special work of God upon the soul of man, making him laborious, to walk
according to Gods Will in all things, that God may have all the glory due to
his Name.

First, I say, that godly sincerity is a special work of God upon the soul,
etc. Genus in Definitione.
This Genus, the Apostle confirms in my text, calling sincerity (...), the
sincerity of God. That is, that sincerity, which is after a special manner
wrought of God, in the heart of man. So likewise elsewhere the Apostle
solemnly prays for sincerity, in the behalf of the Philippians; which
plain^y shows, that sincerity is not Quid proveniens a natura, a thing growing
naturally in man. And this I pray (says the Apostle) that your love may
abound, that you may approve the things that are excellent, that ye may be
sincere, and without offense unto the day of Christ. Phil. 1.9,10.

The heart of man naturally is deceitful, not sincere; desperately wicked, not
truly good; more opposite to sincerity then to any thing; as things corrupted,
carry a greater dissimilitude to what they were, then to any thing else which
they never were. The Devil is more opposite to the goodness of an Angel
which once he had, then to any lower good, which he never formally had; which
is a torment that lies upon him, as a part of his judgment. God made man
upright: that is, for qualification suitable to his own will; apt and able to
walk in all holy ways blameless. Man voluntarily loosing this, as the Devil
did that, through pride, is with the Devil, more dislike to himself, then to
any thing below himself: he is more like a Lion, a Leopard, a Tiger, a Bear,
a Wolf, a Serpent, a Toad, a Stock, a Stone, then man in innocence; and more
violently opposite to uprightness and justice naturally, then any creature
below him is: and therefore is the heart of man naturally said to be deceitful
[above all things] and desperately wicked [beyond knowledge] Ier. 17.9. which is
enough to demonstrate, that godly sincerity cannot be a natura; and if not of
nature, then of grace. There is no fallacy in this disjunctive argument.
Cu^ulus accidentium, in definitione.


Making a man laborious, etc.] that is, constantly laborious, willingly
laborious, and laborious according to all his strength. First, sincerity is
such a special work of God upon the soul, that it makes a man laborious to
do the Will of God. Solomon confirms this where he says, That the labor of
the righteous tends to life: Prove. 10.16.
that is, to a holy and happy life. A sincere man is laborious to lead a holy
life, to order all his conversation, according to the holy rule of Gods Word.
That thus this clause is to be interpreted, I collect from the following
clause, which by way of antithesis, the Wise man delivers. The fruit of the
wicked to sin. The whole proverb put together, has the force of a comparison
in it. As the labor of the wicked tends to sin; so the labor of the
righteous tends to holiness, and so consequently to happiness. Sincerity has
more in it, then an applauding of holiness: Thou art more righteous then I:
Thy going in and out before me in the host is good. Sincerity has more in it
then a lasie wishing for holiness. O that I might die the death of the
righteous, and that my last end might be like his! Sincerity is such a special
work of God upon the soul, that it sets a man a laboring for holiness.
Wherefore we labor, that is, we which are sincere, that whether present or
absent, we may be accepted of him. 2 Cor. 5.9. that is, that we may live
holily, and die happily; whereas all other men labor after vanities, and so
consequently their labors tend to sin, and so to death, as Solomon says.

Sincerity is such a special work of God upon the soul, that it makes a man
see a transcendant worth in the will of God; and worth begets love, as the
Sun draws forth the spring; and love begets labor, to attain the thing
beloved. Thy testimonies are wonderful: therefore does my soul keep them,
Psalm. 119.129. Thy testimonies are wonderful: that is, wonderful righteous,
just, and equal; and wonderful sweet; sweeter then the honey, or the
honey-combe: therefore does my soul keep them. That is, therefore does my
soul labor to keep them. As if he had said, I see such a transcendant
purity, and taste, such a transcendant sweetness, in the testimonies of God,
that my soul cannot choose, but labor to walk in them.

Sincerity makes a man [laborious] to do the Will of God, you see: that is, it
makes a man constantly, willingly, and according to all his strength,
industrious. That sincerity is such a special work of God upon the soul,
that makes a man [constantly) laborious to do the Will of God, Paul in whom
sincerity was, confirms. And herein do I exercise my self, to have [alwaies]
a conscience void of offense, toward God and toward man, Acts 24.16. Paul's
industry was, to obey the Will of God to day, and the like next day, and so he
continued laborious every day, that he might have [alwaies] a conscience void
of offense, toward God and man. The high way of the upright, is to depart from
evil, says Solomon, Prove. 16. v. 17. That is, this is their daily soul
labor, the continual road in which they travel, to get rid of sin, and to
depart from that more and more. An hypocrite stumbles into this path of piety
now and then, but this is not his high way, his usual and daily road; he
quickly gets out of it again: to this unconstant cloud, (I conceive] Solomon
opposes the upright man, in the place forecited, who makes it a beaten high
way, he is so constant in his endeavors to do good, and to depart from evil,
I have inclined my heart, to perform thy statutes [alway] [even unto the end.]
Psalm. 119.112. Sincerity, is such a special work of God upon the soul, that
it inclines the heart to labor always, to obey the Will of God, which
naturally is quickly weary of well-doing. As the touch of a Loadstone, makes the
needle to have a constant and restless inclination to the North: so godly
sincerity, which I may call Gods secret touch of the heart, it makes the soul
of man, have a constant and restless inclination, to walk in Gods ways; and
this constant inclination makes him constantly laborious, to do according to
his daily desire. Sincerity is such a special work of God upon the soul,
that it makes a man to set God [alwaies] before him, and to do all things
daily as in his presence. I have set the Lord [alwaies] before me, says David,
Psalm. 16.8. For we are not as many, which corrupt the Word of God: but as of
sincerity, but as of God, [in the sight of God] speak we in Christ, 2 Cor.
2.17. This is the genuine nature of sincerity, to make a man to set God
[alwaies] before his eyes, and to do things, as beholding him that is
invisible.

Sincerity is such a special work of God upon the soul, that it makes a man
so constant in his endeavors to do the Will of God, that no opposition can
make him to cease this labor. The proud have had me greatly in derision: yet
have I not declined from thy Law, Psalm. 119.51. Proud wretches scoffed at holy
ways, and David's holy endeavors to walk in them: nay, they did this
vehemently; and yet David (being sincere) held on his holy course still. Nay,
elsewhere he tells us, that they had almost consumed him upon earth, such was
their malice against him, and yet he forsook not his holy industry to obey
Gods precepts, Psalm. 119.87. Neither persecution of tongue nor hand, though
never so vehement, can make a man, in whose heart godly sincerity is, to cease
his industry to obey God, and walk in his ways. Hang him up as a bottle in
the smoke, Ps. 119.83
and yet he will not forget this work he is about, to wit, to obey Gods
statutes. Strong trials may make a sincere heart give back for a time, so
far may they prevail upon the remaining unsoundnesse, that is in the heart
of man naturally when at best; but they never prevail, to make a sincere heart
give off his labor to obey God.

That sincerity is such a special work of God upon the soul, as makes a man
willingly laborious to do the Will of God, is hinted to us by that expression
of the Prophet, Isai. 1.19. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the
good of the Land. Sincere men, are such as shall eat the good of that holy
Land, which Canaan typified: So that this being laid down, as an undeniable
conclusion; we see that sincerity is such a special work of God upon the
soul, as touches the will, and so makes a man not only obedient, but willing
and obedient, without which there is no eating, that is, enjoying of that holy
Land, which Canaan typified. 'Twas that which God did much look at, and stand
upon, under the old covenant, that in all their sacrificall services (which
were of cost and charge) they should be willing and cheerful, or else God
would not account their obedience sincere; and therefore says David an upright
man, and that God and all his people might see his uprightness, in this
chargeable way of serving God, I will [freely] sacrifice unto thee, I will
praise thy Name, O Lord, for it is good. I will freely sacrifice: that is,
willingly, cheerfully, bountifully, etc. If willingness were so much looked at,
in their chargeable services under the old covenant, as a symptom of
sincerity, much more doubtless does God look at it now, in his services of
the new convenant, which are without expense; and answerably doubtless is it
with sincere men for the general, under the Gospel: to wit, more willing and
cheerful in their services to God, then they under the Law were.

A sincere man does not labor to serve God, of constraint, and by compulsion,
as some servants, and all beasts, serve us: but of a ready mind, as one that
has chosen this way of life above all others, to walk in: I have chosen the
way of truth; thy judgments have I laid before me. Psalm. 119.30. Sincerity is
such a special work of God upon the soul, that it makes a man see a greater
beauty in Gods ways, then in any ways beside; and to taste a greater
sweetness in these ways, then in any ways; and hence the soul is raised
voluntarily and freely, to choose these ways to walk in, before all others.
Sincerity is such a special work of God upon the soul, that it makes a man
see the Word of God to be the straightest and truest rule of all others, to
walk by; and therefore voluntarily chooses this, before others, to lay before
him, as a rule to walk by. I have chosen the way [of truth:] thy judgments
have I laid before me.

That sincerity is such a special Work of God upon the soul, as makes a man
labourious [according to all his strength] to do the Will of God, we may
lively see by some notable expressions of Paul. I press toward the mark, for
the price of the high Calling, of God, in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.14. (...), I
pursue, I hunt, says the original. Pursuing and hunting are actions wherein
the creature-puts forth all his strength, to get what they desire. Sincerity
sets a man to hit the white; and there must be all possible care in levelling,
to do this. Sincerity sets the soul to win the prise; (for the price of the
high calling) now a man that would win the prise, must not run lasily, but he
must nervis cunct is laborare, run with all his strength. So you have another
notable expression, Phil. 3.13. Forgetting those things which are behind, and
[reaching forth] unto those things which are before, (...) extending,
contending, stretching forth, reaching forth; which are all terms (you know)
which note the whole strength put forth, to acquire a thing. Sincerity is such
a special work of God upon the soul, as makes a man to set before him no
other rule, but perfection, to walk by; and then it makes a man labor with
all his strength, to walk exactly according to this rule; (...) If by any
means he may attain unto the resurrection of the dead. That is, to do the
Will of God on earth, as men risen from the dead, and living with Christ in
heaven do. Hitherto tend also those expressions in Scripture, of serving God
with the [whole heart] with my whole heart have I sought thee, O let me not
wander from thy Commandments. Psalm. 119.10. I labor with all my strength to
walk in thy ways, and when I have put forth mine own strength to the
uttermost, then I deny all in my self, and wholly depend upon thy strength, to
be made victorious, against the many temptations I meet withal; And whilst
through thine aid, I go in the direct way, to obtain grace, and victory
against corruptions, let me not O Lord be frustrated, and so lie open still, to
be drawn aside from thy Commandments.

Godly sincerity makes a man observe the divine rule, in laboring to do the
will of God. Now the divine rule in this point, is, that we should labor with
all our strength. Thou have commanded us to keep thy precepts. [diligently]
Psalm. 119.4. Thou have commanded us to keepe] that is, thou have commanded us
to labor to keep: but how to labor? lasily? no: diligently. (...) valde,
very much, earnestly, vehemently, says the original. That is, with all our
strength. Now sincerity is such a special work of God upon the soul, that it
makes a man put this precept before him, in all his labourings to do the will
of God: and so he labors very much, earnestly, vehemently, that is, with all
his strength, to do the Will of God.

That sincerity makes a man laborious with all his might [to do all Gods will]
the Scripture abundantly proves. God himself describing a sincere man, to
the Devil, confirms this. And the Lord said unto Satan, have thou not
considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect
and an upright man, one that fears God and escheweth evil? Job 2.3.
That is, one that eyeth all my will, and escheweth all that is contrary
thereunto. That thus these words are to be interpreted is manifest by Jobs own
language, when he would maintain his sincerity to God, the searcher of all
hearts. Let me be weighed in an even balance, that God may know mine
integrity. Why, what is thy integrity Job, upon which thou do so much stand?
Why it is this: I have labored to obey all Gods will. If my steps have turned
out of the way, and my heart walked after mine eyes, and if [any blot] has
cleaved to my hand, etc. Job 31. If I have walked with vanity, or if my foot
has hasted to deceit; and so he goes on largely; driving things to this issue,
that if he had not been laborious, to walk according to all Gods will, he
would yield to what his adversaries charged him with, to wit, that his heart
was not sincere. So likewise the Lord explaines himself, in describing David's
integrity to Solomon. And if thou walk before me as David thy Father, in
integrity of heart, and in uprightness, to do according to [all] that I have
commanded thee, 1 King. 9.4. By this we plainly see, that sincerity, sets a
man to do all that God enjoynes. Christ therefore in the new Testament,
describing sincerity to the young man that thought himself as upright
(doubtless) as any, All these things have I kept from any youth: what lack I
yet? Jesus said unto him, If thou will be perfect: that is, if thou will be
sincere and upright indeed, in the eye of God who is a searcher of the heart,
go and sell all thou have, and give to the poor, and come and follow me: Part
with every lust, with covetousness thy darling sin, as well as with others,
to which thy nature is not so apt, and resign up thy heart, to obey me in all
things, so shall thou be happy here and hereafter. Sincerity makes a man set
all Gods will before him, as a rule to walk by, and to obey God in that part
of his will that most opposes that sin, to which he is most inclined, as
well as any other. For all his judgments were before me; and I did not put aw^y
his statutes from me. I was upright before him, and kept my self from [mine
iniquity] Psalm. 18.22.23. I did not put away his Statutes from me, etc. An
unsound soul will not take notice of such a precept, as opposes his special
sin: such a precept must go for a blanke, which the soul throws by, and
will not think of, but as conscience now and then puts him in mind of it,
whether he will or no. But it is not so with a man in whom sincerity is: that
precept which does most oppose that sin, to which he is most inclined, he
labors to obey as well as any other. J was upright before thee, and J kept my
self from [mine iniquity.] An unsound soul sets so many of Gods statutes
before him, as rules to walk by, as suites with himself and the times, and no
more. Such precepts as oppose his special corruptions, or displease the tunes,
and so expose him to suffering, these he baukes and puts away, as David here
says, and calls them as the rotten Scribes and Pharisees were wont to do,
Least Commandments, small things not to be regarded: which rottenness Christ
took up roundly in those ironicall words, Whosoever shall break one of these
least Commandments, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of God. Godly
sincerity makes no difference of greatest and least, between the precepts of
God, but sets all before a man as a rule to walk by, and makes the soul
laborious to observe all. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto
all thy Commandments. Psalm. 119.6.

That God may have all the glory due to his Name] That sincerity makes a man to
aim at the glory of God, and not at his own glory, is manifest by that
expression the Apostle uses in my Text, not with fleshly wisdom, that is, not
declaring our own humane parts and gifts, to advance our own honor and
esteem, but as the spirit gave us utterance, so we speak in all plainness and
sincerenesse, that so poor ignorant souls might be edified, and God
glorified. Christ describing an upright man to the unsound Scribes and
Pharisees, describes him (I remember) by this property, That he seeks not his
own glory: but his glory that sent him. He that speaks of himself seeks
his own glory: but he that seeks his glory that sent him, the same is
[true,] and no unrighteousness in him, John 7.18. Christ that had no guile
found in his lips, vindicated his sincerity still by this, that he sought not
his own glory in any thing he did, but the glory of him that sent him: and that
man which does thus, he is true, and there is no unrighteousness in him. That
is, he is sincere, and no hypocrit as the world may falsely judge. As Aristotle
said of a friend, that he is, alter ego, another I, or another self: so may I
say of a Christian, that he is alter Christus, another Christ: as he is, so are
we in this world, says Saint John. As he aimed in all things at the glory of
his father; so a sincere man aims in eating, in drinking, or whatsoever he
does, at the glory of God. God forbid (says Saint Paul) that I should glory in
any thing but in Christ. Sincerity is such a special work of God upon the
soul, that it makes a man give Christ all the glory, of all the good he does,
and of all the good he has, and hopes for; and to appropriate nothing to
himself but shame, yet am I nothing, says Paul. Nothing but a sinner; nay, of
all sinners the chief.

An upright man, is a man after Gods own heart: now look what God most looks
for, that an upright man looks most at, and labors most of all to help God
unto. Now God looks at his own honor and glory in every thing, wherein he
has to do with the creature, above any thing. He made all things for his
glory; and upholds all things for his glory. There should never have been a
stone laid, in the glorious Fabric of this world, had it not been for Gods
glory: nor not a stone should have been left upon a stone, long ere this, but
the whole world should have been turned into his first nothing, were it not
for Gods glory. This a sincere man eyes, and answerably applies himself to God
in all he does; as an obedient wife applies her self to that sweet carriage,
that she knows will most delight her husband. When Isaac had discovered to
Esau, that Venison was the most savory meat, which his soul desired, Esau
applied himself to his father, and goes a hunting after it, that he might
bring to his father what he most loved, and so obtain his fathers blessing.
Now God has declared that his honor and glory is that savorie meat which his
soul of all things, most loves; and therefore all that are sincere children of
God, they do hunt and plot for this, in all their ways that they may bring
God that savourie meat, which his soul most loves.

The description of sincerity being thus opened, I am in the next place to show
unto you, the grounds of the point; why we ought thus simply and sincerely, to
have our conversation in this world. The grounds are these four: First,
because God commands it. Secondly, because God delights in it. Thirdly, because
God has appointed this and no other way unto all good. Lastly, because the
world which lies in wickedness, may be left without excuse. First, we ought in
simplicity and godly sincerity, to have our conversation in the world, because
God commands it. I am the Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou perfect;
that is, entire, sincere, Genesis 17.1. This Commandment God gave to Abraham, and
in him to all us. This commandment is not grievous; a Commandment that has
any injustice in it, that any should complain or except against it, and
therefore ought to be obeyed. For God made man, and can unmake him again at
his pleasure; and therefore may justly serve himself of him, and appoint him
wha^ rules he pleases to walk by. I am God Almighty] walk before me and be
sincere. I by my Almighty power made thee of nothing, and can quickly by this
Almighty power, turn thee into worse then nothing: therefore walk thus and
thus as I command thee.

God did more by his Almighty power, then barely make man: God by his Almighty
power made man upright: that is, not as uprightness notes sincerity, but as
uprightness notes perfection. And therefore God might justly command us (if he
would) to walk perfectly, as Angels and Saints in Heaven do. This
Commandment therefore is not grievous, but full of mercy and moderation, that
he commands us only to walk before him and be upright, as uprightness notes
sincerity. Therefore seeing it is a Commandment full of justice and mercy both,
it ought to be obeyed: and so consequently, every one of us ought in simplicity
and godly sincerity, to have our conversation in this world.

Secondly, as God commands us to be sincere, so he delights in it; and
therefore we ought in simplicity and godly sincerity, to have our conversation
in this World. They that are of a froward heart, are an abomination to the
Lord; but such as are upright in their way, are his delight. Prove. 11.20.
Kings, as they have officers for necessity, so they have favorites, persons of
honor for communion and delight. Now the King of Kings, would have no fit
persons of honor, for communion and delight in this world, were there no
upright men, in it: and therefore we ought in simplicity and godly sincerity,
to have our conversation in this world. God would live solitary and alone in
this world, without any pleasure or delight in this world, were there no
upright men, nor uprightness in it: for God has no pleasure in wickedness
nor wicked men. Thou art not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, Psalm.
5.4. The God of this world, that rules in the children of disobedience, is a
God that has pleasure in wickedness; but the God of all the world, is not
such a God; he has pleasure only in uprightness. I know also my God, that
thou triest the heart, and have pleasure in uprightness. 1 Chro. 29.17. And
therefore we ought to walk in uprightness, or else we shall deprive the King
of Kings, of his pleasure.

Thirdly, we ought in simplicity and godly sincerity, to have our conversation
in this world, because God has appointed this and no other way to all good.
For the Lord God is a Sun and a Shield; the Lord will give grace and glory;
no good thing will he withold, from them that walk uprightly. Psalm. 84.11.
If we would have the light of Gods smiling countenance, to shine upon our
souls, which is ten thousand times more glorious, and reviving then the Sun,
we must walk uprightly: for the Lord God is a Sun to such, and to none else.
God is angry with the wicked every day, says the Prophet: and being angry with
them every day, he cannot smile upon their souls, as the Sun does upon all
creatures, but frown and knit the brows against them. God dwells as a
convincer and reprover, and not as a comforter, in the hearts of hypocrites. God
feeds men's souls with gall and wormwood, with bitters, not with sweets; with
a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which
have not their conversation in simplicity and godly sincerity, in this world A
Hell and not a Heaven, shall men that walk not uprightly, have within their
own hearts.

If we would have protection, we must walk uprightly: for the Lord God is a
Shield only to such. He that walks righteously and speaks uprightly, his
place of defense shall be the munitions of Rocks, Isa. 33.15. God is a
consuming fire, and not a defense unto the hypocrit. In a word, if a man would
have grace or glory, or any good thing else that he can name, he must walk in
this way to obtain it, to wit, in simplicity and godly sincerity: for in no
other way has God engaged himself, to bestow any good upon man, but all
evil. The Israelites going out on the Sabbath day to find Manna, found
nothing but a curse; and the reason, because out of Gods way. God will
distribute blessings in his own way: if we decline this way, God will inflict
curses, and not blessings. Now upright walking is that way, in which God has
promised to bestow all good, and none else: and therefore we ought thus to
walk. It Is fit we should come to God, and not God to us: it is fit that unholy
man should conform to a holy God; and not a holy God, to unholy man.

1
Finally, we ought in simplicity and godly sincerity, to have our conversation
in the World, that so the world which lies in wickedness, may be left without
excuse, both in regard of their wickedness toward God, and his children.
Wicked men complain of Christ, that he is a hard master, looking to reap
where he did not sow; that this and that precept is a hard saying, none can
obey it. And others complain that the world is so full of occasions and
provocations, that it is impossible to walk uprightly. Others, that times are
so hard and dead, that they cannot live of their callings, if they should deal
justly, and walk uprightly. Now Christ will stop the mouths of all these at
the great day, by setting before them those that have lived, in the same ages
of the world, in the same employments in the world, under the same government
of Christ in the world, and yet have kept themselves unspotted of the world,
and have in simplicity and godly sincerity, had their conversation in the
world: and then shall Christ be clear when he judges, and liars mouths shall
be stopped, and be like the man that wanted a wedding garment. And therefore we
ought in simplicity and godly sincerity to have our conversation in the world,
every one in his place, that so Christ may do this service by us against the
wicked, at the great day.

2
Again, that wicked men may be left without excuse, as in regard of their
wickedness toward God, so in regard of their wickedness toward Gods
children. Now the wicked persecute the godly with tongue and hand, and pretend
just ground for their practice; that the godly are, as he falsely said of the
Prophet, troublers of Israel; enemies to Church and State. But at the great
day, the searcher of all hearts will lay open all things according to truth;
and make it plainly appear to men and Angels, that they had their
conversation in this world, in simplicity and godly sincerity, and so
guiltless of all, that the wicked accused them of, and punished them for; and
then will Christ be clear when he judges these wretches, for condemning the
generation of the just. Wherefore we ought to walk sincerely and blamelessely
in this world, that so the wicked may have no plea, for their wicked
proceedings against us, or against the righteous proceeding of Christ, against
them.

Ought we in simplicity and godly sincerity, to have our conversation in the
world? Why, then let us examine our selves, and see whether we thus walk. Are
ye laborious? that is, constantly laborious, willingly laborious; laborious
according to all your strength, to do all Gods will, that he may have all the
glory due to his Name? Look back, and call to mind, how this description of
sincerity was opened, and lay open your hearts and lives by it, and see whether
they agree or not. Are ye laborious to do the will of God? Or do ye not the
work of the Lord negligently? Ier. 48.10.
and so stand liable to that dreadful curse denounced by Jeremy? Do ye not
rest in bodily exercises, which profit nothing? It Is the least labor in the
world, to bring the outward man to duties; the labor of labors is about the
heart, to bring that to duties; are ye laborious about this? Are ye watchful
over your Spirits, and laborious about your inward man, that this in every
thing, may go along with the outward man to obey God. 'Twas that the Lord of
old upbraided his people withal, that they were laborious according to the
outward man, to come to Church, and to be at all divine exercises, but they
were careless respecting their hearts, which God most looked at, and let this
run loose after vanity. And they come unto thee, as thy people comes, and
they sit before thee as thy people, and they hear thy words, but they will not
do them: for with their mouths they show much love, but their heart goes
after their covetousness, Ezekiel. 33.31. God most looks at the heart, how that
is entire to, or loose from, himself. Are ye most laborious about that, which
God most looks at? or do ye not least mind that which God looks at most? In
this consists the power of godliness, to be laborious about the inward man, to
bring this to be obedient to the will of God (My Son, give me thy heart.)
Neglect this, and thou were as good sit still, as labor at all about thy
outward man, to bring that to be holy: thy labor about outside holiness, is
to God as the cutting off of a dogs neck: and God will upbraid thy labor, as
he did those hypocritical Scribes and Pharisees, who washed the outside of
the Cup and Platter.

Possibly some of you may think, that you hold weight well enough by this:
That you are laborious according to the outward man, and according to the
inward man, to do the will of God: but put in one weight more into the Scales
and Balance of the sanctuary, to wit, this; Are ye constantly laborious to do
the will of God? Tell me which way the Scales turn now. Sincerity makes a man
constantly laborious to do the will of God, as you have largely heard; do you
thus labor? Or are ye not quickly weary in well-doing; so weary as to leave off
the work? Thou art watchful over thy spirit to day; but art thou not as
careless about it to morrow? The godly are subject to wearisomenesse, and
fainting in their minds (as the Apostle intimates) in their laboring about,
and watching with an unruly heart; but they are never so weary, as to give over
the work. David was wearied often with his groanings, they were so deep, and
breathed out so many precious Spirits; but yet as fresh strength came, he kept
on groaning still, under the heavy burden of a bad heart, and never left
laboring about his spirit, to bring it to be more and more composed, entire,
and one with God as long as he lived. But unsound Christians, are quickly weary
in laboring about their hearts, just in that sense, which God is said to be
weary of repenting, Ier. 15.6. Thou have forsaken me (says the Lord) thou art
gone backward; therefore will I stretch out my hand against thee, I am weary
of repenting. That is, I will repent no more: I will forbear the execution of
my threatenings no longer. So rotten hearts are wearied with repenting, soul
searching, and soul watching, that they will repent no more, nor maintain
inward industry about their souls no more; but judge of it upon a little
trial, as that which will shorten their lives, or at least, utterly end the
felicity of their lives, and at last cry it down, as an unnecessary and
unreasonable service. Is it not thus with you?

Possibly yet some of you may think, that you hold weight well enough, by the
Balance of the Sanctuary. But put in one weight more, and tell me which way
the scales turn then. Are ye willingly and cheerfully laborious, to do the
will of God? Do you find any soul sweetness, in your soul labors? Or are
they not as the disease of the stone, strong tortures, without the least tang
of sweetness? Is it not as death unto thee, to be searching, humbling,
watching and observing thy spirit, a day? Do thou not shun and avoid
occasions, as much as thou can, that may make thee to look in upon thy
spirit, to check it in its vain way, as that which is like the pricking of
thy right eye? Do thou not make frivolous excuses, and needless business,
to put by David's opportunities, of private commerce with God and thine own
soul? as one that finds no pleasure nor profit, in this service of God?
Do thou not wish that Prayers were over, Sermons over, the Lords day over,
that thou might be selling Corn, and following thy secular employments, and
carnal sports and delights, as those wherein thou find more soul content,
then in any divine thing. It Is a joy to the just to do judgment, says
Solomon. It Is the sweetest pleasure in the world to an upright man, to be in
upright holy ways, doing uprightly to God and man. Gods word, Gods ordinances,
Gods people, Gods service in every part thereof, are all transcendently sweet
to an upright soul: Sweeter then honey, that is, sweeter then the sweetest
earthly content. And the more spiritual divine duties and exercises are, the
more pleasing and taking still, to an upright soul. Duties of most
seriousness and strictness, are of most soul sweetness to him Is it thus
with you?

Possibly yet some of you may think that you hold weight well enough, by this
Balance of the Sanctuary. But put in one grain more, and tell me whether
thou be not found too light then? Are ye laborious according to all your
strength, to do the will of God? Do you reach forth and press forward, as
Saint Paul says? that is, put out all your strength to obey the will of God?
this in Scripture, where sincerity is pressed unto, is called a serving of God
with all our hearts. You take a little pains to obey the will of God, but could
you not take a great deal more if you listed? 'Twas the unsoundnesse of the
Jews, that when they could have brought Males and legiti^e sacrifices, they
brought (to save their purses) maimed and deformed sacrifices. And so 'twas the
unsoundnesse of Saul, that he could have killed Agag and the fat of the
Cattle, as well as the rest of the Amalekits, if he would. And is it not your
hypocrisy, that you could do a great deal more to please God, then you do,
if you listed? Do not by and self ends make you pluck in your horns, and
suspend your selves, parts and abilities from God service? Does not the fear
of the loss of your liberties, livings, lives, and the like, make you speak
less for God, and do less for God, then he has given you ability and
opportunity to do? Do ye not put forth your parts in the service of God, in
reference to the safety of your skin, and not in reference to Gods command,
which calls for all our might, in his service?

If you tell me that you hold weight yet by the balance of the sanctuary, why
put in yet one grain more, and tell me whether the skales do not stand without
poising either way? Are ye laborious according to all your strength, to do all
Gods will? according to that holy rule, Deuteronomy. 15.5. Only if thou carefully
hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do [all these
Commandements] which I command thee this day. You do with Herod, by means of
powerful preaching, and sharp affliction, reform many things peradventure,
but do ye labor to reform all things? To divorce your selves from your
Herodias? To pull out right eyes, and to cut off right hands? To mortify your
members which are upon earth; that is, the sins of your souls, which are as
dear unto you as the members of your bodies? or do ye not spare Agag, and the
fat of your lusts? pleasing sins, and profitable sins? Do you observe
doctrine and discipline, matter and manner in the worship and service of God?

You pray, but do ye pray fervently? You pray, but do ye watch and pray? You
hear the word of God, but do ye take heed how ye hear? You receive the
Sacrament, but do ye examine you selves and so eat? You go to the house of
God about holy duties, but do ye look to your feet, when you approach so near
unto God? you give to the poor, but do you give cheerfully? You give, but do
you give liberally? You know the Scripture calls for manner, as well as matter:
manner is all in all with God. And sincerity is such a special work of God
upon the soul, that it makes a man laborious to do every divine thing exact,
according to that divine manner, which God in hi^ word prescribes. It Is not
thus with an hypocrite: he is lead by customs; and makes it a matter of
conscience, not to swerve from these, how incongruous so ever to the word of
God; Or else he is fearfully given over to a careless Spirit, to do divine
things as hits, he cares not how; any way, or no way, all is one. Or else, he
is desperately pinned to his own will, being wiser in his own eyes then ten
men that give a reason. Thus and thus he will walk, say all the world what
they will: is it not thus with you?

If you tell me that yet you hold out weight by the balance of the sanctuary,
I am glad; yet possibly you may be one grain too light. Are ye laborious to
do all Gods will, that God may have all the glory due to his name? Do ye not
sacrifice to your own ners, and take the glory to your selves of your labors
like Herod? When men applaud you, is not this to you, as the rubbing of a
Parrat upon the head, very pleasing, and that which makes you hug your selves
within your own thoughts: Is not this great Babell which I have built? Could
such a thing have been done, if I had not done it? Or could any man have done
it so well as I? Look in upon your spirits before, but specially after divine
duties, and see whether you do not seek your selves in them, more then the
glory of Christ. Do ye not give alms to be accounted liberal men, and that
the poor may applaud you for good men, and good housekeepers? Do ye not blow
a Trumpet, when you give alms? that is, so distribute your charity, as may be
most advantageous to your own repute in the world? Do ye not let your left
hand know still what your right hand does? Are ye not dampt in your designs of
charity and bounty, when it is to go forth in such a way, as if it were cast
upon waters, or into the bottom of a Well, where no eye can see, nor no tongue
speak of your good works, nor no likely'ud of the least return? Do ye not
look for much observance, from such to whom you do much? And repent of your
kindness, when men do not answer it in thankfulness? Do ye eye Christ's
command, and out of love to him, give upon all just occasions, as unto him? Are
those that are religious tendered and succored by you, in their bonds and
miseries, as if you were bound with them, according to the divine rule?

Do ye not in prayer, more look at words and expressions, then to your
spirits? Do ye not pray in the marketplaces? That is, so pray that others may
observe you, and blaze abroad that you are very devout persons? Are ye not
industrious to pray well (as you call it) in public, and careless and
perfunctory, when you pray in private? Are ye not more constant a great deal,
in the performance of public, then in the performance of private prayers,
where there is no observer nor applauder but God, which sees and hears in
secret? Do ye not after prayer, hug your own gifts, and admire your apt
expressions, dexterity of utterance; and to think much, that you have no more
thanks given you for your pains; and that those that joined with you, were no
more affected? Do ye not pin your spirits to your own acute studied forms,
and prayers in print, boasting of things made ready to your hand, (as the
Apostle speaks) and scoff at the spirit of grace and supplication, Zech.
12.10.

Do ye not preach your selves and not Christ; and more look at words then
matter; to please men, then to please God? Do ye labor to approve your selves
to every man's conscience, or to every man's fancy? Do ye not put plain
truths, into abstruse terms, a new coat upon old divinity, and strive to
soar in dry Metaphysicall strains, above your own and others apprehension?
Do ye not build hay and stubble, upon the true foundation? the opinions of
Fathers and Schoolmen, and the tenants of proud time-servers, whom God has
given over to a Spirit of delusion to believe lies, because they received not
the truth in the love of it? Do ye aim at conviction, conversion, or
ostentation in your preaching? Does it not almost make you sick like Ahab,
that your claborate Sermons in places of eminent note, have not yet brought you
to a fat living? Do ye not preach Christ out of envy, as the Apostle speaks,
to bring about your wicked designs, and to vend your malicious spirits against
the godly? Do ye not wrest the word of Christ, to confirm your time-serving
tenants, and to maintain your voluptuous loitering life? And if so: is this in
simplicity and godly sincerity to have your conversation in the world?

To you that by what has been said, see, that you are yet unsound at heart,
that you do not in simplicity and godly sincerity, order your conversation in
this world, I have three things to say: Labor to be affected with your
unsoundnesse: Then judge your selves, that you may never be judged of the Lord:
And then beg the cure of your foul disease.

First, labor to be affected with your unsoundnesse. This is the killing
mischief of hypocrisy, that it is hard and difficult, thoroughly to be found
out, and truly to be bewailed. Hypocrisy is vitium latens, vitium
transfigurans, vitium adulans, and vitium obdurans: a hidden, a transforming, a
flattering, and a hardening vice. 1
It Is a hidden vice. The heart is deceitful, and desperately wicked, who can
[know it] (says the Prophet.) The spirit of a man may know the things of a
man; but deceit and guile, this lurkes and skulkes in such hidden corners of
the heart, that the spirit of man does not know it. And hence it is, that
multitudes think themselves very sincere, which yet are very unsound. A man
may discern drunkenness, swearing, and whoring in himself, and yet all this
while, be utterly unable to see the hypocrisy of his spirit: and hence it is,
that you shall have drunkards, swearers, and whore-masters to confess these
vices, and yet plead for the goodness of their hearts and meanings too.

2
When the unsoundnesse of the heart, is discovered by the word and spirit of God
then hypocrisy becomes vitium transfigurans, a transforming vice. The heart
strives now, to put fair glosses upon foul matters; to put a beautiful
vizzard, upon the uglie face of sin; and to appear in the eye of awakened
conscience, quite of another color; or at least nothing so uglie, as the word
of God would make it to be.

3
If this will not stop the mouth of complaining conscience, then it becomes
vitium adulans, a flattering vice. The heart tells conscience now, that it is
true, things are bad, but God is very good: he is not extreme to mark what is
done amiss; a thousand worse persons have found mercy, and are gone to Heaven,
and therefore thou needst not so much trouble thy self O my soul. He that
believes makes not have; it is time enough yet, to amend all that is amiss, and
to be as good as the best.

4
All this while that it is a hidden vice, a transforming vice, a flattering
vice, it is a hardening vice. All the while hypocrisy lies hid, and after it is
discovered, and shifts and flatters, it insensibly hardens; so that whilst
deceiving, the soul is miserably deceived, and then becomes past feeling,
conscience being seared with an hot iron: that is, God utterly leaving
conscience, to do any office any longer for him, in checking such a shifting
shuffling sinner, in his sinful way. And when this work is done upon any
soul, you may leave tolling, and ring out; for he is dead and gone for ever.

Now because hypocrisy is of such a shuffling subtle nature as this, it is
very hard for a man to become truly sensible of it, and thoroughly affected
with it: and therefore I exhort you, which are convinced by what was formerly
delivered, of your unsoundnesse, first to labor to be truly sensible of it,
and deeply affected with it. It Is a vice that of all vices, puts you into the
furthest unlikenesse to God, and the nearest likeness to the devil. It puts
you into the furthest dissimilitude to God, of all vices: for God is most
upright, says Isaiah. Thou [most upright] do weigh the path of the just.
Isai. 26.7. God is most upright, and an hypocrit of all men least upright: and
therefore, an hypocrite of all men, is least like God, and yet most like the
devil; of whom I may say, as the Lord of the Leviathan, He is King, faith God,
of all the children of pride: So is the devil, King of all the children of
hypocrisy. As it is said of God, that he is most upright; so it may be said of
the devil, that he is most guilefull; an arch hypocrit: and therefore
guilefull persons are most like the devil; and the more guilefull, the more
like: and hence is Elimas, who was full of all subtilty, by way of eminency,
called the child of the devil by Saint Paul, who knew well how aptly to style
hypocrites.

It Is a vice that turns man into a devil, and God into fury fiercer then the
devil: for the devil is but Gods creature, and therefore though his fury be
unexpressible by us, yet it is finite in it self; but Gods fury against
hypocrites is infinite; and therefore you shall find him spending a whole
chapter, in breathing out woes against hypocrites; and therefore hell as the
most suitable place, and the greatest torments in hell, as the most suitable
thing to an infinite fury, is reserved as a peculiar portion for hypocrites. Were
infiniteness communicable, and by a finite creature susceptible, no less then
infinite fury, should hypocrites burn in.

When thou have by such considerations as these, brought thy spirit to be
truly affected with thy unsoundnesse, then judge thy self for it, that thou
may not be judged of the Lord. Judge thy self as one most injurious to
Christ and his glory, of all men. Judge thy self as a Traitor to the King of
Kings: as one that have craftily conspired, with the devil and thine own
heart, to keep out Christ from ruling and reigning in thee: as one that have
subtily betrayed the honor of God, in every action thou have performed,
seeking thy self under pretense of seeking him. Judge thy self as a cheater,
that have been cunning to deceive the godly, and thine own poor soul. Judge
thy self, as a selfe-soule-murtherer, that have craftily baffled thine own
conscience, that Gods word might not convert and turn thee, from thine ungodly
course, and so save thy precious soul. Judge thy self as a Judas, that
kissest Christ, bowest and cringest to Christ, and yet betraiest and crucifiest
Christ. In a word, judge thy self as a right hand of the devil, by which he
has done a great deal of mischief: judge thy self as a capital offender,
as a sinner of all sinners the chief; and then beg pardon.

And entreat God to cure the foul disease of thy heart. Tell him how long this
disease has been upon thee; and what a loathsome creature 'tath made thee;
and what a prime vital part it is fastened upon; and how near perishing thou
art; and how it is past the cure of all other Physicions and Surgeons; and that
there is but one way with thee speedily, if thou have not remedy forthwith from
him; and that thou have nothing of thine own, to satisfy him for the cure of
it; but have a friend Christ, that will pay all. Remember this, to beg him,
who fashioneth all men's hearts alike, to mend thy bad heart with a new one,
according to his promise. Only a new heart, is an upright heart; and this God
has promised to give, and this thou must urge, and believe, and wait: and
this way shall thou be healed, helped and saved.

To you which upon examination find, that you do in simplicity and godly
sincerity, order your conversation in this world, I have only this to say, you
do no more then you ought, and therefore there is no place for boasting. It Is
our beauty in Gods eye, to be vile in our own eyes, what ever our parts and
endeavors be. Thy uprightness of integrity, comes far short of that
uprightness of perfection, in which thou wast created: and therefore when thou
have done all that thou can, yet say that thou art an unprofitable servant; a
man that comes far short of what thou should be, and of what once thou wast.

But that which I would rather stand on a little, is this, Thou that walk
sincerely, do no more then thou oughtst, and therefore go on. The Apostles
exhortation to the Hebrews, shall be mine to you: Look diligently least any
man fail of the grace of God, least any root of ^ternesse springing up,
trouble you, and thereby many be defiled. Heb. 12.15. We have that within us,
and that without us, which will corrupt our simplicity, and turn us aside from
our sincere conversation, if we do not watch over our selves. 1
Where simplicity is, hypocrisy is not wholly extir pated; some remainders of
this foul evil are in the best heart; and these roots of bitterness, if you
be not still laboring to grub up, they will quickly over-grow sincerity, and
all good in the heart.

And as we have that within us, which will quickly seduce us, from that
simplicity which is in Christ; so we have that without us too, which will do the
like, if we be not very watchful, to wit the devil and his children. The
devil is an arch Apostate himself, and he labors might and maine, to make
all the sons of men, to fall from grace and goodness as he has done; that so
every one, may be as near like himself, in sin and misery, as may be. He
goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour (says the
Apostle.) A thousand wiles has the Devil to corrupt our simplicity; and he is
more laborious about this, then about any design against the soul of man. The
devil is not so laborious, to make a breach upon a man's faith or patience, or
the like, as upon a man's sincerity: because he knows that every breach made
upon this, is a stab to the heart, which will kill the soul for ever, if God do
not admirably cure it. If labor will accomplish this design, the devil will
not neglect that: he goes about seeking whom he may devour. If terrors and
affrightments will accomplish this design, the Devil will roar like a Lion,
against a man's soul, as if he would tear him to pieces, and suddenly throw
him into that bottomless pit, without all redemption. If flattery will be
more prevalent then terror, to bring about this design, the devil will
transform himself into an Angel of light, and promise us all the Kingdoms
of the World, to wind us about to him.

2
And as the devil is laborious about this design, so he has many Apostate
children, such as have lost that good that they seemed to have, and these, as
their father, being more like their father, then any of all his children
beside, labor tooth and nail, not only passively by example, but actively by
promises and threatenings, especially in these last days, to turn aside souls
from simplicity in doctrine and manners; and by their divellish craft have
turned away many; so that many have made shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience, and are gone in the way of Balaam the son of Bosor that arch
hypocrit, studying and laboring to mischieve Gods people, for preferments and
honors in the world; speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their consciences
seared with an hot iron. And therefore it is but needful and seasonable, that I
exhort you to look to your spirits, and take heed of these bitter roots, that
ye be not defiled by them. Remember what God says by the Prophet Ezekiel. When
the righteous man turns away from his righteousness which he has done, and
commits iniquity, all the righteousness which he has done, shall not be
mentioned, but in his trespass which he has trespassed, and in his sin
which he has sinned, in that shall he die. Ezekiel. 18.24. And if once you wax
weary of well doing, and decline sincere walking, all thy former integrity
shall not so much as once be mentioned to thy comfort, but to thy terror often
shall it be by way of upbraiding, mentioned to thy conscience here, and to the
aggravation of thy condemnation hereafter, as one that have tasted of the
powers of the world to come, of the sweetness of the spirit of grace, and yet
after this, have grieved, opposed, and done despite against it.

Having therefore put your hand to the plough, look not back: having begun in
the spirit, do not end in the flesh: having begun to order your conversation
sincerely and uprightly, so continue unto the death, what ever you undergo in
life All afflictions for righteousness sake, shall be tolerable, comfortable,
and at last augment your crown. They shall be tolerable when at height: for
no trial shall be above your strength: God is faithful by whom you are
tempted, who will with the temptation show a way to escape.

2
They shall not only be tolerable, but they shall be also comfortable, when at
the very height. For as the afflictions of Christ abound in you, so shall your
consolations abound by Christ (as the Apostle says.) The prereception of
bitters, makes sweets the sweeter.

3
Finally they shall be profitable, to augment your crown of glory in the life
to come. Blessed are ye when persecuted for righteousness sake, for great
shall be your reward in heaven (says Christ.) And this reward shall come
quickly, which adds to the worth and excellency of it: Behold I come quickly,
and my reward is with me, wherefore hold that fast which thou have, that no man
take thy Crown. Revel. 3.11.

FINIS.
2 COR. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the [testimony of our conscience] that
in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace
of God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to
you-wards.


THE second proposition now in order to be handled, is this, That conscience
can give testimony, concerning the simplicity or hypocrisy, of a man's
conversation Paul's conscience gave testimony with him, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity, he had behaved himself, in preaching and living, in life and
doctrine, as a faithful Minister of Christ ought to do. So likewise his
conscience bore witness with him, concerning his sincere and holy desires,
toward his brethren and kinsmen according to the flesh. I say the truth in
Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me witness in the holy Ghost,
that I have great heaviness, and continual sorrow in my heart; for I could
wish my self were accursed from Christ, for my brethren, my kinsmen according
to the flesh. Romans 9.1. Jobs conscience also gave testimony concerning his
integrity. Let me be weighed in an even balance, that God may know mine
integrity. By this and many such like expressions of his, it is most plain,
that his conscience could give testimony concerning his conversation, what it
was, whether good or bad. David's conscience did the like. Thou O Lord shall
judge the people: judge me O Lord, according to my righteousness, and
according to mine integrity that is in me. Psalm. 7.8.
A large induction of particulars to this purpose, might easily be made, but I
rather take another way, to confirm this point.

The truth of this point (I conceive) will be better confirmed and opened, by
setting before you what conscience is; and then you will plainly see what
conscience can do, and does do, in the soul of man. Conscience is better
felt then defined, for ought that I can yet find, among the learned.
Conscience is a part of the understanding, in all reasonable creatures,
determining of their particular actions, either with them or against them, say
some. Conscience is a reflection of the soul upon it self, say others.
Conscience (say I) is a natural power which the soul of man has, above all
unreasonable creatures, to compare his ways by some rule, and according as his
ways agree or disagree with that rule, so answerably to bear witness with or
against him.

First, conscience (say I) is a natural power, etc. My meaning is, conscience
is an ability, wherewith God endowed the soul of man by creation, as with
other gifts and abilities, for his comfort, it he walked well; for his terror
if he walked ill. We may not imagine, that conscience came not into the world,
until after Adams fall: this were to suppose Adam in Paradise, to be a man
without conscience. Conscience indeed as an accuser and condemner, came not
into the world, until after Adams fall; but conscience as an accuser,
acquiter, and comforter, was in Adam before his fall. As long as Adam obeyed
the commandment of God, there was no cause that conscience should accuse him,
but as soon as he disobeyed Gods commandment, conscience flew in his face, as
appears by his flying from the face of God. Which plainly shows us this
truth, that conscience was in Adam before his fall, but did not begin to
accuse, 'til Adam began to sin.

Secondly, conscience (say I) is a natural power [ which the joule of man
has, etc. Now whether this power be in the understanding only, or partly in
the understanding and partly in the will, I find controverted amongst the
learned. My opinion, I here humbly lay down, but I undertake not to state and
determine the controversy. This power we speak of, I conceive to be a reflect
act of the practicke understanding only, transcendently seconded by the power
of the holy Ghost. Saint John confirms the first, that it is a reflect act of
the practicke understanding only, where speaking of this power in the soul,
says, And hereby we do know, that we know him, if we keep his Commandments.
1 John 2.3. That is, as if John had said, We do view our ways by the word of
God (which is an act only of the understanding) and finding them to be in some
measure level with that holy rule, we have this comfortable reflection back
upon our souls, that our faith is not a fancy, but a faith which works by
love, and so sincere and saving: which reflection, is no other as I conceive,
but an act of the understanding, collecting a divine conclusion from divine
premises. He that keeps Gods Commandments, knows God savingly; that he may
safely conclude: but I do keep the Commandments of God, this I know, for I
have viewed the Commandments of God, and my life by them: and therefore I
know, that is, I am assured that I truly and savingly know God: which is no
other, but that power in the soul, which we call conscience.

The Apostle Saint Paul (I conceive) confirms the second, that it is a reflect
act of the understanding, transcendently seconded by the holy Ghost, where he
says, My conscience bearing me witness [in the holy Ghost,] Romans 9.1. That
is, my conscience transcendantly seconded and assisted, by the holy Ghost, does
strongly testify to my soul, that I am full of bowels toward my kinsmen
after the flesh, and could do any thing, or suffer any thing for their good.
The order according to which the holy Ghost strikes in with conscience, is
this. The understanding makes a double proposition, one grounded in the word of
God, the other in the heart of man: as thus, He that keeps the Commandments
of God, truly loves God; this proposition is grounded in the word of God: but
I do keep the Commandments of God; this is grounded in the heart of man: And
then draws a conclusion from both; therefore I do truly love God. This
conclusion whilst holy and drawn from divine premises, to wit, the word of
God, and the grace of God in the heart of man; the Spirit of God strikes in
with the soul, in making this conclusion, and assists the weak soul, so that
he concludes thus with strong confidence, that he truly loves God: and not
only secretly assistes, but seconds, and says the same thing to man, that his
own spirit does. Then is fulfilled that of the Apostle, the Spirit bears
witness with our spirits, that we are the Sons of God. If the premises be
corrupt which the understanding makes, (for the mind makes propositions
suitable to the light that is in it, from which to argue the goodness or
badnesse of man) then the Devil that lying spirit, strikes in and seconds the
soul, in that corrupt conclusion, which he collects from corrupt principles,
concerning himself: So that now the deluded soul is peremptory, and wiser
then ten men that give a reason: in these is fulfilled that of the Apostle,
Their minds and consciences being defiled.

Thirdly, I affirm conscience to be a natural power, which the soul of man
has [above all unreasonable creatures, etc.] Brute beasts have no conscience:
and yet they better serve God in their kind, then many of us which have
conscience. Bruit beasts want reason, and therefore are not capable subjects of
conscience; and yet against reason, and against conscience, man ofttimes does
worse then a beast.

Fourthly, conscience (say I) is a natural power which the soul of man has
above all unreasonable creatures, [to compare his ways by some rule; and
according as his ways agree or disagree with that rule, so answerably to bear
witness with, or against him.] By the former part of this description, is
showed unto us, what conscience is according to its being in the soul: It is a
natural power, etc. By the latter part of this description, is showed unto us,
what conscience is according to its office in the soul.

The office of conscience, according to the description here given, consists in
two things. First, conscience compares a man's ways by some rule. Secondly,
Conscience bears witness with or against a man, according as a man's ways
agree or disagree with that rule. First say I, conscience compares a man's ways
by some rule. If the understanding be enlightened with the truth, to wit, the
word of God; then conscience compares the ways of man, by a perfect rule, to
wit, the word of God. But if the understanding be enlightened, with natural and
moral principles only, then conscience compares a man's ways according to
these principles only, and so by an imperfect rule. For it is my judgment, with
submission to better, that conscience in every man, follows that light which
the understanding holds up unto it. This I know, that a man may and often does,
go against conscience: but conscience goes not against that light, which the
understanding holds up unto it. A man may outwardly say this or that, contrary
to the light of his understanding, but conscience inwardly speaks, at the same
time, according to that light. I will further clear this unto you, by an apt
example. Paul you know zealously persecuted the Church of God, and his
conscience (for ought that I can find) never checked him, but doubtless rather
acquitted him, for it; I mean as long as he remained unconverted. And the
reason, I think, is sufficiently rendered, where it is said, that he did it
ignorantly. That is, according to that light which his understanding held up
unto him, he thought he did God good service, in sheading the blood of his
Saints, which me thinks makes manifest what I say, that conscience still
follows the light of the understanding.

The Apostle Paul persecuted the Church of God, and yet obtained mercy,
because (says the text) he did it ignorantly: he did out of conscience (as I
may say) shead the blood of the Saints. But now the most men have received the
knowledge of the truth; and therefore if now men persecute the Saints of God,
either in heart, tongue, or hand, they go against knowledge, and so
consequently against conscience; for conscience follows the light of the
understanding; and so comes near the committing of the unpardonable sin, to
the committers of which God has said, there shall be no mercy showed, either
in this world, or in the world to come.

Here I would have you observe this, for the further clearing of what has
been said, That the word of God is the rule, by which conscience compares the
ways of men, so far-forth as the understanding is enlightened by the word of
God, and no further. So far-forth as the understanding is ignorant of the word
of God, so far-forth conscience is silent. As long as St. Paul knew not lust to
be a sin, conscience never accused him for lust as a sin. And this surely is
one reason why many shun the preaching of the word of God, and the study
thereof, least by increasing knowledge they should increase grief, as Solomon
says: least by this means they should come to the knowledge of their sins,
and so conscience pull them by the throat for them. Of such as these the
Apostle Saint Peter speaks where he says, Of this they are willingly
ignorant, that by the word of God the Heavens were of old, and the earth, and
the world that then was perished. 2 Pet. 3.3,4,5. That is, they did purposely
do as much as in them lay, to put out that light which was in their
understandings, which told them that he which at first made the heavens by his
word, and did by his word destroy them with water, would one day again destroy
them with fire and brimstone: this they did labor to keep themselves ignorant
of, that so they might without check of conscience, go on in their sins.

To such as these I may truly say with the Apostle, If our Gospel be hid, it
is hid unto those which perish, in whom the God of this world has blinded the
minds, of them which believe not, least the light of the glorious Gospel of
Jesus Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4.3,4. He
that keeps himself in ignorance, that his conscience may let him go on
quietly in wickedness, loves to go to hell without control. Thou that can
not endure, that thy conscience should reprove thee secretly, it is no wonder
that thou can not endure, that thy minister should reprove thee publicly.
Thou that can not endure that thy conscience should reprove thee for sin
now, must endure whether thou will or no, conscience to torment thee for thy
sin, hereafter.

The second thing that I would have you to observe is this, That conscience
does compare all a man's ways with the rule of the word, so far-forth as the
understanding is enlightened with the word. All that light which the
understanding has received from the word of God, conscience takes it and makes
it a rule, by which he measures all a man's ways, thoughts, words, and deeds,
to try what agreement or disagreement there is, between them and the rule.

That conscience compares the thoughts of men by the word of God, so far
forth as the understanding is enlightened by the word, as well as words and
deeds, is manifest by the language of the Apostle, where he speaks of the
Gentiles on this wise, Which show the work of the Law written in their hearts,
their consciences also bearing witness, and their [thoughts] the mean while
accusing or excusing one another. Romans 2.15. Divine light so far-forth as it
shines into the hearts of heathens, conscience makes use of it as a rule, by
which to examine their very thoughts, and so answerably to accuse or excuse
them, as their thoughts are found to agree or disagree with the rule. Saint
Paul likewise in the ninth to the Romans at the first verse, confirms this
truth. I say the truth in Christ I lie not, my conscience bearing me witness
in the holy Ghost, that I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my
heart, for I could wish my self separate from Christ, for my kins-folk in the
flesh. Saint Paul here tells us that his conscience did bear him witness, that
his thoughts and desires were thus and thus sincere, respecting his brethren;
which conscience will never do, before he has leavelled a man's thoughts and
desires by the word of God, and found them to be so: by consequence then it is
manifest, that conscience compares a man's thoughts by the rule, as well as his
words and deeds.

Conscience keeps court in the heart, and therefore can and does observe our
thoughts, as well as our words and deeds. Conscience keeps a Court of justice
in the heart, and sits upon the life and death of the soul, which is ten
thousand times more precious then the body; and therefore will not sift this and
that, and let other things go, which the word condemns, as well, and as
plainly, as it does any thing else. The word of God you know condemns evil
thoughts, as well as evil words; and not only gross evil thoughts, as
thoughts of murder, adultery, and the like, but vain idle thoughts; and
therefore conscience can do no less, as Gods Vicegerent in this lower
circuit, but examine these, as well as words and deeds, by the rule of Gods
word, to see how far they agree to, or disagree from it. Which work when
conscience has exactly done, then it! bears witness with or against a man,
answerably as a man's ways agree or disagree with this rule: which is the last
clause in the description of conscience, and comes now according to order and
method to be a little opened.

Conscience when he has compared a man's ways by the rule, and exactly found
out how they agree with, or disagree from it; the next thing he does, is, he
bears witness with, or against a man. This clause I add, in the description
of conscience; because it is a divine power placed in the soul of man, to be as
it were a judge between God and man. Conscience takes notice of things
together with God, and compares them by the rule together with God, and then
pronounces sentence with or against man, for God. First I say, conscience
takes notice of things together with God: and hence it is, say the learned,
that this power in the soul is called conscience. Scire (say they) is said of
him which knows one thing alone, so as none else knows it with him. Conscire
is said of three or four, which know some secret together. Conscience
therefore must needs signify a combination of two at the least, in the
knowledge of some secret thing. Now this combination cannot be between man and
man; for man does not know the secrets of my heart, no further then as I
reveal them to him: this combination neither cannot be between man and
Angels, for they do not know the secrets of my heart together with thy self.
This combination then must needs be, between God and man. God knows all our
thoughts, There cannot be a thought hid from thee, says Job of God. Job 42.2.
And he knows all our words and deeds: all things are naked before him, with
whom we have to do. And man also by a gift from God, knows together with God,
his thoughts, words, and deeds; and compares them by the rule together with
God; and then bears witness with or against himself to God: and this gift we
therefore call con-science.

Here note this, That conscience bears witness with or against a man, no
farther then his ways agree or disagree with the word of God. There can be no
bribing of conscience, to speak better or worse of any man to God, then his
ways deserve. Conscience bears witness against a man, when having compared
the ways of man by the word of God, he finds them to disagree from it. But
here possibly some of you may say, Does any man's conscience bear witness
against himself? against his own Landlord, in whose house he dwells? To this
I answer, yes. The Apostle confirms this, where he says, If our hearts
condemn us, God is greater then our hearts, and knows all things, 1 John
3.20. If our hearts condemn us, etc. Conscience will give testimony and
sentence, against the very womb that bears him, if wicked; and so far-forth
as he knows it to be wicked. Conscience cannot now give an exact testimony,
nor an exact sentence against a sinner, because the understanding holds not up
unto it an exact light: We know but in part, though God know all things; and
knowing but in part, conscience yet can do his office but in part; but what he
does is faithful and righteous, according to the light which the understanding
holds up unto him. But hereafter when we shall all appear before the judgment
seat of Christ, Christ will by his Almighty power, set up a glorious light in
every man's understanding, so that they shall know all things done in the body
whether good or evil, as completely as Christ himself, and then conscience
will speak as plain and as broad as Christ himself: and hence it is that men
shall stand silent before the Judge of all the world.

The testimony which conscience gives against a man now, is very audible: so
audible that it causes the merriest heart, in the midst of laughter to be
sad. It will make the stoutest sinner stoop, his heart to ache and shake
within him, and his countenance to gather blackness. But at the great day, it
will make every sinner in Belshazzars case, and worse, when he saw the
handwriting in the wall. It will make sinners at their wits end: to wish for
mountains to fall upon them, and cover them, or dispatch them utterly.

Conscience bears witness with a man, when having compared his ways by the
rule, he finds that they agree therewith. So audible and so sensible is the
testimony, that conscience gives now with a man, that it makes him to rejoice
in the midst of all outward troubles and hardships: For our rejoicing is this
(says Paul and Timothy in the midst of all their outward troubles) the
testimony of our conscience that in simplicity and go^ly sincerity, not with
fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conve^sation in the
World. Conscience spoke so loud, and so plain, and so comfortable, in giving
testimony with them concerning their integrity, that they understood well what
he said, and were more comforted by this still testimony within, then if
hundreds without, had given testimony with them to their adversaries, and said
they were upright men. But much more audible and comfortable will the testimony
of conscience with a man, be, at the great day: but I let that alone till then.

At presert I hope you see enough, by this description of conscience, to
confirm the truth in hand, to wit, That conscience can give testimony,
concerning the simplicity or hypocrisy of a man's conversation. Now the reasons
why God has given unto conscience this power, are these: First, That man might
have some thing within him, to comfort or terrify him, when all things without
fail. Secondly, That Gods proceedings with man, may be by man, confessed to be
just. Lastly, That God at the great day, may dispatch a great deal of weighty
business speedily.

First, God has given this power to conscience, to give testimony concerning
the simplicity or hypocrisy, or man's conversation, That so man might have
something within him, to comfort or terrify him, when all things without him
fail. If a man walk sincerely, conscience will be a comfort to him, when
father, mother, husband, wife, wealth, and all friends fail him. And this
comfort will be a continual feast, in famine; continual honor, in disgrace;
continual wealth, in poverty; continual liberty in bonds; continual peace,
in war; continual health, in sickness; continual ease, under every
burden. This was meat to eat, to Paul and Timothy, which the world knew not
of. Nay, this was transcendent consolation in the midst of troubles, to Paul
and Timothy, which the believing Corinthians dreamt not of: and therefore it is,
that they thus wrote to them, Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
conscience, that we have sincerely ordered our conversation in the world. As if
they had said thus, Though we have lost many comforts, yet we have not lost
all; we have something within us, which is a continual comfort to us, in the
midst of all the sorrows and miseries, which we meet withal; and that is, the
peace of a good conscience. And if man walk not sincerely, conscience is by
divine appointment, to be an accuser, condemner, and in part an executioner of
torture upon the delinquent, in this life. This worm shall gnaw within, when
things are carried smooth without. This dog shall bite and tear within, when
all are afraid to bark without. This blood-hound shall dog the sinner; let
him go with Cain into the Land of Nod, into what place he will, or to what
employment he will: so that proud man shall feel something within, for his
wickedness, when he feels nothing without.

Secondly, God has given this power to conscience, to give testimony
concerning the simplicity or unsoundnes of man's conversation; That so all Gods
proceedings with man, both here and hereafter, may be confessed to be just. One
witness, said God, shall not testify against any person, to cause him to die,
Deuteronomy. 35.30. Two witnesses God accounted sufficient, to vindicate every act of
justice amongst men: but under two, God would not allow judicature against any
man; that so judgment might be clear, the Judge confessed to be righteous,
and the malefactor silent. God the great Judge of all the world, keeps
himself to this rule, in his proceedings of judicature against man. Two
witnesses will God have, against every malefactor, to wit, Christ and
conscience. God does immediately see all things done by man, and is a witness
himself, to all that he commits in the body, as we may guess by his own
words. Because they have committed villainy in Israel, and have committed
adultery with their neighbors wives, and have spoken lying words in my Name,
which I have not commanded them, even [I know] and am a witness, says the
Lord, Jer. 29.23. By this we see, that God the Father sees our sins, and is a
witness; but because he will not be a witness in his own cause, he will have
two sufficient witnesses besides himself, to wit, Christ, and conscience: both
very true.

The Devil would willingly be a witness against man, as an evil spirit that
knows much by man, but does not know so much as the Spirit of man, which is in
him: and therefore not a sufficient witness. But if that evil Spirit, did
know as much by man, as man's own evil spirit which is in him, yet being
corrupt, he would prove a false witness against man: a Knight of the Post, and
swear any thing against man, to bring as great misery upon him, as is upon
himself, if he might be admitted for a witness, such is his divellish hatred
and malice, to all beings better then his own; but therefore God will not
admit of him as a witness, for or against a man. Two true witnesses will God
have, one without a man, and another within him; one in heaven and another in
earth; to wit, Christ and conscience: Behold I have given him for a witness to
the People, says God the Father of Christ, Isa. 55.4. And this witness is in
Heaven, says Job: Behold my witness is in Heaven Job 16.19. Not so in heaven,
that he is not also in earth; or as if he were ignorant of any thing done in
earth, for then he could not be a sufficient witness. Job speaks of Christ,
according to his special place of residence; and that is in heaven: but Christ
has a Country house, here below in our hearts, where he has one abiding
continually, that is equal to himself, that tells him all, to wit, his spirit:
so that Christ is as competent a witness as conscience, that sits as Register
still in the heart, and never stirs out of his place.

These two witnesses do, as that man was commanded to do, which had a sheep
committed to his trust, and the sheep torn in pieces by wild beasts; he was
to bring some of that which was left; some horn or hoof, or any part else
that was left for a witness of the truth thereof. Exodus 22.13. Thus Christ and
conscience bring before God and the soul, those precepts which were by God
committed to man, to be kept, and which he has suffered his unruly heart to
break to pieces: my meaning is, so lively do these two witnesses set before
the sinner, the breach of every precept, according to every circumstance, as
ever any party under the Law, could set before the owner, the tearing in pieces
of his cattle, by the limbs and pieces thereof. And this being done, divine
sentence is given, and the soul must needs be silent, being so legally
handled; and Angels and Saints be forced to break forth and say, Righteous art
thou O God in all thy ways, and holy in all thy works.

Lastly, God has given this power to conscience, to give testimony concerning
man's simplicity or hypocrisy, that so God at the great day, may dispatch a
great deal of weighty business speedily. And I will come near to you to
judgment, and I will be [a swift witnesse] against the sorcerers, and against
the adulterers, and false swearers, says the Lord, Mal. 3.5. What the Lord
then spoke respecting a particular judgment, the same will be Gods proceeding
with all at the great day. The books shall be opened; Christ's book, and the
book of conscience; and so in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye; that is
very speedily, all things shall be clear to Judge and malefactor, without
troubling Juries, and other witnesses, as we do here, which would make a long
work, at that great assize; and all persons be judged and sent to their place;
and so righteously judged, that not one shall open his mouth to complain. Now
this could not possibly be a work speedily done, if God had not given this
power to conscience, to reflect and give testimony, and to be instead of, and
better then a thousand witnesses beside, and all debating pro and con, between
them.

The wisdom of God is here to be admired: for he has made such a witness to
give testimony with Christ for or against a man, every way so fit, that nothing
in the world can be judged so fit. Christ we must all confess to be very sit,
to be Gods Delegate; because he came out of the bosom of God, and knows
exactly all his Laws, which he has given man to observe, which Angels do
not, and man is a party, and therefore both unfit. But the holy Ghost cannot be
judged fit to be man's Delegate, because one with the Father and Son, and so a
party in the cause. And as for Angels, they know not neither the proposed rule
exactly, nor the aberrations of the Delinquent; and as for men, they are
parties in the cause, and so would juggle together, and swear one for another:
or at least as one flesh and bone, with foolish pity spoil a City (as we say:)
that is, they would speak flattering and halting, and so over-turne justice at
last, after a great deal of do with them. Now to prevent all this danger,
toil, and stir; God has created such a power within man as to observe all
things done by man; and no less one with man, then Christ is with the Father;
and therefore as inexceptible a Delegate for man on the one side, as Christ is
for God on the other side. And these two of an instant, without all
disturbance, distraction, or turmoile, give in exact evidence concerning man's
integrity or hypocrisy; and so speedily without all clamor, sentence, and
execution, and all is finished; and the Judge of all the world, does more
weighty business in a moment, and far better, then all the Judges in this
world could do, in the age of the world.

Having thus given you the point, and the grounds of it; let us see in the next
place, how useful this may be unto us all. Has God given power to conscience,
to give testimony concerning the simplicity or hypocrisy of man's ways? Why
then let us all take heed, how we order our conversation in this world. Give
leave to your souls to think nothing, speak nothing, nor do nothing, but
what you would have written down, and delivered into the Judge of all the
world at the great day. When we know a tale-teller is near us, we are very
careful what we say, or do. Why, we have always a tell-truth in our bosoms,
where ever we go, or whatsoever we do; who will tell all to the Judge of all
the world, that we think, speak or do: and therefore let us watch over our
thoughts, words, and deeds; and so think, and so speak, and so do, as those
that look to have the comfortable testimony of conscience with them, at the
great day of account; That in simplicity and godly sincerity, we have had our
conversation in the world. Under the old covenant, God had a Tabernacle of
witness, which was the inner Court where the Arc was, in which the Law was,
to give testimony against the Israelites, when they did evil. So God has now
under the new covenant, a Tabernacle of witness; and this is the inner Court,
to wit, the heart, where conscience is, to give testimony against us, when we
transgress. And therefore let us set a watch upon our hearts, and tongues, and
hands, and entreat God with David, to hold up our goings in his paths, that
our footsteps slip not. Psalm 17.5.

I note this, because I see multitudes live, as if there were neither
conscience, nor God, nor Devil, Heaven nor Hell. The speech of the Prophet of
old, may I sitly here make use of. Men were then so audaciously wicked, that
the very show of their countenance did testify against them: they declared
their sins as Sodom, and hid them not: Woe unto their soul (says God) they
have rewarded evil unto themselves, Isa. 3.9. Thus may I say of multitudes
amongst us now, The very show of their countenance, does testify against them.
The wanton eye, the fiery eye, the drousie walling eye, the burly Malmsey nose,
the painted face, Anticke postures, gestures, and fashions, do all as Jobs
wrinkles in his face, testify against thousands, that they little lay to heart
this doctrine, That conscience can speak, and tell all their doings to God.
Proud Hamans, time-serving Doegs, drunken Nabals, whorish Iesabels, scoffing
Ishmaels, declare their sins as Sodom, and hide them not; and as for
conscience, turn him off with a glass of Sack, and a Playhouse.

But let me say to these wretches, with the Prophet, Woe unto their souls, for
they have rewarded evil unto themselves. You have made a long, black, bloody
bill, for conscience to open against you, the last day of this Term, to wit,
at death; which shall be tried the first day of the next Term, to wit, as
soon as you are out of the body: and then will conscience give testimony, so
strongly against you, that if you would give ten thousand Rivers of Oil, nay,
if you would give the fruit of your body, for the sin of your soul, it
shall do no good; the cause shall go against you, and sentence shall be past
upon you: and then shall you know by woeful experience, the meaning of that
place, Romans 2.5. But after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up
unto thy self wrath, against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous
judgment of God.

Wherefore three things I would give in counsel to you all: seeing conscience
can give testimony concerning the simplicity or hypocrisy of man's ways;
suspend him not; slight not his language; but give diligent attention to what
he says. Let us not stop the mouth of conscience, seeing he can speak, and
tell us what we are. Many there are that labor to stop the mouth of
conscience, when he tells them plainly of their sins, and to destroy that
divine power which conscience has, to speak in them, and to them. The Apostle
Peter gives us a hint of these, where he says, Scoffers shall come in the last
time, and shall say, where is the promise of his coming. For this (says he)
they are willingly ignorant of, that by the world of God, the Heaveni were of
old, 2 Pet. 3.5. When conscience told those scoffers, that would live in their
sins, and scoffed at the day of judgment, saying, where is the promise of
his coming; that God made the world by his word, and drowned it quickly by his
Word, when it was overspread with wilful wickedness; and therefore you have
like cause, to look for like swift misery, for as much as you are so wilfully
and desperately wicked. This sharp and plain language of conscience, they
could not endure; and therefore willingly labored to darken this divine light,
and to silence this faithful House-Chaplaine. Thus it is with many sinners now;
Conscience now and then, delivers stinging language to their souls, for such
and such sins; and then they set to lift this faithful Monitor out of his
place; and because they cannot possibly do this, being so immediately inducted
by God, they strive to gagge his mouth, and kill him; by running wilfully into
wickedness, against all checkes and reproves of conscience, and friends, as
men desperately resigning up their souls to the devil, because God will not
humor, and satisfy them in their own ways: and so ship wrack faith,
conscience, soul, and all for ever. That which oft-times follows upon this,
is selfe-stabbing, selfe-drowning, selfe-hanging, selfe-poysoning, and the like.

This is crying wickedness, and incurable wickedness. It Is crying wickedness
to strive to gagge and kill conscience. It Is Dei-cidium, to murder God.
Conscience is no other but Gods Vicegerent in the soul: or rather, Gods
judiciary presence in the soul. So far forth therefore as a man wilfully
does injury to this, he does commit high treason against the King of Heaven.
It Is to stab the Judge of all the world as he sits upon the Bench, speaking Law
and Justice, which very nature abhorres, as desperately divellish.

And it is incurable wickedness: for it is to destroy the first medium of
conversion, by which the holy Ghost works in man, to gagge and kill
conscience. The first thing that the Spirit of God does when he come to convert
a sinner, is to convince his conscience, and to make that sting him for his
sins, and then stir him up to long after, and to seek for Christ; and then
gives faith in Christ, and so saves the sinner. Now he that strives to silence
conscience, undermines his own salvation, in the very foundation and first
stone thereof. He does wilfully and wickedly prevent his own soul, of all the
good that God does in this way, to bring sinners home to himself. Thou do
little consider, O desperate wretch, what great wickedness thou committest,
that strivest to gagge and kill conscience. Thou committest double murder, in
a spiritual sense; which is murder of the highest kind: thou do murder
God and thine own soul. And therefore I beseech you all, to take heed of this
practice. Seeing God has given conscience ability and parts to speak, let him
speak freely, though he speak never so sharply and plainly, and do not
check him.

2
Nay do not slight him: which is the next thing I would a little press upon
you. A man that can speak, and speak to good purpose, though he be an enemy,
we so far honor him, as to let him speak out fully what he has to say, and
not turn away the ear from him: give but this honor to conscience. Many deal
with conscience, as Felix did with Paul; he willingly heard Paul a while,
concerning the faith of Christ, but when he came to reason of righteousness,
temperance, and judgment to come, he set Felix into a trembling; and then
says he to Paul, Go thy way for this time; when I have a convenient season, I
will send for thee, Act. 24.25. So many will hear conscience, whilst he gives
testimony with them, of this good thing, and that, which they have done, and it
may be whilst he tells them of lesser faults, but when once he comes to reason
thoroughly with them about their sins, which are as dear as right eyes, and
right hands unto them, and threatens them home, with judgment to come: when he
tells them of that righteousness and temperance which the word commands, how
much they have neglected it, and what they are liable to for it, and so sets
their souls into a cold shaking sweat, then they have enough of conscience,
and they turn their ears and minds, to some other matters; and send
conscience away, till they be better at leisure: this is no other, but to
slight conscience in his place.

God will make no other of this, but contempt of his prime Court of justice
here below, and those that sit chief there, as for him: and thou will find no
other, but a great deal of secret soul mischief by this. God has no other
Court here below, but the heart of man; and no Judge in this Court, but
conscience: and conscience being Gods Chiefe-judge, will thou hearken to him
when thou please; and when thou please, turn the deaf ear to him, say
what he will? Do thou think that God swears Judges for this lower Circuit,
which know not Law, nor how to speak upon the Bench, worth the hearing? Do
thou think thy self too great, to be arraigned by God? and to answer to such
interrogatories, as he shall put unto thee?

As God will make no other but contempt of this, so thou will find no other
but a great deal of secret soul mischief by this. To slight the voice of
conscience, is the ready way to bring the soul, into security and presumption,
which are unsensible damning evils. When there was no King in Israel, nor
royal Courts of judicature, every man did what was right in his own eyes. So
when this royal Court of conscience is slighted, the soul will grow
fearelesse and careless, and man will give leave to himself, to think, and
speak, and do as he lists, and yet promise peace to himself, though he
live in the wickedness of his own heart; then which, what can be a greater
soul evil?

Wherefore honor God, in his Royal way of judicature: and seeing he has
appointed an able Judge in thy soul, of thy ways; slight him not, but
diligently hearken to what he says; which is the last thing I would a little
press upon you. Conscience can speak better of thy ways, then any man can
do: therefore give him leave to speak, and diligently observe all his words,
and tell me what he says to thee. Does he not tell thee, that thou art a
drunkard, an adulterer, a swearer, a prophaner of the Lords day, an unjust
dealer, a selfe-seeker, a time-server, a man that orderest thy devotion and
conversation, suitable to the times, a man that makes thine own ends thy aim,
in all thy actions? Does he not tell thee that thou art an idle person, a
busie-body, a railer, a scoffer, and malicious person? Or what is it that
conscience says unto thee? For he speaks to no man else, but to thy self, so
faithful and discreet is he; and therefore I can enquire of none but of thy
self O sinner, what conscience says unto thee. Conscience can give testimony
with or against thee; prithee hearken to him, and tell me what he says. When
Christ was arraigned, and stood still and said nothing, the high Priest arose
(says the Text) and said unto him, answerest thou nothing? What is it which
these witness against thee? Math. 26.62. So say I to you, conscience does
arraigne you now and then, and he does give testimony; what testimony is it
that he gives? Is it against you, or with you?

If against you: What is it that he accuses you of, and condemns you for? Does
he condemn thee, for the vanity of thy thoughts, for the levity of thy words
and deeds? Does he condemn thee for the pride of thine heart, or for the pride
of thine heart and life both? Does he condemn thee for sheading of innocent
blood? for scoffing and persecuting the ways of God? Does he condemn thee for
hugging some secret sin, which the word disallowes? or for thy superficial
perfunctory piety? Whatsoever conscience accuses and condemns thee for, honor
this Viceroy so far, as to weigh thoroughly what he says; and call to mind
thy ways, and consider whether they have not been, so as conscience says:
and if so, then compare what conscience says of thy course, with the word of
God; and if conscience within, and the word of God without agree in one, in
what they say against thy course; do thou strike in with thy conscience and
the word of God, and say of thy self and ways, as they say, and join with
them in judging and condemning thy self, and thy courses.

And then beg the Lord, that he will not strike in and judge thee too; for if
he judge thee too, then thou art gone for ever. Tell him, that though thou have
sinned, yet Christ has died; and here hold. And then beg him to cleanse and
cure thy wicked heart, that thou may go, and sin no more, least a worse
thing befall thee: namely, to be delivered from the hands of a condemning
conscience, into the hands of a condemning God, who will tear thee in pieces,
and there will be none to deliver.

If conscience give testimony with you, that you are pure and upright, as he
uses the expression to Job, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, you have
had your conversation in the world; why then, weigh your ways by the word of
God, and see whether the word of God says the same of your ways which
conscience does: if so, why then do you strike in too, and say as conscience
and Gods Word do, and so own Gods great work of grace in your hearts, in
making them upright; and think that thou can never declare love enough to
God, which has declared so much love to thee, as to make thee a man after his
own heart, to be a companion for his own Son and self, in grace and glory.

FINIS.
2 COR. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that
in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace
of God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to
you-wards.


THE third proposition, which now according to order and method, comes to be
handled, is this, That consciousnesse to our selves, of the simplicity and
sincerity, of our conversation, will yield us joy in the midst of troubles.
Paul's and Timothies conscience, giving testimony with them, concerning the
simplicity and sincerity of their conversation, made them to rejoice in the
midst of all the troubles they underwent. For our rejoicing is this, the
testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, we have
had our conversation in the world. I think the Psalmist points at this truth
too, where he says, Unto the upright there arises light [in the darkness,]
etc. Psalm. 112.4. By the darkness, I conceive he means troubles and injuries
from wicked men, which because they are more vehement then many other troubles
are, the mercies of the wicked being cruelties, the Psalmist elsewhere calls
them, the sorrows of hell, as here he calls them (...) the darkness: now in
this darkness, though the darkness, that is very sharp misery, yet there
arises light in it; by light I conceive is here meant, comfort and joy from
conscience, giving testimony concerning their uprightness, as attended with
the spirit of glory and of God, as Peter calls the holy Spirit of consolation.
If you conceive not this Scripture plain enough, to consent with my Text, read
David's language in the seventh Psalm. 10,11. My defense is of God, which saves
the upright in heart. God judges the righteous; and God is angry with the
wicked every day. As if David had said, This is my comfort in the midst of all
the troubles and fears I am in, that my conscience tells me, my conversation
in the world has been lead according to the dictate of an upright heart, no
way injurious to these sons of Belial, which labor to be every way injurious
to me; and therefore I am sure that God, which is always a defense unto the
upright, will be a defense unto me: God considers the ways of the upright, and
smiles upon their souls to their great consolation, when the world frowns,
this I sinde by experience; but rotten wretches God is continually angry with,
and this he will first or last (I am sure) make them to know with a witness.
Solomon likewise consents to this as a truth, to wit, That the testimony of
conscience concerning the simplicity of man's conversation, will yield him joy
in the midst of troubles, as we may collect from his language, Prove. 15.23. A
man has joy (says he) by the answer of his mouth. When a man upon every
occasion speaks sincerely, conscience within cheares and comforts a man
whatsoever follows upon plain dealing to the outward man. It Is me thinks as
if Solomon had said, Let a man speak sincerely upon all occasions, and he
shall be sure to find his conscience comfort him, in the midst of all troubles
that may follow upon it.

Troubles are either natural, or accidental. Natural troubles I call such as
man is borne unto, by reason of sin. By the fall of Adam, man is horn to
troubles, as the sparks sly upward, Job 5.7. to troubles in body, in soul,
in husband, in wife, in children, in servants, in kindred, in friends, in
substance, in all things that are given man for his good. To the just as well
as unjust, come troubles in all these; only here is the difference,
consciousnesse of simplicity and sincerity sweetens all those to the godly,
whereas the wicked must swallow them in their full bitterness. That
conscience, which tells a man that in simplicity and godly sincerity, he has
had his conversation in the world, will also tell him, that all troubles in the
flesh, shall work together for the good of his Spirit; and that God will give
strength to bear them, and a seasonable deliverance out of them; and this
sweetens these bitters. That conscience, which tells a man, that in simplicity
and godly sincerity, he has ordered his conversation in the world, will tell
him also, that it is a wise and gracious Father that does thus, and thus afflict
him; yea, conscience now and then shows the soul, the bright beams of Gods
smiling countenance, that he may see that it is indeed a reconciled father which
does afflict; and this like Jonathans honey revives much, and fetches life in
swooning fits, under great troubles. That conscience which told Job that he was
sincere, told him also in the midst of all his troubles, that his Redeemer
lived, and he should see him, with his fleshly eyes: moreover it told him, that
when God had tried him, that she should come forth as gold. This sugared his
bitter potion, and sweetened every bitter drugge he took. The like may be said
of David; his conscience told him that he was upright, and this conscience told
him also, that God was his God; Thou art my God, and I will praise thee: thou
art my God, and I will exalt thee. Psalm. 118.28. and that God would light his
candle, and enlighten his darkness Ps. 18.28.
: that is, turn all his sorrows into joy, and his troubles into advantages;
and this made every burden easy. Thus we see, that consciousnesse to our
selves of the simplicity of our course, yields comfort in all troubles for
sins sake, which I call natural troubles.

Troubles caused by religion and religious walking, which I call accidental
troubles, because by accident not of its proper nature, religion exasperates
wicked men against us, these I conceive my text principally points at; and as
for all these, though the fiercest kind of troubles, and therefore called by
David, the sorrows of hell, yet if a Christian has but the voice of
conscience with him, that he has walked simply and sincerely in the world,
this will keep his head above water, though these waves be never so
tempestuous: this will make a man sing in a dungeon at midnight, as Paul and
Silas did: this will make a man smile in fiery flames, as many of the Martyrs
did: this will make a man always rejoice, in the midst of all sorrows: as
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing, 2 Cor. 6.10. Sorrowful always were the
Apostles of Christ, such hard usage they always met withal from the world,
for the Gospels sake; and yet in the midst of all, joyful, because of that
sweet peace which their consciences spoke unto them, that they were not such as
the world judged them to be, but were simple and sincere in life and doctrine;
and so this Scripture sounds the same in sense and substance with my text: For
our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God we have had
our conversation in the world.

You have seen now, in what troubles the testimony of conscience, concerning a
man's simplicity, will rejoice a Christian. I will in the next place show you,
what rejocying it is that the testimony of conscience will yield a man in
trouble. Joy is either sensual, or spiritual. Sensual joy is a mere and
naked joy in the creature, so far as it pleases the senses. Of this joy
speaks Solomon, where he says, that he withheld his heart from no joy, Eccl.
2.10. That is, any thing that might delight any sense, he got to him: he had
men singers and women singers, and all the delights of the sons of men. Thus
to order a man's conversation, is to live sensually and not sincerely; and
therefore conscience gives testimony against this man, and not with him; and so
consequently checks and curbs this joy, and not causes it: conscience dampes
this mirth much, by griping the spirit now and then, in the midst of laughter.

Spiritual joy, is the souls rejoicing in God, as reconciled in Christ.

Spiritual joy, is the soules] rejoicing in God, etc. Divine joy is therefore
called spiritual, because the subject of it is a spirit, and the object of it
is a spirit, and all the manifestations of it spiritual. The subject of divine
joy, is the spirit of man. Divine joy does not take only the ear, or the eye,
or the taste, or the smell, as carnal joy does, but the heart: Let the heart
of them rejoice, that seek the Lord, Psalm. 105.3. The heart is broken for
sin, and this is made to rejoice in Gods mercy, as a pardoner of sin: the
same bones which are broken, are made to rejoice. Make me to hear joy and
gladness, that the bones which thout have broken may rejoice. Psalm. 51.8.
David's heart was so overcharged with sorrow, that his bones were ready to
break in his body, and in this he desired some divine refreshing, that so all
things out of order might be quieted and composed again. As sorrow is no
sorrow, unless it take the heart; so joy is no joy, unless it warm the
Spirit. And therefore says David, My soul shall be joyful in the Lord, [it]
shall rejoice in his salvation. Psalm. 35.9.

God does honor that in man with joy, with which man honors him by obedience:
now, the soul of the upright, obeyes God. My Soul has kept thy testimonies,
and I love them exceedingly, Psalm. 19.167. and therefore God made David's soul
to rejoice. I delight to do thy will, O God, yea thy Law is within my heart,
Psalm. 40.8. The Law of God was within David's heart, and therefore the joy of
God was within his heart too. Hypocrites do not with their souls keep Gods
testimonies; their righteousness is like Ephraims, an outside righteousness
that vanishes, and so answerably God gives them an outside superficial joy,
that soon vanishes and perishes. They do not set their hearts aright to
obey God, as David uses the expression, Psalm. 78.8. and therefore God does not
tune and set their joy aright, so that it jarres at the best; their spirits and
their faces, are not always merry together; in the midst of laughter their
hearts gripe them.

Divine joy takes the spirit of man wholly, and oft-times immediately. Divine
joy takes the spirit of man wholly when at lowest. A dram, a sparkle, the least
measure of divine joy that can be thought of, revives and makes glad the whole
Spirit of man, as a drop of strong water warmes the whole heart. Hence it is,
that David when he had but a drop of divine joy, distilled into his heart (as
it is but a drop of this heavenly liquor, that our weak giddy souls can bear,
whilst here below) presently he breaks out as a man warmed all over: I will
praise thee, O Lord, with my whole heart: I will show forth all thy mavelous
works, Psalm. 9.1. The like phrase you shall find David often speaking in.
David found his whole heart warmed by those sparkles of divine joy, which God
struck in his dark dolorous heart, and this fetched life in him still, when
ready to faint and swoon, and then all he returned to God again, which he gave
him; God warmed his whole heart with joy, and he returned his whole heart to
God in thankesgiving. Divine joy warmes all that is within, and all that is
without, soul and body, and sets both at work to praise God. Praise the Lord,
O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name. Psalm. 103.1. All
that was within David, was warmed with divine joy, and therefore all that was
within him, he would have should return thanks and praise unto the Lord.
Elsewhere, he calls upon all without him. And my soul shall be joyful in the
Lord, it shall rejoice in his salvation: this is for all within him: then in
the next verse says he, All my bones shall say, Lord who is like unto thee.
Psalm. 35.9,10. Divine joy warmes all that is within a man, and all that is
without: it warmes Spirit, flesh, and bones; the whole man, and sets all on
fire to praise the Lord.

As divine joy takes the Spirit wholly, so it oft-times seises upon the Spirit
immediately; breaking forth in the heart as lightning, without any certain
known medium, by which to come into the soul. David does darkly hint this,
where he says, Rejoice the soul of thy servant, for unto thee, O Lord do I
lift up my soul, Psalm. 86.4. Thou need not this to speak in, or that
creature to work by, to revive a drooping Spirit, as if the Psalmist had said,
thou can put joy and gladness into the sad soul of man, by thine own
immediate work, as well as if forty Ministers were employed: this I believe,
that none without thee can rejoice me, but thou without any other can do it;
and therefore unto thee, do I lift up my soul. Sometimes God does work by
secondary means and inferior instruments, to rejoice the souls of mourning
sinners, as David would have comforted Hanun by his messengers: at other times,
he will make use of none but his own Spirit, to bear witness with our
spirits, that we are the Sons of God, and walk before him as obedient
children, and so rejoices the souls of his people in troubles. Thus did God
rejoice the soul of Paul and Timothy, in their troubles and sorrows: by the
Almighty work of his Spirit, he assured their spirits, that they were his, and
that their ways were pleasing to him; which made them thus to speak, in the
midst of miseries, Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that
in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace
of God, we have had our conversation in the world, etc.

Secondly, divine joy is called spiritual, because the object of it is a
spirit. The object of divine joy is God, who is a Spirit, says John. Divine
joy has God for its immediate object, and all other good things as beams of
this Sun, as streams from this fountain, as mediat objects coming from, and
relating to God. God alone is the object of divine joy. Most true it is, that
God has always in his right hand Heaven; and in his left hand earth, to wit,
all the Kingdoms of this world, to bestow upon whom he will; but had he
neither, or would he part with neither, to any beside himself, but keep all
in his own hand, yet an upright man would joy in him, and desire no better
object to let out his affections upon. Although the Fig tree shall not
blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines, the labor of the Olives shall
fail, and the field shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the
folds, and there be no herd in the stalles, yet I will rejoice in the Lord; I
will joy in the God of my salvation, says the Prophet, Hab. 3.17,18. Habakkuk
will rise in judgment against a thousand thousand souls, which would never
judge God worthy to be looked after, muchlesse delighted in, if he had not Corn
and Wine, Heaven and Earth to bestow upon his favorits. This text I conceive is
a plain testimony, that God alone is the object of divine joy: that is, not
God as very wealthy, and very bountiful, but as very holy, and an absolute
complete being, above all things beside him. This was Paul's joy, to wit, in God
alone, as he whom his conscience told him, he served sincerely, though weakly.

Upright men eye the divine rule in their rejoicing, as well as in all other
things. Now the divine rule of joy, is, that it should be bounded and
terminated in God. Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous, Psalm. 97.12. This rule is
repeated again and again in Scripture, to note how apt we are to rejoice in
creatures, and sins which are worse then any creatures, and not in God: as
also to note, how strictly God looks at this, that we should make him only
the object of our joy, and all other good things, as beams of this Sun, as
blessings from his hand; and so consequently to rejoice still, as long as we
have communion with God, and our consciences witnessing with us that we
sincerely serve him, though we have nothing else in the world beside him, as
Paul and Timothy did. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom,
but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, etc.

Thirdly, divine joy is called spiritual, because all the manifestations of it
are spiritual. They that have this joy in their hearts, do not let their
tongues sing ribaldry and vanity, such as flesh and blood delights in, but they
sing in the ways of the Lord, Psalm. 138.5. That, is, they rejoice in divine
things, to be thinking, and speaking of, and walking in, the ways of the Lord.
'Twas Paul's and Timothies matter of joy, that they could walk sincerely in the
ways of the Lord, and this they humbly gloried in. Such as have the joy of the
Lord in their hearts, their tongues speak, and sing, in such a manner, that
God is extolled and magnified, according to one attribute or another, which is
making melody to God, as the Apostle terms it. As here in my text, the
Apostles so expressed divine joy, that the power and goodness of the Lord were
magnified, that he could and would give internal comfort, to those that did
sincerely, though weakly serve him, when all external comforts failed. Divine
joy does not, as carnal joy, transport men into drunkards, whore-masters,
wantons, libertines, and so turn them out of the ways of the Lord; but raises
their spirits, to a higher pitch of love to God, and so makes them walk more
strictly and cheerfully, in the ways of God. Divine joy makes a man rejoice
and work righteousness, and not rejoice and work wickedness. Thou meetest
him that rejoices and works righteousness, Isa. 64.5. Paul and Timothy thus
rejoiced, that they could work righteousness, that they could order their
conversation sincerely, though by many handled injuriously. For our rejoicing
is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly
sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our
conversation in the world, etc.

2
Divine joy is the souls rejoicing in God [as reconciled in Christ.] Divine
joy, as man upon earth is the subject of it, has God in Christ for its object:
that is, God as reconciled in Christ; for otherwise God is an enemy, and no man
rejoices in an enemy. And not only so, but we also rejoice in God, through
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have received the atonement. Romans 5.11. We
cannot joy immediately in God, as Adam could, because of our sin in Adam,
which made God angry with us: we must now have some to interpose between God
and us, in whom is made up, what is wanting in us, and so Gods anger against us
appeased: and therefore it is, that the Apostle thus speaks in the person of
the godly, we joy in God [through] our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have
received the atonement. This is sweetly set forth also unto us, under
metaphorical terms by the Prophet Isaiah. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord,
my soul shall be joyful in my God, for he has clothed me with the garments
of salvation, he has covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a
Bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth her self
with Jewels, Isa. 61.10. God as clothing us with the garments of salvation,
and as covering us with a robe of righteousness, is the object of joy to
fallen man; and thus we know, he does in Christ. God freely reveals an
infinite love to man in Christ, and this begets love to him, and joy in him. He
washed away all our sins in Christ's blood, covers all our wants with Christ's
righteousness, subjects his Son to suffer what we had deserved, and to merit
for us, all that from which we were justly excluded, to wit, communion with
God, and eternal life. This love, God sheads abroad in the heart of man, and
this makes man love God, and joy in him. God out of Christ, is no other but a
condemner of man: conscience so apprehending God, is no other but a tormentour
of man: and man between both these is in no other but Hell: and there is no
joy in Hell. God in Christ reconciles man to himself, and then God joys in
man, and man in God. The blood of Christ makes peace between God and man, and
between man and his conscience; and makes God acquit, and conscience acquit:
God to speak peace, though man be not perfect; conscience to speak peace,
though man walk weakly, yet whilst sincerely; and this makes divine joy in
the heart, in the midst of all troubles, natural or accidental. For our
rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have
had our conversation in the world, etc.

You have had a brief hint now, by what has been said, what that joy is,
which the testimony of conscience brings to the soul, to wit, a conciliatory
joy, as I may fitly call it. A joy of peace and friendship, between God and
man, and between man and himself, to wit, conscience. Conscience tells that
man which walks sincerely, that he for his part is at peace with him; and that
God is the like, though men and devils be at variance with him; and that he
shall have favors spiritual and temporal, here and eternally hereafter, say
and do all his enemies what they can; and this makes the heart of man leap
within him, in the midst of troubles, as the babe in Elizabeth's womb, when she
heard the salutation of Mary. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom,
but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world.

Having showed you in what troubles, the testimony of conscience will give joy;
and what joy it is that conscience causes in the soul, I will in the next
place show you the ground of the point, why the testimony of conscience,
concerning a man's simplicity, must needs cause joy in the midst of troubles.
This testimony of conscience is attended with a glorious power, as the Apostle
calls it, (...) according to the glorious power of him, says the original,
that is, of the holy Ghost, which makes the testimony so strong, and so
transcendently comfortable, that troubles and sorrows for sincerity sake,
though never so great, cannot possibly over-beare the heart. Strengthened with
all might according to [his glorious power] unto all patience and long
suffering, with joyfulnesse. 1 Col. 11. There is a glorious power, attending
the testimony of conscience, extended to upright souls, in times of great
troubles for uprightness sake, which strengthens them with all might, so that
all burdens cannot depresse them; unto all patience and long suffering, so that
they will never be weary, and out of breath with bearing; and to do all this
with joyfulnesse, so that no outward hardship, can utterly exhaust joy out of
their spirits. Now, the testimony of conscience concerning our simplicity and
sincerity, being attended with this glorious power in times of trouble, as
Peter says, it is, the spirit of glory and of God rests upon such, it must
needs keep up the dolorous spirit of man, and make him rejoice in the greatest
troubles. Paul and Timothy doubtless found this glorious power, attending the
testimony of their conscience, strengthening them with all might, unto all
patience and long suffering with joyfulnesse, which made them thus to say, For
our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have
had our conversation in the world.

2
Secondly, the testimony of conscience concerning man's simplicity and sincerity,
must needs rejoice a man, in the midst of all troubles, because conscience now
minds a man, that he walks in the midst of all enemies and troubles, just as
Christ did. There was no guile found in Christ's mouth, though he was put to it
again and again: Whatever he underwent from his Father, from the devil, and
his children, yet still he walked sincerely, and faultered not in the least
kind, for the greatest advantage, though he was proffered all the kingdoms in
the world, to do it. Now, when conscience tells a man, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity, he has had his conversation in the world, it does at once
tell him, that he has walked in this world, just as Christ did. As he was, so
art thou in this world, O my soul; which cannot but rejoice the heart, in the
midst of the sharpest afflictions for Christ's sake. Thy Savior, O my soul,
though God, yet was called a devil, nay Beelzebub the prince of devils; though
temperate, yet called a drunkard and Wine-bibber, and companion to Publicans
and Harlots; though a man without guile, yet called a deceiver; though
innocent, yet scoffed, imprisoned, condemned, and executed as a malefactor.
It Is just thus with thee O my soul: thou art studious to walk uprightly, and
yet censured for an hypocrit: thou labourest to be better then any, and yet the
world judges thee to be worse then any: thou labourest more for humility and
love, then for all the wealth in the World, and yet the World judges thee to be
fuller of pride, and malice, then any man: thou do not blow a Trumpet, when
thou give alms, but hidest from thy left hand, what thy right hand does, and
therefore the world thinks that thy religion toward God, is without mercy
toward man: thou think no evil to others, but labourest to do good to
all, and yet all almost think evil, or speak evil, or do evil against
thee. In this, O my soul, thou art not alone, 'twas the condition of thy
Savior; therefore mourn not, O my soul, but rejoice, according to the divine
rule, that thou art made like him. Thus the testimony of conscience concerning
a man's sincerity, brings in matter of comfort and joy to the soul of man, in
the midst of troubles, and makes it smile, when under heavy burdens of cruelty.

Lastly, it must needs be, that the testimony of conscience concerning the
simplicity of a man's conversation, should minister joy in the midst of
troubles, because such plainly see their interest, in the divine word of
consolation. Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye righteous, and shout for joy
all ye that are upright in heart, Psalm. 32.11. Conscience now tells me that I am
upright in heart; and that in simplicity and uprightness I have had my
conversation in the world; and so consequently that joy here, as well as
hereafter, belongs to me. Out of this reasoning, between conscience and the
divine word of consolation, joy will break forth in the soul first or last,
lade an upright man with what burdens you will. Rejoice all ye that are
upright in heart, says God: thou art upright in heart, says conscience to a
sincere soul; and conscience will not stay here, but will press upon the
soul to apply his own mercies; why then do not thou rejoice? Do thou
think it a small matter, to disobey a command of God? This pressing language
of conscience, will make a sincere soul strive hard, and pray hard, to rejoice
in afflictions for Christ's sake, according to the divine rule, which prayer God
will hear, and bring the upright foul at last, to say in the midst of
troubles, with these champions in my text, For our rejoicing is this, the
testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with
fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God we have had our conversation in the
world.

Having given you the point and the grounds of it, a word or two I would
speak, by way of application, to you that are unsound, and then a word more to
you that are sincere, and so conclude this point. This doctrine may in the
first place serve to unfold a riddle, to you that are unsound. Possibly you may
wonder, to see a man go rejoicing to prison, and to fire and faggot, especially
when censured by learned men, for such and such a malefactor: you it may be
think of such a man, as he of Paul, that he is mad and merry without cause, as
bedlams are; or else that he laughs from the teeth outward, as he that would
put a good face upon an ill matter. No, no, do not judge so uncharitably, it
may be this man has meat to eat, which ye know not of. It may be he has his
conscience testifying within, that he has walked in all uprightness, and is
not such a one, as the world has censured him to be; and this makes him
rejoice, in the midst of all troubles. 'Twas wonderful to Nebuchadnezzar, to
see the three children walk in the fiery furnace, as if they had been walking
in his stately walks; because he was not aware that they ha^ such a divine
comfortable companion, as they had. So it is wonderful to blind worldlings, to
see men so cheerful in suffering for trifles in religion (as they call them)
and the reason is, because they know not that divine comforter conscience, which
is continually within them, and unto them, a feast. This is to walk sincerely,
to be tender to obey all Gods will, and this conscience tells the soul, in the
midst of all the troubles he undergoes, from men of corrupt minds, and large
consciences; and this language of conscience, being attended with the glorious
power of the holy Ghost, as a comforter, this soul cannot but rejoice, though
bleeding upon a Pillory, groaning upon a Rack, dying upon a Cross, and
condemned by wise men for a fool, in standing out in such small matters.

Secondly, as this doctrine tells you blind souls, the reason why some are so
cheerful, under great troubles, for small things; so it tells you that are a
little more grown in hypocrisy and wickedness, that your design against the
godly is frustrate. The maine design of the devil and his children, in all
the troubles he puts them to, is, to deprive them of all joy and comfort, and
to make their being upon earth hell, which is a place without all consolation.
Now this they can never do, for as much as they cannot deprive them of the
peace of conscience, and joy of the holy Ghost, which go hand in hand, in an
upright heart. True it is, if all the joy of the godly, did consist in outward
things, as wicked men's joy does, then possibly they might serve the godly, as
God will one day serve them, to wit, utterly strip them of all consolation; but
the least part of an upright man's joy, consists in external things; his prime
joy is within, from conscience and the holy Ghost which keep company always
with it; and these two, all the wicked men upon earth, nor all the Devils in
Hell, cannot suspend, muchlesse silence from speaking comfort to an upright
heart. Conscience will still say this within, that he which so walks as before
mentioned, is upright; when men and devils without, say, that he is an
hypocrit, a dissembler, and not worthy to live. And the Holy Ghost will still
second this language of conscience, by speaking over the same again: in such
glorious expressions, and with such sweetened words, will the spirit of God,
bear witness with the spirit of man, that do what you will to this man, he
will still, notwithstanding all, rejoice. Cast him into prison; nay, cast him
into a dungeon, a dirty dungeon, as Jeremies was; nay, cast him into a fiery
Furnace; into a fiery Furnace heat seven times-hotter then ordinary, Give his
back to the smiters, and his cheeks to them that pluck off the hair, as the
Prophet speaks, Isa. 50.6. do what you will to him, yet you will never
deprive him of his joy. As long as breath is in his nostrils, conscience will
comfort him; and when this is gone, by thy cruelty, he will be in fullness of
joy; and in the fuller, by how much the more cruelty thou have inflicted on
him. The joy of conscience, is proportioned to what we suffer, for conscience;
as the afflictions of Christ, abound in us, so shall our joys both here and
hereafter. And therefore do not break your sleep and your brains, to plot
mischief against the upright, for they will have more joy in suffering
cruelty, then you can have in inflicting it. You do but lessen your own joy,
to increase theirs. The more terrible you are unto them, the more shall the
testimony of conscience be attended, with a glorious Spirit of consolation,
which will make them rejoice and be exceeding glad, under all that you can
inflict; and this will exceedingly vex you.

Thirdly, this doctrine will acquaint you with this truth. That if consciousnes
of sincerity, will lessen and sweeten troubles, by giving joy to the upright in
the midst of them; consciousnesse of hypocrisy and unsoundnesse, must needs
imbitter all troubles, and make them more pressing and piercing, upon you that
are halters, and time-servers: this was that which Jobs friends drove at, in
all their discourses with him, to bring him to sorrow doubly and trebly, for as
much as all his outward miseries, were attended (as they conceived) with inward
rottenness: intimating, and that truly, that it must be so, and will be so
with all hypocrites, when conscience is once thoroughly awakened, to tell them of
their unsoundnesse, under afflictions. What a terrible sting will this be, to a
man in poverty, when his conscience shall tell him. Thou have shuffled and
shifted basely to get wealth, and yet by all thy unjust ways, thou can
skarce keep a cue above a beggar. This blunt language of conscience, will be
such an addition of sorrow to poverty, as will exceed the pressure of poverty,
when at greatest. What a sting will this be to a man in disgrace, when his
conscience shall tell him, Thou have been a time-server; one that have studied
to humor and please men, more then God, that thou might get honor, and
keep honor in the world, and yet for all thy dog-like fauning and flattering,
thou stinkest in the nostrils of all, and art cast unto the dunghill as
unsavory salt. What a sting will this be to a man in sickness and death, when
his conscience shall tell him, that he has been but an outside Christian,
all the days of his life; a man zealous about humane inventions and bodily
exercises, to give God the outside, and careless to worship God in spirit and
truth: this close language of conscience, will pain a man more then any
sickness, or death can do. This was that which stung Balaam worse then death,
that his conscience told him, he had been but an hypocrit all his life. This
made Judas hang himself, after he had sold his master for money, for as much
as his conscience told him then strongly, that he had been but an
hypocritical follower of Christ, from the first to the last. And thus would
every rotten wretch do or worse, in every little trouble, if God should not
admirably step in, and restrain and hinder, so terrible is the sting of
conscience, when it testifies against a man, and such deep additions of grief
it brings to the soul, in every calamity. Sharp arrows and coals of
Juniper, conscience shoots and kindles in the soul of man, in every
trouble, when it testifies against him, as the Psalmist uses the expressions,
in relation to the hypocrit, the man concerning whom I here treat of, Psalm.
120.4.

Wherefore I would exhort all you, that are unsound at heart, to beg upright
hearts at the hands of God, that you may walk uprightly, and so have the
testimony of conscience with you, to rejoice you in all your troubles. You
labor by hook and by crook to get wealth to stand by you, and to comfort you
in troubles; and this will prove gravel in your bellies to torture you, as
Solomon affirms, so far will it be from comforting you in troubles. The
testimony of conscience concerning your sincerity, is better then all the
wealth in the world, to stand by you and to revive you in troubles. You flatter
and faune, turn and wind, shuffle and shift, to get great men to be your
friends to stand by you, and to comfort you in troubles; and alas their
favor is a vapor; as unconstant as the wind. Walk sincerely, and conscience
will be a faithful friend for you to the death; yea, after death, in
judgment. If thou had the favor of all the Princes in the world, yet could
not they procure for thee a dram of comfort in sickness, in death, or in
judgment: conscience in all these times can, and will procure for thee, not
only drams, but flaggons of consolation, if thou walk sincerely. Conscience
is an incomparable friend, or foe, in sickness, death, and judgment.

The blindness and folly of man above all other creatures, is much to be
wondered at; he hunts after things which are not, as Solomon says, to be
comforters to him, and takes no pains to procure that, which will indeed be
stable and abiding comfort to him, in all states. Riches, and honors, and
friends, all the things of this life, they are, called by Solomon, things that
are not, because they are not such things, as the blind heart of man conceives
them to be: he thinks they are sufficient to make him happy, and they are not
so. The least fit of sickness, will nonplus all these things, for reviving
the soul. Vain man like that fool, thinks that he has comfort enough for
many years; that is, for all his life, when he has great revenews in the
world, and therefore sings a requiem to his soul, as if there needed no other
thing, to the tranquillity of the Spirit, throughout a man's life, but wordly
things; and alas! these things are not abiding, but still upon the wing,
ready to flee from us; and if they were abiding, yet they are not satisfying;
and therefore Solomon calls them vanity and vexation, to the Spirit. Conscience
is a lasting friend, and a substantial friend, to the spirit of man. A friend
that has such waters of life, which will revive the soul in the greatest
extremities; and he is a fountain made by God, that will never wax dry; So
that the soul, as long as she keeps her self sincere, shall never be without
a spring of joy, boiling up day and night, within her.

And this joy is not a low prised commodity, a thing little worth: it is called
in Scripture, a joy of the Lord, such a joy of God, as is the strength of man.
When the Levits had opened the Law unto the people, their consciences were
awakened, and smote them so, that they wept, says the text, and weakened and
unfitted themselves, for the duties of the day; and therefore the Levits were
feign to comfort them, that conscience might take hold on something, to work
joy in them, which is the strength of the soul, unto the duty of thanksgiving,
which was the special work of that day. As an accusing condemning conscience,
secretly consumes spirits and strength of soul and body; and when attended
only with a legal spirit, begets such a horrid grief in the heart of man, as
unfits for the highest and noblest service of God: So an acquitting conscience,
does exhilarate and revive the soul; and as being attended with an
evangelicall spirit, begets such a joy in the heart, as tunes and strengthens
it, unto all divine duties, especially unto thankesgiving, which is the highest
and hardest divine lesson, that can be played upon the heart of fallen man, but
makes the sweetest melody in the ears of God, of all divine lessons committed
to man, to learn. If thou then would be a sweet singer in Israel, a man apt
and able to that which God most loves, walk so that conscience may still be an
acquitter within thee: if this accuse and condemn thee, 'twill put every
string in thy heart out of tune; consume thy spirits, and make thy living a
continual dying, and yet death undesirable.

Secondly, divine joy is called in Scripture an exceeding joy. I am exceeding
jayfull in all our tribulations, says Paul, 2 Cor. 7.4. The joy which
conscience gives to an upright man in all tribulations for uprightness sake,
is an exceeding joy; a joy that does far more take, content, and delight the
soul, then any other joy can do: so the Apostle explaines this clause, by
that which goes before it in the same verse. I am [filled] with comfort (says
he) I am exceeding joyful in all our tribulations. Conscience gives such a joy
to the soul in tribulations, that sils the soul with comfort, which is more
then all the sweets and delights of this world can do. The delights of this
life they do not reach the soul of man; they reach no further then the
external senses, so far are they from filling the soul with comfort; and
yet they do not fill nor satisfy these neither: for the eye is not satisfied
with seeing, nor the ear with hearing, nor the nose with smelling, nor the
tongue with tasting, nor the hand with handling. It Is but a tyring, and not a
satisfying joy, that all outward things bring to the outward senses. That joy
which only the external senses bring into the soul, Solomon calls madness,
as not worthy of the name of joy, because it reaches not the spirit of man as
rational, but as merely sensitive. The joy which conscience brings into the
soul, does not barely reach the soul, but it filles it and satisfies it. My
soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall praise
thee with joy full lips; when I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate upon
thee in the night watches, Psalm. 63.5.6. If thou will live all thy days, with
the joy of a bruit, with a mere sensual outside, spiritlesse, vain, vexing
joy, then thou needs not take pains to order thy conversation sincerely, to
get thy conscience to testify with thee; but if thou would live all thy days
in the joy of a man that bears the Image of God, then must thou strive so to
walk, that conscience may bear witness that thou art sincere.

The Scripture does not stay here, but calls divine joy everlasting; which is
an attribute so high, that it leads us necessarily to the original, to wit,
God, who is everlasting. As hell is a place of everlasting sorrow to all that
be in it, because a river of Brimstone from an everlasting fountain, runs to
it; so heaven which is begun in joy upon earth, to wit, in the hearts of the
upright, it is everlasting; because fresh streams of consolation continually
come from an everlasting fountain, to wit, God. God always seconds conscience
in him that is sincere, with such a glorious power as Saint Paul calls it, that
though he be always in sorrows for Christ's sake, yet he is always rejoicing:
As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing, 2 Cor. 6.10. You may many ways cause
sorrow to an upright man, but yet joy will live in all, and outlive all his
sorrows. You may set on fire the body of an upright man, and consume that; but
you can never set on fire his joy and consume that. You may various ways kill
a sincere man, but you can no way kill his joy, as long as he holds fast his
integrity. The joy that conscience gives to the soul of man, upon testimony of
his sincerity, 'twill live in fire, 'twill live in water, 'twill live in this
land, 'twill live in any land; famine cannot starve it, plague cannot infect
it, the sword cannot murder it, the rack cannot tear it; it is very healthy,
it is long-lived, 'twill never die: it is from heaven, and will abide with the
soul until he come to heaven; and then will be consummated, to give full
solace to the soul for ever. If then thou would have joy to stick bythee,
in health, in sickness, in peace, in war, in plenty, in famine, in honor,
in disgrace, in liberty, in bonds, in life, in death, and eternally after
death, walk so that thy conscience may say that thou art simple and sincere in
thy conversation.

The Scripture stays not here, but calls divine joy unspeakeable and full of
glory. As that joy which just men made perfect inherit, is beyond conception,
so that it cannot enter into the heart of man to conceive of it, so that joy
which conscience gives to upright men in troubles, it is beyond expression: the
tongue of man cannot fully express it. I do not affirm that the heart of man
cannot fully conceive it, though possibly it may be so. It Is joy unspeakeable
strong: stronger and more vehement, then the joy of worldlings, when Corn and
Wine and Oil increase; and yet it is hard to express how much joy an earthy
heart has, in great earthly increase. It Is joy unspeakeable sweet; so that he
which tastes of this joy, tastes no more sweetness in sensual things, then in
the white of an egg: it is sweeter then the Honey or the Honey-combe: that is,
sweeter and more pleasing to the soul, then all the delights of this life, to
the carnal heart; and yet it is hard to express, how sweet and pleasing
sensual delights are, to the carnal heart of man.

It Is joy unspeakeable pure: as David says, that the fear of the Lord is
clean; so I may say, that the joy of the Lord, which he gives to man upon the
testimony of conscience concerning his sincerity, it is clean; that is, it is
pure, unspeakeable pure, and holy. What was said of the generation of Christ,
that may be said of the generation of divine joy. Who can declare his
generation? says the Scripture of Christ; so may I say, Who can declare the
generation of divine joy? It Is begotten in the heart, as Christ was in Mary's
womb, to wit, by the holy Ghost: it is shead abroad in the heart, by the holy
Ghost: it is continually nourished and cherished by the holy Ghost. It fills the
heart full of holy thoughts, the mouth full of holy words, and the hand full of
holy deeds. It is immediately from heaven, and makes a man have his conversation
in heaven, whilst on earth.

It Is joy unspeakeably precious: a dram of it is more worth then the world: a
damned soul in hell would give ten thousand worlds, if there were so many, for
the least drop of this cooling comforting liquor, to assuage his scorching
torments, but for a moment. It has heaven in it, with which what can be
compared for worth? It Is joy unspeakeable, and full of glory. The smiling face
of God, which is more glorious then the Sun, may be seen in it, so
diaphanous is it.

It Is joy unspeakably lasting: whereas all other joys die when man dies, if
not long before; this joy lives, as long as the soul and God lives. Labor
then so to live, that conscience may testify before God and you, that you are
sincere, and so lead your souls into that unspeakeable joy, which will make
you unspeakeably happy.

I have now a word or two to you which walk sincerely and uprightly in this
world, and so I shut up this point. If you do not yet find experimentally,
the truth of this point; to wit, your consciences causing you to rejoice in the
midst of your troubles, by alively testifying your integrity to you, then by
prayer plead your integrity to God, and entreat him so transcendently to second
conscience, with his glorious power which works in us, that your hearts may
be revived under every pressure for pieties sake. Thus David was forced to do
sometimes, to wit, plead his integrity, to find the benefit of it in
troubles; for God will be sought unto for every good thing, though we be never
so sincere. Let integrity and uprightness preserve me: for I wait on thee,
Psalm. 25.21. David you see was put to it, to plead his integrity to God, to
obtain the benefit of it in troubles; and thus must we still do if we find
our hearts to droope in troubles, although we are conscious to our selves of
our upright and innocent conversation. Say, Lord thou know that I have
walked uprightly as concerning this thing and that, about which I am troubled,
and therefore do thou stand up in my heart, and second my conscience by the
Almighty power of thy holy Spirit, and make it speak peace so lively and so
gloriously within me, that I may rejoice in this tribulation for thy sake;
that I may find my integrity, as a cordial to me, to keep me from fainting
in my mind, and from stretching out tongue or hand to iniquity.

If you find the comfortable testimony of conscience, reviving and rejoicing
you in your troubles, then bless God with David, that he has enabled you so
to walk in this wretched world, as to have the voice of conscience with you,
that you are sincere. It Is of God that we walk uprightly a moment: did not he
stand by us, and watch over our deceitful hearts, and uphold our goings in his
paths, we should show our selves hypocritical wretches in all our ways. God
is my strength and power; and he makes my way perfect, Psalm. 28.32. When the
lively testimony of conscience, concerning David's integrity, had rejoiced, and
raised his dull spirit, then he took wing, and made his soul mount up to
heaven like an Eagle, to magnify God which had been such strength and power
to him, as to make his way perfect, that is, sincere, and so capable of
deliverance from his insulting enemies, [God] is my strength and power; and
[he] makes my way perfect. David would not appropriate the praise, of his
upright and innocent conversation to himself, as if he by his own wisdom,
strength and goodness, had made his way perfect, and upright; he had through
experience of the rottenness of his own heart, and his aptness to declare
it, if God had not been a special strength and aid unto him, in his
conversation; and therefore does he so humbly and imitably say, [God] is my
strength and power; and [he] makes my way perfect. 2 Samuel 22.33. he enabled me
so to walk, as to be capable of the accomplishment of his promises of defense
against, and victory over ungodly men, and no wisdom, strength, or goodness
of his own. Thus let us humbly do; when we feel our hearts leap within us,
as rejoiced by the secret testimony of conscience, concerning the integrity of
our carriage, in this or that matter of weight and trial that we were put
upon; Thou wast my wisdom, strength, and power, O God, to guide and enable me
to walk uprightly in such and such hazardous matters; my heart is deceitful,
and full of base fear, and if thou had not stood up as a mighty God in my
weak spirit, I had been over-borne with fleshly fears, and selfe-respects,
to the wounding of my integrity, and thy Gospel and glory: blessed be thy
name, that did enable me to look over all by ends, to thy glory; and to
acquit my self, at the time of trial, answerable to my upright purpose and
resolution: it is of thee to will and to do good, and unto thee I give all the
glory. This is the good way to have God stand by us still, and so mightily to
guide us in all our ways, that we shall keep faith and a good conscience to
our grave, and so consequently our joy, which is the life of our lives. This
was upright Jobs sweet carriage, as we may guess by his language. Though I
were perfect, yet would I not know my soul: I would despise my life. If I were
for holiness, as just men made perfect in glory, yet whilst a soul so holy,
is in a body so diseased, I could not take any pleasure in my life. Thus to
interpret these words, is to give us a hint and more, that Job was extremely
overgone with impatience under Gods hand, which is the worst that can be said
upon this place: I think there may be hinted this unto us (if the other be the
maine scope) that Job saw all the integrity and uprightness he had, or
possibly could be had, was from God, and that he had no reason to boast, and
magnify himself, what ever his endowments were.

Lastly, if you find by comfortable experience the truth of my doctrine, your
sincerity, causes joy and rejoicing in our souls, then hang upon God for
perseverance in a sincere way, that your joy may abide, and still more and more
increase, as the light of the Sun unto the perfect day. You have tasted of
the sweetness of a sincere way, and therefore you should zelously follow God,
to keep you on in it, as long as breath is in your nostrils, that you may
never loose your grapes, your first fruits of the holy Land, your taste of
heaven, until you come to the full fruition of it. 'Twas David's prayer often
(and let it be yours) though he were sincere, that God would make his heart
sound in his statutes. There is much rottenness in the best heart, and this
will break forth in a man's life, to the dishonor of God, and the wounding of
his conscience, and robbing of his joy, if he be not still with David, hanging
upon God by prayer, for more and more uprightness, and for further and further
cleansing of an unsound heart. Things that are apt to bend and become crooked,
we are every foot rectifying and straightning them, and laboring to
strengthen them, so that they may abide straight, and so be still fit for use
and service. You know to what to apply this, if I should not tell you, to the
heart of man. Flattery or violence will turn you aside, from your sincere
walking, if you do not humbly seek God still with David, to make your heart
sound in his statutes, and to be still with you, to uphold your steps in his
paths. You will ship wrack conscience, and all the peace and joy you have by
it quickly, as Peter did, if you grow confident of your own strength, and do
not fear always, and depend upon your God, for ability, to do every thing
uprightly. And therefore lean not to your own understanding, as Solomon said
to his son, nor to any parts else you have, to steer your conversation, if
you would maintain the integrity and uprightness of it; but renounce all in
your selves, and beg God to make you run and not be weary, and to deliver
you from backsliding in heart and life, to make you faithful to the death, and
to give you at last the crown of life.

This counsel that you may carefully follow, think on these two or three
things. The peace and joy of a good conscience, is better then the greatest
preferment in the world, and the loss of it, is worse then the loss of thy
life, in the cruel'st way that man can invent. Thou will loose a little heaven,
and create within thy heart a little hell, which will last till the marrow of
thy bones be consumed, and thy moisture turned into the drought of summer, in
the day that thou turnest aside from thy sincere course, and setst conscience
against thee. The joy of an acquitting conscience, is unspeakable and full of
glory: and so the sorrow of an accusing condemning conscience, is unspeakable
and full of terror.

It Is sorrow unspeakeable strong. What God said to the woman, after she had
turned aside from the upright way of the Lord, that may I say of all the seed
of the woman, when once they turn aside from their upright conversation. Unto
the woman God said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow, Genesis 3.16. Sorrow
multiplied, is to have sorrow upon sorrow, as Paul uses the expression to the
Philippians. Phil. 2.27.
As in childbearing there is pang upon pang; and these returns of pangs, grow
still stronger and stronger, till the womb be discharged of her burden: so
say I to you, in the day that you turn aside from upright walking, God will
greatly multiply your sorrow; you shall have sorrow upon sorrow, pang upon pang
by an accusing conscience; and these pangs shall still be stronger and
stronger, till you have humbled your souls thoroughly for your halting, and got
your consciences sprinkled with the blood of Christ.

The sorrows which God distributeth to his, when they turn aside from sincere
walking, they are sorrows fetched from hell, and those sorrows, of all
sorrows, are the strongest. The sorrows of hell compassed me, says the
Psalmist. To turn aside from uprightness and holiness, was the practice of
the evil angels, for whom hell was first founded, and therefore God does
borrow some sorrows from thence, to punish such sins in his children, which
carry a near similitude to their sin: that similes vitio, may be similes
supplicio; like in sin, may be like in punishment. The sorrows which God
inflicts upon revolters, for similitude sake, are called the sorrows of hell.

The sorrows of hell God distributeth in anger, as Job says. How often is tho
candle of the wicked put out? and often comes their destruction upon them: God
^istributeth sorrows in his anger. Ioh. 21.17. So the sorrows which God
distributeth to his people, when they turn aside from their sincere walking,
are from God, as with an angry frowning visard upon his face, as if he were
indeed very angry, as indeed he is with the sin, though not with the person
of the godly; for he hates sin in all, with a perfect hatred. The sorrows
which God will distribute to thee by accusing conscience, when thou haltest,
shall be such as in which thou shall see nothing, but the angry face of God,
and this will make thee tremble and sorrow, as the Lord speaks of the
Babylonians. Jer. 51.29. as the very damned in hell do, as one that feels
the very sorrows of hell to compass thee. God looking angerly upon the earth,
it trembles, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 104.32. The earth is the vastest and
gravest body under Heaven, and therefore least apt to shaking; and the
foundations of it were laid, by Gods own immediate hand; and yet if God do but
look angerly upon this firm stable body, so transcendantly founded, it
trembles: how much more then needs must man, which is but a little dust of
that grave vast body, shake and tremble, when God as an angry God looks upon
him?

Secondly, the sorrows of hell are such as principally torture the spirit. The
fire which we make, can only burn and torture the bodies of men; because this
only of man is material: Igris socalis i^ material ^on ^quit Ph^lo^ph^.
immaterials, as the souls of men are, our fire cannot fasten upon: but that
strange fire, which God has kindled in hell, for all that disobey him, burns
the souls of men, though immateriall substances. Nay, so strange is that fire,
that it burns these immateriall substances most fiercely, as being the most
sinful part of man; for it is only sin that pitches and defiles the soul,
and makes it combustible, which otherwise would never burn, if all the fiery
artists of hell did blow the bellows. Now, just such is that fire, which
conscience kindles upon the breach of integrity; to wit, a fire that
principally tortures the spirit of man: a fire that burns inwardly, and
consumes the marrow of the bones, and drinks up the spirits. The arrows which
conscience shootes in upon a man, upon the breach of sincerity, are such as
pierce principally the spirit. As long as Job was patient under Gods hand, he
felt the arrows of the Almighty only without him, as I may say, to wit, in
his body, in his children and substance; but when he brake out and cursed his
day, he presently complains, that he felt the arrows of God within him, and
that the poison of them did drink up his spirits. Job 6.4. All that which
before he felt without, was nothing to that which he now felt within, upon his
spirit; as the torments which damned wretches shall suffer in their bodies, are
nothing to those which shall continually flee up and down, within their
souls. So David after he had made breaches in his integrity, God filled his
loins with loathsome diseases, but this was nothing to speak of; God made
things strike into his heart, and then he roared. I am feeble and sore broken,
I have roared by reason of the [disquietnesse of my heart.] David felt pains
gather about his heart, and then he cries out. The heart is the mark that God
principally aims at, when a Christian has turned aside from his upright
course: other outward parts he may hit and deeply wound, but this is but to
make holes into the heart, where the seat of unsoundnesse that principally
offends him is. The fire which conscience kindles, it may flash forth into the
eyes, and tongue, and hands, and make a man look fearfully, speak
desperately, and do bloodily against the body; but the heat of the fire is
principally within, in the furnace, in the spirit; it is but some sparkles and
flashes only, that you see come forth at the lower holes of the Furnace, which
you behold in the eyes, words, and deeds of such men.

Thirdly, the sorrows of hell are torturing, but yet not such as utterly
consume and end the soul. The fire which we make, let it fasten on never so
hard a thing, yet it will consume it in length of time. But that strange fire
that God has kindled in hell for all that disobey him, though it burn with
the greatest fierceness that can be conceived, yet it never consumes the
souls of those that are now burned in it; no nor yet the bodies that shall
hereafter be burned in it. Damned souls are ever burning, and yet never
burned; ever a consuming, and yet never consumed; and this adds infinitely to
the misery of the damned. Even such is that sire which conscience kindles in
the soul of man, upon the breach of integrity. It Is a fire that will burn and
torture the soul day and night, but never consume it. He-man complains that
this fire burnt so fiercely in his soul, that it distracted his spirit, but
yet did not end his spirit. While I suffer thy terror I am distracted, Psalm.
88.15. The terrors that conscience kindles in the spirit, will rack the
spirit, rend and tear limme from limme, faculty from faculty, and make the
spirit mad with horror and anguish, but yet for all this not put a period to
the spirit: he shall be as susceptive and as sensible of tortures to day as
yester-day, and tomorrow as to day, and next week as this week, next year
as this year, the last day of his life, as the first day they begun, if God
do not admirably intercept. Conscience hangs the soul in chains alive, upon
the breach of integrity; and there lets the soul beat himself, bite and gnaw
himself, but yet cannot when he would end himself, and this makes every
torture double. O that I might have my request! and that God would grant me the
thing that I long for! Why what Job do thou long for? Why, even that it would
please God to destroy me: that he would let loose his hand and cut me off. No
Job, your spirit has hanged but a while, it is not dead yet, and therefore it
shall not be cut down. The things that Jobs soul refused to touch, were made
by conscience his daily sorrowful meat, and this Gall and Wormwood fretted
his guts, but did not strangle and end him; conscience forced him every day,
and every night to drink a new draught, that kept his Spirit in continual
torture, and yet he could not get his soul out of this body, nor have it
consumed in. The terrors that conscience kindles they are so terrible, that
they will make a man wish for death, nay inflict death upon himself, and all
to put an end unto them, and yet all will not do, because these tortures
fasten upon the Spirit, but destroy not the Spirit.

Final, the sorrows of hell, they are such as are not in the least measure
pitied by God. Though the damned in hell, be tormented with sulfurous flames,
which is a very fierce fire; and though they cry and roar, howl and yell,
shrich and gnash the teeth continually, and all this in the hearing of God
continually, which would stir, nay, turn the bowels of any man, to hear but
a moment; yet it stirs not God a jot, though he has heard these dolorous
cries so many hundred years, to give them the least good word, or good look.
So that sorrow which conscience raises in the soul, upon, the breach of
sincerity, God seems not to pity in the least measure, for a long time.
Though the spirit of man be rackt, tortured and affrighted even unto
distraction, yet God will not so much as afford a good look to the soul.
Though he pray and fast, and consume himself with fasting, yet not any beam
of light and love, that the revolting soul shall see in the countenance of
God, to take hold on, and to comfort himself by. Hence it is that the Psalmist
complains of God and his mercy as clean gone. Will the Lord cast off for ever?
and will he be favorable no more? is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his
promise fail for evermore? Psalm. 77.7,8. Nay, many times God serves
backsliding Christians, as he served the Israelites of old, to wit, increases
their sorrow, when they are in earnest suit for release and comfort; so far
he is from pitying of them: and as Joseph carried himself to his brethren;
instead of pitying them in their want, he spoke affrightingly to them, and
told them that they were spies, and so put them in fear of the loss of their
lives. Just thus for a time does God usually carry himself to revolting
Christians: he is so far from pitying them, notwithstanding all their
prayers, that he calls them dogs, and speaks roughly to them, and puts them
in fear of the loss of their best lives, and seems resolved to proceed
against them as his enemies, beg and cry as long as they will. Job points at
this, where he says, Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me for
thin-enemy? Job 13.24. And is not this hell indeed, to be in soul misery, and
to have no compassion from God? To be pitied and condoled by a man's friend,
though he be not able to help him, we take it as a great mercy, and moderation
of misery; Job would so have accounted it. But when such as we take for
friends, do not only forbear to pity, but set themselves against us in our
misery, and add to our afflictions; this makes misery unspeakeably miserable,
and a lively Emblem of Hell indeed: But I go no further this way.

Secondly, as the sorrow which conscience causes upon the breach of sincerity,
is unspeakeable strong no other in a manner but the torments of hell; so it is
often times unspeakable sudden. As the Wind raises hideous storms and tempests
at Sea on a sudden, that endangers the drowning of all: So conscience, when
once the soul has turned aside to crooked ways, often times of a sudden raises
hideous storms and tempests in the soul, which adds exceedingly to the
torture. Horror and terror breaking forth suddenly, affrights more by far,
then if it came with warning. The fire that conscience kindles in the soul, is
like the setting a fire of Gunpowder, very sudden, as it is very fierce. After
once a breach is made upon sincerity, conscience lays trains of wildfire, and
blows up all a man's joy on an instant, and sets on fire the soul, and then
lets in legions of such spirits whose dwelling is only in fire to keep
Garrison against all promises of good to this soul, and then the soul becomes
like Tashur, fear round about: the face of God terrible; the face of friends
terrible; the thought of sickness, death; and the thought of death, hell; and
the thought of hell, as at the door, and unavoidable. As the Arrows which God
will shoot, against the enemies of his Church, shall go forth as lightening,
Zech. 9.14. so the Arrows which God shootes by conscience, against such as
turn aside to evil ways, they go forth oft-times as light^ings, very
sudden, and very swift. Sometimes when a sinner like Belshazzar is in the very
act of sin, conscience writes down a man's doom in his heart, and in such
legible letters, that the sinner cannot choose but read and tremble. When a
sinner is taking pleasure in unrighteousness, of a sudden conscience breaks
forth into thundering and lightning in the soul, and the sinner is as one
descending quick into hell. And [immediately while he yet spake] the Cock
crew, and the Lord looked back upon Peter, says the text, Luke 22.60. On a
sudden, while Peter was in the very act of denying, a cock crew within, to
wit, conscience that made Peter's spirit die within him. Once and twice Peter
denied Christ, and Christ did not awaken conscience, and set him at him, to
pull him by the throat; but the third time, immediately while he yet spoke,
conscience like a Lion ran upon his soul, and made him believe, that he
would be a tormentour to him, as he is to the damned, before the time. Sometime
conscience may let a man alone, after he is turned aside from sincere walking,
but if the soul still go on, of a sudden conscience will break forth, into
thundering and lightning so fiercely as he did in Peter's soul, on whom if
Christ had not looked back, Peter would have gone near, to have served
himself as Judas, after he had betrayed his Master.

To conclude all, This I am sure, O sincere soul, that as conscience will make
thee know to thy comfort, that it is a sweet thing faithfully and sincerely to
serve God; so conscience will make thee know to thy grief, that it is an evil
and a bitter thing, to turn away from the good way of the Lord. Having
therefore now set good and evil before thee, make a wise choice. Choose rather
to undergo any thing, that man or devil can invent, that thou may still
enjoy the peace and joy of a good conscience, then to have the greatest honor
this world will afford, and shipwreck sincerity, and so lie liable to the lash
of an evil conscience.

FINIS.
2 COR. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that
in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace
of God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to
you-wards: but specially amongst you.


THe fourth and last proposition, which now according to order and method,
comes to be handled, is this, That there be special times and occasions, for
the declaration of sincerity, which ought to be observed, and answerably to
declare and show our selves. The Church of the Corinthians was very vicious in
doctrine and manners, as we may plainly see by many expressions or Saint Paul,
in his first and second Epistle to them. They were 1 Cor. 1.11.
contentious, and 1 Cor. 4.6.
puffed up one against another. They had itching ears, and carnally gloried in
(...); one was for 1 Cor ^ ^.
Paul, and another for Apollo, and another for Cephas. They were voluptuous; so
voluptuous, that before they came to the Lords Supper, one was hungry, another
1 Cor 11 21
drunken, in the House of God. They were followers of heathenish fashions, as in
their apparel and meats, so in their hair, wearing it so long that (...) 1
Cor 11 14,16
nature, and the custom of the Church of Christ condemned it. They were 1 Cor.
10 25.
superstitious, 1 Cor. 10 14
idolatrous, 1 Cor. 6 9,10,11
adulterous, fornicatours, abusers of themselves with mankind, theives,
covetous, drunkards, revilers, extortioners, murmurers 1 Cor 10 9,10.
tempters of Christ, 1 Cor. 11 ^.
backbiters whisperers, raisers of tumults and what no^? This gross wicked^
made Paul to stir up the grace of (...) in him, and to use great bold^ (...),
toward this Church, as himself says, 2 Cor. 7.4. with all plainness and
powerfulness, reproving their sins, and making manifest the truth, to every
man's 2 Cor. 4.2.
conscience, in the sight of God. They were grown so loose, that Paul was forced
to use such 2 Cor. 13.10
sharp and home expressions, and with such majesty, as you shall not find him
the like, to any Church* Twice in one Epistle uses he this upbraiding
expression, 1 Cor 5.6. 1 Cor 15 34
I speak this to your shame, which not once throughout all his Epistles, to
any other Church, does he use the like upbraiding language. And then delivering
his reproves, with such a transcend^nt majesty. Moreover I call God for a
record upon my soul that to spare you I came not as yet to Corinth. 2 Cor.
1.23. A^ it he would dart their soule^ through, with such an holy fear of God,
that their loose hearts for ever after, might stand in awe and sin not. Thus as
this Church above all other, gave Saint Paul, special occasion for the
declaration of his uprightness and sincerity, so answerably he courageously
applied himself unto them, which is the meaning of this expression in my text,
but more abundantly to you-ward, or, specially among you.

Paul had dealt sincerely with all other Churches, but other Churches were not
so openly wicked, and therefore there needed not, that he should use such open
majesticall contestation with them. This Church of Corinth, was very openly and
wilfully wicked, and therefore Paul answerably opened his mouth against them. O
Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is enlarged: ye are not
straightned in us, but ye are straightned in your own bowels, 2 Cor. 6.11. We
have said enough and done enough (as if the Apostle had said) to work upon
your profane hearts, and to turn you from your profane lives, but yet your
affections are straightned and clogged, that you come not off so readily, to
follow our holy instructions as you should. The point you see to be very
naturally raised, That there be special times and occasions, for the
declaration of sincerity, which we ought to observe, and answerably to declare,
and show our selves in our places.

Special times and occasions for the declaration of sincerity, are either
personal, domestical, sociall, or national. Personal occasions, which
require sincerity after a special manner to be declared, are when a man is
strongly assaulted by the world, the flesh or the devil, to sin against God;
or else strongly hindered in seeking the glory of God, and the good of his
Church. When Simon the sorcerer saw, that through laying on of the Apostles
hands, the holy Ghost was given, he offered Peter money to impart his skill
unto him, and so to have made him a Merchant of the holy Ghost, for gain; then
was a special personal occasion from the world, for Peter to declare his
sincerity, that he abhorred all unjust ways to get wealth, and that he was not
mercenary in his Ministry, as the world might suppose; which he wisely
considered, and answerably carried himself. Peter stood up, and courageously
said to Simon the sorcerer, Thy money perish with thee; because that thou
thoughtst the gift of God may be purchased with money, thou have neither part
nor lot in this matter; for thy heart is not right in the sight of God. Repent
therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God if perhaps the thoughts of thy
heart may be for given thee; for I perceive that thou art in the gall of
b^tternesse and bonds of iniquity, Acts 8.18,19,20,21. When Samuel was thought
hardly of, the people being strongly set to have a King, as other Nations had,
not liking their government by Judges; then was a special personal occasion
from the world, for Samuel to declare his integrity, that he had walked
faithfully as Gods Vicegerent over them, and had given them no just occasion,
to wax weary of this way of government, and so consequently that they did
evil to desire a King. And Samuel said to all Israel, behold here I am,
witness against me before the Lord and before his Anointed: whose Ox have I
taken? Whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I
oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes
therewith? and I will restore it you, 1 Samuel 12.3. When Bariesus withstood Paul
in his Ministry, that he could not do that good he would upon Sergius Paul is
then was a special personal occasion from the world, for Paul to declare his
sincerity, that he strongly abhorred slatterers and time-servers, and dearly
loved the glory of God, and the winning of souls unto him; which he wisely
considered, and answerably with courage declared himself Then Saul who also is
called Paul, filled with the Holy Christ, set his eyes on him, and said, O full
of all subtilty and all mischief, thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all
righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?
Act. 13.9,10.

2
When Paul was strongly set upon by his own flesh; when the law in his members,
rebelled against the law of his mind, and carried him captive to the law of
sin; then was a special personal occasion from the flesh, for Paul to
declare his sincerity, that he loved God more then his lusts, and to please
him, rather then to enjoy the pleasures of sin; which he wisely considered,
and answerably declared himself. But I keep under my body, and bring it into
subjection, least that by any means when I have preached to others, I my self
should be a castaway. 1 Cor. 9.27. This is after a special manner to declare
sincerity indeed, when a man courageously fights against himself, so
farreforth as sinful, and opposite to God. The lusts of the heart, are the
enemies of a man's own house, which are the worst enemies of all, and therefore
when these begin to war and rebel, against that holy light which is in our
minds, then is a special time indeed for a man to stir up the grace of God
in him, and to declare his uprightness for God, whose throne the heart of man
ought to be, or else God will give up the heart to the power and dominion of
sin, and then the soul is undone for ever. This Paul wisely considered, 2
Cor. 12.7
and therefore when he felt this prick in the flesh, after a special manner
molest him, he still after a special manner declared his uprightness in
wresting against it, that so be might subdue his flesh, which otherwise would
have subdued his spirit, and outed Christ of his prime Hold, and Saint Paul of
his prime happiness.

3
When the devil tempted Christ, to cast down himself from the top of a steep
place, and to fall down and worship him, and so to decline his Father utterly;
then was a special personal occasion from the devil, for Christ to declare
his uprightness; that he prised every title of his fathers will, above all
this world, and all the honors and pleasures in it. Which Christ wisely
considered, and answerably with much courage and resolution declared himself.
Then said Jesus unto him, get thee hence Satan, for it is written, that thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only thou shall serve, Math. 4.10. So
when the Serpent subtly got into one of the followers of Christ, and prayed
him to pity and spare himself, from that painful work on which the glory
of God, and the salvation of man so much depended; then was a special
personal occasion from the devil, for Christ again to declare his sincerity,
that he more regarded the glory of God, and the good of man, then his own
life, though his life were worth a thousand of ours; which be thoroughly
considered and answerably declared himself; Get thee behind me satan, Mark.
8.33. So when the serpent subtly set upon our first parents, to draw them to
eat^ of the forbidden fruit, then was a special personal occasion from the
divell^ for them to have declared their uprightness; that they would not
disobey their God in the least point, though they might have been made Gods
themselves, to do it: which because they did not seriously consider, and
answerably carry themselves, they lost the confirmation of their happy being,
and plunged themselves, and all us their posterity, into unspeakeable misery.

^
Domestical occasions which require sincerity after a special manner to be
declared, are, when in family relations, good or evil, after a special manner
is to be conversant about. When Ely's sons abused their high calling, by a
profane conversation; then was a special domestical occasion, for Ely to
declare his sincerity, to God and man, that he loved the glory of God, above
the lives of his sons, which because he did not seriously observe and
answerably carry himself, but passed over a special occasion, with an
ordinary reproof, therefore God fell out with him, and punished him as one
that esteemed and loved his sons, more then God. When God commanded Abraham
to sacrifice his only son Isaac, then was a special domestical occasion
for Abraham to declare his sincerity, that to obey the Will of God, was dearer
to him then the life of his only son; which he seriously considered, and
answerably carried himself; and God then openly confessed Abraham to be
upright. For now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld
thy sin, thine only son from me Genesis 22.12. When Job's wife bid Job in his
extremity to curse God and die then was a special domestical occasion, for
Job to declare his sincerity, that he served God for naught; which Job
seriously considered, and answerably carried himself toward his wife. Thou
speak as one of the foolish women speaks, what? shall we receive good at
the hands of God, and not evil? Job 2.10. So when David Saul's son had a
special advantage against Saul, and might have slain him, but would not,
because he was the Lords Anointed; then was a special domestical occasion
for David, to declare his uprightness to God and to Saul, that he was an
obedient son to Saul, and desired not the life or Kingdom of his father, but
to live in love and peace with him; which David wisely considered, and took
this special occasion to declare his integrity to Saul; and this done so
seasonably, his words were to Saul like Apples of gold in pictures of silver,
which made him to confess David, to be more righteous then himself, 1 Samuel
24.17. so likewise when God met Moses in an Inn, and commanded him to
circumcise his son, to which bloody ordinance Zipporah was so averse, or
otherwise he should loose his life, then was a special domestical occasion
for Moses to declare his uprightness to God and to his wife, that he regarded
more to please God then to please his wife; which Moses seriously considered,
and answerably with courage carried himself, or else he had assuredly smarted
severely.

3
Sociall or Symmachicall occasions and times, for the declaration of sincerity
after a special manner, are, when good or evil are more then ordinarily
conversant about in relation to such or such a Society or Corporation. When
Ioab that bloody man, would have destroyed Abel that ancient City, because of
Sheba a seditious man which fled thither, then was a special symmachicall
occasion for that wise woman to declare her uprightness, for her own good,
and for the good of that City whereof she was a member; that she was none of
them that made strife and contention against David, nor that City in which she
lived; which she wisely considered, and answerably with wisdom and courage
carried herself. I am one of them that are peaceable in Israel; thou seek
to destroy a City, and a mother in Israel; why will thou swall^w up the
inheritance of the Lord. 2. Sam. 20.19. When Judas one of that honorable
society, plotted mischief against Christ, the Master of that company, then was
a special wine for Christ to declare his integrity that the world might know,
that Christ had given Judas no just cause, thus trecherously to behave
himself, but had every way so carried himself toward ^m, as might have been
enough, to have won any man's heart for ever to him. Christ made him as his
equal; his familiar friend; he did eat of his bread; he had favors in
commune with the rest of the Apostles; and vet plaved the traitor to Christ:
this, Christ upon this occasion (you know) declared. When the holy Ghost after
a transcendent manner, fell upon the Apostles, that they spoke with diverse
tongues, some sons of Bel^l mocked them and said, These (...) are fall of new
Wine; then was a special symmachicall occasion for Peter to declare his
uprightness, for the glory of God, and for the credit of that honorable
society of which he was: to declare to all the world that they were not
drunken, as the blind worldlings conceived, but transcendently filled with the
holy Ghost; which the Apostle seriously considered, and answerably with much
courage he declared himself. But Peter standing up with the eleven, lifted up
his voice and said; Ye men of Judas and all ye that dwell as Jerusalem, be this
known unto you, and hearken unto my words: for these are not drunken as ye
suppose, seeing it is but the third hou^e of the day, but this is that which
was spoken by the Prophet Joel, etc. Act. 2.14,15,16.

4
National occasions and tunes for the declaration of sincerity after a
special manner, are, when good or evil after a special manner is conversant
about in relation not to this or that particular person, but to a whole Nation.
When bloody Pharaoh would have destroyed all Israel, then was a special
National occasion, for Moses and the rest of the worthies of the Lord, to
declare their sincerity, for the glory of God, and the good of his Church;
which Moses seriously considered and answerably, with much courage carried
himself toward Pharaoh, upon all occasions, though a King: he told him his
own, and held him strictly to Gods terms; and though he shuffled and shifted,
and went forth and back as a halting rotten Prince, to work Moses about to
decline a little from Gods will, yet so sincerely did Moses declare himself to
God and all his people, Exo. 10.26.
that he would not yield to Pharaoh a hoof, nor swerve from a tittle of what
God bid him to stand for. So when Balaam would have cursed all Israel for
wealth and honor, then was a special National occasion, for all Israelites
indeed, to declare their sincerity, by wrestling with the Lord by prayer, to
countermine all his enchantments, which they seriously considered, and
answerably with much unweariednesse doubtless did, or else doubtless God
would never have withstood Balaam in that admirable manner as he did, and have
forced him still to bless, when he meant to curse. When Israel committed
whoredom with the daughters of Moab, and joined themselves unto Baal-Peor, and
the anger of the Lord kindled, threatening to destroy all, then was a special
National occasion for Moses, to declare his sincerity, that he loved the glory
of God above the lives of his brethren, which he seriously considered and
answerably with much courage did. And Moses said, unto the Judges of Israel,
slay ye every one his men, that were joined to Baal-Peor, Number. 25.5. So when
Israel had made them a molten Calfe in the absence of Moses, and God would have
destroyed them all at once, and have made Moses a great Nation if he would have
let him alone in his way, then was a special National occasion indeed for
Moses to declare his uprightness, that he loved the lives of his brethren,
above all honors and preferments this world could afford him, and that he
loved the glory of God (which would have been much blemished by the heathen,
if he had destroyed Israel) more than his own life; which be seriously
considered, and answerably declared himself. And Moses returned unto the Lord,
and said, Oh this people have committed a great sin, etc. Yet now if thou will forgive their sin, and if not, blot me I pray thee out of thy book,
Exodus 32.31,32. When Israel halted between God and Baal, making a mixture of
divine worship and idolatrous together, one to color the other, that poison
might be swallowed without scrupling, to the speedy and unsensible perdition of
souls, then was a special National occasion for the Prophets of the Lord to
declare their uprightness, in crying against halting, not fearing man who
shall be made as grass; which Elijah seriously considered, and answerably with
much courage carried himself. And Eliah came unto all the people, and said,
how long halt ye between two opinions? if the Lord be God, follow him; but if
Baal, then follow him: and the people answered him not a word. When Azariah the
Prophet told Asa and all Juda, that their halting in Gods worship, was the
cause of all their troubles, and that if they did zealously return to that
purity of divine worship, which God required, and shake off man's inventions, it
should go well with them, and that God would still be with them for good, and
not for hurt, as he had been; then was a special National occasion for that
people to declare their sincerity; their love to the purity of Gods ordinances,
more then to their own inventions; which they seriously considered, and
answerably with much zeal and life did. And they entered into a covenant, to
s^eke the Lord God of their fathers, with all their heart, and with all their
soul: that whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel, should be put to
death, whether small or great, whether man or woman, 2 Chro. 15.12,13. So when
Haman had plotted the death of all the Jews, then was a special National
occasion for Mordecai and Esther, to declare their sincerity, for the glory of
God and the good of his Church; which they seriously observed, and answerably
with much courage carried themselves. Then Esth^r bad them return Mordecai
this answer. Go gather together all the Jews that are present in Shushan, and
fast ye for me, and neither cate nor drink three days, night or day: I also
and my maidens will fast likewise, and so will I go in unto the King, which is
not according to the Law, and if I perish, I perish. Esther 4.15,16.

The reasons why God in the course of his providence, brings about, special
occasions for the declaration of sincerity, are these; First, that the world
and the devil may see, that his people are indeed sincere. Special occasions
of trial, are like Nebuchadnezzars fiery Furnace, heat seven times hotter then
ordinary, which will thoroughly discover Gold from dross. These made known
Jobs sincerity so universally, that all mouths were stopped, which strangely
thought and spoke of Job before. It Is very common with the devil and his
children, to account and call Gods people hypocrites; such as do not serve God
for naught, but follow Christ for loaves, and profess religion for their own
ends. Now God to convince these censorious wretches, that judge amiss of the
generation of the just, brings his children as 'twere upon the stage, in the
open view of all, and puts them upon special trials of their uprightness; he
sets them such taskes of doing or suffering, that shall stretch every vein in
their bodies, and convince all beholders, yea the devil and all his children,
that they are sincere; and make them confess with Saul, that they are more
righteous, then themselves. As there be some stars, which by divine
institution are invisible to us, and others visible, to declare the glory of
God, and to be of use for man: So those stars which God has placed in the
lesser world, to wit, the soul of man, some of them God would have to be as it
were invisible to the world; God would have a Christian modestly, and humbly to
conceal as much as may be, many gifts, but others again God would they should
declare them as much as may be, to his glory and the good of others, as love,
and sincerity, that they may sparkle in the eyes of all the world, as glorious
beams of the divine Image. Now man being too backward to this work
voluntarily, God makes and fits occasions and times for the very purpose, that
shall sit a man thoroughly, and sound his heart to the bottom, and turn-his
inside outward, and so declare his sincerity or hypocrisy to all the world. As
God knows who are his; so he will have the devil and his children to know
also who are his; that they may walk as selfe-condemned wretches, as Saul did,
for persecuting of them. Now, to effect this, this is the thing God does, viz,
he makes bitter pills for his children to swallow, heavy burdens for his
children to bear, such as no unsound heart would touch, with one of his
fingers; he heates Furnaces seven times hotter then ordinary, and throws his
children into them; one thing or other God so orders, that shall put his people
to it, to see what mettle they be made of; that shall anatomise every string in
their hearts, so that the Devil, and all his children, to their conviction and
torment, shall read sincerity written in their hearts, with capital letters.

2
The second reason why God in the course of his providence, brings about
special occasions for the declaration of sincerity, is, that his own glory
may thereby be greatly advanced. Special cures they win a name to a
Physician, more then the ordinary cures of seven years practice: likewise
special victories, win their prime agents more honor, then all the ordinary
warfare of their whole life: So God by carrying his people through special
occasions of trial magnifies the glory of his power, wisdom, and love, more
then a thousand ordinary passages of his providence toward them. What a name
for power, God won to himself, in the heart of Daniel, and the three
children, for enabling them with such courage, to stop the mouths of Lions,
and to quench the violence of fire; to expose themselves to the mercy of Lions,
and fire; rather then to wrong their consciences. This doubtless made them
more to sing of the power and goodness of the Lord, then all the passages of
his providence toward them, in the whole course of their lives before. Some
skillful Physicians will make their men swallow this or that strong poison,
that they may show their skill before multitudes in curing of them, to win
them a name: So God he puts his people to great plunges often times, that he may
win them a name for ever in their hearts, and in the hearts of all beholders,
for wisdom, power, and mercy in carrying them sweetly thorough all, without
making shipwreck of faith and a good conscience. This know, that it is Gods
great work in this world to advance his own Name, and to make it great to the
ends of the earth: now, amongst the many notable ways, he has to magnify his
Name, this is one, and not the meanest, to wit, to put his people upon special
occasions, of the trial of their sincerity, and by these, such an art has God
to advance his own honor, that he winnes a world of hearts to himself at
once, that will be so many living Trumpets to sound forth the praise of his
greatness and goodness, from generation to generation.

Thirdly, God by his providence brings about special occasions for the trial
of sincerity, to add to the torture of the devil and his children. Great
trials of the godly, put the devil and his children in hope of their utter
ruin. When Haman had prevailed so far, as to get a bloody decree against the
Jews, he then joyed exceedingly, as one that promised himself their utter
ruin: now God stepping in between, and on a sudden turning this trial of
Mordecai's to his advantage, and to Hamans disadvantage, to his honor, and
Hamans disgrace, no man can tell, nor hardly conceive, how this added to Hamans
torture. God has admirable ways, to make wicked men gnash their teeth, before
they come to Hell; and amongst the many admirable ways, which God has for
this end, this is not one of the meanest, to put the wicked into a kind of
hope, of having their will upon the godly, by giving the godly in part (for
trials sake) into their hands, and then on a sudden, snatching them farther out
of their power, then ever they were before, and making them engines of the
downfall of the wicked. This has made many a proud malicious wretch, hang
himself, stabbe himself, poison himself, to wish himself any where, so he
were but out of the sight and talk of them that fear God.

Lastly, God in the course of his providence, brings about special occasions,
for the trial and discovery of sincerity, that so the joy of the upright may
be augmented, in this life, and in the life to come. Special trials of
sincerity, sincerely gone through, they procure joy unspeakable and full of
glory in this life; and they work about joy unconceivable and full of glory in
the life to come. There is joy in this life for the godly, and joy unspeakable
and full of glory. So there is a reward in Heaven for the godly, and a great
reward, as Christ uses the epithete. Math. 5.12. Now, unspeakable joy, God
gives to them that undergo unspeakable trials of their integrity; he gives
full flaggons of consolation, to such as have been soarely shot at, as the
expression is used concerning Joseph, Genesis 49.23. and yet have kept faithful
to their God. So the great reward in heaven, is kept for them, that undergo
great trials on earth, and yet hold fast their integrity. As Princes have their
ways to advance men to great honor, honorably; to wit, by putting them upon
some notable hard and difficult service, and if they acquit themselves well and
faithfully in it, then to confer great honor upon them, not otherwise: So
the King of Kings he has his honorable ways, to advance mean Christians to
great spiritual dignities, here and hereafter: and amongst many others this is
one, namely, to put them upon special trials, and difficult taskes and
services, that shall put every nerve and sinew to it; and discharging
themselves well and faithfully in these, then he puts a long white robe upon
them, and palms in their hands, great spiritual dignities, that so they may
be known to all, to be such as came out of great tribulation, as John says,
Rev. 7.14.

This doctrine finds fault with two sorts of persons, viz, Such as of
wilfulness and such as of weakness, neglect and pass by special times and
occasions, for the declaration of sincerity.

Men wilfully pass by special times and occasions, for the declaration of
sincerity, when they shut their eyes, and will not take notice of such times;
out of some selfe-respect. The Prophet Isaiah speaks of this fort of men,
where he says; Let favor be showed to the wicked, yet [will he not] learn
righteousness, in the Land of uprightness [will be deal unjustly] [and will
not] behold the Majesty of the Lord. Lord when thy hand is lifted up, [they
will not see:] but they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy at the
people, etc. Isa. 26.10,11. God gave special times to this generation of men,
to mend their manners, and to declare uprightness in their conversation to his
glory, but though this special favor were showed them, yet would they not, so
much as set about, to learn righteousness, to acquaint their deluded
conscience with what was right, and to be practiced by them. God in a very
majesticall manner lifted up his hand against them, to cross and curse them in
their corrupt ways, and all to this end, that they should behold it, and take
shame to themselves, and break off from their unrighteous courses, and they
wilfully shut their eyes, that they might not behold the Majesty of God against
them. God gave them (of his rich favor) special times and opportunities, to
declare uprightness, and they made them special times and occasions, to
declare their pride and rottenness. There is an iron sinew in the will of men
naturally, and therefore let God give never so fair opportunities and
occasions to them, to show themselves for him and for his righteous ways, yet
they will not bow and stoop unto it. This iron sinew was in the neck of Saul,
and therefore God called his sin, in not slaying all the Amalekits, when he
gave him a special opportunity thereunto, stubbornness and Rebellion. God saw
more into Saul's sin then he, or many of us could imagine. He looked upon
Saul's will, in sparing Agag, when he might have killed him; and God saw that
Saul's will was resolutely set to do this, what ever hypocritical plea he made
for himself, and what ever express charge he had to the contrary. God gave to
Saul there, a special opportunity wherein to declare his sincerity, and he as
a selfewilled wretch, made it a special time wherein to declare his
hypocrisy, to his utter disgrace and ruin both of soul and body.

Pride and malice are the cause, why men wilfully pass by special times, for
the declaration of sincerity. God gave to Herod a special time wherein to
declare sincerity, by causing that promised branch, to spring out of the root
of Iesse in his time, which root was thought to have been quite dead. Here was
such an opportunity given Herod, to declare his love to Christ, by protecting
and countenancing of him, as was given to no Ruler before him; and he out of
pride and malice, as one that could not endure, that there should be any other
King of the Jews besides himself, sought with all his policy and might to
kill him, so far was he from using all his regal power, to protect and fence
this choice branch from spoilers. God gave likewise to the learned Scribes and
Pharisees, special occasions for the declaration of sincerity, by causing him
that was the wisdom of God to converse amongst them, and to speak as never
man spoke, and to do those things which never man did; that so they (as John
the Baptist, according to what they had heard with their ears, and seen with
their eyes, might magnify him, and labor as Gods faithful Ministers in their
place, to bring all men to believe on him, and follow him; and they out of
pride and malice, used all their craft and might, to crush him in the shell, to
nip him in the very bud, to cloud his glorious sun, as soon as risen, that
none might see his light and walk in it.

Such wretches as these, who wilfully shun special times and occasions for
the declaration of sincerity, must be told this, That their sin is very
great, and answerable shall be their punishment unless they repent. That your
sin is great, appears by the example of Saul, sinning in this very kind. God
gave him a special occasion, to declare his sincerity to him, when he gave all
the Amalekites into his hands; he wilfully taking his own course, and pleasing
his own humor, you know how God calls this sin, viz, stubburnnesse;
Rebellion; rebellion parallel to Witchcraft, Rejecting the word of the Lord.
God will no otherwise account your sin, who now wilfully pass by occasions
and opportunities of declaring your sincerity to him. He will account your
practice, stubbornness: and did any man ever stout it out with God, and
prosper? He will account your practice Rebellion: and did ever any man play the
rebel against God, that was not hanged and quartered? He will account your
practice a rejecting of his Word: and for this God will certainly reject you.
You know well what heavy punishment God inflicted upon Saul for this sin: he
stripped him of his Kingdom, nay, he stripped him of the holy Ghost, ten thousand
times more worth then his Kingdom, and gave him up to an evil spirit, to be
vexed and whorried headlong into great sins, and great miseries; Pares
peccato, supplicio pares.
and according to this proceeding of divine justice, must you look to be dealt
withal. God offers you now golden opportunities, to declare your sincerity to
him, by killing all Amalekits, every sin in your souls, which are more
abominable to him, then ever was the Amalekits, and to the killing of all, he
promises you his assisting of all, he promises you his assisting grace, as he
caused his victorious arm to go along with Saul; and if now you wilfully
spare some one Agag, some fat of the Kine, some sins, that bring you in
pleasure and profit, look for Saul's sauce to such sweet meats. God will take
his spirit utterly from you, and give you up to your own hearts lusts, to
commit wickedness with greediness, to the aggravation of your condemnation.

Secondly, the doctrine in hand, Est debilitas culpabilis, sicut excusabilis.
finds fault with such as pass by special occasions and times, for the
declaration of sincerity, out of weakness: under this head four sorts of
persons are to be reproved. First, such as through ignorance pass by special
times and occasions, for the declaration of sincerity. Many men in place have
often by the providence of God, special occasions and times put upon them, for
the declaration of their sincere love to Christ and his members, Ignorantia
normae, ignorantia culpabilis, est.
but being ignorant of what is indeed sincerity, to wit, what is indeed right,
and the thing to be stood for, do nothing, show themselves neuters, or else
do as the most do. Some though they have a long time lived in the light, and
should be able to distinguish between light and darkness, yet through a
careless improvement of the light, and resting in customs, know not what is
indeed the exact will of God to be stood for; and therefore when they are by
the providence of God, brought upon the stage, to set their seal to Gods
truth, they as fools, say and do they know not what.

Others there are, who though not ignorant of what is indeed right and good,
but yet ignorant of the danger which may ensue upon the neglect of any
opportunity for the declaration of sincerity, pass by one special occasion,
and promise to themselves another, and god greadventure presently proceeds
against them in a strict way of judicature, to the deserting of their souls,
and never brings about such a golden opportunity more unto them, wherein to
show themselves so admirably for him. Solomon points at this where he says,
Because to every purpose there is time and judgment: therefore the misery of
man is great upon him, Eccl. 8.6. The misery of man is great upon him indeed,
that is either ignorant of judgment (1) of what is right, and sincere; or that
is ignorant of time: that is of such special and sit opportunities as God
offers to man, for the performing of, and standing for, what is right and good.
You that are ignorant of judgment; of what is right to be done or suffered,
you will by the example of others be drawn to stand against right, instead of
standing for it, as did the ignorant multitude against Christ, concerning whom
the Apostle speaks thus, That had they known it, they had not crucified the
Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. The ignorant Jews not knowing judgment, were by
the example of the learned Scribes and Pharisees, drawn to stand against
Christ, instead of standing for him, and so pulled the guilt of innocent blood
upon them, which is not yet washed off.

You that are ignorant of time; of the special occasions and times, which God
in the course of his providence brings about, for the declaration of sincerity,
and of the dangers which ensue thereupon, must be told this, That you will open
great gaps unto evil, ere you are aware. Old Ely not taking that special
occasion given him, to declare his sincerity, by a due punishment upon his
sons, they grew horribly wicked, and Gods wrath grew quickly unquenchably hot.

Secondly, let me tell you this, That you blindfoldly pass by the choysest
times of your life, to advance your own happiness both here and hereafter.
Phinehas for taking that special time which God gave him, to declare his
sincere love to him, won a great deal of honor to himself and posterity.
And so likewise Levi, who took hold of that special time that God gave him to
declare his sincerity; Who said to his father and to his mother, I have not
seen him, neither did he acknowledge his brethren; nor knew his own children,
Deuteronomy. 33.9. won unspeakeable honor. So likewise Abraham in taking that
special time which God gave him, to try the sincerity of his love in putting
on to sacrifice his only son, won incomparable dignity.

2.
Secondly, such as through carnal fear pass by special occasions for the
declaration of sincerity, are here to be blamed. This I think was Pilats case.
God gave a special time unto him, for the declaration of sincere love to
Christ, when Christ was brought as a malefactor before him, and yet nothing
worthy of death or of bonds could be found against him. But Pilat out of fear
to displease the Jews, passed by this golden opportunity, and passed Sentence
upon the innocent. This was Peter's weakness. God gave him a special occasion
for the declaration of sincere love to Christ, when the Damsel so hardly put
him to it, and yet he out of fear, passed by this golden opportunity, and
denied Christ with all vehemence, which he should with all boldness and
fervor then have confessed.

Such as these may do well to keep these two Scriptures still in their minds:
I, even I am he that comfort you, Who art thou that should be afraid of a
man that shall die, and of the son of man that shall be made as grass, Isa.
51.12. But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny, before my
father which is in Heaven, Math. 10.33.

Secondly, such may do well also to consider this, That they will brand their
name with everlasting reproach; rob God of more honor, through their
cowardlynesse, then their souls are worth, though rated above all this world;
and rob themselves of the spirit of glody, which rests transcendently upon
suffering Christians, as Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 4.14.

Thirdly, such as pass by special times for the declaration of sincerity,
through carnal persuasion, are here to be blamed. The man of God which cried
against the Altar at Bethel, was faulty in this kind. God gave to him a
special occasion to declare his sincere love to him, when that old Prophet
persuaded him to do contrary to his commission, but he being overborne with
the smooth language of the Prophet, returned back with him, and did eat bread
and drink water, contrary to the express command of God. How the man of God
was handled for this, such shall do well to think of, that are apt to have an
ear open to carnal counsel and persuasion, to be turned thereby from taking
hold of special times for the declaration of sincerity. Three examples more
there be, which are most worthy of these men's consideration, which would have
this weakness cured in them. The first is the example of Joseph in his
carriage to his Mistress; He would not admit of discourse with her, nor stand to
hearken to her unclean persuasions, but speedily breaks away from her company
and counsel both. The second, is the example of Paul, that would not consult
with flesh and blood, when he was to take hold of special occasions and times,
for the declaration of his sincere love to Christ. The third is the example of
Christ himself, in his carriage to Peter, who when he sought to persuade him
to spare himself, said, Get thee behind me Satan.

4.
Fourthly, such as out of carnal pity, pass by special occasions for the
declaration of sincerity, are by this doctrine to be blamed. Good old Ely was
faulty in this kind. Out of pity to his sons he forbore to do that which he
should have done, to have declared his sincere love to the glory of God. Let
such as are faulty in this kind, think on Elies misery to humble them; and on
these divine examples following, to reform them. Think on Levi, who sheathed
his sword in the bowels of his brethren, nay, he knew not his father nor
mother, no, nor the children of his loins, that he might declare his sincere
love to the glory of God, when opportunity was offered. Think on Gideon, who
threw down the Altar of his father, that he might declare his sincere love to
God, when he called him hereunto. Think on Asa's dethroning his mother, and
stamping her idols to powder, 2 Chronicles. 15.16. And on Salomons denying the
request of his good mother Bathsheba, when she requested a bad thing, to wit,
Abishag the Shunamite, for Adonijah, which was given to lie in David's bosom in
his old age to keep him warm, and to cherish him. All these worthies were not
swayed by foolish pity; but looked over all relations, to obey the will of
God, and to declare their sincere love to him, upon all occasions offered.

Wherefore:

The second and last use of this doctrine, shall be fore exhortation. Seeing
there be special times and occasions for the delcaration of sincerity, and
that many have broken thorough all impediments, to take hold of them, let us
also strive thus to do. Two things I would exhort you to; to observe such
times; and secondly, to take fast hold of them. Seeing there be special times
for the declaration of sincerity, let us give all diligence to observe, when
they are by God offered to us. Shut not your eyes against such times; nor
through ignorance, and carelessenesse over-looke such times.

Quest.
But how should I know special times and occasions for the declaration of
sincerity?

Answ.
I answer, by these three things. First by the dependancy of Gods glory and
thine own eternal good, upon times, occasions, and actions. If the glory of
God, and thine own eternal good depend much upon the doing or suffering of
this or that thing; so depend, that if not performed, both Gods glory and thine
own peace fall to the ground; this is a special time and occasion for the
declaration of sincerity; and therefore observe it.

Secondly, by strong internal motions and movings to this or that duty,
together with the hand of God externally in a special manner, by mercies and
corrections seconding. It Is said (you know) that the spirit of the Lord moved
Sampson at times in the camp of Dan. That is, God after a special manner
stirred him up now and then, to that great work of fighting with the
Philistines, to which he had assigned him. So likewise now, the Spirit of God
does at times, move men's hearts, after a powerful and special manner, to this
duty or that, to the mortification of this lust or that; and seconds this
strong internal motion, by such mercies and corrections, as may most suitably
tend to further this motion, and spur on backward man, to the performance of
this duty. This is a special time for the declaration of sincerity; observe
it. Balaam (doubtless) had special motions and internal stirrings not to go
about to curse Israel, and the Angel of the Lord without seconding to hinder
him; and yet for all this sword within, and sword without, he would on. You
that will do as he did, must look to fare as he did. So on the other hand,
Mordecai (doubtless) had strong internal motions and stirrings to labor for
the good of the Jews, and the downfall of proud Haman; and the providence of
God externally, after a special manner seconding; which he observed, and
answerably moved in this golden opportunity, and so won much honor to God,
to himself, and good to his Church.

Thirdly, by the word of God. The word of God is so full and perfect, that it
plainly sets before every man that studies it, what is of weight to be done,
and what is of moment not to be done. It sets forth things to be done, or not
to be done, with all the circumstances about them, which makes them of more
special consequence or less. So that if a man look upon an action or
occasion by the word of God, he shall presently be able to see, of what
consequence the thing is, and how answerably he is to move in and about it,
whether with more or less care and diligence. Hence it is that Christ willed
those which he urged to embrace him, to search the Scriptures concerning him;
intimating that there they should see, of what consequence this work was, of
embracing Christ, and following him.

Secondly, as I would have you to take notice, so I would have you to take hold
of special times and occasions for the declaration of sincerity. When you have
espied these golden opportunities, fasten upon them.

Quest.
But how should I take hold of these golden opportunities aright?

I answer, the taking hold of these golden opportunities aright, consists in
these three things, viz, That a man when such times are brought about to him,
by the providence of God, set himself, first, speedily; and secondly,
thoroughly, to answer them; and thirdly, that he go about all in the strength
of Christ. First a man that would take hold aright of special times and
occasions for the declaration of sincerity, must be speedy in this work. Time,
we say, tarries for no man. And opportunity is the extract, and quintessence of
time, and far more gliding. Opportunity let slip, possibly a man may have
never such another, though he should live an hundred years. Hence it is that
Christ speaks so dolefully to Jerusalem, which had slipped her opportunity, O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, if thou had known in this thy day, the things that
belong to thy peace! but now they are hidden from thine eyes.

Secondly, as you must set your selves speedily, so you must set your selves
thoroughly to this work, if you would take hold of these golden opportunities
aright. That is, you must set your selves to declare sincerity, answerable to
the occasions and special opportunity which God offers. For this is to take
hold of these precious opportunities aright, to wit, when special occasions
for the declaration of sincerity present themselves, after a special manner,
to declare our sincerity in them. When a special occasion of this kind was
offered to Paul, by Peter's Judaizing, you know with what courage and spirit
Paul declared himself answerable to the occasion. To whom I gave place, not
for a moment. Whom I withstood to the face, for he was to be blamed, Gal 2. And
Moses likewise though a very meek, quiet, and patient spirited man, yet when a
special occasion for the declaration of his sincerity was offered, by Aaron
and the peoples making a Calte, with what a Lyon-like courage did he show
himself? And old Ely because he did not set himself thus to declare his
sincerity, when his sons of provoked God, to wit, answerable to that special
occasion offered, you know what construction God made of his mild cold
carriage, in that urgent weighty matter, between God and his sons.

Thirdly, a man that would declare sincerity aright in all occasions offered
thereunto, must set about this work in the strength of Christ, and not in any
strength of his own. I will go in the strength of the Lord God: I will make
mention of thy rightousnesse even of thine only, Psalm. 71.16. I will go in
the strength of the Lord God, etc. That is in every design, and in every
business I will depend wholly upon the aid and assistance of God, and upon no
strength of my own. Thus we know David went against Goliath, when he would
declare his sincere love to God, whom Goliath blasphemed. Thus must we do when
ever we set upon any opportunity, wherein to declare our sincere love to God,
or else we shall do as Peter, deny Christ, instead of standing for him
answerably to the occasion offered.

Now, that what has been said touching this point, of taking hold of golden
opportunities offered, for the declaration of sincerity, you may all observe
and follow, think on these two or three things. God calls for it: Conscience
calls for it: Church and State calls for it: Soul and body will else severely
smart for it. First, think on this, God calls for this at our hands, that we
should declare sincerity according to the special occasions calling thereunto.
Gather your selves together, etc. says the Lord to the disobedient Jews, and
in them to us, before the decree come forth, before the fierce anger of the
Lord come upon you. Seek ye the Lord all ye meek of the earth, seek
righteousness, seek meekness: it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the
Lords anger. Zeph. 2.1,2,3. A special time was offered, wherein to show
themselves for God and for good, and God called upon them carefully to take it,
as they tendered their temporal and eternal good.

God calls us now to the declaration of sincerity, as by his word, so by his
works, both of mercy and justice. God has loaded us with mercies and
corrections of all sorts, and all for this end, that we should declare our
sincere love to him, answerable to all opportunities offered hereunto. Many a
time (as the Psalmist says) has he turned away his anger, and has not made a
full end of us, when we have highly provoked him thereunto, and all for this
end, that we should declare our sincere love to him, answerable to all
opportunities offered thereunto. To the language of the Lord by the Prophet
Amos I may fitly here allude. God has withholden the rain from us, when there
have been but three months to the harvest: God has caused it to rain upon
one shire and county, and not upon another: God has smitten us with blasting
and Mildew; and all this to bring us to declare a sincere love to him,
according to all opportunities offered; and yet we are backward hereunto. God
has smitten us with the pestilence again and again; and with the sword has
he threatened us again and again, and all this to bring us on to declare a
sincere love to him, according to all occasions offered; and yet we are
backward hereunto. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, says the Lord to
Israel, and because I will do thus, prepare to meet the Lord thy God, O
Israel, Amos 4. So say I to you, forasmuch as all the mild means which God
has hitherto used are not effectual for this end, to bring us to declare our
sincere love to him, according to all opportunities offered, therefore we must
expect that God will take some severe course with us for the time to come; and
because we are to expect this at the hands of God, let us prepare to meet the
Lord our God. Let every one of us repent of our halting and time-serving past,
and for the time to come let us set our selves to declare a sincere love to
God, according to all occasions offered.

2.
Conscience calls us hereunto, as well as God. Special occasions for the
declaration of sincerity, now so frequently and so openly show themselves, that
every man's conscience tells him, that he should show himself a great deal
more then he does, for God, his King, and Country. As in the night the Owls
and the Bats look abroad: so in these dark sad days of sin and
wickedness, the eyes of Owls and Bats, the eyes of wicked and secure sinners,
begin to open, and their consciences begin to tell them, that they should do
something more now then they have done, for God, and the good of this Church
and Kingdom.

3.
Church and State calls for it. They both now with one doleful voice cry out to
us, in the language of the Psalmist: Who will rise up for me against the evil
doers? or who will stand up for me against the workers of iniquity? Psalm.
94.16. They know not, neither will they understand, they walk on in darkness:
all the foundations of the earth are out of course. Psalm. 82.5.

Finally, soul and body will else severely smart for it, if we do not now
step in, to take hold of all opportunities for the declaration of sincerity.
Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the inhabitants
thereof: because they came not to the help of the Lord against the mighty,
Judge. 5.23. This curse may all such expect who now come not forth, to declare
their sincere love to Christ and his truth, upon all just occasions calling
thereunto. The souls of such Christians as now neglect and put by these golden
opportunities, of declaring their sincere love to Christ, will be given up to
lukewarmnesse, coldness, deadness, hardness, and some to obstinatenesse, and
maliciousness against God, and all goodness: which are all soul curs^s with
a witness. And such bodies as have in them such cursed souls as these, you
may assure yourselves, they shall meet with misery enough first or (...) Paul
intimates something to this purpose, where he says, At my first answer no man
stood with me, but all men forsook me: I pray God that it may not be laid to
their charge, 2 Timothy 4.16. Such as take not hold of special times and
occasions for the declaration of their sincere love to Christ and his truth,
may fear that sad things will be first or last, laid to their charge; such as
shall make body and soul shake. Let us therefore all, as we love our bodies
and souls, and as we profess love to Christ, which should be dearer to us
then our bodies or souls, take hold of all opportunities for the declaration
of sincerity. As God brings about special times and occasions for this end, so
let every one of us after a special manner, take hold of them, that we may
after a special manner be honored of God, both here and hereafter. Dixi.

Trinuni Deo gloria.
Imprimatur

Tho Wykes.
Febr. 24. 1639

