THE STRATAGEMS of Jerusalem: With the martial laws and military discipline,
as well of the Jews, as of the Gentiles.

By Lodowick LLoyd Esquier, one of her Majesty's Serieants at Arms.

Sap. 7. Candor lucis aeternae est sapientia.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, 1602.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Sir Robert Cecill Knight; Principal Secretary to the
Queens most excellent Majesty; Master of the Court of Wards and Liueries,
One of her Highness most Honorable privy Council, and Chancellor of the
University of Cambridge.
ALexander the great (right Honorable) thought long to write the strange
sights he saw in India, to Aristotle the philosopher in Macedonia, Caesar
made haste to write the celeritie of his victory in Pontus, to his friend
Anitus at Rome. The like desire is in my self, with no less longing to make
my labor known to such honorable friends, as will both accept and defend my
travail herein; Of whom I made choice of your honor, to dedicate the
Stratagems of Jerusalem, as unto one that is furnished with stratagems,
wisdom, and knowledge, of who^ I may say, as Plato spoke of such like,
Consilium eius est, qui rei cuiusque peritus. Such wise and grave counselors
the Lord ever provided, to attend on godly and virtuous Princes, as eyes and
ears, to prevent both home and foreign stratagemes of enemies, as Chusai
with David, to prevent the wicked purpose of Absalon; and Nathan with Solomon,
to find out the treacherous intention of Adonias. The Lord left not the wicked
Samaritans unprovided of Prophets and counselors, yea even among Infidels and
Pagans the Lord stirred up Daniel to counsel Nabuchodonozer in Babilo^, and
Joseph to counsel Pharao in Egypt, that they might confess and acknowledge
God to be the Lord; therefore well said Solon, Non quae suauissima, sed quae
optima, sunt co^sulenda: It is not the co^sultatio^ of the Romans with their
soothsaiers, that made their Empire so to flourish, nor of the Persians with
their Magi, that got the Monarchy of the Assyrians to Persia. All stratagems,
victories, and good counsel comes from the Lord, so wisdom says, I dwell
with Princes in council, and am among them that seek wisdom and knowledge.
Plato the Philosopher could so say, Omnis consultatio quiddam sacrum est: and
Aristotle his scholar, called council of Princes, Diuinissimum consilium. The
kings of Persia, when they admitted any into council, took their fignet, and
laid it on their mouths, as a seal of silence, saying, Anima co^silij
secretu^; so Alexa^: did to his councellor Ephestio^; Neither could any be of
council in Persia, but such as were in counsel most secret, and in government
most wise and prudent. The cause why Demosthenes was so esteemed amo^ng the
Athenia^s, was his wisdom and policy often to prevent the force and stratagems
of Phillip of Macedon. The cause why Vlixes was judged more worthy of Achilles
armor then Ajax, was his experience and council to Agamemnon in the Grecian
wars. So it may be well spoken of Nestor, who was preferred before all other
Greek Captains, for the like cause, Multitudo enim sapientu^ sanitas orbis
terraru^ est, says wisdom. It was not the counsel of the Nymph Egeria to Numa,
which was ridiculous, but the wisdom and policy of Numa, thereby to establish
his laws, much commended. Neither the counsel of Jupiter in the Capitol to
Scypio, which was foolish, but the policy and practice of Scypio, thereby to
animate his soldiers, much extolled. But no council, no policy against the
Lord, no wisdom nor Stratagem to overthrow a king or a kingdom, but the sins of
the king and the kingdom. So could Cratippus the Philosopher, to that effect
answer Pompey the great, Fata per causas agunt; So could Phaetenissa the Witch
answer Saul at Endor, Fatum pietatis appendix; So could the Idol of Apollo
answer Augustus Caesar at Delphos, the one willing to know what should become
of the kingdom of Israel, the other of the Empire of Rome. But such busy
ambitious brains, like Cornel. Lentulus, that dreamed, he should be the third
Cornelius that should govern the Empire, were banished out of Athens by the law
Ostracismus, and such might not come in Rome in gowns or in long cloakes into
the Senate house, by the law of Cincius. Many have Iocobs voice, but they have
Esaus hands, like Balaam, Qui vocem non mentem mutant. These dissembling
Gibeonites were found out by Ioshuah; these bragging Ephraimites were tried by
pronouncing the letter Schiboleth. None can resist the set purpose of the
Lord, who could hinder Moses of his triumph in the midst of the sea? or let
Ioshuah to set his trophey in the midst of the heavens? even he that
commanded the seas to be divided, and commanded the Sun to stand over Gibeon,
and the Moon over Aialon; to whom justly belong all stratagems, victories,
tropheys, and tryumphes.

Your Honors always ready at commandment, Lodowick Lloyd,

To the courteous Reader.
ALphonsus king of Cicile (gentle Reader) was ever wont to say, Optimos
consiliarios esse mortuos, meaning wise and profitable books, both at home and
abroad. Lucullus one of the greatest captains among the Romans, and
Philopome^ of no less fame among the Grecians; the one by reading Euangelus
books, the other by reading Xenophon, became excellent soldiers. In so much
that Cicero wondered that Epaminondas being such a singular Philosopher, should
become so famous a Captain. A great stain in M. Corilianus and in C. Marius,
(though otherwise stout and valiant) not to be learned. Caesar's Commentaries
are at this time as much esteemed among the Turks, as Homers Illiads were in
ancient time among the Grecians. If these Polymarchies and Campmaisters
confess, that by holding a pen in the one hand, do profit as much, as by
holding a sword in the other, or rather more; If Fabius weakened Hanibal more by
delays, then Marcellus did by the sword; If Fabritius wearied Pirrhus more by
counsel, then all Rome could do by their wars, then it is truly said, that
Plura auspicijs and concilijs, quam telis and manibus geruntur. So that
sometimes that saying of Cicero is true, Cedantarma togae; an other time the
saying of Lysander is as true, Sileant leges inter arma. So all Empires ought
to be, Non ^olum armis decorata, verumetiam legibus ornata. Therefore Alexander
Seuerus used both the sword and the pen, as well in decreeing of his laws at
home, as in mannaging of his wars abroad, Consilijs togae, and militiae
literatos adhibere. I speak not of such books which Plato compares Adonijs
hortis, fresh and full of savor in the morning, and withered and decayed at
night, like the Elephants of India at their first sight in Asia, were so
wondered at, that Antiochus the great, having but two, named the one Ajax, the
other Patroclus, the names of two Princes: but when these Elephants became so
common in Rome and in Asia, that they were in every Co^suls triumph, they were
called but Boues Lucanias; a great change from the names of Greek Princes, to
be named oxen of Lucania. Books are no otherwise; for in ancient time, when
books were yet rare, they were fellows and companions with Kings and Princes
in courts, it so seemed by Alexander the great, who could not sleep before he
laid Homer with his dagger under his pillow; and by Scypio Affrican, who would
not from Rome to Carthage, without either Panetius or Polybius in his company:
and now books being common, are so little regarded, rather bought for their
golden tytles which the Printer gives them for his sale, then for the matter
therein by the Author written for the Revder, much like to Mithridates sword,
whose scabbard was far more precious and richer without, then the blade
within. Of such books Plato speaks, Qui subito and vno die nati, celerime
pereunt, therefore seldom seen in sight are most in request. The Ebaine tree
which Pompey the great brought in his triumph into Rome, was more wondered and
gazed upon, then all the brave shows of the triumph besides: So few wise
words out of a wise man's mouth, are more esteemed then heaps of words out of
an unwise mouth, like the Abderites Ambassadors, more desirous to hear few
words out of Zeno the Philosophers mouth, then of all the Athenians besides:
and therefore Pau. Aemilius, after he had subdued the king and kingdom of
Macedonia, wrote no more to the Senators, but Victus est Perseus. Caesar, after
he had conquered king Pharnaces, wrote no more words, but Veni, vidi, vici:
Like the Lacedaemonians, whose writings and speeches were so short and brief,
that they would answer either Ambassadors, friends, or foes, by writing or by
mouth, in two or three words. And so with the like few words, I refer my
self to the gentle disposition of the reader, rather to excuse my travel in
courtesy, then to accuse my goodwill wrongfully.

Lodowick Lloid.

The first Book of the Stratagems of Jerusalem.
CAAP. I.
Of diverse Battles and Combats. Of several marks of diverse nations upon the
good and bad. Of the calling of Abraham, and of his praise and travel.

THe whole BIBLE is a Book of the Battles of the Lord, and the whole life of a
man a military marching to these Battles between the seed of the woman, and
the Serpent, which Battle was first fought in heaven between Michael and his
Angels, and the Dragon and his angels, at what time Satan was overthrown and
cast out of heaven with all his angels with him.

The second Battle was in Paradise, fought between the seed of the woman,
and the seed of the Serpent, where likewise Satan was overthrown, for then
it was promised that the seed of the woman should tread down the Serpents
head, thereby perpetual war was publicly proclaimed in Paradise, to
continue between the seed of the woman and Satan, and therefore are the
battles of the Lord innumerable, in respect of number, for that every living
man must fight in this battle in his own person for his own life, and
invincible in respect of power and force: for all battles and victories are of
the Lord, yea even amongst Infidels and Pagans. Which if the Hebrews had so
acknowledged it, and had marched truly and faithfully in the Lords battles,
they should have acknowledged this to have bin their true Oracle, that all
victories come from the Lord, and not from the arm of man. The^ the Hebrews
might have known, that Egypt where they had been bondmen and slaves 430.
years, was given to them for a pray from the Lord, by the hands of Moises and
Aron, and after Egypt, the Canaanites, Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites,
Philistines, and diverse other nations were also given into their hands, they
might have acknowledged that the overthrow of 39. Kings was no small booty to
such simple men, 39. Kings overthrown by Moises and Joshua.
as were no soldiers by education, but brought up as shepherds from Abraham's
time to Moises.

But they forgot the great armies and legions of Frogs, Flies, Grasshoppers,
and such armies which the Lord provided to fight for them, while yet they were
bondmen in Egypt, where they had ten victories, and ten tryumphs, some in the
midst of the land of Egypt, some in the midst of the Court of Pharao; and some
in the midst of the red sea, to the wonder, and terror of the whole world. The
Hebrews might likewise have known, that the Chaldeans were given to the hands
of the Assyrians: the Assyrians to the Persians, the Persians to the
Macedonians, the Macedonians to the Romans.

Yet all these miraculous victories, which the Lord gave the Hebrews over so
many Kings and Countries, could not make them to acknowledge the author
thereof, but what victories soever the good kings of Judah got by serving of
the Lord, that the evil and wicked Kings both of Judah and Israel lost by their
Idolatry and contempt of the Lord, until they themselves were rooted out of
their Country, slain and overthrown, and their Kings taken and carried
captives, the one by Salmanasser to the Assirians, the other by Nabuchodonozer
into Babylon, of whom you shall read more, of them and of their wars
hereafter.

And now I think it most convenient to speak somewhat of diverse several
combats, which is the Of combats.
strongest and only battle, for in this battle every man must first
overcome himself, and after be ready armed to fight with Satan and his
soldiers, the only enemy of man, against whom all men are The vow of Cherim.
bound by the vow of Cherim, to fight the battles of the Lord. We are
commanded to be as subtle as Serpents to prevent the subtle stratagems of
Satan with spiritual weapons, who from the beginning against the Lord in
heaven, and against man in Paradise practiced his policies, this is the old
Dragon which Michael threw down out of heaven, this is the serpent which the
seed of the woman subdued in Paradise, this is that ghostly enemy which
practiced his stratagem by his servant Pharo in Egypt, not only by making a
law and decree first to kill the Hebrews children, and after by a second
decree to drown them in Nilus, least he should be deceived in the first, but
also with a like stratagem by his servant Herod to kill to the number of 14000.
young Infants in Bethelem and in Judah, among the which he sought Christ:
therefore we are commanded to be strong and valiant, as the Lord commanded not
only Joshua, David, and others of his own servants, but also Nabuchodonozer
and Cyrus.

In these kind of battles or combats, every man must be armed with such
spiritual weapons, as is by Paul the Apostle appointed, to resist the violence
of so great an enemy, who does not only assault us abroad, but in our chambers,
yea in our beds, we must therefore wrestle with this enemy as Jacob wrestled
with the Angel, for the which he was named Israel: as Job wrestled with
Satan, for the which the Lord called him his servant Job: Or as David did with
the Giant Goliath, for the which he was anointed King of Israel.

In these kind of combats the Prophets and Martyrs of the Lord win many
victories of Satan and his soldiers, as Esaias that was sawed in pieces by
Manasses in Jerusalem, Jeremy that was stoned to death at Taphnis in Egypt by
the people: Ezechiel whose brains were beaten out in Babylon, and infinite
numbers of the Martyrs of the Lord, which fought in these battles of the Lord
with legions of devils, and armies of spirits, and got glorious victories, and
were crowned not with the Olive of Olimpia, nor with the Laurel of the
Romans, but with Crowns and Garlandes made of the tree of knowledge, and of
the tree of life, crowns of immortality, and garlands of eternity.

These might say with Paul, We have run a good race, and fought good
combattes, far greater combattes then Romulus had with Acron, and yet it was
for two kingdoms: greater then the combat that Artaxerxes had with his brother
Cyrus for the great kingdom and Empire of Persia, or the combattes between
Hector and Ajax, where many Kings and kingdoms were overthrown: but the only
combat which makes every soldier stout and valiant, was by the seed of the
woman who rescued Adam from the bonds of Satan, and Adam rescued by the seed
of the woman.
restored him to liberty, and wanne a greater victory to Adam, then Adam had
lost to Satan: this is the strong armed man that is spoken of in the Gospel
of Saint Luke, that did bind Satan and Luke. 11.
took his rich spoil out of his claws, restored to Adam his life and
liberty, with a condition to stand out and resist Satan, and to fight stoutly
against Satan in these combattes and battles of the Lord, for Adam was
first a murderer of his children, before he had children, and Adam was the
cause that Christ was slain for him, thereby to save him and his children.

Under this strong armed Captain, all men must march armed to fight the Lords
battle, as Elias did, who marched himself against 450. false Prophets of
Baal, in combat of life and death, whom he overcame and slew for their
Idolatry, at the brook Kyson.

In like sort marched Elizeus and led the whole Army of Benhadad from Dothan to
Samaria blind Elizeus leads the Army of Benhadad blind from Dothan to
Samaria.
among their enemies, for Benhadad king of Syria had sent to bring Elizeus from
Dothan to Damascus, as Achab sent Captains with 50. soldiers to take Elias in
mount Carmel, but Elias commanded fire from heaven to destroy them, as he
destroyed Baals Prophets: thus the Prophets of God are for their victories over
Kings crowned, for the Lord raised among all Nations some faithful servants of
his to fight in these combats, as Joseph in Egypt, Daniel in Babylon, Job in
the land of Huz, and many such, were crowned victors, and triumphed over
Satan, for none shall be crowned says Bernard, but he that obtains
victory, none obtains victory but he that fights, no man fights but with
him that is his is enemy: so the Lord reserved as he said to Elias, 7000. in
Israel, that never bowed, nor bended knee to Baal, for the Lord has marked his
people in all Countries with the letter Tau in their foreheads.

So he marked the Hebrews in the land of Gosen, to be saved from the plagues
in Egypt, the Angel also was commanded of the Lord to mark the door posts
of the houses in Egypt with the sprinkling of the blood of a lamb, as a mark
to spare his people.

So the Lord commanded his Angels to go They that mourned in Jerusalem were
marked with the letter Tau.
through the whole City of Jerusalem, that those that wept and lamented for
Jerusalem, should be marked in their foreheads with the letter Tau.

The Lord also charged those Angels that had power to hurt the earth and the
sea, not to hurt the earth until the servants of the Lord were sealed and
marked in their foreheads.

Paul as himself said, bare the marks of the Lord Paul's mark.
Jesus in his body, opposing the marks of those stripes which he bare for his
master Christ, as a mark of his Apostleship against the outward circumcision
of the Jews, these were external marks by the Prophets set down in the old
Testament, but in the new Testament, the servants of the Lord were marked, with
the blood of the Lamb Christ Jesus, a true mark of our salvation.

There is a Nation in the East Country, dwelling Iacobites mark.
in some part of Armenia called Iacobites, both circumcised and baptized, that
are marked both in their forehead and in their breast with the character or
likeness of the cross.

The wicked also have their inward and outward marks: Cain had his mark, not
outwardly seen by men, but inwardly so felt of Cain, that he Cains mark.
often did wish to die, and could not, for that was his mark, that whosoever
killed Cain should be seven fold punished.

Esau had also his mark, and such a mark, that all the Edomites that came of
him had also Esaus mark, Esaus mark
whose mark was that he could not repent though he sought it with tears.

So had the false Prophets their marks, as the messengers of Satan, to speak
lies to the people: and so Heretics had their marks, for blaspheming the name
of the Lord, denying one article or other of our faith.

I leave these inward marks to such as be marked in conscience with hot Irons,
and come to the external mark ofthe Romans, who marked men condemned to die,
with two letters, Cappa and Thita, as marks of death: and those that should be
saved with T. and a. Turneb. lib. 24. cap. 12.
as marks to live: this letter Tau was used in many Countries for a mark to
live: so soldiers that escaped The marks of diverse nations with the letter
Tau.
the dangers of wars, were likewise marked with this letter Tau. As among
the Romans by the decrees of Honorius and Arcadius, both Emperors of Rome,
the soldiers were marked upon their arms. The Thracians were marked in their
foreheades, whereof they were so proud, and rejoiced so much of these marks to
terrify their enemies, like the old Britains who painted themselves, that
they might seem terrible in their wars. Of these marks of soldiers I shall
have occasion to speak of, when I entreat of military discipline to soldiers,
omitting now further to speak of letters written in servant foreheads, of
rings on bondmens feet, and hairs of the head half shaued. Of which Appulius
writes, Appul. lib. 9.
Frontes literati, Pedes annulati, etc. So that among diverse nations they were
marked on the breast, foreheads, hands, and arms.

As the Syracusans burned their servants in the forehead with the print of a
horse, to be known as bondmen, so the Sameans burned the Athenian soldiers
taken captive in the wars, in the forhead with the print of an Owl. And in
like sort the Athenians burned the captive soldiers of Samana in the Alex.
Neapolit. lib. 6. cap. 18.
forehead with the likeness of a ship.

Among the Lacedaemonians, and in most part of Greece, it was not lawful for
bondmen to wear hair neither on head nor face.

Among the Romans for 454. years, there was no Barbers seen nor known: Pub.
Tycinius was the first that brought Barbers from Sicilia to Rome: and The time
that Barbers were first seen in Rome
Scypio Affrican was the first that shaued his beard in Rome.

It is written that Caesar the first Emperor of Rome, so hated hairie heads,
that whersoeuer he met them, he caused the hinder part of their head to be
shaued that they might seem bald, because he was bald himself.

Phillip king of Macedon understanding that one Philip.
of his Captains died the hair of his head and beard, disgraded him from his
place. The like did Archidamus Archidamus.
king of Sparta, when he saw one with colored hair, exhorting and animating
the people, forbad him straight to speak, saying he could not have a true
tongue, that had a false colored head: yet both Pirrhus and Hannibal in Italy
colored their hairs, but it was a stratagem to deceive the enemies that they
should not be known.

I come to speak of greater marks, the marks of calling of Gods people, both
of the Jews and of the Gentiles: For as Abraham was the first man of Abraham
the first man marked.
the stock of the Hebrews, that is called the Father of the faithful, so was
he the first man marked among the Hebrews, to confess the name of the Lord,
to whom the first promise was made, who being admonished by an Oracle at 75.
years of age to leave the Chaldeans, removed to Carres a City of Mesopotamia,
where he buried his old father Their, from thence Abraham removed, and went to
dwell in the land of Canaan, where so great a famine began, that Abraham with
his wife were forced to fly to Egypt, where likewise he doubted that the
beauty of Sarah Genesis 12. Abraham feared Abimelech and Pharao for his wife.
should put him into much peril and danger, and therefore he named her his
sister and not his wife, for he feared Pharao, as he feared Abimelech king of
Ierar, saying to his wife Sarah, I know thou art a fair woman, and therefore
they will destroy me for thy sake, for I know the fear of God is not in these
places.

But the Lord delivered Abraham from all this care and fear, and vexed both
king Pharao and Abimelech for their wicked thoughts, and intention against
Sarah: with such terror and fear by visions, and vexations both of themselves
and of their people, that they were warned by their own Oracles, to reverence
and to honor Abraham as a Prophet, after which time Abraham continued in Egypt
3. years, taught the Egiptians true religion, and read Astronomy Abraham read
Astronomy in Egypt
so long there, in the which Science he being instructed in his own Country
among the Chaldeans, the first learned Nation and Empire of the world.

Of this Abraham, Berosus the Chaldean writer Joseph. lib. 1. de Antiq. I^.
reports these words: Post diluuium decimae aetate apud Chaldeos, erat quidam
iusticiae cultor, Vir magnus and syderalis scie^tiae peritus. And Damasenus
also reports that Abraham dwelt in Damascus, that at the time of Josephus,
not only his name was much spoken of, but also his house well known where he
dwelt in Damascus, and therefore we will speak something of the Hebrews, of
whom Abraham was the first Father of the faithful. I am not ignorant that Heber
was the first of the Hebrews name before Abraham. In those days seldom was
seen any battle, for the first and greatest only battle among kings that we
read of at that time, was the battle at Siddim, which was fought in the time
of Abraham.

CHAP. II.
Of the Battle at Siddim, where four kings were overthrown by Abraham, and
Lot rescued.

IN this Battle met nine Kings together to join battle, four against five,
the king of Shinaer, the king of Ellasar, the king of Elam, and the king of the
nations, against the five kings of Pentapolis: In this battle were Rephaims,
Emims and Horims, Giants, which lived of theft and robbery in mount Seir, and
in other places: yet in this battle the five kings of Pentapolis, were
overthrown by the four kings and fled, and Lot the Nephew of Abraham, was
taken prisoner in this battle by the Assirian kings, besides they took all
the wealth and substance of these five kings for a spoil to the soldiers,
they were such kings at that time, as had the whole Empire of Asia between
them four. Abraham rescued the five kings, and Lot his Nephew.


Abraham hearing this hard news of the overthrow of these kings his neighbors,
and of Lot his nephew, used this stratagem, made strait after the^ in the night
time with his only household servants, which were three hundred and eighteen,
came suddenly, and set upon them, fought with them, overthrew them, and chased
them to Dan, where Abraham gave them another battle, recovered Lot, the men,
the women captives, and all the wealth of the five Cities called Pentapolis,
and delivered all the wealth to the kings of Zodom and Gomorrah, the owners
thereof, and kept no part to him nor to his soldiers.

This was a battle of the Lord, that Abraham being but a private man with his
household servants overthrew four of the greatest kings of Asia, for in these
battles of the Lord numbers are not respected. As Gedeon marched with three
hundred Soldiers, The victory of Gedeon over the Madianites. Iud. 7.
against the Madianites and Amalekites, who were like Grasshoppers in number,
and like sands of the sea in multitude, yet were they overthrown, chased and
slain an infinite number by Gedeon, and his three hundred soldiers: with the
like stratagem as Abraham did the Assirians.

So David with four hundred soldiers marched after the Amalekites after they
had burned Ziclags, David rescued his two wiuess. 1. Sam. 30.
and had taken David's two wives with all the rest captives, slew and overthrew
them, and rescued his wives at Bezor, with all the men, women, cattle, wealth,
and all the spoil which the Amalekites took away from Ziclags. But yet David
according to his manner, would never begin battle before he had consulted with
the Lord, commanded Abiather the Priest to bring him the Ephod, and was assured
thereby of the victory over the Amalekites at Bezor, as Gedeon was of his
victory over the Madianites.

So Abraham rescued Lot his Nephewe, at the battle of Siddim, where
Melchisedech king of Sale^, for the victory thereof met Abraham, and entertained
him and his soldiers with great liberality, and Melchisedech offered gifts
unto Abraham, and sacrifice unto the Lord, with thanks for the victory, and
Abraham gave Melchisedech Genesis 14.
tithes of all the spoils he had by the victory, and delivered it to the
king of Zodom, and the rest of the kings their wives, and all the men and women
captives which the four kings took away, and Abraham refused to take the
worth of a shoe latchet at the king of Zodoms hand, least he should say I have
made Abraham rich. So that Abraham was in his own person in the first and
greatest battle, where nine kings met in battle: after this Abraham returned
to Canaan, and dwelt in Hebron, until Zodome and the rest of the five cities
were destroyed with fire from heaven in the sight of Abraham, who but few
years before defended Zodom from the four kings of Assyria.

And at that time Abraham stayed the Angels, as they went to destroy Sodom,
under the oak of Mambre, Three Angels feasted at Mambre with Abraham.
where he feasted them, and entreated them on the behalf of Zodome, that if
ten godly men might be found in it, the city might be saved, but none was
found there but just Lot, at this very time under the oak of Mambre Isaac was
promised to Abraham, for so the Lord named him at that time, Sarah his mother
being 90. years old. Four were named before they were borne.


So Samuel was borne of Anna his mother, so Jacob, and so Joseph his son were
borne of barren women, as Isaac was, four also were named before they were
borne, Ismael the son of Abraham by Agar, Isaac, Solomon, and Josias.

Now again to Abraham, after Lot was rescued by him, Lot dwelt again in
Zodom, among reprobates Tantae virtutis est, qua^tae and difficultatis bonum
esse inter malos. Bernar. Epis. 25.
and wicked ungodly men, being named just Lot, hard it was for Lot to live
honest or just among such wicked Zodomites, and yet in Zodom Lot saved himself,
but in Zoar Lot was overthrown: Abraham could rescue Lot at the battle at Dan
from 4. kings, the Angels could save Lot from the fire and brimstone in Zodom,
yet could not Lot save himself from drunkenness in Zoar, so foul a fact by so
just a man may not be much spoken off.

Hence grew the first beginning of the Moabites and Ammonites, enemies unto
God, so much may be spoken of Ismael Abraham's son, by Agar, who Ismaelites
would not be called Agareni of Agar, but Saraceni of Sarah.
grew so great and so mighty on earth, that they would not be called Agareni
from Agar the bondwoman their mother, from whence they took their beginning,
but they would be called Saraceni, as borne of Sarah the true wife of Abraham,
and as the Ammonites and Moabites were left to plague the Hebrews, as pricks
in their sides, and needles in their eyes, so the Saracens and Turks are now
left to plague the Christians with sword and fire.

Before the battle at Siddim, no battles in a manner have been fought, but
what was by Nimrod don, who lived within a hundred and thirty years of the
flood, at what time people lived, not knowing the name of a king, until Nimrod
grew so mighty and so great, that he brought the people under subjection, in
such fear and awe of him, that they rather worshipped him as a God, then
obeyed him as a king, whereof Nimrod waxed so proud, that it grew to a
proverb, that if any Monarke or King should wax too insolent or proud, he
should be noted and named hic alter Nimrod, for now Nimrod having obtained the
Monarchy into his hands without resistance, he called the people together to
make a Tower from the The Tower of Babel builded by Nimrod.
earth unto heaven, to revenge the injuries of his predecessors, and to defend
himself and his Empire, and to resist the violence of any further deludge: He
for want of men to fight withal on earth, made a Tower that he might ascend up
to go fight with the host of heaven.

So Cyrus imitating Nimrod, having subdued all Cyrus army to Scythia.
nations and kingdoms about him, went for want of men to fight against him, to
fight against women into Scythia.

Alexander also imitating Cyrus, after he had subdued Alexan. voyage to India.
all men, and that no king would fight against him, he went unto India to fight
with Elephants.

Leaving Nimrod to build his Towers in the air, Cyrus to fight with women in
Scythia, and Alexander the great to fight with Elephants in India, we come to
Ninus, who took upon him to be the first Monarch Ninus the first Monarch.
over the Assirians, 150. years after Nimrod, who after he had joined his
force with Aricus king of Arabia, he went with his army against Babylon,
subdued it, and brought it into Assyria, led his army unto Armenia, gave
battle to the Armenians, subdued them also, took their king Barsanes, and
went Barsanes. Diodor, fic^. lib. 3.
conquering all the kingdoms about, until he came unto Medea, where the king
fought with Ninus, and the battle was equally fought of both parts, but after
that in another battle, Ninus ouerthrewe the Meades, and took their King in
the battle, and hanged him, his wife, and his seven children, in his Farnus K.
of the Meades.
own kingdom.

So that within seventeen years, Ninus subdued all Asia, and became so great,
that if the authors write truth, he had such an army as none is read to Seven
hundred thousand.
have the like, especially at that time when the world was not populous, within
50. years after the flood.

Before Ninus, the Greek, nor the Roman writers, make no mention of any war
or battle, who proceeded forward and marched (after he had conquered Arabia,
Medea, and Babylon) unto the Bactrians, and fought with Zoroastes their king,
who is said to have first found the Art of Astronomy and Magique, but this
Zoroastes was slain in the field by Ninus, and Ninus himself slain with an
arrow as Orosius says: others say that he was slain by his wife Semyramis.
It is written of this Zoroastes, that when all Zoroastes laughed at his birth.
The first Idolatry by Ninus.
other Infants weep at their birth, he laughed.

In Ninus time, we read of the first Idolatry in scripture, and that by Ninus
himself, who set up the Image of Belus his father, in a Temple which Ninus
made and dedicated to his father Belus after his death, in Niniuie, where all
the countries and people, came to worship and reverence the name of Belus,
which grew in such credit in Asia, and the East kingdoms, that there was no
law, nor religion, but what by Baals Priests and Baals Prophets were allowed.

And at that time that Nabuchodonozer reigned in Babylon, a thousand years
after Ninus, Baal was so reverenced and honored in Babylon, that if any man
should speak words against Baal, or not kneel to him, or worship him, should
die for it. So was Sydrach and his fellows thrown into a hot fiery furnace
to be burned. So was Daniel thrown into a den to be devoured of Lions, but
neither Lions nor fire had power to hurt the servants of the Lord.

This Baal was the only Idol in the East country, until Elias found out the
shifts of the false Prophets of Baal, in the time of Achab King of Israel, who
first nourished Baals prophets in Israel: After Elias, Daniel found out in
Babylon the falsehood of Baals priests, how they cousoned Nabuchodonozer, for
his great allowance, of bread, wine, and meat.

Leaving Belus to be the first Idol, and Ninus the first Idolater, after whom
little mention is made of Baal the first Idol.
the most part of the kings of Assyria, saving a catologue of their names,
though the Greeks (as their manner is) speak more then needs of them, for the
which Berosus the Chaldean writer does much reprehend them for it, and Plato
their own country Plato in T^meo.
man called them children, for that they are addicted unto fables, and not
given to learn antiquities: but letting the Assirians to sleep in silence, I
will return to the marching of the Hebrews, under Moses out of Egypt.

CHAP. III.
Of the calling of Moses and Aaron to lead the children of Israel out of Egypt.

THe Hebrews which were 430. years bo^dme^ and slaves unto Pharao in Egypt,
until they multiplied to be such in number, as Pharao doubted either to let
them go out of Egypt, least they joined with the Affricans, or with the
Assirians, to war upon Egypt, or else least the number of the Hebrews should
be so multiplied in Egypt, as they might overthrow Pharao in his own kingdom:
and therefore Pharao kept them in slavery and bondage, vexing and molesting
them, and withal decreed a law to put himself out of doubts, and his
kingdom out of danger, that all the male children of the Hebrews The male
children of the Hebrews were thrown to Nilus.
borne in Egypt, should be presently murdered after their birth, with a great
charge given that they should be slain, his fear was such, that it did not
content Pharao, but least he should be deceived with killing of them, he made
another law that they should be drowned in the River Nilus.

But Pharao determined, and God disposed, for the Lord revenged the house of
Israel upon Pharao, The tyranny of Pharao.
with ten horrible and terrible plagues, and at last Pharao the king, his
peers, and the most part of the nobles of his land, and almost all his
kingdom, were drowned in the red sea to an infinite number, and as Orosius
says, more of the Egiptians were drowned, then the number of the Hebrews that
came out of Oros. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Egypt, yet there is no just number written by Josephus, who ought best to know
it.

As the Egiptians were compared to the Romans A comparison between the
Egiptians and the Romans.
for their cruelty, so were the Hebrews compared to the Christians for their
punishment, the Jewish Synagogue to the Christian Church, and as the Hebrews
were plagued by the Egiptians 430. years in Egypt, so were the Christians so
long afflicted and persecuted throughout all the Empire of Rome, but as Pharao
and all Egypt were destroyed for their vexations of the Hebrews, so Rome, and
the Empire of Rome, was plagued for their bloody persecutions against the
Christians, and therefore every several plague in Egypt, shall be compared to
every several persecution in Rome.

The Lord now being armed to manage war with the Egiptians, and to revenge
the wrong of his people the Hebrews, he appointed his soldiers ready, and
divided them into several troops and bands.

He has an army above in the heavens, the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars,
he has another army in the air, lightning, thunder, haile-stones, and such
The armies of the Lord in Egypt under Moses.
soldiers: another in the waters, whales, crocodiles, serpents, and such
monstrous creatures in the seas. Another in the wilderness and woods, as
Lions, Bears, Wolves, Tygres, and the like beasts. Yea the Lord has his
armies in ditches and lakes, as Frogs and Toades, and has also his army
even out of the dust and ashes of the earth, Lice, Flies, and vermines, The
Captain that the Lord appointed over these armies was Moses, which was but a
shepherd, to dant the courage of Pharao, who at the commandment of the Lord,
marched to Egypt with these legions of soldiers, to take his people from the
bondage of Pharao, threatening wars unto Pharao, and yet not without
conditions of peace, according to the law of arms, if Pharao would let his
people peaceably depart out of Egypt, with bag and baggage.

Moses (to whom Jehovah appeared in the bush burning) was commanded to take
the charge of the Hebrews, and lead them from Egypt to the land of Canaan,
Moses obeyed the Lords commandment, yet accused himself of some imperfection
he had in his speech, and therefore had Aaron his brother for his Orator, who
having done the Lords commandment in Egypt to Pharao, their message was
rejected, and had no audience at Pharaos hand.

The^ was Moses commanded by the Lord, to stretch his rod upon Nilus, and upon
all the rivers of Egypt, The first plague.
the pooles and standing waters, that they might be turned into blood, so that
the Egiptians were constrained to drink of that bloody river Nilus, the just
judgment of God upon Pharao, who thirsted for blood, to drink blood, like so
Tomyris Queen of Scythia spoke to Cyrus, whose head she caused to be cut off
being slain in the field, and to bathe it in a great tun full of blood,
saying, drink Cyrus of that blood which thou did ever thirst for. So Pharao
in like sort was forced to drink of that bloody river, where before time he
commanded all the male children of the Hebrews to be drowned, and where Moses
him self being but three months old, so long his mother kept him secretly
unknown unto Pharao, but Amri Moses father, much fearing that he, his wife and
family should die for it, according to the decree that Pharao made, committed
him to Gods providence in Nilus, by whose providence Moses was saved, to be a
captain over his people, to lead them out of Egypt, to plague Pharao, and to
revenge the 430. years calamities and miseries of the Hebrews in Egypt, upon
Pharao and his kingdom, with ten such terrible plagues, as was never heard or
read of before, like in all points to the ten cruel persecutions, which
continued in all the Roman Empire during the reign and government of ten
Emperors, which persecuted the Christians in Rome, as Pharao plagued the
Hebrews in Egypt.

This first plague of the Egiptians, may be compared to the first persecution
of the Christians, under that The comparison of the first plague with the first
persecuton.
cruel Emperor Nero: at what time there was nothing in Rome, nor in Italy, but
as in Egypt, for as Nilus and all the rivers of Egypt were turned into blood, so
in Rome in every street, was nothing but sheading of christians blood, under
the tyranny of Nero, by who^ Paul, Peter, and diverse others of the chief
members of the church, were most extremely persecuted, some beheaded, some
hanged, and some burnt, so that (beside his vehement persecutions to the
Christians) few escaped the cruelty of Nero, otherwise he spared none, no not
Seneca his master, nor his mother Aggrippina, but Nero like his cruel uncle
Caligula, wished all Rome to have but one neck, that he might with one stroke
cut it of, for he caused Rome to be set on fire, and to burn 6. days to
resemble ye burning of Troy, where he in his tower Maecenatia^ beholding the
great flames of fire, recited merrily certain Odes of Homer, touching the
burning Orosi. lib. 7.
of Troy.

Thus from one tyranny to another, he passed all men in tirannie, that as the
fish that was in Nilus, and all the rivers of Egypt, died and stank in the
rivers, so the Christians were murdered and persecuted by Nero, whose bodies
likewise stanke for want of burial: but as Nero without mercy or respect slew
all, spared none, and at last slew himself, being proclaimed Nero slew
himself.
by the Senators of Rome a traitor to his Country, thus Nero lived and ended
his life with blood, and for that he could kill no more, he killed himself, in
whom also ended the whole stock and family of Caesar.

So Abimelech the base son of Gedeon, slew his seventy brethren to usurp
the government by destroying the lawful sons of Gedeon, or like proud Hamon,
who sought with all means possible to destroy Mardocheus, and all the Jews
within the hundred Ester 3.
and seven and twenty Provinces of Persia. So Nero sought the destruction of
the Christians, within all the Empire of Rome: Achab was not so greedy to have
his wrath and anger satisfied upon the Prophet Micheas, nor Iezabel upon the
Prophet Elias, as 3. Reg. ca. 19
Nero was to have Paul the Apostle and Peter slain in Rome, who filled all the
streets of Rome with the blood of Christians, as Manasses king of Judah filled
all the 4. Reg. ca. 21
streets of Jerusalem with innocent blood: so that Nero could not be satisfied,
until he had ended his tragedy, killing his mother, his wives and his
sisters, and after himself, as Mithridates king of Pontus had done before him.
The second plague.


The second message of Moses was to command Pharao to let the Hebrews depart
out of Egypt, which being refused and denied, the Lord used a stratagem, began
to vex them with a second plague, with an ugly army of Frogs, which
assaulted Pharao and his country so fiercely, that all the Rivers and all the
land of Egypt were covered over with loathsome Frogs, Pharaos Court, his
privy chamber, his victuals, An army of Frogs.
upon every man these Frogs scrawled, climbed upon Pharao, his Peers, his
States, and upon all his people, without respect of persons they spared none,
that all the force and strength of Egypt, could not resist the force and
violence of these simple creatures, but were constrained to forsake their
houses, their beds, and to seek to escape these filthy Frogs, who left no
secret place unsought, but the Hebrews Exodus 8.
in the land of Gosen were free from these plagues.

Pharao being dismayed and fearful to see such ugly sights and terrible
stratagems, was forced to yield himself to Moses the Captain and leader of
this army, at what time Moses had his second triumph in the midst of Egypt.
This was the second victory and The second triumph of Moses in Egypt.
triumph, which the Hebrews had in Egypt, by an army of Frogs, weak
soldiers of themselves, but there is nothing so weak that the Lord cannot
cause to overcome the greatest power of man. Yet Pharaos heart was so hardened,
that he answered Moses message from the Lord, Quis est dominus? Who is the
Lord says Pharao, most blasphemously, much like to the blasphemy of Nicanor,
who doubted of The blasphemy of Nicanor punished.
the Lord being in heaven, and demanded of Judas Machabaeus, Is there a Lord
in heaven, that can command you to keep the Sabbath day? But I have power on
earth to execute the kings commandment Nabuchodonozer, besides him there is
no Lord in heaven nor in earth, that can defend you out of Nabuchodonozers
hand, but that tongue which blasphemed the Lord was cut off, and cast to the
sowles of the air to be eaten: the head and the hand that fought against the
Lord, were cut off, he being slain in the battle by Judas Machabeus, and hanged
upon the Temple in Jerusalem.

This second plague may be well resembled to the The comparison of the second
plagne with the second persecution.
second persecution under Domitianus the Emperor, who, with no less cruelty
persecuted the Christians in Rome, then Pharao did the Hebrews in Egypt, or as
Nero his predecessor did in Italy, but as in Egypt all men fled from their
houses, their beds, their tables, to seek some rest from the Frogs, so in
Rome and in Italy, the poor Christians fled every where from place to place to
hide themselves in secret caves and dens, to escape the cruel sword of this
swelling toade Domitianus, who excelled Pharao in tyranny. Pharao said, Quis
est dominus? Who is the The horrible blasphemy both of Pharao, and Domitianus
alike.
Lord? I know not the Lord. But Domitianus named himself Lord, and god
Domitianus, and by a decree commanded so to be named of all me^ in Rome, and
throughout the Empire of Rome: and therwithall caused his Image to be set up in
the Temple at Jerusalem.

This cruel and blasphemous Emperor Domitianus, Domitianus Image set up in
the temple as Jerusalem.
so persecuted the Christians, and so vexed the whole Empire, that not only the
Citizens of Rome, but also all Italy, sought other places in other countries as
banished men, to seek to avoid the sword of this bloody Emperor, who passed
Pharao in blasphemy, and Nero in tyranny, but his end was no better then
Neroes, for as Nero slew himself with his own hand, so was Domitianus in his
own house murdered and slain Domitianus slain in his own house by his
servants.
by his own servants, for he that kills many, must of some be killed, and so
Domitianus was, for blood is revenged with blood, and is one of those four
sins that cries up to heaven for vengeance: but Rome was ever full of blood
between their foreign wars abroad, and their civil wars at home.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the third and fourth plagues of the Egiptians, compared with the third and
fourth persecutions of the Christians.

Moses again after two denialls, marches with his army against Pharao to
his third battle, which was with more The third plague.
simple and weak soldiers, then the second battle was: for the Lord
commanded Moses to smite the dust of the earth with his rod, that all the dust
of the earth became Lice throughout all the land of Egypt, Exodus 8.
and these were the armies of the Lord, the which crept upon every man, and
upon every beast, and went as in battle raie, and well instructed soldiers,
upon Pharao, his Lords, and his Courtiers, and over all the land of Egypt, this
army spared no place, feared no man, but the land of Gosen, and the Hebrews
there dwelling.

To this were Iamnes and Iambres, and all Soothsayers Iamnes and Iambres.
and Charmers of Egypt publicly forced to say, that it was digitus dei, the
finger of God, and Pharao after them, was (as before twice) now the third time
constraited to yield to Moses, but still without grace or repentance. Thus
every victory had his triumph, and every triumph was solemnized without
either a stroke given, or a sword drawn, but with a white rod in Moses hand,
so that it seemed rather a combat betweeene Moses and Pharao, then a set
battle between the Hebrews and the Egiptians.

The third persecution under Traiane in Rome, in all points is to be likened to
the third plague under Pharao The third persecution.
in Egypt, for the blood of the Christians in Rome, and the plague of the
Hebrews in Egypt, cry for equal vengeance and justice upon wicked Tyrants and
murderers unto heaven. Though Traiane was wrote unto by Pliny the second, to
admonish him to mittigate the vehement persecutidus of the Christians,
certifying Traiane that the Christians lived soberly and quietly, not offending
the Roman laws, but by professing their religigion and the name of Christ.
Notwithstanding Pliny Pliny to Traiane.
could do little good with his Letters to Traiane the Emperor in the behalf of
the Christians at Rome, no more then Philo could do with his persuasions to
Nero, for the Jews in Alexandria, though Philo himself being learned and
grave, and of great authority with the Jews, spoke in person to Nero, and yet
Appian the Egiptian, Philo was not heard of Nero.
being but a schoolemaister in Alexandria, a man of no reputation, had audience
of Nero, which was denied to Philo, so much Rome hated the Christians, and
Egypt the Hebrews, that their plagues and persecutions may well be compared
together, for still persecution increased in Rome, in so much that the
Christians that were dispersed and scattered in every place for fear, were so
persecuted, that under Traiane and under Sapor King of Sapor King of Persia.
Persia, infinite slaughter was made of the Christians, and every where, where
the Roman Emperors ruled, the was but sword and fire, but the more the
Christians were persecuted, the more they were increased, the more they were
hanged, slain, and burned, the more were they multiplied, and encouraged
through faith, to esteem little or nothing these tyrants, or their tyranny,
which might move the Romans as well to say, that it was Digitus dei in the
third persecution, as the Egiptians did confess in their third plague.

For if the Egiptians had observed how the Hebrews in the land of Gosen, had
never heard, or seen, or felt any plague, being in one Country, and at one
time, nor so much as a dog among the Hebrews miscarried, or if the Romans
had but considered the works of the Lord, how he increased the Christians to
surmount the slaughters of the persecutions, and strengthened the Christians to
conquer the cruelty of these Tyrants, that as the Hebrews multiplied in Egypt
to the overthrow of Egypt, in spite of Pharaos killing and drowning: so the
Christians multiplied in all the Roman Empire, for all their slaughter and
destroying of the Christians.

But no amendment appeared in Pharao by the three former plagues, then marches
Moses forward with his fourth Army, commanding with one message still; thus
says the Lord, Let my people go, The fourth plague.
or else to be afflicted with the fourth plague, with the like simple Army of
soldiers, as before in the second and the third, for great swarms of flies
came into the Court of Pharao, and into all the land of Egypt, so that all
Egypt was corrupted by this infinite multitude of flies, but in the land of
Gosen, (to the great wonder of Pharao and his people) were none of these
soldiers seen: for the Lord had separated the land of Gosen where his people
the Hebrews dwelt, that they should not be touched either with Frogs, Flies,
or Lice. Pharao, and all his kingdom of Egypt, man and beast, were so bitten
and infected with these swarms of Flies, and wearied with these soldiers, The
fourth yielding of Pharao to Moses.
that Pharao again yielded to Moses, and requested Moses to do sacrifice for
him unto the Lord, and promised Moses that Israel should go out of Egypt.

Notwithstanding he kept no promise, but still hardened his heart, and provoked
the Lord to plague him, his court, and his kingdom. It seemed the Egiptians
hated the Hebrews mortally, being thus persecuted with such horrible plagues,
that they still yielded, but never repented. But no plague, no calamity, could
move Pharao to yield obedience to the lord, neither acknowledge his name, but
still saying Nescio dominum, but by means made to Moses to remove these
plagues from him, yielding ever the victory to Moses, but never yielding his
heart to the Lord.

In Rome, in Antioch, in Alexandria, in Caesaria, and every where else where
the Romans had any government, the Jews were given to be devoured of wild and
fierce beasts, as Lions, Elephants, and Tygres, and to The fourth persecution.
fight upon public theaters to solemnize the tryumphs of Vespasian and Titus.
And therefore were the Hebrews well compared to the Christians, for their
manifold plagues and miseries, and the Egiptians to the Romans for their
tyranny. Yet the Hebrews had some odds The fighting of the Jews with wild
beasts.
more then the Christians had, for they might fight on public shows and upon
theaters, with Lions, Elephants, and wild beasts, which Titus sent from
Jerusalem to Rome, to beautify his father Vespasians triumph to the number of
16000. Jews: but the Christians with present death, with all the tortures that
could be invented, executed upon them.

I may not forget Pharao in Egypt, for his well deserved plagues, the violence
whereof he could not resist, nor defend himself from these armies in his privy
chamber. For that it was the Lords battle, as Iamnes and Iambres, and the
charms of Egypt before did confess.

So Nabuchodonozer confessed, after he was taken from The yielding of tyrants.
the throne of his kingdom in Babylon, to live among beasts in the field.

So Manasses confessed after he was taken captive from his kingdom in Judah,
to become from a king a bondsman in Babylon.

So Julian the Apostata was constrained, after he threw into the air a
handful of his heart blood, to say, Vicisti Galile: and so all blasphemers and
tyrants confess, that the Lord is God, when they are punished and plagued, and
cannot resist it, and yet Pharao in Egypt would not confess that it was the
finger of God, as Iamnes and Iambres did, neither acknowledging the Lord to be
God, as Nabuchodonozer and Manasses did, neither yielding the Blasphemers
confess the Lord to be God.
conquest unto the Lord as Julian the Apostata did, and therefore Moses is sent
unto Pharao to denounce unto him the fifth plague, and to give Pharao the space
of a whole day to think on it, assuring Pharao, the next morning it should come
to pass, unless he would let his people go.

CAAP. V.
Of the fifth and sixth plagues of the Egiptians, compared with the fifth and sixth
persecutions of the Christians.

BEhold the fifth plague by the hand of the Lord upon Pharao, and upon his The
fifth plague.
cattle, his Horses, Asses, Camels, Oxen, and Sheep, with a mighty great
morraine, so that all the cattle of Egypt died, and of the cattle of the
Hebrews died not one. Pharao being with this astonished, more fearful of
these plagues and losses, then careful to avoid punishments, or mindful of
repentance, not acknowledging God to be the Lord, sent to the land of Gosen
to know whether any of these plagues happened among the Hebrews, being
instructed and certified that there was nothing in the land of Gosen but love,
mirth and joy, none of their cattle, nor of their beasts died. It is the
nature of wicked men to envy virtue and godliness, in good men.

Yet Pharao revolted from the Lord, and refused his mercies often offered,
though aforehand he knew, and Moses told him, that the next day the Lord
should bring this fifth plague to pass. And so before the waters were turned
into blood, before the Frogs, the Lice, and the Flies, who like armed
soldiers Phalanges wise assaulted Pharao, of the which he was warned before
by Moses, but yet it moved not Pharao for all this to repentance, though
Pharao was often astonished, and moved to yield victory, yet not to embrace
penitencie, far worse then Esau who would have repented, but could not, Pharao
and Esau compared. The fifth persecution.
though he sought it with tears.

This fifth plague may fitly and well be compared to the fifth persecution under
Sept. Seuerus, for as in Egypt both man and beast died of the morraine, so
under this cruel Emperor, as well by bloody persecution, as civil wars,
every where blood was shead, beside the Roman legions of soldiers were slain,
that the slaughter was infinite. For like as in Egypt their horses, asses,
oxen, camels, and sheep, and all their beasts were slain with a mighty great
morraine, so the Roman generals, their colonels, captains, and all kind of
soldiers were slain, as well in Rome and Italy, as every where throughout the
Roman Empire, as well with wars, as with diverse sicknesses and diseases, yet
not ceasing to persecute the Christians, according to their custom, but the
martyrs of the Lord, the soldiers of God increased still in number in every
country.

Such ever was the providence of the Lord, that Septimius Septimius and
Antiochus murdered.
and the like, were either murdered and slain in their country, or else
banished and died out of their country as this Septimius did, or as the great
Antiochus Epiphanis did being the only enemies of Gods people, tyrannizing
against Judah, forcing them with sword and fire, to forsake God, their religion
and laws, strangling men, hanging some women with their children about their
necks, other women they cast down headlong over the walls, with their babes
hanging at their breasts; making search for the books of Moses, and burning
all that he could find written of the law of Moses, profaned the temple,
sacrificed swines flesh against the law of the Jews, compelled the Jews to eat
swines flesh, to forsake circumcision, and to adore his gods, his tyranny was
such, that the Samaritans The tyranny of Antiochus against the Jews. 1.
Machab. 6.
sent unto him messengers for very fear, denying themselves to be Jews, but a
people coming out of the Meades and Persians, (therein they said the truth for
they were not true Jews) requesting Antiochus that the Temple which they
builded in Mount Garisim, should be named the Temple of Jupiter, and that they
would be governed by Appolonius and Nichanor his Lieftenants, and become
Antiochus servants.

Yet the Lord raised those in Judah that esteemed not his threatenings, waighed
not his commandments, Joseph. li. 12. cap. 13.
feared not his tortures; for so the Lord said to Elias, that he reserved 7000.
that never bowed nor bended knee to Baall, which kept the laws of the Lord, as
Mattathias and his five sons in Modin, and diverse other in Judah, not
weighing Antiochus nor his Lieftenants.

When this cursed and cruel Antiochus saw how little the Jews weighed his
threatenings, and how they Antiochus at his death confessed the great wrong he
did to Jerusalem and Judah.
still increased in number, and how forward they were in their religion, he
thereby fell sick, and confessed, that the evil that he did to the Temple of
Jerusalem, and to the inhabitants of Judah, was the cause that he must die in a
strange land: for before, Antiochus had proudly promised to make Jerusalem a
grave for all the Jews burial, we leave Antiochus dead out of his Country in
Persia, and turn to Moses in Egypt.

This was ever the commandment of the Lord to Moses, rise, and stand up
before Pharao, and say thy The sixth plague.
wonted message, thus says the Lord, let my people go. Yet nothing moved
Pharao, but as a sworn enemy against the Lord, stiff necked and hard hatred,
refused al graces and mercies offered: and therefore Moses was commanded to take
the ashes out of the furnace, and to sprinkle it up into the air before
Pharaos face, and strait out of the same ashes there brake out sores with
blaines, botches and swellings both in man and beast: so that Iamnes and
Iambres, and all the Sorcerers of Egypt could not stand before Moses, forthey
themselves were plagued with botches and biles, which Manetho an Egiptia^
historiographer falsely fained a fable, that these blaines and botches which the
Egiptians had to be a leprousie on the Hebrews, naming The fable of Manetho of
Moses which he named Osarphis. Tisithes.
Moses Osarphis, a Priest and a lawgiver over the Hebrews. Yet Cheremon named
him Tisithes, one contrary to another, and both contrary to the truth, and as
Josephus says, both Manetho and Cheremon affirmed, that what Moses had done
concerning the miracles in Egypt to be done by Magic. So Pliny held the like
opinion, that Moses Pliny his opinion of Moses.
was a great Magitian, and did all those miracles before Pharao in Egypt by
Magic. Pliny had no cause so to say, for Nero the Emperor which was
instructed with the best Magicians of all the East kingdoms, which Tiridates
king of Armenia brought with him to Rome: yet it helped not Nero at his need,
neither the Emperor Iulianus Apostata being well learned and thoroughly
instructed in Magic: It could do him no good, no more then Iamnes and Iambres
to Pharao. And therefore I will set down the true History of Moses written by
Josephus, a grave and a learned Jew, and a governor of all the country of
Galiley, far to be preferred before Appian an Egiptian Schoolmaister in
Alexandria. Who after their Joseph. lib. 2. contra Appionem.
fabulous lies most impudently blasphemed their Temple, affirming an Ass head
all of gold, by the Jews most religiously worshipped and honored in their
temple: which was found in the time of Antiochus Epiphanis, when he sacked
Jerusalem and spoiled the temple. We will pass over these false Egiptia^s
writers, and come to Moses.

This sixth plague is likened to the sixth persecution under The sixth persecution.
Maximinus, a most cruel Emperor, being puffed up with pride and insolency,
and wearied with vulgar persecutions, proceeded forward to persecute Bishops,
Doctors, and other learned Christians that professed the Eusebius. lib. 3. cap.
37. Polycarpus.
name of Christ, as Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, Ignatius; and such he spared
no degrees within the Romain provinces: but as the Egiptians were plagued with
soars, botches, blaines and biles, so he vexed the Christians with sword,
fire, and extreme tortures. And as nothing could move Pharao in Egypt to
acknowledge the Lord to be God; so nothing could move this tiger Maximinus, to
acknowledge Christ to be the Lord, but without mercy and compassion persecuted
and afflicted the Christians.

Thus not only the Emperors of Rome tyrannized against Christians, but also the
kings of Syria, little inferior to the Romans in tyranny, against whom the
Lord did not only stir men, but women and children to contemn their
threatenings, and to despise their cruelty, as Antiochus king of Syria
commanded caudrons and brazen pots to be heated, straightly charging that he that
spoke but a word with Moses law, should have his tongue cut out: this could not
terrify a woman with her seven sons, who one after another, denied the
eating and sacrificing of swines flesh, the defiling of their temple with
Images, refusing to forsake the laws of Moses, and in this to live and die.

The king straight commanded that the tongue of the eldest brother should be
cut out, to pull the skin over his The persecution of the seven brethren. 2.
Machab. cap. 7.
head, to pare off the edges of his hands and feet, and after these tortures,
while yet there was any life in him, to be fried in the hot caudron, and that
in the sight of his mother, and his other six brethren, assuring them, that
they should suffer the like torments one after another, unless they would
forsake the religion and laws of the Jews, eat swines flesh, and offer
sacrifice of swines flesh unto Jupiter, upon the altars at Jerusalem and
Samaria, but they esteemed the least jot of their law, more then the greatest
tortures, that either the Emperors of Rome which persecuted them, or the kings
of Syria which tyrannized over them, could inue^t, saying that they would only
obey the laws which the Lord gave unto them by Moses, and not the
commandment of the king: then were the other brethren one after another put
to death with the like tortures as their elder brother was, in the sight of
their mother, who spoke to her children these words, My sons I neither gave
you breath nor soul, nor life, and as you regard not your selves, to die for
the law es of the Lord, so shall the Lord restore unto you, your souls and
your lives to live for ever. And thus were theyto rtured to death, one brother
after another, and the mother after her sons. And now I will return to Pharao.

CHAP. VI.
Of the seventh and eight plagues of the Egiptians, compared with the seventh
and eight persecutions of the Christians.

AMd Moses was sent with his seventh message to Pharao, saying; How long will
it be before thou submit thy self to me, says the Lord? But Pharao being
marked with Cains mark, who could not die, though he would feign die, or like
Esau, who would repent and could not, though he sought it with tears. So
Pharao though he yielded victory to Moses, yet could not he yield his heart
unto the Lord, but refused the offers of the Lord, and despised his mercy, and
therefore Moses was commanded to vex Pharao with the seventh plague, which The
seventh plague.
he executed upon Pharao with thunders, hail and lightnings, fiery soldiers of
the Lord, this smote the herbs, and brake the trees of the field, this smote
all the land of Egypt, both man and beast, the thunder, the rain, the hail and
the fire mingled together, so hurtful, and so grievous, as there was not the
like in Egypt, since it was a nation: and yet the land of Gosen where the
Hebrews dwelt neither hard thunders, nor saw fire, lightnings nor rain.

But Pharao still against his promise, stayed the Hebrews in extreme bondage in
Egypt, and yet with terror and fear of the punishments, requested Moses and
Aaron to cease the horrible thunders, and fiery lightnings, which being
ceased, Pharao ceased not to sin upon sin, neither gave he himself to seek
the Lord, for all the terrors of so many plagues past.

The Macedonians at any Eclipse of the Moon would be so frighted and terrified,
though the natural cause were opened unto them of the defects thereof by many
Liui. 35.
of their Captains, yet would they not but against their will, at the Eclipse
time enter into battle.

So the old Romans were so amazed that they took the ebbing and flowing of
the sea, to be wrought by some Q. Curtius lib. 4.
divine power of the gods. So Scipio confessed at the besieging of Carthage,
and said to his soldier, Ducem sequimini Neptunum. Though the Romans and the
Macedonians confessed the Eclipse of the Sun and Moon, and the ebbing and
flowing of the Seas to be the works of God, yet Pharao confessed not the
wonders which Moses did in Egypt.

This cruel marching of Pharao against the Hebrews in Egypt, resembles much
the cruel persecution under The seventh persecution.
Decius Emperor of Rome, under whom reigned still persecutions of the
Christians, as under others his predecessors. But the Lord so plagued the
Empire at this time, even from the East unto the West, with plagues, and diverse
such sicknesses, as not only the earth was infected, but the air corrupted,
with such slaughter of man and beast by sickness, that there wanted in many
places of the Empire, men alive to bury the dead, justly Great plagues and
sicknesses upon the Romans.
plagued and punished, so that between the cruel persecutions of Christians,
in Antioch, Caesaria, and Alexandria, and the multitude of the Romans that
died, made the ground of Rome and Italy to stink, as Egypt stunk with their
bloody water and dead frogs, and as in Pharaos days, the Hebrews so
multiplied in Egypt: for all Pharaos tirany, so likewise the Christians
increased in Rome, and every where in the Roman Empire in spite of the Roman
Emperors, though they sought every way to devour them with sword and fire.

Moses is sent again to Pharao, and to say, let my people go, behold to
morrow will I bring grassehoppers into thy land, and they shall cover the face
of the earth in every place, and quarter of Egypt, that the earth cannot be
seen, and they shall eat the residue The eight plague.
which remains unto you, and escaped the hail, they shall eat all your
green trees upon the field, and shall fill your houses, and all your servants
houses, and these threatenings, and cominations of Moses could nothing move
Pharao, and yet dissembled like an hypocrite to Moses saying, I have sinned
against the Lord, and against you, forgive me therefore, and Hypocrisy of
Pharao.
pray for me, it is to be wondered that Pharao and all Egypt would suffer such
horrible plagues for the Hebrews, to them a strange nation, whom they mortally
hated, and yet stopped and stayed them in Egypt, against the law of Mena and
Bocoris and custom of Egypt, and against the custom of all countries.

The Lacedaemonians by Lycurgus law would not admit any stranger to stay in
Lacedemon. In Athens Pericles made a decree, that no stranger might dwell in
Athens, but such as were banished for ever from their Pericles made a decree in
Athens against strangers. Strangers not long entertained in Carthage.
Country, those only might stay in Athens, bringing their gods and their
goods with them.

Likewise the Carthagineans could not abide strangers, for those that sailed
into Sardinia or to Hercules pillars, escaped hardly the Carthagineans hands,
for that they would suffer no stranger to dwell in their territories.

So also in India no stranger might stay among them past three days, so
straight were strangers looked unto in all Countries, that the Romans would
not admit any mercenarie soldier being a stranger in their wars.

The Hebrews suffered no stranger to dwell among them, to use foreign
religion, and therefore it was not lawful for the Samaritans to come to
Jerusalem, nor for the Samaritans to converse themselves with the Jews.

Yet Pharao against the laws and customs of all countries, and against the
law of his own country, admitted strangers, his own enemies to dwell in
Egypt. Pharao as I said before, had Esaus mark, could not yield, and let these
strange Hebrews go.

How fitly this eight Egiptian plague, resembles the eight Roman persecution
under the Emperor Valerianus, The eight persecution under valerianus.
who like as Antiochus compelled the Jews to forsake the Lord, their laws,
and religion, so Valerianus constrained the Christians to Idolatry, and forced
them to forsake the religion of Christ, commanding by his Letters sent to his
lieftenants, and generals, every where to burn, to kill, and to murder all
the Christians that professed the name of Christ, so odious was the name of the
Christians among the Romans, as the name of the Hebrews among the Egiptians.

And like as the grasse-hoppers in Egypt, did waste, spoil, and eat all that
was left untouched and unspoiled by the plague of haile-stones and lightnings
before, so this bloody Emperor Valerianus left no place unsought to persecute
the remnant of the Christians, (which his predecessors could not find) with
sword and fire, until he himself was taken, and his army ouerthrown by Sapor
King of Persia, who took him and kept him in prison all his life time in
bondage, and slavery, using him as a block to mount on horseback, things hard
and strange to the Romans, to have their Emperor in such slavish service,
and to become a vassal and a block for Sapor King of Persia, to lay his foot
upon his neck to go on horse.

And was not the great Turk Pazaites ouerthrown, and his Army slain at Mount
Stella by Tamberlane, a Valerianus the Emperor of Rome used as a block by
Sapor king of Persia.
rude and barbarous Scithian, and himself taken, and kept in a cage under his
table, and carried him in that cage in all his wars, during Tamberlanes life,
so that the great Emperor of Rome died as a block for King Sapor in Persia,
and Pazaites the great Turk died in Tamberlanes cage, as a captive in Scythia.
So Pharao in diverse battles was overthrown by Moses, and used as a block, and
at last drawn as it were by a cord like a dog, by Moses from Egypt, into
the red sea, and there to dye as you shall read in the two next plagues that
follow.

CHAP.
Of the ninth and tenth plagues of the Egiptians, compared with the ninth and
tenth persecutions of the Christians.

MOses is sent from the Lord to Pharao, and commanded to hold out his hand unto
heaven, that there was darkness The ninth plague.
upon all the land of Egypt, and such palpable darkness, that neither fire,
candle, torch, or any light, might give the^ light, it was such palpable
darkness that the Egiptians might feel it, and this darkness continued three
days long, that one might not see an other. Yet Pharaos heart was so hardened,
that now in his fury and rage, he commands Moses and Aaron to go out of The
dissimulatio^ of Pharao.
his sight, threatening them with death if they came any more before him, though
in the last plague he requested Moses and Aaron to pray for him, and to forgive
him his sins, but then were his words full of dissimulation, and his
repentance full of hypocrisy: he could say, I have sinned, but he could not
say, I have repented, and beforie for his sins.

The ninth persecution under Aurelianus in Rome, may thoroughly be likened to
the ninth plague under The ninth persecution.
Pharao in Egypt. The like threatenings of speech, and the like words that
Pharao used to Moses and Aaron in Egypt, the like used Aurelianus against the
Christians in Rome: but it contiued not long, for he was slain as others his
predecessors were. And as for the great palpable darkness in Egypt, so was it
in Rome, when their mind was more dark then darkness it self. The Egiptians
hated not the Hebrews so much, as the Romans hated the Christians. For Pilate
the Roman president in Jerusalem, which gave sentence on Christ to die, and
saw many miracles done by him, sent Letters to his master Tiberius the
Emperor, and to the Senators, recyting the miracles Christ denied among the
Romans.
that Christ had done before he died, saying he was worthy to be canonized
and placed among the Roman gods, which all the Senators with one consent
denied, though Caesar requested them first, and threatened them after, yet
Christ was not allowed to be a Roman God.

Tiberius without effect of his good motion died, and so did that wicked
Emperor Aurelianus, in the midst of his cruel persecutions. After who^
succeeded a good valiant Emperor Flam. Claudius, and so valiant that he
vanquished the Goths; the Illyrians, and Macedonians, whereby in Rome he was
so honored, that the Senators sent to him A golden target sent by the Senators.
a golden Target, which afterward was set up in the shewplace, and a golden
statue to stand in the Capitol, but he died too timely of a sickness at
Sirmium.

After him succeeded his brother Aurel. Quintilius, a good moderate Emperor,
equal, or rather to be preferred before his brother, but he was slain within
18. days after he was elected Emperor by the soldiers. These good Emperors
only I name, for that persecutions were ever executed by cruel Kings and
Emperors.

But these cruel Emperors, as they cruelly destroyed The evil end of cruel
Emperors.
others, so cruelly were they destroyed after: as some of them were killed by
their own hands, as Nero, some murdered by their own servants, as
Domitianus, some suddenly slain riding by the high way, as Decius, some
banished died in strange Countries, as Seuerus: others died captives in
bondage and slavery, as Valerianus did in Persia: others eaten with cankers
and worms, as Maximinius, others murdered one after an other, as Aurel.
Tacit. and Florianus. Thus were those Emperors slain and murdered that
cruelly persecuted the Christians.

The Lord being determined now to finish his plague in Egypt, and to bring
his people away, willed The tenth plague.
every man and every woman to borrow of their neighbors, Jewels of gold and
silver, for Moses was very great in the land of Egypt, with Pharao, and with
the people: for before this, Pharao had appointed Moses General of the
Egiptians, against the king of Aethiopia, which I wrote in the History of
Moses. Yet said the Lord, I will bring one plague more upon Pharao, and upon
Egypt, and after that he will let you go hence, for all the first borne of the
land of Egypt shall die, even from the first borne of Pharao that sits on
his seat, until the first borne of the maid servant that sits in the mill.

The Lord knew at that time how to save the Hebrews in Gosen from all the
plagues in Egypt, and to The Lord uses all things by means.
save Noah from the geneall deluge in the Arc, to save Lot from fire and
brimstone in Zodome, and to save the Christians from the destruction of
Jerusalem in Pella.

As this tenth plague was the greatest, and the heauiest, so the tenth
persecution was the greatest, and the The tenth persecution.
longest, under Dioclesian in the East parts; and under Maximianus in the West,
either of them persecuting and afflicting with such slaughters of martyred
Christians, that for the space of ten years, for so long continued the tenth
persecution, there was nothing but the wonted bloody persecution, sword and
fire, by the commandments of both these Emperors with most extremity to be
executed, and as under Nero the first persecution began, so under Dioclesian it
ended. For the Church of God so flourished, the Christians so increased, and
the godly martyrs so multiplied, that these tyrants were weary to persecute
them any longer.

At that very time, when persecution ended under Dioclesian, then heresy began
to spring under Satan: When persecution ended, heresy began.
for when one stratagem of Satan fails, he practices an other.

Now Arius marches with his Antitrinitary crew, and set themselves in battle
against the Lord, with horrible and blasphemous weapons, and as the Poets
feign, the Giants set themselves in battle against the Sun, the Arrius the
first of his sect.
Moon, and the Stars, so this crew of heretics set themselves to fight
against God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, some denying Christ by
nature to be Cod, but only of accidental participation of divine properties
as Arius.

Some affirming that Christ took his beginning of the Virgin Mary, denying the
divine nature of Christ, as Samosatenus and Photinus.

Others imagined that Christ had not a true and natural body borne of the
Virgin Mary, as the Marcionites Eusebius. in many of his books especially in the
fourth at large, writes of these masters. Saturninus.
and Manichees.

The Ebionites affirmed Christ to be naturally born of a woman gotten by man. I
will omit to speak of Simon Magus, and his disciple Menander, of Cerdon, and
his disciple Marcion, and of Saturninus, and a number more of this crewe, who
deny one Article or other of our Christian faith, confounding the divine
nature of the Trinity. These heretics possessing diverse seats, as Arius in
Alexandria, Saturninus in Antioch, Photinus in Lions, and so of the rest, which
being the very blast and breath of Satan, have brought into their heresy
many kings and princes of Asia and Europe, but all these heretics were by
general council confuted and condemned.

The Nicene council condemned Arius and his partners which denied the deity
and divine nature of Christ, this council held under the Emperor Constantine,
where 318. Bishops met together to confute Arius and his heresy.

The second council at Constantinople, under Gratianus the Emperor, against
Eudoxius and Macedonius, denying The 4. general councels.
the holy Ghost to be God.

The third council at Ephesus under Theodosius the great against Nestorius,
affirming two sons, the one of God, the other of man, denying the mystery of
the incarnation of Christ.

The fourth council at Calcedon under Martianus against Eutiches, who
confounded the natures in Christ for the unity of the three persons.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the marching of the Hebrews from Egypt under Moses and Aaron, toward the
land of Canaan. Of the life of Moses in Egypt, and of his victories against the
Aethiopians.

NOw Moses and the Hebrews being discharged out of Egypt, where they had bin
in bondage and miseries many years, and were called Hicsos, now they march
like soldiers of the Lord Hicsos.
under Moses and Aaron, toward the land of Canaan: but mark the hardness
of Pharaos heart, for while the Hebrews were in Egypt, being extreme enemies
unto Pharao, yet Pharao endured ten horrible and terrible plagues, before he
would let the Hebrews go out of Egypt, until he was brideled and hooked by
the nosthrils as Senacharib was, and compelled to let the Hebrews go. Yet
Pharao with his wonted hardened heart, with all the power and force of Egypt
followed The marching of Pharao after the Hebrews.
after, being two hundredth thousand footmen, fifty thousand horsemen, six
hundredth chosen chariots of the kings own army, a sufficient army against
weaponlesse and unarmed men. Notwithstanding he had infinite number of
footmen, horsemen, and chariots, out of all parts of Egypt, assuring himself,
by this multitude he would make a full end of the Hebrews, having this
advantage, the sea being before the Hebrews, the mountains on either side
them, and Pharao with all the force of Egypt at their back, a narrower straight
as Pharao supposed, then the Greeks had against the Persians at Thermopyla, and
there Pharao thought to end his long desired tyranny upon the Hebrews.

It was to be wondered that after ten great victories in Egypt, gotten against
Pharao, by no other weapon then with a rod in Moses hand, durst not look Moses
in the face, and after these victories in Egypt, durst follow Moses, having
six hundred thousand Hebrews marching in his camp, this was the time
appointed of the Lord to do with Pharao that which Pharao thought to do to the
Hebrews, for the Lord commanded Moses to hold up his rod, and to stretch out
his hand upon the sea, and to A stratagem of the Lord.
divide the seas, to let the Hebrews go through on dry ground, and to suffer
the Egiptians to follow after, until the Lord commanded Moses again to
stretch out his hand upon the sea, (a divine straragem of the Lord) to The
drowning of Pharao in the red sea.
let the waters turnevpon the Egiptians and ouerwhelme them. So the Lord by
water saved the Hebrews his people, and by water drowned the Egiptians his
enemies.

Yet Appian most impudently affirmed Moses to have done what he did by
Magic, whom the common people in Egypt named Tisithes, and Ioshuah
Peresephes. Appian alleges Manetho and Cheremon two Egiptian Appins impudent
lies against Moses
writers, to prove his fond assertions.

Pliny also held that opinion that Moses was a great Magician, and did many
miracles in Egypt through Magic, yet it is more lawful for Pliny that wrote
of so many things, to lie in some things, then for Manetho a poor
schoole-maister in Alexandria, or for Cheremon, two fabulous writers of the
Egiptian history only.

The best Magician that helped himself at need, was Appollonius Thianeus, who
being accused of capital crimes before Domitianus the Emperor, being
demanded Appolonius Thianeus.
by the Emperor what help he could do now to himself by his Magic, nothing
said he but this, and vanished This story is reported otherwise in the life of
Apollonius.
away out of the Emperors sight, so much could not Iamnes and Iambres do to
save themselves from the botches and blaines, which as they say was done by
Moses Magic in Egypt. And therefore I think it best to set down the true
history of Moses, before yet he was called by the Lord to lead the Hebrews
out of the land of Egypt into Canaan.

Moses the son of Amri, was of the tribe of Leui, and the seventh from
Abraham borne in Egypt, brought up by Thermutes king Pharaos daughter and
heir, in this child Moses she delighted so much, being brought up in all the
learning and knowledge of the Egiptians, that Moses pleased Thermutes so well,
that she moved her father having no male child but her self, that it might
please the king to make Moses her adopted son, least Thermutes also should be
barren, and want an heir to possess the crown. This being agreed upon
between Pharao and his daughter, Moses grew great in Egypt, The education of
Moses in Egypt.
favored and well beloved amongst all the Aegiptians.

It happened at that time that the Aethiopians had war with the king of
Egypt, having won two great victories over the Egiptians, spoiled and wasted
Egypt unto the very city of Memphis.

The Priests of Egypt being instructed by the Oracles of Ammon to choose an
Hebrew captain, to lead their army against the Aethiopians, the king being
informed Moses chosen captain for Pharao.
of this Oracle, spoke fair to his daughter Thermuthes through the persuasion
of the Priests, who used the like policy to have Moses slain among the
Aethiopians, as Joseph. lib. 2. cap. 5. de antiq. Iudaic.
Saul used to have David slain among the Philistines, Thermutes perceiving the
danger of her fathers kingdom, which fell unto her by succession, would know
of Moses secretly his mind therein, Moses being therewith contented, the kings
daughter brought Moses before her father and the Priests, to whom Thermutes in
this sort spoke: Is Moses the man whom before this time you found by
Oracles, should destroy Egypt, and now you find by the same Oracles, to have
that man to be your captain to save Egypt?

But the Priests forgot not when Thermutes laid the diadem upon the childs
head, which Moses being but Moses death sought by the Priests of Egypt.
a very child, with both his hands took the diadem from his head and threw
it to the ground, and treaded it under his feet; whereat the Priests of Egypt
were so astonished, that they told the king, that that child should be the
overthrow and destruction of Egypt, they all counseled Pharao to take away the
fear of Egypt, and the hope of the Hebrews.

Notwithstanding Moses, as he was by the providence of God preserved, saved
from killing and drowning being a child, so likewise then was he kept from the
envy and malice of the Priests, and of the Egiptians, who sought to kill him,
as the Jews thought to kill Paul, but as Paul prevailed over the Jews, so
Moses prevailed over The victories of Moses in Aethiopia.
the Egiptians, and marched forward with this Hebrew army toward Aethiope,
gave them two great battles, overthrew them, chased them, and daunted the
courage of the Aethiopians, that they were brought lower by the Hebrews, then
the Egiptians were before by the Aethiopians.

The Aethiopians thus being brought low, Moses brought his army, and besieged
Saba, the chief city of Aethiope, at what time the king of Aethiope his
daughter named Tharbis, having hard such great report of Moses fortitude and
prowess, went up on the walls of the city, to behold the army of the
Hebrews, where she saw Moses manfully and valiantly fighting before his army,
she much admired his courage, and wondered at his prowess, doubting much the
destruction of her country, she sent some of her chief servants unto Moses,
by whom she opened her favor and her love toward Moses, offering her self
to him in marriage, and to conclude peace between the Aethiopians and the
Egiptians, which Moses accepted upon her oath, that the city Saba should be
yielded up into Moses hand, and peace concluded The marriage of Moses to
Tharbis.
between Aethiope and Egypt, which presently was yielded up, and the marriage
performed, notwithstanding Moses at his return to Egypt, his service was more
maliciously accused and suspected, then thankfully accepted, such hatred and
malice grew in Egypt toward Moses, by means of the Priests, and the king
himself suspected him for his greatness, and success of his victories over
the king of Aethiopia, that Pharao doubted that Moses might do the like in
Egypt: by these means traps and snares were laid to destroy Moses, that Moses
was in such fear of his life, and the rather for that he killed an Egiptia^ that
abused an Hebrew; that he was forced secretly to fly through the wilderness
unto the Madianites, where he married Zephora, Iethro his daughter, and there
Joseph. lib. 2. cap. 5.
continued forty years, from whence he was called by the Lord to lead his
people from Egypt to Canaan; whose greatness then was more known then before,
as is set down in Exodus, so that Appian with his Egiptian Authors, with their
fained fables against Moses, are worthy to be scoft at for their impudent
lies, for Moses was Appians lies.
brought up with Thermutes the kings daughter, and heir of Egypt, and married
to Tharbis the kings daughter of Aethiope. But let us omit Appian with his
fellow liars, and come to Moses, marching with his Hebrew camp.

CAAP. IX.
Of certain military laws and marshall exercise of the Hebrews, under Moses
in the wilderness.

AFter that Pharao and the Egiptians were drowned in the red sea, the Hebrews
had such rich spoils by their dead bodies found on the sea shoares, that now
the Hebrews became from poor shepheardes called Hicsos in Egypt, to be rich
soldiers, that neither Phillip Hicsos.
king of Macedonia, had such spoil in Delphos, nor his son Alexander in
Babylon, nor Nabuchodonozer in Jerusalem, as the Hebrews had of the spoil of
the Egiptians upon the shore. For now the Egiptians pay them their hires for
the service and bondage of four hundred and thirty years.

So Philo said, that the borrowing of Jewels of silver and Jewels of Gold,
was nothing else but to pay Philo.
the due debt unto the Hebrews, for their long bondage and service.

So Rupertus said, the wages and hires which the Egiptians kept so long
unjustly from the Hebrews, by an honest guile the Hebrews obtained their long
detained due, for the Lord commanded the Hebrews Exodus 12.
to borrowe Gold and silver of the Egiptians: and the spoil which is gotten
of the enemies is due by the law of arms.

The Hebrews marched under Moses with Egiptian weapons, with songs of hymns
and Psalms, for the victory unto the Lord. Myria Moses sister, the women and
virgins of Israel, with violls, harpes, and tabrets, and with great melody,
gave thanks unto the Lord, so that it was afterward a custom among the
Virgins of Israel to sing Psalms and Songs, to thank the Lord for their
victories, and withal to advance the fame of the Generals and Captains, as
they did to Saul and David.

The Lord sets down certain martial laws to Moses, to govern and to rule
his people, commanding him to make two silver Trumpets, to assemble the army,
to call the congregation, and for the removing of the Camp, and charged the
sons of Aaron The law of arms.
to sound out the trumpets in any service, only the Priests were appointed by
the law to sound the trumpets, and to carry the arc, which was their office
for ever.

When thou go out with the host against thy enemies, keep thee then from all
wickedness, be clean from pollution in the night, for the Lord may not abide in
the host any soldier that is any way unclean, before he be washed with water,
and purified, and when a soldier must serve the necessity of nature, among
other weapons he must have his paddle staff to dig the earth, The 2. law of
arms.
and after to cover his excrement, for the Lord would have his people pure and
holy both in soul and body, for the Lord walks in the midst of the camp
among his soldiers.

The Hebrews were also commanded when they went to any battle, that the Priest
should stand before the whole army, being called together with the sound of a
trumpet, to exhort the army, and to encourage them to fear nothing the
multitude of their enemies, but to fight valiantly the battles of the Lord,
assuring them that the Lord would be their Captain, and go before The 3.
law of arms.
them, and therefore not to doubt of the victory. So the Lord promised, and
said to Moses, I will go before thee to Egypt against Pharao.

So the Lord said to Joshua, that he would go before him and his army to
Jericho.

So the Lord with the like words spoke to Nabuchodonozer, when he went against
Jerusalem.

And even so he spoke to Cyrus, when he went against Babylon, All battles and
victories are mine says the Lord.

As the Lord promised, not only to Moses, to Joshua, and to others, but also to
Nabuchodonozer and Cyrus, Heathen Princes to go before them in his own
battles, and therefore the Heathen kings made their soldiers believe, that the
Gods taught them stratagems to overcome their enemies.

Archidamus used a stratagem against the Arcadians, commanded secretly in the
night time, certain horses to go round about his camp, and in the morning
he showed his soldiers, the steps of the horses, saying that it was Castor
and Pollux, that would be ready in the next battle to take their parts, and
to fight with them against the Arcadians.

So did Epaminandas, he caused the armor which did hang in the temples, and
were dedicated to their Gods, Front. lib. 1. cap. 11. The strata gems of
Archidamus, Epaminandas and Pericles.
secretly to be taken down, by this stratagem he persuaded his soldiers, that
the gods promised to be in those armors themselves, to fight in the battle.

Pericles General for the Athenians used the like policy, caused a comely
tall man of great stature, all in purple, to sit on a high stately chariot,
drawn with goodly white horses, standing in a thick wood consecrated to
Pluto, where both the armies might behold him, until the sign of the battle
were given, then he called to Pericles, and willed him to go forwards, and
said, that the gods of Athens were at hand, by this stratagem Pericles got a
great victory, for the enemies fled before the battle began.

The Gentiles and the Heathens believed and confessed that all victories and
good success, came to them by serving of their gods, and all their overthrows
and calamities fell upon them by offending their gods, so much stood the
Heathens in awe and fear of their gods.

And like as Joshua, Iosaphat and David, returned to give thanks to the Lord,
with violls, harpes and trumpets for Joshua etc.
their victories, so the Lacedaemonians with trumpets and flutes, crowned with
garlands made of all kind of flowers, and with a song to Castor and Pollux for
any victories which they had obtained. Castor and Pollux.


The Romans also and the Grecians, not only with building of Temples and
Aultars, but with the great sacrifice Haecatombae did please their Gods for
their victories.

In Hercules Temple in Sparta, the Armours that were hanged up and consecrated
to Hercules, seemed to make Cic de divine lib. 2.
a sound and and a noise, and at Thebes in the Temple of the same Hercules, the
gates of the Temple being shut, were suddenly of themselves opened, and the
shields and the targets that were hanged up in the roof of the Temple
dedicated to Hercules, fell down and were found upon the ground, which
foreshewed to the soothsayers the destruction both of Sparta and Thebes. Now to
the Hebrews.

The Lord commanded that he that builds a new house, and had not possessed
it a year, should be spared from war. Joseph. lib. 4. cap. 8.


He that planted a vineyard and not received the fruits thereof should also
be spared from war.

And he that betrothed himself to a wife, and had not married her, might in
like case be spared from war.

After the Priest had ended his exhortation to the soldiers, the General of
the Army proclaimed that if The law of Arms.
any timorous or fainthearted soldier were within the Army, he should return
home, least he through his cowardlinesse should disanimate or discourage the
rest of his Army.

Hence the Gentiles had the first instruction to use the like long after this
time, for the law of Arms which the Lord gave unto his people the Hebrews in
the wilderness, were in all countries of the Gentiles afterward imitated in
all their wars. The Priests Faecials in Rome.


As among the Romans the Priests Faeciales in like sort as the Hebrews
exhorted and encouraged the Romans manfully to fight for their Country,
repeating the law of Arms of the Hebrews.

So the Athenians before they co^menced any battle, The Priests Mantes in
Athens.
their Priests called Mantes stood before the army, made a speech to the
soldiers, of the just cause of their wars, and would be further instructed by
their Oracles to know of their victories.

The Persians likewise would take no war, nor battle in hand, before they
had consulted with their Magi in Persia.
soothsayers, which were their wise men called Magi.

CHAP. X.
Of the camp of the Hebrews, of their exercise in the wilderness, and of the
whole Army, divided under four principal standarts: and of placing of the Arc
in the midst of the Camp.

THe Lord commanded at the setting out of the Army unto the battle, that the
Arc should be carried by the Levites, which Ark signified the presence of God,
and the figure of Christ, at what time Moses used always these words, at the
lifting up of the Ark, rise up Lord and The removing of the Arc.
let thy enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee, flee before thee.
And when the Arc rested, Moses always said these words, Return (o Lord) to
thee many thousands, when the Arc was carried, a cloud covered the Arc, and
where the cloud stayed, there the Arc would rest, and when the cloud removed,
the Arc was also to be removed, for by the removing of the cloud, the Arc was
also to be removed.

The Lord commanded in the wilderness of Sinai to Moses and Aaron, with the
twelve Princes of the Tribes of Israel, to take muster, and to number the^ that
were able to go to the wars from twenty years upward, hence from 1. Number.
the Hebrews, the Gentiles took their instructions in numbering, and mustring
their soldiers. Moses numbered The nu^bring and mustring of the Hebrew Army by
Moses.
the people, and found six hundred three thousand five hundred, and fifty able
men to go to wars in the camp of the Hebrews, beside the Levites which were
appointed to attend the Tabernacle.

For the Levites were numbered three several times, the first time they were
numbered at a month old, when they were consecrated unto the Lord: The second
time at 25. years old, when they were appointed to serve in the Tabernacle.
The third time at 30. years old, to bear the burdens of the Tabernacle, and
to serve in the Tabernacle until 50. years, and then to cease from bearing
such heavy burdens, and painful service. But after that, they should minister
in the Tabernacle, singing hymns and Psalms, instructing, counselling, and
keeping of things in order.

After that Moses had brought the Hebrews from Egypt, instructed them with
military discipline, and given them martial laws, then the Lord would not
have Moses to bring his people straight way to the land of Canaan, but to lead
them too and fro in the wilderness, to keep the^ in continual exercise, and to
teach them military discipline The Hebrews were left in the midst of their
enemies to practice Arms.
by the law of Arms appointed, for they might within 3. days as Philo writes,
have passed from Egypt to the la^d of Canaan, but that the Lord would have the^
to endure labor, and to be exercised in martial discipline to become good
soldiers, and therefore suffered the Amalekites, Moabites, Edomites, and the
Philistines to be with the^ as needles in their eyes, and thorns in their sides,
being their professed enemies, to war, to fight, and to keep them still in
practice and exercise of arms.

The Lord suffered the Camp of the people to wander too and fro in the
wilderness backward and forward, to learn to endure cold and heat, and all
kind of hardness, removing their camp too and fro 42. mansions, 42. Mansio^s.
before they came to the land of Canaan.

Cai. Marius perceiving his soldiers ready to yield for want of drink, showed
them a River behind the enemies, Stratagems of Marius and Cyrus.
saying: if you will drink, you must drink in yonder River, that I showed
you, either you must win it of your enemies or loose it.

Cyrus King of Persia brought his soldiers to a certain wood, and caused them
all day to hew down Front. lib. 1. cap. 2.
trees, until they were weary, the next day he prepared for them great
feasts, and liberal banquets, and in the midst of their good cheer, Cyrus
demanded of them, whether they thought better of their pain and travel in
hewing of wood the day before, or of their feasting and banqueting that day:
they preferred feasting before hewing of wood. But said Cyrus, you must come to
the one by the other, unless you fight valiantly and overcome the Meades, you
cannot enjoy the pleasures and good cheer of Persia.

So Moses brought the Hebrews to the wilderness, and said: you must take
pains, and exercise military discipline, to learn to fight with the
Canaanites, Edomites, Moabites, and Philistines, the enemies of the Lord,
before they should pass over Jorden, and enjoy the pleasures of Canaan, the
land of milk and honey: for as these Nations were left as pricks and needles
to vex the Hebrews, so Satan is now left, to vex, to tempt, and to be an
enemy to Gods people withal the stratagems he can.

No doubt the Chaldeans, the Assirians, the Persians, and other Nations, had
their first military discipline from the Hebrews, and were taught to exercise
their soldiers to endure labor, as it seemed the Gentiles used it by
imitation from one Empire to an other.

Moses being the only general of so great an Army, being continually vexed
and molested, without any under officers to aid him, the Lord taught him, and
after his father in law Iethro, to choose from among the whole 70. Governors
chosen under Moses. Exodus 18.
army 70. wise, religious, valiant, and just men, to rule and govern the
people, as magistrates, and officers under Moses, to guide and lead them into
all service. For among the Hebrews no General was chosen without consultation
of Vrim and Thummim, after Moses and Ioshuas time.

Mark the discipline and martial laws of the Lord to his people. The Hebrews
were commanded every man to stand in his place, and under his standart,
throughout The Levites tents about the tabernacle.
the whole Army of the Hebrews, but the Levites should pitch their tents round
about the Tabernacle, who were three and twenty thousand in number, and when
any victory was gotten by the Hebrews over the enemies, the first part of the
spoil was yielded to the Levites who attended the tabernacle: the second to
the soldiers that fought in the field: the third to them that remained in the
camp.

The whole Army was divided under four general The four standarts of the
Hebrews.
and principal standarts. The first standart under Judah, the second standart
under Ruben, the third standart under Ephraim, the fourth standart under Dan.

Every Tribe should stand, and camp by his standart, and under every standart
were three Tribes, and over the three Tribes, three captains, and the number of
the soldiers of the three Tribes under their Captains.

The Tribe of Judah had seventy four thousand and six hundred soldiers under
their Captain.

The Tribe of Isacher had four and fifty thousand and four hundred soldiers
under their captain.

The Tribe of Zabulon had seven and fitie thousand and four hundred soldiers
under their captain. These three Tribes were appointed to stand by the standart
of Judah, and the whole number of the host of Judah, were The tent of Judah on
the East.
one hundred, four score, and six thousand, and four hundred soldiers under
their three captains, and the standart of the host of Judah was appointed to
camp on the East side of the Tabernacle.

Of the South side of the Tabernacle, was the standart of the Tribe of Ruben,
the Tribe of Simeon, and the Tribe The standart of Ruben on the south side.
of Gad, with their three captains, and the whole number that marched under
the standart of Ruben, were one hundred, fifty one thousand, four hundred and
fifty soldiers, and this was the second principal standart.

The third standart of the camp of Ephraim was toward The standart of Ephraim
on the West side.
the west, with the Tribe of Ephraim, the Tribe of Manasses, and the Tribe of
Benjamin, with their several captains, and the whole number that marched
under the standart of Ephraim, was one hundred, eight thousand, and one hundred.

The fourth standart of the host of Dan was on the North side of the
Tabernacle, with their three Tribes, The standart of Dan on the North side.
the tribe of Dan, the tribe of Asher, and the tribe of Nepthali, with their
three captains, and the whole number that marched under the standart of Dan,
was one hundred, fifty thousand, and six hundred.

In this most solemn and royal sort marched the camp of the Hebrews 40.
years in the wilnernesse under these four principal standarts, where their
garments and clothes were not worn, nor any thing they had The marching of
the Hebrew c^po.
decayed, heaven gave them bread, the food of Angels, Manna, and every rock
in the wilderness gave them drink, the Lord fed the^, otherwise they were
simply and slenderly provided for so great an army, but marching in the
wilderness amongst serpents, and venomous beasts, and yet without danger or
harm, but had all things at their wills that were necessary to the wars, from
the Lord.

Notwithstanding all these blessings, the Hebrews wished still to have stayed
in Egypt, and made diverse profers of return, at any touch or trial of them,
they longed for the flesh pots of Egypt, of which they made often mention, of
the oynions, melons, and garlecke, but they made no mention of the slavery,
bondage, and servitude, which they endured for 430. years in Egypt.

If you look into the majesty and state of the Hebrew camp, of the presence
of the arc, of the placing of their The state of the Hebrew camp.
standarts, of the solemnity of their marching, and of their orders and laws,
and that in a wilderness, where they had neither castles, towns, cities, or
forts, to defend the^; and Xerxes great Army
yet they far excelled Xerxes with his innumerable army, in his voyage against
the Greeks, ye sailed on land, and marched on seas, and much doubting whether
Hellespont had sufficient room, and Greece had land enough for his soldiers,
or the air had place enough to receive his shot.

The Hebrew Camp far exceeded Alexander the Alexander.
great, (who after he had subdued all Greece, and the Persians) took in hand
to conquer the whole world, and wept because he heard there was two worlds.
Yet neither Xerxes, nor Alexander the great, might be compared with the
Hebrewe Camp for state and majesty, every Tribe marching under his Captain
and every Captain under his standard, every standard placed to stand about the
Tabernacle, and the Tabernacle was placed in the midst of the camp, because it
might be in equal distance from each standard, that all might The Tabernacle
placed in the midst of the camp.
indifferently have recourse to the Arc, where the Lord instructed Moses, and
instructed him from the mercy seat, for at the door of the Tabernacle it was
commanded to Moses what he might do, and how he should govern the Army, for
the custom of the Hebrews was, to run to the Arc, as to their only Oracle,
where the presence of the Lord was, to cry and to call for help at the Lords
hand in their most danger and greatest calamity.

As the Arc was made by Noah to save himself from the deluge, in such form
and fashion as the Lord had commanded, The Tabernacle 30. cubits long, and 12.
broad. Exodus 26.
the length, the breadth, and the height: so was the Tabernacle made by Moses,
in which the Arc was placed, in such proportion as the Lord commanded Moses,
that the tabernacle should be 30. cubits long, and 12. broad, the Arc 2. cubits
and a half long, and a cubit and a half broad. A cubit of the Greeks two
foot, of the Romans a foot and a half.


After the use of the Tabernacle, the Temple was appointed, where Solomon and
the Priests were instructed to manifest the word of the Lord unto his people.

The Gentiles also ran in any danger or doubt, as to Jupiter in Hammon, to
Apollo in Delphos, to Baall, and other such Oracles, where their wooden Idols
and gods gave false answers. And where the Hebrews (as I said before) had no
provisions for their wars, either in towns Chief and strong forts of the
Gentiles.
or Cities, nor any place to fly unto but the Tabernacle, where the Romans in
any danger might defend themselves in the Capital. The Carthagineans to their
strong fort Byrsa. The Thaebans to their Castle Cadmea. And so the Argiues to
their strong fort Larissa. And the Syracusans to the Castle Acradina. These
were the forts of the Gentiles.

Besides the Gentiles had their treasures and their money laid up in strong
holds and forts.

As Tygranes king of Armenia, kept his treasure in Tygranes.
Bambinsa and Olena, two strong castles, to war with the Romans.

Iugurth king of Numidia, kept his money in two of his Iugurth.
strongest cities called Capsa, and Thola, to war with the Romans.

So likewise Mithridates king of Pontus, kept his treasure Mithridates
in Ptera, to war against the Romans. So the kings of Macedonia, and all the
kings of Asia, had their treasures and store houses to war against the
Romans.

The Hebrews had no such store houses prepared, nor money laid up, nor
provisions ready, but their food was such from the Lord that they wanted
nothing, and yet they conquered more kings, and subdued more countries, then
all they.

CHAP. XI.
Of the manner and order of the Gentiles, and of their principal standards. Of
the setting up of the Tabernacle, and the dedication of the altar by Moses.

Having spoken something of the Hebrew camp, of their several marching The
standarts of Egypt.
under their standards, I think it not amiss to set down the orders and
manners of the marching of some of the Gentiles in their camps for variety of
matters, and for that men may see and understand how far inferior were all
the nations The Hebrews named of the Egiptians Hicsos.
of the world to the poor Hicsos the Hebrews. And first of the Egiptians, who
carried in their proper standard into any battle the Image of that Idol which
they worshipped in that city, as in Heliopolis an ox, in Memphis a bull, in
Arsinoe a crocodile, and so in other cities, cattes, calves, serpents, such as
they worshipped in the temples, such they carried as their ensigns to the
field.

The Persians carried in the first and principal standart, the Image of the
Sun, which the Persians call Mithra.

In their second standart they carried the picture of The standarts of Persia.
Viget. lib. 2. cap. 6.
the eternal and sacred fire which they call Orimasdes.

In their third standart they carried a golden spread-Eagle.

The old Romans when their Empire grew strong had five principal standarts,
which were carried before their military legions. The first standart before the
legion was an Eagle, this was chief, in the second was carried The standarts
of the Romans.
the picture of a Wolf, in the third the picture of Minotaurus, in the fourth
the picture of a horse, in the fifth the picture of a boar.

The Athenians carried in their standart the Image Athenians.
of an Owl, which was likewise printed on their coin with the face of Minerua.

The Thaebans carried in their standart the picture of Thabans.
Sphinx into any battle.

The Cymbrians carried before their armies in their standart unto the field the
picture of a braze^ bull, so did they in the Cymbrian wars against Marius the
Roman Consul.

The old Germains used to carry the picture of lightnings The old Germans.
to lead their armies into the field in their standart.

Sometimes great kings for their proper standarts in their wars, carried the
pictures of diverse and sundry beasts and fowls, as Osiris the first king of
Egypt, a dog. Anubis.


Cyrus also the great king of Persia, gave in his ensign a cock, as
Themistocles did, for the day before Themistocles had battle with Xerxes, by
the crowing of a cock he was sure of victory.

Julius Caesar gave in his ensign an Elephant, for that he vanquished Iuba
king of Mauritania, who bare an Elephant Caesar.
in his ensign, and so Porus king of India, bare in his ensigns the picture
of Hercules.

The Hebrews might better have claimed the Sun in their ensigns then the
Persians, as Joshua, for that the Sun stayed over Gibeon, and the Moon over
Aialon, at Ioshuaes commandment, until he had full victory over the
Amalekites, and therefore he might as well have the Image of the Sun in his
ensign being alive, as he had it set on his grave being dead. So might Judah,
Gedeon, David and others, which had the son of God, the star of Jacob, and
the lio^ of Judah in their standarts and ensigns.

Because we may omit nothing that the Lord commanded Moses concerning the
setting up of the tabernacle, and the dedicatio^ of the altar, the twelve
Princes of the Tribes of Israel, at the setting up of the tabernacle, The
setting up of the tabernacle.
after the tabernacle was anointed and sanctified, brought their offerings
before the Lord, six chariots covered over, and twelve oxen, one chariot for
two Princes, and for every one of the Princes an ox, which they before the
tabernacle offered to the lord, which were delivered to the Levites. So for the
dedication of the altar, after it was anointed and sanctified, these twelve
Princes offered their offerings before the altar, every prince offered a silver
The dedication of the altar.
chargior of an handreth and thirty shickels weight, a silver bowl of
seventy shekels, a cup of gold full of Incense, a young bullock, a ram, a
lamb of a year old, and a he goat. This was the manner of the setting up of
the tabernacle, and dedication of the altar.

Hence grew the building of temples, the dedica^on of altars, oblations and
ceremonies among the Gentiles and Heathens, to dumb Idols and wooden gods.

It was ever the property of Satan like an Ape to counterfeit, and seem to
imitate the laws of the Lord.

There was nothing so rife among the Gentiles as temples and altars, which made
Paul full of anger to see The multitude of altars in Athens.
so many altars in Athens, and especially one dedicated Ignoto deo to an
unknown God.

Athens excelled all Greece for the number of their gods, and of their altars,
for they had an altar in Athens to lust, another to shame.

They had also strange kind of altars in Delos, one to Apollo, made only of
the right horns of all kind of Strange altars in Delos.
beasts, and an other altar made of the ashes of the sacrificed men and
beasts, like Belesus, who raised up a promontorie in Babylon, of the ashes of
the city of Niniuie destroyed, to give light to passengers that sailed by
Babylon Diod. fic. li. 3. cap. 7.
on Euphrates, in the which ashes Belesus carried secretly all the wealth,
gold, silver, and all other rich metals melted of Niniuie into Babylon.

Numa Pomp. a very profane religious king, put up The laws of Numa.
a temple to Faith, another to Terminus, and decreed a law, for that Terminus
was the god of peace, and a Judge of meares and marks between neighbors,
that whosoever would plough any of his neighbors marks, and meares, both he
and his oxen should be sacrificed and slain to god Terminus, upon the very
meare where the offense was done: This temple which king Numa builded to
Terminus, was made uncovered and open above, as the Greeks did use to build
their temple to Jupiter, Hypaethra. Open Temples above in the top.
and to Anfidius, which the Greeks called Hypaethra, both the Romans and the
Greeks thought it not fit, that that these gods should be honored and served
in close and covered temples, and upon their altars no sacrifice of blood
should be offered, but according to Pythagoras laws, fruits, cakes, honey,
flowers, and such because they were gods of peace.

Again the Romans, the Greeks, and the Egiptians, used in old time to build
temples out of the cities to those gods that should watch and guard the cities
from Temples builded of the Gentiles.
the enemies. And therefore Romulus builded a temple to Vulcan out of the
walls of the city of Rome: so his successor king Numa, builded two temples,
the one to Bellona, the other to Mars, four miles from the gate Ca^ena, out of
Rome.

The Athenians to that purpose as the Romans did, builded a temple to Hercules
out of Athens, named Cynosarges. Cynosarges.
Neither would the Egiptians allow the temple of Esculapius to be in any city
of theirs, neither would they allow any temple to Saturn, or to Serapis, within
the city, supposing by their watching and garding abroad they might live more
safe and sure from the enemies.

So among other Gentiles, temples were builded to the gods of fear, of
poverty, and of old age; because Superstition fondnes of the Gentiles.
they might pray to these gods to escape the wants and misery of poverty and
old age: and thus the Gentiles took pattern of the Jews who had so many
Synagogues, and but one Temple, for the Jews afterward became so Idolatrous
as the Gentiles, that (as Jeremy said) every city in Judah had a god, and
every where in groves and hills were several altars, that mount Oliuet Mount
Oliuet.
thereby was called the mount of corruption, because they had made altars under
every grove, and under every green tree, to honor their Idols. But now let us
return to the Hebrews under Moses in the wilderness.

Moses leading the army of the Hebrews in the wilderness from Egypt, marched
with six hundred thousand, and having diverse battles given him by the king of
Arabia, by Arad king of the Canaanites, by Zeon king of the Ammorites, and Og
the king of Basan, and after them having battle with the king of Madianites,
and the king of Moabites, whom he conquered before Joshua had charge of the
army, and because the battles of the Lord were most miraculous in Egypt,
gotten by a white rod, by the which Moses obtained ten victories, and ten
tryumphs, The victories of Moses over diverse kings.
over the Egiptians in Egypt. So Moses in the wilderness had the like
success, not by devised stratagems of their own heads, but by following the
commandments of the Lord, which are the only stratagems of all victories.

After that Moses had brought the Hebrews out of Egypt into the wilderness, as
to a school to instruct them in military discipline, and to be acquainted with
martial laws, to arm themselves ready soldiers to fight the Lords battles,
at Ioshuahs commandment, who in the battle at Riphidim was against the
Amalekites, at what The battle of Riphidim.
time Moses, Aaron, and Hur, went up to the top of mount Horeb, and Moses held
up the rod of the Lord in his hand and prayed for victory, for the battle
continued until Sun setting, and when Moses hand was weary, Aaron and Hur held
up Moses hand between them, and Joshua prevailed, overthrew Amelech, and all
his army, and wanne a great victory, for Moses prayers and Ioshuahs sword,
were both means by the Lords appointment to obtain the victory, for while
Moses hand was up the Hebrews prevailed, and when he let down his hand
Amelech prevailed, this great victory was commanded by the Lord to Moses, to
be written in the book of the law, for a remembrance of so great a victory.
And all other victories which they had as well against Pharao before they came
out of Egypt, and against the Canaanites before they passed over Jorden, were
obtained by stratagems of the Lord, in the behalf of his people, which the
Lord had determined to place in Canaan.

King Arad hearing of the great overthrow that the Hebrews gave the Amalekites,
their friends and neighbors came with a great army, and fought against the
Hebrews, and for that the Hebrews served not the Lord, The battle at Horma.
and were thanklesse for the last victory, king Arad prevailed, slew, and
took of them many prisoners. When the Hebrews cried unto the Lord, and made a
vow to destroy the Canaanites, if they might have the victory, the Lord upon
their promise and vow delivered the Canaanites, their king Arad, their cities
and towns, and The overthrow of the Canaanites and Arad their king, by the
Hebrews.
the people, unto the hands of the Hebrews, that the Canaanites were slain and
utterly destroyed, this was the battle of the Lord, for the Hebrews vanquished
king Arad, and the Canaanites, according to their vows which they made to the
Lord.

These were lawful vows to destroy the enemies of the Lord by the vow of
Cherim, of which vow the Lord himself is the author, the Lord himself
determined and commanded the Hebrews to destroy the Canaanites as his enemies.

So the Prophet published a commandment saying; Vow unto the Lord and
perform it: the same Prophet says; Thy vows are upon me (o Lord) I will
render praise unto thee, having that which I required, I am Psalm. 56.
bound to pay my vows of thansgiuing, as I promised thee (o Lord.)

CHAP. XII.
Of the vows and feasts of the Gentiles. Of espialls sent to the land of
Canaan by Joshua, with diverse other Stratagems.

IN all Countries of the world, as well the Gentiles as the Jews, were wont to
make vows unto their Gods, with prayers and promise to perform those things
which they vowed, if their gods would grant victories in wars against their
enemies, or health to their Kings and Princes, or to remove any plague or
sickness from the people.

The Persians when they vowed any thing to the Sun, the King with his council
called Magi, ascended upon a high hill or mountain, where they made two piles
of wood one upon an other for sacrifice, and upon the same pouring wine, milk,
honey, frankenscense, The vows of the Persians.
with other sweet odours, for a sacrifice to the Sun, the King himself with
his soothsayers called Magi, with their song Theogonia, fired this pile of
wood, for the Kings of Persia would offer no sacrifice without their Magi were
present, nor the ancient kings of Rome, without their soothsayers, which they
called Augures.

The Egiptians used when they vowed, to bring the swords, the shields, the
rotten ships and chariots, with all The vows of the Egiptians. Appian. de
bello punico.
the armours and ensigns of war of the enemies unto one place, laying the^ all
upon a pile of wood, the general holding a firebrand in his hand, kindles the
pile of wood, the soldiers standing about the pile according to the Egiptian
manner, with songs, mirth, and joys for the victories.

In like sort the old Gauls burned and sacrificed Caesar. lib. (...). de
bello gall^
to Mars and Minerua as the Egiptians did, their targets and old armours.

No victory was had among the Gentiles, but some of the spoils thereof were
burned and sacrificed to their Gods, some hanged up to honor and beautify
their Temples. So Alexander the great sacrificed and consecrated some of the
spoils of his victory over Tire to Hercules. Plut. in Coriliano.


The Romans after any victory, hanged up some of the spoils thereof in the
Temple of Castor and Pollux, the Egiptians in the Temple of Vulcan, according
Liui lib. 1.
to the old ancient law, Vulcano armaius esto.

The Grecians when they prayed for victories to The vows of the Grecians.
their Gods, they promised and vowed to present their Gods with Images,
statues, chains, jewels, crowns, and garlands, with songs of Paeana.

The Romans also promised and vowed to Jupiter and to Mars, to build them
Temples, to make them places to sacrifice the tenth man, and the tenth beast
taken in the wars, and to keep an annual feast in the Capital, in memory of
their victories. This vow (the Dictator, The vows of the To manes.
Consul, Praetor, and the high Bishop going before them) was made in the
Capital, before they went to the wars. For both the Romans and the Greeks
upon any great victories obtained, celebrated the great feast Hecatombeon.

The Athenians for any prize they brought into the The feast Bendidia.
Haven Pyroea, celebrated a feast, where many Orators and great Captains came
once in a year to solemnize this feast, for in sea victories Athens excelled
all cities of Creece.

The old Romans had an ancient feast called Consualia, in memory of Romulus
watchword Talassa, at the The first Consualio.
rauishment of the Sabine virgins.

They had an other feast called Anoyllia, in memory of Mamurius Targets that
he made in Rome, like the Ancyllia.
Nymphe Egerias Target which she gave to Numa Pomp.

The Romans had an other feast in Rome, called Tubilustria, in the which the
magistrates met in the Capital, Tabilustria.
and celebrated a solemn sacrifice unto Vulcan, with sounding of Trumpets
about the city, to purge the city of their crimes and offenses against their
gods.

The Athenians had diverse feasts, they had one in memory of Thesius, for his
victory over the Amazons: an other in memory that he brought diverse men out
of Achaia to dwell in Athens, being strangers, who celebrated The feast
Metoichia.
an annual feast to honor Thesius, as Milciades had a feast in memory of his
victories at Marathon.

Themistocles had an other feast for his victory over the Persians at
Salamina. And Thrasibulus for his victory The feasts of the Greeks in memory
of their captains.
over the thirty tirants at Athens, these were the tirants that used such
cruelty, that made the children of Athens to dance in their fathers blood.

The like feasts they used in Achaia, in the city Cycionium, yearly in the
honor of Aratus victories.

A feast celebrated among the Roman youths, called Agonalia, wherein they
co^te^ded about mastry in all kinds of exercise, for trial of agilitie,
courage and strength, The feast called Agonolia.
having thereunto many kinds of crowns and garlandes appointed for rewards
unto the victors, imitating the manners and orders of war, in scaling of
walls, in assaulting of forts, in fighting of battles, and such other
military discipline, that some were crowned with Laurel, some with Pine, some
with oke^ boughs, every victor bearing in his hand a branch of Palm, in
token of victory.

In Syracusa also they held an annual feast to honor Timoleon, in memory of
many benefits and Timoleon.
great victoryes that he obtained to the Syracusans.

For among the Grecians and the Romans, diverse feasts were celebrated, and
triumphs solemnized, in memory of victories to stir up, and kindle young
soldiers minds to embrace arms, and to imitate the examples of their
predecessors.

Having spoken something of the vows and feasts of the Gentiles, we must
return to the Camp of the Hebrews, marching under Joshua, being ready to
pass over the River Jordan, who sent certain espialls Espialls sent by Joshua
to Canaan.
to view the land of Canaan, one of every Tribe, twelve in number, that should
instruct him of the state, situation, strength, and manners of the people,
which being returned after forty days, with such fearful news, of their
strong and lusty men, of their walled Cities, strong Fortes, huge and
monstrous Giants, of the strength and invincible situation of the Country,
that brought the Army to such terror and fear, that they were more willing
to return to Egypt, then to go forwards to conquer the Canaanites, until
Caleb overthrew their Caleb.
speeches, and found great faults in his fellows and consociates of his
journey, to disanimate the Army.

It does much amaze soldiers, to see or to hear terrible reports, for at
that time the people were ready to stone Caleb and Joshua, to force them to
fight against such Fearful reports in wars are dangerous.
a strong Nation, fearful reports to terrify the soldiers, were ever
dangerous, and therefore wise Generals and Captains invented and framed many
subtle stratagems to conceal and hide the multitude of enemies, to keep
terror and fear away from the soldiers.

Tullius Hostilius used a skillful stratagem to annimate his soldiers against
the Fidenates, who stood in fear as well of the multitude of their enemies
before them: as also the report they heard of Messius General of the Albanes,
lying in some secret ambush for his advantage, being indifferent to set either
upon the Romans, or upon the Fidenates. Tullius the Roman General perceiving
The Stratagem of Tullius.
the terror of his soldiers, spurred his horse forwards before the Army, and
told them, they need not to fear Messius, for he was gone, neither to fear
the enemies, which being a scattered Army, to make themselves seem a great
multitude, were more ready to fly then to fight.

So Iugurth in his wars at Nunudio against Cai. Marius, Front. lib. 1. cap.
12.
spurd his horse forwards and rode to every part of the battle, crying aloud
in Latin as he rode from place to place in the battle, go on forward
soldiers, I slew Cai. Marius with my own hand, whereby the Nunudians were so
animated and encouraged to fight the more lustily, that Iugurth by that
stratagem obtained a great victory over the Romans.

Val. Leuinus the Consul in his wars at Tarentum against Pirrhus, used the
like stratagem, showing a bloody sword in his hand, saying to his soldiers
that it was the blood of Pirrhus whom he slew with his own hand, thereby to
move the soldiers to greater courage, and to fight more manfully.

Soldiers ought not to be terrified with the multitude of enemies, with
slaughters of their Armies, whereby Cities, Towns, and Countries revolt to the
enemies, Varro.
as at the battle at Can, the report of Varro the Consul, of the overthrow
of the Romans, caused all the city of Capua to revolt to Haniball.

Again the report in Praeneste, of the overthrow of Sylla by Telesinus, at
the battle of Antemna, and of the The battle of Antemna.
marching of Telesinus toward Rome, with all his whole Army, it so affrighted
Offella one of Syllas Colonels, that he at that time besieging Praeneste,
thought to raise his siege, hearing such hard news of Sylla the General.

Skillful Generals and wise Captains used ever to Milciades and Themistocles
cover and conceal the multitude of enemies, as Milciades, Themistocles, and
other Greek captains kept the innumerable multitude of the Persian Armies
secret from the soldiers. So did Mardonius conceal from Xerxes the great
slaughter of the Persians in Greece.

The Romans being besieged by the Gauls, many of the chief Romans, to the
number of a thousand, fled into their Capitol. The Gauls having possessed the
City of Rome for seven months, expecting the yielding of the Capitol, the
Romans also within the Capitol having welnigh consumed their victuals, used
The Romans stratagem.
this stratagem, to throw loaves of bread in every place out of the Capitol,
in such abundance, though at that time they wanted provision of bread, that the
Gauls were amazed, suspecting they had provision enough to hold out that they
presently fell to composition with the Romans.

The Thracians being besieged on such a straight hill where their enemies
could have no access to come unto them, and ready to die for famine, used
this stratagem, to feed certain beasts with wheat and cheese, and to let the
beasts go down toward their enemies Front. lib. 3. cap. 15.
Camp, which being taken of the enemies and killed, they found wheat and
cheese in the bowels of the beasts, (thinking thereby that the Thracians had
bin well victualled and provided) removed their siege.

Clearchus the Lacedemonian, understanding that the Thracians had carried
sufficient provision of victuals for Clearchus.
themselves up to the mountains to their Camp, the Thracians sent their
Ambassadors, still expecting when Clearchus for want of victuals would remove
his siege. Clearchus knowing that the Thracian Ambassadors Front. lib. 3 cap. 5.
were coming, used this stratagem, commanded one of the captives to be
slain, to be divided in pieces, and to be distributed between him, and other
ten of his captains in his pauilio^, in the very sight of the Thracian
Ambassadors, the sight whereof made the Thracians so astonished and thereby to
yield, thinking that they that could feed on such food, might continue too
long for the Thracians to endure it.

But the Son of God gave himself to be slain for his soldiers, to be
their spiritual food, to feed them both in body and soul, to weary Satan
which still continues his siege against Jerusalem.

I shall have occasion to write of more stratagems hereafter, and therefore I
return to the battles of the Hebrews against the Canaanites.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the great victory had over five Kings, in the plain of Moab by Joshua. Of
their unthankfulness afterward, and disobedience, and of their marshall
punishment therefore.

A Great battle was fought in the plain of Moab, commanded by the Lord unto
Moses, where five Kings of the Reba, Eui, Reken, Zur, and Hur.
Madianites were slain, their names you may read in the margeant, all their
villages and cities burnt with fire, all their people slain with the sword,
the Hebrews took all the spoil and all the pray both of men and beasts, and
Moses was angry with the Captains of the host, for sparing the women, as Samuel
was with king Saul, for sparing Agag king of the Amalekites, and Disobedience
punished.
Elizeus with Achab for sparing Benhadad, and caused all women that had known
men carnally to be slain with the sword, and to save those that were virgins
that knew no man, which were two and thirty thousand, whereby it appeared that
innumerable was the slaughter of men, women, and children, in this battle,
where two and thirty thousand virgins were found and reserved to live, whereby
also the spoil and pray was very rich in this battle to the Hebrews. In this
battle was not one slain of Ioshuas soldiers. All the Captains and Colonels
of the Army came before Moses, saying: thy servants have taken the number of
all the men of war which are under our authority, and there lacks not a
man of us.

This was a stratagem of Jerusalem in the battles of the Lord, that not one man
died of the army in so great a victory.

The Lacedaemonians rejoiced much that Archidamus had obtained a great victory,
got great spoil, and slew many of his enemies without the loosing of one of
his Archidamus
soldiers, and therefore called it Bellumsine lachrimis. Yet the Hebrews (for
their three former victories at Riphidim, at Horma, and in the plain of Moab)
were unthankful unto the Lord, and murmured and rebelled The vnthank fullness
of the Hebrews.
against Moses and Aaron, and after against Joshua and Caleb, as at Taberah,
where they so murmured against Moses their General, that the Lord was so
displeased with Nomb. 11. ca.
them, that he executed martial laws upon them: for the fire of the land
burnt them, and consumed the utmost part of their Army because of their
disobedience.

Moses sister Myria, for that she spoke against the General, and began to
rebel in the camp, martial laws were Nom. 12.
executed upon her, she was not spared for that she was Moses sister, nor Moses
himself when he had offended the Lord at the water of Meribah: she was made
leaprous, and shut out of the host seven days, until she had due punishment
for her seditious mutiny, and prayers made by Moses before she was received
into the host.

Again, Coreh, Dathan, and Abiron, conspired and rebelled against their
General, with two hundred and Martial punishment.
fifty soldiers that were famous in the Congregation, and men of renown, but
the law of arms was most Nomb. ca. 16
terribly executed, the ground claue asunder underneath them, and opened her
mouth, and swalowed them alive with all their treasures and wealth, and all
their families.

Again, they murmured against Joshua and Caleb, that the whole multitude would
have stoned Joshua and Caleb, so severe was the Lord against his own people
the Hebrews for their disobedience and murmuring, that he Six hundred thousand
died for disobedience in the wilderness.
used martial laws upon them, that all they that came out of Egypt, six
hundred thousand, for their disobedience against the Lord, and rebellious
mutinies, from time to time, from place to place, at Horeb, at Taberah, at
Massa, at Riphidim, at Meribah, died in the wilderness: for the Lord accepts
obedience more then sacrifice.

And therefore Noah for that he obeyed the Lord in making the Arc, saved
himself and his family from the deluge.

Abraham, for that he obeyed the Lord, and was ready to offer, and to
sacrifice his son Isaac, the whole world was blessed in his seed, therefore
the Lord said to Gene. 6.
Solomon, If thou do all that ever I shall command thee, thy throne shall be
established for ever in Jerusalem. 3. Reg. 9.


The Lord commends the Rechabites for their obedience to Ionadab their father,
because Ionadab said, Non Iere. 35. Obedience of the Rechabites. 1. Machab. 2.
Great obedience of creatures to God. Psalm. 148.
bibetis vinum.

Mattathias and his children answered Antiochus messenger, saying; We had
rather obey the laws of the Lord given to Moses and to our fathers, then to
obey the king. So the seven brethren answered that they had rather die, then
disobey the laws of the Lord.

The Prophet says, Fire, hail, snow, Ise, obey the commandments of the
Lord, he commands seas and winds, and they obey the Lord, he commanded
ravens to feed Elias, and they obeyed. 3. Reg. 17.


Cyrus King of Persia obeyed the Lord, for Cyrus Cyrus. Lib. 1. Esdr. 1. cap.
confessed that he was commanded to set forwards the Jews to build up the
temple in Jerusalem, and as obedience is unto the Lord most acceptable, so is
disobedience even in the least things extremely punished.

He that gathered sticks upon the Sabbath day was stoned to death. And the man
of God for that he eat 3. Reg. 13.
bread in Bethel against the Lords commandment, he was devoured of a lion,
and Jonas the Prophet, for that Jonas 2.
he fled from the presence of the Lord, he was thrown for his disobedience
into the sea and swallowed up of a whale. And Moses the servant of God, with
that rod that struck the rock that water gushed out, with that rod which
divided the red seas, that turned all the rivers and waters of Egypt to blood,
that turned all the dust of Egypt into Lice, and brought Frogs, Flies,
Grasse-hoppers, and wrought so many wonders in Egypt, yet for that The offense
of Moses and Aaron at the water of Meribah.
Moses disobeyed the Lord at the water of Meribah, the Lord was so offended
with Moses and Aaron for their incredulity and disobedience before the people,
that the Lord told them that they should not enter into the land of promise,
and that Moses should die in mount Nebo, and Aaron his brother in mount Hor,
such was the exact justice of the Lord, and his severe punishment against
wilful and disobedient people, that he spared none, no not Moses his own
servant, Aaron his own Priest, Jonas his own Prophet, nor Israel his own
people.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the martial laws and military discipline of the Gentiles.

IN all Countries, among all Nations where military The martial law of Egypt.
discipline was not observed, there martial laws were executed. As among the
Egiptians the Soldier that brake military rules, to forsake the rank, to go
out of the camp, and would disobey the chief magistrates, officers and
captains of the army, and would any ways offend the martial laws, he
should be displaced from his place, were he either Serieant, Lieutenant, or any
other officer, and be placed in the meanest place of the army; and if he
should bewray the counsel of his captain, or speak any thing against the
general, he should have his tongue cut off, and sowed upon his helmet.

Among the Persians there was a martial law written, that if any cowardly
soldier should steal secretly from the camp, and become a vagabound or a
runnagate from place to place, he should (being taken) be clothed The martial
laws of Persta.
in a woman's apparel, and be chained fast with an Iron manicle upon his hands,
sitting with both his legs in a pair of stocks, in the midst of the camp, to
be flouat, and scoft at of all the whole army, which in like sort the
Thrasians observed) and after he should be taken for a woman and not for a man.

The Romans were somewhat more severe against The martial law of the Romans.
disobedient soldiers, especially against seditious and fugitive soldiers,
and against them that forsook their standart, and turned their backs to the
enemies, and from the camp to flee to the enemy, these amongst the Romans
were punished with death.

The law in Sparta was, if any soldiers of theirs should in any great and
shameful faults in the wars offend, they should be so noted and defamed,
that they might The martial law of Lacedaemonians.
not borrow so much as a cup of water, or a brand of fire with their next
neighbors, nor light a candle, besides it was not lawful for any man that met
the^ in the streets, to speak to them. These punishments far differ from the
former punishment of the Lord, fire from heaven, the opening of the earth, the
throwing into the feas, devouring by lions, and such of which I shall speak in
another place.

Now to the marching of Jerusalem under Joshua, to who^ a charge was given of a
new army which was borne in the wilderness, after their fathers came out of
Egypt, to whom the Lord said, Moses my servant is dead, as I was with Moses so
will I be with thee, and will never leave The charge of a new army given to
Ioshuah.
thee, nor forsake thee, be strong and bold, fear not, and show thy self
stout and valiant, therefore observe and do, according to all the laws which
Moses my servant commanded thee. What is spoken here to Joshua, was spoken
after Joshua to Judah; and after Judah to Gedeon, to David, and others, so
careful was the Lord over his people, that they should not choose them a
General without the consultatio^ of Vrim and Thummim, to guide and govern the
army to fight the battles of the Lord.

So among all nations in all ages, they were very careful to have and to
choose wise, stout, and skillful Generals. For as the Roman captain
Fabritius said, that it was Pirrhus skill that overcame Leuinus the Consul, and
not the Epirotes the Romans, and besides the strange sight of the Elephants,
which the Romans never saw before that battle at Heraclea, which the Romans
called Boues Lucanias. Fabritius thought it a scorn that the Romans should be
overthrown by any nation in the Commenda^n of Generals.
world, if they had discreet, valiant and stout generals. The like imaginatio^s
the Romans supposed, that they were overthrown at the battles of Trebeia,
Trasimen and Cannes, either by the subtle and deceitful policy of Hannibal,
or else for that their gods were offended with them; and not by the strength of
the Carthagineans nor the Affricans.

But Pirrhus after four years wars with the Romans, Pirrhus forsook
Italy. Elephants first seen in Rome.
was constrained to forsake Italy after his overthrow at the battle of Arusina:
and to leave his Elephants behind to beautify Curious Dentalus tryumphe, which
was the first sight of Elephants in Rome: for before nothing could be seen in
Rome in former tryumphes; but cattels of the Volscians, flocks of beasts of the
Sabines, broken weapons and old armor of the Samnites, coaches and couerings
of the old Gauls.

Hannibal the greatest enemy that ever the Romans Hannibal.
had, yet after seventeen years wars, he was forced to retire from Italy
to Carthage, and there in his own countery to be overthrown at the battle of
Zama by Scypio Affrican.

Hannibal so straightly besieged the city Casselina, that the Romans could by
no means send a conuoy to relieve the soldiers, the Romans devised this
stratagem, to fill certain tons, some with flower, and some with meal, and
to let them go down upon the river Vulturnus, but the river being chained
over by Hannibal, this stratagem was prevented.

In another stratagem the Romans deceived Hannibal, Front. lib. 3. cap. 14.
they scattered infinite numbers of Nuttes, and let them go down with the
same self river Vulturnus, which neither Hannibal himself, nor his chain
could prevent, so that the soldiers of Casselina were relieved and refreshed
for a time with these Nuttes.

Such a stratagem used* Hircius to relieve the poor Roman soldiers in
Mutina, being besieged by Mar. Antonius, who wanted chiefly salt, Hircius let
go infinite numbers of great close bowls made like little tuns, full of salt, to
swim down ye river Saniturnus, and so relieved Mutina.

So should we use such stratagems against Satan, that if Satan should overthrow
us in the first, we should arm our selves with spiritual weapons to overthrow
him in the second. Again to Joshua.

The Lord commanded Joshua to march forward to vanquish the Canaanites,
because the conquest might not be assigned unto man; the Lord commanded Joshua
and all the strong men of wars to go round about the walls of Jericho once a
day for seven days, and seven priests to bear seven trumpets of Rams horns
before the Arc, and to compass Jericho the seventh day seven times, and then
commanded the priests to blow the trumpets, and all the men of war without
shot or sword, to shout with a loud and great shout, and then the Amiraculous
overthrow of Jericho. Joshua cap. 6.
walls of Jericho should fall flat down to the ground, this was the Lords
stratageme at his battle, at which time Joshua saw a man stand over against
him with a naked sword in his hand, who being asked of Joshua what he was,
said, I am the Prince of the Lords host, and am therefore comen now to be a
Captain of the Lords people, and Joshua bowed himself and worshipped him,
and thereby acknowledged him to be Christ the son of God.

Now Joshua being instructed of the Lord what to do, the priests and the
warriors by Joshua (the walls being fallen flat down) went unto the city,
destroyed both man and woman, young and old, ox and sheep, with the edge of
the sword, and after burnt the city with fire, and Joshua cursed that man
before the Lord that would build up Jericho again to the destruction of
himself and both his sons.

That captain that went before Joshua to the battle at Jericho, and was
present at the fall of Ierichos wall, went likewise before Cyrus, as himself
said to Cyrus, I will go before thee to Babylon, and I will break their
brazen gates, and crush in pieces their iron bars, I will humble the glorious
people of the earth in thy presence. Es^. 10.


The same captain spoke to Nabuchodonozer as he spoke to Cyrus, I will send
Nabuchodonozer as the staff of my wrath, and the rod of my punishment, and he
shall tread my enemies down like the mire in the streets, so that all
victories come from the Lord, even to all good kings and to tyrants.

After the overthrow of Jericho, the Lord commanded Joshua to besiege the
city of Ai, where he slew all that dwelt in Ai, and left not one to live, and
took their king alive, and hanged him on a tree until the evening, The
destruction of Ai.
and the city was burnt, and twelve thousand slain, for the Lord said to
Joshua, stretch out the spear that is in thy hand toward Ai, in toke^ of the
victory. Now mark Signs given of victories.
the victories of the Lord in his battles, the victory at Riphidim, was had by
holding up of Moses hand, the victory of Jericho, by sounding of Rams horns,
the victory of Ai, with the lifting up of Ioshuah spear, the victory at Aphec
by shooting of Ioas Eastward, the victory over the The victories of Ioshuah and
others in the Lords battles.
Madianites by Gedeon, with the sounding of trumpets and breaking of pitcher
pots, these are stratagems which are often seen in the battles of the Lord.

So also the Lord strengthened many of his people, to vanquish and overcome
their enemies in several combats, one man to overcome many, as Sampson with
the iaw bone of an ass slew a 1000. Philistines. Samgar with an ox goade slew
600. Philistines. David with his fling and little stone, slew the monstrous and
blasphemous Giant Golias. Who knows not, that Moses rod, Ioshuahs spear,
Gedeons pitcher pots, Sampsons iaw bone, Samgars goade, or David with his sling
and little stone, had bin but weak means to overthrow so many enemies, had not
the Lord strengthened the means by the men. These were battles of the lord,
which were not fought with swords, shots, nor weapons, but armed with
spiritual armours, and fought with weapons of faith, and vanquished their
enemies. But such victories were only granted to the soldiers of the Lord,
the people of Israel, which victories at that time were to them only peculiar.

The great victory which the Lord gave unto Samuel by means of thunderboltes,
lightnings, and earthquakes, that thereby the Philistines were so amazed, that
Samuel unlooked for, fell upon the^, slew them, overthrew 1. Reg. 7. cap.
them, and chased them til they came to Cortaeos, which is Bethgar, such
stratagems uses the Lord against his enemies, as thunderboltes, lightnings,
and earthquakes.

Mar. Aurelius having wars with the Germains and Sarmatians, his Army being
like to be lost for water, requested Mar. Aurelius. Eusebius. 1.
the legion of Christian soldiers to pray unto their God for help, and they
were heard of the Lord, the Emperor confessed the goodness of God, naming
Legio fulminea.
him Jupiter, at what time their enemies were stricken with lightning and fire,
that they perished, and therefore these soldiers were called Legio fulminea,
the legion of thunder, by the Emperor himself.

Cornelius, a Captain of an Italian band in Caesaria, a just and a devout man,
was by an Angel warned to go to Ioppa to be baptized of Peter, and to become
from a Heathen, a Christian Captain, to fight in the battles of the Lord.

So likewise the Centurion, which was at the death of Christ Jesus in
Jerusalem, seeing the miracles that were then done, confessed him to be the
Lord, and glorified God: these two were called both to be Christian Captains.

In the battle that Judas Machabaeus had with Gorgias the governor of Edumea,
where the victory fell to Machabaeus, In. Machab. Deuteronomy. 7.
they found under the coats of them that were slain, Jewels consecrated to
the Idols of the Iamnites, but as the Lord commanded the Hebrews to burn
such Idolatrous Jewels, destroy their gilded Images, and the gods of the
Gentiles, and not to take the silver and gold that is on their gods, as Achan
did against the law at the City of Ai, and dyed for it by the law.

I will proceed for to show, in old time in what sort and after what manner
every Nation entered into battle.

I think it not amiss, as well for variety of matters to please the reader,
as also of their diverse and strange The simplicity of soldiers in old time.
fashions of their coming into battle, being then not acquainted with so many
sundry shots, with such Armors of proof, but with the sword and shield, the
spear and lance, yet every Nation devised stratagems and strange means to
terrify the enemies, and to obtain victories.

The ancient Greeks used in their wars the skins Homer. Illiad.
of sea dogs for their helmets, and for great plumes of feathers which
soldiers use now to wear, they used the manes and tails of horses.

The Affricans came to the battle with leopards and horse skins. The
Aethiopians and the Scythians, with Fox skins. The Troglodites with Serpents
skins. The Cydones with Goat skins. The Massagets with barks of trees.
The people called Geloni, with the skins of the slain enemies in the field.
The old Trojans came to the battle The strange fashions of diverse nations in
their wars.
with horns of oxen and ears of horses on their heads, and all to terrify
the enemy. The old Brytaines used to paint their faces to look grim and
terrible upon the enemy, and to seem cruel and fierce soldiers in the
battle. The Thracians used Fox skins for their helmets, and painted their
faces with such marks as might make them seem terrible to the enemies, like
the old Brytaines.

The people of Mauritania came unto the countries of their enemies with
Elephants and Lions skins: so the Arabians upon camels, and the Indians upon
Elephants came unto the wars, which before Alexanders time were not seen in
Asia, neither before Pirrhus time in Rome, which the Romans at the first sight
thought strange, but after they had subdued Africa, these strange beasts,
elephants, camels, lions, and such, were in Rome, as in India or Veget. lib. 3.
cap. 24.
in Affrike, and used in Rome so familiarly and commonly upon the Theaters to
fight with other beasts and with men.

And yet Pirrhus as I said before, was the first captain that brought
Elephants to Lucania in Italy, where being Pirrhus brought Elephants to Lucania
in Italy.
overthrown in his last battle at Arusnia by Curious the Consul, at what time
four Elephants were brought to Rome, which were so strange among the Romans,
that they called them Boues Lucanias, the great oxen of Lucania, but within
fifty two years after, Metellus in his victory at the battle at Panormus,
sent to Rome 104. Elephants, Plyni. lib. 8. cap. 2. and. 6.
or as Plyni says, a hundred, forty and two.

The ancient kings of Egypt were wont to wear on Veget. lib. 1. cap. 20.
their helmets, the likeness of diverse kinds of heads of beasts, either the
head of a Lion, of a Bull, of a Dragon, or such, which the Grecians imitated,
and after them the Romans.

In many Countries they used to wear on their helmets the likeness of Lions,
Wolves, Hearts, Dragons, Dogs, Eagles, and other such beasts and fowls, as
pleased the Generals or Captains to wear for a terror to the enemy.

For in the Cymbrian wars against Marius, it is written in Plutarch, that the
Cymbrian horsemen ware on their helmets the likeness of monstrous and terrible
Plut. in Mario.
beats wide gaping, and open mouthed, thinking thereby to fear their enemy.

And what enemy soever he slew in the field, might by the law of Arms take
the Swords, Targets, Helmets and all other weapons of the enemy, and hang them
up as Tropheys at the doors and gates of his house, the rather to move others
by the sight thereof, with greater desire to arms, as the Belgeans were wont
sometime to cut off the head of the slain enemy, and to take off his bloody
garments, and to hang them upon posts and trees, as trophies of victories.

Now after the old and ancient manners and strange habites of diverse nations
going into wars, as you have The account of the Hebrews for their soldiers.
read of the Affricans, Arabians, and Indians, so also in numbering their
soldiers, you shall read the manner of diverse nations, when they sent their
soldiers to any battle, and first of the Hebrews, who brought account to
Joshua of the soldiers slain and not slain in battle.

The custom among the Persians was, that the soldiers that went to the wars
should every one take a shaft out of his quiver, and write his name thereon, and
throw The custom of the Persia^s for their soldiers going to wars.
the same unto great chests before the chief magistrates, and that the
soldiers that returned from the wars again alive, should take their arrows from
the chest, that the Persians thereby might know the number of their lost
soldiers.

In like sort the Romans recorded the names of their soldiers in writing
tables, that they might know at their return from the wars by their names
written, how many were slain in the wars. For among the Romans The manner of
the Romans for their soldiers.
there could be no greater reproach to the General, then to be ignorant of the
names of all his captains, officers, and magistrates of the field: and also
not to be acquainted with the name of any well deserved soldier.

Cyrus therefore King of Persia, and Mithridates King Cyrus could name all the
soldiers in his army.
of Pontus, were both much honored and much esteemed of their soldiers. Cyrus
for his skill and art of memory, for he could name all the soldiers in his
Army. And Mithridates for his knowledge of tongues, for he could speak two
and twenty languages to all those nations Mithridates could speak 22.
languages to his soldiers.
that served under him.

CHAP. XV.
Of diverse battles and victories which Joshua had at Iahaz, at Edrei, and over
five Kings at the battle at Gibeon.

THe Hebrews proceeded forwards in their wars against the Canaanites, for
the Lord said to Moses, Go to Sehon king of Amorites, provoke him to battle,
and conquer his land, for that he denied passage to Moses Army, to go through
his land to the land of Canaan: and therefore the Lord gave Sehon King of the
Amorites unto Moses hands at the battle at Iahaz. And the The battle of Iahaz.
Army of Israel destroyed all the Cities of the Amorites, with their King, men
and women, from the River of Arnon unto Gilead, there was not one City that
escaped, the Lord had cursed Canaan, and therefore he commanded to spare none.
Deuteronomy. 28. 3.


In like sort in the battle at Edrei, the Lord delivered Og King of Basan the
Giant into Moses hands, as he did Sehon King of the Amorites, and the Hebrews
smote the king and all his people, destroyed three score strong The battle of
Edrei.
walled and fenced Cities, the Hebrews destroyed all the Country of Argob,
and all the kingdom of Og in Basan, which was called the land of the Giants,
and possessed from the Biuer of Arnon to mount Hermon. Og king of Basan
remained only of the Giants, for the Lord said unto Moses, I will send the
fear and dread of thee upon all the Nations under heaven, so that when they
hear of thee, they shall tremble and quake for fear of thee.

As Sehon king of Hesbon denied passage to Moses to go through his land to the
land of Canaan, so the Citizens of Ephron denied Judas Machabaeus passage
through Ephron destroyed.
their Country, though he sent with peaceable words unto them, as Moses did to
Sehon king of Hesbon before, that he might pass through their land, doing no
harm, but they denied him his request, whereupon he besieged Ephron, took it,
destroyed it, and spoiled it, and slew as many as were males within the City.

Diverse kings assembled themselves against Joshua, hearing how Joshua and the
Hebrews had conquered two great Cities, Jericho and Ai, five kings came
together to fight against Joshua at Gibeon, for they feared exceedingly the
report of the great battles and wonders, Five kings joined against Joshua.
that Moses before Joshua, had done unto the Arabians, Madianites, Amalekites,
and others, for the Lord promised to send the fear and dread of the Hebrews
upon all people under heaven, and all the Nations of the world should tremble
and quake at the fame and great glory of the Hebrews, and therefore came these
five kings The victory of Joshua at Gibeon.
with all their Armies most strongly against Joshua, but it was the battle of
the Lord, for the Lord discomfited them before the Hebrews, and slew them at
Gibeon with a great slaughter, and the Hebrews chaced them from Gibeon to
Bethoron, and the five kings fled with the rest that were unslain, but the
Lord cast great stones down from heaven upon them, that more of them died by
the stones that fell from heaven, then the Hebrews slew with the sword in the
field, and the five kings that fled into a cave in Makedah, were brought before
Ioshuah, and he called the captains and chief men of the Army, and commanded
them to set their feet upon the necks of these kings, signifying unto them,
that they should so overcome all nations, and vanquish all their enemies in the
battles of the Lord.

This Ioshuah did to encourage his captains, in the setting of their feet upon
the five kings necks, that conquerors may do what please them of kings
conquered.

So did Sapor king of Persia use Valerianus the Roman Emperor, as a block to
lay his foot upon his neck, to Sapor. Oros. lib. 7. cap. 22. Tamberla^nus.
mount on horseback. The like did Tamberlane to the great Turk Pazaites at
mount Stella, where he overthrew him, and took him prifoner.

There also Pompey the great overthrew Mithridates K. of Pontus before, where
Tamberlane gave the overthrow to the great Turk, took him, and kept him in a
cage under his table, and carried him about with him to his wars.

Observe how the kings of the Canaanites, Edomites, Maobites, Ammonites, and
Philistines knit themselves together against the Hebrews, feeling in
themselves such inward fear of them, as the Macedonians, the Persians, and all
Asia were fearful of the Romans, as you Monarchs.
read before of Mithridates king of Pontus, Tygranes king of Armenia, and
Iugurth king of Numidia, and yet prevailed not, for the Lord had determined to
take the Monarchy out of the Macedonians hands, and give it to the Romans, as
he gave it before from the Persians to the Macedonians.

Cratippus the Philosopher could say so much to Pom-Pey the great, after he was
overthrown by Caesar at the battle of Pharsalia. Pompey being desirous to
know what should happen of the Empire of Rome, Cratippus answered Cratippus
saying to Pompey.
that all Kingdoms and Empires are fatal. And as Sirach says, Regnum non
trasferetur, nisi ob in iustitiam regni and regis, so the kingdoms and
monarchies of the world passed one unto another by the Lord appointed.

Now Joshua proceeds forward to his last battle at the waters of Merom,
where diverse and sundry kings gathered together with all the force and power
they had to fight with Ioshuah, with as many people as the sand that is on the
sea shore, for multitude of men, horses, and chariots, for in this battle all the kings joined their force The last battle and victory of Joshua over the
Canaanites.
and power together against Ioshuah at the waters of Merom, for to fight
against the Hebrews, but the Lord gave them into Ioshuahs hands, for they were
so slain that they fell before Joshua, and fled before the Hebrews unto
Sidon, and unto the valley of Mispech. Such a great victory did the Lord give
unto Ioshuah over these kings, that the Sun stayed over Gibeon, and The sun
stayed over Gibeon.
the Moon over Aialon, until Ioshuah had full victory over the Canaanites,
having subdued one and thirty Kings. These are the stratagems of the Lord in
the behalf The Moon over Ailon.
of Jerusalem.

What stratagems has not the Lord used to save his people from their enemies,
environed with so many nations against them in the wilderness, and ready to
be devoured of so many Kings about them in Canaan, for the Canaanites thought
it more strange, that Joshua should come into the land of Canaan with his
poor Hebrew Army, called Hicsos, in scorn among the Egyptians, then the
Babylonians thought of Cyrus to come to Babylon with his most invincible
Persian Army, or the Carthagenians of Scypio, to come to Carthage and Africa
with his Roman army. Both Cyrus and Scipio used stratagems to win these
victories.

Decius Brutus being so straightly besieged by Mar. Antonius at the city
Mutina, to whom Hircius the Co^sull devised a stratagem, to write certain
letters upon Front. lib. 3. cap. 13.
lead, and to send them tied about soldiers necks that swam down the river
Scultenna to Mutina, by the which he was certified of the Consuls mind.

Another stratagem of Hircius, who tied certain letters about tame Doves
necks, which he kept to that purpose hungry without meat and in darkness,
which were sent by some of his soldiers in the night time, as Stratagems.
nigh as they could to the city Mutina, and then to let them fly, the Pigeons
being hungry fled straight to the Towers and high buildings of the town, which
were brought to Brutus.

Brutus being now instructed with this stratagem of Hircius, used the like
himself, to feed Pigeons within the city Mutina, and to let them flee, which
were for a time carriers of letters between Hircius the Consul, and Brutus.

It is not read that the Hebrews revolted during the whole time of Ioshuah, the
Hebrews needed not to doubt of victories, if they would serve the Lord, having
the Arc in the midst of their camp, where the Lord presented himself to give
them Oracles, and therefore they might boldly commence war, or enter any
battle, being imboldned by the Lord, as he promised to Moses and to Joshua
that he would go before them with such miraculous stratagems, some in the
seas as against Pharao, some in the Sun and Moon as against the Canaanites:
some with fire from heaven as against Baals false prophets and priests. Some
with the opening of the earth in swallowing rebellious Jews. And other such
stratagems with stones, lightning and thunderbolts, to destroy the enemies of
Jerusalem.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the order and manner of the Gentiles, how they brought their wives and
concubines, how they ware their best apparel, and how they brought the dearest
and preciousest Jewels they had in the sight of the camp before they entered
into any battle, because they should more manfully and courageously fight.

THe kings of Asia soldiers when they went The soldiers of Asia.
to fight any great battle, they brought into the field their most dearest
things and preciousest Iewelles which they ware about them; to signify how
willing and glad they were, to offer their lives, and all that they had in the
defense of the country of Asia.

The Persians brought not only into the field, their The soldiers of the
Persians.
Jewels, treasures and wealth, but also their wives and their concubines, which
the Persians esteemed and preferred before all the treasures of the world, that
by looking on their wives and concubines, they should the more be encouraged
and kindled manfully to fight for their country, for their wives, and for their
concubines.

The Roman soldiers used to put all the money and gold they had in bags
sealed, and to lay them under The stoutnes of the Romans.
the principal standart of the General, as pawnes and pledges that they would
fight the battle lustily and valiantly like Romans.

The Lacedaemonians the only soldiers of Greece; before they would go to any
battle they would wash The Lacedaemonians.
themselves, wear the best apparel they had, they would trim their beards and
kembe their heads, and therefore called Comati milites, and entered into any
battle as though they should go to the games of Olimpia, or to the plays of
Histmia, but all these nations could not bring such a treasure, nor such a
Jewel into the field as the Hebrews did, which was the arc where the presence
of the Lord was, and continued with them in the midst of the camp.

Now after all these victories over the Canaanites, Iosuah returned to Gilgal,
where the Camp was, and where the Arc remained, to give thanks unto the Lord
for so many great victories he had over so many kings, and so many nations.

After that Ioshuah was dead, the manner of the Hebrews was to consult with the
Lord, and to take counsel by Vrim and Thummim of their further proceedings and
choosing of a General, to lead and govern them in their war, as the like
in all countries were used.

The Judges of Greece called Amphictio^s, assembled together for the whole
state of Greece, to consult of martial Amphictions.
causes, and matters concerning the state, in the temple of Neptune at Trozena.

So among the Latins, before the Romans time, they met at the woods
Ferentina, to decree and determine of matters of wars: after the Romans had
subdued the Latins, they agreed upon all causes of wars in the temple of
Ianus in Rome. The temple of Ianus.


The Lacedaemonians when they had any wars in hand, they met in the temple of
Diana in the confines of Laconia, with the Messenians and others, to conclude
of great warlike causes, and to provide for their Generals.

The Aetolians would allow no decree, nor no law Consilium Panaetolium.
passed unless it were done in their counsel house Panaetolium, with the
consent of the whole state.

So the Senators of the Athenians met in Panaegiris; Panaegyris.
to consult of warlike causes, there was no country or city in Greece, but
they had their Senate and Council house to determine of wars, and other
matters of state concerning their Country, for at that time all Greece was in
arms one city against another through civil wars. As among all nations,
they ever sought wise, stout, discreet and godly captains, for the whole force
of the army depends upon a wise, resolute and stout captain. And therefore
the Carthagineans and the Affricans Xantippus sent from Sparta to Carthage.
sent in any great wars to Sparta, for a Lacedemonian captain. And so the
Carthagineans had Xantippus sent to them for their General.

So the Tarentines sent for Pirrhus to be their General Pirrhus.
against the Romans; skillful Generals were so esteemed in Greece, that the
Athethians made Phocian twenty several times their General, and Pericles
nine Pericles.
times. That made the Achaians to appoint Aratus seven Aratus. Pelopidas.
times their General. So the Thaebans made Pelopidas thirteen times their
General. And the Achaians made Philopomen eight times their General. So that
it Philopomen.
was not hard among the Grecians to find skillful Generals that knew how to
overcome their enemies, though not by force and multitude of many soldiers,
yet with stratagems and policy of few. As by the stratagem of Leonidas at
Thermopyla, and the stratagem of Themistocles at Salamina, with few Grecians
overthrew many thousands of the Persians.

The Greeks for that they were wise, politic and learned, far exceeded the
Romans in stratagems, especially Agesilaus and Epaminondas, two great noble
captains, Agesilaus and Epaminondas.
whose greatness was such, that the one envied the other, as much as Caesar
envied Pompey, or Pompey Caesar, though the Romans far excelled the Grecians
in arms, yet were the Romans inferior to the Grecians in policies and
stratagems, the Romans accepted no treachery to overcome their enemies but by
arms, they refused to give money to Timocheres Pirrhus Physician, Timocheres.
though he offered to Fabritius to poison his master for money, for Fabritius
thought it an infamy to the name of the Romans, any way to accept treachery,
therein they far excelled the Grecians or Macedonians.

For Philip king of Macedonia, got as many victories Phillips speech.
by corruption and fraud, as he did by arms, and therefore he was wont often
to say, that there was no city so invincible, but an ass laden with gold
might enter in through the strongest gate of that city, nor no wall so
Byzantium now called Constantinople.
high but a ladder of gold might scale it, so Philip took Byzantium, and so
Lysimachus Philips successor, took Ephesus.

Conon General of Athens, having overthrown the Conons stratagem.
Persian navy in the I Will of Cyprus, he caused his own soldiers to put on
the armours and clothes of the Persians, whom he overthrew, and placed them in
Persian Front, lib. 4. cap. 4.
nauies, and sailed to Pamphilia, to another Persian army on the land, the
Persians doubting nothing seeing their own ships, and their own soldiers, as
they supposed, Conon landed with his Grecian army, clothed with Persian
garments, and gave them such a battle at the river Eurimedon, that he obtained
by this stratagem two victories over the Persians, the one on sea in Cyprus,
the other on land at the river Eurimedon.

The like stratagem used Epaminondas upon a Feast day, in one of the cities of
Arcadia, the women and virgins of the city coming to solace themselves
abroad, Epaminondas caused certain of his soldiers to be clothed in women's
apparel, in like garments as the women of Arcadia had, and to go and mingle
themselves among the citizens of Arcadia, and entered the town among other
women, as though they had been citizens wives, and in the night time slew the
watch, and opened the gate to let Epaminondas and his army come in.

As Epaminondas used Arcadian garments to deceive Epaminondas.
the Arcadians. So Conon used Persian garments for a stratagem to deceive the
Persians. So Hanibal deceived the Tarentines with hu^ters garments, like the
Tare^tines. Front. lib. 3. cap. 2.


So the Gibionites deceived Joshua, but we must deceive Satan with a contrary
garment, we must put off the old garments of the first Adam, and put on the
garments of the second Adam, which is Christ. If we mean to obtain victories
over Satan, we must put on our wedding garment, if we mean to come to the
banquet.

Note also the custom and manner of the Gentiles, The old custom of the
Romrnes and the Persians in choosing their kings.
as well in choosing their Generals (as you heard) as also in choosing their
former and ancient kings, some by flying of fowls, as the old Romans choosed
Numa Pomp. some by neying of a horse, as the Persians choosed Darius: others by
swiftnes and agilitie of the body, as in Lybia: others by strength, qualities,
and comeliness of person, as among the Meades. So the Aethiopians, if they
Alex. Neopol. lib. 4. ca. 23.
wanted one of the kings stock and his name, they made a choice as the Meades
did, of one to be their king of a most comely personage, that excelled in
strength and in qualities. So because the Israelites would have a king, and were
weary of those governors that the Lord set over them, the Lord commanded
Samuel to anoint Saul to be Saul.
their king, who was the tallest and the goodliest man in all Israel from his
shoulders vpwardes. And so Xerxes Xerxes.
(though an Infidel) among ten hundred thousand men which he brought in his
army from Persia against the Greeks, was the only tallest and goodliest man of
all his host, and so in many countries among diverse nations, they made such
choice of their generals and of their kings, that they should be such men as
should have Bonum animi and bonum corporis, fit and apt qualities both in mind
and body to rule and govern an army.

But so did neither the Grecians nor the Romans: Agesilaus ^ame.
for Agesilaus was lame, and had one leg shorter then the other. Darius king of
Persia had one hand longer then another, Hanibal for two eyes had but one: and
Caesar for Darius long handed. Caesar's baldness.
his baldnes was fain to cover it with a garland oflawrel: yet lame Agesilaus
for his many victories (...) warlike know ledge, was called Agesilaus the
great. Hanibal with his one eye was the only captain of his time of all men
reputed called Hostis Romany, and Caesar (though bald) yet had not his peer,
nor his equal in martial exploits, captains that far excelled these goodly
and tall kings Saul and Xerxes, and far exceeded those comely and tall
captains, whom the Meades, the Aethiopians and the Lybians were wont in old
time to choose to be their kings.

And as the Lord is indifferent in bestowing his good gifts upon the simplest
and meanest that serve him, as well as upon the comeliest and goodliest men, for
the Lord has no respect to the personage of men, as we read in sacred
scripture.

Moses was goodly and tall, fair of complexion, and of Moses tall and
slender. Phryg. in vita Moses. Joseph. Genesis 39.
yealow hair, and a servant of the Lord. Absolon, the comeliest and best made
man from the crown of his head to his toe, and yet the servant of Satan.
Joseph the son of Jacob, the fairest and best favored in Egypt, a godly
servant of the Lord. Saul the tallest man in all Israel from his shoulders
upwards, yet served not the Lord. So the gifts of nature appear upon the good
and the bad as you heard.

So may it be said of Elias a Prophet of the Lord, being rough and hairy, so we
read of him and of Esau, rough Elias rough and hairie.
and hairy like Elias, but a reprobate of the Lord, for so the Lord said; Jacob
have I loved, and Esau have I hated. In fine, Elizeus was bald, for so was he
mocked and called baldpate, but a bear came out of the wood and devoured 42.
children in Bethel for calling the prophet bald pate. 4. Reg. 2. ca.


David the least of his brethren, not able to carry Saul's armor to fight with
Golias, and yet valiant enough to kill Golias, and to bring his head to Saul.

Zachaeus so little a fellow, that he could not see Christ among the press of
the people, but climbed a fig tree, where Christ saw him, and bad him quickly
come down, This day will I dine in thy house said the Lord to Zacheus. So that
David being but of little stature, Elias rough and hairy, and Flizeus bald, yet
three chosen Prophets of the Lord. Now to the marching of Ierusalam.

CHAP. XVII.
How Judah was elected to be the third Judge of Israel, by Vrim and Thummim, of
his battle at Besecke. Of Ehud, Deborah and Gedeon with their victories,
together with certain stratagems as well of the Jews as of the Gentiles.

AFter Joshua died, Judah was appointed the third captain over the Israelites,
by the judgment of Vrim Judah the third captain over Israel.
and Thummim, elected and chosen to be the leader of the whole army of Israel:
the Lord from the beginning had appointed judges and governors to lead his
people from Egypt to the land of Canaan, as Moses, Ioshuah, and after Ioshuah,
Judah now the third captain, who fought the battle of the Lord in Bezeck, and
slew ten thousand of the The battle at Beseck.
Canaanites, and the Perezites, and took Adonizebech, not a king, but a tirant.

This king was by the just judgment of the Lord, used in like sort as he used
other kings, for the thumbes of his hands and of his feet were cut off, as he
most cruelly cut off the thumbes of the hands and of the feet of seventy
kings, which he kept and fed with the crummes The tyranny of Adonizebech.
that fell from his table, for so he confessed himself, that as he had done,
so the Lord rewarded him, for he was brought to Jerusalem and there died.

Hannibal well nigh played the like part, who used the poor captive Romans in
like sort being weak and wearied, Lu. Flor. li. 2. cap. 6.
he cut off their thumbes and pared the soales of the feet of a great number,
and so left them that they could neither stand nor go.

Fabius Seruilianus, equal or rather before these tyrants in tyranny, after
he had vanquished a great number of the barbarous people of Scythia, and had
taken 5. Oros. ca. 4. A cruel act of Fabius the Roman.
captives (Iure deditionis) very many, yet contrary to the faith and nature of
the ancient Romans, he cut off both the hands of five hundred of the
principallest soldiers of them, and left the poor Scythians without hands, as
Hannibal left the Romans without feet.

Thrasibulus being a tyrant for his tyranny, sent one The figne of Periander
sent to Thasibulus.
of his chief men to Periander, another tyrant to consult and to be advised by
him, how he might live without fear and danger, he being a tyrant among the
Milesians. Periander brought the messenger of Thrasibulus to a ripe corn
field, where with the staff he had in his hand, he did beat the ears of the
corn, and turned to Thrasibulus messenger, and said no more, but commend me to
thy master. Thrasibulus after he heard what Periander did, knew his meaning
was that he should destroy and kill all the chief men and citizens in Milesia,
if he would live in safety. That tyrant must needs fear some, of whom all men
stand in fear.

This was such a dumb stratagem which Periander taught Thrasibulus, as
Torquine the proud taught his son Sextus, by a servant which he sent to his
father, whom Dyonis. lib 7. cap. 4.
Torquine brought unto a garden, where with his staff he beat the head of
poppies. This was a dumb stratagem which Torquine sent to his son, whereby he
knew his fathers mind, slew the chief Citizens, and betrayed the Town to his
father.

Though the Israelites fell to Idolatry after Ioshuahs death, who (during the
time of Joshua) served the Lord, and never forsook him, yet the Lord at all
times, though they always offended him, delivered them from their enemies,
when they cried unto him for his aid and help. So being now vexed with their
euemies, the The stratagem of Ehud Judge and general of Israel.
Lord sent Ehud as a Judge and Captain, to lead them and to govern them as
their General, being a stout and a valiant Captain, who was wont to say to
his soldiers, follow me, went boldly to Eglon king of the Moabites, and used
this stratage^, told the king that he had some Judges. 3. ca.
secret from the Lord to tellhim, whereupon the chamber being avoided, and the
door shut, he out with his dagger, slew Eglon the king, and came out and shut
the door after him, and after slew ten thousand Moabites Eglon king of Moab
slain.
at that time: yet Ehud was left handed, and unable to fight, and therefore it
was a stratagem of the Lord.

Iabin king of Canaan, an other enemy of the Israelites, sent his general
Cisera, a mighty captain, with nine hundred chariots of Iron, and a huge Army
of soldiers, to fight against Israel, yet the Lord still provided for his
people, and delivered the Canaanites into the hand of Deborah, a woman, and
Barac; even the whole Army The victory of Debora over Cisera at Meroz.
of the Canaanites, at the battle at Meroz, where even the stars (in their
courses) from heaven fought against Cisera, as Deborah confessed in her song of
thanksgiving to the Lord for the victory.

For all the battles that the Lord had fought for Israel, yet they sinned
more, and so offended the Lord, that they were delivered seven years into the
hands of the Madianites for their wickedness, that Israel made themselves
dens and caves in the Mountains for fear of the Madianites and Amalekites,
whose tents were as thick as Grasse-hoppers in multitude, so that they, their
cattels, and their camels were without number. Yet the Lord, when Israel cried
for help, raised up sound Judges, as Othoniel, Ehud, Barac, and Deborah, What
kind of men were generals and Judges among the Hebrews.
who overcame their enemies, and had many victories over them, but still Israel
offended the Lord, and therefore the Lord left Sidonites, Canaanites, and
Philistines to afflict and vex the Israelites, for that they still offended the
Lord. He left these Nations among them with their gods and Idols, that should
be as snares unto Israel, and as thorns in their sides, and needles in their
eyes to try them, and to force them to call upon the name of the Lord.

The Hebrews as they offended the Lord, so were they punished by the Lord, who
often gave them over into their enemies hands, for their rebellious sedition
and disobedience, and therefore the Lord made choice of a wise and discreet
general, whom he strengthened to Gedeon chose^ Judge in Israel.
rule his people, sent his messenger to Gedeon a husbandman threshing his
corn, to be their captain before them, who with the three hundred soldiers
that laped the water by putting their hands to their mouths, as the Lord had
commanded him by that sign, and had appointed the number for him to take the
Lords battle in hand, and to let the rest which were one and thirty thousand
and seven hundred return to their home, which were by proclamation discharged.
The generals that the Lord made choice of to rule his people, were but
shepherds, heardmen, and husbandmen, as Moses, Joshua, Gedeon, Saul, and
David, and of the like men he made choice for his Prophets.

Gedeon obeyed the message of the Lord, and called at the Lords hand for
strength and courage to fight his battle, and after divided the three hundred
men into three several bands, and used this stratagem, gave every man a
Gedeons stratagem.
Trumpet in his hand, with an empty pitcher, and lamps within the pitchers,
signifying by these weak means which the Lord used, that the whole victory
should come from the Lord, and not from man. So Gedeon their general coming
to the side of the enemies with his threee bands, he commanded all the
soldiers at once to sound all the trumpets together, to break their pitchers,
and to shout and cry, the sword of the Lord and of Gedeon, the enemies were so
frighted, and the Lord set every man's sword upon his neighbor, and caused the
Madianites to kill one an other. He made the Moabites, the Ammonites, and
Edomites, in like sort one to destroy an other. They took in that battle two
Princes of the Madianites, called Oreb and Zeb, whom they slew and brought
their heads to Gedeon from beyond Jorden, as they fled from the sword of
Gedeon. The slaughter was an hundred and twenty thousand that were slain with
three hundred men as the Lord had commanded.

Observe the stratagem of Gedeon, who commanded his three hundred soldiers at
once to sound all the trumpets together, to break their pitchers, and to shout
and cry, the sword of the Lord and of Gedeon. It so amazed the Madianites that
the victory was Gedeons.

Ioshuah in like sort was by the Lord commanded, after he had carried the Arc
round about Jericho seven times upon the seventh day that the Priests should
blow the rams horns, and all the soldiers to cry aloude, and to shout out
all together at once, that the walls of Jericho fell.

With a stratagem also Joshua deceived the king of Ai, who came out of the
City to fight with Joshua, who took upon him to fly from the king, but
having laid ambushes upon the way and about the Town, the Lord gave both the
Town and the King to Ioshuas Joshua. 8.
hand.

So did the Israelites deceive the Beniamites with the like stratagems as
Joshua did, who took upon them to fly, to draw the Beniamites from the City
to the high Iud. 20.
ways, until they were compassed round about with the Israelites, who
destryed 25. thousand and 100. men.

These are divine stratagems, and to be attributed unto the Lords doings.

Pericles general of the Athenians, besieging a certain City in Greece, who
upon the sudden in the night time, caused all the Trumpets to be sounded at
once, and all Pericles stratagem.
the soldiers to shout and cry as loud as they could: it so terrified the
Citizens within, that they ran from all parts of the City unto that place
where Pericles commanded the trumpets to be sounded, and that loud cry to be
made, thinking thereby that the enemies had entered (...) lib. 3. cap. 9.
the City, Pericles without resistance made an entry into the City in an
other place.

Antiochus used the like stratagem against the Ephesians, Antiochus stratagem.
commanded certain Rhodians which were of his Army to shout out loud, and to
make a sudden out cry in the dead time of the night, their fear and terror
was such, that all went to defend that place of the Town, and left the other
side of the Town without defense to let Antiochus enter in.

Luc. Cornelius after he had besieged and taken many Towns in Sardinia, he
used this stratagem, to take a populous strong City, made a great number of
his soldiers to hide themselves in ambush, he having but few soldiers,
provoked them of the Town to come out, faining himself to fly, the enemy
following with great fury after. Luc. Cornelius with all his hidden soldiers
returned upon the sudden with such a terrible cry, that the enemies turned
their backs and fled to the Town, and the Romans followed after them close
at the heels, and entered the Town with them all together.

So Pompey the Consul, General for the Roman Army in Albania, perceiving
the enemies both in horsemen Front. lib. 2 cap. 3.
and in footmen to be far more in number then the Romans, practiced this
stratagem, placed his footmen behind the horsemen, being in a straight, and
commanded his horsemen to cover their helmets, least by the sight of the
helmets they should be seen of the enemies, and to take upon them to fly to
draw the enemies forwards into the midst of the Army of footmen, and then the
Roman horsemen to turn back, and divide themselves, and to set on both sides
of the enemies. By this stratagem Pompey got a great victory over the
Albanians.

Iphicrates the Athenian, compared an Army in this sort, the light horsemen to
the hands, the men of arms to the feet, the battle of footmen to the
stomach and breast, the captain to the head.

But the Hebrews for all the victories of Ioshuah, of Judah, and of Gedeon,
were still unthankful, and wrought wickedness in the sight of the Lord, for
all the battles that the Lord fought for them, they were so well acquainted
with the gods of the Gentiles, yea they served the gods of Acron, the gods of
Sydon, the gods of Moab, and the gods of the Philistines, and forgot the The
vntha^kfulnesse of the Israelites
god of Israel, they served strange gods, and attributed victories unto their
Idols, and honored them, and gave no glory unto the Lord of Israel, and
therefore the Lord gave them over, and sold them to their enemies and were
eighteen years sore tormented and vexed by the Ammonites and Philistines, and
the enemies, proudly went over Jorden to fight against Judah, against Benjamin,
and against the house of Ephraim, but they cried unto the Lord according to
their custom in extremity, and were answered by the Prophet from the Lord:
Let the Gods whom you serve, save you, and whom you trust unto defend you, for
you weigh not me, neither will I defend you, and then they put away their
strange gods from among them.

Thus the Israelites did not only rebel upon the death of Ioshuah, but also
upon the death of Judah, Ehud, The Israelites forget their victories.
Deborah, and others, neither did they esteem the victories which they got by
Deborah a woman, and by Gedeon a Husbandman, who with three hundred soldiers
slew a hundred and twenty thousand, but ever forgetful and unthankful to
the Lord, more willing to return to Egypt to be slaves unto Pharao, then to
stay in Canaan to serve the Lord.

The name of Leonidas was famous among the Lacedaemonians, for his victory at
Thermopyle, where Leonidas with three hundred, overthrew twenty thousand
Leonidas.
of Xerxes Army, being innumerable.

The Athenians gloried much for their great victory at Marathon by Milciades
and Callimachus, having The victory at Maratho^.
but 10000. Grecians in their army, overthrew the general of king Darius Army,
and made a great slaughter of the Persians, to the number of two hundred
thousand.

The Romans brag much of the victory of Marius, The Romans.
with few soldiers over the Cymbrians at the river of Xextas, of Sylla over
Mithridates at the battle of Orchomenon, and of Lucullus over Tigranes king of
Armenia, being three great victories, with infinite slaughter, with the loss
of few Romans.

The very Schythians can boast and brag of the overthrow The Scythians.
of Cyrus, having two hundred thousand in his Army, and that by a woman, which
increased the fame of the Scythians, to the greatest infamy of the Persians.

All Nations can brag and boast of their victories, and be thankful unto
their Idols, and to their gods, with sacrifices, with vows, with games and
plays, with rearing of Aultars and building of Temples, but the Hebrews and
the people of the Lord, who The vntha^kfulness of the Hebrews.
had greatest cause and occasions to remember their victories and triumphs
that they had over so many Kings and so many Nations, before they came to the
Land of Canaan, by fire, haile-stones, thunder, and great stones from heaven,
and though the Lords presence went before them in the Arc, and the Arc among
them in the midst of the camp, yet were the Israelites stiff necked people,
ever offensive to the Lord, seditious against their leaders, and envious one
toward an other, so the Lord cried out against them, and said: I have
nourished and brought up children, and they are fallen away from me, the Ox
knows his Lord, and the Ass his Masters stall, but Israel knows Esai. 1.
not me, wicked children, sinful people, a froward generation, which are
ouerladen with blasphemies. Nothing could instruct them to obey the Lord,
neither the Arc of covenant, neither the Tabernacle of Moses, neither the
pillar of fire, where the Lord appeared The Arc of couenan^t.
unto them, and after the use of the Tabernacle, neither the Temple of Solomon,
nor the Prophets to whom the Lord manifested himself in Jerusalem, yea even in
Samaria among the wicked Samaritans they had the Prophets of the Lord, Elias
and Elizeus to instruct them.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Iepthas victories over the Ammonites and Ephraimites, the civil wars,
the tyranny of Sylla and Marius in Rome. Of the slaughter of the Philistians
by Sampson, the revenge of pulling out his eyes, and of the battle of Saul at
Mich-mash.

NOw after Gedeon, the Lord sought out Ieptha, being fled and chased by his
brethren from his country, to the Land of Tob, from whence he was called by
the Lord (who always appointed a general over Israel while they served him)
to lead his people against the Ammonites, which the Lord delivered into
Iepthas hand.

At that time Ieptha made a rash vow to the Lord, Iepthas rash vow.
(that if he should have victory over the Ammonites) that which came out of
the doors of his house, when he returned home in peace shall be the Lords, and
he will offer it up a burnt offering. He foolishly performed that which he
rashly vowed. Though some of the Rabines The opinion of some of the Rabines of
Iepthas vow.
do excuse Ieptha that his daughter died not, but was separated to dwell by her
self from common conversation in a solitary place, to bewail her virginity,
according to the custom and manner of the virgins of Israel, to live in
prayers, and to consecrate her self unto the lord. Yet some of (...) best
divines, as Augustine and Ambrose, which both were of a contrary opinion that
she was sacrificed according to Iepthas vow. But the Lord gave the victory to
Ieptha over the Amonits, with the overthrow of twenty cities, and with
exceeding great slaughter.

Ieptha again after his first victory over the Ammonites, Ieptha the General,
threatened to be burned. Judge. cap. 12.
had another victory over the Ephraimites, who envied the former victory of
Ieptha most ambitiously, as they before did unto Gedeon, threatening to burn
the General in his house, whereupon Ieptha with all the men of Gilead gathered
themselves together against the Ephraimites, overcame them, and slew two and
forty Forty two thousand slain of the Ephraimites.
thousand of the Ephraimites, the greatest cause of this slaughter was, that
the Ephraimites called the Gileadites, runnagates of Ephraim. And yet both the
Ephraimites and Gileadites were Israelites, much like to the battle between
Silla and Marius, being two Romans, who for mere malice one toward another,
continued their civil wars ten years: in the which were slain a hundred and
fifty thousand Romans, five and twenty flaine that have been Consulls in
Rome, threescore that had bin in Rome, in the office called Aediles, and
welnigh two hundred Senators slain, equal in number almost to the slaughter
of Hannibal, for Consuls, Senators, Praetors, and other magistrates.

Cinna then Co^sull, with his Roman legions, and Marius with his banished men
and fugitives, entered the city of Rome: at what time Sylla was with his army
in Greece, slew many of the chief citizens of the Senators, and of diverse that
had bin Consuls, that when the heads of these slain me^ were presented to Cinna
and Marius at their banquets, it was commanded by Cinna the Consul, that some
The tyranny of Cinna and Marius.
should be set up in the market place, some in the Oratory, and some in other
places. Such was the ti^a^ny of Marius the^ in Rome, that the rest of the
Senators that were left unslain, sought to escape the hand of Cinna, the
cruelty (...).
of Marius, the rage of Fimbria, and the force of Sertorius, Oros. ca. 19. and
20.
and to fly to Sylla in Greece for succor. At whose return Marius with his
co^federates fled from Rome, where Sylla played a part of a second tragedy,
destroying all that he knew or heard of to be Marius friends, setting down in
his first proscription fourscore of the chiefest of Marius side, besides
Marius himself, Carbo, Norbanus, and Scipio, who had bin all Consulls of Rome.
Marius being at that time in his seventh Consulship, and died in the beginning
of it, but too late to his country, yet left Sertorius, Carbo, Cinna and
others, to plague his country after him, But as before I spoke of Iepthas
victories, and of the sacrificing of his daughter, so now I think good by
comparisons to show the manner and custom of the Gentiles in the like.

The report of Iepthas sacrificing his daughter, came (as it seemed) first from
the land of Canaan into Greece, Iphygenia.
whereby Agamemnon sacrificed his daughter Iphigenia in the city of Aulis in
Baeotia to please Diana. For their voyage to Troy, and after ten years wars
in Troy after victory had, they slew Polixena king Priamus daughter, upon
Prolixena.
the grave of Achilles, for a sacrifice to Neptune for their safe return from
Troy to Greece again.

So Ericthius king of the Athenians, sacrificed his daughter as Agamemnon did,
to have a victory over Eumolpus, general of the Thracian Army.

It is not only a common thing among the Gentiles to sacrifice their servants
and their children to their Idols, but also among the Hebrews, as Achab,
Manasses, and other kings of Israel, offered their sons and daughters for
sacrifice unto Molech, and as Ieptha sacrificed his Molech.
daughter according to his rash vow, so Saul king of Israel The oath of Saul.
would have slain his son Jonathan, to perform his foolish oath. These kind
of sacrifices only unto Idols, are otherwise then the sacrifice of Abraham,
being commanded by the Lord to offer his only son Isaac, which was the true
type of Christ Jesus the only son of God, Differences of sacrifices.
but these wicked Idolatrous kings Achab and Manasses, offered their children
to dumb Idols and wodden gods, not following Abraham in sacrifice: they far
differed from Ieptha, he vowed to sacrifice his daughter to the Lord, and not
to Idols, and Ieptha differed far from Abraham, in that Abraham's faith was
accepted without sacrificing of his son, and Iepthas affection was rejected
though he sacrificed his daughter; for so the Lord himself testified, saying:
I have no pleasure in your feasts and sacrifices, neither do I delight in your
new moons, how much less is he pleased with the killing of an innocent
virgin, as Ieptha did? These bloody sacrifices of Achab and Manasses, were not
like the sacrifice Iud. cap. 6.
of Gedeon, which was but a Kid, a few cakes made but of an Epha flower, a
piece of flesh in a basket, and a little broth in a pot, this sacrifice did the
Lord accept of Gedeon, under the oak of Ephrah, as a sign of his victory
against the Madianites.

The Lord strengthened Sampson to plague the Philistines sundry times, burning
their corn and their vinyards, killing a thousand of them at once with the
iawe Judge. 15.
bone of an Ass, and destroyed the five Princes of the Philistines, and above
six thousand Philistines besides, The revenge of Sampson upon the Philistines
for his eyes. Judge. 16.
by pulling down of a house upon them, their wives, their children, their
friends and their servants, at a banquet.

Because Sampson being molested and vexed by means of his wife Dalyla, to whom
he trusted too much as many do, by opening his secrets where his strength lay
to his wife, who betrayed him to her own brood and stock the Philistines, who
came and took him, bound him, and put out his eyes, at what time the five
princes of the Philistines so rejoiced, that they gathered themselves together
to offer sacrifice unto Dagan their god, for that Dagan.
Dagan delivered Sampson into the Philistines hands as they supposed, being
merry and glad they sent for Sampson to this great feast, where they offered
solemn sacrifice unto their god Dagan, to laugh and scoff at him, that at
that feast so many Philistines came to see Sampson, that three thousand for
want of room, were forced to take their place upon the roof of the house.

Sampson being agreeued that he offended the Lord, prayed unto the Lord that
he might be revenged upon the Philistines, and the Lord strengthened Sampson,
that he revenged their scoffs, their flouts, and the pulling out of his eyes,
upon the princes of the Philistines Dagans servants, that Sampson sacrificed
himself unto Sampsons sacrifice.
the Lord, slew and sacrificed them unto their god Dagan.

Many armies have been taken, slain and overthrown in the midst of banquets,
as the Syrians were at the besieging of Samaria, making merry in their tents
and banqueting, were forced to fly, and in their flight to be slain. So was
Simon the high Priest at Jerusalem with his two sons slain at a banquet, by
the stratagem of Ptolomeu who married Simons own daughter, after he had
received them into his house, and were merry at their banquet. So Tryphon slew
Jonathan, and both his sons. So Ismael being received of Godoliah into his
house and well entertained, Ismael slew Godolias in his own house, too many
such stratagems are extant.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Priesthood taken away from the house of Elie, and government of Judges
taken from Samuel and his posterity: and of the first election of kings in
Israel, and of Saul the first king, and his battle at Michmash.

AFter Sampson the last Judge in Israel died, Eli was appointed high Priest to
govern them, who (though a godly man himself) yet brought not up his sons
in virtue and in the fear of God, therefore the Lord rebuked Eli, and The
Priesthood taken from the house of E^i.
said to Samuel, I have sworn that the wickedness of Eli his house shall not
be purged with sacrifice nor offering for ever, for the Lord took away the
priesthood from Eli, and from his house, for the transgression of his children.

Likewise the Prophet Samuels sons, for that they followed not their fathers
steps, but looked after lucre, 1. Reg. 2. cap.
and took rewards, were reprehended for corruption Joseph. lib. 6. cap 3. de
Antiq. The government taken from the house of Samuel. 1. Reg. 8. cap.
and bribery. For Samuel being old not able for age to execute his office, he
appointed both his sons to be Judges in Bersabe, but they loved rewards and
bribes, and therefore the people complained to Samuel of his sons refusing to
be governed by them, but would be governed by a king as other nations were.

Therefore was the Priesthood taken away from the house of Eli, for the
wickedness of his children Ophnes and Phineis. So was the government taken
from Samuel and from his house for ever, through the corruption and briberie of
his sons, Ioell and Abiah.

Who would think that so good a King as David should have so wicked a son as
Absolon, that killed his brother Ammon in his own house, and sought the crown
of Judah even from his fathers head, a murderer of his Brother, and a notable
Traitor to his Father.

Who would think that good king Ezechiah should have so wicked a son as
Manasses to succeed him, that sawed the prophet Esaias in the midst, and filled
the streets of Jerusalem with blood?

And again, who would judge but Solomon being the only wisest king of the
world, having a thousand Queens and concubines, yet had but one son
Rhehoboham, Ten Tribes forsook Rhehoboam.
that he was so brought up to offend the people, that ten of the twelve Tribes
forsook him, and went to Jeroboam his fathers servant?

Such was the care of kings among all nations, that Philip king of Macedonia,
was glad to have a son born in Aristotle's time, by whom he might learn to
know Philip of Macedon.
how to be a king, and of whom Alexander the great himself was wont to say,
that he was as much bound to Aristotle his master for his learning, as he was
to Philip his father for his birth.

And therefore Cyrus commanded his son Cambises, at his going to wars to
Scithia, to follow the counsel of Craesus, to be ruled and governed by him:
For Cyrus knew Craesus to be so wise, that by naming of Cyrus.
Solons name, he saved his own life.

In like sort king Antigonus commanded his son Antigonus.
Helenus, to be advised and counseled by Aratus, whom he knew to be a great
learned man and a noble captain, for that he was chosen to be seventeen times
General over the Achaians.

The cares of the kings of Persia was such for their children, The kings of
Persia.
that they made choice of four principal men in all knowledge to instruct
them and to bring them up.

The first schoole-maister should teach them the service of the gods, with
their sacrifice and ceremonies.

The second should instruct their children, in the ancient laws and customs
of the kings of Persia. Gemma Platonis.


The third should bring them up in sobriety and temperancy, to vanquish lust
and incontinency.

And the fourth should learn them to be valiant and hardy, and to be acquainted
with military discipline.

And therefore Alexander the great brought up three Alexander.
thousand Persian youths in the martial discipline of the Macedonians. And so
Sertorius brought up all the Sertorius.
noble men's sons in Hispaine in martial discipline of the Romans.

This much I thought good to write of the good bringing up and education of
children, for by the wickedness of Eli his sons, and corruption of Samuels
sons, the Priesthood was taken from the one, and the government taken from
the other, and therefore Israel Israel cried for a king.
cried for a king, thereat Samuel was much displeased, but the Lord said unto
him, hear the voice of the people, they have not cast thee away, but me that I
should not reign over them: yet says the Lord, Tell them the nature of a
king, that he will take their sons to run before his chariots, to ear his
ground, to gather in his harvest, and the king will take their daughters, and
make them dressers of his ointments, his cooks, and bakers, Samuel expounds
to the people the nature of a king.
the king shall take the best of their fields, of their vineyards, and of their
olive trees, and give them to his servants, he shall take the tenth of their
seed, and of their vines, the best of their men servants, and maid* servants,
their young men and their asses to do his work, yet (though Samuel told all this to Israel from the Lord) they would have a king, much like the fable of
the frogs.

The frogs would have a king, being refused of many, they came to the storke,
and would have him to be their The frogs would have a king.
king, which he accepted, he got him a block, as a seat to sit on, to hear
their causes, and to give judgment, but when the frogs came before their king
to complain, he began with his bill to prick them, and after to wound the^,
that some were wounded, some slain, and some made have away. So Samuel spoke to
the Israelites to that effect, as they found in Saul, Jeroboam, Achab, Manasses
and others such wicked kings.

The Apology of Iothan, may be now well mentioned, who spoke in a parable to
the Sychemites, that the trees Reg. 9.
would have a king, but the vine, the fig, and the olive trees refused to be
their king, then would the trees have The appollogy of Iothan.
a bush or a gorsse to be their king, who did accept of it. This bush or gorsse
would easily take fire, and burn all the Sychemites in Sychem, and did not
Abimelech so? after he killed 70. sons of Gedeon his brethren, he destroyed
Sychem, and slew all the Sychemites, and sowed Plyni. lib. 13. cap. 7.
salt in that place to make it barren for ever, for salt as Pliny says, makes
ground barren and unapt to bring any thing.

When the Philistines heard that Israel had a king, The battle of Saul at
Michmash.
they gathered themselves together to fight against Israel, thirty thousand
chariots, six thousand horsemen, and the footmen were like the sand by the sea
side in multitude, and they pitched their camp in Michmash, and the Philistines
seemed so many unto the Israelites, that the Israelites hid themselves in
holtes, in towers, caves, rocks, and pits, and many of them fled over Jorden,
yet the Lord delivered the Philistines into Ionathans hand, The victory of
Ionathon.
Saul's son, that Israel might know that victory consists not in multitude,
nor armor of men, but only in the arm of the Lord, and therefore Jonathan
smote the Philistines, and the Lord turned every man's sword upon his fellow, so
that there was a very great overthrow, and the battle continued until they
came that fled for fear of the Philistines from mount Ephraim, and now
followed the enemies unto Bethauen, and the victory was great which Saul got
over the Philistines.

Saul in this battle did bind the soldiers by oath, not The rash law of Saul.
to eat till evening, and cursed him that would eat any food till night, for
Jonathan tasted a little honey with the end of his rod, and Saul his father
would have put him to death, saving that the soldiers rescued and delivered
him, for the Lord had given a great victory by Jonathan over the Philistines.

CHAP. XX.
Of the victory of Saul at Iabesh Gilead, and after how he was overthrown by
the Philistines, and slew himself in mount Gilboa, and of the reward of diverse
treasons.

AFter the battle at Michmash, Saul had an other victory over the Ammonites,
where the Ammonites were slain at Iabesh The victory of Saul.
Gilead, and the Lord prospered Saul, and endued him with such virtues as were
meet for a K. yet Saul disobeyed Sa^. cap. 5.
the Lord, being commanded to destroy the Amalekites, and sley both man and
woman, The disobedience of Saul.
both infant and suckling, both ox and sheep, both camel and ass, yet he
spared Agag king of the Amalekites, and the fat beasts and the lambs, the
sheep, and the oxen that were good, against the commandment of the Lord, and
therefore Samuel reproved him, and told him that the Lord had rejected him,
and that his kingdom should be given to an other, and upon Saul's
disobedience, Samuel was commanded to anoint David king over Israel, so Saul
won the victory, but lost his kingdom and his life in the next battle.

Saul being forsaken of the Lord for his disobedience, the Philistines
prevailed against him in diverse battles, for Saul was more desirous to kill
David the servant of the Lord, then to destroy the Philistines the enemies of
the Lord. But David was reserved, and ordained to fight the battles of the
Lord, and to destroy the Amalekites, the Philistines, and the rest of the Lords
enemies, whom Saul spared, being commanded to the contrary: therefore the Lord
gave Saul to the hands of the Philistines, at the battle in mount Gilboa, that
the Israelites fled, and fell before the Philistines, and the three sons of
Saul were flaine, and Saul himself sore wounded.

Such was his cruel life seeking to kill David, that he had a desperate death,
for he slew himself with his own sword, seeing the battle so sore against
him, his sons Saul slew himself in mount Gilboa.
slain, his soldiers killed, and all the rest of his army fled.

This was the end of Saul the first K. of Israel, like the end of Zedechia the
last king of Israel. And when the Philistines came to the spoil of them that
were slain, they found the body of Saul and his three sons in mount Gilboah
slain in the battle, and they cut off Saul's head, and stripped him out of his
armor, and they laid up his armor Sam. 51. cap.
in the Temple of their god Astaroth, and hanged up his body on the wall of
Bethshan in token of victory and triumph, and they sent the head of Saul unto
the land of the Philistines, that they might show it in their cities, and
publish it in the Temples of their Idols among the people, and after to set up
Saul's head in the Temple of Dagon. This was the end of Saul, whom the Lord
raised Saul's head set up in the temple of Dagon.
from keeping his fathers asses, to be a king over his people, for not obeying
the commandment of the Lord: thus ever the Lord punished disobedience in
Saul, in Rehoboam, Achab, Manasses and Zedechiah, that the Lord delivered
Jerusalem, and the kingdom of Judah to the hands of Nabuchodonozer king of
Babylon.

Saul being now slain in mount Gilboa, the Amalekite which brought to David
Saul's crown and his bracelets, and told David that he himself slew Saul,
(which was a lie, for Saul slew himself) thought to have a great reward for
such good news, but David commanded him to be slain.

The like reward had Rechab and Banah, that brought Isbosheths head unto David,
who disguised themselves as Merchants to buy wheat, and went to Isbosheths
house Traitors had ever like rewards.
who slept on his bed at noone, and they slew him, took his head with them,
and presented it unto David at Hebron, supposing they should be better
rewarded then the Amalekite was, but David rewarded them in this sort, that
their hands and their feet were cut off, and hanged up over the poole in
Hebron.

The recompense of such treacherous servants were ever so rewarded, as Bessus
the only chief captain under Darius head brought to Alexander.
Darius, who after he fled from the battle at Arbela, was slain by Bessus,
and his head cut off, and brought unto Alexander, who thought to be advanced
for his treacherous service, but Alexander commanded that he should be tied to
the tops of two young trees bending to the ground, that he by the swinge and
lifting up of the trees might be torn in pieces.

So Septimius and Achillas commanded by Ptolomeus king of Egypt, to kill
Pompey, and to present his head unto Caesar from him, though Pompey before time
had restored Ptolomeu his father to his kingdom in Egypt, and Septimius had
been Pompey his soldier in diverse wars, yet they slew him most trecherously
in his boat at Pellusium, and cut off his head to please Caesar, but they were
rewarded of Caesar as Bessus was of Alexander, for the king was slain, and his
kingdom given to Cleopatra his sister.

When Antigonus saw Pirrhus head presented unto Treachery in^y rewarded.
him by his son, though they were both enemies, and in the field in armor one
against an other, yet he covered Pirrhus head with his hat, discommending the
cruelty of his son, with such a reward, that he made his Caus^.
blood run about his ears, saying: how durst thou like a savage beast bring
Pirrhus head from his body being dead, whom no prince or captain in Asia or in
Europe durst in the face meet in the field alive?

Yet most men think that treachery is allowed though traitors be not accepted.
I do not think but the head of Darius brought to Alexander by Bessus, and the
head of Pompey to Caesar, were as grateful as Ciceroes head was to Marc.
Antonius, brought by Popilius: or as Marc. Crassus Treason has better success
then traitors have
head sent by Surena to Horodes: for thereby had Alexander the kingdom of
Persia, and Caesar the Empire of Rome, treason has better success then
traitors have. To this effect spoke Iezabell to Iehu: Had Zimri peace which
slew his master Elah? as though she should say, can traitors Iezabell.
have good success? but she was rewarded by Iehu, (for that Naboth was stoned
to death by her means for his vineyard) as the rest were.

Even cruel Sylla the Roman, the enemy of Marius and all his well-willers,
and especial of Sulpitius, Syllas mortal foe. Yet when Sulpitius servant
would have betrayed Sulpitius his master unto Sylla, Sylla caused him to be
thrown headlong down from the rock Tarpeia.

So much the old Romans hated traitors and treasons, that when Viriatus an
other Haniball, and a great Traitors odious to the old Romans.
enemy of the Romans, for 14. years space, gave diverse ouerthrows to some
Roman Praetors and Consuls, as Cai. Vetulius, Cai. Plantius, and others, that
he waxed so proud and insolent of his victories over the Romans, Oros. lib. 5.
cap. 4.
that he hanged up the Roman Ensigns on high hills and mountains, as
trophies to show his victories over the Romans, but Viriatus was betrayed and
slain by some of his soldiers, by means of Caepio the Consul, against the
manners of the old Romans, which never allowed treachery, thinking to have a
great reward of the Romans for his treachery: but they according to their
Viriatus named the second Haniball.
manners, sent him back bound unto Hispaine, as a traitor to his captain and
country, as they did to Timocheres, Pirrhus Physician, who offered the Romans
if they would to poison his master Pirrhus. Timocheres.


So Camillus sent the schoolemaister of the Phaelicians (who brought all his
scholars being noble men's sons to betray the Town) back naked before his
scholars, every scholar having a rod in his hand to whip his master, for
betraying their fathers, their friends, Camillus.
and the city: so that neither Viriatus servant that slew his master, neither
Pirrhus Physician that would have poisoned his master, nor the schoolemaister
that would betray his city, could get any rewards at the Romans hands for
treachery. Now to David, whose example of wars and victories upon the
Amalekites, Canaanites, and the rest, as in this the next book shall be
mentioned.

The end of the first book.
The second Book of the Stratagems of Jerusalem.
CHAP. I.
Of David the second King of Israel, and his great victories and good success
which he had in all his wars against the Canaanites, Edomites, Moabites,
Ammonites, Philistines, and others.

David a man whom the Lord found to his own heart, a second Ioshuah of Israel,
he fought many battles of the Lord, and won many victories: for when the
Philistines heard that Saul was dead, they sought for David to fight with him,
and David asked counsel of the Lord before he would take any battle in hand,
which made his victories so many, and himself so famous, that all his enemies
feared him. So should all Kings, Generals, and Captains, hold that rule for a
principal part of their charge, and not to commence war without a just
cause, and lawful means to be executed.

Josias had no good cause to fight with Necho king of Egypt, who commanded his
soldiers not to fight with Unjust and unnecessary wars.
Josias, but against Charchemish, a city of the Assirians.

So the King of Syria charged his soldiers to fight with none but with Achab
king of Israel, at what time Iosaphat king of Judah was spared, and therefore
returned safe and sound to Jerusalem, by the counsel of the king of Syria.

Had Josias followed the counsel of Necho king of Egypt, as Iosaphat followed
the counsel of the king of Syria, Josias had saved his life as Iosophat did.

David fought with the Philistines, smote, scattered them, and slew them, that
they fled before David's face The battle of David at Baal Pharazim 2. Sam. cap.
5.
in the valley of Giants, which is, the plain of division, because of their
victories, and there they left their Images and Idols, and David burned them,
much like to the Iamnites, who carried the Images of their Idols in their
bosoms to the battle, and tied them about Iamnites.
their necks, for they were so found after the Iamnites were slain: as in
ancient time the Egiptians carried their gods and their Idols, painted on
their Ensigns and Banners into the field, as their standarts.

Again, the Philistines gathered their force against The victory of David at
Rephaim. 2. Sam. 5.
David at Rephaim, which is called the valley of Giants, and David overthrew
the host of the Philistines, and chased them from Geba unto Gazar.

An other battle of the Lord against the Philistines fought by David, and he
again subdued them, and took the strong city of Gath, which they called the
bridle of bondage, out of the hands of the Philistines. This city Gath the
bridle of bondage.
kept the country round about in subjection and bondage. Thus all wise and
skillful generals ought to imitate David herein, to seize by all warlike
policy upon those strong cities and fortes that can command the country.

So Hanibal thought himself sure of Rome, having gotten Capua and Tarentum, two
of the strongest cities in Italy into his hand. So the Romans having gotten
Syracusa, Policies of Generals.
doubted not to take Carthage: and having Carthage in their hands, they soon
conquered all Affrike: and having Affricke, they made no account to win Asia:
for at that very time the best soldiers of the world were in the West
kingdoms. For Antiochus the great, the greatest Antiochus.
king at that time in all Asia, was soon overthrown by a Consul of Rome.

So David went forward in his victories, after he had gotten the strong city
of Gath, he smote Moab, and measured them with a cord, he slew them and cast
them down to the ground, he overcame whom he would, and saved whom he listed,
so that the Moabites became David's servants, and brought him gifts and
presents, that the Lord made David famous throughout all the world.

During the time of David's wars against the Canaanites, and other nations
their associates, there was no great war then among the Syrians, neither in
any part of Asia, and especially in Europe, which was scant Europe scant
inhabited in David's time
thoroughly inhabited in David's time, and therefore there was no such war to be
written of, as was the^ between the Israelites and the Canaanites, in the time
of David. For as Joshua slew the Canaanites, and gave the possession of the
land unto Israel, so David rooted them out, slew their giants, and brought all
the land tributary unto Solomon his son, who governed Israel forty years in
peace and quietness without war.

Hadarezer king of Zobah, hearing of the name and Hadarezer.
fame of David, went to establish his borders by the river Euphrates, with a
great army with him, where David gave him battle, fought with him, overthrew
him, and took from him a thousand chariots, seven thousand horsemen, and
twenty thousand footmen. David destroyed all the chariots, and hought all the
horses, The number i^ less in the 2. of Sam. cap. 5.
but reserved an hundred chariots for himself, so that the Lord was with
David wheresoever he went, and whatsoever he took in hand.

The Aramites hearing what great overthrow Hadarezer king of Zobah had by
David, came from Damascus with a very great army to succor the king of Zobah:
for they knitted themselves against Israel with all their force and power, but
they had the like welcome, as the Philistines, the Moabites, and the king of
Zobah had. David slew of the Aramites two and twenty thousand, and David The
Aramites and Philistines brought under David.
put a garrison in that part of Syria where Damascus was, and the Aramites
became David's servants, and brought him presents and gifts. David so plagued
the Aramites, which are also named Siria^s, that they bare such mortal hatred
to Judah, for they ever joined themselves after with the Ephraimites against'
the Tribe of Judah.

Observe the martial proceedings of the Israelites, to put garrison in every
strong City and fort where they had subdued. So by these means David and
Joshua before him, brought the Moabites, the Edomites, and the Philistines, and
all their enemies round about to be under their government. So after David all
nations did the like (a principal point in all good Generals to strengthen
themselves with garrison in strong places.)

Herein the Remanes excelled all nations, that whersoeuer, or whosoever they
subdued, there they placed The Romain governors over diverse provinces.
Roman Magistrates to govern. As Scypio and Pompey the great did in Asia,
Titus and Sylla in Greece: this made the Romans to be feared and dreaded among
all nations of the word. For after the Romans had subdued the Carthagineans,
they made Carthage a province to be governed under a Proconsull of Rome.

After they had subdued Numidia and Lybia, they were made provinces, and
governed under a Consul of Rome.

So Egypt and Mauritania, were in like sort governed under Roman Presidents.

So Sardinia, Cicilia, Achaia, and many others, were made Praetorian provinces,
and governed under the Romans.

But we will proceed forward with the wars of David, every where under his
General Abishai, Ioabs 1. Chron. 18.
brother, who slew eighteen thousand of the Edomites in the salt valley: and
he put garrion in Edom and all the Garrison in Edom.
Edomites became David's servants, so that David's enterprises and his battles,
which he fought against the enemies of the Lord, had (wheresoever he went)
good 2. Sam. ca. 12.
success. David ever used martial laws upon the Lords enemies, when Rabbah
was taken by Ioab, he was presently commanded by David the king, to put all
the people to cruel death, and for that they were malicious enemies unto the
Lord, he put them to such tortures, as under sawes, Iron harrowes, Iron axes,
and cast them Martial laws.
into the tylekilne, so cruel and grievous were the punishments of the Lord
upon the cities of the Ammonites.

The fame of David grew so great, that all the kings about him envied him much,
that Hamnon king of the Ammonites prepared an army against David, understanding
that David would revenge the injury he did unto his Ambassadors, whom David
sent to Hamnon of mere kindness and courtesy, the cause was that David's
Ambassadors, by the King of Ammon, and the counsel of his Princes and Lords,
had the half of their beards shaued, and their garments cut off in the middle
even unto their buttockes, and so sent them away, which among the Israelites
was the greatest reproach The law of arms broken.
that might be. Thus the Ambassadors of David against the law of arms were
disfigured, to make them odious unto others, but they were commanded by David
to stay in Jericho, to avoid the obloquy of so foul a fact until they were
provided for.

Alcibiades General over the Athenians, laying siege to the chief city of
the Aggregentines, which was so strongly every way defended with forts and
trenches, that Alcibiades devised a new stratageme, and thereby sought means
to have a convenient place of parley to talk with them before he would lay
siege to the town, which being granted, Alcibiades appointed certain
captains, while he held the Aggrentines in parley of peace, to take the
city. Alcibiades and Ionathans stratagems.


Jonathan after that Iud. Machabaeus his brother was slain in the field by
Bacchides, and after that the children of Amri took John, Ionathans brother,
he used this policy to revenge his brother upon the marriage day of a daughter
of one of the noblest Princes of Canaan. Jonathan and his men hid themselves,
and lay in ambush 1. Mac. 9.
under the covert of a mountain, that when the children of Amri came out of
Medeba, with tymbrels, Instruments of music and great pomp, Jonathan set
upon them, slew the most part, and the rest fled, so that their marriage was
turned into mourning, and the noise of their melody to lamentation: thus
Jonathan revenged his brother at Medeba.

Cymon the son of Milciades, a noble Greek Captain, Cymons stratagem.
at the besieging of a city in Caria, used this stratagem to burn the temple
of Diana, which goddess the Front. lib. 3. cap. 2.
Carians most religiously worshipped, the temple being builded without the
walls of the town, all the city ran to defend Dianaes temple from burning,
Cymon with his Athenian army, entered and obtained the city, while they were
busy about the temple.

The like policy used Demetrius to deceive Jonathan, who hearing that Jonathan
came in the night time with his men armed, Demetrius and all his army feared
and Demetrius stratagem.
trembled in their hearts, and kindled great fires in their Tents, and fled
away, which Jonathan suspected not that they fled, because they saw the fire
burning in the tents, and so Demetrius by this strageme of fire passed over the
1. Machab. 12.
flood Eleutherus, and escaped from Jonathan.

Many such stratagems have been used by fire to deceive the enemy, as Hannibal
by fire tied to Oxens horns in the night time against the Romans: Sampson by
tying of firebrands to Foxes tails to burn the corn of the Philistines. So
Absolon used the like stratagem against Ioab, with many such.

Now having heard that Ioabs chief captains came in, and that David was come^
over the river Jorden, five kings came against Ioab, and pitched their tents
before Medeba, The battle at Medeba.
a city of the Tribe of Ruben, but when the battle joined together, the
Ammonites and the Aramites fled and fell before Israel, so that the victory
was Ioabs, and yet had they two and thirty thousand chariottes, and five kings
set in battell-raie to fight against David, but it was the Lords battle, and
therefore too few if they had had ten times as many. And therefore the
Aramites and the Ammonites were sore grieved at the good success of David,
that they gathered their whole force and power together; and sent messengers
beyond Jorden, to draw all the enemies of Israel to fight another battle
against David, and David hearing of their great armies, came over Jorden to
Hel^, and fought with The number of the chariots and men are otherwise set down
in the (...). of Sam. ca. 10. and 18.
them, and the Aramites fled before him, and David destroyed of the Aramites
seven hundred chariots, forty thousand footmen, and killed Sophach General
of the host.

David at length made a general conquest of the Philistines, destroyed the
Ammonites and their chief city Rabbah, slew their King and Princes, and cut
the people in pieces with sawes, with harrowes of Iron, and with axes, and
David requited fully the spiteful and malicious wrong they did unto his
Ambassadors. And as Joshua brought them over Jorden, and placed them in A full
conquest over the Canaanites by David.
Canaan, and destroyed their enemies before them, and gave the Hebrews the
possession of Canaan, so David rooted these nations out, and made a full
conquest of them, and left Israel in peace and quiet to his son Solomon, and
Solomon to his son Rehoboam, so that the Tributes to the kings of Israel by
David's means.
Edomites, Moabites, and Ammonites, became David's servants, and paid tribute
unto Solomon, during his whole life.

CHAP. II.
Of tributes paid to the kings of Egypt. And what manner of tributes the old
Romans and Persians received. The rewards of adultery.

SO Joseph made a law in Egypt, that the first part of all the land of Egypt
should be as a yearly tribute paid unto Pharao, so that Joseph enriched
Pharao by means of the yearly tribute, and saved Tributes to the kings of
Egypt by Joseph.
Pharaos life and all Egypt by Gods providence and his wisdom, that at that
time he was called in Egypt, Pater patriae, but soon forgotten in Egypt, as
was seen after in the tyranny of the Egiptians toward Joseph's children, and
the whole stock of the Hebrews.

Victories and overthrows by wars gotten, imposed Steuech. com. in Uiget.
lib. 3. cap. 5.
such tribute as pleased the co^querer. For among the Romans before their
Empire grew great, the Lucanians paid for their tribute but swine, the
Brusians oxen; the Frizians the skins of oxen: others paid diverse kinds of
wine, others wax, others fish, and such like.

And as the old Romans tributes were but cattle, The old Romans tributes
and tryumphes.
corn, wine, fish, and such, so were their tryumphes had over the Samnites,
the Volscians, Sabines, Tarentines, and old Gauls, but the weapons, armors,
coaches, garments, cattells, and such like of the enemies.

To the Persians, while yet the Monarchy was in Persia, the Aethiopians paid
but Ebanye, Iuory, Elephantes teethe, Frankencense, and certain measures of
base gold every third year. So the Capadocians paid to the Persians for
yearly tribute five hundred Horse, two thousand Moyles. So likewise the Towns
and small Villages about Babylon, were to provide and feed the dogs of the
king of Persia. But Tributes paid to the Persians.
the City of Babylon it self, paid for tribute to the king of Persia,
Artabas plenas argento certain accounts of money every day.

The Arabians likewise paid to the King of Persia certain measures of such
sweet odours, as the country did abound, as Frankincense and such like.

These were but small tributes, as swine, oxen, corn, wine, fish, in former
time which the Romans had, in respect of their tributes had over Asia,
Affricke, and Europe afterward, which commanded not only corn, nauies,
horses, soldiers and armours, but also after this, a far greater tribute
began in the time of Paul: Aemilius, who after he had subdued the
Macedonians, and Persius their king, the Illyrians and their king Gentius, he
imposed upon the Macedonians and Illyrians half the tribute which they were
wont to pay to their former kings.

So Scypio Affrican after he had conquered Hanibal at Zama, and brought the
Carthagineans to such composition Composition between Scipio and the
Carthagineans.
as pleased himself, to pay two hundred talents yearly for fifty years,
with such conditions that the Carthagineans should depart from Sardinia and
Cicilia, to restore the Roman soldiers which Hanniball brought captive with
him out of Italy, and to deliver Appian. in Lybico.
up their Elephants and all their nauies (ten excepted).

To such greatness grew the tributes of the Romans by their victories, that
Hispaine and Carthage were to pay yearly stipendary tributes, not only in
Veget. lib. 3. cap. 3.
money, but also horses, corn, nauies and armours, and to maintain stipendary
soldiers. And among all other conquered nations by them, they had in their
cities and towns places called Cripta, for corn and provisions Horre^ Romanum.
for soldiers, but especially in Egypt, which was for their provisions called
the storehouse or barn of Rome.

But now to the victories of David again, which after he had reigned twenty
years king quietly in Jerusalem, he lost two great battles, in the one he lost
seventy thousand, and in the other battle he had welnigh lost both himself
and his kingdom: in the first battle David committed great faults in setting
out his power, his glory, his victories, and his greatness, and most
ambitiously to command Ioab to number all Israel from Berseba even unto Dan,
as though power, strength, and victory came from him, and not from the Lord.
Here David consulted not with the judgment of Vrim and Thummim, and therefore
he lost the victory, and Satan gave him a buffet.

David again in the second battle was overthrown by prouokeme^t of the former
enemy, not only to look The offenses of David.
upon the beauty of Bethseba from the roof of his house, but also to send for
her, and lie with her, and to hide the first wicked great fault, he committed a
greater, he sent Letters to Ioab his captain, to put Vriah, Bethsebas husband
in the front of the battle to be slain: in this battle also David did not
call for the Ephod, nor asked counsel of the Lord, as he was wont to do,
therefore Satan gave two such great buffets to David, that he lost the field
and two victories one after an other: of these buffets and stratagems Paul
speaks, that he was buffetted of Satan, least he should glory too much by
revelation showed unto him. Moses also had a buffet of Satan at the water of
Meribah, for his incredulity, that the Lord said unto him, that he should not
enter into the land of Canaan, but dye in mount Nebo. Job also had a buffet in
the land of Huz. Satan uses many such stratagems, whereby he gives many
such buffets.

If Moses, Job, David, Paul, and others, were thus buffeted by Satan, who can
think himself free from the stratagems of Satan? we must therefore watch,
if we will not be deceived, and we must fight if we think to have victory,
our battle is not against flesh Ephesians. 6.
and blood, but against power and states of heavens, against the prince and
ruler of darkness, and against spiritual enenemies.

But the Prophet Nathan was sent to David, to open unto him the rewards of
adultery and murder, and that the sword should not go from David's house, the
banishment, the punishment and misery that should fall upon The rewards of
adultery and murder
him for offending the Lord. First his son died gotten in adultery by
Bethseba; the rauishment of his women by his own son Absolon; the incest of
his daughter Thamar by her brother Ammon; the murdering of David's eldest son
Ammon, by his brother Absolon; and The tragical end which David saw on his
children
the rebellion of his son Absolon against his father the King.

Thus David saw the just judgment of the Lord, and the tragical end of his
children, for offending the Lord. Even David that subdued so many nations, that
got so many victories, that fought with a bear, with a lion, and with a giant,
and subdued them, is now subdued by a woman; had David after these victories so
much temperance and chastity at the sight of Bethseba, as he had faith and
courage at his combat with Golias; he had conquered both alike; but the Lord
punished 2. Reg. 16.
David and his house.

The son of Emor for that he violately abused Dina Jacobs daughter, her
brethren took at it such a spite, that Simeon and Leui, Jacobs sons, went
and slew Sichem Dina Jacobs daughter.
and his father Emor, and all the men within Sichem, and took Dina their
sister away with them. Genesis 34.
Thus the gadding abroad of Dina to Sichem, to see the manner and fashion of
the Sichemites, was the cause of the overthrow of Sichem and the Sichemites.

The going of the Sabine virgins to the feast of Consus, to see plays in Rome,
were ravished and taken by The Sabino virgins.
the Romans, to the number of six hundred, were the only cause of the wars
between the Sabines and the Romans.

In Siloth likewise on that day the feast of the Lord was kept, the virgins of
Siloth came abroad to dance, to The virgins of Syloth.
sing, and to play, the Beniamites caught the maids of Siloth, to the number
of 200. and brought them to the land of Benjamin. So the abuse of one woman,
the Levites wife, by the Beniamite, cost sixty four thousand men's lives and
more, in Israel.

For by the taking away of Viriahs wife by David, Israel was plagued with the
death of seventy thousand men, and the taking away of Menelaus wife from
Greece, cost the lives of many millions of men, and the wars of ten years
between the Greeks and the Trojans.

And for that the time of the taking away of Vriahs wife by David, agrees with
the history of the taking away of Menelaus wife by Alexander, otherwise called
Paris.

After the death of David, and Solomon his son, the kingdom of Israel was
established upon Rehoboam Salomons son, he forsook the law of the Lord, and
rejected his fathers wise and grave counselors, and followed The sacking of
Ierursale^ and many cities of Judah by Shesak.
rash young men's counsel, and therefore the Lord raised Shesak king of Egypt
against Israel, and he came with twelve hundred chariots, three score thousand
horsemen, and his footmen were without number: for from Egypt came with him
the Lybians, the Troglodites, and 2. Chron. cap. 12.
the Aethiopians, he took the strong cities of Judah and Jerusalem, and all
the treasures of the Lords house, and all the treasures of the kings house, and
he carried away two hundred targets and three hundred shields of gold, which
Solomon made, and returned to Egypt with a great spoil, because Rehoboam
forsook the Lord, and therefore was forsaken of the Lord. The temple that
Solomon his father builded, was spoiled by the negligence of Rehoboam, Salomons
son.

This was the first victory that was had over Jerusalem by Shesak king of
Israel: and here began the first battle of the civil war between the kings
of Judah, and the kings of Israel: and such civil war if you consider The
first battle of civil wars between Judah and Israel.
the slaughter between Judah and Israel, and the continuance of their wars,
you must needs confess that in one battle between Abiah and Jeroboam, were
more slain of the Israelites, then among the Romans in forty years: to
talk of the Romans civil wars, which was forty years between Sylla and
Marius, between Caesar and Pompey, and last between Octauius and Marc.
Antonius: or the civil wars of the Greeks, called the Peloponesian war,
which endured seven and twenty years, it was nothing in respect of the
murder and blood between Judah and Israel, for in the civil wars of the
Romans, histories do not record above the 500000. Israelites slain.
deaths of three hundred thousand Romans. Where in this battle, being the
first civil battle between Jeroboam king of Israel, against Abiah king of
Judah, at what 2. Paralip. cap. 13.
time was slain in the field five hundred thousand of king Ieroboams soldiers
in one battle; which neither Tamberlane nor Xerxes (though they could match
them in number, yet could they never match the^ in slaughter.

For as the Romans were full five hundred years in conquering the Sabines,
the Latins, the Vients, the Fidenates, the Samnites, Tarentines, Hetruscans
and others, from Romulus time to Scypio Affrican, before the Romans could be
Lords of Italy.

The like may be spoken of the Israelites in conquequering the Moabites,
Ammonites, Amalekites, Philistines, and others, from Moses time unto David,
welnigh five hundred years, and as the Romans held their Empire, so long a
time as they were in winning of it from Scypio Affrican, who conquered Haniball
and Italy, unto the Emperor Probus, which was five hundred years, at what time
the whole Empire fell by degrees to decay.

So Israel as they subdued their enemies, from Moses to David, five hundred
years, as you read before: so after The comparison of the Hebrews with the
Romans.
David by civil wars of Judah and Israel, unto Zedechias time, which was
five hundred years, they lost both the kingdoms Judah and Israel; the one
taken captive by Salmanasser unto Niniuie: the other by Nabuchodonozer unto
Babylon: so that now the land of Judah called the land of milk and honey, is
become Athisme, subject to Pagans and Infidels, which continued from Abraham
the The sin of Israel.
first father of the faith, until Titus Vespasian, two thousand and odd
years, and al through disobedience and contempt of their Lord and God.

Even so the Romans which were wont to be called lords of the world, whose
Consuls at that time ruled and governed the most kingdoms of the world, are
now left without King, Emperor, or Consul, and many cities in Italy at this
day preferred before Rome, now governed by the Pope a Bishop, as Jerusalem is
governed by the Turk an Infidel: so that in all things the Romans The enemy of
Rome was Italy.
and the Hebrews may be compared: for as the greatest enemy that ever Rome
had, was Italy, and the dangerousest foes that the Romans had were Italians:
for the Gauls, the Cymbres, the Carthaginians, and the Affricans, The enemy of
Judah was Israel.
vexed not the Romans as the Italians did, their own country men and next
neighbors. So Judah had no enemies but the house of Israel. So Israel had no
enemies but Judah, for Jerusalem could not away with Samaria for their two
Idols, the one at Dan, the other in Bethell, so Samaria could not brook
Jerusalem for the great solemnity of Salomons temple.

CHAP. III.
The great battle between Abia king of Judah, and Jeroboam king of Israel,
where 500000. were slain on Ieroboams side. Of the victories of Asa and
Iosaphat kings of Judah, over Zerah king of Aethiopia, and over the Edomites,
Ammonites, and Maobites.

AS it seemed by the long oration which Abiahs oration in mount Zemaraim.
Abiah made to Jeroboam and his army upon mount Zemaraim, before the battle
joined together, to dissuade them from the battle, saying: that the Lord had
given the kingdom over Israel to David, and to his house, but Jeroboam
contemned Abiahs counsel, and thought by his policy and subtle stratagem to
have overcome the host of Judah, but he himself was deceived, to the loss of
five hundred thousand of his soldiers, that his power and force failed, that
he was not able during his life to prevail against Judah; for Jeroboam had
gathered to increase his army, all leaud, idle, and wicked unthrifts, to fight
this battle against Rehoboam the son of Solomon, like Cinna in Rome, that
made open proclamation, that al bondme^, 2. Chron. 13.
wicked doers, and banished men, should come to Cinna the Consul, and they
should be restored to their former liberty Cinna.
and freedom, and thus Cinna gathered all the leaud and wicked men within all
Italy: he then being Consul, taking part with Cai. Marius, against his other
fellow Consul Octauius, which held with Sylla, slain at that time, and a
number more of the citizens of Rome, but The cruelty of Marius and Sylla in
Rome.
between Sylla and Marius, one revenging upon an other fomi^g in their
countries blood, that all the streets of Rome. anne of blood. These two Marius
and Sylla began the first Roman civil wars (as Jeroboam and Rehoboam did)
and yet were they both compared to Scypio Affrican, for their victories to
their country, though they were compared to Hanibal for the harm and hurt
which Oros.
they had done to their country.

Had Jeroboam harkned to the counsel of Abiah king of Judah, upon mount
Zemaraim, he had saved five hundred thousand Israelites which were slain at
the battle.

If the Beniamites had taken counsel of their brethren the Israelites, and to
yield unto them the wicked me^ Iudie. 20.
that abused the Levites wife, the whole tribe of Benjamin had not bin
destroyed. It was the overthrow of Judas Good counsel not obeyed.
Machabaeus by Bacchides at the battle of Laisa, for that he would not be
persuaded by his friends to refrain the battle for that time.

Had the Prophet Jeremy been heard of Zedechiah and the princes of Judah,
Zedechiah had saved the lives of his own children slain in his sight, and had
likewise saved his own eyes in his head, which presently were pulled out,
after he saw his children slain, and himself carried captive and blind unto
Babylon, Jerusalem destroyed, and the kingdom of Judah subdued by
Nabuchodonozer: so it may be said of Saul refusing the counsel of Samuel, and
so of Josias disobeying the counsel of Necho.

After the great victory that Judah had over Israel, by Abiah king of Judah,
his son Asa fought with Zerah, king of Aethiopia, an Infidel, who brought an
host of ten hundred thousand men, and three hundred chariots from Aethiope to
Judah, and came to Maresha a city of Judah; The great victory of Asa king of
Judah over the Aethiopians.
and Asa the king of Judah came with an army of five hundred and four score
thousand into the valley of Zephatah, and both the kings set the battle in a
ray.

But Asa began with prayers, and cried unto the Lord by prayers for ye
victory, putting no trust in his own power, or policy, neither fearing the
strength of the multitude of his enemies, and so with full confidence in the
Lord, he set upon the Aethiopians, and the Lord smote them before Asa and
before Judah, that the Aethiopians fled, and the army of Judah followed, and
pursued them unto Gerer, for the Lord had stricken the Aethiopians with such
fear, that there was no life in them, that the slaughter was exceeding great,
and the spoil exceeding much, of camels, sheep, and cattle. And Asa after
the victory which he had given him by the Lord, returned to Jerusalem, and
gave the Lord thanks, who gives all victories, so as all good kings and
generals ought to pray to the Lord before they enter into battle, so ought
they also to give thanks after the battle, for their victories.

This victory was a requital and a full revenge upon the Aethiopians, for the
sacking and spoiling of Jerusalem, and of the great slaughter of the people by
Shesak king of Egypt.

In like manner as Abiah began with prayers before he began to battle, so
did king Asa his son follow his fathers rule and order in seeking help and
aid at the Lords hand, which every King, General, or Captain should do. So
Iosaphat Asas son did when it was told him that the Moabites, Ammonites and
Edomites Good kings prayed for victories.
came with an infinite number to fight against him, he set himself to seek the
Lord, and to ask counsel of him, and all Judah with him prayed unto the
Lord, to aid and strengthen him to fight the Lords battle, whereby he got a
marvelous victory over his enemies, for The victory of Iosaphat. 2. Chron.
20.
before he went into the battle, Iosaphat caused a Psalm of thanksgiving to
the Lord to be sung before the men of arms, and so entered the battle, and the
Lord laid ambushments and showed such stratagems against Ammon, Moab and Edom,
that every one helped to destroy another, and the Lord turned every man's sword
to kill his fellow.

Where the Lord leads the army the victory is soon gotten, so Iosaphat
putting his whole trust and confidence in the Lord, slew all his enemies that
none did escape, and the spoil was such of gold, of silver, and precious
Jewels, that they were three days in gathering and in carrying the spoil
away, and then they assembled together after the victory by Iosaphats
commandment to give the Lord thanks for the victory, and called the place
where they got the victory Berachab, Beracha.
and they returned to Jerusalem with violls, harpes, and with trumpets.

These three battles of Abiah, Asa, and Iosaphat, were battles of the Lord,
and as the Lord had done at that battle at Michmash to Jonathan, so the Lord
did now at the battle at Beracha to Iosaphat, and so the Lord in all the
battles of the good kings of Judah and Israel showed always his divine
stratagems for the defense of Jerusalem, as in Egypt by Moses against Pharao,
by Elias at the brook Kyson against Baals prophets: by Elizeus at Dothan,
against king Benhadads soldiers.

The Gentiles in like sort, commence no war, enter Gentiles.
no battle before they sing a song unto their gods: as the Lacedaemonians
brought up only in war from seven years old, used before they went to the
wars, to Plut. in Licurgo.
make solemn sacrifice to the Muses and to the goddess Fear, with a song to
Castor and Pollux. The Thrasians sing a song to their god Mars, and brag much
of Mars for that he was borne in Thracia.

Others made vows when they went to any wars. As among the Romans, their
wives, their children, and Veget. lib. 1. cap. 6.
their friends, should make vows, and cause the same to be written in tables,
and to be set on that gate, through the which they went out of the city to
war, that upon their return home they might see and read their vows and
perform them.

The three hundred Fabians, which were slain at the Three hundred Fabia^s.
battle at Crimera, the gate that they went through out of Rome then, was ever
called after that Porta Scelerata. So did the Romans likewise call the field,
where one of the Vestal virgins called Minutia, for her incest and carnal
Minutia. Oros. lib. 3. cap. 9.
fault, was buried in the field was called Sceleratus Campus, according to the
Romain laws made for the Vestal virgins that so offended.

We leave the profane marching of the Romans and the Greeks, and we will
return to the marching of Israel under king Asa and king Iosaphat his son,
who both by prayers obtained great victories, as all the Israelites prevailed
more by prayer then by fight. As by prayer Joshua made the Sun to stand still
over Gibeon, and the Prayers both commended and also compared.
Moon over Aialon. By prayer Elias made the clouds to fall and rain. By
prayer Moses made his enemies to fly. Elizeus raised the dead to life. Solomon
obtained wisdom. So long as the Lord takes not away thy praying, so long he
does not take away his grace and mercy from thee, for a wicked man cannot pray
well, and he that prays well cannot live wickedly. And therefore prayers are
compared to Sampsons hairs, for as Sampsons strength lay in his hairs, so
our strength lies in prayers.

Ester prayed to have that to come to proud Ammon, Esters prayers.
which Ammon wished to have done to Mardochaeus, and the poor Jews.

Judith prayed at the striking, and the cutting off, of Iudiths prayers.
Holofernes head, which blasphemed the Lord, and would prefer Nabuchodonozer
before the God of Israel.

Susan prayed unto the Lord for her innocency against Susannas prayers.
the false Judges at Babilo^, that accused her of inco^tinency, and they were
stoned to death by means of Daniel.

We read also of Iud. Machabaeus, a noble captain of Iud. Machabaeus.
the Jews, that he never entered into any battle before he prayed, yet was he
in twelve set battles, and in every one obtained victory saving at the last,
at what time some write he prayed not, where he was slain in the field by
Bacchides, and his people overthrown.

As you heard of good kings by prayers that wanne victories, so also shall you
hear of wicked and Idolatrous kings, as Achas who caused an Idolatrous Altar
to be Achas.
made in Judah, like the Altar at Damascus, and consecrated his son in fire,
and offered him to Moloch.

In like sort the king of Moab supposing his Idol Chemosh to be angry with him,
slew and sacrificed his eldest son, that should have reigned next after him
King, and offered him as a burnt offering to his God Chemosh upon the walls of
the Town. As Achab and Manasses Kings of Judah did sacrifice their children in
the valley of Hynnon to Moloch: for Achab was one of the first kings that
brought the name of Baal into Israel; and maintained between him and his wife
Iezabel, four hundred and fifty false prophets of Baal.

Achas had good king Ezechias to his son, but Achas the father walked not
uprightly before the Lord, The Idolatry of Achas.
as his son Ezechias did, but made moulten Images for Baalim, and burnt
Incense in the valley of Benhynnon, sacrificed his sons and burnt them with
fire, and offered them unto his god Moloch, and sought help at the gods of
Damascus, at Chemosh god of the Moabites, Milcombe god of the Ammonites, and
other strange gods: and therefore the Lord gave him over, and delivered him
into the hands of the king of the Aramites, and he smote him, and slew a great
number of his soldiers, and brought many prisoners of Judah with him to
Damascus.

Again, the Lord delivered Achas into the hand of Six score thousand slain.
the king of Israel Phaekah, and he slew in one day six score thousand in
Judah; and took two hundred thousand prisoners of women, sons and daughters,
and brought them into Samaria with all the spoil. The Edomites slew of them of
Judah, a great number, and carried many captives away: Mark what mischief
happens where an evil king does reign. The Philistines also invaded the
cities of Judah, and took Aialon and Gederith, and other cities of Judah, and
thus were they vexed by Judah vexed by the Aramites. etc.
the Aramites, Edomities, and Philistines, and by the Israelites being their
own nation; for that Achas king of Judah forsook the Lord, and sought help
at strange gods, and not at the hands of the god of Israel.

After wicked Achas, the good king Ezechias his son succeeded, he was to
commence a battle with Senacherib, who blasphemed the Lord, and threatened
destruction to Jerusalem, but the Prophet Esaias had instructed Ezechiah, that
this was the Lords battle, and that he would be revenged upon the blasphemy of
Senacherib, for proud Ashur challenged the Lord into the field to fight with
him, saying, what god could take Judah out of his hand? he numbered the kings
and their gods which he and his fathers destroyed, and with horrible blasphemy
persuaded the king of Judah not to trust to his god, but to yield unto him; but
the lord did put his hook in his nosthrils, and his bridle in his lips, as the
Lord had told Ezechiah The blasphemy of Senacherib punished.
the king, by Esayas the prophet, that Senacherib with all his army should not
come to Jerusalem, nor shoot an arrow there, for the battle is mine says the
Lord. And he sent his Angels that night which destroyed all the Chron. ca. 19.
princes, all the captains, and all the valiant men of Ashur, and all the
whole army of Senacherib, to the number of an hundred, four score and six
thousand, without the drawing of one sword of Judah, and Senacherib fled with
ten men with him, some think that Nabuchodonozer was one, but I think time
will not so allow, for he was at that time but a very child. But Senacherib
fled to Niniuie, where he was slain in the temple, praying before his Idol
Nisroch, whom he preferred before the living God, and that by his two sons
(the just judgment Adramelec and Sharaser.
of the Lord for his blasphemy) to be slain, before his own god, before whom
he worshipped and prayed when he was slain by his own sons; and thus we see
in all just battles when we serve the Lord, and trust only in him, that
victories come not by man, but by ye Lord.

Iosaphat a good king had Ioram an evil king to his son, Iosaphat.
a murderer of his brethren.

Ezechias a good king in Jerusalem, had Manasses to his Ezechias.
son, a wicked Idolater, who filled all the streets of Jerusalem with blood.

Josias a good godly king, had to his fonnes Ioachas and Ioachim, who were
taken captives by Nabuchodonozer into Josias.
Babylon, for their transgressions and sins, at what time Daniel was taken
captive, and many other gentle^men of Judah; even Jerusalem whom the Lord had
defended from 2. Reg. ca. 17.
the sword of Senacherib, and from all the kings of Egypt and Ashur: yet when
the sins of Jerusalem were ripe, it was delivered into the hand of
Nabuchodonozer, to be carried captive into Babylon, as Samaria was to Niniuie
by Salmanasher, one hundred thirty and three years before Iudahs captivity.

After Ashur had taken the ten tribes of Israel away, he brought from Bethel,
from Cutha, from Anah, and from Amath, strange people, and placed them in the
cities of Samaria, in stead of the children of Israel, and of these The
Samaritan woman
people came the Samaritans, of whom mention is made often in the gospel, with
whom the Jews would have no society, for so the woman spoke to Christ at
Jacobs well, that why he being a Jew, should ask water of a Samaritan.

This time Zedechiah the king gave no hearing to the Prophet Jeremy, who
forewarned the king of their destruction Jeremy and Micha both stricken and put
in prison.
to be at hand, for the which the Prophet was imprisoned, first by Fashur high
bishop of the temple, who smote Jeremy and put him in the stocks, struck him
as Zedechiah the false Prophet struck Micha, who was after Iere. cap. 20.
commanded by Achab to be imprisoned as Jeremy the Iere. 18.
Prophet was, and by means of the nobles of Judah to king Zedechiah. Jeremy
was imprisoned in a dirtie dungeon, Jeremy notwithstanding spared not to tell
them, that they should die an horrible death, and should lie as dung upon the
earth, and no man to bury them; whereat they were so moved saying, let us not
regard his words, and let us cut out his tongue.

The citizens of Anathot commanded Jeremy not to preach unto them in the name
of the Lord, and if thou do thou shall die.

Ieremies speech was performed to the overthrow of Iere. 11.
the whole kingdom of Judah, neither could it be otherwise, considering they
sinned still against the Lord, and the long civil wars between themselves,
which continued so long from Ieroboams time, who caused Israel first to sin,
unto the last king of Israel.

Elias after he had destroyed two captains one after another, with their 50.
soldiers severally with fire from heaven, and after he had subdued 450. of
Baals Prophets, after all these great conquests, and many other such, he feared
so much one woman, that for very fear he fled Elias.
from place to place from her, and being weary of his life, he lay under a
Juniper tree, wishing to die, and prayed to God that he might die, complaining
unto the Lord that there was none left of the Prophets of the Lord but
himself, but he was answered by the the spirit of God, that there was seven
thousand more in Israel that yet never once bended theer knees unto Baall.

The like may be spoken of Jonas, being like Elias Jonas.
weary of his life, he sought means to forsake his Country, and to fly by
sea to other Countries, but the sea could not brook him, but delivered him to
be devoured of a wh^, and the whale could not keep him, but was compelled to
vomit him up from the bottom o^ his b^y to go to preach to Niniuie, so that
Elias (...) (...) die under the Juniper tree, and Jonas would (...) be thrown
and drowned in the Sea, ^leane contrary to the purpose and providence of the
Lord.

E^ (...) ^ly of his life to see the Prophets of the Lord so destroyed and
Jonas to see his labor in preaching profit nothing, that he should be ^pured a
false Prophet, the Lord not destroying the City after forty days according
to his word, but sparing it in mercy as he did pity the gourd in mercy.

After the Lord had given great victories to many of 4. Reg.
the kings of Judah. to Asa over Zerah king of Aethiope; to Iosaphat over
Shesak king of Egypt; to Ezechiah over Joseph. lib. 7. ^ap. 6.
Senacherib, yet Judah still forsook the Lord, though Ie^emy told them from
the mouth of the Lord their destruction, when they rather threatened then
believed.

But neither Ioachim, nor Zedechias, would neither hear, nor believe the
Prophet, and therefore the Lord delivered them both into Nabuchodonozers hands,
the one was slain in Jerusalem, and his body commanded to be cast out of the
city, and to be left unburied like an ass: the other Nabucho. took prisoner,
and caused his own children and all his chief friends to be slain in his
sight, and after he saw this tragical sight with his eyes, Nabuchodonozer
being then in Rebla, before whom Zedechia was brought, after he reprehended him
for his perjury and treachery, and accused him for his falsehood, caused his
eyes to be put out, and so bound in a chain and carried prisoner to Babylon,
where he lay and dyed in prison, being the last king of the line of David, and
the twentieth king after Saul.

There was a mighty king in Damascus over the Syrians called Adad, who after
many great battles with David, was subdued in a great battle at Euphrates.
This Adad was so great for his great victories among the Syrians, that they
named every king after his name Adad, to the number of ten, and the tenth
king was that Benhadad which besieged Samaria in the time of the Prophet
Elizeus, whom this king Adad could no better favor, then Adad his predecessor
could favor David, or king Achab did Elias.

After this great victory David imposed tributes upon the Syrians, as he did
before upon the Idumeans, Joseph. lib. 7. cap. 6.
Moabites, and others, he returned to Jerusalem, dedicated and consecrated as
a trophey of his victory, the armours and rich spoil of Adad, king of the
Syrians, in Jerusalem to the Lord.

So the Philistines used the body of Saul, slain in mount Gilboa, after they
had sent his head to the Land of the Philistines, and hanged his body on the
wall of Bethshan, they would be sure to lay up his Armor in the temple of
their god Ashtaroth, according to the customs and manners of the Gentiles: for
they used to hang the armors and spoils of their victories in their Temples to
their Gods.

CHAP. IIII.
How Achab though a wicked king had two great victories against Benhadad king
of Syria, who had 32. kings in his armies. Of diverse great blasphemers
punished. Of the Idolatry of Israel. And of the prophesying against Jerusalem.

BEnhadad king of Aram, assembled an army against the Lord, having two 32.
Kings came with Benhadad against Achab.
and thirty kings, which were governors and rulers of provinces, with horses
and chariots without number, came and fought against Achab king of Israel, a
most wicked king. And yet the Lord seeking to win this wicked king, as well
by victories now, as by miracles before, sent a Prophet to 1. Reg. 20.
Achab; promising him over Benhadad king of Aram a great victory. For the army
of the Syrians were so many, that Benhadad sent a Herald unto Achab,
commanding him to deliver up to his hand Samaria, and all the cities of
Israel, or else he would come with such an army, that the dust of Samaria
should not be enough for every soldier a handful; much like Xerxes king of
Persia for his vaunts and bragges, who doubted that the sea Hellespont had not
room enough for his nauies, nor Greece had land enough for his armies, nor the
air wide enough for his shottes, but Xerxes was answered by Demarathus Achabs
words to Benhadad.
the Philosopher, as Benhadad was by Achab: Let him not brag that puts on
his harness, as he that puts it off, but the king of Syria bragged as Xerxes
did before he wan the victory, for the Lord gave the victory to Achab, and such
a victory by slaughter, by chasing, by taking of men, horses and chariots, that
the king of Syria fled and escaped narrowly with few horsemen that were his
guard, and said that the gods of Israel were the gods of the mountains, and
therefore they overcame us, and challenged a battle with Israel in the valleys,
where they assured themselves of victory; thus they blasphemed the Lord in
their fury, but to their loss and great overthrow.

The blasphemy of Rabsacis, and of his master Senacherib king of the
Assirians, saying to king Ezechiah, let not thy god deceive thee in whom thou
hopest and put thy trust; was not he slain praying before his god Nesroch
in Niniuie, by his own two sons?

The blasphemy of Nabuchodonozer, saying: What God is he that is able to take
you out of my hands? was not he punished with the loss of his kingdom, and to
live among beasts like a beast, and not like a king, until he acknowledged the
Lord?

The blasphemy of Holofcrnus, saying there was no god but his master
Nabuchodonozer, was not his head Diverse great blasphemers punished.
cut off by Judith a woman, and put upon the walls of Bethulia?

And likewise the blasphemy of Nicanor, which said: is there a God mighty in
heaven that commands to keep the Sabbath day, and I am mighty on earth that
comcommaunds the contrary? but his head, his hands, and his blasphemous tongue
were cut off, and hanged upon the pinacles in the temple at Jerusalem.

And so the blasphemy of the Scribes and Pharisees, saying, that Christ the
Lord did not cast out devils by his own virtue, but by the power of Belzebab,
but the Lord left not them unpunished.

The blasphemy of Benhadad, saying, that the Lord was the God of the mountains
only, not God of the valleys: 2. Reg. 8.
was not he strangled by Hazael his own servant, in his own house, and in his
own bed?

Yet the Syrians prepared such a number for the second battle, after they had
escaped hardly from the first battle, that they filled all the country, and
the children of Israel were like to little flocks of Kids in respect of their
number: but the Lord sent his Prophet to Achab, saying: Because the Syrians
have said that the Lord is The second victory of Achab over Benhadad.
the God of the mountains, and not God of the valleys, behold, this great
multitude of men, and Benhadad the King himself, withal the two and thirty
Kings besides, will I deliver to thine hand, and he shall know that I am the
Lord as well of the valleys as the mountains.

And so the Lord brought it to pass, that in that battle an hundred thousand
footmen were slain of the Syrians, and seven and twenty thousand that fled
from the field to Aphec to save themselves, were killed by the fall of a wall
that crushed them to death, and Benhadad the King fled to the city, from
chamber, to The great victory of Achab over Benhadad at Aphec.
chamber, and hid himself, according to the Prophets saying, until many of
his chief Princes that escaped hardly from the battle, came with sackcloath
about their loins, and ropes about their necks in token of submission, to
entreat Achab king of Israel for the life of Benhadad, which he granted,
contrary to that which he was by the Lord commanded for to do as Saul did by
Agag king of the Amalekites, so Achab did by Benhadad, but it was told Achab by
the Prophet, that his life should go for his life, and his people for his
people.

This Achab a wicked and Idolatrous King had such two great victories for that
the Lord always would have Israel to forsake their calfe in Bethell, and their
Idolatry to Baall in Samaria, but sin was written in the The two great
victories of Achab.
table of their hearts, and graven upon the edges of their Aultars, with a
pen of Iron, and with an Adamant clawe said the Prophet, that there was
nothing among Iere. 17.
them more precious then woods thick trees, groves, mountains, hills and
fields, for altars to serve their Idolatrous Iere. 18.
wooden gods, so greatly they offended the Lord that he asked the Heathens,
if any heard such horrible The Idolatry of Israel.
things as his people had done, yea the Priests to whom the law was committed,
the Prophets which wanted not the word of the Lord, and the grave wise
Senators.

So that Israel would not be instructed, neither take warning by the Prophets,
before the final end and sudden destruction of Jerusalem by Nabuchodonozer
king of Babylon, though the Lord commanded the Prophet Amos to strike the
lintell of the door, that the posts Amos 9.
might shake, signifying the threatening of the Lord against Israel.

So was Ezechiel commanded to take a brick and to purtray the city of
Jerusalem upon the brick with a sharp knife, to signify the destruction of
the people and of the city; and the ^ame self Prophet shows the destruction
Ezechi. 24.
of Jerusalem by Nabuchodonozer king of Babel, by a parable of a seething
pot, and the day was commanded to be written by the Prophet. Jerusalem the
the valley of vision, so named, because of the Prophets The valley of vision.
which were also called seers. The Lord said that he would bring such a
plague upon Jerusalem, that the ears of them that should hear it should
glowe, for I will send many fishers to take them, and many hunters to hunt the^
from all mountains and hills, and out of the caves of stones says the Lord.

Yet though Jerusalem was so severely prophesied Jerusalem.
by Amos, Ezechiel, and other Prophets, to be destroyed, yet they were
comforted by the Prophet Jeremy again, Iere. cap. 16.
that they should return from their captivity after seventy years, and
rebuild Jerusalem.

And as by Jeremy by hiding of his leather girdle by the river Perah, as the
Lord had commanded him, signifying Iere. 13. 33.
that by the rotte^nes of the girdle Jerusalem should be rebuilded after
seventy years. And by the selfsame Prophet they were assured by his buying
of the field Anothot, and by the hiding of his writing of possession thereof,
in signs and tokens of their liberty again, and that Ierusatem should be
builded again, and inhabited: this was but the second overthrow of Jerusalem
by Nabuchodonozer.

This was like Noah that preached the destruction of the world by a deluge,
before the deluge, and yet married Noah.
a wife, much like to the Prophet Jeremy that preached the destruction of
Jerusalem, and yet bought lands.

The Prophets used many of these signs as eyewitnesses to confirm their
memory better, and to expect with more faith the words of the Prophets.

The Prophet Jeremy proceeds forward to denounce the overthrow of those proud
kingdoms, that rejoiced Iere. cap. 51.
much at the destruction of Jerusalem, as Egypt and Babylon, and all the evil
that should come upon Babylon, Jeremy wrote it in a book, and sent Sheraiah
with his book to read it, and when he had done reading, Jeremy commanded him
to bind a stone to the book, and to cast it into the midst of the river
Euphrates, and then to say, thus shall Babylon be confounded; thus the Prophets
used besides their prophesies to add some action to make the words the more to
be remembered.

So also the Prophet Ezechiel prophesied against Egypt, and against their great
cities, saying: The sword of the Lord shall come to Memphis, to Pellusium, and
to Alexandria, I will overthrow Memphis says the Lord, I will destroy Ezechiel.
Pellusium the strength of Egypt, and I will make a great slaughter of all the
men in Alexandria.

For as Babylon was taken, Maradach overthrown, and Bell confounded, so was the
strength of Egypt, and the arm of Pharao destroyed without any recovery of
their Empires again, but so was not Jerusalem.

Nabuchodonozer in like sort as he overthrew Jerusalem, and made a conquest of
the country, even so his great city of Babylon was carried by Cyrus away into
Persia, within seventy years after he took Zedechiah the last king of Judah
captive in Babylon: so Egypt was taken by the Persians, and last by the Romans.

But Jerusalem as you heard by Jeremy, should not be so destroyed, but should
be defended against all her enemies, and the Lord shall destroy all nations
that come against Jerusalem, for the Lord has delivered Israel out of the
fiery furnace of Egypt, and from all the stratagems of the Heathens. I will
make the Princes of Judah like Zach. 12.
coals of fire among the wood, and like a firebrand in the sheffe, and they
shall devour all people round about them, says the Lord.

The four horns which Zachary saw, which scattered Jerusalem, Judah, and
Israel, but the Lord appoints Zachary.
Carpenters and Smiths, with mallets and hammers, to break the horns of those
enemies, for Jacob the Patriarch prophesied that the scepter should not depart
from Judah until Siloh should come, so that after the destruction of Jerusalem
under Nabuchodonozer, to the last destruction of the same under Titus,
Jerusalem continued her government, according to the prophecy of Jacob, so
that neither force, power, nor strrtagems could prevail against Jerusalem.

CHAP. V.
Of Semiramis stratagems in India, and of Tomiris in Scithia. Of the victories
of Alexander the great. Of Pyrrhus wars in Italy, and of the overthrow of
Xerxes army in Greece, by Leonidas at Thermopyles, and by Themistocles at
Salamina.

THe stratagems which Jerusalem used in the battles of the Lord, were nothing
like to the stratagemes of the great Monarchies and Polymarchies of the world,
who reposed their trust in their dumb Idolles and wooden gods, and in
multitude of men and beasts, as Semyramis did, a woman of great fame and
report in histories, willing to excel men in martial actions, took her
voyage into India, with such innumerable armies, that Staurobates king of India
was so frighted with the report thereof, that he caused all his Elephants to be
brought and to be set in the most show to terrify the Assirians, that it made
the Assirian army more willing to return back, then to go forwards.

Semyramis perceiving that the Assirians were afrighted and amazed, at the
sight of so many Elephants, and that the king did purposely set his Elephants
in sight to amaze the Assirians, which was the order of the India^s to terrify
all Princes with the sight of their Elephants: Semyramis stratagem in India.
Diod. sic. lib. 3. cap. 5.
she used this stratageme, caused 300. thousand great oxen to be slain, and
their skins to be stuffed and filled with heye, and to be framed in form and
fashion like Elephants: in every one of these she put in a Camel, and a man
upon his back, which she placed in the forefront of the battle to terrify
the Indians, and their king Staurobates, for (as Semyramis thought) the Indians
supposed that all the world could not bring more Elephants into the field then
the Indians could.

After these fained elephants, she placed such an infinite number of camels
behind the army, that the sight thereof much terrified Staurobates and his
army, that Semyramis by this stratagem got two great victories in India. But
after these fained elephants were betrayed by one of Semyramis Captains taken
in the wars, who by torture confessed the secrecy of Semyramis stratageme,
that she was glad to leave India, and to return to her Country.

Even so Tomyris Queen of Scythia, to requite Cyrus stratageme, by a banquet
which he made purposely to deceive the Scythians, fained to fly for fear, and
left his tents full of wine and good cheer, and suddenly returning, found the
Scythians banqueting and feasting, and so charged with wine, that they were
more ready The victory of Cyrus in Scythia.
to sleep then to fight; whereby Cyrus slew Sargapises Tomyris son, with two
hundred thousand Scythians.

The like stratagem used the Lord against the Aramites, when an Ass head was
sold in Samaria for fifty sickles, that such plenty was in Samaria as
Elizeus said before, that the Aramites left their Tents with all provisions,
and fled without any show or likeness to be done against them, but this was
a divine stratagem by the Lord.

Tomyris after her great loss which she had by Cyrus of her son and her
people, caused trenches, deep ditches, and sharp stakes to be made secretly,
and placed Tomyris stratagem against Cyrus.
armed soldiers in the same, being in narrow and straight places, dissembling
that she was not able to give a second battle to Cyrus, but feigned her self
to fly, and al her army Tomyris Stratagem.
with her, to draw the Persians after her, until she brought the^ unto these
trenches, ditches, and narrow places, where she had set in wait an innumerable
multitude of armed Scythia^s round about Cyrus and hisarmy, which upon the
sudden fell upon the Persians, and slew two hundred thousand of them, that there
was not one left alive to bring tidings unto Persia of Cyrus death; and thus
Cyrus the great king of Persia was overthrown with all his army by Tomyris
Queen of Scythia, a woman, with the like stratagem as he overthrew Tomyris
before.

Sampson who overthrew 6000. of the Philistines at one time by ye fall of a
house, at an other time slew 1000. Iud 16.
of them with a Iawe bone of an ass, who burned their rickes and their corn,
destroyed their vines, and plagued them every way. Yet this Sampson was taken,
bound, his eyes pulled out, sold and delivered to the Philistines his enemies,
by a stratagem of a woman, Dalyla his wife.

Moses being chosen general over the Egiptians against the Aethiopians, hearing
by reports of the dangerous passage through the wilderness from Egypt unto
Aethiope, devised a stratagem to pass through the wilderness full of Moses
stratagem.
noisome serpe^ts, where Moses must needs pass through, he made certain chests
of bull-rushes, and carried out of Egypt with him a number of the birds called
Ibes, which bird to kill in Egypt was a capital crime by law made, for that
they were so beneficial to Egypt, whose natural hatred is such against
serpents, that when serpents assaulted Moses in the wilderness, he would let
out his birds Ibes who assaulted them, chased them, and slew them, that Moses
by this means passed safe through the wilderness, to the wonder of both the
Egiptians and Aethiopians, and thereby had two victories over the Aethiopians.

Alexander the great, twelve hundred years after Semyramis taking his journey
with his Army into India, where, when his army saw so many Elephants set in
battle raie, along upon the river of Ganges side, it so amazed the Macedonian
army, that they told Alexander that they came not to fight with beasts but with
me^, so fearful at the sight of the Elephants, that the Macedonians would go
no further: Alexander being of invincible courage that nothing could fear him,
without stratagems, but of mere magnanimity, requested the Macedonians and
the Persians that were in his army, not to leave him their king to such
shameful reports, as the sight of a few Elephants might terrify Alexander the
great and his invincible army.

The Argyraspides his principal soldiers, having persuaded the most part of
the army to avoid shame and infamy, and to stick to their captain Alexander,
whose only request was to have them altogether at once to shoot at Alex. his
victory over king Porus.
Porus King of India, which being persuaded hardly thereunto, were forced for
shame to perform the request which Alexander sought at their hands, which they
performed, that so many shots lighted upon the king at once that he fell to the
ground from his Elephant, and the Indians fled, supposing their king to have
been slain.

Thus Alexander got the first victory in India, made a great slaughter, took
their king, being sore wounded, and delivered him to his generals and captains
to cure: and Porus was substituted a king under Alexander in India.

Alexander had not such a booty in India by taking king Porus, as he had by
Darius in Persia: the greatest treasure which Alexander brought from India were
a few Elephants, which were not before Alexanders time seen in Asia:
Alexander had such treasure in Susa, being but one city in Persia, that he
found above 40. thousand tallents of gold and silver in the kings treasury at
Susa vncoined: Diod. fic. lib. 17.
he found besides, nine thousand tallents of gold in Dariks, which were with
Darius name stamped on it. A-

Alexander also found in Persepolis the chief city of Persia, twelve hundred
thousand talents of gold and silver, The infinite treasure which Alexander
found in Persia.
which were from Cyrus time, ready always kept for the wars, for the yearly
revenues of Persia were kept in Persepolis.

It is written that Alexander the great found such a marvelous treasure in
Persia, that he loaded ten thousand Moyles, and three thousand Camels, with the
gold and silver of Persia only, and the kings warderobes. At what time he was
requested by one Thais a Curtizan of Athens, of singular beauty, that the
great palace of king Xerxes might be destroyed and burned, to revenge the
Xerxes palace burnt in Persepolis.
burning of Athens, and the injuries which Xerxes did in Greece, that it might
be said afterward that a woman of Athens, requited the wrong which Xerxes did
to Athens, with the burning and destroying of great king Xerxes palace in
Persepolis. Yet got Alexander more fame by the Elephants he brought out of
India into Asia, by the overthrow of king Porus, then by all the wealth he had
Elephants the only strength of India.
in Persia by subduing of Darius, for as Elephants were the only strength of
the Indians against Alexander with his Macedonian and Persian army, and of the
Affricans against Scypio, and others of the Roman armies.

So in Asia in many places Camels were their only force in field. So
Mithridates furnished his wars against Lucullus with Camels. So did Antiochus
the great against Scipio. So also it is written of Craesus, that the sight of
his Camels was such, that the horses overthrew their ryders, that Craesus wanne
by his Camels great victory.

All the Arabian kings used Camels in their wars, Front. lib. 2. cap. 4.
as the Indians and Affricans used Elephants, for Camels were as plentiful in
Arabia, as Elephants were in India.

After Alrxander the great, Antigonus used Elephants, after Antigonus Pirrhus,
who grew so great a soldier after he had vanquished Demetrius king Antigonus
son, that he brought from Epyre to Lucania in Italy twenty Elephants, to
fight with the Tarentines against the Romans, at what time Elephants were
first sent in Rome, as I said before: but in Hanibals time after Africa was
subdued by the Romans, Affrican Elephants were as common at Rome in a manner as
horses (though not so cruel in fight as the Indian Elephants were) yet seldom
used by the Romans in any of their wars, but rather used in triumphs.

Leaving these Elephants, and a little to speak of Thais, a Curtiza^ of Athens,
who was no less desirous to become famous upon some conquest over the
Persians, then was Semyramis Queen of Babylon over the Indians.

If the desire of fame be thus in women found, how much more in men? and
therefore Scypio Affrican would Plyni. lib. 7. cap. 30.
have the picture of Ennius the Poet put up in the Capitol, for that Ennius
wrote that while Africa was subject to the Romans, and as long as the Roman
Empire should flourish, so long the name of Scypio should flourish.

Pompey the great gave to Theophenes a whole city because he wrote much of
the name and fame of Pompey, and Alexander the great thought Achilles to be
most happy, for that his wars and victories were advanced Cic. pro Archis.
by Homer, and the same Alexander (hearing Anaxarchus alleging a place of
Democritus his master, that there were many worlds) wept, for that he had not
won half a world; thus great men sought ever to have their name advanced on
earth.

Haniball being called from Italy into Afric, after his brother Asdrubal was
slain, to resist Scipio Affrican General over the Roman army at Carthage,
Hannibal before he returned from Italy, caused tryumphant arches and pillars to
be set up to advance his fame, in many places of Italy, in the which he caused
to be engraven his Hannibals trophies in Italy.
great victories, and the number of all the Senators, Co^suls, Proconsuls,
Praetors, Roman knights and captains, which he vanquished and slew at the
four great battles, Tisinum, Trebeia, Thrasimen and Can, which were set in
Greek and Punike letters, for a memorial of his being in Italy.

Pirrhus, after that he had given two overthrows to the Romans in the behalf
of the Tarentines, had the third overthrow himself, and such an overthrow,
that of twenty Elephants which he brought with him from Greece to Italy, he
brought none back from Italy again unto Greece.

Yet Pirrhus caused an Epilogue of his victories and fame to be written and set
up in the temple of Jupiter at Tarentum, Oros. lib. 4. cap. 1.
in these words; Qui antehac inuicti fuere hos vici, victusque sum ab ijsdem,
the stout Romans which were by none before overthrown, I overthrew, and was
again by the Romans overthrown, but being blamed by his chief captains
that he confessed himself to be overthrown, said; I so overthrew the Romans,
that I dare not answer them another battle, lest I should have no more men
come out of Italy, then I have Elephants.

The Romans in the wars against Pirrhus in Italy, The Romans stratagem
against Pirrhus.
were once or twice overthrown by means of Pirrhus Elephants, but the
Romans thus annoyed in the first and second battle by the Elephants, invented
this stratagem, to fling down bundels of broom-stalks or hemp, besmeared with
pitch, tar, and brimstone, being set on Oros. lib. 4. cap. 2.
fire from the walls upon the Elephants and the soldiers in the Turrets.

Upon these Elephants were strong Towers made of wood, upon every tower was 32.
men placed that fought in them, besides the Indians that ruled them, but by the
foresaid stratageme they were all overthrown, saving Curious Detat. his
tryumphe.
four which were brought to Rome from Lucania, to set forth Curious his
triumph, but in the time of Hannibal to provoke these Elephants to fight, they
used to show them the blood of grapes and mulberies. So did Antiochus 1.
Machab. 6
in his wars against the Jews.

In Italy, between the Tarentines and the Lucans a great battle was appointed
to be fought, in the which battle Archidamus king of Lacedemonia, taking part
with the Tarentines was slain in the field by the Lucanians. Archidamus slain
in Italy


This Archidamus was the son of great Agesilaus, he had gotten diverse victories
in Greece his own country, and that victory especially over the Arcadians
called the teareles Bellum sine lachrimis.
battle, and yet this king died in Italy, being called from Greece to aid the
Tarentines.

So Pirrhus in the like, was almost taken by the Romans, but he was driven to
forsake Tarentum, and glad to his loss to fly from the Romans, though he was
the most renowned warrior in the world at that time, and to say that the
Romans had their Pirrhus, as Hannibal said after 17. years wars with the
Romans, that the Romans had also their Hannibal, and that Rome could hardly
be subdued but by Romans, for both Pirrhus and after him Hannibal, found the
Romans to be an invincible nation.

For after that Cineas Pirrhus Ambassador had returned from Rome, being
demanded of Pirrhus of what state the Romans were in Rome, what rules, what
laws, and what kind of government the Romans had.

Cineas answered that the Senate of Rome appeared to him a counsel house of
many Kings, and every man seemed to him in Rome to be such as King Pirrhus was
in Epyre.

At that time Pirrhus said to Cineas, were I king of Rome, or had I Roman
soldiers, I should soon be an Pirrhus speech of the Romans.
other Alexander. For Pirrhus was by Hanibal adjudged to be the second soldier
at that time in the world after Alexander.

Pirrhus was a man so full of courage and valor, that when he was challenged
into a combat by a General of the Army, and though he was wounded in the
battle, yet bloody as he was, he could not endure the challenge, but
answered his challenger, and killed him.

Marc. Seruilius for private challenges in combats excelled all, who had been a
Consul, and had fought in his own person 23. challenged combats of life and
death, and slew as many as he fought withal.

For among the old Romans and the Grecians, (when two armies met together)
they used to challenge Deuers kinds of combats.
combats to save blood, between one and one, as Marcellus and Britomarus:
between three and three, as the Horatians and Curatians, between three
hundred and three hundred, as the Lacedaemonians and the Argiues.

For-at the great battle between Marcellus the Roman Consul, and Britomarus
King of the Gauls, who challenged Marcellus to fight a combat between them
both in the battle at Chastidium to spare blood, and to yield the conquest
where the victory fell.

The combat being performed, and the king slain by Marcellus in the field,
both the armies joined their forces The battle of Chastidium.
together, and fought it out, that four score thousand were slain of the
Gauls, and their King, which honor happened to none of the Romans besides, but
to Romulus, who killed Acron King of the Caeninians in the like combat, and
also to Cornel. Cossus, who slew Tolumnus general of the Thuscanes.

The Romans were so joyful of this victory of Marcellus, that they caused a
massy cup of gold to be made of the spoil, and to be sent to Appollo Pythian
in Delphos.

So did Xerxes the great king of Persia, in his voyage against the Grecians,
drank a cup of wine to Neptune, and after his draught threw the cup into the
midst of the sea, as a sacrifice to please Neptune, yet had not he such good
success as Romulus and Marcellus had, for at 600000. bushels of corn daily
spent in Xerxes army.
that time Xerxes levied so great an army into Greece, that six hundred
thousand bushels of corn was daily spent in Xerxes Army, thinking to conquer
all Greece with terror and fear of such an Army, for that Greece at that time
was busy in setting forth their Olympicall feast. He came to Thermopyla, where
he was met by Leonidas Herodot. li. 7.
a noble Greek, with six hundred Grecians, and Cic. de finibus. 2.
was put to flight with the loss of twenty thousand Persians.

This was one of the most samous victories and rarest battles that ever the
Grecians had over the Persians, though the battle at Artemisium and Salamina,
by Themistocles, and the battle at Marathon by Milciades, were far greater
battles, with such slaughters as Xerxes lost three hundred thousand Persians,
yet none was fought with such a resolute courage, as noble Leonidas did to the
last man at Thermopyla.

Such was the courage of Leonidas, that when it was told him, that the Army of
the Persians were innumerable, Front. lib. 4. cap. 5.
and so many that they covered the Sun as it were with a cloud with the
multitude of their Archers, we shall fight the better said Leonidas, in the
shadow.

Xerxes Army being overthrown first by Leonidas at Thermopyla, and after by
Themistocles at Artemesium, after much slaughter of the Persians, Themistocles
soldiers thought to take away the bridge, to prevent Themistocles stratagem.
those Persian soldiers, that sought by flight to escape through the bridge.

But Themistocles forbad the contrary, saying, I had rather have the Persians
willing to depart out of Greece, then to force them desperately to fight in
Greece against their wills: this time used Themistocles a subtle stratagem, he
sent to Xerxes a secret messenger, and feigned himself to be Xerxes friend by
the messenger, and told him what danger he was in, unless he would make have
out of Greece.

Many used these kind of stratagems, as Caesar did against the Germains, and
Agesilaus against the Thaebans, Front. lib. 2. cap. 6.
for it was one of Pirrhus precepts left to his soldiers in writing, not to
resist the violence of the enemy, being desperately urged to fight.

The like stratagem used Lu. Martius, General over the Roman army against the
Affricans, having compassed round about the army of the Affricans, that either
they must fight valiantly, or die. Martius knowing well that all men will fight
desperately in extremities, commanded his soldiers to give them way enough for
passage, and to hide themselves out of sight, and presently to fall upon them
in their flight disordered, so that the poor Affricans being glad to fly,
were miserably slain of the Romans, without any slaughter of the Romans.

Clau. Nero after he overthrew the Affrican army, and their general Asdrabal,
coming to Italy to aid Haniball his brother, but being prevented, his army
was overthrown and slain, and his head cut off and sent to his brother
Haniball on a pole for a present, which so daunted Hanibals courage and his
army, that he had no longer Front. lib. 2. cap. 9.
list to stay in Italy, then Xerxes had to stay in Greece.

So Lu. Sylla sent the heads of Marius captains which were slain in the field,
upon poles to discourage his enemies, being besieged by Syllas captains at
Praeneste.

The very like did Arminius general of the Germains, Diverse stratagems.
caused the heads of those soldiers that he slew in ye field, to be sent and
cast in the trenches or rampires of the enemies, strange sights, and strange
reports, does much discourage the enemies: for Q. Sertorius stabd a soldier,
for that he said that Herculeus one of his great captains was slain in the
field, least he should discourage the soldiers: these are kind of stratagems
which great captains use, to terrify the enemies, and to encourage their own
soldiers.

So Iugurth said that he killed Cai, Marius with his own hand in the wars of
Numidia. And Leuinus said, that he killed Pirrhus with his own hand in the
wars at Tarentum: but these were words to encourage their soldiers, but it
fell out otherwise, that Iugurth was taken by Marius, and sent to Rome prisoner
from Numidia, and Leuinus the Consul overthrown by Pirrhus at the city
Heraclea, by the river Cyris.

CHAP. VI.
Of military discipline and reward of soldiers among diverse nations.

IN all nations military discipline was so taught, and martial laws so
observed, that if they deserved by their good service any preferment, though
he were but a mean soldier, he should not loose the honor and dignity of
his advancement, to rise by degrees from the lowest soldier unto the highest
captain, and so in like sort by faults and offenses committed, they should be
disgraded and casseerd from their government and regiment, and be punished
further by the laws military for them therein appointed, which I will entreat
of, when I come to speak of every several country, of their wars, battles,
and victories, then you shall find the several military discipline agreeable
to the skilfulnesse of the captain, the greatness of the victory, and the
nature of the place.

It should seem that all nations of the world had their first instruction from
the Hebrews, as well their military The original of military discipline from
the Hebrews.
discipline, as martial laws, for the Lord commanded Moses first in the
wilderness to muster the people from twenty years upwards, and likewise Moses
commanded Ioshuah to muster the Hebrews to fight against the Moabites, for
that the Moabites denied them passage through their country into the land of
Canaan.

Among the Persians imitating the Hebrews, their youths from twenty to
fifty should be brought up in wars, and no longer by the Persian law might
they continue in wars, but had their maintenance and preferment Golden
girdles given by the Hebrews and by the Persians to their soldiers as rewards
of service.
after to live at rest, and to teach the young youths of Persia military
discipline, having after their long service golden girdles given them by the
king, to show their good service to their country, and their credit with the
king of Persia.

The like law among the Scythians was duly observed and carefully examined,
that no soldier past fittie six years old should be chosen a fit soldier
for the wars, though both in Persia and in Scythia, two nations The order and
law of the Scythians.
ever in wars one with the other, their captains and officers were men of
knowledge, counsel and authority, to instruct the army by whom they should be
governed.

So also the later Romans being Polymarchies, and camp-maisters of the world,
having brought all kingdoms and countries under their government, were not
ignorant of all foreign, external martial laws, and military discipline,
but followed the Persians and the Scythians in instructing of their soldiers,
making choice of the fittest, and youngest men, from twenty to fifty, to serve
the commonwealth. Though Camillus in his Old soldiers of Alexander and Caesar
much esteemed.
wars against the Latins and the Volscians, and Alexander the great in his
wars against the Grecians and the Persians made choice of skillful and old
soldiers, which were brought up in wars before with Philip of Macedon his
father; to be in his Camp. So likewise did Caesar honor much his old
soldiers.

In later time the kings of Syria used to send collers of gold, robes of
purple, and to be called the kings friends, to the chief captains of the
Jews, so the Jews were wont to send to the Romans, and to the Lacedaemonians,
targets and crowns of gold to be in league and favor Collers of gold, etc.
with the Romans, so that all nations sought favor and friendship at the
Romans. So the Carthagineans sent to the Romans gifts and rewards for captains
and generals.

The Roman soldiers that were of courage, and known as Praetorian,
legionarie or manupular soldiers, were rewarded with such gifts and presents,
as they were in all countries preferred and advanced from one office to
another, esteemed and extolled, with sundry kinds of gifts and rewards, as
crowns and garlands, some crowns Crowns and garlands of the Romans.
made of Laurel, some made of myrtle, some of Popley, some of Olive, and some
of Pine, some made of Oaken boughs, for those that had saved cities or
citizens.

There were in the later time of the Emperors, new Suet. in vita Calignlae.
kinds of crowns invented, by the Emperor Caligula, made, some like the
Sun, others like the stars, called Exploratoriae coronae, Tribunes and
great Captains had bracelets and golden ringes.

The Romans wanted no variety of crowns and garlands, beside money, lands,
and other gifts. Besides there were certain special crowns and garlands
called Murales coronae, made like the walls of a city, for those that scaled
Murales coronae.
walls, as Cicinnanus; for others that besieged fortes, as Corilianus, crowns
were made of green grass, called Coronae graminea: for those that saved
cities, or by sea fight, crowns made like a ship, called Coronae nauales were
given, as to Lu. Varro, by Pompey the great, in his wars against the Pirates.
Such crowns and rewards were chiefly by the general appointed by the law of
arms, to be given Aulus Geli. lib. 5. cap. 6.
to such soldiers that had either scaled walls, besieged forts, saved cities,
or by sea fight. For even as the Consuls and Generals might claim a triumph by
their victories, so might the Colonels, Captains, and gallant soldiers,
claim their garla^ds, and military rewards for them for their service
appointed. It was lawful for any Roman knight to come with his horse in his hand
before the Ce^sors The custom of the knights of Rome.
of Rome, declaring every captain under who^ he served, what countries he had
bin in, and having declared an account of his victtories and service,
requesting to be dispenst with for going any longer to the wars, according to
the custom of the knights of Rome, he might with license of the Censors take
his ease according to the law.

So Lucullus gave over after he had gotten many victories and triumphs, and
much enriched Rome and himself, took his rest and quietness according to the
law of the Romans, though after he was in scoff called by Pompey the great,
the Romain Xerxes, for his great fare, and idle Xerxes Romanus.
life in Rome, yet he escaped thereby the tragical end of Pompey, whom
Lucullus called the great Agamemnon, to requite the name of Xerxes by Pompey
given unto him, he also escaped the tragical end of Caesar, who would not take
his rest before he became Perpetuus Dictator, to be slain in the Senate. So
also of Crassus, who could not stay in Rome being the wealthiest man in Rome,
and thought no man wealthy, but he that could keep an army of his own
charge, but would go seek for more wealth into Asia, to be slain in Parthia,
and to have gold melted in his mouth, being dead among the Parthians in
reproach of his avarice, as Cyrus had his head bathed in blood in Scithia, in
reproach of his tyranny.

Had Scipio when he had joined Numantia unto Carthage, and vanquished Hanibal,
followed Lucullus in taking his ease, after his great victories. Had Cicero
himself Foresight i^ great wisdom.
after he had quenched Catelines co^spiracy, quieted himself, no doubt his
head had not bin brought by Popilius to Mar. Antonius. Had M. Crassus been not
moved with the sight of Lucullus triumph, stayed in Rome, and taken his rest as
Lucullus did, his head had not bin sent to Herodes by Surena. But I will return
to military rewards of the Persians, among whom diverse military gifts were
appointed for soldiers.

The king gave them a golden girdle, and rings of gold that had either by
policy or manhood gained fame by service, whereby they were known to be in
the kings favor, and therefore to be accepted and reputed among the Persians as
gallant soldiers, in any province of the Persians.

Among the Romans and the old Gauls, as among Vlpian. de infamia militum.
the Persians, the greatest honor that they could give their soldier, was to
give them girdles, and the greatest infamy and dishonor that might be, was to
loose their girdles from them, which was as great a dishonor, as to take their
spears out of their hands, or their horse from under them.

The Kings of Persia herein followed the Hebrews, for in the time of Absolon
in his wars against his father in the wood of Ephraim, where he hanged by the
hair 2. Reg. 18.
of his head between two oaks, at what time Ioab would have given the
messenger that brought these tidings, In David's time girdles given to soldiers.
ten sickles of silver and a soldiers girdle, if he had killed Absolon; and
therefore girdles were given to soldiers among the Hebrews, in the time of the
kings of Israel, before the kings of Persia.

Among the Hebrews before the time of the kings, after they came to the land
of Canaan from Egypt, the soldiers had lands, towns, cities, countries, and
what spoil soever they gained by the sword, for all that they won in the
land of Canaan, and other countries, was equally divided between the Hebrew
soudiers and the twelve tribes.

The Kings of Asia so esteemed the old and chief soldiers of Alexander the
great, called Argyraspides, that The honor of the soldiers Argiraspides in
Asia.
they sat in counsel with the kings of Asia, as Judges over other soldiers,
to direct and instruct them in military discipline, and after if occasion
required, to correct them for military faults, and martial offenses, having
their allowance out of the kings treasury: for these captains after the death
of Alexander the great, contemned to serve under Antigonus, Seleucus,
Demetrius, or Lysimachus, which during the time of Alexander, were named but
Argyraspides themselves.

In Egypt the chief and ancient soldiers called Calasiries, had after good
service done, besides their martial The allowa^ce of the kings of Egypt to
their soldiers Calasiries
allowance, a certain proportion of bread and flesh, and a measure of wine, by
the king appointed in several cities and garrisons of war in Egypt, to
instruct the Egiptian youths in martial affairs.

Even so the Ethiopian kings, imitating the manner The Aethiopians.
of the Egiptians, observed the like law, their old and chief soldiers being
bruised and broken in the wars, called Hermothibij, with a certain
proportion of allowance of bread and flesh.

The Grecians very careful to maintain their good The Judges Amphictions
consulted of the public wars in Greece.
soldiers, they met together at the temple of Neptune in Isthmos, and there
the Judges of Greece, called Amphictions did consult, and with judgment
discern, and thoroughly examine the deserts and service of every well deserved
soldier, with such rewards and gifts as were appointed for them accordingly by
martial law. The Amphictions as you heard, were wont twice a year, in March
and September to meet, the one in Isthmos, the other in Trozaena, wherein the
one seven cities appeared, and in the other twelve, to consult of martial
causes.

So that it was not lawful among the barbarous Scythians, that any soldier
should claim or challenge any The Scythians law for soldiers.
martial reward by the law of Scythia, unless he had brought an enemies head
slain by himself in the field, upon his spear unto the camp, and presented
it before his captain, he might not be partaker of any booty or pray among
other soldiers, without some exploit done worthy of it.

CHAP. VII.
Of provisions and maintenance of soldiers. Of the honorable burials of them
that were slain in the field, and of diverse Monuments.

AMong all Nations of the world, the greatest care they had was to provide
means to maintain soldiers, that Solon made a law in Athens, that the The
law of Solon for soldiers.
rewards due unto those valiant soldiers that died in the wars, should be
distributed unto their children, being alive, and those gallant Captains that
died in the field, should be honorably buried, with pillars and arches set
upon their graves, and their names written upon them in Ceramicus and such
other places.

This law of Solon was revived two hundred and three score years after by
Alexander the great, who so 120. knights buried in the field Adrasteis by Alex.
much honored and advanced the worthiness of martial men, that he caused to
be buried in the field Adrasteis, one hundred and twenty knights, that died
valiantly in the field, and caused strong arches, and pillars of marble to be
made over their graves, with their statues and Images, and their names written
upon them, with their due commendation as an honorable monument of their
perpetual fame.

Licurgus law was, that no dead man should put his name in brass, in Iuorie,
or otherwise upon his Tomb, Alex. Neapolit. lib. 6. cap. 4.
unless he had been slain in the field like a valiant soldier, fighting for
his country.

These Funeral monuments were used long time before the Greeks among the
Hebrews, who used to set up pillars and monuments on the graves of the dead,
the ancient Fathers did it to testify the hope they had of the resurrection,
not as the Gentiles did it, for pomp and pride of their triumphs and
victories, but as monuments and virtuous visions.

Jacob after his vision had in his dream, took the Bethel the house of God.
stone that he had laid under his head, set it up, and made a pillar of stones
in that place, and after he had anointed the same with oil, which was the
first anointing Genesis 25.
we read of in scripture, he named it Bethel, which was Luz before, which
name continued Bethaue^ the house of iniquity.
until Ieroboams time, 784. years, at what time Jeroboam erected a golden
calfe to be worshipped, and therefore was named Bethauen, as mount Olyuet, for
that it Osee. 10.
was full of Images, Idols, and Aultars in the time of the Kings of Judah, was
named the mount of corruption.

After this, Jacob when his wife Rachel dyed at the birth of her son whom she
named Benoni, which Jacob Monuments of virtuous men.
after his wives death called Benjamin, on whose grave he pitched up a pillar
of stones, as Joshua had the picture of the Sun on his grave.

So Samuel took a stone and pitched it between Mazphah and Seen, and called
the name thereof the stone of help, as a mark and a trophey of victory which
The stone of help.
the Israelites had over the Philistines. Yet Absolon following the Gentiles,
of very pomp and pride reared up a pillar, saying: I have no male child, and
therefore 2. Reg. 18.
I will pitch up a pillar as a monument to have my name in remembrance, and he
called it after his own name Absolons pillar, to have his name great.

There was ever care in former age of holy men's burials, long before Ceramicus
in Athens, or the field of Mars Ceramicus in Athens.
in Rome, these places were appointed, where Greek and Roman captains were
buried with their pomp and Mars field in Rome.
pride together.

Abraham the Patriarch had care for the burial of the faithful, and bought a
field therefore in Hebron for the Abraham bought a field for his burial.
burial of him, his wife Sarah, his children, and posterity.

So Jacob did command his son Joseph to bring his body from Egypt to Hebron.
The like charge gave Joseph to his children when he died.

We read of certain kings of the Gentiles, who had such care of their burial,
as Menedes king of Egypt, imitating Abraham, appointed a place of burial for
himself and the kings of Egypt that lineally succeeded him, of his name and
stock, which continued the reign of 17. kings successively after king Menedes.

In like manner Perdica king of Macedonia, showed to his son Argaeus a place,
where he himself and his posterity The care of burials of the Gentiles.
after him should be buried, for he was instructed by an Oracle, that as long
as they buried the kings of Macedonia in that place, the kings should continue
in one stock and family, which continued three hundred and three score years,
until the time of Alexander the great, who died in Babylon out of Macedonia,
and was buried in Alexandria in Egypt.

This much I wrote to prove the Hebrews to be fathers of all antiquities; and
now to Athens, and to their soldiers, where with such care they were looked
unto after any victory that their hairs should be curled, and The houor of the
Athenia^s to their generals for victories.
trimmed up with silver fillets, others were crowned with a knot like the roll
that women wear on their heads, others were decked with garlands of myrtle. In
this the Athenians seemed equal to the Romans, that they brought all the
Images and statues of their gods, and all the whole state of Athens with such
solemnity and pomp, came crowned with Olives, Myrtle, and Iuye, to meet the
co^queror at their gates with the song of Paeana, at what time the Orators and
Poets contended upon theaters to excel one an other in the praise of the
conqueror and his captains, as they did of Demetrius, and others.

For among the Grecians diverse places of exercise were appointed for Orators
and Poets, as at Thesius grave, and at Helicon, where some in Comedies and some
in Tragedies, contended for victories, where Sophocles was judged to be victor
in his Tragedies over Aeschylus, for the which he was rewarded with a Bucke
Goat.

Again in the second games and plays the Poets met in the City of Elis,
where Menander was overthrown by Philomene in the contention of Comedies, for
the which Philomene had in reward a Bull.

So Theopompus, Isocrates scholar, had the garland given him by consent of all
the Judges.

Hesiodus in verses co^tended with Homer, and had at that time only the
garland given him, for the victory thereof Hesiodus wrote an Epigram upon a
pillar, in memory of his victory over Homer in Helicon.

Among all these Poets and Orators, there was one woman Alex. Neapolit. genial.
lib. 6. cap. 19,
called Corinna, so excellent in verse, that she was named Musca Lirica, and
contended with Pindarus the Poet in Thaebes in verses, and had 5. several
victories, for the which victories she was 5. times crowned with garla^ds.

And because Corinna shall not be alone without fellows, Arete, Aristippus the
Philosophers daughter, shall be the second, who after her fathers death ruled and
governed Cic. de natura. deoz. li. 1.
Aristippus scholars, and read philosophy in Athens.

So Leonitum as a third fellow, though light, yet so learned, that she durst
write and that in Atticall phrase against that great Philosopher Theophrastus.

Agamemnon General of all Greece in the wars of Troy, so rewarded Ajax for a
combat that he fought with Hector hand to hand, with the sacrificing of an ox
with gilt horns; and rewarded Achilles for that he killed Hector Alex.
Neapolit.
in the field, with ten talents of gold, twelve horses, and seven fair women
of Lesbia, that was the old custom Achilles.
and manner of ancient time in that country to reward such champions.

So Themistocles was crowned with a crown of the sacred Olive tree, and
gratified with a rich triumphant Themistocles honored of the Grecians.
chariot by the Lacedemonia^s, for the delivery of Greece at the battle of
Marathon, from the invasion of the Persians.

Horatius Cocles had a statue of marble to him erected in the palace of common
meetings, for that he resisted the army of the Hetruscans, being but himself,
standing on a bridge of wood over Tiber.

The reward of soldiers among the Scythians was, to drink out of the Kings
cup, as often as they had brought The manner of the Scythians to honor good
soldiers in the field.
an enemies head to the camp, and might by the law of Scythia make claim to
drink of the kings cup, as often as any soldier slew an enemy in the field, and
brought his head to his captains tent.

It was the manner and custom among the Scythians, that the kings cup should be
carried up and down in the field to honor those noble captains that had well
deserved by service to drink out of it.

So among the Indians the soldier that had brought the head of an enemy to his
captain, should have for his reward, a black horse, and a black bull, which
color was far more esteemed in India then any color else.

CHAP. VIII.
Of triumphs, tropheys, and victories, and of military laws, and advancing of
soldiers.

NO victory was gotten in Rome, without feasts, sacrifices, and triumphs
made, to annimate the generals, captains, and soldiers, valiantly to stand
in the face of their enemies. For Pompey the The 3. triumphs of Pompey.
great in his three triumphs over Africa, Asia, and Europe, carried captive
three hundred, thirty, and nine kings, kings children, princes, peers, and
noble men, brought as prisoners and pledges with him to Rome. In this Pompey
was compared by Plutarch to Alexander the great, for his triumphs over three
quarters and parts of the world.

Others brought in their triumphs withal pomp and solemnity, crowned with
Laurel and with Olive garlands, the forms, likenesses, and pictures of
mountains, hills, woods, cities, towns, and rivers, situated in those regions
whom they conquered.

Lu. Cornel. Scypio, after he had put Antiochus the great The triumph of Scypio
Asiaticus.
to flight, he carried into Rome in his triumph, the likeness and form of an
hundred and thirty cities and towns which he conquered in Asia, and therefore
was surnamed Asiaticus.

Luc. Sylla in like manner carried in his triumph The triumph of Lu. Sylla.
all the Cities of Greece, which were set out very lively in large ensigns,
and painted bravely in banners and flags.

So did Marcellus carry the city of Syracusa in his triumph set out on long
tables.

So did Caesar carry the likeness and form of the river Nilus, and the river
of Rien in long tables painted, Caesar's triumph.
with the picture of Scypio and Cato.

Pau. Aemilius triumphed over Persius king of Macedonia, and his children, whom
he conquered, and brought them captives and prisoners into Rome. In this
triumph Aemilius brought all the old ancient monuments The noble triumph of
Pau. Aemilius.
of the Kings of Macedonia, and the greatness of Alexanders Empire, which was
brought by Alexander from Persia to Macedonia, was trodden under foot in one or
two victories, and the Empire carried by Aemililius, from Macedonia to Rome.

In this triumph of Pau. Aemilius, the rich armours of all the Macedonian and
Illyrian kings, then all the plate, cubbords, and Jewels of the ancient kings
of Macedonia, were carried in charriots, after followed four hundred princely
crowns of gold, which the cities of Greece sent to honor Aemilius victory,
and to beautify his triumph, in the which triumph such wealth and treasure was
brought to Rome by Pau. Aemilius, as far exceeded the triumph of Scypio
Asiaticus, who carried in his triumphs the pictures of Towns and Cities of
Asia painted in tables, or the triumphs of Caesar, who brought but the
likeness of hills, mountains, and rivers: or of Pompey the great, who brought
in his several triumphs 339. kings, kings children, princes, peers and
noblemen, yet none of these were equal to Pau. Aemilius, in respect of the
wealth he brought in one triumph to Rome, who brought all the treasure and
wealth of two kingdoms, Macedonia and Illyria, not in show, but in substance.

Others brought in their tryumphes, the Images and statues of the kings which
were slain, or otherwise died before they could be taken captives, as
Lucullus brought the statue or picture of Mithridates, set out and painted very
lively in ensigns.

Scipio carried in his tryumphe at Carthage, the Image The Image of Asdrubal.
of Asdrubal, Hannibals brother.

So Augustus Caesar brought the Image of Cleopatra to Rome in his tryumphe,
after she slew her self to bear The Image of Cleopatra.
company with her friend Mar. Antonius.

Others brought in their tryumphes kings alive, as Iuba brought in triumph to
Rome.
Iul. Caesar brought king Iuba and his son with all their treasures of
Mauritania, in great tryumphe and pomp into Rome.

Marius brought in his tryumphe Iugurth, with all Iugurth.
spoils and wealth of Numidia, with all the solemnity that could be.

Yet in the infancy of Rome, before Rome grew to any greatness, the first
kings tryumphed on foot into the city, as Romulus, who though he tryumphed
over king Acron whom he slew in a combat challenged, yet he being a king
carried upon his shoulders the rich spoils The combats of Romulus Cornel.
Cossue and Marcellus.
of the same king, being set in order upon a young green bough of an oak, as
trophies of tryumphes, without either horse, coach, Elephant, or brave shows,
and yet his tryumphe was for two kingdoms.

So did Corneli. Cossus, who slew fighting in the field hand to hand, Tolumnus
General of the Thuscans.

And so did Marcellus, who likewise slew with his own hand Britomarus, king of
the old Gauls, before they were called Frenchmen, this honor happened to none
of the Romans besides, but to these three, for Rome yet was scant heard of
out of Italy.

Vechoris king of Egypt, by Herodot called Sesostris, for examples sake of
courage and fortitude of soldiers, and to kindle their minds to attempt great
exploits in wars, he used when he had overthrown a valiant Army, and manly
soldiers, he would set up a marble pillar, The manner of Sosostris tryumphes.
and upon it the picture of a man in brass, with a naked sword in his hand,
as a trophey in triumph of his victory over hardy men: and if he had
vanquished but a cowardly company and timorous soldiers, he would cause to
be put up the picture of a naked woman with a Glass in her hand and a comb,
to disgrace the soldiers which he had conquered, signifying they were
timorous, cowardly and womanish soldiers.

For honor and reward of military discipline of all kingdoms and countries,
were invented by wit, and by law confirmed, to set up monuments of fame to
great conquerers and noble Captains, to stir up young men to embrace Arms,
and to exercise martial feats.

As Pericles in Athens had nine several trophies for Pericles trophies.
nine several victories, and upon every one his name written.

So Sylla for his victory against Archelaus had a trophey Syllaes trophies.
set up, and his name written with these words, Victoria and Sylla.

Domitius Aenobarbus, and Fabius Maximus, for their victories against the
Allobroges, were the first among The trophies of Dom. anobarbus and Fab. Max.
the Romans that builded up high towers of stone and pillars of wood, and
hanged the enemies armors and weapons thereon, as trophies and momuments of their
victories.

Sicinius Dentatus, to signify his singular commendations, Sicinius Dentat.
Rewards for ser^ce.
had for his noble exploites in diverse wars, eight golden crowns, four
civil crowns, three scaling crowns called Murales coronae, four score and
three chains, eighteen pure spears, and had a hundred three score bracelets
given him in rewards and gifts, for his brave service in several battles.

The like praise had Manlius Capitolinus, who besides four civil crowns, had
twenty six military rewards: and before he was seuenteen years old, wanne two
rich spoils of the enemy. So forward to win fame and become famous were the
old Romans.

The old Romans used to honor them that saved a citizens life with a garland
of oaken boughs, for so was Corilianus by the Dictator Titus Largius, at the
last Corilianus.
battle of Torquine the proud, crowned with a garland of oaken boughs.

Besides these crowns, garlands, chains, bracelets, rings, and armor, given
by the General, they had certain military garments, and certain acres of
ground, Lexagraria.
divided between worthy and well deserved soldiers by the law Agraria,
appointed to encourage the soldiers to hardiness.

Alexander the great so esteemed the Tribune of the soldiers, that he would
admit none in the place under three score years old, unless he had been of
great skill, long experience, and a man of good and long service, Plyni lib.
33. cap. 1.
to whom Alexander the great admitted to wear golden rings, as a reward of a
military honor, neither was it lawful to any Roman citizen, unless he
were a Senator, or of the order of knighthood, to wear golden ringes in
ancient time.

This officer called Tribunus militum with the Romans, was named with the
Lacedaemonians Harmostes, an officer of the care and charge of service, as the
Tribune Harmostes.
or the Collonell of soldiers, and might not continue in that office past six
months, as long as the Dictator of Rome was to enjoy his office.

And when the Emperor, Prince or General, would allow and commend the office
and place of the Tribune to a grave skilful Captain, he would put a naked
sword The form and manner of making of Tribunes.
in his hand, signifying his authority over the soldiers, repeating the
words of the law of arms before the whole army, set down in these words;
Milites quibus iussierunt, Parento, eorumque Tribuni sunto.

The same form used Traiane the Emperor in his time, when he appointed Zura a
Tribune over the Praetorian soldiers, giving a sword in his hand saying;
Accipe gladium, quem prome etc. If I use this government Dio. in Traiano.
well, use it for me, If I do evil, use it to destroy me.

None might be with the Romans admitted to be Tribunes of the soldiers,
unless he had been before a leader of the band called Cohortes, neither might
any man be taken Harmostes among the Lacedaemonians, unless he had been a
Captain, or a leader of the band called Agema. Agema.


In all countries the honor of arms was advanced, and the skillful soldiers
so esteemed, that one nation practiced how to excel another in feats of arms.

As among the nations called Auctyles, people of Lybia, Auctyles.
who practiced to fight in the dark with their enemies, to excel others, they
became so prompt and ready, that they made no difference between night and
day, either to fight on horse or on foot.

The people called Arij dwelling in Russia, delighted Ar^
so much to fight in the dark with black shields, and black apparel, for
that one should not see the other.

So we read of the Lacedaemonians, because they would excel others, they would
in the dark night go to the field, and learn to fight in the dark one with
the other, to excel others in martial knowledge.

Iugurth when he would enter battle with the Romans, he would make choice
of his time in the evening, Front. lib. 2. cap. 1.
that if his soldiers should be overthrown, they might better escape, and
hide themselves in the night time, then in the day time.

So Mithridates kings of Pontus, fled from Pompey the great in the night time
to save himself, but 40000. of his soldiers were slain.

The soldiers notwithstanding of Athens, might not by the law of Solon go out
of their chamber in the night Soldiers might not walk in the night time in
Athens.
time without light, such differing of military discipline was between Athens
and Sparta, for the busie-headed Orators at Athens, often troubled and moved
the best captains to seditions, and therefore Solons law was observed, so that
no captain might go abroad in the night without light.

In like sort the Parthians (as the Athenians) were by Parthians.
law commanded not to fight in the dark.

The Persian king had besides the soldiers called Homotimi, others which were
ten thousand chosen soldiers, of the best and chiefest men in all Persia,
named Turmae immortales, the immortal band, a thousand of these were elected
to be the kings chief guard, called Mellephori the kings guard of Persia.
Mellephori, these had chains, bracelets, ringes, and girdles of gold, and
only commanded to attend upon the kings person, and were such soldiers in
Persia, as the guard of Romulus called Celeres, were with the Romans.

With the Lacedaemonians their chief and strongest soldiers called Neodomadae,
which Sparta ever kept Neodomadae chief soldiers of tho Lacedemonian.
in store, as their only stay in any great battle, against the Persians,
these plagued the Persians, and therefore called of the Persians Gardates.

The Turk has in his principal band called Ianizari, one thousand, two
hundred chosen men of the Ianizari chief soldiers of the Turks.
greatest skill, and longest experience in war, which is among the Turks,
called Robur and Medu^la Turcici excercitus, instituted by Amurates, the second
of that name, and resembling much the Macedonian Army called Phalanges, for
the Turk imitateth the Macedonians, as the pattern of their military
discipline in all martial exployts.

For as that little kingdom was much renowned by the fame and fortune of
Alexander the great, who brought the Empire from Persia to Macedonia, so was
that kingdom and other kingdoms, by civil wars between his captains
destroyed within few years after Alexander.

Now it follows after we have spoken of the honor and tryumphes of nobles,
captains, and skillful soldiers, and after the gifts and rewards of good
soldiers, to speak of the punishments due to such idle insolent soldiers,
that were seditious and rebellious within their camp.

CHAP. IX.
Of several military punishments by martial laws, both of the Jews and of
the Gentiles, in diverse kingdoms and countries.

Diverse punishments by diverse great notable captains were inflicted upon
rebellious, seditious and cowardly soldiers, As first of the punishment of the
Hebrews, as Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, Chore, Dathan, and Abiron.
were so punished for their disobedience, that the earth swallowed them up
alive, and many of their accomplices, to the number of two hundred and fifty.

Achan for stealing of the Babilonian garment at the Achan punished.
city of Ai, he, his wife; his children, and all his family, was burnt to
death at the commandment of Joshua, so severe the law of the Lord was
against disobedient soldiers in diverse places of the wilderness, as at Massa,
Riphidim, and Meribah, that it spared not Moses General of the army, and the
servant of the Lord, it far excelled the punishment of the Gentiles, besides
in the wilderness they were stung and bitten with serpents, and venomous
beasts, as also they were left among the Canaanites, Amalekites, and others,
that should be as pricks in their sides, and needles in their eyes, to punish
them.

So the soldiers that obeyed Moses, Joshua, and others, were rewarded with all
good blessings, with Manna and Quails from heaven, and drunk of every rock.

Besides, Moses was commanded to lift up a brazen Serpent in the wilderness,
that those that were stung, bitten, and daungerously hurt by Serpents, by
looking on the brazen serpent should be healed. Thus were the Hebrews forty
years in the wilderness, where their The brazen serpent.
shoes were not worn, their apparel, nor their garments changed, and thus
were the soldiers of Moses both punished for their faults, and rewarded for
their service. Now to the punishment military of the Gentiles.

The Romans which excelled all Nations for their liberality in rewarding good
soldiers, and for their severity in punishing evil soldiers, had such
cruel several laws to inflict punishment, as far exceeded all people.

As Fabius Maximus, was so severe for his military punishment, that he would
cut off the right hand of any mutinous or seditious soldier within the camp.

Aufidius Cassius, being Consul and General in the field, would cut off both
the hands and the feet of those soldiers that so offended, saying, that they
should have no hands to fight with the enemies, nor feet to go to the enemies.

Even so Scipio Affrican commanded those soldiers that were seditious, to be
devoured of beasts, and Seditious and mutinous Roman soldiers punished.
Paul. Aemilius commanded them to feed Elephants.

So Iul. Caesar thought no punishment sufficient for those that were seditious
among their fellows in the camp, and fled from the camp to the enemies. The
Romans would not suffer the least offense in a soldier unpunished. It was
Caesar's rule and order that his soldiers should come as brave to the field as
himself, that no man knew the difference betwixt Caesar and his soldiers. It
was not so with Agesilaus, as great a captain The difference between
Agesilaus and Caesar.
accepted among the Grecians, as Caesar was among the Romans, and as much
feared of the Persians and of all Asia, as Caesar was feared among the Gauls
and all Europe.

Agesilaus went as simple among his soldiers, as the basest soldier he had.
Many great captains imitated Agesilaus in all his discipline military, who
only among the Greeks for his victories and greatness of mind, was called
great Agesilaus, whose stratagems were notable; for that noble captain and
great soldier Agesilaus having wars with Tysaphernes, the king of Persia his
Front. lib. 1. cap. 8.
general, feigned himself to remove his camp, and to go to Caria, by which
stratagem he entised Tysaphernes to follow after him, Agesilaus in the mean
season entered into Lydia, sacked cities, slew many, and carried much of the Kings
treasure, and of the wealth of Lydia, into Stratagems.
Greece. Many the like stratagems used Agesilaus against the Persians.

Antigonus king of Macedonia, compelling the Aetolians into a narrow straight
siege, ready to famish, and being advised that the Aetolians would come out
desperately Front lib. 2. cap. 6.
to fight, and valiantly to die, before they would either yield or be famished,
commanded certain of his captains to draw back, and to hide themselves, to
give them an open passage to fly, and in their flight to set upon them.

Epaminondas with his Thaeban Army, being ready to strike a battle with the
Lacedaemonians, used this stratagem, to make his soldiers believe, that the
Lacedaemonians, Front. lib. 1. cap. 11.
if they should have victory, had decreed to kill, and to make an end of all
the Thaebans, and to bring their wives and children into servitude and bondage
to Sparta, to make his Thaeban soldiers to fight more valiantly for their
country, for their wives, and for their children.

So Christ Jesus does instruct us to fight the battles of our salvation against
Satan, with all our hearts and minds, least he should bring us in perpetual
servitude, not to Sparta, but unto Gehenna.

Marcellus used those soldiers that began to fly from the battle, and for
fear forsook their standart. Marcellus brought those at the next time, and
placed them Marcellus military punishment for soldiers
in the forefront of the battle, either there to die like men in the battle,
or else to recover the shame and ignomie that they had sustained in the last
battle before.

Appuis Clau. appointed those fugitive soldiers that would first fly, and
turn their backs to the enemy, to be brought bound before the whole army, and
to number The law of Decimation.
them, and after to take every tenth soldier by Decimation, and to kill them
with clubs in the open sight of the army. Many Roman generals used this
punishment according to the ancient law of Decimation.

Alexander the great caused two captains that kept a castle, committed to
their charge by Alexander, for that they fought not in their place, the one was
slain with the other being bound to a post, and shot to death by Front. lib.
4. cap. 6.
captains with arrows. Yet Alexander was of that gentle and mild nature,
that when he saw one of the soldiers shaking, and ready to dye for cold in
the winter time, and cold weather, Alexander sitting in his chair at the
fire, made him sit in his seat and warm him well, saying: If thou were borne in
Persia, and had sat in king Cyrus chair, thou should die for it, but not
so in Macedonia, to sit in Alexanders chair.

The like humanity was in Xenophon, being on horseback, who commanded
certain of his soldiers, to take a hill hard by, one of the company murmured,
Front. lib. 4. cap. 6.
and said, it is easy to command on horseback, Xenophon presently lighted,
and made that base murmuring soldier to ride in his place, and he marched on
foot up the hill before his soldiers, until the Army was ashamed, and
forced him to take his horse again from the soldier, whom the soldiers
reviled and railed on, beating and buffeting him.

Bochoris decreed a military law against offensive Diod. sic. lib. 2. cap. 3.
soldiers in Egypt, that would not obey their Captain or forsake their
standart, or any way were seditious, they should be removed from the place
where they served, and become again as base soldiers as they began.
Bochoris military law in Egypt.


Also if there were any soldier that would betray any secrets of the Camp to
the enemies, he should have his tongue cut out of his head by the law of
Bochoris.

Iuba King of Mauritania, for the like offense, for that certain soldiers of
his Army fied from their company to their tents, caused them to be hanged up on
a gybbet, in the midst of the camp.

The Persians thought it no greater infamy to their soldiers, then to break
the law of their country, the The Persian punishment.
penalty whereof was, that the idle, sloathfull, and cowardly soldiers,
should bear on their backs a knowna strumpet, or a common woman, through the
whole camp in the sight of all the Army, open faced and bareheaded, because he
might be known for ever after to be a defamed ignominious soldier, and
therefore Scypio in his wars against the Affricans, and Artaxerxes in his
wars in Persia, forbad by the laws made, that no woman should follow the
camp, least soldiers should Women banished from the camp of Persia.
be among women out of the way, when they should be in the way to fight in the
field amongst men. Yet Alexander the great, and Alexander Seuerus the Roman
Emperor, allowed women to follow the camp.

Among the Lacedaemonians, the only skillful soldiers of Greece, the Judges
called Ephori, made a law in Ephori.
Sparta, as the Ariopagites made in Athens, or as the officers Censores did in
Rome, against vagabounds, runnagates, and idle soldiers. Ariopagit^.


Among the Macedonians it was not lawful for any man that was not Miles
adscriptus, and had not taken a military oath to be a soldier in any war
that the Macedonians took in hand: neither might a soldier unsworn be
admitted to fight or draw his sword against the enemy, so careful then was
old age to keep the order of military discipline, and martial laws.

The law among the Syracusans was, that the General of the horsemen did write
the names of those soldiers in tables that disordered themselves, or troubled
Syracusa.
others of the Army, that they might be punished after the battle, with such
punishments as was appointed for them by the laws of Syracusa.

The people called Daci, had a law writren in their country, that when their
soldiers had not fought stoutly Daci.
or manfully, they should lie with their heads downward, toward the beds
feet, without pillow or boulster, and be at their wives commandment, and
their heads to lie at their feet, if they should break this law, their wives
might have an action against them in law.

Aurelianus the Emperor so severely charged the Tribunes and Colonels, that in
any case they would punish those soldiers, that would either steal a lamb, or
pullet, either grapes from the vine, or pluck ears from the corn.

Observe among all nations, the punishments and seuerities of offenses, and
that by the rudest nation of the world. As among the barbarous Scythians,
Tamberlanes severity was such, that a poor woman complained of one of his
soldiers, that he took a piece of cheese and a little milk, and after
refused to pay, Tamberlane Tamberlanes severity.
caused the army to stay at the complaint of the woman, and to march before the
woman's face, until she found that soldier, he caused his body to be ripped,
and opened in the sight of all the Army, and when he saw milk and cheese in
his mawe, he said to the woman, behold, I have made this soldier to pay well
for thy cheese and milk, and so will I make others that so offend.

An other example in Tamberlane, being presented by a poor husbandman with
great treasure which he found in a vessel as he was digging in his own ground,
Tamberlane demanded whether his fathers name and Image were upon the^, causing
the superscription of the money to be read; being answered that it was Caesar's
the Romain Emperors, he said, the^ they be not Tamberlanes, and commanded that
none of the soldiers should rob or spoil the poor man of the benefits of his
good luck by his travel.

This was that great Scythian Tamberlane, that had six hundred thousand
footmen, and four hundred thousand horse against Pazaites the Turk, and gave
him battle at mount Stella, a place more famous, for that there Pompey
Pazaites subdued and taken by Ta^berlane.
the great overcame Mithridates king of Pontus: there Tamberlane overthrew the
Turks, and took Pazaites their Emperor, kept him, and fed him in a cage under
his table, whom he carried afterward in a cage every where in his wars. The
like infamy happened to one of the Emperors of Rome, by Sapor king of Persia, who
kept him all the days of his life as a block to mount on horse. Ualerianus.


But Sesostris king of Egypt, did far pass the Scythian Sesostris.
and the Persian kings in his victories, for he carried those kings and princes
whom he subdued, bound round about his coach from country to country, from
region to region, as in a great triumph, wherein Sesostris gloried much.

And yet all these three came short to Adonizebech, who kept seventy kings
under his table, whose toes and thumbes he cut off. Thus cruel tyrants have
the like punishment oftentimes, as others were by them punished.

CHAP. X.
Of certain noble Roman Captains, compared with Greek Captains. Of the
force of eloquence, the commendations of diverse great Captains, and their
stratagems.

PLato says, that from great minds, great virtues, or great vices do proceed,
and so it seemed in many noble and heroical men, as well of the Greeks, as of
the Romans, as Alcibiades might well be compared to Lu. Sylla, and Demetrius
with Mar. Antonius, al alike given to virtue and vice, friends and foes to
their Countries, and yet all four valiant and wise, whose fortune seemed not
much unlike in all their victories.

Plutarch therefore very fitly compares some Captains of the Greeks with the
Romans, as Lucullus compared with Cymon the Athenian, both of equal fortune
Comparisons of certain Roman captains with the Greeks.
in great victories, the one in Asia, the other Persia. Mar. Cato, surnamed the
Demosthenes of Rome, compared with Aristides surnamed the Just in Athens.

So Hanibal is well compared to Philip of Macedon, for false, subtle,
deceitful, and crafty stratagems, they weyed Plutarchus in Alcibiad.
not how they conquered, so they might conquer, they were in no wise to be
trusted unto either, by their promise, or by their oaths: so far differed
Philip from his son Alexander, that what Alexander won, he won it only
by magnanimity, and Philip by fraud.

Demetrius after many victories of Ptolomeu king of Egypt, and an other victory
by sea in the I Will of Cyprus over the same king: the third victory against
Cassander king of Macedonia at Thermopyle in Greece, this Demetrius grew so
fortunate and great, that Seleucus, Ptolomeus, Lysimachus and Pirrhus, four
mighty kings, envying Demetrius greatness, conspired against him, and joined
their force together, for they all feared and doubted his courage, and envied
the greatness of his fortune.

Demetrius marching on with a great army to besiege Athens, Crates a
Philosopher, careful of his Country, and fearful of Demetrius least he
should destroy Athens, the school of learning, and the eye of Greece, The
force of eloquence.
met Demetrius upon the way with his Army, whom he so entreated with sweet
persuasions, and eloquent words, that the fury of Demetrius was mitigated by
Crates the Crates.
Philosopher, that he raised his siege, and departed from Athens.

So Demades the Orator in like sort did persuade Alexander the great, ready
with his army to plague and to Demandes.
destroy all the cities of Greece.

So did Arius the Philosopher persuade Augustus Casar to spare the city of
Alexandria. Arius.


So had Cicero welnigh persuaded Caesar from the battle Cicero.
at Pharsalia, with such pithie force of eloquence, with such vehement words,
that Caesar's countenance changed, and his body so shook, that the book which
he held fell out of his hand.

Cyrus spared Craesus for Solons sake; and Alexander spared Thaebes for
Pindarus sake; the force therefore of eloquence is such, that Philip king of
Macedon ever doubted the tongue of Demosthenes more then the strength of the
Athenians. But again to return to Demetrius, whose greatness grew so great
in Macedonia, in Asia, and in Greece, that in sumptuous building of ships,
framing of all sorts of engines of battery, this Demetrius excelled all Kings
of his time: For Aeropus King of Macedonia, delighted only to make fine tables
and lamps: Arsaces King of Parthia, in making their arrows heads keen and
sharp: Attalus King of Asia, in planting of physical herbs: but Demetrius
might be The greatness of Demet.
compared for his engines of batteries, and his princely practice, to
Archimedes himself, being the only Geometrer of the world at that time, whose
death Marcellus lamented more, then he rejoiced for the winning of Syracusa.

For when Archimides was slain in his study, and Syracusa taken by Marcellus
soldiers, he sought no longer time to live, but till he had ended certain
Geometrical Cic. de Natura. deor. lib. 3.
conclusions which he had invented, for Marcellus that noble Roman feared more
the Geometrical engines of Archimedes, then all the force of Syracusa, and
therefore Pythagoras when he found any new skill in Geometry, he straight
offered sacrifice to the Muses.

Demetrius grew so great in Greece, that at a general assembly of the states
in Greece, he was chosen Lieutenant general of all the Grecians, where none
were but four before him. Philip king of Macedon, and his son Alexander the
great: before them, none but Agesilaus and Agamemnon, and yet died Demetrius a
yielded prisoner to Seleucus, whom Demetrius in his greatness was wont to call
but keeper of the Elephants.

Demetrius laughed them to scorn which called any other prince king, but
Antigonus his father, and himself. The orators in Athe^s co^tended in orations
who should exceed in preferring new titles of honors to Demetrius. In so much
they decreed that the month Munichian Demetrius picture carried in the triumph
of Peplon.
which is January, should be called Demetrion, and their feast Dyonisia, should
be called Demetria, and that Demetrius and his father king Antigonus, should
have their pictures carried with the pictures of Jupiter and Minerua in the
tryumphe of Peplon, in the holy banner of Athens. This was the marching of
Demetrius greatness to die a prisoner.

CHAP. XI.
Of the war like marching of diverse noble Captains, with their famous
victories and stratagems. Of the cruelty of Mithridates against the Romans.
Of Marius, and his revenge over the Cymbrians.

TWo other great marchings of Epaminondas and Agesilaus, the emulation between
these two Captains, was the cause of the overthrow of Sparta, in the battle
at Leuctres, by Epaminondas: at which battle Cleombrotus the king, with all
his captains and chiefest of the Lacedaemonians was slain, and that noble
Greek Cleomenes, was slain at the kings foot, with a thousand of the most
valiant Spartans about him, at that time there was a great feast at Sparta,
when this news came to the Ephories of the victory of the Thaebans. This
battle was thirty years after the overthrow of Athens by Lysander the
Lacedemonian, and now the overthrow of Sparta by Epaminondas the Thaeban.
Epaminondas fame.


These two cities were named the two eyes and the two legs of Greece: and yet
Sparta could not abide Athens, nor Athens abide Sparta: there was never such a
victory heard of in Greece, that the stout Lacedaemonians, the most skillful
soldiers and warlikest people of all the Grecians, should have their king
slain in the field, and the chief captains and citizens of Sparta.

In this battle Pelopidas being neither General nor governor, but Captain
of the holy band, deserved as much honor and glory of this victory as
Epaminondas Pelopidas commended.
did, being then General of the whole army, and governor of Baeotia, and this
great overthrow of the Lacedaemonians, fell justly through the malice and envy
that Agesilaus their king bare to the Thaebans, being thereunto moved by the
stout answer of that most noble Captain Epaminondas, giving no place to king
Agesilaus greatness, nor to his stout Lacedaemonians.

Pelopidas the Thaeban, laying siege to two great cities of Greece at one time,
wrought this stratageme, caused four Captains to come all crowned with
garlands of myrtle on their heads, having brought some of their own soldiers,
as fained captives to Pelopidas, and withal caused a whole wood, which was
between the two cities to be burnt, as though it had been that city The
stratagems of Pelopidas.
which they besieged, which so terrified the town, that upon the sight of that
fire, they yielded to Pelopidas.

Epaminondas being ready to enter battle with the Lacedaemonians, his seat
where he sat, after he rose Front. lib. 3. cap. 8.
up, fell down, which the soldiers took for no good sign, which he
perceived, and said; We are forbidden to sit going about to win victory. We
must watch and The stratagems of Epaminondas.
pray, we must not be idle, for Satan is most busy, when we think our selves
most sure: We must say as Epaminondas said to his soldiers, Vetamur sedere,
so Christ speaks unto us, Videat qui stat ne cadat, You that stand, take heed
lest you fall.

Another famous victory at Mantinea the chief city of Arcadia, the glory
thereof fell to the Thaebans, by the prowess and courage of Epaminondas their
General, and yet died he of a wound he had in that battle.

When Epaminondas died, died the honor and glory Epaminondas praise.
of the Thaebans, for before him no great fame was heard of Baeotia, and after
him nothing esteemed, so little he weighed glory, as he weighed wealth, and so
little he esteemed wealth, that when Epaminondas died, he wanted money to bury
him. In so much that Cicero said, Cicero.
that he wondered that so great a Philosopher and so singularly learned, should
become so noble a captain that all Greece preferred him for both.

Many sought to imitate Epaminondas, for Philopomen Philopomen imitated
Epaminondas.
followed Epaminondas steps in all his actions, but chiefly in three things:
he followed his hardiness to enterprise any thing: he followed Epaminondas
wisdom to execute all great matters; and followed his integrity from
corruption, bribery, and taking of money, hereby came Philopomen to be the most
renowned captain of all Greece in his time.

Philopomen was eight times General of the Achaians, being then seventy
years old, for Philopomen delighted from his youth in war and martial
exercise, and loved always soldiers and arms, for he was in his time one of
the best, and one of the last Captains of Greece, and therefore reputed a
better Captain for war, then a wise governor for peace. For at the battle by
the river of Larissus, Philopomen being General of the Achalans against the
Aetolians, where he slew Demophantus General of the Aetolians, in a combat
fought between them both in the sight of the army, and after overthrew the
whole host.

Philopomen grew so great in Greece, that the name of Philopomen made the
Baeotians to fly for fear from the siege of Maegara, and made the Spartans
after he had rased the town to forsake Licurgus law, and compelled the
Lacedaemonians to follow the Achaians manner and customs. The Grecians so loved
and so esteemed this Philopomen a noble captain.
Philopomen, that Titus Flaminius, enuyed him for his fame and greatness in
Greece, being then Consul of Rome, and had restored all Greece to her former
liberty.

Philopomen turned all curiosity and dainty fare, to Plutarch. in Philop.
brave and rich armor, to gallant and warlike horses. Philopomen was the last
famous man of the Grecians, after whose death Greece decayed. He was wont in
his youth to read Homers Illiads, and especially Euangelus books of the
discipline of wars, for by reading and talking he became an excellent
soldier.

So Lucullus by talking with soldiers, by reading of books, and by exercising
of military discipline, became one of the noblest Captains that the Romans
had: for at the battle at the river of Rindacus, he gave the overthrow to
Mithridates soldiers, that forty thousand were slain in the field, fifteen
thousand taken, and The victory of Lucullus.
six thousand horse of service, besides an infinite number of beasts for
carriage, the overthrow was such, that they which came from the city
Appolonia, had as great a spoil Plutarch. in Lucullo.
while both armies were a fighting, as Lucullus and his soldiers had after the
victory was gotten.

Lucullus fought with Mithridates another battle at the river Granicus, where
Alexander the great gave the first battle to Darius king of Persia. Here also
Lucullus in a very great battle fought with his Roman army so Appian. in
lib. Mithrid.
fiercely and with such courage, that both the river of Granicus and the river
of Asapus ran all of blood: and the number that were slain of Mithridates
soldiers as mentions are made, were welnigh three hundred thousand men of all
sorts of people.

This Mithridates was the greatest enemy that the Romans had after Hannibal,
and yet Hannibal and all Africa was subdued within seventeen years by the
Romans, and that most noble captain Pirrhus, who fought with the Tarentines,
Samnites and others, against the Romans, he was driven out of Italy within
four years, but Mithridates endured the fury of the Romans forty years,
until he was weakened by Sylla, wearied by Lucullus, and at last subdued by
Pompey the great.

Mithridates king of Pontus, fearing much the power and policies of the
Romans, frequented hunting, that he used no house in town or country for
seven years, that thereby he was able to endure any labor and to prevent any
stratagem of his enemies.

So did Sertorius, with many other Roman and Greek Xenoph. lib. de venatione.
captains, that Xenophon makes a catologue of their names that became noble
soldiers by hunting.

Hannibal laying siege to Tarentum, being agreed with one Eoneus a Tarentine
for a certain sum of money to betray the city Tarentu^, Eoneus used this
stratagem by the counsel of Hannibal, to go out a hunting in the night time,
for fear of the enemies, and to bring to Liuius Stratagems of Hannibal.
the governor of Tarentum, buckes, boares, and such other wild beasts, as
Hannibal himself delivered unto him, who taught him the stratageme. Hannibal
seeing that Eoneus was nothing suspected, for that he used hunting, caused
Affrican soldiers of his to be clothed like these hunters, and to enter with
these hunters into Tarentum, who as soon as they entered into the Town, kilde
the watch, and opened the gates to Hannibal to come in.

Lysimachus king of Macedonia used the like stratagem, Lysimachus.
laying siege to Ephesus the chief city of the Ephesians, having corrupted
one Mandro an arch pyrate for money, who often used to come to Ephesus with a
ship laden with pray to relieve the Ephesians, and by his often coming,
being not suspected, brought certain Macedonian soldiers fast bound to his
ship, as Captives taken to please the Ephesians, which afterward betrayed and
delivered the town to Lysimachus.

So did Marcellus take the city Syracusa, by soliciting Marcollus.
of one Sosistratus a Syracusan, whom he wanne with money to be his friend,
who counseled him to be ready, and to come under entreaty of peace upon the
Syracusans feast day called Epicides, by this means through the counsel of
Sosistratus, Marcellus obtained Syracusa.

This great Roman enemy Mithridates king of Pontus, so hated the Romans, that
he gathered together all the poor banished Romans, scattered every where The
cruelty of Mithridates against the Romans.
in Asia, Romain merchants and others, busied about their traffiques, and
caused them to be slain, to the number of 50000. in one day, to satisfy his
wrath upon the Romans.

Lucullus had also two of the most famous and renowned victories over two of
the most mightiest and greatest Two great victories of Lucullus.
princes of Asia, Tigranes king of Armenia, and Mithridates king of Pontus, at
mount Taurus: for Tigranes army as Lucullus himself wrote unto the Senate,
was two hundred three score thousand men; of the which number above a hundred
thousand footmen were slain, and few of all the horsemen were saved, and the
king driven in his flight to throw his Diadem to some of his friends, who was
taken with the Diadem and brought to Lucullus. It is written by Plutarche that
the Sun saw not the like overthrow.

So Lucullus revenged the great spite of Tigranes king of Armenia: and
Mithridates king of Pontus, for the spite and hatred they bare to the Romans,
as Cai. Marius revenged upon the Cymbrians, and Almaines, and as Camillus
revenged upon the Gauls.

Ca. Marius revenge was such and that in time, for that the Cymbrians, Teutons,
Ambrons, Tygurins, and Germans, The revenge of Marius over the Cymbrians.
had conspired and joined their force together, after the overthrow of both the
Consuls, to the slaughter of fourscore thousand Romans, that they jointly
marched together toward Rome, at what time Cai. Marius and Luctatius his
fellow Consul gave them such a meeting, that two hundred thousand of them
were slain, four score thousand taken prisoners, Lugius and Boiorex two kings
slain in the battle, besides innumerable that fled from the battle, and hanged
themselves on trees, and for want of trees, they tied slipping halters about
their necks, unto the horns and feet of their oxen, and pricked them forwards
with goades, that they might tread and trample them under their feet until
they were killed, besides the horrible cruelty of the women, which was most
terrible, in strangling their young babes with their own hands, they cast
them under their Carts wheels, and between the horses legs, and at last
slew themselves. At what time Marius for his great fortune, victories and
service, was called Pater patriae, the father of the country.

After Marius had been seven times Consul in Rome, Marius seven times Consul.
and called the father of the counrey, which was so great a name among the
Romans, that none but Romulus, Cicero, and himself had it, and had showed
himself a valiant noble captain, in diverse and sundry great battles, and
wanne many victories, besides the victories over the Cymbrians, Teutons, and
the rest, over the Spaniards, Numantines and Affricans, open proclamation was
made by the Senate throughout all Italy; that they should apprehend Marius, and
either kill him wheresoever they found him, or to bring him before the Senators
of Rome alive. This was the end of Marius marching, which if you compare him
with Sylla, you shall find them both firebrands to their country, for the
harm they have done to their country, and yet both great benefactors to their
country before their civil wars. For Sylla was either another Hannibal in
doing harm to his country, or another Scypio in doing good to his country
And as concerning Marius, Scypio himself spoke, that he was the only next man
that should do great good, or great harm to the Romans after Scypio.

The like words spoke king Antigonus of Pirrhus, that if Pirrhus should live
till he were an old man, he should prove so great a captain, that he should be
feared of all nations.

CHAP. XII.
Of the manners and form of wars, denounced by the Prophets of the Lord,
against the Canaanites and other nations which were enemies to the Hebrews.

THe order and manner of the Prophets by the Lord commanded to denounce wars
to the Canaanites, Edomites, Ammonites, Philistines, and all other nations that
were enemies to Israel, was in this sort.

The Lord commanded the Prophets as his heralds, to denounce war after this
manner: Ezechiel. 35.
Set thy face against the Idumeans, and say, behold (o mount Seir) I come
against thee, and will stretch my hand out against thee, I will make thee
desolate, and wast all Idumea.

And so against the Egiptians, Ezechiel was commanded as an herald from the
Lord, to set his face against that dragon Pharao, to publish war, and to say,
I will Ezechiel. 32.
water with thy blood all the land of Egypt, and as Nilus ouerfloweth Egypt
with water, so will I make the blood How the prophets denounced wars to the
Jews and to the Gentiles.
of thy Army to ouerflowe Nilus.

Against Tire in like sort Ezechiel was commanded with the like words: Set thy
face against Tire, and say, behold (o mount Tire) I will come upon thee, and
will bring Nabuchodonozer king of kings against thee, and will make thee a
desolate city. Ezech. 26.


So likewise as the Prophet Ezechiel was commanded by the Lord to publish war
against the Idumeans, the Egiptians, and against Tire, so against Gog and Magog
the Prophet was sent with the like words, for it was the charge and
commandment of the Lord to all his prophets, being his Heralds, to proclaim
war against the great monarchs, and Polymarchies of the earth, enemies to
his church and to his people, as to the Chaldeans, the Assirians, Egiptians,
Affricans, Lybians, and Persians, showing unto them their destruction before
the sword of the Lord came upon them.

So the Lord sent Moses his first Prophet and his Herald, long before this
time, to Pharao in Egypt with the like words as he did to these Prophets now,
they spared not Jerusalem nor Samaria, but they had their message told them by
the Prophet. And so much of the manner and form of the publishing and
denouncing of war by the Lords Heralds, his Prophets. And now likewise to
show the manner and form of the Gentiles in denouncing of war by their
Heralds.

The Gentiles in old time proclaiming their wars against their enemies in
several sorts, as the Romans by The manner of the Gentiles in proclaiming of
wars to their enemies.
their Priests called Faecials, which were first instituted by Numa Pomp. and
after appointed by the Romans to be their heralds, both for war and peace:
for the law was written in these words. Belli pacis, faederum induciarum, or
atorum faeciales Iudices sunto. The chief of the^ was called Pater Patratus,
being crowned with a garla^d made Au. Gelius. li. 16. ca. 4. noct. Attic.
of Verbena; who went with four of them to the co^fines of the enemies,
reciting the just cause of the wars, which were it not by the enemies satisfied
and answered within 33. days after, the Faecial Priests being sent from the
Senators and Citizens of Rome, should throw after the word spoken, a bloody
dart or an iron spear, into the enemies lands, proclaiming war against them
(Iure faeciali).

But if the Romans had their wars far from Rome, the Faeciall Priests
should go out of the city through the gate Carmentalis, to the Temple of
Mars, in the which Temple there was hanging a bloody spear upon one of the
pillars of the Temple, called Columna bellica, and from that place should the
Faeciall Priest throw that Columna bellica.
bloody dart toward those nations whom they denounced to be their enemies:
then after this, the Consul, Proconsul, Viget. lib. 1. cap. 6.
or Praetor, should go to the Temple of Mars, and take the Targets called
Ancyllia in his hand, and after prick the Image of Mars with his spear or
lance, and say, Mars Vigila.

The Persians also used this ceremony, to throw a The Persians
bloody dart toward the confines of their enemies, thereby denouncing war,
either to have land and water Amian. li. 19. histor.
by yielding, or else to abide war.

The manners and customs among the Grecians, when they went to publish war,
they used to send their The Greeks
Herald to the confines of the enemies, and after the just cause of the war
being publicly declared, unless they were Perius sanctum legatorum,
satisfied, the Greeks sent a Ram to the enemies confines, to signify that
they were ready armed for their enemies; for the sending of the Ram with the
Greeks, did signify as much as the throwing of the bloody dart, or Iron
spear with the Romans, for the Romans were instructed in martial discipline
by the Greeks, as the Greeks were by the Persians, and the Persians by the
Egiptians.

The old Gauls used this manner of order, that their Senators called Druydes,
called a council of the chief The old Gauls.
men, which should be all armed, and therefore called among them the armed
council, and after consultation had between these Priests Druydes, and the
armed council, that whatsoever was agreed upon between them, there of war or
peace, was established for a law.

The Scythians had strange customs in defying their enemies, and in
proclaiming of war, they did send by Ambassadors to Darius king of Persia, a
bird, a mouse, a The Scythia^s
frogge, and an arrow, signifying thereby, that unless the enemies would fly
away like a bird, creep away like a Front. lib. 3.
mouse, or swim away like a frogge out of Scythia, that an arrow should pierce
them through.

Wars being proclaimed by the Lacedaemonians, warlike people, the herald
should carry in his hand a vine twig, wreathed about with wool, which the
enemies, The Lacedaemonians.
if they would accept and receive upon conditions by the herald opened, it
should be a full bond of peace, otherwise a denouncing of war, and withal,
the herald threw the vine twigge out of his hand, as in defiance.

The Carthagineans though they could never abide the Romans, yet used they the
selfsame ceremonies, (Hastae proiectio) as the Romans did in pronouncing The
Carthagineans.
of their wars.

There was a strange manner and custom among some nations, when they proclaimed
war, they would send a herald with a present to their enemies, wrapped round
about with the likeness of snakes, which if the present would be upon
conditions accepted, they would take away the snakes, and deliver them the
present: if otherwise, the herald would deliver the enemies the The old
Corinthians.
snakes in defiance, and bring the present away: this manner of defiance against
their enemies, the old Corinthithians used, with others.

Now that you read the manner and form of proclaiming of wars among diverse
nations, you shall also observe diverse fashions and ceremonies touching
composition of peace, for both proclaiming of war, and concluding of peace
were in all authority, Per vi^faciale, but altered in ceremonies.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the manner, and diverse ceremonies in concluding of peace.

THe concluding of peace of diverse nations, was in this sort, those that were
sent as Heralds to proclaim war, were again sent as Ambassadors to
entreat for peace in diverse Countries, for as blood was sought by wars, so
by blood peace should be reconciled.

For as you heard the Lord did threaten war long before war came, to the
Hebrews, the Chaldeans, Assyrians, and the rest, by the Prophets and his
Heralds, and before these nations punished the first age for their sins with
an universal deluge over the whole world (eight persons excepted) and after
made a league of peace, and gave the Rainebowe as a sign in the heavens, The
Rainebowe.
not to destroy the world any more with water, and when the people again
transgressed his commandments, the Lord commanded his Prophets to threaten
the Hebrews, the Chaldeans, and Assyrians, denouncing war to punish them, as
you heard of the Egiptians, the Sodomites, and others, with a condition of
peace to continue between him and his people, which was written out in the law
of Moses.

This league was signified and confirmed also with the blood of a lamb, as the
blood of covenant between God and man, the true type and figure of the lamb
Christ Jesus, which gave us everlasting peace by his blood in the new (...):
this peace was proclaimed to the Shepherds in the field at Bethelem by legions
of Angels, which came down from heaven singing, glory be to Luke 24.
God on high, and on earth peace toward me^. This peace Christ repeated to his
disciples, saying, Peace be unto you, this peace he brought into the world,
this peace he left with his people in the world, which the world cannot give,
for there is no peace to the wicked faith the Lord.

The ceremonies of every nation in all countries in concluding of peace, was
generally by blood, and as it were confirmed by an oath in supping each others
blood, or by dipping in of their swords, arrows, flint-stones or wool. The
manner and ceremonies of all nations in co^cluding of peace.


As the Meades drew blood out of their arms, the Lydians out of their
shoulders, the Arabians out of their fingers: that by sucking and licking of
each others blood they thought it the soundest and surest testimony of peace
and friendship that could be.

The Armenians used to draw blood, every man out of his thumb, and that every
man should lick an others Radamistus and Murates.
blood, in witness that all should live in peace and love thereafter: so did
Radamistus king of Hiberia, with Mitrates king of Armenia.

But in the place where the Scythians concluded peace, they had a great bowl
of wine before them, and The Scythians.
there every man letting a vain to bleed into the bowl of wine, and then
dipping a sword and an arrow into this bowl, drank one to another this
mingled wine and blood, in token of peace and friendship between them.

In like manner the Carmanes, people in Persia, when The Carma^s.
they met together at a banquet, they would strike a vain in their forehead to
draw blood, to mingle their blood with wine, and to drink that one to an
other, which was among them the greatest oath, and the surest bond of love that
could be.

The ceremonies of the Arabians, when they were to be agreed with their
enemies, they would drawbloud with Arabians.
a sharp flintstone out of their fingers into a dish, and therein dip white
wool, and certain small thin stones, with the which stones and wool, they
would rub and die their garments, to continue as a perpetual league of peace
between them.

The old and ancient manner of the Persians was, to bring their wives, their
children, and their dearest friends, Persians.
and at their banquets, calling their hospital gods to be their witnesses,
and their friends then present, to be as pawnes, and pledges of their faith
and peace, by drinking one to an other.

The Thracians and the Egiptians also had their ceremonies in contracting
conditions of peace, which was, to The Thracians.
drink wine out of an ox horn one to an other, being an old ceremonial
custom among them of great antiquity: for without drinking out of that ox
horn, no composition of peace could be taken in Egypt, or in Thracia, for the
horn was an ancient monument reserved for that purpose.

Clearchus general of the Lacedaemonians, at what time the Persians and the
Greeks were at composition Clearchus.
of peace, Clearchus sacrificed a bull, a wolf, a boar, and a ram, and in
the blood of these sacrified beasts, the Greeks dipped their swords, and the
Persians their lances, as a full record before the gods of peace and amity.

Aristides laboring much for universal peace among Aristides.
the Greeks, after long civil wars, at the concluding of the peace, he
threw hot fiery Iron bowls into the sea, praying unto the gods, that as
those fiery bowels were extinguished by water; even so they that would break
this league of peace, and live in Greece with all their friends and
confederates, should be rooted out of Greece, or quite destroyed in Greece.

Had Agesilaus been so willing as Aristides was with Epaminondas, when all
Greece came to Lacedemon, to Agesilaus.
make a general peace, Sparta had not been so plagued at the battle of
Leuctres, where King Cleombrotus was slain, and a thousand of the best
soldiers and citizens of Sparta.

Fabius Max. being sent by the Romans, as an Ambassador Fabius Max.
to the Carthagineans, used these words: I bring you here in the lap of my
gown, war or peace, whereof you must make present choice.

The like embassage the Roman Popilius carried from Rome to Antiochus
Epiphanis, opening the whole cause Popilius.
of his embassage. Antiochus seeming to cast off time with delays, Popilius
made a circuit with his rod round about him, saying: you must answer the
Senators of Rome before you go out of this round circuit, whether you will
have war or peace: so valiant and stout the Romans ever were, that they
offered peace and war together, and the enemies to make the choice.

Now having opened the manner and order of denouneing wars, and concluding of
peace, before I proceed forward to military discipline taught in all countries,
and among all nations, I will set down the manner and order how diverse nations
were wont in old time to yield and to seek peace at their enemies, being in
the enemies hands without hope of life, and ready to be overthrown.

CHAP. XIIII.
The manner of yielding among all nations. Of diverse battles and victories, and
how the Romans and the Greeks esteemed their weapons.

THe manner of yielding of diverse nations in old time was, either in the field
to their enemies, or else by entreaty of peace, The manner of yielding.
they should come in base and simple apparel to offer their lands, their
waters, their livings, their cattels, their Temples, and their Cities.

So the Egiptians came with poor simple garments, without weapons, to seek
peace at the enemies, and to yield themselves, their Priests carrying their
gods before them with sacrifice.

So the citizens of Alexandria came to yield themselves to Caesar.

So the Jews came out of Jerusalem with their high Priest, to meet Alexander
the great, yielding unto him Iosep. lib. 2. cap. 8.
all dignity and honor, submitting themselves unto him.

So the Gibeonites came to Joshua, feigned themselves Ioshue. 9.
Ambassadors, took old sackes upon their asses, and old clowted shoes upon
their feet, and said unto Joshua, we be thy servants, we be come from a far
country; so Joshua consented unto peace, made a league with them, and suffered
them to live.

So the Sabine Ambassadors when they came to yield themselves to the old Roman
kings, were demanded by Torquin: Do you and your people come to yield your
selves Liu. lib. 1.
to me and my people at Rome, your lands, your waters, your cities, your
temples, your wealth, your liberties, and all that you have? the Ambassadors
answered we do, and I king Torquine accept and receive your yielding.

The Greeks likewise came as the Egiptians did, in sad mourning apparel, and
offered boughs of Olives, The yielding of the Greeks
and branches of Laurel to the enemies, as signs and tokens of submission, in
yielding and in seeking of peace.

The Persians manner was to offer land and water to the conqueror, as a sign
of yielding, for so the Persians The manner of the yielding of the Persians.
sought of others, when they took wars in hand, before they conquered, which
was their pride and brag. But the Athenians according to the law of arms put
the Persian Ambassadors to death; for that they sought land and water, before
any war was denounced, or battle given.

The Assirians also according to their wonted manner, Assirians.
when they come to yield themselves, their Priests come with their labels,
miters, and holy ornaments, to seek peace at the enemy.

The Syrians came to yield themselves with halters about their necks to Achab
to entreat for peace for Benhadad their king, who said a little before that the
dust of Samaria was too little for every one of his soldiers to have a
handful.

With the Frenchmen and Spaniards, it was their custom and manner to yield to
their enemies in showing their hands and arms naked to the enemy.

The Lacedaemonians, when they sought peace and yeeded to the enemies, they
threw their shields away The Lacedaemonians manner in yielding themselves to the
enemies.
from them, and took the enemies by the hand, saying Herbando, a word of
yielding.

For in all military discipline among all nations, and by martial laws of all
countries, those that were forced to seek peace and yield themselves to the
conqueror were to be accepted (Iure deditionis). Yet the Romans could Viget.
lib. 2. cap. 14.
scant away with yielding soldiers, for those Roman soldiers that yielded
themselves to Pirrhus, were not redeemed by the Romans, especially soldiers
that yielded Eutrop. li. 2.
in armor, were never after accepted as Romans, and the soldiers that fled
back from the enemies to his fellows in the camp, should be met by the way
and slain by their own fellows, so that the Romans would never grace a
yielded soldier.

So Philopomen said, hearing certain Grecians much commending a valiant
captain for his courage and policy; Can you said Philopomen, so commend a
valiant Philopomens speech of the Romans.
captain that yielded himself, and was contented to be taken prisoner alive?
I like the Romans said Philopomen, that would never pay ransom for a Roman
captain taken alive in battle, and yet they would ransom the body of a
captain slain in the field to bury him.

Yet at the battle of Pharsalia, after Pompey and his captains fled, and his
army scattered, the rest yielded to Caesar, holding their targets on their
heads, and delivering their weapons to Caesar.

So much the Romans esteemed their targets, that laying them upon their
heads, though they yielded their swords, their spears and other weapons to
Caesar, yet would they not yield their targets but together with their heads.

So did the Greeks esteem their targets, that the A soldier to lose his
target in the field was death in Greece.
Lacedaemonians mad^ law, that that captain or that soldier that had lost his
shield in the battle, should loose his life after the battle.

And therefore the women of Lacedemonia commanded their children when they went
to wars, holding up, and showing a Target in one of their hands, saying: Aut
cuns hoc redeas, aut super hoc moriaris: either to dye upon their shields and
targets in the field, or to bring with the^ their targets from the field.

So odious were coward soldiers in Lacedemonia, that the women of Sparta would
meet their sons that The saying of the women of Sparta.
fled from the battle, and hold up their clothes, saying: where will you fly
you cowards? will you creep again into your mothers belley?

Of all nations, only the Lacedaemonians and the old Germans, were so severe
against those that lost their shields in the battle, that among the Germans
they should not be allowed to come to any public council, Cornel. Tacit.
nor be admitted to come to the Temples, or to the Church, to hear service.

Though there was punishment appointed for soldiers that lost spear, lance,
or any other military weapon, yet not capital punishment, which was only by
law appointed to those soldiers that lost their shields, Enemies finding their
targets.
for that both the Greeks and the Roman captains had their names written
within their shieldes, and therefore they thought it most ignominious, that
Their shields much esteemed among the Romans and the Grecians.
their shelds should be lost, least their shields should brag of their names,
which made that worthy Captain Epaminondas, being wounded to death at the
battle at Mantinea, to enquire if his Target were safe, which being delivered
unto him, he took it and kissed it, and said: now Epaminondas dies not,
Oros. lib. 3. cap. 2.
but begins to live, for I have two daughters of mine, Mantinea and
Leuctres, to celebrate the fame of Epaminondas, which subdued the stout
Lacedemodians, subject unto the Thaebans.

Scypio Affricanus looking on a soldiers target which was most brave and most
richly adorned, said I much Front. lib. 4. cap. 1.
commend thee to make most of that which defends and saves thy life most
often.

So Marius and Catulus both Gonsuls of Rome, in their wars against the
Cymbrians, their soldiers, each one had his captains name, and his own name
written on his shield and other military weapons, that by looking on their
captains name they might do the greater service to honor their captains.

So ancient was the fame and honor in old time given to targets and shields
among the Grecians and the Trojans, that the name of Neptune was written in the
shields of the Grecians, and the name of Minerua on the shields of the Trojans.

I will therefore speak something of the Grecian wars against the Persians,
before I entreat of military discipline, and I will mention but four
principal special victories, which the Grecians had over the great kings of
Persia, for that the Grecians may not be thought to esteem their targets for
nothing.

The first and most renowned victory of the Grecians Plut. in Aristide.
over the Persians, at the battle of Plataea, where of six hundred thousand
fighting men, which Mardonius General of the Persians had in his camp, there
was Oros. lib. 2. cap. 8.
slain two hundred thousand Persians, and Mardonius himself slain by a
Spartan soldier under Pausanias.

In memory of this victory, there is a common assembly The Grecians victory at
Plataea.
of all the states of Greece at Plataea, where the Plataeans make a solemn
sacrifice unto Jupiter protector of their liberty, for those noble Grecians
that were slain at Plataea, with chariots laden with branches of fur trees,
with nosegaies and garlands of triumphs, then followed a black bull, and some
young noble gentlemen, that carried great bowls full of wine, and others
carried pots full of milk to power upon the graves of those dead noble
captains that died for their country, others carried oils, perfumes, and
sweet odours in glasses. After this followed the General, holding a funeral
pot in the one hand, and a naked sword in the other, unto the graves The
funeral ceremonies for those captains that died in the battle at Plataea.
where these noble captains and gentlemen were buried, that were slain in that
battle, and there the General washed the pillars, arches and Images of those
noble valiant Greeks that were wrought upon them: then anointed them with
oils, sweet savors, and after beautified them with sweet flowers and
nosegaies, and crowned them with several kinds of garlands. In this solemn
sort the General took a great bowl of wine, holding out his hand toward the
graves, saying; I drink to you noble captains and valiant gentlemen that died
in the defense of Greece.

Alexander the great upon the grave of Achilles, used a funeral sacrifice, not
altogether unlike the Grecians manner, caused himself with diverse of his
company to be Alex. Neapoht. lib. 5. cap. 26.
washed, and after to be anointed with ointments, with garlands of myrtle upon
their heads, and in solemn procession to go round about Achilles grave, all
naked, six hundred years after Achilles death.

So Traiane the Emperor in Alexandria used the like funeral sacrifice upon
Alexanders grave 400. years after Alexanders death, after the Roman manners
and custom, with garlands and crowns made of flowers upon his grave, with
sacrifice of frankincense and other sweet odours, in the very same house in
Alexandria, where Alexander dwelt, for he died at Babylon, and was buried in
Alexandria his own town.

They used the like funeral ceremonies in the feast Parentalia. Alex. Nepolit.
lib. 3. cap. 12.
called Parentalia in Rome, which was celebrated with beans, pulses, wafers
and dry figs, laid upon a bare flint stone, on the grave of their dead
parents, or their great friends and next kinsmen, which grave they decked with
flowers, nosegaies, and all kind of sweet herbs, Lemuralia.
and garlands, going about it naked, and after sitting about the grave of the
dead banketting and feasting, much like to the feast called Lemuralia, where
among the Grecians they drink to the souls of the dead.

The Jews held an anuall feast called Purym, in memory of their deliverance
from the malice of Ammon, A feast of the Jews called Purym.
who had obtained from king Ashuerus license to destroy all the Jews dwelling
in 127. provinces in Persia, upon that very day that Ammon thought to kill the
Jews and hang Mardocheus upon a gallows which he made of ten cubits high, was
Ammon himself withhis ten sonsha^gd upon the same gallows which he made for
Mardocheus.

But to return to the victory at Marathon, for the which victory strife grew
between the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians, at what time Milciades was
General for the Athenians, and Pausanias for the Lacedaemonians, but the
victory was by Aristides and by all men given to the Plataeans Herodot. lib.
vlt.
to end the strife. This battle of Marathon was in the morning, and in the
evening of the same day was the battle and victory at Mycala, though some hold
opinion there was some distance of time between them.

Upon the very day that Lu. Crassus was slain by the Parthians at Carras, and
his Romain army ouerthrown: Alex. Neapolis. lib. 4. cap. 20.
upon that very day few years after were the Parthia^s ouerthrown by Pub.
Ventidius, which so reue^ged Crassus with such a slaughter of ye Parthians ye
Pachorus the eldest son of the king was slain. And upon the very day that the
Cymbrians gave the overthrow to the Romain Co^sull Caepio, and his army, upon
that very fame day Marius afterward with terrible slaughter of ye Cimbria^s
requited it.

Again the second victory which the Grecia^s had over the Persian navy by sea
at Salamina, at what time armed men were seen in the air that did reach out
their hands from the I Will of Aegina toward the Grecian galleys, also songs were
heard in the air in the praise of Bacchus, and flames of fire were seen in the
Element, with many more wonders which appeared toward the City Eleusina, this
was one of the most glorious and greatest victories that ever the Greeks had,
chiefly gotten by the policy and cunning of Themistocles the Athenian.

Artemidord, Queen of Alicarnassus, came to aid Some call her Artemisia.
Oros. lib. 2. cap. 10. Hrodot. lib 8.
the Persians against the Grecians, as Pentheselia Queen of the Amazons came to
aid the Trojans in their wars against the Grecians, but the one died in Greece
taking part with the Persians, and the other died in Troy in the quarrel of
the Trojans: yet some writers affirm that Artemisia was not slain in Greece.

In this battle Xerxes king of Persia had a thousand ships of wars, of the
which he lost eight hundred of The victories of Themistocles over Xerxes and
his army.
them, and his Admiral called Ariames taken, the wisdom and foresight of
Themistocles in this battle was honored of all the Grecians, for it was
equal to the famous battle at Plataea, for renown and fame, though not so
great a victory, and yet Themistocles being but a young man, at the battle at
Plataea under Callimachus and Milciades, two noble captains of Athens, showed
himself so valiant that all Greece much commended his courage. Themistocles
was ever wont to say in his youth, that the fame of Milciades victories and
triumphs, would not suffer Themistocles to sleep, nor to rest in his bed.

So likewise was Themistocles the cause of the most renowned victory of the
Greeks over the Persians, by sea at Artimisium, where Xerxes with all his
whole navy was overthrown.

This victory made Themistocles to be so honored of the Grecians, that the
Captains after sacrifice done, gave him an Olive branch in token of victory,
and The battle at Artenisium.
they sent three hundred of their lusty youths to accompany Themistocles. His
renown grew such by this victory, that when Themistocles came to the next
feast of the Olympicall games, all the people cast their eyes upon him,
clapping their hands, and showing him unto Plut. in Themist.
strangers that knew him not, but Themistocles only at Artemisium, was the
original cause of the saving of all Greece, and did then most advance the
honor and glory of the Athenians, and was after battle done honored above
all the Grecians, and also all the Grecian captains, having upon the Altar of
their sacrifice, sworn that Themistocles best deserved the glory of that
victory, yet was he banished from Athens, though his victories were so great
over the Persians, as Hanibals victories were over the Romans.

CHAP. XV.
Of strange apparitions in the air, and prodigious miracles. Of seven signs
seen before the overthrow of Jerusalem, with the last destruction thereof. Of
diverse great Captains by the Lord appointed to favor Jerusalem and the Jews.

MAny strange apparitions were seen in the air in many places of Greece,
before the victories which the Grecians had over the Persians, and before the
victories which the Affricans had over the Romans. And first at the battle of
Salamina, as you read before, where flames of fire were seen in the element,
songs were heard in the air in the praise of Bacchus, and armed men were seen
in the air, as you read before, that did reach out their hands from the I Will of
Aegina, toward Strange apparitions in the air.
the Grecian galleys.

So at the battle at Thrasymen, at Arpos, the likeness of bucklers were seen
in the heavens, and the Sun seemed to fight with the Moon at Carpena; and
two Targets sweat blood at Sardinia; and at the very battle it self, such
earthquakes happened, that towns and rocks fell to the earth, mountains were
carried from one place to an other, and the rivers ran backwards, yet in the
battle it self it was neither known nor felt of the Romans, nor of the
Affricans: for among the Romans seldom happened any earthquakes without
great loss or harm, either by ouerthrowning of towns and cities, Val. Max.
lib. 1. cap. 6.
or loss of victories, as the Romans supposed; and yet in the second Affrican
war, 57. earthquakes happened among the Romans in one year; also an ox spoke,
and said, Cave tibi Roma. In Piceno it reigned stones. In Cicilia two Targets
sweat blood.

At the city Antium in Italy, blood flowed out of the ears of corn, and many
such prodigious signs, and yet not so many as were equal to the Romans
calamities, during the time of the second punike war, but it was ever the
greatness of the Romans to be most valiant in their greatest affliction. And as
in the second Punike war an ox spoke, so in the time of Torquine ye proud
after his ouerthrows in 2. battles, a dog spoke, and a serpent barked.

At the destruction of Constantinople by the Turks, a great Alex. Neapolit.
Genial. lib. 3. cap. 15.
multitude of dogs were seen in the air, after which followed a great number
of diverse kinds of beasts, in manner and form of light armed soldiers; after
them followed an other company of beasts with spears and targets; another
company of beasts divided in troops on horse; after the^ followed a mighty
monstrous man, of a terrible stature, riding upon a terrible horse, which
appeared 3. hours over the city Comu^, and vanished away a little before night.

Strange apparitions and meteors have bin in many battles seen in ye air,
eclipses of sun and moon, earthquakes and such, besides many visio^s seen, and
many voices yielded. Pub. Vatinius a Roman Praetor, late walking out of Rome,
there met him Castor and Pollux, unknown to Vatinius, P. Vatinius. Cic. de
natura deorum. 1.
like two goodly young gentlemen on white horses, who told him that the Consul
Aemilius had taken Persius K. of Macedonia, and ouerthrown his whole force, the
selfsame day. Vatinius reciting the same to the Senate, was presently
committed to prison, until letters came from Pau. Aemil. unto Rome from
Macedonia, certifying ye Senators of their victories, and taking of Persius the
same day ye Vatinius told the^.

In the wars that the Lucania^s had against the Romans, the likeness to a man of
exceeding great stature, appeared to the Romans, and spoke these words, Gradus
victoriae factus, Valor. Max. lib. 1. cap. 6. de mirac.
and after these words passed through the midst of the enemies, and vanished
away; at that time the Romans got the victory, slew 20. thousand, and took 23.
ensigns.

Camillus in his wars against the Vients, after the people were destroyed and
the town taken, the general Camillus commanded the soldiers to carry the
Image of Juno Liui. 5. and Valor. Max. lib. 1. cap. 8.
from Veients to Rome, and being demanded of one of the soldiers in a jest
whether she willingly would remove from Vients, and come to Rome, the Image
suddenly answered I will: which words so amazed the Romans, that they with all
honor brought her to Rome, and builded a temple to Juno in mount Auentine,
where she was honored as one of their chief gods among the Romans.

Thus the Romans imagined that all their victories were had by means of their
gods, and therefore brought as many gods as they could to Rome, and yet when
Pilate wrote from Jerusalem to Rome, to his Lord and master Tiberius the
Emperor, to have Christ allowed to be one Pilate wrote to Tib. Caesar
of the Roman gods, Pilate was flatly denied, though the Emperor himself
persuaded the Senators, of many miracles that Jesus had done in Jerusalem, but
the Senate would not allow Jesus to come to Rome among their gods.

Josephus writes, that at the destruction of Jerusalem, there were many signs
seen in the air, and voices heard in the earth, before the City was
destroyed, and the Temple burned, signifying the calamity which was at hand.

The first sign was a Comet, like a sword, hanging in the air over the City
of Jerusalem, which continued a whole tweluemoneth, contrary to the nature of
a Comet, which was not seen to continue past six months.

The second sign was a lightning that shined in the night time, about the
Temple, and about the Altar, as light as day, and this light continued the
space of half an hour, of the which some judged well, some otherwise.

The third strange sight was, that an ox being brought up on the feast day
to be sacrificed, brought Seven signs seen before the destruction of
Jerusalem.
forth a lamb, which terrified the people, and made them much amazed.

The fourth miracle was, that the great brazen gate on the East side of the
Temple, being locked and strongly barred, opened of it self, which could scarce
be shut with the force of twenty men.

The fifth sign was, that after the feast days, a little before Sun setting,
were seen Iron Charriots, and an host of armed men houering round about the
city in the clouds.

The sixth upon the feast of Penticost, when the Priests went according to their
manners, into the temple to celebrate divine service, they heard as it were some
noise or stirring, and after they heard a voice that said, Migremus hinc, Let
us remove from this place.

The seventh and last, and the straungest sign of all, one Jesus a simple man,
seven years before Jerusalem was Joseph. lib. 7. cap. 12. de bello Iudaic.
destroyed, cried out, Vox ab orient, a voice from the east, a voice from the
west, a voice from the four winds, a voice against Jerusalem, and against the
Temple, and a voice against all this people.

Thus went he still through all the streets of Jerusalem, with these words in
his mouth, Vae Ierosolymis, though he was whipped and scourged, and brought
before the Roman President Albinus, yet he used all one words, woe to the
City, woe to the Temple, and woe to the people; thus he cried out for seven
years and five months, and at the last words which he spoke, Vaeautem mihi, a
stone came from the wall and killed him.

This is written of Josephus, who was a Tetrarch in Galiley, and fought many
battles with his country against the Romans until he was taken by Titus, and
brought with him to Rome, where he wrote of the antiquity of the Jews twenty
books in Greek, and wrote seven books of the Jewish wars, and was as much
esteemed in Rome, as Berosus the Chaldean was in Athens; but the Jews little
esteemed Nabuchodonozer in the last destruction by Jeremy and Ezechiel before
prophesied, they following the counsel of such false Prophets that both
prophesied and promised victory to Achab, when he was slain, and his army
overthrown: so they said that the Babilonians should not come within
Jerusalem, and they were believed, and Jeremy imprisoned; so now for all these
signs seen, and for all that Christ prophesied the destruction of Jerusalem,
and wept upon mount Olyuet for the same, yet the Jews believed no prophecy,
weighed not the Romans, no more then they weighed before the Babilonians.

The like prophecy was found in Cataldus book, Bishop of Tarentum, being long
time before dead, who appeared in a vision to a Priest in Naples, and willed
the Alex. Neapolit. lib. 3. cap. 15.
Priest to dig in such a secret place and to bring a book written by Cataldus,
being so found in a table of lead nailed, and to show it to the king, where he
found the calamities and eminent destruction of Neapolis.

In the twelfth year of Nero the Emperor, Vespasian was sent with an army to
subdue the Jews, which could not be quiet, but rebelled ever against the
Romans, whom the Jews mortally hated, though the Romans had so many
Presidents under them to govern the Jews, as Pilate, Petronius, Festus,
Albinus, and last of all, Florus.

Yet they would not be brought to subjection. And after Vespasia^ had conquered
all Galiley, where Fla. Josephus was appointed Tetrarch, who was taken in this
war, and all the whole Country beyond Jorden, as Gadara, Macherunta,
Hiericho, and other cities, Jerusalem he gave to his son Titus to lay siege
to it, and Vespasian went to Alexandria, and from thence to Rome; leaving Titus
to subdue The last overthrow of Jerusalem by Titus and Vespasian.
the Jews at Jerusalem. For upon the very day that Christ dyed upon the Cross
in mount Golgotha, on the same very day eight and thirty years after, was
Jerusalem taken, and destroyed quite to the ground by Titus, the Temple burnt,
eleven hundred thousand slain with the sword and famine, an hundred thousand
sold publicly as slaves, and sixteen thousand were sent to Rome, to
beautify his fathers triumph, as Josephus an eyewitness does report.

The Jews looked not for their destruction so nigh at hand, they observed by
tradition of some of their Rabines, that their Messiah should come about the
time of Augustus, as a magnificent mighty king, and not as a poor man, the
son of a Carpenter, whom the Jews whipped and scourged, for that he took upon
him to be the son of God, and made himself Messiah, the Jews little thought
that he was the Messas, when they cried to Pilate to have him crucified in
Golgotha, saying: his blood be upon us, and upon our children.

The greedy desire and expectation of the people was such, that many took
upon them to call themselves the Diverse feigned themselves to be the Messiah.
Messiah, as Judas Galileus, and an other called Atonges a shepherd: but above
them all, one Barcozba had diverse followers, and was received for their Messas
thirty years, but when they saw that he could not defend them from the
Romans, they would no longer accept him for their Messiah, but slew him.

Titus proceeds forward to destroy the Jews, but especially the Priests, the
Scribes, and Pharisees, on whom he had no mercy, saying, that they chiefly
ought to dye with the sword, sithence the temple was burnt with fire, they
only being rebellious and seditious, and the cause of the destruction of the
city. Titus spared none of the stock of Herod.

In this wars of Titus were ten of the learned Rabbines slain, whose names I
thought good to write, as I found them written in Genebrardus Chronicles.

Rabbi Simeon ben Gamaliel. Rabbi Ismael ben Elizei. Rabbi Hanina ben Tedarion.
(...).
Rabbi Husiphith. Rabbi Eleazer ben Samaa. Rabbi Judah ben Dama, Rabbi Isbak
Scribam. Rabbi Judah ben Hachinas. Rabbi Judah ben Baba. Rabbi Askiba.
These ten Rabbines were slain by Titus, which the Jews record in their
latter Talmud for ten martyrs and after Jerusalem was thus destroyed, Titus
appointed Rabbi Iohanan ben Zachai, governor over the remnant of the Jews in
Ahua, Byther, Oza, and other pla^es as Nabuchodonozer did appoint Godoliah
governor of the rest of the Jews when he destroyed Jerusalem, in the time of
Zedechia the king.

Titus also left Bonia, a younger brother of Fla. Josephus, to govern other
places in Judah, and he returned with his prisoners and captives which he
brought with him to Rome, to beautify his fathers triumphs and his. This was
the fifth and last overthrow of the Jews, and destruction of Jerusalem.

First by Shesac King of Egypt, in the time of Rehoboam; secondly by
Nabuchodonozer, in the time of Zedechias, Jerusalem destroyed 5. ^mes.
the last King of Judah: thirdly by Antiochus: fourthly by Pompey the great:
and fifthly and last, by Titus and Vespasian.

Thus the Jews that subdued all nations before them, and conquered all the
Kings about them, that in the time of Joshua and David, all the earth trembled
at the naming of the Jews, whose government continued from Abraham to
Vespasian, two thousand years and more, though for a time, while they were in
Egypt 430. years, little spoken of, until the Lord raised them, and so
strengthened the^ under Moses and Joshua, that first they overthrew Pharao and
his kingdom, and after subdued the Canaanites, Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites,
Philistines, and the Syrians, which of the Hebrews were called Aromites, the
strongest nation upon the earth at that time, which were subdued
notwithstanding by David.

Thus the Jews which were as famous, and feared as much in those days, as the
Romans were in the time of their Consuls, are now so destroyed, and their
country subdued like wandering banished me^, without king, law, or country.

The cause whereof was the sin of Jerusalem, which would never acknowledge the
goodness of God toward them, nor his miracles and his mercy wrought amongst
them, they refused his grace offered, and persecuted him most violently to
death. Yet Dionisius Areopagita and his fellow Appollonius, in the city of
Eliopolis in Egypt, they both observed by the Eclipse of the Sun, at the very
hour the son of God suffered, more then the rebellious Jews did, for all
the blessings and mercies which they had received, they cried out still unto
Pilate, crucify him, his blood be upon us, and upon our children.

These learned Heathens openly confessed in Egypt, that either the son of God
did suffer death, or else the Dyonisius and Appollonius.
frame of the whole world should be dissolved, these two Heathens confessed
and named him to be the son of God, but the ungrateful Jews called and
named him the son of Joseph the Carpenter, in contempt of him, and therefore
it is convenient to set forth the great goodness of the Lord in a brief and
a short catalogue, what the Lord has done to Israel, since he brought them out
of the furnace of Egypt, where they were bond-slaues under Pharao, 430. years,
even from the first coming of Abraham into Egypt, until Moses brought them
out of Egypt.

For after Esau and Jacob had divided their fathers possession, Esau went to
dwell in Edumea, and Jacob took for his part Canaan, where he dwelt and his
children, until Jacob went to Egypt with all his family to his son Joseph,
which was 215. years after the being of Abraham in Egypt, and 215. years
before Moses brought the children of Israel out of Egypt into the land of
Canaan, at what time the law was written and given to Moses in mount Sinai, to
govern the people; and after the law was given, The Tabernacle was made.
the Tabernacle was commanded by Moses to be made in the wilderness, which
should stand to them for a Temple to serve the Lord, and after the Tabernacle,
the Arc was made, where the tables of the law were commanded by Moses at his
death to be kept, where Moses governed the whole army of the Hebrews forty
years before they went over Jorden.

And Moses before he died, he delivered the army of the Hebrews into the
hands of Joshua, with a charge from the Lord, under whom they passed into the
land of Canaan, after whose death they began to be rebellious and seditious.
Yet the Lord favored the^, and sent the^ stout Joseph. lib. 5. cap. 5. 6. 7. 8.
and wise governors, as Judah, Ehud, Barac, Iephtha, Gedeo^, and Sampson, yet
still rebelled they like Idolatrous people against the Lord, that they were
weary of that government, and rejected Samuel and his government, and would
have a king: the Lord denied them nothing, and they had kings to rule them:
during which time of kings, Idolatry presently crept in, that the lord and his
laws were forsaken, and Baal with his prophets and priests accepted. Hence
grew civil wars between the 12. Tribes, ten against two, that of one kingdom
they made two; so that there was nothing but slaughter and blood, between the
house of Israel and the house of Judah: and that straight after Solomon's death
500. thousand were slain in mount Zemaraim of the king of Isreal's side, by the
king of Judah.

Again such a slaughter of the king of Iudahs side by the king of Israel, that
two hundred thousand of women and children were taken prisoners in Samaria, so
that they wasted and spoiled one another in such sort, that from a happy and
populous people, by forsaking their Lord and God, they became a most miserable
and Idolatrous people to serve strange gods. For during the time of David which
was 40. years, the kingdom of Israel was the most famous and renowned
kingdom of the world. For so the Lord spoke, I will make the Princes of Judah,
like coals of fire among the wood, and like a firebrand in the sheafe, and
they shall devour all people round about them. So David brought all the kings
and nations about, subject and tributary unto Israel, whose happy whole
government was such, that at his death he left a hundred 100000. talents left
by David to Solomon to build the temple.
thousand talents to his son Solomon to build a temple to the Lord, which he
himself had determined to build, but that the Prophet Natha^ warned him from
the Lord that he should not, for that he was a man of blood, but that Solomon
his son should build him a house.

This kingdom of Israel being so happy (as you heard) in king David's time, and
in Solomon's time, so glorious a temple builded, and so richly furnished unto
the Lord, that in Solomon's time, such plenty was in Jerusalem, money was no
more esteemed the^ stones in the streets, yet presently upon Solomon's death in
the time of Rehoboham his son, the state of Jerusalem was so obscured and
altered, Joseph. lib. 8. cap. 8.
that the city was sacked, and the temple robbed, with great slaughter of people
by Shesac king of Egypt, so that the wealth and treasure of Jerusalem and of
the temple, was carried by Shesac into Egypt.

Again the kings of Israel became so Idolatrous, that there were no gods among
the Heathens, but they were as gods worshipped in Israel, so that they were far
worse then the Grecians or the Romans, who would allow no Joseph. lib. 9. cap.
14.
strange gods to reign neither in Athens nor in Rome, and therefore for that
they forsook the Lord, the Lord forsook them, and gave them over, and their
kingdom to the Assirians, by the hand of Salmanasser, and so Samaria and other
towns in Israel were inhabited by strangers.

So the kings of Judah after Israel within 133. years after, were carried
captives into Babylon by Nabuchodonozer, yet the Lord gave them not over, but
brought Three great kings of Persia favored the Jews.
them within 70. years after again to Jerusalem, and stirred up Cyrus,
Darius, and Artaxerxes, three great kings of Persia, to favor and to aid them
with license to return to their country, to inhabit Jerusalem with money and
much treasure, to build up the Temple, redeliuering unto them all the rich
vessels of gold and silver, which Solomon left in the Temple at his death, and
which Nabuchodonozer took away from the Temple, and brought to Babylon.

After Cyrus and these kings of Persia, the Lord stirred up a great Heathen
Prince Alexander the great, who Alexander reverenced the high priest in
Jerusalem
when he came to Jerusalem, lighted off his horse, and came to meet the high
Priest, and reverenced him with great obeisance, where were read unto him the
prophesies of Daniel, where it was found that a Grecian Joseph. lib. 11. cap. 8.
Prince should subdue the Persian kingdom, which Alexander acknowledged to be
himself, and therefore went into the temple and sacrificed to the God of
Israel, and not only freely granted to the high Priest whatsoever he would
ask, but commanded him to ask what he would have him do, and the high Priest
asked nothing but that the Jews that dwelt in Babylon, in Medea, and in other
countries about under his government, might enjoy and live according to the
laws of their country, which Alexander granted, besides his great and
liberal gifts which he bestowed upon the Priest and the temple.

Nabuchodonozer used himself otherwise then Alexander did against Judah, for
he commanded Holofernus, to spare no people, no kingdom, saying, Non Parcet
oculus tuus vlliregno. The terror of Holofernus army thereby Judith. 2. and 3.
was such, that they came out of every city crowned with crowns on their
heads, and lamps in their hands, to receive him with all kind of music, and
with dancing and songs to please him, yet could they not mittigate the
fierceness of his fury.

After Alexander the Lord stirred up Pthol. Philadelphus, so to favor the
Israelits, and to love their laws, that Joseph. lib. 12 cap. 2.
he had the laws of Israel written in the Greek tongue in Alexandria, and
released many prisoners and captives of the Jews, to the number of 120000.
(which Ptol. Lagus his precessor had brought from Judah to Egypt,) with as
great bountiful rewards and gifts, as Alexander did.

So Zeleucus showed such favor to the Jews dwelling in Antioch, in Ionia, and
in Ephesus, that he granted to them the liberties and laws of their country.

After Zeleucus the Lord stirred up Antiochus the great, being before a great
enemy of the Jews; and after Antiochus many of the kings of Asia, so to favor
them, that all the cities of Asia where the Jews dwelt, should suffer them to
live according to the laws of their country, and Joseph. lib. 1^ cap. 3.
to enjoy the benefits of the same, and though many of the Assirian kings
troubled and molested them with great wars, which joined themselves with the
Samaritans to subdue the kingdom of Judah.

Yet the Lord raised up the house of Assamonias, Mattathias to resist the
violence of the Assyrians, and after him his son Iu. Machabaeus, who slew of
the enemies, Edumeans and Assyrians, that sought the overthrow Joseph. lib. 12
cap. 9.
of his country, two hundred, thirty six thousand, and seven hundred, in the
defense of Jerusalem, and after 1. Machab. 3. cap.
him his other four brethren forsook not the laws of the Lord for all the
tyranny of the Roman Emperors and the Assyrian Kings.

But the Jews from time to time so reuoulted from the Lord, that Aristobulus
the son of Hircanus, made Aristobulus first king of the Jews after their
captivity.
himself a King 481. years after the return of the captivity of the Jews
from Babylon, but he enjoyed his kingdom but one year after he famished his
mother and killed his brother, for in Judah their kings had no better
succession then the kings of Rome had, though in both the kingdoms, they made
great means to become kings. After this Aristobulus, there was no king among
the Jews until Herod, who was made by the Senators Joseph. lib. 13 cap. 19.
of Rome, with the consent of Augustus Caesar, and Mar. Antonius, both
Emperors of Rome, under whom Judah was a Province.

Yet one false Alexander a Jew, most subtly adopted himself, being very like
to Herod, to be of the stock and family of Herod, and brother to Aristobulus,
and thereby Pseudalexander.
claimed to be king of Judah, saying, that he was Herod's son, as false
Philip feigned himself in Macedonia, Joseph. lib. 17 cap. 14.
to be Persius son king Philips brother, and as the common people there
reverenced false Philippe in Macedonia, so likewise in all parts of Jury was
this false Alexander Pseudophil lippus.
carried in coach from City to City, with all the reverence and honor that
could be, as though he were their true and lawful king, but being brought to
Rome before Caesar, who found by the hardness of his hands, and rudeness of
his behavior, that he was not brought up like a Kings son, and therefore
Caesar having found his falsehood, bound him all his life time as a galley
slave, and commanded all his counselors and conspirators to be killed with
the sword.

This house continued until the last destruction of Jerusalem.

So that the Jews after Christ his death, being every where afflicted and
oppressed, from Babylon were forced to fly to Zeleucia, the chief City in
all Syria, Affliction of the Jews.
which Zeleucus Nicanor builded; a Town where Greeks, Macedonians and Syrians
dwelt together: there also the Greeks and the Syrians conspired together
against the Jews that there dwelt, and slew trecherously of them to the number
of 50000.

So sedition also began between the Jews in Alexandria, and the Aegiptians: in
Samaria between the Samaritans and the Jews, and all the Jews which dwelt
Joseph. lib. 9. cap. 14.
in Rome, in Sardinia, and other places of the Roman Empire, were from thence
banished.

These Jews had not so much as a place to rest upon the earth, but were
scattered like rogues and vagabounds every where, without credit or love,
without Prince, Priest, law or religion, (the just judgment of the Lord) for
their blasphemy against the son of God, saying: his blood be upon us and our
children. Thus the Jews whom Moses and Aaron brought out of Egypt, to the
number of six hundred thousand, died all in the wilderness, for their
rebellious mutiny.

Moses and Eleazer (after Aarons death) numbered Moses numbered the people.
the people in the wilderness, where all the other died, and they found six
hundred thousand, seuenteen hundred and thirty able and sufficient men for the
wars, and yet not one of them which Moses and Aaron numbered in the desert of
Sinai after they came out of Egypt, saving Number. 26.
Joshua and Caleb, but died in the wilderness, for disobedience and
stubbernesse, ever preferring the cucumbers, melons, oynions and garlicks of
Egypt, before Ma^na, quails, and sweet water which they had from every rock
in the wilderness, where neither their clothes were worn, nor their shoes
spent for forty years, yet Egypt which should be a hell to them, was their
paradise.

The ten Tribes of Israel reigned in Samaria 240. years, seven months, and
seven days, during which time they neither obeyed the laws of the Lord, nor
heard the Prophets that forewarned them of these calamities which were to come,
and therefore the Lord gave them over, and they were taken prisoners, and their
last king Osea, and brought captives by Salmanasser unto Niniuie.

So the kingdom of Judah and the house of David was likewise taken by
Nabuchodonozer in the eleventh year of Zedechiah, the last king of Judah, who
was Zedechia taken captive.
taken captive, his noble men and his children slain in his sight, before his
eyes were plucked out, and after led in a chain unto Babylon, where he died in
prison 133. years Joseph. li. 10. cap. 2.
after the kingdom of Israel was destroyed by Salmanasser, that was the cause
of his miserable end, for the contempt he had to the Prophet Jeremy, disdaining
either to hear him, or to read his book, for before any king reigned in Israel
Judges by the Lord appointed, ruled 370. years, the kings of Judah after
Solomon's death reigned 395. years, which agrees well with Josephus account.

And so of the continuance of the Bishops or high Priests, even from the
building of the temple of Solomon (Sadoc being their first high Priest or
Bishop) were seue^teene high Priests or Bishops in Jerusalem, by succession of
the children after their fathers.

The end of the second book.
The third Book of the Stratagems of Jerusalem.
CHAP. I.
Of the care and diligence which Kingdoms and Countries took in military
discipline to exercise their soldiers.

THe Romans most careful in all military discipline, in no wise trusted
strangers, but every Roman soldier should take a military oath by the
Colonel.

The Persia^s also, were in this point No mercenary soldiers allowed by the
Romans or the Persians.
like the Romans, for not admitting of mercenary soldiers: seldom is found
any constancy or soundness in mercenary soldiers, as by too many examples
the Romans and others found.

Iugurth by treachery of few Thracians that served the Romans in Affrike, in
the night time betrayed the Salust.
Romans to Iugurth, and made a great slaughter of them.

In like sort the Thessalians were treacherous to the Athenians whom they
trusted, but they forsook the Athenians Thucid. 1.
at the battle of Tanagra, whereby through their falsehood and treachery to the
Athenians, the victory fell to the Lacedaemonians, therefore neither the
Romans nor the Persians trusted any mercenary soldiers, for mercenary
soldiers and strangers are not to be trusted, for they do not only forsake
their friends in any Liui. 21.
danger, but join with the enemy for any advantage. So did the Gauls in the
wars of Carthage, slew the watch of the Romans, and fled to Haniball.

The law of arms in every country should hold and maintain the crown and
dignity of the prince by the sword, so most necessary it is, that subjects
should be looked unto with great care and provision to maintain the Care of
countries for soldiers.
willing, forward, and good soldiers, and due punishments and sharp
corrections for evil, leaud, and wicked disposed men, careless of their
countries good. How careful every commonwealth has been of this, you shall
read first of every kingdom and country several punishments by law appointed,
and after of the rewards, honor, and dignities of good soldiers; of which
Plato says: Omnis respub: paena and Praemio continetur.

Agesilaus therefore appointed gifts and rewards to draw and encourage his
soldiers to shoot, to throw the dart, the sling, to ride, to run, and with
diligence and care to keep them severely from faults and offenses, and to
exercise them in martial feats, which kind of Agesilaus his exercise for his
soldiers.
exercise among the Greeks was most commonly used, called Pentatlon, in the
games of Olympia and Isthmia, to honor Hercules and Thesius, two protectors and
principal captains that loved soldiers.

Alexander the great was so severe in martial laws toward his soldiers,
that if any soldier or captain should lie, or be any way proved a liar, he
should be deprived Antigenes banished for a lie.
from his office and place of service, and banished from his camp: for so was
Antigenes, though a valiant captain otherwise, yet was both casseerd and
banished for making of a lie.

Alexander after he had banished all bakers, cooks, brewers, and such like
from his camp, said, that marching in their armor in the night, they should
provide them a dinner, and a stomach to eat their dinner against the next
morning, and as for a supper, he said they should not look for wine nor flesh
to sleep after it, but for bread, Alexander his laws and exercises for his
soldiers.
and he would provide for water, which is the only food of a soldier, and
the most necessary care of a general. Hereby his soldiers being brought up by
Philip king of Macedonia his father, were hardened with continual pain and
travel, and long exercises of wars, that Alexander with an army of thirty
thousand, after he had vanquished Darius king of Persia, he proceeded forwards
without any resistance, but by yielding of all the Kings of the East countries.
It is not read that Alexander used any stratagemes as his father Philippe did.

The like hardiness and courage was found in Masinissa king of Numidia, being
four score years old, that he in the cold winter and hard frost, bareheaded,
would march before his soldiers over mountains, through Masinissas hardiness
in marching.
woods and desert places, with such pain and travel, with such hunger and
thirst, as he being a king and a captain, marching before, heavy and laden
with armors, the soldiers were kindled with great courage to follow after,
being driven thereunto for very shame, to imitate such a valiant captain. Well
therefore Lysander Lysander.
said, that a Lion before three hundred Deares, was better then a timorous
Dear before three hundred Lions. And as well did Iphicrates the Athenian
captain compare the whole band of an army to the whole body of a Iphicrates.
man: for as the head governs and rules the whole body, so the General
rules and governs the whole army.

Fabius Max. would never suffer his soldiers to be either sloathfull or idle,
but before they should take any ease, he would still remove his whole camp from
place The diligence of Fabius Max. to his soldiers.
place, to keep his soldiers in exercise of service, and to avoid
sluggishnesse and idleness, which idleness was the first beginning of
Hannibals ruin in Italy, and as after followed the whole overthrow of all his
Affrican Army in Campania, for they still took their ease and pleasure in
Capua without military travel of exercise.

For we read that Epaminondas that famous Thaehan captain, finding one of his
soldiers idle and sleeping in his tent, did run him through with his spear,
and turning to his army, said, we left this soldier as we found him.

The like did (...) Caesar, finding one of his army asleep caused him to be
bound to a post, and he himself with his Lieftenants and Captains, shot him
to death, speaking loud to his captains and soldiers, we must purge our army
with the sacrifice of such dead soldiers; for said Caesar, Frater euim mortis
somnus est.

Therefore Scypio Affrican was wont to say to idle lazy Scypios saying to his
soldiers. Veget. lib. 3.
soldiers, that the soldiers that would not have their swords and spears
imbrewed with the blood of the enemies, like valiant soldiers should be
diggers and deluers like slaves in their shirts, with dyrtie mattockes and
spades, in lewe of swords.

And so Caesar said, that the soldiers that could not use their swords and
shields, should use the mattock and spade.

Bochoris decreed a military law against sloathfull Bochoris laws. Diod. sic.
lib. 12.
and idle soldiers in Egypt, that would not obey their captains, or forsook
their standart, they should be reremoue from the place where they served, and
become agrarij milites, base soldiers as they began first, and if any soldier
would open any secrets to the enemies, he should have his tongue cut out of his
head by the law of Bochoris.

The fat and full fed soldier among the Romans, that neither could nor
would take pains on foot or on horse, the captain might take his horse from
under him, and give him to an other.

So Agesilaus did in the Peloponesian wars in Greece, Agesilaus military
discipline.
for when he saw young brave soldiers of Asia in his camp, which had more
pride in their apparel, then care of their service, more like to women then to
men, Agesilaus took their brave and fine apparel from them, and gave it to
those soldiers that better deserved it, and forced them to serve very bare and
naked, until they knew better how to become soldiers.

So the Romans used to take the spears from those soldiers that were given
to idleness and sloathfulnesse, though before through service they won them,
and deserved them. They also used to open a vain upon the forehead of a wild,
rash, and disobedient soldier, to let him bleed to become sober.

The Gauls used to put a mark upon the soldiers girdle, which if the
soldier through idleness would not keep himself within that mark, he should
be straightly Caesar. lib. 5. de bello gallic.
kept in prison with thin diet, until the mark of his girdle would serve him.

The old Gauls had an other law, that he which came last to the muster
should be slain in the presence of the multitude, for that he seemed
unwilling to come, and to be with the first to answer for himself and for his
country.

It was so also among the Romans, that he which would not answer to the
first call at any public muster of soldiers, should be noted as a great
offender to his country, and banished out of his country, as a man not borne
nor fit for his country.

Eumenes a noble captain, a soldier of Alexander the great, to take that
sluggishnesse from his soldiers that grew by idleness, did acquaint them with
travel and pain to keep them in breath, sometimes marching forwards The
exercise of Eumenes to his soldiers.
fair and softly, and then retiring with great haste upon the sudden, much
like to the Parthians in their fighting, taking upon them to flee for fear
from the enemies, to draw the enemies after them, and then to return upon the
sudden again to fight with their enemies: so did Eumenes by his soldiers,
which made them ready in service as well backwards as forwards, which many
captains used as stratagems.

Fabius Max. thought good to reclaim the faults of an evil and ignorant
soldier by lenity and gentleness, and wished no captain to use his
soldiers more sharply then the husbandman used his Fig trees, Olive trees,
and wild Pomegranates, which by pruming Fabius Max.
and good handling of them, do alter their hard and wild nature.

Charondas made a law to punish those soldiers that loytred in their
country, and refused to go to wars for their country, and also those
soldiers that were in the wars, that brake any martial order by leaving
their ensign and their company, the soldier that so offended, should be
clothed in a woman's apparel, and be brought into the midst of the camp, and
there to stand in the sight of all the army three several days together. So
Artaxerxes used cowardly soldiers in Persia with the same self law as
Charondas did.

And therefore Attil. Regulus passing with his Army from Samnium to Lucerna,
met with the enemies unexpected: Frent. lib. 4. cap. 1.
his soldiers being taken upon the sudden, began to fly, Regulus commanded
certain of his captains to kill those soldiers that fled from the enemies.

The old Romans for the greatest punishment they had for their slaves in
Martius Corilianus time, was, to carry a limmer on his shoulders, that is
fastened to the axeltree of a coach called Furea, and compelled to go up and
down in that sort among his neighbors, and after to be called Furciser.

Certain military punishments by law of Arms set down: Castigatio,
Pecumariaemulctae, numerum indictio, militiaemutatio, gradus dciectio,
ignominiosa missio. I will Modesti. de re militari.
spare to put them in English because they are in English mentioned before.

If any be desirous of more military punishments, let him read Vegetius, the
third book and fourth chapter, where he sets down that if a soldier
being punished for any offense by him committed, should contrary his Captain
or the Collonell, by resisting or staying Military punishment for soldiers.
his captains hands, or by breaking the staff or the stick wherewith he is
punished, he is by martial law displaced from the place he serves in, and
quite removed from the camp.

If any soldier resist correction, and lay violent hands on his Captain or
Collonell when he is corrected, he is to suffer capital punishment, which is
death by martial law appointed.

Augustus Caesar commanded those soldiers that offended in the camp, with
sloathfulnesse and idleness, which framed not themselves like soldiers, to
carry upon Augustus Caesar.
their backs Decempedam, a perch or pole of ten foot long, sometimes to
carry turffes in their shirts bare-legd Decempede.
and barefooted, to be flowted and scoffed of their company.

Sertorius for that he saw a number of soldiers negligently omit military
discipline, he caused them to be Sertorius.
whipped and scourged in the midst of the Camp, threatening death for the least
fault the next time they offended. For said Sertorius, In bello bis peccare non
licet.

Genutius the Consul, disauthorised and purged his Genutius.
camp of four thousand soldiers, whom he found sloathfull and negligent in
the army, and brought them to open public punishment.

Cyrus therefore after he had conquered the Lydians, knowing them to be soft and
effeminate soldiers, suffered none of them to be in his camp.

Among the Carthaginians, the Lacedaemonians, and they of Creete, a law was
made, confirmed by Plato Plato.
in Greece, that no soldier might drink wine during the time of their wars,
which made Marius to speak to his Army, perceiving them to be very
thyrstie, we must break our thirst in yonder River after the battle.

Pittacus a singular wise man, made the like law in Pittacus.
Mittelena, as Plato made in Greece, that the soldiers that would drink wine,
might receive double punishment without pay.

Among the Romans severe laws were made against wine drinkers, and executed
not only upon soldiers by the General, but also upon the women in Rome by
their husbands, as Egnat. Metellus punished his own wife.

If any soldier should go any where out of their camp, and be found without
sword and weapons about him, Cornel. Tacit. lib. 2. Ueget. lib. 3. cap. 8.
he should be accused of a capital crime, and hardly escape death, unless it
were the first offense of a young soldier.

Those soldiers that cast up banks, made trenches and diches, might not be
without weapons about them, though they were but agrarij milites.

So used Marius, and after him Caesar, they made their soldiers to work with
their swords on their sides, and mattockes in their hands.

So did the Jews for fear of the Samaritans, and others, build up Jerusalem
and the temple, having their weapons in one hand, and working with the other.

Scipio Aemilianus, at the wars of Numantia, perceiving that his under
captains and his officers forgot the military discipline of the old Romans,
which was that women should not follow the wars, and many other The wars at
Numantia
abuses and enormities which were suffered in the camp without looking unto,
and therefore Scipio purged all his army of all idle and leaud company with
whip and scourge, that might hinder service and infect the army.

So did Cyrus the great king of Persia, with the like care keep his soldiers
from slothful idleness, commanding his Generals and Captains to exercise
their soldiers with pain and travel, to suffer hunger and cold Cyrus
discipline to his soldiers.
without meat or drink, before they would certify their captain what
military exercise either on foot, or on horse they had done.

And after that Cyrus had conquered the Lydians, knowing them to be false and
treacherous fellows, very cowards and timorous soldiers, he dismissed them
from his camp, and suffered them not to stay among his soldiers, because they
should not infect soldiers, nor corrupt military discipline.

For that the martial disciplines of the Romans were such as I thought good
to make a catalogue as I found them in the Commentary upon Vegetius, virgis
caedi, vite verberari, linguae abscissio, this kind of punishment used the
Egiptians, by a law confirmed in Egypt, to cut off the soldiers tongue that
betrayed any counsel to the enemy: the fourth punishment among the Romans
was Manuu^ amputatio, to cut off the hands of those soldiers that were found
stealing or filching in the camp. The fifth punishment was Crurum exectio,
Polib. lib. 6.
the breaking of the legs of those soldiers that forsook their standart,
and so to leave them without legs Tacit. lib. 3. anual.
to stay behind, because when he had legs he would not follow his standart.

Another punishment they had called Decimation, Val. max. li. 2 cap. 7.
for offenses among the soldiers unknown, the tenth man by lot as it fell upon
him should die throughout the whole company: this punishment Decimation, was
invented first by Appius Claudius, which long endured among the Romans, and
most frequented.

The seventh punishment was for them that fled to the enemies, and returned to
be eaten and devoured of beasts.

So Scipio Affrican punished some Romain fugitives.

Another punishment among the Roman soldiers, was to be stoned to death, so
was Posthumous stoned in his Tents.

Another punishment among soldiers, was to be shot to death the soldier being
tied to a stake. This punishment used Caesar, Alexander the great, and many
other Generals in diverse countries. To be short, Sepultura priuari, sub crate
necari, carpento trahi, and many other such you may read in Viget. lib. 3. cap.
4.

In this the Romans differed from the Persians, Mercenary soldiers.
hardly would the Romans trust any mercenary soldier, or suffer any stranger
as a soldier to be within their camp.

The Persians imitating the great king Cyrus counsel, who ever thought it best
to choose a soldier, as a a man would make choice of a good horse to travel
far from home, and to spare his own people the Persians, until extreme
necessity forced wars, clean contrary to the Romans who never used but
their own Roman legions, though they subdued the Macedonians, the Persians,
and their kings, yet the Romans would not use their martial discipline, which
made the Romans to vanquish all nations, and to rule over all countries.

CHAP. II.
Of the provincial regiments of the Romans. Of their rule and government over
the greatest kings of the world.

THe Romans every where most renowned for their fame, in a manner Lords of the
whole earth, after they had conquered all nations and kingdoms under them to
pay tribute to the Empire of Rome, and had appointed governors and regents to
govern under them in every country: Some under Consuls, some The governments
of the Romans.
under Proconsuls, some under Presidents, some under Praetors, and some under
Knights, and after they had divided these kingdoms and countries, some into
principallities, some into provinces, some into Toparchies, as Sex. Ruffinus.
Syria, some into Tetrarchies, as Paphlagonia. Some into Tribes, and some into
Ethnarchies, as France: Gasgoyne and Brytaine were divided into eighteen
provinces, and governed under Praetors.

Hispaine in six provinces, two of them under Consuls government, the other
four under Proconsuls.

Macedonia was divided into seven provinces, Thracia Macedonia.
into six, and Illyria into seven provinces.

This might seem strange, that Consuls of Rome being but one city, should
rule and govern so many kingdoms, that after they had subdued Africa and the
most part of Europe, before they came to Asia, and had established Affrike and
Europe under Roman governors. And as by the death of Alexander the great, all
the East kingdoms were left without a king, that they that were Division
between the successors of Alexander.
then but Alexanders Soldiers, divided all the kingdoms of the East as
booties and prays between them, Macedonia to Antipater, Egypt to Ptolomeu,
Asia the less to Antigonus, and so other kingdoms were divided between
others of Alexander his soldiers and they that could agree under one captain,
as fellows, friends, and soldiers of one country, fell to civil wars
within themselves, that one destroyed another, that by this means the Romans
subdued the kings of Asia, as they subdued the kings of Africa and Europe.

After the Romans had subdued Italy, their contrymen and next neighbors,
they granted to the Volsces, the Tyrrhens, the Samnites, Lucans, Tarentines
and Thuscans, the Roman law called Ius Latij.

So did the Romans in Cicilia, which was the first people subdued, and made
the first province under the Romans, they had Iura Latinitatis.

In Carthage, Leptis, and diverse other cities in Affrike Liberties and freedoms
allowed by the Romans.
and Hispaine, they had their freedom and liberty again, and the laws of
Italy granted them by Alexander Seuerus the Emperor: so that in Africa were
fifteen Roman cities, where no magistrate might govern but a Roman citizen,
and that Per ius Latinitatis.

The like law made Pompey in Armenia and in Pontus, Romian magistrates governed
in Asia and in Africa.
and other cities of Asia, that Romain magistrates should govern them, as they
did in Hispaine and in Africa.

All Hispaine were so subject to the Romans, that thirty towns were made
free to use their liberties and laws, and named Roman cities in one part of
Hispaine, and one hundred and twenty towns that paid anuall stipend Alex.
Neapolit. lib. 2. cap. 27.
to the Romans.

The Athenians, Thessalians, and all Greece, were restored to their laws and
liberties by diverse Emperors of Rome, as by Pau. Aemilius, Ti. Flaminius, Lu.
Silla, and others. But other kingdoms and countries were not so: For though
the Romans excelled and exceeded all nations in prowise, in conquests and
victories, yet made they all kingdoms and countries their friends and
consederates which they subdued. So was Masinissa king of Numidia, Masinissa.
ever a friend to the Romans against Hannibal while he lived, and at his death
made the Roman Empire his heir.

And Attalus king of Asia, for the friendship that he Attalus.
found with the Romans, committed his kingdom into the Romans tuition, and
made also the Empire of Rome his heir as Masinissa did.

And though the Cappadocians were a free nation governed by their own law,
yet sought they freedom and liberty of the Romans, and would be governed by
them only forsaking their own liberty, so that they were ruled as the
Egiptians were by Roman knights, for that the Roman knights and the Senators
were of equal power at that time.

For no Consul, Proconsull, Praetor, or such as had Serieants or Tipslaues
before them, might in no wise come into Alexandria or any part of Egypt, for
that the Romans had an old prophecy, that their dignity and iurisdicton
should cease in Alexandria, and also in Egypt, when any Roman officer came to
Alexandria, having Serieants with Maces before them.

The Romans being now Lords of the most part of Africa, Asia, and Europe,
grew so proud of their fortunes, of their triumphs, their victories, and
greatness Ambition in Rome and in Athens.
far from Rome, that they through ambition and envy, began one to spite an
other in Rome, so that there was nothing in Rome but as it was in Athens,
seditions, tumults, envy and malice: and as Iugurth spoke of Rome, that it was
Vrbs venalis si haberet emptorem, a town soon sold, if it had a chapman. So
Demosthenes spoke of the three monsters of Athens, the people, the owl, and
the Populus, Nectuo, and ^aco.
dragon: these were the causes that overthrew Rome and Athens.

The Israelites in like sort as the Romans before they conquered the
Canaanites, they agreed and joined their force together, and the Lord prospered
their wars when they served him, that from Ioshuahs time, who brought them
and gave them the possession of the land of Canaan, unto David's time, who
settled the Israelites as the Lords over the Canaanites, that the Moabites,
Ammonites, and other nations about paid tribute to David, and to his
successors, and that there was no king, no nation, but feared and trembled at
the name of Israel.

And as you heard before of the civil wars of the Macedonians between
Alexanders servants, and of the Romans, so Israel likewise fell to civil
wars, which Israel.
was the cause of the destruction of the Persians, the Macedonians, the
Romans, the Israelites, and others: for the Hebrews being the only
auntientest people which were brought up in the military discipline of the
Lord, their law giver, and General of their Army, under whom Moses, Joshua,
David, and others, kept and executed the same, whose fame grew so great
thereby, that all the kings and captains of the earth trembled thereat.

The Gentiles in their wars with their enemies, took not only counsel of
their Oracles and Soothsayers, but also made their simple soldiers to believe,
that they were instructed by some divine power sent from Jupiter, or from
Appollo.

As Sertorius, a captain no less famous in Affrike, then Sylla was in Asia,
which did by a white hind use many stratagems, whom he taught to follow him
every Sertorius white hind.
where, even into his bed chamber, making his soldiers to believe, that he
would consult with this white hind in some secret place, before he would take
any wars in hand, and after he had consulted with this white hind, he
certainly assured his soldiers of victory, this he used to encourage his
soldiers in all his wars in Africa. Hereby he overthrew Cotta the Consul
in a battle on the sea: and also ouerthrewe Domitius Front. lib. 1. cap. 11.
the Roman Proconsull in Hiberia, and constrained Metellus to his loss many
times to yield, until Pompey the great came with his legionarie army from
Rome, to aid Metellus against Sertorius, with whom Pompey had somewhat to do
before he overthrew Sertorius.

Thus he encouraged his soldiers in Africa by reason of his white hind, as
Lucius Sylla did practice many such Stratagemes in Asia, who did make his
soldiers believe by looking on the picture of Appollo, which he carried about
his neck in a little close tablet, that he was instructed by Appollo to take
such battles in hand, that Sylla would make his soldiers believe the victory
should be his.

So Cai. Marius in his wars against the Cymbrians, carried in his coach an
old woman of Scythia, named Martha, by whom he had often secret conference,
and persuaded his soldiers that all the victories he had, was by the
instructions of this Martha, which Marius made Marius policy.
his soldiers believe she was a prophet, and therefore not to doubt of any
battle, but to have victory.

Scipio Affrican in like manner would take no public matter in hand before he
had gone to the Capitol and consulted with Jupiter, whereby the soldiers were
persuaded, and he also informed them before he entered Scipio his stratagem to
his soldiers.
into any battle, that they need not doubt of victories, for so he himself
was instructed by a messenger from Jupiter. Thus were the soldiers of the
Gentiles blinded with their own superstitiousnesse, that they would believe
their captains in any thing they spoke, that their laws were made, and
victories were gotten by the false oracles of their Idols.

So Sertorius did by his white hind. Sylla by consulting with Appollo. Cai.
Marius with his prophetess of Scythia, and Scypio Affrican by his messenger
from Jupiter, these means which they used as stratagemes was to persuade their
soldiers forwards, with more Val. Max. lib. 1.
courage to take the battle in hand, so religious were the Gentiles toward
their Gods, that they thought nothing could happen amiss if their gods were
well pleased.

Diagoras the Philosopher was therefore banished out of Athens, because he
confessed that he doubted Dagoras the Philosopher. Cic de natura. deor. lib. 1.
whether there were any gods or no.

So was Archilocus banished from Sparta, for that he said, I had rather loose
my shield then my life.

The Israelites were charged not to use these Idolatrous means, and forbidden
to seek foreign helps, either of the Egiptians, or of the Babilonians,
Romans, or Syrians, but of the presence of the Lord in the Arc, and from the
mercy seat to take their answer what they might do, and after the use of
the Arc, in the Israel consulted with idolatrous Oracles.
Temple of Solomon at Jerusalem: but the Israelites after consulted with Milcom
and Moloch, the gods of the Gentiles, and the house of Ephramites joined their
force with the Syrians, and sought help against Judah.

It seemed by the instructions of the Gentiles to their soldiers, set forth in
their laws of Arms, that they were most careful to have them brought into
such straight observations, by obedience to their chief generals and
officers: for it was no small reproach nor little shame, but for ever public
infamy among the Romans, Military punishment of the Romans.
for any soldier, captain, colonel, or any other officer, to be disauthorised
and rejected from his former dignity of service, to disarmor him of his
weapons, to take his horse from under him, to be vnspurd, to take his spear
out of his hand, his shoes from his feet, his gyrdle from his middle, to give
him barley for wheat, to go barefooted, and to begin again to be Agrarius
miles, to be a mean soldier, so severe were the Romans against disobedient
soldiers.

It was an ancient law among the old Romans, that the Captains and
Centurions that fled from their company should stand with their garments loose,
and their swords drawn in their hands in the midst of the camp, which was one
of the greatest and infamousest punishments among the Romans for a Roman
captain.

The penal law they had in Sparta against those that Plut. in Licurgo.
fled from the battle, they were compelled to wear old tattered rags, and to
shave the one side of their beards, A penal law in Sparta for soldiers.
and to be reviled and flowted of every man that met them, that it was not
lawful for them to give any word of answering.

And if they were captains, or any great officers in the field, they should
wear an old patched gown of diverse colors, they should bear no office in
the commonwealth after that time, they might have no man's daughter to
marriage, neither would any marry their daughters, but as men left to live in
shame without any credit, forsaken and refused to come into any Spartans
company, for every man lived in that warlike town Sparta as in a camp, where
each soldier knew his allowance, and what he had to do: for the bondmen called
Helotes.
Helotes, did till their ground, and yearly yielded the^ certain revenues to
maintain their wars, for Sparta was not walled as other strong cities be,
but walled with valiant soldiers, ready always in armor to fight with their
enemies, for as the Romans said Membra militum arma, so the Lacedaemonians
said, Vrbis maenia milites.

The Lacedaemonians of all people so honored martial discipline, that they
studied nothing but to endure How the Lacedaemonians march to their wars.
all labors, to sustain any pain, and to be ready always to fight, and when
they marched in battle ray to any set battle, they put their garlands of
flowers on their heads in the very face of the enemy, and sung a song to
Castor and Pollux, commanding their warlike instruments to sound, and to agree
with the Dittie of their song called Pirricha, and so with motions and gestures
of their bodies in their armor, they marched forwards Perricha.
toward the enemy, wearing tawny short cassocks, least Enoplia.
the enemy should see any blood upon them.

The Massagets went also unto any battle in such colored cassocks as best
resembled the color of blood, Massagets.
least the sight of blood should terrify some cowardly faint hearted soldier
of their army.

The Aethiopians held a clean contrary opinion to the Massagets, they went
into the wars all in white Aethiopians
color, because they might the more be encouraged by the sight of blood to
revenge blood, and as the Aethiopians would often say, that blood should be
revenged when they saw their blood.

Artaxerxes king of Persia, came with an army of nine hundred thousand, all in
red iackets, against his brother Cyrus, to the battle of Conoxa, where Cyrus
gave him battle with a great army, all in white cassockes.

So also sundry nations came into the field with diverse colored shields and
targets, as Alexander the great Veget. lib. 1. cap. 18.
his soldiers came all with white siluered shields, and therefore called
Argyrasipides. Argyraspides


The Roman Emperor Alex. Seuerus, came with golden gilted shields, and
therefore called Chrysoaspides: Chrysoaspides.
the Romans came with diverse colored shields, but never with white, unless
for the first year to young soldiers.

The Carthagineans never used any other shields but white, and the rather
because the Romans refused white Justin. lib. 14. histor.
shields, for the Romans and the Carthagineans could never agree.

CHAP. III.
Of the form and manner of military oaths in diverse countries ministered unto
soldiers.

AFter the mustering and numbering of soldiers, and their names written in
tables, they were also sworn before they went into any wars.

The Persians for that they preferred the faith of their soldiers before any
profit, they were compelled to swear by the Sun, sometime by fire, called
their god The Persians oath.
Orimasdes, to obey and follow the comman dements of their Generals, according
to the martial law of Persia.

Among the Romans a military oath was not only ministered unto the soldiers
to obey the direction and correction of the Consuls, but also the Consuls and
Praetors themselves were sworn, before the Senators Consuls displaced.
of Rome, that they should attempt no battle without full instruction from the
Senators, for many Consuls, Praetors, and Generals, have been displaced from
their Co^sulships, for not obeying the orders of the Senators.

The same observation of oaths as well of captains as of the soldiers, were
ministered to the soldiers by the magistrates in Sparta, called Ephori, though
the Lacedaemonians in their wars against the Messenians, regarded as much
their aultars, their gods, and their faith, as the Athenians did against the
Maegarians, who caused their soldiers to take an annual oath, to waste, to
spoil, and to destroy, and to do as much harm as they could to the Maegarians.

The Aethiopians and Egiptians made their soldiers to swear by the names of
those noble dead captains, whose service alive did most advance their
country, whose bodies they preserved with all sweet odours in glass, in
their sumptuous tombs.

The Thracians and the Scythians, laying their stand The Thracian oath.
upon the sword of Mars, make their soldiers swear in solemn sort, to
perform true service to Mars and to their country.

When King Artaxerxes would have Hipocrates the Physician to be sworn toward
him, and offered him a Hypocrates. Plut. in vita catonis.
great sum of gold, Hipocrates swear unto Artaxerxes, that he would never
serve under a barbarous King that should be an enemy to the Greeks. This oath
was observed ever after of all the Physicians of Greece.

The oath that Benhadad king of Syria swear unto Achab king of Israel was, thus
the gods do unto me, Benhadads oath.
if thou do not deliver me all thy treasures, and yield thy self unto me,
the dust of Samaria shall not be enough for every one of my soldiers to take
a handful.

As you heard of the Lacedaemonians against the Messenians, and of the Athenians
against the Maegarians, so the Thessalians weighed so little their oaths, that
in the Peloponesian war they fled from the Athenians The Thessalians oath.
unto the Lacedaemonians, making no account of their oaths before made to the
Athenians, like the Parthians which made no account of a military oath in
wars.

Notwithstanding the infidelity of the Thessalians, the Parthians, and others,
I think it convenient to set down the old ancient form of the Romans,
when they ministered oaths unto their soldiers or otherwise. The Romans would
swear by Jupiter, laying their hands upon the altar and on the sacrifice,
saying these words: If I say otherwise then truth, or deceive any man, so
Jupiter throw me out of Rome, as I throw this stone out of my hand.

The same words in effect did Scipio Affrican use to Lu. Metellus, and to other
Romans after the great overthrow of the Romans at the battle of Can,
hearing that Metellus and his company had determined to forsake Italy, and to
take sea, Scypio Affrican went purposely unto Metellus lodging, whom he found
very resolute in their purpose, Scypio drew his sword naked upon them, saying:
I swear unto you, that during Scypios The oath of Scypio Affrican.
life, I will not forsake Rome nor any part of Italy, neither will I suffer you
nor any Roman citizen to depart out of Italy with my life; If I do, Jupiter
confound me, my house, my family, and all that I have in the world. Veget.
lib. 2. cap. 5.


This was Scypios oath to Metellus, after that Hanniball had overthrown the
Romans, and so urged Metellus and his company to swear the same oath, and so
to join their force together against Haniball; for after the great victory of
Haniball at Can, his fortune by degrees began to quail, for Mar. Liuius and
Clau. Nero, both Consuls' of Rome, hearing that Asdruball General of the
Affricans came with a great Army unto Italy to aid his brother Haniball, met
him upon the sudden, and gave him battle at the River Metaurus, with the like
overthrow as was equal to the battle of Can, for Asdruball was slain,
Asdrubals head sent to Hanibal his brother.
and his head cut off and sent to his brother Haniball for a present by
Claudius Nero, and fifty six thousand men of his Army slain, and his Camp
taken, upon the which overthrow, Hanibal was sent for presently, to come from
Italy to Africa.

After this great battle Hanibals force and fortune began to be weakened, and
he made means to Scypio for peace, and great Carthage began to alter and
change, and yet were they most angry with Hanibal, for that he counseled them
not to follow their vain hope of any victory, but rather to entreat for peace
at the Romans. But Carthage could not abide the name of Rome, nor Rome
Carthage, and therefore forced Hanibal to take the battle at Zama in hand,
which was The battle at Zama.
the last battle and the utter overthrow of Hanibal and of all the
Carthagineans.

The Affricans and the Carthagineans almost like the Romans, laid their hands
on the Aultars of their Country gods, and on the sacrifice, holding in Liui.
lib. 31.
the left hand a lamb, and in the right hand a flint stone, saying: If they
otherwise spoke then truth, Carthage.
or that they should deceive any man to their knowledge, so they wished that
Jupiter should strike them as dead, as they did strike the lamb with the flint
stone.

The latter Romans made their soldiers to swear by the name of the
Emperors, as the soldiers swear by the name of Vespasian, and by the name of
Augustus.

So the Emperor Caligula swear by the name of Drusilla in Rome. Drusilla.


So Joseph swear by the life of Pharao in Egypt, yet it was not permitted for
women in Rome, to swear by the name of Hercules. Hercules.


The ancient Greeks in their most solemn oaths, were wont to come to the
temple of Ceres Tesmophore, and there after sacrifice done, to put on a purple
robe upon the goddess Ceres, holding lamps in their hands lighted, and there
to swear before the goddess Ceres, Tesmophore. Alex. Neapolit. lib. 5. cap.
10.
in a manner the like words, as the Romans did of Jupiter.

Both Euripides and Aristophenes, charged the Spartanes, that they observed
neither their oaths, neither Aristocrates.
their faith, nor their aultars, and named their king Aristocrates in his
wars against the Messenians, to be as false as the Thessalians were.

Among other nations they swear by waters, rivers, and wells, as the Indians
swear by the water of Sandaracina: Massagetes.
the Massagets by the River of Tanais.

Many Philosophers swear Per genium Socratis. Many Pythagorians swear Per
quaternionem, which with them Pythagorians oath.
was the most perfect number.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the last overthrow of Hanibal at the battle of Zama, by Scypio Affrican,
of his going from Affrike to Asia to Antiochus the great, and from thence to
Prusias king of Bythinia.

HAnibal before he came out of Italy, seeing his force declining, after he
saw his brother Asdrubals head thrown into his tent, said, I ever thought
Carthage unlucky, and I know it should be destroyed, but I requited the
Romans before my brothers head was cut off, at the battles of Trebeia,
Thrasymen, and Can, with the loss of three hundred Roman Consuls and
Senators heads, for Hanibal sent at that time after the victory of Can to
Carthage, three bushels of Three bushels of gold rings.
gold rings, which were had from the slain Romans in the field.

After that Hannibal was overthrown by Scipio at the battle at Zama, he fled
to Antiochus the great, whom he persuaded with all means possible to take
wars against the Romans, being so weakened and brought low by Hannibal, at
which time Antiochus began a new war upon the Romans, whom they feared at
the first beginning as much as they did Hannibal, for before he had wars with
the Romans, he had conquered and subdued the most part of Asia, and all which
Zeleucus had subdued before him. And Antiochus waxed so strong that he subdued
many barbarous and warlike nations, that thereby he was called Antiochus the
great, and The overthrow of Antiochus at the battle at Magnesia.
became so proud, that by Hannibals means he must needs war with the Romans,
by whom he lost diverse victories, and lost all that he wanne before, and was
quite subdued by the Romans in the battle at Magnesia, and driven to be well
contented to live with very small territories, without kingdoms or countries,
within the precincts of Mount Taurus.

Of this Antiochus, might well be spoken, what Antigonus spoke of Pirrhus, who
compared him to a dice The saying of Antigonus.
player, who will not give over until he loose all his winning.

Hannibal after he fled from Affricke, being overthrown by Scipio, went to
Antiochus the great, whom he persuaded to take wars against the Romans, to
whom Hannibal taught many stratagemes, among the which he taught him to throw
little vessels full of Adders and Vipers into the Roman nauies on sea battles,
to hinder not only the soldiers from their fighting, but also the sailors from
their business.

The same self stratagem did Hannibal show to Prusias king of Bythinia, to
whom he fled after Antiochus the great was overthrown by the Romans. This
Hannibal and his brother Asdrubal, the one in Italy, the other in Hispaine, so
afflicted and plagued the Romans, but it was well requited by the two Roman
brethren Scipio Front. lib. 4. cap. 7.
Affrican, and his brother Scypio Asiaticus, both upon Africa and upon Asia.

Scipio Asiaticus in Lydia, in a battle against Antiochus the great, (after
great tempest and rain which continued a whole day and a night together, that
both Antiochus the great ouerthrown by Scypio.
man and beast seemed weary) was counseled by his brother Pub. Scipio
Affrican, the next morning to strike a battle against Antiochus, though it was
by the Roman laws a day forbidden to fight, and by his brothers counsel,
Scipio Asiaticus obtained a great victory over Antiochus the great, which was
the first king among the Syrians, called Antiochus the great, and thereby
Scipio was surnamed Asiaticus, after the overthrow of Antiochus, as his brother
Scipio was surnamed Affricanus, after the great overthrow of Hannibal.

So Cn. Pompeius was called Pompey the great, after the overthrow of Sertorius
and his accomplices in Hispaine.

So Alexander was called Alexander the great, after he overthrew Darius, and
obtained the Empire of Persia.

This good success of these victories had by the Romans, only by the means
of Scipio Affrican, who drove Hannibal out of Italy into Africa, and out of
Africa into Asia, and brought all the Cities of Italy under the obeisance of
the Romans, neither Scipio would give Africa or Carthaginians over, before
he saw Carthage burnt before his face, yet all the Captains of Carthage when
nothing did profit them, after The burning of Carthage.
the matrons and women of the City had shaued all their heads and brought
their hairs unto the captains, as the Massilians and the Rhodians did the
like, to make Gables for their Nauies, and Match for their shottes, and yet
when they saw it would not hold, then all the Town locked their gates, and
brought all their goods and treasure to the midst of the Town, and burned
them, and themselves, before they would yield to the Romans, in the sight of
Scipio, who with tears bewailed the unfortunate estate, and lamentable end of
Carthage, burning before his face, for the space of seventeen days, saying to
Polybius, Veniet illa dies qua Troia nostra peribit.

After all this service of Scipio, he dyed bannished out of Rome, as Hannibal
died out of Africa. In Rome after Scipio, began Marius to be great, and so
great, that he was chosen seven several times Consul Marius seven times
Consul in Rome.
of Rome, under this Marius, served Lu. Sylla, a young gallant Captain, and
grew by degrees in Rome so great, that he went against fifteen Generals of
his enemies, who had four hundred and fifty Ensigns of footmen, well armed
in the field against him, as Sylla himself reports it in his Commentaries
written to Lucullus, but he wanne the victory. This time said Carbos words of
Sylla.
Carbo, the head and chief of all Marius faction, the only enemy of Sylla,
that Sylla was like a Fox to deceive his enemies, and like a Lion to fight
with his enemies.

Sylla fought with captains of greatest power and overcame them. What king
living then in the East was of such power as Mithridates, of such courage as
Lamponius, of such stoutnesse as Telestinus the Samnite? This Sylla after the
overthrow of these three, by force of arms got many victories in Asia and in
Greece, and became as Sylla and Marius the firebrarnds of Italy.
great as Marius was in Rome: and they both grew so great, that one could not
abide the name of the other: hence grew factions and partakings in Rome,
between Sylla and Marius by civil wars; That as the Giliadites suffered not
one Ephraimite to pass over Jorden, that could not pronounce Shchiboleth, so
none might live in Shchiboleth.
Rome, but those whom Sylla either spoke unto, or Marius reached his hand unto.
Such was the hatred between them both, that Rome could not contain Sylla and
Marius, together at one time, no more then Rome could endure Pompey and Caesar,
and yet in the midst of their civil wars, Marius saved Syllas life against
Sulpitius mind, but Marius and his son were after overthrown by Sylla.

So Caesar saved Brutus life in the battle of Pharsalia, against Mar. Antonius
will, but Brutus was one of the chief conspirators that killed Caesar in the
Senate house.

So Brutus saved Mar. Antonius life, at that time when Caesar was slain in the
Senate against Cassius will. But Brutus.
Mar. Antonius never gave Brutus over until he slew him at the battle of
Philippus. And thus Marius was overthrown by Sylla, whose life he saved. So
was Caesar slain by Brutus, whose life Caesar saved: and Brutus by Mar.
Antonius, whose life Brutus saved.

But after Sylla and Marius rage was past, Pompey, which Sertorius called
Syllas boy, when Pompey was a young captain under Sylla in Africa, this
young captain Syllas boy, subdued all Sertorius captains, Marius, Carinna,
Caelius, and Brutus. After them, Pompey overthrew Scypio the Consul, and after
Scypio, Carbo, who had been three times Consul in Rome.

After that Pompey had subdued all Sertorius captains, and at last Sertorius
himself, he took king Iarbas, who The martial exploits of Pompey.
fought on Domitius side, one of Sertorius captains, and brought him prisoner
to Rome in his triumph.

So that within forty days, Pompey overcame all the Marians, which took
Marius part, which were enemies to Sylla, subdued Affrike, and established all
the affairs of all the kings and kingdoms of all that country, that Sylla
named him Pompey the great. Yet Sylla saw Pompeys greatness grow on so fast,
that he went about to hinder Pompeys triumphs: which Pompey spoke to Syllas
face, that men honor more the sun rising then the sun setting.

Pompey having been neither Praetor, Consul, or Senator, had his triumph
granted him against the law, when he was but 24. years of age.

Pompey gave an other overthrow to Sertorius captains, at a set battle hard by
the city of Valentia, slew ten thousand men of Sertorius soldiers, and at
that battle The victory of Pompey as Valentia.
Pompey slew Herennius and Perpenna, both notable soldiers, and Sertorius
Lieftenants, and so obtained the victory, and ended all this war, for the
most part of Sertorius captains were slain in the field at that battle.

Yet had Pompey his hands full with Sertorius at the battle of Lauron, a noble
and valiant captain on Marius side, and one that galled Pompey more then all
the rest, for Pompey could do no good though he saw the city of Lauron burnt
before his face, where Sertorius showed himself a most skillful and valiant
captain.

In like sort at the battle hard by the River Sucron, Pompey had his hands
full with Sertorius, where Pompey was forced to take his horse, and driven from
his horse, The battle at Sucron.
to fly, and in his flight to forsake his horse, and to take his feet, and to
leave his horse for a pray to Sertorius Affricans soldiers, being so rich a
spoil to stay the enemies, who fought for the horse, and let Pompey go.

The Gauls having a great battle to fight with Attalus king of Asia,
delivered all their gold and silver to be kept, that if they were driven to
fly, they should scatter the gold and silver upon the way, that by staying the
enemies Front. lib. 2. cap. 13.
to gather up the gold and silver so dispersed, they themselves might escape.

The like stratagem used Mithridates king of Pontus, to save himself, who fled
from the enemies that followed hard after him, who left a Mule laden with gold
Mithridates stratagems and others.
and silver, a booty which Mithridates knew would please the Romans, to stay
them, and to save himself from Lucullus soldiers.

So did Triphon king of Syria (to escape from king Antiochus horsemen)
scattered money every where on the Triphon.
way, to stay Antiochus soldiers that Triphon might escape, so did Alaricus
king of the Goats and others, save themselves by the like policies.

Few great captains hardly escaped with their lives from diverse dangers and
perils.

Sylla hardly escaped from Telesinus at the battle of Antemna, and Caesar
himself after he had lost 32. Ensigns, Antemna.
and a thousand of his best soldiers, escaped hardly the hand of Pompey at
Dirachium, and after in the battle Dyrachium.
at Munda in Africa, from the Pompeyans.

CHAP. V.
Of Pirrhus war against the Romans, of diverse stratagems, of the marchings
of diverse nations, of the overthrow of Torquine last king over the Romans, of
the praise of Porsenna and Mutius Scaeuola.

PIrrhus the great captain in the battle hard by the river Siris, after he
had given to Leuinus the Consul, a great overthrow Pirrhus.
before, and made up a trophey in the temple at Tarentum to Jupiter, yielding
thanks for his victories, being demanded of the Tarentines to have one battle
more with the Romans, since he had subdued the Romans in two battles before,
he answered: If I stay to give the third battle to the Romans, I shall have
never a soldier to return from Italy to Epyre.

Thus Pompey under Sylla, Sylla under Marius, Marius under Scypio, and Scypio
under his father, whom he rescued in the battle at Can from the Affricans,
as Alexander the great rescued his father Philip at the battle at Cheronea,
being but eighteen years of age, as Scypio was, when he rescued his father at
Can.

While Pompey flourished in Rome after Syllas death, that all the Roman Empire
rung out Pompeys fame.

Caesar practiced among the Gauls his secret ambition, which was such, that he
went as a Roman captain with his army far from Rome, to practice his
stratagems, where he conquered the Gauls with the weapons of the Romans,
Caesar's ambition against Rome.
and won the Romans with money of the Gauls, few in Rome knew this, but
such as he fed with money in Rome to be his friends.

Hence grew the malice and envy betwneene Pompey and Caesar, for Pompey could
not abide his equal in Rome, nor Caesar his superior. Plut. in Caesare.


Caesar was suspected to be confederate with Cateline in his conspiracy, not
only to overthrow the state of the Commonwealth, but also to destroy the
whole Empire of Rome, for the which cause Cato and Piso fell out with Cicero,
for that he then being Consul, had not bewrayed Caesar, when Cicero well
might Plut. in Cicero.
have done it, for many saw the greatness of Caesar far from Rome before
he came to Rome, they saw his courage and mind to be invincible, his
martial skill to be singular, that such was his conquests over the Gauls in
ten years, that he took above eight hundred Towns, and having such an
infinite number of enemies, of thirty hundred thousand soldiers, Gauls,
Germans, Teutons, and diverse others, he slew of them at several times above
ten hundred thousand.

So that Caesar's praise, his wars, his battles, his victories, Caesar's praise.
and conquests, had excelled all the strongest kings and princes of Europe, had
he not only showed himself an enemy to his Country in the battle at
Pharsalia, where Pompey the great, the Senators, and the most part of the noble
men of Rome were slain, overthrown, and taken.

Had Caesar been in the time of Hanibal, of whom Scypio demanded, who had been,
and were the greatest captains of the world, to whom he answered, Alexander
Scipios demand of Hannibal.
was the first, Pirrhus the second, and Hanibal himself the third. Then Scypio
demanded of Hanibal, what if Hanibal had subdued Scypio? He answered that
then Hanibal should not have been the second, nor the third, but the first. For
what Pirrhus could not bring to pass in four years, nor Hannibal in
seue^teen years, Caesar's celeritie in his victories.
that could Caesar bring to pass within threescore days, he was Lord of all
Italy, Emperor of Rome, and conqueror of all the Roman Empire, and therefore
worthily to be preferred before Pirrhus or Hannibal, had he spared his country.

Such was the celeritie of Caesar's victories, over Pharnaces king of Pontus, at
the battle by the city of Zela, that he wrote but three words to his friend
Anitus to Rome, from Pontus, Veni, vidi, vici.

Again, he took three camps in one day, and slew fifty thousand of his
enemies, and lost but fifty of his soldiers for all the force of king Iuba,
Cato, Scipio, and Affranius.

The soldiers of Epaminondas, perceiving that the wind blew away the labell,
which hanged as an ornament about Epaminondas spear, and lighted upon the grave
of a dead Lacedemonian, at the which sight the Thaebans were so frighted,
until Epaminondas said unto them merrily, Ah worthy soldiers, this signifies
the Epaminondas stratageme.
overthrow of the Lacedaemonians, and forewarneth them of their burial. These
wise stratagemes by noble captains, were to remove fear and terror from
soldiers minds, which were so superstitious at the sight of any toy to doubt
of victories.

Scipio Affrican sailing from Italy into Africa, at his going out of his ship
had a fall, which not a little moved the soldiers, who took it for a sign of
no good luck, Front. lib. 1. cap. 12.
he perceiving by his soldiers that they were amazed and astonished at his
fall, spoke unto them presently with a merry countenance and said; Ludite
milites, Affricans oppressi, Be merry soldiers I have overcome Affricke, and
so by this stratagem he turned their doubts and fear into boldness and
stoutnesse.

As Scipio spoke Affricam oppressi, I overcame Affrike, so likewise we may
speak through Christ that eternal Scipio and staff of salvation, who
overcame not only Africa, but the whole world, and the prince of the same
Satan.

The very like chance happened to Caesar, who as he went to take shipping, had
the like luck as Scipio had, and least his soldiers should think it a sign
of hard luck, he used this stratageme, embraced the earth fast and said;
Terra, te teneo matter, which was interpreted by his soothsayers that he should
conquer many lands and countries through victories.

Caesar after all his great fortunes and victories which Caesar was in 52.
pitched fields.
he had in two and fifty pitched fields and set battles, entered with his last
triumph of Ouation, after four great tryumphes had before over foreign
enemies, being Consul, Dictator, and Emperor, by his sword, made a kind of
tryumphe of Ouation from mount Albanus to the Capitol, five months before the
Ides of March, which time Spurnia the soothsayer willed Caesar to take heed
of, at what time Caesar was slain in the Senate house.

This was not to be called a tryumphe, because it was done in the time of
civil discord, for that in civil wars among the Romans, it was decreed by
the Senate, No triumphs in civil wars at Rome.
that no Roman might tryumphe over another Roman, so it was also among the
Thaebans, Epaminondas might not tryumphe over the Lacedaemonians for his
victory at Leuctres.

Sylla might not tryumphe over Marius, neither Caesar over Pompey, nor Octauius
over Mar. Antonius. Yet Caesar against the law tryumphed, and carried the
pictures of Cato, Petronius, and others, but refused to carry the picture of
Pompey, because he knew it would offend many of the Romans, and the rather
for that Caesar gave his daughter Iulia in marriage to Pompey.

Caesar after these his conquests, was named the first Emperor of Rome, the
Romans having had before seven kings, which ruled two hundred and fifty
years, after kings Consulls, which continued five hundred years. For Valerius
Publicola, the first Consul after the The battle between Torquine and
Publicola.
kings, in the battle between the wood called Arsia Sylua, and the meadowe
Aesuuia, where two and twenty thousand and six hundred Romans were slain,
where Torquine the proud was overthrown.

In this battle Brutus one of the Consuls died, who not by chance, but of set
purpose, sought to encounter with Aruns, king Torquines eldest son, to
execute the deadly malice they bare each other, that fighting so desperately
with such fury that one killed another dead at once.

The first tryumphe of Publicola being the first Consul: he had this liberty
granted him, that the door of his house should open outward into the
street, which was never seen in Rome before: but the greatness of this
favor came from Greece to Rome, and Publicola had the first honors and
liberty thereof, and the first The first funeral Sermon in Rome.
funeral sermon that ever was in Rome, was made by Publicola for Brutus his
fellow Consul slain in this battle. So that the name of Torquines was as
odious in Rome, as the name of Tyrants, that the Romans never suffered any
King to govern after Torquine the proud, neither could they abide ever after
the name of a king.

In the second battle that Torquine prepared to recover his kingdom, he went
to the city Clusiu^, and had king Porsenna to promise him his aid, in whose
behalf, he sent his Herald straight to summon the Romans to receive their
king, but being by the Romans stoutly refused, Porsenna proclaimed open
wars, in the which wars, after much slaughter of the Romans, Porsenna.
the city of Rome had been taken, and Torquine restored again to his kingdom,
had not Horatius Cocles, and the noble act of Mutius Scaeuola been, who had
determined fully to kill king Porsenna, and missing the king, killed the Mutius
Scaeuoa.
next unto him, supposing him to be the king: which being reprehended therefore
and tortured, holding his arms in flames of fire, spoke boldly unto king
Porsennas face, that there were three hundred Romans sworn to do the like
enterprise as he did, and had sworn Porsennas death, which made him to forsake
Torquine, and Torquine to forsake Rome, and to live as a banished private man
fourteen years after, expelled from his kingdom.

The Romans in memory of these enterprises caused two Images made of brass
to be set up in the temple of Vulcan, to honor the name of Mutius Scaeuola,
and Horatius Clocles.

Thus was Torquinius Superbus the last king of the Romans, for the rauishment
of Lucretia Collatinus wife, put from his kingdom, and all the kings of Rome
after Torquine driven from Rome.
him.

And after the kings, the overthrow of the ten Commissioners called Decemuiri,
for the like offense by Appius Clau. to Virginea, a Roman virgin, so that the
kings of Rome lost their kingdoms for the rauishment of Collatinus wife, and
the Decemuiri lost their place and offices for the rauishment of Virgineus
daughter. Decemuiri.


Therefore the glory and fame of the Romans grew by the Consuls, which
increased more and more until Caesar's time, who because he was denied the
place of a Caesar.
Consul with their good will, he became an Emperor against their will. We
leave the Romans thus marching, from Kings to Consuls, from Consuls to
Emperors; from Emperors without an Empire, and will speak of the marching of
other kingdoms.

The Scythians marched into Asia, and wanne many great victories, possessed
many strong Forts, gave diverse The marching of the Scythians.
battles to the Egiptians and the Persians, and builded many cities in diverse
places, as well in Greece as in Asia, to whom Asia paid tribute for fifteen
years.

So marched likewise the Saracens into Afric, where Saracens.
they had so many great victories, that they wanne and possessed the most part
of Hispaine under their government, welnigh eight hundred years.

So the Turks marched into Europe, and got the Empire The Turks.
of Constantinople out of the Romans hands, to the lamentable loss of many
countries, provinces, and cities: so the Turks marched upon the Romans, as
the Romans marched upon others.

Cyrus the great king of Persia, having an hundred Cyrus.
and seven and twenty provinces, after his conquest of many kingdoms and
nations, marched with two hundred thousand Persians to be slain in Scythia,
and that by a woman: so Cyrus lost Persia, seeking to win Scythia, and lost
his life to get more lands.

Zerxes marching into Greece with such an innumerable Zerxes.
army, that they drank and dried up many rivers, as Scamander in Thessalia,
the river Simois in Phrygia, Clidorus in Beotia, Lysus in Samothracia, and the
river Menalia by Hellespont: yet he came from Greece home, to be murdered by
Mardonius his servant, in his own kingdom.

Alexander the great having subdued the most parts of the world, he also for
want of men marched to India Alexander the great.
to fight with Elephants; and returned from India to Babylon, where he was
poisoned by his own servants.

Many such crooked marchings, were as well among the Jews, as among the
Gentiles.

Saul the first king of Israel marched not as he ought Saul.
to have done, against Agag king of the Amalekites, and therefore was he slain
with his three sons, in the battle at mount Gilboa by the Philistines.

Jeroboam marched not rightly to the battle in mount I^boam.
Zemaraim, against Abiah king of Judah; and therefore five hundred thousand
Israelites were slain of his soldiers.

The most part of the kings of Israel, because I need not to name, as Acha^,
Manasses, Zedechiah, and the rest, and many of the kings of Judah, for that
they marched not in the path of the Lord, but followed Ieroboa^, which made
Israel to sin, and therefore marched with Ieroboa^ to their destruction.

These marched not with Moses, who said to the God of Israel, We will not go
hence, if thou go not before us. Nor with king David, who would take no war
in The marching of the Lord his ^aptaines.
hand before he had consulted with the Lord. Nor with Gedeon, who would not go
to any battle unless the Lord had given him a sign before he went* so the
captains of the Lord marched no where, attempted no war or battle without
consulting with the Lord by Vrim and Thummim, or with some Prophet of the Lord.

The Gentiles likewise would take no war in hand without consulting with
their Oracles, as the Romans besought the gods of Carthage, promising them
Temples, Altars, sacrifices and feasts, if they would forsake Carthage and come
to Rome: and therefore the Gentiles were so superstitious and blind, that in
many countries they would bind the Images of Hercules and Mars, lest they
Hercules and Mars.
should forsake them and go to other nations their enemies, for no doubt it
should seem, that either they read or heard of Moses books, how the Lord
forsook the Israelites, and gave them over to the Canaanites; Philistines, and
other nations about them, and how the Arc was taken from them by the
Philistines. Here hence grew the blindness of the Gentiles, that the Arc
being taken away from Israel, they feared also lest their gods should be either
allured by fair promises, or taken away by strength of victories.

CHAP. VI.
Of the manner and form of vows, as well of the Jews as of the Gentiles for
their victories in wars.

A Bigail Nabals wife, used a policy to please David, fearing Ge^e. 32.
least David would be revenged upon her husband for his churlish denial of
relief to him and to his company, went after David with victuals, gifts and
rewards, and pleased him with fair words, as Jacob pleased Stratag^
his brother Esau, who used the like stratagem to win his brother Esau, to send
him gifts and rewards to please his brother, whom he much feared, for Esau
promised to kill his brother Jacob when his father should die.

For Jacob the Patriarch made a vow, when he went to Mesopotamia after his
vision in Luz, which the^ Jacob named The vow^ of Jacob.
Bethel, and said, If God be with me, and help me this journey, and will give
me bread to eat, and clothes to put on, he vowed of all things that the Lord
would give him, that he would give the tenth unto the Lord.

Jacobs vow is far more godly then Absolons vow, for Jacob sought but bread
to eat, and clothes to put on, and safe reture again from Mesopotamia over
Jorden, but rebellious Absolon sought the kingdom of Israel from his father
David, by a dissembling vow, saying; I Arebellious vow of Abs^lon.
will go and perform my vows, which I vowed unto the Lord in Hebron; which
vow, he made his father the king believe that he vowed in Ieshur in Syria,
that if the Lord would bring him to Jerusalem he would perform his vows in
Hebron, this is a rebellious vow, like to the wicked vows of the Jews, which
vowed before they would either eat or drink to kill Paul.

The Israelites after they were overthrown in a great battle by Arad king of
the Canaanites, they vowed unto the Lord, that if the Lord would give Arad
and Nom. 21.
the Canaanites into their hands, that they would truly ferue the Lord, and
destroy the Canaanites, their lands, and their cities. They bound the Lord to
so many conditions, that if they should obtain victories, they promised him
true service, and to fight manfully against the Cananites.

And again for another victory that the Lord gave them against the Canaanites,
they vowed the tenth, and The vow^ of the Israelites.
performed their vow, the Hebrews wanted no victories upon their obedience
and dutiful service to the Lord.

Iephtha in his war^es against the Ammonites, vowed unto the Lord, if he should
have victory over the Ammonites, Judge. cap. 11.
that whatsoever first met him at his return from his victory, coming out of
his house, should be a sacrifice unto the Lord.

Asa king of Judah vowed unto the Lord, as Abiah The vow of king Asia.
his father did, when Shesac king of Egypt came with an infinite number. Asa
and all Judah made a covenant to seek the Lord, promised and swear, that they
that sought ^ot the Lord, small or great, man or woman, should die; this with
an oath he vowed, that Judah rejoiced for the victory they had over Zerah king
of Aethiope, with all his army of ten hundred thousand.

Jonas a Prophet of the Lord, when he fled from Niniuie to Tharsis, being in
danger of shipwreck, he told the Mariners that he was the cause of the
perilous tempest, Ion^.
and willed the Mariners to throw him into the sea, confessing the lot fell
justly upon him, saying, I will perform the vow which I promised unto the Lord.

So Anna vowed unto the Lord, and said, that if the Lord would bestow a man
child upon her, she would Annas vow, Samuels mother.
give him unto the Lord, and she vowed that neither razor or sheares should
come upon his head, and so performed her vow, and brought Samuel her son
before the Lord.

There was nothing so common among the Gentiles also, as vows, as you heard of
the Hebrews, of their vows to the gods of Israel, so likewise among the Greeks
and the Romans, upon any conditions to be performed, they vowed a vow to their
gods and Idols.

The old Gauls having wars with the Romans, their General Aristonicus
vowed unto Mars a rich massy chain of gold of the spoils of the Romans, if
he might win the victory.

Flamminius the Consul, and General of the Roman army, in the self-same war
against Aristonicus, vowed likewise, Flammini^ vow.
if he should have victory, whereas Aristonicus vowed but one chain unto Mars,
Flamminius promised all the chains that the Gauls had, and to put up a
trophey, and to hang their swords, weapons, and armors, upon the trophey, to
honor Mars.

In like sort Marius, and Cai. Luctatius, Consuls of Rom; and Generals in the
wars against the Cymbrians, lifted up both their hands to heaven. Marius
promised and The vow of Marius.
vowed a solemn sacrifice unto the gods of an hundred oxen; and the other
Consul Luct. vowed to build a temple unto Fortune, if the Romans might have
victory over the Cymbrians.

At the last battle of Thrasymen, Fabius vowed being Dictator elected, against
Hanibal, and promised to sacrifice all the profits and fruits that should fall
the next year, of sheep, of sowes, of melch kine, and of goats, between
Fabius Max. vow.
the Calends of March, and the Ides of May, in all the mountains, champion
countries, rivers, or meadows of Italy; and also vowed to build places of
music, to have victory over Hanibal: such were the wicked and Idolatrous
vows of the Gentiles; that theyneither spared land, life, nor living, to
please their gods, they would have no wars, no battles, without
consultations with oracles, or conference with sooth says, for they thought
all victories came by performing, or not performing of vows.

The Athenians hearing of the innumerable army of Xerxes, coming with such
terror unto Greece, they sent The vow of the Athenia^s to Aeolus.
to Delphos, from whence they were admonished by the oracle of Appollo, to
erect up an altar to Aeolus, and thereupon to sacrifice with prayers and
vows, to please the winds, to plague the Persians, to scatter and overthrow
the infinite nauies of Xerxes.

The Greeks and the Romans used a vow called Haecatombae, in the which they
builded an hundred aultars, whereupon they offered to the gods a hundred oxen,
a hundred sheep, and a hundred swine, and sometimes The vow called
Haecatombae.
the Dictators and Emperors of Rome, the kings and generals of Greece, added a
hundred Lions, and a hundred Eagles, to make their vows (as they supposed) of
greater effect; this was chiefly done for the preservation of kings and
kingdoms, Emperors and Empires.

So Augustus Caesar would needs go to Delphos to learn of Appollo, who should
reign after him in Rome, and what should become of the Empire, bestowing the
liberal sacrifice of Haecatombae; was answered by Appollo, Suidus in Vita
Augusti.
that an Hebrew child was borne, who commanded him to silence, and to give no
Oracles, but willed the Emperor Augustus to depart with silence from his
altar, and to hold with the people his credit.

So Saul being rejected from the Lord for his disobedience, spoke to Samuel,
yet honor me before the people.

So rebellious Absolon, to disgrace his father, and to please the people,
wished that he were a Judge, for that the people wanted a law, to minister
unto them justice. Many such rebellious and ambitious me^ are in the world,
which vow many things in their hearts, much like to Hamilcar, who caused his
son Hanibal, being but a boy of Hanibals oath.
eight years old, to make a vow, and to take his oath to be an enemy, and to
hold wars with the Romans during life.

It was the manner among the Romans when they made choice of their Consuls, to
go up to the Capitol, and after sacrifice done, there to vow building of
temples, of aultars, and the decimation of the spoils gotten by victories.

So Lucullus did promise and vow to Hercules for his Lucullus.
victories at the rivers of Rindacus and Granicus.

So Pausanias general of the Lacedaemonians, vowed Pausanias.
to Appollo for his victories at Marathon against Mardonius.

These vows were so many and so diverse among the Gentiles, that the husbandman
vowed to Tellus for the seed sown in the earth, and the fruit thereof, to
Siluanus for their oxen and kine, to Hippona for their horses and mares, to
Castor and Pollux for their shipwrackes, for laborers to Tutanus, for
shepherds to Pa^; for ^uellers on long iournies to Hercules, for thieves to
steal safely to the goddess Lauerna. Thus the Gentiles served and obeyed
their Idols, with vows and sacrifices, but as apes do counterfeit to imitate
men, so Satan would Several vows.
seem to imitate the Lord.

Such fond and foolish vows were used among the Gentiles, that if the
Athenians would have victory over the Thracia^s, Erictheus the king must
sacrifice his daughter; a stratagem of Satan.

If Agamemnon would have sound return from Troy Stratagems of Satan.
to Greece, he must sacrifice Iphigenia his daughter, or if Marius would have
triumph over the Cymbrians, he mustkil and sacrifice his daughter Calfurnia;
the very drifts and shifts of the devil, and the oracles of Satan; and
therefore in many countries they would bind their Idols with chains and
bonds. So did they in Carthage bind the Image of Hercules with chains and
bonds, least (when the Romans made their supplications and prayers to
Hercules) he should forsake Carthage and come to Rome.

In wicked men oftentimes the word of God is in their mouths, when the grace
of God is not in their hearts, as in Balaam, who came with his full good will
to Philos speech of the wicked
Balaac to curse Israel, but he was commanded against his will to bless
Israel; and therefore that which Philo says is true, of the wicked, Dona dei
sine deo saepe sunt in impijs; for oftentimes false Prophets prophecy the
truth, as Balaam and Cayphas did.

Satan stands always among the Angels before the Lord, to have license with
his present service to seek whom he may devour, so that Satan is often a lying
spirit in the mouth, (not only of false Prophets) but against the servants of
God, as Job, who, though Satan took from him his servants, his children, and
his goods, yet his malice chiefly was against Job; such stratagems he used
before against the servants of the Lord, as Abraham, Moses, David, and others.

There is an other kind of vow of the Nazarites, whose vows were but for
certain number of days, of months, or of years: these Nazarites should
abstain only from wine, or from any strong drink, they should let their
hairs grow, and let no razor come on it, they The vows of the Nazarites.
should not violate themselves with any mourning for the dead: yet Samuel being
a Nazarite, mourned for Saul, Jeremy being a Nazarite, wept for the captivity
of Judah; and Christ himself the true Nazarite, wept for the city of
Jerusalem.

The Monastical vows of Monks, Benedics, Franciscans, and Dominics, who
would feign be Nazarites, but that they loved wine too well, and shaued their
Monastical vows.
crowns too often: for they separated themselves from the world, vowed
virginity, and yet had bastards, vowed many things, and performed nothing.
These were superstitious orders of Franciscans, and not the vows of Nazarites.

The Ethnicks likewise suffered their hairs to grow, because they might
dedicate it either to Jupiter, to Appollo, to Mars, or to some of their gods.

So did Thesius dedicate his hair unto Appollo, upon Thesius.
his father Aegaeus grave.

So Achilles dedicated his hair upon the tomb of his Achilles.
dear friend Patroclus.

So did Orestes consecrate his hair upon the tomb Orestes.
of his father in law Agamemnon, after he had killed him with the consent of
his wife Clytemnestra.

So Euripides was of Archelaus king of Macedonia so honored, that he lamented
Euripides death in mourning apparel, and with a shaven head and beard.

After the vows of Jacob, of David, of Asa, and such godly men, after the
vows of the Nazarites, and of the Rechabites, which was commanded from Ionadab
the father unto his children, and to their posterity, was kept unviolated
three hundred years. These vows were of The Rechabites vows.
the Lord accepted; but for Heathen vows, which wilfully offer and sacrifice
their servants, their children, and themselves, to Moloch, to satisfy the
oracles of devils, speaking in dumb Idols, as unto Curtius that rode
sacrificing of a quick man, which made Curtius on horseback in armor, to ride
into an open wide gulf in Rome, and Codrus king of Athens likewise in beggars
apparel, to sacrifice themselves to satisfy the oracles. Yet Heliodorus was
better advised, and more to be commended, being sent by Seleucus Heliodorus.
king of Syria, to rob and spoil the Temple of Jerusalem, after he was
scourged on both sides with many 2. Mac. 3. cap.
stripes by some divine power, having recovered his life by the prayer of Onias
the high Priest, Heliodorus offered sacrifice unto God, and made his vows unto
the Lord, which had granted to him his life, and thanked Onias, confessing the
name of the Lord to be great in Jerusalem.

Antiochus after his flight from Persepolis in Persia, thought to revenge his
wrath upon Jerusalem, advancing himself, Antiochus.
that he would make Jerusalem a grave of all the Jews; 2. Mac. cap. 9.
but he was stricken of the Lord, that he promised and vowed (that whereas he
had spoiled the holy temple before) now to garnish it with gifts, to increase
the holy ornaments, to become a Jew himself, and to preach the power of the
Lord, through every place of the world.

So Artaxerxes king of Persia so favored the Jews through the goodness of
the Lord, that he called Esdras the Priest, and reader of the law of the
Lord, and Artax. 3. Esdar. ca. (...).
willed him with all the Jews that would go with him, to go to Jerusalem,
allowed them gold, and silver, and The favor of the kings of Persia to the
Jews.
cattle, to sacrifice unto the Lord, and to perform the vows which they
vowed unto the Lord.

So Nabuchodonozer, Cyrus, and Darius, were moved by the Lord to favor his
people Israel.

And therefore old Homer said, that the sacrifices and oblations, with all
their vows and ceremonies which the Trojans offered to Jupiter, were nothing
of him accepted, for that Jupiter rather esteemed the vows and sacrifice of
Agamemnon, and the oblations of the Greckes before king Priamus and his Trojans.

So the oracle of Ammon answered the Athenians, The oracles of Ammon.
that the gods esteemed more the vows and prayers of the Lacedaemonians, with
the sacrifice of milk, honey, frankincense, cakes, and wine, (according to
Pythagoras rule) then the rich spoils and great gifts of the Athenians, with
the great sacrifice of Haecatombae.

So the Prophet answered the Jews from the mouth of the Lord, I abhor your
incense, I cannot away with The saying of the Prophet.
your new moons, your sabbothes and solemn days I detest, your ceremonies
and fastings I hate, although you make many prayers, and offer many oblations,
yet do I neither hear your prayers, nor accept your oblations.

CHAP. VII.
Of Oracles and soothsayings, as well of the Jews as of the Gentiles.

THe Lord commanded in the laws of Moses, that no soothsaying should be among
the Israelites, yet things containing of necessary causes, are not forbidden,
for signs were asked of the Israelites, and given unto them of victories by
the Lord.

Ionathas desired a sign of the Lord, and he had by the spirit of the Lord a
token, that if the Philistines would say unto Ionathas, come ye hither unto us,
Ionathas by that Ionathas.
sign knew he should have victory.

The like sign was given to Gedeon of his victory, by Sam. lib. 1. cap. 14.
a fleece of wool, that should be so full with deawe, that the deawe thereof
filled a bowl with water, and dry upon Indic. cap. 6.
all the earth besides.

Elizeus bad Ioas shoot eastward in token of his good Signs of victories
given from the Lord.
success in Aphec. And again he bad Ioas smite the ground, and he smote the
ground thrice, so many great victories against the Syrians he had.

Samuel caught the lap of Saul's coat and rent it, saying: 2. Reg. cap. 13
Thus shall God rent the kingdom out of thy hand Sam. 15.
and give it to an other.

So did Ahiah the Prophet take the garment of Jeroboam, and rent it into twelve
pieces, saying: So shall the 1. Reg. 11. Signs given by the Prophets.
Lord rent the kingdom out of Salomons hand, and give ten of the twelve
Tribes unto thee. These were signs given before hand by the Prophets from the
Lord.

A prophet of Judah came to Bethel, and cried against the Altar of Bethel, and
gave them a sign that Josias 3. Reg. cap. 13
which was borne three hundred years after, should offer Priests of the hill
altars, and burn men's bones upon the altar, and this shall be a sign, the
altar presently shall rent, and the ashes that are in it shall fall out.

The being of Jonas in the Whales belly three days, Jonas in the whales belly.
was a sign, as Christ himself said, that the son of man should be three
days in the belly of the earth.

It was lawful for the Israelites to call for the Arc, which was the presence
of God and the figure of Christ, they would call for the Ephod, they would
consult with Vrim and Thummim, before they took any battle in hand.

The Jews required a sign, the Grecians sought after wisdom, but Christ
crucified unto the Jews, was even a stumbling block, and unto the Grecians
foolishness. For the Greeks and Persians went for Oracles to Delphos, the
Egiptians and Affricans to Ammon, but the Hebrews were taught to come to the
door of the Tabernacle, and after the use of the Tabernacle, to consult The
Hebrews consulted with Urim and Thummim.
with Vrim and Thummim, to come to the Temple of Solomon, or to the Prophets,
and there to be instructed what to do.

The Hebrews took no wars in hand, unless they ^ame to the Priest first,
who would stand with his Ephod ^rment before the Ark of the Lord, and there
to be ^ught what to do.

So Ioshuah General of the Israelites, used to stand Nom. 22. and 27.
b^re Eleazar the Priest, to take his instruction by Vrim and Thummim.

So Judah the successor of Joshua, was chosen by Vrim Judah.
and Thummim, to be a General of the Hebrew army.

So did Samuel stand before the high Priest to receive he Oracle of Vrim and
Thummim.

The Hebrews were instructed by the word of the Lord in the mouth of the
Prophet, or else they were answered at the mercy seat, or counseled by Vrim
and Thummim.

So soothsayings and oracles were so had in reverence among the Gentiles, that
nothing should be taken in Superstitiousnesse of the Gentiles.
hand, neither in peace, nor in wars, without consulting with the soothsayers
and oracles.

So that at any Eclipse of the Moon, the Romans would take their brazen pots
and pannes, and beat them, lifting up many Torches and Linckes lighted, and
firebrandes into the air, thinking by these superstitious Veget. lib. 4. cap.
42.
means, to reclaim the Moon to her light.

So the Macedonians were as superstitious as the Romans were at any Eclipse of
the Moon.

Nothing terrified the Gentiles more in their wars then the Eclipse of the
Sun and the Moon.

The like used the Thracians, when it thunders they take their bows and
arrows, and shoot up to the clouds against the thunder, imagining by their
shooting to drive the thunders away.

Cabrias the General of Athens, being ready to strike a battle on sea, it
suddenly lightened, which (...) terrified the soldiers, that they were
unwilling to fig^ Front. lib. 1. cap. 12.
until Cabrias said, that now is the time to fight, wh^ Jupiter himself with
his lightening does show a sig^e that he is ready to go before us.

So Epaminondas, at his going to battle it suddenly lightened, that it so
amazed his soldiers, that Epaminondas Epamino^das stratageme.
comforted them and said; Lumen hoc Numina ostendunt, by these lightnings the
gods show us that we shall have victories, but we may better say so through our
Lord and Savior, then Epaminondas or Cabri^ since we have the great light of
the Gospel to lighten us and to go before us to attempt any war or to
commence any battle against Satan and his armies, whose will is ever to
destroy, though his power cannot. Cuius Gregor. magnus.
semper iniqua voluntas licet nunquam iniusta potestas.

In Rome, the Dictator, the Consul, the Praetor, and other Magistrates, were to
be removed from their offices, if the soothsayer saw any occasion by
lightning, The Consuls of Rome, and kings in Sparta, deposed.
thundering, by removing of stars, by flying of fowls, by intrailes of
beasts, by Eclipse of the Sun and Moon.

So that there was a law in Sparta, that every ninth year the chief
magistrates called Ephori would choose a bright night without Moon light, in
some open place to behold the stars, and if they had seen any star shoot or
move from one place to another, straight these Ephori accused their kings that
they offended the gods, and thereby deposed them from their kingdom. So did
Lysander depose king Leonidas.

So likewise the Romans were persuaded that their overthrow at the battles of
Thrasimen, Trebeia, and Can by Hannibal, were, for that they supposed they
offended the gods, either in not performing their vows, or in not doing of
sacrifice, or else for the unskillfulness of their Generals. So did they
suppose their overthrows by the Cymbrians to be by the unskillfulness and
oversight of Quin. Scaepio, their General, but Quin. Scepio. Ca. Marius.
Cai. Marius afterward revenged the overthrows of the Romans, with the
greatest overthrow that ever the Cymbrians had.

By these means, the Consuls were oftentimes removed and displaced, from their
offices of Consulship by the Senators as Varro, Mansinus, Leuinus and others,
as the kings, and Generals were in Sparta, by means of their magistrates
called Ephori, such sure trust and confidence they had in their soothsayers,
that without the counsel of soothsayers in Rome, or the counsel of Magi in
Persia, or of the Ephori in Sparta, the kings of Rome, of Persia, and of
Sparta, would attempt nothing concerning the state of the country.

And therefore the Macedonians made a decree that no monument of triumph should
be made within their kingdom, for that a Lion had raised up a pillar, which
The superstitions of the Macedonians and Romans.
was set up in memory of a great victory gotten, they thought the gods to be
offended with them, and therefore the decree was made.

So the Romans after Carthage was destroyed, and after restored again, when
the Romans had divided and measured their lands, and limited their meeres and
marks by the pole, for the Romans to inhabit there, for that the marks and
limits were bitten and gnawed with wolves, the Romans paused and stayed before
they had consulted with Oracles.

The first king of Rome Romulus, builded his kingdom by flying of fowls and
soothsaying. Soothsaying by flying of fowls.


So Numa Pompil. was chosen second king of Rome by flying of fowls.

So Torquinius Priscus, an Eagle took his cappe from his head, and fled up on
high to the skies, and after descended, and let his cappe fall on his head
again, signifying thereby that he should be king of Rome.

Pau Aemilius, Consul and General of the Romans in Macedonia, at what time he
sacrificed unto the gods in the city of Amphipolis, it lightened, whereby he
was persuaded, it pretended the overthrow of the kingdom of Macedonia, and his
great victory and tryumphe of the same at Rome.

Swallows followed king Cyrus going with his army Swallows.
from Persia to Scythia, as ravens followed Alexander the great returning from
India and going to Babylon, but as the Magi told the Persians that Cyrus
should die in Scythia, so the Chaldean Astrologers told the Macedonians Cyrus
and Alexander forewarned of their death by soothsaying.
that Alexander the great their king should die in Babylon without any further
warrant, but by the Swallows that followed Cyrus to Scythia, and by the ravens
that followed Alexander to Babylon.

By Swallows also lighting upon Pirrhus Tents, and lighting upon the mast of
Mar. Antonius ship, sailing after Cleopatra to Egypt, the soothsayers did
prognosticate that Pirrhus should be slain at Argos in Greece, and Mar.
Antonius in Egypt.

The Arabians, Carians, Phrygians, and Cilicians, do most religiously observe
the chirping and flying of birds, assuring themselves good or bad events in
their wars.

Themistocles was assured of victory over king Xerxes Themistocles.
and his huge army by crowing of a cock, going to the battle at Artemisium,
the day before the battle began, who having obtained so great a victory, gave
a cock in his ensign ever after. So Iu. Caesar gave an elephant in his
ensign, after he had subdued Iuba king of Mauritania.

The Lydians, Persians and Thracians, esteem not soothsaying by birds, but by
pouring of wine upon the ground, upon their clothes, with certain
superstitious prayers to their gods, that their wars should have good
success.

Pau. Aemilius was assured of victory over Persius king Cice. de diuinatione. 1.
of Macedonia, by a word pronounced by his little girl Tertia, saying to her
father that Persius the dog, and her play-fellow was dead.

Aristander the soothsayer in the battle at Arbela, being the last against
Darius, was then on horse back Aristander.
hard by Alexander, apparelled all in white, and a crown of gold upon his
head, encouraging Alexander by the flight of an Eagle the victory should be
his over Darius. Both the Greeks, the Romans, and the Lacedaemonians, had
their soothsayers hard by them in their wars.

Alexander the great had not rejoiced in his great victory over Darius at
Arbela, and his conquests over kingdoms and countries, had he known he
should have been poisoned in Babylon.

Caesar had never taken the civil wars in hand against Pompey the great, had
he known that he should have been murdered before Pompeys Image in Rome.

Priamus had he known the slaughter of himself, his wife, his children, and
the last destruction of Troy his city, had not resisted the Greeks, nor denied
their lawful request in restoring Helen: and therefore said Cicero, Multo
melius est nescire futura quam scire, Ignorance is better then knowledge of
things to come: but these had no Ephod, no Vrim and Thummim, nor prophet to
tell them of things to come, as Joshua, David, Gedeon, and others had, and yet
Alexander had his soothsayer Aristander, Caesar had Spurina, and Priamus was
warned by his daughter Cassandra, but ever when they escaped one danger, they
fell into another, as Job said; Fugiet impius armaferrca Job. 20.
and irruet in arcum aereum.

So superstitious grew the Gentiles, with such abominable Idolatry, that in
Persia by a cock, in Egypt by a bull, Superstitious oracles of the Gentiles.
in Aethiope by a dog, they took soothsaying, in Beotia by a beech tree, in
Epyre by an oak, in Delos by a dragon, in Lycia by a wolf, in Ammon by a
ram, they received their oracles, as their warrant to commence any war, to
enter any battle, or to attempt any enterprise.

And therefore Alexander the great went to the oracle at Ammon, to know the
success of his wars in India. And Licurgus went to Delphos, to be instructed
to make laws in in Sparta.

Some went to the grave of Amphiraus, sacrificed a The grave of Amphiraus.
Ram, and covered the grave of Amphiraus with that Ram skin, and sleeping
upon the same skin all night, all things should be showed to them by oracles.

But to such men as come to dead men's graves to seek help, might be spoken
that which Semyramis spoke to Darius king of Persia. For Semyramis had written
upon her grave, that what Prince soever had wanted money or gold, should open
her tomb and be satisfied.

Darius being greedy of money opened her tomb Darius.
and found this sentence written upon a table, O covetous wretch, unless thou
had bin an insatiable Prince, thou would never have opened the grave of the
dead for money.

The like was spoken to Xerxes that opened Belus grave, and found nothing but
an empty glass, with this writing on a pillar, If any would open Belus grave,
and not Xerxes. Aelian. li. 13
fill the empty glass with oil, he should be unfortunate. Which being read
of Xerxes, he willed straight to fill the glass with oil, which would hold
oil no more then Belides buckets held water.

Xerxes departed sad therefore, imagining some ill luck to come thereby, as
within a while after it came to pass that he was slain in his own palace at
Persepolis by Artabanus.

The Prophets of the Lord, Esai, Jeremy, and the rest, took no oracles from
flying of fowls, from stars, and such, but from the mouth of the Lord,
saying; Thus The oracles of the Prophets.
says the Lord: giving more certain oracles to the Israelites, then the
Persians, Egiptians, and Grecians, had by Swallows, Ravens, Eagles and Cocks.

The Prophet David's manner was, when he went to any battle, to know of the
Lord whether he should go or no against the Philistines, Canaanites, and
other enemies of the Lord.

So the Israelites would take no war in hand against the Beniamites, before
they asked counsel of the Lord.

When the Moabites denied Joshua and his army passage Any stratagem in just
war is lawful.
through the land, Joshua was commanded by Moses to muster a thousand of every
Tribe, and to give them battle. For it was lawful in just wars, to use any
policies, stratagems and snares against the enemy, as Abraham did in rescuing
Lot, made after the four kings, fought with them, overthrew them, and brought
Lot back again to his own house (where he dwelt) in Zodom.

And so Gedeon did to the men of Sucoth, and to the men of Phanuel, for that
they denied to give some bread to relieve his three hundred faintie soldiers,
at his return Gedeon.
from the victory, he tare the flesh of threescore and seventeen Elders, and
chief men of Sucoth with Sucoth.
briers and thorns, and brake down the Tower of Phanuel, and slew the men of
the Town, according to his promise before told. But let us return to the
oracles and soothsayings as well of the Gentiles as of the Jews.

The Athenians in every public counsel that they took in hand, without their
Priests called Mantes, were present in place, to sacrifice, and to offer
oblations unto their Idols, nothing should be done among the Athenians.

Among the Lacedaemonians in like manner the authority of soothsaying was such,
that in all consultations among the Senators, they would conclude upon nothing
in matters of doubts without warrant from their The credit of soothsayers among
the Gentiles.
soothsayers.

The credit and existimation of soothsayers was such among the Romans, that
they could dispossess any Senator from the Senate, any Consul or Praetor from
their offices, as is said before: for the soothsayers were called in Rome,
Nuntij and interpetres Iouis, the messengers of Jupiter, and his interpreters.

So the latter Jews served and sacrificed to the Idols of the Gentiles,
neither would they attempt any thing without oracles from Chemosh the Idol of
the Moabites, from Nesroch the Idol of the Assyrians, and from Dagan the Idol
of the Philistines; and yet Senacherib was slain praying in the Temple before
his own god Nesroch, Idolatry of Israel.
by his own sons: and the five Lords of the Philistines, at the great feast
which they made to their god Dagon, were slain by the fall of the house where
they feasted. Yet Israel would take no example thereby, but forgot the law of
the Lord, which they obeyed under Ioshuah, Judah, Gedeon, and others, but they
would have new kings, new laws to govern them, an other form of a
commonwealth then the Lord had appointed, and a new kind of religion to serve
strange gods, otherwise then the Lord had commanded them, and to seek help
and aid of other nations, which the Lord forbad them, saying: The strength of
Pharao shall be your shame, and your trust to the shadow of Egypt shall
deceive you, neither the gods whom you serve shall save you, neither the
nations whom you trust unto shall defend you.

As the Ethnikes used dreams, lots, prophesies, oracles, soothsayings, and
charms, to instruct them in their wars, so Nabuchodonozer consulted with his
oracles, asked counsel of the soothsayers, and observed the liver of a beast
for the destruction of Jerusalem: but they are cursed in Gods book, that would
use sorcery, or seek Ezech. 21.
help by any other means then by the Lord: for what have the faithful to do
with Infidels, which were forbidden to go to Jupiter at Hammon, or to Appollo
at Delphos? where the Gentiles came to offer gold, pearls, jewels, chains,
crowns, shields, targets, and Images, to hang there in the temple of Appollo,
that Philip king of The rich spoil which Philip had in Delphos.
Macedonia at the spoil thereof, had as great a pray, as Alexander his son
had of Babylon, or Nabuchodonozer of Jerusalem.

CHAP. VIII.
Of sanctuaries allowed to the Hebrews, and of the multitude of sanctuaries
among the Gentiles.

SAnctuaries were privileged among all Nations, not only for soldiers that
fled from the wars, and servants that fled from their masters, but also for
those that by chance killed any man, or had committed such capital crimes
without proof, these might be succored in sanctuaries until the truth were
known and proved, and therefore the Hebrews had six cities of Sanctuaries
allowed by the Lord to the Hebrews
refuge by the law of Moses, where if any man had slain unwittingly or
unwillingly a man, he might flee to any of these six Cities, as to a sanctuary
of refuge, but they that had killed a man willingly, and had committed any
capital crime purposely, should not only be taken away from the sanctuary,
but be plucked away from the altar, as Ioab was for killing of Abner, and
Adonias Ioab and Adonias taken from sanctuaries.
though he pretended treason before against Solomon, yet had he the
privilege of the sanctuary for that fault by Solomon, but when he sought to
have Abizaig to his wife, he was plucked from the Altar as Ioab was.

Those that were lawfully succored by Moses law in the sanctuary, it was not
lawful for them that fled thither to return home, unless it were at the
death of the high Priest, which was a shadow of the death of Christ, by whose
death the regenerate turn to their eternal home.

The Gentiles imitating the Hebrews, had too many licentious sanctuaries with
the like liberty and privilege, in so much that in continuance of time, it
grew, that Temples, Aultars, Images of Emperors and Kings, and graves of dead
men, were allowed for sanctuaries, as if any that would fly unto the Temple of
Diana at Ephesus, and claimed by the right of a sanctuary to be defended, he
was made free, and had his liberty granted unto him, and that continued a
sanctuary from the time of Alexander the great, who amplyfied the Temple of
Diana the quantity of a furlong, which temple was burnt before by Herostratus,
The temple of Diana burned.
upon the very day that Alexander was borne, until the time of Augustus
Caesar, three hundred years after Alexander, by whom the wickedness of that
sanctuary was was abrogated and quite taken away.

Cadmus (as some write) at the building of Thaebes, was the first in Greece
that gave any privilege to sanctuaries. The sanctuaries of the Gentiles.


Others think that some of the posterity of Hercules erected up in Athens the
temple of mercy, where every man might flee for succor, fearing least they
should be punished and plagued for the injuries that Hercules their predecessor
did to others, and the Athenians made a decree, that none that fled to the
altar of mercy should be pulled away.

Romulus imitating Cadmus at the building of Rome, for the increase of his
city, granted impunitie to all such wicked men that came to Rome, whose
example all other Gentiles followed after, in so much that kings and kings
sons fled unto sanctuaries: so great was the privilege of sanctuaries, that
king Pausanias fled to the Kings fled to sanctuaries.
Temple of Minerua in Sparta, and king Cleombrotus fled to the Temple of
Neptune in Taenero: and Adonias King David's son fled to the Temple in
Jerusalem.

Likewise a soldier taken in the war, if he had fled from thence to the
statue of any King, Emperor, or great captain, he was to have his liberty.

The liberties and abuse of sanctuaries grew so great among all nations, that
where sanctuaries were allowed chiefly, first for those that slew any man by
chance against their will, for captive soldiers that fled from prison, and
for poor distressed servants that were abused by their masters, in time it
became dens for thieves, stews for wicked men and leawd women, that whatsoever
was done, if they came to the Temple of Osiris in Egypt, or to the Temple of
Diana in Thracia, or to the Temple Sanctuaries become dens for thieves.
of Venus in P^hos, they were freed, and might there take their liberty, but
poor Demosthenes was taken from the Temple of Neptune by the tyrant Archyas,
and brought to Athens, before his only enemy Antipater. Demosthenes


Sanctuaries grew so common, that not only soldiers, but also any offenders
might fleee from their liberties, The graves of dead men were sanctuaries.
especially in Greece, to the graves of Achilles, Thesius, and Ajax: in other
places to the grave of Hercules.

In other places, the offender, if he had fallen down at the feet of Jupiters
Priest, of Mars, or of Vulcan, at the gates of their temples, he should go
free.

Though the old ancient Romans could not abide a soldier taken in the wars,
they would neither redeem him, nor allow him sanctuary, yet Agesilaus king of
the Lacedaemonians, allowed any temple of their gods, to Agesilaus.
be a sanctuary for soldiers that fled for succor.

So did Cyrus proclaim sanctuaries for all banished, and bond men in Greece,
and in all Asia; and levied thereby a huge army to fight against his brother
Artaxerxes.

So did Sertorius one of Marius sect, proclaim sanctuaries to all the Roman
fugitives in Hispaine and in Affrike, that he as much harmed Rome, being a
Roman borne, and now out of his country, as either Sylla or Marius did in
their country.

Having sufficiently spoken of these kind of sanctuaries, of their too much
liberty that grew thereby in all kingdoms, as among the Hebrews by Jeroboam,
in the battle at Mount Zemaraim, among the Persians The abuse of sanctuaries.
by Cyrus at the battle at Conauxa, among the Romans by Cinna, and among the
Affricans by Scotorius, who all proclaimed sanctuaries and liberties to all
fugitive and banished soldiers, we leave sanctuaries, which were appointed as
a refuge for those that fled thither for succor and help, until the truth
were known, and speak not of those that abused sanctuaries as a cloak of
their tirannie and wickedness.

You heard before how Adonias and Ioab were taken from the Altar, for they had
abused the sanctuary; for the Lord commanded that his laws should be severely
kept, and that no part thereof should be broken, for King Oza usurping the
Levites office against the law, was stricken with sudden death, for the
vnreuerent handling of the Arc, which was the Levites office.

Ozias the King was stricken with leprosy, for burning Kings destroyed for
breach of the law.
incense against the law, which was the Priests office.

Abihu and Nadab, Aarons sons, for that they both took Censors in their
hands, and put fire thereupon, and incense therein, and offered strange fire
before the Lord, Malach. 1.
contrary to the Lords commandment, fire from heaven destroyed them, for the
priests were commanded to take no fire but from the altar, neither might they
offer unclean bread upon the Lords table, nor sow cockles for corn in the
Lords fields, for the Lord will be more sanctified in his ministers then
others, and therefore he spared not Oza for handling the Arc, nor Ozias for
burning incense, though they were both kings, for transgressing one jot of his
laws.

So severe was the Lord, that he punished fifty thousand 50000. Bethsamites
more slain.
Bethsamites, for looking into the Arc.

It should seem that in Rome, Numa Pomp. in his profane religion, imitated
the law of Moses: he instituted orders of Priests called Flamines, to Jupiter
and to Mars, he likewise instituted the Vestal virgins to attend the fire
consecrated to Vesta, to whom Numa commanded, rhat if the fire by negligence
were out in the lamp, they should take no other fire but from the heat of the
sun.

Numa also instituted the Priests called Aruales, much like to the old
Priests of the Gauls called Druydes, or Numaslawes in Rome.
the Idolatrous Priests called Chemarims in Samaria, who served the golden
calfe under Jeroboam, which made Israel first to sin: so religious a King was
Numa Pomp. that Romulus soldiers, his predecessor, were by Numa Pompilius
turned from soldiers to become religious, and made the old Romans believe,
that the Nimphe called Egeria, gave him rules and laws to instruct his people,
with such sundry and diverse ceremonies, as The Nymph Egeria.
Numa Pomp. himself devised, during whose reign of forty years, Ianus
Temple was never once opened.

He also decreed certain severe laws for those that offended in religion, and
yet no Images were seen in Rome for 170. years, but ceremonial superstitious
service of unknown gods, which Numa decreed then in Rome. And for to profane
any of the holy mysteries of religion, was a sacrilege as well among the
Grecians, as among the Romans, for so Alcibiades was accused, that he had
offended against the goddess Ceres and Proserpina, for that he counterfeited
in mockery their holy mysteries, apparelled himself in vestiments, as the
Priests of Ceres called Eumolpides were wont to do, with his Torch-bearer and
Verger before him, where none should be at this secret service, but priests
holding torches in their hands, and women crowned with garlands made of the
^ares of corn, and therefore Alcibiades for his contempt herein, was first
banned and cursed by the Priests and Nuns of Ceres, and after his goods
confiscated, The profanation of the ceremonies of Ceres by Alcibiades and
Clodius.
and himself banished out of Athens by Eumolpides laws.

In like manner Clodius was accused in Rome of the like sacrilege by Cicero,
with as great inuectiues against Clodius for profaning of religion, as Cicero
did against Cateline for his treason toward his Country. For Clodius was
accused that he entered secretly into the mysteries of Flora against the law,
whereby he was accused with Pompeia Caesar's wife, but it cost Ciceros
bannishment out of Rome afterward by means of Clodius, when he became
Tribune of the people, at 20000. ware mourning apparel for Cicero in Rome
what time twenty thousand ware mourning apparel in Rome for Cicero: but it
cost Clodius life by degrees, for Milo slew him, and Cicero pleaded with all
the eloquence he had before Pompey the great then Consul, in the behalf of
Milo, so that Alcibiades was banished from Athens, and Clodius slain in Rome
for the profaning of their religion.

For the like occasions grew wars between the Athenians and the Acarnanites,
for that two young men of the Acarnanites, and others with them being not
Priests, came to Athens, and entered into the secret Acarnanites.
mysteries of the goddess Ceres, against the law, which the Athenians took
for a sacrilege, and therefore Liui. lib. 31.
they slew the Acarnanites.

The Acarnanites being agrieued with the Athenians, sought help of Phillip
king of Macedonia, against the Athenians, to revenge their wrong, who was
always ready to take quarrels against the Athenians.

So severe and straight were the Heathens in observing the laws of their
religion and ceremonies of their gods, that even among the Scythians a rude and
a barbarous nation, Anacharsis the Philosopher, for that he Anacharsis slain
in Scythia.
altered the religion of Scythia being his country, and imitated the Greeks
in their ceremonies, he was slain in Scythia by his own country men.

CHAP. IX.
Of the reward of soldiers. Of honorable burial of Captains, and of
ambition.

TVllius Hostilius, the next king in Rome after Numa Pomp. changed peace into
wars, and religion into arms; and made as many laws for soldiers, as Numa
made for Priests.

Yet Cicero was of opinion that the Romans wanne more kingdoms rather by
religion then by arms, for the Romans said Cicero were not equal in number
Ciceros opinion of the Romans victories.
to the Hispaniards, neither in strength to the Gauls, nor in subtlety and
craft to the Affricans, neither in learning and knowledge to the Grecians, but
only the Romans overcame these nations as Cicero said; Pietate and religione.

Yet Vegetius affirms, that the Romans became Ueget. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Lords over all Nations through military discipline, which the Romans had
from the Greeks; and especially from the Lacedaemonians, to whom not only the
Affricans, the Carthagineans and Cicilians, but also the Italians and the
Persians, sent for skillful Generals and Captains, as the Syracusans had
Gilippus a Lacedemonian captain against the Athenians: and the Persians had
Phocian the Athenian their General against Phocion.
the Lacedaemonians.

Antalcidas was therefore much offended with Agesilaus, Antalcidas saying to
Agesilaus.
for that he taught the Persians to conquer Greece, by often and continual
wars with the Persians, saying, you teach women to overcome men against
Licurgus laws.

So the Lygurians grew warlike and skillful soldiers, by long fighting and
contending with the Romans. And so the Thaebans became skillful soldiers by
continual wars with the Lacedaemonians, that Epaminondas overcame the
Lacedaemonians at the battle of Leuctres, and brought the pride of Sparta under
Thaebes. Thus Sparta.
the warlike Lacedaemonians, whose aid and help was sought of all nations, are
overthrown by their next neighbors the Thaebans: Even the Lacedaemonians, who
thought it a shame, to follow the enemies that fled from them; and made a
scoff of the Persians great armies, who thought neither Jew nor Gentile
equal to them, are now overthrown in their own country by their own
country men. We leave the Lacedaemonians in their loss, and will speak of
those great captains, that had the like care to bring up their soldiers as
the Lacedaemonians had.

Alexander the great, when any of his soldiers were maimed or hurt in the
wars, that they could Alexander the great rewarded maimed soldiers.
no longer serve, either being hurt, or for their age, he liberally rewarded
them, and sent them to Macedonia with his Letters unto Antipater, that they
should be placed in the chiefest place of games and shows, with Garlandes of
flowers on their heads, to animate others to martial exploytes, and to
embrace arms.

So liberal was Caesar to his soldiers, that he would have them go brave in
apparel, and feed them with Iul. Caesar.
gifts and rewards, and would often say unto them, win gold, and wear gold.

Agesilaus used his soldiers with the like martial exercise, and instructed
them in all military discipline, Xenoph. lib. 3. de rebus Graecorum.
that he appointed certain Armours, brave Targets, Swords, and such military
weapons that should be given to those Soldiers that should most exceed
others.

So Cai. Caesar caused not only the old warriors Viget. lib. 2. cap. 9.
the Roman knights, to train up the Roman youths in martial discipline,
but the Senators themselves, not only abroad, but privately in their houses,
should be careful and diligent to see the young soldiers well instructed and
brought up in warlike exercise. Well therefore said Epaminondas to his
contrymen, If you will be Princes of Greece, Castris est vobis vtendum Tacit.
lib. 2. annal.
non palaestra, you must use Tents for wars, and not places to exercise
wrestling, and such vain games, which made Alexander Seuerus the Emperor, to
bring up his sons in warlike Tents far from any Cities, to become sober
and temperate, without the sight of any thing that might entice them from their
weapons.

Hereby grew Titus to be so well beloved in Titus.
Rome among his soldiers, who being so liberal in his wars, that he was
named of all men, Deliciae hominum.

Fabritius also and Valerius, two noble Romans, were more careful to enrich
their soldiers then themselves. Fabritius.
So in all countries they made much of soldiers, and rewarded them with
presents and gifts, as the Persians rewarded their soldiers with chains,
bracelets, and golden girdles.

The Greeks rewarded their soldiers with crowns, garlands, silver fillets for
their hair, and money: the Romans with lands, livings, territories, and
military garments, with such honors done to their captains slain in the
field, that they made certain plays at weapons, that prisoners being
condemned to die, should fight it out to death upon Theaters, and after to be
sacrificed The honor of the Romans and Persians toward their generals and
captains.
on the captains graves, to honor marshall funerals.

The Persians buried maimed soldiers to accompany their Generals and
Captains to the grave when they died. This kind of killing and sacrificing of
men, was to allure and embolden young youths to love arms, to use their
weapons, to be acquainted, and to see bloody battles, as well the manner of
soldiers in wars, as also the cruel slaughter and terror of the wars, and
to become from skillful soldiers, renowned captains, to deserve such honor
alive and dead.

So the Greeks used to honor their dead captains, to buy condemned murderers
and thieves, to be slain and sacrificed on their graves, to extol the fame of
their Condemned murderers. sacrificed on captains graves.
valiant captains that died in the field: the Greeks were so careful, that
they would not forget the beasts that served them long.

Cymon the son of Milciades, a famous captain of Athens, for that his mares
wanne at the games of Olympia Cymons mares.
in the horse race thrice the garland, he caused his mares to be buried hard
by his grave.

And old Xantippus, for that his dog swamme by the galleys side from Athens to
Salamina, and died when he landed for very weariness, he buried him in the top
of a cliffe.

The Romans in like manner would suffer no draught oxen that ploughed their
lands, and carried their fuells to be sold, when they could not plough for age,
neither might they in Athens by the law of Solon kill an old Alex. Neapolit.
lib. Genial. cap. 11.
wearied ox for sacrifice, but should feed him in his age, so careful were
the Romans and the Greeks to recompense service, even unto beasts, that had
labored and done service unto man. For the Athenians made a law in favor of
the moiles that carried the stones to The Moiles in Athens.
the building of the Temple Haecatonpedon, that they should be suffered to
grase every where without let or trouble of any man, if the Greeks and the
Romans so esteemed their beasts, how much more had they cause to relieve their
old maimed soldiers.

And therefore Hannibal was more detested and hated of his soldiers, that
being so cruel and so covetous, he lost not only many of his own soldiers,
but also many of his friends and associates forsook him.

And so Persius king of Macedonia, a most miserable covetous prince, who to
spare his money, lost both his Covetous princes ever lost more the^ they won.
money, his kingdom, and his life.

Posthumous for that he denied the spoils to the soldiers, which he promised,
was stoned to death by his soldiers.

So that Hanibal lost (through his covetousness and cruelty) to the Romans,
what he wanne by skill and policy of arms of the Romans. This is the end
of all unlawful wars, to be worse far then the beginning. Viriatus.
So was it with Viriatus, for his fourteen years wars for Hispaine, with
Hanibal for his fourteen years with the Carthagineans, and with king
Mithridates for forty years wars with the kings of Asia against the Romans,
but the Romans subdued all their countries, and all came under the Roman
Empire.

I remember Aristotle brings in a verse of Homer, in describing the affection
of the desire and wrath of men, and says, that anger to Achilles was as sweet
as honey Achilles wrath.
melted under his tongue, but the end of his anger and wrath was, that he was
slain out of Greece in Phrygia, and to be buried in Illion.

So sweet was covetousness unto Craesus, being the only wealthiest man in Rome,
that it brought him from Rome to Craesus covetousness.
be slain among the Parthians, the only enemies of the Romans.

So revenge was to Hanibal, as sweet as wrath to Achilles, the one to satisfy
his wrath upon the Trojans, the other to perform his vow and oath to his
father Hamilcar Hannibals revenge.
to plague the Romans, but both thereby died out of their countries, the one
slain in Phrygia, the other poisoned himself in Bythinia.

So to Pirrhus, quarrels were as sweet, as revenge was to Hanibal, and
therefore taking quarrels in hand every Pirrhus quarrels.
where, at last was slain out of his country in Greece.

So may it be spoken of the ambition of Caesar and Alexander: Ambition.
the envy that Caesar had to Alexanders conquests was so great, that he much
complained of himself being an old man, and yet wanne no fame by his small
victories, in respect of Alexanders great co^quests being but a young man.

So likewise Alexander exclaimed against himself, in respect of the fame and
greatness which Homer gave to Achilles. Thus ambition was as sweet to Caesar,
and to Alexander, as either wrath to Achilles, covetousness to Caesar, revenge
to Hanibal, or quarrels to Pirrhus.

Therefore ambition was painted out in Heliopolis, a city in Egypt, without
legs, because ambition might not clime, for ambitious men are not so glad and
proud to see many that follow and obey them, as they are inwardly afflicted and
grieved to see few not obedient unto them.

In the same self city were the pictures of Judges painted Judges.
without hands because they should receive no bribes.

And the pictures of princes painted blind without eyes, Princes.
because they might not see to favor their friends, and in the midst between
these three pictures, was ye picture of The Image of Justice painted in Egypt.
Justice painted without a head. The moral hereof is better to be liked the^
the law of Lycurgus, who ever thought ambition a necessary spur to prick men
forward in causes of commonwealths, as Agamemnon was glad to see Ajax and
Ulysses at variance for Achilles armor; and Caesar Contention between Ajax
and Ulysses.
was not sorry to see Crassus contend with Pompey in Rome. These men wanted no
legs to clime, neither among the Romans nor among the Grecians, nor yet
among the Jews.

In Athens a law was made against ambitious men, that if any sought
singularity, either by his wisdom, or by his wealth, or by favor of the
people, he should be banished by the law Ostracismus out of Athens, as
Themistocles was.

So ambitious men in Rome to get love and favor of the people by the law
called Lex agraria, were not only Cai. Gracchus slain.
banished out of Rome, as Themistocles was out of Athens, but sometimes slain
in Rome, as both Tiberius and Cai. Gracchus were.

And therefore Platoes opinion was, that he which began to be ambitious by any
secret practice with the enemies, Platoes opinion against ambitious men.
to hurt his country, or made means to make wars of his own head, should be
delivered into the enemies hand, and therefore Asdrubal did counsel the
Carthagineans to give Hannibal into the Romans hands, because Hannibal hated
the Romans, because he made war of his own private head, without the
authority of the Senators of Carthage.

And so Cato, Marcellus, and others, persuaded the Senators of Rome to deliver
Caesar unto the Gauls, for the like cause, for that they suspected Caesar with
Cateline, and ever found him ambitious and desirous of war, in Rome, and out
of Rome: and therefore ambitious Generals and Captains are ever most
dangerous, and most necessary to be looked unto.

The ambition of the Israelites is not to be passed over, as Absolon through
ambition under pretense of justice went about to take away the hearts of the
people from his father the king, saying often, Oh that I were a Judge of the
land, that I might do justice to them that have matters in the law, and when
any man came to do him obeisance, he took him by the hand, and kissed The
ambition of Absolo^ and Adoniah.
him, and thus by degrees stole the hearts of the men of Israel from his father.

Likewise Adoniah Absolons brother, through ambition also exalted himself, and
wanne all his brethren 2. Reg. 15.
the kings sons, and all the men of Judah, the kings servants, that through
ambition he occupied the kingdom, 3. Reg. ca. 1.
unwitting to his father the king.

Hammon the Macedonian was so ambitious in Persia Hammon.
the kings court, that he could not abide the sight of Mardochaeus, because he
would not bend and bow his knee unto him.

Abimelech went to Sychem, and communed with The ambition of Abimelech.
his mothers kindred, for that he was a bastard to Gedeon, saying in the ears
of the people, that it were better for them to have one, then to let the
seventy sons of Gedeon to reign over them, for I am your bones and your
flesh: so ambitious was Abimelech, that he went secretly to Ephrah, and slew
the 70. sons of Gedeon upon a stone.

Antipater was so ambitious in Athens, that he could not suffer the Orators to
live in Greece, no more then Hamon could suffer the Jews to live in Persia,
but sent diverse to seek and to search for them, that when Hiperides was found,
he was commanded by Antipater to be punished with all tortures, to have him to
reveal the secrets of Athens, and to confess the faults of Lycurgus,
Demosthenes, Isocrates, and others.

Demosthenes and Isocrates hearing of Hiperides great tortures, and thereby his
death, and of the victory at the The Orators of Athens.
battle of Cranon, under that cruel king Antipater, which after marched with
his army toward Athens, the one famished himself, the other poisoned
himself, the rather for that the tyrant Archias should not bring Demosthenes
alive to Antipater, who made great search for him, so Antipater most cruelly
tirannized with secret ambition against the poor Orators in Athens.

Not only the Orators in Athens, but also diverse Philosophers, as Cleanthes,
Zeno, Empedocles, and others, Philosophers.
who in like sort to avoid Antipaters tyranny, slew themselnes for very
grief, to see Athens the school and nurse of learning, at that time so
oppressed through ambition.

The ambition of Sylla was such toward Marius, and Marius toward Sylla, that
it overthrew welnigh the Empire of Rome, between them and their confederates,
that Sertorius, Carbo, and other Roman Captains, carried flames of ambition
from Rome, to Hispaine and Africa, after whom war followed so fast, that
Sertorius could scarce settle himself to gather an army either in The
victories of Sertorius.
Hispaine or in Affrike, but three Roman captains one after an other followed
him at the heels, Cotta, to whom Sertorius gave battle, and overthrew him by
sea, after Cotta, Phidius, whose army Sertorius overthrew, and caused Phidius
to fly; after Phidius, Toranius, whom he slew, and the most part of his army;
the fourth Metellus, who was driven by Sertorius to such a pinch, that had not
Pompey the great comne from Rome, he had fared little better then the rest, who
for a time both Pompey and Metellus had both their hands full to do with
Sertorius.

This is that Metellus which caused Scypio Affrican to swear that he would not
forsake neither Rome nor Italy his country, which he thought to do with many
Romans Metellus.
more, after the great overthrow of the Romans by Haniball at the battle of
Can. This Metellus is that old woman, of which Sertorius said, that he had
whipped Pompey Syllas boy, had not that old woman Metellus comne, which being
told Pompey, he answered, I had rather be Syllas boy then Syllas fugitive, as
Sertorius is.

Pompey himself within 34. years after, was forced to follow Sertorius
steps, and to fly from Caesar, as Sertorius fled from Sylla: for Caesar
followed Pompey from the field Pharsalia to Egypt, where Pompey was slain, as
Pompey followed Sertorius from Rome to Affrike, where Sertorius likewise was
slain.

Ambition therefore the secret serpent in every commonwealth, as you heard
before among the Grecians, Aristides.
among the Israelites, and among the Romans, and yet in Athens there was one
Aristides that resisted the ambition of Themistocles, and in Rome one Cato that
reprehended Cato.
the ambition of Caesar, and in Israel one Iothan that accused the ambition of
Abimelech.

But as the Philosopher said, the whole world is a commonwealth of contention,
that if strife and contention Licurgus law allowed ambition.
had no place in nature, the generation of all things should be at a stay, and
therefore ambition and contention was allowed among the Lacedaemonians by
Licurgus law, as a spur to prick them forward to martial actions.

Among the Athenians they thought it great policy, to keep men of state in
equal authorities, least any should excel, either in greatness, wealth,
wisdom, honor, or credit among the people, and therefore Aristides was
joined in all authorities with Themistocles, and Ambitious men bannished from
Athens.
Phocion with Alcibiades, for Themistocles and Alcibiades were noted ambitious
men in Athens, and Aristides and Phocion known to be found and just, and if
any seemed to seek singularity through ambition or otherwise among the
Athenians, he should be banished out of Athens, by the law of Ostracismus.

So likewise among the Romans, as among the Greeks, nothing was so common as
banishment, as in Athens, Aristides for his justice, Milciades for his
victories, Phocion for his good life, Socrates for his virtues, Solon for his
sound laws.

So the best deserved men in Rome, as Corilianus that saved the city of Rome,
Scypio Affrican that brought Carthage and Numantia into Rome; Metellus and
diverse others of the best Romans were banished by proclamation, Corilianus
banished.
and sound of a trumpet out of Rome, and yet Corilianus being so unjustly
banished from Rome to ye Volscians, at the request and tears of his mother
Veturia, and of his wife Volumnia, he refused to fight against the Romans,
being General of the Volscians, and therefore was slain of the Volscians in
the City Curiolis, which Corilianus before time won to the Romans, at what
time he was named Corilianus, after the name of the city Curiolis, as all
Roman captains were that won towns, countries, or cities: thus sparing to
destroy his ungrateful country, Corilianus lost his life therefore by the
Volscians, he might well have said, as Scypio Affrican said at Linternum after
he was banished, Ingrata patria non habebis The saying of Scypio.
ossa mea, Oh ungrateful country, thou shall not possess my bones.

Themistocles also being banished by the law of Ostracysmus from Athens, went
to dwell in Argos, from Argos he was feign to fly to Corphu, and from thence
to Asia, for Themistocles banished.
the king of Persia offered two hundred talents to him that would bring him
Themistocles, for that Themistocles was the only enemy that destroyed so many
Persians in Greece.

But Themistocles understanding of the kings intention, for he supposed it the
surest way to avoid the kings wrath, and to save his own life, to go and
yield himself unto the king of Persia, where he was so accepted Myontium,
Lamplacus, Magnetia.
that he had three great cities for his entertainment, and grew in such great
favor with the king, that the princes and nobles of Persia so envied him, that
they sought by all means to destroy him.

But when Themistocles was required by the king, to lead a Persian army against
the Greeks, according to his oath, he thought that fact unworthy of the name
of Plut. in Themist.
Themistocles, to bear arms against his country men the Greeks, though he
was banished from Greece, but resolved to die like a true Greek, reserving his
love to his country, and his oath to the Persians, least he should by any
means seem to hinder the victories and triumphs of Cymon, at that time
general of the Grecians, or seem any way to stain himself with a treacherous
name against his country, after secret conference with his friends (whom he
feasted) and sacrifice done to his gods, Themistocles died in Magnetia, as
Cleomenes did in Egypt in the city of Alexandria, which when Cleomenes saw he
could not escape the kings hand, to whom he bare mortal hatred, after much
slaughter within the town, Cleomenes exhorted the rest of the Greeks, being
his company, which were but thirty in number, to die like men by their own
hands, and not by the enemy, saying: Let not fortune triumph over fortitude.
Plut. in Cleomenes.
Thus Cleomenes persuaded his company to dye like noble Spartans, which they
performed, for they slew themselves one after an other by their own hands.
And thus after Cleomenes had reigned sixteen years king of Sparta, dyed as
you have heard in the City of Alexandria in Egypt, as Themistocles dyed in
Magnetia.

CHAP. X.
Of the comparison between the noble and wise Captains of both the Romans
and the Grecians: of their sundry military kinds of triumphs and watchwords
of Generals in their wars.

PLutarch therefore compares the state and lives of the Romans, with the
Grecians, and matcheth them as well in likeness and qualities of nature, as
also for their qualities of fortune, for their victories, for their triumphs,
and for their benefits done to their country, and therefore compares Agesilaus
king of the Lacedaemonians to Pompey the great, Consul of Rome, and though
Comparisons between the Romans and the Grecians.
Plutarch prefers his country man the Grecian for his skill and martial
knowledge, yet was he forced to advance Pompey for his victories and conquests,
which was compared to Alexander the great, for his victories over the three
parts of the world, Asia, Europe, and Africa.

Pelopidas compared to Marcellus for their courage and prowess, for that the
Thaebans called Pelopidas, Pelopidas.
the arm of Thaebes, and for that Marcellus was called of the Romans the
sword of Rome, both of equal fortune, both of great prowess and courage, yet
without advertisement, rashly and wilfully, overthrew themselves both alike.

Pericles was compared to Fabius Max. for his grave government and wisdom,
the one called the hand of Fabius and Marcellus ^isedly (...).
Athens, the other called the target of Rome, Fabius Max. for his wisdom,
that by watching and long delays, wearied and weakened the force of Hanibal,
that as the history says, Cunctando rem restituit. Of these two noble Romans
Hanibal himself was wont to say, that Marcellus wearied him, and Fabius
weakened him. Yet Plutarch compares Fabius life with Pericles. Marcellus.


The glory of Greece before by Milciades in the battle at Plataea, the great
good fortune and success in wars of Cymon his son against the Persians,
the noble triumphs and victories of Myronides, the noble and valiant acts and
exploits of Leocrates, the many and valiant deeds of Tolmydes, made (...) name
of Pericles to be more famous in Athens, at what time Greece was in her
greatest glory, Pericles surnamed Olympius.
and Pericles most flourished, who then was surnamed Olympius, for his wit and
great eloquence, having nine several monuments of triumphs set up in Greece of
his good fortune, and yet was Pericles supposed to be the cause of the
Peloponesian wars; for his great hatred toward the Maegarians was such, that
all the cities of Greece divided themselves, and held hot civil wars 27.
years. The like may be said of Iulins Caesar in Rome.

The great name and fame of Scypio in vanquishing Hanibal and the Affricans,
the valiant exploits of Marius over the Cymbrians and Teutons, the great
victories of Sylla over Asia and Greece, the noble triumphs of Pompey over
three parts of the world, made the fame and conquest of Caesar to be the
greater, for Caesar performed that Pirrh saying.
which Pirrhus said of Italy and Rome, that Italians must conquer Italy, and
Romans overcome Rome, as Caesar did.

Next we compare Sylla the Roman, with Lysander the Lacedemonian, two noble
and valiant captains, Lysander.
that the one did what he would in Rome, the other did what he listed in
Sparta, both good and beneficial to their countries, for their victories which
they had against their enemies out of their countries, but both scorpions that
scourged and plagued both their country and country men, that Rome and all
Italy was plagued by Sylla, as Sparta and all Greece was by Lysander.

Q. Hortensius ever boasted that he never took part in any civil wars. So
said Asinius Pollio to Augustus Hortensius and Asinius Pollios sayings.
the Emperor, being willing to have him go with him to the battle at Actium,
against Marc. Antonius, he answered and refused, saying, Ero praeda victoris.
Yet the law of Solon in Athens was, that he which separated Velleius. 2.
himself and took no part in civil wars, Is domo, patria, fortunisque
omnibus careto, he should be banished from his friends and from his country.

Timoleon compared to Pau. Aemilius two noble captains and worthy members of
their countries, the one so esteemed in Syracusa, that whatsoever Timoleon
said, Timoleon.
was taken for a law among the Syracusans, the others fortune was so great in
Rome, that he enriched the Roman treasury, with the wealth and riches of two
kingdoms, Macedonia and Illyria, and brought to the Empire of Macedonia all
the old monuments of the ancient Kings of Macedonia, and of Alexander the
great unto Rome.

Philopomen also was compared to Titus Quint. both great benefactors to their
countries, both at one time in Greece: Philopomen being the last captain of
the Grecians that defended Greece, and Titus one of the first Roman Philopomen
the last captain of any fame in Greece.
captains that first subdued Greece, and after enlarged them, and restored to
them their laws and liberties, at what time crows fell down to the ground by
the sound of men's voices, when Titus proclaimed peace and liberty unto the
Grecians at the games of Isthmia. Ish^mia.


And so likewise in Rome, when Pompey the great restored the Tribuneship unto
the people which Sylla took away, the like happened, that the people being so
many, and their joys so great, the sound of the people pearcced the air, that
many crows fell down in the market place at Rome, as they did in Greece at
the games of Isthmia.

Having compared some Greek and Roman captains in their wars and
victories, one with the other, it were not amiss to touch the sundry military
instruments, and warlike soundes which all Nations used in going to the wars,
and of their watchword in their wars.

Among the old ancient Romans they used the sounding of diverse trumpets and
horns together, going The old Remanes did sound trumpets in their wars.
to any war or battle with the Roman legions.

The Egiptians cannot abide the sound of ttumpets, for that it does resemble
the crying of an ass: for there is nothing so odious among the Aegiptians as
is the noise of an ass; and so odious, that if any man do The Egiptians bad
brazen timbrels and horns.
call a man an ass in Egypt, an action may be had against him by the law of
Bochoris, they used brazen tymbrels and horns for trumpets when they go to
wars.

The warlike Lacedaemonians sound neither trumpets The Lacedaemonians used flutes
and pipes.
nor horns, when they go to their wars, but flutes, which yields so
sweet and plausible a sound, that they march proportionably with their feet,
keeping measure with their instrument. This was set down to the Lacedaemonians
by Licurgus. Alex. Neapolit. lib. 4. genial.


The Parthians in their wars use great hollow kettles and pannes, and great
brazen pottes, and a number of little belles, like the lowing of many wild The
Parthians used kettles, pannes, brazen pots, and a number of little bells.
beasts, with such terror and noise to fear the enemies.

The Lydians come to their wars with diverse kinds of pipes, as howboies,
recorders, bagpipes, and diverse other such.

The Cymbrians with diverse kind of dried skins, drawn hard round about
their chariots and coaches, Cymbrians.
in form and manner like great and huge drums, which they beat and strike,
which makes such an horrible sound much like the great thunders.

The Indians in their wars use Cymballes and Indians.
Belles, for it was not lawful among the Indians to use Flutes, but in the
Kings house, when the King went to bed. As the king of Cicilia used harpes, and
chirping notes of birds to make the king sleep.

Among the people of Creete, they used flutes and Creet^.
harpes in their wars, and thus in all countries they used their proper
warlike instruments when they marched into their battles.

The Hebrews in the wars which they had with the Canaanites, used trumpets
and rams horns, for Moses was commanded by the Lord to make two silver Tho
Hobrues had in their wars silver trumpets and rams horns.
trumpets, and to sound them to call the army together, when they marched
against their enemies. So was Joshua at the battle at Jericho, likewise
commanded, that the Priests should sound rams horns. These Hebrew battles
were the only examples to the Gentiles in their wars, for as the trumpets and
horns are most ancient, so after among all nations, they invented diverse
warlike instruments, as in steed of trumpets in their wars, and diverse
kinds of variable sounds.

The Phrygians sounded most lamentable and pitiful notes, the Lacedaemonians
sweet and pleasant notes, the Lydians mournful and planctiue, the Ionians
merry The diuer sitie of sounding in wars.
and pleasant notes, the Dorians warlike notes.

In so much that when Timotheus the trumpeter sounded that Doria^ warlike note,
Alexander the great straight called for his armor, it so kindled and inflamed
Alexanders mind to arms.

Hannibal never used sound of trumpets nor warlike notes, but secret
stratagems, without further notice or knowledge to his enemies, but only his
tents covered with red, the very self same day that he would have his
soldiers ready to fight. It seemed that Hanibal imitated Alexander the great
herein, who used to set up certain red banners and flags about his tents, in
his wars against Darius king of Persia.

And Darius himself in the self same war against Alexander, had upon his
tent the Image of the Sun, set in Crystal, that shined over all the whole
camp, especially in the night time. So used the Romans as well as the Greeks
in the sea fight, every captain to hang up in their ship some mark or other
to be known: as Of tents and sails.
Lysander hanged up in his ship a brazen target, as a sign to be known to the
rest of the nauies.

Brutus in his wars against Mar. Antonius at Philippus, had a round circle,
that his navy might be known from others.

Mar. Antonius in his battle against Octauius Augustus at Actium, gave purple
sails to his Praetorian nauies, as signs of his pride, and hope of his
victories, but soon forsaken, for he was glad to fly, and follow after
Cleopatra.

Alexander the great, when he sailed to India, used diverse colors of sails in
his nauies, whereby one captain might know the other, and himself in his own
ship had purple sails.

The Romans used to have painted upon their ships banners and flagges, the
pictures, Images, and names of their Emperors and Generals. The Grecians used
also to paint and write the names of their nauies, according to the names of
those Isles where they were made. Others the Image and pictures of their gods of
the countries, as the Greeks Neptune, and the Trojans Minerua.

Now that you have read, what military and warlike instruments all nations used
in their wars, you shall also read the watchwords of great Generals and noble
captains, which they used in their greatest wars.

Cyrus the great king of Persia, used this sentence for his watchword, Jupiter
belli socius and Dux.

Clau. Caesar imitating Cyrus, used a whole sentence for his watchword to his
soldiers, Virum vlscis^ decet.

Others for the most part both of Greeks and Romans, used only to give one
word to their soldiers, as Julius Caesar gave for his watchword in some
battles, Victoria, in other battles his watchword was Faelicitas. In some
other of his battles his watchword was, Venus genitrix. These were his usual
watch-words in 52. set battles which he had.

The Roman Consul Sylla in all the wars which he had in Asia and in Greece,
his watchword was to his The watchword of diverse noblo captains in their
wars.
soldiers, Appollo.

Cn. Pompeius in all his wars which he had under Sylla in Africa against
Sertorius, his watchword was among the Romans, Pietas, while yet he was a
young man, but when his victories and his triumphs grew great over Africa,
Europe, and Asia, and that he was called Pompey the great, he gave his
watchword to his soldiers according to his greatness, Inuictus Hercules.

King Demetrius in diverse wars which he had with many kings and princes,
after his father king Antigonus dyed, he still used one watchword in all his
wars against Zeleucus, Pirrhus, Lysimachus, and Cassander: Jupiter and
Victoria.

Antiochus surnamed Soter, leading a great Army against the people Galatae,
his watchword was, Beneualere.

C. Caligula, a beast, and not an Emperor, gave accordingly a beastly
watchword to his soldiers, Priapus and Venus.

Other Emperors of Rome, as Sept. Seuerus, a noble captain, gave his
watchword to his soldiers, Laboremus. And so Pertinax the Emperor, his
watchword was Militemus. And the good Emperor Antoninus, his words was ever to
his soldiers, Aequanimitas.

After these comparisons between the Romans and the Greeks in all military
discipline, it were also fit to compare some of their stratagems.

As Darius king of Persia, to escape the danger by flight which he was in,
from the Scythians, used a stratagem, Front. lib. 1. cap. 5.
left dogs and asses barking and braying in his tents to deceive the
Scythians: which the Scythians supposed by barking and braying of dogs and
asses to have found Darius in his tents.

The like stratagem used the Lygurians to escape the hands of the Romans, who
bound diverse wild oxen and buffes to certain trees to deceive the Romans,
which made such a roaring noise, that the Romans thought thereby the Lygurians
to be in their camp and in their tents, when they escaped secretly away.

Hannibal being most busy in plaguing Italy, Scypio Affrican used a stratagem,
passed with a great Roman Front. lib. 1. cap. 3.
army to Affricke, to draw Hannibal from Italy: who was forced straight to
follow after to succor the Carthaginians.

The like policy used Themistocles to draw the army of Xerxes from the land
into a sea battle, knowing the Athenians far unable to answer Xerxes army
on land, sent all the wives and children from Athens to Troxaena, and to other
cities of Greece, and left Athens empty. The Persians hearing that
Themistocles left Athens, followed hard after him, whereby Themistocles by this
stratagem got a noble victory over the Persians at Salamina. Cities besieged,
suffered as though they were ready to yield, and where they found the enemies
so careless, that they expected nothing but yielding, they suddenly issued out
with great fury, and overthrew their enemies. So did Furius the Consul, so did
Caesar with the like stratageme: so did Labienus. So does Satan when he finds
men without watching and praying, living slothful and careless, and as men
suppose in security, then Satan uses this stratagem, finding them unarmed,
without spiritual weapons, overthrows them, takes them, and brings them as
prisoners and captives to his tents.

CHAP. XI.
Of two overthrows of the Romans, by the Parthians and by the Cymbrians, and
their General Crassus slain. Of diverse other battles both of the Romans and
the Greeks, and of many Libraries destroyed by wars.

THe Romainas flourished at that time with victories and triumphs over all
nations, yet had some of the best of them many shameful overthrows: as Mar.
Crassus a noble Roman, equal in force and power to Caesar or to Pompey, after
many great victories, was among the Barbarians and Parthians overthrown
Crassus slain among the Parthians.
by Carres, a famous city in Mesopotamia, and the more famous for that Abraham
dwelt there, at what time many noble captains slew themselves for very shame
and sorrow, after their General Crassus and his son were slain by Surena
Lieutenant of the Parthians.

This Surena was the second person next the king in Parthia, his greatness was
such, that he had a thousand camels to carry his sumpters, a thousand men of
arm^s armed, two hundred Coaches of Curtizans, that his whole train made above
ten thousand horse. Censorius, Octauius, Petronius, and diverse other Roman
Gentlemen slew themselves, and Surena after he struck off Pub. Crassus head the
son, and sent him to the king his master, in the very self same day was
slain also Crassus the father. In this battle twenty thousand Romans were
slain, and ten thousand taken prisoners, for he had seven legions in his army
of footmen: and after that Crassus head and his sons sent to the king of
Parthia.
Surena had bathed Crassus head in blood, and had melted gold into his mouth,
to the great reproach of the Romans, he sent both the heads of Crassus and his
son to Horodes king of Parthia, at which time the king of Parthia and his
nobles, laughed and scorned the other captive Romans, making rimes, verses and
enterludes of both Crassus heads.

This overthrow was one of the most ignominious that ever the Romans had,
saving the overthrow of Valerianus the Emperor, by Pazaites the Turk, whose
army was quite overthrown, and himself taken prisoner, and used as a block
for the Turk to go on horse.

And another ouerhthrow which the Romans had Oros. lib. 5. cap. 16.
by the Cymbrians and Teuto^s by the river of Roan, where C. Manilius and Q.
Scaepio were Generals of the Roman armies, had such an overthrow, that of
four score thousand The overthrow of the Romans by the Cymbrians.
Romans, and of their associats scant ten escaped with their lives away, the
news thereof made Rome so to quake, and the Senators to fear, that they were
so amazed and so terrified, as they were at their overthrow at the battle at
Can, but Cai. Marius fully revenged and requited upon the Cymbrians at the
river Xextus the overthrow of the Romans, with such a victory over the
Cymbrians, that neither man, woman nor child escaped.

In like sort was M. Crassus revenged upon the Parthians by Pub. Ventidius,
vice-Consull under Mar. Antonius, having done great exployts in subduing the
inhabitants about mount Taurus, and also having won diverse victories over the
Parthians, a stout and hardy Nation, whom the Romans plagued sundry times in
revenge of Mar. Crassus death, which was the third man of reputation in Rome.
Pub. Ventidius was suffered Pub. Ventidius tryiumphes over the Parthians.
to have both the triumphs under Mar. Antonius, who chiefly at that time was
General of the Roman Army, appointed by the Senators and people of Rome. But
Ventidius better deserved to have this triumph then Mar. Antonius, who began
to esteem and attend Cleopatra more then his Roman Army.

Ventidius won more victories over the Parthians, then any Roman Captain
else did, and yet the Romans had eighteen pitched battles against the
Parthians, for the Parthians had eighteen kingdoms under them.

These were stout Nations, and called their king, king of kings, as the
Persians called their kings the great kings, and the Phrygians called their
kings the greatest kings, which the Roman Consulls, could endure no great
names but themselves, as Sylla, Lucullus, and Pompey, took the best hand,
either going, riding, or sitting, of any king in Asia.

Augustus Caesar also revenged on the Parthians Aug. Caesar.
Crassus death, and brought again to Rome all the Roman Ensigns, and all
that Crassus lost in Parthia, saving Crassus himself, his son, and the
Romans that died there.

The Greeks in like sort as the Romans, after they had given diverse
overthrows, and gotten many great victories over the Persians, as at the
battle at Artemisium, at the battle of Salamina, and at the battle of
Marathon, where the Athenians won a famous victory over the Persians, who
were led under Pisistratus a The victory of the Greeks at Maratho^.
banished man out of Athens, not like Themistocles, who refused to fight, but
like himself a tirants son, though a Greek borne, yet he presented
himself to Darius Hisdaspis, king of Persia, to lead his army into Greece, his
country, where he was slain, and two hundred thousand Oros. lib. 4. cap. 14.
Persians at the battle at Marathon, by the Athenians for his welcome home,
who were conducted under Milciades and Callimachus, two noble Captains.

In this war flourished Themistocles, a young man, and was as much commended
by the Athenians for The praise of Themistocles.
his prowess and courage, being so young, as Alexander the great was in the
battle at Cheronea, or Scypio Affrican at the battle at Ticinum. This young
Themistocles was wont to say in his youth, that he could not sleep in his bed
for the sound and report of Milciades triumphs.

The Greeks having so many victories and such good success in their own
countries over the Persians and others, were as greedy as the Romans were to
win other countries, and the Greeks had the like luck with the Syracusans, as
Mar. Crassus had with the Parthians, who in both the battles at Syracusa, the
one by Not Demosthenes the Orator, bus a captain of that name.
land, the other by sea, were overthrown by the Syracusans, by the rashness
of Demosthenes, who was General with Niceas in this voyage, being maliciously
counseled by Alcibiades, to commence war against the Syracusans, but after
these victories which the Syracusans had over the Athenians at the River
Asinanius, where was the most cruel slaughter of the poor wretches the
Athenians, even as they were a drinking, until Niceas fell down flat at
Gilippus feet, and yielded himself, Demosthenes being taken The victory of
the Syracusans over the Athenia^s
prisoner before, not Demosthenes the Orator, but an other Captain in Athens
of that name, and having taken the residue of the Captains unslain, brought
them together in troops, first unarmed the^, and taking their weapons from
the^, hung the^ up as tropheys, upon the goodliest young trees that grew by the
Rivers side, in token of triumph, then they put on triumphing garlands on their
Plut. in Nicea.
heads, having trimmed the horses in triumphant manner, leading all the horses
of the enemies shaven, with some of the best captains in chains, entered into
the City of Syracusa with great pomp, and after they had put all the Athenian
captains to death, and had imprisoned the best, and sold the slaves and poor
wretches as bondmen, and burned them in the forehead with the print of a horse.

The Syracusans decreed a feast for ever to be celebrated (in memory of the
Athenians) in Syracusa, called Asinarus, after the name of the River Asinarius
feast.
where the victory was gotten, by the counsel of Euricles the Orator, with
sacrifice to their gods. Niceas and Demosthenes, both Generals of the
Athenians, killed themselves by a word sent to them by Hermocrates, to avoid
the furious cruelty of the Syracusans. Niceas.


Yet the Syracusans did not so much annoy the Athenians as the Lacedaemonians
did, their neighbors and country men, in the great battle at the River of
Aegospotamos.
Gotes, where the Athenians were so overthrown, and the city of Athens it
self was destroyed unto the very ground by Lysander.

After Lysander had destroyed Athens, Antipater king of Macedonia at the
battle at Cranon, which was the utter destruction of the Greeks, the rather
for that Philip The battle at Cranon.
king of Macedonia before had given a great overthrow to the Greeks in the
battle at Cheronea, by the means of Demosthenes, who would never have the
Greeks to yield, neither to Philip, nor to his son Alexander the great, and
though Alexander after his father, thought to have made a full conquest of all
Greece, and began with Thaebes, took the city, and rased it to the ground,
slew six thousand Thaebans, sold thirty thousand slaves, and spared none but
such as were friends and kinsmen to Pindarus the Poet, whom Alexander loved no
less, then Augustus loved Arius the Philosopher, for whose sake he spared the
whole street in Alexandria where Arius dwelt.

The misery of the Thaebans by Alexander brought down, made the Phoceans, the
Plataeans, the Athenians, and all Greece, to quake for fear of Alexander; he
spared Priests and religious people, and such as were kin The fear of Alex in
Greece.
to any of the Macedonian Lords, and this did Alexander only to terrify
Greece, and to bring them in subjection without further war: so that the
victory of Antipater at the battle of Cranon, after that Philip and his son
Alexander had brought Greece so low, brake quite the back of Greece, for
Antipater so tirannized over the Grecians, that he spared none, especially the
Orators, by whose means only he knew Greece so long resisted kings.

Yet neither Philip king of Macedonia, with his battle at Cheronea, nor
Alexander the great with his victory over Thaebes, neither Antipaters victory
at Cranon, harmed Greece so much as their civil wars, which is the
overthrow of all Commonwealths, and the decay of all states, whereof the
example you may read.

Octauius Augustus after he had vanquished Mar. Antonius, in their civil
wars in a battle by sea at Actium, from whence Antonius fled into Egypt
after Cleopatra, where Antonius and Cleopatra ryoting in Alexandria, A battle
at Actium.
feasting and dancing for few days, until Antonius hearing that Augustus
followed him as he followed Cleopatra, dispairing to have any longer peace
with Octauius, Plut. in Antonio.
slew himself, whom Cleopatra buried, and after in short time slew her self,
over whom triumphed Ostauius, carrying her picture from Egypt in his triumph
into Rome, as Iu. Caesar his uncle in his civil wars between him and Pompey,
carried the pictures of Cato, Petronius, and others in his triumphs, from
Affrike unto Rome, at what time the greatest, and most famous library of the
world was burned, which Pio. Philadelphus had prepared and gathered together in
Alexandria in Egypt, to the number of four hundred thousand volumes, at what
time Philadelphus sent to Jerusalem to the high Priest Eleazarus for the Hebrew
Bible, and for seventy two The library of Philadelphus in Alexandria burnt.
learned men to translate it out of the Hebrew into the Greek tongue, which
were all burned and destroyed, as well in the civil wars between Julius
Caesar and Pampey, as in the civil wars between Mar. Antonius and Augustus
Caesar.

The like library of Pisistratus in Athens, was destroyed by Sylla, who after
he had subdued the most part of The library in Athens destroyed.
the cities of Greece, he laid siege to Athens, took it about midnight, with
such a noise, number of horns, and sound of trumpets in order of battle, with
their swords drawn making such an incredible slaughter, that the greatness of
that murder, and the number of the persons that were slain could not be
known, the noblest men of the city were in such despair, that they made
account to live no longer, because they saw such tirannie and cruelty in
Sylla, that an infinite number slew themselves before they should come to
Syllas hand, at which time the learned libraries at Athens were destroyed quite
and burned.

The most famous library at Pergamus, gathered together of all the universities
of the world, by the great diligence and industry of Attalus and Eumenes, kings
of The library of Attalus and Eumenes in Asia destroyed.
Asia, of the which library one Euporion had the charge, by the appointment of
Antiochus the great, which was also burnt and destroyed in the wars of Asia,
between Antiochus the great and the Romans, which Antiochus by the persuasion
of Hanibal, would take wars in hand against the Romans, supposing by his two
Elephants, whom he named Ajax and Patroclus, to terrify the Romans with these
beasts. Hanibal might have told him he had four score Elephants in his wars
against Scypio Ajax and Patroclus.
Affrican, and after Hanibal was overthrown, and his Elephants brought to
Rome. Metellus at his victory at Panormus, sent to Rome a hundred four and
twenty Elephants, and fifty years before Metellus, Pirrhus was glad to leave
four Elephants to beautify the triumphs of Curious Dentatus, and to forsake
the Romans, and to fly to his country. Antiochus the great might have known
this well, either by himself, or by Hanibal, but being overthrown of the
Romans, the library also of Pergamum was destroyed.

Again, the most noble library at Rome began by Asinius The library at Rome.
Pollio, and finished by Mar. Varro, was such, that both these great learned
men had their Images and statues set up in the market place at Rome, while yet
they lived.

If the Romans had been as desirous of books and learning, as they were of
blood and spoil, Caesar might as well have brought the library from Alexandria
to Rome, as he brought the pictures of Cato, Petronius, and others from Affrike
to Rome, or as Augustus brought the picture of Cleopatra.

Lu. Scypio might as well have brought unto Rome the library of Pergamus from
Asia, as to bring in long tables painted the form and likeness of 130. cities
and towns, which he subdued and conquered in Asia.

And so Lu. Sylla might have brought the library of Athens to Rome, as well as
he did bring all the cities of The Ramans only professed arms.
Greece set out and painted bravely in tables, banners and ensigns to advance
his triumph, but the Romans esteemed nothing but victories, they weighed not
for books, but for battles, they banished Mathematicians and Philosophers out
of Rome, and out of all Italy, for the Romans professed only arms, and yet
many of them were learned: for Cato though learned himself, yet he would have
no Philosophy read in Rome, he much disliked that Carneades the Academick
Philosopher, (who came as Ambassador from Athens to Rome) should tarry long
there, least the Romain youths that were desirous of learning and eloquence,
would give over the honor and glory of Arms, and yet many of the best Roman
captains were well learned.

It was but the opinion of Cato, for Philopomen the Greek, by talking of
wars with Captains, and by reading of Cincius and Euangelus books, became
an excellent captain.

Lucullus in like sort himself being learned as it seemed, for Lu. Sylla
dedicated his commentary of 22. books unto Lucullus, who was as noble a
Captain as any was among the Romans.

Alexander the great would never sleep in his bed without the Iliads of Homer
under his pillow.

So Caesar's Commentaries at this time is no less esteemed with the Turks,
then Homers Iliads with the Greeks.

It seemed in those days that it was not hard to find famous and learned
libraries, when so many learned and profound scholars wrote so much, as
Callimachus wrote Callimachus
eight hundred books. Crisippus a stoik Philosopher, wrote more then others
could read, so many Greeks Chrys^ppus.
and many Romans, wrote all the days of their lives, but as you heard, the
end of war, sword, and fire, consumes all, especially of civil wars.

Some books are also mentioned of the Prophets and of the Apostles in their
writings, which are not extant, Nomb. 21.
as the book of the battles of the Lord, the book of the Just, called Iasher,
and the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Judah, often mentioned in the
Ios. 10.
book of kings.

In the new Testament of the prophecy of Enoch, and the story of the body of
Moses mentioned in the Epistle of Jude, but now not extant.

These things are also declared in the writing of Nehemias, how he made a
library, and how he gathered the Acts of the Kings, and of the Prophets, the
Acts of David, 2. Mac. 2.
and the Epistles of the kings.

CHAP. XII.
Of the breach of the law of Arms, of the treachery and murder that came
thereby.

THe Castle of Thaebes called Cadmea, was taken by Phaebidas, a Spartan
captain, before the Thaebans mistrusted any thing, for there was a league
between the Thaebans and the Lacedaemonians, howbeit the Lacedaemonians against
the law of arms, took the castle, and the captain that then kept the
castle, named Ismenias, and sent him to Sparta as a prisoner. Pelopidas The
law of arms brok^.
and others saved themselves by flight; and for that the Spartans brake their
league with the Thaebans, hereby grew great wars between the Lacedaemonians
and the Thaebans, to the utter confusion of the Lacedaemonians, and the last
overthrow of Sparta, at the battle of Leuctres, where Epaminondas and
Pelopidas were victors.

This overthrow fell justly to the Lacedaemonians, for that they brake their
league and conditions of peace with the Thaebans, for the which it is lawful
among all nations to commence war, so is it great wisdom for all nations to
avoid the great harm that may fall by entreatie of peace.

For under color of peace many have practiced means to war: so Metellus
deceived Iugurth with fair words tending to peace.

Philip king of Macedonia, having a vain hope to have peace with the Romans,
thinking thereby to repair his force, being before foiled by the Romans, was
the second Liui. 32.
time vanquished by the Romans, thrice he rebelled, and thrice he was
vanquished.

This was not that Philip father to Alexander the great, who never kept
conditions of peace, but false and treacherous in all his promises: he could be
as rebellious as the last Philip, but not so soon subdued.

Cotys, King of Thracia, under color of a league, was with fair words allured
to a banquet, where he was Tacit. 2. annal.
slain.

It was the counsel of Archidamus, Agesilaus son, to talk of peace to the
Lacedaemonians, and to provide for Thucyd. lib. 1
war, and therefore the Romans gave audience out of the city to any
foreign Ambassador, especially in matters of peace, and after they would
conduct the Ambassadors to shipping, to prevent practices and policies under
colors of peace.

The Romans in this imitated the Athenians, who entertained the Ambassadors of
the Lacedaemonians in Oros. li 3. ca. 2
like sort, but Rome and Athens were much deceived, for the cities of Italy
often rebelled against Rome, and the cities of Greece against Athens.

Much murder and slaughter was ever found in the Godolias.
breach of faith, and much mischief committed under color of peace.

Godolias being made governor by Nabuchodonozer over the rest of Judea, after
Jerusalem was destroyed, was deceived by the fair words of Ismael, who came
with ten men with him that were sworn to him to do what he would have them to
do in Mazphah, to the house of Godoliah, where he was well entertained, but
Ismael slew Godoliah, all the Jews, and all the Chaldeys that Ismael found
waighting on Godoliah, and the next day after that Ismael had slain Godolias,
certain men came from Ierem. cap. 41.
Sychem, from Siloh, and from Samaria, to the number of fourscore, which had
shaued their beards and rent their clothes, with meat offering and incense to
offer in the house of the Lord. And Ismael went weeping out of Mazphah to meet
them, and said; Come and go to Mazphah to see Godoliah the Governor, where
Ismael slew them in the midst of Mazphah, as he did Godoliah, in the one he
deceived Godolias with fair words, in the other he deceived them with tears
to come to Mazphah to see Godoliah, whom he slew all saving ten, and threw
their bodies into one pit.

Triphon, one of Ismaels brood, after he had taken Jonathan by deceit, he sent
him to Ptolomeu, where he took Ionathans children for hostage, and money for
his redemption. So Triphon promised to deliver Jonathan, Triphon.
but Triphon killed Jonathan and his children against his faith, and promise,
and the law of arms of all nations.

Alexander king of Syria fled to Arabia, to be defended from Ptolomeu his
father in law king of Egypt, but Zabdiel the Arabian slew him most
treacherously, and sent his head to Egypt to Ptolomeu.

Bacchides and Alcinus, Governors under the most cruel king Demetrius, slew
threescore Assideans, that came to entreat Antiochus for peace, against the
law of The breach of the law of arms.
arms.

In like sort Nicanor thought to deceive Machabaeus, as Antiochus did, under
color and pretense to seek peace.

Met. Suffetius, General of the Albaines, promising by oath his faith and
truth to the Romans, and that his friendship should not fail to be ready at
the Romans commandment, yet breaking his oath in the same, practicing his
treachery against the Roman army, he was bound to two tops of trees both
hands and feet, Valor. max. lib. 7. cap. 4.
and terribly pulled in pieces by the trees.

The breach of faith by the law of arms set down, was ever among the
Romans most severely punished: in so much that the Roman soldiers stoned
Posthumous, for that he denied the spoil which he promised to the soldiers.

The like is read, that the Ambassadors of the Lacedaemonians, being sent to the
king of Persia, to have his Theucyd. lib. 2.
aid against the Athenians, being in league with the Lacedaemonians, were taken
and brought to Athens, and by the Athenians slain.

The Ambassadors of Carthage, and Macedonia, because they did conspire against
the Romans contrary to their league, were taken, and by the law of arms
justly slain.

Diverse Ambassadors were slain for breaking their leagues against the law of
arms, as the Ambassadors of the Romans were slain by the Illyrians, the
Ambassadors of the Athenians by the Persians, the Ambassadors of the Persians
by the Macedonians, the Ambassadors of David king of Judah by the Ammonites,
not slain, but 2. Sam. cap. 10.
ignominiously abused; for David sent his Ambassadors to Ammo^ the king to
comfort him for the death of his father, in kindness and of good will, but they
had half their beards shaued, and their garments cut off at their buttocks,
and thus were they turned back in reproach without thanks to David.

So were the Ambassadors of the Romans without cause against the law of
arms, most injuriously slain by the Illyrians, who were governed under a
woman, to the great reproach of the Romans, but the Roman Ambassadors being
thus slain, had their statues put up in the Oratory, and their names written
upon L. Flor. lib. 2. cap. 5.
their Images, P. Iunius, and T. Coruncanus, but the Romans revenged it to the
loss of their kingdom.

Thus every where treachery and murder was committed in all countries, under
color of leagues and laws broken, and most time without either law or
league, but with violence and treachery practiced by many false stratagems
among all nations.

As Zopyrus practiced by a dissembling stratagem to bring the Persians into the
hands of Cyrus, though some Zopirus.
say it was Darius, by cutting and deforming his face, and mangling his body,
in this pitiful sort coming to Babilo^, Front. lib. 3. cap. 3.
saigning and dissembling that he had hardly escaped from Cyrus army, promised
the Babilonians to do them great service to revenge his wrong, if they would
use his service. By these subtle and crafty means he brought Cyrus to be
king of Babylon, of this Zopirus, Cyrus was wont to say, that he wished as many
friends like Zopirus, as a Pomegranate had kernels.

The like stratagem used the Grecian Sinon for Agamemnon in the wars of Troy,
therefore Agamemnon said, he had rather have ten Nestors, or ten Vlixes,
Ten Nestors, and ten Vlixes
then ten Achilles, or ten Ajax: for more does counsel and policy profit
in war, then force or courage, and therefore when Achilles dyed, Ajax made
claim to his armor, as one that might claim it best by the law Ajax.
of Arms, clayming a combat if any one would say the contrary.

Ajax being warned by his old father Telamon, when he went with Agamemnon from
Greece to Troy, to fight valiantly, and to ask at the gods hands good success
and favor, but Ajax more proud then wise, answered his father, that slothful
men and cowards seek help at Plyn. lib. 35. cap. 9.
Gods hands, but said he could overcome without Gods help.

Vlixes also made claim to Achilles armor, saying, that his policy and
counsel did profit more the Grecians in the wars at Troy, then the sword of
Ajax. Agamemnon knowing how much policy and wise counsel auailed in wars,
gave to Vlixes the armor of Achilles, for Agamemnon said, had he had but ten
such counselors as Cyrus and Agamemnons wish.
Nestor was, he doubted not but soon to subdue Troy. So Cyrus spoke of
Zopirus, and so Pirrhus spoke of Roman soldiers, Plus praestant senes
consilio quam inuenes armis.

Thus the Polymarchies of the earth seek to co^quer another world like
Alexander, being not contented with one, and cover all the seas with their
sails like Xerxes, Xerxes. Nimrod.
and to build castles high unto the heavens like Nimrod, who would build Babel
to reach up to heaven, to revenge the injury done to his predecessors by the
universal deludge, resembling much the battle of the Giants, who challenged
Jupiter, and the rest of the gods to battle: but though this be fabulous
concerning the Giants, yet the building of Babel is written by Moses, that
Babel was builded so high by Nimrod, both to avoid a second deludge, and to
revenge his stock and family destroyed in the first: but the Lord saw their
folly, confounded their works by a confusion of one language into many.

Philo might ask a question as well now, why the Lord did not overthrow the
tower of Babel with wind, tempest, and thunderbolts, as he did ask, why the
Lord did not destroy Egypt with Lions, Tygres, Bears and such. But as Philo
answered his own question, that it was to Philo.
fright them with Frogs, Flies, Grasshoppers, and such simple vermines, to
show his mercy, and to save them to repentance, and not to destroy them with
wild beasts. And so with the like reason Philo, or any man for Philo, may now
answer, that the Lord would not destroy the Tower of Babel with tempest and
wind to destroy the people, but by dividing of one tongue into many, that they
might acknowledge the Lord to be God, and to confess their own folly.

If Nimrod had confessed his sin, and said I have 2. Reg. 12.
sinned, as David spoke to Nathan the Prophet, or with Daniel, who said,
Peccauimus, iniquitate^ fecimus: or with Dani. 9.
Nehemias, who said, I and my fathers house have sinned, to whom the Lord
showed mercy. Nehemi. 1.


Wicked Pharao also said to Moses, I have sinned against the Lord, and the Lord
is just, I and my people Exodus 9.
are wicked.

Saul said I have sinned, and have done foolishly. So Judas the traitor said, I
have sinned in betraying innocent 1. Reg. ca. 26.
blood, but the Lord accepts not the fained Math. 27.
confession of wicked men.

CHAP. XIII.
Of security of Generals in wars. Of celetitie in victories. Of diverse
dreams and names given.

TWo much security was in Pompey his soldiers, after he had given two
repulses to Caesar's soldiers at Dyrachium, as Caesar said himself, the victory
might have been Pompeys, if he had followed his good fortune. So again if
Pompey had followed his good luck, and had not stayed the Roman youths being
fierce to go forwards at the battle at Pharsalia, he had put Caesar to
greater danger then he was at Dyrachium.

So Hannibal was touched with that fault by Hamilcar the Affrican, that if he
had gone forwards and brought his army after the battle at Can before Rome,
as Scipio Security in wars hurtful.
after his overthrow of Hannibal brought his force before Curthage, Rome might
have been in as great a danger as Carthage was.

Nothing abused Pompey so much as his own captains, flattering him, and
calling him the great Agamemnon, king of kings, by Domitius, Scypio, Spinther,
and Pompeys parasites.
others, after the victory at Dyrachium, assuring themselves soon to overthrow
Caesar's army, and contending in bravery for offices at their return to Rome,
drawing lots who should be Consuls, Praetors, Quaestors, or high Bishop, which
Caesar himself was at that time.

It should seem that Pompey and his captains, made no doubt of the victory,
for when his camp was taken, his tents and pauilions were full of nosegaies,
and garlands of myrtle, and their coaches all covered with flowers, their
tables full of bowls of wine, as men more ready to do sacrifice for joy
before the victory, then armed and prepared to fight for the victory, At
Fortuna vitrea cum splendet frangitur?

So also Tigranes king of Armenia, was flattered with his Leiftenants,
Captains, and other Parasites, who scoffed and flowted the Romans, they
sported and made a May* game of Lucullus army, some dividing the spoil, and
drawing lots before the battle began, much like to the Cherussians, the
Sueuians, and the Sycambrians, who gathered themselves together in a great
army, they likewise like the Armenians, little esteeming L. Flor. lib. 4 cap.
12.
the Romans, divided the Roman spoils between them before they fought for
it: the Cherussians would have all the Roman horses, the Sueuians would have
all the gold and silver of the Romans, and the Sycambrians all the Romain
captives taken prisoners in the wars. Thus had they fully concluded before the
battle began, but it fell out otherwise, for Drusus the Roman Captain
overthrew them, that their horses, their cattels, The victory of Drusus.
their chains, their gold and silver, and they themselves were a spoil and a
pray to the Romans. Incerti exitus pugnarum and Mars communis said Cicero, it
was ever found in all wars, that Nimia fiducia semper noxia.

The like victory had Lucullus over Tigranes king of Armenia, whose captains
before scoffed and flowted The victory of Lucullus over the Athenians.
Lucullus army, dividing the Roman spoils before the battle began, but
they were overthrown by Lucullus, to the slaughter of a hundred thousand
footmen, and the most part of the horsemen slain, and the king himself
hardly escaped: and for that so many were slain of the enemies, and so few of
the Romans, Plutarch says, that the Sun saw not the like overthrow, that such
variety of shows were seen, of Chariots, Coaches, Plut. in vita Luculls.
and of infinite number of Carts, that carried the spoils, of Armours, of
Ensigns, of battering pieces, besides twenty cupbords full of silver plate,
thirty cupboords full of golden vessels, eight Moiles laden with gold, a
hundred and seven Moiles laden with silver coin.

Crassus, at the sight of this Lucullus triumph, was afterward when he was
Consul with Pompey the great, so beyond all measure most desirous with all
celeritie to take his journey against the Parthians, with more haste then good
speed.

In like sort the sight of Milciades triumph moved Themistocles in his youth
to say, that he could not sleep in his bed, before he had obtained the like
triumph, and so he proved among so many great captains in Greece, one of the
greatest, for he was being but a young youth at the battle at Plataea, being
the first battle and the first Themistocles celeritie in his victories.
victory that the Grecians had over the Persians. He was also at the battle
at Marathon, with more commendatio^ then he had at Plataea, but in the battles
at Salamina and Artemisium, all Greece gave him the honor and fame, the one by
sea, the other by land: he did all things with such celeritie, that
Themistocles himself would say, that whatsoever happened to him well, happened by
celeritie.

But it seemed that Themistocles with all celeritie missed to borrowe money in
the I Will of Andria, though he brought two great and mighty gods with him from
Athens, the one called the God of Love, the other the God of Force, requesting
the Andrians to lend some money to please and to satisfy the want of their
Gods.

But he was answered by the people of Andria, that there were two as great
goddesses with them in Andria, as there were in Athens, the which commanded
the Andrians, neither to lend, nor to give any money to Themistocles gods,
saying our goddess of Poverty weighs not for love, neither does the goddess
of Impossibility weigh for force.

The Lacedaemonians were not so religious as the Athenians were, for Agesilaus
took another course the^ Themistocles did, when he wanted money, he went to
the confines of Persia, to spoil and to plague the Persians, for the Persians
ever feared the greatness of Agesilaus, Thirty thousand archers drove
Agesilaus out of Persia.
and yet was he but a little lame man of stature, that he was satisfied with
gold and silver to return to his country, that Agesilaus would often jest
and say, that thirty thousand Archers did drive him out of Asia, which was the
Persian coin, that was stamped with the print of an Archer: with these Archers
the Persians caused oftentimes Agesilaus to return from Persia into Greece
again.

The like jest did Gilippus servant, he told the Ephories of Sparta, that his
master Gilippus had under the roof An Owl printed in the coin of Athens.
of his house, more Owls then all Athens, for the coin of Athens was stamped
with the print of an Owl, as the Persians was with the print of an Archer: for
Gilippus had taken from his master Lysander much money, and hidden them under
the shield of his house, and so by his servant was in a jest betrayed. Thus
leaving Agesilaus with his Archers, and Gilippus servant with his Owls, I will
return to Themistocles, to whom Marcellus shall be compared in celeritie, of
whom Hannibal said, that Marcellus could not be quiet, neither with good
fortune, nor bad, neither victor, nor convicted.

Scypio Affrican with such celeritie, after he had conquered Hannibal at the
battle at Zama, soon subdued Carthage.

Pau. Aemilius with great celeritie subverted the whole Empire of Macedonia,
and brought their king Persius and Gentius king of the Illyrians, both
prisoners unto Rome in his tryumphe.

Pompey the great used such celeritie, that within forty days he vanquished
all the Pirates, who had a thousand ships on the seas, and taken above four
hundred towns, they robbed and spoyld all merchant venturers, Plut. in vita
Pompei.
rifled and destroyed all the Islands and towns upon the sea coast, and
destroyed many Temples, they feared no force, neither weighed for kings nor
subjects, and grew so strong, that they ruled both land and sea without law.
But Pompey had such victory over them, that after the great slaughter in the
battle at the city Coracesium, he took twenty thousand persons prisoners:
and thus in less then three months Pompey ended and quite vanquished the
Pirates. Celeritie praised.


Caesar in all his wars excelled all men in expedition and celeritie, in the
which he had such wonderful good success against Pompey in Pharsalia, against
his son in Africa, against Affranius in Hispaine, against Cato in Vtica,
with such expedition, that he became as you read, being one that was denied to
be Consul, to be Perpetuus Dictator, and the first Emperor of Rome.

Clau. Nero the Consul, considering that Italy was plagued by Hannibal in
Lucania, and by Asdrubal his brother in Vmbria, made such secret great have,
that before Hannibal knew he went out of his camp in Lucania, he was in
Vmbria, and before Asdrubal knew he was in Vmbria, he was with his fellow
Consul at the battle of Metaurus, where Asdrubal was slain, his army
overthrown, and his head sent to his brother Hanibal in Lucania: so that by
one Roman stratagem, the two great Polyb. 11. Front. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Roman enemies, Hanibal and Asdrubal, were overthrown, the one slain at the
River Metaurus, and the other driven from Italy into Affrike.

Celeritie upon deliberation is most necessary at all times, therefore the
chief guard about Romulus person, were called Celeres, for their quickness
and celeritie in executing Romulus commandment.

David king of Judah had such resolute men called Cerethites about his person,
ready with such celeritie to Cerethites
effect any thing the king would command them, that when they heard the king
longing for some water out of the well of Bethelem, they presently ventured
their lives through the camp of the enemies, and brought water to the king
from Bethelem, before the king missed them, but David sacrificed the water unto
the Lord, and would not drink of it, because his men offered their lives for
it.

Caleb used such expedition, after he had viewed and traveled all the land of
Canaan, that he returned within Caleb.
forty days to the Hebrew camp with a full resolution, persuading Joshua to
take the wars in hand.

Ehud, one of the Judges of Israel, who was wont to say to his soldiers,
follow me, went fully resolved to Eglon king of Moab, an enemy of the Lord,
and therefore slew him in his chamber.

Many soldiers of the Lord, are resolved through faith, to effect many things
with celeritie and zeal: so Nomb. 25.
Phineas slew Zimri the Israelite, and Cosbi a Lords daughter of the
Madianites, for that they offended the Lord in the camp, and therefore Phineas
thrust them through both with his spear. Iehu, though a wicked man, yet much
commended for his resolute zeal, for that he overthrew Achabs house, 4. Reg.
(...). 10
slew Baals prophets, and destroyed Baals temple and his aultars.

The great kings of the world are resolved to hazard their lives to win fame
and glory, either by parasites or flatterers, moved thereunto, or by oracles of
their Idols, or by visions and dreams especially, as Astiages king of the
Meades dreamed that his daughter Mandanes which was Cyrus mother, made water
that ouerflowed all Asia. Astiages dreams.


Astiages dreamed the second time, that a vine grew out of his daughters womb,
whose branches covered all Asia, therefore he called all his wise men and
soothsayers of his kingdom together, to interpret him these two dreams, who
told him that his daughter should have a son that should be such a king,
that he should rule over all Asia, which made Cyrus so ambitious Herod. lib. 1.
and proud, that he could not be content with all the kingdoms of Asia, but
must go to be slain in Scythia.

The like dream saw Xerxes, before his voyage in to Greece, that in his
dream he thought he saw Xerxes dreams.
an Olive tree crowned, whose boughs and branches covered the whole earth,
and withal suddenly vanished Alex. Neapolit. genial. lib. 3.
away.

The same Author writes, that Julius Caesar dreamed that he lay with his
mother, and by these means he was flattered by his soothsayers, that he
should subdue the whole earth.

Even so Hamilcar General of the Carthagineans, Cic. diuini. 1.
thought he heard in his sleep a voice that he should the next night suppe
in Syracusa, but he was so glad of his speech, that he was deceived of his
hope, and yet he supt in Syracusa, not as a conqueror but as a prisoner, but
was deceived as Xerxes was by the hope of his crowned Olive, or as Caesar was
by his mother.

Hannibal after the taking of Saguntum, dreamed that Jupiter should call him
into council with the gods, where he was commanded to take wars in hand
against the Romans, there he seemed that Jupiter had Cic. divine. 1.
given him a captain to go before him, even from the Hanniballs dream.
council house, one of the company of the gods, and looking behind him, he
thought he saw a terrible monstrous Serpent, which Hannibal in his sleep
asked Jupiter what monster that was, which was answered and said to be
Vastitatem Italicae, the spoil and destruction of Italy.

Homer and Virgil, both feigned that all kind of dreams pass through two
sundry gates, the true dream through the hornie gate, the false dream through
the Iuorie gate.

Yet we read in the sacred scripture, that Joseph was exalted by expounding
Pharaos dream in Egypt, and so was Daniel, by expounding Nabuchodonozers
dream in Persia.

But Joseph while yet he was amongst his brethren a young boy, dreamed, and
told his brethren saying, we were making sheaues in the field, and lo, my
sheffe arose and stood upright, and your sheaues stood round about and made
obeisance to my sheffe. Then Iosephes dream.
said his brethren shall thou be our king, or shall thou reign over us? They
hated him before, for that his father loved him more the^ they, and for his
dream they hated him the more.

And Joseph told his father and his brethren a second dream, saying; I saw
the Sun, the Moon, and the eleven stars make obeisance to me, and his
father rebuked him, saying; shall I, thy mother, and thy brethren, come and
fall before thee? but yet his father noted his dream: but his brethren took
such indignation against him, that they sold Joseph to an Arabian merchant,
Joseph's second dream
who sold him again into Egypt, where he came by expounding of Pharaos
dream, of the seven lean Genesis 37.
kine that did eat the seven fat kine, and yet were but lean, to be the
second person, and the only ruler of Egypt under Pharao. Thither came his
brethren constrained by a dearth in Canaan, to buy corn in Egypt, and after
Joseph being known, his father Jacob, and all his household came. These were
the Sun, the Moon, and eleven Stars: here his brethren performed the
dream, honoring Joseph upon their knees, as all Egypt did.

In like manner Daniel being a captive of Nabuchodonozers, by expounding his
dream, and his son Balthazers after him, was commanded to be clothed with
purple, and to put a chain of gold about his Daniel by expounding of dreams.
neck, and by proclamation made ruler over the third part of the kingdom of
Persia, and to be one of the three Princes that ruled the kingdom of Persia,
of a hundred seven and twenty Provinces under King Darius. Dan. 5. and 6


No doubt Joseph was instructed by an Angel to expound the dream of Pharao,
and Daniel to expound the dream of Nabuchodonozer.

Angels did instruct men, minister unto men, rebuke sinners Angels comforted
the afflicted, and foretold things, an Angel appeared to Zachary, who told
him, that his wife should bring forth a son, and his name should be John. So
an Angel appeared to the virgin Mary, and said she should have a son, and
his name shall be Jesus.

Abraham in the feast which he made to the Angels under the oak of Mambre, was
promised he should have a son by Sarah, and was named by the Angels Isaac,
laughing, for that his mother laughed, hearing she Isaac named
should have a child in her old age, being four score and ten.

So was also Ismael, Solomon, and Josias, named long before they were borne.

The old Hebrews took example, for that the name of Abram was changed by
the Lord, and named Abraham, which signified the father of many nations.

Jacob likewise was named of the Angel, (with whom he wrestled) Israel, the
prince of God.

So the Hebrews gave such significant names of things to come upon their
children, that when they remembered the names of their children, they should
also remember the thing signified by the name, as Solomon was named Iedidia,
beloved of God, Josias an oblation to the Lord, and so Ismael the son of
Abraham by Agar, Absolon the son of David, and others more, named of the
Hebrews in like manner.

Women only gave names to their children among the Hebrews, as Leah and
Rachel, Jacobs wives, named Women among the Israelites gave names to their
children.
the twelve sons of Jacob.

So Sampson was named of his mother, and so also was Samuel named by his
mother, for the Hebrew women gave such names to their children, as should
contain something signified by the name, not following the fathers name, but
one only name, which the Hebrew women gave to their children.

The Romans had three or four names commonly, contrary to the Hebrews, and
besides three or four names which were proper unto them, they would purchase
as many names as they could get, as Pub. Cornel. Scypio, had the fourth name
Affricanuss for his conquest over Affricke, and his brother Lu. Scypio, was
surnamed Asiaticus, for the fourth name, because he subdued Asia.

Lu. Q. Metellus, surnamed Numidicus, by his victories in Numidia. Mummius, for
his victories in Achaia, surnamed Achaicus.

So the Romans being glorious people full of their victories, would possess
as many names as they could have, and being not contented with so many names,
they would have the months of the year to be named after their names. So Iu.
Caesar called the month Quintilis, after his own name July, Augustus the
second Emperor, Months named after the names of Emperors.
called the month Sextilis, after his name August.

So other Emperors imitating them, as Nero would have the month of April
after his name Neronius, and Domitianus would have October named Domitianus.
Likewise Claudius would have May called after his name Claudius: and Germanicus
would have September named Germanicus after his name. So the Grecians began to
honor Demetrius in like sort, in so much they decreed that the month Manichion
which is January, shall be called De^metrion, and their feast Dionisia which was
dedicated to Bacchus, should be called Demetria, after Demetrius name, and that
Demetrius, and his father king Antigonus, should have their pictures set up and
carried in the sacred banner of Peplon, where none but the picture of Jupiter
and Minerua were set and placed.

Clearchus the tyrant would be called son unto Jupiter, as well as Alexander
the great, so king Antigonus, because he might be called Bacchus, he
resembled Alex. Neapolit. lib. 1. cap. 28.
him outward in his habit, ware a Diadem on his head made of Iuie like
Bacchus, and for his scepter, bare in his hand Thyrsus.

The Greeks also, most commonly had but one name, unless he had a name added
unto it, either by some virtue or vice noted in him: as Pericles for his
eloquence and sweet persuasion, was surnamed Olympius. Aristides for his
integrity, surnamed the just.

Antigonus for his liberality was surnamed Doson, and The surnames of great
Generals and Captains in Greece.
yet reported in Plutarch, that he promised any thing, and performed nothing.

So likewise the Greeks named those that had any blemish on their bodies, as
Antiochus surnamed Griphos for his great belly.

Another Antigonus surnamed Gonatos, for that he had great knees. Demetrius,
surnamed Polycrates, for his invention and skill of warlike engines as
Elepolis, thereby as famous welnigh as Archimedes: otherwise the Grecians used
but one name.

And although Agesilaus was a great soldier, for skill and knowledge in war
so famous, that he was sent from Egypt unto Greece, for to be their General,
and also among the Persians so feared, and among the Grecians so esteemed, and
yet he was called but Agesilaus, without any surname of addition among the
Grecians, neither other great captains of Greece, as Milciades, Themistocles,
Cymon, and others, had no such surnames by their victories as the Romans had.

The Hebrews also had but proper names, and some had Rabbi, Judah ben Dama. Rab.
Si^ ben Gamalael. Rab. Ismael ben Elizei. Genebrardus, lib. 2. cron.
their fathers name added unto it, so our Savior in the Gospel named Peter,
Simon the son of Jonas, so was it oftentimes spoken to Esaias the Prophet, Esaias
thou son of Amos; so all the Jewish Rabines were named after their fathers
names, as Judah the son of Dama, Simeon the son of Gamaliel, Ismael the
son of Elizei, but among the old Hebrews as you heard, they were so named as
pleased the mothers.

The Egiptians used also Greek additions to their names, as Pto. surnamed
Euergetes, for his good deeds and benefits to his country. Pto. surnamed
Ceraunos, that is to say, lightning, for his quick dispatch.

Pto. surnamed Aetos, an Eagle for his swiftness and celeritie, and so
Philadelphus, and other kings and great men of Egypt, added to their own proper
names Greek surnames.

The surnames of the last kings of Egypt began from a soldiers name, who grew
so great among the Egiptians, that he strengthened and established the
country, being subdued and overthrown before by the Persians, that the
Alexandrians so hououred him after his Alex. Neapolit. lib. 1. cap. 2.
death, that all his successors the kings of Egypt, were called after his name
Ptholomei; for as all the first kings of Egypt were called Pharaones, so were
the last kings of Egypt called Ptolomei.

So Arsaces a poor Scythian borne, a great soldier, Arsaces the name of all
the kings of Parthia.
with a great army of poor banished men of the Parthians, overthrew king
Zaleucus, and restored the Parthians to their liberty, for the which benefits
he was made king, and all the kings his successors, were named Arsaces after
his name.

These men seek name and fame on earth, where they have no city, nor place
permanent, but houses made of clay, and forget to build immortality and
eternity in heaven, they make sumptuous and durable tombs for their bodies,
like the Egiptians, which make pyramides for their dead bodies to dwell for
ever. Some again like the Agrigentines, which build them such strong houses as
though they should live always, and yet eat and drink, as though they should
die the next day. But we leave these builders that build towers in the air
with Nimrod, and Iuorie houses with Achab, and would lose immortality with
Ulysses, for Ithaca his country, and come to Paul, who would be losed from the
body and be with Christ, and with Joshua to fix our triumphs and tropheys in
Heaven, with the everlasting Joshua Christ Jesus the son of God, who
purchased unto us eternal habitations, and went in body before us to prepare
for us a dwelling place: to him therefore with the father and the holy Ghost,
be all honor, glory and praise, for ever.

FINIS.
A Table containing a brief sum of the whole Book.
Matters contained in the first Book.
Thirty nine kings ouerthrown by Moses and Joshua page. 2 Of diverse combats
pa. 3 Of the vow of Cherim pa. Ead. Adam rescued by the seed of the woman pa. 5
Elizeus leads the army of Benhadad blind pa. 6 They that mourned in
Jerusalem, were marked with the letter Tau Ead. Of diverse and several marks.
pa. 7 The time that barbours were first seen in Rome pa. 9. Abraham the first
man marked. pa. Ead. Abrahaham feared Abimelech and Pharao for his wife. pa. 10
Abraham read Astronomy in Egypt pa. Ead. Abraham rescued the five kings, and
Lot his nephewe pa. 11 The victory and stratagem of Gedeon over the Madianites.
pa 12 David's victory at Bezor in rescuing his two wives. pa. Ead. Three Angels
feasted at Mambre with Abraham pa. 13. Four named before they were borne. pa.
Ead. The Ismaelites would not be called Agareni of Agar, but Sarazeni of
Sarah. pa. 14. The Tower of Babell builded by Nimrod pa. 15 Ninus the first
Monarch. pa. ead. Alexanders voyage to India. pa. Ead. Zoroastes laughed at his
birth. pa. 16. The first Idolatry by Ninus. pa. ead. Baall the first Idol pa.
17 The male children of the Hebrews thrown to Nilus pa. 18 The tyranny of
Pharao pa. Ead. A comparison between the Egiptians and the Romans pa. 19 The
armies of the Lord in Egypt under Moses pa. Ead. The first plague of Egypt. pa.
20 The comparison of the first plague with the first persecution under Nero pa.
21 Nero slew himself. pa. 22. The second miracle and triumph of Moses in
Egypt. pa 23 The blasphemy of Nicanor punished. pa. Ead. Domitianus Image set
up in the Temple at Jerusalem pa. 24 Domitianus slain in his own house by his
servants pa. 25 Iamnes and Iambres, Phoraos soothsayers pa. ead. The third
persecution under Traiane pa. 26 Philo was not heard of Nero. pa. ead. The
fourth army of the Lord in Egypt, was swarms of flies. pa. 27 The fighting of
the Jews with wild beasts pa. 28 The yielding of tyrants pa. 29 Pharao and
Esau compared. pa. 30 Septimus and Antiochus murdered pa. 31 The tyranny of
Antiochus against the Jews pa. ead. Antiochus confessed the great wrong he did
to the Jews at Jerusalem pa. 32 The fable of Manetho and others, concerning
Moses, whom he named Osarphis pa. 33 The persecution of the seven brethren pa.
34 The seventh plague of Egypt. 35 The comparison of the seventh persecution
under Decius, with the seventh plague. pa. 36 Great plagues and sicknesses upon
the Romans pa. 37 Hypocrisy of Pharao pa. ead. Pericles made a law in Athens
against strangers pa. 38 The eight persecution under Valerianus pa. ead.
Valerianus the Emperor of Rome, used as a block by Sapor king of Persia pa. 39
The ninth plague of Egypt. pa. 40 The dissimulation of Pharao. pa. ead. The
ninth persecution under Aurelianus pa. ead. Christ denied among the Romans.
pa. 41 A golden target sent by the Senators pa ead. The evil end of cruel
Emperors. pa. ead. The tenth plague of Egypt. pa. 42 The tenth persecution
under Dioclesian pa. ead. When persecution ended, heresy began pa. 43 Arius
with diverse crewes of heretics pa. ead. The four general Councels. pa. 44
The marching of Pharao after the Hebrews pa. 45 The drowning of Pharao in the
red sea pa. ead. Appians impudent lies against Moses pa. 46 The education of
Moses in Egypt. pa. 47 Moses chosen captain for Pharao pa. ead. Moses death
sought by the Priests of Egypt pa. ead. The victories of Moses in Aethiopia pa.
48 The marriage of Moses to Tharbis, the king of Aethiope his daughter pa. ead.
Appians lies pa. 49 Philo his speech of the Hebrews. pa. 50 The law of Arms
set down by the Lord to Moses pa. 51 The stratagems of Archidamus,
Epaminondas, and Pericles. pa. 52 Of the law of Arms pa. 53 Of the Priests
Mantes in Athens. etc. pa. 54 The remoouing of the Arc. pa. ead. The numbering
and mustering of the Hebrew army by Moses. pa. 55 The Hebrews were left in the
midst of their enemies to practice arms pa. ead. Stratagems of Marius and
Cyrus pa. 56 Seventy governors chosen under Moses pa. 57 The Levites tents
about the Tabernacle pa. ead. The placing of the four Standarts of the
Hebrews. page. 58 The marching of the Hebrew camp. pa. 59 Xerxes great army
pa. ead. Chief and strong forts of the Gentiles pa 60 The Hebrews named of
the Egiptians, Hicsos pa. 61 Of the several standarts of the Gentiles pa. 62
The setting up of the Tabernacle, and dedication of the Altar. pa. 63 The
multitude of Temples and Aultars among the Gentiles. pa 64 Superstitious
fondness of the Gentiles pa. 65 The victories of Moses and diverse kings pa. 66
The battle at Riphidim pa. ead. The overthrow of the Canaanites and Arad
their king by the Hebrews pa. 67 Of diverse and sundry vows of the Gentiles
pa. 68. and 69 Of diverse Heathenish feasts. pa. 70 Espialls sent by Joshua to
Canaan. pa 71 Fearful reports in wars are dangerous pa. 72 Diverse stratagemes
pa. ead. A Roman Stratagem. pa. 73 The stratageme of Clearchus. pa. 74
Disobedience punished pa. 75 The unthankfulness of the Hebrews for so many
great victories pa. 76 Martial punishment pa. ead. 600000. died for
disobedience in the wilderness pa. 77 The great obedience of all creatures to
God pa. ead. The offenses of Moses and Aaron at the water of Meribah pa. 78 The
martial laws in Egypt. pa. ead. The martial laws in Persia pa. 79 The
martial law of the Romans and of the Lacedaemonians. pa. ead. The charge of a
new army given to Joshua pa. 80 Commendations of Generals among all nations
pa. ead. Pirrhus forsook Italy pa. ead. Elephants first seen in Rome. pa.
ead. A stratagem of Hanibal against the Romans pa. 81 A stratagem of the
Romans against Hambal pa. ead. The overthrow of Jericho by sounding of rams
horns pa. 82 Signs given of victories pa. 83 Logio fubinnea pa. 84 The
strange fashions of diverse nations in their wars pa 85 Pirrhus brought
elephants to Lucania in Italy pa. 86 The numbering of the Hebrews of their
soldiers. pa. 87 The manner and custom of the Romans and Persians, when their
soldiers go to wars. pa. ead. The battles at Iahaz and Edzei. pa 88 Cyrus
for his languages, and Mithridates for his memory. pa. Ead. Five kings joined
against Joshua. pa. 89 The victory of Joshua at Gibeon. pa. ead. Valerianus
taken by Sapor king of Persia pa. 90 Pazaites the Turk taken by Tamberlane pa.
ead. Cratippus saying to Pompey. pa. 91 The sun stayed over Gibeon. pa. ead.
Stratagems of Brutus and Hircius pa. 92 The diverse orders of the Heathens going
to their wars. pa. 93 Amphictions Judges of Greece. pa. 95 Xantippus sent
from Sparta to Carthage pa. ead. Conons stratagem pa. 96 Byzantium now called
Constantinople pa. ead. The old custom of the Romans and Persians in
choosing their kings pa. 97 Description of Xerxes, Agesilaus, Caesar, Darius,
and others. pa 98 The battella^ Besecke pa. 99 The tyranny of Adonizebech. pa.
100 A sign of Periander sent to Thrasibulus pa. ead. The stratagem of Ehud,
Judge of Israel pa. 101 What kind of men were Generals and Judges in Israel
pa. 102 Gedeon chosen Judge and General in Israel pa. ead. Gedeons stratage^
against the Madianites pa. 103 Stratagems of Antiochus and Pericles pa. 104
Pompeys stratagem pa. 105 The unthankfulness of the Israelites pa. 106 The
victory at Marathon pa. 107 The Romans brag of their victory by Marius over
the Cymbrians pa. ead. The Scythians brag of their victory over the Persians.
pa. ead. The arc of covenant pa. 108 Iephtha threatened to be burned. pa. 109
42000. of the Ephramites slain. pa. ead. The tyranny of Cynna and Maririus
pa. 110 Kings sacrificed their daughters to please their Idols pa. ead.
Difference of sacrifices pa. 111 The great sacrifice of Sampson. page 112 The
Priesthood taken from the house of E^ pa. 113 The government taken from the
house of Samuel pa. 114 Ten Tribes forsook Rhehoboam pa. ead. The care of
all nations for education of their children pa. 115 Israel cried for a king pa.
116 The trees and frogs would have a king pa. ead. Ionathans victory at
Michmash. pa. 117 The disobedience of Saul. pa. 118 Saul slew himself in mount
Gilboah pa. 119 Saul's head set up in the temple of Dagon pa. ead. Traitors
rewards pa. 120 Treason has better success then traitors have pa. 121
Traitors odious to the old Romans pa. ead. Uiriatus named the second Haniball
pa. 122
Matters contained in the second Book.
Unjust and unnecessary wars page. 123 David the second king of Israel, his
battles and victories. pa. 124 Policy of Generals and Captains. pa. 125
Europe scant inhabited in David's time pa. ead. The Aromites and Philistines
brought under David. pa. 126 The Roman Governors under diverse Provinces pa.
ead. David put garrison in Edom. pa. 127 The law of Arms broken by the
Ammonites against David. pa. 128 Alcibiades and Ionathans stratagem pa. ead.
Demetrius stratagem and others. pa. 129 Tributes paid to Israel by the
Edomites and others pa. 130 Tributes paid to the kings of Egypt by Joseph pa.
131 What manner of tributes the old Romans and latter Romans had pa. 132
Tributes paid to the Persians. pa. ead. Composition of peace between the
Romans and the Carthagineans pa. ead. The sins of David punished. pa. 133
The tragical end which David saw on his children pa. 134 Diverse stratagems
in rauishing of virgins pa. 135 The first sacking of Jerusalem by Shesac pa.
136 The first battle of civil wars between Judah and Israel. pa. ead. Five
hundred thousand Israelites slain pa. 137 The comparison of the Hebrews with
the Romans pa. ead. The enemy of Rome was Italy. pa. 138 The enemy of Judah
was Israel. pa ead. The cruelty of Marius and Sylla in Rome pa. 139 Good
counsel of the Prophets not obeyed pa. ead. The great victory of the king of
Judah over the Aethiopia^s. pa. 140 Good kings prayed for victories. pa. 141
The victory of Iosaphat. pa. ead. Three hundred Fabians slain at the battle
of Crunera pa. 142 Prayers commenaed and compared. pa. 143 Judah vexed by the
Aromites. pa. 144 The blaspemy of Senacherib punished pa. 145 Jeremy and Michah
both stricken and put in prison pa. 146 Elias fled from Iezabel. pa. 147 Two and
thirty kings came with Benhadad against Achab. pa. 150 Achabs words to
Benhadad. pa. ead Diverse great blasphemers punished pa. 151 The second victory
of Achab over Benhadad pa. 152 Jeremy preached the destruction of Jerusalem pa.
154 The four bornes which Zachary saw pa. 155 Semyramis stratagem in India.
pa. 156 The stratagems of Cyrus and Tomyris in Scythia. pa. 157 Moses stratagem
pa. 158 Alexander his victory over king Porus pa. 159 The great treasure which
Alexander found in Persia pa. 160 Xerxes palace burnt in Persepolis pa. ead.
Of Elephants and Camels used in wars pa. 161 Hanibals tropheys in Italy. pa.
162 The Roman stratagem against Pirrhus pa. ead Curious Dentat. his triumph.
pa. 163 Pirrhus saying of the Romans. pa. 164 600000. bushels of corn daily
spent in Xerxes army. pa. 165 Themistocles stratagem against Xerxes pa. 166 Of
Roman stratagems. pa. 167 The original of military discipline had from the
Hebrews. pa. 168 Golden girdles given by the Hebrews and the Persians. page.
169 Of diverse military rewards to encourage soldiers. pa. 169. 170 The custom
of the Knights of Rome pa. 171 Lucullus named the Roman Xerxes, and Pompey
called Agamemnon the great pa. ead. Foresight is great wisdom. pa. ead.
Argyraspides, Alexanders soldiers pa. 172 The Scythians law for soldiers.
pa. 173 The law of Solon for soldiers. pa. 174 One hundred and twenty
knights buried in the field Adrasteys, by Alexander the great. pa. ead. Of
monuments pa. 175 Bethel become Bethauen. pa. ead. Abraham provided for the
burial of himself, his wife, and his posterity pa. 176 The care of the
Gentiles for their burials pa. ead. The honor of the Athenia^s to their
Generals for victories. pa. 177 Themistocles honored of the Grecians pa. 178
Pompey for his victories and triumphs compared to Alexander the great pa. 179
The triumphs of Scypio, Lu. Sylla, and Pau. Aemilius. pa. 179. and 180 The 3.
great combats of Romulus, Cossus, and Marcellus. pa. 181 The manner of Sesostris
triumph. pa. 182 The Greek and Roman tropheys pa. ead. Sicinius Dentat, his
reward to his soldiers pa. 183 The form and manner of making of Tribunes pa.
184 Auctyles people of Libia. pa. ead. Soldiers might not walk in the night
time in Athens. pa. 115 Mellephori chief soldiers of the king of Persia pa.
ead. Neodomadae among the Lacedaemonians, and Ianizari among the Turks pa. 186
Of diverse military punishments. pa. 187 The difference between Agesilaus and
Caesar pa. 189 Stratagems of Agesilaus, Antigonus, and Epaminondas. pa. ead.
The law of Decimation. pa. 190 Bochoris law in Egypt. pa. 191 Coward
soldiers punished in Persia pa. ead. The punishment of cowards among the
people called Daci. pa. 192 Tamberlaines justice and severity. pa. 193
Comparison of certain Roman captains with the Greeks. pa. 195 The force
and persuasion of eloquence pa. ead. The greatness of Demetrius envied pa. 196
Demetrius picture carried in the triumph of Peplon. pa. 197 Epaminondas and
Pelopidas commended pa. 198 Philopomen imitated Epaminondas pa. 199 Philopomen
greatly commended. pa. 200 The victories of Lucullus. pa. 201 Stratagems of
Hanibal, Lysimachus, and Marcellus pa. 202 The cruelty of Mithridates against
the Romans pa. 203 The revenge of Marius over the Cymbrians pa. ead. Marius
seven times Consul. pa. 204 How the Prophets denounced wars to the Jews, and
to the Gentiles. pa. 205 The manner of the Gentiles in proclaiming wars to
their enemies pa. 206. 207. 208 The rainebowe, a sign that the world should
not be destroyed with water again pa. 209 The manner and ceremonies of all
nations in concluding of peace. pa. 210. 211. and 212 The manner of yielding
among all nations. pa. 213. 214. 215 A soldier to loose his target, was death
in Greece pa. 215 The saying of the women of Sparta concerning cowardly
soldiers. pa. 216 Shieldes much esteemed among the Romans and the Grecians.
pa. ead. The victory of the Grecians over the Persians at Plataea. pa. 217 The
funeral ceremonies for those captains that dyed in the battle at Plataea pa.
218 A feast of the Jews called Purim. pa. 219 The victories of the Grecians
over the Persians at Salamina and Artemisium pa. 220. 221 Many strange signs
and apparitions in the air. pa. 222. and 223 Signs seen before the
destruction of Jerusalem. pa. 224. and 225 The last overthrow of Jerusalem by
Titus and Uespasian. pa. 226 Diverse feigned themselves to be the Messiah pa.
227 The Rabins slain at the siege of Jerusalem pa. 228 Jerusalem destroyed five
times. pa. ead. The saying of Dio. Areopagita and Appollonius of the Eclipse of
the Sun pa. 229 100000. Talent's left by David to Solomon to build the temple
pa. 231 Heathen kings favored the Jews pa. 232. and 233 Aristobulus first
King of the Jews, after their captivity. pa. 234 Affliction of the Jews. pa.
235 Zedechiah taken captive. pa. 236
The contents of the third Book.
NO mercenarie soldiers allowed by the Romans nor the Persians page. 237 Of
the care of kingdoms and countries in military discipline. pa. 238 Alexander
his laws and exercise for his soldiers pa. 239 Massinissas hardiness in
marching pa. ead. Fabius Max. diligence to his soldiers pa. 240 Bochoris
military laws. page. ead. Full fed soldiers punished by the Romans pa. 241
Agesilaus military discipline. pa. ead. The exercise of Eumenes to his
soldiers pa. 242 Military punishment recited by Modestinus pa. 243 Laws of
Plato and others against wine drinkers pa, 244 The wars at Numantia. pa. 245
Cyrus discipline to his soldiers. pa. ead. Diverse kinds of martial
punishments pa. 246 Provincial regiments of the Romans pa. 247 Division
between the successors of Alexander pa. 248 Liberties and freedoms allowed by
the Romans pa. ead. Roman Magistrates governed in Asia and in Africa. pa.
299 Ambition in Rome and in Athens. pa. 250 Sertorius white hind pa. 251
Marius carried Martha his Scythian soothsayer pa. 252 The policy of Scypio to
his soldiers pa. ead. Israel consulted with Idolatrous oracles pa. 253 Pennall
laws in Sparta. pa. 254 How the Lacedaemonians march to their wars pa. ead.
The manner and habit of all nations in going to their wars. pa. 256 Of
military oaths ministered unto soldiers in diverse countries. pa. ead. Oaths
of the Romans and of the Grecians pa. 257 Asdrubals head sent to Haniball his
brother pa. 258 The overthrow of Haniball at the battle of Zama pa. 259 Three
bushels of gold Rings sent by Haniball to the Senators of Carthage pa. 261 The
overthrow of Antiochus the great at the battle of Magnesia pa ead. The saying
of Antigonus and of Pirrhus pa. ead. The burning of Carthage. pa. 263 Marius
seven times Consul. pa. ead. Civil wars between Marius and Sylla pa. 264
The diverse victories of Pompey the great pa. 265 Stratagems of great Captains
that saved themselves by flight. pa. 266 Scypios questions with Haniball. pa.
268 Caesar's celerity in his victories. pa. 269 Epaminondas and Scypios
stratagems pa. ead. Caesar was in 52. pitched and set fields pa. 270 No
triumphs in civil wars at Rome pa. ead. The battle between Torquine and
Publicola page. 271 The first funeral sermon in Rome. pa. ead. The noble act
of Mu. Scaeuola and Horatius Cocles pa. 272 Torquinus the proud driven out of
Rome pa. ead. The marching of the Scythians, Saracens, and Turks pa. 273 The
marching of the kings of Israel pa. 274 Arebellious vow of Absolon. pa. 276
The vows of the Israelites. pa. ead. The vows of the Romans. pa. 277. 278
The vows of the Athenians to Aeolus. pa. ead. Of diverse several vows. pa.
279. and 280 Stratagems of Satan pa. ead. Philos speech of the wicked. pa. ead.
The vows of the Nazarites. pa. 281 Monastical vows pa. ead. The Rechabites
vows. pa. 282 The Oracles of Ammon. pa. 283 Signs of victories given by the
Lord pa. 284 The Hebrews consulted with Urim and Thummim. pa. 285 The
superstitious Oracles of the Gentiles pa. 286 The Consuls of Rome, and the
Kings of Sparta deposed. pa. 287 Soothsaying by flying of fowls. pa. 288 Cyrus
and Alexander forewarned of their death by soothsaying. pa. 289 Themistocles
pa. ead. Aristander, Alexander his soothsayer pa. 290 Superstitious Oracles of
the Gentiles pa. ead. The greediness of Dacius and Xerxes of money pa. 291 Any
stratageme in just wars is lawful. pa. 292 The credit of Soothsayers. pa.
293 The Idolatry of Israel pa. ead. The rich spoil which Philip had in Delphos
pa. 294 Sanctuaries allowed by the Lord to the Hebrews pa. 295 Sanctuaries
allowed among all nations pa. 296 Kings fled to Sanctuaries. pa. ead. The
abuse and ill order of Sanctuaries pa. 297 The breach of laws severely
punished in kings pa. 298 Numas religious laws in Rome. pa. 299 The
prophanatio^ of the ceremonies of Ceres by Alcibiades and Clodius pa. 300
20000. ware mourning apparel for Cicero in Rome. pa. ead. Ciceroes opinion of
the Roman victories pa. 301 Antalcidas saying to Agesilaus. pa. 302 Alexander
the great rewarded maimed soldiers pa. ead. The liberality of Captains. pa.
303 Condemned murderers sacrificed on Captains graves. pa. 304 Greedy
Princes ever lost more the they wanne pa. 305 Of ambitious Generals and
Captains. page. 306. 307. 308 The Image of Justice painted in Egypt without a
head. page. 307 Platoes opinion against ambitious men pa. ead. Philosophers
slew themselves. pa. 309 The victories of Sertorius. page. 310 Licurgus law
allowed ambition. pa. 311 Ambitious men banished from Athens pa. ead.
Themistocles banished. pa. 312 Comparisons between the Romans and the
Grecians. page. 314 Pericles surnamed Olimpius. pa. ead. Pirrhus saying of
Rome. pa. 315 Philopomen the last Captain of any fame in Greece. pa. 316 Of
diverse kinds of trumpets in wars 317. 318 Of diverse tents and sails. page.
319 The watch word of diverse noble captains in their wars. page. 320 Of
sundry stratagems. pa. 321 Crassus slain among the Parthians pa. 322 The
overthrow of the Romans by the Cymbrians pa. 323 Pub. Ventidius triumphs.
page. 324 The victories of the Greeks at Marathon pa. 325 The victory of the
Syracusans over the Athenians. pa. 326 The battle at Cranon. pa. 327 Alexander
feared in Greece. pa. ead. Libraries destroyed pa. 328 The library of Attalus
and Eumenes in Asia destroyed. page. 329 Ajax and Patroclus two Elephants, so
named of Antiochus. pa. ead. The library at Rome pa. ead. The Romans only
professed arms pa. 330 The opinion of Cato pa. ead. Callimachus and
Chrysippus, great writers pa. 331 The law of Arms broken. pa. 332 Fair words
deceived many Captains pa. ead. Archidamus counsel to the Lacedaemonians pa.
333 Much blood spent in breach of faith pa. ead. The breach of the law of
Arms. pa. 334. 335 Zopyrus stratagem pa. 336 Ajax foolish answer to his
father pa. ead. Cyrus and Agamemnons wish. pa. pa. 337 The great pride of
Xerxes and Nimrod pa. 338 Security in wars hurtful. pa. 339 Pompeys
parasites pa. ead. The victory of Drusus pa. 340 The flatterers of Tigranes
King of Armenia pa. ead. The victory of Lucullus over the Athenians pa. ead.
Themistocles celeritie in his victories pa. 341 30000. Archers drove Agesilaus
out of Persia pa. 342 An Owl printed on the coin of Athens pa. ead. The
celeritie and quick dispatch of great captains pa. 343 Celeritie praised page.
344 Astiages dreams pa. 345 Xerxes dream pa. ead. Hanibals dream pa. 346
Joseph envied of his brethren. pa. ead. Joseph's second dream. pa. 347 Joseph
and Daniel expounders of dreams. pa. ead. Isaac named pa. 348 Women among the
Israelites gave names to their children. pa. ead. The surnames of great Roman
captains pa. 349 Months named after the name of Emperors pa. ead. The
surnames of great Captains and Generals in Greece. pa. 350 Arsaces the name of
all the Kings in Parthia pa. 351 The Iuorie house of Achab. pa. 352
FINIS.

