An Epitaph upon the death of the honorable, sir Edward Saunders Knight, Lord
chief Baron of the Exchequer, who dyed the.19. of November. 1576.
YOU Muses wear your mourning weeds, strike on the fatal Drome,
Sound Triton out the Trumpe of Fame, in spite of Parcas dome:
Distyll Parnassus pleasant drops, possess Pierides plase,
Apollo help with doleful tune, to wayle this woeful case.
Wring hard your hands, wayle on your loss, lament the fate that fell,
With sobbes and sighs to Saunders say, oh Saunders now farewell.
Whom Pbaebus fed with Pallas pappe, as one of Sibils seed,
Lo here where Death did rest his corpse, the vermines foul to feed:
Whom Impes of Jove with Nectar sweet, long in Libetbres noursht,
Behold how dreadful Death him brought, to that whence he came first.
Lycurgus he for learned laws, Rhadamanthus race that ran,
Another Nestor for advise, Zaleucus fame that wanne.
A Damon dear unto his friend, in faith like Phocion found,
A Cato that could counsel give, to prince a subject sound:
Not Athens for their Solon sage, not Rome for Numa wail,
As we for Saunders death have cause, in flooddes of tears to sail.
Not Sparta card for Chilos death, ne proud Prienna pressed,
To weep for Bias as we wayle, our Saunders late possessed.
His learned paths his talentes rare, so now by Death appears,
As he that Solomon sought to serve, in prime and youthful years,
His counsel sad, his rules, his laws, in country soil so wrought,
As though in Cuma he had been, of sage Sibilla taught:
His virtuous life was such I say, as Virtue did embrace,
By Virtue taught in virtuous school, to grow in virtuous race:
Might tender babes, might orphantes weak, might widows rere the cry,
The sound thereof should pearce the clouds, to skale the empire sky:
To bid the gods to battle bend, and to dissend in sight,
Though far unfit, and mates unmeet, with mortal men to fight.
Too late (alas) we wyshe his life, to soon deceived us Death,
Too little wit we have to seek, the dead again to breath.
What helpless is, must careless be, as Natures course does show,
For Death shall reap what life has sown, by Nature this we know:
Where is that erce Achilles fled, where is king Turnus shroude,
What is become of Priamus state, where is Periander proud:
Hector, Hanno, Hanibal, dead, Pompei, Pirrhus spild,
Scipio, Cirus, Caesar slain, and Alexander killed.
So long there Fortune fast did floe, and charged Fame to sound,
Till frowning Fortune foyld by fate, which fawning Fortune found:
Shun Fortunes fears, shake Fortune of, to none is Fortune sound,
Since none may say of Fortune so, I Fortune faithful found.
Behold where Fortune flowed so fast, and favored Saunders lure,
Till fickle Fortune false again, did Saunders death procure.
Lo clothed could in cloddes of clay, in drossy dust remain,
By fate returned from whence he came, to his mothers womb again.
Who welnigh thirty years was Judge, before a Judge did fast,
And judged by that mighty Judge, which Judge shall judge us all.
The heavens may of right rejoice, and earth may it bewail,
Since heaven wan, and earth has lost, the guide and arc of veil.
There gain is much, our loss is great, there mirth our moan is such,
That they may laugh as cause do yield, and we may weep as much:
O happy he, unhappy we, his hap does aye increase,
Happy he, and hapless we, his hap shall never cease.
We live to dye, he dyed to live, we want, and he possessed,
We bide in bands, he bathes in bliss, the gods above him blessed.
Being borne to live, he lived to dye, and dyed to God so plain,
That birth, that life, that death, do show, that he shall live again:
His youth to age, his age to death, his death to fame applied,
His fame to time, his time to God, thus Saunders lived and dyed.
O happy life, O happier Death, O ten times happy he,
Whose hap it was such hap to have, a Judge this age to be.
Oh joyful time, oh blessed soil, where Pallas rules with wit,
O noble state, O sacred seat, where Saba sage does sit.
Like Susan sound, like Sara sad, with Hesters mace in hand,
With Iudiths sword Bellona like, to rule this noble land.
I had my will, you have your wish, I laugh, reioy^^ you may,
I wan now much, you gain no less, to see this happy d^^
Wherein I died, wherein you live, Oh treble happy cost,
Wherein I ioyed in glory great, wherein you triumph most.
Kneel on your knees knock hard your breasts, sound forth ye joyful Drome,
Clappe loud your hands, sound Echo say, the golden world is come.
Rejoice you Judges may of right, your mirth may now be such,
As never erst you Judges had, in England mirth so much.
Here Cuma is, here Sibill reigns, on Delphos seat to sit,
Here she like Phoebus rules, that can Gordius knotte vnknitte.
I lived to nature long yenough, I lived to honor much,
I lived at wish, I died at will, to see my country such.
As neither needs it Numas laws nor yet Apollos sweard,
For Mauger Mars, yet Mars shall be of this our Queen afeard.
O peerlesse pearl, O Diamond deer, O Queen of Queens farewell,
Your royal Majesty god preserve, in England long to dwell.
Farewell the Phaenix of the woorld, farewell my sovereign Queen,
Farewell most noble virtuous prince, Mineruas mate I ween.
No Iuel, Gemme, no Gold to give, no perles from Pactolus lo,
No Persian Gaze, no Indian stones, no Tagus sands to show.
But faith and will to native soil a live and dead I find,
My heart my mind my love I leave, unto my prince behind.
Farewell you nobles of this land, farewell you Judges grave,
Farewell my fellows friends and mates, your Queen I say God save.
What rise in time in time does fall, what flows in time does ebb,
What lives in time* in time shall die, and yield to Parcas web*
The sun to darkness shallbe turnde, the stars from skies shall fall,
The Moon to blood, the world with fire shallbe consumed all.
As smoke or vapor vanishe straight, as bubbles rise and fall,
As clouds do pass, or shadow shifts we live, we die so all.
Our pomp our pride, our triumph most, our glory great herein,
Like shattering shadow pass away, as though none such had bin.
Earth, water, air, and fire, as they were erst before,
A lump confused, and Chaos called, so shall they once be more.
And all to earth, that came from earth, and to the grave descend,
For earth on earth, to earth shall go, and earth shall be the end:
As Christ descended up in clouds, so Christ in clouds shall come,
To judge both good and badde on earth, at dreadful day of dome.
From whence our flesh shall rise again, even from the drossy dust,
And so shall pass, I hope unto, the mansion of the just.
Lodowick LLoyd.
EGO SVM VIA ET VERITAS
DVM TEMPVS ABEMVS OPEREMVR BONVM

Imprinted at London by H. S. for Henry Disle, dwelling at the Southwest door
of Saint Paul's Church, and are there to be sold

December. 3.


