Rosalynde.

Euphues golden Legacy, found after his death in his Cellat Silexedra.

BEQVEATHED TO PHILAVTVS Sons, noursed up with their Father in England.

Fetched from the Canaries by T. L. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by Abelleffes for T.G. and John Bushie. 1592.

To the right Honorable and his most esteened Lord the Lord of Hun^don, Lord
Chamberlain cher Majesty's household, and Governor of her Town of Barwicke: T.
L. G. wishes increase of all honorable virtues.
SVch Romans (right honorable) as delighted in Martial exploites, attempted
their actions in the honor of Augustus, because he was a patron of soldiers:
and Virgil dignified him with his poems, as a Moecenas of scholars; both
jointly advancing his royalty, as a Prince warlike and learned. Such as
sacrifice to Pallas, p^esent her with bays as she is wise, and with armor as
she is valiant: observing herein that excellent (...), which dedicateth
honors according to the perfection of the person. When I entered (right
honorable) with a deep insight into the consideration of these premises
seeing your L. to be a Patron of all martial men, and a Moecenas of such as
apply themselves to study: wearing with Pallas both the lance and the bay,
and aiming with Augustus at the favor of all, by the honorable virtues of
your mind: being my self first a Student, and afterward falling from books
to arms, even vowed in all my thoughts dutifully to affect your Lordshippe.
Having with Captain Clarke made a voyage to the Islands of Terceras and the
Ca^aries, to beguile the time with labor, I writ this book: rough, as hatched
in the storms of the Ocean, and feathered in the surges of ma^y perilous
seas. But as it is the work of a Soldier and a Scholar, I presumed to
shroud it under your Honors patronage, as one that is the faut or and favorer
of all virtuous actions: and whose honorable Loves grown from the general
applause of the whole common-welth for your higher deserts, may keep it from
the malice of every bitter tongue. Other reasons more particular (right
Honorable) challenge in me a special affection to your Lordshippe, as being a
Scholar with your two noble sons, Master Edmund Carew, and M. Robert Carew,
(two siens worthy of so honorable a tree, and a tree glorious in such
honorable fruit) as also being scholar in the University under that
learned and virtuous Knight Sir Edward Hobby, when he was Batcheler in Arts, a
man as well lettered as well borne and after the Etymology of his name soaring
as high as the wings of knowledge can mount him, happy every way, and the
more fortunate, as blessed in the honor of so virtuous a Lady. Thus (right
Honorable) tie duty that I owe to the sons, charge me that all my
affection be placed on the father: for where the branches are so precious, the
tre^ of force must be most excellent. Commanded and imboldened thus with the
consideration of these forepassed reasons, to present my Book ^o your
Lordship: I humbly entreat, your Honor will vouch of my labors, and favor a
soldiers and a scholars pen with your gracious acceptance, who answers in
affection what he wants in eloquence: sodeuoted to your honor, as his only
desire is, to end his life under ^he favor osso martial and learned a
Patorn. Resting thus in hope of your Lordships courtesy, in deyning the
Patronage of my work, I cease: wishing you as many honorable fortunes as your
L. can desire or I imagine

Yours honors soldier most humbly affectionate: Thomas Lodge.
To the Gentlemen Readers.
GEntlemen, look not here to find any sprigs of Pallas bay tree, nor to
hear the humor of any amorous Lawreat, nor the pleasing vain of any eloquent
Orator: Nolo altum sapere, they be matters above my capacity: the Cobblers
check shall never light on my head, Ne suitor vltra crepidam, I will go no
further than the latchet, and then all is well. Here you may perhaps find some
leaves of Venus myrtle, but heven down by a soldier with his curtlaxe, not
boght with tle allurement of a filed tongue. To be brief Gentlemen, room for
a soldier and a sailer, that gives you the fruits of his labors that he wrote
in the Ocean, when every line was wet with a surge, and every humorous passion
countercheckt with a storm. If you like it, so: and yet I will be yours in
duty, if you be mine in favor. But if Momus or any squinteied ass, that
has mighty ears to conceive with Midis, and yet little reason to judge: if he
come abord our Bark to find fault with the tackling, when he knows not the
shrowds, I Will down into the hold, and fetch out a rustie pollax, that saw no
sun this seven year, and either well bebast him, or heave the cockescombe
over board to feed cods. But courteous Gentlemen that favor most, backbite
(...), and pardon what is ouerslipt, let such come and welcome, I Will into the
Stewards room, and fetch them a kanne of our best beuradge. Well Gentlemen,
you have Euphues L^gacie. I fetched it as far as the Islands of Terceras, and
therefore read it, censure with favor, and farewell.

Yours T. L.
The Scedule annexed to Euphues Testament, the tenor of his Legacy, the tok^
of his Love.
THe vehemence of my sickness ( Philautus) has made me doubtful of life yet
must I die in counsailing thee like Socates, because I love thee. Thou have
so^s by Camilla, as I hear, who being young in years have green thoghts: and
nobly bo^n, have great minds: bend the^ in their yo^th like the willow, least
thou bewail them in their age f^r their wilfulnes. I have bequeathed them a
Golden legacy, because I greatly love thee. Let them read it as Archelaus did
^assender, to profit by it: and in reading let them meditate for I have
approved it the best method. They shall find Love anatomized by Euphues, with
as lively colors as in A^pelles table: roses to whip him when he is want o^,
reasons to withstand him when he is wily. Here may they read that virtue is
the King of labors, opinion the Mistres of fools: that unity is the pride of
Nature, and contention the overthrow of Families: here is Elleborus bitter in
taste, but benef^cial in trial. I have nothing to send thee and Camilla but
this counsel, that in stead of worldly goods, you leave your sons virtue and
glory: for better were they to be partaker^ of your honors then lords of
your manors. I feel death that summoneth me to my grave, and my Soul
desirous of his God. Farewell Philautus, and let the tenor of my counsel be
applied to thy childrens comfort.

Euphues dying to live. If any man find this scrowle, send it to Philautus in
England.

Rosalynde.
THere dwelled adjoining to the City of Bordeaux a Knight of most honorable
parentage, whom Fortune had graced with many favors, and Nature honored with
sundry exquisite qualities, so beautified with the excellence of both, as it
was a question whether Fortune or Nature were more prodigal in deciphering the
riches of their bounties. Wise he was, as holding in his head a supreme
conceit of policy, reaching with Nestor into the depth of all civil
government: and to make his wisdom more gracious, he had that salemingenii
and pleasant eloquence that was so highly com^ended in Ulysses: his valor was
no less then his wit, nor the ^roke of his lance no less forcible, than
the sweetness of his ton^ue was perswasiue: for he was for his courage chosen
the princip^ll of all the Knights of Malta. This hardy Knight thus enrich^ with
virtue and honor, surnamed Sir John of Burdeux, having passed the prime of his
youth in sundry battles against the Tirkes, at last (as the date of time has
his course) grew aged: his hairs were silver hued, and the map of his age was
figured on his forhead: Honor sat in the furrows of his face and many years
were pourtrayed in his wrinckled lineaments, that all men might perceive his
glass was run, and that Nature of necessity challenged her due. Sir John
(that with the Phoenix knew the term of his life was now expired, and could
with the Swan discover his end by her songs) having three sons by his wife
Lynida, the very pride of all his forepassed years, thought now (seeing death
by constraint would compel him to leave them) to bestow upon them such a
Legacy as might bewray his love, and increase their ensuing amity. Calling
therefore these young Gentlemen before him in the presence of all his fellow
Knights of Malta, he resolved to leave them a memori^l of all his fatherly
care, ^nse^ting down a method of their brotherly duties. Having therefore
death in his loo^es to move them to pity, and tears in his eyes to paint
out the depth of his passions, taking his el^est son by the hand, he began
thus.

Sir John of Bordeaux Legacy he gave to ^is Sons.
OH my Sons, you see that Fate has set a period of my years, and Destenies
have determined the final end of my days: the Palm tree waxes away ward,
for he stoopeth in ^is height, and my plumes are full of sick feathers touched
with age, I mus^ to my grave that discharges all cares, and leave you to the
world that increases many sorrows: my silver hairs conteneth great
experience, and in the number of my years are pende lowne the subtleties of
Fortune. Therefore as I leave you sone fading^ pelf to counterchecke poverty,
so I will bequeath yon ^nfallible precepts that shall lead you unto virtue.
First therefore into thee Saladyne the eldest, and therefore the chiefest
pillar of m^ house, wherein should be ingraued as well the excellency of
thyfathers qualities, as the essential form of his proportion, to the^ I give
fourteen ploughlands, with all my Manor houses and richest place. Next unto
Fernandine I bequeath twelve ploughlands. But unto Rosader the youngest I give
my Horse, my Armor, and my Lance with sixteen ploughlands: for if the
inward thoughts be discovered by outward shadow^^ Rosader will exceed you all
in bounty and honor. Thus (my Sons) have Iparred in your portions the
substance of my wealth, where in if you be as prodigal to spend, as I have
been careful to get, your friends will green to see you more wastfull then I
was bountiful, and your foes smile that my fall did begin in your excess. Let
mine honor be the glass of your actions, and the fame of my virtues the
Loadstarre to direct the course of your pilgrimage. Aim your deeds by my
honorable endeavors, and show your selves fiens worthy of so flourishing a tree:
least as the birds Halcyones which exceed in whiteness, I hatch young ones
that exceed in blacknes. Climb not my sons, aspiring pride is a vapor that
a scendeth hie, but soon turns to a smoke: they which stare at the stars,
stumble upon the ^^ies; and such as gaze at the Sun (unless they be Eagle
eyed al blind. Soar not with the Hobbie, least you fall with the ^a^e: nor
attempt not with Phaeton, least you drown with l^^r^s^ Fortune when she wills
you to fly, tempers your plume^ wit^waxe, and therefore either sit still and
make no wing, or else bewa^e the Sun, and hold Dedalus axiom authentical (
Medium tunere tutissimum.) Low shrubs have deep roots, and poor Cottages
great patience. Fortune looks ever upward, and envy asireth to nestle with
dignity. Take heed my sons, the mean i sweetest melody, where strings high
stretch, either soon crack, or quickly grow out of time. Let your Countries
care be yo^ hearts content, and think that you are not borne for your selue,
but to level your thoughts to beloyal to your prince, careful fothe
commonweal, and faithful to your friends, so shall France say, these men are
as excellent in virtues, as they be exquise, in features. Oh my sons, a friend
is a precious Jewel, within hose bosom you may unload your sorrows, and
unfold youiecrets, and he either will relieve with counsel, or persuade
whreason: but take heed in the choice, the outward them makes it the inward
man, nor are the dimples in the face the Calend^s of truth. When the Lyquorice
leaf looks most dry, then it ^most wet: when the shoares of Lepanthus are
most quiet, themey forepoint a storm. The Baaran leaf the more fair it
look^, the more infectious it is, and in the sweetest words is often hid^ost
treachery. Therefore my sons, choose a friend as the Hiperorei do the metals,
sever them from the ore with fire, and let the^ not bide the stamp before they
be current: so try and then trust, ^^time be the touchstone of friendship, and
then friends faith^^^ ^^y them up for jewels. Be valiant my sons, for
cowardice is the enemy to honor: but not too rash, for that is extreme.
Fortitude is the mean, and that is limited within bonds, and prescribed with
circumstance. But above al, and with that he fetched a deep sigh, beware of
Love, for it is far more perilous then pleasant, and yet I tell you it
allureth as ill as the Sirens. Oh my sons, fancy is a fickle thing, and
beauties paintings are trickt up with times colors, which being set to dry in
the Sun^e, perish with the same. Venus is a wanton, and though her la^es
pretend liberty, yet there is nothing but loss and glistering misery. Cupids
wings are plumed with the feathers of vaniti^ and his arrows where they
pierce, enforce nothing but deadly desires: a woman's eye as it is precious to
behold, so is it prejudicial to gaze upon: for as it affoordeth delight, so it
snareth vnt^^eath. Trust not their fawning favors, for their loves are like
the breath of a man upon steel, which no sooner lights on but sleapeth off,
and their passions are as momentary as the color of a Polipe, which changes
at the sight of every object. My b^eath waxes short, and mine eyes waxes
dim, the hour is co^^, and I must away: therefore let this suffice, women
are wantons, and yet men cannot want one: and therefore if you love, choose ^r
that has eyes of Adamant, that will turn only to one point: ^r heart of a
Diamond, that will receive but one form: her tong^e of a Sethinleafe, that
never wagges but with a Southeast ^^nde: and yet my sons, if she have all
these qualities, to be chal^ obedient, and silent: yet for that she is a woman,
shall thou find ^^ her sufficient vanities to counteruaile her virtues. Oh now
^^ sons, even now take these my last words as my latest Legae, for my thread
is spunne, and my foot is in the grave: keep my recepts as memorials of your
fathers counsels, and let them be lodged in the secret of your hearts: for
wisdom is better thawealth, and a golden sentence worth a world of treasure.
In m^a^ see and mark my sons the folly of man, that being dust climbth with
Biares to reatch at the Heavens, and ready every minu to dye, yet hops for an
age of pleasures. Oh man's life is like lihtning that is but a flash, and the
longest date of his years, buts a ^auens blaze, Seeing then man is so mortal,
be careful that ^hy life be virtuous, that thy death may be full of admirable
honors: so shall thou challenge fame to be thy fautor, and put oblivion to exile
with thine honorable accions. But my Sons, least you should forget your
Fathers axioms, take this scroule, wherein read what your father dying, wills
you to execute living. At this he shrunk down in his bed, and gave up the
ghost.

John of Bourdeaux being thus dead, was grealy lamented of his sons, and
bewailed of his friends, especially of his fellow Knights of Malta, who
attended on his funerals, which were performed with great solemnity. His
obsequies done, Saladyne caused next his Epitaph the contents of the scroule to
be pourtrayed out, which were to this effect.

The contents of the Scedule which Sir John of Bourdeaux gave to his Sons.
MY Sons, behold what portion I do give,
I leave you goods, but they are quickly lost:
I leave advise, to school you how to live:
I leave you wit, but won with little cost:
But keep it well for counsel still is one,
When Father, friends, and worldly goods are gone.
In choice of thrift let honor be your gain,
Win it by virtue and by manly might;
In doing good esteem thy toil no pain,
Protect the fatherless and widows right:
Fight for thy faith, thy Country, and thy King,
For why? this thrift will prove a blessed thing.
In choice of wife, prefer the modest chaste,
Lillies are fair in show, but foul in smell:
The sweetest looks by age are soon defast:
Then choose thy wife by wit and living well.
Who brings thee wealth and many faults withal,
Presents the honey mixed with bitter gall.
In choice of friends, beware of light belief,
A painted tongue may shroud a subtle heart:
The Sirens tears do threaten mickle grief,
Foresee my sons, for fear of sudden smart:
Choose in your wants, and he that friends you then,
When richer grown, befriend you him again.
Learn with the Ant in summer to provide,
Drive with the Be the Droane from out the hiue:
Buyld like the Swallow in the summer tide.
Spare not too much (my sons) but sparing thrive:
Be poor in folly, rich in all but sin,
So by your death your glory shall begin.
Saladyne having thus set up the Scedule, and hanged about his Fathers hearse
many passionate Poems, that France might suppose him to be passing sorrowful,
he clad himself and his brothers all in black, and in such sable suits
discoursed his grief: but as the Hiena when she mourns is then most guileful,
so Saladine under this show of grief, shaddowed a heart full of contented
thoughts. The Tiger though he hide his claws, will at last discover his rapine:
the Lions looks are not the maps of his meaning, nor a man's phisnomie is not
the display of his secrets. Fire cannot be hid in the straw, nor the nature of
man so concealed, but at last it will have his course: nurture and art may do
much, but that Natura natu^ans which by propagation is ingrafted in the heart,
will be at last perforce predominant according to the old verse.

Naturam expellas furca licet, tamen vsque recurret.
So fares it with Saladine, for after a months mourning was past, he fell to
consideration of his Fathers testament, how he had bequeathed more to his
yoonger brothers than himself, that Rosader was his Fathers darling, but now
under his tuition, that as yet they were not come to years, and he being their
gardain, might (if not defraud them of their due) yet make such havoc of
their legacies and lauds, as they should be a great deal the lighter: whereupon
he began thus to meditate with himself.

Saladynes meditation with himself.
SAladyne, how art thou disquieted in thy thoughts, and perplexed with a world
of restless passions, having thy mind troubled with the tenor of thy Fathers
testament, and thy heart fiered with the hope of present preferment? By the one
thou art counsaild to content thee with thy fortunes: by the other, persuaded
to aspire to higher wealth. Riches ( Saladyne) is a great royalty, and there
is no sweeter physic than store. Auicen like a fool forgot in his Aphorisms
to say, that gold was the most precious restoratiue, and that treasure was the
most excellent medecin of the mind. Oh Saladyne, what were thy Fathers
precepts breathed into the wind? have thou so soon forgotten his principles?
did he not warn thee from coveting without honor, and climing without virtue?
did he not forbid thee to aim at any action that should not be honorable?
and what will be more prejudicial to thy credit, than the careless ruin of
thy brothers prosperity; and will thou become the subversion of their
fortunes? is there any sweeter thing than concord, or a more precious Jewel
then amity? are you not sons of one father, siens of one tree, birds of one
neast? and will thou become so unnatural as to rob them, whom thou should
relieve? No Salydine, entreat them with favors, and entertain them with love,
so shall thou have thy conscience clear and thy renown excellent. Tush, what
words are these base fool, far unfit (if thou be wise) for thy humor. What
though thy father at his death talked of many friuilous matters, as one that
doted for age, and raued in his sickness, shall his words be axioms, and his
talk be so authentical, that thou will (to observe them) preindice thy self?
No no Saladyne, sick men's wills that are parole, and have neither hand nor
seal, are like the laws of a City written in dust, which are broken with
the blast of every wind. What man thy father is dead, and he can neither
help thy fortunes, nor measure thy actions: therefore bury his words with his
carcass, and be wise for thy self. What, it is not so old as true: Non sapit,
qui sibi non sapit.

Thy brother is young, keep him now in awe, make him not check mate with thy
self: for Nimia familiaritas contemptum parit.?

Let him know little, so shall he not be able to execute much, suppress his
wits with a base estate, and though he be a Gentleman by nature yet form
him a new, and make him a peasant by nourture: so shall thou keep him as a
slave, and reign thy self sole Lord over all thy fathers possessions. As for
Fernandyne thy middle brother he is a scholar, and has no mind but on
Aristotle, let him read on Galen while thou r^flest with go^de, and pore on
his book til thou doeft purchase lands: wit is great wealth, if he have
learning it is enough, and so let all rest.

In this humor was Saladyne making his brother Rosader his foot boy, for the
space of two or three years, keeping him in such servile subjection, as if he
had been the son of any country vassal. The young Gentleman bare all with
patience, til on a day walkyng in the Garden by himself, he began to consider
how he was the son of John of Bourdeaux, a knight ren^wmed for many
victories, and a gentleman famozed for his virtues, how contrary to the
testament of his father, he was not only kept from his land, and entreated as
a servant, but smothered in such secret slavery, as he might not attain to
any honorable actions. As quoth he to himself (nature woorking these
effectual passions) why should I that am a Gentleman borne, pass my time in
such unnatural drudgery? were it not better either in Paris to become a
scholar, or in the court a courtier, or in the field a soldier, then to live
a foot boy to my own brother: nature has lent me wit to conceive, but my
brother denied me art to contemplate: I have strength to perform any
honorable exployt, but no liberty to accomplish my virtuous endeavors: those
good parts that God has bestowed upon me, the envy of my brother does
smother in obscurity: the harder is my fortune, and the more his frowardnes.
With that casting up his hand he felt hair on his face, and perceiving his
beard to bud, for choler he began to blush, and swore to himself he would be
no more subject to such slavery. As thus he was ruminating of his melancholy
passions, in came Saladyne with his men, and seeing his brother in a brown
study, and to forget his wonted ^euerence, thought to shake him out of his
dumps thus. Sirrah (quoth he) what is your heart on your halfepeny, or are you
saying a Dirge for your fathers soul? what is my dinner ready? At this
question Rosader turning his head ascance, and bending his brows as if anger
there had ploughed the furrows of her wrath, with his eyes full of fire, he
made this reply. Do thou ask me ( Saladyne) for thy Cates? ask some of
thy Churles who are fit for such an office: I am thine equal by nature, though
not by birth, and though thou have more Cards in the bunch. I have as many
trumpes in my hands as thy self. Let me question with thee, why thou have few
my woods, spoiled my Manner houses, and made havoc of such vtensalles as my
father bequeathed unto me? I tell thee Saladyne, either answer me as a
brother, or I will trouble thee as an enemy.

At this reply of Rosaders, Saladyne smiled as laughing at his presumption,
and frowned as checking his folly: he therefore took him up thus shortly. What
sirrah, well I see early pricks the tree that will prove a thorn: has my
familiar conuersing with you made you coy, or my good looks drawn you to be
thus contemptuous? I can quickly remedy such a fault, and I will bend the tree
while it is a wand: In faith (sir boy) I have a snaffle for such a headstrong
colt. You sirs lay hold on him and bind him, and then I will give him a
cooling card for his choler. This made Rosader half mad, that stepping to a
great rake that stood in the Garden, he laid such load upon his brothers
men that he hurt some of them, and made the rest of them run away. Saladyne
seeing Rosader so resolute, and with his resolution so valiant, thought his
heels his best safety, and took him to a loaft adjoining to the Garden,
whether Rosader pursued him hotly. Saladyne afraid of his brothers fury,
cried out to him thus. Rosader be not so rash, I am thy brother and thine
elder, and if I have done thee wrong i will make thee amends: revenge not anger
in blood, for so shall thou stain the virtue of old sir John of Bourdeauz: say
wherein thou art discontent and thou shall be satisfied. Brothers frowns
ought not to be periodes of wrath: what man look not so sowerly, I know we
shall be friends, and better friends then we have been. For, Amantium ira amoris
redintegratio est.

These words appeased the choler of Rosader, (for he was of a mild and
courteous nature) so that he laid down his weapons, and upon the faith of a
Gentleman, assured his brother he would offer him no prejudice: whereupon
Saladyne came down, and after a little pa^ley, they embraced each other and
became friends, and Saladyne promising Rosader the restitution of all his
lands, and what favor else (quoth he) any ways my ability or the nature of a
brother may perform. Upon these sugared reconcillations they went into the
house arm in arm together, to the great content of all the old servants of
sir John of Bourdeaux. Thus continued the pad hidden in the straw, til it
chanced that Torismond King of France had appointed for his pleasure a day of
Wrestling and of Tournament to busy his Commons heads, least being idle,
their thoughts should run upon more serious matters, and call to remembrance
their old banished King, a Champion there was to stand against all comers a
Norman, a man of tall stature and of great strength: so valiant, that in many
such conflicts he always bare away the victory, not only overthrowing them
which he incountred, but often with the weight of his body killing them
outright. Saladyne hearing of this, thinking now not to let the ball fall to the
ground, but to take apportunitie by the forehead: first by secret means
conuented with the Norman, and procured him with rich rewards to swear, that
if Rosader came within his claws he should never more return to quarrel with
Saladyne for his possessions. The Norman desirous of pelf, as ( Quis nisi
mentis inops oblatum respuit aurum.) taking great gifts for little Gods, took
the crowns of Saladyne to perform the Stratagem. Having thus the Champion
tied to his vilanous determination by oath, he prosecuted the intent of his
purpose thus. He went to young Rosader, (who in all his thoughts reached at
honor, and gazed no lower then virtue commanded him) and began to tell him of
this Tournament and Wrestling, how the King should be there, and all the
chief Peers of France, with all the beautiful damsels of the Countrey^ now
brother (quoth he) for the honor of sir John of Bourdeaux our renowned father,
to famous that house that never has him found without men approved in
Chivalry, show thy resolution to be peremptory. For my self thou know
though I am eldest by birth, yet never having attempted any deeds of Arms, I
am youngest to perform any Martial exploytes, knowing better how to survey my
lands, then to charge my Lance: my brother Fernandyne he is at Paris poring
on a few papers, having more insight into Sophistry and principles of
Philosophy, then any warlyke indeueurs: but thou Rosader the yoongest in
years, but the eldest in valor, art a man of strength and dare do what
honor allows thee: take thou my fathers Lance, his Sword, and his Horse, and
hye thee to the Tournament, and either there valiantly crack a spear, or try
with the Norman for the palm of actiuitie. The words of Saladyne were but
spurs to a free horse, for he had scarce uttered them, ere Rosader took him
in his arms, taking his proffer so kindly, that he promised in what he might
to requite his courtesy. The next morrow was the day of the Tournament, and
Rosader was so desirous to show his heroycal thoughts, that he past the night
with little sleep: but as soon as Phoebus had veiled the Curteine of the night,
and made Aurora blush with giving her the bezoles labres in her silver Couch,
he gat him up, and taking his leave of his brother, mounted himself toward
the place appointed, thinking every mile ten leagues til he came there. But
leaving him so desirous of the journey: to Torismond the King of France, who
having by force banished Gerismond their lawful King that lived as an outlaw in
the Forest of Arden, sought now by all means to keep the French busied with
all sports that might breed their content. Amongst the rest he had appointed
this solemn Turnament, whereunto he in most solemn manner resorted,
accompanied with the twelve peers of France, who rather for fearthen love
graced him with the show of their dutiful favors: to feed their eyes, and to
make the beholders pleased with the sight of most rare and glistring objects,
he had appointed his own daughter Alinda to be there, and the fair Rosalynd
daughter unto Gerismond, with all the the beautiful Dammoselles that were
famous for their features in all France.

Thus in that place did love and war triumph in a simpathy: for such as were
martial, might use their Lance to be renowned for the excellency of their
Cheualrie, and such as were amorous, might glut themselves with gazing on the
beauties of most heavenly creatures. As every man's eye had his several survey,
and fancy was partial in their looks, yet all in general applauded the
admirable riches that Nature bestowed on the face of Rosalynde: for upon her
cheeks there seemed a battle between the Graces, who should bestow most
favors to make her excellent. The blush that gloried Luna when she kissed the
Shepherd or the hills of Latmos, was not tainted with such a pleasant dye, as
the Uermilion flourishe on the silver hue of Rosalyndes countenance: her eyes
were like those Lamps that make the wealthy covert of the Heavens more
gorgious, sparkling favor and disdain: courteous and yet toye, as if in them
Venus had placed all her amorets, and Diana all her chastity. The tramelles of
her hair, foulded in a call of Gold, so far surpast the burnishe glister of
the metal, as the Sun does the meanest Star in brightness: the tresses
that foldes in the brows of Apollo were not half so rich to the sight, for in
her hayres it seemed love had laid her self in ambush, to intrappe the
proudest eye that durst gaze upon their excellence: what should I need to
decipher her particular beauties, when by the censure of all, she was the
Paragon of all earthly perfection. This Rosalynd sat I say with Alinda as a
beholder of these sportes, and made the Caualiers crack their Lances with more
courage: many deeds of Knighthood that day were performed, and many prizes
were given according to their s^ueral deserts: at last when the Tournament
ceased, the wrestling began, and the Norman presented himself as a chalenger
against all comers, but he looked like Hercules when he aduaunst himself
against Achelo^s, so that the fury of his countenance amazed all that durst
attempt to encounter with him in any deed of actiuitie: til at last a lusty
Francklin of the Country came with two tall men that were his sons of good
lyniaments and comely personage: the eldest of these doing his obeisance to
the King entered the List, and presented himself to the Norman, who straight
coapt with him, and as a man that would triumph in the glory of his strength,
roused himself with such fury, that not only he gave him the fall, but
killed him with the weight of of his corpulent personage: which the yoonger
brother seeing, lepte presently into the place, and thirsty after the revenge,
assailed the Norman with such valor, that at the first encounter he brought
him to his knees: which repulst so the Norman, that recovering himself, fear
of disgrace doubling his strength, he stepped so stearnely to the young
Francklin, that taking him up in his arms he threw him against the ground so
violently, that he broake his neck, and so ended his days with his brother.
At this unlooked for massacre, the people murmured, and were all in a deep
passion of pity, but the Francklin, father unto these, never changed his
countenance, but as a man of a courageous resolution, took up the bodies of
his sons without show of outward discontent.

All this while stood Rosader and saw this Tragedy: who noting the undoubted
virtue of the Francklins mind, alighted of from his Horse, and presently sat
down on the grass, and commanded his boy to pull off his boots, making him
ready to try the strength of this Champion, being furnished as he would, he
clapped the Francklin on the shoulder and said thus. Bold yeoman whose sons
have ended the term of their years with honor, for that I see thou scornest
fortune with patience, and twhar test the injury of fate with content, in
brooking the death of thy sonnes^ stand a while and either see me make a third
in their Tragedy, or else revenge their fall with an honorable triumph, the
Francklin seeing so goodly a gentleman to give him such courteous comfort, gave
him hearty thanks, with promise to pray for his happy success. With that
Rosader veiled bonnet to the King, and lightly leapt within the lists, where
noting more the company then the combatant, he cast his eye upon the troop
of Ladies that glistered there like the stars of heaven, but at last Love
willing to make him as amourous as he was valiant, presented him with the
sight of Rosalynd, whose admirable beauty so inueagled the eye of Rosader,
that forgetting himself, he stood and fed his looks on the favor of
Rosalyndes face, which she perceiving, blush^: which was such a doubling of
her beauteous excellence, that the bashful read of Aurora, at the sight of
unacquainted Phaeton, was not half so glorious:

The Normane seeing this young Gentleman fettered in the looks of the Ladies,
drove him out of his memento with a shake by the shoulder: Rosader looking
back with an angry frown, as if he had been wakened from some pleasant
dream, discovered to all by the furye of his countenance that he was a man of
some high thoughts: but when they all noted his youth, and the sweetness of
his visage, with a general applause of favors, they grieved that so goodly a
young man should venture in so base an action: but seeing it were to his
dishonor to hinder him from his enterprise, they wished him to be graced with
the palm of victory. After Rosader was thus called out of his memento by the
Norman, he roughly clapped to him with so fierce an encounter, that they both
fell to the ground, and with the violence of the fall were forced to breathe: in
which space the Norman called to mind by all tokens, that this was he whom
Saladyne had appointed him to kill: which conjecture made him stretch every
limb, and try every sinew, that working his death he might recover the
gold, which so bountifuly was promised him. On the contrary part, Rosader
while he breathed was not idle, but still cast his eye upon Rosalynde, who to
encourage him with a favor, lent him such an amorous look, as might have made
the most coward desperate: which glance of Rosalynd so fiered the passionate
desires of Rosader, that turning to the Norman he ran upon him and braued
him with a strong encounter: the Norman received him as valiantly, that there
was a sore combat, hard to judge on whose side fortune would be prodigal. At
last Rosader calling to mind the beauty of his new Mistress, the fame of his
fathers honors, and the disgrace that should fall to his house by his
mis^ortune, rowsed himself and threw the Norman against the ground, falling
upon his chest with so willing a weight, that the Norman yielded nature her
due, and Rosader the victory. The death of this Champion, as it highly
contented the Francklin, as a man satisfied with revenge, so it drue the King
and all the Peers into a great admiration, that so young years and so
beautiful a personage, should cont^in such martial excellence: but when they
knew him to be the yoongest son of sir John of Bourdeaux, the King rose from
his seat and embraced him, and the Peers entreated him with all favorable
courtesy, commending both his valor and his virtues, wishing him to go forward
in such haughty deeds, that he might attain to the glory of his fathers
honorable fortunes.

As the King and Lords graced him with embracyng, so the Ladies favored him
with their looks, especially Rosalynd, whom the beauty and valor of Rosader
had already touched: but she accounted love a toye, and fancy a momentary
passion, that as it was taken in with a gaze, might be shaken off with a wink:
and therefore feared not to daily in the flame, and to make Rosader know she
affected him: took from her neck a Jewel, and sent it by a Page to the young
gentleman. The Prize that Venus gave to Paris, was not half so pleasing to the
Trojan, as this Iemme was to Rosader: for if fortune had sworn to make himself
sole Monarke of the world, he would rather have refused such dignity, than
have lost the Jewel sent him by Rosalynd. To return her with the like he was
unfurnished, and yet that he might more than in his looks discover his
affection, he slept into a tent, and taking pen and paper writ this fancy.

Two Suns at once from one fair heaven there shinde,
Ten branches from two boughs tipped all with roses,
Pure locks more golden than is gold refinde,
Two pearled rows that Natures pride incloses.
Two mounts fair marble white, downe-soft and dainty,
A snow died orb: where love increast by pleasure
Full woeful makes my heart^ and body faintie:
Her fair (my woe) exceeds all thought and measure.
In lines confusde by lucklesse harm appears,
Whom sorrow clouds, whom pleasant smiling ^leareth.
This sonnet he sent to Rosalynd, which when she read, she blushed, but with a
sweet content in that she perceived love had allotted her so amorous a servant.
Leaving her to her new entertained fancies, again to Rosader, who triumphing
in the glory of this conquest, accompanied with a troop of young gentlemen,
that were desirous to be his familiars, went home to his brother Saladynes, who
was walking before the gates, to hear what success his brother Rosader should
have, assuring himself of his death, and devising how with dissimuled sorrow,
to celebrate his funerals: as he was in his thought, he cast up his eye, and
saw where Rosader returned with the garland on his head, as having won the
prize, accompanied with a crew of boon companions: grieved at this, he stepped
in and shut the gate. Rosader seeing this, and not looking for such unkind
entertainment, blushed at the disgrace, and yet smothering his grief with a
smile, he turned to the Gentlemen, and desired them to hold his brother
excused, for he did not this upon any militious intent or nigardize, but being
brought up in the country, he absented himself, as not finding his nature fit
for such youthful company. Thus he sought to shadow abuses proffered him by his
brother, but in vain, for he could by no means be suffered to enter:
whereupon he ran his foot against the door, and brake it open: drawing his
sword, and entering boldly into the Hall, where he found none (for all were
fled) but one Adam Spencer an English man, who had been an old and trusty
servant to Sir John of Bourdeaux: he for the love he bare to his deceased
Master, favored the part of Rosader, and gave him and his such entertainment
as he could, Rosader gave him thanks, and looking about, seeing the Hall empty,
said: Gentlemen, you are welcome, frolike and be merry, you shall be sure to
have wine enough, whatsoever your fare be, I tell you Caualiers, my Brother has
in his house five tun of wine, and as long as that lasts, I beshrew him
that spares his lyquor. With that he burst open the buttery door, and with
the help of Adam Spencer covered the Tables, and set down whatsoever he could
find in the house, but what they wanted in meat, was supplied with drink, yet
had they royal cheer, and withal such hearty welcome, as would have made the
coursest meats, seem delicates. After they had feasted and frolicktit twice or
thrice with an vpsey freeze, they all took their leave of Rosader and
departed. As Soon as they were gone, Rosader growing impatient of the abuse,
drew his sword, and swore to be revenged on the discourteous Saladyne: yet by
the means of Adam Spencer, who sought to continue friendship and amity
betwixt the brethren, and through the flattering submission of Saladyne, they
were once again reconciled, and put up all forepassed injuries with a
peaceable agreement, living together for a good space in such brotherly love,
as did not only rejoice the servants, but made all the Gentlemen and
bordering neighbors glad of such friendly concord. Saladine hiding fire in the
straw, and concealing a poisoned hate in a peaceable countenance, yet deferring
the intent of his wrath till fitter opportunity he showed himself a great
fauorer of his brothers virtuous endeavors: where leaving them in this happy
league, let us return to Rosalynd.

Rosalynd returning home from the triumph, after she waxed solitary, Love
presented her with the Idea of Rosaders perfection, and taking her at
discouert, stroke her so deep, as she felt her self grow passing passionate:
she began to call to mind the comeliness of his person, the honor of his
parents, and the virtues that excelling both, made him so gracious in the eyes
of every one. Sucking in thus the honey of love, by imprinting in her thoughts
his rare qualities, she began to surfeit with the contemplation of his virtuous
conditions, but when she called to remembrance her present estate, and the
hardness of her fortunes, desire began to shrink, and fancy to vale bonnet,
that between a Chaos of confused thoughts, she began to debate with her self
in this manner.

Rosalynds passion.
Unfortunate Rosalynde, whose misfortunes are more than thy years, and whose
passions are greater then thy patience. The blossoms of thy youth are mixed which
the frosts of envy, and the hope of thy ensuing fruits perish in the bud. Thy
father is by Torismond banished from the crown, and thou the unhappy daughter of
a King detained captive, living as disquieted in thy thoughts, as thy father
disco^tented in his exile. Ah Rosalynd, what cares wait upon a crown? what
griefs are incident to dignity? what sorrows haunt royal palaces? The greatest
seas have the sorest storms, the highest birth subject to the most bale, and
of al trees the Cedars soonest shake with the wind: small Currents are ever
calm, low valleys not scortcht in any lightnings, nor base men tied to any
baleful prejudice. Fortune flies, and if she touch poverty, it is with her
heel, rather disdaining their want with a frown, then envying their wealth with
disparagement. Oh Rosalynd, had thou been born low, thou had not fallen so
high, and yet being great of blood, thine honor is more, if thou brookest
misfortune with patience. Suppose I contrary fortune with content, yet Fates
unwilling to have me any ways happy, have forced love to set my thoughts on
fire with fancy. Love Rosalynd? becomes it women in distress to think on
love? Tush, desire has no respect of persons, Cupid is blind and shoots at
random, as soon hitting a ragge, as a robe, and piercing as soon the bosom of
a Captive, as the breast of a Libertine. Thou speak it poor Rosalynd by
experience, for being every way distressed, surcharged with cares, and over
grown with sorrows, yet amidst the heap of all these mishaps, Love has
lodged in thy heart the perfection of young Rosader, a man every way absolute as
well for his inward life, as for his out ward lyniaments, able to content the
eye with beauty, and the ear with the report of his virtue. But consider
Rosalynde his fortunes, and thy present estate, thou art poor and without
patrimony, and yet the daughter of a Prince, he a younger brother, and void of
such possessions as either might maintain thy dignities or revenge thy fathers
injuries. And have thou not learned this of other Ladies, that lovers cannot
live by looks: that women's ears are sooner content with a pound of give me,
then a dram of hear me: that gold is sweeter than eloquence: that love is a
fire, and wealth is the fuel: that Venus coffers should be ever full. Then
Rosalynd, seeing Rosader is poor, think him less beautiful, because he is
in want, and account his virtues but qualities of course, for that he is not
endued with wealth. Does not Horace tell thee what method is to be used in
love: Querenda pecunia primum, post nummos virtus.

Tush Rosalynd, be not over rash: leap not before thou look: either love such
a one as may with his lands purchase thy liberty, or else love not all. Choose
not a fair face with an empty purse, but say as most women use to say, Si
nihil attuleris, ibis Homere for as.

Why Rosalynd, can such base thoughts harbor in such high beauties? Can the
degree of a princess, the daughter of Gerismond harbor such servile
conceits, as to prize gold more than honor, or to measure a Gentleman by his
wealth, not by his virtues. No Rosalynd, blush at thy base resolution, and say
if thou love, either Rosader or none: and why? because Rosader is both
beautiful and virtuous. Smiling to her self to think of her new entertained
passions, taking up her Lute that lay by her, she warbled out this dittie.

Rosalynds Madrigall.
Love in my bosom like a Be
does suck his sweet:
Now with his wings the plays with me,
now with his feet.
Within mine eyes he makes his nest,
His bed amidst my tender breast,
My kisses are his daily feast,
And yet he robs me of my rest.
Ah wanton, will ye?
And if I sleep, then pearcheth he
with pretty flight,
And makes his pillow of my knee
the liuelong night.
Strike I my lute, he tunes the string,
He music plays if so I sing,
He lends me every lovely thing:
Yet cruel he my heart does sting:
Whist wanton stillye?
Else I withroses every day
will whip you hence:
And bind you when you long to play,
for your offense.
I Will shut mine eyes to keep you in,
I Will make you fast it for your sin,
I Will count your power not worth a pin,
Alas what hereby shall I win,
If he gainsay me?
What if I beat the wanton boy
with many a rod?
He will rapay me with annoy,
because a God.
Then sit thou safely on my knee,
And let thy bower my bosom be;
Lurk in mine eyes I like of thee:
O Cupid so thou pity me,
Spare not but play thee.
Scarce had Rosalynd ended her Madrigale, before Torismond came in with his
daughter Alinda, and many of the Peers of France, who were enamoured of her
beauty: which Torismond perceiving, fearing least her perfection might be the
beginning of his Prejudice, and the hope of his fruit end in the beginning of
her blossoms, he thought to banish her from the court: for quoth he to
himself, her face is so full of favor, that it pleads pity in the eye of
every man: her beauty is so heavenly and divine, that she will prove to me as
Helen did to Priam: some one of the Peers will aim at her love, end the
marriage, and then in his wives right attempt the kingdom. To prevent
therefore had I wist in all these actions, she tarryes not about the Court,
but shall (as an exile) either wander to her father, or else seek other
fortunes. In this humor, with a stern countenance full of wrath, he breathed
out this censure unto her before the Peers, that charged her that that night
she were not seen about the Court: for (quoth he) I have heard of thy
aspiring speeches, and intended treasons. This doom was strange unto Rosalynd,
and presently covered with the shield of her innocence, she boldly brake out in
reverent terms to have cleared her self: but Torismond would admit of no
reason, nor durst his Lords plead for Rosalynde, although her beauty had made
some of them passionate, seeing the figure of wrath pourtrayed in his brow.
Standing thus all mute, and Rosalynde amazed, Alinda who loved her more than
her self, with grief in her heart, and tears in her eyes, falling down on her
knees began to entreat her father thus.

Alindas oration to her father in defense of Rosalynde.
IF (mighty Torismond) I offend in pleading for my friend, let the law of
amity crave pardon for my boldness: for where there is depth of affection,
there friendship allows a privilege. Rosalynd and I have been fostered up
from our infancies, and noursed under the harbor of our conuersing together
with such private familiarities, that custom had wrought an union of our
nature, and the sympathy of our affections such a a secret love, that we have
two bodies, and one soul. Then marvel not (great Torismond) if seeing my
friend distressed, I find my self perplexed with a thousand sorrows: for her
virtuous and honorable thoughts (which are the glories that makes women
excellent) they he such, as may challenge love, and race out suspicion; her
obedience to your Majesty, I refer to the censure of your own eye, that
since her fathers exile has smothered al griefs with patience, and in the
absence of nature, has honored you with all duty, as her own father by
nouriture, not in word uttering any discontent, nor in thought (as far as
conjecture may reach) hammering on revenge: only in all her actions seeking to
please you, and to win my favor. Her wisdom, silence, chastity, and other
such rich qualities, I need not decypher: only it rests for me to conclude in
one word, that she is innocent. If then, Fortune who tryumphs in variety of
miseries, has presented some envious person (as minister of her intended
stratageme) to taint Rosalynde with any surmise of treason, let him be brought
to her face, and confirm his accusation by witnesses: which proved, let her
die, and Alinda will execute the massacre. If none can avouch any confirmed
relation of her intent, use Justice my Lord, it is the glory of a King, and let
her live in your wonted favor: for if you bannish her, my self as copartner
of her hard fortunes, will participate in exile some part of her extremities.

Torismond (at this speech of Alinda) covered his face with such a frown, as
tyranny seemed to sit triumphant in his forhead, and checked her up with such
taunts, as made the Lords (that only were hearers) to tremble. Proud girl
(quoth he) has my looks made thee so light of tongue, or my favors encouraged
thee to be so forward, that thou dare presume to preach after thy Father:
Has not my years more experience than thy youth, and the winter of mine age
deeper insight into civil policy, than the prime of thy flourishing days? The
old Lion auoides the toils, where the young one leapes into the net: the
care of age is provident and foresees much: suspicion is a virtue, where a man
holds his enemy in his bosom. Thou fond girl, measurest all by present
affection, and as thy heart loves, thy thoughts censure: but if thou know
that in liking Rosalynd thou hat chest up a bird to pecke out thine own eyes,
thou would entreat as much for her absence as now thou delightest in her
presence. But why do I allege policy to thee? sit you down huswife and
fall to your needle: if idleness make you so wanton, or liberty so malipert, I
can quickly tie you to a sharper task: and you (maid) this night be packing,
either into Arden to your father, or whither best it shall content your humor,
but in the Court you shall not abide. This rigorous reply of Torismond nothing
amazed Alinda, for still she prosecuted her plea in the defense of Rosalynd,
wishing her Father (if his censure might not be reuerst) yt he would appoint
her partner of her exile: which if he refused, either she would by some secret
means steal out and follow her, or else end her days with some desperate
kind of death. When Torismond heard his daughter so resolute, his heart was so
hardened against her, that he set down a definitive and peremptory sentence,
that they should both be banished: which presently was done. The Tyrant rather
choosing to hazard the loss of his only child, than any ways to put in
question the state of his kingdom: so suspicious and fearful is the
conscience of an usurper. Well although his Lords persuaded him to retain his
own Daughter, yet his resolution might not be reuerst, but both of them must
away from the Court without either more company or delay. In he went with
great melancholy, and left these two Ladies alone. Rosalynd waxed very sad, and
sat down and wept. Alinda she smiled, and sitting by her friend began thus to
comfort her.

Alindas comfort to perplexed Rosalynd.
Why how now Rosalynd, dismayed with a frown of contrary fortune? Have I not
often heard thee say, that high minds were discovered in fortunes contempt, and
heroycal seen in the depth of extremities? Thou were wont to tell others that
complained of distress, that the sweetest salve for misery was patience, and
the only medicine for want, that precious implaister of content: being such a
good Physician to others, will thou not minister receipts to thy self? But
perchance thou will say: Consulenti nunquam caput doluit.

Why then, if the Patients that are sick of this disease ran find in
themselves neither reason to persuade, nor art to cure, yet ( Rosalynd) admit
of the counsel of a friend, and apply the salues that may appease thy
passions. If thou grieuest that being the daughter of a prince, and envy
thwarteth thee with such hard exigents, think that royalty is a fair mark,
that Crowns have crosses when mirth is in Cottages: that the fairer the Rose
is, the sooner it is bitteh with Caterpillars: the more orient ye Pearl is,
the more apt to take a blemish: and the greatest birth, as it has most honor,
so it has much envy. If then fortune aymeth at the fairest, be patient
Rosalynd, for first by thine exile thou go to thy father, nature is higher
prised then wealth, and the love of ones parents ought to be more precious
then all dignities: why then does my Rosalynd grieve at the frown of
Torismond, who by offering her a prejudice, proffers her a greater pleasure?
and more (mad less) to be melancholy, when thou have with thee Alinda a
friend, who will be a fathful copartner of al thy misfortunes, who has left her
father to follow thee, and chooses rather to brook al extremities then to
forsake thy presence. What Rosalynd: Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris.

Cheerly woman, as we have been bed fellows in royalty, we will be fellow
mates in poverty: I will ever be thy Alinda, and thou shall ever rest to me
Rosalynd: so shall the world canonize our friendship, and speak of Rosalynd
and Alinda, as they did of Pilades and Orestes. And if ever fortune smile and
we return to our former honor, then ^olding our selves in the sweet of our
friendship, we shall merrily say (calling to mind our forepassed miseries): Olim
haec meminisse iuuabit.

At this Rosalynd began to comfort her, and after she had wept a few kind
tears in the bosom of her Alinda, she gave her hearty thanks, and then
they sat them down to consult how they should travel. Alinda grieved at
nothing but that they might have no man in their company: saying, it would be
their greatest prejudice in that two women went wandering without either guide
or attendant. Tush (quoth Rosalynd) art thou a woman, and has^ not a sodeine
shift to prevent a misfortune? I (thou see) am of a tall stature, and would
very well become the person and apparel of a Page, thou shall be my mistress,
and I will play the man so properly, that (trust me) in what company so ever I
come I will not be discovered: I will buy me a suite, and have my Rapier very
handsomely at my side, and if any knave offer wrong, your Page will show him the
point of his weapon. At this Alinda smiled, and upon this they agreed, and
presently gathered up al their Jewels, which they trussed up in a Casket, and
Rosalynd in all have provided her of robes, and Alinda being called Aliena, and
Rosalynd Ganimede: they traueiled along the Uineyardes, and by many by-waies:
at last got to the Forest side, where they traueiled by the space of two or
three days without seeing any creature, being often in danger of wild
beasts, and payned with many passionate sorrows. Now the black Ox began to
tread on their feet, and Alinda thought of her wonted royalty: but when she
cast her eyes on her Rosalynd, she thought every danger a step to honor.
Passing thus on along, about midday they came to a Fountain, compast with a
groaue of Cipresse trees, so cunningly and curiously planted, as if some
Goddess had entreated Nature in that place to make her an Arbor. By this
Fountain sat Aliena and her Ganimede, and forth they pulled such victuals as
they had, and fed as merely as if they had been in Paris with all the Kings
delicates: Aliena only grieuing that they could not so much as meet with a
shepherd to discourse them the way to some place where they might make their
abode. At last Ganimede casting up his eye espied where on a tree was engraven
certain verses: which as soon as he espied, he cried out, be of good cheer
Mistrisse, I spy the figures of men: for here in these trees be engraven
certain verses of shepherds, or some other swains that inhabit here about.
With that Aliena start up joyful to hear these news, and looked, where they
found carved in the bark of a Pine tree this passion.

Montanus passion.
Had thou been borne whereas perpetual cold
Makes Tanais hard, and mountains silver old:
Had I complainde unto a marble stone,
Or to the floods bewraide my bitter moan,
I then could bear the burden of my grief:
But even the pride of Countries at thy birth,
Whilste heavens did smile did new array the earth with flowers chief.
Yet thou the flower of beauty blessed borne,
Have pretty looks, but all attirde in scorn.
Had I the power to weep sweet Mirrhas tears,
Or by my plaints to pearce repining ears:
Had thou the heart to smile at my complaint,
To scorn the woes that does my heart attaint,
I then could bear the burden of my grief:
But not my tears, but truth with thee preuailes,
And seeming sour my sorrows thee assailes: yet small relief.
For if thou will thou art of marble hard:
And if thou please my suite shall soon be heard.
No doubt (quoth Aliena) this poesy is the passion of some perplexed
shepherd, that being enamoured of some fair and beautiful Shepherdess,
suffered some sharp repulse, and therefore complained of the cruelty of his
Mistress. You may see (quoth Ginimede) what mad cattle you women be, whose
hearts sometimes are made of Adamant that will touch with no impression, and
sometime of wax that is fit for every form: they delight to be courted, and
then they glory to seem coy, and when they are most desired then they freese
with disdain: and this fault is so common to the sex, that you see it painted
out in the shepheardes passions, who found his Mistres as froward as he was
enamoured. And I pray you (quoth Aliena) if your robes were off, what metal
are you made of that you are so satirical against women? Is it not a foul bird
defiles the own nest? Beware ( Ganimede) that Rosader hear you not, if he
do, perchance you will make him leap so far from love, that he will anger
every vain in your heart. Thus (quoth Ganimede) I keep decorum, I speak now
as I am Alienas Page, not as I am Gerismonds daughter: for put me but into a
peticoat, and I will stand in defiance to the uttermost, that women are
courteous, constant, virtuous, and what not. Stay there (quoth Aliena) and no
more words, for yonder be Caracters graven upon the bark of the tall Beech
tree: let us see (quoth Ganimede): and with that they read a fancy written to
this effect.

First shall the heavens want starry light,
The seas be robbed of their waves:
The day want sun, and sun want bright,
The night want shade, the dead men's graves.
The April, flowers and leaf and tree,
Before I false my faith to thee.
First shall the tops of highest hills
By humble plains be ouerpride:
And Poets scorn the Muses quils,
And fish forsake the water glide.
And Iris loose her colored weed,
Before I fail thee at thy need.
First direful hate shall turn to peace,
And love relent in deep disdain:
And Poets scorn the Muses quils,
And fish forsaks the water glide.
And Iris loose her colored weed,
Before I fail thee at thy need.
First direful hate shall turn to peace,
And love relent in deep disdain:
And death his fatal stroke shall cease,
And envy pity every pain.
And pleasure mourn, and sorrow smile,
Before I talk of any guile.
First time shall stay his staylesse race,
And winter bless his brows with corn:
And snow bemoysten Iulies face,
And winter spring, and summer mourn,
Before my pen by help of fame,
Cease to recite thy sacred name.
Montanus.
No doubt (quoth Ganimede) this protestation grew from one full of passions. I
am of that mind too (quoth Aliena) but see I pray, when poor women seek to
keep themselves chaste, how men woo them with many fained promises, alluring
with sweet words as the Sirens, and after proouing as trothlesse as Acneas.
Thus promised Demophoon to his Phillis, but who at last grew more false? The
reason was (quoth Ganimede) that they were women's sons, and took that fault
of their mother, for if man had grown from man, as Adam did from the earth,
men had never been troubled with inconstancy. Leave off (quoth Aliena) to
taunt thus bitterly, or else i will pull off your pages apparel and whip you (as
Venus does her wantons) with nettles. So you will (quoth Ganimede) persuade me
to flattery, and that needs not: but come (seeing we have found here by his
Fount the tract of Shepheardes by their Madrigalles and Roundelaies) let us
forward: for either we shall find some foldes, sheepcoates, or else some
cottages wherein for a day or two to rest. Content (quoth Aliena) and with that
they rose up, and marched forward till toward the even: and then coming into
a fair valley (compassed with mountains, whereon grew many pleasant
shrubbes) they might descrie where two flocks of sheep did feed. Then looking
about, they might perceive where an old shepherd sat (and with him a young
swain) under a covert most pleasantly situated. The ground where they sat
was diapred with Floras riches, as if she meant to wrap Tellus in the glory of
her vestments: round about in the form of an Amphitheater were most curiously
planted Pine trees, interseamed with Lymons and Cytrons, which with the
thickness of their boughs so shadowed the place, that Phoebus could not pry
into the secret of that Arbor, so united were the tops with so thick a
closure, that Venus might there in her iollitie have dallied unseen with her
dearest paramour. Fast by (to make the place more gorgious) was there a Fount
so Christalline and clear, that it seemed Diana with her Driades and
Hemadriades had that spring, as the secret of all their bathings. In this
glorious Arbor satte these two shepheardes (seeing their sheep feed) playing
on their Pipes many pleasant tunes, and from music and melody falling into
much amorous chat: drawing more nigh we might descry the countenance of the one
to be full of sorrow, his face to be the very pourtraiture of discontent, and
his eyes full of woes, that living he seemed to dye: we (to hear what these
were) stole privily behind the thick, where we ouerheard this discourse.

A pleasant Eglog between Montanus and Coridon.
Coridon. SAy shepherds boy, what makes thee greet so sore?
Why leaves thy pipe his pleasure and delight?
Young are thy years, thy cheeks with Roses dight:
Then sing for joy (sweet swain) and sigh no more.
This milk-white Poppy and this climbing Pine
Both promise shade, then sit thee down and sing.
And make these woods with pleasant notes to ring,
Till Phoebus daine all Westward to decline.

Montanus. Ah ( Coridon) unmeet is melody
To him whom proud contempt has ouerborn,
Slain are my joys by Phoebus bitter scorn,
Far hence my weal and nere my ieopardy.
Loves burning brand is couched in my breast.
Making a Phoenix of my faintfull heart:
And though his fury do enforce my smart,
Ay blyth am I to honor his behest.
Preparde to woes since so my Phoebe wills,
My looks dismayed since Phoebe will disdain,
I banish bliss and welcome home my pain,
So stream my tears as showers from Alpine hills
In errors mask I blindfold judgments eye,
I fetter reason in the snares of lust,
I seem secure, yet know not how to trust,
I live by that, which makes me living dye.
Deuoyd of rest, companion of distress,
Plague of my self, consumed by my thought,
How may my voice or pipe in tune be brought?
Since I am reft of solace and delight.

Coridon. Ah Lorrell lad, what makes thee Herry love?
A sugared harm, a poysonfull of pleasure,
A painted shrine ful-fild with rotten treasure,
A heaven is show, a hell to them that prove.
Again, in seeming shadowed still with want,
A broken staff which folly does uphold,
A flower that fades with every frostie cold,
An orient Rose sprung from a withred plant.
A minutes joy to gain a world of grief,
A subtle net to snare the idle mind,
A seeing Scorpion, yet in seeming blind,
A poor rejoice, a plague without relief.
For thy Montanus follow mine arreede,
(Whom age has taught the trains that fancy uses)
Leave foolish love, for beauty wit abuses,
And drownes (by folly) virtues springing seed.

Montanus. So blames the child the flame, because it burns,
And bird the snare, because it does entrap,
And fools true love, because of sorry hap,
And sailors curse the ship that ouerturnes.
But would the child forbear to play with flame,
And birds beware to trust the flowlers gin,
And fools foresee before they fall and sin,
And masters guide their ships in better frame.
The child would praise the fire, because it warmes,
And birds rejoice, to see the fowler fail,
And fools prevent, before their plagues prevail,
And sailors bless the bark that saues from harms.
Ah Coridon, though many be thy years,
And crooked elde has some experience left,
Yet is thy mind of judgment quite bereft,
In view of love, whose power in me appears.
The ploughman little wots to turn the pen,
Or bookeman skils to guide the ploughmans cart,
Nor can the cobbler count the terms of Art,
Nor base men judge the thoughts of mighty men.
Nor withered age (unmeet for beauties guide,
Incapable of loves impressien)
Discourse of that, whose choice possession
May never to so base a man be tied.
But I (whom nature makes of tender mold,
And youth most pliant yields to fancies fire)
Do build my haven and heaven on sweet desire,
On sweet desire more dear to me than gold.
Think I of love, O how my lines aspire?
How have the Muses to embrace my brows,
And hem my temples in with laurel bows,
And fill my brains with chaste and holy fire?
Then leave my lines their homely equipage,
Mounted beyond the circle of the Sun:
Amazd I read the style when I have done,
And Herry Love that sent that heavenly rage.
Of Phoebe then, of Phoebe then I sing,
Drawing the purity of all the spheres,
The pride of earth, or what in heaven appears,
Her honored face and fame to light to bring.
Influent numbers and in pleasant veins,
I rob both sea and eath of all their state,
To praise her parts: I charm both time and fate,
To bless the Nymph that yields me love sick pains.
My sheep are turned to thoughts, whom froward will
Guydes in the restles Laborynth of Love,
Fear lends them pasture where so ere they move,
And by their death their life renueth still.
My sheepehooke is my pen, mine oaten reed,
My paper, where my many woes are written:
Thus silly swain (with love and fancy bitten)
I trace the plains of pain in woeful weed.
Yet are my cares, my broken sleeps, my tears,
My dreams, my doubts, for Phoebe sweet to me:
Who wayteth heaven in sorrows vale must be,
And glory shines where danger most appears.
Then Coridon although I blithe me not,
Blame me not man since sorrow is my sweet:
So wills Love, and Phoebe thinks it meet,
And kind Montanus likes well his lot.

Coridon. Oh staylesse youth, by error so misguided,
Where will prescribes laws to perfect wits,
Where reason mournes, and blame in triumph sits,
And folly poysoneth all that time provided.
With wilful blindness bleard, prepared to shame,
Prone to neglect Occasion when she smiles:
Alas that Love by fond and froward guiles,
Should make thee tract the path to endless blame.
Ah (my Montanus) cursed is the charm,
That has bewitched so thy youthful eyes:
Leave off in time to like these vanities,
Be forward to thy good, and fly thy harm.
As many bees as Hibla daily shields,
As many fry as fleet on Oceans face,
As many herds as on the earth do trace,
As many flowers as deck the fragrant fields.
As many stars as glorious heaven contains,
As many storms as wayward winter weeps,
As many plagues as hell enclosed keeps:
So many griefs in love, so many pains.
Suspicions, thoughts, desires, opinions, prayers;
Mislikes, misdeeds, fondioies, and fained peace,
Illusions, dreams great pains, and small increase,
Vows, hope, acceptance, scorns, and deep despaires.
Truce, war, and woe do wait at beauties gate:
Time lost, laments, reports, and privy grudge,
And last, fierce Love is but a partial Judge,
Who yields for service shame, for friendship hate.

Montanus. All adder-like I stop mine ears (fond swain)
So charm no more, for I will never change.
Call home thy flocks betime that straggling range:
For lo, the Sun declineth hence amain.

Terentius. In amore haec insunt vitia: induciae, inimicitiae, bellum, pax
rursum: incerta haec situpostules, ratione certa fieri nihilo plus agas, quam
sides operam, vt cum ratione insanias.


The shepherds having thus ended their Eglogue, Aliena slept with Ganimede
from behind the thicket: at whose sudden sight the shepherds arose, and
Aliena saluted them thus: Shepherds all hail (for such we deem you by your
flocks) and Lovers good luck, (for such you seem by your passions) our eyes
being witness of the one, and our ears of the other. Although not by Love,
yet by Fortune, I am a distressed Gentlewoman, as sorrowful as you are
passionate, and as full of woes as you of perplexed thoughts: wandering this way
in a forest unknown, only I and my Page, wearied with travel would feign have
some place of rest. May you appoint us any place of quiet harbor (be it never
so mean) I shall be thankful to you, contented in my self, and grateful to
whosoever shall be mine Host. Coridon hearing the Gentlewoman speak so
courteously returned her mildly and reverently this answer.

Fair Mistress, we return you as hearty a welcome as you gave us a
courteous salute. A shepherd I am, and this a lover, as watchful to please his
wench, as to feed his sheep: full of fancies, and therefore say I, full of
follyes. Exhort him I may, but persuade him I cannot: for Love admits neither
of counsel, nor reason. But leaving him to his passions, if you be distressed,
I am sorrowful such a fair creature is crossed with calamity: pray for you I
may, but relieve you I cannot: marry if you want lodging if you vouch to shroud
your selves in a shepherds cottage, my house for this night shall be your
harbor, Alinea thankt Coridon greatly, and presently sat her down and
Ganimede by her. Coridon looking earnestly upon her, and with a curious survey
viewing all her perfectious, applauded (in his thought) her excellence, and
pitying her distress, was desirous to hear the cause of her misfortunes,
began to question with her thus.

If I should not (fair Damsel) occasionate offense, or renew your griefs by
rubbing the scar, I would feign crave so much favor, as to know the cause of
your misfortunes: and why, and whither you wander with your page in so
dangerous forest. Aliena (that was as courteous as she was sayre) made this
reply: Shepherd, a friendly demand ought never to be offensive, and question
of courtesy carry privileged pardons in their forheads. Know therefore, to
discover my fortunes were to renew my sorrows, and I should by discoursing my
mishaps, but rake fire out of the cynders. Therefore let this suffice gentle
shepherd, my distress is as great as my travail is dangerous, and I wander
in this forest to light on some cotage where I and my page may dwell: for I
mean to buy some Farm, and a flock of sheep, and so become a shepherdess,
meaning to live low, and content me with a country life: for I have heard the
swains say, that they drunk without suspicion, and slept without care. Marry
mistres quoth Coridon, if you mean so you came in good time, for my Landflord
intends to sell both the Farm I till, and the flock I keep, and cheap you
may have them for ready money: and for a shepherds life (oh Mistres) did you
but live a while in their content, you would say the Court were rather a place
of sorrow then of solace. Here mistress shall not fortune thwart you, but in
mean misfortunes, as the loss of a few sheep, which, as it breeds no
beggary, so it can be no extreme prejudice: the next year may mend all with
a fresh increase. Envy stirs not us, we cauet not to climb, our desires
mount not above our degrees, nor our thoughts above our fortunes. Care cannot
harbor in our cottages, nor do our homely couches know broken slumbers: as
we exceed not ill diet, so we have enough to satisfy: and Mistress, I have
so much Latin, Satis est quod sufficit.

By my truth shepherd (quoth Aliena) thou make me in love with your
country life, and therefore send for thy Landslord, and I will buy thy Farm
and thy slocks, and thou shall still under me be ouerseer of them both: only
for pleasure sake, I and my Page will serve you, lead the flocks to the field,
and fold them: Thus will I live quiet, unknown, and contented. This news so
gladded the heart of Coridon, that he should not be put out of his farm yt
putting off his shepherds bonnet, he did her all the reverence that he might.
But all this while sat Montanus in a muse thinking of the cruelty of his
Phoebe, whom he wooed long, but was in no hope to win. Ganimede who still had
the remembrance of Rosader in his thoughts, tonke delight to see the poor
shepherd passionate, laughing at love, that in all his actions was so
imperious. At last when she had noted his tears that stole down his cheeks,
and his sighs that broke from the center of his heart, pitying his lament,
she demanded of Coridon why the young shepherd looked so sorrowful? Oh sir
(quoth he) the boy is in love. Why (quoth Ganimede) can shepherds love? I
(quoth Montanus) and ouer-loue, else should not shou see me so pensive. Love I
tell thee, is as precious in a shepherds eye, as in the looks of a King, and
we cuntry swains intertaine fancy with as great delight as the proudest
Courtier does affection. Opportunity (that is the sweetest friend to Venus)
harbors in our cottages, and loyalty (the chiefest fealty that Cupid
requires) is found more among shepheardes than higher degrees. Then ask not
if such silly swains can love? what is the cause then, quoth Ganimede, that
Love being so sweet to thee, thou look so sorrowful? Because quoth
Montanus, the party beloved is froward: and having courtesy in her looks,
holds disdain in her tongues end? What has she then, quoth Aliena, in
heart? Desire (I hope Madame) quoth he: or else my hope lost, despair in Love
were death. As thus they chatted, the Sun being ready to set, and they not
having folded their sheep, Coridon requested she would sit there with her
Page, till Montanus and he lodged their sheep for that night. You shall go
quoth Aliena, but first I will entreat Montanus to sing some amorous Sonnet
that he made when he has been deeply passionate. That I will quoth Montanus,
and with that he began thus.

Montanus Sonnet.
Phoebe sat,
Sweet she sat,
Sweet sat Phoebe when I saw her,
White her brow,
Coy her eye;
Brow end eye how much you please me?
Words I spent,
Sighs I sen^
Sight and words could never draw her.
Oh my love,
Thou art lost.
Since no sight could ever ease thee.
Phoebe sat
By a fount,
Sitting by a fount I spide her:
Sweet her touch,
Rare her voice:
Touch and voice what may distain you?
As she sung,
I did sigh,
And by sighs whilst that I tried her,
Oh mine eyes
You did loose
Her first sight whose want did pain you.
Phoebes flocks,
White as wool,
Yet were Phoebes locks more whiter.
Phoebes eyes.
Douelike mild,
Douelike eyes, both mild and cruel:
Montan swears,
In your lamps
He will die for to delight her.
Phoebe yield,
Or I die:
Shall true hearts be fancies fuel?
Montanus had no sooner ended his sonnet, but Coridon with allow courtesy rose
up, and went with his fellow, and shut their sheep in the folds: and after
returning to Aliena and Ganimede, conducted them home weary to his poor
cottage. By the way there was much good chat with Montanus about his loves:
he resolving Aliena that Phoebe was the fairest Shepherdice in all France, and
that in his eye her beauty was equal with ye Nimphs. But quoth he, as of all
stones the Diamond is most cleerest, and yet most hard for the Lapidorie to
cut, as of all flowers, the Rose is the fairest, and yet guarded with the
sharpest prickles: so of al our country lasses Phoebe is the brightest, but the
most coy of all to stoop unto desire. But let her take heed quoth he, I have
heard of Narcissus, who for his high disdain against Love, perished in the
folly of his own love. With this they were at Coridons Cottage, where Montanus
parted from them, and they went in to rest. Alinda and Ganimede glad of so
contented a shelter, made merry with the poor swain: and though they had but
country fare and course lo^ging, yet their welcome was so great, and their
cares so little, that they counted their diet delicate, and slept as soundly as
if they had been in the court of Torismond. The next morn they lay long in
bed, as wearyed with the toil of unaccustomed travail; but as soon as they
got up, Aliena resolved there to set up her rest, and by the help of Coridon
swapt a bargain with his Landslord, and so became mistres of the farm and the
flock: her self putting on the attire of the shepherdess, and Ganimide of a
young swain: every day leading forth her flocks, with such delight, that she
held her exile happy, and thought no content to the bliss of a Country
cottage. Leaving her thus famous amongst the shepherds of Arden, again to
Saladyne.

When Saladyne had a long while concealed a secret resolution of revenge, and
could no longer hide fire in the flax, nor oil in the flame: (for envy is like
lightning, that will appear in the darkest fog.) It chanced on a morning very
early he called up certain of his servants, and went with them to the chamber of
Rosader, which being open, he entered with his crew, and surprised his brother
when he was a sleep, and bound him in fetters, and in the midst of his hall
chained him to a post. Rosader amazed at this strange chance, began to reason
with his brother about the cause of this sudden extremity, wherein he had
wronged, and what fault he had committed worthy so sharp a penance. Saladyne
answered him only with a look of disdain, and went his way, leaving poor
Rosader in a deep perplexity. Who thus abused, fell into sundry passions, but
no means of relief could be had: whereupon for anger he grew into a
discontented melancholy. In which humor he continued two or three days
without meat: insomuch, that seeing his brother would give him no food, he fell
into despair of his life. Which Adam Spencer the old servant of sir John of
Bourdeaux seeing, touched with the duty and love he ought to his old
master, felt a remorse in his conscience of his sons mishap: and therefore,
although Saladine had given a general charge to his servants, that none of
them upon pain of death should give either meat or drink to Rosader, yet Adam
Spencer in the night rose secretly, and brought him such victuals as he could
provide, and unlocked him, and set him at liberty. After Rosader had well
feasted himself, and felt he was loose, straight his thoughts aimed at
revenge, and now (all being a sleep) he would have quit Saladyne with the
method of his own mischief. But Adam Spencer did persuade him to the contrary
with these reasons: Sir quoth he, he content, for this night go again into
your old fetters, so shall you try the faith of friends, and save the life of
an old servant. Tomorrow has your brother invited al your kindred and allies to
a solemn break fast, only to see you, telling them all that you are mad,
and feign to be tied to a poast. As Soon as they come, complain to them of the
abuse proffered you by Saladyne. If they redress you, why so: but if they
pass over your playntes, sicco pede, and h^ld with the violence of your
brother before your innocence, then thus: I will leave you unlock that you may
break out at your pleasure, and at the end of the hall shall you see stand a
couple of good pollaxes, one for you, and another for me. When I give you a
wincke, shake off your chains, and let us play the men, and make havoc
amongst them, drive them out of the house and maintain possession by force of
arms, till the King has made a redress of your abuses. These words of Adam
Spencer so persuaded Rosader, that he went to the place of his punishment, and
stood there while the next morning. About the time appointed, came all the
guestes bidden by Saladyne, whom he entreated with courteous and curious
entertainment, as they all perceived their welcome to be great. The tables in
the hall where Rosader was tied, were covered, and Saladyne bringing in his
guests together, showed them where his brother was bound, and was inchainde as
a man lunaticke. Rosader made reply, and with some inuectiues made complaints
of the wrongs proffered him by Saladyne, desiring they would in pity seek
some means for his relief. But in vain, they had stopped their ears with
Ulysses, that were his words never so forceable, he breathed only his passions
into the wind. They careless, sat down with Saladyne to dinner, being very
frolic and pleasant, washing their heads well with wine. At last, when the
fume of the grape had entered peale meal into their brains, they began in
satyricall speeches to rail against Rosader: which Adam Spencer no longer
brooking, gave the sign, and Rosader shaking off his chains got a pollaxe in
his hand, and flew amongst them with such violence and fury, that he hurt
many, slew, some, and drove his brother and all the rest quite out of the
house. Seeing the coast clear, he shut the doors, and being sore an hungered,
and seeing such good victuals, he sat him down with Adam Spencer, and such
good fellows as he knew were honest men, and there feasted themselves with
such provision as Saladyne had prepared for his friends. After they had taken
their repast, Rosader rampierd up ye house, least upon a sodeine his brother
should raise some crew of his tennants, and surprise them unawares. But
Saladyne took a contrary course, and went to the Sheriff of the shire and
made complaint of Rosader, who giving credit to Saladyne, in a determined
resolution to revenge the Gentleman's wrongs, took with him five and twenty
tall men, and made a vow, either to break into the house and take Rosader, or
else to coope him in till he made him yield by famine. In this determination,
gathering a crew together, he went forward to set Saladyne in his former
estate. News of this was brought unto Rosader, who smiling at the cowardice of
his brother, brookt all the injuries of fortune with patience, expecting the
coming of the Sheriff. As he walk upon the battlements of the house, he
descryed where Saladyne and he drew near, with a troop of lusty gallants. At
this he smilde, and calde up Adam Spencer, and showed him the envious
treachery of his brother, and the folly of the Sheriff to be so credulous:
now Adam, quoth he, what shall I do? It resls for me, either to yield up the
house to my brother and seek a reconcilement, or else issue out, and break
through the company with courage, for coopt in like a coward I will not be. If
I submit (ah Adam) I dishonor my self, and that is worse then death, for by
such open disgraces, the fame of men grows odious: if I issue out amongst
them, fortune may favor me, and I may escape with life, but suppose the
worst: if I be slain, then my death shall be honorable to me, and so inequall
a revenge in famous to Saladyne. Why then Master forward and sear not, out
amongst them, they be but faint hearted lozels, and for Adam Spencer, if he
die not at your foot, say he is a dastard. These words cheered up so the
heart of young Rosader, that he thought himself sufficient for them al, and
therefore prepared weapons for him and Adam Spencer, and were ready to
entertain the Sheriff: for no sooner came Saladyne and he to the gates, but
Rosader vnloookt for leapt out and assailed them, wounded many of them, and
caused the rest to give back, so that Adam and he broke through the prease in
despite of them all, and took their way toward the forest of Arden. This
repulse so set the Sheriffs heart on fire to revenge, that he straight raised
all the country, and made Hue and Cry after them. But Rosader and Adam knowing
full well the secret ways that led through the vineyards, stole away priorily
through the province of Bourdeaux, and escaped safe to the forest of Arden.
Being come thither, they were glad they had so good a harbor: but fortune (who
is like the Camelion) variable with every object, and constant in nothing but
inconstancy, thought to make them myrrours of her mutabilitie, and therefore
still croft them thus contrarily. Thinking still to pass on by the bywaies to
get to Lions, they chanced on a path that led into the thick of the forest,
where they wandered five or six days without meat, that they were almost
famished, finding neither shepherd nor cottage to relieve them: and hunger
growing on so extreme, Adam Spencer (being old) began to faint, and sitting
him down on a hill, and looking about him, espied where Rosader lay as feeble
and as ill perplexed: which sight made him shed tears, and to fall into
these bitter terms.

Adam Spencers speech.
OH how the life of man may well be compared to the state of the Ocean seas,
that for every calm has a thousand storms, resembling the Rose tree, that for
a few flowers, has a multitude of sharp prickles: all our pleasures end in
pain, and our highest delights, are crossed with deepest discontents. The
joys of man, as they are few, so are they momentarie, scarce ripe before they
are rotten: and withering in the blossom, either parched with the heat of
envy, or fortune. Fortune, oh inconstant friend, that in all thy deeds art
froward and sickle, delighti g in the poverty of the lowest, and the over
throw of the highest, to decypher thy inconstancy. Thou stand upon a globe,
and thy wings are plumed with times feathers, that thou may ever be
restless; thou art double faced like Ianus, carrying frowns in the one to
threaten, and smiles in the other to betray; thou profferest an Eele, and
performest a Scorpion, and where thy greatest favors be, there is the fear of
the extremest misfortunes, so variable are all thy actions. But why Adam do
thou exclaim against Fortune? she laughes at the plaintes of the distressed:
and there is nothing more pleasing unto her, then to hear fools boast in her
fading allurements, or sorrowful men to discover the sower of their passions
Elut her not Adam then with content, but thwart her with brooking all mishappes
with patience. For there is no greater check to the pride of fortune, then with
a resolute courage to pass over her crosses without care. Thou art old Adam,
and thy hairs wax white, the Palm tree is already full of bloomes, and in
the furrows of thy face appears the Kalenders of death? Were thou blessed by
fortune thy years could not be many, nor the date of thy life long: then since
Nature must have her due, what is it for thee to resign her debt a little
before the day. Ah, it is not this which grieueth me, nor do I care what
mishaps fortune can wage against me: but the sight of Rosader, that galleth
unto the quick. When I remember the worships of his house, the honor of his
fathers, and the virtues of himself: then do I say, that fortune and the
fates are most injurious, to censure so hard extremes, against a youth of so
great hope. Oh Rosader, thou art in the flower of thine age, and in the pride
of thy years, buxsome and full of May. Nature has prodigally inricht thee
with her favors, and virtue made thee the myrror of her excellence: and now
through the decree of the unjust stars, to have all these good parts nipped
in the blade, and blemished by the inconstancy of fortune. Ah Rosader, could I
help thee, my grief were the less, and happy should my death be, if it
might be the beginning of thy relief: but seeing we perish both in one
extreme, it is a double sorrow. What shall I do? prevent the sight of his
further misfortune, with a present dispatch of mine own life. Ah, despair is
a merciless sin.

As he was ready to go forward in his passion, he looked earnestly on Rosader,
and seeing him change color, he rose up and went to him, and holding his
temples, said, What cheer master? though all fail, let not the heart faint:
the courage of a man is showed in the resolution of his death. At these words
Rosader Iifted up his eye, and looking on Adam Spencer began to weep. Ah Adam
quoth he, I sorrow not to dye, but I grieve at the manner of my death. Might I
with my Lance encounter the enemy, and so die in the field, it were honor,
and content: might I ( Adam) combat with some wild beast, and perish as his
pray, I were satisfied: but to die with hunger, O Adam, it is the extremest
of all extremes. Master (quoth he) you see me are both in one predicament,
and long I cannot live without meat, seeing therefore we can find no food,
let the death of the one, preserve the life of the other. I am old, and
ouerworne with age, you are young, and are the hope of many honors: let me
then dye, I will presently cut my veins, and master with the warm blood
relieve your fainting spirits: suck on that till I end, and you be
comforted. With that Adam Spencer was ready to pull out his knife, when Rosader
full of courage (though very faint) rose up, and wished A. Spencer to sit there
til his return: for my mind gives me quoth he, I shall bring thee meat. With
that, like a mad man he rose up, and raunged up and down the woods, seeking to
encounter some wild beast with his Rapier, that either he might carry his
friend Adam food, or else pledge his life in pawn of his loyalty. It chanced
that day, that Gerismond the lawful King of France, banished by Torismond, who
with a lusty crew of Outlawes lived in that Forest, that day in honor of his
birth made a feast to all his bold yeomen, and frolic it with store of wine
and venison, sitting all at a long table under the shadow of Lymon trees. To
that place by chance Fortune conducted Rosader, who seeing such a crew of brave
men having store of that, for want of which he and Adam perished, he stepped
boldly to the boords end, and saluted the company thus.

Whatsoever thou be that art master of these lusty squiers, I salute thee as
graciously, as a man in extreme distress may: know that I and a fellow friend
of mine, are here famished in the Forest for want of food: perish we must
unless relieved by thy favors. Therefore if thou be a Gentleman, give meat
to men, and to such as are every way worthy of life: let the proudest
squire that sits at thy table, rise and encounter with me in any honorable
point of actiuitie whatsoever, and if he and thou prove me not a man, send me
away comfortless. If thou refuse this, as a niggard of thy cates, I will have
amongst you with my sword: for rather will I dye valiantly, then perish with so
cowardly an extreme. Gerismond looking him earnestly in the face, and seeing
so proper a Gentleman in so bitter a passion, was moved with so great pity,
that rising from the table, he took him by the hand and badde him welcome,
willing him to sit dowae in his place, and in his room not only to eat his
fill, but the Lord of the feast. Gramerry sir (quoth Rosader) but I have a
feeble friend that lies hereby famished almost for food, aged and therefore
less able to abide the extremity of hunger then my self, and dishonor it
were for me to taste one crumme, before I made him partner of my fortunes:
therefore I will run and fetch him, and then I will gratefully accept of your
proffer. Away hies Rosader to Adam Spencer, and tells him the news, who was
glad of so happy fortune, but so feeble he was that he could not go: whereupon
Rosader got him up on his back, and brought him to the place. Which when
Gerismond and his men saw, they greatly applauded their league of friendship:
and Rosader having Gerismonds place assigned him, would not sit there himself,
but set down Adam Spencer. Well to be short, those hungry squires fell to
their victuals, and feasted themselves with good delicates, and great store of
wine. As Soon as they had taken their repast, Gerismond (desirous to hear what
hard fortune drove them into those bitter extremes) requested Rosader to
discourse, (as it were not any way preiudicall unto him) the cause of his
travel. Rosader (vesirous any way to satisfy the courtesy of his favorable
host, (first beginning his exordium with a volley of sighs, and a few luke
warm tears) prosecuted his discourse, and told him from point to point all
his fortunes, how he was the youngest son of sir John of Bourdeaux, his name
Rosader, how his brother sundry times had wronged him, and lastly, how for
beating the Sheriff, and hurting his men, he fled: and this old man (quoth
he) whom I so much love and honor, is surnamed Adam Spencer, an old servant of
my fathers, and one (that for his love) never failed me in all my misfortunes.
When Gerismond heard this, he fell on the neck of Rosader, and next discoursing
unto him, how he was Gerismond their lawful King exiled by Torismond, what
familiarity had ever been betwixt his father sir John of Bourdeaux and him,
how faithful a subject he lived, and how honorably he dyed: promising (for
his sake) to give both him and his friend such courteous entertainment, as his
present estate, could minister: and upon this made him one of his forresters.
Rosadar seeing it was the King, craude pardon for his boldness, in that he
did not do him due reverence, and humbly gave him thanks for his favorable
courtesy. Gerismond not satisfied yet with news, began to enquire if he had
been lately in the Court of Torismond, and whether he had seen his daughter
Rosalynd, or no? At this, Rosader fetched a deep sigh, and shedding many tears,
could not answer: yet at last, gathering his spirits together, he revealed
unto the King, how Rosalynde was banished, and how there was such a simpathie
of affections betwixt Alinda and her, that she chose rather to be partaker of
her exile, then to part fellowship: whereupon the unnatural King banished them
both: and now they are wandered none knows whither, neither could any learn
since their departure, the place of their abode. This news drive the king into
a great melancholy, that presently he arose from all the company, and went
into his privy chamber, so secret as the harbor of the woods would allow
him. The company was all dashed at these tidings, and Rosader and Adam Spencer
having such opportunity, went to take their rest. Where we leave them, and
return again to Torismond.

The fight of Rosader came to the ears of Torismond, who hearing that Saladyne
was sole heir of the lands of sir John of Bourdeaux, desirous to possess
such fair revenues, found just occasion to quarrel with Saladyne, about the
wrongs he proffered to his brother: and therefore dispatching a Herehault, he
sent for Saladyne in all poast haste. Who marueiling what the matter should be,
began to examine his own conscience, wherein he had offended his highness:
but imboldened with his innocence, he boldly went with the Herehault unto the
Court. Where as soon as he came, he was not admitted into the presence of the
king, but presently sent to prison. This greatly amazed Saladine, chiefly in
that the Iayler had a straight charge over him, to see that he should be close
prisoner. Many passionate thoughts came in his head, till at last he began to
fall into consideration of his former follies, and to medicate with himself.
Leaning his head on his hand, and his elbow on his knee, full of sorrow, grief
and disquieted passions, he resolved into these terms.

Saladynes complaint.
Unhappy Saladyne, whame folly has led to these misfortunes, and wanton
desires wrapped within the laborinth of these calamities. Are not the heavens
doomers of men's deeds? And heldes not God a balance in his fist, to reward
with favor, and revenge with justice? Oh Saladyne, the faults of thy youth, as
they were fond, so were they foul: and not only discovering little nourture,
but blemishing the excellence of nature. Whelps of one litter are ever most
loving, and brothers that are sons of one father, should live in friendship
without jar. Oh Saladyne, so it should be: but thou have with the dear
fed against the wind, with the crabbe strove against the stream, and sought
to pervert nature by unkindness. Rosaders wrongs, the wrongs of Rosader (
Saladyne) cries for revenge, his youth pleads to God to inflict some penance
upon thee, his virtues are pleas that enforce writtes of displeasure to cross
thee: thou have highly abused thy kind and natural brother, and the heavens
cannot spare to quite thee with punishment. There is no sting to the worm of
conscience, no hell to a mind coucht with guilt. Every wrong I offered him
(called now to remembrance) wringeth a drop of blood from my heart, every bad
look, every frown pincheth me at the quick, and says Saladyne thou have
sinned against Rosader. Be penitent, and assign thy self some penance to
discover thy sorrow, and pacify his wrath.

In the depth of his passion, he was sent for to the King: who with a look
that threatened death entertained him, and demanded of him where his brother
was? Saladyne made answer, that upon some riot made against the Sheriff of the
shire, he was fled from Bourdeaux, but he knew not whither. Nay villain
(quoth he) I have heard of the wrongs thou have proffered thy brother since
the death of thy father, and by thy means have I lost a most brave and resolute
Cheualier. Therefore, in justice to punish thee, I spare thy life for thy
fathers sake, but banish thee for ever from the court and country of France,
and see thy departure be within ten days, else trust me thou shall loose thy
head, and with that the King flew away in a rage, and left poor Saladyne
greatly perplexed. Who grieuing at his exile, yet determined to beer it with
patience, and in penance of his former folies to travail abroad in every
Coast, till he had found out his brother Rosader. With whom now I beginnne.

Rosader being thus preferred to the place of a Forrester by Gerismond, rooted
out the remembrance of his brothers unkindness by continual exercise,
traversing the groves and wild Forests: partly to hear the melody of the
sweet birds which recorded, and partly to show his diligent endeavor in his
masters behalf. Yet whatsoever he did, or howsoever he walked, the lively
image of Rosalynde remained in memory: on her sweet perfections he fed his
thoughts, proving himself like the eagle a true borne bird, since that the one
is known by beholding the Sun so was he by regarding excellent beauty. One
day among the rest finding a fit opportunity and place convenient, desirous to
discover his woes to the woods, he engraued with his knife on the bark of a
Mir tree, this pretye estimate of his Mistres perfection,

Sonnetto.
Of all chaste birds the Phoenix does excel,
Of all strong beasts the Lion bears the bell,
Of all sweet flowers the Rose does sweetest smell
Of all fair maids my Rosalynd is fairest.
Of all pure metals gold is only purest,
Of all high trees the Pine has highest crest,
Of all soft sweets, I like my mistress breast,
Of all chaste thoughts my mistress thoughts are rarest.
Of all proud birds the Eagle pleases Jove,
Of pretty fowls kind Venus likes the Dove,
Of trees Minerua does the Olive love,
Of all sweet Nimphs I honor Rosalynd.
Of all her gifts her wisdom pleases most,
Of all her graces virtue she does boast:
For all these gifts my life and joy is lost,
If Rosalynde prove cruel and unkind.
In these and such like passions Rosader did every day eterni^ the name of his
Rosalynd: and this day especially when Aliena and Ganimede (enforced by the
heat of the Sun to seek for shelter) by good fortune arrived in that place,
where this amor^us forrester registered his melancholy passions: they saw the
sodai^ change of his looks, his folded arms, his passionate sighs, they heard
him often abruptly call on Rosalynd: who (poor soul) was as hotly burned as
himself, but that she shrouded her pains i^ the cinders of honorable
modesty. Whereupon gessing him to b^ in love, and according to the nature of
their sex, being pitiful in that behalf) they suddenly brake off his
melancholy by their approach, and Ganimede shook him out of his dumps thus.

What news Forrester? have thou wounded some Dear, an^ lost him in the fall?
Care not man for so small a loss, thy fe^ was but the skin, the shoulder,
and the horns: it is hunters luck to aim fair and miss: and a woodmans fortune
to strike an^ yet go without the game.

Thou art beyond the mark Ganimede (quoth Aliena) his passions are greater,
and his sighs discouers more loss: perhaps i^ traversing these thickets, he
has seen some beautiful Nimph^ and is grown amorous. It may be so (quoth
Ganimede) for be^^ he has newly engraven some sonnet: come and see the
discour^^ of the Forresters poems. Reading the sonnet over, and hearing ^^^
name Rosalynde, Aliena looked on Ganimede and laughed, an^ Ganimede looking back
on the Forrester, and seeing it wa^ Rosader, blushed: yet thinking to shroud all
under her pages apparel, she boldly returned to Rosader, and began thus.

I pray thee thee tell me Forrester, what is this Rosalynd for whom thou pinest
away in such passions: Is she some Nymph that wayts upon Dianaes train, whose
chastity thou have deci^ phred in such Epethites? Or is she some shepherdess
that hants these playnes, whose beauty has so bewitched thy fancy, whos^
name thou shaddowest in covert under the figure of Rosalynd a^ Ovid did Iulia
under the name of Corinna? Or say me for sooth, is it that Rosalynde, of whom
we shepherds have heard talk, she Forrester, that is the daughter of
Gerismond, that once was King, and now an Outlawe in this Forest of Arden. At
this Rosader fetched a deep sigh, and said, It is the O gentle Swayne, it is
she, that Saint it is whom I serve, that Goddess at whose shrine I do bend
all my devotions: the most fairest of all faires, the Phoenix of all that sex,
and the purity of all earthly perfection And why (gentle Forrester) if she be
so beautiful, and thou so amorous, is there such a disagreement in thy
thoughts? Happily she resembles the Rose, that is sweet, but full of
prickles? or the Serpent Regius that has scales as gloous as the Sun, and a
breath as infectious as the Aconitum is deadly? So thy Rosalynd may be most
amiable, and yet unkind: full of favor and yet froward: coy without wit, and
disdainful without reason.

O shepherd (quoth Rosader) knew thou her personage graced with the
excellence of all perfection, being a harbor wherein the Graces shroud their
virtues: thou would not breath out such blasphemy against the beauteous
Rosalind. She is a Diamond, bright, but not hard, yet of most chaste operation:
a pearl so orient, that it can be stained with no blemish: a Rose without
prickles, and a Princess absolute, as well in beauty as in virtue, But I,
unhappy I, have let mine eye soar with ye Eagle against so bright a Sun, that
I am quite blind: I have with Apollo enamoured my self of a Daphne, not (as
she) disdainful, but far more chaste than Daphne: I have with Ixion laid my
love on Juno, and shall (I fear) embrace naught but a cloud. Ah shepherd, I
have reached at a star, my desires have mounted above my degree, and my
thoughts above my fortunes. I being a peasant, have ventured to gaze on a
Princess, whose honors are too high to vouchsafe such base loves.

Why Forrester, quoth Ganimede, comfort thy self: be blyth and frolike man.
Love sowseth as low as she soareth high: Cupid shootes at a ragge as soon as at
a roabe, and Venus eye that was so curious, sparkled favor on pole-footed
Vulcan. Fear not man, women's looks are not tied to dignities feathers, nor
make they curious esteem, where the stone is sound, but what is the virtue.
Fear not Forrester, faint heart never woone fair Lady. But where lives
Rosalynde now, at the Court?

Oh no quoth Rosader, she lives I know not where, and tha^ is my sorrow,
banished by Toresmond, and that is my hell: for might I but find her sacred
personage, and plead before the ba^ of her pity, the plaint of my passions,
hope tells me she would grace me with some favor: and that would suffice as
a recompenc^ of all my former miseries. Much have I heard of thy mistres
excellence, and I know Forrester thou can describe her at the full as one
that have suruaid all her parts with a curious eye: then d^^ that favor, to
tell me what her perfections be. That I will quot^ Rosader, for I glory to make
all ears wonder at my Mistres excellence. And with that he pulde a paper
forth his bosom, wherein he read this.

Rosalyndes description.
Like to the clear in highest sphere,
Where all imperial glory shines,
Of self same color is her hair
Whether unfolded or in twines:
Heigh ho fair Rosalynde.
Her eyes are Saphires set in snow,
Refining heaven by every wincke:
The gods do fear when as they glow,
And I do tremble when I think.
Heigh ho, would she were mine.
Her chekes are like the blushing cloud
That bewtifies Auroraes face,
Or like the silver Crimsin shrowde.
That Phoebus smiling looks does grace:
Heigh ho, fair Rosalynd.
Her lips are like tow budded roses,
Whom ranckes of lillies neighbor nie,
Within which bounds she balm incloses,
Apt iointice a Deity:
Heigh ho, would she were mine.
Her neck like to a stately tower,
Where Love himself imprisoned lies,
To watch for glaunces every hour,
From her divine and sacred eyes,
Heigh ho, fair Rosalynd.
Her pappes are centers of delight,
Her pappes are orbs of heavenly frame,
Where Nature molds the deaw of light,
To feed perfection with the same:
Heigh ho, would she were mine.
With Orient pearl, with Rubie red.
With Marble white, with Sapphire blew,
Her body every way is fed,
Yet soft in touch; and sweet in view:
Heigh ho, fair Rosalynde.
Nature her self her shape admires,
The Gods are wounded in her sight,
And Love forsakes his heavenly fires,
And at her eyes his brand does light:
Heigh ho, would she ware mine.
Then muse not Nymphs thouh I bemone
The absence of fair Rosalynde,
Since for her fair there is fairer none,
Nor for her virtues so divine.
Heigh ho, fair Rosalynde.
Heigh ho my heart, would God that she were mine.
Periit, quia deperibat.
Believe me (quoth Ganimede) either the Forrester is an exquisite Painter, or
Rosalynde far above wonder: so it makes me blush, to hear how women should
be so excellent, and pages so imperfect.

Rosader beholding her earnestly, answered thus. Truly gentle page, thou have
cause to complain thee, were thou the substance: but resembling the shadow,
content thy self: for it is excellence enough to be like the excellence of
nature. He has answered you Ganimede, quoth Aliena, it is enough for pages to
wait on beautiful Ladies, and not to be beautiful themselves. Oh Mistres quoth
Ganimede, hold you your peace, for you are partial: Who knows not, but that
all women have desire to tie soueraintie to their petticotes, and ascribe
beauty to themselves, where if boys might put on their garments, perhaps they
would prove as comely, if not as comely, as courteous. But tell me forrester,
(and with that she turned to Rosader) under whom maintainest thou thy walk?
Gentle swain, under the King of Outlawes, said he, the unfortunate Gerismond,
who having lost his kingdom, crowns his thoughts with content, accounting
it better to govern among poor men in peace, than great men in danger. But
have thou not said she, (having so melancholy opportunities as this Forest
affoordeth thee) written more Sonets in commendations of thy Mistress? I have
gentle swain quoth he, but they be not about me: to morrow by dawn of day, if
your flocks feed in these pastures, I will bring them you: wherein you shall
read my passions, whiles I feel them, judge my patience when you read it: til
when I bid farewell. So giving both Ganimede and Aliena a gentle good night, he
resorted to his lodge, leaving them to their prittle prattle. So Ganimede (said
Aliena, the forrester being gone) you are mightily beloved, men make ditties in
your praise, spend sighs for your sake, make an idol of your beauty: believe
me it greeues me not a little to see the poor man so pensive, and you so
pitiless.

Ah Aliena (quoth she) be not peremptory in your judgments, I hear Rosalynde
praisd as I am Ganimede, but were I Rosalynde, I could answer the Forrester:
if he mourn for love, there are medicines for love: Rosalynde connot be fair
and unkind. And so Madame you see it is time to fold our flocks, or else
Coridon will frown, and say you will never prove good huswife. With that they
put their sheep into the coats, and went home to her friend Coridons Cottage,
Aliena as merry as might be, that she was thus in the company of her
Rosalynde: but she poor soul, that had Love her loadstarre, and her
thoughts set on fire with the flame of fancy, could take no rest, but being
alone began to consider what passionate penance poor Rosader was enjoined to
by Love and Fortune: that at last she fell into this humor with her self.

Rosalynde passionate alone.
AH Rosalynd, how the Fates have set down in their Sindde to make thee unhappy:
for when Fortune has done her worst, then Love comes in to begin a new
tragedy: she seeks to lodge her son in thine eyes, and to kindle her fires
in thy bosom. Beware fond girl, he is an unruly guest to harbor: for entering
in by entreats, he will not be thrust out by force, and her fires are fed with
such fuel, as no water is able to quench. See thou not how Venus seeks to
wrap thee in her Lahorynth, wherein is pleasure at the entrance, but within,
sorrows, cares, and discontent: she is a Siren, stop thine ears at her
melody: she is a a Basiliscke, shut thine eyes, and gaze not at her seast
thou perish. Thou art now placed in the Country content, where are heavenly
thoughts, and mean desires: in those Lawnes where thy flocks feed Diana
haunts: be as her Nymphs chaste, and enemy to Love, for there is no greater
honor to a maid, than to account of fancy, as a mortal foe to their sex.
Daphne that bonny wench, was not turned into a Bay tree, as the Poets fain, but
for her chastity her fame was immortal, resembling the Laurel that is ever
green. Follow thou her steps Rosalinde, and the rather, for that thou art an
exile, and banished from the court: whose distress, as it is appeased with
patience, so it would be renewed with amorous passions. Have mind on thy
forepassed fortunes, fear the worst, and entangle not thy self with present
fancies, least loving in have, thou repent thee at leisure. Ah but yet
Rosalynd, it is Rosader that courts thee: one, who as he is beutifull, so he
is virtuous, and harbors in his mind as many good qualities, as his face
is shadowed with gracious favors: and therefore Rosalynde stoop to Love,
least being either too coy, or too cruel, Venus wax wroth, and plague thee
with the reward of disdain.

Rosalynde thus passionate, was wakened from her dumpes by Aliena, who said it
was time to go to bed. Coridon swore that was true, for Charles Waine was risen
in the North. Whervppon each taking leave of other, went to their rest, all but
the poor Rosalynde: who was so full of passions, that she could not possess
any content. Well, leaving her to her broken slumbers, expect what was
performed by them the next morning.

The Sun was no sooner stepped from the bed of Aurora, but Aliena was wakened
by Ganimede: who restless all night had tossed in her passions: saying it was
then time to go to the field to unfold their sheep. Aliena (that spied where
the hare was by the hounds, and could see day at a little hole) thought to be
pleasant with her Ganimede, and therefore replied thus: What wanton? the Sun is
but new up, and as yet Iris riches lies folded in the bosom of Flora, Phoebus
has not dried up the pearled dew, and so long Coridon has taught me it is not
fit to lead the sheep abroad: least the deaw being unwholesome, they get the
rot: but now see I the old proverb true, he is in have whom the devil drives,
and where love pricks forward, there is no worse death then delay, Ah my good
page, is there fancy in thine eye, and passions in thy heart? What, have thou
wrapped love in thy looks? and set all thy thoughts on fire by affection? I
tell thee, it is a flame as hard to be quenched as that of Aetna. But nature
must have her course, women's eyes have faculty attractiue like the feat, and
retentiue like the diamond: they dally in the delight of fair objects, til
gazing on the Panthers beautiful skin, repenting experience tell them he has a
devouring paunch. Come on (q. Ganimede) this sermon of yours is but a subtlety
to lie still a bed, because either you think the morning cold, or else I being
gone, you would steal a nappe: this shift carries no paulme, and therefore up
and away. And for Love, let me alone, i will whip him away with nettles, and set
disdain as a charm to withstand his forces: and therefore loake you to your
self, be not too bold, for Venus can make you bend: nor to coy, for Cupid has
a piercing dare, that will make you cry Peccaui, And that is it (quoth Aliena)
that has raised you so early this morning. And with that she slipped on her
peticoat, and start up: and as soon as she had made her ready, and taken her
breakfast, away go these two with their bag and bottles to the field, in
more pleasant content of mind, then ever they were in the Court of Torismond.
They came no sooner nigh the foldes, but they might see where their disconted
Forrester was walking in his melancholy. As Soon as Aliena saw him, she smiled,
and said to Ganymede, wipe your eyes sweeting: for yonder is your sweet heart
this morning in deep prayers no doubt to Venus, that she may make you as
pitiful as he is passionate. Come on Ganimede, I pray thee lets have a little
sport with him. Content (quoth Ganimede) and with that to waken him out of his
deep memento, he began thus.

Forrester, good fortune to thy thoughts, and ease to thy passions, what makes
you so early abroad this morn, in contemplation, no doubt of your Rosalynd.
Take heed Forrester, step not too far, the Foord may be deep, and you slip
over the shoes: I tell thee, flies have their spleen, the antes choster, the
least hairs shadows, and the smallest loves great desires. It Is good
(Forrester) to love, but not to over love: least in loving her that likes not
thee, thou fold thy self in an endless Laborinth. Rosader seeing the fair
shepherdess and her pretty Swayne, in whose company he felt the greatest
ease of his care, he returned them a salute on this manner.

Gentle shepherds, all hail, and as healthful be your flocks, as you happy
in content. Love is restless, and my bed is but the cell of my bane, in that
there I find busy thoughts and broken slumbers: here (although every where
passionate) yet I brook love with more patience, in that every object feeds
mine eye with variety of fancies: when I look on Floraes beauteous tapestrie,
checkered with the pride of all her treasure, I call to mind the fair face of
Rosalynd, whose heavenly hue exceeds the Rose and the Lilly in their highest
excellence: the brightness of Phoebus shine, puts me in mind to think of
the sparkeling flames that flew from her eyes, and set my heart first on fire,
the sweet harmony of the birds, puts me in remembrance of the rare melody of
her voice, which like the Siren enchaunteth the ears of the hearer. Thus in
contemplation I salve my sorrows, with applying the perfection of every object
to the excellency of her qualities.

She is much beholding unto you (quoth Aliena) and so much, that I have often
wished with my self, that if I should ever prove as amorous as Oenone, I might
find as faithful a Paris as your self.

How say you by this Item Forrester, (quoth Ganimede) the fair shepherdess
favors you, who is mistress of so many^ flocks. Leave of man the supposition
of Rosalynds love, when as watching at her, you roue beyond the Moon, and cast
your looks upon my mistress, who no doubt is as fair though not so royal,
one bird in the hand is worth two in the wood: better possess the love of
Aliena, then catch frinously at the shadow of Rosalynd.

Ale tell thee boy (quoth Ganimede) so is my fancy fixed on my Rosalynde, that
were thy mistress as fair as Laeda or Danae, whom Jove courted in transformed
shapes, mine eyes would not vouch to entertain their beauties: and so has
Love locked me in her perfections, that I had rather only contemplate in her
beauties, then absolutely possess the excellence of any other. Venus is too
blame (Forrester) if having so true a servant of you, she reward you not with
Rosalynd, if Rosalynd were more fairer then her self.

But leaving this prattle, now i will put you in mind of your promise, about those
Sonnets which you said were at home in your lodge. I have them about me (quoth
Rosader) let us sit down, and then you shall hear what a Poetical fury Love
will in fuse into a man: with that they sat down upon a green bank,
shadowed with sigge trees, and Rosader, fetching a deep sigh, read them this
Sonnet.

Rosaders Sonnet.
In sorrows cell I laid me down to sleep,
But waking woes were jealous of mine eyes,
They made them watch, and bend themselves to weep,
But weeping tears their want could not suffice:
Yet since for her they wept who guides my heart,
They weeping smile, and triumph in their smart.
Of these my tears a fountain fiercely springs,
Where Venus baynes her self incenst with love,
Where Cupid bow seth his fair feathred wings:
But I behold what pains I must approve.
Cure drinks it dry: but when on her I think,
Love makes me weep it full unto the brinke.
Mean while my sighs yield truce unto my tears,
By them the winds increast and fiercely blow:
Yet when I sigh the flame more plain appears,
And by their force with greater power does glow:
Amids these pains, all Phoenix like I thrive,
Since Love that yields me death, may life revive.
Rosader en esperance.
Now surely Forrester (quoth Aliena) when thou made this Sonnet, thou were in
some amorous quandarie, neither too fearful, as dispairing of thy mistress
favors: nor too gleesome, as hoping in thy fortunes. I can smile (quoth
Ganymede) at the Sonettoes, Canzones, Madrigales, roundes and roundelaies, that
these pensive patients power out, when their eyes are more full of wantonness,
then their hearts of passions. Then, as the fishers put the sweetest bayt to
the fairest fish: so these Ouidians (holding Amo in their tongues, when their
thoughts come at hap hazard) write that they be wrapped in an endless
laborinth of sorrow, when walking in the large leas of liberty, they only have
their humors in their inckpot. It they find women so fond, that they will with
such painted lures come to their lust, then they triumph till they be full
gorgde with pleasures: and then fly they away (like ramage kytes) to their own
content, leaving the tame fool their Mistress full of fancy, yet without
ever a feather. If they miss (as dealing with some wary wanton, that wants not
such a one as themselves, but spies their subtlety) they end their amors with
a few fained sighs: and so their excuse is, their mistress is cruel, and
they smoother passions with patience. Such gentle Forrester we may deem you to
be, that rather pass awa^ the time here in these woods with writing amorets,
then to be^ deeply enamoured (as you say) of your Rosalynde. If you be^ such a
one, then I pray God, when you think your fortunes ^^ the highest, and your
desires to be most excellent, then that yo^ may with Ixion embrace Juno in a
cloud, and have nothing b^^ a marble mistress to release your martyrdom: but
if you be tru^ and trusty, eye-paynd and heart sick, then accursed be
Rosalynde if she prove cruel: for Forrester (I flatter not) thou art worthi^
of as fair as she. Aliena spying the storm by the wind, smile to see how
Ganymede flew to the fist without any call: but Rosader who took him flat for
a shepherds Swayne, made him this answer.

Trust me Swayne (quoth Rosader) but my Canzon wa^ written in no such humor:
for mine eye and my heart are relatiues, the one drawing fancy by sight, the
other enterteining her by sor^row. If thou saw my Rosalynd, with what
beauties Nature has favored her, with what perfection the heavens has graced
her, with what qualities the Gods have endued her; then would thou say, there
is none so fickle that could be fleeting unto her. I^ she had been Aeneas Dido,
had Venus and Juno both scolde^ him from Carthage, yet her excellence despite
of them, would have detained him at Tire. If Phillis had been as beauteous or
Ariadne as virtuous, or both as honorable and excellent a^ she; neither had
the Philbert tree sorrowed in the death of dispai^ring Phillis, nor the stars
have been graced with Ariadne but Demophoon and Theseus had been trusty to
their Paragons, I will tell thee Swayne, if with a deep insight thou coulds^
pierce into the secert at my loves, and see what deep impression^ of her Idea
affection has made in my heart: then would tho^ confess I were passing
passionate, and no less endued with admi^rable patience. Why (quoth Aliena)
needs there patience in love Or else in nothing (quoth Rosader) for it is a
restless sore, tha^ has no ease, a cankar that still frees, a disease that
takes awa^ all hope of sleep. If then so many sorrows, sudden joys,
mo^mentary pleasures, continual fears, daily griefs, and night^ woes be
found in love, then is not he to be accounted patien^ that smothers all
these passions with silence^: Thou speak by experience (quoth Ganimede) and
therefore we hold al thy words for Axioms: but is Love such a lingering malady?
It is (quoth he) either extreme or mean, according to the mind of the party
that entertaines it: for as the weeds grow longer untouched then the pretty
flowers, and the flint lies safe in the quarry, when the Emerauld is suffering
the Lapidaries tool: so mean men are freed from Venus injuries, when kings
are environed with a laborinth of her cares. The whiter the Lawne is, the
deeper is the moale, the more purer the Chrysolite the sooner stained: and such
as have their hearts full of honor, have their loves full of the greatest
sorrows. But in whomsoever (quoth Rosader) he fixes his dart, he never
leaves to assault him, till either he has won him to folly or fancy: for
as the Moon never goes without the star Lunisequa, so a Lover never goes
without the unrest of his thoughts. For proof you shall hear another fancy of
my making. Now do gentle Forrester (quoth Ganimede) and with that he read over
this Sonetto.

Rosaders second Sonetto.
Turn I my looks unto the Skies,
Love with his arrows wounds mine eyes,
If so I gaze upon the ground,
Love then every flower is found.
Search I the shade to fly my pain,
He meets me in the shade again:
Wend I to walk in secret grove,
Even there I meet with sacred Love.
If so I bayne me in the spring,
Even on the brinke I hear him sing:
If so I meditate alone,
He will be partner of my moan.
If so I mourn, he weeps with me,
And where I am, there will he be.
When as I talk of Rosalynd,
The God from coyness waxes kind,
And seems in self same flames to fry,
Because he loves as well as I.
Sweet Rosalynd for ptity rue,
For why, then Love I am more true:
He if he speed will quickly fly,
But in thy love I live and die.
How like you this Sonnet, quoth Rosader? Marry quoth Ganimede, for the pen
well, for the passionill: for as I praise the one, I pity the other, in that
thou should hunt after a cloud, and love either without reward or regard.
It Is neither frowardness, quoth Rosader, but my hard fortunes, whose destenies
have crossed me with her absence: for did she feel my loves, she would not let
me linger in these sorrows. Women, as they are fair, so they respect faith,
and estimate more (if they be honorable) the wit than the wealth, having
loyalty the object whereat they aim their fancies. But leaving off these
interparleyes, you shall hear my last Sonnetto, and then you have heard all my
Poetry: and with that he sight out this.

Rosaders third Sonnet.
Of virtuous Love my self may boast alone,
Since no suspect my service may attaint:
For perfect fair she is the only one,
Whom I esteem for my beloved Saint.
Thus for my faith I only bear the bell,
And for her fair she only does excel.
Then let fond Petrarch shroud his Lawraes praise,
And Tasso cease to publish his affect,
Since mine the faith confirmd at all assaies,
And hers the fair, which all men do respect.
My lines her fair, her fair my faith assures,
Thus I by Love, and Love by me indures.
Thus quoth Rosader, here is an end of my Poems, but for all this no release
of my passions: so that I resemble him, that in the deapth of his distress
has none but the Echo to answer him. Ganimede pitttying her Rosader,
thinking to drive him out of his amorous melancholy, said, that now the Sun
was in his Meridionall heat, and that it was high noone, therefore we
shepherds say, it is time to go to dinner: for the Sun and our stomachs, are
Shepherds dials. Therefore Forrester, if thou will take such fare as comes out
of our homely scrips, welcome shall answer whatsoever thou wantst in
delicates. Aliena took the entertainment by the end, and told Rosader he
should be her guest. He thankt them heartily, and sat with them down to
dinner: where they had such cates as Country state did allow them, sawst with
such content, and such sweet prattle, as it seemed far more sweet, than all
their Courtly iunckets.

As Soon as they had taken their repast, Rosader giving them thanks for his
good cheer, would have been gone: but Ganimede, that was loath to let him
pass out of her presence, began thus: Nay Forrester quoth he, if thy business
be not the greater, seeing thou saift thou art so deeply in love, let me see
how thou can woo: I will represent Rosalynde, and thou shall be as thou art
Rosader, see in some amorous Eglogue, how if Rosalynd were present, how thou
could court her: and while we sing of Love, Aliena shall tune her pipe, and
play us melody. Content, quoth Rosader. And Aliena, she to show her
willingness, drew forth a recorder, and began to wind it. Then the loving
Forrester began thus.

The wooing Eglogue betwixt Rosalynde and Rosader.
Rosader. I pray thee Nymph by all the working words,
By all the tears and sighs that Lovers know,
Or what our thoughts or faltring tongue affords,
I crave for mine in ripping up my woe.
Sweet Rosalynd my love (would God my love)
My life (would God my life) aye pity me:
Thy lips are kind, and humble like the dove,
And but with beauty pity will not be.
Looks on mine eyes made red with rufull tears,
From whence the rain of true remorse descends,
All pal^ in looks, and I though young in years,
And naught but love or death my days befriendeth.
Oh let no stormy rigor knit thy brows,
Which Love appointed for his mercy seat:
The tallest tree by Boreas breath it bows,
The iron yeels with hammer, and to keat.
Oh Rosalynd then be thou pitiful,
For Rosalynd is only beautiful.

Rosalynde. Loves want ons arm their traitrous suits with tears,
With vows, with oaths, with looks, with showers of gold:
But when the fruit of their affects appears,
The simple heart by subtle sleights is sold.
Thus sucks the yielding ear the poisoned bait,
Thus feeds the heart upon his endless harms,
Thus glut the thoughts themselves on self deceit,
Thus blind the eyes their sight by subtle charms.
The lovely looks, the sighs that storm so sore,
The deaw of deep dissembled doubleness:
These may attempt, but are of power no more,
Where beauty leanes to wit and soothfastnesse.
Oh Rosader then be thou wittifull,
For Rosalynd scorns foolish pitiful.

Rosader. I pray thee Rosalynd by those sweet eyes
That stain the Sun in shine, the morn in clear,
By those sweet cheeks where Love encamped lies
To kiss the Roses of the springing year.
I tempt thee Rosalynd by ruthful plaints,
Not seasoned with deceit or fraudfull guile,
But firm inpayn, far more than tongue depaints,
Sweet Nymph be kind, and grace me with a smile.
So may the heavens preserve from hurtful food
Thy harmless flocks, so may the Summer yield
The pride of all her riches and her good,
To fat thy sheep (the Citizens of field,)
Oh leave to arm thy lovely brows with scorn:
The birds their beak, the Lion has his tail,
And Lovers naught but sighs and bitter mourn,
The spotless fort of fancy to assail.
Oh Rosalynde then be thou pitiful:
For Rosalynde is only beautiful.

Rosalynde. The hardened steel by fire is brought in frame:

Rosader. And Rosalynde my love that any wool more softer:
And shall not sighs her tender heart inflame?

Rosalynde. Were Lovers true, maids would believe them ofter.

Rosader. Truth and regard, and honor guide my love.

Rosalynde. Pain would I trust, but yet I dare not try,

Rosader. Oh pity me sweet Nymph, and do but prove.

Rosalynde. I would resist, but yet I know not why.

Rosader. Oh Rosalynde be kind, for times will change,
Thy looks ay nill be fair as now they be,
Thine age from beauty may thy looks estrange:
Ah yield in time sweet Nymph and pity me.

Rosalynde. Oh Rosalynde thou must be pitiful:
For Rosader is young and beautiful.

Rosader, Oh gain more great than kingdoms or a crown.

Rosalynde. Oh trust betrayed if Rosader abuse me.

Rosader. First let the heavens conspire to pull me down,
And heaven and earth as abject quite refuse me:
Let sorrows stream about my hateful bower,
And retchlesse horror hatch within my breast,
Let beauties eye afflict me with a lower,
Let deep despair pursue me without rest:
Ere Rosalynde my loyalty disprove,
Ere Rosalynde accuse me for unkind.

Rosalynde. Then Rosalynde will grace thee with her love,
Then Rosalynde will have thee still in mind.

Rosader. Then let me triumph more than Tithons dear,
Since Rosalynde will Rosader respect:
Then let my face exile his sorry cheer,
And frolike in the comfort of affect:
And say that Rosalynde is only pitiful,
Since Rosalynde is only beautiful.

When thus they had finished their courting Eglogue in such a familiar clause,
Ganimede as Augure of some good fortunes to light upon their affections, began
to be thus pleasant: How now Forrester, have I not fitted your turn? have I
not playde the woman handsomely, and showed my self as coy in graunts, as
courteous in desires, and been as full of suspicion, as men of flattery? And
yet to salve all, iumpe I not all up with the sweet union of love? Did not
Rosalinde content her Rosader? The Forrester at this smiling, shook his head,
and folding his arms made this merry reply.

Truth gentle Swain, Rosader has his Rosalynde, but as Ixion had Juno, who
thinking to possess a goddess, only embraced a clowd: in these imaginary
fruitions of fancy, I resemble the birds that fed themselves with Zeuxis
painted grapes: but they grew so lean with pecking at shadows, that they were
glad with Aesops Cock to scrape for a barley cornell: so fares it with me,
who to feed my self with the hope of my Mistress favors, sooth my self in thy
suits, and only in conceit reap a wished for content: but if my food be no
better than such amorous dreams, Venus at the years end, shall find me but a
lean lover. Yet do I take these follyes for high fortunes, and hope these
fained affections do divine some unfeigned end of ensuing fancies. And
thereupon (quoth Aliena) I Will play the priest, from this day forth Ganimede
shall call thee husband, and thou shall call Ganimede wife, and so we will have a
marriage. Content quoth Rosader, and laughed. Content quoth Ganimede, and
changed as red as a rose: and so with a smile and a blush, they made up this
jesting match, that after proved to a marriage in earnest; Rosader full little
thinking he had wooed and woonne his Rosalynde.

But all was well, hope is a sweet string to harp on, and therefore let the
Forrester a while shape himself to his shadow, and tarry fortunes leisure,
till she may make a Metamorphosis fit for his purpose. I digress, and
therefore to Aliena: who said, the wedding was not worth a pin, unless
there were some cheer, nor that bargain well made that was not stricken up
with a cup of wine: and therefore she wild Ganimede to set out such cates as
they had, and to draw out her bottle, charging the Forrester as he had imagined
his loves, so to conceit these cates to be a most sumptuous banquet, and to
take a Mazer of wine, and to drink to his Rosalynde, which Rosader did, and so
they passed away the day in many pleasant devices. Till at last Aliena
perceived time would tarry no man, and that the Sun waxed very low, ready to
set: which made her shorten their amorous prattle, and end the banquet with a
fresh Carrowse: which done, they all three arose, and Aliena brake off thus.

Now Forrester, Phoebus that all this while has been partaker of our sports,
seeing every woodman more fortunate in his loves, than he in his fancies:
seeing thou have won Rosalynde, when he could not woo Daphne, hides his head
for shame, and bids us adieu in a clowd, our sheep they poor wantons wander
toward their foldes, as caught by Nature their due times of rest, which tells
us forester, we must depart. Marry though there were a marriage, yet I must
carry this night the bride with me, and tomorrow morning if you meet us
here, I Will promise to de^^uer you her as good a maid as I find her. Content
quoth Rosader, it is enough for me in the night to dream on love, that in the
day am so fond to doat an love: and so till to morrow you to your Folds, and
I will to my Lodge: and thus the Forrester and they parted. He was no sooner
gone, but Aliena and Ganimede went and folded their flocks, and taking up their
hooks, their bags, and their bottles, hyed homeward. By the way ( Aliena to
make the time seem short) began to prattle with Ganimede thus: I have heard
them say, that what the Fates forepoint, that Fortune pricketh down with a
Period, that the Stars are sticklers in Venus Court, and Desire hangs at the
heel of Destenie: if it be so, then by all probable coniecures, this match
will be a marriage: for if Augurisme be authentical, or the Deuines doomes
principles, it cannot be but such a shadow portends the issue of a substance,
for to that end did the Gods force the conceit of this Eglogue, that they
might discover the ensuing consent of your affections: so that ere it be long,
I hope (in earnest) to dance at your wedding.

Tush (quoth Ganimede) all is not malte that is cast on the kill, there goes
more words to a bargain than one, love feels no footing in the air, and
fancy holds it slippery harbor to nestle in the tongue: the match is not yet
so surely made, but he may miss of his market: but if fortune be his friend,
I will not be his foe: and so I pray you (gentle Mistress Aliena) take it. I
take all things well (quoth she) that is your content, and am glad Rosader is
yours: for now I hope your thoughts will be at quiet: your eye that ever
looked at Love, will now lend a glaunce on your Lambs, and then they will
prove more buxsome, and you more blyth, for the eyes of the Master feeds the
Cattle. As thus they were in chat, they spyed old Coridon where he came
plodding to meet them: who told them supper was ready, which news made them
speed them home. Where we will leave them to the next morrow, and return to
Saladyne.

All this while did poor Saladyne (banished from Bourdeux and the Court of
France by Torismond) wander up and down in the Forest of Arden, thinking to
get to Lions, and so travail through Germany into Italy: but the Forest
being full of by paths, and he unskillful of the country coast, slipped out of
the way, and chanced up into the Desert, not far from the place where
Gerismond was, and his brother Rosader. Saladyne weary with wandering up and
down, and hungry with long fasting, finding a little cave by the side of a
thicker, eating such fruit as the Forest did afford, and contenting himself
with such drink as Nature had provided, and thirst made delicate, after his
repast he fell in a dead sleep. As thus he lay, a hungry Lion came hunting
down the edge of the grove for pray, and espying Saladyne began to ceaze upon
him: but seeing he lay still without any motion, he left to touch him, for that
Lions hate to pray on dead carcasses: and yet desirous to have some food, the
Lion lay down and watched to see if he would stir. While thus Saladyne slept
secure, fortune that was careful of her champion, began to smile, and brought
it so to pass, that Rosader (having stricken a Dear that but lightly hurt fled
through the thicket) came pacing down by the grove with a Boar spear in his
hand in great haste, he spyed where a man lay a sleep, and a Lion fast by
him: amazed at this sight, as he stood gazing, his nose on the sudden bledde,
which made him conjecture it was some friend of his. Whereupon drawing more
nigh, he might easily discern his visage, and perceived by his phisnomie that
it was his brother Saladyne: which drove Rosader into a deep passion, as a man
perplexed at the sight of so unexpected a chance, maruelling what should drive
his Brother to trauerse those secret Deserts without any company in such
distress and forlorn sort. But the present time craved no such doubting
ambages: for he must either resolve to hazard his life for his relief, or else
steal away, and leave him to the cruelty of the Lion. In which doubt he thus
briefly debated with himself.

Rosaders meditation.
NOw Rosader, Fortune that long has whipped thee with nettles, means to salve
thee with roses, and having crossed thee with many frowns, now she presents thee
with the brightness of her favors. Thou that did count thy self the most
distressed of all men, may account thy self the most fortunate amongst men:
if fortune can make men happy, or sweet revenge be wrapped in a pleasing content.
Thou see Saladyne thine enemy, the worker of thy misfortunes, and the
efficient cause of thine exile, subject to the cruelty of a merciless Lion:
brought into this misery by the Gods, that they might seem just in revenging
his rigor, and thy injuries. See thou not how the Stars are in a favorable
aspect, the planets in some pleasing conjunction, the fates agreeable to thy
thoughts, and the destinies performers of thy desires, in that Saladyne shall
die, and thou be free of his blood: he receive meed for his amiss, and thou
erect his Tomb with innocent hands. Now Rosader shall thou return unto
Bourdeaux, and enjoy thy possessions by birth, and his reuenews by
inheritance: now may thou triumph in Love, and hang fortunes Altars with
garlands. For when Rosalynde hears of thy wealth, it will make her love thee
the more willingly: for women's eyes are made of Chrisecoll, that is ever
imperfect unless tempred with gold: and Jupiter soonest enjoyed Danae, because
he came to her in so rich a shower. Thus shall this Lion ( Rosader) end the
life of a miserable man, and from distress raise thee to be most fortunate.
And with that casting his Boar spear on his neck away he began to trudge.
But he had not stepped back two or three paces, but a new motion stroke him to
the very heart, that resting his Boar spear against his breast, he fell into
this passionate humor.

Ah Rosader, were thou the son of Sir John of Bourdeux, whose virtues
exceeded his valor, and the most hardiest Knight in all Europe? Should the
honor of the Father shine in the actions of the Son? and will thou dishonor
thy parentage, in forgetting the nature of a Gentleman? Did not thy father at
his last gasp breath out this golden principle: Brothers amity is like the
drops of Balsamum, that salueth the most dangerous sores? Did he make a large
exhort unto concord, and will thou show thy self careless? Oh Rosader, what
though Saladyne has wronged thee, and made the live an exile in the Forest?
shall thy Nature be so cruel, or thy Nurture so crooked, or thy thoughts so
savage, as to suffer so dismal a revenge? what, to let him be devoured by
wild beasts? Non sapit, qui non sibi sapit is fondly spoken in such bitter
extremes. Loose not his life Rosader, to win a world of treasure: for in
having him thou have a broth^r, and by hazarding for his life, thou gettest a
friend, and reconcilest an enemy: and more honor shall thou purchase by
pleasuring a foe, than revenging a thousand injuries.

With that his Brother began to stir, and the Lion to rowse himself:
whereupon Rosader suddenly charged him with the Boar spear, and wounded the
Lion very sore at the first stroke. The beast feeling himself to have a
mortal hurt, leapt at Rosader, and with his paws gave him a sore piuch on the
breast, that he had almost fallen: yet as a man most valiant, in whom the sparks
of Sir John of Bordeaux remained, he recovered himself, and in short combat
slew the Lion: who at his death roared so loud, that Saladyne awaked, and
starting up was amazed at the sudden sight of so monstrous a beast lying slain
by him, and so sweet a Gentleman wounded. He presently (as he was of a ripe
conceit) began to conjecture, that the Gentleman had slain him in his
defense. Whereupon (as a man in a trance) he stood staring on them both a good
while, not knowing his Brother being in that disguise: at last he burst into
these terms.

Sir, whatsoever thou be (as full of honor thou must needs be, by the view of
thy present valor) I perceive thou have redressed my fortunes by thy courage,
and saved my life with thine own loss: which ties me to be thine in all humble
service. Thanks thou shall have as thy due, and more thou can not have: for
my ability denies me to perform a deeper debt. But if any ways it please
thee to command me, use me as far as the power of a poor Gentleman may
stretch.

Rosader seeing he was unknown to his Brother, woondered to hear such
courteous words come from his crabbed nature, but glad of such reformed
nurture, he made this answer. I am sir (whatsoever thou art) a Forrester and
Ranger of these walks: who following my Dear to the fall, was conducted
hither by some assenting Fate, the I might save thee, and disparage my self.
For coming into this place, I saw thee a sleep, and the Lion watching thy
awake, that at thy rising he might pray upon thy carcass. At the first sight
I coniectured thee a Gentleman (for all men's thoughts ought to be fouorable in
imagination) and I counted it the part of a resolute man to purchase a
strangers relief, though with the loss of his own blood: which I have
performed (thou see) to mine own prejudice. If therefore thou be a man of
such worth as I value thee by thy exterior liniaments, make discourse unto me
what is the cause of thy present misfortunes. For by the furrows in thy face
thou seem to be crossed with her frowns: but whatsoever or howsoever, let
me crave that favor, to hear the tragic cause of thy estate. Saladyne
sitting down, and fetching a deep sigh, began thus.

Saladynes discourse to Rosader unknown.
ALthough the discourse of my fortunes, be the renewing of my sorrows, and the
rubbing of the scarre, will open a fresh wound: yet that I may not prove
ungrateful to so courteous a Gentleman, I will rather sit down and sigh out
my estate, then give any offense by smothering my grief with silence. Know
therefore (sir) that I am of Bourdeaux, and the son and heir of Sir John of
Bourdeaux, a man for his virtues and valor so famous, that I cannot think,
but the fame of his honors has reached further than the knowledge of his
personage. The unfortunate son of so fortunate a Knight am I, my name
Saladine: who succeeding my Father in possessions, but not in qualities, having
two Brethren committed by my Father at his death to my charge, with such golden
principles of brotherly concord, as might have pierst like the Sirens melody
into any humane ear. But I (with Ulysses became deaf against his
Philosophical harmony, and made more value of profit than of virtue, esteeming
gold sufficient honor, and wealth the fittest title for a gentleman's dignity:
I set my middle brother to the University to be a Scholar, counting it
enough if he might pore on a book while I fed on his revenues: and for the
yoongest (which was my Fathers joy) young Rosader. And with that, naming of
Rosader, Saladyne sat him down and wept,

Nay forward man (quoth the Forrester) tears are the unfittest salve that any
man can apply for to cure sorrows, and therefore cease from such feminine
follies, as should drop out of a woman's eye to deceive, not out of a Gentleman's
look to discover his thoughts, and forward with thy discourse.

Oh sir (quoth Saladyne) this Rosader that wrings tears from my eyes, and blood
from my heart, was like my father in exterior personage and in inward
qualities: for in the prime of his years he aimed all his acts at honor, and
covered rather to die, than to brook any injury unworthy a Gentleman's credit.
I, whom envy had made blind, and covetousness masked with the veil of
self-love, seeing the Palm tree grow straight, thought to suppress it being
a twig: but Nature will have her course, the Cedar will be tall, the Diamond
bright, the Carbuncle glistering, and virtue will shine though it be never so
much obscured. For I kept Rosader as a slave, and used him as one of my servile
hindes, until age grew on, and a secret insight of my abuse entered into his
mind: insomuch, that he could not brook it, but coueted to have what his
father left him, and to live of himself. To be short sir, I repined at his
fortunes, and he countercheckt me not with ability but valor, until at last
by my friends and aid of such as followed gold more than right or virtue, I
banished him from Bourdeaux, and he poor Gentleman lives no man knows where
in some distressed discontent. The Gods not able to suffer such impiety
unrevenged, so wrought, that the King picked a causeless quarrel against me, in
hope to have my lands, and so has exiled me out of France for ever. Thus, thus
sir, am I the most miserable of almen, as having a blemish in my thoughts for
the wrongs I proffered Rosader, and a touch in my estate to be thrown from my
proper possessions by injustice. Passionat thus with many griefs, in penance of
my former follies, I go thus pilgrim like to seek out my brother, that I may
reconcile my self to him in all submission, and afterward wend to the holy
Land, to end my years in as many virtues, as I have spent my youth in wicked
vanities.

Rosader hearing the resolution of his brother Saladyne, began to compassionate
his sorrows, and not able to smother the sparks of Nature with fained
secretie, he burst into these loving speeches. Then know Saladyne (quoth he)
that thou have met with Rosader, who grieves as much to see thy distress, as
thy self to feel the burden of thy misery. Saladyne casting up his eye, and
noting well the phisnomy of the Forrester, knew that it was his brother
Rosader: which made him so bash and blush at the first meeting, yt Rosader was
feign to recomfort him. Which he did in such sort, that he showed how highly
he held revenge in scorn. Much a do there was between these two brethren.
Saladyne in craving pardon, and Rosader in forgiving and forgetting all former
injuries: the one submisse, the other courteous; Saladyne penitent and
passionate, Rosader kind and loving; that at length Nature working an union of
their thoughts, they earnestly embraced, and fell from matters of unkindness,
to talk of the Country life, which Rosader so highly commended, that his
brother began to have a desire to taste of that homely content. In this humor
Rosader conducted him to Gerismonds Lodge, and presented his brother to the
King, discoursing the whole matter how all had happened betwixt them. The King
looking upon Saladyne, found him a man of a most beautiful personage, and saw
in his face sufficient sparks of ensuing honors, gave him great entertainment,
and glad of their friendly reconcilement, promised such favor as the pouertic
of his estate might afford: which Saladyne gratefully accepted. And so
Gerismond fell to question Torismonds life? Saladyne briefly discourst unto him
his injustice and tyrannies: with such modesty (although he had wronged him)
that Gerismond greatly praised the sparing speech of the young Gentleman.

Many questions past, but atlast Gerismond began with a deep sigh, to inquire
if there were any news of the welfare of Alinda or his daughter Rosalynd? None
sir quoth Saladyne, for since their departure they were never heard of.
Injurious Fortune (quoth the King) that to double the fathers misery, wrongst
the daughter with misfortunes. And with that (surcharged with sorrows) he went
into his Cell, and left Saladyne and Rosader, whom Rosader straight conducted
to the sight of Adam Spencer. Who seeing Saladyne in that estate, was in a
brown study: but when he heard the whole matter, although he grieved for the
exile of his master, yet be ioyed that banishment had so reformed him, that
from a lascivious youth he was proved a verteous Gentleman. Looking a longer
while, and seeing what familiarity past between them, and what favors were
interchanged with brotherly affection, he said thus: I marry, thus it should
be, this was the concord that old sir John of Bourdeaux wished betwyxt you. Now
fulfill you those precepts he breathed out at his death, and in observing them,
look to live fortunate, and die honorable. Well said Adam Spencer quoth
Rosader, but have any victuals in store for us? A piece of a red Deer (quoth
he) and a bottle of wine. It Is Forresters fare brother, quoth Rosader: and so
they sat down and sell to their cates. As Soon as they had taken their repast,
and had well dined, Rosader took his brother Saladyne by the hand, and showed
him the pleasures of the Forest, and what content they enjoyed in that mean
estate. Thus for two or three days he walked up and down with his brother, to
show him all the commodities that belonged to his walk. In which time he was
mist of his Ganymede, who mused greatly (with Aliena) what should become of
their forester. Somewhile they thought he had taken some word unkindly, and had
taken the pet: then they imagined some new Love had withdrawn his fancy, or
happily that he was sick, or detained by some great business of Gerismonds,
or that he had made a reconcilement with his brother, and so returned to
Bourdeaux.

These conjectures did they cast in their heads, but specially Ganimede: who
having Love in heart proved restless, and half without patience, that
Rosader wronged her with so long absence: for Love measures every minute, and
thinks hours to be days, and days to be months, till they feed their
eyes with the sight of their desired object. Thus perplexed lived poor
Ganymede: while on a day sitting with Aliena in a great dumpe, she cast up her
eye, and saw where Rosader came pacing toward them with his Forest bill on
his neck. At that sight her color changde, and she said to Aliena, See
Mistress where our jolly Forrester comes. And you are not a little glad
thereof (quoth Aliena) your nose bewrayes what porredge you love, the wind
cannot be tied within his quarter, the Sun shadowed with a veil, Oil hidden
in water, nor Love kept out of of a woman's looks: but no more of that, Lupus
est in fabula. As Soon as Rosader was come within the reach of her tongues
end, Aliena began thus: Why how now gentle Forrester, what wind has kept you
from hence? that being so newly married, you have no more care of your
Rosalynd, but to absent your self so many days? Are these the passions you
painted out so in your Sonnets and roundelaies? I see well hot love is soon
cold, and that the fancy of men, is like to a loose feather that wandreth in
the air with the blast of every wynd. You are deceived Mistres quoth Rosader,
it was a copy of unkindness that kept me hence, in that I being married, you
carried away the Bride: but if I have given any occasion of offense by absenting
my self these three days, I humbly sue for pardon: which you must grant of
course, in that the fault is so friendly confessed with penance. But to tell you
the truth (fair Mistress, and my good Rosalynd) my eldest brother by the
injury of Torismond is banished from Bourdeaux, and by chance he and I met in
the Forest. And here Rosader discourst unto them what had happened betwixt
them: which reconcilement made them glad, especially Ganimede. But Aliena
hearing of the tyranny of her father, grieved inwardly, and yet smothred all
things with such secrecy, that the concealing was more sorrow then the
conceit: yet that her estate might be hyd still, she made fair weather of it,
and so let all pass.

Fortune, that saw how these parties valued not her Deity, but held her power
in scorn, thought to have about with them, and brought the matter to pass
thus. Certain Rascals that lived by prowling in the Forest, who for fear of
the Provost Marshall had Caves in the groaues and thickets, to shrowde
themselves from his trains: hearing of the beauty of this fair shepherdess
Aliena, thought to steal her away, and to give her to the King for a present,
hoping, because the King was a great leacher, by such a gift to purchase all
their pardons: and therefore came to take her and her Page away. Thus resolved,
while Aliena and Ganimede were in sad talk, they came rushing in, and laid
violent hands upon Aliena and her Page, which made them cry out to Rosader:
who having the valor of his father stamped in his heart, thought rather to die
in defense of his friends, than any way be touched with the least blemish of
dishonor: and therefore dealt such blows amongst them with his weapon, as he
did witness well upon their carcasses, that he was no coward. But as Ne
Hercules quidem contra duos, so Rosader could not resist a multitude, having
none to back him: so that he was not only rebatted, but sore wounded, and
Aliena and Ganimede had been quite carried away by these Rascalles, had not
Fortune (that meant to turn her frown into a favor) brought Saladyne that way
by chance, who wandering to find out his brothers walk, encountered this crew:
and seeing not only a shepherdess and her boy forced, but his brother
wounded, he heaued up a Forest bill be had on his neck, and the first he
stroke had never after more need of the Physician: redoubling his blows with
such courage, that the flaues were amazed at his valor.

Rosader espying his brother so fortunately arrived, and seeing how valiantly
he behaved himself, though sore wounded, rushed amongst them, and laid on such
load, that some of the crew were slain, and the rest fled, leaving Aliena and
Ganimede in the possession of Rosader and Saladyne.

Aliena after she had breathed a while and was come to her self from this
fear, looked about her, and saw where Ganimede was busy dressyng up the
wounds of the forrester: but she cast her eye upon this courteous Champion
that had made so hot a rescue, and that with such affection, that she began
to measure every part of him with favor, and in her self to commend his
personage and his virtue, holding him for a resolute man, that durst assail
such a troop of unbridled villains. At last gathering her spirits together,
she returned him these thanks.

Gentle sir, whatsoever you be that have adventured your flesh to relieve our
fortunes, and to have as many hidden virtues, as you have manifest resolutions.
We poor Shepherds have no wealth but our flocks, and therefore can we not
make requital with any great treasures: but our recompense is thanks, and our
rewards to our friends without faining. For rannsome therefore of this our
rescue, you must content your self to take such a kind gramercy, as a poor
shepherdess and her Page may give: with promise (in what we may) never to
prove ungrateful. For this Gentleman that is hurt, young Rosader, he is our
good neighbor and familiar acquaintance, we will pay him with smiles, and feed
him with loue-lookes: and though he be never the fatter at the years end, yet
we will so hamper him that he shall hold himself satisfied.

Saladyne hearing this shepherdess speak so wisely, began more narrowly to
pry into her perfection, and to survey all her liniaments with a curious
insight: so long dallying in the flame of her beauty, that to his cost he
found her to be most excellent: for Love that lucked in all these broils to
have a blow or two, seeing the parties at the gaze, encountered them both with
such a veny, that the stroke pierst to the heart so deep, as it could never
after be raced out. At last after he had looked so long, till Aliena waxt red,
he returned her this answer.

Fair Shepherdess, if Fortune graced me with such good hap, as to do you
any favor, I hold my self as contented, as if I had gotten a great conquest:
for the relief of distressed women is the special point, that Gentleman are
tied unto by honor: seeing then my hazard to rescue your harms, was rather
duty than courtesy, thanks is more than belongs to the requital of such a
favor. But least I might seem either too coy or too careless of a
Gentlewomans proffer, I will take your kind gramercie for a recompense. All
this while that he spoke, Ganimede looked earnestly upon him, and said, Truly
Rosader, this Gentleman favors you much in the feature of your face. No
marvel (quoth he, gentle Swayne) for it is my eldest brother Saladyne. Your
brother quoth Aliena? (and with that she blushed) he is the more welcome, and I
hold my self the more his debtor: and for that he has in my behalf done such a
piece of service, if it please him to do me that honor, I will call him servant,
and he shall call me mistress. Content sweet mistress quoth Saladyne, and when
I forget to call you so, I will be unmindful of mine own self. Away with
these quirkes and quiddities of love quoth Rosader, and give me some drink,
for I am passing thirsty, and then will I home for my wounds bleed sore, and
I will have them dressed. Ganimede had tears in her eyes, and passions in her
heart to see her Rosader so payned, and therefore stepped hastily to the bottle,
and filling out some wine in a Mazer, she spiced it with such comfortable
drugges as she had about her, and gave it him, which did comfort Rosader: that
rising (with the help of his brother) he took his leave of them, and went to
his Lodge. Ganimede as soon as they were out of sight, led his flocks down to
a vale, and there under the shadow of a Beech tree sat down, and began to
mourn the misfortunes of her sweet heart.

And Aliena (as a woman passing discontent) seuering her self from her
Ganimede, sitting under a Lymon tree, began to to sigh out the passions of her
new Love, and to meditate with her self on this manner.

Alienaes meditation.
AYe me, now I see, and sorrowing sigh to see that Dianaes Laurels are harbors
for Venus Doves, that there trace as well through the Lawnes, wantons as chaste
ones, that Calisto be she never so charie, will cast one amorous eye at courting
Jove: that Diana her self will change her shape, but she will honor Love in
a shadow: that maidens eyes be they as hard as Diamonds, yet Cupide has
drugs to make them more pliable than wax. See Alinda, how Fortune and Love
have interleagued themselves to be thy foes: and to make thee their subject or
else an abject, have inueigled thy sight with a most beautiful object. Alate
thou did hold Venus for a giglot, not a goddess, and now thou shall be
forced to sue suppliant to her Deity. Cupide was a boy and blind, but alas his
eye had aim enough to pierce thee to the heart. While I lived in the Court, I
held Love in contempt, and in high seats I had small desires. I knew not
affection while I lived in dignity, nor could Venus counterchecke me, as long
as my fortune was majesty, and my thoughts honor: and shall I now be high
in desires, when I am made low by Destenie?

I have heard them say, that Love looks not at low cottages, that Venus iettes
in Roabes not in rags, that Cupide flies so high, that he scorns to touch
poverty with his heel. Tush Alinda, these are but old wives tales, and
neither authentical precepts, nor infallible principles: for experience tells
thee, that Peasauntes have their passions, as well as Princes, that Swaynes as
they have their labors, so they have their amoures, and Love lurkes as soon
about a Sheepcoate, as a Pallaice.

Ah Alinda, this day in avoiding a prejudice thou art fallen into a deeper
mischief, being rescued from the robbers, thou art become captive to Saladyne:
and what then? Women must love, or they must cease to live: and therefore did
Nature frame them fair, that they might be subject to fancy. But perhaps
Saladines eye is leuelde upon a more seemlier Saint. If it be so, bear thy
passions with patience, say Love has wronged thee, that has not wroong him,
and if he be proud in contempt, be thou rich in content, and rather dye than
discover any desire: for there is nothing more precious in a woman, than to
conceal Love, and to die modest. He is the son and heir of sir John of
Bourdeaux, a youth comely enough: oh Alinda, too comely, else had not thou
been thus discontent: valiant, and that fettered thine eye: wise, else had
thou not been now won: but for all these virtues, banished by thy father, and
therefore if he know thy parentage, he will hate the fruit for the tree, and
condemn the young sien for the old stock. Well, howsoever, I must love: and
whomsoever, I will: and whatsoever betide, Aliena will think well of Saladyne:
suppose he of me as he please. And with that fetching a deep sigh, she rise up,
and went to Ganimede: who all this while sat in a great dumpe, fearing the
imminent danger of her friend Rosader, but now Aliena began to comfort her, her
self being over grown with sorrows, and to recall her from her melancholy
with many pleasant persuasions. Ganimede took all in the best part, and so
they went home together after they had folded their flocks, supping with old
Coridon, who had provided there cates. He after supper, to pass away the
night while bed time, began a long discourse, how Montanus the young shepherd
that was in love with Phoebe, could by no means obtain any favor at her
hands: but still pained in restless passions, remained a hopeless and
perplexed Lover. I would I might (quoth Aliena) once see that Phoebe, is she so
fair, that she thinks no shepherd worthy of her beauty? or so froward, that
no love nor loyalty will content her, or so coy, that she requires a long time
to he wooed, or so foolish that she forgets, that like a fop she must have a
large harvest for a little corn?

I cannot distinguish (quoth Coridon) of these nice qualities: but one of these
days I Will bring Montanus and her down, that you may both see their persons,
and note their passions: and then where the blame is, there let it rest. But
this I am sure quoth Coridon, if al maidens were of her mind, the world would
grow to a mad pass: for there would be great store of wooing and little
wedding, many words and little worship, much folly and no faith. At this sad
sentence of Coridon so solempnly brought forth, Aliena smiled: and because it
waxt late, she and her page went to bed, both of them having fleas in their
ears to keep them awake, Ganimede for the hurt of her Rosader, and Aliena for
the affection she bore to Saladyne. In this discontented humor they past away
the time, till falling on sleep, their senses at rest, love left them to their
quiet slumbers: which were not long. For as soon as Phoebus rose from his
Aurora, and began to mount him in the Sky, summoning Plough-swaines to their
handy labor, Aliena arose, and going to the couch where Ganimede lay, awakened
her page, and said the morning was far spent, the deaw small, and time called
them away to their foldes. Ah, ah quoth Ganimede, is the wind in that door?
then in faith I perreiue that there is no Diamond so hard but will yield to the
file, no Cedar so strong but the wind will shake, nor any mind so chaste but
Love will change. Well Aliena, must Saladyne be the man, and will it be a
match? Trust me he is fair and valiant, the son of a worthy Knight, whom if
he imitate in perfection, as he represents him in proportion, he is worthy of
no less than Aliena. But he is an exile, what then? I hope my Mistress
respects the virtues not the wealth, and measures the qualities not the
substance. Those Dames that are like Danae, that like Jove in no shape but in a
shower of gold: I wish them husbands with much wealth and little wit, that
the want of the one may blemish the abundance of the other. It should (my
Aliena) slain the honor of a shepherds life to set the end of passions upon
pelf. Loves eyes looks not so low as gold, there is no fees to be paid in
Cupids Courts: and in elder time (as Coridon has told me) the Shepherds
Loue-gifts were apples and chestnuts, and then their desires were loyal, and
their thoughts constant. But now Quaerenda pecunia primum, post nummos virtus.

And the time is grown to that which Horace in his Satyrs wrote on: omnis enim
res
Virtus famae decus diuina humanaque pulchris
Diuitiis parent: quas qui constrinxerint ille
Clarus erit, fortis, iustus, sapiens, etiam and rex
Et quicquid volet-


But Aliena let it not be so with thee in thy fancies, but respect his faith,
and there an end. Aliena hearing Ganimede thus forward to further Saladyne in
his affections, thought she kissed the child for the nurses sake, and woed for
him that she might please Rosader, made this reply. Why Ganimede, whereof
grows this persuasion? Have thou seen Love in my looks? or are mine eyes
grown so amorous, that they discover some new intertayned fancies: If thou
measurest my thoughts by my countenance, thou may prove as ill a
Phisiognomer as the Lapidarie, that aims at the secret virtues of the Topare,
by the exterior shadow of the stone. The operation of the Agate is not known by
the strakes, not the Diamond prized by his brightness, but by his hardness.
The Carbuncle that shines most, is not ever the most precious: and the
Apothecaries choose not flowers for their colors, but for their virtues.
Women's faces are not always Calenders of fancy, nor do their thought and
their looks ever agree: for when their eyes are fullest of favors, then are
they often most empty of desire: and when they seem to frown at disdain, then
are they most forward to affection. If I be melancholy, then Ganimede, it is
not a consequence that I am entangled with the perfection of Saladyne. But
seeing fire cannot be hid in the straw, nor Love kept so covert but it will be
spyed, what should friends conceal fancies? Know my Ganimede, the beauty
and valor, the wit and prowess of Saladyne has fettered Aliena so far, as
there is no object pleasing to her eyes, but the sight of Saladine: and if Love
have done me justice, to wrap his thoughts in the foldes of my face, and that
he be as deeply enamoured as I am passionate: I tell thee Ganimede, there shall
not be much wooing, for she is already won, and what needs a longer battery.
I am glad quoth Ganimede, that it shall be thus proportioned, you to match with
Saladyne, and I with Rosader: thus have the Destenies favored us with some
pleasing aspect, that have made us as private in our loves, as familiar in our
fortunes.

With this Ganimede start up, made her ready, and went into the fields with
Aliena: where unfolding their flocks, they sat them down under an Olive
tree, both of them amorous, and yet diversely affected: Aliena ioying in the
excellence of Saladyne, and Ganimede sorowing for the wounds of her Rosader,
not quiet in thought till she might hear of his health. As thus both of them
sat in their dumpes, they might epsy where Coridon came running toward them
(almost out of breath with his have)^ What news with you (quoth Aliena) that
you come in such post? Oh Mistres (quoth Coridon) you have a long time desired
to see Phoebe the fair shepherdess whom Montanus loves: so now if it please
you and Ganimede to walk with me to yonder thicket, there shall you see
Montanus and her sitting by a Fountain, he courting her with his Country
ditties, and she as coy as if she held love in disdain.

The news were so welcome to the two Lovers, that up they rose, and went with
Coridon. As Soon as they drew nigh the thicket, they might epsy where Phoebe
sat, (the fairest shepherdess in all Arden, and he the frolickst swain in
the whole forest) she in a petticote of scarlet, covered with a green mantle,
and to shroud her from the Sun, a chaplet of roses: from under which appeared
a face full of Natures excellence, and two such eyes as might have amated a
greater man than Montanus. At gaze upon this gorgeous Nymph sat the
Shepherd, feeding his eyes with her favors, wooing with such piteous looks,
and courting with such deep strained sighs, as would have made Diana her self
to have been compassionate, at last fixing his looks on the riches of her
face, his head on his hand, and his elbow on his knee, he sung this mournful
Ditttie.

Montanus Sonnet.
ATurtle sat upon a leauelesse tree,
Mourning her absent pheare,
With sad and sorry cheer:
About her wondering stood
The Citizens of Wood,
And whilst her plumes she rents,
And for her love laments,
The stately trees complain them,
The birds with sorrow pain them:
Each one that does her view,
Her pain and sorrows rue,
But were the sorrows known,
That me has overthrown,
Oh how would Phoebe sigh, if she did look on me?
The love sick Polypheme that could not see,
Who on the barraine shore,
His fortunes does deplore,
And melts all in moan,
For Galatea gone:
And with his piteous cries,
Afflicts both earth and skies:
And to his woe betook,
Does break both pipe and book:
For whom complains the Morn,
For whom the Sea Nymphs mourn,
Alas his pain is naught:
For were my woe but thought,
Oh how would Phoebe sigh, if she did look on me?
Beyond compare my pain
yet glad am I,
If gentle Phoebe daine
to see her Montan die.
After this Montanus felt his passions so extreme, that he fell into this
exclamation against the injustice of Love.

Helas Tirant plein de rigueur,
Modere un peu ta violence:
Que te sert si grande dispense?
C'est trop de flammes pour un cueur.
Esparguez en vne estincelle,
Puis fay ton effort d'esmouoir,
La fiere qui ne veut point voir,
En quel fu je brousle pour elle.
Execute Amor ce dessein,
Et rabaisse un peu son audace,
Son cuer ne doit estre de glace.
Bien que elle ait de Niege le sein.
Montanus ended his Sonet with such a volley of sighs, and such a stream of
tears, as might have moved any but Phoebe to have granted him favor. But she
measuring all his passions with a coy disdain, and triumphing in the poor
shepherds patheticall humors, smiling at his martyrdom, as though love had
been no malady, scornfully warbled out this Sonet.

Phoebes Sonnet, a reply to Montanus passion.
Down a down,
Thus Phyllis sung
by fancy once distressed:
Who so by foolish love are stung,
are worthily oppressed.
And so sing I. With a down, down, etc.
When Love was first begot,
And by the mouers will
Did fall to humane lot
His solace to fulfill.
Deuoid of all deceit,
A chaste and holy fire
Did quicken man's conceit,
And women's breast inspire,
The Gods that saw the good
That mortals did approve,
With kind and holy mood,
Began to talk of Love.
Down a down,
Thus Phyllis sung
by fancy once distressed, etc.
But during this accord,
A wonder strange to hear:
Whilst Love in deed and word
Most faithful did appear.
False semblance came in place,
By jealousy attended,
And with a double face
Both love and fancy blended.
Which make the Gods for sake,
And men from fancy fly,
And maidens scorn a make,
For sooth and so will I.
Down a down.
Thas Phyllis sung
by fancy once distressed:
Who so by foolish love are stung
are worthily oppressed.
And so sing I, with down, a down, a down a.
Montanus hearing the cruel resolution of Phoebe, was so euergrowne with
passions, that from amorous Ditties he fell flat into these terms: Ah Phoebe
quoth he, whereof art thou made, that thou regardest not thy malady? Am I so
hateful an object, that thine eyes condemn me for an object? or so base,
that thy desires cannot stoop so low as to lend me a gracious look? My
passions are many, my loves more, my thoughts loyalty, and my fancy faith: al
devoted in humble deuoire to the service of Phoebe: and shall I reap no reward
for such fealties. The Swains daily labors is quit with the euenings hire,
the Ploughmans toil is eased with the hope of corn, what the Ox sweates out
at the plough, he farneth at the cribbe: but unfortunate Montanus, has no
salve for his sorrows, nor any hope of recompense for the hazard of his
perplexed passions. If Phoebe, time may plead the proof of my truth, twice
seven winters have I loved fair Phoebe: if constancy be a cause to further
my suit, Montanus thoughts have been sealed in the sweet of Phoebes
excellence, as far from change as she from love: if outward passions may
discover inward affections, the furrows in my face may discover the sorrows of
my heart, and the map of my looks the griefs of my mind. Thou see ( Phoebe)
the tears of despair have made my cheeks full of wrinckles, and my scalding
sighs have made the air Ecchoher pity conceived in my plaintes: Philomele
hearing my passions, has left her mournful tunes to listen to the discourse
of my miseries. I have pourtrayed in every tree the beauty of my Mistres, and
the despair of my loves. What is it in the woods cannot witness my woes? and
who is it would not pity my plaints? Only Phoebe. And why? Because I am
Montanus, and she Phoebe: I a worthles Swain, and she the most excellent of
all faires. Beautiful Phoebe, oh might I say pitiful, then happy were I
though I tasted but one minute of that good hap. Measure Montanus, not by his
fortunes, but by his loves, and balance not his wealth, but his desires, and
lend but one gracious look to cure a heap of disquieted cares: if not, ah if
Phoebe cannot love, let a storm of frowns end the discontent of my thoughts,
and so let me perish in my desires, because they are above my deserts: only at
my death this favor cannot be denied me, that al shall say Montanus died for
love of hard hearted Phoebe. At these words she filled her face full of frowns,
and made him this short and sharp reply.

Importunate shepherd, whose loves are lawless, because restless: are thy
passions so extreme, that thou can not conceal them with patience? Or art
thou so folly-sicke, that thou must needs be fancie-sicke, and in thy affection
tied to such an exigent, as none serves but Phoebe? Well sir, if your market can
be made no where else, home again, for your Mart is at the fairest, Phoebe is
no lettice for your lips, and her grapes hangs so high, that gaze at the^ you
may, but touch them you cannot. Yet Montanus I speak not this in pride, but in
disdain: not that I scorn thee, but that I hate love: for I count it as great
honor to triumph over fancy, as over fortune. Rest thee content therefore
Montanus, cease from thy loves, and bridle thy looks, quench the sparkles
before they grow to a further flame: for in loving me thou shall but live by
loss, and what thou vtterest in words are all written in the wind. Were thou (
Montanus) as fair as Paris, as hardy as Hector, as constant as Troylus, as
loving as Leander, Phoebe could not love, because she cannot love at all: and
therefore if thou pursue me with Phoebus, I must fly with Daphne.

Ganimede ouer-hearing all these passions of Montanus, could not brook the
cruelty of Phoebe, but starting from behind the bush said: And if Damzell you
fled from me, I would transform you as Daphne to a bay, and then in contempt
trample your branches under my feet. Phoebe at this sudden replye was amazed,
especially when she saw so fair a Swain as Ganimede, blushing therefore she
would have been gone: but that he held her by the hand, and prosecuted his
reply thus. What shepherdess, so fair, and so cruel? Disdain beseemes not
cottages, nor coyness maids: for either they be condemned to be too proud, or
too froward. Take heed fair Nymph, that in despising love, you be not
ouer-reacht with love, and in shaking off all, shape your self to your own
shadow, and so with Narcissus prove passi^nat and yet unpitied. Often have I
heard, and sometime have I seen, high disdain turned to hot desires. Because
thou art beautiful, be not so coy: as there is nothing more fair, so there is
nothing more fading: as momentary as the shadows which grows from a clowdy
Sun. Such (my fair Shepherdess) as disdain in youth desire in age, and
then are they hated in the winter, that might have been loved in the prime. A
wringled maid is like to a parched Rose, that is cast up in Coffers to please
the smell, not worn in the hand to content the eye. There is no folly in Love
to had I wist: and therefore be ruled by me, Love while thou art young, least
thou be disdained when thou art old. Beauty nor time cannot be recalde, and
if thou love, like of Montanus for^ as his desires are many, so his deserts are
great.

Phoebe all this while gazed on the perfection of Ganimede, as deeply enamored
on his perfection, as Montanus inueigled with hers: for her eye made survey of
his excellent feature, which she found so rare, that she thought the ghost of
Adonis had been leapt from Elysium in the shape of a Swain. When she blushed
at her own folly to look so long on a stranger, she mildely made answer to
Ganimede thus I cannot deny sir but I have heard of Love, though I never felt
Love: and have read of such a goddess as Venus, though I never saw any but
her picture: and perhaps, and with that she waxedred and bashful, and with
all silent: which Ganimede perceiving, commended in her self the bashfulnesse
of the maid, and desired her to go forward. And perhaps sir (quoth she) mine
eye has been more prodigal to day than ever before: and with that she stayed
again, as one greatly passionate and perplexed. Aliena seeing the hare through
the maze, hade her forward with her prattle: but in vain, for at this abrupt
period she broke off, and with her eyes full of tears, and her face covered
with a vermillion die, she sat down and sighed. Whereupon, Aliena and Ganimede
seeing the Shepherdess in such a strange plight, left Phoebe with her
Montanus, wishing her friendly that she would be more pliant to Love, least in
penance Venus joined her to some sharp repentance. Phoebe made no reply, but
fetched such a sigh, that Echo made relation of her plaint: giving Ganimede
such an adieu with a piercing glance, that the amorous Girle-boy perceived
Phoebe was pincht by the heel.

But leauig Phoebe to the follies of her new fancy, and Montanus to attend
upon her: to Saladyne, who all this last night could not rest for the
remembrance of Aliena: insomuch that he framed a sweet conceipted Sonnet to
content his humor, which he put in his bosom: being requested by his brother
Rosader to go to Aliena and Ganymede, to signify unto them that his wounds
were not dangerous. A more happy message could not happen to Saladyne, that
taking his Forest bill on his neck, he trudgeth in all haste toward the
plains, where Alienaes flocks did feed: coming just to the place when they
returned from Montanus and Phoebe. Fortune so conducted this jolly Forrester,
that he encountered them and Coridon, whom he presently saluted in this manner.

Fair Shepherdess, and too fair, unless your beauty be tempred with
courtesy, and the liniaments of the face graced with the lowliness of mind: as
many good fortunes to you and your Page, as your selves can desire, or imagine.
My brother Rosader (in the grief of his green wounds) still myndful of his
friends, has sent me to you with a kind salute, to show that he brooks his
pains with the more patience, in that he holds the parties precious in whose
defense he received the prejudice. The report of your welfare, will be a great
comfort to his distempered body and distressed thoughts, and therefore he sent
me with a strickt charge to visit you. And you (quoth Aliena) are the more
welcome in that you are messenger from so kind a Gentleman, whose pains we
compassionate with as great sorrow, as he brooks them with grief: and his
wounds breeds in us as many passions, as in him extremities: so that what
disquiet he feels in body, we partake in heart. Wishing (if we might) that
your mishap might salve his malady. But seeing our wills yields him little ease,
our orizons are never idle to the Gods for his recovery. I pray youth (quoth
Ganimede with tears in his eyes) when the Surgion searched him, held he his
wounds dangerous? Dangerous (quoth Saladyne) but not mortal: and the sooner
to be cured, in that his patient is not impatient of any pains: whereupon my
brother hopes within these ten days to walk abroad and visit you himself.
In the mean time (quoth Ganimede) say his Rosalynde commends her to him, and
bids him be of good cheer. I know not (quoth Saladyne) who that Rosalynde is,
but whatsoever she is, her name is never out of his mouth: but amidst the
deepest of his passions he uses Rosalynde as a charm to appease all sorrows
with patience. Insomuth that I conjecture my brother is in love, and she some
Paragon that holds his heart perplexed: whose name he often records with sighs,
sometimes with tears, straight with joy, then with smiles: as if in one
person Love had lodged a Chaos of confused passions. Wherein I have noted the
variable disposition of fancy, that like the Polype in colors, so it changes
into sundry humors, being as it should seem, a combat myxe with disquiet, and
a bitter pleasure wrapped in a sweet prejudice, like to the Sinople tree, whose
blossoms delight the smell, and whose fruit infects the taste. By my faith
(quoth Aliena) sir, you are deep read in love, or grows your insight into
affection by experience? Howsoever, you are a great Philosopher in Venus
principles, else could you not discour our secret aphorisms. But sir our
Country amors are not like your Courtly fancies, nor is our wooing like your
suing: for pore shepherds never plain them till Love pain them, where the
Courtiers eyes is full of passions, when his heart is most free from affection:
they court to discover their eloquence, we woo to ease our sorrows, every
fair face with them must have a new fancy sealed with a fore finger kiss, and
a far fetched sigh: we here love one, and live to that one, so long as life
can maintain love, using few ceremonies because we know few subtilties, and
little eloquence for that we lightly account of flattery: only faith and troth
that's shepherds wooing, and sir how like you of this? So (quoth Saladyne) as I
could tie my self to such love, What, and look so low as a Shepherdess,
being the son of sir John of Bourdeaux: such desires were a disgrace to your
honors. And with that surueying exquisitely every part of him, as uttering all
these words in a deep passion, she espied the paper in his bosom: whereupon
growing jealous that it was some amorous Sonnet, she sodeinly snacht it out of
his bosom, and asked if it were any secret? She was bashful, and Saladyne
blushed: which she perceiving said: Nay then sir, if you wax read, my life for
yours it is some Love matter: I will see your Mistress name, her praises, and
your passions. And which that she looked on it: which was written to this effect.

Saladynes Sonnet.
If it be true that heavens eternal course
With restless sway and ceaselesse turning glides,
If air inconstant be, and swelling sourse
Turn and returns with many fluent tides,
If earth in winter summers pride estrange,
And Nature seems only fair in change.
If it be true that our immortal spright
Deriude from heavenly pure, in wandering still
In novelty and strangeness does delight,
And by discouerent power discerns ill,
And if the body for to work his best
Does with the seasons change his place of rest.
Whence comes it that (inforst by furious Skies)
I change both place and soil, but not my heart?
Yet salve not in this change my maladies?
Whence grows it that each object works my smart?
Alas I see my faith procures my miss,
And change in love against my nature is.
Et florida pungunt.
Aliena having read over his Sonnet, began thus pleasantly to descant upon it.
I see Saladyne (quoth she) that as the Su^ is no Sun without his brightness,
nor the Diamond accounted for precious unless it be hard: so men are not men
unless they be in love: and their honors are measured by their amors not
their labors, counting it more commendable for a Gentleman to be full of fancy,
than full of virtue. I had thought Otiasi tollus periere Cupidinis arcus,
Contemptaeque iacent, and sine luce faces:


But I see Ouids axiom is not authentical, for even labor has her loves,
and extremity is no Pumice stone to race out fancy. Your self exiled from
your wealth, friends and country by Torismond, (sorrows enough to suppress
affections) yet amidst the depth of these extremities. Love will be Lord, and
show his power to be more predominant than Fortune. But I pray you sir (if
without offense I may crave it) are they some new thoughts, or some old
desires? Saladyne (that now saw opportunity pleasant) thought to strike while
the iron was hot, and therefore taking Aliena by the hand sat down by her:
and Ganymede to give them leave to their Loves, found her self busy about the
foldes, whilst Saladyne fell into this prattle with Aliena.

Fair Mistress, if I be blunt in discovering my affections, and use little
eloquence in leuelling out my loves: I appeal for pardon to your own
principles, that say, shepherds use few ceremonies, for that they acquaint
themselves with few subtilties: to frame my self therefore to your country
fashion with much faith and little flattery, know bewtifull Shepherdess, that
whylest I lived in the Court I knew not Loves comber, but I held affection as
a toy, not as a malady: using fancy as the Hiperborei do their flowers, which
they wear in their bosom all day, and cast them in the fire for fuel at
night. I lyked all because I loved none, and who was most fair, on her I fed
mine eye: but as charily as the Be, that as soon as she has sucked honny from
the Rose, Flies straight to the next Marigold. Living thus at mine own list, I
wondered at such as were in love, and when I read their passions, I took them
only for poemes that flowed from the quickness of the wit, not the sorrows
of the heart. But now (fair Nymph) since I became a Forrester, Love has
taught me such a lesson that I must confess his deity and dignity, and say
as there is nothing so precious as beuty, so there is nothing more piercing
than fancy. For since first I arrived in this place, and mine eye took a
curious survey of your excellence, I have been so fettered with your beauty
and virtue, as sweet ( Aliena) Saladyne without further circumstance loves
Aliena I could paynt out my desires with long ambages, but seeing in many words
lies mistrust, and that truth is ever naked: let this suffice for a country
wooing, Saladyne loves Aliena, and none but Aliena.

Although these words were most heavenly harmony in the ears of the
Shepherdess: yet to seem coye at the first courting, and to disdain Love
howsoever she desired Love, she made this reply.

Ah Saladyne, though I seem simple, yet I am more subtle than to swallow the
hook because it has a painted bayt: as men are wily so women are wary,
especially if they have that wit by others harms to beware. Do we not know
Saladyne, that men's toongs are like Mercuries pipe, that can inchant Argus with
an hundredth eyes: and their words are prejudicial as the charms of Circes,
that transform men into monsters. If such Sirens sing, we poor women had need
stop our ears, least in hearing we prove so foolish hardy as to believe
them, and so perish in crusting much, and suspecting little. Saladine, Piscator
ictus sapit, he that has been once poisoned, and afterward fears not to
bowse of every potion, is worthy to suffer double penance. Eiue me leave then
to mistrust, though I do not condemn. Saladyne is now in love with Aliena,
he a Gentleman of great parentage, she a Shepherdess of mean parents: he
honorable, and she poor? Can Love consist of contrarieties? Will the Fawlcon
perch with the Kistresse, the Lion harbor with the Woolfe? Will Venus join
roabes and rags together? Or can there be a simpathie between a King and a
beggar. Then Saladyne how can I believe thee that love should unite our
thoughts, when Fortune has set such a difference between our degrees? But
suppose thou likest of Alienaes beauty, men in their fancy resemble the waspe,
which scorns that flower from which she has fetched her wax: playing like the
inhabitants of the Island Tenerifa, who when they have gathered the sweet
spices, use the trees for fuel: so men when they have glutted themselves with
the fair of women faces, hold them for necessary evils: and wearied with that
which they seemed so much to love, cast away fancy as children do their
Rattles: and loathing that which so deeply before they liked, especially such
as take love in a minute, and have their eyes attractiue like ieate, ape to
entertain any object, are as ready to let it slip again. Saladyne hearing
how Aliena harpt still upon on^ string, which was the doubt of men's constancy,
he broke off her sharp inuectiue thus.

I grant Aliena (quoth he) many men have done amiss, in proving soon ripe
and soon rotten, but particular instances infer no general conclusions: and
therefore I hope what others have faulted in, shall not prejudice my favors. I
will not use sophistry to confirm my love, for that is subtlety: nor long
discourses, least my words might be thought more than my faith: but if this
will suffice, that by the honor of a Gentleman I love Aliena, and woo Aliena,
not to crop the blossoms and reject the tree, but to consumate my faithful
desires, in the honorable end of marriage.

At this word marriage: Aliena stood in a maze what to answer: fearing that if
she were too coy to drive him away with her disdain, and if she were too
courteous to discover the heat of her desires. In a dilemma thus what to do,
at last this she said. Saladyne ever since I saw thee, I favored thee I cannot
dissemble my desires, because I see thou do faithfully manifest thy
thoughts, and in liking thee I love thee so far as mine honor holds fancy
still in suspense: but if I knew thee as verteous as thy father, or as well
qualified as thy brother Rosader, the doubt should be quickly decided: but for
this time to give thee an answer, assure thy self this, I will either marry
with Saladyne, or still live a virgin: and with this they strained one
another hand. Which Ganimede espying, thinking he had had his Mistress long
enough at shrift, said: what, a match or no? A match (quoth Aliena) or else it
were an ill market. I am glad (quoth Ganimede) I would Rosader were well here to
make up a mess. Well remembered (quoth Saladyne) I forgot I left my brother
Rosader alone: and therefore least being solitary he should increase his
sorrows, I will have me to him. May it please you then to command me any
service to him, I am ready to be a dutiful messenger. Only at this time
commend me to him (quoth Aliena) and tell him, though we cannot pleasure him we
pray for him. And forget not (quoth Ganimede) my commendations: but say to him
that Rosalynd sheds as many tears from her heart as he drops of blood from his
wounds, for the sorrow of his misfortunes, feathering all her thoughts with
disquiet, till his welfare procure her content: say thus (good Saladyne) and so
farwell. He having his message, gave a courteous adieu to them both, especially
to Aliena: and so playing loath to depart, went to his brother. But Aliena,
she perplexed and yet joyful, past away the day pleasantly still praising the
perfection of Saladyne, not ceasing to chat of her new Love, till evening drew
on, and then they folding their sheep, went home to bed. Where we leave them
and return to Phoebe.

Phoebe fiered with the uncouth flame of love, returned to her fathers house,
so gauled with restless passions, as now she began to acknowledge, that as
there was no flower so fresh but might be parched with the Suune, no tree so
strong but might be shaken with a storm, so there was no thought to chaste, but
Time armed with Love could make amorous: for she that held Diana for the
Goddess of her devotion, was now fain to fly to the Altar of Venus, as
suppliant now with prayers, as she was froward before with disdain. As she lay
in her bed, she called to mind the several bewties of young Ganimede, first
his locks, which being amber hued, passes the wreathe that Phoebus puts on to
make his front glorious: his browe of yuorie, was like the seat where Love and
Majesty sits inthronde to enchaine Fancy: his eyes as bright as the burnishing
of the heaven, darting forth frowns with disdain, and smiles with favor,
lightning such looks as would inflame desire, were she wrapped in the Circle of
the frozen Zoane: in his cheeks the vernullion teinture of the Rose flourished
upon natural Alabaster, the blushe of the Morn and Lunaes silver show were
so lively pourtrayed, that the Troyan that filles out wine to Jupiter was not
half so bewtifull: his face was full of pleasance, and all the rest of his
liniaments proportioned with such excellence, as Phoebe was fertred in the
sweetness of his feature. The Idea of these perfections tumbling in her mind,
made the poor Shepherdess so perplexed, as feeling a pleasure tempred with
intolerable pains, and yet a disquiet mixed with a content, she rather
wished to die, than to live in this amorous anguish. But wishing is little worth
in such extremes, and therefore was she forced to pine in her malady, without
any salve for her sorrows. Reveal it she durst not, as daring in such matters
to make none her secretary, and to conceal it, why it doubled her grief: for
as fire suppressed grows to the greater flame, and the Curreut stopped to the more
violent stream: so Love smothered, wrings the hare with the deeper passions.

Perplexed thus with sundry agonies, her food began to fail, and the disquiet
of her mind began to work a distemperature of her body, that to be short
Phoebe fell extreme sick, and so sick as there was almost left no recovery of
health. Her father seeing his fair Phoebe thus distressed, sent for his friends,
who sought by medecin to cure, and by counsel to pacify, but all in vain:
for although her body was feeble through long fasting, yet did she magis
aegrotare animo quam corpore. Which her friends perceived and sorrowed at, but
salve it they could not.

The news of her sickness was bruted abroad through all the Forest: which no
sooner came to Montanus ear, but he like a mad man came to visit Phoebe.
Where sitting by her bed side, he began his Exordium with so many tears and
sighs, that she perceiving the extremity of his sorrows, began now as a Lover
to pity them, although Ganimede held her from redressing them. Montanus
craved to know the cause of her sickness, tempred with secret plaints: but she
answered him (as the rest) with silence, having still the form of Ganimede in
her mind, and coniecturing how she might reveal her loves. To utter it in
words she found her self too bashful, to discourse by any friend she would
not trust any in her amors, to remain thus perplexed still and conceal all,
it was a double death. Whereupon for her last refuge she resolved to write unto
Ganimede: and therefore destred Montanus to absent himself a while, but not to
depart: for she would see if she could steal a nappe. He was no sooner gone
out of the chamber, but reaching to her standish, she took pen and paper,
and wrote a letter to this effect. Phoebe to Ganimede wishes what she wants
her self.
Fair Shepherd (and therefore is Phoebe unfortunate, because thou art so
fair) although hitherto mine eyes were adamants to resist Love, yet I no
sooner saw thy face, but they became amorous to intertaine Love: more devoted
to fancy, than before they were repugnant to affection, addicted to the one by
nature, and drawn to the other by beauty: which being rare, and made the more
excellent by many virtues, has so snared the freedom of Phoebe, as she
restes at thy mercy, either to be made the most fortunate of all maidens, or
the most miserable of all women. Measure not Ganimede my loves by my wealth,
nor my desires by my degrees: but think my thoughts as full of faith, as thy
face of amiable favors. Then as thou know thy self most beautiful, suppose
me most constant. If thou deemest me hard hearted because I hated Montanus,
think I was forced to it by fate: if thou say I am kind hearted, because so
lightly I loved thee at the first look, think I was driven to it by desteny,
whose influence as it is mighty, so is it not to be resisted. If my fortunes
were any thing but unfortunate love, I would strive with fortune: but he that
wrests against the will of Venus, seeks to quench fire with oil, and to thrust
out one thorn by putting in another. If then Ganimede, love enters at the eye,
harbors in the heart, and will neither be driven out with physic nor reason:
pity me, as one whose malady has no salve but from thy sweet self, whose
grief has no ease but through thy grant, and think I am a Uirgin, who is
deeply wronged, when I am forced to woo, and couiecture love to be strong, that
is more forceable then nature.

Thus distressed unless by thee eased, I expect either to live fortunate by
thy favor, or die miserable by thy denial. Living in hope. Farewell.

She that must be thine, or not be at all Phoebe.




To this letter she annexed this Sonnet.

Sonnetto.
My boat dothpasse the straights
of seas incenst with fire,
Filde with forgetfulness:
amidst the winters night,
A blind and careless boy
(brought up by fond desire)
Does guide me in the sea
of sorrow and despite.
For every oar, he sets
a rank of foolish thoughts,
And cuts (instead of wave)
a hope without distress:
The winds of my deep sighs
(that thunder still for noughts)
Have split my sails with fear,
with care and heaviness.
A mighty storm of tears,
A black and hideous cloud,
A thousand fierce disdaines
do slack the haleyards often:
Till ignorance do pull,
and error hale the shrowds,
No star for safety shines,
no Phoebe from aloft.
Time has subdued art, and joy is slave to woe:
Alas (Loves guide) be kind, what shall I perish so?
This Letter and the Sonnet being ended, she could find no fit messenger to
send it by, and therefore she called in Montanus, and entreated him to carry it
to Ganimede. Although poor Montanus saw day at a little hole, and did perceive
what passion pinched her: yet (that he might seem dutiful to his Mistress in
all service) he dissembled the matter, and became a willing Messenger of his
own Martyrdom. And so (taking the Letter) went the next morn very early to
the plains where Aliena fed her flocks, and there he found Ganimede sitting
under a Pomegranade tree sorrowing for the hard fortunes of her Rosader.
Montanus saluted him, and according to his charge delivered Ganimede the
letters, which (he said) came from Phoebe. At this the wanton blushed, as being
abashe to think what news should come from an unknown Shepherdess, but
taking the letters, vnript the seals, and read over the discourse of Phoebes
fancies. When she had read and ouer-read them, Ganimede began to smile, and
looking on Montanus, fell into a great laughter: and with that called Aliena,
to whom she showed the writings. Who having perused them, conceipted them
very pleasantly, and smiled to see how Love had yokt her, who before would not
stoop to the lure, Aliena whispering Ganimede in the ear, and saying: Knew
Phoebe what want there were in thee to perform her will, and how unfit thy
kind is to be kind to her, she would be more wise, and less enamoured: But
leaving that, I pray thee let us sport with this Swain. At that word Ganimede
turning to Montanus, began to glaunce at him thus.

I pray thee tell me Shepherd, by those sweet thoughts and pleasing sighs
that grow from my Mistress favors, art thou in love with Phoebe? Oh my youth,
quoth Montanus, were Phoebe so far in love with me, my flocks would be more
fat and their Master more quiet: for through the sorrows of my discontent
grows the leanness of my sheep. Alas poor Swain quoth Ganimede, are thy
passions so extreme, or thy fancy so resolute, that no reason will blemish the
pride of thy affection, and race out that which thou striuest for without hope?
Nothing can make me forget Phoebe, while Montanus forget himself: for those
characters which true love has stamped, neither the envy of time nor fortune
can wipe away. Why but Montanus quoth Ganimede, enter with a deep insight into
the despair of thy fancies, and thou shall see the depth of thine own
follies: for (poor man) thy progress in love is a regresse to loss, swimming
again the stream with the Crab, and flying with Apis Indica against wind and
weather. Thou seek with Phoebus to win Daphne, and she flies faster than
thou can follow: thy desires soar with the Hobbie, but her disdain reaches
higher than thou can make wing. I tell thee Montanus, in courting Phoebe,
thou barkest with the Wolves of Syria against the Moon, and roauest at such a
mark with thy thoughts, as is beyond the pitch of thy bow, praying to love,
when love is pitiless, and thy malady remediless. For proof Montanus, read
these letters, wherein thou shall see thy great follyes and little hope.

With that Montanus took them and perused them, but with such sorrow in his
looks, as they bewrayed a sourse of confused passions in his heart, at every
line his color changed, and every sentence was ended with a period of sighs.

At last noting Phoebes extreme desire toward Ganimede, and her disdain
toward him, giving Ganimede the letter, the Shepherd stood as though he had
neither won nor lost. Which Ganimede perceiving, wakened him out of his dream
thus: Now Montanus, do thou see thou vowest great service, and obtainest but
little reward: but in lieu of thy loyalty, she makes thee as Bellephoron carry
thine own bane. Then drink not willingly of that potion wherein thou know
is poison, creep not to her that cares not for thee. What Montanus, there are
many as fair as Phoebe, but most of all more courteous than Phoebe. I tell
thee Shepherd, favor is Loves fuel: then since thou can not get that,
let the flame vanish into smoke, and rather sorrow for a while, then repent
thee for ever.

I tell thee Ganimede (quoth Montanus) as they which are stung with the
Scorpion, cannot be recovered but by the Scorpion, nor he that was wounded with
Achilles lance be cured but with the same truncheon: so Apollo was feign to
cry out, that love was only eased with love, and fancy healed by no medicine
but favor. Phoebus had herbs to heal all hurts but this passion, Cyrces had
charms for all chances but for affection, and Mercury subtle reasons to
refell all griefs but love. Persuasions are bootles, reason lends no remedy,
counsel no comfort, to such whom fancy has made resolute: and therefore
though Phoebe loves Ganimede, yet Montanus must honor none but Phoebe.

Then quoth Ganimede, may I rightly term thee a despairing lover, that live
without joy, and love without hope: but what shall I do Montanus to pleasure
thee? shall I despise Phoebe as she disdaines thee? Oh (quoth Montanus) that
were to renew my griefs, and double my sorrows: for the sight of her discontent
were the censure of my death. Alas Ganimede, though I perish in my thoughts,
let not her die in her desires. Of all passions, love is most impatient: then
let not so fair a creature as Phoebe sink under the burden of so deep
distress. Being love sick, she is proved heart sick, and all for the beauty
of Ganimede. Thy proportion has entangled her affections, and she is snared
in the beauty of thy excellence. Then since she loves thee so dear, mislike not
her deadly. Be thou paramour to such a paragon: she has beauty to please thine
eye, and flocks to enrich thy store. Thou can not wish for more than thou
shall win by her: for she is beautiful, virtuous and wealthy, three deep
persuasions to make love frolic. A liena seeing Montanus cut it against the
hair, and plead that Ganimede ought to love Phoebe, when his only life was
the love of Phoebe, answered him thus. Why Montanus do thou further this
motion? seeing if Ganimede marry Phoebe thy market is clean mard. Ah Mistres
(q. he) so has love taught me to honor Phoebe, that I would prejudice my life
to pleasure her, and die in despair rather than she should perish for want.
It shall suffice me to see her contented, and to feed mine eye on her favor.
If she marry though it be my martyrdom: yet if she be pleased I will brook it
with patience, and triumph in mine own stars to see her desires satisfied.
Therefore if Ganimede be as courteous as he is beautiful, let him show his
virtues in redressing Phoebes miseries. And this Montanus pronounst with such
an assured countenance, that it amazed both Aliena and Ganimede to see the
resolution of his loves: so that they pitied his passions, and commended his
patience, devising how they might by any subtlety get Montanus the favor of
Phoebe. Straight (as women's heads are full of wiles) Ganimede had a fetch to
force Phoebe to fancy the shepherd, malgrado the resolution of her mind he
prosecuted his policy thus. Montanus quoth he, seeing Phoebe is so forlorn,
least I might be counted unkind in not saluing so fair a creature, I will go
with thee to Phoebe, and there hear her self in word utter that which she
has discourst with her pen, and then as Love wills me. I will set down my
censure. I will home by our house, and send Coridon to accompany Aliena.
Montanus seemed glad of his determination, and away they go toward the house
of Phoebe. When they drew nigh to the cottage, Montanus ran before, and went in
and told Phoebe, that Ganimede was at the door. This word Ganimede sounding in
the ears of Phoebe, drove her into such an ecstasy for joy, that rising up in
her bed, she was half reuined, and her wan color began to wax red: and with
that came Ganimede in, who saluted Phoebe with such a courteous look, that it
was half a salve to her sorows: sitting him down by her bed side, he questioned
about her disease, and where the pain chiefly held hit? Phoebe looking as
lovely as Venus in her night gear, tainting her face with as ruddy a blush, as
Clitia did when she bewrayed her loves to Phoebus: taking Ganimede by the
hand began thus. Fair shepherd, if love were not more strong than nature, or
fancy the sharpest extreme, my immodesty were the more, and my virtues the
les: for nature has framed women's eyes bashful, their hearts full of fear, and
their tongs full of silence: But love, that imperious love, where his power is
predominant, then he peruerts all, and wrests the wealth of nature to his own
will: an instance in my self fair Ganimede, for such a fire has he kindeled
in my thoughts, that to find ease for the flame, I was forced to pass the
bounds of modesty, and seek a salve at thy hands for my harms: blame me not if
I be over beld for it is thy beauty, and if I be too forward it is fancy, and
the deep insight into thy virtues that makes me thus fond. For let me say in a
word what may be contained in a volume, Phoebe love Ganimede: at this she held
down her head and wept, and Ganimede rose as one that would suffer no fish to
hang on his fingers, made this reply. Water not thy plants Phoebe, for I dopity
thy plaints, nor seek not to discover thy loves in tears: for I conjecture thy
truth by thy passions: sorrow is no salve for loves, nor sighs no remedy for
affection. Therefore frolic Phoebe, for if Ganimede can cure thee, doubt not of
recovery. Yet this let me say without offense, that it greeues me to thwart
Montanus in his fancies, seeing his desires have been so resolute, and his
thoughts so loyal: but thou alledgest that thou art forced from him by fate: so
I tell thee Phoebe, either some star, or else some destenie, fittes my mind
rather with Adonis to die in chase, than be counted a wanton in Venus knee.
Although I pity thy martyrdom, yet I can grant no marriage; for though I held
thee fair, yet mine eye is not fettred, love grows not like the herb Spattanna
to his perfection in one night but creeps with the snaile, and yet at last
attaines to the top Festina Lenter especially in love: for momentary fancies
are often times the fruits of follies: If Phoebe I should like thee as the
Hiperborei do their dates, which banquet with them in the morning, and throw
them away at night, my folly should be great, and thy repentance more. Therefore
I will have time to turn my thoghts, and my Loves shall grow up as the water
Cresses, slowly, but with a deep root. Thus Phoebe thou may see I disdain
not though I desire not, remaining indifferent til time and love makes me
resolute. Therefore Phoebe seek not to suppress affection, and with the love
of Montanus quench the remembrance of Ganimede, strive thou to hate me as I
seek to like of thee, and ever have the duties of Montanus in thy mind, for I
promise thee thou may have one more wealthy, but not more loyal. These
words were corasiues to the perplexed Phoebe, that sobbing out sighs, and
straining out tears, she blubbered out these words.

And shall I then have no salve of Ganimede but suspense, no hope but a
doubtful hazard, no comfort, but be posted off to the will of time: justly
have the Gods ballanst my fortunes, who being cruel to Montanus, found
Ganimede as unkind to my self: so in forcing him perish for love, I shall die
my self with overmuch love. I am glad quoth Ganimede, you look into your own
faults, and see where your shoo wrings you, measuring now the pains of Montanus
by your own passions. Truth q. Phoebe, and so deeply I repent me of my
frowardness toward the shepherd, that could I cease to love Ganimede, I
would resolve to like Montanus. What if I can with reason persuade Phoebe to
mislike of Ganimede, will she then favor Montanus? When reason (quoth she) does
quench that love that I owe to thee, then will I fancy him: conditionally,
that if my love can be suppressed with no reason, as being without reason,
Ganimede will only wed himself to Phoebe. I grant it fair Shepherdess
quoth he: and to feed thee with the sweetness of hope, this resolve on: I will
never marry my self to woman but unto thy self: and with that Ganimede gave
Phoebe a fruitless kiss, and such words of comfort, that before Ganimede
departed she arose out of her bed, and made him and Montanus such cheer, as
could be found in such a country cottage. Ganimede in the midst of their
banquet rehearsing the promises of either in Montanus favor, which highly
pleased the Shepherd. Thus all three content, and soothed up in hope, Ganimede
took his leave of Phoebe and departed, leaving her a contented woman, and
Montanus highly pleased. But poor Ganimede, who had her thoughts on her
Rosader, when she called to remembrance his wounds, filled her eyes full of tears,
and her heart full of sorrows, plodded to find Aliena at the Folds, thinking
with her presence to drive away her passions. As she came on the plains, she
might espy where Rosader and Saladyne sat with Aliena under the shade: which
sight was a salve to her grief, and such a cordial unto her heart, that she
tript along the Lawnes full of joy.

At last Coridon who was with them spied Ganimede, and with that the Clown
rose, and running to meet him cried, Oh sirrah, a match, a match, our Mistres
shall be married on sunday. Thus the poor peasant frolic it before Ganimede,
who coming to the crew saluted them all, and especially Rosader, saying that
he was glad to see him so well recovered of his wounds. I had not gone abroad so
soon quoth Rosader, but that I am bidden to a marriage, which on Sunday next
must be solemnized between my brother and Aliena. I see well where Love
leads delay is loathsome, and that small wooing serves, where both the parties
are willing. Truth quoth Ganimede: but a happy day should it be, if Rosader
that day might be married to Rosalynd. Ah good Ganimede (quoth he) by naming
Rosalynd renew not my sorrows: for the thought of her perfections, is the
thrall of my miseries. Tush, be of good cheer man quoth Ganimede, I have a
friend that is deeply experienst in Negromancy and Magic, what art can do
shall be acted for thine advantage: I will cause him to bring in Rosalynde, if
either France or any bordring Nation harbor her: and upon that take the faith
of a young shepherd. Aliena smilde to see how Rosader frownd, thinking that
Ganimede had iested with him. But breaking off from those matters, the Page
(somewhat pleasant) began to discourse unto them what had past between him and
Phoebe: which as they laughed, so they wondered at, all confessyng, that there is
none so chaste but Love will change. Thus they past away the day in chat, and
when the Sun began to set, they took their leaves and departed: Aliena
providing for their marriage day such solemn cheer and handsome roabes as
fitted their country estate, and yet somewhat the better, in that Rosader had
promised to bring Gerismond thither as a guest. Ganimede (who then meant to
discover her self before her father, had made her a gown of green, and a
kirtle of the finest sendal, in such sort that she seemed some heavenly Nymph
harbored in Country attire.

Saladine was not behind in care to set out the nuptials, nor Rosader
unmindful to bid guests, who invited Gerismond and all his folowers to the
feast: who willingly granted, so that there was nothing but the day wanting to
his marriage. In the mean while, Phoebe being a bidde^ guest, made her self as
gorgious as might be to please the eye of Ganimede: and Montanus suited himself
with the cost of many of his flocks to be gallant against that day: for then
was Ganimed to give Phoebe an answer of her loves, and Montanus either to hear
the doom of his misery, or the censure of his happiness. But while this
gear was a brewing. Phoebe past not one day without visiting her Ganimede, so
far was she wrapped in the beauties of this lovely swain. Much prattle they had,
and the discourse of many passions, Phoebe wishing for the day (as she thought)
of her welfare, and Ganimede smiling to think what unexpected euentes would
fall out at the wedding. In these humors the week went away, that at last
sunday came.

No sooner did Phoebus Hench-man appear in the sky, to give warning that his
masters horses should be crapt in his glorious couch, but Coridon in his
holiday suit marvelous seemly, in a russet iatket welted with the same, and
faced with red worsted, having a pair of blew chamblet sleeves, bound at the
wrests with four yeolow laces, closed before very richly with a dosen of pewter
buttons: his hose was of gray karsie, with a large sloppe bard over thwart the
pocket holes with three fair gards, stitcht of either side with red thread,
his stock was of the own sewed close to his breech, and for to bewtifie his
hose, he had trust himself round with a dosen of new thredden points of medley
color: his bonnet was green whereon stood a copper brooch with the picture of
Saint Denis: and to want nothing that might make him amorous in his old days,
he had a fair shyrt band of fine lockeram, whipped over with Couentry blew of
no small cost. Thus attired, Coridon bestird himself as chief stickler in
these actions, and had strowed all the house with flowers, that it seemed rather
some of Floraes choice hours, than any country cottage.

Thither repaired Phoebe with all the maids of the Forest, to set out the
bride in the most seemliest sort that might be: but howsoever she helped to
prancke out Aliena, yet her eye was still on Ganimede, who was so neat in a
suit of gray, that he seemed Endymion when he won Luna with his looks, or
Paris when he played the swain to get the beauty of the Nymph Oenone. Ganimede
like a pretty Page waited on his mistress Aliena, and ouerlookt that all was
in a readiness against the bridegroom should come. Who attired in a Forresters
suit came accompanied with Gerismond and his brother Rosader early in ye
morning, where arrived, they were solemnly entertained by Aliena and the rest
of the country swains, Gerismond very highly commending the fortunate choice of
Saladyne, in yt he had chosen a shepherdess, whose virtues appeared in her
outward bewties, being no less fair than seeming modest. Ganimede coming in
and seeing her father began to blush. Nature woorking affects by her secred
effects: fearce could she abstain from tears to see her father in so low
fortunes: he that was wont to sit in his royal Pallaice: attended on by twelve
noble Peers, now to be contented with a simple Cottage, and a troop of
reuelling woodmen for his train. The consideration of his fall, made Ganimede
full of sorrows: yet that she might triumph over Fortune with patience, and
not any way dash that merry day with her dumps, she smothered her melancholy
with a shadow of mirth: and very reverently welcomed the king, not according
to his former degree, but to his present estate, with such diligence, as
Gerismond began to commend the page for his exquisit person, and excellent
qualities.

As thus the King with his Forresters frolickt it among the shepherds, Coridon
came in with a fair mazer full of Sidar, and presented it to Gerismond with
such a clownish salute, that he began to smile, and took it of the old
shepherd very kindly, drinking to Aliena and the rest of her fair maids,
amongst whom Phoebe was the foremost. Aliena pledged the King, and drunk to
Rosader: so the carrowse went round from him to Phoebe, etc. As they were thus
drinking and ready to go to Church, came in Montanus apparelled all in tawny,
to signify that he was forsaken: on his head he wore a garland of willow, his
bottle hanged by his side whereon was painted despair, and on his sheephooke
hung two Sonnets as labels of his loves and fortunes.

Thus attired came Montanus in, with his face as full of grief, as his heart
was of sorrows, showing in his countenance the map of extremities. As Soon as
the Shepherds saw him, they did him all the honor they could, as being the
flower of all the swains in Arden: for a bonnier boy was there not seen since
the wanton wag of Troy that kept sheep in Ida. He seeing the King, and gessyng
it to be Gerismond, did him all the reverence his country courtesy could
afford. Insomuch that the king wondering at his attire, began to question what
he was. Montanus ouerhearing him made this reply. I am sir quoth he loves
swain, as full of inward discontents as I seem fraught with outward follies.
Mine eyes like bees delight in sweet flowers, but sucking their fill on the
fair of beauty, they carry home to the Hiue of my heart far more gaul than
honey, and for one drop of pure deaw, at tun full of deadly Aconiton, I hunt
with the Fly to pursue the Eagle, that flying too nigh the Sun, I perish with
the Sun: my thoughts are above my reach, and my desires more than my fortunes:
yet neither greater than my loves. But daring with Phaeto^, I fall with Irarus,
and seeking to pass the mean, I die for being so mean, my night fleeps are
waking slombers, as full of sorrows as they be far from rest, and my days
labors are fruitless amors, staring at a star and stombling at a straw,
leaving reason to follow after repentance: yet every passion is a pleasure
though it pinch, because love hides his wormeseed in figs, his poisons in sweet
potions, and shadows preiudize with the mask of pleasure. The wisest
counselors are my deep discontents, and I hate that which should salve my
harm, like the patient which stung with the Tarantula loathes music, and yet
the disease incurable but by melody. Thus (Sir) restless I hold my self
remediles, as loving without either reward or regard, and yet loving, because
there is none worthy to be loved, but the mistress of my thoughts. And that I
am as full of passions as I have discourst in my plaintes, Sir if you please
see my Sonnets, and by them censure of my sorrows.

These words of Montanus brought the king into a great wonder, amazed as much
at his wit was as his attire: insomuch that he took the papers off his hook,
and read them to this effect.

Montanus first Sonnet.
Alas how wander I amidst these woods,
Whereas no day bright shine does find access:
But where the melancholy fleeting floods
(Dark as the night) my night of woes express,
Disarmde of reason, spoilde of natures goods,
Without redress to salve my heaviness
I walk, whilst thought (too cruel to my harms)
With endless grief my heedles judgment charms.
My silent tongue assailde by secret fear,
My traitrous eyes imprisoned their joy,
My fatal peace deuourd in fained cheer,
My heart inforst to harbor in annoy,
My reason robde of power by yielding ear,
My fond opinions slave to every toy.
Oh Love thou guide in my uncertain way,
Woe to thy bow, thy fire, the cause of my decay.
Et florida pungunt.
When the King had read this Sonnet, he highly commended the device of the
shepherd, that could so wittily wrap his passions in a shadow, and so
covertly conceal that which bred his chiefest discontent: affirming, that as
the least shrubs have their tops, the smallest hairs their shadows: so the
meanest swains had their fancies, and in their kind were as charie of Love as
a King. Whelted on with this device, he took the second and read it: the
effects were these.

Montanus second Sonnet.
When the Dog
Full of rage,
With his irefull eyes
Frowns amidst the skies
The Shepherd to assuage
The fury of the heat,
Himself does safely seat
By a fount
Full of fair,
Where a gentle breath
(Mounting from beneath)
Tempreth the air.
There his flocks
Drink their fill,
And with ease repose
Whilst sweet sleep does close
Eyes from toylsome ill.
But I burn
Without rest,
No defensive power
Shields from Phoebes lower:
Sorrow is my best.
Gentle Love
Lowre no more,
If thou will invade,
In the secret shade,
Labor not so sore.
I my self
And my flock^
They their love to please,
I my self to ease,
Both leave the shadie oaks:
Content to burn in fire
Says Love does so desire.
Et florida pungunt.
Gerismond seeing the pithy vain of those Sonets, began to make further
enquiry what he was? Whereupon Rosader discourst unto him the love of Montanus
to Phoebe, his great loialite and her deep cruelty: and how in revenge the
Gods had made the curious Nymph amorous of young Ganimede. Upon this discourse,
ye king was desirous to see Phoebe: who being brought before Gerismond by
Rosador, shadowed the beauty of her face with such a vermilion teinture, that
the Kings eyes began to dazzle at the purity of her excellence. After Gerismond
had fed his looks a while upon her fair, he questioned with her, why she
rewarded Montanus love with so little regard, seeing his deserts were many,
and his passions extreme. Phoebe to make reply to the Kings demand, answered
thus: Love (sir) is charity in his laws, and whatsoever he sets down for
iustire (be it never so unjust) the sentence cannot be reuerst: women's fancies
lend favors not ever by desert, but as they are inforst by their desires^ for
fancy is tied to the wings of Fate, and what the stars decree, stands for an
infallible doom. I know Montanus is wise, and women's ears are greatly
delighted with wit, as hardly escaping the charm of a pleasant tongue, as
Ulysses the melody of the Sirens. Montanus is bewtifull, and women's eyes are
snared in the excellence of objects, as desirous to feed their looks with a
fair face, as the Be to suck on a sweet flower. Montanus is welthy, and an
ounce of give me persuades a woman more than a pound of hear me. Danae was won
with a goldon shower, when she could not be gotten with all the entreaties of
Jupiter: I tell you sir, the string of a woman's heart reaches to the pulse of
her hand, and let a man rub that with gold, and it is hard but she will prove his
hearts gold. Montanus is young, a great clause in fancies court: Montanus is
virtuous, the richest argument that Love yields: and yet knowing all these
perfections I praise them, and wonder at them, loving the qualities, but not
affecting the person, because the Destenies have set down a contrary censure.
Yet Venus to ad revenge, has given me wine of ye same grape, a sip of the same
sauce, and string me with the like passion, has crossed me with as il a penance:
for I am in love with a shepherds swain, as coy to me as I am cruel to
Montanus, as peremptory in disdain as I was perverse in desire, and that is
(quoth she) Alienaes page, young Ganimede.

Gerismond desirous to prosecute the end of these passions, called in
Ganimede: who knowing the case, came in graced with such a blush, as beautified
the Crystal of his face with a ruddie brightness. The King noting well the
phisnomy of Ganimede, began by his favors to call to mind the face of his
Rosalynd, and with that fetched a deep sigh. Rosader that was passing familiar
with Gerismond, demanded to him why he sighed so sore? Because Rosader (quoth
he) the favor of Ganimede puts me in mind of Rosalynde. At this word,
Rosader sight so deeply as though his heart would have burst. And what is the
matter (quoth Gerismond) that you quite me with such a sigh? Pardon me sir
(quoth Rosader) because I love none but Rosalynd. And upon that condition
(quoth Gerismond) that Rosalynd were here, I would this day make up a marriage
betwixt her and thee. At this Aliena turned her head and smilde upon Ganimede,
and she could scarce keep countenance. Yet she salued all with secrecy, an
Gerismond to drive away such dumpes, questioned with Ganimede, what the reason
was he regarded not Phoebes love, seeing she was as fair as the wanto^ that
brought Troy to ruin. Ganimede mildly answered, If I should affect the fair
Phoebe, I should offer poor Montanus great wrong to win that from him in a
moment, that he has labored for so many months. Yet have I promised to the
bewtiful shepherdess, to wed my self never to woman except unto her: but with
this promise, yt if I can by reason suppress Phoebes love toward me, she
shall like of none but of Montanus. To ye q. Phoebe I stand, for my love is so
far beyond reason, as it will admit no persuasion of reason. For justice q. he,
I appeal to Gerismond: and to his censure will I stand q. Phoebe. And in your
victory q. Montanus stands the hazard of my fortunes: for if Ganymede go away
with conquest, Montanus is in conceit loves Monarch, if Phoebe win, then am I
in effect most miserable. We will see this controversy q. Gerismo^d, and then
we will to church: therefore Ganimede let us hear your argument. Nay, pardon
my absence a while (quoth she) and you shall see one in store. In went
Ganimede and dressed her self in woman's attire, having on a gown of green, with
kirtle of rich sandall, so quaint, that she seemed Diana triumphing in the
Forest: upon her head she wore a chaplet of Roses, which gave her such a
grace, yt she looked like Flora pearkt in the pride of all her flowers. Thus
attired came Rosalind in, and presented her self at her fathers feet, with her
eyes full of tears, craving his blessing, and discoursing unto him all her
fortunes, how she was banished by Trismond, and how ever since she lived in
that country disguised.

Gerismond seeing his daughter, rose from his seat and sell upon her neck,
uttering the passions of his joy in warry plaints driven into such an ecstasy
of content, that he could not utter one word. At this sight, if Rosader was
both amazed and joyful, I refer my self to the judgment of such as have
experience in love, seeing his Rosalynd before his face whom so long and deeply
he had affected. At last Gerismond recovered hi spirits, and in most fatherly
terms entertained his daughter Rosalynd, after many questions demanding of
her what had past between her and Rosader. So much sir (quoth she) as there
wants nothing but your Grace to make up the marriage. Why then (quoth Gerismond)
Rosader take her, she is thine, and let this day solemnize both thy brothers
and thy nuptials, Rosader beyond measure content, humbly thauked the king, and
embraced his Rosalynde, who turning to Phoebe, demanded if she had shown
sufficient reason to suppress the force of her loves. Yea quoth Phoebe; and so
(...) a perswasiue, that if it please you Madame, and Aliena to give us leave,
Montanus and I will make this day the third couple in marriage. She had no
sooner spoke this word, but Montanus threw away his garland of willow, his
bottle, where was painted despair, and cast his sonnets in the fire, showing
himself as frolic as Paris when he hanseled his love with Helena. At this
Gerismond and the rest smiled, and concluder that Montanus and Phoebe should
keep their wedding with the two brethren. Aliena seeing Saladyne stand in a
dumpe, to wake him from his dream began thus. Why how now my Saladyne, all a
mort, what melancholy man at the day of marriage? perchance thou art
sorrowful to think on thy brothers high fortunes, and thine own base desires
to choose so mean a shepheardize. Cheer up thy hartman, for this day thou
shall be married to the daughter of a King: for know Saladyne, I am not
Aliena, but Alinda the daughter of thy mortal enemy Torismond. At this all the
company was amazed, especially Gerismond, who rising up, took Alinda in his
arms, and said to Rosalynd: is this that fair Alinda famous for so many
virtues, that forsook her fathers court to live with thee exilde in the
country? The same q. Rosalynde. Then quoth Gerismond, turning to Saladine,
jolly Forrester be frolic, for thy fortunes are great, and thy desires
excellent, thou have got a princess as famous for her perfection, as exceeding
in proportion. And she has with her beauty won (quoth Saladyne) an humble
servant, as full of faith, as she of amiable favor. While every one was amazed
with these Comicall euentes, Coridon came skipping in, and told them that the
Priest was at Church and tarried for their coming. With that Gerismond led the
way, and the rest followed, where to the admiration of all the country swains
in Arden, their marriages were solemnly solemnized. As soon as the Priest had
finished, home they went with Alinda, where Coridon had made all things in
readiness. Dinner was provided, and the tables being spread, and the Brides set
down by Gerismond, Rosader, Saladyne, and Montanus that day were seruitors:
homely cheer they had, such as their country could afford: but to mend their
fare they had mickle good chat, and many discourses of their loves and
fortunes. About mid dinner, to make them merry Coridon came in with an old
crowd, and played them a fit of mirth, to which he sung this pleasant song.

Coridons Song.
A blyth and bonny country Less,
heigh ho the bonny Less:
Sat sighing an the tender grass,
and weeping said, will none come woo me?
A smicker boy, a lyther Swain,
heigh ho a smicker Swain:
That in his Love was want on feign,
with smiling looks straight came unto her.
When as the wanton wench espide,
heigh ho when she espide
The means to make herself a bride,
she simpred smooth like bonny bell:
The Swain that saw her squint eied kind
heigh ho squint eyed kind,
His arms about her body twind,
and fair Less, how fare ye, well?
The country kit said well sorsooth,
heigh ho well forsooth,
But that I have alonging tooth,
a longing tooth that makes me cry:
Alas said he what garres thy grief?
heigh ho what garres thy grief?
A wound quoth she without relief,
I fear a maid that I shall die.
If that be all the shepherd said,
heigh ho the shepherd said,
He make thee wine it gentle maid,
and so recure thy malady.
Hereon they kissed with many a oath,
heigh ho with many a oath,
And fore God Pan did plight their troath,
and to the Church they hied them fast.
And God send every pretty peate,
heigh ho the pretty peate:
That fears to die of this conceate,
so kind a friend to help at last.
Coridon having thus made them merry, as they were in the midst of their
iollitie, word was brought in to Saladyne and Rosader that a brother of theirs,
one Fernandine was arrived, and desired to speak with them. Gerismond
ouerhearing this news, demanded who it was? It is sir (q. Rosader) our middle
brother, that lives a scholar in Paris: but what fortune has driven him to
seek us out I know not. With that Saladine went and met his brother, whom he
welcomed with all courtesy, and Rosader gave him no less friendly
entertainment: brought he was by his two brothers into the parlour where they
all sat at dinner. Fernandine as one that knew as many manners, as he could
points of sophistry, and was as well brought up as well lettered, saluted them
all. But when he espied Gerismond, kneeling on his knee, he did him what
reverence belonged to his estate: and with that burst forth into these
speeches. Although (right mighty Prince) this day of my brothers marriage be a
day of mirth, yet time craves another course: and therefore from dainty cates
rise to sharp weapons. And you the sons of Sir John of Bourdeux, leave off
your amors, and fall to arms, change your loves into lances, and now this day
show your selves valiant, as hitherto you have been passionate. For know
Gerismond, that hard by at the edge of this forest the twelve peers of
France are up in arms to recover thy right: and Torismond troupt with a crew of
desperate runnagates is ready to bid them battle. The armies are ready to
join: therefore show thy self in the field to encourage thy subjects: and
you Saladine and Rosader mount you, and show your selves as hardy soldiers as
you have been hearty lovers: so shall you for the benefit of your Country,
discover the Idea of your Fathers virtues to be stamped in your thoughts, and
prove children worthy of so honorable a parent. At this alarm given him by
Fernandine Gerismond leapt from the board, and Saladyne and Rosader betook
themselves to their weapons. Nay (q. Gerismond) go with me, I have horse and
armor for us all, and then being well mounted let us show that we carry revenge
and honor at our fanchons points. Thus they leave the Brides full of sorrow,
especially Alinda, who desired Gerismond to be good to her Father: he not
returning a word because his have was great hied him home to his lodge, where he
delivered Saladyne and Rosador horse and armor, and himself armed royally led
the ^^y: not having ridden two leagues before they discovered (...) a valley
both the battles were joined Gerismond seeing the wing wherein the Peers
fought, thrust in there, and cried S. Denis, laying on such load upon his
enemies, that he showed how highly he did estimate of a crown. When the Pe^rs
perceived that their lawful king was there, they grew more eager: and Saladine
and Rosader so behaved themselves, that none durst stand in their way nor abide
the fury of their weapons. To be short, the Peers were conquerors, Torismonds
army put to flight and himself slain in battle. The Peers then gathered
themselves together, and saluted their king, conducted him royally into Paris,
where he has received with great joy of all the citizens. As Soon as all was
quiet and he had received again the crown, he sent for Alinda and Rosalynd to
the court, Alinda being very passionat for the death of her father: yet
brooking it with the more patience, in that she was contented with the welfare
of her Saladyne. Well, as soon as they were come to Paris, Gerismond made a
royal feast for the Peers and Lords of his Land, which continued thirty days,
in which time summoning a parliament, by the consent of his nobles, he created
Rosader heir apparent to the kingdom, he restored Saladyne to all his
fathers Land, and gave him the Dukedom of Namours, he made Fernandine
principal secretary to himself: and that Fortune might every way seem
frolic, he made Montanus Lord over all the Forest of Arden, Adam Spencer
Captain of the Kings Guard, and Coridon, Master of Alindas flocks. Here
Gentlemen may you see in Euphues golden Legacy, that such as neglect their
fathers precepts, incur much prejudice, that division in nature as it is a
blemish in nurture, so it is a breach of good fortunes, that virtue is not
measured by birth but by action, that younger brethren though inferior in
years, yet may be superior to honors: that concord is the sweetest
conclusion, and amity betwixt brothers more forceable than fortune. If you
gather any fruits by this Legacy speak well of Euphues for writing it, and me
for fetching it. If you grace me with that favor you incorage me to be more
froward and as soon as I have ouerlookt my labors, expect the Sailers Calendar.

FINIS.

