AN Alarm against Usurers. Containing tried experiences against worldly
abuses. WHEREIN GENTLEMEN may find good counsels to confirm them and
pleasant Histories to delight them: and every thing so interlaced with
variety: as the curious may be satisfied with rareness, and (...) courteous
with pleasure. HEEREUNTO ACHE ANnexed the delectable history of Forbonius and
Prisceria: with the lamentable Complaint of Truth over England. Written by
Thomas Lodge, of Lincolnes Inn, Gentleman.

O Vita! misere longa, foelice breuis.

Imprinted at London by T. Este, for Sampson Clarke, and are to be sold at his
shop by Guyld Hall. 1584.

To The Right worshipful, Sir Philip Sidney Knight, endued with all
perfections of learning, and titles of Nobility: Thomas Lodge Genesis wishes
continuance of honor, and the benefits of happy Study.
IT is not (noble Gentleman) the titles of Honor that allureth me, nor the
nobility of your Parents that induces me, but the admiration of your virtues
that persuades me, to publish my pore travails under your undoubted
protection. Whom I most humbly entreat, not only in so just a cause to
protect me, but also in these Primordia of my studies, after the accustomed
prudence of the Philosophers, to confirm with favorable acceptaunce, and
continuance as the equity of the cause requires. I have set down in these
few lines in my opinion (Right Worshipful) the image of a licentious Usurer,
and the collusions of devilish incrochers, and hereunto was I led by two
reasons: First, that the offender seeing his own counterfaite in this Mirror;
might amend it, and those who are like by ouerlauish profuseness, to become
meat for their mouths, might be warned by this caveat to shun the Scorpion
ere she deuoureth.

May it please your Worship, to favor my travails, and to accept my good
will: who encouraged by the success of this my firstlings will hereafter in
most humble sign of humanity continue the purpose I have begun, commending
the cause and my service to your good liking: who no doubt compassed with
incomperable virtues, will commend when you see occasion, and not condemn
without a cause.

Your Worships in all duty to command, Thomas Lodge.

To The Right worshipful, my cu^teous friends, the Gentlemen of the Innes of
Court, Thomas Lodge of Lincolnes^ Inn Gentleman, wishes prosperous success
in their studies, and happy event in their travails.
Courteous Gentlemen, let it not seem strange unto you, that he which has
long time slept in silence, now begins publicly to salute you, since no
doubt, my reasons that induce me hereunto be such, as both you may allow of
them, since they be well meant, and account of them since they tend to your
profit. I have published here of set purpose a tried experience of worldly
abuses, describing herein not only those monsters which were banished Athens,
I mean Usurers, but also such de^ouring caterpillars, who not only have
fatted their fingers with many rich forfaitures, but also spread their venim
among some private Gentlemen of your profession, which considered, I thought
good in opening the wound* to prevent an ulcer, and by counselling before
escape, forewarn before the mischief. Led then by these persuasions, I doubt
not, but as I have always found you favorable, so now you will not cease to
be friendly, both in protecting of this just cause, from unjust slander, and my
person from that reproach, which, about two years since, an injurious cauiller
objected against me: You that know me Gentlemen, can testify that neither my
life has been so lewd, as y^ my company was edious, nor my behavior so
light, as that it should pass the limits of modesty: this notwithstanding a
licentious Hipponax, neither regarding the asperitie of the laws touching
slanderous Libellers, nor the offyring from whence I came, which is not
contemptible, attemted, not only in public and reproachful terms to condemn me
in his writings, but also so to slander me, as neither justice should wink at so
heinous an offense, nor I pretermit a commodious reply. About three years ago
one Stephen Gosson published a book, entitled, The school of Abuse, in which
having escaped in many and sundry co^clusions, I as the occasion the^ fitted
me, shapt him such an answer as beseemed his discourse, which by reason of the
slendernes of y^ subject (because it was in defense of plays and play makers)
y^ godly and reverent y^ had to deal in the cause, misliking it, forbad y^
publishing, notwithstanding he coming by a private imperfect coppye, about two
years since, made a reply, dividing it into five sectio^s, and in his Epistle
dedicatory, to y^ right honorable, sir Frances Walsingham, he impugneth me with
these reproaches, y^ I am become a vagara^t person, visited by y^ heavy hand of
God, lighter then liberty, and looser the^ vanity. At such time as I first
came to y^ sight heerof (judge you gentlemen how hardly I could digest it) I
bethought my self to frame an answer, but considering y^ the labor was but
lost, I gave way to my misfortune, contenting my self to wait y^ opportunity
wherein I might, not according to the impertinacie of the iniurye, but as
equitye might countenance me, cast a rain over the untamed curtailes chaps,
and wiping out the suspicion of this slander from the remembrance of those y^
knew me, not counsel this injurious Asinius to become more conformable in his
reports: and now Gentlemen having occasion to pass my travails in public, I
thought it not amiss somewhat to touch the slander, and proving it to be most
wicked and discommendable, leave the rest to the discretion of those in
authority, who if the Gentleman had not played bo peep thus long, would have
taught him to have counted his cards a little better: and now Stephen Gosson
let me but familiarly reason with thee thus* Think thou y^ in handling a
good cause it is requisite to induce a falls proposition, although thou will say
it is a part of Rethorike to argue A Persona, yet is it a practice of small
honesty to conclude without occasion: if thy cause were good, I doubt not but
in so large and ample a discourse as thou had to handle, thou might had
left the honor of a gentleman inuiolate. But thy base degree, subject to
servile attempts, measures all things according to cauelling capacity,
thinking because nature has bestowed upon thee a plausible discourse, thou
may in thy sweet terms present the sowrest and falsest reports y^ can
imagine: but it may be, y^ as it fortuned to y^ noble man of Italy, it now
fares with me, who as Petarch reported, given greatly to y^ intertainme^t of
strangers, and pleasure of the chase, respected not the brave and gorgious
garments of a courtier, but delighted in such clothing as seemed y^ place where
he soiourned, this noble gentleman returning on a time from his game, found all
his house furnished with strangers, on who^ bestowing his accustomed welcome,
he bent himself to y^ ouerseeing of his domestical preparation, and coming to
y^ stable among the horse keepers of his new come guests, and reprehending one
of the for faulting in his office, y^ fellow impatient of reproof, and
measuring y^ gentleman by his plain coat, stroke him on the fa^e, and turned
him out of y^ stable, but afterward attending on his master, and perceiving him
whom he had stricken to be y^ Lord of y^ house, he humbly craved pardon: y^
gentleman as patient as pleasant, not only forgave him ye escape, but pretely
answered thus, I blame not thee good fellow for thy outrage, but this
companion, pointing to his coat, which has made thee mistake my person. So at
this instant esteem I M. Gosson has dealt with me, who not mesuring me by my
birth, but by ye subject I handled like Will Summer striking him y^ stood next
him, has vpbraided me in person, when he had no quarrel, but to my cause, and
therein pleaded his own indiscretio^, and loded me with intolerable injury.
But if with Zoylus he might kiss the gibet, or with Patacion hop headless,
the world should be rid of an injurious slaunderer, and that tongue
labored in suppositions, might be nailed up as Tullies was for his Philipicall
declamations. But good Stephen, in like sort will I deal with thee, as
Phillip of Macedon with Nicanor, who not respecting the majesty of the king,
but giving himself over to the petulancy of his tongue vainly inueighed
against him, whom notwithstanding Philip so cunningly handeled, that not only
he ceased the rumor of his report, but also made him as lavish in commending,
as once he was profuse in discommending: his attempt was thus performed, he
seeing Nicanor sorely pressed with poverty, relieved him to his content.
Whereupon altering his coppie, and breaking out into singular commendation of
Philip, the king concluded thus: Lo, courtesy can make of bad good, and of
Nicanor an enemy, Nicanor a friend. Whose actions my reprouer, I will now fit
to thee, who having slaundered me without cause, I will no otherwise revenge
it, but by this means, that now in public I confess thou have a good pen,
and if thou keep thy Method in discourse, and leave thy slandering without
cause, there is no doubt but thou shall be commended for thy coppie, and
praised for thy style. And thus desiring thee to measure thy reports with
justice, and you good Gentlemen to answer in my behalf if you hear me
reproched. I leave you to your pleasures, and for my self I will study your
profit.

Your loving friend, Thomas Lodge.

BARNABE RICH Gentleman Soldier, in praise of the Author.
IF that which warnes the young beware of vice,
And schools the old to shun unlawful gain,
If pleasant style and method may suffice,
I think thy travail merits thanks for pain,
My simple doom is thus in terms as plain:
That both the subject and thy style is good,
Thou needs not fear the scoffs of M^^mus brood.
If thus it be, good Lodge continue still,
Thou needst not fear Goose son or Ganders hiss,
Whose rude reports past from a slaundrous quill,
Will be determind but in reading this,
Of whom the wiser sort will think amiss,
To slander him whose birth and life is such,
As ^alse report his fame can never tuch.
JOHN JONES GENtleman, in praise of the AVTHOR.
THough not my praise, yet let my wish prevail,
Who so thou be that list to read this book,
I never yet by flattery did assail,
To count that good that most did please my look.
But always wished my friends such style to use,
As wise might like, though foolish would refuse.
In opening vice my friend who spends his time,
May count by private good no profit lost,
What errors escape in young and lusty prime,
Experience (badge of truth) may quickly cost.
Who sets the mark, that makes men shun the sand,
Deserves good words, his proofs for profit stand.
For common good to cross a few men's veins,
Who like to Midas would that all were gold,
I count not miss, since there unlawful gains
Makes some men sink, whom birth might well uphold.
I know the sore, the scarre is seen to plain,
A blessed state where no such wills do rain.
In brief, I praise this book for pretty style,
For pithie matter, Gentle be thou judge,
O would my wish some fancies might beguile,
Then fair revenues should not fit a snudge.
A world to see how Asses dance in gold,
By wanton wills, when Gentles starve for cold.
Whose errors if it please succeeding age,
To see with sighs, and shun with sad advice,
Let him behold this book, within whose page,
Experience leaves her chiefest proofs of price,
And thank the youth that suffered all these toiles,
To warn thee shun that rock which many spoils.
FINIS.
GEntlemen, since the press cannot pass without escape, and some things are
so mistaken, as without co^rrection they will be very gross. May it please you
when you read to correct, especially, such principal errors as these that
follow.

Folio. 30. b. Line. 4. For woed, Read won. Folio. eod. Line. 8. For cold,
Read clouds. Folio. eod. Line. 15. For showde, Read shoard. Folio. eod. Line.
30. For concluding. Read concluded. Foli. 31. a. Lin. 34. For presents a
secrets meet, Read with seemly secret greet.
For the rest I refer them to your discretion, who can distnguish colors,
and either better, or fit words to your fantasies.

Your friend: Thomas Lodge.

AN ALARVM against Usurers.
NO marvel though the wise man accounted all things under the sun vain, since
the cheifest creatures be mortal: and no wonder though the world run at
randon, since iniquity in these later days has the upper hand. The
alteration of states if they be look into, and the overthrow of houses, if they
be but easily laid in open view, what eye would not shed tears to see things
so transitory? and what wisdom would not endeavor to dissolve the
inconvenience?

There is a state within this our Common wealth, which though it necessarily
stand as a pillar of defense in this royal Realm, yet such are the abuses
that are grown in it, that not only the name is become odious by somes
error, but also if the thing be not narrowly looked into, the whole land by
that means will grow into great inconvenience: I mean the state of Merchants,
who though to publyke commodity they bring in store of wealth from foreign
Nations, yet such are their domestical practices, that not only they enrich
themselves mightelye by others misfortunes, but also eat our English Gentry
out of house and hame. The general faculty in it self, is both ancient and
lawdable, the professors honest and virtuous, their actions full of danger,
and therefore worthy gain, and so necessary this sort of men be, as no well
governed stat^ may be without them.

But as among a tree of fruit there be some withered fallings, and as among
wholesome herbs there grows some bitter Colloquintida: so it cannot be, but
among such a number of Marchaunts, there should be some, that degenerate from
the true name and nature of Marchaunts. Of these men I write, and of none
other, my inuectiue is private, I will not write general: and were it not I
respected the publyque commodity more then my private praise, this matter
should have slepte in hugger mugger. Of these ungracious men I write, who
having nothing of themselves, yet greedelye graspe all things into their own
hands.

These be they that find out collusions of Statutes, and compass land with
commodity, these be the boulsterers of ungracious petty Brokers: and by
these men (the more is the pity) the prisons are replenished with young
Gentlemen: These be they, that make the Father careful, the mother sorrowful,
the Son desperate: These be they that make crooked straight, and straight
crooked, that can close with a young youth, while they cosen him, and feed
his humors, till they free him of his Farms. In brief, such they be that
gloss most fair then, when they imagine the worst, and unless they be
quicklye known, they easelye will make bare some of the best of our young
Heirs that are not yet stayed, whom zealouslye I be^eech to ouer-looke this
my writing: for what is set down here, either as an eye witness I will
auowe, or informed even by those Gentlemen, who have swallowed the Gudgen, and
have been intangeled in the hook, I have approouedlye set down.

Such be those sort of men, that their beginning is of naught, set by the
devotion of some honest Merchants, of whom taking up their refuse
commodity, they imploye it to this ungodly and dishonest purpose.

They find out (according to their own vain) some old soaking vndermininig
Solicitour, whom they both furnish with money and expense, to set him forth
and get him more creditte: This good fellow must haunte Ordinaryes, canuasse
up and down Powles, and as the Catte watches the pray of the Mouse, so
dilygentlye intendes he to the compassing of some young Nouice, whom by
Fortune either he finds in melancholyke passions at the Ordinarye, or at
pennilesse devotion in Powles, or perhaps is brought acquaynted with him by
some of his own brotherhoode. Him he handeleth in these or such like terms,
both nothing place and circumstaunce.

GEntleman, why be you so melancholye? How falls it out, that you are not
more lyghtsome? Your young years me thinks should loathe such sollome
aspectes. I may not any way imagine a cause why you should be pensive: you
have good Parents, you want no friends, and more, you have lyuelyhoodes, which
considered, truly you commit mere follye to be so meruaylouslye sad and
wonderfullye sorrowful, where you have no occasion.

If you want money, you have creditte, (a gift which who so ever inioyeth now
a days, he is able to compass any thing: and for that I see so good a
nature in you, (if proferred service stink not) I will very willynglye (if so
be you will open your estate to me) further you in what I may, and perhaps you
shall find your self fortunate, in falling into my company.

The young Gentleman, unacquainted with such like discourses, counting all
gold that glysters, and him a faithful friend that has a flattering tongue,
opens all his mind to this subtle underminer, who so wringeth him at last,
that there is no secret corner in the poor Gentleman's heart, but he knows
it: after that, framing his behavior to the nature of the youth, if he be sad,
sober: if youthly, riotous: if lascivious, wanton: he labors so much, that
at last the bird is caught in the pit-fall, and perceiving the vain of the
youth, he promises him some relief by his means: the Gentleman thinking he
has God almighty by the heel, holds the Devil by the toe, and by this
means, is brought to utter wrack and ruin. The Broker furnished of his
purpose, having learned the Gentleman's name, lodging, want, and wealth: and
finding all things correspondent to his purpose, hies him to his setter up, who
rejoices greatly at his good hap, and rewards this wicked seducer with a
piece of gold. To be brief, at first issue on the Gentleman's bond, this
broking knave receives forty or fifty pounds of course commodity, making
him believe, that by other means money may not be had, and swearing to him,
that there will be great loss, and that he could wish the Gentleman would
rather refuse then take. But the youth not esteeming the loss, so he supplye
his lack, sets him forward, and gives the willing Jade the spur, who
finding all things meat in the mouth, makes sale of this Marchaundize to some
one of his greatest fraternity, and if it be forty, the youth has a good
peniworth if in ready money he receive twenty pound, and yet the money
repayable at three months end. The Broker in this matter, gets double fee
of the Gentleman, treble gain in the sale of the commodity, and more, a
thousand thanks of this devilish Usurer. Truly Gentlemen, it is wonderful to
conceive, (yet are there some of you can tell if I lie) how this Sicophant that
helped our youth to get, now learneth him to spend: What says he? my young
master, what make you with this old Satin doublet? it is soilde, it is unfit
for a Gentleman's wearing, apparel your self as you should be, and ere few
days pass, I will acquaint you with as brave a dame a friend of mine, as ever
you knew. Oh how sweet a face has she, and thus dilating it with rethoricall
praises, to make the Gentleman more passionate, it falls out that the mand
Fawlcon stoops to lure, and all things are fulfilled according to his Brokers
direction. Promises are kept on both parts, and my youth is brought acquainted
with Mustres Minxe: this harlot is an old beaten dog, and a maintainer of the
brothell house brotherhoode, a stale for young nouises, and a limme of Satan
himself, whose behauiours and iestures are such, as the world cannot imagine
better, if the Gentleman weep, she will wail: if he sorrow, she will sigh: if
he be merry, she will not be modest. To conclude, her lesson is so taught her,
as she can reckon without book: Lord what riotousnesse passes in apparel,
what lavishness in banketting, what looseness in living, and in very short
space, our youth which was fligge, is now at leake, his purse^is empty, and
his mistres begins to lowre, which he perceiving, and earnestly bent to
continue his credit with his Curtisan, comes to his ungracious Broker, whom
with fair terms he desires, and with humble suites more earnestlye
beseeches to further his credit in what he may. Who seeing which way the
Hare windeth, begins to blame him of his liberality, and yet only is the cause
of his spending, and after a few privy nippes, bearing show of good meaning,
but yet indeed his way is to try conclusions, he hastes to the principal
his good maste^ Merchant, whom he finds altogether prompt and ready at a
beck, to send abroad his refuse commoditye for cracked angels: what conclusion
is between the^ both may easily be imagined, but y^ end is this, y^ Broker
returns to my solitary youth, and recountes unto him, first to make him
fearful, how many places he has been at, when he has not visited one, how
many he has desired, yet how few are ready to pleasure, at last he breketh out,
and tells him y^ whole, assuring him y^ he is to think well of his master
scrape-penie y^ usurer, who is willing in hope of his well doing to let him
have once more of his inco^modious commodity, upon reasonable assurance. To be
brief, y^ bargain is quickly beaten on, y^ broker lays y^ loss, y^
gentleman es^eemeth not so his need be served, y^ Merchaunt laughs at his folly
in his sleeue, and to conclude, y^ bonds are delivered, ye cursed commodity
received,and at this second mart, how speeds our yoncker think you, perhaps of
50. pounds in ware, he receives 30. pounds in ready money, and yet y^ money
repayable at three months end. O incredible and injurious dealings, O more then
Judicial cousonage, truly Gentlemen this that I write is true, I my self
know the paymaster, naie more, I my self know certainly, that by name I can
reckon among you some, that have been bitten, who left good portio^s by their
parents, and fair lands by their ancestors, are desolate now, not having
friends to relieve them, or money to affray their charges. A miserable and
wretched state is this, full of inconvenience, when such eye sores are not
seen in a common weal, when such abuses are winked at, when such desolation
is not perceived, and wonderful it is, y^ among so many godly laws, made for
y^ administration of justice, there be none found out: for these covetous
malefactors, purchase arms now, possess y^ place of ancient progenitors, and
men made rich by young youths miss^idings, do feast in y^ halls of our riotous
young spend thrifts. It will be answered, it is y^ gentlemen's own folly, and I
grant it, yet of their folly who should bear the blame, truly the bier, who
having experience to cousin, might have also conscience to forbear the^: nay
among ye rabbleme^t of such as we find to have fallen in their youth, how many
experienced men find we at years of discretion? who having only y^ name of
gentry left the^ to promote them to honor, and finding no relief any way, are
enforced either in foreign countries to end their lives miserably or desperately,
some more ungracious, are a pray for y^ gallous, choosing rather to die with
infamy, then to live to beg in misery. But to leave this to his place, and to
return from whence we have digressed: Our gentleman having got new supply, is
pricked on to new sin, and the minister of y^ devil serving, at his elbow,
persuades him to new change, for variety says he, is meruelously to be
admitted of, especially in such causes, and withal bringes him to a new
gamester a witty worldling, who more cunningly can handle him the^ y^ first,
and has more shifts of descant for his plain song, (but this by y^ way is to
be noted, y^ the broker has his part of y^ gains with y^ curtisan, and she
cosins for them both,) this minio^ so traineth our seduced youth in folly, as
not only himself is at her command, but also his substance remains to her
use, this high prised commodity is employed to y^ curtisans bravery, and she
which makes him brutish in behauior, does emty his replenished purse: thus y^
eye of reason is closed up by sensuality, and the gifts of nature are
diminished, by y^ disordinate usage of bestly venery. Spuplies are sought for
every way, by his wicked broker, to bring him to ruin, and to work his utter
confusion. Thus, thus, alas, y^ father before his eyes, and in his elder years,
beholds as in a mirror, y^ desolation of his own house, and hearing of the
profuseness of his ungracious son, calls him home, rebukes him of his
error, and requesteth account of his money misspended: He (taught and
instructed sufficiently to color his folly by his ungodly mistres, and
cursed mis^eader) at his return to his father, makes show of all honesty,
so that the old man lead by natural affection, is almost persuaded that y^
truth is untruth: yet remembering the privy conueiaunce of his youthly years,
and deeming the^ incident to his young son, he discourses with him thus.

O my son, if thou knew thy Fathers care, and would answer it with
thy well doing, I might have hope of the continuance of my progeny, and thou
be a joy to my aged years. But I fear me the eyes of thy reason are blinded,
so y^ neither thy fathers tears may persuade thee, nor thine own follies
laid open before thine eyes, reduce thee, but that my name shall cease in
thee, and other covetous underminers shall inioye the fruits of my long
labors. How tenderly good boy in thy mothers life wast thou cherished? How
dearly beloved? How well instructed? Did I ever entice thee to vice? Nay
rather enforced I thee not to love virtue? And whence comes it that all these
good instructions are swallowed up by one sea of thy folly? In the
Uniuersities thy wit was praised, for that it was pregnant, thy preferment
great, for that thou deseruedst it, so that before God I did imagine, that my
honor should have beginning in thee alone, and be continued by thy offspring,
but being by me brought to the Innes of Court, a place of abode for our
English Gentri^, and the only nurserie of true lerning, I find thy nature
quite altered, and where thou first should have learnt law, thou art become
lawless: Thy modest attire is become immodest bravery, thy shamefast
seemelynes, to shameless impudency: thy desire of lerning, to loitering love:
and from a sworn soldier of the Muses, thou art become a master in the
university of love, and where thou know not any way to get, yet fear
thou not outragiously to spend. Report, nay true report, has made me pri^i^ to
many of thy escapes, which as a Father though I cover, yet as a good father,
tenderly I will rebuke. Thy portion by year from me, is standing forty
pounds, which of it self is sufficient both to maintain you honestly and
cleanly: besides this, you are grown in Arrerages within this two years no
less then 100. pound, which if thou will look into, is sufficient for three
whole years to maintain an honest family. Now how have thou spent this,
forsooth in apparel, and that is the aptest excuse: and lavishness in that,
is as discommendable as in any other, if in apparel thou pass thy bounds,
what make men of thee? A prodigal proud fool, and as many fashions as they
see in thee, so many frumpes will they afford thee, counting thee to carrye
more bombast about thy belly, then wit in thy head. Nay my son, muse not
upon the world, for that will but flatter thee, but weigh the judgment of
God, and let that terrefie thee, and let not that which is the cause of pride,
nussell thee up as an instrument of Gods wrathful indignation. What account
reapes a young man by brave attire? Of the wise he is counted riotous, of the
flatterer, a man easily to be seduced, (...) where one will afford thee praise,
a thousand will call thee proud, the gretest reward of thy bravery is thi^^
see yonder goes a gallant Gentleman: and count you this praise worth ten score
pounds? Truly son, it is better to be accounted witty, then wealthy, and
righteous, then rich, praise lasts for a moment that is ^^ounded on shows,
and fame remains after death, that proceeds of good substance: choose
whether thou will be infamous with Erostratus, or renowned with Aristides, by
one thou shall bear the name of a Sacrilege, by the other, the title of Just,
the first may flatter thee with similitude, the last will honor thee indeed,
and more, when thou art dead. Son, son, give ear to thy Fathers
instructions, and ground them in thy heart, so shall thou be blessed among
the elders, and be an eye sore unto thy enemies. A second grief, nay more, a
coras^ue to my heart (young man) is this, you are both prodigal in apparel,
and in life, and ungracious and ungodly curtisans, (as I understand) are become
the mistresses of your mastership: and think thou this report could come to
thy Fathers ear, and not grieve him? Son, I had rather thou should be
accounted foolish then amorous, for the one may be borne withal, the other is
most odious. Incontinencie (young man) is ye root of all inconvenience, it
dulleth the memory, decays the body, and perishes the bones, it
makethstedfast fickle, beautiful deformed, and virtuous vicious: it impayreth
man's credit, it detracteth from his honor, and shortneth his days, a harlots
house is the gate of hell, into the which whosoever enters, his virtues do
become vices, his agilitie is grown to slothfulness, and from the child of
grace, he is made the bondslaue of perdition. The wisest by lewd love are made
foolish, the mightiest by lust are become effeminate, the stoutest Monarkes to
miserable mecockes. I wot well (my child) that chaste love is necessary, but I
know (my son) that lechery is horrible. A harlots wanton eye is the lure of
the devil, her fair speeches, the snares of sin, and the more thou delightest
in her company, ye more hepest thou the wrath of God against thy self: Let
Lais look never so dem^rely, yet Lais is Lais, measure not thy liking by
looks, for there be some holy devils: to be brief, the end is this, he is
best at ease that least meddeleth with any of them. Demosthenes will not buie
repentance so dear, as with high sums to purchase transitory pleasures.
and I had rather thou should learn of a Philosopher, then be instructed by
thy own fancy, mark this axiom, there is no virtue which is odious after it
is attained to, but the pleasures of love are then most loathsome, when they
are determined: and therefore no virtues: and to conclude, not to be sought
after. It is idleness my son, that seduceth thee: for the mind that is well
occupied, never sins. When thou enterprisest any things, measure thine
own fortune by other men's success: as thou considerest of their ends, so
imagine of thine own. Think with thy self the wisest have fallen by love, as
Solomon, the richest, as Anthony, the proudest, as Cleopatra, the strongest,
as Sampson, and by how many degrees they did exceed thee, by so many
circumstaunces prevent thy ruin. It is enough for silly Birds to be lead by
the call of the Fowler, and for men it is most convenient to fly apparaunt
goods, and stick to that which is indeed. Though thine eye persuade thee the
woman is beautiful, yet let thy experience teach thee, she is a Curtisan, and
will thou esteem of painted Sepulchers, when thou know certain and
determined substaunces? Do we buie ought for the fairness or goodness?
Spangled Hobbie horses are for children, but men must respect things which be
of value indeed. I imploie my money upon thee, not to the use thou should
be lewd, but for that I would have thee learned. It greeueth me to hear
reports of thy company keeping, for where thou offendest in the two foremost,
thou art altogether nusled in this, and truly I can not but marvel at thee,
that being borne reasonable, to make election, thou art so untoward in picking
out thy choice: Agree light and darkness? Or the I^knewmon with the Aspis?
Does the Weesell love the Cockatrice? Or gentle borne, such as be ungracious?
No my Son, broking bugges are not companions for continent Courtyers: for who
so either accompanyeth them, is either accounted a spend thrifte, or one that
is Sir John Lack land, either of their fraternity, or else a very fool.

Find me out any one of them, that in thy aduersiti^ will help thee, or in
thy misdemeanor advise thee. Nay. such they are, as will rather bind thee
prentice with Satan, then exhort thee to eschew sin. They be the
Caterpillars of a Common weal, the sting of the Adder, nay, the privy foes of
all Gentry, and such they be, that if they get, they care not how ungodly, and
if they cosen, they care not how commonly: So that three vices have now taken
hold of thee, first prodigality, the enemy to continency, next
lasciviousness, the enemy of sobriety, and thirdly ill company, the decayers
of thy honesty. The means to avoid these evils are manifest, but they must
be followed: it is not sufficient to know a fault, but it is wisdom to amend
it: Humble thy heart (my son) to the highest, and the more thou considerest
of him, the less will thou care for this flesh: For what is the body better by
the gay raiment? truly no more then ye soul is by superfluous zeal, for as
the one is foolish, so is the other frantic. Leave lust, least it lose thee,
use chaste delights for they will comfort thee; it is better driving a toye out
of memory by reading a good lesson, then by idleness to commit an error,
which is sawed with repentance. Of needless evils make no account, y^ less
you accompany ye worst, the more will you be sought to by the best. Easy is it
to say well, but the virtue is to do well: O my dear child, as thy friend I
exhort thee, and as thy loving father I command thee, to consider of the tender
care I have of thee, and to employ all thy indeouours now to my comfort: if
thou have run awry, call thy self home, and way within thy heart the reward
both of virtue, and the discredit by vice, so the honor of the one will
incite thee, the infamy of the other will deter thee. For those debts that
have ouerpast thee, in hope of amendment I will see them satisfied, and if
hereafter thou fall into the like lurch, I promise thee this, that as now I
deal with thee as a father, so then will I account of thee as a reprobate.
Thou see fire and water before thee, choose to thy liking: in doing well, I
will rejoice in thee, in dealing otherwise, I will nothing account of thee.

The, father with tears having ended this his exhortarie, is answered in
humble sort of his dissembling son, thus.

Whatsoever (good father) has passed, is irreuocable, but what is to come may
be considered of: it is natural in me to fall, and virtuous to recover my
self. I confess good sir, I am guilty of error, and have faulted highlye,
yet not so greatly as you intimate: the world now a days is rather bent to
aggrauate then to cover escapes. Wherefore, as the first step to amendment is
repentance, so (dear father) I am sorry for that is past, and most earnestly
request you to continue your favor, and no doubt but your son shall behave
himself hereafter to your comfort.

The father delighted with his sons discreet and humble answer, conceiueth
hope of amendment, and returns him to the Innes of the Court again, and
setting him on free foot, exhorts him to follow virtue, and intentiuely to
long after learning. But he, whose heart was pliable to receive all
impressions, no sooner is out of the view of his fathers house, but began to
forget his old promises, and renewes the remembrance of his mistress,
devising by the way how to delight her, and what suits to provide that may
satisfy her. To be brief, being returned to London, and quit of his fathers
servants, (y^ news of his arrival being blazed abroad) his Broker in post
have comes and salutes him, his mistress by tokens and sweet letters greetes
him, he makes his merchant joyful in the receipt of the money, and mistress
Minxe merry for the return of her young copesmate.

To be brief, in post have he* posteth to her chamber, where Lo^d what
friendly greetings pass, what amorous regardes, how she blames him of his
delay, and with fained tears waters his youthly sace, how she swears
that she is constant, and yet a curtisan: how she vows she is continent, and
yet common: truly it were a matter to make a Comedy on, to see both their
actions, and to note their discourses: there needs not many or long sermons on
this, master Brokers help in short space is sought for: for the money my youths
^ather gave him, has bought his mistress a suit of the new fashion. The
Broker ready at a beck, without delay furnishes him with money: it is
lamentable to report every loss, and since in another place I mean to set them
down, I will not motion them here. In short space, our Merchant begins to
look after more assurance, and where to fore he was content with obligation,
he now hunteth after statutes. (This kind of bond Gentlemen is well known
among you, the usurers by this time have built manor houses upon some of your
lyuelihoods: and you have lost that for little, which will not be recovered
with much.) The force whereof our youth considering not, so he have foyson of
money: the world to be short, at the last falls out thus, both land, money,
and all possibilities, either by father or friends, are incroched upon, by this
gentle master Scrape-peny, so that now our youth finding neither surety nor
similitude, by his flattering usurer is laid up close for escaping. Let him
write to his huswife Mistress Minxe, she disdaineth him: let him entreat the
Broker he refuses him, let him make suit to the usurer, he says he shall not
cosen him: thus (this Gentleman that neither by his fathers counsel would
refuse, nor by his own experience be persuaded, to avoid the eminent danger
that hanged over his head, is brought to confusion, and those friends that
fawned on him before in prosperity, now frown at him in his adversity: those
that depended with flattering words in time of wealth on his finding, now
altogether disdain him that cannot find himself. Lo Gentlemen what it is to
wink at good counsel, and to prefer young attempts before old experience:
see here the fruits of contempt, and let these lessons serve you to look
into: had this Gentleman regarded advice, had he considered of his estate,
himself had been at liberty, his friends in quiet. But (alas the while) our
heirs new a days have running heads, which makes their parents abound in
tears: some are led with novelties in foreign Nations, some with prodigality
in their own Country: some with pride, the first fruits of all impiety:
some by love, the lady of looseness. If one hunteth after virtue, how many
hundreds do daily practice vice? Let the experience of this young Nouice (my
youthly country men) make you wary, and see but into this one parcel of his
life, and give your judgment of his misfortune: his wit was sufficient to
conceive virtue, yet knowing (with Medea) the best, he headlong run to the
worst. Natures gifts are to be used by direction: he had learning, but he
applied it ill: he had knowledge, but he blinded it with self opinion. All
graces whatsoever, all ornaments what so they be, either given us by our
fore-parent, or grafted in us by experience, are in themselves as nothing:
unless they be ordered by the power of the most highest. What care conceive
you, may be comperable to this young Gentleman's fathers sorrow? who sees his
house pluckte over his head: his son imprisoned to his great discredit, and
the usurer the only gainer, and yet the most vilest person.

Now, what becomes of our youth think you? his Father refuses him,
dispossessing the right heir of what he may, and poor he is left
desolate and afflicted in prison. And in these days how many are infected with
this desperate disease, Gentlemen judge you, I my self with tears have heard
some privy complaints, and lamented my friends misfortunes, fallen so suddenly.
My good friends y^ are hereafter to enter into this world, look on this
glass: it will show you no counterfeit, but the true image of a rebellious
son, and the reward of contempt* of parents; account your selves happy to
learn by others experience, and not to be pertakers of the actual sorrow:
Obey your parents, for they love you, trust not to strangers, for they will
vpbraide you of their benefit; it is better to have the stripes of a friend,
then the kisses of a flatterer. Plato would have young men to look in the
glass, for two causes, the one, that if they found themselves beautyfull in
visage, and of exquisite stature, they might endeavor to make the virtues of
their mind, answerable to the liniaments of the body: the other, that if they
found themselves of deformed shape, they should seek to beautify the same by
the inward perfections of the mind; and for two causes my good friends, would
I wish you to consider of this man's fall, and read his misfortune: the one,
that not being yet nipped, you may prevent: the other, that being but yet a
little galled, you would hold back.

Est virtus placidis abstinuisse bonis. As the Loadstone draws iron, so let
good counsel conquer your affections, as the Theamides of Egypt drives
away iron, so let the fear of God dispell all worldly plesures: If a simple
man fall to decay, it may be borne withal, if a man of wisdom grow in
arrerages, may we not blame his folly? It is better to be envied then
pittyed, for thou art pitied always in misfortune, but en^ied at time of thy
prosperity. To be brief (Gentlemen) ouerlooke this advisedly, and you shall
find many things worthy the noting, and no few matters written for your
commodity. This miserable young man, overwhelmed thus on every side with
manifold and sundry cares, beholding his most unfortunate state, in woeful
terms in the prison house breketh into these complaints.

Alas unhappy wretch that I am, that having a good father that did cherish me,
a tried mother that tenderly nourished me, many friends to accompany me, fair
revenues to enrich me: have heaped sorrow on my own head by my Fathers
displeasure, refused of my friends for my misdemeanour, and dispossessed of my
land by my prodigality. O incestpous lust that enterest the heart, and
consumest the bones, why followed I thee? and O ungodly pleasure why did thou
flatter me? O wicked and ungracious man that have undone me, and woe be unto
thee (vile wretch) that in my misery do thus leave me. What shall become of
me poor wretch? feign now would I beg that bread, which vainlye I have
spent: now too too late do I see, that fainednesse is no faith, and he that
trusts to this world, cleaues to a broken staff. Alas, how should I attain to
liberty? or by what means may I escape my confusion? My Father has accepted
of another son, and all by reason of my lewdness: O that I had respected his
unfeigned tears, O that I had accepted his good advice, O that I had rejected
my flattering friends. But I see no hope is left me, my creditour is too
cruel, yet has he co^soned me: and feign would I be his bond slave, would he
release me: but since no hope is left me of recovery of my Estate, I refer
my cause to God, who as he will remit my offense, so will he redress my
misery and grief.

Whilst in these or such like terms, the poor young man bewayles his heavy
hap, suddenly enters his cousoning creditour, and in outward show bewailyng
his misfortune, yet in very truth the only original cause of his destruction,
comfort him in these or such like terms.

Gentleman, the exigent and extremity that you are now at, though it be most
tedious unto you, it is most lamentable in my opinion. These young years to
taste of sorrow so soon, is strange, considering all circumstaunces: but
since the cause proceeds of your own lewd misspending, mine be the loss in
part, but the greter must your affliction be. I hoping of your well doing,
neither denied your pleasure nor profit, yet in liew and recompense of all, I
find just nothing: a few subscribed papers I have, and some money I have
received, but nothing to my principal, and yet notwithstanding so favorable
will I be unto you, as if you procure me any one surety I will release you. To
leese my money I were loath, and to keep you here it were more loathsome. I
would do all for the best, not hindering my self, so you would strain your
self to satisfy me somewhat.

The Gentleman knowing in himself his inability, begins in truth to open
his state, protesting, that neither of himself, nor by any one at the present
he is to do any thing, no not so much as if he released him to pay his
charges, such is his misery, in that all his friends had given him over,
whereupon most humbly he beseeches him, to way his cause, promising any
service what so ever may be: if so be it will please him to set him free. Mas
usurer smelling out the disposition of the youth, begins to bring him to his
bow after this sort.

The world at these days is such (my friend) as there is small respect had of
those which have naught, and great honor attributed unto them, that will most
nearly look to themselves: which I perceiving, have given my self (as
naturally men are inclined to seek after glory) to the hoording up of riches,
to the end that my posterity might be raised up, and my fathers name (which as
yet is of no account) might by my means become worshipful. To perfourmaunce
of this, truly I have neither ben idle nor evil occupied: my thoughts have
wholly been set of gettings, and who so now a days has not the like meaning,
his purpose will grow to small effect. And though of my self, I do what I
may, yet (as it is necessary) I must have ministers, where by that which I look
for may be brought to my hands: otherwise, my stock might lie without vsaunce
to my utter undoing. Whereupon, if thou will follow my direction and be ruled
by my counsel, I will release thee of prison, and set thee at liberty:
restore thee to thy wonted credit, and countenance thee with my coin, so
that in short space thou may have money in thy pursse, and other necessaries
to set thee up again. Thou see that now thou art miserable, but I will make
thee fortunate: thou now art almost foodlesse, by me thou shall be satisfied
with the best: thy friends now disdain thee, the day shall come that they shall
seek to thee: now art thou without apparel, through me thou shalt be
costlye attired: nay, what pleasure soever thou shall either imagine for thy
preferment, or wish for to do thee good, thou shall both find me ready to
perform it, and friendly to continue it.

The Gentleman surprised with this sudden joy, and unacquainted good speeches
(not dreading that the Serpent lay hidden in the grass) most willinglye
assented, promising to the adventure of his life, (so his creditour would be
his words master,) to do his endeavor to perform his will, as he ought to
do. The Usurer seeing the mind of his prisoner, preciselye bent to do his
command, opens his heart unto him thus.

Gentleman, for that I have an opinion of your honestye, and trust in your
secrecye: I will open unto you my mind, and according as I find your
answer, I will shape your deliverance. Such time as you were at liberty,
you know you had acquaintance with many Gentlemen, and they not of the
meanest: who at sometimes as well as your self were destitute of silver: such
as those be you must find out for me, I will deliver you presentlye: apparayle
you in print, give you money in your pursse, and at such an Ordinarye shall
you lie, where the greatest resort is: your behavior and usage toward all
men must be very honest, especially in all causes look into the natures of
men. If you spy out any one Gentleman pensive, enter into discourse with him,
if you may perceive, that either by parentage or possession, he is worthy
credit, lay hold on him, feed him with money if he want, and (as though it
proceeded of your own good nature) profer him to be bound for him: if he accept
your offer, come to me, I will furnish him: now you may divide the commodity
or the money between you, and out of your part (considering me after the
bigness of the sum) take the rest for your own fee: which if you look
into, in a year will grow unto no small sum. This is the Lodestone must
lead you: and by all means you must fashion your self to feed humors: this
is an honest means to live by, this is a way to liberty, by this you may
pleasure your self: and to conclude in doing this, you may mightelye in
short space enrich me. When you have found out one fit to your vain, remember
this lesson, that what so ever vauntage you get of him, either for me, or for
your self, care not how little paper and ink he can show of yours, keep
still your own stake clear. In these matters you must be very circumspect,
for there be now a days such underminers start up, that scarce a man can
imagine his own profit but they preach it a broad, and lay it open. Thus do
you see whereto you must trust: how say you now, will you be content to do
this.

The young man answers, Good sir, there is nothing that you have said that
by me shall any ways be forgotten, I am ready and willing to put in
practice what you have taught, and no doubt you shall find me so diligent, y^
your self shall say, you were happy in putting me in trust. In brief the
conclusion is this, the usurer glad of this new Gentleman broker, discharges
him, sets him a floate: now who so brave as our late prisoner, or who so
frolic? The old sorrows are forgotten, and new inventions to cousin*
possess the receptacle of his reason. His old acquaintance flock about him,
some rejoicing at his recovered liberty, some wo^dering at his sudden
bravery, yet few suspecting his pretended and hidden knauerie. Of them some
he saluteth humblye, some ordinarilye, he was not so well instructed, but it is
as well performed. Now who but our Gentleman is a companion for the best, and a
cousiner of the most, he stays not long before he be-prouided of a pray, whom
he so orders, as himself is pertaker of y^ half, though the other be
paymaster of the whole, and as those that are in the heat and extremity of an
ague, desire drink to satisfy their drought: so this young gentleman that is
brought into bonds by one cousining spend thrift, having once entered foot in
the high way of prodigality, continues headlong his course to his own
confusion. But by the way it is to be noted, that this Gentleman which is
brought into the laps by our late prisoner, has his possession and portion
allotted him, so that our usurer and his mate work upon sure grounds. Two or
three Obligations and commodities received, our usurer grows to new devises,
and sets his scholars to practice them, says he, I must now have you learn,
to bring in this your friend to pay your debtes, and by this means you shall
bring it about, you shall when next time he shall demand your help, tell him
that of me there will be had no money before your old bonds be canceled, so
that unless he deal with me, by some means to acquit that, it is impossible
to attain unto any farther supply. You may allege unto him how in such
like extremities you have stuck, and will stick unto him, and desire him in
so easy a request he will not leave you destitute, by this means shall you be
rid of your old debts, and be as free from inconvenience as ever you were. No
sooner has our seducer learnt this lesson, but forth he trudgeth to find out
this young master, if possible may be, if so be he as yet be stored, he does
either make him spend it or lend it, and upon his new request of supply,
opens unto him all the circumstance which before he had learned, and so
cunningly handles him, that the Gentleman desirous of money is easilye
content. Whereupon the matter is handeled thus betwixt the Merchaunt and this
Gentleman broker to prevent inconvenience, if the brokers bond be an hundredth
pounds, the Merchant will lend fifty more, and makes y^ young man to seal an
absolute bond as his own debt, so that the desperate debte of the decayed
co^soned, by his means is brought to be the true debt of this silly Gentleman.
Naie when they have fatted both their fingers, they leave not thus, but from
money shoot at land, for if the Gentleman have 500. pound in stock payable at
24. or 25. years, they will so work as all that shall be their proper goods
which they will recover out of the executors hands, either by attachment or
otherwise, and besides that, so cunningly will they deal, that although they
have sufficient assurance in hand already, yet will they not leave till they
get an other more sure string to their bow, thereby to compass the poor
Gentleman's lands, at his want they will deal thus. This Gentleman and the
broker must be invited by the Merchant, when amongst other table talk, M.
Scrape-penie feels my youth if his money be gone, and offering speeches of
willingness to provide him always at his need, sets on by a beck his cousoning
mate, to procure y^ gentleman to crave more money, which he does, ye merchant
cunningly coulering his craft, answers him thus. Gentleman you see I ^m far
out already, and upon your single bond I have disburst a round sum of money, no
less then 500. pounds, which in a poor man's purse as I am, is no small
quantity, nevertheless if you will afford me farther assurance, I will not stick
in ready money once more to lend you 30. pounds. The gentleman never tofore used
to receive ready money at y^ first hands, begins to yield him hearty thanks and
humbly to pray him to demand and he will perform, for says he, considering
your honest dealing, I cannot think you may imagine any reasonable assurance
which I will not seal to. Why the quoth y^ merchant, y^ matter stands thus,
if so be you will seal me an estatute for my money, no sooner shall you have
done it, but you shall have y^ money, all your bonds in, and a desesance, to this
y^ I offer is reasonable, and to morrow if you will I will do it. Agreed quoth
y^ Gentleman, and so takes his leave, the next morrow according to promise,
the Gentleman seals the assurance, acknowledging an estatute, before some one
Justice of the bench, and coming to his Merchants house for his money, is
delaied for that day of, and in fine, his absolute answer is this, that
without a surety he promised him none: he takes witness of his friend (as he
terms him) a pretty piece of witness, when he sees no remedy, he
demands his bonds, and he witholdeth the^, he craves his deceasance, and
cannot have it. Thus is ye poor Gentleman brought into a notable mischief;
first in being co^soned of his money; next deluded by his estatute without
deceasance (for if y^ deceasa^ce be not delivered y^ same time or day, y^
statute is yet nothing auailable) thirdly by his bonds detaining, which may be
recovered against him, and continue in full force; and the usurer that plays
all this rye, will yet be counted an honest and well dealing man. But flatter
them who so list for me, I rather wish their souls health, then their good
countenances, though I know they will storm at me for opening their secrets,
yet truth shall countenance me since I seek my countries commodity. Here
you see two houses destroyed manifestly, y^ one of them, from a Gentleman made
a crafty cousoner; the other of them from a landed man, a silly poor wretch.
And wonderful it is to see, considering the asperitie of the Penal statutes
set down by her Majesty, and her honourables Peers in the Parliament. How
pretty collusions these cunning merchants can ^ind to infringe them. One
private practice they have in delivery of ye commodity, to make the condition
of the Obligation thus. The condition, etc. is this, that if the within bound.
T. C. his heirs, executors or assigns, do well and truly pay or cause to be
paid to y^ above named M. S. the sum of 40. pounds of lawful money of England,
at his own dwelling house, situated and being in Colman street, which he y^
said T. C. stands indebted unto him for, if so be that he the said M. S. or
S. his wife be in life, y^ then. Otherwise, etc. Now in this co^ditio^, y^
casual mart brings it out of compass of statute, thus by collusions M.
Scrape-penie gathers up his money. Others work by statute and recognisaunce,
making their debtor to discharge in their books of account the receipt of so
much money, where indeed they had nothing but dead commodity. Other work by
lives, as if such a one live thus long, you shall give me during his or her
life 10. pounds a year, for 30. pounds, and be bound to the performaunce of
that by statute. Other some deal in this sort, they will pick out among the
refuse commodity some pretty quantity of ware, which they will deliver out
with some money, this sum may be 40. pound, of which he will have you receive
10. pound ready money, and 30. pounds in commodity, and all this for a year:
your bond must be recognisaunce, now what think you by all computation your
commodity will ar^se unto, truly I my self knew him that received the like,
and may holdly avouch this, that of that thirty pounds commodity, there
could* by no broker be more made then four nobles: the commodity was Lute
stringes, and was not this think you more then abominable usury? Naie common
losses, and y^ reasonablest is, for 36. pound for three months, accounted a
good penie worth, if there be made in ready money, 20. pounds, nay passing good
if they make 25. pounds, I have known of forty, but sixteen pound, and
ten shillings. These be general payments, and receipts, incident to the most
part of the young Gentlemen that I knew deal that ways: and truly I my
self know within my time, no few number of Gentlemen, which are utterly
undone by this means, and unless this evil be prevented, and Gentlemen take
not more heed, more will follow after. But if the punishment of these men
were. In discretione Iudicis, notwithstanding the law were colored with all
by them, yet the conscience of the judge would cut such ill members off. In
former ages these things being known, were looked unto, and now when most
punishment is meanaced, usury is most practiced. Well may we now see that the
crafty have as many cautiles, as the discreet cautions. If we had as severe
laws in England, as once in Athens Solon set down, we should then cast a
rain over the head strong vnrulynesse of these Caterpillars: there it was not
lawful, the Father being living, that any money should be lent unto the
son: who being under his Fathers government, was not to be ordered
according to his own lyking: and there whosoever did transgress this law, it
was ordained that he might have no recouerye, nor be relieved any way by
justice, for that it was doubted, that the son having no ways to answer
that he did owe, should either be enforced by practicing coniurations in the
City, or exercising priuye theft in his Fathers house, to rid and discharge
himself of the burden of his debte.

The Aegygtians and Athenians seeing the error of covetous usury to take
footing in their provinces, by approved judgment concluded, that by no
instrument, plea, execution, or other means in law, a body might be
detained: the original being for corrupt gains.

The Romans, who not only invented, but imitated those Laws which
confounded error, by decree of Senate, with the Athenians, in the very same
terms as they did set down, that no money should be lent to young
heirs upon interest, neither allowing the detinue pleadable, nor the usury
aunswerable, having a private eye into the unmeasurable and greedy intents of
those covetous carles, who compass the Fathers lands before the Son come to
it.

In the Law of the twelve Tables, orders in this cause were prescribed, and
directions set down by the Tribunes: among whom, a man of rare virtue, Lucius
Gomatius instituted and made a law, where in he enacted, that no usury, nor
usurers should be allowed.

Lucius Lucullus seeing this error already creapt thorough all Asia, and
(like a wise governor) wylling to prevent, not only made a Law to avoid all
occasion of unlawful games, but also appointed punishments to those that were
subject to the error.

Tiberius Caesar as curious as the rest for common good, did with as great
circumspection as might be, take away the cause, and displace the effect of
this mischief: not suf^ering that to take head in his government, that was
the capytall enemy of a well ordered State: Claudius Caesar not yielding to
his Ancestors in honorable actions, renewed these Laws: Vespatian continued
them: and Marcus Antonius Pius, with Alexander Seuerus established them with
public instruments: who to the fore-passed erroures by farther insight joined
this, That by this unlawful getting, many of the best and most ancient
houses in all Italy, were brought to utter ruin, and confusion.

The Indians disdayning such servile attemptes, not only mislikie of lending,
but also forbad borrowing, neither is it lawful for an Indian to proffer, nor
agreeable for one of the Nation to suffer iniuryes: disdayning among them both
the use of oblygations, and the abuse of pawning.

Hateful was this error in Licurgus Common weal of Sparta, whereas not only
the name was odious, but also the thing it self was asperlye punished.

Agis King of the same City, seeing the practices of the covetous to work so
wonderfully as they seemed, not only punished the attemters of unlawful
profit, but also in the open market place, he burnt all the bonds and
Oblygations of the rich Bankers in the City.

In Thebes it was by statute ^orbidden, that any man should be put in office,
that within ten years before the election had practiced any unlawful
chaffering.

The Germans in their tarations of antiquity: whereas they bound the Thief
to restore double the thing he stole, they ordained that the usurer should make
recompense four fold* for his injury. And in borrowing the felicity of all
these Countries, we ar^ not so happy, as to abridge those errors that they
most mislykt off: But here perhaps some curyous maintainer of unnecessary
members will conclude, that the state cannot any ways be hindered by ani^
these actions, inferring that the dissolution of one family, is the setting up
of another: which in as many virtues may match, and with as great value
imploie it self in the state, as the other that is decayed.

Hereunto I shape this answer, that if it be true, that the nobility of
the Father works in the child, I cannot see how these vpstartes may any
ways employe themselves in honorable Actions, when as neither their
ancestors ever knew more then their Beads, or their Fathers other then
unlawful gains: and how can it be that where the mind only works in
servile subjects, it should any ways be elevated to attempt honorable
exploits? But be it these sort of men are necessary both in themselves, and
for their Country, which cannot be concluded, in that they be broken members:
yet must they conclude by the (touchstone of truth) the Scriptures, that their
necessarinesse in this world, makes them unnecessary for God: by whose
presidents if they should level their laws, I am afraid the graft would be so
stiff in the bending, that it would be rather thought more necessary for the
fuel, then worthy the correction. In the most happiest man y^ ever was,
whether philosopher or otherwise, I find this, y^ one only blemish in his
actions has made them ben noted for an error: now if these men should in their
enterprises be ga^de into, I fear me y^ as in the black Iet is seen no white:
in the deadlye poison is found no preservative: in the sprouting iuie, no
fruit: on the unnecessary thistle no grapes: so in these men the mischief
would be so manifest, that the show of virtue would be extinguished. So that I
can necessarily conclude this, that both these sort of men are vnnessarye for
themselves, unmeet for their country, unfit for a family, yea convenient for
nothing, but to present the painter with the true image of covetousness. For
themselves how can they be profitable, in destroying their souls, and
martering their bodies? in consuming themselves with thought, in devising of
new attemptes to delude. If they compare but their hearts sorrow, with their
excess gain, they shall find this most certain, that the encombrances of the
mind are so peysant, that they do by odds weigh down their commodity in
the ballaunce. What is it to get good, and to loose happiness? to enjoy much
riches, and little rest? to have many Lordships, and much hart-breake? Alas,
what are the goods of fortune, that they should entice? or the plesures of the
flesh, that they should allure? If our stately pallaices were to continue
permanent, if our worldly riches were to make our after years renowned, if
every thousand of our ducates, were to benefit us but with a hundred good
precepts: I would bear with covetousness with the best, and practice it with the
most: but since we see that much hording cannot be without sin, much getting
without grief, much profit without pain, much increase of goods, without
decrease of virtues, I cannot but conclude with the philosophers, that the
hoording up of riches makes many impressions of vices. And that those that are
no ways profitable for themselves, are not worthy the names of citizens in a
state: whereas, when all things should be limited by virtue, how can usury be
winkt at, when it is no way legitimate. Our laws in this state, although they
suffer a commodity, yet confirm not they taking: concluding herein, a
meruaylous pollicye: to those have in sight, which is, that leaving it evident,
that where neither Law of God can limit them, nor disposing of right suffer
them, nor prevention of errors withdraw them from punishing this error, and
not letting it slip, they as willing to pull away by peece-meales, as to
confound altogether: like wise Surgions eat out the dead flesh, by sundry
plasters, and no sudden corosiue, thereby wisely warning the wise to pull
back by courtesy, and the indurate by beholding their forbearance, to fear the
scourge when it shall come.

Yet some will here add and infer, (though unnecessarily,) that those whom
I here so asperlye reprehend, are as religious as the best, haunt the Church
with the most, at their burial be as bountiful as the godliest, and therefore
it may not be thought, that seeing so many goods, they should follow the bad.
To whom I answer, If they hear correction of sin by often haunting of
sermons, yet continue their wickedness, when they know what it works, their
actions are wicked, their lives dissolute, their ends desperate. For their
bounty at their burialls, that is but their last action, and their best
attempt: but if we look into the considerations of their benificence, I doubt
not but we shall find whereas their shoe wringeth them. If they are liberal
to leave them a memory when they are gone, alas they strive against the
stream: for this it will fall out, perhaps they shall have a few poor wome^s
praicrs for their black gowns, but a thousand decayed Gentlemen's curses for
their high exactions. If they be bounteous in hope to recompense y^ which is
past, alas it is as much, as to cast water to stop a gappe, or gather brambles
to build manor houses. If they be looked into in this their penie doale, we
shall find a kind of impulsion in all things: Truly, truly, I fear me,
if Mas usurer knew he should live, he had rother have a fair pawn for his
four nobles, then a thousand prayers of a poor woman: and the forfaiture of a
Lease for his xx. pounds, then the funeral Epitaph of the universities for
his last wills liberality. Since therefore impulsion forces them to be
bounteous, not free will, liberal, we must account of them thus, that both
they are both unworthy praise, being unwilling to be bountiful, and little to
be esteemed of, though their pretense be never so perfect. What praise
deserves he that will proffer medicines to a whole body? or the spur to a
willing horse, or the rain to an unwieldy colt, or honor to a perverse man:
shall we conclude, because ye usurer is rich, he is righteous? Because
wealthy? Wise: because sul of gold, therefore godly? I fear me it will fall
out that some of our scrape penies, are as worthy to be delivered to
perdition, as Sauanarota of Rome, of whom Marubus makes mention) who not
satisfied with excessive gain in his life time, at his death became a pray to
devils: It greeueth me to consider of y^ unhappy state of some, who like fine
cloth are devoured with these moths, like white rambricke are stained with this
iron moulde: and silly birds, are deceived with the call of this Fowler. O
unhappy state, staind with so unprofitable members, whose feet tread the ways
of errors, minds imagine mischief, hearts are indurate, confounding the
fatherless, oppressing the widow, making all poor, and themselves only rich.

A lamentable case it is, to see how true simplicity, the maintainer of
peace, is almost altogether exiled out our common weal: and that worldly wit
does wade so far, as heavenly wise are brought into admiration of their
mischief. In other notable Gouernementes and commonweals, this one vice has
had a fall, and here where it should be most detested, it is most used.
Great has ben^ our wisdoms in repression of co^spiracies, great our policies
in maintaining of peace, circumspect our preue^tions to eschew mutinies: and
yet the long time we have labored in this, yet daily more and more it grows
to head: and whereas the other vices have been exterminated by good looking to,
this (though altogether loathed) is most looked after. And in this case I must
appeal to you (right Honorable) whose wisdom is continually employed, to the
maintenance of our state: and crave you cast your eye aside, and but look
into the world a little, let your Herauldes Books be spied into, consider
the state that has been, and now is: and I fear me there will some tears
fall, and more care be conceived. Alas I know it well, that many ancient
coats will be found there vncountenaunced, and it is to be found out, that
some sleep on their beds of down, in those manor houses, which were
builded for the stay of some of our best noble seigniors. Nay, is it not true,
that more are eaten out with usury, then any other abuse whatsoever? And
although Commissions are graciously granted from her Majesty, as a most
merciful Prince, and from your Honors, as most sage, fatherly, and prudent
tenderers of gentry, grown into pouerti^: yet such is the contempt of some men,
as they neither measure command, nor have respect to conseience. The reverend
Fathers and eyes of Religion in this Common weal, how exclaim they on this
vice, and pronouce the wrathful threats of the Almighty against these
ungracious gatherers? yet how slenderly they regard them, their manifest and
notorious mischiefs bear record. So that it is to be feared, that when
neither honorable command may control them, nor divine admonition reclaim
them, they are grown into a reprobate sense, and hane forsaken the Law of the
Lord, and hunted after the whore, and are dronken with the lycour of her
abominations.

Principijs obsta sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas inualuere moras.
Noble Lords, may it please you yet a little more to give me leave, that as I
have manifested the mischeife, so (to my slender conceit) I may imagine a
salve. The Nobility, Gentry, and other heirs whatsoever, either by reason of
their Fathers tenor are wards unto her Majesty, or else by the tender
provision of their Parents, they are left to the discretion of their
kinsfolk. For those that by her Majesty's prerogative, by y^ death of their
Fathers, fall into her protection: the most part of them are begged by
Gentlemen, and committed to their tuition: among whom, as there be some
provident and careful to consider of the childs commodity, so (I fear me)
other some are self minded, and greedy of their own gain: which if so be it
fall out. I fear me the child that is under this government will happily
miscarrie, for if maintenance come from the protector slenderly, the nature of
the youth being noble, will covet after supply, and so through the
covetousness of the one, grows the confusion of the other, and by this means
grows ye Gentleman into y^ Merchants book in arrerages, when his warden
furnishes him not according his degree and calling: but it may be, that there
be purposes imagined by the governor, and practiced by the Merchaunt, so that
the one will not be pertaker of the shame, yet will he not stick to bear
part of the gain. But to let further matters wittingly ouerslip, for that I
find it good to wink at somewhat: return we to the other sorts of heirs,
left to the tuition of friends: among whom there grow like inconveniences,
as in the former: for now a days kinsfolks are as covetous as others, and as
craftye as the best, whose private conueyaunces the young heirs know, and
seuerallye when they be sought into, will open. But for the ordering of all
these things, and the recovering of this state, it were convenient that the
Warden of the Wards under her Majesty's protection, should at the receipt of
the Gentleman, be bound according to the value, to the honorable, that have
authority in that case, for the usage of the Gentleman, and that certain
stipend might be set down annuallye for his provision, rather with the most
then least, so that then it will fall out, that having sufficient of his own,
he will not depend on the supply of an other. The like annimaduertion if it
be had in respect of the other, and the care of taking the bonds, and
prefiring the portion set down by the direction of certain Justices of peace
in every sheere, we should have less complaints to trouble your honors, and
merchauntes should want young ministers to rid them of their resuse
commodity. I have glaunced into a matter (my good Lord) which if wisdom
consideratly look into, there will grow an exquisite platform. These causes
right honorable are necessary, and needful to be noted, and such they be,
that no doubt they will be as beneficial to the state, as any other
whatsoever. For by this means your honors shall be praised, the wardens well
thought of, the Gentlemen kept in good state, and the Merchant abridgde of his
crafty dealings. I have heard this cause lamented of among the most part of
that profession, who loath their title should be attributed to so outrageous
dealers. If they will desire the name, let them use the nature, and let not all
the whole order be blemished, by a few disordered dealers blame: but to leave
this to your honorable and grave consideration, and to return to your
courteous Gentlemen, to whom this matter most pertains, and for whose only
cause this pain is taken: I most earnestly beseech you look into your own
states, and consider with your selves, the misery and mischief that grows by
these follies: consider y^ end of all these practices which the usurers do put
in ure, forsooth it is to make you beggars, where now your supplies be
plentiful, and to empty your purses, where now they are replenished: consider
of their mercy either it is imprisonment, or else liberty with more shame:
weygh of their ends agreeing to their life: it was a pretty and witty saying
which was written.

Auaro quid mali optes ni vt viuat diu. Wish a covetous man no more mischief,
then that he may live long. For he dies daily in care, and consumes in
thought: refrain prodigality, so shall you have no need of the^: be
continent, so shall you be sought to of them: leave them to their own lusts,
they are not of y^ Lord: let your garments be comely, and not costly: sor a
comely continent man is more esteemed of, then a costly spend thrifte accounted
of. It is the virtues of your minds, the perfections of your understanding,
your intellectual contemplacions, that makes you accounted of among the wise,
and beloved among the learned: In your professions be studious, for y^ brings
profit: an hour well spent, is better then a days pleasure: eschew those
things that may decay your memory, and in every good action continue to the
end: trust not to apparent goods, believe not credulously y^ fair spoken, be
as provident to eschew trouble, as the envious is prudent to procure your
discomsort: look on nothing that may altar you from a man, think on nothing
that may mislead you, if you promise, perform it, but in promising use
discreation: these be the fruits of experyence, learnt by some in sorrow, and
let them be practiced by you in security Let not the garish show of a
present pleasure, the silly shadow of an earthly delyght, a transitory
similitude of a momentanye glory, make you follow that which will cost you
many sighs and sundry sorrows (when you look into your state, and see how
you are compassed of friends, smilde upon by fortune, beautified by nature,
pefectd by art, when you perceive care has not yet forrowed your forhead:
labor even then to continue friends, to make peace with fortune, to
mainetaine nature, to study art, and being freed as yet from trouble, fence
your actions so strong, as they may never become troublesome. Aurelius in his
Court seeing certain Philosophers using unseemly iestures, wagging their
heads, toying with their garments, and stamping with their feet, gathering by
their exterior behavior, how unapt their actions were in respect of their
precepts, exprlsed them the court, as unmeet to be preferred to honors.
Although not Marcus Aurelius, but wise Saba now governing, think you that
gracious Elizabeth cannot as well find out a vain head under a wauing feather,
a dissolute mind under a codpeece dublet, a wanton thought under a strange
habit, as the Emperor under a light iesture? Yes truly (Gentlemen): no doubt
but that eye y^ winketh at most things, sees many, and that wonderful
capacity that comprehends so much discipline, cannot ouerslip the mislyke of
masking bravery. If one error were as much banished England, as it was Rome,
neither should idleness offer the covetous opportunity, neither the idle be
cousened by the covetous. It is idleness that makes amorous, it is idleness
that makes fascionatine, it is idleness that breeds excess, it is idleness
that destroys all humane happiness the eye fixed on heavenly
contemplations, gazeth not on earthlye beauty, the thought occupied on
remembrance of moral precepts, never vouchsafe the misdeemings of the
fantasy: y^ body subdued by assidious travail, is never altered by the
motions of the flesh: the hope grounded on immortality, has not reference to
an hours pleasures. So that man is never altered in himself, enemy of
himself, procurer of his parents troubles: but even the^ chiefly, when idleness
is predominant, follypreferred, and fashions to feed fantasies allowed of. The
means then to avoid the Usurers book, is to be continent: the way to be
continent, is not to be idle: the reward of not being idle, is the daily
increase of more knowledge: and the increase of more knowledge makes a man
happy. The sting of the Aspe confounds in slumbers, the venonie of
idleness, waits careless opportumities: truly gentlemen, the first step to
avoid expense, is to grow in contempt of bravery, which if our noble young
youths would practice for a while, it would so fall out, y^ not only vain
fantasies should cease, fond fashions find no favorers, and the usurer
having his odd refuse commodities dead i^ his hand, would either afforde
better peniworths, or seek for foreign traffic. But to leave you Gentlemen
to your good counsels, and return to you good master usurers, whose ears
glowe at the rehearsal of these enormities, I must pray you give me leave to
make up a conclusion, and to finish these few lines with an admonition for
your cause; and though the corrections I use be bitter, account of them the
better, for why they be more cordial. A greedy desire of gain, is the
disease that infecteth you, some terms it thriftinesse, some neernesse, but in
plain terms, it is usury: and that is naught else but a greedy desire of
other men's goods, and this by the commandment is forbidden to be followed, and
therefore irreligious are they that use it. The man that coueteth gold,
conceiueth not goodness, his appetite is of the earth, and those that are
earthly minded, savor not the things that are of God. What though you cloth
your selves in simplicity of Doves, and your inward habit be worse then the
voracite of Wolves; he that made you knows you, and he whom you offend can
(and will) punish you; you will say you were naturally borne, (as Tully
witnesses) to take care for your selves, and to provide Victum and vestitum,
meat and clothing: and I grant it, but where find you, either Ethinke,
profane, or sacred sentence, to confirm your extreme hoording up of gold,
yea then most earnestly, when you are most rich? The laboursome Ant gathers
not in excess, but sufficient provision for the Winter, yet without reason:
and you which are reasonably borne, hoorde up more, then orderly (at first
sight) you well know how to employ. You long after Nabals vineyard with
Iesabel, but the dogs shall devour you in the gate: you heap house upon house,
land upon land, Quasi numquam sit periturum soeculum, as though this world
would last ever, but suddenly shall the wrath and curse of the Lord fall upon
you, and (without speedy repenta^nce) he will consume you in a moment. O turn
speedely unto the Lord, and put not off from day to day, least his wrath be
hot against you, and he make you pertakers of the plagues of Chore and Abiram.
Remember your old escapes that have past you, consider of their falls that are
decayed by you, and your selves if you have any contrition, and compunction of
heart, will lament the general misfortune with me. Did you arise of nothing?
Were you calde from base degree to high estate? From poor servants were you
made rich masters? Why, your goods make answer, saying, you have more then you
can well spend, and I deem the greater your talent is, the more you have to
answer for: but weigh in your selves, how this great mass of money grew
unto you: you must count that this Farm came to your hands by the forfayture
of such a Lease: this money became yours, by the virtue of such an Obligation:
you have scrapte up this ready coin, by making Centum pro cento: nay, you have
undone these many poor Gentlemen, only by iuriching your self. Too true it
is, (alas) (and wisdom privately bewaileth it, to look into your cruelty,
and Gentlemenes folly) that many houses are decayed by your means, and that
you are Lords of that, which should be the portion of more profitable subjects:
whose misery drives them to try conclusions in all places: and both to
forsake their Country, I pray God not to alter their conscience.

Nay in these extremities that they are driven into, which of you either
releeueth them? or comfort them in their sorrows? so far are you (you
worldlings) from lessening their miseries, as that ( Perillus like) you invent
new tortures, to drive them from your doors, calling them varabonds, and bride
well birds who in very truth were your best Masters and setters up? but your
selves with Perillus shall taste of the engines you have provided for others,
and the Lord shall pity the fatherless, and comfort the afflict^d, when
that dreadful day shall come, in which the heavens shall be opened, and the
Son of man shall come to judgment: how will the case then stand with you?
shall your wealth then acquit you? No, no; the Judge is not partial, he is
just in all his doings, and true in all his sayings. In that day the horror
of your conscience shall condemn you; Satan whom you have served shall accuse
you; the poor afflicted members of Christ shall bear witness against you; so
that in this horror and confusion, you shall desire the mountains to fall upon
you, and the hills to cover you from the fearful indignation of the Lord of
hosts, and the dreadful condemnation of the Lamb Jesus. When it shall be found
out, that you were rich, yet relieved none: that you were of wealth, yet
comforted none: that you rather replenished the prisons, then released the
prisoner: that your life be sound sawced with cruelty, and no one action
savoring of mercy: the Lord shall place you among the goats, and pronounce his
Ve against you, he shall thunder out this sentence, Go you cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angeles. This is the reward
of wickedness, this is the punishment of cruelty: look upon this therefore
(you worldly minded men,) and consider of these sayings: harden not your
hearts, but be you converted, relieve the poor, be harboursome, restore to the
owner that you have wrested from him, and turn, turn, turn unto the Lord (I
beseech you) least you perish in your own abominations: and to conclude,
account of me as your well wisher, who for public commodity have opened your
inconueniencs, and for brotherly amity, counseled you to call your selves
home: and I beseech yo as speedely reclaim you from your errors, as I do
brotherly admonish you of your escapes. How happy were I that having less
cause, might have less matter to write on? And hapless are you, if not won
with these warnings, you give more occasion to be written on: now stay you
where you are, and alter your natures, and where you were accustomed to do
ill, now acquaint your selves to follow goodness; and then it will thus fall out,
that I which exclaimed upon you for your vices, will then honor you for your
virtues: and where in common assemblies your name grows odious, in public
audience, you may be praised for your good life. The Lord send our Gentlemen
more wit, our usurers more conscience, and ungodliness a fall: so Nobility
shall not decay, but the sinner shall be reclaimed, and wickedness confounded.

FINIS.
THE DELECTABLE History of Forbonius and Prisceria.
IN Memphis (the chiefest city of Egypt) a place most renowned by reason of
the opulencie of the princes that have governed that Monarchy: at such time as
Sisimithres was head Priest of the same, and Hidaspes governor of the
Province, a noble Gentleman called Forbonius (highly accounted of for his
unreprovable prowess, and among the best sort allowed of for his unspeakable
virtues) made his abode, whose tender years not yet subject to the experience
of more riper judgment (as the winding Iuie about the stately Oak) entangled
it self with many amorous objects, now allowing this choice, now approving y^
person, straight admitting a third. But the fates having registered his last
opinion in everlasting and permanent destiny, made his manifold aspectes (as
yet not stayed) to light upon one seemly impression, and to allow of but one
only paragon: yet so sealed they his opinion, as (if it be true that the gods
ever were lascivious) I think the chiefest commander of the Heavens might
vouchsafe of such dalliance, and be only amorous in this, that knowing
heavenly perfections to be resident in earthly substance, he would either
borrow fire of Venus to make the creature pliable, or carry fire into the
heavens from whence Promotheus first did steal lightning. Favorable was the
climate, that allowing universally to all the creatures it compassed only,
blackness, vouchsafed Prisceria (Forbonius mistres) such sweet favor, who
borne of noble parents within the city, (as of Solduuius, vizeroie of that
Province adjoining to the city, and Valduuia, daughter and heir of Theagines
of Greece, the copartener of sorrow with Caricleala, the strange borne child
of the Egyptian king:) not only match al titles of honor with exquisiteness
of proportion, but also so coupled the perfections of the mind, with the
proportion of the body, as rather nature might disdain her industrye, not art
repent her of the dowry she had granted her: this sweet fixed Comet coasted
Forbonius affections, who like the careful Mariner, having (amidst the frostie
night) sought for his Load star, and at break of morning (his eyes almost
dazzled with looking) found it out: so our noble young Gentleman, having past
over many personages with a slight over look, at last finding out his mistres
allotted him by fate, yielded willinglye unto importunity of the Destinies, and
won altogether to be subject, being captiued with fancy, he applied
himself wholye to the accomplishment of his desires, and the attainment of his
mistress favor: and for that the Goddess of love is pliable to all
benignity, as not suffering a true seruitour to be long unrewarded: it so
fortuned, that she prosperously furthered our noble Egyptian in his purpose,
preferring him by opportunity to the sight of his desired pleasures: for the
propinquitie of their abode was such, as that Priscerias chamber window, had a
prospect into Forbonius garden, by which means, the Gentleman in his
meditations might behold his mistres, and Priscer^^ (being by the equity of
the destinies prefigurated to strange misfortune) might have occasion to
look, and seeing, might love: but as this conueniencie was favorable one
way, so was the froward disposition of the parents, untoward on the other
part. for Solduuius, (whether lead thereto by appointment, or driven to the
exigent, by some former malice borne by the progenitors of Forbonius) had
neither a lyking to the youth, nor a longing to have his daughter married:
either lead by covetousness, for that he would not stresse his coffers, or by
envy, for that he contemned Forbonius: yet what is concluded secretly amidst
the heavens, cannot be circumuented with man's circumspection: for Forbonius as
one which depended only on the favor of Prisceria, though fortune had hereft
him of occasion to enjoy, yet would not he be severed from the benefit to
behold her whom he loved: who warmed with the same fire, in increasing his
flame, kindled her own fancy, and being as willing as the other to procure
remedy to her passion, with many change of colors, and sundry sweet
aspects, opened that to her servant, which he wished for in his mistres: who
(with like sorrows requiting every circumstance) as one willing and borne to
attempt: at such time as Prisceria solitarily solaced her self at her window:
in mournful melodye (making his Lute tunable to the strain of his voice) he
recorded this Sonet.

THE Turtle pleased with his she compeare,
With sweet aspects, and many a turning lure,
Describes the zeal in terms should well appear,
If nature were so gracious to assure
The silly bird with speech as well as I:
Who stopped of speech by turns my woes descrie.
And though perhaps my terms by distance be,
Seaioynd from thee: I wis my mou^nfull moan,
Does pearce thine ears, and Echo tells for me,
In sour reports: would she and I were one.
For whom I live, and whom I only love,
Whose sweet aspects my dying fancies move.
And if the air by yielding calm consent.
Make sweet Prisceria privy to my suite,
Vouchasafe dear sweet, that beauty may relent,
And grant him grace, whom distance makes ^uter
So either hope shall make me climb the sky,
Or rude repulse enforce my fancies fly.
Prisceria not altogether privy to the report, yet concluding all purposes to
her own fantasy, conceyuing by his manifold sighs, aspectes, and motions,
whereunto he applied his actions, with a solemn sighe, as wishing him
present, and a seemly bent, as requiting his courtesy, betook her self to
her pillowe, where comparing every accident together, both of the zeal she
bare to Forbonius, and of the profer he proffered to her, she brake out into
these speeches.

Alas (unhappy Prisceria) what untoward destiny has befallen thee? That in
thy flowring years and prime of beauty, thou art become a thrall to
uncertain pleasure, neither knowing from whence the error first sprung, nor
by what Treacles it may at last be expelled. If it be that nature envying my
perfections has allotted me this purgatory, that having at free beck all
the benefits of Fortune, yet I should with inward bonds be inchained with
the holdefast of fancy. Alas that in prefixing the torment, she has not
proffered a remedy, or in bestowing an ulcer, has not vouchsafed a corrasiue.
How straungely am I martyred, sillye maid that I am? That by one only look
have conceived such an impression, as neither art can alter with medicine, nor
time eat out with continuance.

Woe is me that I love, yet fortunate am I that I hate not, for by the one, I
am deprived of liberty: by the other, I shall onerpasse the sorrow by
surenesse. Yet are thy thoughts more favorable to thee Prisceria, then the
success in thy love will be fortunate. Thou love Forbonius, and why? for his
virtue: yet thy father hates him upon old grudges, with whom when rancour
preuayleth, what may be more looked for, then contempt and denial? But
Forbonius seeks Priscerias favor, not Solduuius friendship: but Prisceria
cannot enjoy Forbonius, without Solduuius favor. But Forbonius will by happy
marriage conclude all malice, but thy father having an envious mind, will have
a suspicious ear. Alas why imagine I wonders in my fancy, hoping that those
destenies (which inthralled my affection) will subject my fathers resolutions:
since neither reason allows me any probablitie to work upon, neither has
Forbonius any motion as I see to compass ought: well, to the satisfaction of
my friend, and to the contentment of my sorrowing heart: my friend shall know my
zeal, and I will continue my affection, which being begun with so wonderful
causes, must needs finish with a miraculous effect.

With these conclusions she fell a sleep, leaving me to return to Forbonius,
who being tormented with the same fury, and troubled with equal fancy,
seeing his light to be eclipsed, I mean his Mistress vanished, began heauely
to complain himself in these or such like terms.

Alas you destinies, whose courses are inevitable: how fortuneth it, that in
bestowing casualities in ma^s life, you prescribe not means to prevent
misfortunes? and only beginning to fester the heart, prefixe no presidents,
whereby the humors may be expelled. If all things are to be referred unto an
end, what may I well imagine of my estate? who intercepted by all occasions,
must either finish my misfortunes miserably, or desperately. O love, justly
may thou be counted licentious, whereas thou neither prescribest limits to
thy self, to inthrall: nor means to thy subjects to attain liberty. But why
exclaim I on him, that has blessed me with a benefit? as though the fate that
made Forbonius happy in loving, cannot establish his success, as that it
shall not be measured by misfortune. I glory in the benefit of my martyrdom,
since a certain inward hope assures me, that divine beauty cannot be
sequested from just pity, nor a tried service in love, requited with a
disdainful hate. But foolish man that I am, how may it be, that in seeking
beauty, I labor not to attain it? and desiring to enjoy a benefit, I attempt
not to make trial of my Mistress bounty? Why, by last nights beck she
vouchsafed some show of acceptaunce: and that may as well be of reproof as
lyking. (O Forbonius,) it is a silly hope that is conceived by signs, either
attempt further, or persuade thy self of no savor. Her father (silly wretch)
enuieth thee, and think thou to compass his daughter? alas, faint hope is
this when as those that should build up, do destroy: when such as should
persuade, do diss wade: when as he that does command most earnestly, does
forbid. But love has no respect of consanguinitie, but having only relation
to him which he favors, delights only in the possession of his choice,
yet is not Forbonius, sure she loves: well, I see he that will be fortunate,
must hazard, and that man that will be gracious in his Mistress eye, must by
outward attempts and vnaccustoured purposes, seek to confirm his happiness.

Whereupon (upon sundry conclusions) he inserred thus, that the next day, by
certain rare attemptes, he would either finish that he had so long sought
for, or perish in the perfourmance of his enterprise: and the day serving to
attempt that which he imagined by night, he bethought himself of the
Cymnosophists of y^ country, among whom remembering one of singular experience,
and notable lerning, he resorted unto him, opening first, how he was inthralled
by fancy, how precluded by all occasions especially by the fathers disdain,
next, how some opportunity served him, lastly how the agony tormented him,
desiring the Philosopher, whose wisdom could see into all causes, to search
out the fatal Exigent of his love. Appollonius (for so the Gymnosophist was
called) having calculated the Gentleman's nativity, and seeing some planets
retrogate: covering the asperitie of the destenies, with the hidden secrecy of
an Artist, discoursed thus.

O Forbonius, if as Socrates did his gold, thou drown thy affections, it would
follow that with him thou should enjoy free liberty of thy self, and not
suffer thy affects to rule thy reason. Art thou bewtiched by Circes? of a
humane shape have thou gotten a beastly form? of a man borne to reasonable
actions, will thou now swallow an unreasonable misfortune? If many cares be the
decayers of the mind, if many sorrows the consumers of the body, better were
it by day to study the lyberall Sciences, then at such time as we should
imploye our selves to honorable attempts, to become vnhonourably licentious.
Alas Forbonius considering what a lover is, what a lover suffers, what a
lover seeks, I find the person idle minded, I find his patience an
insupportable sorrow, I find himself not himself, in y^ he is unreasonable.
The daily actions of a lover are discommendable, the night exclamations so
odious, as that they in this convert nature, who shadowing y^ world with
darkness, limitting each creature his rest, yet they even in y^ time labor in
outcries, in which they should take convenient rest. My good friend, y^ gretest
wisdom is to measure every attempt with his casualties, and if ought happen y^
may seem impossible, to cast off the rain, and suffer it to pass in that
sorme it was concluded in.

Thou love ( Forbonius,) better were it thou did loath: for by loathing thou
can but be comp^ed unnatural, but by loving thou may fortune to be
unfortunate. If all things be ordered by the higher powers, it is vain you
must conclude to infringe what is concluded on, if the destenies have
appointed, that Forbonius shall not be happy in inioying Prisceria, Forbonius
is not reasonable in suing for Prisceria. Unhappie Paris in Helen, though
fortunate in inioying her beauty: but when love begins with a fading benefit,
it ends with an everlasting sorrow. The conclusion of a wise man must be, to
yield to the necessity of Fate, and to continue contented with that which
cannot be altered by succession. Tell me by the immortal Gods, my good friend
I beseech thee, what happiness conceiuest thou possible to follow, either in
enjoying thy Lady, or finishing thy love? Alas, the greatest sweet is a
continual sower, and after many unfortunate repulses, a sudden misfortune
makes an end of many a years courting. I speak all this to this end (my
Forbonius,) because I would prevent that by counsel in thee, which otherwise
(if thou follow thine own lure) will be a confusion to thy self. Thou come
to me for counsel to compass love, and I would confirm thee, that thou
should avoid the occasions of following love. Thou would by my means
strain art to subdue nature, yet I labor both to direct by art, and to
suppress by nature. Truly (my good friend) looking but to the hidden secrets
of nature, I find thee subject to many misfortunes, and no way to be remedied
but by one only virtue. Thou shall (after long toils) compass that thou
hopest for, yet when thy greatest plesures begin to take the original: even
then shall they find their exigent. Since therefore the reuolutions of the
heuens conclude, that by only continent forbearaunce, thou shall be
disburdened of many misfortunes, I beseech thee let this transitory pleasure
be accounted off as it is, and finish up thy love with my counsel: so shall
thou be fortunate in preventing destenie, and continue in happiness, where too
much love may make thee unlucky.

Forbonius lead by the inconstant opinion of his young years, not waying the
grave and fatherly council of Appollonius, answered him thus.

O Father, when the wound is given, it is ill counsayling how to avoid the
stripe, and when the heart is captiuated, there can be but small recovery by
counsel: how were it possible for me to restrain that in my self, which the
Gods could not limit in their Deities? Easy it is for the whole Physician to
counsel the sick patient, but when y^ extremity wringeth excessiuely, none
bideth the martyrdom but the afflicted. O Appollonius my mind measures not
the iniquity of fate, neither do I seek limits for that, which by no
direction can be exterminated from out my heart. So that good father rather
respect my present suit, then my future discommoditie, and by your counsel
make end to my sorrows: whereby it will thus come to pass, that enjoying the
pleasure I long wish for, I may more boldlye bear the assault of froward
fortune when it comes. If it be only death, that my enemy Fate threteneth
me with, let me enjoy this benefit, as for Fortune, I will be friend to her
enemy, the which is the grave, and acquaynting my soul but with the only
Idea of my Mistress, think my self as happy, as they that have walked the
Elisian fields, a long space to their content.

Appollonius willing to do him good, yet sorry he could not prevail with
his counsel, at length began thus.

Since my Forbonius thou will be ruled by no counsel, thou must be pertaker
of thine own sorrow. As for thy request, I will so satisfy thee, as not
only thou shall at thy pleasure conceive thy Mistress mind, but also open
unto her the secrettes of thy heart, by which means thou shall herein have
accomplishment of thy wish, though in so doing thou show but little wisdom.
Whereupon, resorting to his studdie, he brought forth a mirror of notable
operation, a practicke in prospectiue, which delivering to Forbonius, he
commended it thus.

O my friend, I deliver thee that here to feed thy humor, which was composed
to comprehend Art. In this myrrour thou may after thou have written thy
mind: taking the Sun beam, send the reflection to thy mistress eye, whereby
she may as legeably read thy letters, as if they were in her hands, and by thy
instructions made privy to the secrets of thy glass, return thine answer
in that very form in which thou sendest. For the rest, I leave it to your
discretions, and good fortune, wishing all things to fall out as prosperouslye
in your love, as you would, and as I wish.

Our noble youth ( In amors) having furnished himself of that he sought for,
repaired unto his study, where devising in what terms he might solicit his
Mistres, at last he cyphered out his sorrows in this sequel.

THat fancy that has made me thrall to thy beauty (sweet Prisceria)
commends my submission to thy good grace: beseeching thee to be as favorable
in ministering a remedy, as thy beauty was ready to procure my thraldom. I
make no resist in this my loving torment, but only yield my self subject to y^
impression. May it therefore please thee (sweet Prisceria) to be as
beneficial in this, as the Gods are in their bounty, who for every faithful
interatie, return a grateful satisfaction. And herein may thou see my
faith to be steadfast, since Art it self serves opportunities, and ministers
me both a means to open my hidden sorrows, and thee a messenger to bewray thy
silent secrets. I beseech thee (by the sweet statues that are builded for the
Goddess that is honored in Paphos,) to be as just in returning favor, as I
am forward in bewraying my fancy: so shall thou have the possession of him,
that is by destinies appointed thy assured beads-man, and I enjoy those
plesures, in which I may be only fortunate. Till then I must write my self as I
am, The most unhappiest lover that lives.

Forbonius.


This cyphered out in fair charecters, and disposed in such terms as his
fancy then prefixed him, he took his way into his garden, waiting some
necessary opportunity, to put his purposed attempts in practice, and to
bewray his woes to Prisceria: who wounded with the remembrance of Forbonius
perfections, and seeing no way but his presence a mean to expel sorrow,
betook her self to her accustomed prospecte, and with longing looks she
leuelled at his love, which was alredie stricken with her beauty.

The Gentleman fitted by these convenient occasions began his Philosophical
demonstration, and taking his aspecte as necessarilye as he might, he
presented Prisceria with his pensive submission: who confirmed by so convenient
opportunity, betaking her self with all speed possible to her study, and by
a beck charging him with no less dispatch to give attendaunce: she gave
annswere to his amorous entreaties with this gracious affability.

THe Climate Forboniurs where under I was (...), (believe me) either has
pre^^gured me the deste^i^ to be inamoured by thee, or thee the subject that
should besot me: and truly herein the working of the Gods are secret, who
employ such thoughts in me, as now by thy letters I find wrought in thee,
making a unity in both those hearts, wh^ by reason of parents enui^s, are like
to find fatal conclusions. And whereas by necessity of fate I find my self
wholly captiuated to thy pleasures, I doubt not but that God whom we honor
for his brightness, and who by his lightening ministers to our misfortunes,
will be favorable in our proceedings. For me, if thy constancy be such as my
true zeal is, I beseech thee by the same Godddesse to succor me, by whom I
found my self first inthralled and made subject to thee: mean while I will
write as thy self, and rest as I am. The most unhappiest lover that lives.

Prisceria.


These conclusions being ministered with the same aspectes they were proffered,
the two poor couple had no other means to noate the effect of their private
joys, but only by silent smiles, gracious regardes, and trickelyng tears,
and such like amorous actions, each one wishing the other, either happy in
possessing their delyght, or fortunate, if by death they were relieved of their
sorrow: and being intercepted by the closure of the evening, they betook
themselves both of them to their restless pillowes, concluding upon many
purposes, how to finish their languishing and tormenting martyrdom.

Forbonius as one born to attempt, concluded with himself, considering how
favorably all occasions fawned upon him) to attempt y^ stealing away of
Prisceria: who poor soul in careful dreams imagining of her days fancies,
was forestaled of all favor by the unhappy approach of her father, who
furnished with all worldly policies to prevent what he mislyked, and compass
that he suspected: perceiving by his daughters solome aspects, some secret
sorrow y^ troubled her, having remembered that axiom of the Philosophers, that
dreams are the prefigurations of days sorrow, watched his time so nearly,
that even at that very instant he entered the chamber of his daughter, when
drowned in her sweet delightful dreams, she began at his entry to cry (...)
thus. O fortunate Forbonius! which her father marking very precisely, and
concluding whereupon the sigh took his hold fast, awaking his daughter on a
sudden, very cunningly compassed her thus.

O my Prisceria, let it not seem strange unto thee, to behold thine aged
Fathers vnaccustomable access, since he is now perplexed with unacquainted
fears. Alas my daughter, thy father seeing thee beautiful, is not careless
of thy comfort, neither can he that labored to bring thee to light, suffer
she to pass thy days in loathsome mislyke. At this instaunt when I entered
thy chamber, in thy dream (as me seemed) thy soul betokening (as it should
seem) some days sorrow or pleasure, exclaimed thus: O fortunate Forbonius, thou
know how hateful the person thou did name is to thy father, who if he
be fortunate in thy dowry, I love him: I shall esteem him unfortunate in the
favor thou will assure him: who being a collop of my ^lesh, wilt not allow
of that, which is loathsome to thy father: O Prisceria Solduuius sees, and thy
secret dreams bewraie that the fortunacie of Forbonius, is either unfortunate
for thy self, or not allowable by thy Fa^hers opinion. Thy change of
constitution, thy hidden sorrow, my sweet child made me suspicions, but now
the very true messenger of thy mind confirming me, I must without
circumstance conclude, that Prisceria loves her fathers enemy, that Prisceria
desires Forbonius favor, and detesteth her fathers choice, which if it be so;
O my daughter, I fear me thy love will not be so favorable, as my disdain
bitter, wherefore if thou art entangled, since thou know my opinion,
forbear, or if no wisdom will conclude thee within limits, my displeasure
shall exclude thee from out all benefit of my favor. Choose now Prisceria,
whether with calm persuasions thou will yield to my bent, or by unaccustomed
displeasure be pertaker of thy Fathers wrath.

Upon these conclusions, Prisceria all abashed, shaking of the drowsinesse of
her dreaming, made answer to Solduuius in these terms.

These strange suppositions, my good Father, argue the slender opinion of your
self, who by the vncertainest signs y^ may be, confirm your opinion as you
please. In my dreams you said I called Forbonius fortunate, and may it not
be, that as my tongue uttered y^ it thought not, your mind immagineth that
which is not? counting every light shadow a substance, and every little
similitude of truth, an undoubted demonstration. Did I call thine enemy
fortunate? Truly Father I fear me I might justly conclude it, for he poor
Gentleman little dreameth on displeasures, when at such time as rest should
occupy your senses, you most travail in your rancour: by certain tokens as
you say, you conclude, that I am affectionate, and by this silly conclusion of
a dream, you infer an undoubted truth, that I am enamoured with Forbonius,
and if perhaps the necessity of the fates be such, Prisceria shall find her
self happy in loving Forbonius, by whose means her Father may cease rancour,
and take rest, and his daughter satisfied with that she seeks for, be no
farther troubled with dreaming fantasies.

Solduuius perceiving by these speeches the certainty of his daughters
affection, as one altogether enraged, calling up his wise, and raising his
servant, left the ^illye maid all amassed at his sudden departure, whereas
the old man exclaiming upon the disobedience of his daughter, and thundering
out many reuenges against poor Prisceria, caused his horses to be saddeled,
and perforce (contrary to her expectation) made her be conuayed to Farnusium,
a manor house of his own, a place for the solytarinesse more fit for a Tymon,
then convenient for a beautiful Lady, the only company there being
shepherds, who upon the Vast mountains recorded the praise of the Country
favorer Pan, and the rural amity between them, and their Country lasses.
Thus from stately Court, from the regards of her sweet friend, from the
plesures that follow the City, her companions were rural maidens, her retinue
forlicke shepheardes: whose slight rapacitie not yielding any comfort to
allaie the Gentlewomans sorrowings, made her (to her more heart grief) continue
her pensiveness, and sup up her conceived sorrow in silence. But to repeat the
moan on the other side that amorous Forbonius made, when hy certain report he
had notice of his mistres departure, were wonderful, who being in himself
altogether confounded, not knowing where to find her out which was the only
mistres of his fantasy, Lord with how many sighs breathed he forth his
sorrow, and compassed on every side with dispairing joys, in the very same
garden where tosore he repeated his pleasures, he in these waylefull terms
recounted his miseries.

Alas unfortunate Egyptian, whose faithful affections ar^ so immutable, as thy
natural all color is vnstainable. How injurious are the destinies? that
granting thee life, they daily hasten thy destruction, that vouchsafing thee
pleasure, they sus^er it not to be permanent: that admitting thee the benefit of
beauties good grace, they deprive thee of the possession and blessing of that
thou desire. Alas what shall befall me? when the glory of my eyes are
dimmed? when the pleasures of my heart are determined? when she whom I love
nearest, is farther off from my presence? when y^ injurious repulses of y^
father, makes every attempt of Forbonius unfortunate. Woe is me, what way may I
imagine to make an end of my misery? Should I with dispairing rashness finish
up the Catastrophe of my troubles? Should I being bereft of her by whom I
live, dispossess my self of that she most does like? Should I in making my
self only fortunate by y^ alaie of my sorrows, leave Prisceria to her daily
mournings, both to lament my deceasure, and her frow^rd destiny? no Forbonius,
it is but vain quiet that is to her coffeehouse, who being equally
inthralled with thy self, will as willingly be pertaker of thy torment as thy
self. But why wail I thus in feminine sorrow, when my happiness is to be
accomplished by manly attempt? Solduuius rigor has caused Priscerias absence,
yet cannot the fathers displeasure determine the daughters love, she lives to
thy wish Forbonius, she loves to thy weal Forbonius, she will be constant til
death Forbonius, why should thou then leave her unsought for, Forbonius?
Attempt vain man, to seek out thine assured, let not the distance of place
disanull thy good hap? Solduuius banishment is concluded within the limits of
Egypt, and since it is so, either Forbonius will attain her he desires, or
revenge the unjust rigor of an injurious Father.

Upon this resolution, as a man quite dispossessed of himself, he hasted to
Apollonius, recounting unto him how all things haw fortuned, beseeching him
(not without foison of t^ares) to seek but by art where Prisceria was
conversant, and to direct him by counsel, who altogether was confounded with
despair. Apollonius by exterior ^^gnes conceiving the interior
heartesgriefe, and seeing the poor young Gentleman martyred so miraculously,
comparing times and reuolutions, attained to the knowledge of her abode, and
concluding in himself to comfort him, which almost dispaired, he spoke thus
to Forbonius.

My good friend, whence grows it, that neither the nobility of thy
ancestors? nor thy forepassed attempts? neither the benefit of thy mistres
favor can confirm thee, but that thou will be careful for that which thou
have already almost compassed. Pluck up your heart my sweet Forbonius, for
thy Prisceria is not far from ^hee. Farnusium a manor house of her Fathers,
seated East out of this City, whereas she is so circumspectly looked into, that
by any means, unless by secret and convenient policy, thou can come to
the accomplishment of thy desire. Thou must therefore attyred altogether like a
shepherd, depart this city, and by some convenient means procure the keeping
of some one Farmers sheep, which is resident among those mountains, by whose
means thou shall fall in acquaintance with the garden of thy mistres, called
Sotto, and having convenient occasion to satisfy thy affection, possess thy
self of y^ thou have long desired.

Forbonius concluding his reply with hearty thanks, suddenly departed, and
remembering himself of one Corbo, a tenant of his, which had his mantion house
very conveniently, seated hard by the manor house of Soldunius, he hastily
shaped his journey unto him, and making him prive to y^ he desired, and
swearing him to be constant and continue secret, he betook himself to y^
keeping of his tenants sheep, and not forgetting to drive his flock near
unto the lawnd whereas Solduuius servants grased their sheep, he so demean^ed
himself, that not only he attained the favor of Sotto which he sought for,
but also for his courteous affability was accounted of among y^ whol^ troup of
herds men for y^ best singer, and y^ tunablest Musition. His Aeglogs were so
delectable, and the delivery of them so delicate. Whereupon by good fortune it
so fell out, y^ Forbonius under the coulourable name of Arualio, was desired by
Sotto, to resort unto y^ ma^nor house, who informed him of all y^ happened,
telling him of the careful demeanor of his sorowing young mistres, who pleased
with nothing but with solitary music, pined her self away with melancholy,
and not without cause, (said he,) for my old master has forbidden me y^
admitting of any one to her presence, not suffering her to pass the limits of
my wary eye: nor allowing her to walk without y^ castle walls for her
recreation. For my sake therefore chaunt her some melody, and resort with me to
a conuenieet arbor within our garden, whereas she walking for her recreation,
may perhaps take some delight in thy sorrowful mournings, in y^ they most fit
her fantasy. Forbonius as willing to wend, as he desirous to persuade,
accompanied Sotto to Farnusium, where having a place appointed him to apply his
Aeglogs, and the Goddess before him whom he should divine upon, he under
these secrets described his passions.

AMidst these Mountains on a time did dwell,
A lovely shepherd who did bear the bell.
For sweet reports and many loving lays:
Whom while he fed his flock in desert ways,
A netheards daughter decked with lovely white,
Beheld and loud the less Corinna hight.
Him sought she often with many a sweet regard,
With sundry tokens she her suits preferred,
Her care to keep his feeding flock from stray,
Whilst careless he amidst the lawnes did play.
Her sweet regards she spent upon his face,
Her Country cates she sent to gain his grace,
Her garlands gaie to deck his temples fair,
Her doubled sighs bestowd on gliding air,
Her pleasant kiss where she might steal a touch,
Corinnas zeales to Corulus was such.
He wanton shepherd glorying in her suit,
These signs of zeal to folly did impute:
Not waying of her many loving sightes,
Her watrie eyes, her secret moan by nights:
Her careless comfort in her fruitful ewes,
Her monefull Aeglogs full of careful shows,
But scorning that, (which might that Godhead move,
Who in a shepherds form, for Jove's behoue,
Did charm the watchman of the heifer fair,
For whose behoof the thunder left the air.)
He left the place where she did love to bide,
And drove his flock another way beside.
Whose dire disdain (the God that kindles love,
And makes impressions straungly from above
Misliking) struck with fancy at that stower,
The silly shepherd wounded by his power.
Now sought for that which he tofore did shun,
And now the heat of fancy first begun,
To strain a yielding in his restless mind:
Such are the wounds that pass from fancy blind,
That Corulus will now Corinna we,
Though erst he loathd and scorned so to do.
Now she that sought with many a sweet aspect,
Is sude to now by him that did neglect.
Now bountiful is sweet Corinnas grace,
Now like the Sun in welkin shines her face,
Her eyes like Gemini attend on ^oue,
Her stately front was figured from above,
Her dainty nose of Iuorie fair and sheene,
Bepurfurate with ruddie roses been.
Her cherie lip^ does daunt the morning hiew,
From whence a breath so pleasant did insew,
As that which laid fair Psiches in the veil,
Whom Cupide wood and wo^d to his avail.
Within the compass of which hollow sweet,
Those orient ranks of silver pearls do meet,
Prefixing like perfection to the eye,
As silver cold amidst the summers sky:
For whence such words in wisdom couched be,
As Gods from thence fetch their Philosophy:
Her dimpled chin of Alablaster white,
Her stately neck where nature did acquit
Her self so well, as that at sudden sight,
She wished the work were spent upon her self,
Her cunning thus was showde upon the shelfe:
For in this pile was fancy painted fair,
In either hand an asure pipe she bare:
By one repeating many a sweet consent,
By other comfort to the heart she sent.
From which a seemly passage there does show,
To strangers pleasures that are plast allow,
Like to the forrowe Phaeton did leave,
Amidst the welkin when he did receive,
His Fathers charge, and set the world on fire:
In this fair path often paced sweet desire,
At every turn beholding with delight,
That Marble mount that did affect the sight.
Of virgins wax the sweet impression was,
The cunning compass thereof did surpass,
For art concluding all perfections there,
Wrote this report, All graces bideth here.
Which Cupide spying built his mansion so,
As scorning those sweet graces to bestoe
O^ mortal man, with bow ibent does wait,
Least Jove should steal impressions by deceit.
And wondering at the (...) come^^ ^ake,
In thought concludes it m^^ter for the air
Then mortal mould: next which the stately thies,
Like two fair compast marble pillars rise,
Whose white does stain the dainty driven snow:
Next which the knees with lusty bent below
Conioynd with nerves and cords of Amber sweet,
This stately pyles with gladsome honor greet,
Such stately knees as when they bend a lite,
All knees do bend and boow with strange delyght.
Her calves with stranger compass do succeed,
In which the asures streams a wonder breed,
Both art and nature therein labored have,
To paint perfection in her colors brave,
Next which, the pretty ground work of the pile,
Does show it self and wonder does beguile,
The joints whereof combind of Amber sweet,
With coral cords, yield bent to seemly feet.
From which, whose li^t to lift his gasing eye,
Shall greater cause of wonder soon epsy.
When on the back he bends his wavering look,
In which the work and task Diana took,
When with Arachne for the prise she straue,
Both art and nature there excelled have.
Where from Pigmalions image seemly white,
Where close conueiaunce passing Gordians plight,
Where lovely Nectar drink for all the Gods,
Where every grace is stained there by ods.
Will not content with gasing look for more,
And spy those arms that stand his sight before,
Which for their mould the Egyptian wonders pass,
Which for their beauty stain the Crystal glass,
Which in their motion master natures sweet,
Where bl^shing streams present a secrets meet,
Will now amazde, conclude at last of this,
That in the hands all grace concluded is.
Where Nature limits ever fatal time,
Where Fortune figures pleasure in her prime,
Whence spread those fingers tipped with Iuorie,
Whose touch Medusas turn may well supply,
Where to conclude as now the shepherd deemes
All grace all beauty, all perfections seems.
Thus Corulus with many secret thoughts,
D^aines on her whom erst he set at naughts:
And forced by scorch of inward shrouded fire,
He seeks for her his fancy did require.
Who fraught with woes in secret shrewdes renude,
Her silent grief unsure of that insude.
Her Corulus with wary search at last
At sudden found: and as a man aghast
At that he saw, drew back with fear, and than
Remembering of his lwoes his suit began:
Of weete Corinna blessed be the soil
That yields thee rest amidst thy daily toil,
And happy ground whereon thou sa^est so:
Blessed be thy flock, which in these lawnes do go,
And happy I, but having leave to look:
Which said, with fear he pawsd, and blood forsook
His (...) face, till she that wrought the fire,
Restorde the red, and kindled sweet desire.
And with a bashful look beholding him,
Which many months her pleasant foe had bin:
She cast her arms about his drooping neck^,
And with her dainty fingers dawde him up.
And kissing of his palie colored face,
(Like as the Gods) by touch did soon displace
The sour, that alterd the poor shepherds sweet,
When thus she began her Corulus to greet:
O lovely shepherd happy be the hour,
In which (I know not by what secret power)
The Gods have sent thee hither to thy friend,
Alas what grief should Corulus offend?
Whom fairest Nymph might well a liking lend.
Thy grasing Ewes with vdders full of milk,
With fruitful ^leece and wool as soft as silk,
Take glory in the fatness of this soil
And praise their Mastres care and busy toil:
And now accuse thee of thy drooping moan,
It Is but enough for me to wayle alone
For why Corinna only hapless is.
Poor Corulus at last reuiude by this,
Began sighing silence now to interrupt
And banish fear which did his hope corrupt.
And thus he said: O Nymph of beauties train,
The only cause and easer of my pain:
It Is not the want of any worldly joy,
Nor fruitless breed of Lambs procures my noy,
Ne sigh I thus for any such mishap:
For these vain goods I lull in fortunes lap.
But other greefes and greater cause of care,
As now Corinna my tormenters are.
Thy beauty Goddess is the only good,
Thy beauty makes mine eyes to stream a flood,
Thy beauty breaks my woonted pleasant sleep,
Thy beauty causes Corulus to weep:
For other joys they now but shadows be,
No joy but sweet Corinnas love for me.
Whereon I now beseech thee, by that white
Which stains the lilly, and affects my sight,
By those fair locks whereas the graces rest,
By those sweet eyes whereas all pleasures nest:
Do yield me love, or leave me for to die.
Corinna studious for to yield reply,
With many tears bedewd the shepherds face,
And thus at last she spoke: O happy place.
The which the Gods appointed for my good.
What blessed Nymph within this sacred wood
Has pleaded poor Corinias lawful cause*
Or be they dreams that now my fancy draws?
O Corulus ne reads^ thou sue to me,
Nor spend the tears for to accepted be,
Since long ore this I would have bent to bow,
If modest fear could well have taught me how.
In happy bonds of Himen I am thine:
Ne plead thou grace to her that does incline.
Thus with a kiss she sealed up the deed:
When as the shepherd glad of happy speed
Embracing her he had desired long,
Began call for grace to her he so did wrong.
Confirmed thus with mutual glad consent,
They finished up the marriage that they meant.
Great was the day, and every field compeere
Delighted in the pleasure of his deer^.
Poor I alone in sad lamenting lays,
Deprived of the pleasure of my days,
In careful tunes in brief concluding thus:
O happy times and planets gracious.
When in a mirror beauty did behold
The hidden woes, my muse could well vnfold^
And with a liking look shape some reply.
But woe is me, since fathers cruelty
In changed forms has altered terms of suit,
And altering place has made my Goddess mut^.
Who honoring Pan, may hap the person see,
Whom habit strange persuades it should be me.
THis delectable Aeglogue finished by the amorous Forbonius gave occasions to
Prisceria to satisfy the thoughts that then troubled her fantasy. For
confounded in her self, not knowing what to conclude of that she shepherd
Arualio had reported, yet welnigh persuades that the reporter was he she liked
off, with a seemly grace, not minding to incur the lightest suspicion,
turning toward Forbonius, whose hand was on his half-pe^ie, she say thus.

Gentle shepherd, that Nymph thou love should alter from womanhood, that
considering thy true zeal, and exquisite proportions, would not requite thy
loyalty, with the benefit of her love. Truly Madame (answered the imagined
Arualio, and I think my self gracious in this, that for her whom I love I am
enjoined this torment, whereupon t^rning himself a side, and drying up the
tears which should bewray his fancy, he was at last known by Priscoria, who
altogether amazed at the presence of Forbonius, forgerting weln^e the
infortunacie she was entangled in, cast her arms about his neck, yet
coloring with a seemly disdain to shadow her opinion, and blindfold subtle
^otto, she said thus. Truly shepherd, if I may prevail with thy mistres,
thou shall not be unrewarded for this courtesy: and Madame (said Forbonius)
might I counsel your Ladyship, you should not sorrow for that may be
compassed at your pleasure.

This said, Sotto taking Arualio by the hand, took his leave of his young
Mistress thus: My young Lady, I as studious of your pleasure as may (...)
have brought you this young shepherd to laugh at, and if his music like you,
you shall have every day at the least a lay or two. And heerin shall thou do
me no small pleasure said Prisceria? and so with a seemly regard shaping a loath
departure, y^ two shepherds resorted to their flocks, Arualio altogether amazed
at his mistres beauty, and Sotto very iocond he had fitted his young Ladies
fancy so well: whereupon y^ old shepherd, turning to our solitary and
distressed Arualio, said thus, What maks thee thus sollom my youthly compeere?
cease to grieve thy self about those things that may be compassed, if thou
love, time shall eat out that which Treacle cannot, and thou shall either be
fortunate in possessing her thou desire, or in ouerpassing thy passions with
good government, leave love to those that like her. Arualio not to seek of
courteous humanity, gave him this answer. O Sotto, it is not the love that
greeueth me, but the means to compass love: I labor not to attain love, but
to possess the profits of my long service in love: as for time, it may work
wonders in them that are repulsed: but when Cupid is gracious, and occasions
unfortunate, think you y^ this is not a bitter sour? Yea, but answered Sotto,
and if it be so Arualio pluck up thy sprights, and doubt thou not, but if thou
prove dilygent in pleasing my young mistress, I mean not to be idle, if I
may know whom thou likest of. As for that doubt not, said our disguised
Forbonius, for since I know by thy only means my love is to be compassed, I
will not stick in so slight a pleasure to profit, when as by thy means I may
only succor my self. In such like terms passing over their werisome walk:
At last they betook themselves each of them to the folding of their sheep, for
it was welnie night, and the Sun was steeped in the Ocean: whereupon Arualio
the shepherd, becoming now Forbonius indeed, hasted him home unto his
Tenaunts house, making him both privy of his happy ^ortune, and concluding
with himself how to perform that he wished for, and for that long travail
requires some quiet, he betook himself to rest: where recompencing al his
nights wakings, with a quiet sleep: At dawne of day he returned in his
counterfeit habit unto the field, and unfolding his flock, he drove them into
those pastures, that were adjoining to Sottos walk: who no sooner spied Arualio,
but saluting him very courteously, he earnestly entreated him, (setting all
excuses apart) to go to Farnusium, and in the best sort that he might to
solace the unfortunate Prisceria* who only waiting that occasion, commending
his flock to the ouer-flight of the old man, and accompanied with Saracca the
daughter of old Sotto, he was presented to his desired, within the castle, who
by the absence of Sotto, finding all occasions to serve her turn, having sent
sillye Sarraca about some sleeuelesse arrant, she taking the occasion proffered,
said thus to Forbonius: Blessed be that sweet conceit of thine (O my friend)
which to the unfortunate rigor of my father, has adapted so convenient an
end. Now may thou with as great pleasures enjoy thy desired, as with deep
perplexities thou have sorrowed in her absence. Now neither distaunce can sever
us from embracing, nor the watchful eye of my fether, intercept thee of thy
wish. See here thy Prisceria, who though the Fates work never so contrary,
will live to Forbonius, and only love Forbonius.

This said, with many kisses com^orting him which was almost overcome with
pleasant imaginations, she was returned this answer by her most assured
favorer.

O Prisceria, if ouerpressed with many suspicious thoughts, if made pertaker
of the infernal tortures in Phlegeton, if subject to the punishment of the
Daughters of Danaus, or affixed to the torture (...) martereth Titius, I should
be confirmed by this only benefit in opinion, and made constant in all
misfortunes, yea, even to overcome the insupportable travails of the sisters,
and be enabled with constancy to subdue all torments what so ever, by
remembrance only of one gracious regard. It is neither thy fathers rancor
sweet Prisceria, nor distance of place, nor any one occasion what soever, can
either sequester me of my hope, nor thee of the possession of thy wished: cast
off therefore all doubt of after dole, and assure your self, that as this
pleasure has his original this present instant, so by my means ere long it
shall be continu^d for everlasting mamory. Passing the time in such like
pleasures, and ministering a remedy unto each others torments, I cannot tell,
whether by the iniquity of destenie, or otherwise: Solduuius learning out
Forbonius departure, and suspicious of his forward attempts, at that very
instant arrived at Farnusium, when the two amorous couple, little doubting his
sudden approach, were coasted with this sower, in midst of all their sweet,
that the enemy of their plesures even then entered the Castle, when as it
seemed the fates had prefixed them that conueniencie and opportunity to allaye
their long sorrowing. The brute of whose aduent brought to the ears of
Prisceria, Lord how she was confounded in her self, how dismayed was Forbonius
at that instant, how at y^ very time were they both astonished, when most
circumspection should be had: so that scarce they had ^en dried up their
tears, when as Solduuius entering the chamber, quicklye discovered the whole
counterfaite (for jealous eyes inflamed with rancour pretermit nothing)
whereupon the old man at first, nothing at all deluded by the strange habit,
spying out their proceedings, laying violent hands on Forbonius caused him
forcibly to be conveyed to the strong ^^ower in the Castle, and tourning
himself to Prisceria, he began thus.

O thou wicked and ungracious maid, degenerating from the Nobility of thy
ancestors, and led by unseemly affections, not directed by the likings of thy
tender parents, in what terms should I accuse thee? or bewray my sorrows? Woe
is me, that am enforced to be an eye witness of mine own sorrow, and to behold
y^ with mine eyes, that I hate in my heart: Is this the reward of breeding
children? Is this the benefit that is reapt by issue? Are these the pleasures
that befall Parents? O Solduuius, happy had thou been, if either Prisceria
had been unborn, or thou unmarried, by the one thou should have escaped
this present misery, by the other prevented the untoward sorrow that now
confounds thee. Is thy love to be fixed there where I hate? or should thou
be amorous of him who is odious to thy Father? O vile wretch borne among the
Hirean Tygres, which respecting not thy Fathers felicity, ouerburthenest his
old years with unlooked for calamity: but if ever just Gods pitied a
lawful complaint, I doubt not but they that minister justice to all men, will
wreak the injuries thou have done to me.

Thus said, he sat down altogether confounded with melancholy. When as
Prisceria finding occasion to speak for her self, began thus.

Who seeks O father, to prevent the destinies, laboreth in vain, and who
indeauoureth to alter nature, as he strives against the stream, so must he
perish in his own ouerweening: the Gods have concluded our love, and will you
being a creature seek to infringe it? Alas my father, why should my pleasure
be your discomfort? or that by which I live, prove that which most you hate?
Do not you herein break nature? who lay violent hands on your own flesh,
and seek to alter that by rigor, that was ordained by divine instinct? O let
your rancor ouerslip (my good father) and (...) humble suit prevailed with an
honorable mind, cease to hate him whom I love: and couple us both together,
whom the Gods having joined in an assured league of friendship, it cannot be
but injustice to alter their proceedings.

Soldu^tius not able to digest the fury of his passion, nor willing to weigh
of the submissiue request of his daughter, interrupted her thus: And is it not
sufficient or thee (vain wench as thou art) to pass the limits of nature?
but to continue thy error too? Think thou to compass me with tears, who
without sighs cannot call to memory thy escape? no Prisceria, both thou shall
see, and that varlet shall know, that my displeasure will not be finished but
with blood, nor my anger satisfied, till I have confounded him, who has
discomforted me. Whereupon flinging ont of the chamber in a great rage, and
fastening both boltes and locks he with his frame resorted to the imprisonned
poor shepherd, his capital enemy Forbonius, whom after he had taunted with
these unjust terms, he proceeded further to this unjust revenge: Thou cursed
and abominable caitife, is it not sufficient by the injuries of thy Father
Clunamos, to move my patience, but that thou in person must violate my
daughter? Think thou that the Gods detest not these iniuryes? when as with
wicked attemptes thou be witchest the daughter, and massacrest the Father? naie
nether in justice will they pretermit the offense, nor will nature suffer me to
bear with thine error: prepare thy self therefore to make him recompense
with thy blood, whom thou have troubled with thy attempt.

Forbonius confounded with sorrow, and amazed at this austere judgment, yet
remembering the nobility that was always accounted in him, answered him thus.

Alth^^gh enraged rancour has made thee pass the limits o^ honor. (O
Solduuius) yet pass not so far in thy resolutions, as to stain the dignity
of thy person, with the martyrdom of a guitlesse Gentleman. If I did hate thy
daughter, that little envy that grew by my Fathers displeasure, might by
reason grow to deep and rooted malice, but when I love Prisceria, why should
I be contempned of Solduuius? It should seem that love was not accounted
loathsome among the gods, when as prefixing a punishment to all escapes, they
prescribe an honor to this: chiefly concluding it to be a virtue: whereupon
thou must conclude, that either thou contemnest the decrees of the Gods, or
measurest all things by thine own malice. Thou threatnest me with death
(vain man) and I weigh not the dissolution of my body: for this I assure
thee, as long as I may live, I will honor Prisceria, and being dead, my ghost
shall persecute thee with revenge, and prosecute my affections toward my best
beloved. So Prisceria live, Forbonius cares not to dye, the only memory of
whom shall make me constaunt in misfortunes, and willing to withstand the
brunt of thy cruelty: whereupon my conclusion is, that if Solduuius for
faithful assurance will become a friendlye allower of Forbonius, he which by
reason of the malice of his Father had once cause to hate him, will now honor
him, and that strife which separated two so noble families, shall now be
finished in our happy marryage: if this like not, proceed as thou please. In
granting me favor, thou shall find honor, in bereauing me of life, thou
shall finish all my misfortunes.

The discourse of Forbonius thus ended, Solduuius began thus, after y^ he had
somewhat digested his cholar: Although Forbonius the iniuryes thou have offered
me, together with former displeasures, be sufficient to continue my resolution,
yet weyghing with my self that it is vain to alter that which is prefixed by
destinye, won by reason which directs all men, and by the tender love I
bear my Daughter, which should prevail with a Father: I yield thee thy love
to inioye in chaste wedlock, and where is thou lookedst I should be thy
tormentour, lo I am now contented to be thy unlooked for Father. Whereupon
taking Forbonius by the hand, and conueying him to Priscerias chamber, he
confirmed the Gentleman in his former purpose, and his daughter of his assured
savor, using these kind of his intention: My daughter, that father that even
now hainously mislikt of thy lover, now gloryeth in thy lyking, and he which
whilome hated Forbonius, now vouchsafes him his son in law: whereupon comfort
your selves with mutual solace, and to morrow we will to the City to finish
up y^ ceremonies. The two lovers compassed with incredible pleasures, and not
able to suppress the affections that possessed the^, but by breaking out into
speech: they both humbled themselves to aged Solduuius, returning him by y^
mouth of Forbonius these thanks. O noble gentleman, it may not be expressed by
tongue, what I imagine in heart, who by your means, of the most vnfortunatest
man that lives, am become the only happy man of the world: notwithstanding
this in lieu of all favor I will return you, that both by that means all
private quarrels shall cease between our two families, and you registered in
our Egyptian Records, for the only peacemaker of Memphis. In these I sweet
spea^hes over passing the day and night, the next morrow the whole train
po^^ed to Memphis, whereas by the high Priest of the Sun they were solempnly
espowsed, and after many sorrows were recompensed with nuptial pleasure. Now
Ladies and Gentlewomen, I must leave this to your consideration, whether the
lovers for their constancy are more to be commended, or the old man for his
patience more to be wondered at: I leave you to fit that conclusion, till you
have read what is written, promising you that if my rude discourse have wrought
you any pleasure, I will both labor, here after to serve all occasions, and so
fixo my studies as they shall not far differ from your fantasies: and thus
craving you to wind at an error, and commend as the cause requires, I take
my leave: willing to be made privy if I have any ways trauayled to your
contentment.

FINIS.
TRVTHS COMplaint over England.
MY mournful Muse Melpomine draw near,
Thou saddest Lady of the sisters three,
And let her plaints in paper now appear:
Whose tears like Occean billows seem to be:
And should I note the plaintiffes name to thee?
Men call her Truth, once had in great request,
But banished now of late for crafts behest.
Amidst the rest that set their pen to book,
She picked me out to tell this woeful tale,
A simple Poet, on whose works to look,
The finest heads would think it very stale:
Yet though unworthy, to my friends avail
I take the toil, and pray my Muses aid:
To blazon out the tale of Truth dismaide.
Such time as Phoebus from the colored sky,
Did headlong drive his horses t'ord the West,
To suffer horned Luna for to pry,
Amidst the duskie dark, new raisde from rest,
As I in fragrant fields with woes oppressed:
Began walk to drive out melancholy grief,
Which in my heart at that time had the chief.
It was my hap fast by a rivers side,
To hear a rufull voice lamenting thus,
You ^^lling str^ames, even as your waves divide:
So breaks my heart with passions perilous,
Which feign I would unto the world discuss,
Were any here for to recount my moan,
Whose woeful heart for inward grief does groan.
Which said, the cast her dewed eyes as kance,
And spying me, began rowse her heavy head,
And praide me pen her sad and heavy chance,
And she recounted it that present sted,
I did agree, and granting Truth me fed:
With these reports which I set down in vearse,
Which greeues my Muse for sorrows to rehearse.
Whilome (dear friend) it was my chance to dwell,
Within an Island compast with the wave,
A safe defense a foreign foe to quell.
Once Albion called, next Britain Brutus gave,
Now England hight, a plot of beauty brave,
Which only soil, should seem the seat be,
Of Paradise, if it from sin were free.
Within this place, within this sacred plot,
I first did frame, my first contented bower,
There found I peace and plenty for to float,
There justice ruled, and shinde in every stowre,
There was I loud and sought too every hour,
Their Prince content with plainness loved Trutli,
And pride by abstinence was kept from youth.
Then fl^w not fashions every day from France,
Then sought not Nobles nouells from a far,
Then land was kept, not hazarded by chance,
Then quiet mind preserud the soil from jar,
Cloth kept out cold, the poor relieved werre.
This was the state, this was the luckie stowre,
While Truth in England kept her stately bower.
Justice did never look with partial eyes,
Demosthenes was never dum for gold,
The Princes ears were open to pesants cries,
And false suspect was charely kept in hold,
Religion flourisht, livings were not sold
For lucre then, but given by desert,
And each receiud, and preached with zealous heart.
Then learning was the Loadstone of the land,
Then husbandman was free from shifts of law,
Then faithful promise stood in steed of band,
The Drones from busy Be no Mel could draw,
Then love, not fear, did keep the state in awe:
(...) then did flourish that renowned time,
(...) earth and ashes thrusted not to clime.
For As the horse well mand abides the bit,
And (...) his stop by rain in riders hand,
Where mountain calt that was not sadled yet,
(...) headlong on amidst the fallowed land,
Whose fierce resist scarce bends with any band:
So men reclainide by virtue, tread aright,
Where led by follies mischiefs on them light.
Use masters all, use nurtereth mortal ways,
Use, use of good, continues happy state,
Use, use of me, made England then have praise,
But since abuse has banished me of late.
Alas the while, there runs another rate,
Which while by sad insight I look into,
I see the want of those that have to do.
And yet I see not Sodom: some are good,
Whose inward bowels daily melt in moan,
To see how Britane now is raging wood,
Hard hearted, flintie minded, all in one,
Bent to abuse, and leaving me alone.
Alonely lead with careless show of peace,
Whereas secure regard does sin increase.
Some, some there be whom zeal has swallowed up,
First, blessed Prince, of whom I find relief,
Some noble peers that taste errors cup,
Some godly Prelates in the Church are chief,
Same Lawiers lead by zeal, lament my grief.
Some Merchants follow God, not swallow gold,
Some country Swains love truth you may be bold.
Yet as great store of Darnell marres the seed,
Which else would spring within a fertile field:
And as the fruitful bud is choakt by weed:
Which otherwise a gladsome grape would yield,
So sometimes wicked men do ouerweeld,
And keep in covert those who would direct,
The common state, which error does infect.
Yet Truth must never alter from his name,
Good Prince said I. ye good: what of her self?
And that is good, for Princes that do frame.
Themselves to private good, do subjects good,
Yet that is not that same goodness I would name:
Good Prince, good people, that is the good I crave,
Of Princes goods, that goodness would I have.
For as the great commander of the tides,
God Neptune can allay the (...),
And make the billows mount on either sides:
When wandering keeles his cholar would displease:
So Princes may star up and some appease,
The commons heart to do: and to destroy
That which is god, (...) this* which threats anoy.
For common state can never sway amiss
When Princes lives do level all a right,
Be it for Prince that England happy is,
Yet hapless England if the fortune light:
That with the Prince, the subjects see^^ not right,
Unhappie state, unlucky times they be,
When Princes lives and subjects disagree.
I know not I whence come these wayward woes,
Whose sudden shows portend this sudden change,
Yet does mis doubt such sudden fears disclose,
As Truth this present doubts the sequel strange:
When stable head, lets stailesse members range,
I fear me: as the buildings trust to sand,
So every blast will stroy with turn of hand,
When as in Court by proud contempt I see,
A fashion feeds the fancies now a days,
When as in Court promotions passed be
By self opinion: often the wise man says,
The turns are strange, and favor soon decays:
And those whom fortune windeth now a floate,
By change of favor, soon may change their coat.
When as election does but pass by sense,
Then must I deem the world is fed by shows:
When garish beauty causes vain expense,
It (...) the man should see, but little knows,
Repentance is the fruit by loving grows:
So when in Court naught but such pleasures be,
Repentance must ensue we well may see.
But leaving Court, where though the bramble groes,
Yet zealous care there se^ts her self I see,
I do in Court but now complain of those,
Who practice that that sits not their degree:
Whose veins by power full often corrected be:
But now such colors cloak each bad pretense,
That shows do hold the wise in some suspense.
But I poor I though greeud at courtlike scapes,
Lamenting there the lavish vain expense,
Have farther cause abroad to note escapes,
Where craft does keep true meaning in suspense:
And wily worldlings cover their pretense:
With holy shapes, and in a holy coat,
Does flattry praise those men that swim a floate:
In Nobles trains, who sees not strange mis deemes,
Where each does gape and catch at private gain,
And fleece the Lord, who though he blindfold seems,
By often attempts does bar them of their veins,
The painful wretch who toiles with often pains,
He has fair words, when flattrie sucks the sweet.
Thus shows take place, and Troth's trod under feet.
In England gistes can compass each reproof,
The bad for gold may soon be counted good,
The wicked gainer for the states behoof,
The blindest buzzard to give hea^enly food,
The faintest heart in warlikst place has stood:
And who gives most, has now most store of farms,
Rackt rents, the Lord with golden fuel warmes.
And Justice so I fear by power is led,
The poor may cry, and gladly creep to cross,
The rich with wealth, the wealthy now are fed,
The simple man now only be^^^s the loss,
The Lawier he the golden crowns does toss,
And now has fees at will with cap and knee,
And each man cries, good sir come plead for me.
O sweet the time, when neither folly might
Mislead your hopes, nor alter old decrees.
O happy Truth when as with sweet delight,
She labored still for conscience not for fees.
O blessed time, when zeal with bended knees,
Began bless the heavens, that bent their powers divine,
The English hearts to wisdom to incline.
But now refusd, disdaind, and set at naught,
Inforst to seek for rest in place unknown,
I wayle poor wretch, that no redress is sought:
But well I wot, my greefes are not mine own,
Some bear a part and help to wait my moan,
But all in vain: such colors now are made,
That those would mend the miss, do dance in shade.
This said, be wetting all the place with tears,
And from her eyes expelling floods of moan,
Her lovely locks bespred about her ears,
She waude her wings as willing to be gone:
And after pause, she soard away anon,
And thus she said: You Ilanders adieu,
You banished me, before I fled from you.
Lenuoy. Believe me Countrymen this thing is true.
FINIS.

