A TREATISE of the Plague: Containing the nature, signs, and accidents of the
same, with the certain and absolute cure of the Fevers, Botches and Carbuncles
that reign in these times: And above all things most singular Experiments and
preservatives in the same, gathered by the observation of diverse worthy
Trauailers, and selected out of the writings of the best learned Physicians in
this age.

By Thomas Lodge, Doctor in Physic.

LONDON Printed for Edward White and N. L. 1603.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD Mayor, and to the Right Worshipful the
Aldermen and Sheriffs of the City of London.
TWo causes (Right Honorable and Worshipful) have moved me to publish this
present Treatise of the plague; One is the duty and love which I owe to this
City (wherein I was bred and brought up, and for which (as the Orator Cicero
in his Offices, and the Philosopher Plato in his Commonweal do testify)
every good man ought to employ his uttermost endeavor: The next is a charitable
remorse I have conceived to see my poor countrymen and afflicted brethren
turmoiled and attainted with the grievous sickness of the Plague: and left
without guide or counsel how to succor themselves in extremity: For where
the infestion most rages there poverty reigns among the Commons, which
having no supplies to satisfy the greedy desire of those that should attend
them, are for the most part left desolate and die without relief. For their
sakes have I undertaken this province to write of the plague, to the end that
with a little charge a poor man may have instructions by a little reading both
to know and to cure all the evil accidents that attend the diseases. It rests
in your Honor and those your right Worshipful assistance, to have especial
care that this charitable intent of mine may be furthered by your discreet
orders, in such manner that these books may be dispearsed among those families
that are visited, to the end they may find comfort and cure by their own
hands and diligence. This is the only reward I require, as Almighty God
knows, to whose mercy I commend you. From my house in Warwick Lane, this 19.
of August.

Your Honors and Worships in all affection, Thomas Lodge.

To the courteous and friendly Reader.
THou may wonder perhaps (Gentle Reader) why amongst so many excellent and
learned Physicians of this City, I alone have undertaken to answer the
expectation of the multitude, and to bear the heavy burden of contentious
Critiques and deprauers: But when the cause shall be examined, and the reasons
considered, I hope to resolve thee so well, as thou shall have no cause to
condemn me: There have been lately certain Thessali that have bestowed a new
Printed livery on every old post, and promised such miracles, as if they held
the rain of desteny in their own hands, and were able to make old Aeson young
again: Amongst these, one by fortune is become my neighbor, who because at
the first he vnderwrit not his bills, every one that red them came flocking to
me, coniuring me by great profers and persuasions to store them with my
promised preservatives, and relieve their sick with my Cordial waters: These
importunities of theirs made me both agreeued, and amazed; agreeued, because
of that loathsome imposition which was laid upon me, to make my self
vendible, (which is unworthy a liberal and gentle mind, much more ill
beseeming a Physician and Philosopher, who ought not to prostitute so sacred a
profession so abiectly, but be a contemner of base and servile desire of money,
as Galen witnesses in his book, Quod optimus medicus, idem sii and
Philosophus: amazed, to see the ignorance and error of the multitude, who dare
trust their lives to their hands who build their experience on hazard of men's
lives: and are troubled with the scab of the mind, which Plato in Alcibiade
calls Probrosam imperitia^, and M. A. Natta, in his 5. book de Pulchro,
voluntary ignorance. Hereupon (by the earnest solicitation of my friends) and
under a great desire to do good unto my neighbors, I have faithfully gathered
out of the most approved Authors, (especially out of certain notes which I
received from Valenolaes son now Doctor of Phisique in Arles, in Province) a
true Method how to know and cure the Plague, which freely and charitably I
offer to the relief of those who want means to relieve their estates in this
time of visitation, and the rather because the world might conceive of me in
such sort, that I prefer a common good (according to Platoes counsel,)
before all the gaping desires of gain and profit in this world. An other
reason was, because such books as already are past abroad, are confusedly
hudled up, without either form or Method, which is an unpardonable error in
those that endeavor to instruct others. For these causes have I been drawn to
write and expose my self to men's judgments. Now that I study not in this
Treatise to hunt after vainglory, God can bear me witness, and the plain style
I have used therein may easily make known, which had I a mind to bewitch the
ears and minds of the reader, might perhaps have bin better tempered: neither
have I a settled purpose to wound other men's fame, (as all men may conjecture)
since having just occasion offered me to reprove them, yet had I rather
conceal that wherein they err, then discover their Scribendi Cacoethen (as
the Poets says) to their disgrace. Truly my resolution is to provoke no man,
and those that know me inwardly of late time can witness, that I resemble the
Mauritanian Mare (of whom Plutarch makes mention) which being led to the
water, and seeing her shadow therein, suffers her self afterward to be ridden
by Asses: I thank God I have endured wrongs, tho I have had power to revenge
them. But because my desire is to leave all men satisfied, I must a little
retire my self to yield men of worth and learning satisfaction in a matter
wherein perhaps they might except against me. There is a learned Physician that
has lately written against Amuteles or cakes of Arsenick, who perhaps may
conceive unkindness against me, because in this Treatise I have set down the
use thereof as a sovereign preservative against the Plague, where he has
condemned them; but he must excuse me in this case, for I have no intent to
commend the same because he condemns it, but by reason of their authority
and experience who have bin the lights and honors of Physic, as Mercurialis
in his book de Venenis, chap. 13. Capiuachius in his book de Febribus chap. 13.
and Heurinus in his book de Febribus, chap. 19. Valeriola and diverse others,
who by uniform consent do allow the same either worn under the arm pittes,
or about the region of the heart, by reason that by a certain similitude one
venom draws an other with it, as Arsenick, which voideth the poison of the
Plague insensibly, Quod venenum and corpore attrahat and tota forma, and
ratione caliditatis. This Antipathie in Arsenick experience does allow,
authority does confirm, and reason (which is an other of the feet whereon
Physic walks as Galen testifies) does assist it, which he may easily
perceive that reads Mercurialis, in the place before alleged. But for that I
intend only to justify mine own acts and not to impugn others, let this
suffice. And to conclude, if any man in the ripeness of his judgment be more
oculatus in this cause, then either these Fathers of Physic or my self am, I
envy him not, but leave him to his better thoughts, till I may be more fully
satisfied. Thus committing you to him on whose mercy I depend, I take my leave
of the gentle Reader, desiring no other reward at thy hands but a few devout
prayers for me, which I will pay thee again with double usury whilst God
lends me life. Vale.

Thine in all friendship, Thomas Lodge.

The causes and cures of the Plague.
CHAP. 1. Of the nature and essence of the Plague.
THe Divine Philosopher Plato (declaring unto us in diverse of his Dialogues,
the perfect way and path, whereby we may rightly entreat, and skilfully
proceed, in the discovery of any thing) says, That it behooves every man,
that indeuoureth by Art and method to attain the perfect knowledge of that
whereof he stands in doubt, or is desirous to instruct an other in any
Science whatsoever, to begin with the definition of the same, without the
perfect grounds and understanding whereof, nothing may be either worthily
known, or truly explicated: (which lesson of his, both Tully in his Offices,
and Gallen in his Book of the differences of sicknesses have very carefully
observed:) Since therefore in this Treatise of mine, I am purposed (by the
grace and assistance of Almighty God) to manifest unto you the nature,
malignitie, and accidents of the Plague, to the intent and purpose that I may
instruct you after what manner you may withstand a sickness so grievous, and
accompanied with so diverse and dangerous accidents, by those means and
medicines, which God of his mercy has left us, by the noble Art of Physic,
it shall not be amiss, if for your better understanding what the plague is, I
take my beginning from the definition of the same. But before I prosecute this
my intended purpose, let us invoke and call upon that divine bounty, from
whose fountaine-head of mercy every good and gracious benefit is derived, that
it will please him to assist this my labor, and charitable intent, and so to
order the scope of my endeavor, that it may redound to his eternal glory, our
neighbors comfort, and the special benefit of our whole Country: which
being now under the fatherly correction of Almighty God, and punished for our
misdeeds by his heavy hand, may through the admirable effects and fruits of the
sacred Art of Physic, receive prevention of their danger, and comfort in
this desperate time of visitation: To him therefore king of kings, invisible,
and only wise, be all honor, majesty and dominion, now and for ever, Amen.

The Plague then (as Galen witnesses, is a pernicious and dangerous Epidemie,
(that is to say, a general, or popular sickness) which violently rauisheth
all men for the most part to death, without respect or exception of age, sex,
complexion, government in life, or particular condition whatsoever: And
therefore is it worthily called pernicious, because there can be nothing more
dangerous then the same, which by the malignitie and violence thereof,
inforceth sudden death, and by the proper nature, propriety and contrariety
it has with our bodies, kills mankind no less readily, then violently. But
that you may more exactly understand what ye plague is, you ought to note that
there are diverse sorts of sicknesses; that is to say Epidemick, Endemick
plague, and private disease, (as Galen witnesses in diverse places:) An
Epidemick plague, is a common and popular sickness, happening in some region, or
country, at a certain time, caused by a certain indisposition of the air,
or waters of the same region, producing in all sorts of people, one and the
same kind of sickness; as namely burning Fevers, Tertian Agues, Opthalimes, or
inflammation of the tunicle of the eyes, Carbuncles, or Collicks, or general
and grievous coughes, accompanied with shortness of breath, or disenteries, or
fluxes of blood, which universally and very often times reign in some
countries about the end of summer: All which sicknesses when as they are common
in any particular place or region, are called Endemick, which is as much to
say, as sicknesses happening publicly and popularly in the same region or
country, by a certain evil quality of the air that reigns therein, and
produces such like infirmities in men's bodies. For as both Galen and the
divine old man Hypocrates do testify, every sickness that proceeds from
the air infected with a venomous quality, that is the cause which produces
and begets the same, is in his essence Epidemick, popular, and
pestilentiall. Thus far according to the fathers of Physic have I truly
discovered what Epidemick is. Endemick is a common sickness, and yet for all
that proper to some one country or region: which is as much to say, as a
regional, or prouincial sickness: For there are certain regions and places
which by a peculiar property in themselves engender certain kinds of
infirmities, which are particular only to the inhabitants of that region,
either by occasion of the air, or the waters in that country. As in the new
found land (discovered by the Portugalls and Spaniards) in that Island which is
called Hispaniola, and other places of India, there reign certain pustules or
broad seabs, (not much unlike the French poxes) wherewith almost all the
inhabitants of the country are infected, the remedy whereof they have gathered
from the infusion of the wood of Guaiacum, whence the use thereof with very
fruitful success has been discovered and proved forcible here in Europe. In
Sauoy and the valley of Lucernes, the most part of the inhabitants have a
swelling in the throat. In Pouille and Calabria, for the most part all the
inhabitants have ye Iaundis. And such sicknesses as are these, are called
Endemiques, prouintiall or regionall infirmities, yet for all that they are not
to be accounted pestilentiall or contagious: The Plague as I have said, is a
pernicious Epidemie, that is to say, a common and popular sickness, which is
both contagious and mortal. A private sickness is that which is particular
and proper to any one in private, proceeding from particular indisposition of
the body of him that is attained, or by reason of some disorderly diet by him
observed, or rather by some excess committed by him, or through the corruption
of the humors in his body, yet not contagious; but such an infirmity as
neither is free from danger, nor exempted from mortality. These are the
differences of such sicknesses as serve for our purposes to declare the nature
of the Plague, which in her proper signification is a popular and contagious
sickness, for the most part mortal, wherein usually there appear certain
Tumors, Carbuncles, or spots, which the common people call Gods tokens: which
Plague proceeds from the venomous corruption of the humors and spirits of the
body, infected by the attraction of corrupted air, or infection of evil
vapors, which have the property to alter man's body, and poison his spirits
after a strange and dangerous quality, contrary and mortal enemy to the
vital spirits, which have their residence in the heart: by reason whereof it
suddenly rauisheth and shortly cutteth off man's life, who for the most part is
attainted with such a venomous contagion: And for that we have said that the
plague is a popular and contagious sickness, it shall not be amiss to declare
and plainly discover, what these words Popular, and Contagious, do signify.
Popular and Epidemich, have one and the same signification; that is to say, a
sickness common unto all people, or to the most part of them. Contagion, is
an evil quality in a body, communicated unto an other by touch, engendring
one and the same disposition in him to whom it is communicated. So as he that
is first of all attainted or ravished with such a quality, is called
contagious and infected. For very properly is he reputed infectious, that has
in himself an evil, malignant, venomous, or vicious disposition, which may be
imparted and bestowed on an other by touch, producing the same and as
dangerous effect in him to whom it is communicated, as in him that first
communicates and spreddeth the infection. This sickness of the Plague is
commonly engendered of an infection of the Air, altered with a venomous vapor,
dispearsed and sowed in the same, by the attraction and participation whereof,
this dangerous and deadly infirmity is produced and planted in us, which
Almighty God as the rod of his rigor and justice, and for the amendment of
our sins sends down upon us, as it is written in Leuiticus the 26.
Chapter, and in Deuteronomy the 28. If you observe not my Commandments says
our Lord, I will extinguish you by the Plague which shall consume you. To the
like effect is that of Celsus (a man of famous memory amongst our Physicians)
who very learnedly says, that all strange sicknesses befall mortal men, by
reason of the wrath and displeasure of the Gods, and that the necessary
means to find recovery and remedy for the same, is to have recourse unto
them by intercession and prayer^. The same also testifies Homer (the
sovereign of all divine Science and Poetical perfection) in the first book
of his Iliades. Since therefore it is evident by the testimonies abouesaid,
that the Plague is a manifest sign of the wrath of God conceived against us,
the first and most wholesome remedy is to have recourse unto him, who is the
Father of mercy, and soueraign Physician of all infirmities, imploring his
grace and mercy, by fastings, prayers, and supplications, by almesdeeds, good
works, and amendment of life, to the end we may appease and pacify his wrath,
and reconcile our selves unto him, and obtain his grace and mercy, according
to the example of penitent David, and the contrite Ninevites. In imitation of
whom, if we shall have our recourse unto his mercy seat, we may rest assured
that he will behold us with his eye of pity, and grant us both health of
soul and body, according unto his promises made unto those who call upon him
in humility and sincerity of heart and conscience. See here the first rule.

CHAP. II. Of the causes of the Plague.
THose sicknesses which are contagious and pestilent (even as al other kinds of
infirmities) have their causes. For nothing may produce without an efficient
cause that brings the same to effect: The Plague then has his original and
producing causes, from whence she takes original beginning: and is engendered
by a certain and more secret means then all other sicknesses. For, for the
most part the causes of private sicknesses which are not infectious, are either
to great repletion, or a general deprauation of the humors which are in the
body, or obstruction, or binding, or putrefaction, as Galen in his Book, ( Of
the Causes of sicknesses) has very learnedly written. But the Plague has none
of these above mentioned causes, but only contagious and pestilent: yet
notwithstanding together with these causes of repletion, Cachochimie,
obstruction, and putrefaction, the Plague may be annexed and united; but yet
in such sort, as they be not the proper reputed causes which engender the
Plague, for then if yt should follow, all sicknesses accompanied with such like
causes might be reputed pestilentiall, which were both untrue and absurd: It
behooves us therefore, to find out a proper and continent cause of the
Plague, and such like contagious infirmities. Let us then conclude with Galen,
in his Book Of Treacle, to Piso, and Pamphilianus, that all pestilentiall
sicknesses, as from the proper cause, are engendered from the air, depraved and
altered in his substance, by a certain vicious mixture of corrupted and
strange vapors, contrary to the life of man, and corrupting the vital spirit:
which unkindly excretion sowed in the air, and infecting the same,
communicates unto us by our continual alteration of the same, the venom
which poysoneth us. The ready and speedy chaunges, says Galen, which happen in
the air, through the evil corruption of the same, produce the Plague; which
like a rauishing beast depopulateth and destroys diverse men by death, yea
whole cities, because men having a necessity to suck in the air, together
with the same suck in the infection and venom: By this it appears that the
proper and immediate cause which ingendreth the Plague, is the attraction and in
breathing of the air, infected and poisoned with a certain venomous vapor,
contrary to the nature of man. To his effect before his time, the great M. of
Physique, Hipocrates writes thus, in his Book Of Humane Nature: The cause
(says he) of the general pestilence which indifferently attainteth all sorts
of men, is the air which we suck, that has in it self a corrupt and
venomous seed, which we draw with our in-breathing. Now the causes which
engender such vapors in the air, are diverse and of different kinds, for
sometimes such a vapor is lifted up into the air, by reason of the corruption
and stench of dead and unburied bodies; (as in places where any great battle
have been fought, it often falls out, according as diverse Histories
testify.) It is engendered also through evil vapors that issue from the
earth, or certain Caves thereof, which yield forth exhalations full of
corruptions that infect the air, where it contracteth by an evil quality. It
happens likewise by a loathsome steame, of certain Marsh in plashie Fennes
full of mudde and dirt, as also from diverse sorts of Plants, and venomous
beasts, whose evil quality may produce such an effect in the air. But the
ancient Physicians and Astrologers, (as namely Auicen, with diverse others)
report: that the Plague has two originals and sources, from whence (as from a
Fountain) she takes her beginning.

The first is, in the indisposition of the earth ouerflowed with too much
moisture, and filled with gross and evil vapors, which by virtue of the
Sun being lifted up into the air, and mixed with the same, corrupts the
nature and complexion thereof, and engenders a certain indisposition in the
same contrary to our substance, from whence it comes to pass, that they who
suck this infected air are in danger to be attainted with this contagion and
sickness of the Pestilence. Especially, if they be of an evil constitution of
body, repleate with evil humors, men of unbridled diet, sanguine, and such as
have large and portuall pores: They likewise who are weak and delicate, are
men ready to be surprised and infected.

An other cause of the Plague says Auicen, proceeds from the celestial
forms, that is to say, the stars and their configurations and malignant
aspects, which by their influences cause such sicknesses full of contagion and
Pestilence, as in general all other Astrologians testify: But in truth as
touching mine own opinion which is grounded upon the divine determination of
Plato in his Epinomides, and his Timaeus, of Plotinus his chief follower, of
Iamblichus, Proclus, Mercurius, Trismegistus, Aristotle, and Auerrhois, I find
that this opinion, is both false and erroneous; as namely, to think that any
contagion or misfortune, incommoditie or sickness whatsoever may by reason of
the stars befall man. Because as Plato witnesses in his Dialogue entitled
Epinomis, The nature of the stars is most goodly to behold, well governed in
their motions, and beneficial to all living creatures, bestowing on them all
commodities of generation and conservation: If then the nature of the stars
be so good that it meriteth to be called divine (as in the same place Plato
intituleth it) and yields so many benefits to these inferior bodies: how
can it be that the stars infuse such infection and contagion upon the earth
and earthly creatures, whereas it is manifest that no cause can produce such
effects as are contrary to it self? If then the good of inferior bodies
proceeds from celestial bodies, as namely the generation, production of
fruits, and riping of the same: yea and the conservation of every ones virtue
(as in truth it does): It shall never be truly and possibly concluded that the
corruption and extermination of bodies proceeds from the stars. And
therefore Aristotle very advisedly says; That this inferior world is very
necessarily coupled and joined with the superior, to the end that all the
virtue thereof might be conducted and guided by the same. If the stars by
their virtue conserve all the creatures in this world, how can they by
corruption, venom and contagion, dissipate and destroy them? The said Plato
also calls all the Planets and stars sisters, for their accord in good
doing; and says that it is a great folly in men to think that some Planets
are evil and malignant, and the rest good, whereas all are good. For as
Calcidius the great Platonist says in his Commentaries upon Platoes Timaeus,
No evil may either proceed or take beginning from the heavens, because in that
holy place all things are good, and such as resemble the divinity, and
nothing that sauoureth of malice may abide and have place: neither says he,
can the stars change their nature, because it is simple and pure, neither
can they degenerate from the simplicity and purity which by the Almighty
power has been bestowed upon them. Why then shall we attribute unto them a
malignant, pestilent, and contagious quality, and such as rauisheth and
spoyleth all living creatures by a venomous and pestilent influence? For if
contagion be as badde a thing as may be (as in truth it is) the most
disordinate and contrary to nature, or rather enemy to life) the source and
original of which contagion, is nothing but very infirmity, putrefaction and
corruption in matter, how dare we attribute to the stars and heaven (which is
the beginning of all generation) such an erroneous and unnatural accident?
Whereas the Planets are Celestial bodies, well disposed, powerful, without
vice, corruption, or matter, subject or inclining to any contagion: And
therefore Auerrois the chief Commenter upon Aristotle says; That whosoever
believes that Mars or any other Planet disposed in any sort whatsoever, does
hurt to any inferior bodies; the same man in sooth believes such things as
are estraunged from all Philosophy. And the same Author upon the ninth of
Aristotle's Metaphisiques, says; that the Celestial bodies which are the
beginning of all things are eternal, and have neither evil error or corruption
in them; for corruption is of the order of such things as are evil. And
therefore says he, it is impossible to know that which the Astronomers say,
that there are some fortunate, and some unfortunate stars, but this only may
be known, that whereas all of them are good, that some of them are better then
other some. Behold here the worthy and true opinion of this excellent
Philosopher, which before him (in as much as concerns the first part of this
sentence) Aristotle in the ninth of his Phisiques, Chapter 10. had testified.
The wise Philosopher Mercury Trimisgistus in his Dialogue entitled Asclepius,
says; that all that which descends from heaven is generatiue; if then in
respect of us the influence of heaven be generatiue (as in truth it is): for as
Aristotle says, Sol and homo generant homine^) it cannot any ways be possible
that it can corrupt or cause the confusion of mankind. The like also is
confirmed by Proclus, (who interprets upon Platoes book de Anima and
Demone,) The Celestial bodies (says he) by a sovereign harmony contain all
things in themselves, and perfect them, and conform them among themselves:
and to the universe, If then it appears that the Celectiall bodies perfect all
things, and both confirm and conserve them, (as in truth they do, and this
Author witnesses) how can these engender contagion and infection in us, which
abolishe our perfection and integrity, and destroy us by rauishing our lives?
To speak truth, as me seems it were a thing impossible. For it is contrary
to the nature of contagion, that it should descend from heaven, because
contagion is no other thing but an infection proceeding from one unto an other
by communication of a pestilent and infected vapor, and by this means if the
Plague and contagion proceeded from the stars, it should necessarily follow
by the definition of contagion, that the stars were primarily or formerly
infected, if by their influence they should send a pernicious contagion among
us. But this in no sort may be granted, because the stars by being
Celestial bodies, pure, divine, and estranged from all corruption, receiving
and containing no infection in them, being no material bodies apt to
transmutation or change, (as Aristotle and Auerrois in his Book de Caelo est
mundo, do learnedly allege) cannot be capable of infection or contagion,
neither communicate it to the inferior bodies. Let us therefore cast off this
vain and sottish opinion whereby we are induced to believe that the Plague
proceeds from the heavens: that is to say, from the influence of the stars,
(as by the vanity of time we have had inducements.) But let us confess that
it proceeds from the secret judgments of God, who intends by this scourge
to whip us for our sins, as it appears in Leuiticus, and Deuteronomy* To
conclude, we say that the cause of the Plague is a malignant alteration and
corruption of the air infecting our bodies, as it has been declared in the
beginning of this Chapter.

CHAP. III. Of the signs of the Plague, both impendent and present, with the
good and evil signs appearing in pestiserous sicknesses.
THe signs whereby a man may know the infection of the air which threatens
us with Pestilent sicknesses, are, when as we see the same continual and
accustomably troubled with thick, cloudy, moist, and ill smelling vapors, the
Sky unaccustomed to Northren winds, but solicited with Southerly blastes;
The air full of fogges and vapors, making a show of rain without any
showers: For such signs as are of that nature engender corrupt Feuours, as
Aristotle says in his Probleames. If the winter be hot and moist, and observe
not his natural temperature, and when the Spring time is very dry without
rain, and notwithstanding cold, and after for many days charged with
Southerly winds, troubled air, and then clear, and afterward suddenly
ouercast, the nights cold, and the day very hot and soultry, It signifies
that we shall have an evil Plague the Summer after. Moreover, if at that time
there appear any increase of such creatures as are engendered of putrefaction,
as worms of the earth, flies, gnattes, eales, serpents, toades, frogs, and
such like foretokening corruption and putrefaction in the earth and waters, and
when the air the same day changes from fair to foul, and from clear to
cloudy, when the Sun shines and afterward hides his head in clouds, in
one and the same day, it is a sign that the temperature of the air is
altered. And when as Rats, Moules, and other creatures, (accustomed to live
under ground) forsake their holes and habitations, it is a token of corruption
in the same, by reason that such sorts of creatures forsake their wonted places
of aboade. And when as the Birds of the air fall down dead, or forsake their
nests, it is a sign of great corruption and contagion in the same. Long and
continual raines, accompanied with Southerly winds, dispose the air to
sicknesses and putrefaction, as Hipocrates, and Galen testify in their
Epidemies. When as Fevers are accompanied with small Pox, or Mesels, with
spots, or red marks like to the biting of Fleas, it is a sign of a pestilent
Fever. When the sick is very much tormented with the passion of the heart,
vomitings, soundings, or weakness, or faintnes of the heart, without great
outward but vehement inward both heat and drought, with appearance of
swellings, botches, carbuncles, and Mesels, without all question he is seized
with a pestilential Fever, especially if diverse at the same time and in the
same place are attainted with the same grief: and if so be the party which is
infected has frequented places both contagious and infected. See here the the
principal signs of the Plague and pestilentiall Fever. The evil, dangerous,
and mortal signs in such as are diseased, are feeblenes and weakness of the
regitiue virtue of the body (which may be discovered by the pulse when it is
weak, unequal, disorderly, lanquishing and intermittent, by often Sincopes or
soundings, alienation, and frenzy, blewnesse and blackness appearing about
the sores and carbuncles, and after their appearances the sudden vanishings of
the same, cold in the extreme parts, and intolerable heat in the inward,
unquenchable thirst, continually soundings, vrines white and crude, or red,
troubled and black: Cold swet about the forehead and face; crampes,
blackness in the excrements of the body, stench, and blewnes, the flux of the
belly, with weakness of the heart, shortness of breath, and great stench of the
same, lack of sleep, and appetite to eat, profound sleep, changing of
color in the face, exchaunged to palenesse, blackness, or blewnesse,
cogitation or great unquietness. All these signs betoken either certain death
or danger thereof in the Plague; even as contrariwise the contrary foretoken
recovery of the sickness, by reason they testify upon the regitiue power and
virtue of the body, goodness of the complexion, and virtue of the same, with
strength of ye heart. For as Auicen says: They that are manly, and confidently
bear out their sickness without any show of fear, they are those which for
the most part escape. Likewise to have a good appetite to sleep in repose,
without disturbance of the body, it is a good sign. The Botches, and
Carbuncles to retain a good color, and without great pain to be brought to
ripeness and supponation, to have a moderate heat mayntained through all the
body: The vrines, in disgestion, color, substance, and contents, to be good:
To have easy breathing, swet warm, and universal through all the body,
appearing on a decretory or critical day. All these signs appearing in the
infected person, give great hope of his recovery. These be the signs and
tokens by which you may gather a sure and unfeigned judgment of that which
shall befall him that is attainted with the Plague.

CHAP. IIII. A Rule and instruction to preserve such as be in health, from the
infection.
WHen as (by the will of GOD) the contagion of the Plague is gotten into any
place, City, or Country; we ought to have an especial regard of the general
good, and by all means to study for their preservation who are in health,
least they fall into such inconueniencie. First of all, therefore it behooves
every man to have special care that he frequent not any places or persons
infected, neither that he suffer such to breath upon him: but as Galen has
learnedly advised, in his Book De Differentijs Frebrium, Chap. 2. Estrange
himself as far as him lies, from their society. The first and chiefest
remedy then, is to change the place, fly far and return late: Hipocrates,
likewise in his Book De Natura humana, says: that we ought to forsake the
place whereas a general sickness rangeth, according to the common Proverb,
Cito, long, tarde. And if necessity constrains us to frequent the infected,
(either to be assistant to our friends, or otherwise:) every man ought to
demean himself in such sort that the sick man's breath do not attaint him:
which may very easily be done, if a man have ye skill to choose and take the
wind that properly blows toward the sick and infected, and not from the
infected to the healthful: And therefore in that case the healthful ought to
keep themselves under, not over the wind. The first part of preservation, is
to purify and purge the air from all evil vapors, sentes, stench,
corruption, putrefaction, and evil quality. For which cause, it is necessary
to make good fumes in our houses, of sweet and wholesome wood, as Rosemarie,
Juniper, and Laurel, or Bays, and to perfume the whole house and chambers
with the fume of Rosemary, Juniper, the parings of Apples, Storax, Benjamin,
Incence, dried Roses, Lauender, and such like, both Evening and Morning. It is
not amiss likewise at every corner of the street, (at least twice in the week)
to make clear and quick Bonefires to consume the malignant vapors of the
air, according as Acron the great Physician, commanded to be done during the
mortal plague in Greece: As Paulus Aegineta testifies in his second Book,
Chap. 35. It is good also to wear sweet sauors and perfumes about us, such as
in Winter time, are Marcorame, Rosemarie, Storax, Benjamin, or to make a
Pomander after this sort that ensues, and to wear it about us to smell too
upon all opertunities. Take of the flowers of red Roses, of Violets, of Buglos,
of each half a little handful, of the three Sanders, of each a Dram; of the
roots of Angelica, Gentian, and Zedoary, of each four scruples; of white
Encens, Cloves, Nutmegs, Calamus, Aromaticus, of each a dram, of Storax,
Calumit, and red Benjamin, of each a dram and a half, of oriental Musk a
scruple, of Ambergris half a scruple, of Ladaum infused in Rose Water one
ounce, mix all these together in Rose Water where in the Gum Dragacanth has
been infused, and with a little of Rose-vinegar make a paste, of which you may
form certain round Pomanders, to wear about your neck, and smell unto
continually. Or take of Rose Water three ounces, of white Vinegar, of Roses ij,
ounces, of white Wine, or pure Malmosie two spoonfuls, of the powder of Cloves,
of the root of Angelica and Storax of each half a dram, mix them all
together, and with this liquor it shall not be amiss to wash your hands,
bedeaw your forehead and nostrils, and the pulces of your arms, for such an
odor and of so wholesome a quality, vehemently repulceth the venom that
assaileth the heart, and alters the pestilence of the air. It shall not be
amiss likewise to carry an Angelica root in your mouth, or a Gentian or
Zedoary root, or else the rine of an Orange, Lemon, or Pomecitron, which as
Auicen testifies have sovereign effects in this case. The continual uses of
these good odors comfort the heart and vital spirits, drives away all
venomous vapors, and rectifieth the air that whirleth about us, as Auicen
testifies in his Book, Of the Forces of the Heart. For which cause, they
which desire the continuance of their health, ought never to be unprovided of
these things. Amongst all other medicines that have the property to comfort
and rejoice the heart, the Eastern Hyacinth, being worn about the breast, and
next unto the naked skin, or else held in the mouth is very effectual, as
Auicen testifies, in his Book, Of the Forces of the Heart, (in that Chapter
wherein he entreats of the Hyacinth,) where he says; that the said Stone
has not only a property to fortify the heart, and quicken the vital
spirits, but also to resist all venomes. For which I advise all such as have
both means and maintenance to get such a jewel, to carry the same either in
their mouths, or continually about their necks, near unto the region of
their hearts, by reason of that excellent property which all Authors by
uniform consent attribute unto the same.

CHAP. V. The means and preservatives which are to be ministered inwardly
against the Plague.
GAlen in his first book of the differences of Fevers, and in that Chapter
wherein he entreats of the pestilent Fever, says: That to preserve the body
from infection, it shall be very necessary to cleanse and purify the same from
al corruptions and superfluities, by sit purgations, and to take away these
oppilations, and stoppings, which are the means that natural heat cannot be
dispersed, and to dry the body from humidities, and to maintain such bodies as
are dry in their Estates. In imitation of whose opinion and direction, it
shall be good to euacuat and expel those superfluities of humors, which
abound according to there natures, age, complexion, virtue, quantity and
quality, who are forced with the same superfluous humors. It is therefore
note worthy, in suspected and dangerous times that no accustomed euacuations
either by flux of Hemeroides, or of the belly, old ulcers, menstruall blood,
itches, or such like should be restrained. For those purgations which are of
this kind do cleanse the unnecessary humors, and by this means makes the
body healthful, whereas such humors being either repressed by astringent
medecines or such like ointments, might greatly hurt the principal members,
and produce strange sicknesses in the same. And for this cause, Galen, and
Hipocrates write: That it is a good sign when as any defluxion is expelled,
from the inward and principal parts of the body: where contrariwise, if the
same be transported from the outward to the inward parts* it is a most evil and
sinister sign. For which cause in the Plague time it is the surest way, rather
to suffer those superfluities to have their course, then to stop or stay them
by any medecin because by the voydance thereof, the body is purged from the
same superfluities which being retained might wonderful annoy it. Which
counsel of theirs, may serve for an advertisement to all those that shall be
so disposed and affected in the time of the Plague. It behooves therefore such
as be Sanguine, full in love, and youthful in years, to be let blood after a
competent manner, thereby to diminish their replexion and abundance of blood.
Those that are chollerique, ought to be purged with an infusion of Rubarb; if
they be wealthy: and if poor, with the Electuary of the juice or Roses, by
taking three Drammes, or half an ounce thereof in Sorrel, Endive, or Purslane
water, or else by Diacatholium, Diaprunis, Laxatiue, the sirope of Roses,
Cassia, or the pills of Rubarb, Femetorie, or those that for their gentle
working are called (by the Physicians) Aureae. The Flegmatique, ought to be
purged with Agaric, Diaphenicon, Diacarthami, the pills Aggregatine, Cochiae,
according to the strength of their bodies, the quality of the humor which are
offensive* at the discreton of the learned and experienced Physicians, by whose
directions and prescriptions such medecines are to be ministered, and not
according to the custom of this time, by foolish Idiotes and ignorant
Emperiques. Such as are melancholy should be purged with the infusion of Sena
and Epithemum with a little Anice seed, and Diacathelicon, with the
Confection, Hamech, Diasene, Solutiue, the pills of Femitory, and Aureae. I
forbear to call the pills, De lape Armeno, and Lasuli into use, because they
are too violent, and scarcely well prepared. Such as are weak and delicate
persons (As woman with child, children, and aged people,) it shall suffice to
purge them with an ounce of Cassia, extracted with half or a whole dram of
Rubarb, or two ounces of Manna, or three ounces of sirope of Roses, or with the
sirope of Sucery with Rubarb, but with this Prouiso always, that the direction
be taken from a learned and diligent Physician, and not according to the fancy
of foolish chare women, and ignorant practizers. To those little children that
are subject to the worms, you shall give this powder in the Plague time, which
is both fit to correct the one, and expel the other, the use thereof is in
Purslane or Sorrel water, with one ounce of sirope of Limons. Take Worme-seed,
Citron, or Pomecitron-seed, of the seeds of Sorrel and Purslane, of each half
a dram, of the herb called Scordion one scruple, of Rubarb a dram, of bole
Armenus one scruple, make a small powder of all these, whereof in the aforesaid
waters give half a dram or a scruple to the child, acording to former
direction.

CHAP. VI. A Rule and direction, whereby, by Potions, Pills, Powders, Opiates,
and Losenges (which are most fit, apt, and convenient to preserve the body from
Contagion,) the Plague may be prevented.
THe Divine providence of God, being careful for his creatures, and the
preservation of mankind, has produced many remedies to repress and prevent
the dangerous insultes and assaults of ye Plague, or any other venomous
contagion whatsoever: (which remedies our ancient Physicians have called
Antidotes, that is to say, certain medecines which in their nature and hidden
property enclosed in them, are contrary unto them, as Galen in ij. books of
Antidotes has learnedly declared.) Of these remedies I will set down some, and
those the most effectual in this Chapter, as well for the rich as for the
poor, whose misery and distress we ought more inwardly to releive then the
rest: partly because God has especially enjoined us no less, partly because
they of themselves have no means to succor themselves, for which cause we are
in charity bound to relieve the^, as herafter shall be proved. And of these
remedies we ought to use some change, to the end, that nature making use of
one of them do ^ot despise the virtue thereof, as Galen writes in his fifth
book, de Sanitate Tuenda. The body therefore being first of all well purged,
it is good to make use of Guidos Electuarie Theriacal, especial in Winter or
Autumn, namely in those who are of a cold and moist complexion, especially
where it may every ways be commodiously applied. The Apothecaries either have
or may conveniently have the Species thereof ready prepared, of which a man may
take a dra^ at once in Buglos, or Sorrel-water, or in good White wine, or in
the winter time with Claret wine. This powder is very effectual in this case,
if it be well and faithfully dispensed, neither is the price over valued for the
poor: of this powder may you make use two or three days, either with some fit
water, or else in the form of Losings. This powder also which ensues is a
very singular remedy, which in stead of the former, and in way of change, you
may use for two or three days space. Take the roots of Tormentill, the roots
of Zedoary, and Angelica, of each a Dram; Fine Cinnamon, yellow Sanders, of
the seeds of Citrons and Sorrel, of each a Dram and a half, of the
shauings of Iuorie, of Cardus benedictus, and the rindes of Citron, of each
four scruples, of bole Armenus prepared two Drammes, of fine Sugar as much as
shall suffice: make thereof a a very fine powder, of which those that are
strong and in years may take a dram, and the younger sort, half a dram in
Scabious water, and Sorrel water, or in three good spoonefuls of good White
wine. Galen, (in his second book of Antidotes) sets down this singular
remedy for the poor, which was made and composed by Apollonius. Take twenty
leaves of Rue, two common Nuttes, two dried and fat Figs, a little Salt,
mix all together and take every Morning a morsel, and drink a little pure
White wine after: If any one fasting takes this medecin, no venom may hurt
him that day, as Galen (according to Appolonius opinion) testifies, in the
place before alleged. There is an other easy and excellent medecin which
follows, the which King Nicomedes used against all venom and poison. Take of
Juniper berryes two Drams, of Terra Sigillata as much, make hereof a powder,
and incorporate the same with good Honey, and reduce it to the form of an
Opiate, of which a man may take a bole or bit to the value of ij. drams for the
rich, and for the poor, in stead of Terra Sigillata, you may use as much bole
Armenus prepared. This remedy is set down by Galen, in the foresaid place, and
is of great efficacy. The Electuary de bolo Armeno, also is commonly used, and
has no unpleasant taste therewith. The Pills of Rufus also are an excellent
preservative against the Plague, which are made after this manner following:
Take Aloes and Armoniack of each two drammes, and make a composition thereof
with white Wine and use the same, for they are of Paulus Aeginetas description:
but if you will more properly dispense the same, leave out the Ammoniac, and in
stead thereof, put thereto a little Saffron, according to the form which
ensues, and you shall make a most excellent medicine to this effect. Take of
Aloes washed in Rose water, one ounce of Mirrh and Saffron, of each two
drammes, of Bole Armenus two drammes, make Pills thereof with white Wine, or
the juice of Limons in Summer. Of this composition you may form five Pills
for a dram, and take them every morning. An other preservative, and very
profitable for the poor, is this that follows. Take one or two handfuls of
Sorrel, steep them in a Uioll in good Rose-Wine Vinegar, and keep it close
stopped, and in the morning when you rise, take three of four leaves of the
Sorrel thus steeped, and eat the same, for it is a profitable medicine: the
reason is, because Sorrel by his virtue represseth the heat of the blood, and
resists against all putrefaction. And if you drink a spoonefull or two of
the said Uineger in the morning: Or steep a toste of white bread in the same,
and ouerspread it with Sugar, it is both comfortable and wholesome at all
times: Some there are that use the leaves of Rue after the same sort, but this
memedicine is not allowable but in the cold time of the year, and in such
bodies as are cold and phlegmatique by reason of the heat thereof, Juniper
berries also being steeped in Rose Uineger and taken in the morning, as
wonderfully profitable to that ef^^ct.

These remedies which ensue are very excellent and appropriate for the Plague.
A Pomander of excellent sent and savor good against Pestilent aires.
TAke pure and sweet Ladanum, Benjamin, Storax Calamite, of the Trocisques of
Gallia Moscata, of Cloves, Mace, Spikenard, the wood of Aloes, the three
Saun^^rs, the roots of Orace, of each half an ounce, let all these (...)
beaten to a fine powder and searsed, and then incorporate the whole with
liquide Storax, adding thereunto of Musk and Amber, of each a dram, of Ciuet
two drammes, make ^ ^aste hereof with the infection of Gum Tragacents in ^ose
water.

^ pretty preservative to be carried in a man's mouth during the time of
infection, which procures a sauoury and sweet breath.
TAke of fine Sugar one ounce, of Orace half an ounce, of the shell of an Egg
the inward skin being taken away half an ounce, put the shell of the Egg into
Musk Rose water till it be mollified for the space of eight days, beat (...)
these to a fine powder, and with Rose water wherein Gum Tracagant has been
infused, make pretty Pellets according so what bigness you please. These are
very wholesome, and make the breath sweet, and comfort the heart inwardly, and
are of a temperat quality, which you may keep in your mouth some three hours.

An admirable and excellent defensatiue in form of an ointment to defend the
heart in time of infection, profitable both for the healthy and diseased, and
of admirable effects.
TAke of the best Treacle you can get, or in stead thereof Methridate (but
Treacle is the better) take I say two ounces. The juice of six Limons mixed
together, and put them into a little glassed pipkin, and let them boil therein
till half the juice be consumed. Then suffer it to cool, and afterward take
two drams of beaten Saffron, of Caroline and white Diptamy, of each two
drammes, incorporate all these things together after they are well pounded, and
bring them to the form of an ointment, wherewith every day anoint the region
of the heart under the left pappe, making a circle with the same round about
the pap. Afterward take an ounce of Christaline and pure Arsenick, and wrap it
in Gossapine Cotton and red Taffata, after the form of a little bag, carry the
same about you, being bound underneath or hard upon your left pap: by this
means each man may be assured that he shall not be infected, if so be he use
those interior remedies which I shall set down and have heretofore declared for
the good of my Country.

An other excellent preservative against the Plague.
TAke of the leaves of Mary-golds, which the Latins call Calendula, of
Uerveine, Scabious and Sorrel, of each a handful: of the roots of Gentian,
Zedoary, and white Diptamy, of each two drams, boil them all together for two
hours space in good and pure fountaine-water, from the value of a quart to a
pint, add thereunto the juice of six Limons and as much Sugar as shall be
sufficient, make a sirope hereof, and aromatise it with Cinamom, and take
thereof every morning four or five spoonefulls.

A singular water both for the healthy and diseased in the time of the
sickness, whereof they may take an ounce every morning with much comfort.
TAke Ualerian, Carline, Zedoary, good Mirrhe, Bole Armenus, Gentian, of round
Birtwoort of Aristolochia, of Calamus Aromaticus, of white Diptamy,
Imperatoria, of each one ounce and a half: of five Aloes two drams, of Saffron
a scruple, beat all these to a fine powder, and afterward steep them in five
pintes of excellently well r^ctified spirit of Wine, and let them in^use therein
six hours, and see the body wherein you put them be well luted. After the
six hours be past, add thereunto five pintes of good Malmessie, and strain
the same, or rather you may leave the simples in the bottom and dreine it
clearly and gently: Of this water every morning fasting, take two or three
spoonefulls, for it is an excellent and well approved remedy.

Excellent Pills against the Plague.
TAke of Aloes one ounce, of Mirrh and Saffron, of each three drammes, of Bole
Armenus, Terra Sigillata, Zodoarie, white Diptamus, the roots of Tormentil, of
each a dram, make Pills of these, being all of them well poudered and mixed
with the juice of Mary-goldes or read Coleworts, of which, every day take one,
and once every month a dram.

An excellent and approved remedy allowed by diverse learned men's experience.
TAke the roots of Tormentil, and of white Diptamus, the roots of Ualerian,
and white Daises (and if it be possible to get them green it shall be the
better:) Take these above named roots, as much of the one as of the other,
pound them and make a fine powder of them: Then take the decoction of Sorrel,
and let the above named powder be infused in the same, then let it be taken out
and dried in the Sun; Afterward beat it to powder again, and infuse it
anew, and afterward dry it in the Sun as before: which when you have done
three or four times, reserve the same powder clearly in some convenient
vessel, and when as any one feels himself strooken with the Plague, give
him presently half an ounce of this powder in Rose water, or Scabious water,
or in nine hours after he shall seele himself infected. This remedy in diverse
persons and very oftentimes has been experimented, and has wrought wonderful
effects, if it were given within the time prescribed.

A singular and secret Remedy the which I received from a worthy man of
Venice, admirable for his learning in all Sciences, who of courtesy imparted
the same unto me, with protestation that he had seen wonderful effects of the
same.
TAke of the Roots of Tormentil and white Diptamy, as much of the one as of
the other, of Bole Armenus washed in Rose water, the quantity of a great
Chestnut; of oriental Pearls one dram: of the sharings of Iuory one dram
and a half, beat all these into a fine powder, and incorporate them with
conserve of Roses in a marble Mortar, reserve this confection in a vessel of
glass well covered. Take hereof the quantity of a great Nut in the Morning,
and drink a spoonefull of the Juice of Mary-golds or Lemons with Sugar after
it. The Gentleman that gave me this, assured me that he had given it to many
in the time of the great Plague in Venice, who though continually conversant in
the houses of those that were infected, received no infection or prejudice by
them. A Remedy worthy the use and noting.

An Opiate against the Plague, extracted partly out of Galen, partly out of
Dioscorides, and others of excellent effect.
TAke twenty common Nuttes, of dried Figs, to the number of 15. and of Rue
and Scabious, of each twenty leaves: Of the roots of both sorts of
Aristolochia, the round and long, of each half an ounce, of Tormentil, white
Diptamy, Pimpernell, Bay Berries, Borage flowers, the Kind of the root of
Capres, of each two drammes and a half: of Galingale, Hearts horn, Mace and
Mirrhe, of each two drammes: of Bole Armenus, Terra Sigillata, common Salt, of
each two scruples, beat all these to fine powder, and incorporate them with two
pound of pure clarified Honey, and make an Opiate thereof: whereof in the morning
take the quantity of a Nut, and drink thereafter a little white Rose Uinegre
and Rose water, and you shall find this medicine very effectual.

A perfume for to air the Chamber of him that is infected, correcting the
venomous air.
TAke black Pitch, Rosin, white Frankincence, of each six ounces, of Mirrhe
four ounces, of the wood of Aloes half a dram, of Storax and Benjamin, of
each a dram, of Juniper berries, and the leaves of Rosemary, of each two
drammes, make a gross powder of these, and in a Chafingdish and coals cast of
the same and perfume the Chamber.

A powder of great virtue against the Plague, which was sent by Philip King of
Spain, to Charles the ninth King of France, in the year 1564. when as almost
the whole kingdom of France was infected with the Plague.
TAke chosen and perfect Mirrhe, the wood of Aloes, Terra Sigillata, of Bole of
Armenia prepared, of Mace, Cloves, and Saffron, of each an ounce, beat them to
a fine powder, of which you may take a dram in Rose water, or the juice of
Limons in summer, and in winter with good wine. This powder was sent to the
King and Queens Majesty for a sovereign remedy. Valleriola in his third book
of his Physical observations the first Enarration, sets down a composition
to this effect, taken out of the best Authors in Physic, especially out of
Galen, Paulus, Aegineta, Diascorides, and Auicen, according to this form
following.

Take of the best Bole of Armenia one ounce, of perfect Cinamom half an ounce,
of the roots of the herb called in Latin and Greek Pentaphillon, or else
Tormentil, of each half an ounce, of the root of Gentian three drammes, of
the roots of both the sorts of Aristolochia the round and long, of the roots
of Florentine Lillies, of each two drammes, of the roots of Enula, Campana,
three drammes, of the dried rind of Oranges or Pomecytrons (which is far
better and more effectual) three drammes, of Pomecytron seeds, or in stead
thereof Orange or Limon, of Tornep seed, and Sorrel seed, of each two drammes.
Of Juniper berries, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Zedoary and Angelica, of each two
drammes, of the leaves of Rosemary, Sage, Rue, Bittony, and Chama Pilis, of
each a dram, of Bay Berries, Saffron, Masticke, Frankincense, the shauings of
Iuory, orient Pearls, white, red, and yealow, Saunders, of each a dram, of
the flowers of red Roses, of Uiolets, of water Lillies and Buglosse, of each
two drammes: let all these be beaten to a fine powder and with clarified Honey,
or the juice of Limons, make an Opiate thereof. The dose of the powder to those
that are in health is a dram for preservation: and in those that are sick two
drammes, with Scabious or Rose water in summer, and with good wine in winter,
and if a man desire to have it in an Opiate, he may well take half an ounce.

A sovereign and excellent Remedy taken out of Alexis.
TAke Iuie berries of the oak in their full maturitie, (gathered if it be
possible in such places as are Northward) dry them in the shadow, and
afterward keep them in a box or leather Sachell, and reserve them for an
especial Remedy, and when you would make use thereof, you shall give of this
powder to those that are infected to the value of a dram, as much as will cover
a French Crown, mix this powder with good white wine, and let the Patient
drink thereof, and cover him well in his bed, that he may sweat so long as he
may endure, and afterward cause him to change his shirt, sheets, and bed, if
it be possible. And by experience it will profit, for proof whereof the Author
produces marvelous effects of this medicine, especially of a Millanors being
at Allep in Siria, who witnesses that he took this medicine, and that
suddenly the Carbuncle or Botch brake. And this was in the year 1523.

The Almaines and Flemmings in the time of the Plague, use this Remedy that
ensues.
TAke one part of Aqua Uita of the best, three parts of Malmesie, or other
pure wine, of Juniper Berries half a handful, or of common Nuttes three or
four, these do they steep in the abouesaid Liquor three hours, and
afterward eat them morning and evening. This Remedy in old folks and in the
winter time is not to be misliked: Treacle and Methridate, are excellent
remedies in the Plague time, if you take a dram in summer time in Rose water,
or Sorrel water, and in winter with good Wine. But those that take the same
ought to abstain from meat for the space of six hours after, and to suppe
little or nothing at all the day before: for otherwise the said medicines
takes no effect.

See here the most sovereign and exquisite remedies that may be found to
preserve those that are in health, as well the rich as the poor in this
contagious time, which interchangeably upon all opportunities a man may use.
But above all things it is behoueful to keep a good diet and order every
ways, and to see the body be soluble, for that it is one of the most
principal points to preserve and continue the body in health. But amongst
those things that are most necessary and requisite toward the continuance and
preservation of health, and auoydance of contagion, nothing is more to be
respected then sobriety and an orderly course of life: for continence is the
mother and fostresse of all good disposition in man's body, by reason that by
sobriety the health is confirmed and continued in his estate; the humors are
well tempered, and natural heat fortified, the natural passages of the body
entertained in their due harmony, the operations of nature every one in
themselves well and duly accomplished: and by these reasons sobriety is the
foundation to warrantise the body from all evils: as contrariwise, intemperance
is the source and and original of all mishap and fatal infirmity. All which
is confirmed by Hypocrates and Galen, in the second book Of the Aphorisms:
Aphorism, 17. and Hipocrates himself in the sixth of his Epidemies, where he
says, That the chiefest care that is to be had for to continue health,
consists principally in this: to live soberly, to use convenient exercise,
and not to gorge a man's self with surfets. The like also is confirmed by Galen
and Plutarch, in their writings and Books, De Sanitate Tuenda, wherein the
error and folly of the common sort appears most manifestly, who dare in the
time of infection and pestilence, to ouercharge themselves with wine, and fill
their stomachs in the morning before they go out of doors, thinking by this
time to conjure the time, (according to their lewd discourse) and abate the
evil vapor of the air, whereas in effect, they effect nothing but the
contrary. For wine being taken fasting, makes the body more apt to conceive
infection through the heat thereof, and the piercing quality and opening it,
causes in the parts and vessels of the body, namely the veins and arteries,
making the^ by these means more capable to receive the evil influence of the
air, if any reign at that time. Let therefore all men be curious to observe
this commendable sobriety, if they be desirous to avoid the dangers of the
Plague, by forbearing al diversities of meats, and surceasing to fill their
stomachs with unmeasurable repastes, and let them feed soberly, and no more
then is needful to sustain life, observing a temperate exercise in pleasant
and delightful places. Let them lead their life in peace, and quiet of mind,
in joy, disport and honest pleasure, avoiding all perturbations of the spirit,
and especially sadness, melancholy, wrath, fear, and suspect, which are the
most dangerous accedents that may encounter a man in such like times: as Galen
in his Book, ( Of the Art of Medecin) has written, and of this kind of
temperate life, I will make a particular discourse in the Chapter ensewing, to
the end that every one may understand what means he ought to observe, in the
maintenance of his health by good diet and order.

CHAP. VII. A brief Method and rule of life, how to preserve the healthful
in the time of sickness.
THE Principal means to continue a man in health, consists in an orderly
observation of diet, elections of meat, measure and opportunity in receiving
the same, and in the quantity and quality thereof, (which shall be the
argument of this present Chapter.) It is therefore especially to be considered
and provided, in this cause, that the body abound not in superfluities and
excrements, which may yield matter and food to putrefaction and contagion in
humors, which may no better ways be performed, but by a good regiment in
life. Men that are curious of their health, will take heed of all immoderate
repletion of meats, and in suspected times diversity of meats is to be
eschewed, least the stomach should be ouercharged thereby, by which means
diversities of humors may be engendered; but it behooves a man to feed of one
only dishe or two, that in quality and nourishment may be conformable to his
nature. He ought likewise to beware in these times of such meats as may easily
putrify in the stomach, such as yield but gross nourishment, and breed
oppilation and obstruction that heat the blood and humors, and make them
vicious and sharp. Of this sort are salt meats, Porke, Beef, Scalions,
Colewortes, Garlike, Onions, Spice, Mustard, old Cheese, such* Fish as are
caught in standing Pooles and Marshes: strong, hot, hie and troubled wines.
Such meats as are convenient, are of delicate flesh and easily digested, as
Capon, Chickens, young Pullets, the broth whereof does rectify and temper the
humors of the body, as Mesue testifies. Also the flesh of Ueale, Kid, or young
Mutton are allowed, and the birds of the field, such as are Partridges, young
Pigeons, Turtells and such like are to be admitted. And in the broth of such
like things, you ought to sees Sorrel, Purslane, Borage, and Marigoldes, which
according to Alexander Benedictus, in his Treatise of the Plague, is an
excellent medecin. The juice of Sorrel likewise and sour Grapes are allowed,
and Oranges, and Limons with Sugar are not amiss, in the juice whereof you may
dip your meat or bread at your meals, and such like. Rose vinegar in this time
is commended. As for all bakt meats (as Pasties or such like are forbidden,)
both for the gluttonous substance that is in them, as for that they engender
obstructions. Fresh and rear Eegges sod in water are of good nourishment, Sea
fish, as the Soale, the Mullet, Gurnard and such like may be admitted, yet
ought they not too oftentimes be used by reason they breed humidite and
waterish blood. Amidst the sowrer fruit, the Proyne, Straberries, and
muscadine Pear are to be eaten, so they be taken in a little quantity, as for all other fruit they may well be omitted, because they fill the veins with
watrish blood, and such as easily corrupts, except the Raison which is very
good. In use of wine, Claret and white (not fuming nor over hye colored, but
tempered with good water) are very fit to be drunk at meals and no otherwise.
For exercise, it ought to be convenient and temperate accustomed in the morning
in places delightful and pleasant, in the shade in Summertime: in Wintertime
in the Sun. Touching apparel, each one ought to use decency and comeliness
therein, and oftentimes to shift both woollen and linen, especially in Summer,
in which time if those that are of ability shift once a day it is not amiss.
Care likewise is to be had, that men heat not their blood by violent travel,
but to use a convenient rest after their repasts. It is behooueful likewise (as
has been said) to keep the body soluble, so as once a day or twice in 21.
hours, either by the benefit of nature or the use of the pills above
mentioned the belly may be loosned, and the body no ways suffered to be bound.
Especially in those times al use of women is forbidden. For there is not any
thing during this contagious season more forcible to enfeeble nature, then such
unbridled desires which stir and distemper the humors and dispose the body to
receive infection. Briefly, to live in repose of spirit, in all joy, pleasure,
sport and contentation amongst a man's friends, comfort heart and vital
spirits, and is in this time more requisite then any other things.

This is the order and manner which every one ought to observe, in his manner of
life in these suspected times, with this final Prouiso, that the houses be
kept clean and well ayred, and be perfumed with water and vinegar in Summer
time, and in winter time with perfumes, of Juniper, Rosemarie, Storax,
Benjamin, and such like. That the windows thereof be kept open to the East,
toward the shining Sun and the Northren wind, shutting out all Southerly
winds, and such as blow from contagious places.

The order and policy that ought to be held in a City, during the plague time,
and wherein the Lord Mayor and Sherifs, and such as under them have care of the
infected, ought to show their diligence in the maintenance and order of their
citizens. Chap. VIII.
AS order conducted by good advice and counsel, is in all things, that
concern the administration of a Commonweal most necessary, so in this cause,
(which is one of the most urgent) order, policy and serious diligence, is not
only profitable, but also necessary; because the sickness of the plague and
contagion inuading a city, is the total ruin of the same by reason of the
danger and spoil of the citizens, as we read in Thucidides of the great
plague in Greece, which for the most part ravished the inhabitants of the same,
and in Titus Liuius, of diverse horrible pestilences that happened in Rome,
which by their greatness and cruelty made that mother City almost desolate
and destitute of the better part of the citizens thereof, bringing with it
both famine and fatal indigence. For which cause such as are in authority in
Cities, as Mayors, Sherifes, and those that have the charge to ouersee the
sick, ought above all things to procure that their City remain in health, to
the end that their citizens remaining in security, may communicate the one
with the other by traffike and following their business, whereby there
redoundeth a common profit and utility to all: whereas on the contrary side
(their City being infected by a popular and pernicious disease,) their traffike
cease, and that which is most dangerous and important of all, the life and
health of all men is brought in danger. Now to withstand this inconvenience
with prudence and foresight, it behooves the Magistrates, first of all
diligently to examine what places, either near or remote, are visited or
infected, to the end to warrantize themselves from that infection, not
suffering any of those to enter their City that come from such places as are
suspected, except they be men of note, of whose prudence and security they may
be assured. For it is not always a consequent, that all the inhabitants of a
City are always infected, especially when they are men of respect, who have
the means, and observe the method to preserve themselves: whereof it is very
necessary that the governors, and such as have the keeping of the gates,
should have respect: but for such as are vagabonds, masterlesse men, and of
servile and base condition, for such I say, they ought not to be admitted. And
if by chance, or by the will of God the City becomes infected, it ought not
incontinently to be made known: but those that have the care and charge of
such as are attainted, ought in the beginning to keep it close, and wisely
conceal the same from the common sort, imparting it only to such, who by
their good advise and counsel may assist them in the time of danger, which
counsel and advice divine Hipocrates sets down in his oath and
attestation to Physicians, and consequently to all those that have the charge
of the sick, forbidding them to reveal that which ought to be hidden for the
common profit: which being considered by the divine Philosopher Plato, in the
third book of his common weal, he auoweth that it is lawful for Magistrates
and Physicians to lie for the safety and conversation of their City. For
oftentimes to conceal a truth to this intent, is no error in such men, whenas
by such means the common weal is conserved and profited: which counsel I
thought good to make known to you, to thend I might restrain the superstitious
fantasies of some men, who are of the opinion, that nothing ought to be
concealed in these times, but made known unto all men, for fear their
reputation should be touched, and themselves esteemed liers. The magistrates in
these times ought to commit the charge of their gates to good and discreet
citizens, on whose trust and fidelity the City may rely: and therefore the
best citizens both in place and reputation ought to have this place, and not
they, who are young, indiscreet and inconsiderate. Which thing has been wisely
noted by the divine Philosopher Plato in the third book of his common weal,
where he says, that he that has the charge of a city, ought to be strong in
person and prowess, and a Philosopher in his spirit, that is to say, sage,
prudent, and well advised. For by such a governor and so well qualified, there
redoundeth a great profit unto all men, where to one of the contrary
disposition all things fall out frowardly. Moreover the Magistrates ought to
have an especial care, that their city be kept clean and neat from al filth,
dunghils and stinking rubbige that may breed infection, because the steame of
such unclean heaps and places being drawn up into the air, do for the most
part infect and contaminate the same. And to this effect Hipocrates counsaileth
us to use the air in these times, which is most pure and clear, and to fly
the contrary. The like confirms Galen in his first Book, de Sanitate tuenda,
and in his Commentaries on Hipocrates book, de Natura humana. And therefore
the Magistrate ought to give charge, that in every place the streets should be
kept clean, and daily purged, forbidding every one under a penalty to cast out
any uncleanness or filth out of their doors. They ought also to take order,
that the slaughter houses (for the provision of the city) be not continued and
used within the city, but placed in some remote and convenient place near
unto the river of the Thames, to the end that the blood and garbige of the
beasts that are killed may be washed away with the tide. This advice the nobles
of Arles observed by Valenolaes advise, to the great good of their
commonweal, who to the westward of the city upon the river of Roane have
builded their slaughter-houses. It is no less necessary also to take note of
such sick folks as resort unto the city, and to know with what sickness they
be seazd with, and whether it be dangerous or no. For which cause it is
requisite to appoint certain discreet and skilful men in every quarter and
parish within the city, who may have the charge to take particular notice of
every householder, in what estate their family is, or rather to visit them
themselves, and if they find any sick in these houses, to make a true report
unto those that have the charge and ouerlooking the sick, to the end they may
cause them to be visited by expert Physicians, who may inform whether the
disease be infectious or no, to the end they may be attended and cured
according as their disease requires. And for that in all suspected cities, it
is a common custom for the Magistrate to shut up those that are surprised with
the sickness, or to send them to the hospitalls or pesthouse, for fear lest
by conuersing with the healthy they should spread the contagion by breathing on
them and touching them: because, as Galen says, it is dangerous to converse
with them, and God himself also gives an express commandment in Leuiticus
chap. 13. and Numb. chap. 5. where speaking of the leapers, he commands that
they should be separated from the host and company of the healthy. Me thinks
it is very necessary at this time to speak somewhat hereof, and to examine
every circumstance, to the end that it may be known what is to be done in this
case. Now the truth is, that our duty commands us to separate such as are
sick from the whole, for fear lest they should be infected with their
disease, nevertheless in this case we ought not to use such separation before
it be truly known to be that disease, and that the sickness is of the
quality, that it deserve shutting up.

For in truth it is a great amazement, and no less horror to separate the
Child from the Father and Mother; the Husband from his Wife; the Wife from her
Husband; and the Confederate and Friend from his Adherent and Friend: and to
speak my conscience in this matter, this course ought not to be kept, before
that by the judgment of a learned Physician the sickness be resolved on:
And when it shall be found it is infectious, yet it is very needful to use
humanity toward such as are seized. And if their parents or friends have the
means to succor them, and that freely, and with a good heart, they are
willing to do the same, those that have the charge to carry them to the
Pesthouse, ought to suffer them to use that office of charity toward their
sick, yet with this condition, that they keep them apart, and suffer them not
to frequent and converse with such as are in health. For, to speak the truth,
one of the chiefest occasions of the death of such sick folks (besides the
danger of their disease) is the fright and fear they conceive when they see
themselves void of all succor, and as it were ravished out of the hands of
their parents and friends, and committed to the trust of strangers, who very
often are but slenderly and coldly inclined to their good, wanting both service
and succor. And therefore in this cause men ought to proceed very discreetly
and modestly. And in regard of the time wherein the suspected and sick, or
rather those who frequented and served them, there ought some rule and
moderation to be held. For whereas by ancient custom and observation they are
wont to have the prefixed term of forty days given them, yet ought not this
term, equally and rigorously be observed in all.

To those that are sick of the plague this limitation of time ought to be
prefixed and furthered for more assurance; besides the forty days, they ought
over and above remain enclosed twenty days, which are in all sixty, before
they be suffered to return to their houses, or frequent the company of their
fellow Citizens. Before which time they that are infected, after their recovery
ought to change the place where they have been sick: and to take the air in
a more healthful place, far distant from infection, and change their
garments, and put off their old, or rather burn them, for fear they should
infect those that might happen to put them on. For in truth, the keeping of
such things is very dangerous, and whereas after the plague is ceased, it
oftentimes without any manifest occasion begins anew, it oftentimes
proceeds from such like accidents: In prevention whereof the Magistrate ought
to have no little care and diligence. Heretofore have we set down what term
should be prefixed to the sick; it now likewise concerns us to prescribe a
time and term to those that have had the keeping of them, for both public and
private security, wherein in my judgment (which I submit to those of more
reverend authority) we ought to observe other rules following. If the sick
be dead in his house, and has continued all the time of his sickness in that
place, and his parents and friends cohabitants with him, have continualy
assisted him and ministered unto him, they ought to remain enclosed the said
term of forty days, or else transport themselves to their country houses, if
they have any, or to live apart and separated from others in their garden
houses, and not to frequent amongst the people, during that time. If the sick
has remained in his house but two or three days, and has had but small
access unto him, and the assistants that were with him, be men of discretion,
knowing well how to defend and preserve themselves by good remedies and diet,
being men of respect and mark, they ought not to be shut up so long time; but
it shall suffice in this case to keep them close some twenty or four and
twenty days, or somewhat longer. For in that space by natural reason, the
venom ought to have wrought his worst, if any of the assistants has been
seized therewith: Likewise, if they have been well purged, and have taken
remedies to preserve themselves in that time. For in truth, if a vapor or
contagion be in the body, it cannot so long time remain enclosed, but that in
forty days space it will show it self. And if in the space of xxi. days it
discovers not it self (as nature molested with any vehement sickness or
contagious infirmity is accustomed to fulfill and execute his forces and
expulsion to drive out the same (as Galen declares in his book de diebus
Cicitis) it will hardly show it self in any time after the xxi. day, for that
the venom has already lost his force, and nature makes no more account to
expel the same, but euaporeth it insensibly without any hurt, if there has not
some new occasion been offered that causes such an accident, as it oftentimes
happens. If any one unwittingly happens to visit one that is sick in his
house, and that but once or twice, we ought not to prefixe him that term, but
to suffer him to keep himself close some fourteen days or more, provided
that he observe a good diet: And to speak my absolute opinion what ought to
be done in this case of keeping the sick and their assistants enclosed in the
plague time, it is necessary to resolve upon the effects and accidents, which
apparently happen in the said houses, and according to the rule observed by
those that are shut up, as also according to their quality and condition,
and especially, we ought to have regard, and rely on the judgment of a
faithful and learned Physician, who according to his Art, and the effects that
he shall discover in those that are enclosed, may yield an assured judgment of
the matter, to whom we ought to give credit, as to him that is the fittest and
truest judge in such a matter. For in truth this custom has been but newly
brought in, and was never heard of in the ancient and autentike writings,
either of Greek, Arabian, or Latin physicians, but only by some late
Practitioners as Guainerius and some other which Guainerius in his Treatise of
the Plague, Chap. 3. de tertia differentia has set down this term of forty
days, speaking of the term wherein a man ought to return into the house of
him that is infected. And in his opinion (which is not answerable to truth) he
prefixeth three months. For if the infected house shall be cleansed from all
infection, and perfumed and ayred by those that have the charge, a man may
return into it after forty days, provided, there remain nothing in the said
house that is infected or contagious, as the garments, sheets, beds, couerlets,
or such like of the diseased. For such things as these keep the infection
enclosed in them long time, especially fetherbeds, as Alexander Benedictus
testifies in his book of the Plague, where he makes mention of a featherbed
of one that was sick of the plague in Venice, which kept the venom seven
years, and the first yt slept upon the same at the end of the same term were
suddenly surprised with the plague, as he recites in the third Chapter of his
Book. Lo here, what I have thought requisite to be spoken touching the said
term* nevertheless I submit my judgment to those that are more learned, to
whose mature resolution I shall subscribe when with better and more substantial
reasons they shall reprove me. Which purpose of mine, every true lover of
learning ought to follow, as for that I have said it is but only my opinion,
set down to advise the ignorant, and to be censured by the learned. The
governors also ought to be careful of those, whom in this sort, and for this
cause they have shut up or sent unto their Pesthouse, foreseeing that they
want nothing of that which appertains to their health. And if those that are
sick be poor and indigent, let them be supplied by the charity and liberality
of the city. And if they be rich and by reason of infection shut up, they
ought to be supplied with all things necessary till such time, as being at
liberty they may make recompense for that they have received.

Chap. IX. Of the building of an Hospital for the Plague.
THat which is most necessary in great Cities, is to have a certain selected
place, whither they may convey the sick men in time of the plague, when God
inflicteth sickness upon them. And therefore it concerns a weal public
before necessity happen, to provide a house to this purpose answerable to the
charitable intent of those good men, who have already contributed to the same.
The form whereof, since as yet I perceive it unfinished, should (in my opinion)
be after this manner: It ought to be situate, (as already it is begun)
without the City in a separate and unfrequented place, and not so near the
high ways or walks of the Citizens as it is, for fear lest the Passengers
should be infected. It ought also to be builded very amply and largely, that it
may be able to receive the number of the sick, the aspect thereof ought to be
between the orient equinoctial and the north, to the intent that the heat of
the midday warm it not too much, and that in summer it may have competent
fresh air: which it will have if it be thus builded: for it highly concerns
that such a house should receive the northern wind, for that it is the most
dry, and healthful, and such a wind as purges and drives away all evil
vapors and infection, because the air thereof is cold and dry, which
consumes the superfluities of the body, as Galen and Hippocrates testify in
the third book of the Aphorisms, and Hippocrates himself in diverse places
witnesses. The like also does Auicen auerre at large, where he speaks of
the north wind, to which he attributes this property, to correct all
pestilentiall and corrupted air. And therefore it is necessary that the aspect
thereof should be after this manner: It ought also to be more long than large,
to the intent the upper story may contain eight and twenty or thirty chambers
above, and as many beneathe. For in regard of the multitude of the sick that
are likely to be brought thither, there ought to be many lodgings, and so
many, if not more. These Chambers ought to be separated the one from the other,
and yet adioyne one an other after the manner of the Dortuaries in Religions
houses. Each of these ought to have a chimney, and be so disposed, that they
may receive lights from the East and the North. In each of these chambers there
ought to be two beds, that the sick may change from the one to the other upon
opportunity. The situation and place of the Hospital ought to be in a pure
air, and in no place that abutteth on donghils: it ought likewise to have many
springs derived into the same, that the ministers that attend the same, may the
better cleanse their clothes and houses: The Chambers of the Physician,
Surgeon, and Minister appointed to attend the sick, ought to be builded apart
from the sickmens lodgings: and likewise the Apothecarie, who must have his
shop furnished apart with all necessaries at the Cities charge, which custom
in all well policied Cities is observed. It behooves also that all the doors
of the Chambers open into some Gallery, where in the sick may take air for
their recreation, and beat their clothes and bedding, when need requires:
some fifty foot aparte from that Hospital, an other body of building should
be made, wherein they that are recovered may make their probations. It is also
requisite that a Chapel be builded somewhat separated from the body, and after
such a manner, that the diseased may hear their Preacher, and assist him in
his devotions. This is the order I thought meet to advise in the building of a
Pesthouse, which by the particular liberality and faithful performance of the
deceaseds will, may be builded and furnished. Toward the finishing whereof,
all they that have the zeal of our Lord in their hearts, and that have the
means to distribute their goods to the poor, ought to be diligent and
charitable, to the end they may receive the reward which is promised unto
them, whereas Christ says, Come unto me you blessed of my Father, because that
being sick you have visited me, and being hungry you have given me meat, I
was a stranger and you received me; Possess the kingdom which is prepared for
you from the beginning of the world. This is a marvelous reward for a little
pelf and worldly pleasure bestowed on their neighbor, to obtain the eternal
glory of heaven, which is a treasure of incomparable felicity. Thus much as
concerning this matter.

Chap. X. Of the manner how to govern and heal such as are sick of the
plague, as well in diet, chamber beds, as in fit remedies, both for their
botches and carbuncles.
AS soon as the sickness has seized any patient (which by the proper signs
and accidents is presently known) as a burning fever outwardly of little
appearance, but gentle and easy, but inwardly malignant, full of anguish and
very tedious to the sick; disquiet of the body, passions of the heart, vomit,
soundings, extreme thirst, pain and lassitude through the whole body, with
appearance of spots or marks, or swellings under the arm pits, or in the
groine or under the ears, or in any part of the body, then is it evident that
the person so affected is infected with the plague, by reasons of such signs
or accidents (especially if he that is surprised, has co^uersed with any, or
in any place that has been infected.) By these signs and accidents we may
easily know the nature of that sickness, as Auicen and Ra^is do testify:
otherwise the said sickness is very often times so fraudulent and deceiuable,
that for the most part it deceives the patient and the Physician, as Auicen
after Galen does testify. For diverse of those that are infected, supposing
themselves to be free from the plague, make no account thereof in the
beginning, nay, during the first and second days, they only suffer a gentle
fever without any other appearance, so that nature desisteth not to perform
her functions, being as yet vnassailed by the venime. For which cause the
patient will have a good pulse, and healthful urine, almost as perfect as when
they were in health, when as suddenly they are seen to die without any
manifest occasion, which breeds doubt and trouble in the Physician, as Galen
and Auicen do testify. For this cause men ought not to marvel though the
Physicians in this case are pusseld and doubtful, since this sickness in his
nature, is so doubtful, fraudulent, and deceiuable. This notwithstanding,
whenas with the fever, the tokens, tumor, or carbuncle do appear, there is no
cause of suspicion or doubt of the disease. Then ought they readily to
withstand the same by a fit and convenient diet, and by exquisit and proper
medicines suddenly and exquisitely ordained; for a sickness of that nature
admits no delay without certain danger of death. And therefore Hipocrates
says that it is expedient in such sickenesses to minister euacuations and
other means the very same day: Now for that it is one of the principal
intentions of a Physician, in this case, to correct the air, and prohibit the
venime, that it may have no operation in the body, we will begin with the
same, and so consequently discourse upon the rest.

The preparation of a Chamber.
FIrst therefore, men ought to make choice of a chamber for the patient, that
is well aired, if it be possible, having the windows toward the North or East.
And if it be in summer time, it is good to keep those windows that regard the
North opened, to the end that the air of the chamber may be purified and
cleansed. Care likewise must be had to have the Chamber cleansed two or three
times a day, and that the floor be sprinkled, and the walls bedewed with good
Rose-vineger, mixed with common-water, or with Rose Water, if the patient be
rich. The said chamber likewise must be strewed with odoriferous flowers and
sweet smelling herbs, namely in Summer time, with roses, violets and pinkes,
with the leaves of willow and the vine. It is good also to have quinces and
citrons to smell to, to the end that the air may be more odoriferous. Neither
is it amiss at what time soever it be, to make a light fire in the Chamber in
Summer time, for it purges the infected air very much. And if it be in
Winter, it is not amiss to make a great fire in the Chamber of Rosemary;
bays, Juniper, and such like, perfuming the Room with Benjamin, Storax,
Frankinscence, Cloves, Iuniper-berries, or such like. And if the patient be of
ability, so as he may change chambers, it shall not be amiss to do it
oftentimes, so as it be prepared, as we have advised.

The bed of the patient ought to be large, clean, and perfumed with good odors
according to the season of the year, as is aforesaid. He ought also
oftentimes to change his sheets and his shirt if he have means twice or at
leastwise once in the day: Round about his bed if it be summer time, and on the
top of his couerlets you shall strew flowers and odoriferous fruit and boughs,
and the sick party shall have by him diverse orenges, quinces, limons, or
citrons to smell to: And if he be rich, he shall cause certain sheets to be
steeped in vinegar and water, and hung round about his bed, not only to
refresh the place, but to repulse the evil vapor of the chamber: He shall
likewise oftentimes wash his hands, his pulses, and his face and forhead with
this mixture. Take of white rose vinegar four ounces, or half a pint of rose
water, a pint of good malmsey, claret, or white wine four ounces, of the
powlder of zodoarie, cloves, dried roses, and musk, of each two grains, let
al these be beaten and mixed together, and let him rub his nose, his ears,
hands and face therewith, for it will comfort and quicken the heart and
vital spirits, and drive away all evil vapors: Lo here the preparation of
the chamber and bed of him that is diseased and sick of the plague. Hereafter
insueth the manner of his diet.

Chap. XI. The Diet of him that is stricken with the Plague.
BEcause in this sickness the appetite is dejected, and the virtue of the
stomach and all other members is much enfeebled, it behooves those that are
sick, to enforce themselves to eat, to the end they may resist the sickness,
and strengthen nature, as Auicene commands, where he says, that they who
manfully enforce themselves in this disease, and eat courageously, are they
who escape. The Diet therefore of the patient ought to be in quantity
moderate, taken by little and little, and often, and in quality substantial
and nourishing, and tempered with such things as resist venom. Let his meat
be of good nourishment, of easy digestion, and pleasant to the taste, as shall
be hereafter declared. His meat shall be caponets, chickins, and pullets, young
kidde, veale and mutton, partridge, plouer, turtle, fesant, and quail, and the
pottage made of them very nourishing, shall be altered with sorrel, lettuce,
borage, pimpernell, and the leaves of mariegoldes, for in this sickness they
have great virtue, as Alexander Benedictus testifies in his 23. chap. de
peste, yet must you not mix them all together, but it shall suffice to use one
or other: and in the said broathes it shall not be amiss to mix some little
quantity of the juice of limons, orenges, or sour grapes in their seasons:

The bread and meat which they eat, should be taken with the Juice of
lemmons, citrons, oringes, pomegranats, rose vinegar, veriuyce, the Juice of
sorrel using one or the other at several repasts: And if sharpness be
displeasant to his stomach, you may use a little of the Juice of mintes with
sugar and alittle sinimon: Barley, cream, Almond milk, and panatels, are fit
meats in this cause, as also fresh and new eggs poched in water, and taken
with the Juice of sorrel and alittle sugar.

And among other restoratiues our ordinary candles of white wine, rose water,
yelks of Eggs, sugar and cinnamon is much commended. A coulis also is of very
good nourishment, whenas the sick man cannot eat, for then must we restore him
with cordial and strong broths. His drink shall be good white or claret wine,
such as fumes not, but is well qualified with pure fountain water, for by
reason of the weakness of the virtue in this cruel sickness, and to resist the
operation of the venom, it is not necessary to take from them the use of wine
except the sick be very sanguin, young, full, and of an able body. In which case
it shall be better to forbid than to license them to use it. Between meals they
may drink barley water, in which they may steep and infuse some leaves of
sorrel, and with their barley water, they may mix sirrop of limons, sirrop of
sour grapes, sirrop of the Juice of Citrons, sirrop Alexandrine, or sirrop of
violets. And if the patient will not drink barley water, let him drink
fountain water, or rain water boiled and mixed with the sirrops aforesaid.
The patient likewise may in this fever drink water very freely, and his fill,
to the intent he may extinguish the inward heat of the pestilent fever, and
not by little and little, but freely, as Paulus Aegineta and Auicen think
necessary in this disposition. For which cause let this serve, both to advise
the sick and his keeper to allow drink freely, and the use of water, after
which let the patient be well covered to provoke sweat, which is one of the
best euacuations that profits in this sickness.

Chap. XII. Rules as touching bloodletting, the potions and Euacuations which
are necessary for him that is sick of the plague.
AS soon as the sick man by the signs aforesaid feels himself strooken, he
ought very speedily seek out for some remedy for this sickness, neither
leisure nor delay without danger of death, by reason of the malignitie thereof
opposed against man's life: wherefore we ought with all diligent care to
withstand the same, and prohibit the venime, and break the forces thereof,
lest it work the utter ruin of our bodies. As soon therefore as any one
feels himself seized, give him this potion. Take of the juice of marigolds
the quantity of two or three ounces, give it the patient to drink, with a
little white wine or sorrel-water, and cover him well, that he may sweat. This
Juice makes a man free and assured from the venime, as testifies Alexander
Benedictus in his treatise of the plague, and it is a most tried and notable
secret. And if he sweat after he has taken the same, he shall be assured by
the grace of God of perfect health In stead of the said herb you may take the
juice of veruine in like quantity, or the Juice of the herb called Scabious,
which has great force and efficacy in this case, give two ounces of the said
Juice with white Wine, Rose Water, or Sorrel-water, and you shall see a
wonderful effect. But these remedies ought to be given suddenly. For if the
sick man dally a day or two before he complain, they have no effect or force.

Of Blood-letting.
AS soon as the sick feels himself stricken, if he be sanguine, young, and
full, you ought to let him blood by those rules that ensue hereafter. If the
sign or tumor appear not as yet, you ought to let him blood in the Mediana of
the right arm rather than of the left, to provide lest the venime have
recourse to the heart, and to take blood according to the repletion and virtue
of the patient. Or to work more surely, we may take the vein in the foot
called Saphena, to divert the venime from the noble parts, or insteede of
letting blood apply cupping-glasses with scarification on his shoulders and
buttocks. From the strong, able, and well complexioned, you may take some six
ounces of blood, or at the least three or four: but for such as are weak,
they must not be dealt with. And note, that in this sickness, we ought not to
be busy in taking blood although bloodletting be necessary, because blood is
the treasury of life, whose assistance nature needs to combat with the
venime. As also for that by much letting blood men's forces are weakened, and
the venime works with more advantage, as shall be hereafter declared.

And whenas the patient is letten blood, we ought to cause him keep in his
mouth either a little piece of an orange or a lemmon, or a cloue or some
cinnamon, or else a little rose vinegar, and rose water mixed together, to
comfort his heart and vital spirits. But if the marks or botch do appear,
the blood is to be drawn on that side of the body on which the tumor shows
it self, namely, if the swelling begins to show behind the right ear,
draw blood in the Cephalica of the right arm, and so of the left. If the
sign appear under the arm pits, you shall cut the median of the same side,
namely on the right arm, if the impostume be under the right armehole, and that
on the left: likewise when the impostume shows it self under the left arm
hole. But in truth the surest way is rather, in this case, to open the veins
of the feet then of the arms, to the end you may draw the venime farthest
off: if the sign appear under the groyne, strike the Saphena on the same
side, or rather the inward vein of the ham, if it may be found, the like ought
also to be done in the carbuncle when it appears, yet ought not the
bloodletting be redoubled, but only used on that side where the carbuncle
appears. But note in this case of bloodletting, that it ought to be done
before the patient has remained infected four and twenty hours, for after
the term is past, blood letting is both hurtful and pernicious, because that
by the same the contagion is inwardly drawn into the body and heart. Whence it
happens, that the most part of those that are let blood do die, as by
Hierome Fracastorius an excellent and noted Physician is sufficiently testified
in his treatise of the Plague, the third Book and fifth chapter, who testifies
that all they, who in the pestilent years of 1505. and 1528. were let blood,
died all of them by the reason aforesaid, because that where the interior
seed of the venime is scattered and mixed with the blood and humors of the
body (which is done in two days space or thereabout after a man feels
himself infected) letting blood is greatly harmefull, because it causes
agitation of the blood, and augmenteth by this means the putrefaction, and by
such agitation and motion the contagion does more inwardly mix it self with
the humors, and makes them, of pure and sincere, corrupt and infected: after
no other manner than whenas stinking mud is moved, it venteth out the more,
and makes the air infected and stinking, as is seen by experience, or
whenas a man shakes or shoggeth a vessel full of salt or bitter water, the
water becomes more bitter and salt than if it had been suffered to be
settled, without moving it: For every matter that is moved, is worse then
that which remains in quiet, as testifies Galen in his fifth book de
Symptomatum causis. And by these reasons the said Fracastorius and Fernelius
likewise, men both of them excellently learned, are of opinion, that blood is
not to be let in this case, to whose judgments I subscribe. And for mine own
part, and in truth I find it more expedient, insteede of letting blood, to
use cupping glasses with scarrification, for after the second day is past,
phlebotomy is to be omitted. See here our instruction as touching
blood-letting.

Of Purging.
AS touching purgation, it ought to be administered in the beginning, but rather
with gentle and pleasing medicines than violent, which do weaken and force
Nature, and with them we ought to mix some powlder, as the powlder of the
electuary Theriacal of Guidon, or the powlder of Bole Armenus, with Juniper
berries: or for the rich, with Terra sigillata, or treacle, or good mithridate.
If then the patient be poor, thou must give him half an ounce of the
electuary of the juice of roses, or as much of Diaprunis solutiue, or an ounce
of Diacatholicon, if he be cholerike. And if he be phlegmatike, three drachmes
of Diacarthamum, or Electuary de Citro solutiue. And if he be melancholic, the
confection Hamech dissolved in water of scabious, or sorrel, or buglosse, an
ounce of sirop of limons, or a drachme of good treacle, or the powlder of bole
Armenus prepared, or the seeds of Citron or Juniper berries. The richer sort
ought to be purged with manna Rubarbe, sirrop of roses solutiue without
scammony with Cassia and Mirabolans, and if need require, you may mix a
little dose of the electuary of the juice of roses, or Diaprunis solutiue in
those that are cholerike, as in the phlegmatike, a little Diaphenicon: or in the
melancholic alitle of confection Hamech, mixing with the said potions for the
rich, half an ounce, or a drachme of Terra sigillata, or of the powlder of
Diamargariton, or of the powlder Theriacal of Guidon, with the abouenamed
waters, and the sirrope of limons, or the juice of citrons. And if they take
more contentment to be purged by pills, they may use the common pills of Rufus,
made of aloes, mirrhe and saffron, adding thereunto a little Rubarbe: for the
rich, Agaric, with a little Terra sigillata, or Bole Armenus prepared, The
poor may use pills Aggregatiue, or Aurea, or Cochia, to the quantity of a
drachme or four scruples, and when their medicine has wrought his operation,
they may take half a porrenger of the broth of a chickin, and make a light
meal: And during the working of their medicine, they may always hold in
their hands to smell to roses, orenges, limons, marioram, rosemary, and such
like, and may oftentimes wash their hands and wet their nostrilles in rose
water mixed with vinegar and the powlder of cloves or Angelica or Zedoary as
has been before times declared: See here the method in purgation.

Potions against the Plague.
AND to accomplish this chapter, it remains to set down certain necessary
potions to minister to the sick that may resist the venime, which during the
time of their sickness, ought very oftentimes to be ministered unto them,
until such time as nature overcomes the force of the infection, being
assisted by the virtue of natural heat, and by cordial Antidotes, that is to
say, by medicines, that are altogether contrary to the venime of the plague:
(which the Arabians in their tongue are accustomed to call Bezoatici, and the
Latins Antidotes.) Every morning and evening therefore, and if need be, at
midday or midnight (if the accidents be violent) you may cause the patient to
drink these potions following. If he be poor, take Iuniper-berries, and Bole
Armenus, of each a drachme, powlder them well and mix them with scabious,
buglosse, or sorrel water, and one ounce of sirop of limons, cause him to take
it evening and morning, every day, or else take the powlder of the Electuary of
Guido, give him a drachme after the same manner: you may also use with good
effect the poulder of betony, dried to the quantity of a drachme or 4.
scruples, taking it in summer time with rose water, and in winter in good white
wine, and it works wonderful effects, if the patient keep himself well
covered, and sweat thereupon, for it causes the venime to euaporate by sweat.
Treacle and Mythridate also are sovereign medcines to this effect, being taken
to the quantity of a drachme with rose water in summer, or succorie or sorrel
water, and in winter with good white or claret wine. For the rich, let this
powlder be dispensed.

Take the roots of tormentil, the root of Diptamus Creticus, if it be
possible, the roots of Angelica Zedoari and Gentian of each a drachme, of the
seeds of citrons and sorrel two drachmes, of true Bole Armenus prepared two
drachmes, of Terra sigillata three drachmes, of pearls two drachmes, of red
coral four scruples, of the rind of the citron or Oringe dried a drachme,
beat all these to a fine powlder, of which you may give the patient in the
waters above named, the weight of a drachme, or a drachme and a half. If you
will make an opiate thereof, you may confect the powlder with conserve of
roses, or buglosse, or sirrop of limons, and make an opiate, of which you may
give the patient half an ounce at a time. This poulder is of most excellent
virtue and great effect, if it be well dispensed, which amongst all other
medicines is most appropriate, as by the virtue of the ingredients, the expert
and learned Physician may easily conjecture. These are the remedies which in
potions are most assured and are both experimented and allowed (laying aside the
superstitious and vain opinions, of the unicorns horn, of which the common
sort make so great reckoning.) For in truth it is a mere folly to believe that
the pieces of horn, which diverse men bear about them, is the horn of that
beast which the Greeks called Monoceros, and the latins Vnicornu, (as the
simple sort, unicorns horn) for it is a beast so rare to be seen, and in
places so strange, that scarsely Alexander the great could recover one to his
great charge and expense, (as Pliny, Aelian and Philostratus testify) neither
may it be taken alive, for that it lives in places desert and solitary in the
extremest parts of India and the East. But leaving these things apart, I say
that we ought to trust to perfect tried and experienced medicines, such as are
those, which heretofore I have faithfully set down for the common good, and
the love I bear unto my neighbors. In prosecution of which matter, I say by
the authority of Galen Lib. 9. de simpl. fac. cap. 14. V.T. that Bole Armenus
is by him singularly commended amongst all other simples for the plague: For in
that great plague which in his time was in Greece, all those that drunk Bole
Armenus were suddenly healed, as the said Galen testifies, who advises us to
take it with good white wine, somewhat qualified and mixed with water, the
quantity ought to be some two drachmes: And here you are to note that in those
who are already taken with the plague, it behooves to give them a greater dose
of your Antidotes, then those whom you intend to preserve. For in the venime of
the plague is already enclosed in their bodies, it is necessary that the
medicine should be more forcible to overcome and subdue the same, then before
that it seazeth the body. And therefore if to the healthy you will ordain a
drachme to preserve him, you ought to give ear to those that are sick. And
this may serve for an advertisement to the common sort, how they should
govern their sick in time of visitation.

This water that enseweth, is likewise of great virtue, and allowed by many
experiences.
TAke two pound of the juice of limons, of rose vinegar, as much of Bole
Armenus prepared two ounces, of the dried rind of orenges one ounce, infuse
them a day natural, or xxiiii. hours in the said vinegar, and afterward
distill them in Balneo Mariae, give of this water four ounces with sirrope of
limons, or sirrope of sour grapes, for it is an excellent medicine, as
Fracastorius in his third Book de morbis Contagiosis, chap. 7. whose name I
here set down, to the end I may no ways seem to defraude any one of the
praise due unto them, or challenge to my self other men's inventions. Hitherto
have we sufficiently spoken of those medicines which are to be taken inwardly,
it remains that we speak of those that are to be applied outwardly. But
before that I entreat of them, I will describe in this place a confection or
restoratiue to be ministered unto him that is infected with the plague. Take
conserve of roses, conserve of water lillies, conserues of sour grapes, and
buglosse, of each an ounce, of pouldered pearls one drachme, of Bole Armenus
prepared four scruples, of fine sugar as much as suffices, reduce all these
into the form of a Conduite, with leaves of gold for the rich. As for the
poor, it shall suffice to give them the foresaid conserues, with a little of
the poulder of Bole Armenus, or Triasantali, or the seeds of sour grapes, or
citrons, or the bark thereof. It is good also to give them often times a tablet
of losenge of Diamargariton, when they have the fainting of the heart, with a
little buglosse water, or white wine: and if they fall into soundings, give
them confection Alchermes after the same manner: for it is a miraculous medcine
in strengthening the heart, and reviving the spirits. And in this case it is
good to restore them with good broaths, wine caudles, and eggs, as we have
heretofore advised. Manus Christi perlata also is good in this case, and
pleasant to the eater, which you may give in brothes, in buglosse water, or in
the form of a tablet. To comfort the heart outwardly, use this Epitheme that
follows. For the rich take rose water, sorrel water, buglosse, and balm
water, of each four ounces, of good white wine or malmsey three ounces, of the
powlder of Diamargariton, and de Gemmis, of each one drachme, of powlder of
scarlet which we call vermilion, of cloves, of each half a drachme, of powlder
of zedoary and Bole Armenus, of each a scruple, of the trochisques of camphre
half a scruple, make an Epitheme for the heart, the which you shall apply with
a piece of fine scarlet upon the region of the heart morning and evening: For
the poor it suffices to make an Epitheme of sour grape-water or sorrel
water, of balme-water, and rose water, with alittle white wine, and the powlder
of sanders and alittle powlder of Iuniper-berries: Instead of the said
Epithemes, you may make certain bags of silk for the heart after this
fashion. Take dried red roses, flowers of violets, water-lilies and buglosse,
of each a little handful; of rosemary flowers as much, of the powlder of
scarlet cloves, sa^ders, the powlder of Diamargariton, of each a drachme, of
Citron seed, Bole Armenus of each four scruples, of musk and amber of each
five grains, beat all these to powlder, and baste them with cotton in red
taffatie, and make a bag thereof which you may easily besprinckle with rose
water, and a little white wine, and apply to the heart.

An Epitheme for the liver.
TAKE of the distilled water, of endive, succory, sorrel, rose, and wormwood
water, of each three ounces: of good white rose, wine, vinegar, three silver
spoonfuls, of the powlder of sanders, one drachme, of the seeds of sower
grapes, two scruples, of spicknard a scruple, make an Epitheme hereof for the
poor, and for the rich you may add powlder of Diamargariton, pearls, coral,
and Zedoary, of each half a drachme. Mathiolus of Siena a notable Phision of
our age (principally in matter of simples) in his sixth book of his
Commentaries upon Dioscorides writing upon the preface, sets down an excellent
ointment of great virtu to withstand the operation of venim in those that are
sick of the plague: the description whereof is long and difficult to be made,
and serves but for Princes and great Lords, in that it is very chargeable:
Therefore to avoid prolixitie, we have thought good to refer the Reader to
that place, if he think good to cause it to be dispensed: The name thereof is
the oil of scorpions, which in truth is of marvelous virtue to expel poison
and venime, as by the marvelous composition and art in making that oil may be
seen. But instead thereof, we will set down an other oil of scorpions, of a
more easy composition set down by Alexander Benedictus in the xx. chapter of
his book of the plague: the description whereof hereafter ensues: Take of
oil olive, the oldest that may be gotten one pound; then take threescore live
scorpions, and put them in a violl of glass, in the said oil, and boil them
over a soft fire nine hours, or set the said oil in our Ladies baine, and
when they have thus boiled in the oil, thou shall add unto them of treacle
two ounces, and let it boil in the said oil a quarter of an hour, then
strain all of it, and keep the said oil in a violl well closed and stopped
with wax, and parchment, and with it annoint the sick under the armepittes,
behind the ears, on the breast, the pulses of the arms, the temples, and
nosthrilles twice or thrice a day. This is a most excellent remedy, and of
great force, as the aforesaid Authors testify, who writes, that if this
unction be applied suddenly to him that is sick of the plague, before 24.
hours be past he shall be delivered, using the remedies aforesaid. The same
Author likewise reports that this ointment is of great effect: Take a glass
that contains a pint and a half and more, fill it with oil that is old, in
which oil you shall infuse of elder flowers six little handfuls, of the flowers
of walworth two handfuls, of the leaves and flowers of Hipericon, or S. John's
wort a handful, (but let the oil cover the herbs, and be more in quantity:)
set this vessel closely luted in the sun for the space of forty days, or a
whole summer, and reserve it to the abouenamed uses to annoint the sick, as
has been said. But after you have anointed him, you must cover him close,
for the oil procures sweat, and by such euacuation causes the venime to
vapor outwardly: and, if to the said oil you shall annex twenty or thirty
scorpions, it will be far more excellent, if besides you add two or three
ounces of good treacle, and boil them in our Ladies bayne, it will have more
force See here the best outward remedies that you may use in this strange
sickness.

How a man ought to proceed in curing the plague sore.
WHenas the plague sore appears in any of the emunctories, it is a sign that
Nature by her power would discharge the member principal of that venim which
assaileth it, and therefore has she by her providence created in the heart, the
brain, and liver, certain glandalous and spungy parts, which are apt to
receive the superfluities that are hurtful to those members. For under the arm
pittes there are certain kernels that serve the heart, and these are the
emunctories of that member, as behind the ears also there are the like which
serve to discharge the brain, and in the groines, for the liver. And when as
the venime inuades any of these principal members, nature, (to warrantize the
nobler part) discharges, and sends the venime to his proper emunctory:
wherefore, if the heart be attainted with venim, the plague sore will soon
appear under the arm pits: if the brain be infected, the sore will appear
behind the ears: as also, if the liver be indempnified, the sore will break
out in the groine: and because it is an expulsion which nature makes to the
exterior and vilder parts, to defend the interior and principal, we ought to
take great heed, lest by cold repercussiue or astringent medicines, we drive
the sore inwards, but rather, because the said sore is of a venomous nature, it
ought to be driven and forced outward by medicines that draw, and are in
quality hot and fit to draw the sore to ripeness and matter if it be
possible. When as the tumor appears in any of the said emunctories, you
shall suddenly make incision round about the tumor after the manner of
scarification made with the rasor to avoid the inuenimed blood, and shall
suddenly apply a cupping-glasse thereupon to draw out the venomous poison, if
that place be capable of a cupping-glasse, as in the groine and behind the
ears, but under the arme-pittes very hardly. And afterward you shall apply
suppuratiue and ripening medicines, and such as draw after this form. Take a
white onion and cut out the inward kore with your knife, and make a sufficient
hollow therein, fill it with very good treacle, or the theriacall powlder of
Guidon, cover and close it, and roast it gently under the ashes, till it be
soft and hot, as it comes from the fire, or as the patient may endure it,
apply it to the sore. This is one of the best remedies that a man can apply: Or
take the herb scabious, bruise it between two stones, and apply it on the
sore, either of it self or mixed with salted hogs grease. You may also make
a cataplasme according to this form following: take of the roots of white
lillies well cleansed, half a handful of the leaves and roots of mallows and
holy-hocks, two handfulls; of fat figs, to the number of thirty, of
linte-seede and fenu-greek seed, of each half an ounce, of leuaine one ounce,
of bran, half a handful, of scabious, half a handful; boil al these in
water, stamp and strain them, and afterward add unto them wheat flower, of
lin-seede and fenugree seed, of each an ounce, boil them as before with a
little water and honey, Galbanum two drachmes, ammoniac a drachme, the yelkes
of eggs, two in number, common salt, a drachme; oil of white lillies, as much
as needs, of hens grease, one ounce; of safferne a drachme, make a
cataplasme of all these, and apply it on the sore with fat wool, remoouing it
two or three times a day. This also is very good: take the crummes of white
bread, to the quantity of half a pound, fat figs, xxx. in number, leuan,
two ounces, live snayles with their shells xx. in number, fenugreeke seed one
ounce, seethe all these together in water, then beat them together, and add
unto them of salted hogs grease one ounce, of oil of white lillies as much as
needs, make a cataplasme hereof, which is very good to ripen and break an
impostume. The ancient Physicians use the implaster of Diachilon magnum, and
spread it on the sore, and of that I have made proof. For it is a good drawer
by reason of the gums that are ingredient. It is likewise very allowable to
draw out the venime from the sore to take a chicken or cock, and to pull the
feathers from his tail, and to apply him to the soar, for by this means, he
drives out the venom, and when he is dead, apply another: In stead of this
remedy, some use to take great pullets and pigeons, and cutting them in two
along the back, apply them hot as they are upon the tumor or carbuncle, for
this is an appropriate remedy, both for the one and the other. When the kore
shall be ripe, you must open the same with an actual cautery, which is better
the^ the lancet or cold iron, because it comfort the member and drives out
the venom by the actual heat and violence of the fire: I likewise advise all
those that are sick of the plague, to endure the same, notwithstanding it shall
affright them somewhat, for it is the best and most wholesome remedy that may be
given, as both Albucatus and Auicen do testify in that place, where they
discourse of the actual cautery: And instead of the actual cautery, if the
patient will not endure the same, you must proceed with familiar ruptories, of
which the best is that which is made of ashes and quick lime boiled together,
till such time as the water is consumed, and there remains nothing but the
ashes and lime incorporated and united together, which is a strong and
excellent ruptory, and such a one as works his operation without any, or very
little pain, as at diverse times, and in many patients I have approved: And
note that in these pestilent tumors, you must not exspect the entire maturation
thereof, but must open the same before it be thoroughly ripe, to the end that the
venom remain not long time in the body, and there thorough steame up to the
principal members and communicate the venom with them to the danger of him
that is diseased, and therefore it is better to open them sooner than later.
And whenas the sores or sore is opened, you must not thrust big tents of lint
into them, but little ones, to the end that the venomous matter may the better
issue forth and make no stay in the sore. And in this case Alexander Benedictus
councelleth in the 14. chap. of his book de peste not to put any tents of
linte or other linen into the sore, lest the venime be forced back, and in
effect the reason is very good. He likewise wills us, not to bind up the sore
too straight, when it is opened, thinking the ligature sufficient which keeps
the plasters to the sore. And for mine own part, I am truly assured that it
is far better to use certain tents of hollow silver, lead, or tin, then of
lint altogether, to the end that by the hollow tents, the venime may the better
and the sooner be euacuated, and not stayed within, which is the intention that
a good and advised Surgeon ought to have. And this may serve for advise and
counsel hence forward, although that diverse will think this matter somewhat
strange unto them who are accustomed to use an other fashion, but the truth in
all things ought to have place, and should not be any ways disguised. After
that the sore is opened, you must mundifie the same with these cleansing
abstersive medicines following: and note, that you ought to keep these sores
open a long time, and to suffer them to purge out their venime by the use of
these cleansing medicines following. Take of the mundification of rozen, and
put it upon the said sores within them by hollow tents: or take barley meal
sod in water, and honny, an ounce or two, incorporate with good honny of roses,
annexing the root of the lilly of Florence and a little salt, make a clensing
medicine hereof: or take Sarcocolla beaten to powlder, sodden honny, of each a
like quantity, incorporate them together and make an ointment thereof, for it
is a mundifier. But amongst all other unguents that cleanse loathsome ulcers
and such as are of a venomous and evil quality, I have not found any more
excellent, or that cleanses the loathsome, stinking, and evil matter, then
this which I composed my self, and have often used and tried the same with
good effect.

Take of the juices of daffadill and wormwood, of each four ounces, of honey
of roses clarified, eight ounces, boil these together until the juices, be
consumed, then add thereunto of turpentine of Venice, washed in rose water, or
aqua vitae, four ounces of the roots of the Florentine lilly and Aristolochia
the round, of each three drachms, of the flower of Lupins two drachms, make an
ointment of these: in truth I can assure you that I have seen this medicine
work admirable effect in the ulcers of the french pox and such like, cleansing
them very purely, not only of their gross and evil matter, but of the dead
flesh and kores enclosed in the said ulcers, as I have often times tried: Or do
thus: Take of Venice turpentine washed in aqua vitae in winter, and barley
water in summer, half a pound of oil of roses three ounces, of honny of roses
four ounces, of good and gummy mirrh, aloes, mastike, Aristolochia the round,
of each one drachme and a half; of barley meal, three drachmes, make an
ointment hereof to mundify these ulcers, for it is very good. See here the
order of cleansing ointments. After the ulcer is well mundified a long time, you
must skin with the emplaister of Diacaletheos, or the plaster of Seruse, or
the red desiccatiue plaster of Tutia, but this is the best. Take betony,
centory the less agrimony, Aristolochia the round, of each one ounce, of dear
suet half an ounce, of masticke three drachmes, of aloes half an ounce, of
new wax two ounces, seethe the herbs in good red wine, and strain them, then
add the pitch, the wax, and sewet, and seethe it again, and in the end, add
Aloes and masticke, and make a good incarnatiue hereof: And note, that if the
sore be very painful, you must assuage the grief thereof with a cataplasme of
bread crumbs boiled in milk, and afterward with the yelkes of eggs saffron, and
oil of roses as much as suffices, apply it to the painful sore. Or foment
the place with the decoction of mallows, holihocks, camomile and melilote
flowers, and branne sodde in water, and apply it in way of fomentation to the
pained place. Lo here the cure of the plague sore, it follows, that we
entreat of the carbuncle.

Of the cure of the Carbuncle.
THE Carbuncle is a malignant pustule proceeding from blood very hot and
gross in substance, which causes the adustion thereof, an ulcer with an
Eschare or crust in the skin, swelling and red, raising through the inflammation
thereof, those parts that are near about it, and procuring exceeding pain in
him that is possessed therewith. Which by Galen in his second book, ad
Glauconem the sixth chapter, has very learnedly taught. And of these, though
every sort of carbuncle be malignant and dangerous, (as testifies the same
Author in his third comentarie, on the the third book of Hippocrates his
Epidemes the xii. Aphorism,) yet notwithstanding those that have not with them
a contagious and pestilent venime intermixed, are not so dangerous of death, as
they that rain in the time of the plague, by reason of the venom which is
introduced into the humors and mass of blood, infected by the evil quality of
the air, which makes such pustules over and above their natural
malitiousnesse more malign, dangerous, and deadly, and accompanied with great
and mortal accidents. And therefore in such pustules it is necessary to take
great care and diligence in curing them readily, and rooting out and
extinguishing their venime, as soon as may be possible, which by the means
heerevnder written, may be orderly performed according to method: When as
therefore the carbuncle shall appear in any part of any person, the most
sovereign remedy is by actual fire applied upon to pustull, to consume and
abate the venom; for there is not any thing that sooner mortifieth and
extinguisheth the venime, than fire: And therefore the actual cautery, applied
upon the pustull, is the souerainty and sure remedy to cure the same: But
diverse fearful patients will not endure the same, insteede thereof, therefore
you shall apply upon the carbuncle these following remedies, which have a
cautsike virtue: Take an old nutte or two, barley flower, small reasins,
without their stones, fat figs dried, of each one ounce, beat them all
together in a mortar, and afterward seethe them in wine and oil of poppy, and
apply it upon the carbuncle, for it mortifieth the venom, and helps to rotte
the evil flesh: Take also two or three yelks of eggs, of pepper, a drachme,
of common salt, a drachme and a half, of soot of the chimny or oven, half a
drachme, mix al together, and make an ointment thereof: or this, Take of the
leaves of rue, half a little handful; of fat figs, six in number, of
pepper a drachme, of soote of chimny or oven, half an ounce, two yelks of
eggs, of safforne, half a drachme, of fresh capons grease without salt, one
ounce, and with the Juice of scabious, make an ointment which is very
excellent. For it suffers not the venime to proceed any further, but opens
the carbuncle very quickly and makes a good eschare: Or do thus: take of fat
figs, half a pound, of mustard seed three ounces, of oil of white lillies, as
much as suffices to incorporate them, make a plaster hereof, and apply it upon
the carbuncle. The ointment called Basilicon mixed with half an ounce of good
treacle of mythridate and the juice of Scabious is marvelous good, and
appropriate, as also the yelke of an egg, incorporate with salt; and the juice
of scabious is a singular medicine, and very common. The simple medicines that
are convenient in this case is scabious pounded betweeue two stones, and
applied; the herb also which is caled Cauda Equina, that is to say, horse
tail, which is a kind of comfery, and Verbascum which the Apoticaries call
Tapsus Barbalus and the english, herb Mullen, is a good remedy: The like
quality is by diverse of our Masters ascribed to the Sapphire, which has the
virtue to extinguish the venime of the carbuncle, if the sore be diverse times
touched with that stone: Mythridate also or treacle are very good to be laid
thereunto, and old nuttes applied with dried figs. And note, that as soon as
the carbuncle appears, it is good to scarifie it round about, with the rasor
(as Galen in the xiiii. book of his Method says) or to apply horse-leaches
to draw the venomous blood outward: these are the remedies which you must
presently lay upon the carbuncle. But round about the parts that are near the
sore, you must apply repercussiue medicines, for fear lest the venime attaint
them; to which effect the unguent de bolo is the chiefest and most ordinary
means applied round about: For it conforteth the part, and repulseth the
venime. You shall therefore do thus: Take of oil of roses three ounces, of
rose vinegar one ounce, of Bole Armenus, an ounce and a half, make an ointment
thereof, and apply it round about the carbuncle: Or thus: take oil of roses
Omphacine (made of green olives) wine of pomgranats one or two ounces, Bole
Armenus (and Terra Sigillata for the rich) of each half an ounce, make an
ointment thereof, and apply it round about the carbuncle: Galen makes a
plaster of plantane and pomegranets with their rindes and household bread, and
boyleth them in strong wine, adding lintels unto them: Or take lintells,
crummes of brown bread and bran, and boil them in vinegar and make a plaster
of them; you may make the like also of sour pomegranets, cut into quarters,
with their rind, and sodde in vinegar, til they be brought to a pulpe, beat
them and apply them about the carbuncle: Or else thus: Take of oil of roses as
much as suffices, dissolve in it Bole Armenus, Sanguis Draconis or beaten
galls, and make an ointment to the same use. The whites of eggs likewise
beaten, with rose vinegar and rosewater, and clouts steeped in that liquor, may
be ministered round about the sore: Then are those medicines that defense the
parts from the venime of the carbuncle. Hitherto I have taught both what
should be applied upon, and round about the sore; it remains now to set
down the means how to break the carbuncle, which are these: Take of Opoponax
three drachmes, of fat figs, an ounce; of currants, as much; of leven, half an
ounce, beat and mix al together and apply it on the carbuncle. The doung of a
man also is a fit remedy, but for that it is filthy, use better* yet wants it
not his effect. Take the yelke of an egg and a little salt, and incorporate
them with the juice of scabious, and minister it. Or do after this manner: Take
strong leven one ounce, of scabious and the greater comfery, of each one ounce,
of small reasins without their stones, half an ounce, Cantarides, six in
number, of sparrowes doung three drachmes, incorporate all with oil of white
lillies. This also is good: Take of fat figs, three ounces; of leven, two
ounces; of mustard seed, the leaves of rue, common salt, the roots of
Aristologe the round, of each an ounce, and a half, of the meal of wheat and
fenugreeke, of each an ounce, of common honey as much as suffices, mix al
together and apply it.

To make the Eschare or dead flesh to fall out of the carbuncle.
TAke fresh butter and capons grease, of each one ounce, and the yelke of an
egg, mix them together, and minister it: you may likewise add an ounce of
Basilicon: take also of the roots of holihockes two handfulls, of buglosse, a
handful, seethe them in water, and beat them together, and strain them, and
add unto them of the powlder of fenugreeke and lin-seed, of each an ounce, of
fresh butter washed in water, of fresh hogs-greace, of each an ounce, make an
ointment. Or take of holi-hocke roots, of beare-foote, of mallows, and Herb
Robert, called storcks-bill* of each a handful, seethe them together in water,
stamp and strain them, mix them with fresh butter and capons grease, apply
them to the sore till the eschare fall. Rasis made a plaster of honey and
Sarcacoll of each a like, and ministered the same: After the Eschare is fallen,
you must mundifie the ulcer with one of those mundifiers, which are described
in the twentieth chapter, and then when the carbuncle shall be well purged from
matter and corruption and yields no more, incarnate the same with this
unguent following. Take of mastike full of gum, white incense, Aristoloch the
round, mirrh, of the flower of Orobus, Litharge, Ceruse, Aloes, of each a like,
of dear suet as much as suffices, a little oil of roses, make an ointment of
these according to art, and apply it till the sore be thoroughly cicatrized: And
because in carbuncles, there ordinary happens some deformed cicatrice, after
they are healed, to repair and correct the same, you may use these remedies
following: take of Borax two drachmes, of Camphire one drachme, of white coral
half an ounce, of gum dragacanth, starch, cristall, of the stone called
Dentalis, white incense, common salt, of each three drachmes, of white marble
two drachmes; Let the gum dragant be beaten in a marble mortar, and the rest
be beaten and serced, afterward add hogges-greace clarified, goats-greace,
capons-greace, of each an ounce and a half: melt al together in a leaden
vessel, and strain it through a cloth, and after mix the powlders except the
Camphire and Borax, sees all together on a gentle fire, stirring it often with
a spatula, and when it begins to seethe, put to the camphire, and when they
are all of them well incorporated together, keep this ointment in a vessel of
lead, for it has a marvelous effect. For the poor to the said intent you may
take fresh cheese mixed with honey, and a little powlder of Ceruse: Likewise
take hogs grease to the value of a pound, prepared after this manner, boil
it in a little white wine, and afterward strain it through a cloth, and
incorporate the same in a marble mortar with goats milk, or plantane water,
then add unto it litharge of gold, vnmelted brimstone, of each three ounces,
of white incense one ounce, of quick silver quenched and killed in the juice
of limons half an ounce, of Borax two drachmes, of Camphire a drachme, make an
ointment hereof: Take likewise as much lime as you list (that is quenched and
slacked in water) wash it six times in plantane or rain water, until such
time as all the sharpness thereof be taken away, mix the same with oil of
roses in a leaden mortar, and stir it well, and you shall have a good
ointment to repair the deformed cicatrises which are left after carbuncles.
This is the whole form of the cure of a pestilent carbuncle.

Chap. XV. The manner how to withstand the most urgent accidents that happen in
the pestilent fever, the Botch and Carbuncle.
THE most troublesome and dangerous accidents in this sickness, are
weakness of virtue, faintings of the heart, soundings, rauing, or frenzy,
extreme drith, profound sleep, or continual waking, crampes, coldness of
the extreme parts, which we ought diversely to correct, according as the nature
of each of them requires. The feebleness of virtue (which may be known by
the weakness of the pulse, palenesse of the face, and dullness of the patient)
may be prevented or corrected by comforting the sick by good and cordial
broths and colices, cawdles, or such like, with good wine also, (as Galen
commands in the twelfth book of his Method) ministering it but little in
quantity, and alayed with water, or to make him take a toste of bread with
sugar and cinnamon steeped in good white or claret wine: you shall give him
Diamargariton Manus Christi with pearls, and amongst all the medicines that
are proper to comfort the virtue, the confection Alchermes described by Mesue
in his Antidotary) is allowed, which has marvelous force and efficacy to
restore virtue almost extinct in the sick, as by diverse experiments I am able
to auow, to the value of a drachme in buglosse water or white wine: It shall be
good also to comfort the patient, to encourage him with friendly words, to
embolden him, and extinguish his fear, for these means both quicken and
strengthen virtue. The faintings of the heart (which the Greeks call
Lipothimiae) may be eased by the Electuary of Diamargariton, or the powlder
thereof, annexing unto it the powlder of Electuarium de gemmis, or a little of
the powlder of Diamosci dulcis given in white wine, or buglosse, or scabious
water, to the value of a drachme. And in this accident you must comfort the
sick with good odors, and rub the pulses of his arms and his temples with
rose water and rose vinegar, or with the mixture of rose water, rose vinegar,
the powlder of cloves and cinnamon: and if the patient be bound, it will be good
to give him a clister of the decoction of mallows, beetes, borage, mercury,
mellon seeds, and a little annice seed, and branne, and dissolve therein an
ounce of Catholicon, or Cassia, oil of violettes, and gross sugar. If the
sick fall into a sound, give him suddenly two or three spoonefuls of pure
wine, (as Galen commands in the twelfth of his Method) and in such a case
it is good to give him four grains of musk, dissolved in good wine and
buglosse water, if the Fever be not over vehement: or insteede of this remedy,
give him this drink following: Take of powlder of cloves half a drachme, of
the powlder of pearls and corrall, of each half a drachme, make a drink with
buglosse water, and a little good white wine or claret wine. And in such an
accident you must cry upon the sick, rub him violently, make him smell rose
water and musk, or give him a drachme of the confection Alchermes, with
buglosse water, and a little wine: and half a drachme of pearls for the rich:
and for the poor, the powlder of cloves. And if he abound in cholerike humors,
purge him with a little rubarbe, or the Electuary of the Juice of roses, or the
sirrope of roses. It is good also to cast fresh water very oftentimes in his
face, for it quickens the decayed spirits: These are the remedies for
soundings: If the patient fall a rauing, you must give him some speedy
euacuation to divert the humors lest they mount to the brain, you must
therefore rub the lower parts very often, and apply ligatures to the
extremities, and make him take sirrope of poppy with water of the decoction of
lettuce, purselane, or sorrel, and wash his feet and arms with the warm
decoction of the leaves of willow, vine leaves, lettice, flowers of roses and
lillies, camomile, and the tops of white poppy, boiled in water: and keep the
patient in silence and in a secret place, and to beware that he speak not, as
much as is possible: and if the raging be ouerfurious, you ought to bind him,
and to take all things from him that may hurt him, as all sorts of armor, and
other offensible things finally to procure him to sleep. The extreme thirst
that presses the patient, must be eased by drincking freely, (as Paulus
Aegineta and Auicen command) and his drink shall be fresh water in great
quantity, if the patient be young and strong, or mixed with sirope of limons,
or sower grapes, or sirop of violets: And note that he must drink largely and
abundantly to extinguish the heat of the fever that burns him inwardly:
for, to drink in little quantity, rather inflameth, then cools the same:
And therefore the above named Authors will, that in the pestilent fever we
should allow abundance of drink, for it either provoke vomit, or sweat,
or extinguisheth the fever: heaviness of sleep must be remedied by strong
rubbings of the feet and hands, by often calling on the sick, by keeping him
in a lightsome chamber, by clapping cupping glasses, with scarification to the
nape of his neck, by sharp clisters made with the decoction of mallows,
holihockes, beetes, hisope, bitony, rue, sage, and the lesser centory, of each
a handful; agaric two drachmes, polipody an ounce, coloquintida a drachme,
branne a handful, let all be boiled in water, and strayned, to which you may
add of catholicon one ounce, of the electuary of Indie, or Hiera piera
composita half an ounce, of salt a drachme, of common honey, half an ounce:
make hereof a clister, which he may take in the morning, or after supper,
during his heaviness, Subeth and deep sleep. It is good also to make him smell
to the powlder of burnt hair mixed with vinegar, for it awaketh him much. And
if contrariwise the patient cannot sleep, you shall give him two ounces of the
sirope of poppy, or one ounce, an hour before he take rest, with the decoction
of lettuce, and poppy seed, and you shall annoint his forehead with vnguentum
populeonis, or alittle of the seeds of white poppy and annice: you may annoint
his nosthrills also with the oils of poppy and violets, with a grain of
Opium, and saffron incorporated together, if necessity require it, and not
otherwise: If the patient be seized with the cramp (which is a mortal sign,
and after which few escape, as Hippocrates testifies in his second book 2^
Aphorism) yet must we notwithstanding assist all that we may, and annoint the
nape of his neck with oils of white lillies and violets, and make him hold
in his mouth a piece of nutmeg, and chew it often, you shall likewise give him
lenitiue and no sharp clisters, and make him drink barley water with sirrope
of violets, and moysten him with good brothes, for the cramp very often comes
of emptines, and is commonly mortal: if the extreme parts be cold in a
pestilent fever, or other sharp sickness, it signifies the weakness and
mortification of natural heat, and (for the most part) betokens death. In
this case we must minister unto his hands and feet with hot clothes, and
chafe them, and give him a little wine to quicken natural heat, and make him
hold a clowt in his mouth, and give him the powlder of Diacameron, or
Diamoscum, and keep him warm in his bed, and take heed that no cold touch
him: But when the poor patient is come to this estate, there is little hope of
them, as testifies Hippocrates in the fourth of his Aphorisms, Aphorism 48.
for it is a sign that death is at hand.

Chap. XVI. The order and government they ought to observe who assist and serve
those that are sick of the plague.
IT is a matter most evident, that they that dwell continually with those that
are infected with the plague, are in great danger to receive the same infection
from those that are sick, by reason they haunt with them night and day,
receive their breaths, and smell their corruptions, and suck the infected air
of the infected houses wherein they converse; which is a thing very dangerous,
as Galen witnesses in the first book de differentijs febrium cap. 2. For
which cause, they that are resolved to keep them that are sick of the plague,
ought to have a great care of themselves for fear they be infected. And first
of all, they must have recourse unto God, beseeching him to preserve them, to
the end that being thus assisted by his grace they may the better accomplish
this charitable office to the sick, and succor and serve them to their
uttermost; which is an action that pleases Almighty God. Following then the
order prescribed in the second, third, fourth, and fifth chapter of this
treatise, he shall use those preservatives there described according to his
complexion, age, strength, and the nature of these humors that abound in him,
taking fit medicines or pills, powlders, opiates, or tablets against the
plague. treacle, or mithridate according to the form we have set down in the
places before alleged, continuing the same without intermission. When he shall
visit the sick, he must not approach over near unto him, for fear he receive
his breath, but stand far off him, especially, if he be fasting. Also before
he enter into the sick man's Chamber, let him perfume it, and cause the
windows to be opened, and make a good fire therein of rosemary or juniper. He
shall hold in his mouth, an Angelica or zedoary root, or a cloue, or the
rind of a citron, orange, or limon. He shall wash his hands, face, forehead,
and temples with vinegar and rose water, and if he have leisure, do the like
under his arme-pits, and in other emunctory places, but this is not always
sure and easy to be done: He shall oftentimes, and almost every day change his
garments and linen, and carry in his hand apples, pomanders, orenges, or limons
to smell to. He shall hold a sponge steeped in rose water, vinegar, white
wine, besprinckled with the powlder of cloves, zedoary, and Angelica, to which
he shall often smell, and with some of the same liquor he shall gargarise his
mouth and throat. He shall perfume all the house and chamber of the sick
thrice a day, and oftener in summer, because the days are longer. When he
comes to touch the sick, he shall cause him to turn his face from him, lest
he breathe upon him, and he likewise that performs this office, shall do the
like for his better security, he shall keep himself cleanely, purge often
with the pills against the plague, or other fit medicines: He shall be sober
in his diet, and avoid all superfluous meat and drink: he must be merry and
lightsome, and drive away all fear, sadness, and melancholy: For those that
are fittest to be employed in this matter, are such as have a good courage, and
are merry, pleasant, and well complexioned that despise the danger of death,
and are ready to do service to their parents and friends, wives or children.
These in truth are they that in these times are in least danger, and whom God
(foreseeing their good zeal) protects by his mercy, preserving them from so
great danger. Nevertheless in this time men ought not to be too rash or
hazardous, nor trust too much to their complexions, youth, virtue, and force of
body. For the secret venom of the plague preuenteth all this, and except a man
be wary and prudent, it will then seize him when he least suspecteth: because a
venime of that nature is accustomed to lie hidden in the body a long time
without any effect, or at leastwise notable impression, after the nature of the
biting of a mad dog, which suddenly before it be discovered takes a
lamentable effect. For which cause men ought not to be so bold and rash as to
expose themselves to such dangers, except necessity constrains them to
succor their parents, or faithful friends, to whom, by law of nature, they
are tied: Neither on the contrary side should they be too fearful, and so
cowardly, as to forsake their fathers, mothers, wives and children for fear of
death, but both by the commandment of God, and law of nature, they ought to
employ all their power, yea to adventure life and blood, to preserve those, who
next under God gave them life, being, and living.

Chap. XVII. The manner how to cleanse the houses and places that are infected,
the woollen and linen, and the moouables of the same: And how long they may
remain infected, if they be not well cleansed, and in what time they may be
reputed clean.
I Have heretofore declared in the first Chapter of this Treatise, that the
Plague is a contagious sickness, rauishing life by the malignity thereof, and
because that the contagion of the same (which is no other thing but a like
disposition by a certain hidden consent communicated by touch unto another) it
remains long time hidden, in such things as may receive the same such as are
the air of the house infected, the walls, the garments of woollen, linen,
cotton, fether, and such like, it is therefore necessary to know how to cleanse
the houses of those that have bin infected with the plague, to the end, that
after they that have been infected, shall return to their houses, they may
not be infected anew, by reason their garments, couerlets, beds, and such like,
have not been well ayred and cleansed. And therefore, by way of advertisement
to all in general, every one during the time of the plague, ought to shut up
his best moouables in a place apart, that is clean and neat, and to forbear
the use thereof, I say, they ought to shut up their linen, tapistry and
couerlets, and only reserve some to their ordinary use: For where there is a
pestilent sickness in a house, it continually infecteth the air where it
reigns, the garments, couerlets, bedding, and sheets, and all things that
are capable thereof: or either receive the breath, sweat, spittings, or vapor
that issues from the sick, and al things that are of a slender substance, and
full of pores, are fit to receive, and that very easily, such infection, as
are woollen, linen, cotton and feathers: wherefore it behooves above all
other things, that such household stuff be carefully cleansed, aired, washed,
and purged. For if they be once attaynted, they long time retain the infection
in them, because the venime inbibeth and incorporateth it self in their
substance very vehemently, by reason of the spongines and thinnest of these
things: and as oil, pitch, and rosin and such like norish, conserve, and
augme^t the fire, in that they yield it a convenient matter, so likewise does
woollen, cotton, feathers, linen, and such like nourish and entertain for a
long time, that infection which is imparted unto them from the sick, retaining
the pestilent venime, conceived in them for a long time: Even as we see chists
and coffers where we lay sweet bags to perfume our linen or garments do long
time retain that odor which we laid on them, as lauender, roses, oringes, and
such like, which sort of odor is maintained a long time in these garments, and
linen, as experience teaches us, which also we see in Cotton wherein a man
has wrapped musk or ciuet, which keeps the said odor an infinite time. The
which the Poet Horace has aptly expressed in this verse.

Quo semel est imbuta recens seruabit odorem
Testa diu --
The vessel long time will retain
The odor which it first did gain.
Since therefore such infection may long time remain hidden in the things
aforesaid, we ought very diligently to cleanse them after this form that
ensues. The garments of such as are dead of the plague, if they be rich, ought
to be burned, according as the custom is in Italy: or if poor) whose misery
is such, as they cannot buy new) let the clothes they have used, be bucked and
washed in lie, and oftentimes exposed to the northerly wind and sun, and
perfumed with rosemary, Juniper, and such like, and in time of drith be exposed
to the Northern air, which dries al infectious vapors; for the garments that
are infected, may retain the same four years, nay the feather-beds seven
years, as Alexander Benedictus testifies. Note also that feather-beds, cannot
be cleared except the tikes be opened, and the down be ayred, till a month or
forty days be past, in which time they may be purified. Let each bench,
wenscote, and other tables of the house be thoroughly washed with water and
vinegar, so that no sluttish corner be left: Let the windows by day be kept
open to the north, and shut when the south wind blows: Thus in xxiiii. days
may the wooden implements be ayred. If any sick man has before worn a furred
gown, let each man beware how he wears it after, for furre is too apt to
take infection, as appears in those xxv. hie Almaines, of whom Hierome
Fracastorius makes mention, who in the year 1511. in Verona died one after
another, til al were made away by wearing of that gown. The surgeon that has
assisted the sick after xl. days trial may be admitted to converse the
City, and so the rest after sixty (so preservatives and purges have been
observed, and especialy, so mirth, joy, and pleasure have been their
companions:) if men observe these precepts, they may by Gods help, and by
keeping good order, avoid the plague by those means I have discovered, by
which helps there will be no humors capable of infection, and where there is no
matter fit to receive the same, there can it not surprise any man.

General rules to be observed by all men in the plague time.
FIrst must we call upon God, desiring him to defend us: secondly, but
especially (when we are fasting) we ought to fly from the conversation of
those that are infected: Let the wind be between thee and the person that is
sick, or some perfume be kindled, or hold in thy hand some odoriferous
perfume. Fly the narrow ways and streets where are dunghils: hant no vain
assemblies of feasts, but if thy means be to follow Hippocrates rule. Fuge
long, cito, Tarde: or if thou must needs stay, be temperate, advised and
devout, and God shall bless thee, to whose mercy, and thy hearty prayers I
humbly commend me.

FINIS.
A Table or Index.
A.
ANgelica root, to prepare it, fol. 7. Aptham, how to help it, fol. 26.
B.
Blood when and where it is to be drawn, fol. 17, 18.40 Bolarmoniake, how to
prepare it, fol. 19. Botch, in the throat, to cure it, fol. 17. Botch, how to
know where it will be, although no sign appear, fol. 18. Botch, the general
cure thereof, fol. 30. Botch, that is hard, and will not come to maturation,
how to help it, fol. 32, Botch, how to draw it, from one place to another,
fol. 34 Botch, when he strickes in again, how to bring him out. fol. 33.
Botch, how to draw him from one place to another, fol. 34.
C.
Carbunkle or blayne how to know him, as also to cure it. fol. 35. Carbunkle
with pain and inflammation to help it, f. 36 Chickens, how to apply them,
fol. 17* Cordial preservatives, fol. 4. Cordial, to be taken after purging,
fol. 26. Costiuenes, how to help it, fol. 8.9.
D.
Digestive for a botch, how to make it, fol. 30.31.33. Diet to be kept in time
of the plague, fol. 11. Diet, for them that have the small pockes, fol. 41.
E.
Ears, how to preserve them from the pockes, fol. 41. Ears running of them,
what you must do to it, fol. 47, Epithemation, to comfort the heart, fol,
2.42. Epithemation, for a botch, fol. 34. Exercise and orders to be kept in the
plague, fol. 12. Eyes, how to preserve them from the pockes, fol 41: Eye,
pain, and burning therein to ease it, fol. 41 Eye, perle or web therein to
help it, fol. 46 Eyes, fastered and clong together, to help it, fol. 46.
F.
Faynting and pounding, to help it, fol. 23: Face, how to preserve it from
deformiting, in the small pockes, fol. 43. Face, spotes therein and rednes,
after the pockes are gone, to help it, fol: 46: Feet, extreme heat in them,
with the small pockes, to help it, fol. 45. Flowers of women stopped to provoke
them, fol. 10.11 Flixe, how to stop it, fol. 25.
H.
Hands and feet, extreme heat in them with the small pockes, to help it,
fol. 45. Head lightness and pain therein for want of sleep, f. 25 Holes in the
face, with the small pockes, what is to be done to it, fol. 47: Hoarsnes,
remaining after the pockes are gone, to help it. fol. 48*
I.
Issues, commended against the plague, fol. 11. Iuleps, Cordial, to make them,
fol. 22. Iulep, to quench thirst, fol. 23.24.
L.
LAske, or flixe, how to stop it, fol. 25. Longs, how to preserve them from the
pockes, f. 41.
M.
MAturatiue, to ripe and rot a botch, fol. 31.32.35. Mouth, vlceration therein,
called Aptham, to help it, fol. 26. Mouth sorenes and vlceration therein, with
the small pockes how to prevent, and cure the same, fol. 45. Mundificatiue, for
a carbunkle or blayne, fol. 36.
N.
Nodule, against the plague, fol. 7. Nosgaye, against the plague, fol. 7.
Nostrels how to preserve them from the pockes, fol. 41. Nostrels, stopped and
vlcerated with the small pockes, to help it, foll. 47.
O.
Opiat, good to expel the plague, fol. 19. Ointment, to keep on sollible,
fol. 8. Ointment to provoke sleep, and ease pain of the head, fol. 26.
Ointment, to keep the face from pitting, in the small pockes, fol. 43.
P.
Parfumes against the plague, fol. 3 Pills, to keep one sollible, fol, 9.
Pills, to purge the body, fol: 9. Plague what it is, fol. 1. Plague, cause
thereof, fol. 1. Plague, forewarnings thereof, fol. 2. Plague, how to prevent
it, fol. 2* Plague, how to cure it, fol. 16. Plague, how to expel it, fol. 18.
unto. 21. Pomanders, against the plague, fol. 6. Potion, to purge the body,
fol. 10. Potion, to expel the plague, fol. 20. Preservative, against the
plague, fol. 4. Powder, to purge the body, fol. 10. Pouders, to expel the
plague, fol. 18.19 Pockes, and measels, whereof they proceed, fol. 38: Pockes,
and measels how to cure them, fol. 40: Pockes, why they are infectious, fol.
39. Pockes, how to maturate them, fol. 44. Pockes, or measels, that are slow
in coming forth to help it, fol. 42. Pocks and measels, how to use them when
they are come forth, fol. 43. Pockes vlcerated how to cure it, fol. 44.
Purgation for a strong body: fol. 24 Purgation for a plethoricke body, fol. 24.
Purgation for a weak body, fol. 25. Purging, when it is tolerable, fol. 24
Q
Quilte, against the plague, fol. 5. Quilte, for the heart after sweat, fol.
22.
R
Rauing and raging, to help it, fol. 26. Raysins laxatiue how to make them,
fol. 8:
S
Signs to know when one is infected with the plague, f, 15 Signs of recovery
in the plague, fol. 15 Signs of death in the plague, fol. 15. Signs to know
when one is infected with the small pox, f. 39. Signs laudable, and ill signs in
the small pockes, f. 39. Scabes which chance to come after the pockes are gone
to help them, fol. 48. Sleep when it is tolerable, fol. 23. Sleep, an
ointment to provoke it, fol. 26. Sounding how to help it, fol. 23.
Suppository, how to make it, fol. 8.
T
Thirst, a Iulep to quench it, fol. 23.24.43. Throat botch therein, to help
it, fol. 17, Throat how to preserve it from the pockes, fol, 41. Throat
vlceration therein to help it, fol. 45.
V
Ventoses, when and where to apply them, fol. 18. Vessicatorie, how to make
it, fol. 32. Vesicatorie of the sick, fol. 14. Unguent, defensatiue against
the plague fol. 21. Vlceration of the small pockes, to help it, fol. 44.
Unguent, for spots, and rednes of the face, fol. 47. Vomiting extremely, to
help it, fol. 28.
W
Water, good against the plague, fol. 20 Water, for spots and rednes of the
face, after the small pockes are gone, fol. 46.
Y
Yexing, or yoxe, how to help it, fol. 28,

