The godly garden of GETHSEMANI, furnished with wholesome fruits of Meditation
and prayer, upon the blessed passion of Christ our Redeemer.

SVRSVM.
blazon or coat of arms

CANT. I. Fasciculus Myrrhae dilectus meus mihi:
inter vbera mea commorabitur.
A nosegay of myrrh is my true love to me:
Between my breasts his dwelling shall be.
depiction of crucifixion of Christ

To the Reader.
BY chance happeninge upon this little Treatise written in the Italian by a
devout person, as it appears, and one specially professed by rules of
Christian life, to the glorious name of Jesus: for my small understanding in
that tongue, and further exercise therein, I put on it an English habit of
such course weauing as skill served me. And finding therein such sweetenes as
is always proper to so good matter, I thought good to bestow my simple
travail though with more charges, in presenting only the same to a special
good friend or two: as a winter flower to wear in their bosom, or red Rose
now at Christmas, by my tenure or service due: which they might at their
pleasure join with other posies of their accustomed devotions. If thou, good
Reader, chance upon any one book thorough the liberality of the printer, or
otherwise by more number printed then I purposed, I have therefore to desire
thee to accept it with good will, as I know they do to whom of purpose I vowed
my travels, and also that thou will excuse and bear with all the faults
committed by the Printer or me for this time, which are not so great to
frustrate thee or me of the fruit of thy exercise or expectation herein, which
is increase of piety and devotion. Of which thou may assure thy self to
reap as much fruit to thy comfort as is possible of so little a treatise.

I have called it by the name of the garden of Gethsemani, alluding in my
fancy to the Garden where Christ prayed and shed both water and blood for
mankind: which name for need may put thee sometime in mind oftener to resort
to this garden of exercise, and to have Christ's words to his Disciples there
always sounding in thy ears and slumbring mind: Can ye not watch with me a
little while? etc. Also our heavenly Solomon and Savior Christ inuiteth his
spouse ye Church in these words: Come into my garden my sister and wife: And
she our mother found no flower or fruit in this paradise of god more to her
liking, than this tree of life, the blessed cross of Christ: as may well
appear by her own words: A nosegay of myrrh is my true love to me, and within
my breast his habitation shall be. Meaning by the myrrh, which for the
bitterness thereof was given Christ to drink in his extreme thirst, and which
for the sweet smell again, served amongst other things to annoint his body
in the sepulcher: That she rejoiced in nothing more then to gather her self a
posie of the bitter pains and sorrows that Christ suffered for her and her
faithful children. Then according to her example, as children rightly nurtured
in her lap, let us not think it tedious to follow her course and steps,
and say with her: In the sweet sent of thy oyntmentes (Gracious Lord) I do
run after thee. And let us hold always in our breast, and keep in memory
by continual meditation, all the grievous torments and troubles which our
savior suffered for the redemption of ye world, that thereby we may learn and
know the length and the breadth, the height and depth of that most healthful
tree and Cross of Christ, which of his great mercy I beseech him grant both
thee and me good Reader.

Of the fruit of such devout meditation, and of the manner and order of this
little Treatise.
AMongst all exercises of devotion that a Christian man can have, one of the
most fruitful and most acceptable to God is, to be often and deuoutely
occupied, in calling to remembrance and well to consider in mind (which
otherwise we term to meditate) the passion of Christ our redeemer. The which
all the Doctors that write thereof affirm, and also reason and experience do
plainly declare the same. For by such holy meditation the soul is inflamed in
the love of Christ, considering how tenderly he loved it, how much he
suffered to save and beautify it: and moreover it fears and is ashamed of
his sinfulness, knowing and seeing how grievously it was punished in the son
of God, who as the Prophet Esaias says, was stricken of the father for the sins
of his people. Yea the soul thereby receives in her self and increases new
and fresh desires to amend the life: seeing the lively and marvelous
examples which particularly do shine in the holy passion of Christ. And
likewise it is thereby styrred and pricked forward to give thanks and praise
for his infinite goodness and mercy, that it has pleased him with so tender
love to be made a sacrifice, and to suffer so bitter death, that he might give
us miserable and wretched wretches, life and salvation. And thus finally the
soul may seem in some part to pay the great debt it is bound in, feeling in
it self the great benefit it has received, when it calls to remembrance
and bethinketh particularly the manyfolde sorrows, injuries, and torments
which the savior of the world suffered in his death and passion: and does know
that this service is most acceptable to him, and also is sorry for them who do
not the like, but forget the great kindness of their Redeemer.

So then, for this and many other fruits gathered of this blessed meditation,
certain Doctors affirm that those gain more, which every day do meditate
with devotion, some little part of ye passion of Christ, than if they should
exercise many prayers, fastings, disciplins and chastenings of the body
otherwise. And therefore albeit many have copiously at large written hereof,
yet notwithstanding for the better commodity and help of them that have not
such books, and specially for such our Christian brothers and sisters sakes,
that have a desire to exercise them selves in the meditation of the passion of
our Lord, we are moved to find out some means how they may with more
facility and taste godlily occupy them selves therein. Which I doubt not, my
good brother, but thou shalt well prove, if thou be willing with attention
diligently to mark what shall in this little Treatise be laid before thee,
wherein thou shall find great sweetness in applying thy self to so heavenly
an exercise, both necessary and highly commended. For here thou shalt see in
figures set forth the Images of those mysteries thou have to call to thy
remembrance and mind: in beholding whereof thou may be helped to be more
settled and stayed in memory and mind of that imagination which is so
imprinted within thee. Herein also are declared the points to discourse on,
and so to proceed with more devotion in thy meditation. Or if thou know not
how of thy self to make these or the like talks or speeches with God, then I
say, this may teach thee the order and manner how, because herein is showed
thee how to give thanks to thy Redeemer for that which thou shall meditate or
call to mind he has suffered for thee: and also what thou ought to pray
for, conformable to that point and part of the passion thou ^ast to meditate
upon. Which ^oing (by Gods grace) with as great devotion as thou can, ^hou
may then well hope thou shall not at any time be occupied therein without
fruit: the which shall be so much the more, as thou shall more earnestlye
persevere in so godly an exercise.

Diverse profitable ways how to meditate upon the blessed passion of Christ our
Redeemer.
IT is declared in the book o^ the Prophet Daniell, that there was showed in a
vision to Nabuchodonosor, a tree plante^ in the middle of the earth, which tree
was very hye, garnishe^ with goodly leaves and abundance of fruit. By this
tree is figured Christ crucified in the midst of the earth, under the shadow
of which tree whosoever is willing to rest him self, and record within his
mind the most holy passion, he shall find fruit both sweet and copious, and
that so much the more, as his understanding shall serve him in more diverse
sort to meditate on the same. And therefore ye must note that there be diverse
ways to meditate upon the holy passion, and out of each of them there may be
gathered new varieties of fruits: for that you shall find one fruit and
taste when you do in your meditation take sorrow and compassion within your
self for the great torments and injuries which Christ suffered: and an other
kind of fruit when thou shall meditate thereon in mind to follow the great
virtue that is taught thee therein, and so in diverse other sorts, as your
meditation may run for diverse other ends and purposes. And although the
devotion of every man may devise different ways of exercise in this
meditation* yet nevertheless I thought good in this little treatise to set
forth certain sorts, which I hope shall not a little further and help such
as be willing to serve their turn therewith.

The first manner or sort which is general, and here set forth before the rest
we intend to speak of, may be called historical or literal: which
consists in knowing well the letter and history of that mystery which thou
purposest to have in mind and contemplation: the which thou must as freshly
remember and consider of, as it were presently set before thine eyes.

The second manner of this meditation is, by way of compassion: that is to say,
for that intent that thou would have compassion, and as it were lament and
be sorry for the grievous torments, reproaches and sorrows which thou conceyuest
in thy mind that Christ has suffered for thee: considering well the quantity
and quality thereof, with other circumstances which do increase the sorrows and
passion, and therefore the more stir thy heart to pity and compassion.

The third manner is, to meditate by way of compunction or contrition, which is
to that end that thou may be pricked with remorse of conscience and sorrow for
thy sins, which are with such rigor and cruelty punished in thy redeemer,
for that he was offered up as a ransom and price for them, so to make
satisfaction before the justice of his eternal Father. And this shall cause
thee to hate them the more, and to keep thy self the more warely hereafter
from committing the like offenses again, when thou shall consider how much
they offended God, that he would punish the same with so great severity.

The fourth manner and sort of meditation is, by way of imitation or following,
that is, to the end to follow the marvelous virtue and rare examples that
Christ our redeemer shows and sets forth in his passion, as well in the
words which he spoke, as in the works which he did, and in the manner of his
suffering. All which to consider is a certain lively example and pattern of
perfection, for thee to use as a glass to behold what virtue wants in thee,
and so to use thy self that thou may obtain it.

The fifth manner and sort of meditation is by way of thanks giving, that is,
in rendering of thanks and praises to God for his bountiful goodness, calling
to remembrance the innumerable gifts and great benefits which are given thee
by means of this holy passion: the which are so great that no understanding
of man is able to comprise them. Yet notwithstanding, those which by this
discourse thou art able to understand, may suffice to stir thee to give
thanks and praise to thy Lord God, which has done so much for thee.

The sixth manner is by way of admiration: for having well considered in thy
mind the unspeakable charity and love of Christ, in that he has offered
him self to suffer so bitter and shameful death: and likewise the infinite
wisdom and justice of God, declared in the bitter passion of his dear son:
thou shall become as a man ravished out of him self, being amassed of so high
and wonderful things.

The seventh manner is, by way of joy and hope: For if thou consider that all
which Christ has suffered, and that death which he has sustained, was only
for thy remedy and behoue, and that by such means he would make satisfaction
for thy sins, and leave to thee the treasures of his redemption and mercies,
if thou be willing to help thy self therewith: Calling I say, these and the
like things to thy remembrance, they may cause thee to rejoice and be glad in
hope that by this help thou may again recover that infinite treasure which
thou had lost, and he by this means has purchased for thee.

The eight and last manner of meditation upon this blessed passion, is, by way
of love. For because the principal fruit which thou may seem to gather of
that thou have meditate upon, is a certain exceeding tender love of our Lord
him self, which so vouchsafed to suffer and dye for thee.

And now that thou may in all these manners and ways of meditation know the
better how to proceed, these instructions and declarations following may serve
thy turn.

Declarations of the said sorts and manners of meditations upon the blessed
passion, and first concerning the first kind, called historical or litterall.
THE first manner how to be occupied in meditation upon the most blessed
passion of our redeemer, we have said it may be termed historical or
literal, because in it we presuppose chiefly that the history of things which
happened and came to pass, are therein contained. Upon the which foundation
all the other sorts of meditation are grounded, which we have before
specified. And therefore it is necessary that this kind and sort go before
the other: besides that, this remembrance what things Christ suffered, is of
it self laudable enough, and commended in the holy Scripture: as it appears
in that which the Prophet Jeremy in person of our Lord said: Remember thou
my poverty, my wormwood and gall. And in an other place our Lord him self
does likewise lament us that we have likewise forgotten him, and that which he
has done and suffered for us. That we may therefore the better exercise our
self in this kind of meditation, it behooves often to read the history of
the passion as the four Evangelists do set forth the same, and is to be
found in certain godly books, or else to be learned at sermons, or by other
spiritual talk, so that thou must travel to have the same well fixed and
rooted in thy memory, imagining and thinking always upon it, chewing it in
thy mind, until thou find thy self so ready and prompt in it, that if thou
were apposed in any part of the history of the passion, thou might be able
to answer to it, and declare it perfectly. And to this it shall help thee often
to exercise thy self in meditation of Christ's passion. Also to this manner it
does apperteine to call to thy remembrance according to that which thou have
read or learned by books or preaching, that whatsoever thou see in thy
contemplation thy savior to have suffered, they were before figured and
foreshowen by many holy Prophets. And so thou shall know and well perceive
that the truth of that thou go about to meditate, does answer to the old
figures and ancient prophecies: the which shall minister great cause of
consolation, and more confirm thee in faith, and also chase and drive away all
other fancies which distract the mind, and make the same more attentive and
ben^ to the matter in meditation. And so this shall be as a beginning to pass
further to the other considerations.

A declaration of the second manner of meditation, which is by way of
compassion.
The second manner of meditation upon the blessed passion, which is by way of
compassion, is more acceptable to our Lord, and that is to endeavor to travel
in sorrow and grief with him. And it is also no less profitable for us, for
that, as Saint Paul says, if we will suffer with Christ, we shall also reign
together with Christ. In this kind the matter of meditation is so plentiful
and copious, that it should be long to write or meditate the same at large: and
therefore it shall suffice to consider therein two points, to the which the
other may be reduced that are used for that purpose to be considered of. The
first is, to consider the person that suffers. The second, to conside^ the
thing which he suffers: the which two points well considered of, may suffice
to move any hard heart to compassion. For what heart will not mollify o^ melt to
consider, first the qualities which do concur in the person that would suffer
being very God and man? And touching his divine nature, no man is able to
declare or comprehend neither his generation, nor his dignity, nor his
majesty, nor his highness, nor his eternity, nor yet the fulness of his
perfections. And touching his humanity, he is most noble of blood royal, the
son of ye most clear Virgin mother, formed by the operation of the holy
Ghost, the most beautiful body that ever was seen amongst men, ye most
gracious, sweet, humble, meek, ^ouing, with all other excellencies more then
can be thought. And touching the soul, in him is the fullness of grace, of
charity, of holiness, of all other noble virtues and heavenly gifts, in more
high degree then ever was communicate to any creature. And this such and so
mighty a Lord did suffer, being most innocent without any fault or sin,
more grievous payns and terrible torments then man's tongue or Angels can
express.

Now let this be the second point, that is to say, the things which he has
suffered: and thereof thou have to remember in thy meditation, how he suffered
in his body from the crown of his head to the sole of his foot, from top to
toe, yea, and in all his senses and feelings, and so running in through
discourse of them, thou shall find that there remained in him no one part nor
sense, or feeling, in the which he did not suffer so many sorts of torments
as can not be thought, yea and that in flesh most tender, delicate, and
quick to feel for the perfection of his complexion. Consider here withal
that he dyed in the flower of his age, when to live was most sweet, and death
the cause of more sorrow.

Remember also ye blasphemies they gave him, the injuries, the reproaches, the
scornings and mockings they devised against him, sometimes clothing him in one
fashion of garment, and sometimes in an other, with so many kinds of mockinges:
and finallye in spoiling and stripping him bare and crucifying him naked before
such a multitude of people that it can not be declared, and it passes man's
wit to express how great the spite and shame was they wrought against him. O
infinite heap of sorrows and reproaches so great, that there can not be found
the wit or understanding to think, nor yet tongue find words to express and
utter them: yea or how much soever they were able to think or utter, yet
should it be the least part of all that he suffered. O my Redeemer how well
worthy may those words be spoken of thee by the Prophet Jeremy: O all ye
that pass by the way consider and see, if there were ever any sorrow like unto
mine. And so truly it is, O our Lord, that like as there was never love to be
compared to thine: so also verily there was never sorrow like nor equal unto
thine, neither in quantity nor in quality, nor yet in all other circumstances
that can be imagined. How then, good brother, can thy heart hold out and not
with pity relent and melt, and with compassion be moved, when thou shall
consider these and many other things which thou may call to thy
remembrance, and which do aggrauate and make more lamentable the bitterness,
the sorrows, the torments and great injuries done to thy Savior? And this is
that he suffered in his body and to our sight outwardly, which in deed was the
least part, because much more grievous and percing were the inward sorrows,
pains and afflictions of his most blessed soul. As that his sorrow unto
death did witness which he said he felt, and also that agony which he
suffered in his prayer, having diverse and infinite obiectes of pains before
his glorious sight: which so troubled and tormented him, that it caused him to
sweat that bloody sweat, trickling down from his face and body to the
ground. The causes of that so great heaviness and affliction of his blessed
soul, may in our meditation be gathered to be these: First the consideration
he had of the sins of all people from the beginning of the world in time
past, time present, and time to come: the number, the malice, and wickedness,
the abomination he both saw, and evidently knew, and plainly understood, how
great injury and dishonor they committed thereby against his eternal father,
whom he above all other things loved, and desired to honor, the which did
grieve and torment him more then all those outward torments. Secondly he
sorrowed for the unkindness and unthankfulness of men, and chiefly Christians,
for whom he gave his life and offered him self to so great and bitter pain,
and yet he saw they would not endeavor nor begin to know, nor esteem or care
to help them self with so great and inestimable benefit: and so through
their own fault he should not gain by his grievous passion and death that
fruit for the which he traueled so sore, and which he might have had, if they
them selves would have disposed their good wills thereto, which did more
grieve him then death it self. And that he plainly shows where he lamenteth
by the mouth of the Prophet Esaias, saying, in vain have I traueled, and without
cause and fruit have I consumed my strength.

Thirdly he sorowed much the damnation of Judas, and of so great a multitude of
people otherwise, whom he knew should be damned for despising of that most
wholesome medicine he should leave for them in his precious blood: and that by
how much the more with infinite charity he desired their health and
salvation, so much the more it grieved him to see their perdition, and also
considering the inestimable riches they lost, and the horrible torments
wherein they should for ever be punished. This was a cause of more bitter
sorrow to him, then the cup of his passion.

Fourthly the representation of that sword of sorrows which he knew should
pass through the virgin heart of his most dear mother, was likewise a cause of
great grief and sadness. For he knew she would accompany him in the middle of
his torments, and the sight of her did increase the same through the tender
compassion he had of her. And likewise he did sorrow and pity the solitarines,
cares, and travels his disciples should be left in, and all his friends both
present, and all other his elect that should come unto the end of the world,
of whose persecutions, torments and tribulations he did no less grieve at and
feel, then the head does feel pain and grief when any of his members does
suffer. See then how diverse sorts of sorrows, besides many other, a man may
call to remembrance and meditate, that perced and ran through his most
sacred soul, and those he felt, every pain by it self, the one not letting
the grief of the other, and that without all consolation or comfort, without
ease or rest, and being forsaken of all parts, as he declared upon the cross,
when he said: O God my god why have thou forsaken me? And as it is said of him
in an other place, That he was made as a man without help. For so it pleased
his entier love the more to suffer for us, and so to make the greater
satisfaction to the justice of God. O love without measure, O infinite
clemency and pity most evidently declared, in that thou would show thy
self cruel to thy self, to be pitiful toward us: And that thou more
esteemedst our health, then thy own comfort and life. Seeing that being
deprived of all comfort and help, thou wast drowned in a bottomless pit of
so great griefs and sorrows, and wast content to be swallowed up as an other
Jonas in the belly of the whale of death. What man then can find in his heart
to be so void of all pity, that thinking upon these things, will not be
mollified and moved to compassion? Seeing he would be sorry (I trow) for the
greatest enemy he had, if he should see him in like torment of body and soul
without all ease and comfort?

Lo then, my dear brother, how in these points hitherto is declared what was
ye person that suffered, and what he suffered as well in body as in soul:
wherein thou shall find sufficient matter to stir thee to compassion, which
is the end we purposed in this part. For if thou meditate and consider in thy
mind after this sort this holy mystery, it can not be but if thou remember
well the aforesaid things with good attention and ^euotion, it shall move and
break ^hy heart were it never so hard, ^eing that the very stones in the
street brake and shiuered in pieces, in the death of ye very same thy Savior.

A declaration of the third manner of meditation, by way of contrition and
compunction.
The third manner we purposed to teach thee how to meditate on the blessed
passion, is by the way of contrition and compunction: the end whereof is, to
have an inward sorrow and repentance of thy sins committed against the
majesty of God: and to find out the fruit of this, which is not a little, it
behooves a man to ground him self upon this verity, that all which christ our
redeemer has suffered, was for the sins of the world. In so much that if man
had not sinned, Christ had not suffered nor dyed, for so the divine scripture
affirms, that for the sins of the people he was stricken of his ^ternal
father, and that he laid upon his shoulders the sins of ^s al, and that he
was scourged and wounded for our iniquity, and beaten and buffeted for our
^eseruing. And this verity is ^onfirmed by many other au^horities, as well of
the old as ^he new Testament. Now then this so being, when thou shall be
disposed to make discourse and occupy thy mind in meditation of the death and
passion of thy Redeemer, thou haste to think verily, that thou wast the cause
of all those sorrows, torments, and injuries, which thou see him to have
suffered. For notwithstanding he suffered and dyed for all, yet nevertheless
he dyed as well for thee alone, as he dyed for all. So that thou may truly
say with Saint Paul, that he was offered for thee, that he was scourged for
thee, that he was nailed on the Cross for thee, and dyed for thee. And
likewise that thy sins killed him, thy pride crowned him with thorn, thy
dishonesties and filthy life scourged him, thy drunkenness and gluttony gave
him the eysel and gall, thy disorderlye doings and sins were the causes of
his grievous sorrows, and that thy sins were those many dogs and great bulls,
of whom he said he was environed or compassed round about: and so when thou
shall behold him in the pi^^full image where Pilate she^eth him to the Jews
when he ^ayde, Behold the man: then ^^so remember that our Lord says the
very same words unto thee: Behold, O man, the reward I have received for
thee, Behold how I am handled for thee, Behold how I suffer the scourge of
thy deseruings, Behold what thy unthankfulness has caused me to have, Behold
the deformed picture and image which thy sins have given me, in recompense of
my good will to make thee partaker of my beauty. Of this consideration we sha^
soon conceive in our mind^ what an horrible thing sin is which in such sort
has handle^ the son of God, and how abominable the filth thereof is which
has outwardly so berayed, darkened, stained and soyled him, which is the very
myrror and glass without spotte, the brightness of eternal life. This well
considered and called to thy remembrance, shall strike into thy heart great
hatred and repentance of thy sins, which were the cause of so sore pains and
punishments of thy Redeemer which never committed sin, neither any guyle
was ever ^ou^d in his mouth. And so much ^he more thou ought to sor^ow and
lament thy sins, by ^ow much the oftener thou have ^allen into the^. For
every time thou have sinned as the Apostle says, so often thou have gone about
to crucify and despise the son of God. And if they for their part should
repent them selves and be grievously sorye, which once only offended him
mortally and crucified him: how much more ought thou to repent and be sorry,
which haste crucified him so many times. This consideration and remembrance
may strike into thee sometimes such sorrow and fear of thy self, that it
shall provoke thee to say these or the like words: Ah my God and gracious
Lord, where was my judgment and wit, when I was so bold to commit such
sins against thy divine majesty? where was my understanding that could not
remember how that eury time I sinned I went about to crucify thee again? how
is it possible that I should employ my hands to offend thee, thou having thy
hands nailed on the cross to save me? how could I open my mouth to blaspheme
thee, thou having opened thy mouth so often to pray for me? how is my heart
become so hard and stubborn to love thee and obey thee, seeing thine heart
with a spear even through perced, to show the great love thou barest me? Thou
shall not only learn by this consideration, how to hate and be sorry for thy
sins passed, but also it shall move thee with more earnest purpose ever after
to fly such sins, fearing again to run unto the horrible abomination to
go about to crucify Christ again, and likewise cause thee to be afraid of
the great punishment which thou should deserve, if with new sins thou go
about to defile thy self again. If the son of a Prince would be afraid when
for the fault that he him self commits, he does see his page or slave
beaten: how much more ought the slave to fear, when he sees the son of the
Prince beaten for ye fault which he the slave him self commits? Fear thou
then and tremble, miserable wretch, seeing for thy fault the son of God thy
king and Lord is beaten and so cruelly handled, and call to thy remembrance
the words he spoke to the women that wept when they saw him ^eare the cross:
If they do this ^n the green tree, what shall be ^one in the dry wood? That is
^o say, If in Christ which is the ^reene tree, full of the leaves of most holy
words and fruits of most excellent works, so severe punishment is used, for
that he has taken upon him our sins: what shall be done to thee which art a
dry withered tree yielding no good fruits, neither of patience nor of
charity, nor of any virtue, nor yet is there to be seen in thee so much as ye
leaves of words profitable to thy self or any other, and much less any one
flower of lively desire to amend thine own life? If thou then shalt be a
tree not only barren and fruitless, but also vicious and laden with most
evil and wicked fruits: wha^ shall become of thee, but that which is used to
be done of the like tree, that is, to be cut down and cast into the fire? And
that shall thou have worse then any other tree, for that the fire of other wood
is soon consumed, but thy fire shall be everlasting. See therefore how this
meditation of Christ's holy passion shall cause thee to sorrow for thy sin
passed, and to fear the sins to come, because thou would not willingly fall
into the justice of god the which thou see so rigorou^ly and sharply executed
upon thy savior, in that he was offered to pay thy ransom.

The fourth manner of meditation, which is by way of imitation or following.
The fourth manner how to meditate and consider upon the blessed passion, we
said it was by the way of imitation, which is of much fruit, and highly
commended by holy men. For as the chief of the Apostles S. Peter says, one
cause why that Christ suffered for us, was, to leave us an example to follow
his steps. And Christ him self says, that he has given us an example to do
as he has done. Which so being, when thou shall occupy thy self in
meditating upon his passion, mark well the manyfold and marvelous virtues
which he teaches therein, as well in that he suffered, as in the manner of his
suffering: the which thou must desire to follow by his grace as much as is
possible in thee, staying thy self chiefly upon the consideration of that
virtue which thou know principally to be lacking in thee. And because it may
seem impossible to consider all the virtues which shine in his most glorious
passion, who was the most perfect pattern of all virtue and perfection, I will
only ^et here before thy eyes those which thou ought most often to
remember, and which be most necessary for thy turn. And first to begin
with those two virtues which our Lord specially commends unto us by his
own example, and to be learned of him, saying, Learn ye of me, because I am
meek and humble of heart: Consider (I say) how perfectly he teaches them in
his blessed passion. Humility which is the foundation of all virtues, he
declares plainly in humbling him self to so shameful a death, as that of
the cross, disdaining not that the very thief Barrabas found more friendship
and favor to be delivered before him, and being content to be crucified
between two thieves.

In many other things thou may by discourse call to mind and consider that
lovely humility which he sets forth in the rest of his life, as well as in
his passion, as that in washing the feet of Judas and of his other disciples
not long before, and in being born in an ox stall or stable, with many other
examples of ye same virtue, whereof both the rest of ^s life and death are
full. For in ^s birth, in his living, and in his ^ing, he never ceased to
leave us all examples that might be of so necessary a virtue for us. He showed
also a marvelous example of meekenes in his holy passion, when he was led unto
death (as the Prophet Esa^ spoke of him) even as sheep, an^ stood as gentle as
a lamb before them who so cruelly han^led him, not once opening hi^ mouth to
speak an evil word against them which railed upon him, nor yet to threaten
the^ which tormented him. In lyk^ manner he declared his modest^ and soberness
in that clear an^ lightsome countenance of hi^ standing before the Judges an^
his accusers, and in the manner of his answering to their questions, and in that
peaceable calmnesse of mind whcih he always expressed, not once being
troubled in his countenance or changing mood, although he ^ere never so much
iniuried, and wrongfully slaundered. He ^eclared also his perfect obedience,
not only being obedient ^o his eternal Father, in the ^ommandement of death
which ^e gave him, but also declared ^he same in every thing, even ^owardes his
wicked enemies which crucified him, in doing whatsoever they willed: as in
suffering him self to be spoiled of his clothes, and again to be clothed, and
that as often as pleased them to command him: Now going to one judge, and
now unto an other, as they would have him: and finally when he was appointed
thereto, he bare the Cross whereon he should be crucified. What shall we then
say of the softness, and of the silence he observed and kept in all that
pitiful pageant of his passion? He was not desirous to multiply words nor to
answer so many injuries and blasphemies they spoke against him, neither to
defend him self against the false witness they brought forth, ne to excuse
him self of that they unjustly accused him and laid to his charge: But he
suffered patiently all things, without aunswering of any thing, even as though
he had been domme. So that he therein well fulfilled that which was written of
him: I as a deaf man did not hear, and as a domme creature which opens not
his mouth, I made no answer. And the Evangelist affirms, that even the very
judge Pilate him self did much marvel at his great silence. But much more his
invincible patience may cause us to marvel, with the which he suffered and
bare, not only the innumerable scorns, skoffes, and mockings, with other
outrages devised against him, but also the grievous sorrows and pains, the
most bitter torments they could invent to punish him withal, which were so
many and so cruel, that they might suffice to break any hard stone. Verifying
in this that which Ezechiel prophesied of him, when he likened his face to the
Diamond and hard flint, because of the hardness wherewith he bare so many blows
and buffettes, with their fists and hard gauntlets: and all with such an
invincible patience, without making resistance at all, ne yet so much as any
show of murmuring or grudging. And likewise consider how that his most fervent
and burning charity was not able to be quenched or diminished with all the
waters of those his afflictions and sorows which entered into him, and perced
even through the very midst of his most blessed soul: but rather the more
they doubled his torments, the more increased ye flame of love, by the which in
his most excessive sorows he prayed for them that crucified him, and excused
them before his father who accused and condemned him. Furthermore remember that
intier dear mercy of his, that where he saw our great miseries and calamities,
he had compassion upon us, and weeped for our sakes, he prayed for us, and
shed his most precious blood, thereby to heal and cure our grievous diseases
and dangerous wounds. Call also to mind and consider that fortitude and
magnanimity of his, who knowing (as notes the Evangelist Saint John) all
things that should be done unto him, that is to say, the great battle which
was prepared against him, and in the which he should dye with so many
grievous torments and deadly wounds: yet feared he nothing at all to march
forward to meet his enemies in the face, and offer him self into their
hands, to execute what cruelty they would upon him.

Consider also his constante perseverance, which is a virtue that crowns and
rewards all our good works: Because who so ever shall persevere and continue
in well doing to the end, he shall be saved. Which virtue is in none better
seen then in Christ, who in such sort perseuered, continued, and ^^^tly went
forward with that wor^e of our redemption he had bego^^ that neither the fear
of paine^, nor strokes, nor injuries, nor scorns, nor threatenings, foul
words nor fair promises, nor men, nor devils, could be able to make him come
down from the Cross, or leave undone any one jot of that was to be done, for
finishing of the work of our redemption which his Father had commanded him.

Nor yet leave thou here unremembered both for thy consolation and example to
follow his blessed stepps, that contempt of the world, and that his extreme
poverty, whereof he gives us notable examples both in his blessed passion and
death, and also in his life and conversation, which was full of poverty and
contempt of honor and worldly favor. But specially it is to be seen in his
passion and end of his life, because he dyed in that strait bed of the
Cross, having nothing at all to lean his head upon, standing spoiled and
naked with so great shame and ignominy in that multitude of people beholding
and gasing upon him. And in the thirst and dryness which he suffered, they
gave him not so much as a cup of water, but only bitter gal and vinegar. There
was not one that might help or comfort him with any ease or relief: but
rather those his enemies studied by all devises and inventions they could, new
kinds of pains and ways, how to vex and disgrace him.

O my God, what is that man, but if he will remember this, and mark it well,
may be ashamed to murmr, grudge, and lament him self of any grief or
adversity that he does suffer* What poverty or barennesse in the world may be
compared to thine? what abstinence, what austeritie of life, or straitness of
penance was ever so hard and sharp, which may be compared to that thou
did suffer on the Cross? what man was ever in the world so despised, so
mocked, and so persecuted, as thou waste in thy passion and death? Truly, O
Lord, he that can well remember and consider thee, may shut his mouth and
shame to lament him self at al, either of poverty, hunger, thirst, nakedness,
unkindness, or of any other lack or grief that he suffers. He may be
ashamed to see how fayntly and coldly he traueleth to follow thee, O Lord,
being set before us as an example and rule of our life. Thou see now good
brother, what order thou must observe, being after this sort occupied in thy
meditation upon the passion. Behold the pure and clear glass in the which
thou may look and learn to know and see in thy self thy faults,
deformities and defects, and then compare them together with his virtues and
perfections: because thou shalt so understand how great thy pride is, if thou
behold and have respect to his lowlynesse, meekness, and humility: how
great is thy coldness, in comparison to his tender and burning charity: and
the like of other virtues aforesaid, and many more that may be considered of,
which shall discover and open unto thee thy lackes and imperfections, thy
foulness and deformities. And so shall thou be encouraged with more diligence
to bestirre thee, to work according to this examplar and pattern showed unto
thee in this mount of most ^igh perfection, as it was said unto Moses:
Because in this imitation and conforming of thy life after the example of
Christ, consists the greatest merit thou can have in this life, and the
greatest reward prepared for thee in the life to come.

A declaration of the fyfth manner of meditation, which is in thankesgeuing.
The fifth manner of meditation upon the holy passion, is by way of
thanksgiving, which we are bound often to do. For if we ought of very
duty, because we would not fall into the vice of ingratitude, which so
much displeases God, and no less hurts us, to call often times to our
remembrance such other benefits as we ^aue received at Gods hand, and to
thank his infinite goodness and liberality for the ^ame: How much more
ought ^e so to do for the benefit of ^ur redemption, the which so much more
passes all other be^efites, as it has by our redee^er with more dear cost
and ^rice, and for our greater pro^ite, been purchased?

A great matter it was that ^e gave us a soul and body, with all our members
and sen^es, and much it is to be esteemed, that for our conservation and
benefit he has created the heavens and the earth, with so many and diverse
creatures as we see in it. But what should it have profited us to be borne into
the world, if we had not been redeemed? Of what estimation or valor might our
creation have been thought, if our redemption had lacked? For by the first we
received but our being, by this second we have received our well being. The
first thing cost our creator but little, for that he created us and all the world
with his only word, and in a short time: but as for the second, who is able
to declare how dearly and with how great expense our redeemer purchased and
bought it? Seeing that with the travels and sweat of three and thirty years,
and finally with torments and death upon the Cross he gave us life, and
repaired the world which in six days he had made.

Now if it seem to thee that thou art little bound to him for that which cost
him little, yet thou can not deny but that thou art much in his debt, and
very greatly bound unto him, for that thing he paid so dearly for. Thou shall
do then right, as the wise man gives thee counsel, not to forget the grace
and benefits thou haste received of such a benefactour, that has given his
life for thee. Consider if thou had received of any man the like benefit,
how greatly should thou have remained bound: how highly would thou have
praised him? how would thou have endeavored thy self to have served him?
And therefore thou may persuade with thy self how greatly thou art bound to
God thy Creator and Redeemer: for if thou might possibly be bound to any
other man which had delivered thee from a corporal death: how much more
ought thou to be bound to him that has delivered thee from the spiritual
death of the soul? And if thou would acknowledge thy self much beholden
to a man that had suffered a little for thee: then remember how much more
thou owe to him that is both God and man, who has suffered such pains and
torments for thee, and not only torments, but also most bitter and
shameful death, through which thy sins were cancelled and rased out of
remembrance, the might of the devil was broken to pieces, peace and
reconciliation was made with God, the gates of heaven opened, besides other
innumerable gifts given thee. And seeing thou can not better recompense this
so great debte, then to know, to love, and to be thankful to thy benefactour:
why then remember to offer to him the often sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, as the holy king and prophet David exhorts and encourages
thee to do, styrring up thy soul with those words wherewith he lifted up his
own heart and soul unto God, saying: O my soul bless the Lord, and all the
powers within me praise ye his holy name. O my soul bless thy Lord, and
forget not how great benefits he has bestowed upon thee. But yet chiefly
remember the greatest of all the rest, which is, to have delivered thy life
from eternal death, and to crown thee with mercy in his glory, if the fault be
not in thy self. As verily it shall not be, whenever thou shall declare thy
self thankful for his gifts received: And that shalt thou do in exercising
thy self to give praise and thanks to the giver thereof. And think it therefore
thy duty, as often as in this manner thou art disposed to meditate upon the
blessed passion, to remember and endeavor by all means, earnestly to give
thanks and praise for that entier loving charity of thy Savior, that would
redeem thee with his own blood, and for that incomparable patience of his, by
the which he suffered all those sorrows, injuries, mockes, and scorns, as
thou shall call to thy mind, being after this sort occupied in thy
meditation. And albeit that the giving of thanks which in this little treatise
is set in the end of every prayer, may help and serve thee to that effect:
yet nevertheless it shall further thee much, that in thy discourse of
meditation thou devise of thy self new praises and thanks giving, saying
sometimes: Thanks be to thee, O my God, for thy exceeding charity. Blessed
may thou be in thy patience, that would suffer such torments for me. O
most innocent Lamb, praised and blessed be thy meekness. Let thy Angels in my
behalf bless thee, that would so much humble thy self. And at an other
time say: When shall I be able, O my Lord, to recompense these and other so
great pains and sorrows, shames and reproaches which thou have suffered for me?
Let every spirit and creature confess thy mercies, and be thankful therefore.

And so using such other like words of praises, according as thy devotion
shall move thee.

A declaration of the sixth manner of meditation, which is by way of admiration.
The sixth manner is, according to our former division in order, of admiration:
which thy soul shall feel to be very great, if thou know once how to
exercise thy self well in that sort of consideration. And seeing that the
Prophet David used, as he affirms of him self, to consider and meditate in
his mind the marvelous works of God, so is it good reason that thou do
exercise thy self in the meditation of his most holy passion and death, which
is the most marvelous work amongst all that he has wrought. And who will
not marvel when he considers that such a one did suffer, who is the only
refuge and protection of al those that do suffer? And that he is sad and
heavy for sorrow, who is the mirth and comfort of Angels: And that he is
despised and scorned, who is that Lord before whose sight the powers of
heaven fear and tremble? Who can but wonder when he remembers that he dyed,
who is the life of all things living? O how aptly to this did the Prophet
Abacuc, understanding in the spirit of prophecy, say: Lord I considered thy
works, and I was afraid. And truly the causes of wonder be so great to make
a man muse thereat, that it is more marvel to see one not marvel and muse,
then one that does muse and marvel at it. For how can it be, dear brother,
but thou must marvel and wonder, if thou consider the greatness, the
mightiness, the highness, and the eternal majesty of him that suffered so
many kinds of pains, of injuries, of torments, and of so shameful a death?
And contrariwise, the baseness, the vileness, and the unthankfulness of men, for
whom he suffered. And if any of these things being by itself considered, have
cause sufficient to make thee marvel: what shall it be if thou join all
together that his high majesty has suffered such and so great torments for
so base and vile creatures? That is to say, that the judge of the living and
the dead was crucified between two thieves: that the king of glory which is
adored of Angels, was blasphemed of most vile men: who would not marvel? who
would not be afraid? who would not be astonnied to think upon it?

This is one thing that shall give thee copious matter to wonder and marvel:
to consider the infinite love, bounty, and mercy of God, in this work of thy
redemption declared. And thou shall no less marvel, if thou consider the
great wisdom he shows in the same his passion and cross: in that he found
out so convenient and apt mean to vanquish and overcome our adversary, even
as it were with the same weapon wherewith he overcame us. And this is it that
the Catholic Church sings: That he ordained the tree of the cross to be
the instrument and mean of our salvation: because the devil, like as he wanne
the victory over us by one tree: so likewise he might be vanquished and trodden
under foot by an other tree. Also his cross and passion was a most present
remedy for all our infirmities. For he humbling himself even to the death of
the cross, did pay sufficiently the price of our disobedience and pride:
Giving us the greatest example that might be of his humility, which is so
necessary a virtue for us, besides diverse examples else, as of despising the
world, and of many other virtues spoken of before. By means whereof we may
know our own vices and amend them, and chiefly renounce and forsake our
self-love, which is the root of all vice.

Also the remembrance of his Cross and passion may encourage us to suffer and
patiently bear the manyfolde travels, miseries, and griefs, whereof our life
is full: For what greater comfort can there be had then to behold Christ
nailed on the Cross? whose wounds are sufficient to heal our wounds: whose
pains and grief if we well consider them, may cause us not so impatiently to
take our troubles whatsoever they be. And likewise to inflame and kindle our
love toward him, there can not be found a better mean then to lay before
our eyes how greatly and entierly he loved us, in suffering so much for us, and
that he has left us so great riches of his mercies, of Sacraments, of
examples, of co^forts, of satisfactions, of faith, of hope, of devotion, of
consolation. Behold Christ with diligent eyes upon the Cross, and thou shall
find hid therein so great and so wonderful treasures, that they will cause
thee to cry out and say with Saint Paul: O the dep^nesse of the riches, of
the wisdom, and knowledge of God. Thou shall find also good cause to
marvel, if thou consider his great power and might which he showed in his
passion: for so much as thereby he overcame the devil, and being exalted on
the Cross, he drew all things to him, as he said before, and dying he
destroyed death, triumphing over the world and hell.

Thou shall likewise find good cause to wonder, if thou mark well the justice
he observed in his passion and death, in that he would not our sins and
offenses should remain without recompense and satisfaction, and by it give
remission and pardon of them, and that more freely and fully, then of our part
was due or deserved. And by how much more thou art willing to consider and
search out the secrets of the Cross, so much the more high mysteries shall be
revealed unto thee, and cause thee not only to marvel, but also to be greatly
amassed. And then shalt thou know that Saint Paul the Apostle spoke not
without great cause, when he said: He would preach none other, nor would
learn to know any other thing, but Jesus Christ and him crucified.

By this then hitherto said, thou may gather and perceive how copious matter
thou haste to marvel and wonder at, when thou art in this manner disposed to
meditate upon the death and passion of thy Redeemer. All which the better to
retain in memory, thou may reduce and bring them to these points.

The first is, to consider the infinite highness and majesty of thy Lord
that suffered for thee. The second is, the servile and base estate of them for
whom he suffered. Thirdly, the wonderful torments and injuries which he
suffered. Fourthly, the wisdom, power, and justice which he declared in his
blessed passion and death. These things in manner before specified and others
that may happen to come into thy remembrance whiles thou art in thy
meditation, if thou consider them as thou ought attentively, shall minister
occasion unto thee, greatly to marvel and wonder at this divine mystery.

A declaration of the seventh manner of meditation, which is by way of hope and
rejoicing.
The seventh manner of meditation we said was by way of rejoicing and hope:
Which kind of meditation is very necessary also sometime to use. For when a
man shall with him self consider, how great the wickedness and evil of sin
is, how odious it is, and how much it displeases God, seeing for the due
punishment thereof, and for to repaye and repair the great losses it had
caused in the world, our Lord him self came down from heaven, and after so
great travels and paynefull life, at the last he would suffer so bitter
passion and death: And when he shall likewise call to mind, that he has run
and fallen into his heinous evil and sinfulness, not only once, but many
times and in diverse sorts: he shall then rest so sad and dismayed, that he
shall need of some special help for to comfort him, that he despair not in
him self when he remembers that he shall appear before the judgment seat
of the fearful judge, to yield the account of all his life. To remember this,
it has made not only many sinners to fear and tremble, but also just men
and persons of holy life, as is to be seen by those words which that just
m^n Job spoke: That even as the maryner fears when he sees the swelling
waves of the seas, so he feared God. And this fear does often grow to a man,
when he remembers the latter day: because he knows that to be true which is
spoken by the Prophet David, that no man living shall be justified before God.
Now if the just shall scarsly be saved, as Saint Peter says, how shall the
sinner do, which remembers how greatly and how many ways he has offended
God, for the which he has deserved to be condemned, not once, but many times.

Therefore, good brother, when thou shall find thy self to stand in like fear
and despair, one of the best remedies that thou can have to comfort thy
self and pull up thy heart again, is, to remember and bethink thy self what
thy most merciful Savior has done and suffered for thee. The very same
remedy the prophet David signified that he found, when he said: My soul is
troubled within me self, and therefore will I remember me of thee in the land
of Jordan, and Hermon, and in the little hill. In which words he teaches us
that the remedy a man may have, feeling himself sorrowful, sad, and troubled
in spirit, for the remembrance of his sins, or for any other thing: is to
remember him self again what Christ did for us in his life, which is
signified by ye land of Jordan and Hermon where he was baptized, preached, and
was conversant. And likewise to call to mind that which he suffered, which is
noted by the little hill, that is to say, at Caluarie, where he was crucified.
When therefore thou shalt see thy self troubled in mind, sorrowful, sad,
and afflicted, considering the bottomless pit of thy sins, of thy
blindness passed, and of the myserie present wherein thou find thy self:
turn then thy consideration to think upon the deepnesse of the mercy of thy
most gracious Lord, who for thee and thy salvation came down from heaven and
was made man, and for thy sake was crucified and died. Consider therefore the
plentyfull redemption he has left for thee, and that if thou have offended
much, he has much satisfied for thee, if thou be willing and diligent to
know how by his satisfaction to help thy self. If the multitude of the sins
thou have committed do fear thee, because thou have thereby justly deserved to
be condemned, comfort thy self in thinking how he has fully satisfied the
justice of God, because thou should participate of his mercies. If thou
faint, despair, or else miscrust thy own poverty, and the small good service
thou have done toward god: remember thy self of the great riches and merits
he has left thee by means of his passion, in the which thou may chiefly
behold and put all thy trust. But yet so that thou fail not to endeavor thy
self to the uttermost of thy power to serve and please him. And remember also
how that Lord which in time to come shall be thy judge, is at this present
thy advocate to god the Father eternal, to whom he shows those his five
blessed wounds, with the marks and signs wherewith it was his pleasure to be
seen after his resurrection: because his heavenly father should thereby be
inclined to have mercy upon us, and to us they should be a testimony of the
love he bare us. Which both the one and the other shall give thee great
occasion and holdefast of hope and comfort.

Moreover consider the number of Sacraments he has left thee in this Church,
as strong effectuous medicines and salues, for all the wounds, sores, and
infirmities which thou can have.

Remember also that, even as the Apostle says, better and louder cries the
blood which Christ shed, then the blood of Abel. Because the blood of Abel
asked vengeance against his brother that shed it: but the precious blood of
Christ asks mercy and pardon for them that shed it, and also for all them
that trust in it. See therefore how great hope and joy thou may receive in
using of this kind of meditation upon the holy passion. And the order thou
ought to observe herein, is, that when thou art disposed to meditate upon
that which thy Redeemer has suffered, then assuredly accounte and think all
was done for thy sake, and that the plentiful fruit and benefit which by
means of his passion and death he has purchased, was for thee and to thy
behoue, and he would that thou should be partaker thereof, if the fault be
not in thy self. So that thou may assuredly believe, that his torments be
thine, that his tears and sorrows are thine, the infinite price of his
bloodshedding to be thine, and finally that all his death and passion is thine.
For as we have said, for thee he suffered, and he graciously would thou
should be partaker of the fruit thereof, so to understand what precious
treasure thou have laid up in him. Which consideration shall so ease thee of
thy pain and fear, and give thee so great hope and gladness, that it shall
cause thee to say with Saint Paul: God forbid that I should rejoice or
glory in any thing else, but in the Cross of my Lord Jesus Christ. And
worthily, for in it thou have an infinite treasure, by means whereof thou have
obtained salvation and reconciliation between God and thee, and thy sins be
forgiven thee, thou art received for the son of god, the gate of heaven is
opened unto thee, and with it and by it all goodness in one heap is cast unto
thee. See then what cause thou have to rejoice and leap for gladness
considering this. But here I must not forget to advise thee, that when after
this sort thou have meditate upon this holy mystery, thou must remember that
this hope and joy which thou shall feel in finding thy self so enriched and
full of spiritual treasures: they cause thee not to wax cold, negligent, and
slouthful in good works, but rather that thereby thou be stirred and pricked
forward in fervent and earnest love of God, and to serve him: As Well to show
thy self, as good reason is, thankful to thy benefactor, as also lest he take
away again from thee the same his gifts and riches, as it has happened to
others for their unthankfulness and negligence.

And thus much touching this manner of meditation.

A declaration of the eight manner of meditation, by the way of love.
The eight kind and sort of meditation upon the passion, is by way of love,
which we have placed here lastly, because according to the mind of Saint
Paul: Like as the end of the commandments is charity or love proceeding
from a pure heart: So also the principal purpose and end of meditation upon
this holy mystery and others, is, that the soul may remain inflamed in the
love of God. According to that which the holy prophet David understood when he
said: In my meditation the fire shall be kindled, that is to say, my soul
shall be inflamed with the fire of the love of God and true charity. And among
all meditations in the which this heavenly fire is kindled, the chiefest is
this of the passion and death of our Redeemer. Because if there be any thing
that has force to draw the love of one man to love an other, it is to know
that he is loved of the other: and so there can not be a thing in the world
more apt to draw the heart of a Christian to love God, then to consider how
God first loved him, the which he may very well understand by that which he
did and suffered for him. And if it be the greatest sign that a friend can
show of that love he bears toward an other, to give his own life for him,
as he our Lord him self says, this sign then have we most manifestly of the
love he bare us, for that his will was to give his most precious life for us,
or rather as Saint Paul concludes, a greater sign can we not have of his
innumerable love, then to know his will was to offer him self unto death,
even the death of ye cross, and that not only for his friends, but also for
his enemies. If then thou were negligent, slothful, and cold to love God
before thou knew how much he loved thee: now thou do know it by such
and so many signs and arguments, endeavor to him which has so loved thee.
Call to mind in this mystery how streatly thou art beloved of all the whole
Trinity, seeing the father so much loved thee, that he gave his only
begotten son unto death for thee. Remember well those words of the Evangelist
S. John, which says in this manner: So God loved the world that for it he gave
his only begotten son. In which words thou may know the greatness of the
person of whom thou art so beloved, and that is the Father almighty maker of
heaven and of earth: and also the greatness of his love wherewith he loved thee
is manifest, by the greatness of the gift which he gave thee, and that is his
only begotten son, who has the same like infinite power, bounty and majesty
with the father. And this such a son he has graciously given thee, that
taking thy humanity or manhood, he might dye in the same for thee and redeem
thee, in such sort as the Apostle says, God spared not his own son, to
pardon us his miserable servants. O inestimable love, and greater then any
understanding can comprehend. And likewise the love of the Son was nothing
less then this of the Father, in that he came down from heaven and was
incarnate for thee, spente his life and dyed for thee, that by such means he
might in diverse sorts be given to thee: In birth as thy companion, in life as
thy comfort, in his last Supper as thy food, in death as price for thee, in
heaven as a reward for thee. And as the love of the Father and the Son was
toward thee, so was the love of the holy Ghost, who willed and wrought
together with the father and the son, thy salvation and redemption. Now the
most blessed and glorious Trinity has so loved thee, how can thou be so
slack in re^dring to him love for love, seeing that love can not be repayed
but with love.

And if thou understand not this exceeding love of God by other benefits
which he has done for thee, as in thy creation and conservation: consider yet
what thou have received of him in thy reparation and redemption, and then shall
thou perceive how true those words be which he spoke by the prophet Jeremy:
With perpetual love have I loved thee, and therefore have I drawn thee to me
in having mercy upon thee. These be the sharp arrows which the kingly prophet
David speaks of, sufficient to pearce any hard heart. These be the new wars
which the scripture speaks of, that a king is from heaven elected to subdue
and conquer men of the earth: Differing from the first, which he made with
thretnings and fear. These be the ropes of Adam, and the cords of charity
with which the prophet O say says he would draw men unto him. Because if they
will work according to the use of reason, which they have in respect they be
reasonable men, they ought not to be more unreasonable then brute beasts, who
suffer them selves to be drawn with ropes and halters in finding them selves
forced and constrained to love such as loves them.

When thou therefore shalt meditate upon the death and passion of thy
Redeemer, let the principal end of thy travel be to be ravished in the love
of such a Lord that has so loved thee, and by so many profes has well
declared his love toward thee: and assure thy self that al those stripes and
bloodye wounds which thou beholdest in him, be voices crying and testifying
his dear and true love toward thee. Behold him upon the Cross thrust
through with a spear, and thou shalt perceive how he provoke and forces
thee to love him. His feet so nailed do show that he will tarry for thee, if
thou will return and come again to him. His arms so stretched do signify
that he desires to embrace thee. His head so bowed down, does signify that
he will give thee the kiss of grace. That side of his opened with a spear,
does manifestly show that he is willing to give thee a place in his heart, where
thou may rest thy self quietly and surely. And what other thing might he do
for thee, which he has not done? And what other thing does he more require of
thee, but in that acknowledging this his love, thou answer him again with thy
love? O most sweet Jesus the true lover of men, what is he, if he well
consider this and know it, that can deny the thing thou requirest of him, and
for so many causes is due unto thee? And how can any man excuse himself to
love thee, being pricked forward and provoked with so many motions and sweet
callings of thy divine love?

Be not therefore, my good brother, unthankful, nor so dull to understand
this his so great love, for the which it should behoue thy heart to melt even as
the wax, whenever thou remembrest that he loved thee first, and that he
washed thee with his precious blood. Deny him not the tribute of love thou
owe him, for although he have forgiven thee other thy debtes, yet this he
will not discharge or acquit thee of, but rather affirms that he came to put
fire on the earth, and would that it should burn continually. And in figure
of this he commanded in the old law, that the fire should stand always
kindled upon his altar. The which is not so much meant of the material fire,
as of the spiritual, which is our love toward him, and that he would should
always burn upon the altar of our heart, because that sacrifice is always
acceptable to him which is offered with such fire. And because this may be
nourished and maynteined, it behooves that even as the Priests in the old
Law did bring of all sorts of material wood for to maynteyne and keep in
that material fire: So thou must be careful to lay on that spiritual
wood, and that is of the Cross, of the whippes and rods, of the spear and
other instruments of that holy passion, whereupon if thou devoutly meditate, it
shall stand thee in stead of wood most fit to kindle thy devotion and love
toward God.

Let the conclusion therefore be of that which we have hitherto said: that in
meditating after this manner upon this holy mystery, and knowing by it how much
thou art bound (as is declared) for that which he has suffered for thee, and
much more for the love in which he suffered, and that was much more then his
excessive torments: thou must render and yield unto him the best recompense
thou can, which is but love for love. And this thou shall do, if thou be
mind ^ull always to have thy heart inflamed in love toward him, and melting
with the meditation and remembrance of his tender love toward thee.

Thus then as thou see we have declared unto thee all the foresaid orders of
meditation upon the passon: but yet for thy better exercise thou may help
thy self with these aduises following.

Certain aduises which may be observed in the said meditations, or in any
other.
Now thou have seen all the aforesaid kinds and sorts of meditation, it does
remain for a conclusion and accomplishment of these instructions, to give thee
briefly certain aduises whereby thou may with more fruit and sweetness
exercise thy self in the same. The which may not only help thee to
meditate upon the mystery of Christ's passion, but also in any other
meditation else upon his life, or prayers, which thou do intend to mark.
And in these aduises thou shall learn three things. The first, what order thou
must observe before thou entrest into thy meditation. Secondarily, the manner of
proceeding in thy meditation. And the third, what thou should do when thou
haste finished thy meditation.

The first advise to be had before thy meditation, is to be learned of the wise
man, who counsels thee that before thou pray, thou prepare thy mind or
heart. Which preparation consists in endeavoring to go about this holy
exercise with the greatest clennesse and pureness of heart and mind thou
can. For even as we should see always that the vessel be well washed and
clean, in which we purpose to put any kind of precious liquor: Agreeable to
that which our Savior says: That men use not to put new wine into old
bottels. So also to receive the new wine or must of that heavenly love, and
precious liquor of grace, devotion and other gifts that the mercy of God is
willing to bestow upon us: it is necessary that the vessel which should
receive it, that is the soul, be pure and made fresh. And the more washed and
clean it shall be, so much the feruenter and better disposition it shall
have, to receive more abundantly this most precious liquor. It shall be
therefore good, before thou begin to meditate, that thou examine thy
conscience, and make clean and sweep the dust and filthe which thou find
therein, the which commonly are wont to be venial sins, that is to say,
vain thoughts, idle words, negligences, and other like things which do
easily cleave and stick fast in us, or rather let and take away that perfect
holiness and purity with which a man ought to endeavor earnestly to appear
before the sight of God. This thou may do in asking God humbly pardon for
thy particular faults, which thou shall remember to have committed: for which
and for other general defectes that thou can not remember, thou may say
at the beginning of thy meditation, the general confession, with the hymn of
the holy Ghost, or one Pater noster, and an Aue Maria, or some other prayer, as
shall seem best for thy purpose, desiring God of his grace to spend that time
in meditation, with such attention, reverence, and devotion as thou art bound
to, and shall be most acceptable to his divine majesty.

The second advise is, that thou endeavor so to set thy things in order before
thou pray, that thy thought and care of that which thou have after to do,
molest and trouble thee not, or let thee in thy prayer. The which thou may
do, if thou first dispatche all things thou haste to do, if thou may
commodiously: or else in making accounte with thy self, not to have any other
care or business in the world, but that which thou go about, and that is
the gretest and chiefest thou can do, if that upon thine obedience there be
none other thing appointed thee in charge. Finally thou must endeavor to be
free and rid clean from all other cares and thoughts, when thou give thy
self to this exercise: remembering that when the Patriarch Abraham went with
his son Isahac to offer him in sacrifice, when they came to the foot of the
hill where he should sacrifice him, he said to his servant that waited upon
him, Tarry there beneath a while, till I come again unto you after we have
prayed to God: Even so likewise shall it be requisite that thou command thy
thoughts and cares to tarry without, when thou go to the place where thou
must offer to God the sacrifice of thy prayer. As we read a certain holy man
did always at the Church door every time he went in to pray, and then he
made his prayer with more fruit of devotion and comfort, when the soul so
rested in solitary manner to it self, rid and discharged from all other
impertinent cares and thoughts, so that he might truly say as the spouse in the
Canticles: I to my well-beloved, and my well-beloved to me. In such sort that for
the time present she harken to none other voice or company.

The third counsel is, that thou give thy self to this holy exercise with a
right and perfect intent: for that there be diverse respects and ends with
which many go to prayer and meditation: some to the end they may receive: some
to taste of spiritual comfort, which at other times they have proved: Some
to desire of God some particular grace, gift, or virtue, which many desire,
knowing that to be the principal mean to obtain it: Some to represent before
God as their most merciful father, their travels, troubles, and temptations,
their spiritual and corporal necessities, desiring to be delivered from them.
Finallye, other some go to pray, to fulfill a good use and custom they have
every day so to exercise them self, or because they be upon their obedience
so commanded to do. And albeit these and such other like causes may be both
good and laudable: yet the principal purpose and end of this thy exercise:
must be for pure love and only for the glory of God. So that thy own
particular necessity or need, or thine own comfort, gain, and profit ought
not so much to move thee, as the end and desire thou should have in all
things to seek for the glory of God and to please him, even as the Apostle
counsels thee, that al things which we do, be for the glory of God. This
than being thy principal scope and intent, it shall cause thee with cheerful
heart and willing mind to meditate or pray, considering that God would that
those gifts which his servants do offer unto him, and the service that thy
do, be offered and done cheerfully and willingly. And this wise thou shall
always find fruit and contentation of mind in thy prayer and meditation, if
perchance thou find thy self dry without spiritual taste in it.

These three aduises which we have hitherto declared of the cleanness of
conscience and quietness of mind from all other business, thereby to come with
more attentive pure mind to the glory of God, may help this before thou begin
to pray. And the other three no less necessary aduises, are to be used
during the time of thy prayer: of the which the first is, that the mysteries
which thou do meditate upon, be not curiously searched into of thee, either
with too much speculation, in going about subtillye to seek out diverse
points, arguments, comparisons and imaginations, the better to understand
them, where as in deed it does rather distract the understanding and hinder
devotion, according to that which the wise man says: That he which is
inquisitiue of his majesty, shall be oppressed of his glory. And the heavenly
spouse says to the soul his spouse: Turn away thy eyes from me because they
make me fly away: which is to be understand by curious eyes, with which she
would behold him in prayer. Wherefore endeavor to stand in it, with a simple
and humble sight of the mystery which thou shall think upon, beholding it
inwardly, or outwardly, as though thou saw it present before thee. To the
which it may help thee to have before thy eye the image of ye mystery which
thou shall meditate upon, and with the only sight and regard of it
outwardlye content thy self, without busy discoursings of the mind, or
imaginations upon other things impertinent. Nor yet must thou do any violence
to thy will, that is, to wrest out as it were by force some tears or sensible
devotion: because all this hurts, heals, and helps, little to that thou
go about. Therefore study to meditate quietly and closely the points which
are set before thee, abiding with silence and hope, as the scripture says,
the grace that God shall vouchsafe to give thee.

The second advise is, that if in meditation thou shall find thy self over
dry and without taste of devotion, or else to much distract with diverse
cogitations and wavering of the mind: thou must not therefore be troubled, nor
yet cease to go forward in thy exercise, but in such case thou may help
thy self with some colloquies and talk with thy Lord God, to whom thou shalt
open thy distraction and weariness, desiring him to help thee to drive away
those busy flies of thoughts and imaginations which draw unto thee, to wast
the sweet ointment of thy devotion.

If thou will this do, with that faith, humility, and patience as is
requisite thereto: God which regards and hears the prayers of the humble,
will have compassion of the trouble thou do suffer, and will visit and
comfort thee presently, or after when it shall be expedient for thee.

For so we read in the book of Genesis, that Abraham offering on a time
sacrifice to God of certain beasts which he had killed, there came byrds to
eat the flesh of those beasts, and to let the sacrifice: so that he was
troubled and occupied a good part of the day in driving away those birds, that
they should not come near the sacrifice, whereby he deserved of God to be
visited and comforted with a quiet and pleasant vision, which he sent him,
wherein he received a great revelation. The which is a figure of the reward
that our Lord God is wont to give afterward to them who busily drive away
the little birds of temptation and lothsomenesse, which commonly happen to
them that offer the sacrifice of prayer. And therefore the wise man says that
the end of prayer is better than the beginning.

Because that albeit a man in the beginning feels him self cold and
distract, yet afterward in the discourse of his meditation, he gathers
himself to gether, and calling his wits to him, begins to be fervent, and
fyndeth consolation. And if so be he fails of this at one time, yet it is
supplied at an other.

The third advise is, that if contrariwyse it happen thee to find devotion
and sweetness at the first or second point of that thou haste to meditate
upon, than stay thy self in consideration of that as long as thy devotion
shall endure and the inward feelyng thereof, without having any doubt or
scruple at all for not passing any further to meditate upon the other points
remaining. Because it avails more to meditate a few things well with
devotion and fruit, then many without taste and sweetness. And chiefly that
those points which for this cause are left vnmeditated upon at one time,
may be taken in hand another time, and recompensed in thy meditations
following. And of this that may be well understand which saint Paul affirms:
that it is better to speak five words with a spiritual feeling or edifying,
then ten thousand without attention and spirit.

With these three aduises thou may serve thy self, and which I trust shall
be profitable unto thee, for the time thou art in thy meditation: and after
thou have done, thou may use the other three which we shall here declare
unto thee.

Let therefore ye first advise be, that when in prayer God shall vouchsafe of
his goodness to endue thee with some inspiration and devotion, or other
particular gift or grace: that thou then endeavor to keep it diligently, and
not suffer thy self to be cold strayghtwayes after thy meditation with
unprofitable thoughts, imaginations or other distractions or contrary
occupations: but rather endeavor to walk all day as closely with thy wits
gathered to thy self as thou can, remembering to thy self often that which
in thy prayer was commicate unto thee, and of thy good purpose and desire which
thou foundest in it: Because it may so rest more fixed in thy mind, and to
the intent that devotion and feruencie which thou receiuedst whiles thou
did pray be not lost. And after this sort thou shall fulfill that which
the wise man counsels thee, saying: With all diligence keep thy heart,
because of it proceeds life. And also it shall avail thee to go all day with
such care and diligence, because thou shall not so easily fall into sin as
at other times thou were used to do. And because God may give thee sometime in
the day that devotion and consolation, the which was not given thee at the
time of thy prayer, as it has often happened to many: This diligence and care
does likewise profit thee, in that thou may be the readier and better
disposed to make thy prayers and meditations afterward. For even as water
which is already hot may be so kept in the same heat with a little fire, the
which if ye suffer it once to be lost, it becomes cold, and is not without
more pains again made hot: So likewise chances it to the soul, in
preserving or suffering it to loose the heat which it once received. And to
this end the blessed men in times paste did use oftentimes in the day those
kind of prayers which in Latin they termed Iaculatoriae, which were no more
but certain short eleuations or lifting up of the mind and sweet sighs,
which they speedily shot up to God, that by them as it were with certain
styckes laid to the fire, they mayntayned and continued that heat still which
they had before received. And this a man may do easily although he be
occupied about diverse other business and exercises.

The second advise is, that sometime in the week or when thou best may, thou
find a time to examine thy self, and to see whether thou have gone forward,
or gotten any profit of thy praying. And when thou shall see that thou have
profited nothing at all, nor found in thy self any difference of one time
better than an other: then examyne and try out from what cause it proceeded,
and thou shalt always find, that it happened of some fault or lack in thy
self, either for not mortifying thy self, which is necessary in this exercise,
or for not doing it with due care and diligence, or for not following the
aduises which are given thee, or for some other negligence of thine own.

And for what cause soever thou shall understand that this small increase of
devotion and profiting has proceeded, procure yet to remedy the same, and
make amends for the time to come of the fault passed. And that thou may
understand the better whether thou have gotten any fruit or no of thy prayer,
thou must note that which nouices or young beginners in prayer or other their
exercises have chiefly to regard, which is, the mortification of their
passions, their sensual appetites and affections, and to purge and cleanse well
their souls. And those which have further entered and proceeded, ought
chieflye to labor and care to attain the virtue which they lack, and to
increase and augment the same, specially their charity. And those which be
more ancient as it were, and more forwardly entered into perfection, have to
travel for the perfect union and conformity with God in making one spirit
with him as much as shall be possible for them, although sometime the exercise
of the one of these may attend to the end and effect of the other. According
to this advise then you may understand when you have profited more, or less,
or nothing at all, and so study to remedy that shall be convenient.

The third and last advise is, that although perchance it seem in long time
thou have little profited, or that thou art nothing given to this exercise of
meditation, nor feel in thy self that devotion, nor such taste therein as
thou would: Yet ought thou not therefore to despair or slack to
proceed forward. Because that even as in other good works, perseueraunce is
it that makes all perfect, and crowns every virtue with reward: So also it
happens in this so holy and necessary a work of prayer, that by how much
the more thou shall persevere and continue thy good exercise therein, so much
thou shall the more merit, and God shall give thee in process of time so much
the more comfort and reward, as thou have felt thy self dry and faint in
the beginning.

For oftentimes God permits that some are found dry and bare of all
devotion, without all taste and sauourinesse in their meditation: to the intent
that how much the more they labor and travel to persevere and continue in the
same, so much the more comfort and fruit they receive afterward in reward
of their perseverance. For even as God did in the creation of the world first
frame the earth to be hard and dry, and then covered it with waters, that so it
might fructify and produce plants of diverse green and fruitful trees: so
also the same our Lord God permits some souls to be found in their prayers
dry and barren, without taste or savor of devotion at al, that by their
patience in perseueraunce of this travel of mind and lothsomnesse, they come
afterward to bring forth fair fruit and plentiful of much virtue and grace
which shall be bestowed on them. And that God does signify unto us in saying
by the Prophet Jeremy: I remembered her because she did follow me in the
deserts and wilderness, and in that land that is not sown. Which is to
understand of the soul that perseuered and continued in seeking after God,
although she felt her self dry and desert, without feeling or taste of
devotion or consolation. And the same affirms Christ our redeemer in the
Gospel, saying: In your patience ye shall possess your souls. Take more
courage then, good Christian brother, and let not thy dryness or unsavory
lothsomenesse, or pain which thou feel in meditation or prayer, cause thee
to turn back and leave of thy godly purpose: Least it happen to thee as to
the children of Israel, who deserved not to enter into the desired land of
promise, because they had not patience in their famine and hunger, with other
pain and travel which they suffered in the wilderness. Endeavor rather to
follow that perseueraunce of the woman of Cananie, who although she saw her
self not regarded, and shaken off from Christ, she did not for all that
mistrust, nor ceased her suit or petition: and so deserved to obtain much
more of him then that which she asked or desired. And the like thou may
well hope shall happen unto thee, if thou will have the like patience and trust
in God, which says, he that continues unto the end shall be saved.

To conclude, help thy self therefore with these three ternaries of aduises
and counsels, which I would thou should always have fresh in thy
remembrance, and to practice every one of them in their due place as shall
be needful, as well before prayer, in prayer, as after: and thereby (and
that principallye by Gods grace, which he shall vouchsafe to give thee) thou
shalt be able with great fruit and comfort to exercise thy self in these
meditations of the blessed passion following, as the holy Evangelists declare
the same.

Certain godly Meditations and prayers upon the Passion of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.


Perfundit caput vnguentis pia faemina Christi:
Atque pedibus tergens crinibus ipsa fuis.
The first meditation is of the Supper that was made to Christ our Lord in
Bethania, six days before his passion, which is the Saboth before Palmesunday.
Concerning which ye may meditate these points following.
1 How that Christ our redeemer coming unto Bethania six days before his
Passion, supped in the house of Simon Leprosus, where at that time was Lazarus
and his two sisters Martha and Magdalen, and it is to be supposed, that the
most blessed virgin his mother was there also.

2 Consider with what cheerfulness and diligence Martha served at the table,
and that most fervent love and devotion of Marie Magdalene: who taking a
vessel of Alabaster full of precious ointment, powered it upon the head and
feet of her beloved master, and wyped his feet with her hear, and how that
the house was filled with the savor of that sweet ointment.

3 Remember also how the traitor Judas murmured that Magdalene had so
bestowed an ointment of such great value: And how our most gracious Jesus
defended her, and praised the work of so great charity and devotion that
she had done. In the which was signified his death and burial that was at
hand.

The prayer.
O My GOD and Lord, amongst other services and sacrifices which are
acceptable to thee, and which thou requirest of us, thou haste declared how
the sacrifice of laud and praise pleases thee. Wherefore knowing how much
all men are debtours to thee for so great gifts and benefits received of thy
most liberal hand: I desire to offer to thee the same sacrifice. My soul
therefore, most sweet Jesus, makes adoration and gives thanks to thee, and
all my powers within me blesses thy most holy name, for all the works which
thou have done in the course of thy blessed life, and for the innumerable
sorrows, reproaches and torments which thou have suffered in thy passion, which
thou would should be always imprinted in my heart. And first I laud and
praise thee, that knowing the nearer thy sorrowful death was at hand, and for
the which those thy dear friends that loved thee so entirely should be in
great sorrow and sadness: it was thy godly pleasure first to cheer and kindly
entertayne them, in supping with them in Bethanie, where those two most
devout sisters Mary and Martha declared the pure love thy bare unto thee. I
beseech thee my good Lord, which art the faithful lover of all them that
love thee, for thine infinite love to vouchsafe to kindle and inflame my heart
with the fire of thy love: that I may love thee from the bottom of my heart as
I am bound, and give me grace to follow that feruencie and devotion, which
thy devout servant Magdalen showed, in casting that sweet liquor upon thy
head and feet: And that I may also declare the same, in annoynting of thee
spirituallye: That is, in beleeuyng stedfastlye, in honoring and reuerencing
duly thy divinity and most holy humanity, in workyng according to my power,
in the service of my neighbor, to aid and help him, and to persevere in so
doing all the days of my life. That by these means in exchange of that
filthynesse and odious savor which my sins have unto this time caused, I may
render for the time to come, the sweet savor of good works which may be
acceptable both unto thee and others that shall see the same. Amen.



Insidet in tardo regum rex Christus asello:
Cui vestem ac ramos plebs bona steruit ouans.
The solemnity in the receiving of Christ into the city of Jerusalem the
sunday before his passion.
Points to meditate upon.
1 How that the day following, that is to say, five days before that Christ
the true Lamb should be sacrificed for us in his passion, he would present
himself in Jerusalem, even as the law commanded of the mystical Lamb,
which so many days before it should be sacrificed, was to be prepared.

And for to show his good will and with what desire of mind, he came to offer
himself: he would therefore enter into Jerusalem with that joy and
solemnity as was showed him.

2 Consider with what devotion and joy, the people at that time received their
true king and Lord, and the diversity of service they showed in honoring
him: as in dressyng the streets with bows, and spreading their garments
before him in the way, and praising him with songs.

3 Call to mind also how that in the myddest of that feasting and joy in
which our Lord went, when he saw the City of Jerusalem, he shed his
sorrowful tears, well knowing how far contrariwise within the space of five
days he was to be handled of them, and sorowing within him self the
destruction of that City, which he knew for their sins should be destroyed
and brought to ruin. Consider how straightwayes after his entering into the
City, he went to visit the Temple, out of the which he drove away them that
profaned the same with their merchandise in buying and selling.

The prayer.
I Adore and worship thee most loving Jesus, true and eternal King of Heaven and
earth, to whom al adoration, honor and reverence is due, for all the works
which living in this world thou did with wonderful wisdom and infinite
charity.

And specially I give thanks and praise to thee for that ready good will,
with which thou most innocent Lamb, knowing that thou should be sacrificed
for the sins of the world, would a few days before present thy self in
Jerusalem, entering into it with feast and triumph, willing thereby to declare
thy cheerfulness and most earnest desire wherein thou came to offer thy
self unto death, whereon thou knew our life to depend: and that in dying
thou should overcome and triumph over death it self, hell, sin, and all
other our enemies. I beseech thy immeasurable bounty and goodness, to give
me grace and strength, willynglye and gladly to offer my self to such
dangers and trauele as shall behoue me to suffer in this life, for thy
service: and make me to despise for thy love, all the praises and honors with
which this deceitefull world would deceive me: even as those solemnities,
praises, and honors, with which the people of Jerusalem received thee, did
not let thee with great compassion to weep and lament, what time other sang
and made great joy.

Let my chief care be to seek thee, and have a zeal to honor thee and thine
eternal Father: seeing and considering that thy care, which as soon as thou
had entered the city, thou did by and by go to visit his temple, and
beholding that most fervent zeal of thine, in dryuing out of it all them that
boughte and sold in the same, not contented that the house of prayer should
be so profaned. I humbly therefore beseech thy divine majesty, that thou
drive out of my heart every thing that may profane or defile it, to the end
it may rest as thy temple and house of prayer, into the which thou may
vouchsafe to enter and dwell. Amen.



Conuiuis fis Christ cibus, coenaque refectis
Abluis ipse pedes: tum loca sola petis.
Of the last Supper which Christ our Lord made to his disciples: there may be
these points following to meditate upon.
1 With how great meekenes and humility the savior of the world rising from
supper, washed the feet of his Disciples, and also of Judas, and wyped them
with the towell wherewith he was gyrt.

2 Secondarily, consider of the entier love which moved him to institute that
high Sacrament, in the which he gave his Disciples to eat his most sacred body
and precious blood to drink, and willed it should remain in his Church, as
the food and consolation of our souls.

3 Thirdly, call to mind that heavenly lesson which he preached to his
Disciples, comforting and exhorting them and us also, to humility, charity,
and patience, of the which virtues he gave us so lively examples in the latter
end of his life here.

The prayer.
I Give thee thanks most sweet Jesus with all my heart, for thy marvelous
humility in abasing thy self to become as a servant to wash the feet of
thy servants. And also I praise and worship thee, for the inestimable benefit
that thou did work for us, in willing to continue with us in thy most holy
sacrament, in the which thy blessed body is verily contained, for the food
and comfort of our souls.

I humbly beseech thy infinite clemency and pity, to grant me grace to
follow this example of so great humility: and that my vile condition never
become proud, when I shall consider and see thy majesty so humbled. And
vouchsafe also my gracious Lord and Redeemer, to wash my feet: that is to
say, the affectes and naughty passions of my soul: And give me that love and
charity which thou did so greatly commend to thy Disciples, that with
pureness of heart, and with such inward cleanness of mind as I am bound,
and as is acceptable to God, I may draw near to this most sweet Sacrament,
and participate aboundauntlye of those effects which it works in devout
souls. Grant me also, O celestial Scholemaster and everlasting wisdom of
the father, that thy most blessed words may be imprinted in me, which thou
did preach in this world, and chiefly those words of thy latter talk near
thy death being full of so great charity and consolation, with the which thou
did comfort the sorrowful minds of thy beloved Disciples. And seeing thou have
ye word of everlasting life more sweet then the honey or honey comb, make my
soul to taste it, chiefly to delight in it, and always to obey it: and that by
it, as by a most lightsome lantern, I may see how to guide my self in all my
ways and works. Amen.



Ter prece sollicitat patrem sudatque pauetque:
Innocuas stringunt impia vinc^a manus.
Of the prayer in the garden, and apprehending of our Savior.
Points to meditate thereupon.
1 How our savior going into the garden, to which place he knew his enemies
should come for to apprehend him: with that inward sorrow and fear which for
our salvation, freely his soul would feel, he fell down flat on the ground,
and with most great reverence, he made his prayers three times to his father,
praying him that ye bitter cup which was prepared for him, might pass away:
yet notwithstanding submitted himself always to his fathers most godly will.

2 How that his affliction and anguishe increasing, which willingly he
received, caused him at the last to sweat drops of blood, that fell upon
the earth: And being in this agony, there came down an Angel from heaven to
comfort him.

3 How that being moved with the burning desire of our redemption, he went and
met his enemies in the face: and was content to be kissed of that traitor
Judas, and of the other to be taken and cruelly bound, to be forsaken of his
disciples, and brought to the house of Annas the Bishop.



The prayer.
BLessed be thou my Lord and God, O Jesus Christ, for that thine infinite mercy,
that it pleased thee, for to harten and comfort us, to be assaulted thy self
with such extreme fear and sadness. And thou being the gladness and comfort
of Angels, did take well in worth to be comforted of an Angel. I bless
and praise thee also for that thy fervent love, that for to loose the bonds of
our sins, and to set us at true liberty, sufferedst thy self to be taken
and bound of thy enemies shamefully like a thief. I beseech thy infinite
goodness therefore that in mine afflictions, fear, and sadness, I may have
the grace always to run unto thee with most humble and devout prayer,
submitting my self wholly into thy blessed hands: and that so to do, may be
my only comfort and help, seeing that without thee, vain is the health and
help, that any worldly creature can give me. I beseech thee also most meek
Lamb, by that thy patience and gentleness, which with hard cords and ropes
did suffer thy self to be bound when thou wast taken: that thou will
vouchsafe to bind my soul, with the chains of thy love, that I being loosed
by thee from my sins, and from my disorderly affections, suffer not my self
to be any more bound with them. And that neither the devil, the world, nor
the flesh, may at any time separate me from thy love, service, and most
blessed will and pleasure. Amen.



Ad seeds Annae rapitur Caifaeque tribunal:
Hic tota insultat nocte proterua oohors.
How Christ was led to the house of Annas and Caiphas.
The points to meditate.
1 The blasphemies and villainies which were spoken against our redeemer by
those wicked ministers: the outrages, buffetinges and beatinges which he
suffered when he was led from ye garden to Annas house, where he was first
presented.

2 Consider the great meekenes, humility and modesty, which shyned in our
Savior whiles he stood before the presence of that proud bishop, and
answered to the demaundes of his doctrine and of his Disciples: and took so
patiently those reproachful strokes and buffets.

3 And after that, how with like spite, cruel handeling, and shame, he was
led to the house of Chaiphas, where they used much scornings and injuries
toward him: as in covering and blindfolding his blessed and reverend face,
spitting in it, and striking it: so that he passed all that night without any
rest at all.

The prayer.
I Render thanks and praises to thee, most loving Jesus, for thy invincible
patience, with which it pleased thee for us most vile sinners, to bear and
suffer so great trauelles, pains and injuries, submitting thy most blessed
body to them that did beat it, and thy most reverend bearde and hear, to
them that did tear it, bespit it and soil it: and did not turn thine
amiable face from them that did spitte in in. I do humbly beseech thy goodness
for that thy insuperable patience sake, with which thou sufferedst so many
strokes and beatinges without grudge or anger toward thine enemies: that thou will grant me strength and patience, to suffer all persecutions and injuries,
which in this world are wrought against me, knowing that my sins deserved
much more.

And seeing that thou, O Lord, whose face the Angels desire to behold, wast
content to have it defiled with their most filthy spettinges, and all for to
beautifye our souls: grant me grace not to regard the vanities of this
body, or of the world, but to care for the beauty of my soul, and the
ornaments of holy virtue, and the works thereof: With which I may seem
worthy to appear before thy face, in that most happy kingdom, where the
true and perfect beawtie is: And where they shall be adorned and clothed in
glory that shall raygne with thee without end. Amen.



Turba furens instat trahit ad praeteria vinctum.
Ficta probare malo crimina test parat.
How Christ our Redeemer was brought to Pilates house.
Points to meditate upon.
1 How the frydaye morning those wicked Jews which so greatly desired the
death of him that was the giver of life, came early in the morning to the
house of Caiphas where they left him, and after they had made an end of their
wicked council, in the which they judged him worthy of death, they led him to
the house of Pilate, that he might give judgment on him.

2 Consider with how great modesty our Lord stood in the presence of
Pilate, and with how great humilytie he answered to the things he demanded
of him, and would neither excuse nor defend himself, against any false
indictment or accusations laid to his charge.

3 Consider also specially those words of our redeemer which he spoke to
Pilate: that is, when he said, my kingdom is not of this world: declaring by
those words, that albeit he were the true king of heaven and earth, he came
not yet to reign in the world, but to suffer pains and to die for the life
and redemption of the world.

The prayer.
BLessed be thou King of heaven for thy so great humility, that being the
universal judge of the living and the dead, it pleased thee so much to abase
thy self to be led and to be judged of an unjust judge. Who although he knew
thy innocence and also the envy of thy persecutours: yet he suffered himself
to be perverted and overcome with worldly fear. All which thou did
willingly suffer, without laying of any excuse for thy self in any thing: so
great was thy desire to give thy life for the world unto death, being moved thy
self thereto, through thy passing love and charity.

I beseech thee, O Lord, to cleanse away from me all wicked inclinations
which I feel in my self, when I excuse my sins and my great imperfections:
Where as thou being an innocent and void of all faults, would not excuse
thy self of those false and unjust accusations which were laid against thee.
And seeing thou did confess that thy kingdom was not of this world, I
pray thee by that poverty and base estate, in which thou being King of heaven
would live upon the earth: That thou will grant me grace to despise the
honor and vain favor of this world, and that I only desire and seek for
that true and everlasting kingdom, which thou have prepared for the^ that
truly and duly love and serve thee. Amen.



Ductus ad Herodem cum nil respondeat, albam
Induitur chlamydem luditur, eijcitur.
How Christ being led unto Herodes house, was also there mocked and scorned.
Points to meditate.
1 Call to mind the diligence and busy cruelty of those peruers ministers of
iniquity, in leading our Savior from Pilate to Herod, with their greedy and
insatiable desire to put him to death.

2 Remember also that clear bright quiet countenance, and continual silence,
in the which our most meek Savior stood^ before Herod, without answering to
any question they made to him, because they were al curious, vain, and
unprofitable.

3 How that being mocked and scorned of Herod and his people, he was
apparrelled in derision with a white garment: and then brought again to
Pilates house, with all the shame and reproachful devises they could imagine.

The prayer.
I Most humbly adore and worship thee most benign Jesus, for those wearisome
iourneys which for our salvation it was thy will to make, being so many times
led, hurried, and haled from one judge to an other: in which procession thou
did suffer such gasings, shame, and mockeries, namely, being clothed with
that white garment thou wast of all men mocked and scorned. How shall I be able
O Lord, to answer these thy so great mercies and benefits received at thy
godly hands: that being by the transgression and disobedience of our first
father Adam, spoiled of that white garment of innocence and immortality
wherewith he was endued, thou which art the second Adam, our most true and
loving father, would recompense that loss and others which we had received
of him, in being content to be so clothed and despised, besides other great
injuries and torments which thou did suffer. I therefore beseech thy
majesty, for thy so great travels and rebukes, that thou will pardon me my evil
and unprofitable walkings which I have made in the discourse of my life,
walking in the way of perdition: and grant me grace to run cherefully from
henceforth in the way of thy holy commandments, and perfect observance of my
calling and state. So that I grudge not or disdain, although I be never so
much set at naught and despised of men for thy love, since that I see thee
which art the wisdom of the eternal father, with so great silence to hold
thy peace, and be content to be mocked and clothed like a fool, to recompense
so my foolish pageantes and ignorances, with which I have so many times
offended thee, from the which I pray thee from henceforth to preserve me. Amen.



Ex pedit hic virgas iudex and verbera torquet:
Largifluo tellus, sanguinis imbre madet.
The scourging of Christ our Savior.
Points to meditate.
1 How our Lord being brought again to ye house of Pilate, who thinking by
giving him some kind of punishment to mitigate the rage of the Jews that were
very importune upon him to put Christ to death: he took order he should be
whipped.

2 Consider the sharpness and bitter cruelty of those pitylesse tormentors in
scourging of that most meek Lamb, in spoiling him of his garments, and
binding him strongly to a pillar, and so to beat him without all mercy and
compassion.

3 Remember also how cruelly he was whipped and beaten with rods, so that there
remained no one part of his blessed body unwounded nor vnbathed with blood,
from the crown of his head to the soles of his feet.

The prayer.
I Adore and worship, O my Lord God, thy deep judgments, which are worthy
to be adored and magnified, and not serched. And amongst other I worship and
thank thee, for that which suffices to make the very Angels them selves to
marvel: that thou being the beloved son of the eternal Father, to whom all
service and reverence is due, and of whom it is written that the whip shall not
come near to his tabernacle: did willingly consent to be bound naked to a
pillar, and so sharply to be whipped and beaten, as if thou haddst been some
vile slave and vagabound: willing to pay with so sharp stripes of thy virgin
flesh, for the vain and superfluous delights that I thy vile slave have
pampered my flesh withal, against thy will and pleasure.

And seeing thou have vouchsafed to defend me with thy shoulders, suffering
them to be sharply whipped: I beseech thy infinite clemency to keep far from
me the scourge of thy wrath, the which I know to have deserved for the
multitude of my sins. And let this thy discipline teach me hereafter, and
cause me to shake off all delicateness and pleasures in pampering of my
flesh, by chastening and mortifying of it by due penance, because it may not
rebel any more against thee, and hinder me to attend upon thy service as I am
bound. Amen.



Spinea serta caput pangunt: illudit amictus
Purpureus, turbis ecce homo praetor ait.
Of the crowning of Christ with thorns.
Matter for meditation.
1 How those tormentors being weerie of beating that blessed body, did loose
him from the pillar, and how our most patient Lord did humbly gather up his
garments which they had cast and scattered on the ground, with the which
he covered again his most sacred body, being all bloody, sore and full of
pain.

2 Consider how that having yet scantly put on his clothes, the soldiers of
Pilat were busy to honor him in scorn, with royal ensigns, because they
said, he had made him self a king, they clothed him with a red purple cape or
mantell, and crowned his head with a garlande of most sharp pricking thorns,
and they put a reed in his hand in stead of a scepter, with which they struck
him, and kneling before him, in mocking they saluted him.

3 Then also behold how Pilate brought forth in the sight of all the people,
the king of heaven, even as he was so mocked and ill handled, thinking that
their obstinate fury might be so pacified, when they should see him in that
case worthy of pity and compassion. But it nothing suffised them, but rather
they cried the more, crucify him.

The prayer.
WHat thanks may I render to thee O my God, that thou being the true king of
heaven and of earth, and so worshipped and reverenced of the Angels them
selves, did not refuse to bear that shameful and painful ensigns of a
faygned King, with which thou waste scorned and mocked of most vile men,
neither yet did grudge to appear openly in the sight of all the people
with that painful sharp pricking crown of thorn, wherewith thou wast
crowned of the^, whom thou contrariwise desiredst to crown with glory? And who
would not marvel at their obstinate malice, in yt they could find out so many
inventions, ye more to put thee to shame, pain and torment? but more cause of
marvel is in thy burning charity, Lord, which the waters of so great
tribulations and persecutions were not able to quench, no, nor in one point to
cool.

And even as thou wast never satisfied, nor could think in thy self to have
loved us enough: so thou could never fully satisfye thy self in suffering
for them whom thou louedst. Let thy bountiful goodness, therefore be
honored and thanked of the Angels and of all creatures, the which I do also
adore and worship and desire that I may always so do with all reverence:
humbly beseeching thee, that thou will cause me to know thy highness and
almyghtie majesty, that I may with truth and unfeignedly, continually honor
that same, and to give me grace that I may with the eyes of my soul behold
that lamentable spectacle and sight, which Pilate showed to the Jews, in
saying, behold the man: That my heart being thereby made tender and mollyfied, I
may have the more compassion and pity of thee, and with more earnest desire
love thee, and embrace thee.

And also to rejoice in my self to be reviled and despised in the world for
thy sake according to thine example, hoping afterward through thy mercy to
be crowned of thee in heaven. Amen.



Insons damnatur, tandem portare iubetur
Proh dolor, ipse suae pondera saeua crucis.
How Christ carried the Cross to be crucified: and the points to meditate
thereon.
1 How Pilate being weryed with the importune calling and cryinges on of the
Jews, did judge Christ the author and giver of life to death: whose judgment
he willingly accepted, for the great desire he had to work our salvation.

2 Consider with how great humility, he did bear that heavy tree of the
Cross upon his shoulders: Which for that it was so huge and great, made him
often times to fall to the ground, and so to renew his grievous pains.

3 Consider also that being not well able to go for his weakness and mighty
burden, they took the cross of his shoulders and caused Cirineus to bear
it. And how he turned himself to comfort and admonish the devout women, who
with great compassion followed him weeping: Where you may call to mind what
sorrow his blessed mother suffered when she saw this lamentable sight.

The prayer.
WHo would not be amassed, O most sweet Jesus, of the bottomless fountain of
thy passing humility, that being the judge of the living and the dead, to
whom by thy heavenly father all judgment was committed: would submit
thy self to be judged of a mortal man, being an unjust and profane person,
thou being most innocent and clear from al sin, and to accept with great
obedience and meekenes the sentence of death which malefactors deserve, that
by death they might obtain life. I render unto thee infinite thanks as well
for this incomparable charity, as also for that good will and readiness with
the which as it were an other Isaac, thou cariedst on thy back, the wood
wherewith thou should be sacrificed in the fire of thy most burning charity:
willing thereby to make satisfaction to the justice of thine eternal father for
our sins which thou barest on the cross. And seeing that in accepting the
sentence of death which Pylate pronounced against thee, thou deseruedst that
the sentence of eternal death should be revoked which was pronounced against
me: therefore I humbly beseech thee of thy mercy to defend and keep me, that
I deserve not to leese this so great privilege of grace, and to incur by my
sinfulnes, into the same sentence of damnation, from the which for thy part
thou have delivered me. Give me also the grace and strength to be always
able to follow thee in bearing of my cross according as thou haste commanded
us: that is to say, the travels and tribulation which it shall please thee to
lay upon me in this life. The which for good cause may be easy and light
unto me: considering the pain and trouble thou did feel, in bearing so
willingly for my love thy cross. Amen.



Crux recipit fessum, claui palmasque pedesque
Traijciunt, sedant fellea vinasitim.
Of the nayling of Christ upon the Cross, ye may meditate these points.
1 How that being with great trouble and travel now come to the mount of
Caluarie which was the place where the malefactors should put him to
execution, in stead of good wine which they used to give others that went to
their sorrowful death to comfort their spirits, they gave Christ wine that
was myxte with gall, because there should no member or part, nor yet any
sense remain in him without torment.

2 Remember the inhumanitie of them to spoil him of his garments, which was a
new cause of grief and torment to that most meek Lamb, and a renewing of the
exceeding sorrows which he suffered. And likewise call to mind how that
being spoiled of his garments, he stood all naked, in most bitter sorrows,
grief and shame.

3 Then further consider, with how great cruelty they caused him to be
stretched upon that hard bed of the Cross, which they had prepared for
him: On the which they perced through and nailed with bygge gross nails, the
most holy hands and feet of him, that made both heaven and earth. And on the
other side consider with what exceedyng patience and charity he suffered so
great torments as no tongue suffyceth to express.

The prayer.
NO tongue most merciful Jesus, suffices to give thanks and praise worthy to
thee, for thy burning charity, which caused thee with so great patience to
bear and suffer the incomparable torments thou did feel, what time thou
wast nailed upon the Cross.

For albeit the grief and smart of thy pain and sorrow were exceedyng great:
yet without all comparison much more passing great and unspeakable was the
greatness of thy love that prycked thee forward to suffer it.

Thy very works, O Lord, praise thee, and for my part I thank and praise
thee, as much as I may, confessing my self never to be able to thank thee
for the least part of that I am bound unto thee.

And therefore I pray the for those most bitter sorrows and for the entier
love of thine, which caused thee for the salvation of the world to suffer so
grievous torments: that thou will grant me grace that they may be always
fixed in my heart and mind as the percing arrows of thy tender love, and that
renouncing all vain love of this world, I may be surely nailed and fastened
to thee in perfect love and obedience. And for so much as thou art figured by
that cluster of grapes which the two men brought on a staff upon their
shoulders from the land of promise, and waste trodden forth in that wine
press of the Cross, that out of thee should flow most sweet wine to
sweeten and overcome our souls: sweeten and fill my soul with that wine which
causes men to become chaste and pure.

And cause that I be fast nailed with thee, with the nails of thy love and
charity. Thoroughly nail my flesh with the fear of thee, that it be not
rebellious against the spirit: and let my hands and feet be so nailed with
thine, that they neither move nor stretche besides thy blessed will. And give
me so abundant grace, that I may be desirous to suffer, and to be dispraysed of
all men for thee, and to be pressed down for thy divine love. Amen.



Conspicitur crux alma, solo caeloque verenda:
In qua expirauit mox viriusque parens.
How Christ was exalted upon the Cross.
Points to meditate upon.
1 How that being in manner aforesaid with such excessive sorrow and outcryes
of the people nailed upon the cross, he was exalted or lifted up on high, that
all men might behold him. And was put in the place appointed between two
thieves that were also crucified with him.

2 Remember the incomparable sorrow and anguishe which his most blessed mother
felt, when she saw her sweet son wounded from top to toe, and deformed so
much through the stripes and torments received, that scarcely she might know
her own child.

3 Call to mind also how amongst so many torments as our most merciful
savior suffered, the first words he spoke being nailed upon the Cross, was
to pray for his very enemies and them that crucified him, whose blindness and
cruelty grieved him more then his own pains and torments.

The prayer.
I Confess, my most sweet Lord and true lover of mankind, that in all the
time of my life, if I should do none other thing else both day and night, yet I
could not worthily for my part praise and bless thee, for this universal
benefit of the redemption of mankind, both ill considered of me and many
other. What may I then say, O eternal love of the father, seeing thee in our
mortal flesh so abased for my sake, tormented for me, and lifted up upon the
cross in the midst of two thieves, and as one of them, and much worse
handled?

O my Lord thanks be given to thee of all men, and of all Angels for thine
infinite charity the which is sufficient to make them all to marvel, seeing
that I am he which has committed the robbery, and yet it is thy pleasure to
suffer the punishment due therefore.

I beseech thee O infinite goodness, that seeing it has pleased thee to pay
for mine iniquity and sins, and that thou haste pardoned me those which I
have committed: that thou will give me grace to take heed that I trespass not
in the like offenses hereafter, and that I deserve not eternal torments, from
which by means of thy torments thou haste so many times delivered me. Give
me O Lord, the grace that I may stand and stay my self surely and
constantly by thy Cross with thy most blessed mother, feeling some part of
the sorrow that she felt.

And give mine eyes grace to look up upon thee raised and lifted on high upon
the Cross, so that I may be helped from my spiritual soars, as they were
helped from their corporal soars, who did behold the serpent that Moses did
in figure of thee exalt in the desert. Vouchsafe also to grant me so much thy
favor and grace, that I may rest my self under the shadow of this tree of
life, and that I may taste of his most sweet fruit, the which may cause
me to love even mine enemies, and to pray for them: even as thou standing
nailed upon the same tree, as it were from thy chair and pulpit, do teach
and preach unto me. Amen.



Exanimum pectus transfigit cuspide miles:
Pectore ab effosso lympha cruorque fluunt.
How Christ was thrust into the side with a spear.
Points to meditate.
1 When that wicked generation had nailed and lifted up the redeemer of the
world upon the cross, and could not now any more strike him with their
hands, they smote him with their tongs with many reprochefull words and
blasphemies, giving him vinegar to drink in his great thirst upon a sponge.

2 Consider also how after the other words which he spoke, in promising the
thief Paradise which committed himself unto him, and giving S. John to his
mother in stead of her son, and in him also us, and her to John, and likewise
to us, to be as a mother: and declaring the great thirst which he had, and that
chiefly was for our salvation: he then finally commended his spirit into the
hands of his eternal father, and so inclining down his head he yielded up the
ghost. Of whose torments and death the heavens declare they did in some part
feel the grief: for the sun was eclipsed, the earth trembled, the very
stones sheuered in pieces, the graves opened, the veyle of the temple divided.

3 Consider also the cruel lance and thrusting in of the spear, with the
which Longinus opened a gappe into the side of Christ, out of the which issued
blood and water. And albeit to him it was no pain, because he was already
dead, yet notwithstanding his most innocent mother felt it, whose bowels and
heart was in those most grievous sorrows and sighs, perce^ and thrust through:
agreeable to the prophecy of Simeon.

The prayer.
I Render unto thee, O Jesus Christ most high and eternal Bishop, infinite
thanks, for that thou have offered thy self to thy father in most sweet
sacrifice, and brought unto an end the works of our redemption thou diddst
take upon thee, never staying therein neither for most bitter torments which
they put thee too, nor yet for the multitude of blasphemies they spoke against
thee. For the which I humblye beseech thee, that thou vouchsafe to open the
eyes of my soul, that I may behold and see, and diligently mark that which
thou have wrought and taught on the cross and in thy death. Bring low, O Lord,
my hawtines and pride, in seeing thy head inclined and brought low, under a
crown of thorn. Temper and moderate my gluttony and intemperancie, with the
remembrance of thy most sweet mouth tasting the bitter gawle and vinegar. Cause
me to forsake the delites of the flesh: in seeing thy flesh put to so great
pains upon the cross. Mollify the hardness of my heart, and suffer it not to
be more hard then ye stones, which shiuered in pieces at thy death, Make me, O
Lord, to enter into thy open side, where I may more safely save my self in the
great and perilous flood of this world, then in the ark of Noah. Cause me for
thy service willingly to endure and bear all trouble and adversity, seeing
that thou for my sake would give thy most blessed life: and even as thou
did persevere and continue unto death in the obedience of thy father, so
grant that I may always persevere in obedience toward thee. Amen.



Ex cruce traiectos artus and frigida membra
Detrahit, alta animi vis pietasque virum.
How our Redeemer was taken down from the Cross.
The points of meditation.
1 How the rage of that unhappy generation being partly mitigate and quieted
with the death of him that is the life of ye world they returned into the
city: but his most afflicted mother continued with him, accompanied with the
beloved disciple John, and other devout women, tarying to see if they might by
any means bury him.

2 Call to remembrance how those honorable personages, Joseph and Nicodemus,
having leave of Pilate to take Christ from the cross, brought oyntme^ts and
other things necessary for to embalme and bury him.

3 Consider also with how great devotion, reverence, and tears, they took him
from the cross: and how desirous his vnco^fortable mother was to take him in
her arms, and to embrace him.

The prayer.
I Adore and worship thee my most loving savior, I tha^k thee and praise thee
with all my heart and power: for that through thy most holy cross thou haste
recovered and saved the world. All thy works, O Lord, are most perfect, and
so it was thy will and pleasure perfectly to finishe this work of so great
importance of our redemption, not leaving any thing that was to be done or
suffered, of that which of thine infinite wisdom was ordained, and of thy holy
Prophets forespoken, which in those words thou did signify: It is
justified: which thou spakest a little before thou gave up the ghost.

Thanks be also to thy divine power and might, with which dying thou have
destroyed death, after the manner of that strong Sampson, with thy death thou
have overcome thine enemies. I beseech thee therefore which art the giver of
life, by the same thy death, that mortifying all my concupiscences and
disorderly affections, thou will revive my soul with the life of thy grace,
and so make me dye to ye vain pleasures, honors, and desires of the world and
of the flesh, that it may live only to thee, only confess thee, adore and
worship thee, dwell in thee, and seek for those things which belong to thy
service: as those thy devout servants did in taking of thee from the cross,
and honoring thy most blessed body in procuring to bury it, being so greatly
dishonored before. (...)



Hic complexa sinu corpus miserabile nati
Virgo parens lachrymis vulnera sacra vigat.
How our Savior being now taken from the Cross, was laid in his most
sorrowful mothers lap.
Points to meditate.
1 First consider with how great tenderness the most blessed virgin mother
received ye dead body of her sweet son being now taken from the cross,
and beholding particulerly ye signs of his soars and wounds, with most
tender love she kissed the same, embraced and bathed it with the tears which
abundantly issued out of her pitiful eyes.

2 Then call to mind the lamentable words which his mother spoke, when she saw
that blessed body of his so scourged, wounded, and ill handled, the which she
with so great love and reverence had brought up, whose words and sighs were
enough to break with compassion the heart of any that heard them.

3 Remember also the lamentable playnt which other devout men and women made
that were there present, and chiefly of that well-beloved disciple John, and
Magdalen which held and clipped fast the feet of her sweet master, not
satisfying her self enough in kissing and washing them with her pitiful
tears.

The prayer.
O My most merciful father and my god, who shall give water to my head, and a
fountain of tears to mine eyes, that I may bewail the paynefull death of my
sweet redeemer both day and night, and celebrate his holy exequies together
with that devout company which with woeful playnt did celebrate the same? Or
who may give me an hoate burning heart worthily to praise thee, and thank thee
for the ineffable benefit which thou have done for me, in that thou haste
vouchsafed that thine only begotten son should leese his life to give me
life? Whom would it not amase to see this thy unspeakable charity, that for to
redeem a vile slave, would give to death thy dearly beloved son? All the
Angelical spirits do laud and praise thee, so that I nor all men in the
world know nor yet are able to thank thee, nor yet understand thy so great
mercy. And because I have no tongue able to do it, as it ought to be, I pray thee
of thine infinite goodness to grant me an heart that may take compassion and
feel in part that which thy most blessed mother felt, when she beheld and saw
those grievous wounds and scourgings of her and thy most loving son. Give me
therefore, O Lord, tears in abundance, that I may bewail with her his death,
and also weep for that which was the occasion thereof, and that was my sins,
the which I pray thee for ye same thy sons sake, that thou will pardon me,
and for the time to come to preserve me, that I offend not in the same again,
but always hate and abhor my sins and wickedness. Amen.



Et florum nimbo, fusisque lignoribus vngunt:
Vnctaque candenti sindone membra tegunt.
How the blessed body of Christ was anointed and dressed to the burial.
Meditations thereof.
1 When night drew near, S. John, Joseph, and Nicodemus, (as it may be godly
thought) prayed our Lady to give them leave to annoint the most blessed body of
her son: who agreed to their godly request, albeit that she understood that
there was an other principal anointing, that is, that he was anointed of his
divinity, with the which he was united.

2 Consider with what great devotion and reverence that most divine body was
anointed, and how many sighs and tears they shed every one that were present
thereat, in seeing him so wounded and pitifully handled, and specially
beholding those five principal wounds worthy of so great compassion.

3 Consider that when the blessed body was anointed, they decently wound it
in a white sheet they brought with them, and covering his said body with a
fine launde, so shrowde it up to be buried, according to the manner of the Jews.

The prayer.
MY soul blesses thee, O most loving Jesus, and all the powers within me give
thanks and praise to thy most holy name for all thy works, which I confess to
be most worthy of all praise and blessings: But specially I praise and magnify
thee, for that thou have accomplished and finished that so high and heavenly
work of our redemption, on which my salvation and life depends. I also
adore and worship thy precious body, with the which it has pleased thee to
suffer most grievous torments, and seeing thou my Lord and God wast content to
accept that devotion and piety of thy friends, that came to do thee their
services, and wast content being dead, that thy body should be anointed with
those material ointments which they brought, of the which thou had no need
at all, because thou wast preserved from all corruption with the sweet balm
of thy divinity. I beseech thy clemency, that thou vouchsafe to grant me
that piety, that charity, and those tears of devotion, that I may be able to
annoint thee spirituallye, which is the unction that is wont to be most
acceptable to thy majesty.

Vouchsafe also my Savior, to imprint in mine heart those five most holy
wounds, which may be at all times my comfort, my medicine, the tower of my
fortress, my refuge and sanctuary more sure and safe, then those Cities
which in the old law were appointed for offenders to run unto and save
them selves: And that by means of them I may escape, what time it shall
please thy divine justice to punish me for my sins. Amen.



Conditur, ah, tumulo mundi mihi conditor in quo
Vnicaspes hominum conditur vnasalus.
How Christ was put into the grave.
Matters of meditation.
1 How that most sacred body was carried and put with due reverence of Joseph
in a new sepulcher or grave, the which was nere to the place where he was
crucified. And here you may call to mind also the multitude of sighs and
abundance of tears of his most sorrowful mother, and of those holy persons
that were there present.

2 Consider the extreme poverty of the king of heaven and of earth, who when
he was dead, had not any place where to rest his head, but after death was
buried in the sepulcher or burial of an other.

3 Then finally consider how loath and grievous that sorrowful mother was, to
depart from the sepulcher where her tresure was left and laid, and the
doleful desolate sadness she felt, seeing her self deprived from his joyful
company, until his rising again, which she looked for with a steadfast faith.

The prayer.
AL thy works, O my God and lord Christ Jesus, be holy, perfect, and wrought by
infinite wisdom, for ye which without end I laud, give thanks and praises
to thee, and specially for thy holy passion, death and buryall.

For even as when the work of the creation of the world was finished, the
scripture says thou did rest and cease from creating any more things:
so also now the great work of the redemption of man being also finished, thou
tookest thy rest and dyddest cease from suffering any more, and would that
thy blessed body united with thy divinity, should remain closed within the
sepulcher: thy most blessed soul united with the same Divinity, in mean
time discending to visit and comfort with thy presence and glory, those holy
fathers thy great friends, the which with unspeakable desire looked for that
day.

Blessed and praised for ever be thine infinite mercy, power and wisdom: the
which stretches over all, and disposes all things sweetly. For the which I
pray thee to open the eyes of my soul, that I may learn to know, love and
reverence thee. Give me also my redeemer, plenty of tears of compassion with
the which I may accompany thy most sorrowful mother who at this time
remained sole and desolate bewayling with great affection which she felt for
thy death and absence, unto the time that thou came again to wype away
those pitiful tears which ran down her reverend face. I desire also and
pray thee to grant me a clean heart, void of all corruption of sin, where
as in the like Sepulcher, not of hard stone, but of tender flesh and loving,
it may delight thee to rest, until the time thou vouchsafe of thy mercy to
bring me eternal rest. Amen.



Mortis victor adest, animis comitatus ab orco,
Ne tumulo hanc matres quaerite, vinus abit.
The glorious resurrection of Christ our Savior.
Points to meditate upon.
1 First consider how that when the most blessed soul of Christ had been in
Lymbo and comforted those holy fathers, and brought them from thence: the
sunday morning it did return again and unite it self with his most blessed
body, and caused it to become glorious, resplendent, immortal and impassible,
and so with the divine power, and those glorious indowme^ts which it
communicated to the body, it rose up out of the place where it lay, the
sepulcher or grave remaining fast shut and closed.

2 Ye may also think, that the first thing he did, being raised from death,
was to visit his beloved mother, which with so many tears, sighs and
sorrows, missed him and looked for him. All which griefs were turned into
incomparable joys and gladness, with the glorious sight of her son, raised
again from death to life.

3 Ye may also meditate how he first appeared unto Magdalen before the other,
who when she knew him, she was greatly comforted: and likewise upon his other
apparitions as upon this day, as when he showed himself and appeared to the
devout women which went to the sepulcher, and after to his Disciples going
toward the castle of Emans.

The prayer.
THy name be blessed without end, most sweet Jesus my redeemer, for that after
the tempest of thy passion, there is come the fair bright day of thy glory:
and to the night of sorrows and tears for thy death, the festival and joyful
day of thy resurrection does succeed. For the one and for the other, I give
praise and thanks to thee, as for the one and for ye other I am debtour to
thee: because thou would die for my sins and rise again for our
justification. And therefore it is just, that they which do suffer and weep
with thee in thy sorrowful passion and death, should also in thy glorious
resurrection rejoice with thee and thy most blessed mother. Who according to
the measure of her anguishe and sorrows passed, has received the joys and
consolatio^s of this day present. And what tongue may suffice to express that
unspeakable gladness which her heart felt, when she saw thy glorious risyng
again, and the darkness of thy passion, turned into such beautiful
clerenesse, thy shames and reproaches into glory, thy wounds into such beauty
and brightness? When she did consider that now the stormy winter of thy
persecutions was past, and the waters of the fludde of thy sorows ceased, and
that there should be now no more Pharisees to accuse thee nor Iudasses to
betray thee, nor Pilates to judge or condemn thee, nor death to have might and
power over thee? If Jacob did so much rejoice when he understood, that his
son Joseph who^ he believed to be dead, was a live and did rule over all
Egypt: how great may we think the joy of thy glorious mother to be, when
having seen thee dead, yea and of such a death, did see thee alive again, a
vanquisher of death, triumphing over the devil and hell, Lord of heaven and
of earth? wherefore I beseech thee my heavenly king, that I calling to
remembrance this great triumph and gladness of thy blessed mother, thou will
give me grace to hate all other vain pleasures and worldly consolations,
which may separate me from thee. Grant me Lord I pray thee by thy holy
resurrection, that my soul may rise again with thee, by the life grace, and
that I dye no more by the death of sin: so that I may by thy mercy hereafter
rise again glorious in body and soul, and come to reign with thee eternally
in glory. Amen.

FINIS.
Laud, Honor, and Glory, be for ever to Jesus Christ our Redeemer, which
suffered, dyed, and rose again. Amen.

