CVPIDS REVENGE.

As it has been diverse times Acted by the Children of her Majesty's Revels.

By John Fletcher.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed for Iohas Harison, and are to be sold at the
Golden Anchor in Paternoster Row. 1615.

The Printer to the Reader.
IT is a custom used by some Writers in this Age to Dedicate their Plays to
worthy persons, as well as their other works; and there is reason for it,
because they are the best Mineruaes of their brain, and express more purity
of conceit in the ingenious circle of an Actor Scaene, then is to be found in
the vast circumference of larger Volumnes; and therefore worthy an answerable
Mecoenas, to honor and be honored by them. But not bauing any such Epistle
from the Author (in regard I am not acquainted with him) I have made bilde my
self, without his consent to dedicate this Play to the Iuditious in general,
of what degree soever; not insinuating herein with any, he they never so great,
that want judgment, for to them it belongs not, though they pay for it, more
then in this respect, that like AEsops Cock, having met with a precious Stone
by accident, they knew not the true use thereof, but had rather have a
Barlie-corne to their humor, then a perfect Diamond. But leaving them to their
ignorance, I once again dedicate this Book to the Iuditious, some where of I
have heard commend it to be excellent, who, because they saw it Acted, and knew
what they spoke, are the better to be believed: and for my part I censure it
thus, That I never red a better

CVPIDS REVENG.
Act. pri. Sceana. pri.
Enter Dorialus, Agenor, Nisus.
Agenor. TRust me my Lord Dorialus, I had mist of this if you had not called
me, I thought the Princesses birth day had been to morrow.


Nisus. Why, did your Lordship sleep out the day?


Dor. I marvel what the Duke meant to make such an idle vow.


Nis. Idle, why?


Dor. Is It not idle, to swear to grant his Daughter any thing she shall ask
on her birth day? she may ask an impossible thing: and I pray heaven she do
not ask an unfit thing at one time or other; it is dangerous trusting a man's vow
upon the discretion on's daughter.


Age. I wonder most at the Marquess her brother, who is always vehemently
forward to have her desires granted.


Dor. He Is acquainted with 'em before.

Age. She Is doubtless very chaste and virtuous.

Dor. So is Leucippus her Brother.

Nis. She Is twenty year old, I wonder
She ask not a Husband.

Dor. That were a folly in her, having refused all the
Great Princes in one part of the world:
She Will dye a Maid.

Age. She may ask but one, may she?

Nis. A hundred times this day if she will;
And indeed, every day is such a day, for though
The Duke has vowed it only on this day,
He keeps it every day: he can deny
Her nothing.
Cornets.
Enter Hidaspes, Leucippus, Leontius, Timantus, Tellamon.
Leon. Come fair Hidaspes, thou art
Duchess to day,
Art thou prepared to ask, thou know
My oath will force performance.
And Leucippus, if she now ask ought that shall,
Or would have performance
After my death, when by the help of heaven,
This Land is thine, accursed be thy race,
May cuery one forget thou art my son,
And so their own obedience.

Leuci. Mighty Sir,
I do not wish to know that fatal hour,
That is to make me King, but if I do,
I shall most hastily (and like a son)
Perform your graunts to all, chiefly to her:
Remember that you ask what we
Agreed upon.

Leon. Are you prepared? then speak.

Hida. Most Royal Sir, I am prepared,
Nor shall my will exceed a Virgins bounds,
What I request shall both at once bring
Me a full content.

Leon. So it ever does:
Thou only comfort of my feeble age,
Make known thy good desire,
For I dare swear thou love me.

Hidas. This is it I beg,
And on my knees. The people of your Land,
The Lycians, are through all the Nations
That know their name, noted to have in use
A vain and fruitless Superstition;
So much more hateful, that it bears the show
Of true Religion, and is nothing else
But a selfe-pleasing bold lasciuiousnes.

Leon. What is it?

Hidas. Many Ages before this,
When every man got to himself a Trade,
And was laborious in that chosen course,
Hating an idle life, far worse then death:
Some one that gave himself to wine and sloth,
Which breed lascivious thoughts;
And found himself conioynd
For that by every painful man,
To take his stain away, framde to himself
A god, whom he pretented to obey,
In being thus dishonest, for a name
He called him Cupid. This created god,
Man's nature being ever credulous
Of any vice that takes part with his blood,
Had ready followers enough: and since
In every age they grew, especially
Amongst your Subjects, who do yet remain
Adorers of that drowsy Deity:
Which drink invented: and the winged Boy,
(For so they call him) has his sacrifices.
These loose naked statutes through the Land,
And in every Village, nay the palace
Is not free from'em. This is my request,
That these erected obsceane Images
May be plucked down and burnt: and every man
That offers to'em any sacrifice, may lose his life.

Leon. But be advised my fairest daughter, if he be
A god, he will express it upon thee my child:
Which heaven auert.

Leucip. There is no such power:
But the opinion of him fills the Land
With lustful sins: every young man and maid
That feel the least desire to one another,
Dare not suppress it, for they think it is
Blind Cupids motion: and he is a god.

Leon. This makes our youth unchaste. I am resolved:
Nephew Ismenus, break the Statues down
Here in the palace, and command the City
Do the like, let proclamations
Be drawn, and hastily sent through the Land
To the same purpose.

Ismen. Sir, I will break down none my self,
But I will deliver your command:
Hand I will have none int, for I like it not.

Leon. Go and command it. Pleasure of my life,
Would thou ought else? Make many thousand suits,
They must and shall be granted.

Hid. Nothing else.
Ezit Ismenus.
Leon. But go and meditate on other suites,
Some six days hence I Will give thee audience again,
And by a new oath bind my self to keep it:
Ask largely for thy self, dearer then life
In whom I may be bold to call my self,
More fortunate then any in my age,
I will deny thee nothing.

Leu. It Was well done Sister.
Exeunt all but these three Lords.
Nis. How like you this request my Lords?

Dor. I know not yet I am so full of wonder,
We shall be gods our selves shortly,
And we pull'em out of heaven of this fashion.

Age. We shall have wenches now when we can
Catch'em, and we transgress thus.

Nis. And we abuse the gods once, it is a Justice
We should be held at hard meat: for my part,
I Will eene make ready for mine own affection,
I know the god incenst, must send a hardness
Through all good women's hearts, and then we have
Brought our eggs and muskadine to a fair market:
Would I had gin an 100. poun for a tolleration,
That I might but use my conscience in mine
Own house.

Dor. The Duke he is old and past it, he would
Never have brought such a plague upon the land else,
It Is worse then Sword and Famine:
Yet to say truth, we have deserved it, we have lived
So wickedly, every man at his livery, and would that
Would have suffis'd us: we murmurd at this
Blessing, that was nothing; and cryde out to the
God for endless pleasures, he heard us,
And supplied us, and our women were new still
As we need'em: yet we like beasts still cryde,
Poor men can number their woers, give us
Abundance: we had it, and this curse with all.

Age. Berlady we are like to have a long Lent out,
Flesh will be flesh: now Gentlemen I had rather
Have angered all the gods then that blind Gunner.
I remember once the people did but flight him
In a sacrifice: and what followed?
Women kept their houses, grew good huswiues,
Honest forsooth, was not that fine?
Wore their own faces,
Though they wear gay clothes without suruaying:
And which was most lamentable,
They loved their husbands.

Nis. I do remember it to my grief,
Young Mayds were as cold as Cowcumbors,
And much of that complexion:
Bawds were abolisht: and to which misery
It must come again.
There were no Cuckolds.
Well, we had need pray to keep these
Devils from us,
The times grow mischievous.
There he goes, Lord!
Enter one with an Image. This is a sacrilege I have not heard of:
Would I were gelt, that I might not
Feel what follows.

Age. And I too. You shall see within these
Few years a fine confusion in the country, mark it:
Nay, and we grow for to depose the Powers,
And set up Chastity again, well I ha done.
A fine new Goddess certainly, whose blessings
Are hunger and hard bedds.

Nis. This comes of fulness, a sin too frequent with us;
I believe now we shall find shorter commons.

Dor. Would I were married, some what has some savor
The race of Gentry will quite run out now,
It Is only left to husbands: if younger sisters
Take not the greater charity it is lawful.

Age. Well, let come what will come,
I am but one, and as the plague falls,
I Will shape my self: If women will be honest, I Will be
Sound, if the god be not too unmerciful,
I Will take a little still where I can get it,
And thank him, and say nothing.

Nis. This ill wind yet may blow the City good,
And let them (if they can) get their own children,
They have hung long enough in doubt: but howsoever, the old way was the surer,
then they had'em.

Dor. Farewell my Lords, I Will eene take up what
Rent I can before the day, I fear the year will fall out ill.

Age. We Will with you Sir: And Love so favor us,
As we are still thy servants. Come my Lords,
Lets to the Duke, and tell him to what folly
His doting now has brought him.
Exeunt. Priest of Cupid, with four young men and Maids.
Priest. Come my children, let your feet,
In an even Measure meet:
And your cheerful voices rise,
For to present this Sacrifice
Lo great Cupid, in whose name,
I his Priest begin the same.
Young men take your Loves and kiss,
Thus our Cupid honored is.
Kiss again, and in your kissing,
Let no promises be missing:
Nor let any May den here,
Dare to turn away her ear,
Unto the whisper of her Love,
But give Bracelet, Ring, or Glove,
As a token to her sweeting,
Of an after secret meeting:
Now boy sing, to st^cke our hearts
Fuller of great Cupids darts.
Song.
Lovers rejoice, your pains shall be rewarded,
The god of love himself grieves at your crying;
No more shall frozen honor be rewarded,
Nor the coy faces of a maid denying.
No more shall Virgins sigh, and say we dare not,
For men are false, and what they do they care not.
All shall be well again, then do not grieve,
Men shall be true, and women shall believe.
Lovers rejoice, what you shall say henceforth,
When you have caught your Sweet-hearts in your arms,
It shall be accounted Oracle, and worth:
No more faint-hearted Gyrles shall dream of harms,
And cry they are too young: the god has said,
Fifteen shall make a Mother of a Maid:
Then wise men, pull your Roses yet vnblowne,
Love hates the too ripe fruit that falls alone.



The Measure. After the Measure Enter Nilo and others.
Nilo. No more of this: here break your Rights for ever
The Duke commands it so; Priest do not stare,
I must deface your temple, though unwilling,
And your god Cupid here must make a Scarcrow
For any thing I know, or at the best,
A dorne a Chimney-peece.

Priest. O Sacrilege unheard of!

Nilo. This will not help it, take down the Images
And away with them.
Priest change your coat you had best, all service now
Is given to men: prayers above their hearing
Will prove but bablings; learn to lie, and thrive,
Twill prove your best profession: for the gods,
He that lives by'em now, must be a beggar.
There Is better holiness on earth they say,
Pray God it ask not greater sacrifice. Go home,
And if your god be not deaf as well as blind,
He will some smoke for it.

Gent. Sir --

Nilo. Gentlemen there is no talking,
This must be done, and speedily;
I have Commission that I must not break.

Gent. We are gone, to wonder what shall follow.

Nilo. On to the next Temple.
Exeunt. Cornets. Desceudit Cupid.
Cupid. Am I then scornd? is my all-doing will
And power, that knows no limit, nor admits none,
Now looked into by less then gods? and weakened
Am I, whose Bow struck terror through the earth,
No less then Thunder, and in this, exceeding
Even gods themselves; whose knees before my Altars
Now shook off; and contemd by such, whose lives
Are but my recreation! anger rise,
My sufferance and my self are made the subject
Of sins against us. Go thou out displeasure,
Displeasure of a great god, flying thy self
Through all this Kingdom: so we what ever evils
Proud flesh is taking of, amongst these Rebels;
And on the first heart that despise my Greatness,
Lay a strange miscry, that all may know
Cupids revenge is mighty; with his arrow,
Hotter then plagues or mine own anger, will I
Now Nobly right my self: nor shall the prayers
Nor sweet smokes on my Altars hold my hand,
Till I have left this a most wretched Land,
Exit.
Enter Hidaspes, and Cleophila.
Hidas. Cleophila, what was he that went hence?

Cleo. Means your Grace now?

Hidas. I mean that hansome man,
That something more then man I met at door.

Cleo. Here was no hansome man.

Hidas. Come, he is some one
You would preserve in private, but you want
Cunning to do it, and my eyes are sharper
Then yours, and can with one neglecting glaunce,
See all the graces of a man. Who was it?

Cleo. That went hence now?

Hidas. That went hence now: I he.

Cl. Faith here was no such one as your Grace thinks,
Zoylus your Brothers Dwarf went out but now.

Hidas. I think it was he: how bravely he past by:
Is he not grown a goodly Gentleman?

Cleo. A goodly Gentleman Madame?
He is the most deformed fellow in the Land.

Hidas. O blasphemy! he may perhaps to thee
Appear deformed, for he is indeed
Unlike a man: his shape and colors are
Beyond the Art of Painting; he is like
Nothing that we have seen, yet does resemble
Apollo, as I often have fancied him,
When rising from his bed he sturres himself,
And shakes day from his hair.

Cleo. He resembles Apollos Recorder.
Exit Cleo.
Hidas. Cleophila, go send a page for him,
And thou shall see thy error, and repent.
Alas what do I feel, my blood rebels,
And I am one of those I used to scorn,
My mayden-thoughts are fled against my self,
I harbor Traitors in my Virginity,
That from my childhood kept me company,
Is heavier then I can endure to bear:
Forgive me Cupid, for thou art a god,
And I a wretched creature; I have sinned,
But be thou merciful, and grant that yet
I may enjoy what thou will have me, Love.
Enter Cle. Enter Zoy.
Cleo. Zoylus is here Madame.

Hida. He Is there indeed.
Now be thine own Judge; see thou worse then mad,
Is he deformed? look upon those eyes,
That let all pleasure out into the world,
Unhappy that they cannot see themselves.
Look on his hair, that like so many beams,
Streaking the East, shoore light ore half the world.
Look on him all together, who is made
As if two Natures had contention
About their skill, and one had brought forth him.

Zoyl. Ha, ha, ha: Madame, though Nature
Has not given me so much
As others in my outward show;
I bear a heart as loyal unto you
In this unsightly body (which you please
To make your mirth) as many others do
That are far more be friended in their births:
Yet I could wish my self much more deformed
Then yet I am, so I might make your Grace
More merry then you are, ha, ha, ha.

Hidas. Beshrew me then if I be merry;
But I am content whilst thou art with me:
Thou that art my Saint,
By hope of whose mild favor I do live
To tell thee so: I pray thee scorn me not;
Alas, what can it add unto thy worth
To triumph over me, that am a Maid?
Without deceit, whose heart does guide her tongue,
Drowned in my passions, yet I will take leave.
To call it reason that I door on thee.

Cleo. The Princess is besides her Grace I think,
To talk thus with a fellow that will hardly
Serve in the dark when one is drunk.

Hidas. What answer will thou give me?

Zoy. If it pleafe your Grace to jest on, I can abide it.

Hidas. If it be jest, not to esteem my life,
Compard with thee: If it be jest in me,
To hang a thousand kisses in an hour
Upon those lips, and take 'em off again:
If it be jest for me to marry thee,
And take obedience on me whilst I live:
Then all I say is jest:
For every part of this, I swear by those
That see my thoughts, I am resolved to do.
And I beseech thee, by thine own white hand,
(Which pardon me, that I am bold to kiss
With so unworthy lips) that thou will swear
To marry me, as I do here to thee,
Before the face of heaven.

Zoy. Marry you! ha, ha, ha.

Hida. Kill me or grant: will thou not speak at all?

Zoy. Why I will do your will for ever.

Hidas. I ask no more: but let me kiss that mouth
That is so merciful, that is my will:
Next, go with me before the King in have,
That is my will, where I will make our Peers
Know, that thou art their better.

Zoy. Ha, ha, ha, that is fine, ha, ha, ha.

Cleo. Madam, what means your Grace?
Consider for the love of heaven to what
You run madly; will you take this Viper
Into your bed?

Hidas. Away, hold off thy hands:
Strike her sweet Zoylous, for it is my will,
Which thou have sworn to do.

Zoy. Away for shame
Know you no manners: ha, ha, ha.
Exit.
Cle. Thou know none I fear,
This is just Cupids Anger, Uenus look down mildely on us: And command thy
Son to spare this Lady once, and let me be in love with all: and none in
love with me.
Exit. Enter Ismenus: and Timantus.
Tima. Is your Lordship for the wars this summer?

Ismen: Timantus will thou go with me?

Tima: If I had a company my Lord

Ism: Of Fiddlers: Thou a Company?
No, no, keep thy company at home, and cause cuckolds,
The wars will hurt thy face, there is no semsters,
Shoemakers, nor Tailors, nor almon milkith morning,
Nor poacht eggs to keep your worship soluble,
No man to warm your shyrt, and blow your roses:
Nor none to reverence your round lace breeches:
If thou will needs go, and go thus,
Get a case for thy Captain-ship, a shower will spoil thee else. Thus much for
thee.

Tim. Your Lordships wondrous witty, very pleasant, beleeue't.
Exit. Enter Telamon, Dorialus, Agenor, Nisus, Leonti.
Leon. No news yet my Son?

Telam. Sir, there be diverse out in search:
No doubt theyl bring the truth where he is,
Or the occasion that led him hence.

Tim. They have good eyes then.

Leon. The Gods go with them:
Who be those that wait there?

Telam. The Lord Ismenus, your General, for his dispatch.

Leon. On^ph^n We have no use to employ your
Virtue in our war: now the province is well settled:
Hear you ought of the Marquis?

Ism. No Sir,

Leon: It Is strange he should be gone thus:
This 5. days he was not seen.

Tim. I Will hold my life, I could boult him in an hour:

Leon: Where Is my Daughter?

Dori. About the purging of the Temples, Sir.

Leon: She Is chaste and virtuous; Fetch her to me,
And tell her I am pleased to grant her now
Her last request, without repenting me.
Be it what it will: she is wise Dorialus,
And will not press me farther then a Father.
Exit Nis.
Dori: I pray the best may follow: yet if your grace
Had taken the opinions of your people,
At least of such, whose wisdoms ever wake
About your safety, I may say it Sir,
Under your noble pardon: that this change
Either had been more honor to the Gods,
Or I think not at all. Sir the princess.
Enter Hidaspis and Nisus.
Leon. O my Daughter, my health!
And did I say my soul, I lyde not;
Thou art so near me, speak, and have what ever
Thy wise will leads thee too: had I a Heaven,
It were too poor a place for such a goodness.

Dori: What Is here?

Agener. An Apes skin stufft I think, it is so plumpe.

Hida. Sir, you have past your word,
Still be a prince, and hold you to it.
Wonder not I press you, my life lies in your word,
If you break that, you have broke my heart, I must ask
That's my shame, and your will must not deny me:
Now for Heaven be not for sworn.

Leon: By the Gods I will not,
I cannot, were there no other power,
Then my love called to a witness of it.

Dori: They have much reason to trust,
You have for sworn one of em out oath country already.

Hida: Then this is my request: This Gent:
Be not ashamd, Sir:
You are worth a Kingdom.

Leon: In what?

Hida: In way of marriage.

Leon: How?

Hidas. In way of Marriage, it must be so.
Your Oath is tide to heaven: as my love to him,

Leon. I know thou do but try my Age,
Come ask again.

Hidas: If I should ask all my life time, this is all still.
Sir I am serious, I must have this worthy man without enquyring why; and
suddenly, and freely:
Do not look for reason or obedience in my words:
My Love admits no wisdom:
Only have, and hope hangs on my fury.
Speak Sir, speak, but not as a Father,
I am deaf and dull to counsel: my inflamed blood
Hears nothing but my will,
For Gods sake speak.

Dori: Here Is a brave alteration.

Nis: This comes of Chastity.

Hida: Will not you speak Sir?

Age. The God begins his vengeance; what a sweet youth he has sent us here,
with a pudding ins belly?

Leon. O let me never speak,
Or with my words let me speak out my life;
Thou power abusde great Love, whose vengence now we feel and fear, have
mercy on this Land.

Nis: How does your Grace?

Leon. Sick, very sick I hope.

Dori: Gods comfort you.

Hida. Will not you speak? Is this your royal word?
Do not pull perjury upon your soul.
Sir, you are old, and near your punishment; remember.

Leon. Away base woman.

Hida. Then be no more my Father, but a plague,
I am bound to pray against: be any sin
May force me to despair, and hang my self,
Be thy name never more remembered King
But in example of a broken Faith,
And cursed even to forgetfulness:
May thy Land bring forth such Monsters as thy daughter is?
I am weary of my rage. I pray forgive me,
And let me have him, will you Noble Sir?

Leon. Mercy, mercy heaven:
Thou heir of all dishonor, shamest thou not to draw
This little moisture left for life, thus rudely from me?
Carry that Slave to death.

Zoilus. For Heavens sake Sir, it is no fault of mine,
That she will love me.

Leon. To death with him, I say.

Hida: Then make have Tyrant, or I Will be for him;
This is the way to Hell.

Leon. Hold fast, I charge you away with him.

Hida. Alas old man, Death has more doors the^ one,
And will meet him.
Exit Hidas.
Leon. Dorialus, Pray see her in her Chamber,
And lay a guard about her:
The greatest curse the Gods lay on our frailties,
Is will and disobedience in our Issues,
Which we beget as well as them to plague us,
With our fond loves; Beasts you are only blessed
That have that happy dullness to forget
What you have made, your young ones grieve not you
They wander where they list, and have their ways
Without dishonor to you; and their ends,
Fall on em without sorrow of their parents,
Or after ill remembrance: Oh this Woman
Would I had made my self a Sepulcher,
When I made her: Nephew where is the prince?
Pray God he have not more part of her baseness
Then of her blood about him,
Gent: where is he?

Ism. I know not Sir.
Has his ways by him self, is too wise for my company.

Leon. I do not like this hiding of him self,
From such society as his person:
Some of it ye needs must know.

Ismenus. I am sure not I: nor have known twice this ten days, which if I
were as proud as some of em I should take scuruily, but he is a young man:
Let him have his swinge, twill make him.
Timantus whispers to the Duke. There Is some good matter now in hand:
How the slave geers and grinnes: the Duke is pleased.
There Is a new pair of Scarlet Hose now, and as much
Money to spare, as will fetch the old from pawn, a Hat and a Cloak to go
out to morrow:
Garters and stockings come by nature.

Leon. Be sure of this.

Tima. I durst not speak else Sir.

Actus secundus. Scoena prima.
Cornetts. descend Cupid.
Cupid. Leucippus thou art shot through with a shaft
That will not rankle long, yet sharp enough
To sow a world of helpelesse misery
In this happy Kingdom, do thou think
Because thou art a prince, to make a part
Against my power, but it is all the fault
Of thy old Father, who belieues his Age
Is cold enough to quench my burning Darts,
But he shall know ere long, that my smart loose,
Can thawe Ice, and inflame the witherd heart,
Of Nestor, thou thy self art lightly stroke,
But his mad love, shall publish that the rage
Of Cupid, has the power to conquer Age.
Exit. Enter Bacha, and Leucippus, Bacha, A handkercheffe.
Leu. Why, what is the matter?

Bach. Have you got the spoil
You thirsted for. O tyranny of men! Lenc. I pray thee leave.

Bach. Your envy is Heaven knows,
Beyond the reach of all our feeble Sex:
What pain alas could it have been to you,
If I had kept mine honor? you might still
Have been a prince, and still this Countries Heir,
That innocent Guard, which I till now had kept,
For my defense, my virtue, did it seem
So dangerous in a State, that your self came to suppress it.

Leuc. Dry thine eyes again, I Will kiss thy tears away,
This is but follic, it is past all help.

Bac. Now you have won the treasure,
It Is my request that you would leave me thus:
And never see these empty walls again,
I know you will do so, and well you may:
For there is nothing in em that's worth
A glaunce, I loath my self, and am become
Another woman; One me thinks with whom
I want acquaintance.

Leu. If I do offend thee; I can be gone,
And though I love thy sight, so highly do I prize thine own content, that I
will leave thee.

Leu. Nay, you may stay now;
You should have gone before: I know not now
Why I should fear you: All I should have kept.
Is stolen: Nor is it in the power of man
To rob me farther: if you can invent
Spare not; No naked man fears robbing less
Then you do: now you may for ever stay.

Leuc. Why, I could do thee farther wrong.

Bac. You have a deeper reach in evil then I:
It Is past my thought.

Leu. And past my will to act: but trust me I could do it.

Bac. Good Sir do, that I may know there is a
Wrong beyond what you have done me.

Leuc. I could tell the world what thou have done.

Bac: Yes you may tell the world
And do you think I am so vain to hope
You will not: you can tell the world but this,
That I am a widow, full of tears in show,
My Husband dead: And one that loved me so
Hardly, a week forgot my modesty,
And caught with youth and greatness,
Gave my self to live in sin with you:
This you may tell: And this I do deserve.

Leuc. Why do thou think me so base to tell?
These limbs of mine shall part
From one another on a wrack,
Ere I disclose; But thou do utter words
That much asflict me: you did seem as ready
Sweet Bacha as my self.

Bac. You are right a man: when they have witcht us into misery, poor
innocent souls,
They lay the fault on us:
But be it so- For prince Leucippus sake
I will bear anything.

Leu. Come weepeno more.
I wrought thee to it, it was my fault:
Nay, see if thou will leave? Here, take this pearl,
Kiss me sweet Bacha, and receiuet this purse.

Bac. What should I do with these? they will not deck my mind.

Leu Why keep em to remember me.
I must be gone, I have been absent long:
I know the Duke my Father is in rage,
But I will see thee suddenly again.
Farewell my Bacha.

Bach Gods keep you: Do you hear Sir: pray give me a point to wear.

Leuc. Alas good Bacha, take one, I pray thee where thou will.

Bac. Coming from you: This point is of as high Esteem with me, as all
pearl and gold: nothing but good be ever with or near you.


Leuc. Fare thee well mine own good Bacha;
I will make all haste.
Exit.
Bac. Just as you are a Dosen I esteem you:
No more, does he think I would prostitute
My self for love: it was the love of these pearls
And gold that wanne me, I confess
I lust more after him then anyother,
And would at any rate if I had store,
Purchase his fellowship: but being poor,
I Will both enjoy his body and his purse,
And he a Prince, nere think my self the worse.
Enter Leontius, Leucippus, Ismenus, Timantus.
Leon. Nay, you must back and show us what it is,
That witches you out of your Honor thus.

Bac. Whose that?

Tima. Look there Sir.

Leon. Lady, never fly you are betrayde.

Bach. Leave me my tears a while,
And to my just rage give a little place:
What saucy man are you, that without leave,
Enter upon a Widows mournful house?
You hinder a dead man from many tears.
Who did deserve more then the world can shed,
Though they should weep themselves to Images:
If not for of me, yet of your self
A way, for you can bring no comfort to me.
But you may carry hence, you know not what.
Nay sorrow is infectious.

Leon. Thou thy self
Art grown infectious: woulst thou know my name?
I am the Duke, father to this young man
Whom thou corruptst.

Bach. Has he then told him all.

Leuc. You do her wrong Sir.

Bach. O he has not told. Sir I beseech you pardon
My wild tongue, directed by a weak distempord head, madded with grief: Alas I
did not know
You were my Sovereign; but now you may
Command my poor unworthy life,
Which will be none I hope ere long.

Le. All thy dissembling will never hide thy shame:
And were not more respecting Woman-hood in
General, then any thing in thee, thou should
Be made such an example, that posterity,
When they would speak most bitterly, should say,
Thou art as impudent as Bacha was.

Bach. Sir, though you be my King, whom I will
Serve in all just causes: yet when wrongfully
You seek to take mine Honor, I will rise
Thus and defy you; for it is a Jewel
Dearer then you can give, which whilst I keep,
(Though in this lowly house) I shall esteem
My self above the Princes of the earth
That are without it. If the Prince your son,
Whom you accuse me with, know how to speak
Dishonor of me, if he do not do it,
The plagues of hell light on him, may he never
Govern this Kingdom: here I challenge him
Before the face of heaven, my Liege, and these,
To speak the worst he can: if he will lie,
To lose a woman's fame, I Will say he is
Like you (I think I cannot call him worse.)
He Is dead, that with his life would have defended
My reputation, and I forced to play
(That which I am) the foolish woman,
And use my liberal tongue.

Leu. Is It possible! we men are children in our
Carriages, compard with women: wake thy felfe
For shame, and leave not her whose honor thou
Should keep safe as thine own, alone to free her self:
But I am pressed I know not how, with guilt,
And feel my conscience (never used to lie)
Loath to allow my tongue to add a lie
To that too much I did: but it is lawful
To defend her, that only for my love loved evil.

Leon. Tell me, why did you

Leuc. stay here so long?

Leuc. If I can urge ought from me but a truth, hell
Take me.

Leon. What Is the matter, why speak you not?

Tima. Alas good Sir, forbear
To urge the Prince, you see his shamefastnes.

Bac. What does he say Sir? if you be a Prince
Show it, and tell the truth.

Isme. If you have layne with her tell your Father,
No doubt he has done as ill before now:
The Gentlewoman will be proud ont.

Bac. For Gods sake speak.

Leu. Have you done prating yet?

Isme. Who prates?

Leu Thou know I do not speak to thee Ismenus:
But what said you Tima. concerning my shamefastnes?

Tima. Nothing I hope that might displease your
Highness.

Leu. If any of thy great, Great-grandmothers
This thousand years, had been as chaste as she,
It would have made thee honester. I stayed
To hear what you would say: she is by heaven
Of the most strict and blameless chastity
That ever woman was: (good gods forgive me)
Had Tarquin met with her, she had been killed
With a Slave by her ere she had agreed:
I lie with her! would I might perish then.
Our Mothers, whom we all must reverence,
Could nere exceed her for her chastity,
Upon my soul: for by this light she is
A most obstinate modest creature.

Leon. What did you with her then so long Leucip?

Leu. I Will tell you Sir: You see she is beautiful.

Leon. I see it well.

Leu. Moved by her face,
I came with lustful thoughts,
Which was a fault in me:
But telling ttuth, something more pardonable,
(And for the world I will not lie to you:)
Proud of my self, I thought a Princes name
Had power to blow'em down flat of their backs;
But here I found a Rock not to be shook:
For as I hope for good Sir, all the battery
That I could lay to her, or of my person,
My greatness, or gold, could nothing move her.

Leon. It Is very strange, being so young and fair.

Leu. She Is almost thirty Sir.

Leon. How do you know her age so just?

Leu. She told it me her self
Once when she went about to show by reason
I should leave wooing her.

Leon. She stains the ripest Virgins of the age.

Leu. If I had sinned with her, I would be loath
To publish her disgrace: but by my life
I would have told it you, because I think
You would have pardond me the rather:
And I will tell you father: By this light Sir,
(But that I never will bestow my self
But to your liking) it she now would have me,
I now would marry her.

Leon. How Is that Leucippus!

Leu. Sir, will you pardon me one fault, which yet
I have not done, but had a will to do, and I will tell it?

Leon. Be It what it will, I pardon thee.

Leu. I offered marriage to her.

Leon. Did she refuse it?

Leu. With that earnestnes, and almost scorn
To think of any other after her lost Mate, that she
Made me think my self unworthy of her.

Leon. You have stayed too long Leucippus.

Leu. Yes Sir, forgive me heaven, what multitudes
Of oaths have I bestowd on lies, and yet they were officious lies, there was
no malice in 'em.

Leon. She is the fairest creature that ever I beheld;
And then so chaste, it is wonderful! the more I look
On her, the more I am amazed.
I have long thought of a wife, and one I would have
Had, but that I was afraid to meet a woman
That might abuse my age: but here she is
Whom I may trust too; of a chastity
Impregnable, and approved so by my son:
The means of her birth will still preserve her
In due obedience; and her beauty is
Of force enough to pull me back to youth.
My son once sent away, whose riuall-shippe
I have just cause to fear, if power, or gold,
Or wit, can win her to me, she is mine.
Nephew Ismenus, I have new intelligence,
Your Province is unquiet still.

Ismen. I Am glad ont.

Leon. And so dangerously, that I must send the
Pirnce in person with you.

Isme. I Am glad of that too: Sir will you dispatch
Us, we shall wither here for ever.

Leon. You shall be dispacht within this hour,
Leucippus, never wonder nor ask, it must be thus.
Lady I ask your pardon, whose virtue I have
Slubberd with my tongue, and you shall ever be
Chaste in my memory hereafter;
But we old men often dote: to make amends for
My great fault, receive that Ring:
I Am sorry for your grief, may it soon leave you.
Come my Lords lets go.
Exeunt.
Bac. Heaven bless your Grace.
One that had but so much modesty left, as to blush,
Or shrink a little at his first encounter,
Had been undone; where I come off with honor,
And gain too: they that never would be trackt
In any course, by the most subtle sense,
Must bear it through with frontlets impudence.
Exit. Enter Dorialus, Agenor, Nisus.
Dor. Gentlemen, this is a strange piece of Justice,
To put the wretched Dwarf to death because
She doted on him; Is she not a woman, and
Subject to those mad figaries her whole Sex
Is infected with? Had she loved you, or you, or I,
Or all on's, (as indeed the more the merryer still
With them) must we therefore have our heads pared
With a Hatchet? So she may love all the Nobility
Out ath Duke dome in a month, and let the raskals in.

Nis. You will not, or you do not see the need
That makes this just to the world?

Dor. I cannot tell, I would be loath to feel it:
But the best is, she loves not proper men, we three
Were in wise cases else: but make me know this need.

Nis. Why yes: He being taken away, this base incontinence dies presently, and
she must see her shame and sorrow for it.


Dor. Pray God she do: but was the Sprat beheaded, or did they swing him about
like a chickin, and so break his neck.


Again. Yes, he was beheaded, and a solemn justice made of it.


Dor. That might have been deducted.

Again. Why how would you have had him did?

Dor. Faith I would have had him roasted like a warden in a brown paper, and no
more talk ont: or a teather stuck in's head, like a Quail: or a hanged him in
a Dog-coller: what should he be beheaded? we shall have it grow so base
shortly, Gentlemen will be out of love with it.


Nis. I wonder from whence this of the Dwarfes first sprung?


Dor. From an old leacherous pair of breeches that lay upon a wench to keep
her warm: for certainly they are no man's work: and I am sure a Monkey would
get one of the guard to this fellow, he was no bigger then a small Portmantu,
and much about that making, if t'ad legs.


Again. But Gentlemen, what say you to the Prince?

N. I, concerning his being sent I know not whither.

Dor. Why then he will come home I know not when: you shall pardon me, I Will
talk no more of this subject, but say gods be with him where ere he is, and
send him well home again: For why, he is gone, or when he will return, let
them know that directed him: Only this, there is mad Moriscoes in the state;
but what they are, I Will tell you when I know. Come, lets go, hear all, and say
nothing.


Again. Content.
Exeunt. Enter Timantus and Telamon.
Tela. Timantus, is the Duke ready yet?

Tima. Almost.

Tela. What ails him?

Tela. Faith I know not, I think he has dreamt he is but eighteen: has been
worse since he sent you forth for the frizling-yron.


Tell. That cannot be, he lay in Gloves all night, and this morning I brought
him a new Periwig with a lock at it, and knocked up a swinge in's chamber.


Tim. O but since, his Tailor came, and they have fallen out about the fashion
on's clothes: and yonder is a fellow come, has board a hole in's ear; and he
has bespake a Vauting-horse, you shall see him come forth presently: he
looks like Winter, stuck here and there with fresh flowers.


Tela. Will he not Tilt think you?

Tim. I think he will.

Tela. What does he mean to do?

Tim. I know not: but by this light I think he is in love; he would ha bin
shau'd but for me.


Tela. In love, with whom?

Tim. I could guess, but you shall pardon me: he will take me along with him
some whither.


Tell. I ouer-heard him ask your opinion of some bodies beauty.


Tima. Yes, there it goes that makes him so youthful, and has laid by his
Crutch, and halts now with a leading staff.

Enter Leontine with a staff and a looking-glass.
Leon. Timantus.

Tim. Sir.

Leon. This Feather is not large enough.

Tim. Yes faith, it is such a one as the rest of the young
Gallants wear.

Leon. Telamon, does it do well?

Tela. Sir, it becomes you, or you become it, the rareliest --


Leon. Away, do think so?

Tela. Think sir? I know it. Sir, the Princess is past all hope of life since
the Dwarf was put to death.


Leo. Let her be so, I have other matters in hand: but this same Tailor angers
me, he has made my dublet so wide: and see, the knave has put no points at my
arm.


Tima. Those will be put too quickly Sir, upon any occasion.


Leon. Telamon, have you bid this Dauncer come a mornings?

Tela. Yes Sir.

Leon. Timantus, let me see the glass again: look you how careless you are
grown, is this tooth well put in?


Tima. Which Sir?

Leon. This Sir.

Tima. It shall be.

Tela. Me thinks that tooth should put him in mind on's years: and Timantus
stands as if (seeing the Duke in such a youthful habit) he were looking in's
mouth how old he were.


Leon. So, fo.

Tela. Will you have your Gown sir?

Leon. My Gown? why, am I sick? bring me my Sword.

Exit Tela.
Timantus, Let a couple of the great horses be brought out for us.


Tima. Heel kill himself. Why, will you ride sir?

Leon. Ride? Doft thou think I cannot ride?

Timan. O yes sir, I know it: but as I conceive your journey, you would have it
private; and then you were better take a Coach.


Leon. These Coaches make me sick: yet it is no matter, let it be so.

Enter Telamon with a sword.
Tell. Sir, here is your sword.

Leon. O well sed: let me see it, I could me thinks. Why Telamon, bring me
another: what, think thou I will wear a sword in vain?


Tela. He has not strenghth enough to draw it, a yoke of Fleas tide to a hair
would have drawn it. It Is out sir now, the Scabbert is broke.


Leon. O put it up again, and on with it; me thinks I am not dressed till I
feel my sword on.


Leon. Telamon, if any of my counsel ask for me,
Say I am gone to take the air.

Tim. He has not been dressed this twenty years then, If this vain hold but a
week, he will learn to play oath base violl and sing to it: He Is poetical
already; For I have spyde a Sonnet ons making lie by's beds side, I Will be so
unmannerly to read it.

Exit. Enter Hidaspes: Cleophila, and Hero, Hidaspes in a Bed. He Is dead,
he is dead, and I am following.

Cleo. Ask Cupid mercy Madame.

Hida. O my heart!

Cleo. Help! stir her:

Hero: Hida: o, o.

Cleo. She Is going, wretched women that we are:
Look to her, and I Will pray the while.

Hero. Why Maddame?
She kneeles.
Cleo: Cupid pardon what is past,
And forgive our sins at last,
Then we will be coye no more,
But thy Deity Adore,
Troths at fifteen we will plight,
And will tread a Dance each night,
In the Fields, or by the Fire,
With the youths that have desire.
How does she yet?


Hero. O ill:

Cleo. Given Eare-rings we will wear,
Bracelets of our Lovers hair,
Which they on our Arms shall twist,
With their Names carved on wrist,
All the Money that we owe,
We in Tokens will bestow:
And learn to write, that when it is sent,
Only our Loves know what it meant:
O then pardon what is past,
And forgive our sins at last.
What, Minds she?


Hero. Nothing, you do it not want only, you should sing

Hero. Leave, leave, it is now too late:

Cleo. Why She is dead:

Hero. Her last is breathed.

Cleo. What shall wedoe.

Hero. Go run,
And tell the Duke; And whilst I Will close her eyes.
Thus I shut thy faded light,
And put it in eternal night.
Where is she can boldly say
Though she be as fresh as May:
She shall not by this Corpse be laid,
Ere to morrowes light do fade.
Let us all now living be,
Warnd by thy strict Chastity.
And marry all fast as we can,
Till then we keep a piece of man,
Wrongfully from them that owe it
Soon may every Maid bestow it.

Enter Bacha and a Maid.
Bac. Who is it?

Maid. Forsooth there is a gallant Coach at the door,
And the brave old man int, that you said was the Duke.

Bac. Cupid grant he may be taken.
Away.
Maid. He is coming up, and looks the swaggeriugst, and has such glorious
clothes. Bac: Let all the house see me sad, and see all handsome.


Enter Leontius and Timantus, a Jewel, and a Ring.
Leon. Nay widow fly not back, we come not now to chide, stand up and bid
me welcome.


Bac. To a poor widows house that knows no end
Of her ill fortune: your Highness is most welcome.

Leon. Come kiss me then, this is but manners widow: Nere fling your head
aside, I have more cause of grief then you: my Daughters dead: but what? It Is
nothing, is the rough French horse brought to the door? They say he is a high
goer, I shall soon try his metal.


Tim. He will be sir, and the gray Barbary, they are fiery both.


Leon. They are the better: Before the gods I am lightsome, very lightsome: How
do thou like me Widdowe?


Bac. As a person in whom all graces are,

Leon. Come, Come, ye flatter: I Will clappe your cheek for that, and you shall
not be angry.

Have no Music? Now could I cut three times with ease, and do a cross
point, should shame all your gallants.


Bach: I do believe you, and your self too: Lord what a fine old Zany my
Love has made him? Is' mine, I am sure: Heaven make me thankful for him.


Leu: Tell me how old thou art, my pretty sweet heart?

Timant. Your Grace will not buy her, she may trippe Sir?

Bac: My sorrow shows me Elder then I am by many years?

Leon. Thou art so witty I must kiss again.

Tim. In deed her Age lies not in her mouth: nere look it there Sir she has a
better register, if it be not burnt.


Leon. I will kiss thee, I am a fire Timanthus.

Timanth. Can you choose Sir, having such heavenly Fire before you?


Lern. Widow, guess why I come, I prithee do.

Bac. I cannot Sir, unless you be pleased to make a mirth out of my rudeness:
and that I hope your pity will not let ye, the subject is so barren: Bite
King Bite, I Will let you play a while.


Leon: Now as I am an honest man, I Will tell thee truly, how many foot did I
iump yesterday Timanthus?


Tim. Fourteen of your own, and some three fingers.

Bach. This Fellow lies as lightly, as if he were in cut Taffata.
Alas good Almanacke get thee to Bed, and tell what weather we shall have to
morrow.

Leon. Widow I am come in short to be a Suitor.

Bach: For whom?

Leon: Why by my troth, I come to woo thee wench: And win thee for my self:
Nay, look upon me: I have about me that will do it.


Bac: Now Heaven defend me, your whore shall never: I thank the Gods, I have
a little left me to keep me warm, and honest: if your grace take not that, I
seek no more.


Leon. I am so far from taking any thing, I Will add unto thee.

Bach: Such Additions may be for your ease Sir, Not my honesty: I am well in
being single, good Sir seek another, I am no meat for money.


Leon. Shall I fight for thee?
This Sword shall cut his throat, that dares lay claim
But to a Finger of thee, but to a look, I would
See such a fellow.

Bac: It would be but a cold sight to you:
This is the father of S. George a foote-backe,
Can such dry Mumming talk.

Tim. Before the gods, your grace looks like AEncaes.

Bac. He looks like his old father upon his back,
Crying to get Aboard.

Leon. How shall I win thy love, I pray thee tell me?
I Will marry thee if thou desire that: That is an honest
Course, I am in good earnest, and presently within this hour, I am mad for
thee: prithee deny me not,
For as I live I Will pine thee, but I Will have thee.

Bac: Now he is in the Toil, i will hold him fast.

Tim. You do not know what it is to be a Queen,
Go to your Maid, else what the old man falls short of, there is others can
eech out, when you please to call on em.

Bac: I understand you not, Love I adore thee,
Sir, on my knees I give you hearty thanks, for so much
Honoring your humble Handmayd above her birth:
Far more her weak deseruings. I dare-not trust the
Enuiou: tongues of all that must repine at my unworthy rising.
Beside, you have many fair ones in your kingdom
Borne to such worth: o turn your self about
And make a Noble choice.

Leon. If I do, let me famish: I will have thee,
Or break up house, and board here.

Bac. Sir, you may command an unwilling woman to obey vee: but heaven knows --


Leon. No more: these half a dozen kisses, and this Jewel, and every thing I
have, and away with me, and clappe it up; and have a boy by the morning
Timantus. Let one be sent post for my son again: and for Ismenus, they are
scarce twenty mile on their way yet, by that time we will be married.


Tima. There shall Sir.
Exeunt.
Finis Act. secundi.
Actus tertij. Scoen. pri.
Enter Dorialus, Agenor, Nisus.
Nisus. Is not this a fine marriage?

Age. Yes, yes, let it alone.

Dor. I, I, the King may marry whom's list, lets talk of other matters.


Nis. Is the Prince coming home certainly?

Dor. Yes, yes, he was sent post for yesterday, lets make haste, we will see how
his new Mother-in-law will entertain him.


Nis. Why well I warrant you: did you not mark how humbly she carried her
self to us on her marriage day, acknowledging her own unworthiness, and that
she would be our servant.


Dor. But mark what is done. Nis. regard not show

Age. O God! I knew her when I have been offered her to be brought to my bed
for five pound: whether it could have been performd or no, I know not.


Nis. Her daughters a pretty Lady.

Dor. Yes: and having had but mean bringing up, it talks the pretlest and
innocentlest, the Queen will be so angry to hear her betray her breeding by her
language: but I am persuaded she is well disposed.


Age. I think better then her mother.

Nis. Come, we stay too long.
Exeunt. Enter Leucippus and Ismenus.
Isme. How now man, struck dead with a tale?

Leu. No, but with a truth.

Isme. Stand of your self: can you endure blows, and shrink at words?


Leu. Thou know I have told thee all.

Ism. But that all is nothing to make you thus: your
Sisters dead.

Leu. That's much, but not the most.

Isme. Why, for the other let her marry and hang, it is no purposed fault of
yours: and if your father will needs have your cast whore, you shall show the
duty of a child better in being contented, and bidding much good do his good
old heart with her, then in repining thus at it: let her go: what, there are
more wenches man, we will have another.


L. O thou art vain, thou know I do not love her:
What shall I do? I would my tongue had led me
To any other thing, but Blasphemy,
So I had mist commending of this woman,
Whom I must reverence now, she is my mother;
My finne Ismenus has wrought all this ill:
And I beseech thee, to be warnd by me,
And do not lie, if any man should ask thee
But How thou do, or, What a clock it is now,
Be sure thou do not lie, make no excuse
For him that is most near thee: never let
The most officious falsehood escape thy tongue,
For they above (that are entirely truth)
Will make that seed, which thou hait fowne
Of lies, yield miseries a thousand sold
Upon thine head, as they have done of mine.
Enter Timantus.
Tim. Sir, your Highness is welcome home, the Duke and Queen will presently
come forth to you.


Leu. I Will weight on them.

Tima. Worthy Ismenus, I pray how have you sped in your wars?


Isme. This Rogue mocks me. Well Timantus, 'pray how have you sped here at home
at shouelboord?


Tim. Faith reasonable. How many Towns have you taken in this Summer?


Isme. How many Stagges have you been at the death of this grass?


Tim. A number. 'pray how is the province settled?

Isme. Prithee how does the dunne Nagge?

Tim. I think you mock me my Lord.

Isme. Mock thee? Yes by my troth do I: why what would thou have me do
with thee? Art good for any thing else?

Enter Leontius, Bacha, Dorialus, Agenor, Nisus, Telamon.
Leu. My good Ismenus, hold me by the wrist:
And if thou see me fainting, wring me hard,
For I shall soon again else --
Kneeles.
Leon. Welcome my son; rise, I did send for thee
Back from the Province, by thy Mothers counsel,
Thy good Mother here, who loves thee well:
She would not let me venture all my Joy
Amongst my enemies: I thank thee for her,
And none but thee, I took her on thy word.

Leuc. Pinch harder.

Leon. And she shall bid thee welcome: I have now
Some near affairs, but I will drink a Health
To thee a non: Come Telamon, I Am grown
Lustier, I thank thee for it, since I married;
I can stand now alone, why Telamon,
And never stagger.
Exit Leontius, Telamon.
Bac. Welcome most noble sir, whose fame is come
Hither before you: out alas you scorn me,
And teach me what to do.

Leu. No, you are my Mother.

Bac. Far unworthy of that name God knows:
But trust me, here before these Lords,
I am no more but Nurse unto the Duke;
Nor will I breed a faction in the State,
It is too much for me that I am raised
Unto his bed, and will remain the servant
Of you that did it.

Leu. Madame I will serve you
As shall become me. O dissembling woman!
Whom I must reverence though Take from thy
Quiver, suer-aymd Apollo, one of thy swift darts,
Headed with thy consuming golden beams,
And let it melt this body into mist,
That none may find it.

Bac. Shall I beg my Lords
This Room in private for the Prince and me?
Exeunt all but Leu. and Bach.
Leu. What will she say now?

Bach. I must still enjoy him:
Yet there is still left in me a spark of woman,
That wishes he would move it, but he stands,
As if he grew there with his eyes on earth,
Sir, you and I when we were last together
Kept not this distance as we were afraid
Of blasting by our selves.

Leu: Madame it is true, Heaven pardon it.

Bac: Amen Sir.
You may think that I have done you wrong in this strange marriage,

Leu: It Is past now.

Bac: But it was no fault of mine:
The world had called me mad, had I refusde
The King: nor laid I any train to catch him,
It was your own Oaths did it.

Leuc: It Is a truth: that takes my sleep away, but
Would to Heaven, if it had so been pleased, you had
Refusde him, though I had gratifide that courtesy
With having you my self: But since it is thus,
I do beseech you that you will be honest
From henceforth, and not abuse his credulous Age,
Which you may easily do. As for my self
What I can say you know alas too well
Is tide within me, here it will sit like lead,
But shall offend no other, it will pluck me
Back from my entrance into any mirth,
As if a servant came, and whisperd with me
Of some Friends death, but I will bear my self,
To you, with all the due obedience
A son owes to a Mother: more then this,
Is not in me, but I must leave the rest to the
Just gods: who in their blessed time,
When they have given me punishment enough,
For my rash sin, will mercifully find
As unexpected means to ease my grief
As they did now to bring it.

Bac: Grown so godly: this must not be. And
I will be to you, no other then a natural Mother ought:
And for my honesty, so you will swear
Never to urge me, I shall keep it safe from any other.

Leu. Bless me I should urge you?

Bac. Nay but swear then that I may be at peace,
For I do feel a weakness in my self,
That can deny you nothing, if you tempt me,
I shall embrace finne as it were a friend, and run to meet it

Leu. If you know how far
It were from me, you would not urge an Oath,
But for your satistaction, when I tempt you.

Bac: Swear not: I cannot move him, this sad talk
Of things past help, does not become us well.
Shall I send one for my Musitions and we will dance?

Leu. Dance Madame.

Bac. Yes, Alaualta.

Leu. I cannot dance Madam.

Bac. Then lets be merry

Leu. I am as my Fortunes bid me.
Do not you see me sour?

Leu. Yes.
And why think you I smile?

Leu. I am so far from any joy my self,
I cannot fancy a cause of mirth.

Bac. He tell you, we are alone:

Leu. Alone. Bac. Yes.

Leu. It Is true, what then?

Bac. What then? you make my smiling now
Break into laughter: what think you is to be don then?

Leu. We should pray to Heaven for mercy.

Bac. Pray, that were a way indeed
To pass the time, but I will make you blush,
To see a bashful woman teach a man
What we should do alone, try again
If you can find it out.

Leu. I dare not think I understand you.

Ba. I must teach you then; Come, kiss me.

Leu. Kiss you?

Bac. Yes, be not ashamde:
You did it not your self, I will forgive you.

Leave. Keep you displeased gods, the due respect
I ought to bear unto this wicked woman,
As she is now my Mother, Have within me,
Least I add sins to sins, till no repentance will cure me.

Bac. Leave these melancholy moodes,
That I may swear thee welcome on thy lips
A thousand times.

Leuc. Pray leave this wicked talk,
You do not know to what my Fathers wrong
May urge me.

Bac. I me careless, and do weigh
The world, my life, and all my after hopes
Nothing without thy Love, mistake me not:
Thy Love, as I have had it, free and open
As wedlock is, within it self, what say you?

Leu. No-thing.

Bac. Pity me, behold a Duchess
Kneeles for thy mercy, and I swear to you,
Though I should iye with you, it is no Lust,
For it desires no change, I could with you
Content my self: what answer will you give?

Leuc. They that can answer must be less amazde,
Then I am now: you see my tears deliver
My meaning to you.

Bac. Shall I be contemd? thou art a beast, worse the^ a savage beast,
To let a Lady kneel, to beg that thing
Which a right man would offer.

Leu. It Is your will Heaven: but let me bear me like
My self, how ever she does.

Ba. Were you made an Eunuch, since you went hence? yet they have more desire
then I can find in you:
How fond was I to beg thy love? He force thee to my will
Do thou not know that I can make the King
Dote as my list? yield quickly, or by Heaven
I Will have thee kept in prison for my purpose,
Where I will make thee serve my turn, and have thee fed
With such meats as best shall sit my ends
And not thy health, why do not speak to me?
And when thou do displease me, and art grown
Less able to perform; then I will have thee
Killed and forgotten: Are you stricken dumb?

Leu. All you have nam'de, but making of me sin
With you, you may command, but never that;
Say what you will, I Will hear you as becomes me,
If you speak, I will not follow your counsel,
Neither will I tell the world to your disgrace,
But give you the just honor
That is due from me to my Fathers wife.

Bac: Lord how full of wise formality you are grown
Of late: but you were telling me
You could have wished that I had married you,
If you will swear so yet, I Will make away the King.

Leuc. You are a strumpet.

Bach. Nay, I care not
For all your Raylings: They will Batter walls
And take in Towns, as soon as trouble me
Tell him, I care not, I shall undo you only, which is no matter.

Leuc: I appeal to you still, and for ever, that are
And cannot be other, Madame I see it is in your power
To work your will on him: And I desire you
To lay what trains you will for my wished death,
But suffer him to find his quiet grave
In peace; Alas he never did you wrong,
And further I beseech you pardon me,
For the ill word I gave you, for how ever
You may deserve, it became not me
To call you so, but passion vrges me
I know not whether my heart break now, and ease me ever.

Bac. Pray you get you hence
With your goodly humor, I am weary of you extremely.

Leuc. Trust me, so am I of my self too:
Madame, I Will take my leave; gods set all right.

Bac. A men, Sir get you gone;
Am I denyde? it does not trouble me
That I have moved, but that I am refusde:
I have lost my patience: I will make him know
Lust is not Love, for Lust will find a mate
While there are men, and so will I: and more
Enter Timantus. Then one, or twenty: yonder is Timantus,
A fellow void of any worth, to raise himselse
And therefore like to catch at any evil
That will but pluck him up, him will I make
Mine own: Timantus.

Timantus. Maddame?

Bac: Thou know well
Thou were, by chance a means of this my raising:
Brought the Duke to me, and though it were but chase
I must reward thee.

Tim. I shall bend my service unto your Highness.

Baca. But do it then entirely, and in every thing,
And'tell me, Could thou now think that thing
Thou would not do for me?

Timant. Noc by my soul Maddame.

Baca. Then thou art right.
Go to my Lodging, and I Will follow thee
Exit Timantus. With my instruction I do see already,
This prin ce that did but now contemn me, dead:
Yet will I never speak an evil word
Unto his Father of him till I have wonnc
A belief I love him, but I Will make
His virtues his undoing, and my praises
Shall be so many swords against his breast,
Which once performde, I Will make Urania
My Daughter, the Kings heir, and plant my Issue,
In this large Throne: Nor shall it be withstood,
They that begin in Lust, must end in blood.
Exit. Enter Dorialus, Agenor, Nisus.
Doria. We live to know a fine time, Gentl.

Nus. And a fine Duke, that through his doting age
Suffers him to be a child again
Under his Wives tuition.

Again. All the Land holds in that tenor too: in woman's service? sure we shall
learn to spinne.


Dor. No, that's too honest: we shall have other
Liberal Sciences taught us too soon;
Lying, and Flattering, those are the studies now:
And Murder shortly I know, will be humanity Gent.
If we live here we must be knaves, believe it.

Nis. I cannot tell my Lord Dorialus, though my
Own nature hate it, if all determine to be knaves,
I Will try what I can do upon my self, that's certain,
I will not have my throat cut for my goodness,
The virtue will not quit the pain.

Age. But pray you tell me,
Why is the Prince, now ripe and full experient,
Not made a door in the State?

Nis. Because he is honest.
Enter Timantus.
Tim. Goodness attend your Honors.

Dor. You must not be amongst us then.

Tim. The Duchess, whose humble Servant I am prou'de to be, would speak with
you.


Age. Sir we are pleased to wait: when is it?

Tim. An hour hence my good Lords, and so I leave my service.


Dor. This is one of her Ferrets that she bolts business out withal: this
fellow, if he were well ripped, has all the linings of a knave within him: how
slye he looks?


Nis. Have we nothing about our clothes that he may catch at?


Agenor. OF my conscience there is no treason in my dublet, if there be, my
elboes will discover it, they are out.


Dor. Faith, and all the harm that I can find in mine is, that they are not
paid for, let him make what he can of that, so he discharge that. Come, lets
go.

(Exeunt. Enter Bach, Leontius, Tella.
Bac. And you shall find sir what a blessing heaven gave you in such a son.


L. Pray gods I may. Lets walk and change out subject.

B. O sir, can any thing come sweeter to you, or strike a deeper joy into your
heart then your sons virtue?


L. I allow his virtues: but it is not hansome thus to feed my self with such
moderate praises of mine own.


Bac. The subject of our commendations is it self grown so infinite in
goodness, that all the glory we can lay upon it, though we should open volumes
of his praises, is a mere modesty in his expression, and shows him lame
still, like an ill wrought piece wanting proportion.


Leo. Yet still he is a man, and subject still to more inordinate vices, then
our love can give him blessing.


Bac. Else he were a god: yet so near as he is, he comes to heaven, that we
may see so far as flesh can point us things only worthy them, and only
these in all his actions.


Leon. This is too much my Queen.

Bach. Had the gods loved me, that my unworthy womb had bred this brave man.


Leon. Still you run wrong.

Bac. A would have lived upon the comfort of him, fed on his growing hopes.


Leo. This touches me.


Bac. I know no friends, nor being, but his virtues.

L. You have laid out words enough upon a subject.

Bac. But words cannot express him sir: why what a shape Heaven has conceived
him in, oh Nature made him up!


Leon. I wonder Duchess.


Bac. So you must: for less then admiration loses this god-like man.


Leon. Have you done with him?


Bach. Done with? o good gods what frailties this pass by us without reverence!


Leon. I see no such perfection.

Bac: O dear Sir: you are a father, and those i oyes
To you speak in your heart, not in your tongue.

Lco. This leaves a taste behind it worse then physic.

Baca. Then for all his wisdom, valor,
Good Fortune, and all those Friends of honor,
They are in him as free and natural as passions
In a Woman.

Leon. You make me blush at all these years
To see how blindely you have flung your praises
Upon a Boy, a very child, and worthless,
Whilst I live of these Honors.

Bac. I would not have my love Sir: Make my tongue
Show me so much a woman: as to praise
Or dispraise, where my will is, without reason
Or general allowance of the people.

Leon. Allowance of the people, what allow they

Bac. Al, I have seed for truth, and they must do it,
And dote upon him: love him, and admire him.

Leon: Howes that?

Bac. For in this youth and noble frowardnes
All things are bound together that are kingly
A fitness to bear rule

Leon. No more

Bac. And soueraintie, not made to know command

Leon. I have sed no more.

Bac. I have done Sir though unwilling, and pardon me.

Leon. I do, not a word more

Baca. I have gin thee poison
Of more infection then the Dragons tooth
Or the gross Air ore heated.

Leon. Timantus when saw you the prince?

Tim, I left him now Sir.

Leon. Tell me truly, out of your free opinion without courting, How you like
him:


Tim, How I like him?

Leon. Yes, for you in conversation may see more then a Father.


Bac: It works.

Timantus. Your grace has chosen out an ill obseruer.

Leon. Yes I mean of his Ill: you take rightly.

Tim. But you take me wrong: All I know by him
I dare deliver boldly: He is the storehouse
And head of virtue: your great self excepted
That feeds the Kingdom.

Leon. These are flatteries: speak me his vices there you do a service worth
a Fathers thanks.


Tim. Sir, I cannot, If there be any, sure they are the times which I could
wish less dangerous. But pardon me, I am too bold.


Leon. You are not, forward and open what these dangers are.

Tima Nay, good Sir.

Leon. Nay fall not off again,
I will have all.

Timan. Alas Sir, what am I, you should believe
My eyes or ears, so subtle to observe
Faults in a State, all my maine business
Is service to your Grace, and necessaries
For my poor life.

Leon. Doc not displease me Syrrha,
But that you know tell me, and presently.

Timan. Since your Grace will have it
I Will speak it freely: Always my obedience
And Love preserved unto the Prince.

Timan. Prithee to the matter.

Tim. For Sir if you consider
How like a Sun in all his great employments,
How full of heat.

Leon. Make me understand what I desire.

Tim. And then at his return

Leon. Do not anger me.

Timan: Then thus Sir, All mislike ye,
As they would do the gods, if they did dwell with em.

Loon. What?

Tim. Talk and prate, as their ignoant rages leads em, without Allegiance or
Religion. For Heavens sake have a care of your own person, I cannot tell,
their wickedness may lead Farther then I dare think yet.


Leo. O base people.

Tim. Yet the prince, for who this is pretended may
Perswadeem, etc no doubt will, virtue is ever watchful
But be you still secur'de and comforted.

Leon. Heaven you have I offended, that this rod
So heavy and unnatural, should fall upon me
When I am old and helpless.

Tim. Brave Gentl: that such a madding love should sollow thee, to rob thee of
a Father: All the Court is full of dangerous whispers.


Leon. I perceive it, and spite of all they, strengths will make my safety:
I Will cut him shorter.


Leon. I Will cut him shorter first, then let him rule.

Bac: What a foul Age is this, when Virtue is
Made a sword to smite the virtuous? Alas, alas!

Leon. I Will teach him to fly lower.

Tim. By no means Sir, rather make more your love,
And hold your favor to him: for it is now
Impossible to yoke him, if his thoughts,
As I must nere believe, run with their rages,
He never was so innocent, but what reason
His grace has to with draw his love from me
And other good men that are neert your person
I cannot yet find out: I know my duty
Has ever been attending.

Leon. It Is too plain: He means to play the villain,
I Will prevent him, not a word more of this, be private.
Exit Leontuss.
Tim. Madame it is done.

Bac. He cannot escape me. Have you spoken with the noble men?

Tim. Yes Madame they are here: I wait a further service.


Bac. Till yet be the prince, you need no more instructions.


Tim. No I have it.

Exit Timantus.
Enter Dorialus, Nisus, Agenor.
Bac. That fool that willingly prouokes a woman,
Has made him self another evil Angel,
And a new Hell, to which all other torments
Are but mere pastime: Now my Noble Lords
You must excuse me that unmannerly
We have broke your private business.

Again. Your good grace may command us, and that.

Bac. Faith my Lord Agenor: It Is so good a cause
I am confident, you cannot loose by it.

Dorialus. Which way does she Fish now?
The Devil is but a Fool to a right woman.

Nisus. Madame we must needs win in doing
Service to such a gracious Lady.

Bac. I thank you, and will let you know the business: So I may have your
helps, never be doubtful,
For it is so just a cause, and will to you
Upon the knowledge, seem so honorable,
That I assure my self your willing hearts
Will strait be for me in it.

Age. If she should prove good now, what were like?

Dorial. Thunder in January, or a good woman,
That's stranger then all Affricke.

Baca. It shall not need your wonder, this it is;
The Duke you know is old, and rather subject
To ease and prayers now, then all those troubles,
Cares, and continual watchings, that attend
A Kingdoms safety, therefore to prevent
The fall of such a flourishing Estate
As this has ever been, and to put off
The murmr of the people that increase
Against my government, which the gods knows
I only feel the trouble of: I present
The prince unto your loves, a Gent.
In whom all Excellencies are knit together,
All pieces of a true man, let your prayers
Win from the Duke half his Vexation,
That he may undertake it, whose discretion
I must confess, though it be from the Father,
Yet now is stronger, and more apt to govern.
It Is not my own desire, but all the Lands
I know the weakness of it.

Nisus. Madam, this noble care and love has won us
For ever to your lives, we will to the King,
And since your Grace has put it in our mouths,
Wecle win him with the cunningst words we can.

Dorial: I was never cousend in a woman before,
For commonly they are like Apples: If once they bruise
They will grow rotten through, and serve for nothing but to assuage swellings.

Bac. Good Lords delay no time since it is your good
Pleasures to think my counsel good, and by no means
Let the prince know it, whose affections
Will stir mainely against it; besides his Father,
May hold him dangerous, if it be not carried
So that his forward will apreare not in it,
Go, and be happy.

Dorial: Well, I would not be Chronikled as thou Will be for a good woman, for all the world.

Nisus. Madame, we kiss your hands, and so inspire
Nothing but happiness can crown our prayers.
Exeu^t.
Actus quarti. Coena prima.
Enter Leucippus, Ismenus.
Leu. And thus she has vsd me, is it not a good mother?

Ismenus. Why killed you her not?

Leuc. The Gods forbid it.

Ismenus. S'light, if all the women ithe world were
Barren, she had did.

Leuc: But it is not reason directs thee thus.

Ismen. Then gave I none at all, for all I have in me
Directs me: Your Father's in a pretty Rage.

Leucippus. Why.

Ismenus. Nay, it is well, if he know himself, but some of the Nobility have
delivered a petition to him: what is int, I know not, but it has put him to his
trumps: he has taken a months time to answer it and chafes like himfelfe.

Enter Leontius, Bacha, and Tellamon.
Leu. He Is here Ismenus.

Leon. Set me down Tellamon. Leucippus.

Leu. Sir.

Bach. Nay good sir be at peace, I dare swear he knew not of it.


Leon. You are foolish: peace.

Bach. All will go ill, deny it boldly sir, trust me he cannot prove it by
you.


Leu. What!

Bach. You Will make all worse too with your facing it.

Leuc. What is the matter!

Leon. Know thou that petition?
Look on it well: would thou be joined with me
(Unnatural child to be weary of me)
Ere Fate esteem me fit for other worlds.

Bac. May be he knows not of it.

Leuc. O strange carriages!
Sir, As I have hope that there is any thing
To reward doing well, my vsages
Which hane been (but it is no matter what)
Have put me so far from the thought of Greatness,
That I should welcome it like a disease
That grew upon me, and I could not cure.
They are my enemies that gave you this,
And yet they call me friend, and are themselves
I fear abused. I am weary of my life,
For Gods sake take it from me: it creates
More mischief in the State then it is worth.
The usage I have had, I know would make
Wisdom her self run frantic through the streets.
And Patience quarrel with her shadow.
Sir, this sword --

Bac. Alas: help for the love of heaven,
Make way through me first, for he is your father,

Leon. What, would he kill me?

Bac. No sir, no.

Leo. Thou always make the best ont: but I fear --

Leu. Why do you use me thus? who is it can think
That I would kill my father, that can yet
For bear to kill you? Here sir is my sword,
I dare not touch it, lest she say again
I would have killed you: let me not have mercy
When I most need it, if I would not change
Place with my meanest servant. Let these faults
Be mended Madame: if you saw how ill
They did become you, you would part with them.

Bac. I told the Duke as much before.

Leuc. What? what did you tell him?

Bac. That it was only an ambition,
Nursed in you by your youth, prouokt you thus,
Which age would take away.

Leon. It was his doing then: come hither Love.

Bac. No indeed sir.

Leu. How am I made; that I can bear all this?
If any one had used a friend of mine nere this,
My hand had carried death about it.

Leon. Lead me hence Tellamon: come my dear

Bacha, I shall find time for this.

Ism. Madame, you know I dare not speak before
The King; but you know well, if not I le tell it you,
You are the most wickedst, and most murderous
Strumpet that ever was called Woman.

Bac. My Lord, what I can do for him he shall command me.


Leon. I know thou art too kind; away I say.
Exit Leon. Bac. Tima. Tella.
Isme. Sir, I am sure we dream this cannot be.

Leu. O that we did my wickedness has brought
All this to pass, else I should bear my self.
Enter Urania.
Isme. Look, do you see whose there? your virtuous Mothers issue: kill her,
yet take some little pidling revenge.


Leuc. Away, the whole Court calls her virtuous; for they say, she is unlike
her mother and if so she can have no vice.


Is. I le trust none of em that come of such a breed.

Leu. But I have found
A kind of love in her to me: alas,
Think of her death; I dare be sworn for her,
She is as free from any hate to me
As her bad mothers full. She was brought up
7th Country, as her tongue will let you know
If you but talk with her, with a poor Uncle,
Such as her mother had.
Ent. V.
Isme. She Is come again.

Vra. I would fene speak to the good Marquess my brother, if I but thought he
could abaid me.


Leuc. Sister, how do you.

Vra. Very well I thank you.

Isme. How does your good mother?

Leuc. Fie, fie, Ismenus for shame, mock such an innocent soul as this.


Vra. Feth a she be no good, God may her so.

Le. I know you wish it with your heart dear sister, but she is good I hope.


Isme. Are you so simple, to make so much of this,
Do you not know,
That all her wicked mother labors for, is but to raise
Her to your right, and leave her this Duked ome.

Ura. I, but nere sir be afred;
For though she take th'vngainst weas she can,
I Will nere hat fro you.

Leuc. I should hate my self Ismenus;
If I should think of her simplicity,
Ought but extremely well.

Isme. Nay as you will.

Ura. And though she be my Mother,
If she take any caurse to do you wrong,
If I can seet, youst quickly hear ont sir:
And so I Will take my leave.

Leu. Farewell good Sister, I thank you.
Exit Urania.
Ismen. You believe all this:

Leu. Yes;
Enter Timantus.
Ismen. A good faith does well, but me thinks
It were no hard matter now, for her Mother to send
Her: yonder is one you may trust if you will too.

Leu. So I will, if he can show me as apparent signs
Of truth as she did; Does he weep Ismenus?

Ism. Yes, I think so: some goods happend I warrant; Do you hear you? What
honest man has scapd misery, that you are crying thus?


Timantus. Noble Ismenus, where is the Prince?

Ismen. Why there; have wept thine eyes out?

Timantus. Sir, I beseech you hear me.

Leuc. Well speak on.

Ismenus. Why will you hear him?

Leu. Yes Ismenus, why?

Ismenus. I would hear blasphemy as willingly.

Leu. You are to blame:

Tim. No Sir: He is not to blame;
If I were as I was.

Ismen. Nor as thou art, y faith a whit to blame,

Leuc. What Is your business?

Tim. Faith Sir, I am ashamed to speak before you,
My conscience tells me I have iniurd you,
And by the earnest instigation,
Of others have not done you to the King
All ways the best and friendliest offices,
Which pardon me, or I will never speak.

Ismen. Never pardon him and silence a knave.

Leu. I pardon thee.

Tim Your mother sure is naught

Leuc. Why should thou think so?

Tim. O noble Sir, your honest eyes perceive not
The dangers you are led to shame upon her,
And what fell miseries the gods can think on
Show down upon her wicked head, she has plotted,
I know too well your death: would my poor life
Or thousand such as mine is might be offered
Like sacrifices up for your presuming,
What free oblations would she have to glut her,
But she is merciless, and bent to ruin,
If Heaven and good men step not to your reskue,
And timely, very timely, O this Duke dome!
I weep, I weep for the poor Orphans ith Country
Left with but Friends; or parents.

Leuc. Now Ismenus, what think you of this fellow?
This was a lying knave, a flatterer,
Does not this love still show him so.

Ismen. This love, this halter: if he prove not yet
The cunningst, ranckest Rogue that ever Canted,
I Will never see man again, I know him to bring,
And can interpret every new face he makes,
Look how he wrings like a good stool for a tear,
Take heed, Children and Fools
First feel the smart: Then weep.

Leac. A way, away, such an unkind distrust,
Is wosse then a dissembling, if it be one,
And sooner leads to mischief I believe it,
And him an honest man: he could not carry
Under an evil cause so true a sorrow.

Ismenus. Take heed, this is your Mothers scorpion,
That carries stings even in his tears,
Whose soul is a rank poison through: Touch
Not at him, if you do you are gone, if you had twenty
Lives: I knew him from a Roguish boy, when
He would poison Dogs, and keep tame Toades,
He lay with his Mother, and infected her, and now
She begges ith Hospital, with a patch of velvet,
Where her Nose stood: like the queen of spades.
And all her Teeth in her purse, the Devil and this
Fellow are so near, It Is not yet known which is the euiller Angel.

Leu. Nay then I see it is spite: Come hither friend. Have thou not heard the
cause yet that ince^sd my mother to my death, for I protest I feel none in my
self?


Timantus. Her will Sir, and ambition, as I think
Are the prouokers of it as in women
Those two are ever powerful to destruction,
Beside a hate of your still growing virtues,
She being only wicked.

Leu. Heavens defend me as I am innocent,
And ever have bin from all immoderate thoughts and
Actions, that carry such rewards along with em.

Tima. Sir all I know, my duty must reveal
My country and my love command it from me,
For whom I Will lay my life down, this night coming.
A Counsel is appointed by the Duke,
To sit about your apprehension:
If you dare trust my faith: which by all good things
Shall ever watch about you: Go along,
And to a place I Will guide you: where no word,
Shall escape without your hearing, Nor, no plot.
Without discovering to you, which once known, you have your answers and
prevention.

Is. You are not so mad to go; shift of this fellow, you shall be ruled once
by a wise man: rats bane get you gone, or --


L. Peace, peace for shame, thy love is too suspicious, it is away offered to
preserve my life, and I will take it: be my Guide Timantus, and do not mind
this angry man, thou know him: I may live to requite thee.


Ti. Sir, this service is done for virtues sake, not for reward, how ever he
may hold me.


Is. The great pox on you: but thou have that curse so much, twill grow a
blessing in thee shortly. Sir, for wisdoms sake court not your death, I am
your friend and subject, and I shall lose in both: if I loved you not, I would
laugh at you, and see you run your neck into the noose, and cry a Woodcocke.


Leu. So much of man, and so much fearful; fie, prithee have peace within
thee: I shall live yet many a golden day to hold thee here dearest and nearest
to me: Go on Timantus. I charge you by your love no more, no more.

Exeunt Leuc. Tim.
Is. Go, and let your own rod whip you:
I pity you, And dog, if he miscarry thou shall pay fort,
I Will study for thy punishment, and it shall last
Longer and sharper then a tedious Winter,
Till thou blasphemst, and then thou die and dambst.
Exit. Enter Leontius and Tellamon.
Leon. I wonder the Duchess comes not.

Tet. She has hard sir your will to speak with her:
But there is some thing leaden at her heart
(Pray God it be not mortal) that even keeps her
From conversation with her self.
Enter the Duchess.
B. O whither will ye me cross affections pull me?
Fortune, Fate, and you whose powers direct our actions,
And dwell within us: you that are Angels
Guiding to virtue, wherefore have you given
So strong a hand to cuill? wherefore sufferd
A Temple of your own, you Deities
Where your fair selves dwelt only, and your goodness
Thus to be soyld with sin?

Leon. Heaven bless us all.
From whence coms this distemper? speak my fair one.

Bac. And have you none, love and obedience,
You ever faithful Servants to employ
In this strange story of impiety,
But me a Mother, Must I be your strumpet?
To lay black treason upon and in him,
In whom all sweetness was: in whom my love
Was proud'de, to have a being, in whom Justice,
And all the gods for our imaginations
Can work into a man, were more then virtues,
Ambition down to Hell, where thou were fosterd
Thou have poysond the best soul, the purest, whitest,
And meerest innocentst it self that ever
Men's greedy hopes gave life to.

Leon. This is still stranger: lay this treason,
Open to my correction.

Bac. O what a combat duty and affection
Breeds in my blood.

Leon. If thou concealst him may
Beside my death the curses of the Country,
Troubles of conscience, and a wretched end,
Bring thee unto a poor forgotten grave.

Bach. My being: for another tongue to tell it,
Cease, a mother! some good man that dares
Speak for his King and Country: I am full
Of too much woman's pity: yet o Heaven,
Since it concerns the safety of my sovereign
Let it not be a cruelty in me
Nor draw a Mothers name in question,
Amongst unborn people, to give up that man:
To law and Justice that unrighteously
Has sought his sathers death: be dease, be dease Sir,
Your Son is the Offender, Now have you all,
Would I might never speak again.

Leon. My Son? Heaven help me.
No more I thought it: and since
His life is grown so dangerous: Let them that
Gave him, take him: He shall dye,
And with him all my fears.

Bac. O use your mercy: you have a brave subject
To bestow it on, I Will forgive him Sir: and for his
Wrong to me, I Will be before ye.

Leon. Durst his villenie extend to thee?

Bac. Nothing but heates of youth Sir.

Leon. Upon my life he sought my Bed.

Bach. I must confess he loved me:
Somewhat beyond a Son, and still pursude it
With such a Lust: I will not say Ambition,
That clean sorgetting all obedience,
And only following his first heat unto me,
He hotely fought your death, and me in Marriage.

Leon. O Villain!

Bac. But I forget all: and am half ashamde
To press a man so far.
Enter Timantus. Where is the Duke? for Gods sake bring me to him.

Leon. Here I am; Each corner of the Dukedom
Sends new affrights forth: what would thou speak?

Timantus. I cannot Sir, my fear ties up my tongue.

Leon. Why, what is the matter? Take thy courage
To thee; and boldly speak, where are the Guard?
In the Gods name, cut with it:

Tim. Treason, treason.

Leon. In whom?

Bac. Double the Guard.

Timantus. There is a fellow Sir.

Leon. Leave shaking man.

Timant. It Is not for fear, but wonder. Leon. Well.

Timant. There is a fellow Sir, close ith Lobby:
You oath Guarde, look to the door there.

Leon. But let me know the business.

Tima. O that the hearts of men should be so hardened
Against so good a Duke, for Gods sake Sir,
Seek means to save your self, This wretched slave
Has his sword in his hand, I know his heart:
Oh it has almost killd me with the thought of it.

Leon. Where is he?
Enter the Guard, and bring him in.
Timant. The Lobby Sir, close in a corner:
Look to your selves, for Heavens sake,
Me thinks he is here already.
Fellows of the Guard be valiant.

Leon. Go sirs, and apprehend him; Treason shall
Never dare me in mine own Gates.

Tim. It Is done.
There they bring the Prince in.
Bac: And thou shall find it to thy best content.

Lesn. Are these the comforts of my Age?
Their happy that end their days Contented
With a little, and live aloof from dangers, to a King
Every coutent does a new; peril bring.
O let me live no longer, shame of Nature,
Bastard to Honor: Traitor, Murderer,
Devil in a humane shape, A way with him,
He shall not breath his hot infection here.

Leuc. Sir hear me.

Leon. Am I or he your Duke? away with im
To a close prison: your Highness now shall know,
Such branches must be cropped before they grow,

Leuc. What ever Fortune comes, I bid it welcome,
My innocence is my Armor: Gods preserve you.
Exit.
Bac. Fare thee well. I shall never see so brave a Ge^tl:
Would I could weep out his offenses.

Tim. Or I would weeepe out mine eyes.

Leon. Come Gentlemen, we will determine presently
About his death: we cannot be too forward in our
Safety: I am very sick, lead me unto my Bed.
Exeu^t. Enter Citizen and his Boy.
Citizen. Syrrha, go fetch my Fox from the Cutlers: There Is money for the
scowring: Tell him, I stop a Grote since the last great Muster: He had in
store Pitch for the bruze. He took with the Recoyling of his Gunne.


Boy. Yes Sir.

Cittiz. And do you hear? when you come, Take down my Buckler, and sweep the
Copwebs off: and Grind the pick out, and fetch a Nail or two: and Tacke on
bracers: your Mistress made a potlid ont, I thank her at her Mayds wedding, and
burnt off the Handle.


Boy, I will Sir.
Exit.
Cittiz. Whoes within here, hoe Neighbor, not styrring yet?


2. Cittiz. O God morrow, god morrow: what
News, what news?

1, Cittiz. It holds, he dies this morning.

2. Cittiz: Then happy man be his fortune, I am resolude,

1. Cittiz: And so am I, and 40. more good fellows
That will not give their heads for the washing, I take it.

2. Cittiz. Sfoote man, who would not hang in such Good company, and such a
cause? A Fire a Wife and Children, It Is such a Jest that men should look
behind em to the world: And let their honors, their honors Neighbor slip.


1. Cittiz. I Will give thee a pint of Bastard and a roll For that bare word,

2. Cittiz. They say that we Tailors, are things that
Lay one another, and our Geese hatche us: I Will make some of vm feel they are
Geefe ath game then,
Ifack take down my Bill, it is ten to one I use it, Take a
Good heart man, all the low ward is ours, with a wett
Finger.
And lay my Cut-fingred Gantlet ready for me,
That that I used to work in, when the Gentl: were
Up against us, a beaten out of town, and almost out a
Debt to, for a plague on vm, they never paid well since,
And take heed sirrah: your mistress hears not of this
Business, she is near her time: yet if she do,
I care not, she may long for Rebellion,
For she has a devilish spirit,

1. Cittiz. Come, lets call up the new Ircmonger, is as
Tough as steel, and has a fine wit in these resurrections:
Are you stirring Neighbor?

3. Within. O Good morrow Neighbors,
I Will come to you presently.

2. Go too, this is his Mothers doing: she is a Polecat.

1. As any is in the world.

2. Then say I have hit it, and a vengeance on her, let her be what she will.


1. Amen say I, she has brought things to a fine pass with her wisdom, do
you mark it?


2. One thing I am sure she has, the good old Duke she gives him pappe again
they say, and dandles him, and hangs a corrall and bells about his neck, and
makes him believe his teeth will come again; which if they did, and I he, I
would worry her as never curre was worried: I would neighbor till my teeth met
I know where, but that's counsel.

Enter third Citizen.
3. Good morrow neighbors: hear you the sad news?


1. Yes, would we knew as well how to prevent it.

3. I cannot tell, me thinks twere no great matter, if men were men: but --


2. You do not twit me with my calling neighbor?

3. No surely: for I know your spirit to be tall, pray be not vexed.


1. Pray forward with your counsel: I am what I am, and they that prove me,
shall find me to their cost: do you mark me neighbor, to their cost I say.


1. Nay look how soon you are angry.

2. They shall neighbors: yes, I say they shall.

3. I do believe they shall.

1. I know they shall.

2. Whether you do or no I care not twopence,
I am no beast, I know mine own strength neighbors;
God bless the King, your companies is fair.

1. Nay neighbor now ye err, I must tell you so and ye were twenty
neighbors,


3. You had best go peach, do, peach.

2. Peach, I scorn the motion.

3. Do, and see what follows: I Will spend an hundred pound, and be two I care
not, but I Will undo thee.


2. Peach, o disgrace: peach in thy face, and do the worst thou can: I am a
true man, and a freeman peach!


1. Nay look, you will spoil all.

2. Peach!

1. Whilst you two brawle together, the Prince will lose his life.


3. Come, give me your hand, I love you well, are you for the action.


2. Yes: but peach prouokes me, it is a cold fruit,
I feel it cold in my stomach still.

3. No more, I Will give you cake to digest it.
Enter the fourth.
4. Shut up my shop, and be ready at a call boys, and one of you run over
my old tucke with a few ashes, it is grown odious with tosting cheese: and
burn a little giniper in my murrin, the maid made it her chamber pot, an
hour hence I Will come again; and as you here from me, send me a clean shirt.


3. The Chandler by the wharfe, and it be thy will.

2. Gossip good morrow.

4. O good morrow Gossip: good morrow all, I see we of one mind you cleave so
close together: come it is time, I have prepared a hundred if they stand.


1. It Is well done: shall we sever, and about it?

3. First lets to the Tavern, and a pynt a piece will make us Dragons.


2. I will have no mercy, come what will of it.

4. If my tucke hold I Will spit the Guard like Larks with sage between em.


2. I have a foolish bil to reckon with em, will make some of their hearts ache,
and I Will lay it on: now shall I fight, twill do you good to see me.


3. Come I Will do something for the Town to talk of when I am rotten: pray God
there be enough to kill, that's all.

Exeunt. Enter Dorialus, Nifus, Agenor.
Age. How black the day begins!

Dor. Can you blame it, and look upon such a deed as shall be done this
morning?


Nis. Does the Prince suffer to day?

Dor. Within this hour they say.

Again. Well, they that are most wicked are most safe: twill be a strange
Justice and a lamentable, gods keep us from the too soon feeling of it.


Dor. I care not if my throat were next: for to live still, and live here,
were but to grow fat for the Shambles.


Nis. Yet we must do it, and thank em too, that our lives may be accepted.


Age. Faith I Will go starve my self, or grow diseased to shame the hangman; for
I am sure he shall be my Herald, and quarter me.


Dor. I a plague on him, he is too excellent at annes.


Nisus. Will you go see this sad sight my Lord Agenor?


Age. I Will make a mourner.

Dor. If I could do him any good I would go, The bare sight else will but
afflict my spirit, my prayers shall be as near him as your eyes: As you find
him settled, remember my love and service to his Grace.


Nis. We will weep for joy sir, farewell.
Exit.
Dor. Farewell to all our happiness, a long farewell.
Thou angry power, whether of heaven or hell,
That layst this sharp correction on our Kingdom
For our offenses, infinite and mighty,
O hear me, and at length be pleased, be pleased
With pity to draw back thy vengeance,
Too heavy for our weakness; and accept,
(Since it is your discretion, heavenly Wisdoms,
To have it so) this sacrifice for all,
That now is flying to your happiness,
Only for you most fit: let all our sins suffer in him.
A shute within. Gods, what is the matter! I hope it is joy.
How now my Lords?
Enter Agenor and Nisus.
Nis. I Will tell you with that little breath I have;
More joy then you dare think, The Prince is safe from
Danger.

Dor. How!

Age. It Is true, and thus it was; His hour was come
To lose his life, he ready for the stroke,
Nobly, and full of Saint-like patience,
Went with his Guard: which when the people saw,
Compassion first went out, mingled with tears,
That bred desires, and whispers to each other,
To do some worthy kindness for the Prince.
And ere they understood well how to do,
Fury stepped in, and taught them what to do,
Thrusting on every hand to rescue him,
As a white innocent: then flew the rore
Through all the streets, of Save him, save him, save him;
And as they cryde, they did for catching up
Such sudden weapons as their madness show them.
In short, they beat the Guard, and took him from em,
And now march with him like a royal Army.

Dor. Heaven, heaven I thank thee,
What a slave was I to have my hand so far from
This brave rescue, 'tad been a thing to brag on
When I was old. Shall we run for a wager to the
Next Temple and give thanks?

Nis. As fast as wishes.
Enter Leucippus and Ismenus: the people within stoppes.
Leu. Good friends go home again, there is not a man shall go with me.


Isme. Will you not take revenge? I le call them on.

Leuc. All that love me depart:
I thank you, and will serve you for your loves:
But I will thank you more to suffer me
To govern em once: more, I do beg ye,
For my sake to your houses.

All within. Gods preserve you.

Isme. And what house will you go too?

Leu. Ismenus I will take the wariest courses that I can think of to defend my
self, but not offend.


Isme. You may kill your mother, and never offend your father an honest man.


Leu. Thou know I can escape now, that's all I look for: I Will leave.


Isme. Tima. a pox take him, would I had him here, I would kill him at his own
weapon single sithes we have built enough on him: plague ont, I Am out of all
patience: discharge such an Army as this, that would have followed you without
paying, o gods!


Leu. To what end should keep em? I am free.

Is. Yes, free o'th Traitors, for you are proclaimed one.


Leu. Should I therefore make my selse one?

Isme. This is one of your moral Philosophy is it?
Heaven bless me from subtilties to undo my self with;
But I know if, reason her self were here,
She would not part with her own safety.

Leu. Well, pardon Ismenus, for I know
My courses are most just; nor will I stain em
With one bad action: for thy self, thou know,
That though I may command thee, I shall be
A ready servant to thee if thou needst: and so I Will
Take my leave.

Isme. of whom?

Leu. Of thee.

Isme. Heart, you shall take no leave of me.

Leu. Shall I not?

Isme. No by the gods shall you not: nay if you have no more wit but to go
obsolutely alone, I Will be in a little.


Leu. Nay prithee good Ismenus part with me.

Isme. I wonnoty faith, never move it any more; for by this good light I wonnot.


Leu. This is an ill time to be thus unruly:
Ismenus you must leave me.

Isme. Yes if you can beat me away: else, the gods resuse me if I will leave
you till I see more reason; you shall not undo your self.


Leu. But why wilt not leave me?

Isme. Why I Will tell you, Because when you are gone, then -- life, if I have not
forgot my reason -- heel take me: you put me out of patience so: O! marry
when you are gone, then will your Mother: a pox confound her, she never comes
in my head but she spoils my memory to: there are a hundred reasons.


Leu. But show me one.

Isme. Show you, what a stir here is, why I will show you: Do you think;
well, well, I know what I know, I pray come, come. It Is in vain: but I am sure.
Devils take em, what do I meddle with em? You know your self. Soul, I think
I am: is there any man ith world? as if you knew not this already better then
I. Pish, pish, I le give no reason.


Le. But I will tell thee one why thou should stay:
I have not one friend in the Court but thou,
On whom I may be bold to trust to send me
Any intelligence: and if thou love me
Thou will do this, thou needst not fear to stay,
For there are new-come Proclamations out;
Where all are pardoned but my self.

Isme. It Is true, and in the same Proclamation your fine sister Urania, whom
you used so kindly, is preclaymd heir apparent to the Crown.


Le. What though, thou may stay at home without danger.


Isme. Danger, hang danger, what tell you me of danger?


Leu. Why if thou will not do it, I think thou dare not.


Isme. I dare not: if you speak it in earnest, you are a boy.


Leu. Well fir, if you dare, let me see you do it.

Isme. Why so you shall, I will stay.

Leu. Why God a mercy.

Ism. You know I love you but too well.

Leu. Now take these few directions: farewell, send to me by the wariest ways
thou can: I have a soul tells me we shall meet often. The gods protect thee.


Isme. Pox of me self for an Ass, I me crying now, God be with you, if I
never see you again: why then pray get you gone, for grief and anger wonnot
let me know what I say. I Will to the Court as fast as I can, and see the new
heir apparent.

Exeunt.
Finis Actus quartus.
Actus Quintus. Scoeni Primi.
Enter Urania and her woman.
Vran. What have thou sound him?

Woe. Madame he is coming in.

Vran. Gods bless my brother where so ere he is:
And I be seech you keep me fro the bed
Of any naughty Tyrant whom my mother
Would ha me have to wrong him.
Enter Ismenus.
Isme. What would her new Grace have with me?

Vra. Leave us a while. My Lord Ismenus,
Exit M. I pray for the love of heaven and God,
That you would tell me one thing, which I know
You can do we will.

Ism. Where Is her feign Grace?

V. You know me weel enough, but that you mock,
I am she my sen.

Isme. God bless him that shall be thy husband, if thou wearst breeches thus
soon, thoult be as impudent as thy mother.


Vra. But will you tell me this one thing?

Ism. What is it? if it be no great matter whether I do or no, perhaps I will.


Vra. Yes faith it is matter.

Ism. And what is it?

Vra. I pray you let we know whaire the Prince my brother is.

Ism. I faith you shan be hanged first, is your mother so foolish to think yonr
good Grace can sift it out of me?


Urania. If you have any mercy left i'you to a poor wench tell me.


Isme. Why would not thou have thy brains beat out for this, to follow thy
mothers steps so young?


Vra. But believe me, she knows none of this.

Isme. Believe you? why do you think I never had wits? or that I am run out
of them? how should it belong to you to know, If I could tell?


Vra. Why I will tell you: and if I speak false
Let the Devil ha me, Yonder Is a bad man,
Come from a Tayrant to my mother, and what name
They ha for him, good faith I cannot tell.

Isme. An Ambassador.

Vra. That's it: but he would carry me away,
And have me marry his Master; and I Will day
Ere I will ha him.

Is. But what is this to knowing where the Prince is?

Vra. Yes, for you know all my mother does:
Again the Prince is but to ma me great.

Isme. Pray, I know that too well, what ten?

Vra. Why I would go to the good Marquess my
Brother, and put my self into his hands, that so
He may preserve himself.

Isme. O that thou had no seed of thy Mother in thee, and could mean this
now.


Vra. Why feth I do, would I might nere stir more if I do not.


Ism. I shall prove a ridiculous fool, I Will be damnd else: hang me if I do not
half believe thee.


Vra. By my troth you may.

Isme. By my troth I do: I know I Am an Ass fort,
But I cannot help it.

Ura. And won you tell me then?

Ism. Yes faith will I, or any thing else ith world, for
I think thou art as good a creature as ever was borne.

Vra. But aile go i'this ladst reparrell:
But you mun help me to Silver.

Ismenus. Help thee: why the Pox take him that will not help thee to any
thing ith world; I Will help thee to Money, and I Will do it presently to, and yet
soul, If you should play the scuruie Harlotrie little pockie baggage now and
cousen me, what then?


Ura. Why, an I do, would I might nere see day again.

Ism. Nay by this light I do not think thou will:
I Will presently provide thee money and a letter.
Exit Is.
Ura. I but I Will nere deliver it.
When I have found my Brother, I will beg
To serve him; but he shall never kno who I am;
For he must hate me then for my badde mother:
I Will say I am a country Lad that want a service,
And have streid on him by chance, lest he discover me;
I know I must not live long, but that taime
I ha to spend, shall be in serving him.
And though my Mother seek to take his life away,
In ai day my brother shall be taught that I was
Ever good, though she were naught.
Exit. Enter Bacha and Timantus: Bacha reading a Letter.
Bach. Run away, the devil be her guide.

Tim. Faith she is gone: there is a Letter I found it in her pocket, would I were
with her, she is a hansome Lady, a plague upon my bashfulnes, I had bobd her
longagoe else.


Bac. What a base Whore is this, that after all
My ways for her advancement, should so poorly make virtue her vndoer, and
choose this time,
The King being deadly sick: and I intending
A present marriage with some foreign Prince,
To strengthen and secure my self. She writes here
Like a wise Gentle woman; She will not stay:
And the example of her dear brother, makes her
Fear her self, to whom she means to fly.

Timan. Why, who can help it?

Bac. Now poverty and Leacherie which is thy end, rot thee, where ere to go
with all thy goodness.


Timan. Berlady they will bruze her: and she wear a brass. I am sure they will
break stone walls: I hane had experience of them both, and they have made me
desperate: but there is a Messenger Madam come from the Prince with a Letter to
Ismenus, who by him returns an answer.


Bac. This comes as pat as wishes: thou shall presently away Timantus.


Tim. Whither Madame?

Ba. To the Prince, and take the Messenger for guide.

Tim. What shall I do there? I have done too much mischief to be believed
again, or indeed, to escape with my head on my back if I be once known.


Bac. Thou art a weak shallow fool: get thee a disguise, and withal, when
thou comst before him, have a Letter faind to deliver him; and then, as thou
have ever hope of goodness by me, or after me, strike one home stroke that shall
not need another: dare thou speak, dare thou? if thou fal'st off, go be
a Rogue a again, and lie and Pander to procure thy meat: dare thou speak to
me.


Tim. Sure I shall never walk when I am dead. I have no spirit Madame, I Will be
drunk but I Will do it, that's all my refuge.

Exit.
Bac. Away, no more, then I Will raise an Army whilst the King yet lives, if all
the means and power I have can do it I cannot tell.

Enter Ismenus and 3. Lords.
Is. Are you inuenting still? we will ease your studies.

Bac. Why how now saucy Lords?

Ism. Nay I Will shake ye, yes devil, I will shake ye.

Bac. Do not you know me Lords?

Nis. Yes deadly sin we know ye, would we did not.

Ism. Do you hear Whore, a plague a God upon thee, the Duke is dead.


Bash. Dead!

Ism. I, wildfire and brimstone take thee: good man he is dead, and past
those miseries which thou, salt infection-like, like a disease, flungst upon
his head. Doft thou hear, and twere not more respect in Woman-hood in general
then thee, because I had a Mother, who I will not say she was good, she lived
so near thy time, I would have thee in vengeance of this man, whose peace is
made in heaven by this time, tide to a post, and dryde ith sun, and after
carried about and shone at fayres for money, with a long story of the devil
thy father that taught thee to be whorish, envious, bloody.


Bac. Ha, ha, ha.

Isme. You fleering harlot, I Will have a horse to leap thee, and thy base issue
shall carry Sumpters. Come Lords, bring her along, we will to the Prince all,
where her hell-hood shall wait his censure; and if he spare thee she Goat, may
he lie with thee again; and beside, may thou upon him some nastle soul
disease that hate still follows, and his end, a dry ditch. Lead you corrupted
whore, or I Will draw good shall make you skippe: away to the Prince.


Bac. Ha, ha, ha, I hope yet I shall come too late to find him.

Cornets. Cupid from above. Enter Loucippus, Vrana,: Leu, with abloudy
handkercher.
Leu. Alas poor boy, why do thou follow me?
What can thou hope for? I am poor as thou art.

Vra. In good feth I shall be weell and rich enough
If you will love me, and not put me from you.

L. Why do thou choose out me boy to undo thee?
Alas, for pity take another Master,
That may be able to deserve thy love
In breeding thee hereafter: me thou know not
More then my misery: and therefore can not
Look for rewards at my hands: would I were able,
My pretty knave, to do thee any kindness: truly
Good boy, I would upon my faith thy harmelesle
Innocense mooues me at heart, will thou go
Save thy self, why do thou weep? Alas I do not chide thee.

Urania. I cannot tell if I go from you, Sir I shall nere dawne day more: Pray
if you can I will be true To you: Let me wait on you: If I were a man, I
would fight for you: Sure you have some ill-willers, I would slay vm.


Leu. Such harmless souls are ever Prophets, well I take thy wish, thou
shall be with me still: But prithee eat, then my good Boy: Thou will die my
child If thou fasts one day more. This four days thou have tasted nothing:
Go into the Cave and eat: Thou shall find something for thee, to bring thy
blood again, and thy fair color.


Ura. I can not eat God thank you,
But I Will eat to morrow.

Leuc. Thow't be dead by that time.

Ur. I should be well then, for you will not love me.

Leu. Indeed I will. This is the prettiest passion that ere I felt yet: why
do you look so earnestly upon me?


Vra. You have fair eyes Master.

Leu. Sure the Boy dotes: why do thou sigh my child?

Vra. To think that such a fine man should live, and no gay Lady love him.


Leu. Thou will love me?

Vra. Yes sure till I dye, and when I am in heaven I Will eene wish for you.


Leu. And I Will come to thee Boy. This is a love I never yet heard tell of: come,
thou art sleepy child, go in; and I Will sit with thee: heaven what portends
this?


Vra. You are sad, but I am not sleepy, would I could do ought to make you
merry: shall I sing?


Leu. If thou will good Boy.

Leu. Alas my boy, that thou should comfort me, and art far worse then I:

Enter Timantus with a letter disguised.
Vra. Law Master, there is one, look to your sen.

Leu. What art thou, that in this dismal place,
Which nothing could find out but misery,
Thus boldly stepped? Comfort was never here,
Here is nor food, nor beds, nor any house
Built by a better Architect then beasts;
And ere you get dwelling from one of them,
You must fight for it: if you conquer him,
He is your meat; if not, you must be his.

Tim. I come to you (for if I not mistake, you are the Prince) from that most
Noble Lord Ismenus with a Letter.


Ura. Alas, I fear I shall be discovered now.

Leu. Now I feel my self the poorest of all mortal things.
Where is he that reciues such courtesies,
But he has means to show his gratefulnes
Some way or other? I have none at all:
I know not how to speak so much as well
Of thee but to these trees.
Leucippus opening the Letter, the whilst Timantus runs at him, and Urania
steps before.
Tim. His Letters speak him sir --

Vra. Gods keep me but fro knowing him till I dye: aye me, sure I cannot live
a day, o thou foul Traitor: How do you Master?


Leu. How do thou my child? alas, look on his, it may make thee repentant,
to behold those innocent drops that thou have drawn from thence.


Vra. It Is nothing sir and you be well.

Tim. O pardon me, know you me now sir?

Leu. How could thou find me out?

Tima. We intercepted a Letter from Ismenus, and the bearer directed me.


Leu. Stand up Timantus boldly,
The world conceiues that thou art guilty
Of diverse treasons to the State and me:
But o far be it from the innocence
Of a just man to give a traitor death
Without a trial: here thy Country is not
To purge thee or condemn thee; therefore
A nobler trial then thou do deserve,
Rather then none at all, here I accuse thee
Before the face of heaven, to be a traitor
Both to the Duke my father and to me, and the
Whole Land: speak, is it so or no?

Tim. It Is true sir, pardon me.

Leu. Take heed Timantus how thou do cast away thy self, I must proceed to
execution hastily if thou confess it: speak once again, is it so or no?


Tim. I am not guilty sir.
Fight here: the Prince gets his sword and gives it him.
Leu. Gods and thy sword acquit thee, here it is.

Timantus. I will not use any violence against your Highness.

Leu. At thy peril then, for this must be thy trial: and from hence forth
look to thy self.

Timantus draws his sword, and runs at him when he turns aside.
Tim. I do beseech you sir let me not fight.

Leu. Up, up again Timantus,
There is no way but this believe me.
Now if -- Fie, fie Timantus, is there no
Usage can recover thee from baseness? were thou
Longer to converse with men, I would have chidde
Thee for this: be all thy faults for given.

Tim. O spare me sir, I am not fit for death.

Leu. I think thou art not; yet trust me, fitter then for life: Yet tell me
ere my breath be gone, know of any other plots against me?


Tim. Of none.

Leu. What course would thou have taken when thou had killed me?


Tim. I would hane taken your Page, and married her.

Leu. What Page?

Tim. Your boy there. -- Dies.
Urania sounds.
Leu. Is he fallen mad in death, what does he mean?
Some good God help me at the worst: how do thou?
Let not thy misery vex me, thou shall have
What thy poor heart can wish: I am a Prince.
And I will keep thee in the gayest clothes,
And the finest things, that ever pretty boy had given him.

Vra. I know you well enough,
Feth I am dying, and now you know all too.

Le. But stir up thy self; look what a Jewel here is,
See how it glisters: what a pretty show
Will this make in thy little ear? ha, speak,
Eat but a bit, and take it.

Vra. Do you not know me?

Leu. I prithee mind thy health: why that's well said my good boy, smile still.


Vra. I shall smile till death an I see you.
I am Urania your sister-in-law.

Leu. How!

Vra. I am Urania.

Leu. Dullness did ceaze me, now I know thee well;
Alas why camst thou hither?

Vra. Feth for love, I would not let you know till I was dying; for you could
not love me, my Mother was so naught.


Leu. I will love thee, or any thing: what? will Thou leave me as soon as I know thee?
Speak one word to me: alas she is past it,
She will nere speak more.
What noise is that? it is no matter who
Enter Ismenus, with the Lords. Comes on me now. What worse then mad are you
That seek out sorrows? if you love delights
Be gone from hence.

Isme. Sir, for you we come, as Soldiers to revenge the wrongs you have
suffered under this naughty Creature: what shall be done with her? say, I am
ready.


Leu. Leave her to heaven brave Cosen, they shall tell her how she has sind
against em, my hand shall never be staind with such base blood: live wicked
Mother, that reverent title be your pardon, for I will use no extremity
against you, but leave you to heaven.


Bac. Hell take you all, if there be a place
Of torment that exceedes that, get you thither:
And till the devils have you, may your lives
Be one continued plague, and such a one,
That knows no friends nor ending.
May all ages that shall succeed curse you as I do:
And if it be possible, I ask it heaven,
That your base issues may be ever Monsters,
That must for shame of nature and succession,
Be drowned like dogs
Would I had breath to please you.

Leu. Would you had love within you, and such
Grief as might become a Mother: look you there,
Know you that face, that was Urania:
These are the fruits of those unhappy Mothers,
That labor with such horrid byrths as you do:
If you can weep, there is cause; poor innocent,
Your wickedness has killed her: I Will weep for you.

Isme. Monstrous woman,
Mars would weep at this, and yet she cannot.

Leu. Here lies your Minion too, slain by my hand,
I will not say you are the cause: yet certain,
I know you were too blame, the Gods forgive you.

Isme. See, she stands as if she were inuenting
Some new destruction for the world.

Leu. Ismenus, thou art welcome yet to my sad company.


Isme. I come to make you somewhat sadder sir.

Leu. You cannot, I am at the height already.

Isme. Your Fathers dead.

Leu. I thought so, heaven be with him: o woman, woman, weep now or never,
thou have made more sorrows then we have eyes to utter.


Bac. Now let heaven fall, I am at the worst of evils, a thing so miserable
wretched, that every thing, the last of humane comforts has left me: I will
not be so base and cold, to live and wait the mercies of these men I hate:
no, it is just I dye, since Fortune has left me my step descent attends me:
hand, strike thou home, I have soul enough to guide; and let all know, as I
stood a Queen, the same I Will fall, and one with me.

She stabs the Prince with a knife.
Leu. Ho.

Isme. How do you sir?

Leu. Nearer my health, then I think any here, my tongue begins to faulter:
what is man? or who would be one, when he sees a poor weak woman can in an
instant make him none.


Dor. She is dead already.

Isme. Let her be damnd already as she is: post all for Surgeants.


Leu. Let not a man stir, for I am but dead:
I have some few words which I would have you heart,
And am afraid I shall want breath to speak em:
First to you my Lords, You know Ismenus is
Undoubtedly heir of Licia, I do beseech you all,
When I am dead to show your duties to him.

Lords. We vow to do it.

Leu. I thank you.
Next to you Cousen Ismenus, that shall be the Duke,
I pray you let the broken Image of Cupid
Be reedified, I know all this is done by him.

Isme. It shall be so.

Leu. Last, I beseech you that my Mother-in-Law may have a burial acording to
-- Dies.


Ism. To what sir?

Dor. There is a full point.

Ism. I will interpret for him; she shall have burial according to her own
deserts, with dogs.


Dor. I would your Majesty would haste for settling of the people.


Ism. I am ready.
Agenor, go and let the Trumpets sound
Some mournful thing, whilst we convey the body
Of this unhappy Prince unto the Court,
And of that virtuous Virgin to a grave:
But dragge her to a ditch, where let her lie
Accursed, whilst one man has a memory.
Exeunt.
Cupids Speech.
The time now of my Revenge draws near;
Nor shall it lessen, as I am a god,
With all the cries and prayers that have been;
And those that be to come, tho they be infinite,
In need and number.
FINIS.

