A SERMON PREAched at Torceter, in the County of Northampton the 8. of June,
Anno Dom. 1588. at the visitation of the right reverend Father in God, the
Bishop of Peeterborow, BY JOHN BEATNIFFE Preacher of the word of God in
Brackley.

2. Cor. 22.28. Beside the things which are outward I am cumbred daily, and I
have a care over all the Churches.

LONDON. Printed by John Charlewood for Roger Ward. 1590.

To the most reverend Father in God, my Lords grace, Archbishop of Canterbury:
Sir Christopher Hatton knight, Lord high Chauncellor of England: Sir William
Scicil Knight Lord Burleigh, Lord high Treasurer of England: Sir Christopher
Wray Knight, Lord chief Justice of England: and to al other which sincerely
favor the word of God, Grace and Peace be multiplied in Jesus Christ.
Amongst the manifold calamities and griefs of heart that fall upon the
Church in this old age of the world (right Honorable and well-beloved in the
Lord) this is not the least, that the peace of the Church, is daily broken in
pieces, and that by such as challenge to themselves the name of the Church,
which cry as did the Jews, Ier. 7, 4.
The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord: but I fear me, be as Christ
says, The congregation of Satan, for they despise Rulers, Reave. 2.9. Jude.
5.8. 2. Tim. 1.4.
and speak evil of such as be in aucthority. They delight in questions and
endless genealogies, which gender strife rather then Godly edyfying, which is in
Faith. These men as they trouble the public State of the Church, with
Schisms: so do they also disquiete, the consciences of many good Souls by
making doubts and ambiguities in matters that be most plain and easy. They
draw so many as they can from obedience of the Godly Magistrate, denouncing all
those to be execrable, cursed and abominable, which be not of their faction,
yea they be grown to such grosnesse, which they call Purity, that as they
say, they dare not defile their clean undefiled and regenerat Souls, by
joining in Prayer with such as hold of the reformed state of this Realm. So by
this means they deface so much as in them is our Church, our Ministry, our
Orders, and Prayers in the Church. That which they say is good, that order
which they observe is godly howsoever it be: they dislike all others but
themselves and their followers. But what is this? truly even the very practice
of the false apostles in the time of Paul: for they to maintain gentilisme
among the people, defaced Paul, and made them believe that he was not the
apostle of Christ: even so these men by the instigation of Satan, to overthrow
our Church and the godly government thereof, disgrace Paul, and deface our
Preachers, and al to wound weak consciences, and to make commendable
themselves and their newfangled devises. This their sinister dealing has
done, yea and does at this day much harm in the church: for besides the things
forenamed, it hinders many good and godly men from doing that good which
they would. I considering with my self of the disposition of these men, of
their manners and mark which they shoot at, being by aucthority called to
preach at a visitation of the right reverend Father in God the Bishop of
Peeterborrow, did there as the time then served my office, and the nature of my
Text required resolutely defend that which they so greatly dislike, that is,
our church and Ministry, the order of our excommunication, and our prayers.
Since which time, I have bin often greatly urged by diverse good men, and many
of my welwillers to make it public for the benefit of the whole Church.
Seeing their request to be reasonable, and that my office binds me not only,
exhortari per sanam doctrinam, Titus 1. verse 9.
but also cotradicere maledicentibus: I have satisfied their honest request,
and suffered it to be published. Most humbly craving that your Honors, and
all others which favor the Gospel, and this our godly government under our most
gracious Soueraign, to patronize and defend the same, so shall I and others,
be the more encouraged to execute our offices in the Church.

The Lord who is the only giver of authority protect and defend your
Honors, to the glory of his name and the benefit of this common wealth.

Most desirous of your Honors prosperity, Io. Beatniffe.

THE TEXT.
1. Peter. Cap 5.2.Feed ye the Flock of God. The holy Ghost by the Apostle
S. Peter in these words read unto you (well-beloved in the Lord,) does set down a
commandment to all Pastors and Ministers, to all those which have cure and
charge of souls committed unto them, diligently and faithfully to feed the
flock of God.

In saying feed the flock metaphorically he exhorts his fellow laborers,
unto whom he speaks to teach the Church and people of God, with sound and
wholesome doctrine: now, whereas the holy Ghost uses so many figures in so few
words, he shows what manner of man he would have over his flock, what
manner of men he would have to teach his Church: that is to say, such as be
well acquainted with his speeches, such as be learned in the tongues, and
thereby be able, not only to exhort with wholesome doctrine but also to couince
and stop the mouths of adversaries, and with facility find out the wrettings
and false enterpretations of subtle enemies: which doctrine of the holy ghost,
does impugn and is fully against all those, whatsoever they be. What
countenance soever they carry, which would persuade, or bear the world in
hand, that they be able soundly to teach, and utterly to convince all
erroninous doctrine, Anabaptisticall factions, and Papisticall opinions, and
that without art: but what do these men? Verily nothing, but even tread under
their feet the excellent gift of God: I mean learning, which is ye ordinary
mean, which God in his wisdom, has appointed to true preaching. They set
themselves unto idleness, and so through their want of skill, (being set forward
through a blind

zeal) they breed iarres in GODS Church, and thereby grieve the Spirit of
God, by whom the Children of God are sealed, unto the day of redemption.

Feed, I. Metaphorically teach, out of the which word of the Apostle, there be
four things to be considered. First, the care that God has over his Church
Second, who they must be, that must feed. Third, with what they must feed.
Four, what they must feed.



This is most apparent, for when God had chosen his Church, the seed of
Abraham, the chosen Israel: he did not only give them a Law, as a Rule to
lead them by, and a direction whereby they might walk, the bounds whereof
they should not pass: but also, he sent forth his servants the Prophets,
whom he did endue with the spirit of Prophecy and true understanding, which
should rise up early and late to teach Israel the said Law: which should
threaten the people with the judgments of God for their transgressions, which
should call them to repentance, and comfort them in their afflictions: and at
the last he sent the true Prophet, even his Son Jesus Christ, to teach his
Church, and to gather together the dispearsed. This proves the Apostle S. Paul
in these words. Diversely and many ways in times past, Heb. 1.1.
spoke God unto the Fathers, by Prophets: but last of all in these days, has
he spo kn to us by his Son, whom he has made heir of all things: By whom
also he made the world.

This Jesus in like manner showed his care over the Church: Luke 13.22.
for as Luke says. He went about through every City and every Town,
teaching, and making his journey toward Jerusalem. He travailed from place to
place, and by the way as he went, he fed the people, he taught and declared
his Fathers will unto them: more then that, that his food might more amply be
distributed, and this doctrine more liberally be taught, he chose certain
whom he called Disciples, Math. 10.18
and sent them abroad into all the world, and commanded them to teach all
nations.

After his resurrection he said to Peter. John. 21.15.
Love thou me? More then these: feed my flock. This he spoke unto him that
time, thereby to signify unto Peter, the great and tender care that he had
over his purchased possession, which is his Church.

After his ascension, he called Paul, that he might carry his name before the
Gentiles, before kings, and before the Children of Israel: thereby showing to
us, that as GOD had gathered his Church, of all estates and degrees of people:
so, he would have al estates and degrees of people to know his will, and also
have matter to feed upon, to the comfort of their souls: and therefore in
deed Paul was very careful over all congregations, and not only taught
diligently himself, but also elected and chose others for the same work: as
Timothy, unto whom he gave authority to rule the Church of God at Ephesus, and
to feed them with wholesome doctrine. As I besought thee to tarry at Ephesus,
when I departed into Macedonia: 1. Tim. 1.3.
so do, that thou may command some that they teach no other doctrine,
neither that they give heed, to fables and genealogies which are endless,
which breed questions, rather then any godly edifying, which is by faith.

To the same effect, he speaks unto his Scholar Titus, that he might see to
the Church. For this cause left I thee in Creta, Titus. 1.5.
that thou should continue to redress the things that remain, and
should ordain elders in every congregation, as I appointed thee.

This care of God the Father, of his son Christ, and of his Apostles or
precessors, do teach us which have cure of souls, to be diligent, paynfull
and careful. You look now peradventure, that I should make some bitter
inuectiue speeches against Bishops, which of some, are thought not to be so
careful as their office requires: but truly I am not so determined, for
indeed they be reverend fathers: Fathers of the Church, and they be brethren.
I came not hither to accuse any, I love it not, I leave it to the devil, qui
est accusator fratrum, which is the accuser of his brethren, and I will set it
over to his adherents, which take pleasure, and exercise themselves therein day
and night. I came hither to do the office of a Preacher, to to teach the
unlearned, and to put the learned in mind, of those things which they already
know: and so will do so long as I live, if God permit.

The Elders says he, 1. Pet. 5.1.
I beseech, which am also an Elder. Feed the flock of Christ. When he plainly
speaks to those, which have the office of teaching, and administering of
Sacraments, committed unto them: and to such, as are thereunto ordinarily and
lawfully called.

Ierom describes unto us, four sorts of calings. Some says he, were called
of God and not by men, as the Prophets and Apostles. Others were called of God,
and by men: as Elizeus, by Elias. Others are called by men and not by God,
which (seeing they have an ordinary calling) they may not be rejected. Others
there be, which are neither sent by GOD nor man: these be the worst, these be
Annabaptists, these run of a blind zeal and take upon them to preach
without any warrant.

Of these callings one is necessary, that is, lawfully to be called by God and
man, especially in this our time, wherein we live under a Christian Magistrate,
without whose authority (in my judgment) it is not lawful for any man to
execute any office in Church or common wealth. Calling therefore is not to be
despised, but to be sought for: for it is not enough to have knowledge in the
word of God, and be able to teach, but also to have calling by the Church,
beeyond which it is not lawful to go. Who so does whatsoever he thinks of
himself, Paul tells him plainly what he is: Even such a one, Phil. 5.
of whom we must take heed. For they be dogs, evil laborers, and
concision. They give fair words: but secretly they bite. They take great
pains in trotting from house to house, in making long prayers, in visiting
widows houses, in ouercomming the weak: but al is to breed factions, and to
get gaynes unto themselves.

They call themselves circumcision, but the Apostle by a pleasant prosonemasia,
caleth them concision, such as break and divide the Church, and such as cut in
pieces, the unity and peace of the same. Ier. 23.21.
Of these says Jeremy: They did run, but I did not send them. How then can
they teach truly? they cannot: for the Apostle Paul asks this question. How
can they preach except they be sent? Romans 10.15.
as though he should say they cannot. And therefore he says to Titus. Tit. 1.5.
For this cause have I left thee in Creta, that thou should ordain Elders
in every congregation, as I have appointed thee. As though he should say,
least any should take unto himself honor, Heb. 5 5.
but he that is called: I have left thee there for that purpose.

They which have this calling, God prospers their labors: they which have it
not, (though they have the words of faith in their mouth) yet they bring
forth no fruit, for they see not that which is good, but even as it were to
lead men by the ears, to their peruersse opinions.

Feed ye, here is secondly noted unto us, who they be that must feed the
flock of God: The elders says S. Peter. The Greek word is Prebutero, which
the Apostle uses: which word of two sorts of people is falsely interpreted.
Of the Papists, which would have it to signify a sacrifising, or a massing
Priest. Of an other sort, which would have it only to signify Laymen: but
the Apostle here confuteth them both, for he speaks not of sacrifising
priests, neither yet of lay men: but of such as should guide and teach his
Church, therefore the word (Elders) signifies here, Bishops and Ministers.
Of whom the office of the first is, not only to teach, but also to rule the
Church of God, to keep it in with a Bishop-like authority: this Paul proves.
Take heed unto your selves, and to the whole flock, Act. 20.
over the which the holy Ghost has made you ouerseeers, to rule the Church of
God, which he has purchased with his own blood. Out of which words I gather
thus much, that of the one side, as a Bishop is not exempted from the office of
teaching because he is a Bishop: so, on the other side, he is not called a
Bishop, because he is apt to teach, neither for the office of teaching, but for
the pre-eminence of ruling and ouerseeing of the Church of God: that false
doctrine come not in, that offenders, which corrupt the manners and peace of
the Church, may be punished, and such like. The office of the other is this,
to teach and to administer the Sacraments: according to the saying of Christ
generally to all ministers. Go into all the world, Math. 28.
teach all nations, and baptize them, in the name of the father, and of the
son, and of the holy Ghost.

And Paul says: Preach thou the word: be fervent in season and out of
season: reprove, rebuke and exhort with all love patience and doctrine. The
which places being with disretion considered of, are sufficient to prove,
that as on the one side, calling is necessary: so, they which be called, must
be such as the Apostle here speaks of, (Elders) that is to say, Bishops to
rule and to teach: Ministers, to teach, to administer, to rebuke and to exhort,
where they be thereunto lawfully called.

(Feed ye) here is thirdly to be noted with what they must feed? verily with
the word, with it have all the Prophets fed: that same is the nourishment of
the Church. S. Peter says: We are borne again, not of corruptible seed, 1.
Pet. 1.2^
but of incorruptible, by the word of God, who liuech and endures for ever.
For all flesh is grass, and the glory of man is as the flower of gras: the
grass withers, and the flower falls away, but the word of the Lord
indureth for ever and this is the word which is preached among you. By which
saying it is manifest that the only word of God ought to be taught in the
church, and that they are not to be heard which would bring in men's devises
into the Church: God has not permitted so much to any mortal man: neither may
the Church be governed or fed by any other word then by the word of God, by
the which it is begotten and borne.

This confuteth the Papists, which would have the Church to be of greater
authority then the word, which can not possibly be, for the Church is
grounded upon the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ himself the
head corner stone: so that it is against the word, that the house, that is to
say, the church, should rule the master, that is to say, the word: and it is
against nature that ye daughter namely the church should rule her Mother, which
is the word.

Hereuppon it follows that the ministers must only feed with the word of
God, Eze, 3.17.
and with no other. God says, thou shall hear words from my mouth, and thou
shall warn others from me. Ier. 1.7. Math. 28.
I have put my words in thy mouth, and what so ever I have commanded thee,
that shall thou speak, and did bind his Disciples to a certain kind of
doctrine, namely to teach those things which he had commanded them: whereby
we learn that only the word of God must be taught in the Church, and no
other. When I say that the only word of God must be taught, I do not thereby as
some do, condemn the reading or alleging of the Fathers, for that were
altogether curiosity, I am not of that mind, I think them very necessary to
be read and alleged, not as doctrine of salvation, but as confirmation of
judgment: for when our judgments, and the judgments of the fathers are one,
upon some place of Scripture, then we say it is idem spiritus, one and the
self same spirit: so that alleging of the Fathers is not to be blamed, but
bringing in man's doctrine as necessary to salvation, in stead of the word of
God, which only serves to that end is woorthily to be condemned: where it
is said, feed, and that with the word. There is rendered a reason, because the
written word of God contains in it all things necessary to salvation, and
also to life and manners, and therefore that we need not seek any further for
the assurance of the same, this proves John the Apostle: John. 21
Many things did Jesus in the sight of his disciples which are not written in
this book, but these things are written, that Jesus Christ is the Son of
God, and that in believing ye might have eternal life. The other proves
Paul: 2. Tim. 3.
Every Scripture given by inspiration is profitable to teach, to reprove, and
to exhort, that the man of God may be made perfect unto every good work.

Romans 15.
Therefore search the Scriptures, for in them ye hoope to have eternal life.

feed the flock of God, he puts a difference betwixt the true and false
Church: now a Church is nothing else but a company of people gathered together,
so that every company is a Church, but every company is not a church of God.
Moreover this is to be observed, that whereas the Apostle says feed the flock
of God, and that the flock of God is partly visible, partly invisible, as is
aforesaid, that he means, that the ministers of the word should diligently
feed all the flock of God upon the earth: which is flatly against those that
would single out the church of God from the rest, not knowing that there be
some which though they do not appear outwardly, yet are they most dear and
precious in the sight of the Lord: I must be plain with you, it is a great
fault in this our time, we will have none to be of the Church but such as we
like, such as follow our fantasies: and such as will not, we utterly condemn
them, whereas there be many hundreds, yea many thousands besides us: this was
Elias fault. O Lord says he, they have broken down thy Altars, and slain thy
Prophets, and I only am left, and they seek my life to take it away: he
thought there had not bin left upon the earth one man that feared God but
himself: but mark responsum Domini, harke^ what the Lord says: Reg. 19.18.
I have reserved to my self seven thousand men that never bowed their knees to
Baal: mark this well, there be more of the church then we be aware of:
therefore let us feed in hope and labor in hope, incoraging all, discoraging
none: but let us feed the flock of God visible and invisible, true and false.

Of these two Churches it is necessary to speak a little, beginning with the
false church, yt the other may be the better discerned: the false church I call
those which either openly set their selves against the children of God, or
those which persuade themselves that they be of the church and are not: of both
these sorts there be many.

The one sort, are they of whom David speaks of. Psalm. 26.
I have has hated the congregation of the wicked, and I will not sit with the
ungodly. Numb. 15,
Such were Corah, Dathan and Abiram, and the two hundred and fifty men that
were with them, men of renown and famous in the congregation. Gene. 11.
Such were they that builded Babel: every of these were a congregation, a
church, but a false church, a church that openly fights and sets it self
against the Church of God. The other sort, are they, which brag that they be
the seed of Abraham, the children of promise, but they deceive themselves, for
they do not the works of Abraham, they speak much, but they do little: they look
like Lambs but they be rauenning Wolves: outwardly they appear bewtifull,
but inwardly they be full of dead men's bones. He is not a Jew which is a Jew
outward, Romans 2.
but he is a Jew which is hid within. Of these face-makers, and outward
Religious persons speaks Leo: Ecclesiae nomine armamini, sed contra ecclesiam
demicatis: Leo.
ye arm your selves with the name of the church, but ye fight against the
Church.

These say they are Jews, but they are not, but are the congregation of Satan.
These be the false church, Reg. 2.9.
these must be taught, if at any time God will give them grace to repent, that
they may be brought to the true church, and so be saved in the day of the Lord.
Now let us proceed unto the true church, which is in God, hereby it is known,
it is not in man, but in GOD, this is the true church, this is the society of
all the true faithful saints and elect of God. This church consists of
Faith, Hope, Love, and of the Spirit of Christ. This we call the catholic
church which is spread over the face of the whole world. Then the catholic
church is not at Rome: no, no, they are much deceived that say so, or believe
so, it is not tied to one place or to one people: but it is the company of all
the faithful, that have been from the beginning of ye world, that are now, and
shall be unto the end of the world: Ierom says Ecclesia Christi in toto orb
ecclesias possidens, spiritus vnitate coniuncta est, and habet vrbes legis and
prophetarum, euangelij and apostolorum: non est egressa de finibus suis, i. de
scripturis: The church of Christ which possesses all the churches in the
world, is joined together in the unity of the spirit, and it has the cities of
the law and of the Prophets, of the Gospel, and of the Apostles, it does not
go beyond her bounds, that is the Scriptures.

This Church has in it pure and sound doctrine, even the same which came from
Christ, and sent abroad throughout all the world by the Apostles, which
excludes all other doctrines and precepts of man, it has also the true and
lively use of the Sacraments, it has unity and catholic consent touching the
cheef points of christian religion. This church (because it often erreth,
sometime by ignorance as Paul before his conversion, 1. Tim. 1.13.
sometime by temptations as Abraham when for fear of his life he fell to
dissembling, or by infirmity, 2. Sam. 10.4
as David when he committed adultery,) ought to be fed with doctrine, and be
kept in with wholesome correction. And therefore over this church has God
placed Bishops, and has commanded them to ouersee it, and to feed it
faithfully and dilligently. let those therefore watch that they may give their
fellow servants meat in due season. Blessed is that Servant whom his Master
shall find so doing. Math. 24.
Verily I say unto you, he will make him ruler over all his goods. Therefore
feed ye flock, this appertains to us ministers: God has made us pastors, and
we have a flock, even a church in God the father, begotten of the word, born
of the word, and now must be nourished, brought up and instructed by the word.

That we have such a church here in England as I have here described, there is
no question at all to be made, neither do the godly doubt of it. But for the
better comfort of the church, and that they may have in a readiness at all times
to stop the mouth of the Anabaptist, to overthrow the Papist, and tread under
feet the Secturian. I will prove it most plainly by the way of an argument,
where the Gospel is truly preached, where the Sacraments be according to
Christ his institution reverently administered, where there is unity, and
catholic consent touching the chief points of christian religion, where
Christ is acknowledged the head of the church, there is the true church in God
the Father: but the church of England has, uses, holds and acknowledges al
these things, ergo in England there is a true church in God the Father.

The chiefest reasons that the Anabaptists Papists and Scismatickes use in
defacing of our church are these: first that our ministers be not lawfully
called: 2. that we want discipline: 3. that we have no lawful prayers in our
church, and therefore no church.

These reasons though they be weak, and most weak, yet are they peevish and
very dangerous: and therefore I think it necessary to confute them.

Touching the first where they say we have not a lawful ministry: I answer, we
have, yea and such a ministry as is sent of God, and lawfully called by man. I
prove it thus: wheresoever there is a Church in God the Father, there is also
a lawful ministry. But we have a Church in God the Father as before is
proved, ergo, a lawful ministry. This argument in plainly proved by ye
words of Jeremy. Ier. 3.14.15.
O ye disobedient Children turn again says the Lord, for I am you Lord, and
I will take you, one of a City, and two of a Tribe, and will bring you to
Sion, and I will give you Pastors according to mine own heart, which shall
feed you with knowledge and understanding. Mark here, he says he will choose
them one of a City, and two of a Tribe, and he will bring them into Sion,
that is, into his Church: he will give them pastors after his own heart, these
be lawful I trow, for he chooses none but those that be meet, you may know
them, for they feed with knowledge and understanding. Whether we do thus in
the church of England or no, judge ye.

Touching the second, that we want discipline and therefore we are no church.
I deny the argument, but they say we have not the discipline of the primative
Church, therefore no church.

It is a non sequitur, for although we have not the discipline of the primative
Church, yet we have discipline: and therefore they slander us. But alas,
these men that say so, they know not what they say: for discipline is no
essential part of the church: men and women be the Church, not discipline, so
that discipline is a wall about a city, or a hedge about a vineyard, whereof
though a piece sometime be broken down, yet a city, yet a vineyard. I grant
discipline to be as necessary in the church, to keep the people within the
railes of Moses, law, as a wall about a city to defend the citizens from the
force of their enemy: and for my part, I know none that denies it, but only
those that make the most to do about it: we have so much that they them
selves complain and cry out of it. I marvel what they would do, if we had
that which they themselves seek for. I cannot tell what they would have: we
find fault with the sins of the people, we excommunicate notorious
offenders, if you ask by what authority, I answer even as Paul did, 1. Tim.
1.20.
so do we. Hymeneus and Alexander have made shipwreck of faith, quos ego
tradidi Satanae vt discant, non blasphemare: whom I (says he) have delivered
to Satan that they might learn not to blaspheme: It is ye judgment of ye
best learned that ever I read of, Act. 5.
that Peeter did excommunicate Ananias and Saphira, after the which they
yielded up ye ghost.

I would here for my learning very gladly know who did help Paul or Peter to
exco^municat, because these slaunderers of our Church do say, it is not lawful
for any man to excommunicate. If it had not bin lawful, surely Paul would not
have done it, neither yet Peter. Tertulian says, that excommunication, Tertul.
in Apolog.
or separation from the Church, was in his time, which was thirteeene hundredth
years agone in the hands of the Bishops, and of the Priests. Origin
commands him that has been thrice admonished, Orig. hom. 7. an. Ios.
and will not repent to be cut of from the body of the church, per ecclesiae
presides, or by the rulers of the church, where also he declares what these
rulers are: for says he, the priests sparing one that had offended, and
neglecting their priestly authority, did go about the distructio^ of the whole
church, so that Origin thought it was a decay to the Church, that
excommunication should go out of the hands of the Priests.

Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 34.
Eusebius shows, that Fabian did excommunicate Philip the Emperor.

Ambrose did excommunicate Theodosius the Emperor, Trip. histo. lib. 9. cap.
30.
for that slaughter which was done in Thessalonica, anno Dom. 391. and is at
this day greatly commended therefore of the learned, and godly. These examples
prove the lawfulnes of our excommunication, which is practiced upon such like
occasions, and is also executed by such kind of means, and therefore not to be
found fault withal, neither yet that our church should be slaundered either
for the want of it, either yet for the practice of that which we have.
Touching the third, whereas they say, we have no lawful prayers in our Church,
and therefore no Church: that is a most abominable slander, and not to be
tolerated. Of these kind of people that say so, there be two sorts: the one
be the Papists, and they come in with their old lying antiquityes, and say
that the service in the church of England is nothing like to the use of the
primitive Church, for it has no set order of prayers, save a little imitation
of the old Mattins and Euensong, and that in Schism and heresy, and therefore
not only unprofitable, but also damnable. The other sort they say that there
be no prayers at al in the church of England (they say so in effect) for they
say we do all read prayers already made to our hands, which by their sayings,
are no prayers, neither yet do edify at all, for (say they) reading is but
bare feeding yea and as all as playing upon a stage, and worse too. But to
these I answer as I did before they slander the church, for we pray truly as
God has commanded in his word, and as our Savior Christ has taught us we
pray to God the Father, and to none but to him only. We come to him in the
name of his son Jesus Christ, and in his name only, and therefore I conclude
that we pray truly. Thus have I as God has moved me, and at this time has
affoorded unto me, declared unto you the sense and meaning of this holy
Scripture.

The Lord grant that it may work that which I look for, that is the
advancement of Gods glory, a zeal and care of Gods ministers over the flock
of God committed unto them. The flourishing estate of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, and the unity, peace, and quietness of the church, that
antichristianity and factio^s being defaced, we may with one heart and one voice
glorify God the Father in this world, and in the world to come reign with him
eternally by the means of his Son Jesus Christ: to whom with the Father and
the holy Ghost be al praise, glory, dominion, and power both now and for ever,
world without end Amen.


