THE Famous, true and historical life of Robert second Duke of Normandy,
surnamed for his monstrous birth and behavior, Robin the Devil.

Wherein is contained his dissolute life in his youth, his devout
reconcilement and virtues in his age: Interlaced with many strange and
miraculous adventures. Wherein are both causes of profit, and many conceits
of pleasure.

By T. L. G.

Imprinted at London for N. L. and John Bushie, and are to be sold at the West
door of Paul's. 1591.

To the worshipful and true Moecenas of learning, M. Thomas Smith, T. L. G.
wishes all abundance of worldly fortunes in this life, and the benefits of
heavenly felicity in the life to come.
SEeing in these our days, men rather seek the increase of transitory wealth,
than the knowledge of divine wisdom, preferring stuffed baggs, before
studious books, their pounds, before precepts, loosing the true riches of the
mind, to level at the transitory allurements of this world, feeding fools
with siggs, and philosophers with floutes; I have among the multitudes of these
men, made choice of your Worship for my Patron and Moecenas, who of a far
more happy nature with Theodosius, honor Appian, and seeing learning almost
suppressed with contempt, or discountenanced with neglect, have in this famous
City (like a virtuous member of the same) begun to exile ignorance, to revive
arts: knowing Ladislaus reasons to be of force, that Citizens who are
unlettered, are less than men, or rather (as Frederick the Emperor was wont
to say) manlike beasts. Which virtuous endeavor of yours (worthy both your
name and fortune) shall in time to come more advance you, than they who tooth
and nail labor to purchase lands, which ordinarily perish through their
heirs lauishnes. It is true fame which is gotten by virtue, and perfect virtue
to maintain learning; which is so kind to those that seek after it, that in
all changes of fortune, in all miseries of this life, and casualties
whatsoever, it prepares the mind, and preuenteth mishaps. And least I among
the poor Tirones of learning, who desire the increase thereof with the most,
though deserve therein with the least, should seem to forget this especially
and ingrafted virtue so admirably bestowed upon your worship, I have thought
good to present you with a rude and homely written history, which if with like
regard you shall accept, as Alphonsus did the silly Satires of Philelphus, I
doubt not but in short time to publish that under your name, which shall not
only merit and deserve your acceptance, but also mightily profit all such as
are studious in all sorts of learning. Till when, I most humbly commend me,
desiring your Worship most earnestly to prosecute your virtuous enterprises,
beseeching God to prosper you in them and all other, to the advancement of
Letters. From my Chamber 2. Maij. 1591.

Your Worships to command, T. L. G.

To the courteous Reader whatsoever.
GEntlemen, I have upon the earnest request of some my good friends, drawn
out of the old and ancient antiquaries, the true li^e of R^bert second Duke of
Normandy, (surnamed for his youthful imperfections, Robin the Devil) wherein
I stand not so much on the terms, as the truth, publishing as much as I have
read, and not so much as they have written. The Loadstarres that directed me in
my course, if they have colors and no counterfeit, do me right to say they
set down coulors without counterfeit: yet many things have happened in times
past, incredible in our age, and in our age such things have fallen out, as had
our fathers known they had meruailed: It only behooves us to apply all
things that tend to good, to their end, which is virtue, and esteem them; to
intend all things that are bad, to their end, which is vice, and eschew them.
So shall we in reading reap that fruit, that impossible things shall be
referred to God, and possible ordered to our amends. Farewell.

T. L. G.

The famous, true, and historical life of Robert, second Duke of Normandy.
IN the populous and plentiful Dukedom of Normandy, (in times past called
Neustria) at such time as Pepin the Father of the great King Charlemaigne
governed the flourishing Kingdom of France, Aubert the first Duke of that
Country, by some supposed to be Ron of Denmark, began to signorize in the
same about the year of our Lord 750. a Prince by nature affable, in nurture
fortunate, as glorious for his Conquests, as gracious in his courtesies,
enterprising his attempts with Metellus constancy, and finishing the same with
Alexanders fortune: who being in years youthful, in person comlie, in
discourse pleasant, in riches mighty, was sought unto by diverse Princ^s, who
intended by inserting him into their lineage, the better to assure themselves in
their liuelyhoodes. Among the rest, the worthy Duke of Burgundy wrought so
earnestly, and persuaded so effectually, that Aubert at last accepted his fair
sister Y^da or Editha for his wife, a Princess in whom nature planted as much
excellence, as amiablenesse, tempering the gifts of fortune and y^ mind with
such equabilitie, that her goods seemed great in respect of her goodness, and
her goodness more great, in that she had goods: for as the mighty inundatio^ns
of Nilus make the river more famous, so ability united with bounty, and a
liberal hand with a merciful heart, do greatly assist in causes of honor.
These two princely cooples ordained by desteny to high desasters, though their
affluence of riches promised them felicity, yet the influence of the heavens
intimated their adversity; for having great signories to bequeath, they had no
heirs to enjoy, accompting this for their only cross, that they were without
children: many were their vows, but to no avail; many their prayers, but to
little purpose; if physic might have made fruitful, Editha had been a Mother;
if great sums could have purchased young sons, Aubert had been a Father. Seven
years and more lived they in this sort, the one careless of loves delight,
the other comfortless in that she was barraine, till on a prefixed Saturday,
when Nature had powered all her treasures on the earth, Flora powdered all the
meadows with flowers, when the louesick Zephirus softly breathed, and the
tender leaves sweetly bowed, when the sun played with the wave, and the wave
dallyed with the sun, both enjoying an equal simpathy of solace, Duke Aubert
(who from his youth upward was meruailously delighted in ye chase) accompanied
with his fair Duchess, departed out of his Capital City of Roan, to take
his pastance in the Forest. Editha (by divine ordinance) was that day attired,
as if she intended to woo Lucina to grant a Son, and win the Norman Duke
to get a Son. Her hair, in stead of gould to grace it, was goulden exceeding
gould, more finer than the third wherewith Arachne wrought her loombe, more
softer than the bed of Roses, wherein ye Morning played with Cephalus. Bound it
was after a careless manner, as if disdayning that so rare beauties should be
imprisoned, but pleyted in such sort, as if Nature should make a laborinth for
Love, Love could not wish a sweeter laborinth. Midst every pleight were
certain spheres of Pearls and Diamonds, which with the excellency of their
pureness, gave no little grace to her hayres perfection: her brows not so
hard as Iuorie, but more whiter, intermedled with some delicate vermilion, her
eyes in purity like the Carbunckle, lightning y^ darkest thoughts in effect
like the Leadstone, drawing the most indurate hearts, concluding all passions in
themselves, in that they were the roots of passions: her cheeks like two
orbs of rubies participating the whitenes of the Lilly, her lips resembling
the Roses, being limits of more wonder than either tongue can express, or eye
behold. Oh how may men that surfeit in conceit, express in pen! Suppose the
attire answerable to the person, the person exceeding report, and in a word
imagine Auberts happiness, who might behold so fair, and enjoy so fair, and
looking on the outward perfections, boldly aver ^his: Quae latent meliora puto.


In this sort both these Princes rode together, till such time as their train
had rowsed a mighty Heart, and vncoopled their howndes, when each one
intentiuely followed the game, enforcing himself either to show his good
horsemanship, or woodmanship, the rocks resounded with the cries, the woods
ecchoed at their clamours. In this sort spent they the morning, till about
Noonesteede, when the Sun was in the South, at that time shining in his
greatest mightines, Aubert being attainted with heat, entered the thickest of
the wood, hoping to obtain some cold shelter, where he might rest himself for
a while, and rid himself of his wearynes. But the further he walked, the more
was his wonder, for ^n every side Nature had been so prodigal of her power,
that the eye could not behold too much, nor the thought imagine so much. Here
saw he a fair delicious brook, recording music in his course, being
crystal in cleerenes, environed with fair Ceders so orderly aranged, as Art
could not in more excellence exemplify the effects of perfection. On that side
a closed Arbor beawtifyed with Roses, paued with Uiolets, on the top whereof,
the byrds with melodious music animated the flowers, and the flowers assisted
by the Western cool wyndes, seemed to dance for delight, and to flourish.
Here within for the self same occasion of refection, Editha had withdrawn
her self, who in her solitariness, bethinking her self of her fortunes, her
decaying beawtie, her detested barrainnesse, the lost labor of her husband, the
last limmit of her happiness, her imperfection the period of his pleasure, his
pensiveness the only fruit of her imperfection, in these terms bitterly
bemoned her self, whilst Aubert little suspecting her presence, yet willing to
hear the sequel of her feminine complaint, closely shrouded himself near
the Arbor, whilst in this sort she desperately complained. O Nature, too
natural unto same, but too negligent on my behalf, who yielding the basest
tree his blossom, the tallest pine his apple, the weakest stalk his flower,
the wasted field his spring, have bequeathed increase to all things, and
bereaved me of increase: thou have made me fair, but unfortunate, a
Princess, but impregnant, making me in desire as rich as any, in defect as
wretched as the most. Oh, had thou been as favorable to me as to the
Lioness, in bequeathing me one princely son, I might then have exclaimed on
Destenie, if I had lost him, and not have disclaimed delight, in that I ever
lack him. But thou art like the veruen (Nature) poison one ways, and pleasure
an other, feeding me with grapes in show like to Darius Uine, but not in
substance, like those of Vermandois. Thou art a partial mistress, pleased in
thy secrecy, peremptory in thy severity. But why blame I Nature, and accuse
not Fortune? she is the mistress of time, and the minister of tyranny,
supplanting Nature in some things, and desert in all things. But why blame I
Fortune, who is only active in ^utabilities of estate, not in hidden causes of
Nature. You are they (O Destenies) whom neither tears may attaint, prayers
persuade, vows prevent, or sighs provoke: you have made Nature a stepdame,
ordained Fortune my foe, and by your secret influence, have prevented my
desired favors. Alas poor unhappy Lady, borne to neglect, be witched with
necessities, why live I to be a byword of the world for my b^^rainesse? O my
Soul, were Death as partial, as thou impatient, he could not be so forward to
destroy, as thou to dye. In this sort with many bitter sighs, she abruptly
finished, washing her lovely visage with luke warm tears, beating her amiable
breasts with bitter strokes, till finally she burst out into this final
outrage. Well you heavens, since you neglect me, I respect you not, if God
vouchsafe me no some, the Devil send me one, so though my woomb be wretched in
beating, yet happily I shall escape the scandale of unfruitfulness.

Aubert not able to endure any longer to hear her lament, brake off her
impious discourse by his unexpected presence, where beholding his beloved
Editha hathed in tears, subdued with sighs, and blushing for that she was
bewrayed, he thus began to comfort^^^.

Ah my Editha, the Creature must not war with the Creator, nor expostulate
unkindness with God, who bestows mercies for good deserts, and miseries for
neglect of duty, he is not tied to our will, but we ordered by his power,
sooner favoring those by whom he is feared, than such who would force
Destenie, which will not be defrauded. What though my Princess thou art
Childlesse, yet art thou not comfortless? What though as yet dispossessed of a
Son, yet not disappointed of thy hope? The Trees that are longest in growth,
are fastest in root, where as Flowers have but their morning's flourish, and
their euenings funeral. Thou art yet young, and meet for increase, fair and
fit for fancy, ordained before thou be a Matron, to become a Mother. Frullick
Editha, me thincks I see a Babe sucking at these breasts, an Infant dallying
in this bosom, and a Son, who shall pay thee with as many smiles, as thou
have been pained with millions of sighs: so saying, he sweetly embraced her,
and finding a fit opportunity wherein both he and she might communicate their
fancies, he dried up the tears from her eyes with his kisses, and foulding his
arms about her neck, left such a pledge with her of her most desired
pleasure, that as the most Historiographers auerre, he in that place begat her
with child, After many their delicious encounteries, and interchaunge of
affections, they both of them arose and went to horse, and were no sooner
issued from the thicket, but they met with their whole train, who presented
the Duke and Duchess with the pray they had taken, which kind couple in
returning homewards with privy smiles discovered their pleasant pastimes. The
Duke rejoicing to see his Princesses merry, Editha joyful in that she hoped
to be a mother.

How Aubert by the commandment of Pepin King of France, was upon his return
sent to war in the aid of the Loraynes against the Vermandois, and how at
his return from the war, Robert his son was borne, who for his villainies
was surnamed the Devil.
NO sooner was Aubert returned to his Court, but certain messengers saluted
him with letters of credence from King Pepin, craving his aid in the behalf
of the Loraynes against the Vermandoies. The noble Duke being naturally
inclined to famous exploites, not effeminate pleasures, rejoiced at this
occasion, and taking kind leave of his Duchess, he levied his men at arms,
marching by long iornies so speedily, till at last he arrived where both the
battles were pitched in fight of one another, his present assistance
increased the hope of the Loraynes, and ruinated the hearts of the Vermandoies,
who that night dislodged themselves in secret, seeking all occasions of delay,
whereby they might either weaken their enemy, or strengthen their army. Five
months and more dallied they the time with light skirmishes, wherein Fortune
now smiled on the one part, now laughed on the other, but Aubert who detested
delays, and by their protraction suspected their policy, so incessantly
incensed the army of the Loraynes, that finally they disolued either to decide
the controversy in fight, or die in the enterprise: so that following y^
Vermandoies in to what place soever they withdrewe themselves, at last they
enclosed the Eneme in a fair plain encompassed with high hills, where was
neither hope of flight nor expectation of delay, whereupon both the adversary
hoasts upon a prefixed day encountered, where the Loraynes had the victory,
losing only six hundred men in the battle, and the Vermandoies, beside
those that were taken prisoners, lost the flower of their Nobility, beside
nine thousand Commoners who fell in that fight. But Auberts courage was of no
small expectation in this encounterie, for with his own hand he slew the
General on the adverse party, and renting the Colors from the staff,
trampled it under the feet of his horse in contempt of his maligners. The
Loraines in this sort being Lords, after they had raunsomed their prisoners,
and concluded their peace, returned to their countries, and Aubert no less
enriched than honored, returned to his City of Roan, where discharging his
train of Soldiers, he intended his accustomed pleasures.

But Editha during the absente of her husband, was so fortunate and fruitful
after their last intercourse; that she increased daily, and at last the
quickening babe in her womb, deprived her of all her wonted suspect: but at
such time as y^ Duke was returned, and the appointed time of her delivery
expected, the heavens intimating some prodigious sequel, were afflicted with
continual thunders; the earth shook as if amazed at Nature, the lightnings
flashed with great fury, and midst all these Commotions Editha was brought a
bed of a son, who by his fathers ordinance was in great pomp carried to the
Church of S. Owens in Roan, and christened by the name of Robert. This infant
in his swathing cloutes, gave certain testimony of his future outrages, for
being borne beyond the custom of nature with all his teeth, according to the
opinion of the Historiographers, was inchaunted, for in stead of drawing
nutriment from his Nurse, he bit off her nipples, and being kissed in the
cradle by the Lady of Sanserres, he bit off her nose: in his food he was
ravenous; in his fashions and behavior rigorous; in stead of his infantly
cries, used severe smiles, planting in his parents more occasion of suspicion,
than ca^se of hope. At seven years of age his mother diligently intending his
amends, sought out a man of good life and great learning, who might instruct
him in the fear of GOD, and resolve him in the secrets of Arts, she
accompanied him with his equalles in birth, his companions in study, leaving
no means unsought to reclaim him, nor persuasions vnapplied to reform him:
but as the Oak sooner breaks than boweth, and the Sallowe being bowed in the
twig is crooked in the tree: so Robert by nature inclined to vice, could in no
wise be induced by advice; he was in wit pregnant, but applied the same to
loosenes, rejoicing as much at diuelishnes as other in their doctrine; in
reading the Poets he despised the precepts of worth, and delighted in the poems
of wantounes; he was eloquent, but in impiety; diligent, but in mischief,
having nothing in more estimate than murder, flying nothing more earnestly
than modesty: and in regard of this his intemperance, it was by some supposed
that his mother at such time as he was begotten, was inchaunted; each one
seeing his inclination fled him as a Serpent, his equals he banished from him
with buffetings, his elders with reuilings, having neither fear of God nor
regard of godliness. If his mother went to see his wretchedness, he became
more wicked: if Aubert sought to reconcile him with good counsels, he
labors the more to defile himself with larcenies and cruelties, yea such and
so many were his mischiefs, that it was wondered at, y^ the earth did not sink
under him in respect of his ungraciousness, no one of his fellows escaped
from him unwounded. Hearing his Tutor one day discoursing upon the nature of
C^euta, he gave diligent attention to his doctrine, and finding out the simple,
he prepared the same according as he was instructed, and presented it to his
masters son a child of rare towardness, who no sooner tasted thereof, but
with vehement and bitter agonies gave up the ghost: the father wonderfully
astonished at this action, and inquiring the cause of him with many pitiful
bemouings, he received this answer.

Master (said he) I have but put in practice that which you have taught me in
precept, and since I find you a man of such credit, I will boldly write under
your lesson probatum est: he was naturally inclined to intort all good
principles of Philosophy, and to apply the earnest secrets of antiquity to
notable insolency; he dissembled most holiness when he was irreligious,
supposing it virtue to invent sin, and shame to be ignorant in sin: his
provident Tutor knowing (as the Proverb runs) the Tree by his fruit, the
Lion by his nail, and the Crocadile by his tear, knowing by daily experience
that too much impunitie is the cause of too much impiety, that it is easier to
stop the river in the spring, than withstand it in the stream, that the Lion
restrained being a whelpe, is tractable in his greatest years; that Custom
was a mean, if not to subdue, yet to alter Nature, thought good by cruelty to
correct that, which by le^^^ie he could not confound: for which cause seeing
that gentle admonition prevailed nothing, he exchanged his strict persuasions
to stern looks, his sound rudiments to sharp rigor, hoping to recover that by
displing, which he could not reform by discipline. But as their labor is
frustrate who seek to bring Cancasus into a plain, to bereave India of gems,
Candia of oils, Cochim of pepper, or Hibla of honey; so where the vnreformable
work of Nature is grounded in peremptory wickedness, it is impossible either
to destroy or disanull the effects thereof, according to the opinion of the
Poet: Naturam expellas furca licet vsque recurrit.
For, giving him ordinary correction at one time for an erroneous offense
which he had committed, in stead of submission and acknowledgement of his
misdeedes, he intentiuely employed himself to murder, and finding his Master
one day asleep, he privily took his penknife and cut his throat, smilingly
concluding his impiety in this sort. Ille mihi feriendus aper.


But as they that paint the Image of Venus shadow her excellence, by
depicturing her back parts, pretending either a secret insinuation of their
own admiration, or her mightines; so in laying these loose colors of Robins
misgouernance, I rather enforce wounder in my self to write them, than credit
with those that shall read them, who conuersing and daily reading the Norman
antiquaries, shall find far more of his youthly insolence, than is here set
down, every way beyond belief, yet no way differing from the truth.

How Duke Aubert and Editha called Robert their son to the Court, where by
his mothers persuasion he was admitted to the Order of Knighthood.
THe rumor of the young Princes outrages were no sooner spread throughout the
Court, but Aubert heauelie agreed at his sons misdeedes, and Editha becoming
wel^y desperate of his amends, with heavy hearts called the young man to their
presence, where the old man showing the severity of a Prince in his looks,
but the sincerity of a father in his laments, began in this manner to school
his son, whilst Editha was wholly given over to sorrow. Ungracious and
ungodly young man (said he) who in thy cradle porteudest thy future
indiscretion, and in the ripenes of thine age show the rashness of thy
nature, that make my title of signorie, thy privilege of sin, and my law,
the occasion of thy loosenes: Is this thy reward for thy mothers care? thy care
for thy fathers comfort, to exempt thy self of all grace, to exemplify in me
all grief. Ahlas haples Prince that I am, reduced to al extremes, should I
punish thee according to thy sin, I should deprive my self of mine only
solace, and in not punishing thy murders, I am as it were agent in thy
massacres. Oh vain youth, if thy studies were answerable to thy estate, and
thy wisdom equal to thy wit, thou migh^st perceive that thy desaster is the
desolation of this Estate, and the more my people hope of succession, so much
they fear thy fatal confusion. The Cockatrice killed in the shell, quelleth
not being a Serpent: the Tiger tamed bring a whelpe, teareth not being grown
great; and were there hope to restrain thee being young, there were some
better hope of regard in thine age. But as Semyramis miraculous birth, showed
her marvelous burial; so thy vnreuerent behauiours in these years, are very
Oracles of thy tyrannies in time to come, so that reason councelleth me rather
to cut thee off in the twig, than endure thee in the tree. Oh cursed youth, I
see by thy careless smiles, the contempt of my counsels, and woe be to the
time that I begat thee, since wilful ignorance does so much beguile thee: but
stay thy hand, or loose thy head, trouble me no more with such complaints,
least I cut thee short in thy complots; and since thou art negligent of my
rudiments, assure thy self I will be unnatural in my revenge. After he had
expostulated with him in this manner, he suddenly departed, and entered his
privy Closet, where as he sat so amazed with grief, and amated at his
ungraciousness, as had not Editha followed him, and with amiable persuasions,
animated him with hope, he had surely in that ecstasy miserably ended his old
years. But Robert in stead of repenting his offenses, began to renew his
follies, quarrelling with his fathers guard, in such manner, that every man
knowing his natural inclination, fled his company as being a monster among
men. If any grave old man came near him attempting to counsel him, after
he pretended some diligent attention for a while, he suddenly took out his
knife, and cut of his beard: satisfying the party wronged with this Ironicall
reason: Quae superflua sunt, abscindenda sunt.


Whilst in this manner he misgouerned himself among the Courtiers, Editha was
not vnbusied in the Closet, but so labored her husband by entreaties and
tears, that (since Robert ^er son was about 21 years of age, and able to
bear arms) he at last consented to grant him the Order of Knighthood,
alleging these reasons, that honors are the spurs of virtue, and natures
that are forward in wickedness, by conuersing with the virtuous are reformed;
naught left she unsought that might insinuate; nothing vnreported that could
persuade. To be brief, the prefixed day of his Knighthood was appointed, and
his arms were delivered him: the Nobles of the Country were assembled, the
Ladies were orderly enuited: neither did Aubert spare any cost to show his
magnificence, or Editha any counsels to reform Roberts mind, but calling him
apart into her privy Chamber, she began in this manner to advise him.

If my secret complaints (thou sinful young man) had not more effect to
mittigate the heavens, than to move thee, I would dry them up and defy thee,
but since they are pitious and respect prayers, I will weep for thee to win
them to thee, in hope they will be as favorable in mercy, as I am forward in
moan: Oh more obstinate than the Northern wind, more indurate than y^ hard
Marble, more cruel than y^ Libian Lioness, more perverse than y^ Lidian
tyrant; thou have open ears to conceive mischief, but a dull heart to
consider of modesty, I see thy repyning looks, thy reprouable leudnes, thou
despisest to hear my prayers, or harbor my precepts. Ah Robin, has the care
of obedience no force, the credit of a mother no favor, or art thou proud to
see me woeful, or pleased to seek out my wretchedness? Thou know that by
nature thou art near me, that thy folly is my fall, thy vain deeds, my very
undoing: if then thou have care of my life, yield some respect unto my lessons;
thou art now stepped in years, and have judgment to discern errors, now call
thy self home, and record thine old wickedness, amend thy life, meditate on
thy loosenes, cast a reyne on thy nature, conceit the reason of nurture, better
is a mean life in virtue, than an high estate in vice: Have thou offended in
thy youth? the misdeede is ordinary: Will thou amend in age? oh the action is
honorable: I conjure thee my son by these devout tears, by these deuote
intreates, by the name of thy mother, by the necessity of obedience, to
exchange thy excess to mediocritie; thy murder to modesty; thy untowardness
to staidness, and prepare thy self to accept the Order of Knighthood which
thy father will bestow on thee on to morrow day, being the feast of the
nativity of S. John Baptist, for arms I will furnish thee, for attendants I
will send them thee, only prepare thy self presently to watch in the Abbey of
S. Peter's, (at this day called S. Owens in Roan) and bethink thee so re behave
thy self, that thy father may have comfort and I content.

Robert by some natural instinct being attainted by these feminine complaints,
and friendly persuasions, seemed in some sort to relent, and suffered his
mother to arm him, and with some attendants departed to the Abbey to perform
his vigill. But when all were departed, and he left alone, and Lucina cleerelie
smiling on the candles of the night, began beautify with her sparkling
brightness the diffused darkness of the Center, Robert more vigilant in
vilanie, than valiant in virtue, suddenly issued out of the Church, and
secretly stealing into the Suburbs, travailed a whole league into the fields,
seeking some subject whereon to execute his pretended injury: at last he
arrived at a Nunnerie distant one league from Roan, at this day called Le salle
de damoiselles, where he entered, and calling the Lady Abbess before him, he
commanded and coniured her in such sort by threatenings, that she brought all
her young Nuns before him, and those that were bed ridden he made them be
brought, then immodestly stripping them naked, he made choice of the fairest, a
virgin of mighty constancy, who being wholly addicted to Chastity, and seeing
his natural churlishness, by all means possible sought to divert that by
humble suite, which he had contrived to effect in horrible secrecy: But he
whose heart was rather hardened than mollified by persuasions, in stead of
tendering her complayntes toare off her attire, and dragged her by the hear of
the head into a shady Wood near adjoining. It would have made a flintie heart
to flow with tears to see the miserable maiden, he comely locks shadowing her
naked limbs, how lifting up her delicate hands to the heavens, and pouring
forth delicious tears on her beating bosom, she implored help, she
complained her harms, how she resisted even in conquest, and seemed loath to
suffer that she must needly suffer. But the cruel caitiffe, careless of God,
forgetful of goodness, given over to sin, made subject to shame, neither
moved by entreaties, nor allured to truce, wretchedly deflowred her, and
hearing how incessantly she called for mercy at his hands, and expostulated
for revenge with the heavens, he cut off both her papps, through the agony
whereof, the gentle religious Lady gave up the ghost.

The bloudsucking wretch having in this sort satisfied his lewd lu^t, embrued
in the purple drops of the murdered Lady, hastily returned to the City,
employing all his labors and study, how to invent new lamentable stratagems:
no sooner did the mornings roseate coatch beawtifie the East with vermelion
redness, and the fair breathing Steeds of the Sun mount above the bosom of
Oceanus, but each noble peer apparrailed in rich attire, his horse trapped
with costly caparisons, attended before the Palace gate, till the Duke should
issue to service, great was the solemnity that day throughout the City. The
Ladies were glorious in their attires, the lovers gorgeous in their train,
there wanted nothing that might delight the eye, or content the ear. Among the
rest, Robert by his Mothers appointment was armed, and ritchly apparrayled
anew, and after his Father, with the rest of his Nobility, had heard Mass in
the Minster, by general appointment he was sent for by the best Nobles of the
land, who certifying him of his Fathers pleasure, and how he attended his
coming, he answered, that he was a hungry, and wanted his breakfast, and that
he would not loose the same for ten of the best Knightwoods in all Normandy.
Long travail, and much persuasion used these princely Nobles to persuade him
thence, till at last bringing him into the presence of his Father, he had with
all solemnity the accolade, and was commanded to kneel down to receive the
order of Knighthoode, at such time as his Father lifted up the sword to
perform the rest of the Ceremony, he joyfully rose up, and drew his weapons,
and had not some more advised stayed his hand, he had assuredly flayne his
Father. I certain noble man offering the Spur, he answered him ridiculously
in this sort. Non sum t^ntus cessator vt calcaribus indigeam.


In these indecent and disorderly de^^tanors, this unhappy young man spent the
flourishing time of his years, having neither regard of person, nor respect of
place. At the Triumph, his desire was rather to drive his horse into the
throng, whereby he might tread men down, than break his lance against his
adversary in the open liftes, such is y^ corruption of man's nature without the
especial assistance of the almighty. But least through tediousness I detayne
you in reporting his Fathers persuasions, his Mothers precepts, the Nobles
counsayles, the Ladies courtesies, I will hear leave off to speak of the
Triumphs, returning to speak of his manner of life, after he had received the
honor of Knighthoode.

How Robert the Devil took the strong Castle of Turnigue which his Father had
builded in defense of his estate, and of certain of his riots he made against
some of the inhabitants of the Country.
THe strong Castle of Tornid^, (that very Turnigue that flourishes at this
day) not only for the serenitie of the air, and the amenitie of the country:
among all the especial houlds of Normandy as held in most account, but also is
best defenced. This strong Castle and Fort was first builded by Aubert against
the invasions of the Brittons, where he reposed his greatest warlike
prouitions, and the most part of his Treasury, and was afterward ceased upon
by this unhappy Robert his son, who gathering together the most part of all
the dissolute persons of the country, kept this strong place for many years,
spoiling the inhabitants round about, burning their houses, rauishing their
wives, and committing such murders, as it was imagined, that Nature had
ordained him and his wicked crew, for the only monsters of his time: and as a
little brook assisted by land waters, and low grounded, extends it self at
last to a huge River, so this riotous company at the first exceeding not the
number of 30. grew at last to a multitude of murderers, thieves, patricides,
and fratricides, so that he who had committed any capital offense in the
country, inserted himself into the number of Roberts followers, who becoming
about 4000. strong, made all the neighbors round about them amazed at their
mischiefs: neither had they regard of age, or religion, or respect of nation
or alliance, but what so best pleased their appetite, or most appeased their
avarice, all that was sacred in their censure, and lawful in their lewdness.
Many were the cries of hapless Mothers, whose babes were murdered in their
bosoms: many the tears of tender Damsailes, enforced in their flower of
youth: many the poor, whose small possessions were ravished by the injuries of
the mighty, whilst Robert sitting aloft as the head of Confusion, su^fetting
in his excess, accounted riot for righteousness, his dronkards for his
divines, his murderers for his mates, his blasphemers for his board
companions. Oh the horror and confusion of those times, where iniquity was
held for equity, and diuelishnes accounted desert. In religious houses this
Devil of a man, and devilish man, in stead of reuerencing the learned, rid
them of their lives; for at Ambois he entered a Monastery of Minorites, and
cutting off the fattest Friars heads, he pitched them upon powles, causing the
veriest knave to carry the cross, and the rest apparrelled in Coapes, to tune
a devilish Dirge of impiety. From others he took away by violence their
riches, saying as Julian the Apostata did after him, that riches did hinder
them from the entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven. Those of his train who
were most tirannous, he most highly rewarded, and such as did swear most,
might spend most. Great were the clamours of the poor, the cries of the
oppressed, the complaints of the fatherless, the weepings of the widows, the
father for his child, the child for his father, the mother for her son, the
son for his mother. Nec quicquam nisi vulnus ^rat, cruor vndique manat.


In an Abbey near to Lisseux he entered and slew all the Monks, in that they
would not show their treasures, and finding four Pilgrims kneeling at a
Cross, he cut off their heads, saying, they could never dye in better minds.
Meeting with the Bishop of Caen ritchly mounted upon a Moyle, attired in his
ri^chest furniture, he dismounted him, saying, he reserved that beast to a
better use than that a beast should bestride it. Such and so many were his
unworthy attempts, without all expectation of amendment.

Of the horrible murder which Robert the Devil committed upon the Lord of
Beaumount.
There dwelled at that time, wherein Robin surnamed the Devil accustomed to
exercise these his detestable injuries, a noble Norman Gentleman, surnamed for
his fair Castle sake the Lord of Beaumount, near to Turingue. This
Gentleman had taken to Wife the daughter of the County Gourdon, a Gentle woman
of inestimable beawtie, who after her espousals, being conducted with great
solemnity to her husbands Castle, was by Robins espialls surprised in the
way, and being bound both her self and her husband, was brought to the
hapless mansion of this wretched murderer, where the disordinate tyrant
beholding the beawtie of the Lady, her young years, her fair face, he first
imprisoned her husband in the dungeon of the Castle, and burning in
disordinate desire, sought all means possible to persuade her unto lewdnes:
but she neither respecting life, or expecting liberty, and careless of her
harms, in regard of her honor, in stead of dalliance, accused him of
diuelishnes, and tempering her sweet looks with a blushing severity, she
reproved him in this sort.

Whereat aimest thou so much thou ungracious tirant? if to bereave me of mine
honor, thou art impious: if to rid me of my life, I am pleased: for one of
these extremes must I expect of one so insolent. The Crane and Rite agree not,
and yet Birds: the Swordfish, and Whale, are at enmity, and yet Fishes:
Saturn, and Venus, accord not, and yet Planets: neither may the vicious agree
with the virtuous, although both be reasonable creatures. Oh Prince, I detest
thy course, I lament thy inconstancy, to see the hope of Normandy, the ruin
of Normandy: if liberty have so great prerogative with thee, to murder at thy
pleasure, to ravish as thou likest, go rid thy Father of his right, who may
better suffer, in that he brought up such a plague, and leave us poor
innocents, who deserve no punishment. My Lord and I are coupled by love,
counited by virtue, allied by holy Matrimony, and will thou sever those whom
God has coupled? no cruel man, though thou presume to separate bodies, thou
have no portion of our Souls: though thou tyrannize over our lives, thou art
no master of our loves: come, practice thy cruelty: I see thine eyes swollen
with sensuality: I see thy hands trembling to attempt: I mark each lineament
of nature, combating in it self, till thou have exercised thy tirannie: but
flay not, if I must be exe^utiate, marti^ me: if thou will surfeit on blood,
glut thy self, for my body (ungracious man) whilst these hands serve to
wraffle, and limbs vouchsafe to resist thee, thou shall not defile it; and if
inhumanitie exceedes so far in thee, as thou intendest lust to the
vtteraunce, assure thy self, my incessant complaints shall so solicit the
heavens, that sooner shall they dissolve to nothing, before I differ to
curse thee. But (partial and perverse young Prince) this makes thine
injustice more manifest, in that thou punishest my husband, who have deserved
no danger, and differrest to revenge thee on her, whose too fair looks have
bereft thee of thy senses: oh suffer him to depart in peace, and detain me in
pe^urie: let not the innocent he held for nocent, nor such as have not wronged
thee, suffer wrong by thee: Lo, I assist this last prayer with pitiful
tears, this humble suite with bitter sighs: oh be thou pliant in this, though
peremptory in all other things.

These her lamentations accompanied she with such mauing passions, as if her
soul intended whatsoever her body had ena^^ed, and like a weak Champion,
entering the Listes with a cruel warrior, seems forward to resist, though
feeble to revenge: so this noble daughter of the County Gourdon, though she
saw no means to ouerpresse her enemy, yet in what she might, she endeavored
to resist him, but Robert like an unmeasurable rock, grounded in the Ocean with
inremouable power, resisted all the showers of her tears, and storms of her
sighs, seeming rather more seueare after her complaints, than before he was
resolute; and calling her husband, in the presence of his new espoused Bride
(who being bound, could no ways assist him but with her courageous comforts)
he caused his limbs peecemeale to be chopped off, and twixt every torment,
continually labored either to persuade the Lady to love, or her husband to
command her to lust. But the young Gentleman feeling the torments
insufferable, and fearing his toongs default, bit off the same, depriving the
cruel rauisher the means of further hope, and his Wife occasion of hazarding
her honor. Which when the tyrannous Prince perceived, he increased his
cruelties: in midst of which extremity fair Emine (for so was the Lady
called) cried out in this sort to her husband: Ah Beomond, the Conquest is
welny finished, and ^^^sing thy life, thou have purchased thy immortality. Be
bold noble young man, the divine spirit shall flourish, when this earthy dross
shall vanish: and though we are separated on earth, we shall be united in the
heaven. Oh condign merit of thine? oh kind token of thy love? thou have
supplied my weakness by thy constancy, and having attained the goal of
grief, thou art even now entering the gates of glory. Oh blessed Soul, if
divine eyes may brook impieties, stay and behold my stayednesse; whose
torments, were they far more then my Beamonds, can be nothing, so I preserve
my self inuiolate. Robert like an enraged Lion, given over to rage and
murder, having shortened the days of the husband, began now to attempt the
wife, and whilst his cursed crew animated and egged him on, seeing no means
possible to accomplish his loose and unbridled lust, he sheathed his sword in
her entralls, who mildly giving up the ghost, suffered her death with more then
manly courage.

How Aubert understanding of the rebellious outrages of his son, after some
messages, caused free pardon to be proclaimed for those who should deprive him
of his life.
The noise of these notorious cruelties were no sooner bruited in the ears of
Aubert, but he picked out certain of his chosen Counsel, and sent them unto
Turingue, commanding them by kind persuasions or policies to bring him to
his presence, who so far forth endeavored themselves on the way, thinking to
accomplish their Princes command, that they arrived at the Castle, where
after certain counsels debated on both parts, Robert utterly denied
obeisance, saying, that his Father was but the shadow of governance, himself
the substance, the one more fitter for his heads, than a battle, himself as
nimble at a less, as in the listes: he showed them his treasuries stored with
wealth, his vaults full of wynes, his ^alles full of cutthroates, his chambers
full of concubines, and in stead of rewards which are bestowed on the
messengers of Princes, he gave each of them a halter, swearing unto them, that
whosoever hereafter durst come and trouble him from the do^ard his father
should die the death. With this ungodly answer and gross intertainment, the
messengers returned to Aubert, who having the gates of his palace pestered
with the troops of such as were injured, cast off the wonted semblance of a
dear father, and presented himself like a severe Judge, causing it to be
proclaimed thorowout his Dominions, that whosoever could bring him the head of
Robert his son, should have pardon for the deed, and a reward for his
labor. But see the constant hearts of faithful subjects, they rather endured
damage, than sought his death; rather supplied his lackes, than sought his
life: It was lamentable to behold how the Princes Court was exchanged to the
Palace of care; how in stead of recreation, he sought desolation, loathing his
life, longing for death: Editha like the picture of despair, closed her self
in her Chamber, naught was heard but moan in stead of melody, sorrow in lieu
of sollace, complaint in place of pomp: but with haples Robert it fared far
otherwise, for no sooner heard he of his fathers decree, but he animated his
ministers to more malice; in stead of quailing, he fell to quaffing; of dread,
he followed delight, leaving no means unattempted whereby he might glory in
his ungodliness, there was no free passage to any city, the Merchants were
beaten and their goods taken from them, the Market wives spoiled, and their
victuals bereft them, so that this flourishing Dukedom seemed almost decayed.
Among the rest, a brave Courtier, son to the Duke of Constances, having a
merucilous delight in the Chase, was ordinarily accustomed to sport himself in
the Woods near adjoining the Castle of Turingue, and one unfortunate day it
was wherein it befell y^ he was busily following his game, at such time as
Robin y^ Devil with his crew of cutthrotes disported himself in that Forest
likewise, the cries of y^ hounds were heard on both sides, y^ games were
interchangably followed, and by unlucky misfortune it so fell out, y^ the
Huntsme^ on both parts fell at debate, and so long time fought it out, till
both the Princes incountered one another in the hottest of the fury: Prince
Robert being naturally harebraind, and careless of equity, seeing how some of
his men were wounded, drew his sword whilst the young toward Gentleman on the
other side rated his servants, and humbly offered satisfaction for injuries:
but Robin in stead of requiting him with the like courtesy, cut his head from
his shoulders, and mangling the same hung it about the neck of the chiefest
Huntsman, and sent it as a present to his father; so returning with his
followers from out the Forest, he entered his Castle, smiling pleasantly at
his sinful practice. The young Princes servants gathering up the mangled
members of their dead Master, laid them upon his horse, and with many
pitiful lamentations brought the same to their Duke and Master, who lay not
far thence at the Castle of Constances, who beholding that dreadful
spectacle, in stead of fatherly cries and fruitless complaints, he hammered
upon revenge, and arming himself at assaye, he gathered together sower
thousand men at arms the most approved and valiant of all his signiorie, and
assembling them together before they were ready to march, he with stearne
visage presented before their eyes the murdered body of his only son, and
with a gravity accompanied with remorse, he burst out into this vehement
exhortation.

Behold here a spectacle my friends and fellow Soldiers, a ruthful spectacle
for the father, a remorsefull despite of you my subjects, not enterprised by a
stranger, who was provoked by injury, but attempted by our near neighbor,
who was rather honored than harmed, and before GOD what greater wickedness?
what more impiety? If murder be unpunished among our selves; if those who
should defend us shall offend us; if the privilege of a father shall
outcountenance all faith, why mistrust we not one another? why murder we not
one another? why rob we not one another? If self same security awaight the
disobedient as the obedient, let us cast off this community, despise
sovereignty, where neither a man may be Lord of his own goods, nor the father
assured of his own son, nor the subject in safety of his own life. Among
the Persians robbery was repayed with death, oh my unhappy Country, here
murder is wincked at with remission! In Lacedemon the Prince might be
impleaded by law, but in Normandy we are spoiled by our Prince beyond law.
But why stand I ripping up the ruthful discourse of many mischiefs? where
this one injury suffices to incense us, behold this haples young man ^laine in
y^ prime of his years, murdered in the heart of his Country, flaine by the
hand of Robert heir of Normandy, see how his bleeding wounds stir up
revenge, me thinks I hear his groaning ghost exclayming on me his father for
revenge, trying out unto you my subjects for revenge, whom I beseech as a
father, and command as a Governor to take pity of these old years, your
own Lord lives to partake this common injury with me. Me thinks I see in
your eyes some tears of remorse; but dry them up my subjects, it is blood
that must requite blood, and revenge that must repay injury. If you leave me
in my attempt I will prosecute it; if you follow me and dye with me, you show
your obedience, you show your courage, you show you love, you show your
loyalty, you shall be dear to your Lord, who will dye for your safeties: let
the resolute therefore swear revenge on their swords, we have Auberts warrant
for our safety, we have rewards prefixed for our warfare, follow me
therefore and let us find out the miscreant who has spoiled us, and either
dye or rid the world of this murderer. After he had discoursed in this
manner, the whole assembly swore to follow him to the death, so that each one
of least expectation enforced himself to be most forward. The Duke caused the
body of his son to be borne out of sight, and entombed with a rich and
sumptuous funeral, and privily marching by night, he laid his me^ in ambush
in the Wood near adjoining the Castle of Turingue, waighting the approach of
the morning, at which time he assuredly hoped to assuage his displeasur^.

The bloody and cruel battle fought between the Duke of Constances and
Robert the Devil and his train, and what thereupon insued.
As soon as the watchful morning had opened her purple gates in the East, and
discovered her palaces full of Roses, and the Sun adorned with a wreath of
Chrisolites, began to shake his deawie locks lately washed in the baine of
Eurotas, Robin surnamed the Devil called up his company of rakehels and
commanded them to arms, where after they had glutted themselves with their
mornings refection^, they marched on with mighty showtings, astonishing the
Woods with their cries, which when the Espials of the Duke apperceaued, they
gave their Lord a secret intelligence, and each one prepared himself to the
fight. By this time had Robert with all his train entered within the compass
of the Ambush, where suddenly the Duke of Constance commanded the allarum to
be sounded, and couching his spear ran into the thickest of the enemy,
seeking on every side for the murderer of his Son, if happily he might
epsy him. Prince Robert apperceauing the pretended treason, arranged his men,
and entering y^ thickest throngs, that each one wondered at his prowess: he
was a man of tall stature, big boned, of a stearne and maiesticall
countenance, of much forwardness and courage, and had his brutish nature been
answerable to his force and valor, assuredly he had been a man of high account
even at that time. Fatal and bloody was the fight on both sides, the one
kindled by the injury they had received, the other combatting according to the
proverb, Pro aris and focis: hope they had none of life but in their valiant
resist, and that which encouraged them the more, was the valor and holdnesse
of their General: which the Duke of Constance apperceauing, he gathered
together thirty of his most brauest Caualiers, and with them all at one time
assa^led Prince Robert. It was now about even tide, and the Princes soldiers
were either al of the^ sore wasted or wounded, when the Duke by maine strength
dismounted Robert, and gave him a great and deep gash in the thigh; the
Catines that followed him seeing the^ master distressed, desperately sought his
rescue, and were every one of them put to the sword, only Robert of himself
recovered a horse, and so valiantly continued in his defense, till the dark
night parted the Combattants, and he found convenient means to avoid the
danger; the Duke of Constances seeing the Enemy was hotly overcome, and that
it was impossible to follow the Prince, being most expert in the secret ways
of the Wood, sounded the retreat, causing the dead bodies of his Soldiers to
be buried, and sending Aubert word of the bloody victory attained against
his son.

Thus in triumph leave we him, rejoicing mightily in his revenge, and
resorting with sollace unto his Castle; and return to Robert, who sore
travailed with his wounds, and having his horse tired, posted with all speed
he could possible now this way now that way, searching for some place of
security where he might hide himself from the enemy: but evil fortune
pursuing him every way, his horse at last tired under him, so that he was
constrained to forsake his arms, and trusting only to his sword to walk
through the Forest on foot; many were his sighs, and bitter curses, many his
exclamations and complaints, whilst desolate Echo the faithful companion of
such as be sorrowful, vouchsafed some pitiful reply in his pensiuenes; but
the great expense of blood, the long and weary course of travel, the cruel
and dangerous pursuit of his foes did not sufficiently amaze him, but to the
more increase of his grief, a hidden affliction of the mind began with such
horror to attain him, that he every way grew desperate. Oftentimes did he
prepare himself to complain, but knew scarcely how to complain, he felt
himself mortal, and that he was a man, he examined the changes of fortune,
and bethought him on the causes of his fall, neither knowing how to amend then
they were so infinite, nor reconcile himself he had been so dissolute: and
lifting up his eyes to heaven, he beheld the Moon performing her course, the
Stars ministering their duties, and by their celestial beauty began with
himself to imagine the beauty of their maker, then called he to remembrance
the old rudiments of his master, as touching the essence and power of God, the
wonderful workmanship of the heavens, the beautiful order of the spheres,
the strange creation of man, the influence of the celestial bodies in these
inferior parts, and considered that all things were made by a determinate and
inviolable law limited by prescript of Nature, and that if in the earthly
compact of man the imperfection and grief of one member afflicted the whole
compact, much more a contrariety in the powers both of soul and body
threatened a confusion: Then called he to mind, that since there was a Moouer
which disposed and ordered al things, so in due ordinance of government it was
requisite too as he prescribed rewards for good deserts, so he should also
ordain punishments for vice. Hereupon began he to meditate on the nature of
sin, the causes of sin, and the effects of sin, and him thought that a
voice sounded in his ear, the reward of sin is death. Oh how great was the
horror and confusion of his soul at this time, his burden heavier than Aetna,
his affliction more fiercer than may be imagined, and suddenly a shower of
tears burst from his eyes, his heart was inflamed, his thoughts troubled, and
the eye of reason long time obscured, at last began to break forth with
inestimable brightness, so that falling down on his knees, and thumping his
wounded breast, he at last in bitter terms entered into this ecstasy. I wonder
thou maker of heaven at thy workmanship, and thy worthiness is known by thy
works, I see that thou art just in dealings, and I desperate through my
delays, I have had a portion with the chiefest creatures, but have employed it
worse than brute beasts. Oh how my soul groaneth within me, and my inward
bowels are grieved in my body. Lord thou have made me, but I have martered
me; thou have saved me, I have shamed thee; thou have elected me, I have
rejected thee; mine impenitence has wrought thy impatience: oh enter not into
the fulness of my sin, least I adventure the fury of thy sword, the vale of
heaviness ouercladdeth me, the hope of heauenlinesse is clowded from me: Oh
that the hills would fall upon me, or that the depth might devour me: oh that I
had never been borne, or had ever been better. Lord it is justice, I merit
condemnation, I deserve affliction and no favor, damnation and no
preservation, commination from thee, not combination with thee. Oh my soul
groan for my sins, grieve at my shames. Oh happy were my soul if grief
could suffice: oh my soul, rent at thy unrighteousness, melt at thy murder,
or happy were my soul if remorse would suffice; but my portion is in the
grave, not among the just; among the defiled ones, and not the reconciled ones;
I am heavy my God; but why call I him mine, whom I have blasphemed? I am sorry
my God: as if sorrow would satisfy the excess of sin? Oh, no I am
unworthy to behold heaven, to conceive hope, to entreat mercy, to promise
amends: but damnation, oh the bitter wound of damnation that threatens me,
that kills me.

In these desperate and sorrowing terms spent he the most part of the night,
neither receiving sustenance, nor inioying sleep, his clear complexion became
pale, his strong limbs grew lither, and he that before time thought himself
more worthy than the King of heaven, now thought himself unworthy to tread
upon the earth. By this time the memory of his sins assailed him anewe, and
a hidden working from above dispersed the clowdie passions of his thought, in
such manner as we see a fair and pleasant breath of wind, which during the
extreme heat of the Sun, tempereth the fury of the same, in which manner I
leave him till the morning.

How a Hermit found Robin the Devil sore wounded, and relieved him, confirming
him in his repentance with his wonderful persuasions, how he dealt with his
followers, and his intended voyage to Room.
The day began no sooner to discover, dimming the brightness of the Stars with
a more radiant cleerenes, but an old Hermit who had sequestered himself from
the world, after he had said his morrow Mass, walked abroad to take the
air, and as he travailed through many beautiful paths, wherein he was
accustomed in great devotion to meditate: at last he arrived where Robert lay,
altogether bathed in his blood, and so overcome with despair, that he
continually languished till it pleased death to yield a final period to his
pensiuenes. The good old man seeing his personage comely, his apparel courtly,
his wounds deep, his danger great, approached more near him, and reviving
him with fountain water, which sprung very near at hand, he brought him into
some remembrance of himself: at last with much persuasion he led him to his
Hermitage, where after some refection taken, and his wounds bound up, Robert
began to break out into these terms.

Ah old man, how fond art thou to foster a viper in thy bosom, and a villain
in thy bed? why permittest thou not that I sleep with death, who am already
damned? and may dye without merry, who have lived by naught but murder? The
old man amazed to bear his cursed melancholy, knowing that desperate wounds
require most of al yrksome medicines, began thus. Ah my son, gather thy
spirits together, it is fondness in thee to desire death, and policy in me to
protract life; by the one thou shall loose occasion of repent; by the other
recover means of amends: Thou art no viper my son, thy sting is blunted,
and these deawes of tears thou powrest in my bosom, are sinews and strings
to draw thee to heaven: thou art not damned, for the knowledge of thy sin is
a mighty step to thy repentance: thou can not dye without mercy, since thou
were borne in mercy, neither will he that made thee to show his power, suffer
thee in thy repentance for to perish. Have thou bin a murderer? a great escape
my son, a breach of Commandment, a heinous sin: but is not God merciful
to forgive beyond our conceit? He knew thee in thy Mothers woombe, and ordained
thee to an end: he limited the days of thy life, and thine hours were not
unknown unto him, and all this was done by ordinance of his secret will, and
not without the mighty hand of his mercy. Thou have carried unclean ^ands,
borne a corrupt heart, been prodigal in disobedience, prone to contempt, these
are the fruits of thy old man, which show God what he is, and his mercy how
great it is. Oh my Son, God is tempted as much in suspect of his mercy, as
in neglect of his justice, for his mercy exceeds all his works: I will teach
thee, and my words shall savor unto righteousness. The hand that governs all
things, is divine: the works of God admit no limits, and his ways are
unknown: he ballanceth not sins by our proportion, nor condemns by worldly
judgment. Be confident therefore, and serve the Lord in fear and trembling.
Suppose all things wicked that is in thee, and confess thy wickedness beyond
measure. Detest that which thou have pursued: be penitent in that thou have
defaulted. If the Lord look upon thee in mercy, thy soul shall feel it,
yea, thy raynes shall wax hot, and thy spirit moved: neither fear thou if
terror assail thee beyond measure, for the hand is mighty that helps
thee. Dread not my son, fear not, boldly disburthen thy mind of uncleanness,
and power out thy soul before thy God, and weep with contrition, for in so
doing, assure thee thy tears are lacked up in his bottle: look what is
between the East and West, so far will he separate thy sins from thee, if
thou repent thee, Robert hearing hereof, began to gather heart, but calling to
mind what he had before time heard of the learned Clearks of Normandy, how
there are some sins which are against the holy Ghost which are neither
forgiven in this life, nor in the life to come, he began to beat his breast,
his eyes stared, his hear stood upright, and as if he had Bemboes vision, he
began to cast away all hope of mercy, crying out in this manner, o etiam in
spiritum sanctum peccaui; nulla remissio, sempiterna condemnatio. The old man
hearing this extreme allegation, cast himself prostrate on his face, crying
out unto the heavens, O ah occultis criminibus liberanos domine. Hold back my
Son, thou art too forward: defer to presume on that sin, which thou can
not define, neither object that to thy self, which depends on the Judge: thy
deeds are written, but to God belongs mercy. It is doubted, whether
presuming too much on the knowledge of hidden sin, be not sin. But be thou
advised by me, refer all to the Lord, detest all means that may seduce thy
mind: arm thee with the shield of faith: pray that thy belief may be
increased: let all things seem vile to thee in respect of true repentance, and
thou shall find the working of God beyond conceit: enter not into his
judgments, but cleave unto his mercies: if thou be tempted, pray
vehemently: what though for a while thy Soul be dull and heavy? it is my
Son for no other cause, but to make thy joy more fuller. What can be a more
certain proof of mercy, than grace to detest sin? or, how can man better
overcome sin, than by imploring mercy? But tell me what thou art, and thy
course of life, that I may further counsel thee.

Robert hearing this heavenly Hermit in how divine sort he sollaced him, began
to gather heart, and could him the order of his birth, the manner of his life,
with other matters too tedious in this place to discourse of. And when the old
man was fully satisfied, he told him the weight of sin, the reward of sin,
exemplifying to him the fruits of repentance, and in such manner schooled him,
that of a lewd young man, he reconciled him to a stayed and holy course of
life, enioyning him for penance to go baresoote to Rome on Pilgrimage,
wearing at his back a cloth of hair. Robert after his stay about seven days
with the Hermit, was in some sort recovered, and intending his souls health,
besought the company of the Hermit to his Castle, where finding those his
dissolute mates who were left alive, he first by earnest persuasions sought to
reconcile them, and finding them no ways tractable, he put them all to death,
as being vipers in his fathers common weal; and locking up the doors, he led
the Hermit into his Treasury, where showing him the riches which he had taken
from others, he humbly prayed him to resort unto his Father and Mother, to
present his submission, and report his contrition, beseeching them to make
restitution to every one whom he had wronged, and with bitter compassion he
so washed the poor Hermits head in tears, that the good old man rejoicing in
spirit, cried out, Benedictus dominus in omnibus operibus suis, and taking
their leave the one of the other, the Hermit travailed to the Court at Roan,
and Robert walked on his journey toward Rome.

How Aubert heard of his Sons overthrow, and did reward the messengers, and
how the Hermit arrived at the Court, whose joyful tidings was great comfort to
the Duke and Duches.
Whilst Aubert in deep melancholy dispended his days, loathing the detested
reports of his Sons practices, and consulting with his Nobles in what sort he
might cut off such an improfitable offspring, the messengers of the Duke of
Constances presented themselves before him, who after their most humble
reverence signified to the Duke, the whole sequel of their message, first, the
death of their young Lord, lastly, the discomfiture of his lewd Son, which
tidings so wounded him to the heart, as for a long time he continued as it were
in an ecstasy, not knowing to what hopes he might aspire, seeing his succession
so desperate: but calling to his remembrance, that a Princes word was a
sufficient warrant, and the loss which (as he supposed) he had sustained, was
rather the occasion to cut off a continual grief, he cleared his distressed
looks wherein care had planted many furrows, and turning unto them with mild
countenance, gave them this friendly answer. My friends, if my brother of
Constances has revenged his sons death (as you certified me) he has
performed the part of a friend, and exemplified my justice, for which cause, in
that he has rid our common weal of a Rebel, and his Father of a wicked
son: we entertain you as messengers from our friend, and deseruers in our
estate, and for this cause we think good, that out of our Treasury he receive
such reward as we appointed, and you for your pain taking, shall enjoy this
small reward of two hundredth marks: in this sort causing his bounty, and the
prefixed recompense, to be delivered unto them, he discharged them, falling
into deep consultation with his Counsel about the affairs of succession:
there was no heart so indurate, that considered on the desperate estate of
Prince Robert, but lamented, some one admyring his valiancie, some after his
supposed loss, arguing Duke Constances of cruelty, who otherwise hated the
young Prince most deadly. But the consultation of the Princes was broken off by
the sudden repair of the Duches, who hearing of the desperate estate of her
Son, and uncertain of his safety and life, filled the whole Palace with
feminine clamours: an every side was sorrow seated, neither was there eye so
partial in the whole assembly, that shead not some tears, till suddenly in
midst of this garboyle, the old Hermit entered the presence, whose sudden
^xcesse brought them all, into expectation, so that the old Duke comforting
his fair Editha, attentively gave ear, expecting some novelty, when after
most humble reverence, the reverent Father began his discourse after this
manner.

These strange alterations in your looks you Princes, persuades me of your
ouergreat forwardness in passions, who are castly overcome with every light
joy, and suddenly crossed with the lightest trouble: which fruit of
intemperance (with reverence, you Nobles may I be bold to tell you) arises
through want of equabilitie in mind, and assured remembrance that you are
mortal. If according to your worldly store, your estates were constant, you
should be so far from knowing God, as you would quite forget him. At the
entrance of thy Palace Aubert I see men weeping, because the report runs
thou art wretched; thus are all affections ruled by the affairs of the
mighty, and honor is so sauourie a thing in those men's minds, who would be
great, that it sootheth, and is soothed by all sorts of them. In Traians time,
all men loved justice, because he was just: in Octauians before him, all hunted
after peace, in that he was peaceable: in Heliogabalus days all were wanton,
in that he was wanton: and now, since thy mind is vexed with doubtful grief,
thy subjects likewise are attaynted with doubtful grief. But dry up your
tears good Princes, and rejoice, Prince Robert (supposed dead) is surely
living, (yet dead to his old wickedness) following better ways: for after he
escaped from his enemies, he arrived in my Hermitage, where after I had cured
his wounds, and counseled him from his wickedness, he undertook his voyage
and Pilgrimage to Rome, but before resorted to Thuringue, laboring to dissuade
the remnant of his followers from their lewd life, which when he could not
effect, he in my presence slew them, under pretense (as he said) to rid his
country of caterpillars. And in that, dread Prince and my liege Lord Aubert,
he has mightily offended you, he humbly by me beseeches his pardon,
protesting vehemently a hearty detestation of his sin; and requesting, that
it would please Editha his Lady Mother and Duchess, to have him in memory in
her most sacred devotions: and for that he knows that he has many ways
indamnished poor men, he humbly entreats your Mightines, to accept these
keys of your Castle of Thuringue, where in the Treasury you shall find
sufficient to make ample satisfaction for all injuries: thus having discharged
the duty of a messenger, and acquitted your Grace of suspicion, I humbly crave
license to depart, that I may the better intend my woonted contemplations. It
were hard to imagine with what incomparable joy the old Duke entertained this
aged Herald of his happiness, for his tears of joy trickling from his eyes
as messengers of his hearts content, abundantly watered the Hermits bosom,
and being unable to express his joy, he silent foulded his arms about his
aged neck, seeming so besotted with delight, as before he gave over he cried
out with the Grecian, O Fortune, pay this most exceeding joy with some durable
grief, for as now it is at y^ fullness: Editha likewise was not careless to
content her self, but drawing the old man apart, with often repetitions of
his troubles, his torments, his passions of mind, his patience in affliction,
as the occasion offered it self, she became either pleasant, or pensive,
showing by her changes of color, her contentation, or discontents: and in this
joy let us leave them, returning to our weary Pilgrim, meditating in this
religious travails: to see how from a graceless person, he became a godly
penitenciarie, truly the discourse hereof draws me into admiration of Gods
mercy, who calls men home beyond common belief, accomplishing herein his
divine promise, who said, that he came not to call the righteous, but sinners
to repentance.

Of the strange trauayles that Robert surnamed the Devil, endured on the way,
with those accidents that befell him betwixt Normandy and Rome.
It was about that time when as the Sun had remembered himself of his
accustomed loves, and had dispersed the bewties of increase thorough the
bowels of the earth, yielding every stalk his flower, every Tree his fruit,
and quickening the decayed beawties of the field, which were beforetime wasted
by Winters obscurity, when this penitent Prince, beforetime esteemed the very
pattern of deformity, began to show himself the paragon of reformation: his
haughty looks exchanged he to humble leuitie, his defying of God, to deifying
of God, his graceless oaths, to godly obseruances, punishing himself by
bodily travel, who before time was given over to butcherly tyranny: in stead
of hammering mischiefs in his head, he humbled himself with contemplations:
his soft bed, was turned to sweet grass: his Robes of Honor, to the rags of
a Hermit: his pampous riot, to poor roots: his rich Wines, to springing
waters: and such was his patience in these alterations, that he preferred them
before all pompous Treasures. Three days trauayled he with restless toil,
till at last being ouerburdned with extreme wea^inesse, he sat him down by
a clear Fountain, cooling his thirst in stead of a courtly Cup, in a homely
clapper: and after he had taken such repast, as the herbs of the field
affoorded him, he sat him down under a Pine tree, and beholding the bark
thereof, which with smoothnes invited him to write, and the cool shade which
gave him shelter against the sunny heat, with a little pencile he ingraued
this his devout passion in the thickest thereof.

Roberts Meditation.
O Heavenly God that gouernst every thing,
Whose power in heaven and in the earth we know,
Thou God from whom the gifts of grace do spring,
Respect my suite who am oreprest with woe.
O pity God, sweet God some pity take,
And cleanse my soul for Jesus Christ his sake.
I wayle the life that I have led before,
The days ill spent that came into my mind
Incense my soul with horror very sore,
And threaten death unless I favor find.
O pity God, sweet God some pity take,
And cleanse my soul for Jesus Christ his sake.
My graceless oaths now laid before mine eyes,
My youth misspent and worn by women's guile,
My hidden sins my woeful soul surprise,
My want of former grace (ay me the while.)
Cry mercy Lord that thou would pity take,
To cleanse my soul for Jesus Christ his sake.
Away thou world that flatterest earthly man
With heavenly joys, and bringst him down to hell,
I loath this life do thou what so thou can,
My longing is with God my Lord to dwell,
Who will relent and eke some pity take,
To cleanse my soul for Jesus Christ his sake.
Anchora Christus.
These verses were written with a zealous spirit, accompanied with fervent
sighs, ha^selled with scalding tears, witnessing his constant contrition, but
being troubled in spirit, and desirous to mitigate his martyrdom, he attempted
further, writing this Madrigale in the bark of a Cipris tree.

Madrigale.
My reasons eye had seen my youthly rage,
How it had worn my hopes of virtue bare,
How careless wit was want on bewties page,
And headless will true judgment did ensnare,
How all was wrackt that hope of wisdom gave,
It wep^ a world of tears my soul to save.
The listening ear of that impartial guide,
That by his beck the earth and man directs,
With sunnie beams of peace the tears up dride,
And will made barraine reckned his neglects:
Since when my soul for grace to heaven does fly,
In praising God and blessing reasons eye.
Etiam in naufragio.
Thus passed he some few hours endeavoring to attain some rest, and after
weary nature vouchsafed him any concent to wander, he walked onwarde: The fifth
day after his mornings Orisons he travailed through a thick Wood, giving
scarce any license to the Sun^e beams to enter those shadie limits: The soil
was barraine, signifying desolation; the trees leaueles, the walks loathsome:
in depth of the shadiest thicket thereof, there sounded a deep and hollow
voice calling intentiuely for help, whilst in stead of Echoes, the fatal
Scritchowle sounded a doleful reply. Robert amazed at this melancholy
spectacle, and wondering at the dolefulnes of the complaint, he boldly entered
the desolate shadow, proposing God for his guide, and his courage for his
companion: he had not long travailed, but suddenly he beheld a fierce Lio^
which furiously assailed him, renting off the lap of his Palmers weed, before
he could shape defense: but at last entering combat with his Palmers staff,
he so valiantly defended himself, that he slew the Lion, and seeing it
spraule upon the ground, entered into this contemplation. Oh GOD that have
delivered this huge Lion into my hands, defend me from that roaring Lion which
seeks to devour my soul, and prosper me in those actions which I enterprise
for thine honor and glory. This said, he proceeded further, when lo^ a fair
delicious Damsel crowned with a garland of Roses, apparelled after the manner
of a Hamadriade, presented her self before him, where making semblance of an
amorous and distressed Lady, she fained a pretty shadow of complaint, and
foulding her arms, as if she had been Loves forsaken, she tuned this Elegy,
whilst from out the heart of the desert, a strange sound of melodious music
accorded to her complaint.

Pluck the fruit and taste the pleasure
Youthful Lordings of delight,
Whilst occasion gives you seasure,
Feed your fancies and your sight:
After death when you are gone,
Joy and pleasure is there none.
Here on earth nothing is stable,
Fortunes chaunges well are known,
Whilst as youth does then enable,
Let your seeds of joy besowne:
After death when you are gone,
Joy and pleasure is there none.
Feast it freely with your Lovers,
Blyth and wanton sweetes do fade,
Whilst that lovely Cupid houers
Round about this lovely shade:
Sport it freely one to one,
After death is pleasure none.
Now the pleasant spring allureth,
And both place and time inuites:
Out alas, what heart endures
To disclaim his sweet delights?
After death when we are gone,
Joy and pleasure is there none.
The final conclusion of this Canzon, was shut up with a pleasant Couranto, in
which from out the grove four Satyrs antiquely entertained four Nimphs, and
suddenly vanished, whilst this fair Hamadriade in semblance approached
Robert, wantonly casting her arms about his neck, proffering dalliance: but
he whose love was planted on heavenly, not on earthly delights, suddenly cast
her from him, and lifting up his hands to heaven began thus. O thou maker of
the heaven, tie me to thy love, entice me to thy law, incense me to virtue,
subdue in me vanity, let not temptation conquer, though it try me; nor Satan
compass, though he tempt me. The prayer was no sooner finished, but a horrible
crack of thunder fell from the heavens, the Woods were inflamed with
lightnings, and this wanton vision suddenly vanished, in stead whereof
succeeded horrible Eathquakes, the Curtains of the heaven were darkened, the
compass of the world was clowded, and on the face of the Center there appeared
through the light of lightning, hideous shapes of Giants threatening him,
monstrous Tigers assayling him, but he constantly putting his trust in GOD, and
boldly walking on his way, at last attained into an open plain, in the midst
whereof there stood a poor Chapel, with a little Cottage hard beside, and by
that time the dangers were ouerpast, and the dimmy approach of the evening
foretold him that the day was spent; for which cause he hasted into the
Chapel to do his devotions, where he found before the Alter a grave old man
performing his divine prayers: neither of these two intended worldly
salutations, but solemnly fell to their devotions, which being performed, the
old man seeing so goodly a personage clothed in a Pilgrims weed, with great
reverence saluted him, deeming him for no less than he was, beseeching his
company in his Hermitage for that night, in that other lodging was not nere at
hand. Robert easily condiscended, and entering the homely Cottage, he was
feasted in friendly sort with such dainties, as his poor estate could afford.
During the time of their repast, Robert desirous to know the secret of the
inchaunted Wood, began to question with the old man about the same: who al
amazed to hear that Robert had passed it, in manner of admyration, he answered
thus. Truly (my son) thou art happy, that through the mercy of GOD have
ouerpassed those dangers which thy predecessors could never attain unto: for
this Wood (my friend) is called Le bois du temptation, the wood of temptation,
where through many holy men have attempted to pass, but they have either been
withdrawn by delight, or driven back by fear, and finally perished through
their own follies: But since thou have so constantly perseuered, proceed in
thy devotion, and let humility be thy companion, and doubtless (my son) thy
end shall be far better than thy beginning. Robert wondering at his
doubtful conclusion, replied thus. And why father, do thou know my
beginning? I son (said he) thou art of the earth as I am, borne of a
Princess as I was not, son to a Duke, yet of detested life, Robert of
Normandy I know thee, thy change was foreshowne me in vision, now therefore
prosecute thy pretense, follow thy repentance, for in so doing thou shall
perform mighty things. The sorrowful Prince hearing but the repeticion of
his former life, wept most bitter tears, being sore ashamed to behold the
grave father. But the old man comforted him, and knowing the expedition of his
journey, so animated him, that he presently set forward, in that the lovely
Moon assisted him with sufficient light: the aged sire conducted him on his
way, in which they had not long travailed, but they took their leaves the one
of the other, and Robert continually prosecuted his journey. In travailing the
Alps diverse Gentlemen offered him their Moyles to ride upon, but he refused
them. In Italy sundry Merchants invited him, wondering at the majesty of his
countenance; but he replied that he was unworthy, and so with tears forsook
them. If any his fellow Pilgrims fainted on the way, he bare him on his
back; if any thirsted, he sought them water; he was comfortable to those that
were comfortless; and where he saw the innocent wronged he was agreeued.
Travailing about Ancona he saw a villain, who cruelly handled a poor
country maiden, and drawing near him he so rigorously revenged the injustice,
that the poor maid falling at his feet was feign to entreat for her
persecutor. Such blind men as he met he called them happy, assuring them that
the loss of their outward eyes kept them from beholding much vanity; seeing a
lame man complaining of his imperfection, make straight thine inward man (said
he) good friend, for that shall mount to heaven through thy virtue, when these
limm^s shall dissolve to earth and become the pray of vermin. In all his
travails he was constant, patronizing the weak, punishing the wicked, and in
this manner travailed he till at last he arrived at Rome.

How Robert the Devil entered Rome, and what there chanced unto him.
TWo months was Robert ere he attained his journeys end, and at the last
entered the City on the feast day of S. Peter, at which time in great
solemnity the Popes are accustomed to go to divine Service, and humbling him
with other Hermites, (as it was the custom in those supersticious days) he
attended there for his benediction: Great was the solemnity on that day, and
throughout the streets where the Bishop should pass, each one devoutly
humbled him on his knees to entertain his blessing: At the entrance of the
Church, among other devout Hermites, he beheld Prince Robert bathed in his
tears, humbled on his knees, and wondering at his manly countenance and tall
proportion, he questioned with himself as touching his estate: the penitent
Norman with bitter sighs made him a due relation of his birth, estate, life,
alterations and cause of travail, beseeching his fatherhood of absolution. The
Pope amazed at the name of Robert, whose infamy had been bruted through the
whole earth, s^ept back as altogether astonished, yet at last gathering his
spirits together, and rejoicing at his reformation, he sent him to a wholly and
devout Recluse, who was his (...) Confessor, commanding Robert to be ordered
by him, and so giving him his benediction he entered his seat royal. Robert
intentiuely to reconcile himself after he had performed his vow, departed
out of the City toward the Cell of this Recluse, who was a man of much
holiness; the place of his (...) was beautiful, from whence he might beh^ld
the cool streams of Tiber beating upon the maiden walls of the world: to be
short, be entered the Cell, discovered himself to the Recluse, who detesting
his abommable life, and not knowing what manner of punishment he might condignly
appoint him, he commanded him for that night to continue in devout prayers in
the Chapel, promising him the next morning to satisfy him in his doubts.
During the time that darkness ouerspred the face of the whole earth, and every
bird beast and fish enjoyed the happy benefits of fleepe, the vigilant
religious couple devoutly applied themselves to contemplation, when about the
third hour of the night the Recluse was resolved of his penance: wherefore
upon the break of day, when Robert had arisen from his prayers, he came unto
him, and carrying in his countenance the gravity of a father, and in his heart
the sincerity of a Counceller, he began thus. Young Prince, if thy contrition
for sin be so compassionate as thou pretendest, and thy zeal to acknowledge
the same so accomplished as thou presumest, know this that thy danger is less
and thy benefit the greater, for repentance is a sweet sacrifice, and desire
to amend is the way to end the fault. But in that thy offenses and follies have
been extraordinary, thy punishment must be no less, in sufferance whereof
thou shall thoroughly perceive the indignity of thy former sin. Hereupon be
prescribed him his penance: first that he should eat no meat but that he
received from a dog: secondly, that during seven years he should be dumb:
lastly, for that space of time he should walk in a fools habit, in
acknowledgme^t of his accustomed leawdnesse. Robert thankfully accepted that
which was enjoined him, neither repyning at the hard penance, nor disdayning y^
flender pittance, but taking humble leave of the Recluse, hasted himself unto
the City to satisfy that which was prescribed him, and buying him a fools
habit he walked up and down the streets, enduring the reuilings of children,
who cast dirt in his face, scoffed and mocked him, and the more lewd language
that they used, the more contentment he received, remembering this, that his
deserts and presumptions deserved far more martyrdom: oftentimes was he
reviled, but devotion closed his tongue, considering this in himself, that in
refrayning the same be avoided much offense. Certain of his confederate
Hermites beholding this madness and idle behavior, came unto him to comfort
him, but he crossing his hands and weeping tears, poynted to the heavens,
signifying thereby that he suffered that cross for sinning against the^. In
short time he became the by word of the City, some buffeted him, which he
endured patiently; some others of more charity offered him food, which he
with gratulation refused, so that no other noise was published through Rome but
of the strange Idiot that was dumb; the people flocked about him, some
praising his person, some lamenting his ignorance, some greeuing that he was
dumb, othersome laughing at his dotage: thus every man gave his several
judgment of him

How Robert entered the Emperors Court, and how he there lived.
AT last he entered the Emperors palace, at such time as with his Nobles he
solemnized a most solemn and festival day, great was the press about the
table, and many the attendants, but Robert boldly entered the presence,
demeaning himself after such a manner, that the Emperor and Princes took
very great delight in him, he was active of body, and vaughted exceedingly
well, performing such aduenterous tricks, as the Emperor all amazed inquired
what be might be; he made him signs of dumnes, shadowing under colors of
delight his intentive devotion. Then presented they him meat which he refused,
accustoming himself at every such offer to make show of discontent. The
Emperor at that time had a fair Greyhound, who for his swiftnes in the chase
and seemelines of body was highly esteemed, that beholding Robert fauned upon
him and played with him, as if appointed by some divine instinct to affect him;
the Emperor seeing he refused meat at his haud, cast some pittance at his
dog, where Robert suddenly strugled for the same and greedily fed thereon,
which made the lookers on intentive to sport, to accustom him to that kind of
feeding. The Emperor caused him for this cause to be cherished in his own
house and tended with diligent care, taking pastime continually to have Robin
in his presence. At night when the festiuals were finished, Robert was brought
unto a good bed well furnished, but he refused it, and gathering together
certain locks of straw he made him a cabin under the staiers of the
Emperors palace, where for seven years space he continually slept with ye
hound, refusing all other content or delectation. Oftentimes was he privily
seen to weep bitterly, and when he could get into any several place to pray
devoutly on his knees, which being told unto the Emperor, made him more
curious to enquire his progeny, but by no means could he understand it, for
the good Prince had kept it most secret. Thus may we see that when the mind is
withdrawn from worldly delights, (wherewith for the most part wretched men are
detayned) all things seem abject and vile, except such as lift the soul unto
heaven, and subdue the body in his sensuality. This most famous and renowned
Roman Emperor, among all other his high blessings and Fortunes benefits, had
a fair Lady to his daughter, whose picture if Praxitiles would describe, or a
better Master than Apelles, he should rather lack cunning, than lay colors;
as beautiful she was as Nature could imagine, and as well formed as she was
fair, and no less exquisite in learning as in lineaments, her only
imperfection was that she was borne dumb. This noble Princess called Emine,
was sought unto by all the Monarkes and unmarried Potentates of the world, so
was her fame bruited abroad, and such was her beauty: among the rest, the
Souldan of Babylon understanding by certain Italian Merchants the exceeding
and surpassing excellence of her person, and receiving from them her picture,
he became woonderfullie surprised in love, so that neglecting all other
pleasures, he only settled his mind toward the attainment of her favor:
Oftentimes presented he rich presents to ordinary trauaylers, desiring only
to grow famous in the Italian Countries, and he that could but in best words
set out Emines praise, had a princely recompense. Round about his Palace was
no other posie but Emine: and in his Oratorie was no other Goddess but Emine:
if he talked, he talked of Emine: if he longed, he longed for Emine: if he
wept, he wept for Emine: thus were all his joys metamorphosed into Emine. It
was woonderous to see his disguise in attire after the Christian manner: his
desire to be holy after the Christian holiness, such power has love both to
alter both the nature and ^^nner of life and religion. But leave we him, and
return we to Robin, who conuersing continually in the Emperors Court, was at
length beheld and fancied by Emine: and although she had not the liberty of
speech to express his affections, yet by the motion of her body, and the
carriage of her eye, she published her fancies. Thus may you see Gentlemen,
certain grounds laid of strange adventures, hidden only in the secret
judgment of God, and certaynely performed in times past, the sequel whereof
followed after this manner: and first as touching the estate of the Souldan.

Of the melancholy and strange life of the Souldan during his love, and the
events of the same.
THe rich and mighty Souldan of Babylon having (as you have read) in beholding
the picture fallen in love with the person, for the space of six months
secretly concealed his hidden grief, and communicated it only with strangers
and aliens, began rather increase than diminish his despair, for knowing the
natural inclination of his subjects every way repugnant against the laws and
manners of the Christians, their dissident religions, their different
regime^ts, their mortal hate, and immovable stiffneckednesse, he began to
give over all thought of contentation, plotting out such a course of life, as
therein he showed more barbarous constancy in love, than judgment and
discretion: for picking out a solitary wood far from the resort of men, he
builded him a place of pleasure, begirt with rich bulwarks, and environed with
sweet springs: the lodgings all of white Marble, the pillars of Iaspis, and
the whole furniture so rich, as never eye of man could behold more wonderful.
In midst whereof, was placed a dainty and wonderful Garden, stored with all
the riches of nature, with sweet shades, clear springs, strange flowers,
wholesome herbs: and in the middle of the same was erected a Temple to Cupide
and Emine, wherein her stature made of the purest gold, seemed to stayne all
the excellency of workmanship, for the Paynter had done as much as might be,
to describe beawtifull Emine. Herein he closed himself, and having all the
battlements of the temple made of polished Iuorie, he with a true loves knot
interlaced his name with Emines, being of himself excellently seen in
portrait. If any one of his Lords resorted unto him, destrous to know the name
of his Goddess, he answered Emine: but how he served, or of what place she
was, he durst not tell, fearing ye barbarous treasons of his greatest subjects.
Thus ceased that warlike nation their arms, who were beforetime so famous, and
he that was wont to fight for signiorie, was now foiled and besotted with
love. The Nobles about him not enduring idleness, presented themselves before
him, seeking to dissuade him from his obscurity, but all in vain, till
Behenzar, a chief Musulmah in Bagdet or Babylon, humbling him on his knee,
spoke in this manner.

Most royal offspring of Mahomet, though thy displeasure be my death, and thy
frown the ruin of my fortune, yet knowing my self a Subject, and thy self
my Sovereign, I will labor for thy delight, though it cost me my death. Why
is thy greatness that scarce was contented with the world, now at last
contained within a wall, or thy courage which never was vanquished, thus on the
sudden vayled: Have thou bin valiant with Haniball, to fall with Hanib^ll? and
will thou that wontest to make Uictorie thy goddess, now make vanity thy gods
good. Let me speak with patience, it is not the idleness of thy mind, but
the idol of thy heart; default of eigernes, but the folly of thine eye: I see
love printed in thy brows, I fear love is planted in thy breast. Oh my Prince,
if I deserve favor, discover thy fancy, there are remedies for wounds that
are known, medicines for apparent maladies, but l^cers that are concealed in
the flesh, are not cured but by sharp Physic: It is love, I see it working in
thine eyes, which infeebled by the power of thy thoughts, would execute that
kindness which thy heart can not consent unto. And what if love? art thou not
Lord of Babylon, who may command? the brauest befriended by great Kings, who
have fair Concubines? let Asia be sought out: if Asia hold thy love, Asia
shall not keep her, if Europe, what may Europe to thy power: As for sandy
Aphrica, the Sun is too hot to breed any white coulored Phaenix: howsoever
thou love my Sovereign, if it be love, (and that it is love thy life
declares) certify thy Princes of thy fancies, command them, employ all, send
Embassades, present benefits: if all fail, thy Sword is true loves dart,
which shall pierce further with the terror of thine arms, than all the world
that attempteth thy countermaund. The Nobles admyring the boldness of
Behenzar, and suspecting no less, cast themselves in general at his feet,
and swear unto him by a solemn oath neither to contrary him, nor forsake him,
till he had achieved the fullness of his joy, if so it pleased him to discover
the cause of his pensiveness. The Souldan marking their incessant suites, and
praising Behenzars dutiful obedience, rowsed himself from his melancholy
seat, and with a milder countenance began thus.

I am fortunate in nothing more my noble Peers, and beloved Princes, than in
this, that I have valiant men to follow me in my Conquests, and vigilant men to
counsel me in my discontents. You require a matter O my companions, which
has cost me much hartbreake, and may procure me much happiness. It is no
ordinary passion that I feel, or servile pleasure that I follow. I tie not my
thoughts to limits, nor my limits conclude my thoughts. My troubles are like
the twynnes of Democritus, augmented at once, counseled by nothing, but by my
opinion: I have the quality of Salmacis, which being tasted, procures
madness, and this quality is love, and this love in me has the disposition
of the Hamonian Lake, capable of all forms, but consumed by one, which form
may not be reformed. Ah Behenzar, well may thou accuse mine eyes, for they by
a heedl^sse glaunce, have eclipsed my matchles glory. Oh my Princes, I swear
to you by Mahound whom I honor, by my right hand that never fainted, I
blushingly confess I love, but not so basely as Haniball, for Capua contained
his, where Europe admyreth my Mistres. It is fair Emine I love, to whom this
Alter is erected, and my vows are directed. Princes wonder not, Theagines a
Greek, loved Cariclia a Moore, and your Souldan a Mahometist, his Emine a
Christian. The aim of my thoughts is the honor of Rome: oh sweet Rome that
contains such an honor, which if I attain not, it is but your discontents,
my death, and if my death, what though: oh happy death if for her grow my
durance. This abrupt conclusion was followed with such a bitter sigh, as all
men expected no other but his final overthrow, or her consent: whereupon his
Nobles privately, consulted, and by his consent Behenzar was made Embassalor,
and with rich presents sent to Rome to crave Emine in Marriage, and if the
repulse should be granted, the conclusion was, that privy intelligence should
be given, and Ships rigged, to the end that on the sudden the Souldan might
invade Christendom, and rid himself of all the obstacles of his happiness.
These conclusions well liking the Souldan, were briefly debated, the
Ambassadors dispatched, the Ships rigged, the souldyours leuyed, and the
despair that the Souldan conceived, at the first was turned into a fresh hope,
yet the sweet grounds of his pleasant discontents so alluref him, that in
seeming to hope, he pretended despair, and in the absence of his Lords, who
intended the furtherance of his affairs, he traffiqued naught else but fancy,
drawing on three Iuorie colombes, enuironing the statue of Emine, these three
succeeding Sonnets: upon the first, he placed a Camelion in a sea of blood,
with this Mot underneath it, Mututus ab ill^, and underneath the same this
Sonnet.

The first Sonnet.
IN how contrarious forms have I conuersed,
Since first mine eyes and heart by love were chained,
Now like the Heart my bosom has been pearsed,
Yet no Dictamnum served when I was pained.
Now like the babe of Climene enclosed,
In piteous barck Electrum have I stilled,
Now like the Nymph of craggie rock composed,
The rocks and woods with sorrows have I filled.
Now to a dying Swan have I been turned,
With doleful tunes my funerals waimenting,
Now to the Salamander never burned.
Yet in the fire for evermore frequenting.
Oh loathed life on naught but sorrow grounded,
Where who so triumphs most, is deepest wounded.
Upon the second he placed a Barck perished in a stormy Sea, a Fury guiding
the helm, the Sky ouercast, the Gemini appearing, under which was written Sic
perij, and under that this Sonnet.

The second Sonnet.
Sailing the sea of my forepointed greenaunce,
My will the helm of my misfortune guiding,
Expecting gain suspecting no mischeeuaunce,
With stailesse keele I cut the waters gliding.
The fair liurnall lamp whilst that I sailed.
With never partial eye my course assisted,
But when the lights delightful beauty failed,
And wavering cinthia in her course persisted.
In silver ^ould two brother Stars appeered,
That in the cloudy journey I attempted,
Incenst the Seas, and more my Shop they necred,
(Though fair in form) my Barck from hope exempted,
Amidst the storm my will the helm forsakes,
And thus my Ship a lucklesse shipwreck makes.
On the third he painted Men's, Fortuna, and Natura, all striving to raise a
dead man, who had four Cupids, two hanging at his hands, two et his feet,
which kept him down with this Motto, Hic labor, and underneath the same this
Sonnet.

The third Sonnet.
IF all things are ordained to an end,
In semblaunce good, or perfect good in deed,
What final bent have these my tears I spend,
Or all the drops my wounded heart does bleed.
Or to what fat all period are you aimd
My bitter sighs, that have my bosom maimd.
Oh my effects of passion every thing,
That to a certain purpose is applied,
His final hope at last to end does bring,
But such success alas is you inuied.
For though mine eye his tears, my heart his blood,
My breast his sighs bestows, they do no good.
For why the end for which you travel sore,
Is not attained by the threefold gifts
Of mind of body, or of fortunes store,
Which man to tipe of matchless honor lifts.
For what you seek no limits does admit,
Nor yields to time, nor is subdewd by wit.
Cease then my tears, and bleed no more my heart,
Restrain your storms, my sighs you toil in vain,
For your felicity exceeds art,
Whereto nor toil nor labor may attain.
For love it is subtle influence,
Whose final force still hangs in suspense.
In these passions and fantasies consumed the Sould^^ the most part of his
time, now imagining hope of success, now fearing cause of repulse, adoring
Emine as his Saint, and placing his follace in his amorous conceits, until
such time as he heard the fatal message of his overthrow: till when we leave
him, returning to Behenzar, who having a prosperous wind, and a better will,
sailed so fortunatly, and travailed so forwardly, that he arrived at Rome,
where what success he had, you shall understand in the Chapter following.

How Behenzar arrived at Rome, and of his repulse and dispatch. The valiant
courage of Robert hearing the name of Christ blasphemed. The love of Emine
toward him: and the assembly of the christian Princes in the aid of the
Emperor.
THe rumor was no sooner spread throughout the dominions of the Empire, but all
contributarie Princes assembled together in the City of Rome to do the
Emperor service, and make his estate more pompous, and after letters of
safeconduit presented to the Ambassador, Behenzar mounted on a brave Barbarion
Horse, trapped in Tissue, and Pearl, himself attyred after the Barbarian
fashion, with his Algozin of cloth of gold embrodered with rubies, being led
between two Kings, was in all solemnity conducted unto the Emperors Palace,
who in his great Hall, set among an innumerable troop of Courtiers, as Phoebus
amidst the lesser Scarres, whom Behenzar after small or no salutation
attempted thus. Emperor of Rome, amongst all the blessings thy God has
bestowed on thee, among all thy fortunes that have befalne thee from thy youth
hitherto, the only good is this, that out Souldan of Babylon, the terror of
the world for arms, the Lord of Conquerours, for actions, dayneth to salute
thee, who hearing of the beawtie of thy Daughter the young Princess Emine, and
vouchsafing to grace thee with his alliance, craves her as his Wife in
Marriage, which bounty of his if thou neglect, know, that thou fosterest the
shadow of thine own ruin, thy Kingdoms shall be spoiled, thy Princes flayne,
thy Crown trodden at his feet, and thy ruins shall be so grievous, that thy
royalties were never so great. If thou entertain his demands, hold, take
these presents (whereupon he caused twenty Moors to discharge their carriages
of gold and silver, and lay it at his feet) if not, be lends thee it as a
pledge of his revenge, till he redeem it with the sword, Great was the murmr
throughout the hall at the insolence of the Pagan, and among the rest Emine was
exceedingly moved, who sitting at her Mothers feet, by her tears began to
testify her cause of terror. The Emperor being a Prince of a haught heart,
disdayning to be outfaced by the brauest warrior in the world, having long
since determined never to marry his Daughter out of Christendom, returned
Behenzar this magnificall answer. It is not our custom in Europe proud
Babylonian, to persuade with peremptory threats, but to woe with gentle
entreaties, and as our natures are mollified by mildnes, so are they indurate
by menaces. If y^ Souldan salute me as his equal he erreth, for ye Emperor of
Christendom daines no so bace companion as a Souldan: if as his superior, I
thus answer him, the distance of his country, the difference of his custom,
the abiectnes of his riches, the barbarism of his religion, these disable him
to be an Emperors son; as for my daughter she must be ruled by her father,
and her father will not admit thy master, who if he attempt me with injuries, I
will temper him for his injustice; as for his presents I bestow the^ on thee,
for gold (Barbarian) amongst us, is of small account in respect of virtue, go
let thy vassalls take it up, and carry thou that home as a gift meeter for a
messenger of the Souldans, than a Master of the Souldan; for his invasions I
fear them not, since my Christ is my protector, under whose safe conduct both
these and I little fear him, and so be thou answered. Behenzar mad with rage
seeing the Emperors small regard, stamped with his foot, and swear thus: By
Mahound (Christian) thy Carpenters son that Christ, your God, shall not save
thy hands, nor thy heads from the sword of the meanest Prince about the
Souldan, but this City shall be raced in despite of thy protector, and thy
power. Behenzar had so said, and in his fury was stinging out of the Palace,
when Robin the Devil having all this while solemnly attended at the foot of
the Emperor, all on the sudden arose, and not enduring to hear the name of
his Savior blasphemed, he flung the Pagan to the ground, and stamped him under
his feet, which done, he made show of a foolish triumph, and bumming the
proud Babilonian with his babble, he had welny killed him, had not y^ Princes
drawn him off, who safety conducted blaspheming Behenzar to his ships, and
smilingly laughed at the insolence of the Idiot. The fair Emine seeing the
forwardness of her Champion was meruailously delighting, showing unto her
father by signs that he was no fool but some man of high spirit, every day
dressed she means to recover his wits, using prescripts of Physic, and the
council of the learned, who secretly informed her that he was a man of rare
expectation. These suppositions meruailously inflamed her, and love began to
show himself in act in all her outward parts, inflaming her eyes, changing her
color, which least it should be perceived, she with humble reverence forsook
the assembly, leaving her father with the other Princes in great consultation,
who resolving to prevent all inconveniences, departed each one to his Country,
swearing by solemn oath each one to gather his greatest power, and to come and
assist the Emperor the next year in the suspected, or rather certainly
pretended wars of the Souldan: in which minds I leave them intentive on
their forces, Robert devout in his follies, Emine detayned with fancies,
Behenzar sailing to Babylon, who with such expedition followed his business,
that with a prosperous wind he arrived in Assiria, and so hastily posted to
Bagdet: what there insued the Chapter following shall declare.

How the Souldan being repulsed by the Emperor, with a huge and mighty army
sailed into Italy, and how he besieged Rome, with some events thereabout.
NO sooner had Behenzar declared unto the Souldan the resolute and careless
answer which the Emperor had returned him, but racing his rich Palace, and
stamping the statue of his Goddess Emine to powder, he furiously called for
Arms, swearing all his Princes by solemn and inviolable oaths, never to
depart out of Christendom, till they had ruinated the Empire, and recovered
his love: and hereupon he embarked himself as soon as the next Spring
appeared, accompanied with 11. Kings, 18. Princes, and 300. Mesulmahes, his
Army co^sisted of 300000. horse and foot, his Barks and Galleys ^hoked the
Sea, and the billows groaning under the burden, began to wonder at the wood of
stately Pines which labored upon their bosoms. With these forces and in this
Equipage arrived this Souldan of Babylon in Italy, the terror of whose threats
amated all the Western parts; the poor country men throughout Italy drove
their Cattle to the chief Cities, forsaking their houses, and leaving their
riches; the noise of trouble amated Greece, and afflicted Spain, and the
French as all amazed prepared arms. And as in common dangers a huge and
mighty army is the only mean to make head against a furious Enemy, the
whole Nations assembled them together about Rome, and submitted themselves
under the conduct of the Empire. Now at Rome in stead of beautiful houses were
builded strong Bulwarks; in stead of Palaces, Palisadoes, and each man was
mightily addicted to the safety of his country. But the Barbarian like the
cruel river of Tigris, exceeding his bounds with unmeasurable and resistlesse
waters, or the lightning falling upon the dry Cedars, ouerran all the
fruitful champion, destroyed Cities, burned Uillages, raced Manner houses; the
voice of desolation was heard on every side, and fear and wonder assailed men
on every side: The Clergy with great devotion called for assistance from
heaven, and every man hearing of the danger of his neighbor, suspected his
own damage to be at hand. At last the Souldan after great victories, rich
spoils, good fortunes, and long journeys arrived at Rome, begirting the City
with a mighty and strong siege, his streamers waned in the wind, and the Egle
of gold shining on the top of his Pauilion, seemed to abash all the beauties
of the Capitol. The Emperor was no less vigilant in preparing defense, for
being assisted by the brauest men of Europe, he neither pretermitted policy,
nor omitted opportunity: often were the outrodes the Enemy made about the
Country, and there passed no day wherein there was no some light skirmith,
wherein for the most part the fortune was doubtful. But Behenzar moved with
the outrage of the Idiot, among all the Pagans was most forward to battle,
every day would he ride about the walls, reuiling the Christians, calling the
Emperor Toward, his followers Foxes, that durst not stir out of their hale,
till at last Pepin of France with other famous Lords, who endured not
concumelie, neither brooked braues, so earnestly wrought with the Emperor,
that the battle was appointed the day following, and the Souldan thereof
advertised by a Harrolt; great was the preparation on both sides, and greater
the dread among the Christians, in that the whole hope of the Empire depended
on the fortune of that conflict. No sooner did the bright and beautiful
messenger of the day, with blushing seemelines awaken the sleeple God of light,
whose Chariot being apparelled by the hours, with golden brightness gave
possession to radiant Phoebus, but both the armies issued out into the field,
and in a fair plain arranged themselves in battle, there might you hear on
both sides the Captains exhort, the Caualiers applaude, the Trompets made a
heavenly harmony, enforcing the horses to carrier, and the heart to courage:
in brief, the battles joined, where the Souldan showed inestimable feats of
arms, hewing, murdering, and overthrowing whom so ever he met. Pepin like
Mars enraged, or Achilles incensed, beating down all that resisted,
brandishing his sword like lightning, now stroke he down the King of
Circasso, the Duke of Hieropolis, now reskewed the old Emperor, who laden
with years and arms, yet lacking no courage, sought all means possible to
subdue his enemies. Behenzar on the other side seemed like Alexander among the
Macedones, for being attended on by a troop of Mamelukes, resembling the
Macedonian Phalax, he dispersed the horsemen, tossing them on his pikes, so
that after a bitter and long ^ight, the right wing of the Christians was
discomforted: there might you see Ortacus of Denmark^ show himself a brave
war^iour, who entering upon the Thessalian horsemen with his Danish Regiment,
so dismembered them, that they fled about the fields, both disordered and welny
destroyed. But the Souldan relied them s^dainly, and intermedling them with
fresh hands of Soldiers, gave such a charge on the front of the enemies
battle, that it was enforced to recoyle. The Christians in this incountrie
were put to the worst; of Princes were slain the Duke of Consa, the Earl of
Malgrania, the King of Pontus, the Marquis of Pisarra, and to the number of
1700. Christians, the Emperor himself hardly escaped, and was in great
perrill of his life, who gathering up his broken wings together, in grievous
discontent of mind entered his City, whilst the Pagans triumphed in their
Tents, having lost but to the number of 900. men, besides those of mark and
account.

Of the great moan that was made throughout Rome for the loss of the
Christians, and how Emine the next day of battle gave Robert the Devil a
rich white Armor and Shield, with a white horse, who reskued the Emperor, and
did wonderful deeds of arms.
GReat was the moan through all Rome for the Christians ruin, many the tears
of the mothers be moaning their sons, many the sighs of the daughters
weeping for their fathers, there was no house in the City which solemnized not
some funeral, and happy was he in his misfortune, whose son had been most
forward. But among all the mestfull families, the Emperors Court was most
unfortunate, where in stead of rich spoils, the Imperial chambers were
replenished with dead and wounded bodies, and confusion seeming to have elected
her habitation in that place, began to infect every particular person with his
poison. The Empress bathed in tears, had her eyes almost choked up with
weeping, and Emine the flower of beauty seemed like the Rose ouerwashed with
ouerlirant shows, her crimson stains became pale and bleake colors; so much
does sorrow alter both the inward and outward habilities. Robert agreeued in
heart to see these discontents, groaned in mind, though he dissembled mirth,
practicing all means possible to delight the Emperor, to move laughter to
the Empress, to content Emine; feign would he have enterprised arms, but he
durst not, fearing it was prejudicial to his vow, and so much courage wrought
in his heart, that espying his Confessor one day, who by reason of these wars
had withdrawn himself into the City, he by signs showed his de^ires to do
the Emperor service. The good old man falling on his neck blessed him, and
confidently persuaded him thereunto, (so his desire were not for vaineglorie
sake, but for the honor and in the name of Christ). Robert resolved herein
became more frolic, moving great pleasure in the Princes, by kissing their
swords, and playing with their arms; many battles were there fought, wherein
he would feign have been present: One day among the rest, at such time as the
Princes issued out to battle, Emine called Robert up into the top of a high
turret, from whence they might behold all the manner of the conflict: but alas,
the day was fatal to the Christians, and the cries of them that fled pierced
the very heavens. Robert not able to endure these massacres, wept bitter tears
for anger, and seeing Emine discontent, made signs unto her for armor; she by
divine instinct somewhat assertained of his intent, secretly with her own
hands armed him in a rich white armor of her fathers, which he used in his
youth, giving him a fair sword and shield, and shutting his beuer close
commanded that a horse should be given him; the grooms of y^ Emperors stable
gave him a fierce and stout Steed of selfelike color as his arms wear of,
on which speedely mounting, he issued forth of the gates, gathering together
the scattered troops, and entered the thickest of the Saracens with such
fury, that before his ^ aunce was broken he dismounted thirty of the best
Pagans: then taking in hand his well tempered sword, he performed such
Cheualrie, as all the beholders were amazed, his sword lighted in no place
where it cleaued not a lim, neither was their Helmets of that temper that could
withstand his stroke, he slew Behenzar hand to hand, and had welny taken the
Souldan prisoner, had not a band of strong Tartarians reskewed him. Emine from
her solitary Turret beholding his prowess, was surprised with marvelous
sollace, now wished she that she could speak whereby she might move her love,
now desired she that he were as noble, as he was valiant, and as witty, as
he was worthy. But the Emperor among the rest was wholly revived with the
sight, and yielding God most humble thanks. animated his Soldiers to pursue
the victory; many and valiant were the men that fell that day by Roberts
sword, and had not the night by speedy approach departed both the Armies, the
Souldan had that day suffered an undoubted overthrow: whereupon both the
Armies sounded the retreat, and Robert with all expedition privily entered
the City, where encountering the Recluse his Confessor, he left his Armor
with him, and hid his horse in a Monastarie, where the good man was resiant,
returning to the Court in his fools habit: by which time the Emperor with
his attendants was entered the City, and being disarmed sat him down in great
content, discoursing with his Princes and Emperors upon the affairs of that
days service; great was the noise throughout the City of the white Knights
valor, and in Court was no other talk but of the strange Knight that behaved
himself so valiantly. The Emperor made great inquisition after him, but by no
means could understand thereof.

By this time Robert and his hound (as was his custom) entered the dyning
chamber, playing many pleasant tricks before the Emperor, who took thereat
wonderful delight, Emines eye was continually fixed on him, and whilst the
Kings talked of the valiant warrior, she purposely poynted at him. It fortuned
in this incountrie that Robert had a little scratch over his right eye, which
being but freshly wounded bled a little; the Emperor that loved him dearly,
examined who had harmed him; great noise was there about the Palace of this
injury, and no man would be known of it, only one Knight kneeling before the
Emperor, certified his grace that the knight who had deserved so much in his
service that day, was wounded in the same place, and that he suspected it was
he. Robert fearing least he should be discovered, began much more to play y^
Idiot, putting his Cockscomb upon the Knights head and laughing, which caused
all ye Princes to take great delight: but Emine still poynted at him, and if
the liberty of her tongue had granted her means to discover the secrecy of
her thought, Robert assuredly had at that time been known. The Emperor
notwithstanding began to gather on these allegations, and desirous to know the
certain truth, privately appointed certain Knights against the next day to
the number of thirty to attend the said Champion; and by some means to cause
his discovery. In this manner passed they the evening in delight, till it was
bed time, when as the Emperor and Emperesse (after order was given for the
safety of the City) betook them to their rest, and the other several Lords
and Princes to their lodging, at which time Robert and his hound entered their
homely cabin, wherein meditating without closing his eyes, the salt tears
streamed down his cheeks in remembrance of his sins, in thought of his
father, in consideration of his country: and now came there to his mind how
for six years and mare he had lived an abject life, unworthy his estate,
the thought whereof so much abashed him, that it is impossible to reckon up his
perplexities: then called he to mind the kind effections of Emine, and his
soul bemoned that so perfect a person should have so palpable an vnperfection:
now applied he the cause thereof to the Emperors sin, accompting the virgin
happy, that by her want of speech escaped from many occasions of offense: then
recorded he the effusion of Christian blood, and of mere compassion in
midst of that thought he wept most bitterly, when the poor kind beast
licked up his tears. In this sort spent he the night in consideration of many
things, and in conclusion of the adventure of his life, for the s^fetie of
Christendom: whilst the approach of the morning called each one from his
^ouch, and the warning Trompet called out to the fight, their went every one to
arm him, and after they had heard the divine service, and taken some
refection, prepared themselves unto the fight: In the Souldans Camp all were
far otherwise, for y^ loss they received y^ day before en^enomed their
hearts, and made them more vigorous unto revenge, each one resolved with this
Camarado, to subdue, or dye; to conquer, or be confounded. In their looks were
shadowed their tyrannies, and in their have their hardiness. Scarcely were the
allarms sounded on both sides, but the enemy gave the charge, and the Souldan
inflamed with love, and enraged with fury, sought by all means possible to
confound his adversaries. On every side were heard the gronings of wounded men,
some having lost their arms, some their legs, the son oftentimes was
trampled under the horse feet of his father, and in these common miseries,
nature her self stood amazed to behold the Massacres. The Souldan which way
soever he travailed, overthrew his resistants, the Emperor was by him
vnhorssed and wounded, and had not Pepin, and Charles of Burgundy rescued him
at that time, actum esset de imperio. Certain men that were lightly wounded,
brought no less astonishment into the City, than was in the battle, for
they aggrauated the discomfiture far more than it was, reporting that the
Emperor was unrecoverably distressed. Robert hearting of these rumors, hasted
to the Recluse, his soul groaned within him, and zeal overcame him, so that
after some devout prayers, accompanied with remorsefull tears, he mounted on
horsseback, and having taken his arms, he so valiantly and furiously entered
the fight, that those who beheld him, thought that some tempest had bin stirred
up, and some whirlewind issued from the City, in his fury he took no regard
of person, murdering whomesoeuer he incountered: scarce could his horse
stir himself for the multitude of dead men that fell before him: such of the
Christians as fled out of the battle before his entrance, returned
vehemently, so that the conflict was renewed with such vigor, as the heavens in
vehement showers seemed to be weep the murder. The Emperor beyond all
expectation, showed himself valiant, and approaching the place where the Norman
Prince fought, he cried out for extreme joy: Oh hope of Christendom, thou
flower of chivalry, thou anchor of mine Empire, the heavens requite thee: see
how old in years my person shall accompany thee, how forward I will fight, and
enforce thy self the more to prevent the desolation of yond City. Robert
quickened with his words, departed as if he understood him not, and meeting with
the Souldan, gave him such a stroke on the helmet, that his horse fell unto
the ground, and he himself was wonderfully amazed. The whole band of the
Mamelucks seeking to withstand him, were either dissipated or destroyed, and be
that thought to gain ye chiefest triumph, enacted the choicest tragedy: in
brief, as the tender blossoms new apparra^led by nature, issuing from their
stalks as newborn creatures, upon the violent breath of a Northren wind, are
deprived of their beawtie and decayed in their blossom: so the Pagans
beholding the forwardnes of the assaylant, and the feebleness of their
assembly, fled away, both careless of their weal, and recurelesse in their
wrack. Robert seeing the evening approaching on, the Christians proud with
victory, the pursuit hot, the flight hasty, suddenly withdrewe himself;
for the gentle Western wind (a kind louemate of the euentide) began with
courteous breathings to assuage his ouergrowne weariness, the sun in the East
set in his scarlet redness, pretending the beawtie of the succeeding day, or
the windynes of the following night; for which cause, dreading to be be ^cried,
and desirous to escape, (ascribing all glory to heavens, and not unto his hand)
he suddenly departed, leaving the Christians to pursue that with swiftness,
which he had compassed by his sword, but whilst he seeks to avoid the fury
of his enemy, he is ready to perish through the means of amity, for the
thirty chosen Knights appointed by the Emperor to descrie him, at such time
as he forsook the battle, followed him hastily, and couching their Lances
all at once, on sudden assailed him: he seeing so many attempting him at once,
turned his horse, resolving to endure the hazard, but finding their arms to
be Christian, he spurred his horse, detesting utterly to come in knowledge:
the pursuit was hot, the flight seruent, the followers in despair, the flyer
determined; how often smiled Robert to himself, knowing that he fled before he
feared? how often feared they to touch him, that fled from them? in brief,
some one better horssed than the other, seeing that the hazard of their credits
depended on their knowledge, having the swiftest Horse, pursued the Norman
Prince, and so egerly endeavored, that he gave him a deep wound in the thygh,
and sodaynely returned to his companyons, knowing, that the bitterness of the
same, and the eagerness of his grief, would soonest disclose the obscurity
of the sufferer. And now began the night to give freedom to the afflicted, and
Robert means of escape, who arriving at the Hospital of the Recluse, set up
his Horse, b^und up his wounds, and in his Idiotlie habbit, entered the
Court. Emine that had seen the battle, could hardly contain her self,
entertayning the supposed Idiot with many solemnities, being only privy with
the holy man to his ordinary rescouses. Often did she offer in signs, to
show he was wounded, but Robert so cunningly concealed his agonyes, as the
world could not discern his greeuaunce. In conclusion, the day closing up, the
dangers were manifest, the Christians had the upper hand, the Pagans were
discomfited, and the Emperor returning in triumph unto his Court, was
solemnelye received with Procession, and every valiant Prince entertained also
with public applaudings. In the Palace was prepared a most sumptuous
Banquet, and such Bonefiers and benevolence was bestowed in the City, as if
the Emperor had been but newly established. After such as were wounded were
with comfortable Oils and Medicines revived, they set them down to Supper,
yielding to almightye GOD most hartye thanks for their so for^unate victory,
passing away the night in such mirth and iollicie, as if they had at that time
solemnised some Festival. The Emperors Treasury was opened, and benefits
were employed on every side with great bounty: the Io Pea^s of triumph,
resounded in all places, and amongst the rest a brave Poet, yet devout, after
the solemn harmony of Music presented this Hymn.

Eurilochus Hymn.
WHen wastfull wars, (fruits of afflicting time)
Have left our soil deuoyde of all suspense:
When barraine hope, the flower of earthly Prime
Perceiues that grace exceeds man's offense:
What may we work, or what may man pretend,
Whereof to God he not ascribes the end?
Our dull and fruitless fruits of fleeting earth
Are sinful (like our selves) that them suppose,
Sins harvest never fails, but grace has dearth,
Oh how contrarious mortal men are those
That ground on this, that God has griefs withstood,
And yet from God acknowledge not the good?
All Empires are exchanged, and changing thrive,
(Yet only God is cause of every change)
Estranged the men that were, from men alive,
Affections thus still live, by being strange.
In changes yet since God alone directs,
He makes a change from grace who so neglects.
In colors thus we compass mickle worth,
All senseless in suppose thus sense we use
(Great Princes) grace from secrets wendeth forth,
Which proffered some accept, and some refuse.
Let those who taste the fruits commend the tree,
This I from God, and God has taught it me.
And besides all these reuelings, Robert notwithstanding his wounds, was in
appearance marvelous pleasant, for neither the greeuousnesse of his sin, nor
the greatness of his misfortune could alter his delights in this public
rejoice. He made pretty skirmi^hes with his hound, and after he had attained
the conquest, seemed in choler to lead the kind creature in his leash. Now
began he in signs to discipher his sollace, presenting the Emperor with Palm
bows in stead of victory and peace, and with an Olive Garland in token of a
Conqueror, which gave the Monarck mighty occasion of rejoice, but the Monarck
after his mind had for a while been detayned with pleasure in midst of his
thought of victory, began to enquire of him who was the occasion of his
victory, and conferring with his Princes, he resolved himself by their
counsayles in what manner he might requite his courtesies, then calling unto him
the thirty Knights, he questioned with them about him, who could no otherwise
inform him, but that through the swiftness of his Horse, he escaped from
them, and was by one of them wounded in the thigh, by which means they thought
he should only be known, and by no other: this made the Emperor amazed,
considering his voluntary obscurity, and great desert, but Emine still
poynted at Robert, Emine still intimated Robert: some suspected this man, some
that man. To be short, in that Christendom had been saved, and Rome preserved
by his mea^es, by common consent it was ordered, and the next day most solemnly
proclaimed, that he who had so well deserved of the Common weal, if leaving
his voluntary obscurity, he would bring forth his white horse and armor,
and show the wound that was inflicted him in the last comba^e, he should
inrecompence of his good deserts toward Christendom, be made he^re apparent
to the Empire, and receive in Marriage fair Emine the daughter of the
Emperor. This being thus concluded, Emine seemed to rejoice, and embraced
Robert in open assembly, moving her Father and Mother thereby to (...)
admiration. Each one thorough the Court, began to descant upon this event, and
the whole City was suddenly styled with the rumor. At last the hour of
midnight approached, whereby the w^erie travailed Princes were called to rest,
and Robert agreeued with his wound laid him down in his Cabban, and the ^ound
supplying the office of a Surgeon, licked up the clotted b^oud of his wound.

How meruailously the Souldan was discontented after his overthrow, with the
tidings that was brought him as touching the Proclamation.
BUt where the Emperor sollaced for victory, the Souldan sorrowed in that he
was vanquished, and entering his royal tent, altogether discontent, he began
to exclaim on the destenies, to complain of his desaster, to expostulate with
love, to repeat of his loss, yea so was his heart ^urthened with incessant
griefs, his mind broken with remediless grudges, that from a reasonable man,
he became enraged. Alas said he preposterous and injurious ^ortune, the
variable goddess of human estates, and the (...) of worldly stabilitie, thou
temperest the indignities of those that trust thee not, and ouerturnest the
dignities of those that tempt thee not. Thou have made me, who whilome might
compar^ for felicity with Caesar, complain my misfortunes with Sertorius. I
am bereft of delight, banished from love, and is not this misrrie? I am robbed
of my friends, reviled of my foes, and is not this martyrdom? Oh that I had
been buried in my Cradle, or bereft of thy cruelty, or thou had been more
c^nstant or I more (...)? Worldy mis^ries have their medicines; discontents are
^elieued by counsels wants and decays by works and diligence, reproves, by
patience, in complections all contrary humors have their helps. Anticira
purges Melancholy, Rubarbe Choll^r, Scency Phlegm, Wounds have their (...)
philosophy to help it: but love, the (...), the determined pestilen^e of (...)
poison of the heart, (...) unconquered (...) of the soul, that has no
Antidotes to prevent, nor elect^aries to comfort, nor persuasions to relieve,
nor purges ^o expulse, only it is infinite in nature, and infinite in cruelty.
Oh my life, how art thou miserable through my love? and my love, how
misgouernest thou my life? by thee I have lost friends, and am desolate in
fortunes, I perish in thy rage, my subjects perish through thy rashness. Oh
that I had been persuaded, or, that I had better prevented. But why spend I the
time in wishes, which are no means of welfare, Vna salus (...) nullam sperare
salutem. Let me dye, for death takes away the scandale of my decay, yea only
death is the medicine of my misery: this said, he cast himself groueling on
his bed, contemning all food, refusing all nourishment, neither could the
persuasion of his Princes, nor the prayers of his souldyours, in any ways
withdraw him from his (...), till sudden news was brought by an espiall out
of the City, of the general Proclamation published in Rome, that who so could
bring forth his white horse and armor, and show the wound that was (...) him
in the (...), he should in recompense of his good deserts toward Christendom,
be made heir apparent to the Empire, and receive fair Emine the Daughter of
the Emperor in Marriage. This news somewhat relieved him, and a sudden hope
entered his hidden thoughts. He knew his own courage of as great consequence
as any man's, whereby if he were crossed in his voluntary purpose, he might wag^
the Combat, he gathered by circumstance, that the Knight who deserved, had
vowed obscurity, and these tokens that were required were possible whereupon
(...) all his (...), he only called unto him a certain (...) knowledge, with
whom he so wrought with (...), that he by Magic found^ the means to draw
the (...) Robins. Being by this means aided with all possibilities, he caused
the (...) to be forged with all expedition, and wounding himself vehemently in
the thygh, he presently (...) up the same, resolving by this means to deceive
the Emperor, to compass Emine, and keep the remnant of his (...) in
security: whereupon, discovering his pretense unto his Nobles, and showing
them both his manner and means, he armed himself, and committed the care of
his army to the charge of his Princes, and so taking his leave, departed
toward the City.

How the Souldan entered the City of Rome in his disguise, and made his claim
to Emine who should have been betrothed unto him, and what miraculous chance
did thereupon infew.
ONe day and more after his last victory, the Emperor kept his bed, and viii.
days continually after intended quietness, knowing that the enemy was too much
weakened to provoke him as yet, yet sufficiently able in their trench to work
for their own defense: it chanced, that upon the feast day of S. Peter (a
day of great solemnity in the City of Rome) that after the Emperor with his
other Princes had heard the divine service, and bestowed their bountiful alms
on the poor, whilst in great pomp the mighty potenta^^ sat in his hall,
attended on by a manly train of Courtiers. The Souldan entered the City in
bright and lucid armor, his cre^t replenished and beawti^^ed with a plume of
rich feathers, which ouerspreading the back of his milk white Steed in many
beawtifull colors, gave greater beawtie to his horse and himself, and in that
he was armed after y^ Christian manner, the first court of guard let him pass.
He was a Prince of high majesty, and wonderful dexterity in arms, and with
such agility managed he his horse, as all the Citizens began to marvel, some
alleging this, some muttering that, according to their natural opinions, and
dispositions; but at such time as he entered the high street wherein stood
the Emperors palace, the second court of guard stayed him, and questioning
with him what he was, it was answered that he was the very same knight that
had reskewed the Emperor, relieved Christendom, and deserved Emine, and for
that cause he was come according to his Excellencies proclamation to claim his
due. The rumor was no sooner spread, nor the word past, but he was entertained
with general applause of the Soldiers, the Citizens began a festival, and
all the chief Courtiers in magnificent pomp came out to meet him, when being
dismounted and brought before the Emperor, after gracious saluations he began
thus.

Most mighty and famous Emperor of Rome, since the common voice throughout
Christendom, and report in foreign Countries, attributes as much constancy
to thy word, as commendation to thy worthiness; I have being a Prince as
mighty as thy self, and more courteous than thou imaginest, presumed to rely
upon thy promise, and require the accomplishment of thy proclamation; I am the
man Roman Emperor, that bewitched with the excellent beauties of thy
daughter, have forsaken mine own friends, to relieve my foes, and have saved
thy life, when thou soughtest my loss, I have invested a mean subject with
the estate of a Souldan, and from a Souldan have I changed my self to procure
thy safety; Love (thou great Potentate) has made me murder mine own
Mercenaries, massacre my native friends, yea love has so governed my
affections, that to enjoy it I have hazarded my fortunes: yet is the reward of
my travel so great, and the regard of Emine so gracious, that were there
thousand kingdom^ to adventure, millions of Soldiers to loose, hosts of
friends to forsake, I would leave them all to betake me to Emine; that I am the
man, behold the means, the armor, the horse, behold the wounds, which thy
pursuing Knights inflicted (wherewith he discovered his thigh) all which yield
apparent testimony of my approved towardnes; had this action been attempted by
a stranger of mean estate, the desert had been mighty; but being practiced by
thy (...) achieved by thine equal, how worthy (...) I thy (...) The Emperor
impatient of delay (his joy was so accomplished) arose from his royal seat,
accompanied with all his Princes, and ca^^ing his arms about his neck began
thus. I had not thought ^raue Souldan, that such bounty of mind had remained
in a Barbari^n, to hazard his own fortune, and to relieve his foe: but since I
see by apparent proof that thy virtue is beyond expectation, and thy deserts
approve thy magnificence, my promise shall be accomplished, and Emine and
this Empire, these Peers and mine own person, shall be at the Souldans
command, only great Monarke it behooves thee this, if thou mean to wed a
Christian, to become a Christian, which if thou shall effect, such a league of
consanguinitie shall be knit between us, as shall concern thine own safety,
and the (...) of both our subjects. The Souldan that accounted no other heaven,
than enjoying Emine, and rather respected his pleasure, than his profession,
voluntarily condiscended, and in the presence of all the Estates of the Empire
was christened by the Pope, that was at that time there in presence, by the
name of Frederick: great was the solemnity in the palace, and many the
Caresses of the Courtiers: then were Lists set up, and Trophies erected, and
nothing sounded throughout Rome but the marriage of Emine, who unawares was
called for by the Emperor, and certified by signs of his determination. The
poor Lady expecting nothing less than marriage of him she (...), sent out
plentiful tears, and spent many bitter sighs to the astonishment of her
father, and the whole assembly continually poynting at Robert, who in the
thickest of the assembly had heard all the ^oloured falsehoods, and smiled at
them; but he that rather ha^ care of GOD, than the world, set all pomp and
(...) naught, acknowledging his actions to have been attempted for conscience
sake, not promotion. Merueilous was the (...) of Emine, whose eye was never off
of Robert, seeming as though with piteous tears she claimed his protection,
which wrought in him a change of color, and made him together with the
grieuousnesse of his wound to depart out of the assembly. Emine astonished
hereat fell down in a sound, and being at last dawed after many mild
persuasions of her father, alleging how her repulse was disparagement of his
majesty, she condescended and vouchsafed the accord: great was the joy of the
Souldan, the rejoice of the Soldiers, the content of the Princes, y^ delight
of the private: in brief, the day following y^ solemnisation was to be
accomplished. The rumor of the Souldans success was no sooner spread through
the Camp, but if there were applause in the City, there were merueilous
triumphs in the Trenches, in such sort as it happens among Sailors, who when
a bitter storm has been past, and their ship in danger of drowning, forget
their old damage, and rejoice, their late escape: so fared it with these
Barbarians, who seeing the farie of war ceased, the cause of peace commenced,
forgot their former broils, and rejoiced at the preseuce of fortunes
benefits. In great delight and iolitie were these Princes conversant all the
day long, and at night with no less expectation of pleasure, each one betook
himself to his rest; only Robert who knew the determined day of his penance
was expired, and saw that the Princess Emine did mightily affect him, began
to conceive some sparks of pity, greening that an imp^ous Pagan should enjoy
such (...); and in such sort fared he, as those that play at the game of
Chesse, still preventing, but always fearing a mate, his mind was wholly
addicted to God but the portion of the flesh began to conspire; great was the
combat all the night long between has affections, now of zeal, then of
compassion, straight of love, for there is no generous heart but is capable of
the same, The morning mean while began to push ^oorth her beauties, weeping
her (...) sweet (...) and pearlie m^ysture on every tree, plant, and flower in
the meadows; the hills were adorned with the golden beams of the Sun, and
Rome enriched with all the beauties of Nations, the spacious galleries (...)
pearls, and tissue, every street was adorned with (...), virgins with lamps
of silver with sweet per^umes and odors apparelled in white, with Coronets of
pearl, their hair scattered about their bosoms attended for the Bride, and a
noise of melodious music, accompanied with delicate voices awaked both the
Princes that were to be espoused. First entered the Souldan into the great Hall
attended with his brauest Musulmahs, so rich and gor^^ous, that the Sun which
beheld them seemed to dazzle at their devises: after entered the Pope with all
his Clergy, singing most melodious himmes, when suddenly all the Princes
attending, the Emperor marched forward, who twixt himself and Pepin of
France, (the greatest of crowned Kings) brought fair Emine apparelled like
Juno in all her pomp, and attended with all the beautiful of Europe; Robert
among the rest in a new fools attire, was a special attendant, and
oftentimes his heart earned and his soul sighed to see that another should
enjoy his title; feign would he have spoken, but religious zeal closed his
lips: In brief, when the solemn service was accomplished, the Pope in all
solemnity presented himself in his Pontificalib^^ to couple these two
magnificent Princes together, Emine was brought forth, the Souldan addressed,
the Ceremonies were begun, and the soothfastnesse was to be plighted; when (lo
the wondrous works of almighty GOD) Emine at such time as their hands
should have been joined, violently drew hers backward, and suspited by divine
providence (^^ter she had been (...) from her infancy thethert^) she began
thus.

Unhallowed Pagan, who to perform thy lust, counterfeitest Religion, and to
attain my love, have coined a lie; know thou that though thou can dissemble
with the world, thou can not be hidden from GOD: with what face ((...)
Souldan) can thou claim another right? or entitle thy self to that honor
which thy vetters have deserved? It lies not in that weak hand to contain
such hardines, in that (...) firmnes, could thou reach to that honor
wanting faith. It was not man (ye Princes) it was no humane power (dread
father) but the divine working of God by the means of this supposed Idiot,
that gave us conquest: This Robert surnamed (for his wicked life in times past)
the Devil, who has turned his damned deeds to devotion, is he that reskewed
the Emperor, was armed by me, was horsed by my command; and if he be
searched, is the very man who was wounded by your Knights; this Souldans armor
is magical, his Steed infernal, himself perfidious; why permit you
(Princes) that he who has soyled his hands in your bloods, should be served
like a Prince of high bounty? Lay hands on him, inflict bonds on him, flay
the viper ere he sting, and the Crocodile ere he can devour. These words were
uttered with a confident and bold spirit, and all the assembly was abashed at
this wonder; the Souldan stood as a man that had lost his senses, and the best
Romans began to flock about Robert. During these miraculous events, whilst
each man's tongue was kept mute with marvel, the holy Recluse entered the
presence (ordained as it is thought by divine ordinance) in his hands bare he
the true Armor, and about his neck the girdle and sword, having a religious
Nouice at his heels who led the white Steed; who taking Robert by the hand
marched throught the prease, and prostrating himself before the Emperor and
Pope, began thus. How many ways (you ties of Christendom) has God permitted
error to supplant the righteous, to the end that beyond expectation he might
express his righteousness? The lips that were shut has he opened, and the
things that were hidden has he revealed; Patroclus is not Achilles (ye
Princes) though he wear his armor, nor the Fox the Lion though he wear his
skin, nor the Crow the king of birds, though he has borrowed the feather,
nor this Souldan the deseruer, though he has claimed the title: but most
sacred Emperor, this man is the cause of your safety, Christendom is
beholding to this prince, and Normandy famous in this Robert; and that this is
he, what greater (...) (before my God) than Emines testim^nie? has not God
given her an instrument to open desert, which before time was closed with
dumnesse? and that this is he, what greater proof than the very Armor, the
very Sword, the very Steed, concealed and kept by me for greater secrecy?
Behold the wound, not enforced by a voluntary stroke as is the Souldans, but
by a favoring hand who labored to discover him; if therefore truth being
opened, be preferred before error, and co^digne worthiness before impiety and
wickedness, Emperor accept this Prince of Normandy for thy son, who
procured thy security; for thy kinsman, who reskewed thy Country, so shall
thou perform the duty of a just Prince, and be commended for thy providence.
This said, he discovered Roberts th^gh, and presented all the titles of his
claim, and craving private conference with him, was permitted to converse with
him alone in a hidden chamber: mean while the Palace was in an uproar, and
some swords were drawn to assail the Souldan, who abashed and ashamed at his
discovery, seemed rather a dead than a lives man. But the Emperor who saw in
his looks the tenor of his loosenes, being a gracious and benign Prince,
withstood the assailants, and after thanks given to the heavens, and kind
embrace to Emine, he spoke in this manner to the Souldan. Pagan, though it be
in my power to cut thee off, it is not my pleasure to use discourtesse, I see
it was fancy that made thee feign, and folly that has procured thy fall, I
know thy estate is desperate, thy soldiers spent, thy Musulmahs discomforted;
and in that I disdain to combat with these who are welny conquered, I pity
thee, and pitying thee grant thy peace: If therefore thou will presently depart
my Court, di^lodge thy Camp, and leave Christendom, thou and thine shall
enjoy both life and liberty, and that for Emines sake; if not, resolve thy
self to dye, to see thy Nobles destroyed, and the memory of thy name entirely
exterminate and extinguished. The Souldan pondering with himself his perilous
estate, seeing his love recureles, and his liberty rechles except he accepted
the opportunity, answered the Emperor in this sort. If my fancies have made
me foolish, bear with me Emperor, more mighty than I have fallen; for the
attainement of Emine if I have fained, I must now only repent it, bearing a
deep wound in my thigh, but more woe in my heart: for my life I respect it
not, were it not I regard my subjects; for thy bounty I accept it, and will
depart Christendom, and so relying on thy word I take my leave, surrendering
thee thy Christianity, since thou have here^t me of mine Emine. This said,
reuiling and exclayming on destiny, the Pagans departed, and tru^^ing up their
baggage shipped themselves, leaving both the siege and Christendom, which was
mightily comforted by their departure.

By this time had the Recluse absolved Robert, and acquitted him of his
penance, and aduising him to put on a robe of majesty, he brought him into
the great Hall unto the Emperor, when as kneeling upon his knee, the brave
Norman began thus. Since my penance is performed, and my conscience
discharged, (most mighty Emperor) I must acknowledge thy inestimable bounty,
who for this seven years space have maintained me being an abject in mine own
country, and ^dious both to God and man: for which bounty if I have done your
majesty or Christendom any service, it was my duty, who having defaulted in
my former life time, ought in my reconciled years to follow honorable actions.
The Emperor hearing his grave and wise salutation, seeing him an amiable and
comely Prince, embraced him, and lifte^ him up, replying thus. I thank my God
(brave Norman Prince) that he has opened truth, to discover treachery, and in
stead of a Pagan has recommended my Emine to a Christian, for which cause hold
take the honor of my estate, and the hope of her father, take Emine, who by
divine providence was ordained for thee, and by right and duty appertains
to thee: and in so saying he caused the Ceremonies of Marriage to be
solemnized between them, to the wonderful rejoice of all the assistance.
Pepin of France seeing one of his Peers so fortunate, wept for joy, neither
was there any one Potentate that entertained not Robert with hearty love and
kind^esse; the Empress rejoiced in him, Emine heartily embraced him, and such
was the sollace throughout the City, as may not be expressed. During these
pompous solemnities, the Emperor bethinking him on his promise, caused the
Princes to be assembled, where he invested Robert with the Imperial Diadem,
proclayming him heir apparent of the Empire after his decease. In which pomp
and triumph I leave them, returning a while into Normandy where our History
began.

How A^bert hearing no news of his son, after the term of seauen-yeares
dyed, leaving the possession of his Dukedom in the hands of Editha and the
Lord Villiers, with the lamentable treasons that thereupon ensued.
AVbert the old Duke of Normandy, after the departure of his hapless son
Robert, lived a desolate and discontented life, hearing no certain notice of
his safety, or security, for which cause he took such inward thought, that
at such time as seven years were ouergone and expired, he gave up the ghost,
leaving the charge of his Dukedom (till Robert his son might be found out)
in the hands of Editha his Duchess, and Villiers a Peer of his signorie. At
such time as his funerals were fully finished, Villiers se^ing Editha was a
Princess of a mild and merciful nature, nothing delighted with troubles, or
worldy affairs, took upon him the handling of all controversy; and so sweet
was the bait of signorie to him, in a short time, that from being an agent for
another, he began to imagine the means how to take the whole possession into
his hands: Little suspected he that Robert was living, and as for Editha
since she was a woman, he supposed it an easy matter to supplant her, and her
power: for which cause, after many conclusions, and melancholy deliberations,
he suborned two false witnesses, who accused the Duchess of poisoning her
deceased husband, so couloring the accusation with probabilities, and
corrupting great men by bribes, that Editha was emprisoned, and after a while
adjudged, which was, either within the term of a year to find out a
Champion to defend her truth, or else to be consumed with fire. The chaste
Princess seeing iniquity prevail against equity, perceiving the Judges
ears were sh^t, and the great men's toongs silent, and beholding her former
friends, how like summer birds they forsook her, she cast off all care of
life, grounding her self upon her innocence, and returning to prison, led
therein a solitary and lamentable life, whilst Villiers enjoyed the Signiorie.
Often and many were her complaints, accompanied with fervent prayers, and
diverse times called she to remembrance her former offenses, and bethinking her
self of her son, wept bitterly. One day looking out of her prison window,
(from whence she might behold the thick Forests, and pleasant Meades) she
bethought her self how wretchedly she had curssed her womb, and the unhappy
fruits of her tempting God: for which cause, humbling her self on her knees,
and sheading tears of compassion, she spoke thus. O my God, thou art just, but
I injurious: I tempted thee by unlawful cur^^es, thou chastisest me with
deserved cruelty: I imputed my barrainesse to thy wrath, not to my
wickedness, and sought help from the Fiend, in hope to be fruitful: this my
tempting of thy Majesty, exempteth me from thy mercy, and my lewd desires are
the cause of my lamentable destruction. O Mothers learn by me, let him that
made all things, moderate all things: let him that grants increase, prefixe
the time of increase, except not against his glory, least he exempt you of his
goodness: his delays are no dalliance, his decrees are divine: since therefore
he does dispose of us, let us not oppose our selves against him: O father of
mercy pardon my impiety: let mine innocence have rescous, as thou art the God
of the righteous: thou that sauedst Susanna succor me; thou that relieuedst
Daniel deliver me: in this sort, and with these sighs, full often and many
times did this poor Princess bemone her mischief, exclaiming on the impiety
of her accusers, whilst suspicious Villiers thought every hour an age, and
every day a year, till her dares were determined, yet in outward show he
b^moned her, visiting her oftentimes, presenting her with many delicates,
enterprising with all possible industry to rid himself of suspicion, and
^buse her simplicity: diverse of the Princes privily murmured, seeing his
ambition by his behavior, and his craf^ cloked under courtesy, but as times
have their reuolutions, so truths are discovered, which shall manifestly
appear by the sequeale that in^ueth, wherein it is evidently proved, that God
never fa^leth those who put their trust in his mercy.

How Robert after he was invested in the Empire, heard of his Fathers death,
and departed to take upon him his Dukedom, accompanied with Emine his
Empress, and Pepin of France, with other Princes.
When Robert surnamed Devil, had in this sort attained to the Monarchy,
enjoying the tipe of worlds felicity, wherewith ambitious minds are greatly
delighted, yet showed he himself to be so far estranged from vaineglory,
that he wholly attributed his good fortunes to the deui^e Majesty: his delight
was to converse with holy men; his study the heavenly doctrine, he
entertained Hermits with great devotion, and Pilgrims received great presents
at his hands: in this sort remained h^ beloved of his equals, and honored of
his subjects, ^ffected by the Emperor, fancied by Emine, till a desire took
him to reuisit his own Country, and converse with his own friends, and ^o to
the f^^therance hereof, how occasion ministered it self. It chanced at such
time as all the Christian Princes prepare to make return into the Countries,
in that y^ wars were finished, that Pepin had certain letters sent unto him,
whereby he understood of the decease of Aubert, and the estate of the Du^hy,
which he imparted with Robert, whose sudden sorrow caused the whole Court to
be detayned with disco^tent. In brief, his heart so earned at the slender and
weak estate of his native Country, that at last he attained license from the
Emperor, to go visit the same: Emine likewise was permitted to accompany
him, with many other great Lords, so when all things were in a readynesse, he
took his leave of the Emperor, who with entire affection, and tender favor,
embraced both his Son and Daughter, recommending them to the safeco^duit of
the Almighty, and King Pepin, who accompanied them: and so long they trauayled
with gracious entertaynement in all great Cities, that at last they arrived on
the frontires of Normandy, when as Robert bethinking him of his Fathers,
loss, began to weep, whom Emine comforted with many amiable consolations,
and Pepin persuaded with sound and sage reasons. They had not long trauayled,
but they met a Damsel galloping in great haste, and lamenting so piteously,
that it grieved the beholders: aged she was, yet goodly of personage: and
being earnest in her have, would have ouerpassed the Princess, had not Robert
stayed her, demanding the cause of that her so great expedition. O Prince
(said she) for no less thou seem, hinder not my haste, least thou harm an
innocent: for why, my let is the loss of such a (...), who has not her equal
in the world for virtue* yet shortly is like to perish through treason and
villainy. Robert knowing her countenance, questioned further, and his mind
persuaded him, that the cause nearly touched (...), as in sooth it afterward
proved, for the Lady ripped up unto him the whole discourse of Edithas
imprisonment, her ^ccusatio^ for poisoning her husband, y^ subtle and maligna^t
insinuatio^s of Villiers, neither pret^rmitted she any thing that might
concern his Mistress, or move affection: she told how his Lady was adjudged
to death within three days, if she found not a Champion, (for only three
days remained of the year) she declared the earnest haste of the accusers,
and concluded thus: Now noble Prince, since thou know the cause of my
travail; if courage serve thee in the attempt, O be forward, and help the
forsaken, for more noble can thou not fight for, more gracious can thou not
adventure for: but if thou prefer thy rejoice before justice, pleasure before
prowess, and bear the name of a Knight, but not the nature, O stay me not,
stay me not good Prince, I will seek out Pepins Court of France, where are
valiant Knights and virtuous, stern in rigor, studious of right; who if they
forsake this cause, are worthy to entertain none. This discourse finished she
with abundant tears, neither was there any in the company so hard hearted, who
be wept not Edithas misery. Robert inflamed with displeasure, replied thus:
Lady, thou have found a Champion, seek no further, hear is Pepin to allow
him, and a Princess to appoint him: this said, he in private conferred with
the King of France and Emine, desiring them to take easy iourneys, whilst he
and the messenger intended the safety of Editha: the request was so
reasonable, that it was quickly granted him* whereupon he took his horse and
armor, and travailed with the ancient Lady, resolving himself in every
respect of that he suspected: yet concealed he himself, though she required
his name very earnestly, and taking up his lodging near the City of Roane,
he charged the Lady to go and comfort her Mistress, assuring her that she had
a Champion that either would dye or acquit her. The Lady was not ^^ack to
accomplish his command, but so schooled her Mistress by comfortable
admonitions, that she who before times was altogether comfortless, began to
gather some consolation. And now the prefixed day was arrived, when Villiers
desirous to effect his pretended tirannie, had erected an ample and fair
Listes in the chiefest and fairest plain adjoining to Roan, building sumptuous
Scaffolds for the Judges, providing place of audience for the prisoner, leaving
nothing unsought for, that pertayned to that tragedy: and at such time as the
assembly of estates was set, he brought forth the Champion, a kinsman of his
own, well instructed in arms, and resolved in the complot of treason. This
brave Caualier ritchly mounted, bonded his horse before the judgment seat,
offering to do his de^oire toward the approbation of the Duchess treachery.
Then was the prisoner called for, where Editha carrying in her looks the badge
of modesty; in her behavior the courage of a Matron; apparrailed in black
Ueluet, and covered with a veil of black Tissue, ascended her Scaffold,
attended by all the chief Ladies of Normandy, who to testify their
melancholy, were in like manner attyred mournefully. After that Editha had
done her obedience to the Judges and Estate, she was demanded for her
Champion, who returned this answer. It is extreme injury, and no justice
(you Fathers) when Princes shall be condemned like private persons, without
respect of their Majesty, or regard of their accusers: for otherwise was
Auberts hope (ye Lords) who appointed me to command you, and not to be
condemned by you: but duty I perceive was buried with him, and those that
honored him in his life time, it was not for love, but in hope to get living. I
am accused for poisoning Aubert, ye Peers, and you your selves were eye
witnesses of his natural death, when no sign of treason, no token of violent
death, ^ppeared either before his death, or after his departure. Had he taken
potions, they should have wrought, but you know there was no violence in his
pangs, but even the infirmity of age that fashioned him to his grave. But you
will say there are witnesses, and what allege they? forsooth that I bought
poison, but of whom? that I tempered poison, but where? that I ministered
poison, but when? were you as forward to examine circumstances, as you are
affected to listen to complaints, you would blush either at your wilful
blindness, or ^ndeserued malice. But be it as you pretend, adiudge me to the
fire, yet shall I dye innocent; call me murtheresse, I know I am innocent; for
my Champion, I have not sought him, but God has sent him: if he come not at
the summons, let my (...) be consumed, this is the aim of mine enemy, and the
worst of your envy. This conclusion she vetered with confident boldness,
insomuch as Villiers blushed, and some of the Peers began to suspect him:
well, the summons was sounded according to order, and brave Robert of Normandy
boldly entered the Listes, offering to adventure his life in the behalf of
Editha. Great was the joy of all the Ladies, to see so goodly a Knight
enterprise the Duchess right, and Editha in thought seemed to claim some
part of him: but leaving tedious circumlocutions, this in brief was the effect
of the matter, the Champions were sworn, and the Judges appointed, and after
sound of Trumpet, and Proclamation, the Combat was commenced. Great was the
courage of the accuser, but greater the constancy of the defendant, the one
fought for money, the other fought for his Mother, the one tru^^ed to his
force, the other to his faith, the one fought with fear, the other with
confidence, in brief, the one no less animated by amity, than the other
emboldned by equity, after their Lances were broken, they betook them to
their Swoords, where (after some small resist) Robert lent his adversary such
a stroke, that he cut off his right arm, and killed his Horse, and nimbly
buckling himself unto his enemy, who prepared to fly, rent off his Helmet
from his head, and rudely casting him on the earth, commanded him either to
discover the truth, or he was but dead. It is wonderful to see the affection
of faithful Commons to their natural Princess, for no sooner was the
appealant overthrown, but they all with common voyc^ cried out, God save
Editha our true Princess and innocent. Villiers was abashed, and descending
from the judgment seat, sought means very politiquelie to make away the
vanquished, before the villainy were discovered: but Robert prevented the same,
for menacing him that was in his danger with present death, he in open
assemblye discovered the Treason, the Complot of Villiers for the Dukedom,
leaving nothing untouched, that might manifest the Duchess innocence. This
his confession so moved Robert, that taking Villiers by the hear of the head,
he drew him to the Judgment seat, causing the Escheu^s of Roan to lay hold
on him, when mounting up the Scaffold where the Princess sat, he took her
by the hand, and conducted ^r to the chiefest seat of Judgment, and opening
his Beauer, he humbling himself on his knee, spoke thus;

Though my unworthiness before times (most gracious Duchess, and courteous
Mother) deserve not the sight of so reverent a person, yet acknowledging my
faults, and beseeching your favor, behold your Son Robert (for his
wickedness before times surnamed the Devil) now humbly prostrate before you
in all du^tie: though I have been a corosiue to you in your youth, behol^e, God
has left me to be a comfort to you in your age: Rejoice (Madame) and as
appertains to you, punish this Traitor according to his demerits. And you
unnatural Normans, that neglecting duty, have affected doubleness, grow
ashamed at your follyes, and confess your faults, who have countenan^ed a
Traitor, and contemned your Sovereign. Editha devoured in joy, in stead of
reply, fell upon his neck in a sound, and with such entyre affection embraced
him, that it was thought that both their bodies were united together with a
mutual simpathie of affections: and after she was revived a little, stealing a
long kiss from his lips, she began thus. And art thou yet living my Son, or
are mine eyes deceived? Yea thou live my Son, for nature tells me so,
planting such a joy in my heart to see thee, as I never had so great will to
sigh for thee. Oh the fruit of my womb, and the comfort of thy father, had
Aubert lived to behold thee my son, to have seen thy wild ^alliance
exchaunged to wise discourse; thy fond behavior, to affable benignity, thy
diuellishnes to discretion; oh the joy, oh the sollace; but he from heaven
beholds thee, and I on earth embrace thee. The Peers and Ladies cut off her
further discourse, each one presenting him homage and humble salute: whereupon
taking Editha with him, and placing her on the right hand, he with great
gravity ascended the Judgment seat, and spoke thus to all the assembly. Were
I as insolent, as I have been accustomed (my countrymen) neither would I ascend
the place of Judgment, nor condescend to administer Justice: but since God
has humbled my heart, and altered my affects, and made you happy, in calling
me home, hearken to me my Subjects, and consider on my sayings: If absence
alter not heritage, as it cannot, and forgetfulness change not duties, as it
should not, you ought ye Normans to acc^mpt me for your Lord, and accompany
my care for you, with your love toward me: and for this love and duty you
employ on me, I must level out and devise means to preserve you, which can
no better be administered but by justice, which orders all things with so
determined judgment, that the good are maintained for their goodness, and the
bad punished for their injustice: Since therefore in the entrance of my
government I find cockle that has choked the corn, weeds that have
ouergrowne the herbs, and perverse me^ who have inuerted policy, I will take
the sword in hand like a commander, and root out this cockle from the corn,
these weeds from the herbs, these rebels from the righteous, that the good
may better flourish, and the bad stand in more fear; for which cause (ye
Normans) since it is confessed, and approved, that Villiers with his
competitors, have conspired against the Lady Duchess my mother, our will is
that they perish in the same fire they provided for the faultles, and suffer
the same punishment they ordained for the innocent. All the whole people
applauded his righteous judgment, and justice was orderly executed, whilst
each one meruailed at his excellency and wisdom. After then that he had
received homage of the Peers, and was invested in the Dukedom, at such time
as he was entering Roan with his Lady mother, the King Pepin with fair Emine
richly accompanied presented themselves; great was the gratulations twixt Pepin
and Editha, who courted her in this manner. Madame, though your son Robert
departed from you a rebel, he is returned in royalty, being not only Prince
of Normandy, but Emperor of Rome, this his Lady and wife, these his followers
and welwishers; so is your sorrow paid home at last with great sollace, and
the grief you have endured requi^ed with gladness. Editha when she heard
these tidings was ravished with joy, humbly entertayning Emine, and honoring
her son; great was the triumph in Normandy for the liberty of the Duchess,
the return of the Duke, and after long and festival sollace, Pepin received
homage and fealty for the Duchy, and returned to Paris in great pomp:
Robert, Emine, and Editha remained in Roan, till afterward being called to
Rome upon the decease of the Emperor, he became of an irreligious person, the
only royal paragon of the world.

Epilogus.
GEntlemen, I have given colors to a rare conceit, as full of wonder as worth,
as full of perfection as pleasure, in which I have satisfied humors, and
performed history, observing with Apelles the proportion of lines, as
Protogenes did the disposition of lineaments, keeping such method in my
humors, as the spheres in the heavens: where Venus is placed near Mars to
correct his malice, and mirth is planted in this discourse to detect the
imperfections of melancholy. If Prosperus seek for contemplation he shall
find it; if Quintilian for invention, he may meet it; yet are all things
tempered with that equabilitie, that we contemplate no more than we may auowe,
nor invent no more than we can verify. Here may the dispayring father find
hope in his sons untowardness, and the untoward son take example to please
his dispayring father: here is Eben, though black in color, yet abiding
trial: let those that make no Idol of their wits, be masters o^ this work;
for the rest they shall if they read, find a thorn where they seek a
thistle, and a reason to condemn themselves, though they commend not this
sequel: and so courteous Gentlemen relying on your favors, I bid you farewell.

FINIS.

