A very fruitful and godly exposition upon the.xv. Psalm of David called Lord,
who shall dwell in thy tabernacle. Made by M. Ihon Epinus, preacher to the
church of Hamborough: and translated out of Latin into English by. N. L.

To the right vertuos and gracious Lady. etc. Katerin Dowches of Suffoke.
Nicolas Less of London most humbly wissheth good health both of soul and body
with continuau^ce in the love and fear of the Lord.
WHat tim^ (most godli and virtuous lady) I take in hand to tra^slat this
goodly piece of work of master Ihon Epinus made upon ye. rv. Psalm of David
beginning with these words (What man shall dwell in thy tabernacle O Lord.
etc) forth of ye latin in to our natural and vulgar mother tongemine (...)
and purpose was not for to tra^s^ate forth of on tongue into an other: that it
should go a broad and be comm^n in eueri man's hand: but for a certain peculiar
dear frind of mine: whom I perceived very desierous of the knoledge thereof
which is unlearned and lame^teth him self much yt he has ^acked the good ye
virtuous bringing up in lerning yt many men have had to there great confort.
Partly because I do knowledge mine own reudnes to be such, yt scant I can
satisfy and please mine own mind in the doing thereof being often time
displeased and offended with my self that I can do no better: at the leastwyse
not so well: as I would that thing should be done which being once a broad,
must needs come under many men's judgments, must sustain and abide ye opinions
of ma^i, of whom some will say this might be more clean tra^statid: this word
or that is not in his own kind: this sens or that is not given according to
the mind of ye author as it has been always sen, the nisnes of some to be
such, that they will be more ready to find a fault in an other man's doing:
than them self to endeavor yt in doing and imitatinge of such like of
theirs, ye reders should have no cause to find any thing worthy-of reprehensio^.

Partly because I knew my friend so gentle: that he would vowchsafe how so
ever it were done to take it in good worth, estemming my zeal and good will in
as much as thowght it were so fienly done: that no man might amend it. But
after that I had made an end of the translacion: and had red it over once or
twyse again, mi thowght that the pleasure done thereby to my peculiar friend,
should not have bine able to have weighede down ye wrong and injury which I
should have wrowght to innumerable: in subtracting and keepinge a way or
rather in hidinge of so great a iuell and treasure from so many which might
have thereby great confort in receiving knowledge and light in the thing
wherein they were ^^norante and blind and also that they the^ selfs might
take occasion ^o vanish such vices and detestable abominacio^ from there hertes
as they should se in this book openly reprehended.

Esteming therefore the sober godly and modest discrecio^ of many: before the
momishe reprehension of a few indiscreet and ungodly momes. I turned my
purpose from apeculier and a private commodite of one or twane to the common
utility of all men which are desirous to know the truth.

This done for as much as in time past men have used to dedicate their works:
some to one man some to an other, some to obtain favor: some to have there
works and writings by their authority defended and maintained (if any
peradventure should or would kick against the) and finally some yt their
works might be the better regarded for those men's sakes under whose name they
were put forth. None of al these causes being in my mind other wise tha^
only for to profit (the verity of it self being always a sufficient succor
and bulwark against all falseheade and lies) yet I thought with my self not
unmeet and inconvenient but rather expedient and necessary folowinge the
example of many learned men which have written, to dedicate this small work
bringinge with it to the reader great and unspeakable proffit to some noble
person at whose hand: they which are desirous of knowledge might receive i^
the more willingly, ye more gladly, and with the more fruit: considering that
it is the nature of al men commonly to have in more high estimacion a small
gift at a great man's hand: and it were but a beke of his head tha^ a thing of
much more valeur to be given and received of a person of lower estat and degree
yea and would also make much more of it.

Thincking therefore with miself how I might bestow this littell gift worthily
and to whom: among all other your grace came first unto my mind, whose
excellency being a goodly and a bright spetacle to womanhod: and no small
reproach to a great meany of men, which are slogardes in ded and very idel
bodies: and great shame (if any shame were in them) to those which should be
the brekars of this heavenly food and bread unto the people, to their trust
and small fidelite committed, not being satisfied and contented them selfs to be
idel: but do wish al other men to be ye same, hatinge and eating them up in
there hertes which be otherwise affectioned and among al other not abideing to
here that a woman should once have the euangelie in her hand or in here
might. Whose excelentie I say what for ye arde^t love and desire that your
grace does bear to the holy word of God: but in specially for the diligent
promotinge and setting forth thereof to your great charges: as it deserves no
small co^mendacion and praise: even so to take upon me to extol and comme^d
those heavenly gifts which the Lord has bestowed in your noble person (your
grace abhorringe nothing more than your own laud and co^me^dacion, which
refers all to the glory of the lord) it should seem rather to be an
obscuringe of the brightness of them then a making of them to apere more
commendable being no thing at al praised when they be but half praised: nor
yet having their dew co^me^dacion: the chief and principal part of them left
unspoken and vnmencioned at the least wise not according to there dignite
declared nether with fit words nor sentencis adorned.

For as much therefore as your grace before alother most luckely did come to my
memoriat whose hands being certain that the common people has received
already many confortable and spiritual co^solatio^s, instructions, and
techinges thinkinge also that they would fech this sweet morsel of meat the
more glad and redier at the hands which have been wont to feed and norishe
them: rather than at the hands of a strainger. I could not devise in my mind
to whom I might be so bold to dedicate this matter as to your noble grace:
where so great gentilnes and lowlines of spirit is: I doubt not but you will
so accept and take in good part: this my rugged and vnfiled reudnes that both I
shall have no cause to be sorry hereafter for my intempeste and bold audacitie:
and also the readars hereof shall have cause to yield thanks to the Lord for
the great knowledge that they shall here fech at your hand: to the great
profit and comfort of theresoulls: praing the Lord of al confort, both they
and I together to preserve your grace in this godli mind to your own hertes
desire according to ye will and pleasure of the Lord *

Peradventure thou will marvel (gentle reader) what I meant to set a prologue
be fore this book which is so litell that almooste a man may as sone read it
over, and in as short space, as many a man would be in the telling and
numbering the leaves thereof ye I should seem to the to do this rather to
enlarge the biggnes of the book with mo leaves and letters yt it might apeare the
bigger, than that the reader should or might take any proffet thereat or be
there by any whitte more the wise then he was before or else should be, if
there were none at all.

Whereto I answer and say yt al thing does not go by greatness more in writing
when a man does make a work tha^ in wrestling where we do se often times not
the lessor man of ye greater but the greater body of the lessor over thrown
and cast down to the ground. Even so although this treatise be small and
lightel yet peradventure (nay with out peradventure) it contains much more
sad and weightiar matters in it tha^ many great monstrous and houge volumes,
whereof thou being advertised and some thing monished be fore as it were
briefly instructed of the mind of the authoure shall find the rest (when thou
takeste in hand to read the worck it self to apere much more facil and light,
and half learned of the thing, before you do come at it: than it would have
bin if this were not. Wherefore thy merueyle put a part, em brace the good will
and intent of the writer which here in, does no thing but for to proffet and
to edify. Receive therefore the co^me^tarie of master Ihon Epinus doctor and
preachar unto the church of Hamborowe, being translated in to our mother tou^g
upon ye fiften Psalm of David, wherein thou shall find so much fruitful
doctrine so godly admonicions instructions and teaching so great reprehension
and rebuking of vices (of those vices I say) which are the only pillars of al
mischief the drounars of al virtues, there being so described and set furthe
that eueri man may know both what they be and also the great dangers and
perils threatened to the committers of them. That euer^e man may so govern and
stir his ship in the troublous sea and houge waves if this world, tha^ with
out he list he shall not need to perish. I do suppose and believe verily that ye
holy ghost did make no less melody in ye breast of this godly doctor in ye
writing of this commentary, and that he was no less ravished therewith: tha^
was the holy Prophet David: what tyine he did wright this psalm.

Here may ye se what is meant by the tabernacle of ye Lord, what by the
worshipping in the tabernacle whereof we do read so often in the old
testament. What also is signified by ye holy mount. And what kind of people
they are which shall rest therein. Here shall you read four notable vices
rebuked and reprehended of the Prophet. Hypocrisy. Ungodly and unlawful
swearinge. The damnable de sir and study to gether goods to gather by usury.
And last of al he speaks of the corrupt judgment and vnryghtuouse justice of
the Judges.

The which four vices have so invaded all the world, that no place almost
can be found clear thereof, that the most part of al me^ are either
hypocrites, or blasphemers against the name of the Lord, either abominable
usurers or else corrupt and wrongful Judges. What needs me here to speak
any thing against the diuelishnes of hypocrites, cloked with outward holiness:
working thereby their own damnation: and the destruction of many thousand
souls? which by the conversation of those which are wicked, and keepynge
company with those which are, and always have been mortal enemies to the Lord
are fallen and gone clean away from the true doctrine of Christ, to the
teaching of the Diuyll. Whose mouths (I say) before their high and forked
promotions so thundered the word of God a broad to the world, yt the whole
rabble of the universities were not able to resist them: being afterward so
stopped with soft wolle that their throtes are choked up: that they ca^ not
give one sound or voice of ye truth. I will not say that they be not ashamed to
declare openly to the people, that they have erred before times, and so being
foul deceived and seduced by the Diuyll: have deceived other, and have taught
the^ most perniciouse and false doctrine exhortyng the^ therefore to take heed
of such doctrine, if any man do sow any such among them.

Wherein like foul Hypocrites they do belly them selves shamfully: they do
sclaunder the truth, and the holy word of God: they hurt the consciences of
many godly men, which beleuynge their words: under a zeal and holiness
spoken, do fall ignorauntly from the truth. If they had not been plucked up to
promotio^s and dignities: they would never have said tongue thou haste lied.
But here we may se the proverb true yt Honores mutant mores. There was a
right godly man, which on a time did say to a bishop: who^ Satan had
deceived, being fallen from the right way: I am glad that I am no bishop: or
if I were once a bishop, I am glad yt I did forsake it, or else I fear me er
this time I should have been carried from the truth, as well as you. Because of
this great corruption and poison which comes by the company of the wicked:
and al for promotion sake, for favor and for friendship: to be bishopped, to
be personed, to be rewarded with great profit for forsakyng of their master
Christ of whom they have taken an earnest penny to serve faithfully: there fore
our Doctor John Epinus moves a certain question, whether that a man, which
does profess Christ, which favors his word: which loves verity may
keep company, and may be familiar with the wicked, may hold them up with yea
and nay: may be conuersaunt with them at all their doings, co^senting to
their abominations, without the hurt of his conscience: not hurting the
spiritual health of his brother or neighbor: not giuyng thereby occasion of
sclau^der to the word of God: and finally, him self not to be a whitte the
worse thereby: Yea or nay. This question being soluted, that nothing ca^ be
said to the contrary: as the Psalm does minister occasion, being very many,
which do affirm that in no case a man ought to swear or to make an oath
whether it be commanded him of the magistrate or voluntarily, co^tending that
it is sin to use any oath: for as much as Christ did forbid us to swear at
all: but that our communication should be ended with yea and nay. Being
also many of a contrary sort, which thynkyng it no sin at al (swear they
never so much) but rather supposinge them selves best men: which ca^ invent
and devise most diuelishe oaths passing all other (As by familiar exemple)
There were two transgressors cast in prison, in one of the counters in London
for a certain robbery committed: which, as they were merrily disposed (their
harlottes being with them to confort the^) the one of the thieves said to the
other. Let us sit down at this table one against the other, and he that can
outswere the other shall pay nothing for his breakfast, he that is overcome
shall pay for all. Such was their swering and staring, such was the tearing
and rentinge of the Lord, such was the rehearsal of all the parts of the
Lord his body privy and aperte, that no godly creature can abide to here it
again. Whose end within three days after was hangyng, a meet punishmente
for their impiety and blasphemy, if there had been none other crime to be
punished. I would to Christ the magistrates would look some thing on this
matter. Concerning therefore the making of oaths, by the way of a question our
writer discusseth whether it be lawful and standing with the word of God to
swear, either voluntarily or else by co^pulsion of the magistrates and rulers.
Whether they be bound to keep and perform the oath, which they hane sworn:
if it be to their hurt and prejudice, which do make the oath. Whether an oath
made without addyng of the name of god in the making thereof do bind the swerer
to the perfourmaunce of the oath. Whether all me^ without exception are bound
to keep their oaths by the^ made. Whether any magistrate can dispense with an
oath lawefully made, yea or nay. In this part also he discusseth the question
of votaries: whether that a man may make a vow, and whether that vows being
made do bind the votaries, yea or nay. What vows do bind and what do not
what men are bound, and what they be who^ their vows do not bind to the
perfourming of the^. All these demaundes being answered, wherein is great
knowledge and learning: more then in a. M. brabling sophistical schools: he
proceeds as the text does go: till he comes to the verse, which
pronounces that man blessed, and one of the church of God which has not lent
his money to usury. In this point he makes an excellent piece of work. He
shows what usury is affirmynge to be impossible that usurers can be saved,
except they do repent, and restore again that which they have wrongfully
taken. O merciful Lord what shall become of a great nu^bre of rich men:
which knowing no end of their goods: did never come by the hundredth part
of yt which they do possess, by any other honest mean and lawful craft,
the^ by this mean which is so cursed and damnable: that it destroys at the
last both body and soul. If many which are worth thousands, should restore
but half that, which they have by this ungodly mean obtained and got: of
their thousands how few hundredes should they have left, nay how many
thousa^des should they be in debt? There are so diverse and many kinds of
vsuries, that almost a man can not reken them up. Yea it is so crafty and
subtle a kind of occupiynge, that when a man shall think him self lest
burdeyned, then shall he find him self at the last most sore cut. As by
exemple, what man would not think him self well at ease, if he might borowe
an hu^drede pound, to pay weekly for one year space, but one penny for every
pound, which amou^ting to an hu^drede pence for one week makes by the years
end, fifty and two hundrede pence, which are pounds. xxi. and. xiii.
shyllinges and four pence. How well at ease is this man now, when he shall
perceive yt he leeseth so much by such small driblettes, as by one penny
meele, thynkyng before that it was nothing at all (to speak of) to give one
penny for the lone of a pound weekly? Much more does that man leese, which
does pay two pence in the pound for every weeks lone. What great gains
thereby comes to the usurer, which of his hu^drede pound should make by the
years end one. C. xl. and. iii. li vi. s. viii. d. An other sort of usurers
there are: which do not lend their money weekly, but for the year, by the
hu^drede, taking for every hu^drede, some xv. li. some. xx li some. xxx. li
The which is the most gentle sort of usurers, of those which intend to be
rich by their craft and occupatio^. But there is an other sort being no men,
but diuils of hell, making them selves so holy, that to win a thousa^de
pound they would not seem to play the usurers. At whose hand if an honest
man being in necessity, and having need, would borowe a little piece of
money to serve his purpose: promising to give to the^ some thing for the lone
thereof, they will deteste and curse that kind of gain, they will spitte at
it: and yet like foul hypocrites they be ten times worse and more abominable
in the syghte of God and man, then that other before rehearsed. They will sort
and point forth such wares for the^ which are in necessity for the time, that
where as a man is now but in necessity, he shall be brought to extreme
calamity and misery, taking such wares at their hands, as hawks cappes,
tassels for hawks, hawks bells, points, broune paper, with such other
peltrie ware, that the poor man shall never make the fourth penny of his ware
agayue, that it had been less harm for him to have lost. xx. or xx. li. in
the hundrede, to receive the rest in money wherewyth he might do his feate and
purpose, then to meddle with such beggarly ware, which he must go about by the
healpe of brokers to sell again (peradventure to the self same man at whose
hands he did receive the said ware) for less the^ three quarters of ye money
which he must pay for it. And by this means, by a color of bying and
sellyng, this foul usurer would color his usury with more oppression and
undoing of them which have to do with him, then the manifest usurers and open
extorcioners. There is an other company of them which will lend their money
with a good will, taking no manner of gain and profit for the lone thereof: but
yet they do mean no less Diuelishnesse in their heart then the other. For if
they do lend a man.xx. pound and take nothing for the use thereof, yet they
will pay him home one way or other that he shall wrynge for it. They will sell
him some old broken wynded horse, some pretty ring with a counterfeited
stone, some old laid and braithed piece of chamlet, or some such like trifel
that he shall leese in that which was bought, five or six pound for the
pleasure of the.xx. li. being lent to him. And thus they do voyed pretelie by
this legerdemayne the name of an usurer. They handle their matters so craftily
that God (as they do persuade the^ selves) ca^ not perceive their usury. What
great lands have these usurers gotten by forfetynge of bonds, the pore men
being so bound in our lady bonds, yt they are ready to braste what with
statutes merchant, and statutes staple, that they are wyped clean out of all that they have, never to be redeemed again if they do break but one condition
of the obligation and bond. There is among them no more redemption then in
hell, that the poor me^ may singe with the soul priests Heu me, quia in
inferno nulla eft redemptio. They may cry out to the Lord with these wtordes,
pluck me (good Lord) from the jaws of hell. There is no hell worse then the
torments wherewyth they do torment the poor, wherewyth they do beggar the^,
their wives, and their children. The third and fourth generation do cry for
vengeance to fall upon them. The Lord before hand does know that these
thus oppressed, will call on him, as on a just Judge for justice. Wherefore as
he is just, so must he and also will judge justly. Therefore except they do
repent and restore again before they depart fourth of this life all their
vsurarie profits: I say yt al their chauntrees, al their trentals and scala
celi masses, all their satisfactorie deeds: al their deuelishe and obominable
sacrifices, al their offering up (as they say) of the body and blood of the
Lord to the high dishonor of his heavenly majesty (then the popes market
and fair being at the best when the most diuyl takes his leave from this
life with such an evil and a desperate conscience, that he cares not what he
gives for this damnable ware and marcha^dise, and yet not a whitte the more
quieted) I say once again all that euerwyth the Romish merchau^tes they have
thus bargayned for to save them, shall do as much good to their souls, as a
nedell point being thruste into the sight of a man's eye. What shall I
speak of the lay men: are there no priests (do you think) which use this
trade? Think you that the priests willet the lay men go to the Devil alone?
Naye^ verily, they will be the lay men's chaplens to hell whether they wylor
nay: it is not meet that such worshipful men should be without their
chaplens. Well, they will go with the^ or run before them rather then fail,
and it were but for company sake. There is a certain priest in London among
many (which I might rehearse) sometime being a monk of the charterhouse (I
will not say that he-serueth in saint Nicholas parish beside Lumbarde street
(though al men there about say so) which will sooner find an hundrede pound
or twain (as the most me^ say) to let forth on usury, then many a man which
does go in a cote of sylke will find two grotes in his purse sometime to pay
for his diner, and yet he will go in a poor goune of fryse, and his hose
heeled up to the calfe of the leg with lether for sparyng of cloth: that and
al goodness (my tongue tripped) I would say avarice and covet ousnes were lost,
it should be (as the proverb makes mention) found in priests.

In discussynge of this matter our Doctor declares to who^ we are bound to
give freely for gods sake: to whom we are bound to lend freely without
interest: and to whom we are not bound, neither to give nor to lend: but at
our own pleasure, dividing mankind into three sorts of me^, that is to say
into those which are extreme miserable and poor: the second into those which
are not driven to such poverty, but that they are able to pay again if they
do borowe any thing: and the third into those which are rich and
substantial.

This done he proceeds to an other questian, which is this. Whether
purchasing of lands be an vsurarie contracte: yea or nay. Wherein he
declares: that lands bought for twenty years purchase: is a lawful
purchase. Alother purchases being under xx. years purchase being plain usury
on his part which did make the purchase: and if the land be sold above. xx.
years purchase: usury is committed on his side which sells the land. But I
do think verily that there is a greater nu^bre of those which are usurers, of
the buyers, the^ of the sellers: other wise it should not be seen, that so
many men do hoppe without their lands as do and have done of long time, sense
that a certain kind of men began to be purchasers: and again we should not
see, that which now al England does both see and feel to the great ruin
and decay of all the whole realm so many come to so great lands: to have
so many Lordeshyppes that they may ride in their own ground, some man ten
miles, some twenty, some man xxx. or. xl. and no man having one foot of
ground within them, vsyng their tenauntes under the^, not like brethren
(which have one father with them) but like bondmen and staves, oppressynge
them with reising of rentes, payinge of fines and incomes: compelling them to
fetch not so much as bread and drink, but at their bakehouses, and bruhouses,
that the poor tenauntes are not able to have one penny before an other. They
become not only insatiable purchasers: but also they are bakers, bruers,
myllers, malt me^, coliers, and woodmen, that there can not be a penny of gain,
which they will not find out first, and lick it from the poor tenauntes
bearde which takes all the peine. The Turks and Mores which are enemies to
the faith of Christ never used their slaves so vumercifully, and uncharitably,
if they would be tractable and not stubburne to their master, as these
helhoundes do crucify and torment their christian and faithful brethren. To
whom are these purchasers profitable and commodious? For soth neither to their
loving and lawful King, nor yet in his commons. Although that he which is
loving to the commons can no chose but be also loving to his Prince But these
as I have said are neither to the one nor to the other. From whence comes
all this beggerie and great barenes among the commons through out all the
kings dominion, but from these cormorauntes which do swalowe al together down
into their bealies whole. What greater tirannie ca^ there be in the whole
world, then to behold and see where as a thousand men had honest lyuynges:
now one Devil to have all, bying and selling their poor tenau^tes in
oppressyng them, and keepyng the^ bare: as they would bye oxen and sheep: lest
they should grow to rich and be to welthie. How can vitayles be good chepe
either in city or town, when that these gorre bealies will be the sellers of
corn both for bread and drink: and also of flesh, by their tenau^tes, by
their slaves, I should say? when yt woodmen and coliars shall be their
servants? Thus much good do the great purchasers to the co^mo^s, yt in
great plenty they make great scarcity and penury. Does the king his majesty
leese no thing by them? yes verily, a much greater matters then men can well
perceive. His grace leeseth so much as the poor men in time of need would
with all their hertes give: if they were so wealthy and rich as they were wont
to be when they were either Lords of their own ground: or else having so
gentle land lords that paying their acustomed rent they might nor should not
be put beside their farms and grounds, neither they them selves nor yet their
wives after the^ or children, and childernes children (the landlordes at that
time reioysynge most which had tenauntes of longest continuance) which now
being so bare that they be able to give nothing at all, nor that other which
has taken away their living, payinge one penny more then they should if they
had not, nay paying much less, then if they had not been purchasers at all,
their great substance now being minished in the byinge of lands. If it be
usury then to bye land for eightene years purchase: what name shall we give to
them which will have their feed men in countries and towns all the year
long: to watch and spy who has need of money: who is willing to sell his
land, who be in that case and danger that they must needs sell their laud,
that a thing shall not so sone fall but it is taken up for ten, nine and eighte
years purchase, to say that they will give.xvi. or.xviii. years purchase,
except they do perceive and see yt they may make as much more of it, either
for the goodness of the ground or in tariyng a little time till a lease be
expired (afterward being worth thrice the value of that it does go for at
that present) they will be ware of it: they will not drink so hot for
scaldynge of their throat. They will say unto me peradventure. Who can let
me to bye as good chepe as I may: the money is mine own: the land is his?
Wherefore shall not I bye as good chepe as I may? I will not answer the^ with
these words, which Christ did speak to his children: saying love you one an
other, as I loved you: which gave my self for you: whereby men shall know you
to be my disciples. I wyn not answer them that they ought to have a pitiful
eye on their brother which is in need. I will not answer them that they are
bound to considre whether the selling of the land shall be their utter
undoing and impouerishing, yea or nay. I will not say that they ought and are
bound rather to healpe them and lend them also (saving the^ selves harmles)
then to bye that which should be the living of them and theirs. But this I
will say. If they will ru^ne to the Devil who shall stop the^? If they will be
damned, who can save them. They will say peradventure to me: that none will say
as I do, but those which be vagabondes, knawe, heretics, and such as never
come to the honor to were skarlette gounes: or to be knights and sordes
fellows. I answer them again that salvation perteyneth to all men that believe
and will be saved, and that: not they which have most, but which do live
most godly: most quietly without damage and hurt of their neighbor, are most
accepted before God. If a man should stand in the declaration of all the evil
which does spring forth of this damnable sin in all common wealths, in all
cities and tounes: beside that no man is able to atteyne to the sum thereof:
but always shall leave as much vnspoke^, as he has told and declared: what
godly man's ears are able to abide to hear ye great impiety thereof
rehearsed? If it were possible by any man's brains to comprehend by writynge
or other wise the houge and monstrous mischief, the great sea of aleuyl,
which it does cause to ouerflowe the whole world.

Wherefore to conclude in few words: hangyng is to fair and to easy a death
for them, which are so abominable traitors both to God and man, which do
rob and kill not one or twain by ye high way side for need: but sittynge
at home in their cheares bankettynge and feastyng, they do rob and undo all the world both high and low. All is fish with them that comes to the net. I
would God every realm had a strayte law for them as certain cities and
towns have for the cormoraunt bird which destroys all river fish. Yet
would they find holes to escape and auoyed the danger of the law: yet would
they be usurers still, yet would they be damned who so ever says nay. For
they will never repent and restore again their wrong gotten riches. They do
perceive: that if they should so do (every bird having his fether home
again) that then they should be left as naked as my nail, they should not
have a sherte to cover them with, I trust the good and godly will be herewyth
nothing offended As for the ungodly and those whose consciences are burnt with an
hot iron. I doubt not but they will hold them selves content and speak not
one word lest that men do find the old Proverb verified in them, which is
rub an horse on the galle and he will winche.

After this matter our Doctor demands. If a man lendyng his money with good
will with out gaynes for certain time: not being paid at the time pointed
but prolonged of to his great hin deraunce: whether that man so lendynge his
money, and being not paid long time after that it should have been: may
demand of him, which did borowe the said money, the interest for the
damage and hurt, which he has sustained in forberynge his money longar
time: then was his ease for to do, and yt demand whether it be usury, yea or
nay. Whereto he declares that it is not reason: that for a man's good will, he
should suffer hurt and that he is bound to recompense him for the hurt
thereby sustained, and that the lender may demand the damage by way of
action: no usury therein committed. Howbeit because every man is ready to
take occasion of evil by every light and small exemple: therefore he
counsayleth them rather not to demand any such interest, the^ for to do it:
teaching them yt it is the stedfaster and more sure way to demand his own
and not to meddle with interest.

This done, where as the Psalmist declares that same man happy, which takes
no gifts against the innocent: master Epinus takes occasion of an other
question to be propouned. Whether it be lawefull for a Judge (though he be
never so good and ryghtuous) to receive any manner of gifts of either of the
parties, which are suitors before him the playntiffe or defendant: or of both,
either before the cause or co^ trouersie be ended or after.

For as much as a Judge is a public and common minister of justice in a
common wealth to see yt every man shall have his right, to see yt no man do
to his neighbor wrong, to see y^ the poor be not oppressed by the rich, but
to deem and judge all causes vpryghtly, indifferently, without respect of any
manner of person, to end al controversies, debates and strifes which do often
times rise and spring up among men, according to equity and justice,
nothing in the world being more enemy, nor greater pestilence to justice
and right judgment, then a Judge to be a gredy and a covetous man, a man
lokyng after gifts not content with his stipende and salary which he does
receive for the doing of his office of the common wealth. Therefore he warns
the^ of their deutie that their office is to be vpryght, to lean and cleue to
neither party: to look a wry neither for friend nor foo, kiffe nor kynne: high
or low, rich or poor stranger or country man: nor yet to receive any manner
of gifts: on which side so ever it be, neither great nor small as it is
written. Deuteronomy. xvii. but to wey all causes by the right line and balaunce of
justice. He declares to them: that it is theft and robbery for a Judge to
take gifts of any man which is a sueter before him, not only because it is a
selling of justice, an occasion of wrong judgment, and a deprinyng or
robbyng of the innocent in his just cause, but also though he be never so much
indifferent, though he mind to do no manner of injury for all that he received
gifts and rewards: Yet because it is a great conjecture, and an evil
suspection of vnryghtuousnesse, because it makes the sentence to be suspecte:
therefore he wylleth Judges for nothing to take any manner of rewards: he
declares to them, that the receyuynge of gifts is counted in the wickedness of
them which are cursed by the mouth of the Lord. He declares furthermore,
that the head rulers of commune wealths, are bound to prouid for Judges such
sufficiient and honest living: that they should not need to take any manner
of rewards and gifts that they may be able to find them selves and theirs
therwyth honestly: sith that they do bestow their time in the commune affairs
and business, since that they ca^ not both labor for their own family and
serve the communes also, in the office whereunto they be called. This lesson
how well many Judges and other persons which are set to be indifferent
between man and man, do observe and keep (I can accuse no man) but the tedious
and long suetes of the poor, the short and quick dispatch of the rich,
makes men to suspecte that all thing is not accordingly as it ought for to
be. It has been often times seen and perceived, that the sentence of the poor
man's cause has been determined before it has been heard what the poor man
might say and lay for him self. I would wish and desire that all Judges
should give their servants great charge that they do receive no manner of
gifts or rewards and that they their self should give to them such wages,
yt they should not need to take any thing of any man. For all that which
is given to them: is to obtain favor and friendshyp in their causes: to be
good unto the^, to remember them to their masters, when they be at leisure,
when assueters are gone, when the servant may boldly speak, then to speak
a good word for them: to healpe to dispatche the^: which all together smells
not of the best. But some Judges and other officers having great and sufficient
liuinges by their offices, have been sclaundered (I fear me of the truth) that
their servants and officers under the^ have had none other wages of the^ for
their service, then such vauntages and gaynes as they might get in their
service, of them which are sueters, skant having of their masters a good
liuerie once in a year. If they have a liueri at their hands, they shall both
bye the lynyng and also the gardyng thereof, of their own purse, or else they
should were a single cote almost as good never a whitte as never the better,
and yet their servants in very few years do grow to so much wealth, that
almost they know not them selves. If all this be true (as I doubt me it is to
true) what does then follow, but that he which might best give, should
speed best, Lord money being the chief judge in his cause whether it be
right or wrong. I have heard also of many men which have wroughte, yea and
boughte them selves into great men's service: neither for necessity, nor for
the desire to do them any honest service, nor yet that they might thereby be
either the more godly or just: but that they might bear the greater swing
because they belong to great me^ in the country where they do dwell, that
they might bear and make such a brag in the countries, that no man should
once route against them or say black to their eye what so ever extortion they
do. Such servants though their masters be never so vprighte and just,
causes the^ to have an evil name, to be ill reported of (as far as men dare
speak) to their great dishonor, and to the sclaunder of justice, that a man
would be loath to have his cause come before the^ which have such leude
servants, gatherynge of the conditions of the servants the manners and
affections of the masters. I have known in other countries some Judges of
such integrity and vpryghte justice that they would not abide him, nor hear
his cause, which would but profer or make mention of any gifts: but yet they
could be content that their nigh servants (whom the sueters knew well
enough) should take for them, all that they could catch, and much worse the^
that, like unto the bare foted friars of the order of Fraunces, which with
their bare hands had rather tutche twenty women, then one penny: but with
their gloves on their hands, or else, per alios, as they were wont to say, by
other: yea and into their sleue if you would power forth of bags bushels of
silver, they would not throw it away.

O Lord where is justice and equity become, when such corruption is in place?
How ca^ a judge both be just, and also a receyuer of gifts? what man will
receive a gift, but to do pleasure again for it, or else he were unkind?
Gifts and rewards have come in so fast to some men in times paste, that
suddenly from a low and mean estate, as from a low ebb, they have risen and
flowen up to great possessions, to be Lords fellows, and what else beside? This
is to be taken for a proved verity as well in England as in all other nations,
that the best Judges have been always the poorest and of smallest substance.
The old and ancient Romans what time they were rulers alone having no
rulers or heads over them being honest and civil wise men, knowing neither
God nor his promise, took it for a certain argument of great extortion, of
great briberie and robbery, when they did perceive a senator or an other Judge
to grow fat in riches, to have and possess great lands and rentes, on
contrary wise that senator which was most poor: him they had in most
honor, in most reputation, him would they bring after his death, with all
solemnity, accompanied with them all the honorable and worshypful persons of
the City to his grave in token of his ryghtuousnes and just service to the
common wealth, they would set his image of stone or brass with his name on
a pillar in the commune places of the City where all resort should be: they
would bestow his children to marriages and other promotions on the common
purse and charges of the city, that they should not need neither to pill nor
poll, nor to do unjustly, for to leave their wife and children rich in great
prosperity and abundau^ce of al things. This good judge did think no
felicity to be compared to that, for to be remembered after his death to have
his image set up to be a memorial to his successoures of his equity and
good conscience: of his indifferent dealing between all parties: that he was no
pollar of the commune wealth: yt he did choose rather to dye poor with
ministration of right justice, then to leave to his posterity great riches
wrongfully gotten and gathered together with the damage and hurt of
innumerable. In few wordesly kewyse as the Lord is a most rightuous iugde
over the quick and dead, judging all thing ryghtuously, so must they be
here in earth, whose room and place they do occupy for a time, otherwise they
are not worthy to be called judges, but robbers and thieves. For the name of a
Judge is an holy, godly, and a heavenly name, the just ministration of whose
office is the preservation of commune wealths, and otherwise the utterly
decay, and turnyng the name of a commune wealth to a commune destruction and
undoing of the body where of they have the governance.

In the end of the work as well as in the beginning, that the workmongars?
those (I say) which do claimesaluatio^ by their own works and ryghtuousnes
shall not in this place at the hands of the Psalmist take^nie manner of
occasion, to maynteyne their presumption and glory of worhes, against the
honor and glory of God, because that the prophet pronounces them happy and
blessed which have not offended in any of those vices by him rehearsed: as
who should say that by those deeds and works they should obtain their
justification and salvation: therefore this author master John ^pinus
declares yt it was not the mind of the Prophet to de^lare in this Psalm
whereby we ^re justified: but what manner of men they be which are justified,
what manner of people they be which are of his militant church: ^ere in earth,
and shall be hereafter of the church triumphant. Which thing no man can
per^eyue but by the outward works which do spring forth of faith, which
works they do see outwardly, whereby they do perreyue that they be the members
of Christ: of the whole body of the holy and elect church, which the self
same Christ has bought not with silver and gold, but with sheddinge of his
blood, not in hypocrisy with a counterfeyted and a strange body from all
humayne nature, but with the same body, which was naturally borne into this
world of his mother. To the which Lord I commend the gentle reader both
body and soul: that his heavenly grace, may be always present with the: may
be all together thy teacher and chief guide, that thou may grow to be
perfect in all godliness and purity of life to his glory: who be praised and
honored for ever and ever Amen.

An exposition on the.xv. Psalm of David made by master John Epinus Doctor
and preacher of the church of Hamborowe.
The title. The Psalm of David.
This Inscription or title does show that David is ye author of this psalm,
which psalm is written in that kind of writing: that does teach a man
this or that thing, as here, by the fruits of a true faith he declares,
which be those men yt are godly in deed which are the people of God: and the
holy church. Also who shall obtain the heavenly heritage: and felicity of
eternal life. It does not show plainly, how or by which way, we are
counted the church of God: and how we shall obtain and get everlasting
health: but what manner of me^ they be, which of right ought to be called the
people of God: and have of free gift everlasting life.

When effect and intent of this Psalm.
THis psalm declares, that neither hypocrites nor the wicked sort are the
people of God, because that both these do lack faith. And that neither of them
shall come to the heavenly kingdom, prepared from the beginning for the elect:
because the elect sort being by the merit of Christ redeemed, regenerated,
or new borne again: and also sealed with the seal of the holy spirit, do
cast of the old man with all his deeds because they do not follow the
flesh, The feythful do cast of the old man.
nor fulfill the desires thereof. He that is borne of God, synneth not. He
which by faith is counted just with God by the faith in Christ, in the fear
of the Lord does live, and always after the commandments of God does rule
and govern his affections, manners and conditions.

The disposition and order of this Psalm.
This Psalm conteyneth two things, yt is to say. A demand and an answer.
It is here demanded who be of the church, and who shall be saved. To that
demand an answer is made from the spirit of God. Who be the people of God
That they are taken to be the people of God and none else, and that they
shall be saved and none else, which do rule and order their mind and life
after the commandments of the Lord. In this psalm, all the precepts and
commandments are not rehearsed: but under those which be rehearsed and
named, all the rest are comprehended. And it does perteine to all the precepts
which are contained in the second table, because it teaches that our life
and manners with all our affections ought to be framed after the commandments
of the Lord.

Of Justification.
THe greatest and most hard question of the Justification of man in this
Psalm is rather touched, then made plain and open. Man's reason does devise
diverse causes of justification. The dsuerse opinion of me conternyng
justification.
Some men do imagen that we are justified by the deeds of our virtues: some by
the keepyng of the law: some by the works of ceremonies and other works of
man's traditions. But the holy scripture teaches that there is but one cause of
our justice, that is to say, the fulfyllyng of the law of God teaching that
men are justified before God by the perfect obedience to the law of God, and
that they are condemned for the contrary, that is, for their disobedience. Who
that kopeth the law by the law is justified, and who breaks the law, by the
law is condemned.
For likewise as God has ordained the pain of death for sin, so has he
also given for the perfourming of the law of God the reward of life
euerlauyng. Christ in Matthew the nintene chapter, to the yongmanne demanding
of Christ what he should do: that he might have everlasting life, answered. If
thou will enter into life keep the comaundementes: declaryng that the
fulfilling and keepyng thoroughly of the commau^deme^tes is the price of eternal
life, by the which fulfyllynge, everlasting felicity is gotten and obtained.
S Paul also witnesses that by the fulfyllyng of the law me^ are justified:
saying that the workers of the law, and not the hearers are justified before
the Lord. But for as much as that man is guilty of the breakyng of ye whole
law, Al me^ are breakers and tra^sgressou^^ of the law, and the^ fore no man
is justified by the law.
which has offended in any part thereof, and as James says, all men are
curfed, which do not abide still in all those things, which are written in the
law that all men should. keep them: it is certain and manifest that by the
obedience of the law no man can be justified before God: because that no man
does fully keep the law as he ought to do: because there is no man: but
either by thought or deed has tra^gressed the law of God. The fault why
that no man is justified by the keepyng of the law, is of man him self and
not of God. For the promise which was declared to the law: The promise of the
law is conditional.
is under a condition: being spoken to them which do fulfill the law. And
therefore the promise is not given and perfour med, except the whole law be
kept and performed. So that by this reason the law works death unto us,
and becomes the cause of death: which was given to be the wynhyng and
purchasyng of life. For as much the^ as no man can fulfill the law, and that
it is plain that by the fulfillyng thereof, the justice of God ca^ not be
gotten: Christ him self which never committed offense, being of his own
nature innocent, Christ fulfylleth the law for us all, and becomes our
justification.
for our sake made him self subject unto the law, and fulfilled the law to
the uttermost for us, making his perfect obedience and fulfillyng of the law
(which he had no need of) to be ours, which was made a free gift, being no
thank to the law that we are justified. Then by the fulfyllyng, which
Christ fulfilled, of the law, the world is redeemed: the same Christ in that
he performed the law in all points is become the price of our redemption:
and that thyng^ which was to us, and to the law impossible: the Lord did
supply for us in his only begotten son: and by him he fulfilled the
justification of the law in us. Rom^. viii.
As to the Roma. viii. transposynge and taking away from our selves, and from
the law the benifitte and gift of our redemption: and putting it only on
Christ. He alone and none other is made our justice: redemption, life and
health, Wherefore is Christ made our redemption and justice.
vicause he has fulfilled the law of God for us, that now without him man
has no hope of redemption, of justice, of eternal felicity and of health, in
whom is all the price of man's salvation, by the which price both God and the
law is satiffied and pleased. He that has not him, he lacks the price of
his redemption, he lacks justice and life, he yt by^aith takes hold on him,
that man also in him does receive the cause of our reconciliation, and
justification, that is to say, the fulfyllynge of the law. For likewise as by
our disobedience, we are destitute of all hope of health, even so, by the
obedience and fulfillyng of the law of God, we are delivered from the loss
thereof. The which obedience when that no man could perform: Jesus Christ
was made obedient for us unto the death of ye cross, he performed that
obedience for us, that by the obedience of one man we might be reconciled to
God, we might be justified, that likewise as by the disobedience of one man we
fell into the wrath and disdain of God, into unrighteous and perdition: so
by the obedience of one man Jesus Christ we are delivered from the w^ath of God,
from unrighteous and perdition. The cause of our justification, by the
goodness of ye lord is translated and put away from us and laid on an other
person which is Christ: because that he has fulfilled for us and in our
behalf, the demau^des and requests of the law, whose obedience and
fulfyllyng has restored and given again to us justice and life.

These sentences and sayings: To be justified by the fulfyllyng of the law:
and to be justified by the merits of Christ freely is alone thing
that men are justified by fulfyllynge of the law. And that men by ye mertie
of God through Christ by the faith in Christ without their own merits freely
are justified: to many men's judgments do appear and seem soco^ trarie
that the one can not be like the other, nor yet can stand both together. But
truile they do differ noth^nge at all: for they do express and set forth
excellently the matter of Justification: showing the wells and causes of our
justification. They do declare by whose will and commandment: yea, and by
what price we are redeemed and reconciled again to God, and also who has paid
this price and by what means we may be partakers thereof. The cause and price
of our redemption.
The cause and price of our redemption is the fulfyllyng of the law, for
therein is set of God the remission of sin, justice and life everlasting.
Th^^ things are contained in the fulfyllinge of the law^.
This chief and final cause of the law Christ has tra^sposed unto him
self, and he is made that thing which the observation of the law should have been.

Therefore both these sayings are true, that we be justified by the law, and
that we be justified by ye mercy of god thoro^^ Christ freely. But where as
it speaks of the perfourmaunce of the law: it is meant of that which is in our
Lord Jesus Christ, and not of our own imperfect and insufficient perfourmyng
and keeping of the law. Christ only fulfilled the law, and in fulfyllynge
of it, he paid the price of our redemption taking the justification from the
law upon his own self.

He has paid I say the price of our redemption, Faith truly instifieth.
for them only which do believe in him. Then the price of our redemption is
received by faith in Jesus Christ. And therefore faith may well and worthily be
said to justify. The first cause efficient of our sustice.
God and his mercy is the first and chief cause efficie^t of our justice.
Christ is the second cause efficient thereof, The second cause efficient
which cause the Logitians do call the ^lowing cause. The cause isntrumental of
out justification.
The faith of Christ is the cause isntrumental or instrument whereby we do
obtain justice. The fulfyllynge of the law is the cause material or matter,
The cause material of our justification.
which done we are justified These causes are so knitte together, yt they
cannot be a su^dre, that one lenynge and dependyng on the others healpe.
Wherefore it is not a miss said that we are justified by the mercy of God:
by the perfourming of the law th^rowe Christ and by faith. For Christ does
justify no man with out faith, nor faith justifies with out Christ. By fayeth
only in Christ which gave him self to be the price of redemption for all
men that do believe in him, we are reputed just before god. And they which are
reputed by faith just, by the mercy of God through the merits of Christ and
no^ ^f their own, they are reputed and made just. Where they which by Christ
his merits are reputed just, they are justified by ye perfourming of the law
which is in Christ. It is said therefore properly and in the own kind, that
we are justified by the mercy of God, by the perfourming of the law, and by
faith. For all these do go together in the perfourminge of the law, ^r does the
will of him which buil death an house: A goodly simi litude.
the workema^shyp of the carpinter, stone and timbre with the tools thereto
belonging go together in the said building. When the scripture does affirm to
us that Christ is our justice, always it does understand this (that is to
say) which Christ has fulfilled, the law for us. For the perfect
observation of the law is the cause material and the cause without the which
not (as the Logitians use to speak) because that without this no man can be
counted just before God. Good works or else the works of the law are not the
cause: Young children and the thief on the cross, be justified with out works,
but not with out the obsersuation of the law.
without the which a man ca^ not be justified. For with out these the infantes
and young children are justified, and the thief which hanged on the cross was
instified. But yet they were not justified without the perfect (...) uation and
fulfyllyng of the law which is the price of our redemption: which fulfylling
is in Christ. When that the scripture does testify that we are justified by
faith, it does understand this cause, under those words: that God does
impute the merits of Christ, of his own mercy freely to them which do
believe, and that Christ freely does communicate his merits to all them wiche
do believe in him. Moses says. Do that which the law commands the, and
thou shalt live. Christ preaches, knowledge and confess thy sin, and
believe in me which have satisfied the law for the, and have fulfilled the
law, and thou shalt live. In me shall thy life be. In the law thou shall have
no life, because thou art not (...) to perform the requests of the law, and
so to purchase the ^ife which is promised for the kee^ing of the law. The
Lord has taken the office of the law on (...) self.
The law could not perform to the that thing wherefore it was given:
therefore I have removed it forth of his place, and am come my self into that
room, that by faith in me you may receive blessing and life, which were
set before you in the law. For I am made the end or the fulfyllyng of the
law to justification, Roma. ^.
to all them which do believe, as to the Roma. x. that is to say. I have done
as much as the law can desire: that they which do believe may have those
things in me which the law does require to the justification of man.

There is yet one thing more in this point to be observed and marked, that
where as we have said that Christ has take(...) to himself the end of the
law, The law is not abrogated altogether, but in ye cause only of our
justification, and wherefore the law yet does serve.
as touching that it should have justified us: and given to us life, yet the
other ends and effects of the law, Christ has not taken from the law, but
has left them still to the law, that is to say, to show our sin to us,
and to be a scholemaister: whereby we may come to Christ. Those things,
which in both the testamentes are written of the abrogatyng and taking away
of the power and authority from the law: it is meant of the principal and of
the first cause, for the which the law was made. For the law is taken away
by Christ in that he has fulfilled and performed it, as concerning our
justification, and obteynyng of life. But as touching the declaration of
sin, the teaching and instructynge of us to Christ: and the governance of
our outward life: it does remain and abide still in his full strength. These
are those which are adversaries to the law.
Wherefore the Antinomians are deceived out of measure, which hold a folyshe
opinion that the teaching and monicions of the law ought not to be had in the
churches. For the reason of man of his own propre nature can not see how
wicked we be: nor yet ca^ perceive and understand the wrath of God against
sin. Wherefore the readyng of the law is not to be refused, but to be kept
still in our churches that in the law: as it were in a glass we may behold our
wicked and perverse nature, our unrighteousness, and that therein we may
learn what for to do, and what things to fly and voied from, while we be in
this life. For the law of God is a la^te (...) to our feet, The law of God
is alanterne to our living.
which teaches us how for to go. By the taking away of the law we are not
set at liberty to live unhonestly and wickedlie after the desire of the
flesh: Nor it is abrogated and taken away from them, which do not believe in
Christ. The law is in his whole strength to the^ which do not believe.
For the beleuers (and none other) do receive and put upon them Christ by
fayeth: by the which fayeth: in Christ they do apprehende and receive the
fulfillyng and perfourmaunce of the law: in who^ also they do receive the
holy ghost: by whom they are renewed and sanctified. The spirit of god is the
stea^er up of all godliness in ^s.
For the spirit of Christ does exitate and steare up new motions of the
mind, and more pure affections making us desirous to embrace godlynes and
virtue.

What be the motions and affections of the godly, and what manner a thing is
the study and desire to do well, and to live godly, and what manner of
obedience they ought to give to the teaching of the law, which are reserved
and saved by Christ. A brief decl^ ration of Psalm.
This Psalm does declare and teaches also what manner of men they be both
within and without, which shall inhabit the holy mount of the Lord. It does
not learn us that we do deserve with good works eternal life: nor that with
our works we do satisfy for our sin and offenses. Remission of our sin,
out justification and life everlasting are the gifts of God
For the remission or forgyuenes of sin and life everlasting, are the gifts
of God, not obtained and won by works, because that no man shall be proud
thereof, nor glory there at, in him self. The prophet also does show that
they which a^^ godly and faithful men in deed, are the church of God: Who is
the church of god
and that they and none other shall inha^ite the everlasting kingdom of God.
What manner of me^ they be which are godly in deed, he does show by the
works of fayeth, saying that those shall be the citisins of heaven which do
enter in with out spotte and work ryghtuousnes. The works of tayth decl^^^
who ^e ^od^y.


This Psalm and these sentences of Paul (which follow) are al one. They
which do live after the flesh shaldie. Also there is no condempnation for
them, which are in Christ Jesus. But what kind of men those be, which are in
Christ, he also declares, saying: which do not walk after the flesh. So
the Lord him self says that the kingdom of God shall be taken away from the^,
which do not repent, How those textes are to be understand and taken which do
seem to make for the justification of works.
and shall be given to them which do bring forth worthy fruits of
repentance. These sayings also of Christ do make for this purpose, saying.
Every tree which brings not forth good fruits shall be cut down and
thrown into the fire. Also: not every man which says Lord Lord shall enter
into the kyngdo^e of heaven: but that does the will of my father which is in
heaven. Also: that God the father does remitte sin to the^: which do forgive
their neigh bours faults: and to them which will not forgive their neighbor,
that the father will not forgive their trespasses. These lessons do not teach
how we may be justified or by what means, but what manner of men they be
which are justified and made ryghtuou^e, to whom the merit of Christ is
imputed and rekened freely for justice and righteousness sufficient. To this
end and purpose pertains the other testimonies of the scriptures, which do
semeto make our works to be the cause of our justification, or rather the
justification it self.

The Psalm.
Lord what ma^^ shall dwell in thy tabernacle, or who shall rest and abide in
thy holy hill.

Moses in Exodus the xv. chap. calls the land of the Jews, the hill of
heritage: the house of God and the sanctuary of the Lord. With this manner of
speaking of Moses some me^ are induced and persuaded in them selves to
expou^de this place, saying that herebye is meant the land of the Jews: the
externe and outward religion and public wealth of the Israelites. They do say
and expound these words, How the dwelling in the tabernacle of the Lord is
understand of many.
the tabernacle and holy hill to be spoken figuratlie by a figure caled
sinechdoche (which is when the part is taken for the hole) a^ though by these
words tabernacle and holy hill: all the land of Jury should be meant, where
the Lord ordained his religion to be observed with observation of a civil
life. They do refer this Psalm unto the corporal and outward rewards of
the law, making this sense and exposition: saying, the Jews: if they do not
obey he Lord: shall for their disobedience and wicked nes suffer many
calamities and miseries: they shall be taken captyue and bond, being carried
away to strange and barbarous nations, and that all the land where the Lord
did found his religion, shall be destroyed and made wast, with their holy temple
and religion also. But if they do obey and fulfill the commandments of the
Lord: that then they shall dwell quietly and saftie in the land of Jury: they
shall have their religion and common wealth still, no man shall hurt them: This
is (say they) yt is meant by the dwelling in the holy tabernacle and holy hill
of the Lord.

There is a like saying in the fyfth book of Moses called the Deutero. and.
iiii. chap. saying. If ye do provoke the Lord to anger: I take heaven and
earth to ^^^nes, that you shall perish: and that quickly forth of the land
which you shall possess beyond Iordayne, you shall not dwello^ge therein. The
Lord shall put you forth and shall disperse and scatter you abroad one from an
other among all nations. But for as much as the promises and threatenynges of
God are to be taken and understand for mokyndes of obedience or disobedience
then one, and are to be referred to al ages: therefore likewise as the Jews
being rebels and disobedient to the Lord: should be cast out of the whole
land of Jury: even so they should be cast forth from the very tabernacle
and holy hill: that is to say, The tabern^cle and the hyare taken in two
senses.
from the kingdom of God which is spiritual and triumphant.

The tabernacle and the holy hill, as many other things like vn^^ these which
are spoken in diverse places of the prophets concerning the religion: the
temple and kingdom of Israel: are to be expounded not only of the corporal
temple which we do se: and kingdom or land of the Jews, but also of the
very church of God, of the kingdom of God. The Lord him self in Osee the
first chap. does wytnes, that the wicked Jews shall leese not only their
temporal possessions and promises, but also their spiritual, saying: you
shall not be my people, nor I will not be your God. Every nation and age does
call and name those things which are present with their common and used
vocables, the which things being changed and altered, they do also change
the manner of calling of them, and ^^ue them other names. The prophets in
their time called the church of God the tabernacle: What was the church of God
called among the prophets, and with what names they did use to call it, and
how it is now among the christians.
the holy hill, the holy city, the people of God, they called Jacob Israel,
and Judah. These names because they are now taken away and are no more used:
therefore the christians do use other vocables more known to the^, calling the
church the kingdom of God, where as the Jews called the tabernacle and holy
hill, Israll and Jacob. The wrytynges of Moses almost altogether, do shadow
to us spiritual things, inspeciallie those which are written of the
tabernacle, of the temple, In what places the Lord was worshipped from Moses
time till Solomon.
and of the worshippyng of God. The worshhippyng of the Lord was in the
tabernacles or tents from the time of Moses till the time of Solomon the
king. The which Solomon by the commandment of the Lord did build up a
temple wherein the Lord should be worshypped. So long as Israellco^tinued not
in one place: but was sometime here and sometime there, and in diverse dangers
and perils: so long (I say) as they did war with strange nations, the
Lord was worshipped in the tabernacle: but after that they were at rest, their
enemies being partly overcome and subdued, partly distroyed, the Lord was
worshipped in the temple honorobly, which Solomon did build for him in mount
Syon. What does the tabernacle and mount Syon signi^i^.
The prophet in this place speaking of the tabernacle and mount Syon does
figure unto us the state of both the churches. He co^pareth and lykeneth the
militant church to the^ which did dwell in the tabernacle, which h^^e do suffer
many evils and innumerable wrong, which conti^ually without taking of
anietruce do wage bataile, The m^litan^ church.
with their own propre naughty desires and ill affections, against the
mistrust and diffidence in the promise of God with the world, and with Satan.

The triumphant church, The tei^^ph^^ church.
that is to say, which has overcome the world, the Devil and it self, with
a^hir ill affections and desires, which is departed forth of the tents of
this world and ascended into heaven: He does lyken it to Israel, which, all
his euylles overcome and paste, has sincerely without ante trouble or danger
worshypped the Lord in the mount Syon, which is called the holy hill, or the
hill of holiness, because that the Lord which is holy in deed should (...)
worshypped in that place, which the Lord did make and dedicate for religion,
Wherefore was the mount called holy.
and for his heavenly seat, it is called holy, I say vicause that the holy
word of God and the sacred mysteries should be there showed and done. The
which holy mysteries being taken forth of that same place, the hyl remains
as all other hills do, nothing better then they. The scriptures do call
p^aces holy for the holy things which are there exhibited and done. Wh^^^o:
eat plac^^ named (...).
Even so Jerusalem is called an holy city: Chanaan: is called an holy land.
The mount Syon, an holy hill, the tabernacle also holy, the place where the
Lord appeared first to Moses is called also holy, yea and the people an
holy people. So with us the faithful (...) are called holy, Wherefore are the
faithful called holy.
although of ^^eyr own nature they be wicked, because that the holy one does
dwell in them, because they do embrace the holy word of God, because they do
use the sacraments, because they do cleave to Christ and to the Lord by
fayeth, because that these things are holy things, therefore by them they are
rudged holy. The which things being taken away they are wicked and unholy.
Some have ^urned and translated this word of the texe (dwell) to be in a
strange place, which is not contrary to the Hebrewe text, for it permits
and allows both translations well enough, for to declare this mystery, that
godly men in this world are pilgrims and strangers, and that they have their
being here, as it were in a wayfarynge or in a journey without any ^^^sion or
place to bide in still, and that their life here in earth is no thing else but
a continual wa^ fare and being forth of their own country, as was the life
of the Jews while they lived in their te^tes. Although that in this present
church (wherein men do lead their life as it were in tents in a field) there
be many great evils and dangerous perils: yet for all that so great is the
ben^^ite and gift thereof to be as a wayfaring man in this church or
tabernacle: that none but such as be godly and faithful can obtain it.
Therefore the first step to come to eternal lyse is to be admitted and
received into this tabernacle or church of the Lord. The first step to
eternal life.
The second step or degree to bliss.
The second is to be taken from this tabernacle into the holy hill of the Lord
where the blessed do live without any trouble or care from all warring, being
delivered from all misery and captivity. This is meant by the restyng in the
holy hill. What the mount Syon or the holy hill is, I have declared in the
second and third Psalm.

The meaning of the prophet is. Who shall be reputed for the people of God?
for whom shall the possession be: which the Lord gives? who shall obtain the
bliss which is promised. He answers and says. He yt enters in with out
spotte, and works ryghtuousnes, that is to say, which repents wythall his
heart of his miss life and by faith lives godly soberly, honestly and
rightuously.

The text.
Who that enters in without spotte.
To enter in without spotte, What it is to enter in wych out spotte.
is not meant to be without sin: but by fayeth for to lead an honest
conversation of life without blame or doing of any hurt as nere as a man
may: to keep him in his calling upright: with all diligence, to flee from
vice, and to embrace virtue. For this word (enter in) is a vocable used
communely in the company or conversation of men, not perteynyng to the inward
innocence and pureness.

The text.
And Works righteousness.
To work ryghtuousnes is to begyuen to ryghtuous deeds and to do and deal
ryghtuously: To work rightousnes
and by faith to do that thing which the Lord commands, that is to flee
from evil and to do good: with all thy heart: to shon and void those things
which are forbidden, and to follow those things which are commanded. Where
as the scripture does say: and call the walking in the law of God: to be
innocent of thine hands: and pure in heart: the self same thing is to work
ryghtuousnes: and to enter in without spotte. These sentences which do follow,
declare what it is to enter in without spotte, and to work ryghtuousnes. The
Jews were puffed up with pride, because the Lord did chose them before all
other people to be his people: because the Lord brought them forth of Egypt,
because he was their bulwark and defense, because he did feed them louyngly
in the deserte, These cause^ made the I^wes pioud^.
and because that he increased them to be so great a people, yt they were
fe^ared of many kings. Also because they came of Abraham, because they were of
the blood of the patriarchs, because in the priesthod and excellency of
their kingdom they excelled all other, because they were in leage with the Lord,
because the Lord did speak with the^, because he sent his prophets, and
committed to the^ above al other his holy speech openyng to them his holy
mystery, ordeynyng and foundinge among them his true and perfect religion,
teaching themhowe to govern a co^munaltie with a common wealth, by honest
civil orders, and such other like benifites which they received at the Lords
hand: they presumed much being not a little proud for the observation of
their ceremonies, and outward worshyppynge of the Lord. They promised to the^
selves by this prerogative, salvation and health, they judged them selves to be
the worthy worshippers of the lord, and that the glory of eternal bliss
should perteine to them only and to none other. Which folishe persuasio^ and
vain superstition of the Jews, the prophet in this Psalm does reprehende
and rebuke, saying: that those are not the tokens of the very people of God
which they do think for to be: but contrary wise that the people of God are
known by the godliness of mind, and pure innocence of life. Whereby the
people of God are known.
Except a man him self be godly disposed both in thought and deed: none
outward thing can make him commendable and acceptable to God. For every man
according as he is godly, or otherwise: so shall be be accepted or cast of. The
sons and heirs of God, are those which are borne of God. They which are
borne of blood, of the will of the flesh and of the will of man, with God
they are not taken for the heirs of God: nor shall rest in the holy hill of
the Lord. Neither for the nobility and excellency of kynred or lineage: nor
yet for any color or cloak of religion and holiness: These outwerde gyfres do
not declare us to be the children of God.
no man shall be allowed and acceptable or pleasant in the face of the Lord.
Saint James in his first chapter in few words declares that, which the
Prophet speaks in many, saying. The true and perfect religion is that,
which keeps a man undefiled, and clean from the fithines of the world,
which does visit the widows and orphaynes in their tribulations and
afflictions. By these marks Thriste will know his people, not by shaven
crowns, nor disguised garmetes like players.
By these marks Christ at the later day of judgment shall and will
acknowledge those which are his: saying to the^ Come you and possess the
kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world, for in my hu^gar,
you have given me to eat. etc. The mind of the prophet is: that by
innocence of life and pureness of mind we are acceptable and pleasant to the
Lord.

Although the prophet in this place makes no mention of faith, The prophet
speaks of ^orkes whi^^ do spring ^^rth of faith
but of good works only: yet (...) must think no less, but that (...)
speaks of those good works, which do proceed from faith. For what so ever
is (...) of faith (...) sin. Verily nom (...) good. That (...) in without
(...), nor yet ^^^keth ryghtuou^^. (...) an unfaithful mind (...) does work
or rather cou^terfette the works of the law. Dorkes with out faith.
Those me^ which in the Gospel said that they had prophesied, yt they had
cast forth deuyls, that they had done many virtues and miracles in the name of
Christ: Although that they did boste them of their good works, yet for all
that they are called the workers of iniquity: not yt the deed which they did
was evil, but because it was not done of faith. Also the works of the
pharasies being in their own kind good are condemned of Christ: not because
they were not good, but because they were done with out faith. Likewise in many
places of the prophets the sacrifices with oblations: holy days and other
worshyppynges of the Lord: are not esteemed but cast away: not that they be
evil works, but because they were not done by faith because they were not
agreeable to the word of god. For every thing which is done by faith is also
allowed and commended by the word of God. All thing not agteable to the word
of God is eupl.
Wherefore that thing can not be good which does differ from the word of God.

The text.
The which speaks verity in his heart.
To speak the verity and truth with the tongue, to work no gile to thy
neighbor, to deserve none opprobry or rebuke, to hate the wicked and to love
those which are godly, not to be forsworn, but to perform yt which thou
do swear, to healpe the needy with thy money without usury, and to judge
rightuously, al these in them selves are good deeds, but if they be done
without faith, The best works that meye be done being not done by faith are
disproued of the Lords.
before God they do leese the name of all Goodness. When that the prophet does
say, yt they which do keep all these, can never be removed nor taken away
from the tabernacle of God, and from the holy hyl of the Lord: He does include
also with these works faith: gyuynge us to understand that he speaks of those
works which are the proceedinges from a true faith, as the works of faith.
For without faith it is impossible to please the lord or to come to ever
lasting bliss. When thou do hear good works commended and praised in the
scripture: being no mention made of faith: thou must always conjecture and
^^ynke verily that by those good works are meant the works which do come and
spring of faith. To speak the verity, is to speak the thing as it is in
deed without gyle or craft, to keep touch in all thy promises and to do al
thing faith fully with a true and an unfeigned heart To speak the verity, is to
speak and to deal like an honest man, plainly and openly, without
dissimulation, fraud or gyle, without staterie, without all doublenes and with
a good heart. The Lord does require the inward pureness of heart, as well as the
outward.
By the law of God verity and truth is not alone required in our words and
promises, but thereto also to have a gentle heart, and a pure sincerity of
minds annexed and joined. For the verity and truth often times may be spoken
of those which be crafty and subtyl men: yea to the hurt of an other man.
The wicked will speak verity to hu^ their neighbors: and that they may be
believed the better when they do lie and speak false tales.
Therefore the Psalm does bid us speak the truth with heart not feinedly and
with a love not cou^terfeted. For the words or communication which is had
with out any dissimulatio^ of any part, and with a pure heart must be without
all gyle and craft. For they which be true me^ have that in their minds
which they do speak with their mouths, they do not give fair words
outward having a corrupt and a crafty mind.

The text.
He that has not Wrought gyle with histo^ge
By this sentence are reproved not only crafty and deceitful people which do
speak with their tongues, lies and false tales. But also al hypocrites which do
teach the word of God not with a pure mind, Hypocrites are here noted which
flatter for promotions and deceive the people with their false doctrine yea and
those which for promotions do teach the verity, deniyng it in their heart
which do not seek with all their hertes after the glory of God, and health
of the church, for the which the ministry of the word is instituted and
ordained: But to win the love and favor of the people, and seek after
their own commodity and profits, and such other things as wicked minds do
use to hunte after under the color and cloak of virtue and godly religion.
This kind of men with their mouth does speak the truth: but with their
hertes they do lie and tell falshod.

Where as our translatoure has turned and translated this word, to work gyle
and craft. In the Hebrew it is written: diffamed, accused, or backbited. The
tongue is given as all other members of the body, to set forth the glory of
God, the profit and wealth of thy neighbor, who that does use his tongue
otherwise: who that does with his tongue backebite his neighbor, who that
hurts his neighbors good fame and name, shall not rest in the holy hill of
the Lord, nor shall dwell in his tabernacle. It is yt duty of pure and perfect
charity to defend the good estimation of thy neighbor: The office of
perfect charity toward thy neighbor
to keep and mayteine love among men, much less to suffer thy neighbor to
be brought out of good name by sclaunders and diffamations, much less (...)
suffer any seeds of discord and debate to be sowed and thrown among men.

The text.
He that has not done evil to his neighbor.
That is to say, he that has dealte justly and louyngly with his neighbor,
which has hurt or hindered his neighbor in nothing, but with good turns
has helped him to the best of his power.

Who is our neighbor.
Our neighbor is called every man without exception because we are all the
creatures being the handiworke and made of one God, begot of one father,
because we are set in one felowshyppe in this world, as it were in one common
wealth, wherein one man has need of the others healpe, and counsel. Christ
does call the^ neighbors which have need one of the others aid and healpe
Not only our friends and them which we do love: but also our enemies must
be taken to be our neighbors, Wherefore, must we call our enemies, our
neighbors.
because that we are also commanded to love them by precepte and express
commandment.

The text.
Nor has not received and admitted any opprobrie and sclaunder against his
neighbor.
Likewise as good and goodly men do covet to have their own good fame and name
whole with out any manner of sclau^der among good men: even so they do defend
ye good name of their neighbor in their absence, nor wy^l suffer their good
fame to be minished with any sinister report, they will not give their ears, nor
herke^ to the voices of sclau^derous, and backebiting persons, they can not
suffer them. What is to say, not to receive opprobrie against thy neighbor.
Not to receive the opprobrie against their neighbor, is not to suffer nor
abide, nor be content with any thing that shall be spoken against their
neighbors honesty. They do offend, A godly man ought not to here his
neighbors spoken ill of
both he that does sclaunder and he also which does give ear and harkeneth to
his sclaunderouse words. For there is neither of them good, they be both
clean contrary to godly love, and perfect charity, which we do owe to our
neighbor, the one in speaking evil, the other in hearing of him with delight
thereat.

The text.
The wicked is brought to naught in his sight. Those which do fear him, he
does glorify.
That is to say, a godly man does not regard, nay, does esteem him as
nothing, which is a dispiser of God and his neighbor: although he be never
so excellent and pass all other never so much in wisdom, Riches and high
estimation in ^uys world ought not to be regarded in ungodliness: not the poor
despised, w^ts the do live and (...) the lord
in birth, in glory, and lordshippes, in riches and other such gaye things
which fortune uses to give. On the other side ye man which fears the lord
him he does louyngly embrace: he has him in good estimation: he uses him
reuere^tly, although in this world, he be never so pore, never so low and base
of blood, be he never so much an ^biecte, because he does love, and
reuerenseth God in him, likewise as in the wicked he did deteste and abhor
sin, The godl^e and wicked are Clean contrary: therefore they can not be
together without distimulation.
and so Satan the devil. God never would that the godly should be joined in
amity and friendshyppe with the ungodly. In the primityue and first age of
men, God did command and forbid that the children of the godly should
keep company with the children of men, that is to say, with those men, which
are al together given and addicted to this world. Also the Lord did warn the
Jews from the company and conversation of the gentiles. What is me^t by the
children of men in the scripture.
The apostles did forbid us that we should not say to the^ which are deceyuers
of men, so much as God speed, neither to have any manner of company with the
wicked: because there can be no good fellowship between the godly and the
ungodly, The godly is forbidden to keep company with the wicked.
no good mache of ryghtuousnes, and unrighteousness together: no fellow ship of
light and darkness, no co^corde nor love between Christ and Beliall, nor no
manner of consent between the temple of God and Idols. They be right contrary
the one to the other, virtue and vice, he that loves the one, can not chose
but hate the other. Here I would desire al christian men to mark and see:
how those men which can turn them into mo facio^s, then ever could Protheus
might, Those men which can (...) of Thrist.
which can work and strue for the place that they be in, for all seasons, all
manners of men, al affections, which will be familiar and friends with all
kind of men (they care not with who^) how vain they be, I say: how great
liars: how far from the truth: and finally how far from the kingdom of
God and from his holy hill they be. The godly here in this world, and al in
one commune wealth must live among the ungodly, therefore they can not clean
eschew and flee the company of the wicked. Moreover it shall not be lawful
for the godly sort to thrust forth of their abydynges the ungodly and wicked.
The evil will always do well among the good.
If so be, they be after a civil manner of facion good and honest, and not
blasphemous against God, private men, which have none authority to punish
must suffer and bear with their wickedness. Show no familiarity, nor love to
the wiched lest thou appear to allow and commend their wickedness.
But for to bear such love unto them, or to give to the^ such honor, as though
we should seem to allow and be content with their wickedness: that is not
comely, that is not meet for a christian and a godly heart. Therefore the
prophet did speak expressly, saying that the good men have and do count wicked
dispisers of God and of their neighbor: to be in their sight as nothing.
Although that for a public honesty and a good tra^quilitie or quietness in a
commune wealth: the virtuous sort do meddle or have to do with the wicked after
a cruil manner of trade and conversation: yet in their hertes, there is nothing
more detestable, more vile, and filthy then the wicked are to them: yea though
they do wear Skarlet: though they be decte with gold and precious stones,
because the godly does know them to be the enemies of Christ, the vile and
most wretched slaves of the Devil, of Satan, and the very bait of hell. The
godly do judge by the inward part and not by the (...) and outward.
The godly man does not judge and deem of men by their outward person and
behauour: but by their inward godliness and virtue, or by their righteousness,
which is from the heart: and contrary. Therefore he dispiseth the wicked men,
though they be cled with purple, and loves the godly, yea though they be al to
ragged. For those which be good men and fear the Lord, they are not only
precious in the eye of godly me^ but also the virtuous men do honor and
glorify them: what it is to glorify the godly.
that is to say, they do love them, they do reverence them, they healpe them,
and do for the^ those things, which perteyne to their estimation, dignity,
and profit.

Although that is sufficiently manifest and made open (as I think) by the
exposition and declaration of this verse, that the godly and christian men
ought not in any wise, live and keep company, nor to have any manner of
familiar conversation with the wicked (those I say) which do live wickedly
which do resist the word of God: yet, forasmuch as I do see, yea those men
which would seem to be godly in deed: that they do call and bid openly to
their feasts, to their marriage, banketynge, and into their daily
conversation, and company, not only to receive and admit such as are the
enemies of God, but also to seek after, and to labor for their love and
friendship to make friends to them to be in their favor, and that to their
own great damage and hurt of their health, to the damnation of their souls.
I thought it there fore both meet, convenient and necessari in this place, some
thing to speak and add to our exposition: concerning the argument and
matter: how that the godly ought not to keep company with the wicked, ^ette
not the ^odi^ in any^ wise compani^^yth the wi^^ed.
that by that means they may the sooner be brought from their wicked purpose,
and I in so doing may discharge my conscience and work health unto me. All
godly men ought to shou and voyed the conversation, company and resort of the
wicked no less then Satan him self, who^ they do know to be adversaries
unto the word of God, to be letters and hinderers of the setting forth of the
true religion of Christ obscurers and darkeners (as much as lies in them) of
the glory of God, and very enemies to all those things, which do perteyue
to our health and salvation. For they which do keep company with the
adversaries of Christ, and enemies of our true christian religion, they do
sin against the open and manifest word of God, they do differ from the
exemples of al godly and virtuous men, they do work against reason, against
the mind of al wise men, against natural honesty, yea against nature her
self, they do more hurt by their exemples, then the wicked with all their
wickedness might do, and become the occasion to many other, of eternal and
endeles forowes. The cause (...) the (...) should (...) from (...) con^pan^.
Except that such men by repentance do amend these faults: they shall heap
up to the^ their own distructio^, and at the last purchase eternal
damnation. This is not so light a matter as many men do think it to be. Men
the account and rekenyng shall be made and given up hereafter to the Lord: then
they which do make them selves so wise, because that under any color of
religion they have been familiar with the wicked, shall see, and perceive how
great a sin it is, to have their felowshyppe and to keep company with them.
There is no sobre and honest brain, but knows that it is an houge offense
to do any thing agayuste the word of God. But they which do keep company
with the wicked, do offend and transgress against the manifest word of god.
For the scripture does forbid and condemn al such manner of fellow ship, as
by the scriptures solowing shall be declared.

Paul to the Thessalon. the.ii. ii. Thessa. iii.
Epist. and iii. Chap. If any man do not obey our word by this our epistle:
mark him well, and company not with him that he may be confounded. ii.
Corhin. vi.
And the.ii. to the Corthin. and vi. Chap. Bear you no yoke with the
unbelief: go you forth from the myddest of them, be you separated from them
says the Lord, and touch none unclean: and I will take you up. Also the
first, 1. Torain. v.
Cor. v. If any man which is called a brother: be a whoremonger, a man given
to covetousness, a worshypper of Images, a brawler and a chidar, a dronkarde, a
thief, with such you shall not so much as once eat meat And Ecclesiasticus
says in the nynth Chapter. Ecclesiasticus (...).
With wise and prudent men have you to do, and let just men be thy gestes, at
thy table. Eccles^^. xxi.
Also Ecclesiasticus. xxi. Receive not into thine house an ungodly, and give to
the wicked no thing: forbid to give him bread. Paul to the To. xvi. Roma. xvi.
I do pray you brethren take heed and beware of them, which do make
dissension and sclaunders against the doctrine which you have learned: keep
you from them. And to Titus the third. Titus. iii
Voyed and shonne the company of an heretic after once or twice warning.
Math.xviii.
The Lord also in Mathe.xviii. shows us ye such persons ought to be to us
as Ethnikes and publicans. Saint John in his second Epistle says. If a man
comme to you and bring not this doctrine with him, that is to say, the
apostolical doctrine, receive him not in to yont houses, nor once salute him.
For who ye does say to him, so much as god speed: is pa^^aker of his ill
works. Behold I do give you warning before: because you should not be
confounded in the day of the Lord.

These testimonies of the scriptures do prohibit and forbid not only the
conversation and company of the wicked men, but also they do make the godly
guilty of other men's faults and sins, whose company they do use: showing
to us two necessary and profitable causes: wherefore this was commanded. For
what cause (...) the (...) of the wicked forbid (...).
The first cause is that the wicked, being expelled and put forth of the
company of the godly, may take shame: and so through shame be brought to
repent^unce and amendment. The second cause is, yt the godly should take none
infection through the conversation of the wicked. For as saint Paul does warn
and cou^ sell us by a certain verse (...) Menander: laying, evil
communication does corrupt and mar good manners. And wyckednes does creep
as a ca^ker gnawing round about as it goes hurtynge and bryngyng, foul
corruption thereto. And likewise as he that does touch pyche, is arrayed and
defiled therwyth, the pyche cleuynge to him, and also as the proverb does
teach us, they must needs learn to halte which dwell with the Devil, even so
they do degender from goodness and wax worse which do keep company with the^
which are ungodly.

Solomon in all manner of wise dome did pass and excel all other kings, Soloman
yet for all that by the company, and conversation of wicked wives, he was
brought into the detestable vice of Idolatry. So much churte may the
conuersasion of evil people do, wherefore the godly all that they can, must
forsake and flee there from: if they will keep them undefiled. Although that
our minds were so strong, steadfast, and surely stablished in godliness and
knowledge of God, that the company of them could not do us any manner of
hurt: yet for these causes we ought not to be co^uersaunt with them: The
co^^aundement of the Lord may be ble^^d with no cloak.
nor to contracte any manner of amity with them, because the Lord commands
the contrary, that we shall not do so, to the intent that we be not come
guilty of the sin of the wicked, with whom we do acquaynt our selves: and so
to bring upon us by our own fault the greuouse vengeance of the wrath of
the Lord. That the lord is nothing pleased: nay greatly disp^eased, that the
godly should keep company with the wicked: Iosaphat is ^eb^ked forco^ paning
with ^^hab. Para. xix.
the Prophet Iehu bears witness, which did rebuke Iosaphat the good and godly
king, because that wicked Achab (which was enemy to the Lord and he were
friends together, and because yt he did healpe that wicked man: the second of
Paralipo. xix. Also the Lord did stryke good king Iosaphat with great loss of
good men, because that he was in leage with wicked Ochozias. ii. Paral. xx. All
godly men always have voyded them selves from the company of the wicked,
iudgyng that such conversation should displease the Lord highly. The Jews
being learned and taught by the misery and miserable calamity, and
captivity of Babylon: what a grievous matt^ it is not to obey the lord: how
sore the Lord does punish and plage the disobedience to his word: when they
were returned and came again into the land of Iewrie, considering with the^
selves and weighing in their mind what an in tolerable delicte and offense it
was to use that company which was forbidden, they did put away their wives,
which were strangers, whom they did love excedingly well, from them, chosing
rather to put and send away both their wives and children, then against the
word of God to keep them company, the first Esdras. xi. xii. (...). xi. xii.


David in this Psalm among the chief benifites and orname^tes which the
godly has, does reken this to be the principal: that they shall dwell in the
tavernacle of the Lord, and that they shall rest in the holy hill, and that in
their sight the wicked are despised. Truly it is the chief praise that anse
godly man can have, nay he can have no greater, then that he can hertely
confess the Lord in all things, not to pass or regard the judgment of
men, to forsake and cast of the conversation and company of the wicked.

This verity and truth, a christian confession and knowledging of God does
require. He that neglects this, he does go back from his promise, he does
not profess ye religion of Christ as he ought to doinaye, he does dishoneste
this religion which against the word of God is friend with the wicked,
preferryng the love and amity of the ungodly before the precepte of God. David
did boste that he absented him self from the wicked.
Thus did David bost him self of the knowledge of God and of his word,
reioysyng that always he despised the love and favor of them, which were
ungodly: although he did it with great peril and danger. and that he would
always continue in that mind as by these words in the xxvi. Psalm appears:
saying, I have not sit in company with men, which are full of lies, and
falshod: and with them which do work unrighteousness, I will not enter in. I
have hated the congregation of the wicked, and with the ungodly I will not sit
down. I will wash my hands among them, which are innocent, and so will I go
to thine alter, O Lord. By these words of reioysynge what does David else
declare and show: but that it is both execrable and wicked, to be familiarly
and friendly conuersaunt with the ungodly, to talk with them, to seek for
their love and favor and to delight in their company.

Good Lord how shall they excuse them selves, what shall or ca^ these falfe
euangelical persons ley for them selves before God against the word of God
which is so manifest against the exemples of so many godly men, which for
lucre and their own carnal wealth in this great tribulation and affliction, or
rather in so houge and cruel persecution of the church do hunt after the love
and fanoure of the most wicked sort of Cardinals, bishops, and other high
prelates: yea monks, chanons and friars, not so much as six John and sir
William, with the poor Requiem priests, unto the very dregs and most
vilest and stinkyng sort of the popish kingdom of Antechriste, omitted and
neglected? If they will make this excuse for them selves: saying, that they do
no harm and are good me^ them selves. I will answer to them again and say. If
they be good men: Against false Gospel preachers which do flatter with the vice
of me^
wherefore do not they obey to the word of God: wherefore do they live in the
wicked fellowship of the ungodly: for what cause do they (as well as the
other) favor and mainteyne pharisaicall and popish superstitions: finally why
do they with the adversaries of God, allow, stablish and confirm the cruel
tiranuie of the Romish Antechriste? It is not enough to say with words, that
they do embrace virtue and godliness, and not to follow, or rather in their
deeds openly to deny it. Verily it is necessary that our words and deeds
be according to our mind, and our mind with our words and deeds all one:
so that our mind do not differ from the lively word of God. There be many
papists which when they be at feasts and bankettes, (...) those (...) cloked
(...).
when they do co^me^ with these men or those men, who^ they do know to love the
Gospel of the lord: outwardly ca^ show a fair face, and with a gaye look can
cover and hide their deuelish thoughts and minds laid up in the deep
stinkinge dongelle of their stomakes. But when the matter of our religion, of
our salvation, of ecclesiastical ministration, and ministers, most godly
ordained and instituted: of the right use of the goods of the church, of the
popish Symony to be redressed, of gyuynge of the ordres of the church to the^
which are meet and able to receive them: of the reformation of the vicious
living of the clergy, with other bold and whorishe facions of them: is
earnestly communed of, for a reformation: then do they stand up and bend their
selves directly against the word of God (whereunto all things ought to give
place) then do they allege against the word of God their most wicked and
damnable vows, What allegations do the papists use against the word of god
their oaths which they have taken, their liberties, francheses, privileges,
the grauntes of Emperors and kings, the decrees of counsels, the ordinances
of their Elders, the processes which have paste in judgments, customs, old
facions, the decrees of the commune law, but what decrees? Those truly which
do make and serve for their purpose, to the mayntenaunce of their Papisticall
liberty of their unjust gaynes and lucre, not those whereby the ministers of
ye church were well governed and ruled in the old time and yet myghtebe, with
such other Popish and monstrous objections for the defense of their
wyckednes. And when they be a shamed to behold and see their shameful
abomination so manifesse that all the wrolde does perceive it, then they do
make as though they were sorry for it, they do lament it with counterfeited
syghes, they do wyshe and desire that there might be a good redres for such
things as are a miss. The which, though they do desire in deed, yet the
self same desire does declare, that they be ungracious and wicked hypocrites,
because that the word of God is of more authority then the decrees of
counsels, which decrees are clean wypte away and made voyed, when they be
against the sacred and holy doctrine of the lord. Wherefore then do they
allege, ley for them, and cloak their wyckednes, with the authorities of
counsels? All popish decrees and canons they do allow and commend but those
which are the decrees of Christ and his apostles, they ca^ not abide to hear
once named. What avails to be prolix and long in rehearsal of all their
popery, of al their crafty iudgeling. They are nothing else but clokes and
colors, wherwyth gladly they would deceive and begile ye church. I do bequeth
them to the^ selves, let them play the crafty merchants as long as the
lift.

This I am sure of, yt in the whole popish covent there is not one from the
highest to the lowest, with who^ a godly man without offense and displeasure of
the Lord, can be conuersaunt and keep company, because they are adversaries
to Christ to his verity and ordinances, they are enemies mortal unto his
church, because they be nothing better then bealy beasts, spendyng and
co^s^myng the patrimony and goods of ye church in all kind of ydlenes and
abominable fyithines of life, After this facion has the popish army
teiumphed in England against God and his church many yetes.
with sword, with fire, with gebbet, with rack, with all kind of tira^ny,
defendyng that the goods of the church should not be distributed according
to the true use wherefore they were ordained and given. Tell me now thou false
eua^gelical man what so ever thou art, with what conscience or right can thou
be in amity and love with a papist which is the enemy both of God and man?
how can thou keep him company and offend not? with what cloak can thou
illude and put away the testimonies of the scriptures and exemples of other
godly men? what excuse can you make to God, which is a rightuous judge,
which knows the hertes of all men and judges ryghtuously? Woe shall be to
the. Thy part and portion shall be with the wicked Popish Hypocrites, which do
lean and bear thy self on a staff of reed as the prophet says which shall
go through thy hand, and confound the, and thou shall have thy worthy reward.

There, Under the ^olo^^ of (...) ^ie and good behauour they w^^ cloak their
wickdnes cal^^ng it good man^^.
be which do color and paynt their wicked conversation with the color of
honest civility and good manner: saying, that it is good manner to show
reverence and to give honor to the^ though they be ungodly: yea, and they
were the enemies of Christ. Some do cloak it with co^sanguinitie and nighnes of
blood, alledgynge their kynred. Some do dream on the great profits and
benifites, which they have received at their hands before time. And finally
how many can you find, I pray you, of these godly desposed, which ca^ not
find one hole or other to escape out of, which can not find one thing or
other to mittigate and swage their offenses: if they do perceive yt they are
not able to make their matter good? But what do they else, then manifest and
make open their own impiety, being no less the^ impiety and wyckednes to
prefer good manners and facions of men before the commaun dement of God? But
these godly men: I would that they would tell me: for what cause. Whetfore
excommunication was ordained
Christ did institute and order in the church, the pain of excommunication.
By what authority and law durst Paul be so bold to give yt man to the
Devil, which was found guilty of fornication: wherefore should he cast and
expulse him forth of the company of the godly i. Corhin. v.
men, if it had been lawefull for the^ to be conueri^aunt and familiar with the
wicked and ungodly? What was in Paul his mind to command the Corhinthes that
they should not mixte the^ selves nor take any meat with a whoremo^ger, with a
man given to covetousness, with an Image worshypper: with a brawler, with a
dronkarde and such other kind, of men, which not repentyng do stand still in
their sin against the precepts and commau^deme^tes of the Lord, and yet for
all that will be called brethren.

Yet thou will say peradventure, that the Popish priests, monks, chanons,
by shoppes and other like of that affinity be not brethern But thou art
deceived. For they will be called Christian men: yea, they would appear to
men's eyes double christen men so religious, so holy that it is not possible
more. They do feyne them selves to be the pillars of the church. The^ must
they needs be comprehended and contained within the limits of the name of
brethren, and so called brethren. And for as much as they be christian men
and willing to appear before men's eyes none otherwise: it does perteine to
us to give judge me^t of them, to dryne them forth of the company of the
godly, and to flee their conversation as long as their manners, lives and
teachinges be evil and contrary to the word of God. Let the friends of the
ungodly, invent, feyne, ymagin, think and devise what color and pretense
that they ca^ to cloak their wickedness with: this one thing I am sure of, that
they which are joined in amity with such deuelishe and cursed people, which do
give any manner of honor to the^, which do give the high places, seats, and
vpperhande to them, which have them I say in any manner of estimation: that
for so doing they can make none excuse to the Lord, yt will or may be
allowed, because they do and work of a set purpose, for the nonce, and
wyllyngly against God, and his commandment, they do participate the sins
of other men. Wherefore except they do repent, although they do seem outwardly
virtuous and godly: yet shall they perish as well as the manifest and open
workers of evil. Such as are well apayed with the company of the wicked, they
do make a light thing of the contempt of the Lord, as though it were a
trifull or a very small matter: or else they would not delight so much in the
conversation of that cursed generation of the papists as they do: wherefore
they shall not rest in the hill of the Lord: nor shall dwell in his
tabernacle.

What do we speak of the testimonies of the scriptures? The very natural
reason of man does much disalowe and improve the conversation of such
ungracious, vngedly, and maliciously disposed people: our natural reason does
affirm these also to be the enemies of God and of Christ, Natural reason
teaches us to voyed the company of the wicked.
high treason workers to the church of God, haters and dispisers of al godliness
and of the health of our souls, which do seek to be acquainted and familiar
with the wicked because they do join them selves to them, and so hold up,
confort, aid, and strength them, which are the manifest open enemies of God
and Christ: the cruel enstrumentes of the Deuy^l, furious, mad; and ragynge
enemies of the church the plage and pestilence of our health, persecutours of
all virtue, mockers and scoffers of al godliness, which are so far gone beyond
al shame, yt they doubt not openly to resist the word and ordinances of God,
living as all men may see in all abomination of life. The natural love and
favor that we do bear to our parents and to our country does detest and
abhor the company of those men, (...) goodly similitude pro^i^ing by a less
that which is more.
which have done any foul displeasure to them, or have wroughte any manner of
hurt to the country, by what reason then can a godly and virtuous man abide
the syghte (much less the company) of those me^, which with opprobrious
words do burdene and lade down the word of God the Gospel of Christ,
which do hyndre it as much as is in them from doing of profit to the flock
of Christ, which do always lie in watch to hurt the health of the church:
which do detest and obhorre the lovers and friends of God and of Christ,
worse then any dog or snake: which in open co^te^^pt of the Lord do wallowe
like swine in all kind of mischefe. Thou shall be of God, and al godly men as
much praised for keepyng company with such manner of people: as if thou had
kept company with the Devils good grace him self, whose galla^t capitaines and
soldiers they be. There can be nothing thought more unjust, more vile, then
to company thy self with such as be the adversaries of our Lord and
sovereign savior Jesus Christ, of his church, and to have them in any manner of
estimation, which do not regard our christian religion, wiche do loeth the
obedience and keepyng of the precepts and commandments of the Lord. The
wise men of the gentiles thought it meet to love and favor their friends, so
long as they touched no^ the alt are (yt is to say) so^onge as their Gods who^
they worshipped were not dishonored thereby, The infidel^s ^ferred their
^eligio^ before ^ll friendship.
preferring their vain religion (such as it was) before all manner of
friendship of men. The christian men are much worse, more wicked then the
gentiles, which ca^fynde in their heart to love and favor them, which are open
enemies to Christ, and his religion, which can find in their heart to play
the hypocrites with the wicked and open stynkynge papists, colourynge and
clokyng their detestable impiety and traitorie against God. To conclude the
whole matter in few words, such men as will play on both the hands are not
worthy to be called christians.

If thou do go this way to work (you will say to me) the^ you shall make
Christ not to be Christ, of himself, said yt he was made all thing to all
manner of men: to the weak, weak, to the Jews: as a Jew, to the gentiles,
which were without a law, as a gentil without a law Wherefore may not we do as
Christ and his Apostle Paul did. To this cauillation I do answer, that
neither Christ nor Paul did keep any company with them that were obstinate
and stubburne wicked. When they were among the wicked, they knew well yt they
should win some of them to God. As Paul declared merueilous well, Wherefore
did Christ and his apostles keep compa^y with the wicked, and what sort of
wicked they were.
saying, that he was to al men after al their facio^g: not to be wray and
betray the christian religion, not to creep into the bosom and favor of the
impenitent and desperate sort: for his owe profit, (as many eua^gelical
brethern use for to do) but that he might do some good among them, that he
might win some of them again, and so cause the^ to be saved. He compares
the conuersat^on of those which will company with the wicked papists, with the
conversation of Christ and his apostles with the wicked together, whether boeth
their conuersations were to on end and effect, yea or nay.
Which of al these things do those which be the friends of the Papists: as
Christ and his Apostles did? When did they at any time go about earnestly to
bring the^ from their popery to prof^sse Christ I will not say all that I
think? They dare not be so hold as once to mewe or open their lyppes to
confess and openly knowledge that thing, which they do think: nay, for
fear of their displeasure, for fear lest their hoke, which they do fish
with al should come empty away: they be glad and dilligent to say, as the
wicked do say: they do hold the wicked up with yea and nay. These flatterers
with the wicked do allege Christ and his Apostles for the^ little to their
honesty. Christ and his Apostles kept company with sinners and transgressors
of his will, to the intent that he might erecte, build up, and increase his
church. These hunters after promotions do betraye and destroy the church,
Hu^ters after promotions.
they do nourish in their common wealths al mischief and wickedness: they do
give courage to the enemies of the Gospel, to persist and stand fast in their
deuelishe purpose and unclean kind of life. If the Popery had not such
patrones, If the popish had not beaters: they would have, o^ this time ben
more gentle and same.
defenders, and conforters, it would remitte and sink down some thing their
abominable impiety: and from their great licencious manner of living they would
show themselves outwardly some thing more honest and godly. But now when
that they do see that great men do favor them, and are glad to seek for their
friend ship, and some other to get promotions and fat benifices at their
hands, they do tempre and harden their stomakes with steel against Christ the
Lord, against his church: they do bear them selves bold on the favor and
healpe of their friends against God and man. If that the church be any
thing bound and beholding to the friends and favorers of the Popish sect:
truly it is beholdynge for nothing else, nay, for nothing so much, as that
they be the cause, wherefore the papists do persist and continue so stubburnly
in their impiety and mischeuous contempt of God and man. For this good deed
and turn that they do to the church: let the^ appear before Christ, which
is judge of the dead and of the quick, let them prove, if they ca^ deceive and
begile him with any of their prete^sed holiness, with any color of civility or
honest facion, Under thy^ color, to keep the commune wealth from sedition
the Papists have holden up their pope (...) and idola^^^^, and that of long
t^me
with any cloak of keepyng the comune wealth in an unity or concord and love,
from sedition and tumultes as they do use to bleare the communes eye (yea and a
degree higher) to cover their impiety and wy^kednes of mind, to ley a cloak
(...) the rain, as the Proverb speaks. This matter is so plain and open to
all men's eyes, that it needs me not to stand any longar therein: But I do
exhort with all my heart: and for the love of God do most earnestly pray and
beseech the godly sort to voyed and shun the company of the wicked that they
do not fall into the hands and displeasure of the living God: which will be
avenged of their impiety and ungodliness, both of the one, and of the other,
that they be not, I say, made worse by the acquayntaunce and conversation of
the wicked, that they take none enfection of them. For like wise as the commune
diseases and sickness of the body do poison and infecte other bodies by touching
or being over nere unto them: as the pox by drinking, and to nigh lyinge one
body to an other, the plage of the pestilence by taking air and the breath
of him, which is infect: the leprosy by the co^uer sation with the leprose
persons, is gotten: even so the infection of the mind, by familiar and
frie^dly co^uer satio^ does creep as it were into the hertes of the^ which be
clean, and poysoneth that which was pure and without al manner of corruption.
Such people, as we do^ company and acquaynt our selves with al: such do we
grow unto, and as the greek verse gives us warnyng: saying. Evil company if
thou do use: godliness will the refuse. For likewise again, as it is
impossible that the virginity of a chaste and honest maiden, being conuersaunt
in places of ill and naughty resort, with stro^pettes and harlottes, should
not be the worse thereby, nor nothing defiled: even so it is impossible, that
a godly man in deed can delight in the company of the wicked, himself being
never the worse man. The poison of ungodliness is so subtle, that it creeps
into a ma^or he beware, much sooner then any corporal disease from one body into
an other. What merueyle is it, if it be so? for as much as Satan than is so
diligent to lay his fire brandes, and red burning coals together to kyndle
and set on flame the deadly poison, which he has instilled into our hertes,
making us more hot then any coals to all kind of mischief. Let this be
sufficiently spoken for this time (I pray the) ye thou may take heed and
beware of the company of the wicked.

The text.
He that swereth evil and does not change.
To swear and not to deceive: is to perform with a good faith, all that thou
haste by thine oath promised. The greek and the latin version differs much
from the Hebrew. For the Hebrew in the place of this word, in latin called
proximus, which is in English a neighbor, has this word, malum, yt is to
say, ill. The which difference comes by the reason that often time one word
of the Hebrews in writing is much like unto an other. For both these words in
writing and in the nu^bre of letters with the Hebrews has no manner of
difference, saving one little title or point: this word, Ra, being as much to
say, as evil, and Resignifiyng a neighbor, a friend a fellow. Wherefore an
ent^rpreter or an expositour may sone be deceived in this place: except that
some of the Hebrew books, when this translatour lived had Ra for Re, which is
most lykest to be true. I do think yt this translation, diverse expositours and
tra^slators have not used for two causes. The one because it seems to have a
certain absurdity in it, to swear evil and to keep an oath ^n an ill
thing, the other cause, ^hynkynge that the prynters in their printe did sail
and printed one thing for an other. But fo^owe which thou wylt, either the
Hebrew manner of speakinge or the latin phrase, it makes no matter which thou
do follow. For if the writing of ye Hebrew in this word be expounded after
the mind of the holy scripture, boeth lessons shal^s al one, neing no
difference between the Hebrew word and the latin, but yt the Hebrews do speak
more plainly, more openly then the latins: declarynge how and after what
manner oaths are to be kept and observed, and whether it is necessary that
oaths be kept, when that he that makes the oath shall receive thereby
disprofite, loss, and hurt. We do not swear only to man, When we do swear
our oath is made to God.
but also we mak^ our oaths to God: therefore the Hebrew speaks of al oaths
generally, both of the^ which are mad^ to God, as well as them, which we do to
man.

In this place, this word malu^ which is euyli does not signify that which
is before god unrighteous and unjust, or that thing which is forbidden by the
law of god: How this word eust is to be taken in the scripture: when we say
the Lord did make evil Esaie. xlv.
but it signifies that thing, which brings by any manner of way, disprofite
to him that swereth, the which disprofite me^ use communely tocal evil. As
Esaie xlv. The Lord makes peace and creates ill. And Hieremie. iiii. I
wylbrynge evil from the mouth and great heuines. Hieremy. iiii.
And Amos. iii. There shall be no evil in the city which the Lord has not
made. Amos. iii.


The Prophet in this Psalm does discuss this question of making of oaths,
being the hardest and that which has most difficulty of all questions
which do perteyne to this matter, that is to say: whether a man be bound to
keep and perform that thing which he has sworn to: although it be
hurtful and unprofitable to him self, which did swear: yea or nay. Whether a
man is bound to keep his oath, if it be against his profit.
He does affirm that no man by any means ought to break his oath, yea in
those things, wherein a man shall receive damage and hurt, so that the hurt
and disprofite be not so great but that it may be borne, and tolerable.
Because yt many questions have been moved concerning the making of Oaths:
therefore briefly (as I may) I will speak some thing of them in this place,
to satisfy and infourme the consciences of men therein.

These be the questions which do follow.

The first question.

Whether it be lawefull, and standing with the law of God to put a man to his
oath, and the man to swear for any manner of cause.

The second

Whether a man be bound to keep his oath: if it be prejudicial to him self.

The third.

Whether an Oath which is made, the name of God not being added thereto does
bind him which does make the oath, yea or nay?

The fourth.

Whether we be bound of necessity to keep all oaths that we do make, yea or
nay.

The fifte.

Whether that all men with out exception be bound to keep their oaths once
made.

The solution of the first question.

The controversies which are so doubtful, and that by witnesses they can not
be made an end of^ the Lord commands to search forth the truth by
putting of men to their oaths, and so to finishe their debate and striefe in,
Exodus xxii. Exodus xxii.
By this precepte the Lord does not only admit and require the manner of
swerynge, as a thing necessary and expedient in all courts: but he does also
allow and commend the manner of deposyng on a book or sweryng (as they use to
call it) which has been used in necessary causes, Oaths have been taken from
the beginning
even from the beginning in all ages. For it was the custom from the first
beginning to confirm and ratefie their bargains, their byinges and sellynges,
their leages of amity and love, and also to end al causes, debates and
striefes, by a certain manner of swering. The history shall hear witness.
For in the time of Abraham all matters that were of any value, were ended by an
oath. The Lord commanded the magistrates to put men to their oaths for y^
finishing of debates, gyuing power beth to take and for to examine the oaths of
them, whom they had before them. Therefore all that is written in the laws
according to good reason, concerning the gyuynge and taking of oaths by the^,
which have power and authority, on conscience, it ought to be observed and
kept. For God him self taking and making an oath by him self: did confirm
his promises, God confirmed his promise with an oath.
which he did make to ye fathers. Christ, Moses, the Prophets, and the
Apostles did often times use to swear in confirmation of their doctrine. The
angels opening the secrets of things., which were to come did swear,
because the people should believe those revelations to be true, that they
would come to pass as they had declared. Daniell. xii. Apo. x. Daniel. xii.
Apocal. ^.
The patriarthes did exact oaths of me^, and swear also their selves to other
again. Abraham caused the stuarde of his house for to swear that he should not
take a wife for his son forth from among the Cananistes. Gene. xxiiii.
Abraham first and Isaac after him, did make their leages with Abimeleche,
co^firmyng it with an oath. Gene. xi. xxvi. The Patriarche Jacob caused his
son Iosephe to swear, that when he should go forth of Egypt, he should take
and carry his body thence also with him. Gene. xlvi. David did with an oath
ratify and confirm the leage which he made with Ionatha the son of Saull,
the first book of the kings and. xx. Chap. Also the Lord commands that we
should make our oaths in his name and none other. Deuteronomy vi Exodus xxiii. Psalm.
lxiii.
Deuteronomy. vi. x. Exodus xxiii. and Psalm. lxii^ witnesses that they are commended
which do take in their oath God for witness. Hereby it is manifest that in
good, honest, necessary and profitable causes, me^ may be put to their oath,
and they the^ selves swear not hurtynge their conscices. To take and make an
oath, of it self is not unlawful. Yea to swear in just causes, taking of
God to witness, it is a worship and honor to the Lord, to take the Lord as
a just judge, which does love all equity and justice, which does behold
and see all thing, for to be witness in the cause. What is it to take the
Lord to witness.
Likewise as it is dishonor and dispite to the Lord, to take wytnes on any
other gods: so it is, to his honor and praise to be taken to be sworn by,
and an oath to be made in his name in a iustecause. It can not be unlawful,
that which the Lord him self did make and ordeyne to be required of men.
That ca^ not be but exceeding good, whereof Christ his Angels, the Prophets,
Apostles, and holy patriarchs left to us exemples for to follow, the end whereof
is honest profitable, and necessary in this life. But where as Christ in
Mathewe the.v. Chap. How are the words of Christ to be understand. Mat.v.
which is against swerynge.
does command us, that we shall swear in no wise: it is to be understand of
these commune oaths and swerynges, which men use to swear without need,
necessity or commandment: sweryng and staryng at every word like men which
are mad, fra^tike and beside them selves, dishonouring highly the name of the
lord having his majesty in small reverence or none. Those oaths are prohibited
of Christ, which are not requisite to be had in the common and familiar
speech among men when they do use to talk together, without the which oaths
al their communications may be ended with yea yea and nay nay. What so ever
is more then our plain assertion or denial, in our private talking one with
an other: it comes of evil says the Lord, and therefore he does forbid
it. To take an oath to the honor and glory of the lord and profit of thy
neighbor in honest, just, profitable and necessary causes, it is law full and
godly: if it were not godly and lawefull, then Christ him self, his Angels,
Apostles, Prophets and Patriarchs should be said to have done evil in that
they did swear in profitable, necessary and honest causes: which were very
wickedly spoken.

Christ does not take away the authority, nor breaks the civil laws and
orders concerning the exactyng and taking of oaths, he does not make a new
law, he does enterpretate and expound the old law. He does condemn, When
is sw^ryng forbidd^
vain, idle, rash, unprofitable, and not necessary oaths. And this is no new
thing. For such manner of swerynge has been always, yea among the old and
ancient fathers, forbid, improued and abhorred. As in the.xvi. and.xvii. Chap.
of Jesus Syrache it is manifest and plain to see. The Jews at that time when
Christ was borne, Of this opinion are all our common swerers.
were of that opinion and presumption, that all manner of oaths, if they were
not made in the names of idolles and strange gods were lawefull and without
offense, so that in their swerynge they did not forswere them selves, and so
fall into perjury, which was syn and none other, as they did think. The
which opinion Christ did improve and refute, teaching us that al oaths which
are made not of necessity and compulsion are wicked and unlawful, because the
glory of god is blemished thereby, which commands, yt we should not take his
name in vain. Deuteronomy.v.
Deutero.v. The teaching and doctrine of Christ may not be laid against
the law of God given forth by Moses, nor yet against honest civil
ordinances: but against the false opinion of the Jews, which did think the
abusyng and taking of the name of God in vain, to be no sin, per suadyng
also to them selves that God was not dishonored nor dipleased, if they did
swear by the creatures. Christ in the.v. chap. of Mathewe does expound the
law of god, he does not abolishe and take it clean away. Wherefore the
Catabaptistes do rage folishly and madly in studiynge in the contrary part:
holdyng opinion that no oath ought or can be exacted and taken of any man for
any cause, without offenses and hurt of conscience: for as much as by that we
have before declared: it is evident that men way be put to their oaths and
also swear with a good conscience in profitable and necessary things. To
declare the truth by an oath as often as the truth otherwise can not be
known, is never offense. To be forsworn, always is sin, whether it be the
oath, being compulsed, or else volu^tary. Beware of periutie.
The Lord does forbid and punishes all oaths wrongfully made, which is
perjury. As for necessary oaths in time of need, he does not prohibit.
Therefore their doctrine which teach yt an oath can in no case, be either
exacted or made with out sin, is deuelishe, blasphemous, wicked and deadly:
because that in so saying it does reprehende and accuse God and Jesus Christ
with his Angels, of sin, for they did swear. The law of god requires oaths:
Christ does not break the law of God. Ergo Christ breaks not the order
of oaths.
They do make Christ a liar, which said that he came not to break the law,
but to fulfill it. The law does requie and commands oaths to be exacted of
men, for the setting men together in unity for the dissoluynge and ending of
doubtful matters hanging in controversy before judges. That doctrine of
them, does make Christ him self, to be an enemy of God and an vndoar of the
commune wealths, which does take away the laws, which the Lord did make to
the conservation and mainteinaunce of the fellowship and godly unity of men,
and maynteynau^ce of civil orders made and instituted for a good and godly
purpose.

As touching the second and third question this is my mind and judgment.

Christ commands that all our words and communication shall be, yea yea,
nay nay. He does also require of us in things which are lawful always to
keep our promise, how so ever it be made. It follows then yt he will not
have yt thing broken: which was promised and confirmed with an oath. All our
communication ought to be firm, stable, and certain: much more every laweful
oath ought to be kept unbroken. We are the sons and children of God.
Likewise as God our father is, in all his promises, faithful and true: so it
becomes us which are his children to be in all our sayings and deeds, be it
by oath, or otherwise, just and true. Every oath that we do make, in whose
name so ever it be, be it in the name of god or any of his creatures, it must
not be broken.

Christ in Mat. xxiii. does reprehende the Pharasies, because they did make a
distinction and a difference between oath and oath for his names sake (by the
which name of god men used to swear) saying that this oath ought to be
observed and kept, yt oath ought not, as the things whereby they did swear,
were esteemed and had in price^ Nothing protitable: which is not honest.
Oaths ought to be judged and regarded according as they be honest and
profitable, not after the names whereby they are taken and made. That thing
which is profitable must be denied by that which is honest: for other wise
it can not be profitable, except it be also joined and annexed to honesty. If
it be lawefull and honest, yt thing which is trowed or promised by oath, that
same oth^ so made and taken must be kept. It makes no matter by what thing
the oath is made. By the breaking of an oath: the Lord is dishonored.
For the glory of god is never poluted and stained, but by the breaking thereof:
as often as thou do not perform that thing, whereto by thine oath thou
have bound the: or when that thing is false, which thou haste sworn to be
true. Less harm to stele a chalice then to break ^hyne oath. ^
To break oaths made in lawful and honest things: no age, no not the
Ethnikes were not so blyude, but they thought it high sacralege. They which
were the friends of god had always oaths which were lawefully made, in such
estimation: that they always preferred the fayethfulnes of their promise in
their oath before any commodity or profit. Iosue kept promise with the
gabionites according to his oath which he did swear to them, Iosue.
though they caused him to swear by craft and gyle to the damage and hurt of
the people of Israel, having in more price and estimation the holiness of an
oath, then all the earthly and civil profit and commodity which he might have
by breakyng thereof. Saul.
Saull afterward did break the leage which was made and stablished by an oath
between Israel and the Gabionites, for the which breach of leage and not
keepyng of the oath, he was punishhed with hunger and with the death of his
children. The second book of the Kings. ii. Reg. xxi.
xxi. chapter. David did swear to Saul, that he would not distroy his seed and
kindred: wherefore he did patiently abide and suffer as long as he lived (not
without great peril of his life) Semey and other seditious men of the family
and household of Saull, chofynge rather to keep the oath which he did make to
Saul: the^ by the death of them to win to him self the kingdom. i. Regu^.
xiiii. i. Reg. xiiii.
^onathas also putting his life in great danger, did keep the leage which
he promised being ratified by oath, with David. i. Regu^. xx. Also
notwythstandyng that the oath which the Israelites did make with the Beniamites
concerning the deliueryng of their daughters to them for to be their wives,
was very unprofitable and vnpleasante to them: yet because they would not
break the oath which they did make to them, to healpe them in their
necessity, granted to them that they should take at their pleasures forth of
y^ Israelites their daughters to be their wives. Judges. xxi. Judges. xxi.
Such was the reverence they had to their oaths: that they regarded neither
pain nor profit, nor no kind of pleasure of this life: in comparison to the
estimation thereof. The self same thing declares this Psalm, which does
exclude and shut forth from the kingdom of God those which do swear evil
and change, which do set more by eart^ly profits and pleasure, the^ by the
oaths which they have made. As for perjury can not be made good, whether thou
takeste pleasure or peynes therefore: because the Lord has forbidden it:
whereby his glory is hurt, and his name dishonored, which we ought to have
in more price and reverence, then any thing else in the world, the^ all worldly
goods. They are without doubt periurous and very wicked persons, which do
hold opinion and contend that me^ ought not to keep promise or perform
their oath, Whether an oath made to an infidel ought to be kept and
petfourmed.
which they have and do make with an infidel, with a Curke, with a Jew, with
any other enemies of our christian religion. For in a civil and a laweful
matter, if the person be an infidel or never so much wicked to who^ a man
makes a pro^ise or an oath: the wickedness and the infidelity of the man ca^
not excuse thine offense in breakyng of thy promise and oath. Like wise as the
wythdrawing of obedience due to a magistrate, because he is ungodly can not be
without sin, even so the promise which thou haste made with an infidel can
not be broken without sin. Lawefull oaths which are made wherein none
unlawful thing is promised nor demanded no man may violate and break For
by the law of God al perjury is forbidden and prohibited utterly. The Lord
has declared unto us often times by the heavy destruction of a great number of
the christians, The Lord does punish breakers and violatours of oaths.
yt oaths broken ca^ not be unpunished. The Curke has subdued the christian
men for their perjury, by the indignation and wrath of God, mon then by power
and arms. The miserable disconforte and calamity of zedechias might be
warnyng enough to us, how to keep our oaths vnbroke^, to who^ so ever they be
made: be he never so wicked an enemy. How the Lord punishes Zedechias for
breakyng of his oath.
For he was grievously punished for breakyng of his promise made with an oath:
and for not keepyng of the leage: his own children being killed before his
own face, his own self brought captive into Babilo^ and his eyes plucked
forth of his head. iiii. Reg. xxv. and Ezec. xvii. There ca^ be no more spite
nor contumely done to the Lord, then that his people should be taken to be a
leage breakar and a periurous people. Therefore he does punish sharply those of
his people which do net set by their oaths and promises. The Lord commands
that we shall not lie nor be in no case perjured or forsworn. He threate^neth
also: Me are forbidden to lie: ^uche more to for swear
that it shall not be unpunished, if any man does take his name in bayne:
whereby he does declare that it is he him self and none other which takes
vengeance of perjury. Therefore they are foul deceived, which do flatter their
selves and think that so great blasphemy to the Lord in perjury and
breaking of promises shall not with most grievous punishments be looked on, and
that sharply. The scripture does witness, that perjury and falshead in
promises be punished with curses both spiritual and corporal, as in zacha. v.
and. viii. and in the book of wisdom. xiiii. chap. Neither Pope, Cardinal,
Bishop, nor all their counsels, No man can despence wtt^ an oath lawe^ fulli
made.
nor any other power of men: no not the angels of heaven can make frustrate,
voyed and undo an oath lawfully in law full things made. As for oaths made in
unlawful matters, they need no dispensation: for they are of them self
dispensed with. To abide by it: there is no greater to ke^ in the world to
prove the seat of Rome to be the kingdom of Antichrist, then because it has
and does us to dispense with kings and princes, How you may: know that the
seat of Rome is the kingdom of Antichrist.
that they may break most godly promises made, and ratified most devoutly
with sole^pe oaths taken and given on boeth sides, which uses, I say, to
cause subjects to break their obedience and bound duty to their most
natural princes, with their dispensations and abominable absolutions and
altogether to stablishe and make strong their tirannical kingdom,

To the fourth question: whether that al manner of oaths are to be performed
and kept: and also whether that all vows what so ever they be, without any
exception, being once made are not to be broken, but to be observed and kept.
^owes whe^herthei are to (...) kept, yea or ^age.
The spirit of the Lord witnesses in this Psalm that they shall not rest in
the holy hill of the Lord which do swear evil and change. Therefore we must
take heed and diligently beware what oaths and what manner of vows they be,
which may be broken, left undone or changed with a good conscience and with
out dishonourynge of the Lord. In this matter we must work wisely and
discretely. For we may not think that all manner of vows without exception,
at all auentures may be broken, or else left undone. For likewise as oaths
which are of faith are to be kept even so it is requisite and reason, that
according to faith, they may be either changed, or left undone. Otherwise as
well the one as the other, that is to say: Vows made not of faith, and
according to the word of God be sin.
both the taking of an oath and making of a vow: as well as the not
perfourmynge of it is sin, because it is done or made against the word of
God and to his dishonor, all that which is done without faith. To show and
certify you what thing is that which is done with out faith: How to know
what bows are of faith
is al manner of things whereof thou can not certify thy conscience to be
godly and lawful by the word of God.

There be two kinds of oaths and vows: either those things be laweful or
unlawful, which are sworn and promised by vow. Those which be unlawful, ^s
they ought not to be promised, Two kinds of vows
neither by oath nor vow: so ought they not to be kept. For it is great
wyckednes and obomination to swear or to vow that thing which is evil: and
much more wicked to perform that thing which thou haste sworn or vowed,
which is for to continewe and stand still in sin.

Of the first kind of oaths and vows, which be unlawful and wicked, and
ungodly, are those which are made against ye word of god, against the faith of
Christ against the oath which thou have made to Christ in Baptism, against
the commune wealth and honesty, against the laws, which for conscience sake we
ought to reverence, with all fear and godly obedience. Here may you see a
googly sort of vows.
Such oaths and vows are those, which me^ do make when they do swear and vow
the death of a man, the maymyng and taking away of one membre or other of his
body, Malicious vows.
the undoing of him, to rob this man or ye man, to steel his good from him,
to play the usurer, sweryng and flaryng, Touetous ^^wes.
that thou wylt not let thy money forth of thy power to no man with out great
enterest and profit to swear and to vow that thou will not do this thing or
ye, Lechere ^^ bows.
till thou haste dishonested this woman or that woman, till thou have played the
harlot with this or that commune and nuslyuyng woman, till thou hasteben avenged
of this or that, Super^tti^us vowen.
to vow this or that kind of Idolatry, to vow and swear that thou will
have these many and so many Masses satiffactory, said and done for thy sins,
and for thy friends, to promys^ and to vow this pilgrimage or that, to swear
that thou will not receive the Sacrament of the body and blood of the Lord,
Heretci^^ vows.
but under one kind, and not under both kinds: that is of bread and mine
together, according as it was by the Lord instituted and ordained, knows of
hy^ocrites.
to vow and promise this or that number, this or that forte of unprofitable
prayers, to be measured by number and by waggyng of their lyppes, to vow
beggary, as the monks did, calling it the vow of poverty, to promise and
make a vow of obedience, as they do call it, which did pluck away the
obedience of servants and children and also of men's wives from the most
lawefull obedience due to their masters, parents and loving hus^kndes, to
profess poverty and barenes in certain parts of their bodies: that as they
were borne into the world naked, so they would show them selves a monge men,
As fraunces fri^rs dy^.
to swear to the order of a sort of idle and ungodly helhou^des, to live
severally, to vow the keepynge of all manner of wicked traditions and laws
made among them selves, yea, and finally to be sworn against the whole
religion of Christ, and al christian men with such other diabolical and
detestable vows and oaths made against the word of God.

Also those manner of oaths and vows whereof the end is unlawful and ungodly,
as was the bow of Iephta concerning the offering up of his daughter for a
brent sacrifice, who^ saint Hierom called a fool for so vowynge, because that
it might have chanced some unclean beast to have been in his way, The vow
of I^ph^^.
which was not lawefull for him to have offered up, much less his daughter.
Hierome said also that in making of that vow he was wicked and vngedly. For
by ye law he mighht have redeemed his daughter, and so not to kill her in a
sacrifice, or shut her vpclosse from the company of all men. There be which
^o think that Iephta was not (...) mad to sley his daughter, affir^yng yt he
did put her up forth of the sight of al men in some pri^y place, as though she
were dead in deed and not to kill her. The proof whereof, they had of the use
and custom of ye mourning of other maidens, which yearly used to lament the
virginity of this maid the daughter of Iephta, and not her death, whereby they
do gether, that she was not slain, but hyd up. But whether he did sley his
daughter or shut her up: it was al one: for both the deeds are wicked and
ungodly. For he might not lawfully neither sley her nor yet shut her up from
the company of men. Such is the vow also to live sole and unmarried, to have
no wife in honest and godly Matrimony, The vow of chastity, as they use to
call it.
thence comes their whorehuntyng, their foul^ and stynkynge fylthynes of life
under the vow of chastity. The oath also which Herod did make to the
dau^syng mayde^, Tee oath of ^^rode.
is of that kind and nature. The canons and decrees of bishops do declare
that those vows are not to be made nor kept, which are against the health of
the soul, and against the laws of princes. Much more such vows as are made
ag^ynst the law and word of god ought to be broken. An oath or a vow is of
things which are possible, lawefull, and honest. It follows the^ that to
unlawful things, unjust, dishonest, In what^ind of things ought vows ^e
made.
and impossible, no man is bound. In making of oaths and vows, thou do
break thine obedience which thou do owe to the Lord, as often as thou do
^ow or promise any thing against the commandment of God.

The second kind of vows and oaths which of them selves are lawful:
Another division of vows.
either they be profitable or unprofitable, possible or impossible. As
touching those which are impossible, Impossible vows
they ought not to be sworn nor vowed. For the impossibility thereof does
reprove him which swereth and makes the vow, of folishnes, it byndeth hym^ot.
For it is manifest and open madness to swear or to vow that thing, which is
not in our power to perform. Unprofitable vows.
As for those which are unprofitable vows and oaths, are to be counted and
rekened among the folishe forte of oaths, which men use to make and vow, as
the going to Jerusalem, to saint James or such other. Such vows as these be,
because they have often times joined and annexed with the^ much impiety and
wickedness, therefore they are to be rekened among those vows which are
unlawful. But all oaths and vows of this second kind, which we now
speak of, either they he prositable and possible: or else they be to men's
judgments and opinions ungodly, and in deed good and virtuous, or else they
be after the phantasy and mind of men, good and godly, and in deed evil and
unlawful. Those vows and oaths which are both in opinion and also in deed,
Vows ^eulbed into there formet kinds: profitable and unprofitable it.
good and godly, they are without doubt to be observed and kept. For of these
vows the scripture speaking: says. Vow you, and pay your vows to the
Lord, your God. In an other place it says: if you have made any vow, be not
flow in perfourmynge of it: what so ever vow thou do make, let it not be
unperformed, for the Lord thy God will ask it at thy hand. What soever shall
go forth of thy lyppes thou shall observe and do as thou haste promised unto
the Lord thy God. Deute. xxiii. Deuet. xxiii. Exode. xxx.
and Exodus xxx. Of these vows are those vows also, which are made on a good
faith in things which be ^wefull. Actu. xxv.
As was the vow of Paul, whereby he wrought and did things according to the
imbicilitie and weakness of the Jews, Acts. xxv. Also of Annas when he did
nominate and point Samuel to the godly ministry and service. i. Reg. i. i.
Reg. i.
Such was also the deed of Ason which did bring into the house of the lord
the silver and gold with other dessels which his father had before vowed and
promised. ii. Paral. xxv. 1. Part. xxv. ^
Such were the vows made to God, of catell, house, field, possessions, tithes,
oblatio^s, fastinges abstinence, and such other: whereof there is often times
mention made in the holy scripturs. As be al such vows as we do make in
things lawefull: not being in any such folyshe opinion, that we do satisfy
thereby for our sins, that we deserve remission of gure sin thereby: But
being done for the conservation and mayntenaunce of virtue and honestye
living, that we may exercise our faith thereby, to tame and bring low the
pride of ye flesh. These kinds of vows for all that, necessity does
break: and also a better purpose or intent of more perfectnes does change
the^ with out danger or hurt of conscience for the law in such manner of vows
does extenuate and mittigate the rigor of the law, Necessity and a better
purpos or intent do break vows
by the benefit of redemption.

Oaths and vows which are lawful in deed: but in the opinion of men
unlawful and ungodly, that is to say, when men dovowe and promise a good
work, which is lawful: but because that men have not that good opinion of i^,
it is not convenient that it be kept and done with a wicked opinion and
estimation thereof. But if it be such a thing that it may be sequestrated and
separated from the naughty and wicked opinion, serving to the glory of God,
and to the profit of thy neigh bour, and profitable to the godliness of life,
to the mortification and subduinge of the old Ada^ in us, castyng away that
wicked opinion and the deed which is vowed must be kept. For it is not meet
that a good and profitable deed should be undone for the ill opinion that is
of it.

The error of the thing must be corrected, that is to say, men must be
taught how to take it better, and so to put away the wyckednes of opinion.
But a work which is of it self good, profitable and necessary, may not be
omitted. Again a work which is both godly and also necessary, being either
by oath or else by vow promised to the Torde: may not be taken from him and
left unperformed without sin. For of such manner of vows as these be
which we now last of aldo speak of: it is written in the scriptures: vow
your vows and see that you perform the^ and pay them to the Lord. Also,
the Lord thy God does require it at thy hand. For as much as such works,
although they were not vowed, are to be performed to the Lord, much more if
they be vowed and also promised to him, they may not be taken from him. If so
be a man yt makes a vow and also confirms that vow with an oath, byndyng
him self thereby, to the ministry and service of the church of Christ:
would for the riches of the world or for fear of the cross forsake it and
go from it again: if they be meet for it: if that the church have need of
their service, they can not excuse them selves before God, because that they
have made voyed the vow and the oath which they did make, and that not without
great injury done to the lord, to Christ and to his holy church. Also they
which have vowed to fast: to pray, to bestow their time in godly reading
of the scripture and such like, which are profitable to godly living, and
ryghtuous dealing, if so be they do forsake these things promised, and in the
steed of fasting and abstinence do follow eating and drinking till they surfeit
or else be dronken, and in the place of godly rea^yng do give them selves to
ydlenes, and for the poverty of the spirit: do embrace covetousness and the
insaciable desire of getheryng together of riches: truly such as these be can
not defend them selves be fore God. As far as they are profitable, How
far ought vows to be abstayned and forsaken.
which are promised to god by vow or by oath, they are to be kept, so far
they ought not to be undone: but as far as they be impediment and let to
godliness, it is reason they be refused and left aside. For it is lawefull
always to take and chose the better: it is convenient that in the forsakinge of
that which is evil, we should be the better not the worse. Therefore they also
which castyng of from them al Popish superstition and Popish vows do follow
and embrace for evil as bad or rather worse, truly they be boeth ways
inexcusable.

In all manner of oaths and vows you must renounce al impiety and ungodliness,
Whereto you must have respect (...) your making of your vows.
your eye being directed to al honest, godly, profitable, and necessary works
to be done. By the ordinau^^e of God vows and oaths are left to us. Yea
always, at al times, in all ages, with the godly men, it was taken for a high
and a great matter, Vows ought not to be made rashli.
for to take an oath or to make a vow, it was in high estimation: therefore
in doing either of the^, either taking of an oath or making a vow, all
thing must be done circumspectly, with a good consideration, not rashly and
unadvisedly.

We may not set light by oaths and vows, In vowing and making of anoth god
is one of the par^es.
they ought not to be broken for every trifull, being lawefully and in
lawefull things made, for he that does sw^^e or vow, has to do with God.
Therefore it is necessary that he mark well and take good heed what he does
vow, what he does swear, what vow or oath he does perform, what vow or
oath he does break, that he seem not to dishonor and defile the holy name of
God, that he be not gyltie of perjury, that he appear not to make God a
laughinge stock. For the Lord says that these things shall not be
unpunished.

The first question is whether all manner men are bound to their oaths and
vows which they have made. Moses does solute and make plain this question
and doubt sufficiently in the.xxx. ca. of Nume. saying. Numer.xxx.
They are not bound to any vow made or oath taken, which do vow or swear
being under the power of an other man: except that he, No body: being under
an other man's power can make a vow or oath without the consent of the head:
much lose being under age
under whose authority ye part is: does grant to the vow and oath, either
by open affirmation, or by consent in not deniynge of it, having knowledge of
the oath and deed For those which are not of their own power to do what
they list: they can not, neither by oath or vow be bound to any manner of
thing. This is spoken sufficient as concerning vowynge and taking of oaths.
Let us now go on with the Psalm.

The text.
Which has not given and put forth his money to usury.
That is to say, which has taken and receyned of the poor and needy
nothing, Vsu^i.
more then the thing which was lent and borrowed, which has taken nothing
above the just price of the thing which was borrowed and lent, for the
lendynge thereof. But has helped and conforted the poverty freely with his
money, without interest, which has not sucked out the blood of the poor, The
property of usurers
which has not oppressed the poor, as the property of usurers is to do.

Under the vocable and name of money, Whether usury be committed only by money
yea or naye^
all manner of things are to be understand, which are lent, and not only
money where with men use to bye and sell.

The feloshippe of mankind in this world is knytte together and preserved by
these three things following, that is to say, by alms deeds, by lendyng and
borowyng one of an other, and by contractes and bargaynes made betwen^ man and
man. The synowe^ whereby the joints of the whole body of mankind is knyt
together and mai^teyned.
By these sinowes and ioynters the whole state of mankind is holden up, and
preserved, the which being taken away all together must needs fail
concerning the friendly and loving brotherly felowshyppe of man, none other
wise then the whole body must needs perish when the sinowes which do hold
together the joints, are cut a sonder. For they are the ordinances of God
among all other things in this world most necessary. The law of God does
not only command deeds of charity, which is called alms deeds, and also
that we should lend one to an other: but also it has ordained byinge and
sellyng, Bying and selling is by the law of God.
for the profit^ of the commune wealth of al me^. There is no doubt then, but
tha^ men may use contractes and m^kyng of bargaynes in byinge and selling by
the law of God, and with a good conscience as al other ordinances of God. The
civil law does also allow the trade and occupiyng between man and man, and
does prescribe certain manner and fourmes of trades and o^ making of
bargaynes, how and after what facion they shall occupy together. The mind of
the which law you may follow with out offense in all civil matters and
business. In all ciusle matters you may follow the order of the civil law.
This is without question, that a christian man may use and observe al politic
and civil ordinances, which be received and confirmed by the authority of
the magistrates and rulers. Wherefore this is not to be reasoned and disputed
of, whether that men may without sin occupy together in byinge and selling
according as the laws have ordained. But this is to be discussed and reasoned
of: The purchasyng of lands.
whether that the byinge and selling of rentes and revenues of lands be a
laweful and a just trade of occupying yea or nay. This question must be
handled so wisely, that the wicked, covetous, and insaciable vserers shall not
take or gether any thing to make for their deuelish purpose, to who^ nothing
is more sweet, more precious then is stynkyng usury: no not heaven, nor God,
nor yet his blessing more pleasant, and again that the consciences of them
which do live by their re^tes and ye profits of their lands be not troubled,
and that there be no manner of tumultes in the common wealth. First we will
speak of vsuries: afterward we will discuss this question of byeynge and
selling of re^tes, whether it is athynge that may be done by the law of
God, yea or nay, among godli men.

Vsuries are forbidden both by the law of God and of man: Vsuries by all laws
forbidden.
wherefore it is not to be doubted that this kind of bargaynyng is unlawful:
and that usurers ca^ have no hope of the kingdom of God except they do repent
them, and restore again that which they have taken away from the needy by
their abominable usury, How many beggeats should we have of the great rich
me^ (you know whom I do mean) if they would follow this lesson: but they pas
not, for they can begile God they do work so wisely.
against the commandment of God and the common law. For a true repentance
requires with it the restitution of an unjust lucre or gain: being manifest
that it ca^ not be called and named a right repentance, nor he to repent her
tely which does wickedly, hold still and keep that thing: which he unjustly
does possess. Vsuries by no mean, by no color, neither with God nor with
man ca^ be excused. Therefore, those which be usurers do flatter them selves in
vain, nay they are foul deceived, which with diverse colors and pretenses
do defend their usury, to maintain and hold up their avarice, and
covetousness. First it shall be said to you what usury is properly. There can
be no good man which is an usurer.
Afterward I will set^e forth the testimonies of the scriptures and of the
laws with certain other reasons, whereby it may well be known, that usury of
and by all right is condemned, and that no good man can use it. What is usury.
Usury according to the teaching of the scripture is to take for the use of a
thing, more then that which was lent, or above the just price and valor of
the thing, lent, taken, I say, of them which are needy. Moses makes this
diffinition of usury: How Moses defined usury.
saying. To take and receive again more then was lent. Ezechiel does call it
that which is above the thing lent, What Ezechi^i does call usury.
or yt which is given for the thing lent and borrowed. Christ calls usury to
be all that gain and vantage, which the le^der does take of the borowar for the
use of that thing which is lent. What Christ does say usury for to be.
Usurers are called those which for hope of va^tage do lend any thing to be
paid and delivered again: Who be usurers.
which do take profit for that thing which is lent. Whether it be little or
much gaynes: that which is taken therefore it can be no less then usury. For
there is no difference betwne usurers, Some usurers are more paste shame: then
other.
but yt they be all one as well they which do take little, as they which do
take unreasonable, saving that the one is more paste shame in demau^dinge then
the other They be both usurers. They do offend both. Both have need of
repe^tau^ce For the Lord is not contented and pleased with such unlawful
gain. That usury can not be taken of any man, without the loss of heaven,
and of the bliss everlasting, the testimonies of the scriptures, the
authority of the laws and good strong reasons do declare and show more
manifest then any sober man can deny or doubt of.

The Lord does forbid vsuries, saying. Take thou no usury of thy brother,
nor more gain, but the self same thing, or so much as thou dyddeste give
unto him, that is to say, in the way of borowyng. Fear thy Lord, that thy
brother may live with the. Thou shall not let thy money to him for usury,
nor thou shall not give to him meat for to receive more again the^ thou
gave to him. Deuteronomy. xxiii.
Deuteronomy. xxiii. It is said also thou shalt not let thy money to thy brother for
usury, nor thy corn, nor any other manner thing, but to a stranger.

But as to thy brother lend him without usury yt which he has need and
necessity of, that the Lord thy God may bless the in all thy works. Exodus
xxii. Also if thou do lend to my pore creple any thing which dwells with
the, thou shalt not be hard unto him, as an usurer: thou shalt not oppress
him with usury Deutron. xxv. If any of thy brethren which do dwell within the
gates of thy city where thou do dwell do fall into poverty, Deute. xxi.
thou shalt not harden thy heart, thou shalt not pluck in and shut thy
hand, but thou shalt open it to the poor, thou shall lend to him yt which
he seems to have need of. etc. Many me^ willende a poor handy crafts man at
his need xx. s. but the poor man shall work at times the worth of forty
shillings for it. Many will take no money of their tenauntes for their houses:
but where as the house does go for forty shyllenges they shall pay in
workema^shyp iiii li. which is no usury.
Thou shall give unto him and thou shalt work nothing craftily in helpyng of
his necessity. and Luke the xvi. Love your enemies, do good to them, lend to
them lokynge for no profit of that which thou do lend, and your reward
shall be great, and you shall be the children of the almighty, for he was gentle
and liberal toward the unkind, unthankful and evil people. The Lord
says that they shall not rest in the holy hill of the Lord which do deliver
their money for usury. Ezechiell says that they shall not live, which do make
the poor sad and heavy with the burden of usury, and take of the^ more then
they delivered for the lone. By these godly testimonies it is manifest, that it
is a thing with out all exception unlawful to play the usurer. And that
usurers are destitute of all hope of salvation and bliss.

Also the civil laws do co^de^ne usury, It is impossible for usurers to be
saved: without they repent and restore yt they have taken.
and taking vantage or profit for lone. (the which laws not only for fear
of the pain ordained for the transgressers, but also for conscience sake you
must obey) they do command also that those which be usurers shall be driven
forth of the commune wealth of Cities and towns where they do dwell. Usurers
by the law must be driven forth of al places as the commune plage of all the
world.


The ecclesiastical laws do ex commune also those men which be usurers, they
do forbid them the comunion of the Sacrament of the body and blood of the
Lord they do depryue them of al honest burial from among the faithful: whose
oblatio^s and offering they do command not to be received. Pains ordained by
the eccles^asticall laws for usury.
All the old and catholyke writers do detest and obhorre usury. Saint Ambrose
says, that the godly me^ may no more play the usurers among them selves one
with an other then to go together by the ears, fight and rob one an other.
The old fathers did esteem and judge usurers worse and more hurt full, then
thieves and robbers by the sea, and worthy of much more grievous punishments,
because that those which are robbers and thieves do but now and then, and from
a few take and sell that which is other men's, they hurt but a small in
comparasion of these. As for usurers they do pyll^ po^ and oppress all the
whole world with their vsuries they hurt all men. But for as much as usurers
are condemned by the law of God, by the common laws, and by the consent of
the whole church of God, truly the impenitent usurers ca^ not excuse them
selves before God, they can make but small boste of salvation and hope of bliss
everlasting. Therefore there be many urgent, just and great causes set and put
in nature, whereby usury is condemned, and is declared also that usury may as
ill be borne and suffered in a commune wealth, as ma^slaughter or murder, as
aduoutry, theft and robbery, sacralege, perjury, and such mischeuous vices,
contrary, and enemy to nature and to the whole felowshyppe of men.

The magistrates are the ministers of God, It is the office of the magistrates
to look ^rnestly on this matter.
in whose steed they be here in this world, whose rome and place they do
occupy here in earth in these civil and worldly matters. It is their duty to
defend those constitutions and ordinances, to set them forth to see that they
be kept, which are commanded by God and by the law of nature, to condemn,
punish, and rote out all those things, which are forbid by the
commandment of God and by the law of nature. Usury because it is contrary to
the brotherly fellowship of man and enemy to nature and contrary to the commune
reason and judgment of men, with the whole consent of all godly me^ that ever
were: therefore it is not for no cause to be borne and suffered. Make well this
point.
For in usury the use of the thing is sold severally and aparte from the
thing it self. And for as much as the use of a thing, is the spending of the
thing which is used, there is nothing sold, and for that thing which is
nothing, How and wherein a man may sell the use of a thing.
there is some thing taken. To ^ell the use of a thing is properly and in his
own kind to be understand of those things, which things may be restored
again whole and safe in that kind that they were delivered in, which is in
lettyng and hyrynge. As in house or ground and such like and not in borowyng
and lone. As for usury is co^mittted in ye lone of things and not in other
bargaynes or contractes. Things lent and borrowed are those which may be
restored again in the self same thing lent or in that same kind of thing,
by the self same weight measure and number that it was borrowed. But yet not in
the self same matter that was lent. For in these things the use of a thing
is the wasting or spending of the thing, which use cease with the thing
when it is consumed. As, bread, wine, butter, chese, flesh, wood, money,
fish, corn, and such like. In these things there must either be a lone or
a sale, that is, they must either be full bought and sold, or lent, friendly,
and freely for love. For it is against nature in such things to sell the use
thereof. Also in those things which may be restored again in the self same
matter that they were delivered in, the substance and matter does not perish
nor is consumed with the use thereof and in such things is properly a
certain kind of trade which is called a letting to hyre, as a servant, a
house, a garment a horse, an ox, ground and such like: when for the use of
these things or such like any price is set and required, The use of these:
may be sold without the thing.
it is called the contracte of hyrynge, not of lendynge. In borowyng and in
lendynge there is no price set: if so be that there be any agreement between the
parts for any price for ye thing which is lent, then it loses the name of
an honest contract between frinde and friend, and becomes mosts unlawful
and wicked usury, which can not be maynteyned nor defended under no color of
honest contracte and bargayne. Moreover by this reason it is manifest ye usury
is clean contrary to the nature of al honest bargaynyng, because that in usury
the needy is oppressed with things which do not increase, nor bring forth
more fruit to him that pays for the use of them, but straight way with the
bare use is consumed, so that there ryseth no more profit thereof. Beside
this, usury is directly contrary to the right and perfect love of our
neighbor, without the which love, nothing can be well done, which only is
the bond and cheyne of brotherly fellowship between man and man, the which
love the Lord him self requires of al men, the which love nature her self
does teach to be necessary for the preservation of mankind among them
selves. Usury.
By usury men do gain to them selves great profit and wynnyng with the
hurt, damage and undoing of them which are in need, wherein it does follow
that usury is repugnant to brotherly love and charity. Usurers.
Usurers do regard nothing but their own avarice and satisfiynge of their
covetous mind, eating up, deuouryng, wringing and oppressyng the poverty, and
needy brethren, whom they are bound of duty to healpe with lendyng of their
good, freely with out interest or gain. I christian love seeks not his own
profit but his broth^ts also.
For a sincere and a perfect pure love, does not seek after his own propre
commodity and wealth, but the profit and wealth also of an other as of him
self, such a love (I say) does nothing unjustly, it enuieth not, it does
profit every body and hurts no body. The usurer does al together contrary.
For he does seek his own profit, and no bodies else, he does hate, and lies
in wait for other men's goods, he does oppress and tread down, but not
healpe and comfort. Also usury does extinguishe and quench, dissipate and undo
the godly ordained felowshyppe and conversation of man, which nature does
teach to be preserved by the mutual love and good turns done one for an other
together among us. The usurers do pass for no such love, friendship and
amity, they do take away clean the good will yt one ought to bea^e to an
other, wherewyth one ought to healpe an other, theidoe seek no bodies profit
but their own, with the damage, hurt and hinderaunce of other men, Against
those which do engrosse all vittayles and wates into there owncha^^es, and also
a gaynst those companies of matchauntes which will take a whole commodity, of
al a realm from the rest of the communes.
they do encrese their riches and do grow to great substance. Those, which
should be conforted and helped by them, with their vsuries they do eat up
clean, they do ingrosse all things to their own hands, they do bring in
derth and scarcity of all things: they do bring all the world into bondage,
and what man is able to rehearse al their obomination, whereby they do take al
good fellowship of men together forth of the world, The usurers do althing
against nature the^ with their usury do bury nature in the grave.
all the gentleness and love that one ought to show to an other, wherwyth they
do bury and ley, as it were in a grave, nature her self, and the end of all
honest manner of occupiynge of men together: finally in all the world there is
no pestilence more hurtful and poisonous then the pestilence of usury For it
forbids utterly that no man shall lend and healpe his brother with his
substance freely, as he is commanded of God, standing in the steed and place
thereof, corruptynge all manner of honest occupiyng, which nature has taught us,
for to be a commune increase of wealth among us together one with an other.

Therefore those co^tractes and bargaynes can not be profitable and just,
which do lack equite. In the bargaynes of the usurers there is neither
equity nor equality: There is none indiffirect in the vsurary bargaynes.
therefore they deserve not to bear the name of contractes and bargaynes, for
as much as the name of contractes and bargaynes is an honest and a lawful
name. Mark this ^^ynt.
There is nothing more unlawful and unjust, then are usurers, there is
nothing further from al equity then their bargaynes: for the usurer biding
still at home in his house idle: bearing of his goods no manner of venture
gayneth certainly and unreasonably. The detter only ventereth, uncertain of
his gain, he does labor, he loses also the stock of that which he received
of the usurers. The (...) be sure (...) to lose, but always to win, he (...)
have (...) (...) (...).
The usurer contrary wise does only not lose any part of his stock, but he
is sure that his detter shall make to him good and that the loss which the
detter does sustain shall be to him profitable with great vantage.

Which is the most misshapen kind of getting that ever might be thought. For
what more unnatural and unjust extremity can there be, more great, more
detestable, more contrary to the law of God and of nature, then to exact of
the poor and needy any vantage, and vsurary profit, Out natural reason is a
blind Judge in good things.
for the whole stock or any part of it, which is lost. The commune opinion
of men, and our natural reason which is corrupted (in all good things a
very evil Judge) in this one thing thinks exce dyngly well, yt it is far from
al reason, and a thing which has great absurdity in it, to say ye a dead
woman should bring forth and bear, and that a thing which does not
fructify and bring forth fruit: yea which is both spent and also lost
should bring forth interest with great profit and gaynes. This great
inequality being so far out of the nocke and wide from all reason and
conscience declares how wicked a thing their vsuries be. Where as an equal
and an indifferent facion in doing of things has no place how or which way
may there be any honest or lawful manner of occupiynge: what kind of
occupiynge so ever it is: for as much as equity, and indifferent dealing for
both the parts: is the only preserver of al honest contractes. For, those
vsurary bargaynes, which are not according to equity, nor indifferent: how
ca^ they be called lawefull and just: when that honest, lawefull, profitable,
and necessay contractes and bargaynes allowed and confirmed by the laws are
become unhonest, unlawful, unprofitable (nay hurtful) if that equity and
conscience be not observed and kept in them, Equity the right balau^ce of
susticie.
which equity is the balaunce of all justice in all worldly things, which
taken away, what thing can be done a right: but all together against
justice, against good equity and conscience? By these reasons it is easy for
to see, or rather, to manifest and open, Vsurets are a damnable sort of men.
that usurers are a damnable kind of me^: whose vsuries ca^ no ways be either
excused or defended. How may a man use any manner of defense in that thing
which the Lord him self has prohibited and forbidden, which the common
laws, the consent of the whole church, Honest contractes were ordained to
meinteyne honch^ and protite.
the order of nature does condemn, and affirm to be a thing repugnant to all
honesty and profit, for the maynteinaunce whereof, lawefull contractes and
occupyinge between man and man was ordained. In usurer is no membre of Christ.
In good faith, that man can not be a civil good man: that is to say:
profitable for city, town and country, which is an usurer, much less can
he be the membre of Christ and of the church.

The defenses and reasons which the usurers do communely use to ley for the^,
as bucklers and shyldes of their impiety: are nothing but bare Sophistical
cauillations. It is possible that in their doings they may deceive the
ignorant (as they are full of al subtilitie and cautell) but the Lord, Their
own consciences ^o condemn (...).
they shall never begyle: he will not be deceived for them, no not their own
conscience, nor yet the consciences of other men can be well pleased, at rest,
and quiet with their doings: how godly so ever they would appear to do and
seem to work This is one of the bulwarks. By usury, With these bucklers they
do bear of the reasons which are laid against usury: full weakly.
merchaundise and occupiynge is maynteyned: men shall by such vsurary
contractes, find one thing or other ever to do: yt they shall not lack in
this life: of what state and degree soever they be, they shall find hereby to
ease them and to healpe them at their need. The second bulwark. Without Dame
usury this worldly substance and riches can not be maynteined. The third. It
is a great benifite to him which needs to find so much pleasure as to have
lent to him money for usury: they do think yt in so doing we do much for
the^. The fourth. Often times they which have been needy and in great
necessity, by borowynge on usury have not ben only helped but also hauegrowe^
to great rich men. The fifte. The laws also do permit usury. The sixth. This
kind of occupiynge is voluntary, not compul^yue, no man is compelled thereto,
(...) these (...) (...).
but they that list their own selves. For they which would have money do
desire and pray for to have it, what so ever they do pay for the usury
thereof: they do receive it and give great thanks that they may be sped: we
force no man to take it. By vs^ries also we do mainteyne gods service in the
church: we do make and ^uylde free schools, hospitals for the poor people: by
our vsuries whole commune wealths when they are in great decay and n^cessitie
are preserved, and helped, though they do pay for the use of our money as
reason is. Orphans and wydowes also are conforted and nourished thereby. Also
our money we do let forth by usury, not to them that have no thing (for they
shall get nothing of us) out to them that are substa^tiall enough of their
own: and yet for a time do lack. Such cauillations as these be: usurers do
shadow their wyckednes with. Every man may lightly refute them and put the^
away, though they do appear in deed (as they be) Sopisticall and crafty:
for they are very folishe excuses which they do ley for themselves, where with
they go about to defend their vsuries. For to the conservation and
preservation of al honest trade of mercha^dise, and increase of substance in
the world, it is necessary and expedient to use honest, just and lawful
bargaynyng between man and man, and no usury. Also we must healpe our neighbor
and succor him that has need, and do good works after the word of God
which ought to be thy rule, and not against the word and commandment of
God. (...)
For seem it never so good a deed that thou do, if it be not according to
the word of God it is evil and sin Yea and moreover when thy neighbor
being driven for need to come to the, (...) man ^^inge in necessity does
(...) care what he pro(...) though he does repent of (...).
to have this or that, and wylling to give the whatsoever thou do ask of
him: thou may not give and healpe him after his asking, which is to his own
hurt and loss: but as the Lord does commau^de the to healpe him: so must
thou do. Also the permission and sufferaunce of this law can not clear men
before God. For no civil law can make that thing just and lawefull: which
by the judgment of God and of the law of nature is pronounced unlawful and
unjust. No ciu^^e laws can dispense with a^ buses, against the law^ of God.
Nay they can not cloak their vsuries by the authority of the laws, for the
laws do condemn vsuries and utterly disprove them. For although that the
wickedness of me^ is such, that the laws must needs suffer and bear with some
things: which can not be reformed without a common disturbaunce and
disquiethes, The laws suffer some things which they cannot redres without more
inco^uentence.
it follows not streyghte wey that the laws do allow and confirm them. For
somuche as the laws can not remedy all vices, enormities and abuses: in so
great diversity of minds, opinions and desires of men: often times they do
wynke at many things: in many things they do set and put a moderation and a
measure, since that the whole cannot be taken clean away, that they shall not
excede and be to far out of the way. This is not to confirm, stablishe and
allow such detestable enounities and vices. Likewise although that the
magistrates do bear, suffer and permit, with vsurary contractes and
bargaynes some thing, it follows not that they do allow and commend such
dealyng, considering that if they did not make some moderation in these
things, the usurers would be to exceeding deuel^she and pass neither for God
nor the Devil. And for all this permission no man can excuse him thereby, before
God: but against the civil pains and punishments by laws ordained against
usurers: they may some thing have to stand by to save them from the danger
of the laws. As for their defenses which they do use they are both ungodly and
unlawful. And although that the Magistrates should or would allow usury:
yet for all that a christian may not exact and require such unlawful gaynes,
except he entendeth to be damned both body and soul. For the magistrate can
not grant any manner of ordinances which are against the law of God and of
nature. But in case yt he would, it is our duty not for to follow that
which he does permit. The Magistrate is the saru^unt an^ minister of God and
of nature.
For the magistrate is the servant of God and of nature: not the lord of God
and nature: therefore he ought to give place to the ordinances of God and to
the law of nature, to be ruled of them, and not they of him. Therefore he that
will have God merciful to him and a gentle Lord, desiring to be in the number
and fellowship of saints and of the children of God: he must forsake all the
blind excuses of these usurers with all their vsuries. Let this be
sufficiently spoken concerning usury: now that remayneh, we will declare of
rentes and interest.

The doubt and question of bying of rentes: (...).
and of the damage, otherwise called the interest or recompensation, which a
man ^^th receive of his detter for the hurt and loss, which he has sustained
and borne: by reason that the detter did not pay him his debt at the day he
should have paid. We will not make thereof any declaration, to thente^t yt we
would allow it: or to steare up the excessive and insatiable covetousness of
men to the byinge and purchasyng of great quantity of lands and tenementes,
or to cause them hereby to be the more streighte and extreme to their tenau^tes
if that they do not pay at the day: but to settle and satisfy the
consciences of these men: which upon just and reasonable considerations and
causes do bye lands and teneme^tes for to live by: and of these no heathen do
use also to require interest for the damage and hinderau^ce that (...) does
sustain by that he has not his money and duty at his day. It is much more
godly to be occupied in doing of good deeds (as to give for gods sake in alms
deeds and to lend freely without hope of gaynes) then for to gape after lucre
and vantage, wherefore to these last good deeds named, thy mind above all
thing ought to be given: in these thou should exercise thy self. To the
sender and (...) great rewards (...)
For ^n lendyng and showing thyselfe liveral to thy neighbor there are promised
of God great rewards both in this life and in the life to come. As for the
purchasyng of re^tes and the desire of lucre and gaynes, they have no manner
reward of God, but such benifites and pleasure as are open to all the world,
that is the pleasure and prosi^e that thou do take thereof. For likewise as
in all man^^ of co^tractes and bergaynes there is some recompense of pleasure
for them in this life: even so in the life to come, these contractes and
bargaynes, for the doing of them have nor shall have no manner of reward. For
as the Lord says the works of the civil ryghtuousnes and justice have
there rewards already. But liberality in gyuynge and lendynge to thy
neighbor, principally and before all other thing is commanded of the Lord.
Wherefore if this be not regarded in all thing that thou do, not only thy
purchasing shall be detestable and wicked but also all other manner of contractes
and bargaynes seem they never so godly, if thou haste not mind of Christ in
doing thereof. For there can be nothing well and godly done, in what state or
degree of lite so ever it be, where the love of thy neighbor is not regarded
and also minded.

There be many which do think that the purchasing of rentes has a spice of
usury in it: because they do perceive that often times men do come by them by
evil crafts and deceitful means. They do think also that it is a thing
unjust and ungodly to exact and demand any manner of interest for the duty
not paid in dew season. And truly therein they are nothing at all deceived.
For it is certeynly true that wicked and ungodly rentes either by ungodly ways
gotten or vnco^scionably deniaunded, Unlawful purchasinge and unjust interest
are usury: with reasyng of re^tes. How many usurers have we in England
and also that interest which is unjust and unrighteous: is plain usury. For
those are wicked re^tes, which are taken against the commandment of God,
against the ^rore of the commune law and against the law of nature: that is
to say, by the which rentes thy neighbor is polde or pylde, wherein the even
and equal portion of equality and justice on both the parts with equity is
not observed and kept. What so ever is boughte and taken according to the
commandment of God, after the publyke civil ordinances and according to
the law of nature, it is bought and taken ryghtuously and according to good
conscience, and ought not to be judged usury in no case. The consciences of
those which are godly men abiding in the fear of the Lord are moved and
troubled by the authorities of the scriptures, for the which cause chiefly it
is to be di^^^ssed whether that re^tes are to be taken as vsuries prohibited by
the scripture, yea or nay. Wherefore we will first speak of rentes, and then
afterward of the interest which is demanded for lack of payment in dew
season. The Lord prescribes no order in civil matters, he does permit is to
the Magistrate to do and order al thing after the rule of his word.
The precepts of the Lord and commandments of liberality in gyuyng and
lendyng ought not to be objected and laid against, as contrary to the
purchasyng of rentes, because the Lord in his commandments and precepts
does not meddle at all: nay speaks no word of byinge and selling, he does
not prescribe any manner of order in bargaynynge. He bids us only to show
our selves gentle and liberal in healpyng of our neighbor, and that yt good,
deed which we do, should be fra^kely and freely done. We ought not to fetch
forth of the scrip^^res the form and manner of bargaining one of us with an
other, but from the civil laws, which do handle al such matters so
conningly, so excelle^tly, that nothing can be more, which has had always
authority to deem and judge between man and man, co^cerninge all manner of
contractes and bargaynes which are used to be made. The Lord does not abolishe
and take away the facion and manner of occupiyng in bargaynyng, but rather
confirms it, commaundyng that by those civil laws al manner of controversies
and striefes should be finished and ended, and that we do obey to them, whereby
he does improve and condemn only vsuries, and not co^tractes. As for the
true bying and sellyng of rentes, it is a kind of co^tracte and bargayne, it
is no part of vsurary co^uention, Ergo it is not condemned of the Lord. Usury
consists in that thing which is lent and borrowed: purchasing of rentes do
not consist in lending and borowyng, ergo lawful purchasing is no usury.
For usury perteyneth only to such things as are lent to be paid again in
the self same substance or in some other substance of the same kind of
thing with vantage and gain, not perteynynge to any other manner of contractes
of occupiyng. But laweful and just byinge of rentes, consists neither in
borowynge nor in lendyng, Ergo bying of re^tes without fraudegyle and deceit,
can be none vsurary conuention, nor to be called usury. This reason proves it
to be true, because that when any man does bye with his goods and money, any
manner of lands or houses, men do not say that he has then lent his money or
his goods, but that he has bought this or that with his money and goods.
Also what soever is taken in lone of the needy, more then that thing which was
delivered, is plain usury, not that which is boughte in their ground or
other possessions, which is a plain sale, without any free gift, and of
duty does owe nothing to begyuen freely therein. Then it follows, if a
rich man do byerentes of him that is not needy and poor, he commits no
usury, for the rentes are the vantage gain and profit of that, which was
bought and sold, and not of money or goods lent and borrowed, For the precepte
and commandment of lendynge is ordained for the needy, not for the^ which
with other men's money do gain and get profit, byinge therewyth ^llages,
grou^des, houses, and such other possessions.

There be three manner of men in this life, Three kinds of men.
to whom by the law of God and of nature we are bound to do good, but after a
several and distinct manner, having respect to what sort of men we do our
good deed. There is one kind of men which be so poor, that of mere
necessity they are driven to beggary and askyng of their alms, Beggars.
which if they doborowe any thing, Honest poor men having need.
can not restore it again. Another sort of men are needy, which have need
other while of other men's healpe, but not always, which can sometime restore
again that which they have borrowed. The third sort are those, which having
possessions and lyuelode, have enough of their own substance to maynt eyne
them without the healpe of other men's goods. Rich men.
This by the diversity and diverse sorts of men: must you ponder and judge, to
who^ you are bound to do well freely without profit, This is a goodly lesson
and full of learnmg^.
and with who^ you may bye and sell or make any other lawefull contract for
va^^^ge and gain. The laws of Moses do bear witness yt the Lord did divide
his people of Israel in to these three fortes of men, showing how and to whom
men ought to show the^ selves gentle and loving, The first sort must be
helped with gift.
and after what manner to every sort. The first sort of these three, he
commands to healpe freely, with free gift, that is to say, with alms
deed: saying. Thou shalt not lack poor men ^wellynge in thy land:
therefore I command the to open thy hand to thy needy brother, and to the
pore which are with the. To this precepte perteyne those words which are
spoken of the Lord, saying, that we are bound to give to them which do ask.
And those words also, concerning hospitality, and the provision which is to
be had for the voyding of great nu^bre of poor folk. The second^ sort with
(...) dyng.
The second fort, the Lord commands to be helped and succourred not with
alms deeds and gyuynge of men's goods, but with lendynge for a time to be
repaied again, because that they are not driven to extreme necessity of
poverty: having of their own wherewyth they are able to restore and pay
again that which they have borrowed. Saint Paul teaches that our good deeds
ought to be done with a good judgment and discretion observing an equal and
an indifferent order and manner therein: Me must have respect in our good deeds
lest we be occasion of much poverty: through our inte^pestiue liberality.
lest the need and necessity of the one should make the other also to be
more idle, slouggyshe and slothful. For if without any respect a man should
give freely as an alms deed, his goods to them, to whom according to
reason, he ought but lend them (because that they are able to restore again
that they do receive) what reason or order would be therein? what equal
judgment would apperre in that thing, which should be to the one extreme
calamity: to ye other occasion of great ydlenes and sloth. Of this second
kind and sort of me^ speaks the laws of God when they do treat of lendyng
and of vsuries which we have rehearsed here before. The which laws apertly,
mani festly and as it were showing with a fingar do mean and speak of those
men which are needy and of none other as the Lord himself wytnesheth,
saying, thou shalt lend to thy brother with out usury. Also of thy brother
which stands in need, thou shalt take no usury for that which thou do
lend him. All these scr^^tures do man for the seco^ sort of men.
Again. My pore people thou shall not oppress with usury. Of this sort also
is that scripture which says. Thou shalt not turn thy face from him which
comes to borowe any thing of the. The third kind of men.


For the third kind of men, contractes and occupiynge by byinge and selling
was ordained, which may lawefully among them selves bargayne for lucre and
gain. To who^ the laws do prescribe how and after what manner they shall
occupy together. For the which cause also Judges are ordained to give
sentences concerning all civil controversies and variaunces, and by judgment
to determe, decree and ordeyne what is right and what contrary. Those ought
men to follow. For Christ does not take away the old politic and civil
ordinances, he makes no new decrees and ordres for civil matters, he does
not take on him to discuss such matters: the knowledge whereof he commits to
the laws and politic ordinances of men. He does bydde and command us to
give unto Caesar: the right of Caesar, and to be obedte^t to the civil and
lawefull magistrates: to keep and follow their ordinances, The ordinauces of
the magistrates are the ordinances of God.
because that their ordinances, are the ordinances of God. For the Magistrate
is the ministre of God. He teaches also that we may without hurt or scruple
of conscience, in all civil busynes and matters, which do perteyne unto this
third sort and order of men: imitate and follow the laws and civil ordres
made and ordained by a lawefull Magistrate, to whom of God is committed the
judgment and ministration of right in all such things. The kingdom of
Christ is not of this world: Wherefore did not Christ make civil
co^stitutions.
therefore Christ does not ordeyne and make civil constitutions and laws for
such matters as do pass among men in their occupiynges and other deeds which
they are bound to observe being ordained by the Magiserates and rulers: he
makes no laws of endyng their controversies and debates between them: but all
together he does commit to the civil Magistrate and head. As by the
answer did anpeare which he did make to him which desired of the Lord that
he would divide and give to him the portion and part due to him of his fathers
heritage, saying that he was not ordained a deuider and Judge of heritage
matters as a thing perteynyng nothing to his office. Christ does yt which is
ye busynes of his father, which his father commanded him to do: those things
which perteyne to the kingdom of God, The office o^ Thrist.
and to the health of man. He shows and sets forth his Gospel: he
offers everlasting health, he gives all spiritual gifts: he opens the
secrets and priuitie of his fathers will, he does enterprete the law of God,
he teaches what is well, what is evil done, what thing the Lord is pleased
or an ^ry with: how we may be saved, how we may be damned, he makes no
civil laws, only he does commend and allow in our civil and politic
matters a civil and politic justice, he, prayseth the ordinances which the
law of nature has ordained and been death us to keep, he extolleth the honest
dealyng and conversation of men, he commands that we do use our co^tractes,
and bargains, whereby we obtain either the propriety, or the use only and
occupiyng of things as the contract does declare, ryghtly and according to
equity and conscience.

The Lord does look for no more, but that we do obserne and keep the civil
laws and ordinances which are brought and borrowed forth of the law of
nature with out any grudgyng, with a simple sincerity and pureness, in our
byinge and sellyng, in our permutation chaungyng or barteryng, in our free
gyuyng, in our lendyng, in our companies and fellow ships in all things that
are laid to us to keep, Contractes innominate and nominate.
being with us in deposite, in taking of pledges, and in all other manner of
contractes, be they nominate or vnnominate, as these which do follow. I do
give that thou shalt give again, I do, to the intent that thou shalt do
again. I do give, for yt thou may do. I do, for yt thou may give. The
judgment of all such matters are left to the civil magistrate and ruler. In
the Gospel and doctrine of the apostles there is no form and order prescribed
for co^tractes and other civil business. But only the church is taught and
admonished of al ver^uous, of all godly and gentle co^uer sation in doing and
deserving well one of an other, ye me^ should not refer their deeds all
together to private va^tage and lucre: but also to the commune profit and
wealth of all other men. It does prohibit no manner of honest lawful
occupiyng: but al fraud, gile, and deceit it does abhor and detest, it does
teach us also that in our contractes and other occupiynges we should behold
our selves louyngly, vprighte and godly, yt is to say, yt we should not
offend and trespass any thing in our dealings. For the which cause the
Lord does prescribe to us certain general sentences, by the which our
deeds and duties toward our neighbor ought to be governed and ruled, that
is to say, that we should give to the poor liberally and freely, wyth^ good
stomache, having a good conscience, and with a charity and love not feyned. To
them which are not in so much poverty as the other be, yt we should lend
our goods without va^tage or gain, or hope of any profit, and to do in all
our contractes as we would be done to. And finally that we do not defraude and
deceive our neighbor in nothing that we do go about. Those me which under
any cloak or color of Christ his doctrine would have abolished civil
ordinances and laws, are paste all shame: workyng wyckedly, ouerthrowyng and
turnynge vpsyde down common wealths, setting division among men, abolishing
honest, necessary and profitable ordinances and acts, and last of all the
disturbers of al qui^tnes and tranquillity, and the love breakers of all men.
The doctrine of Christ as I have said rebukes the vices and abuses which
men use in their occupiynge, the order of occupiyng not abrogated or minished,
nor yet the authorities and judgments of the laws taken from them, but
confirmed and made more strong. Likewise as they do deprave, corrupt and
sclaun the Gospel: which do wry and wrast every precept and commandment,
making it to serve for all states of life for all kinds of persons generally.
So do they which take these precepts of Christ, saying (To him yt asks of
the: give. Turn not from him which would borowe of the and such other) layinge
the said precepts against the commune laws and ordinances as contrary and
repugnant to them, appliynge (I say) these prec^^^ to all manner of men without
respect, difference or knowledge, which of the three states or sorts of men
they be of, in whom these commandments are to be kept. They which do make
the precepts of Christ to serve for all men generally, having no considerat^
on, in what, to who^, and how, truly they do bring in, a foul conf^sion,
they do confound and mingle together sundry and different things, they do
ouerwhelme the duty and office of amity and friendship, they do reprove and
forsake the right judgment of reason, they pluck out al civil justice and
equity from this life: they do trouble men's consciences, bringing them into
a merueilous perplexity and doubtfulnes: they do set forth, as it were to
sale, the law of nature, concerning the keeping of an equal and indifferent
order in all things that men do: finally of all things they do turn that
which should be up, down: and that which should be down, up. It is a very
pernicious error to make every precept which is commanded to serve for all me^
in general together, what state, The precepts in the law are not al
vniuetsall.
degree, or order so ever they be. There is a great sort of me^ thynking the^
selves very wise, which by this error being seduced and deceived, or rather
brought into great madness, do say that by the Euangell or Gospel of God the
commune natural reason and judgment of men is overwhelmed and choked, that it
can not tell what to do: that thereby, the civil laws are abolished: that the
commune wealths of me^ are destroyed, that all good ordinances and (...) are
taken clean away: and finally that the Gospel is nothing else, but the
doctrine of some man which was not sobre or else in his right wits. When
that our old and great Doctors in divinity could not tell which way to make
answer to the cauillations of these wicked raylers, they did make them believe
that these precepts were nothyuge else but counsels, He does impounge the
frantike madness of many which do contend that the Gospel is but an idle matter
and a disquietinge of all commune wealths
which appeared to be repugnant to nature and civil justice, affirming that
these counsels were not written to al me^, but to the^ only which were
perfect. By the which blind reason, they have not made answer to the wicked
and diuilishe cauillations of them, wherewyth they should be contented and
pleased: but they have gone oboute to blind their eyes and to deceive the^:
making them more mad, then they were before, gyuyng to them a greater occasion
to sclaunder and report evil of the Gospel. For every ma^doeth see that
Christ does command earnesty, that which his will is to be done Wherefore if
so be a man should aptly, ryghtly, without any manner of fraud and color,
make answer to their cauillations, it is requisite and necessary that the
precepts and commandments of Christ be so expounded, that they shall not
appear contrary and repugnant to the law of nature, and to the common laws:
otherwise the sclau^ derous reports of the enemies and abuersaries of Christ
can never be put a side and overcome. If so be that the precepts of Christ
were referred and applied to the^, to whom they do perteyne, these foul
raylers against God were confuted and also confounded, that they should have
nothing to answer, we should not need to make the^ believe: as the divines
used to do, that they were but counsels. The Lord does command, (he does not
counsel) yt we should not resist them which would do to us evil, The
Lords prec^p^es may not be called tounsels.
yt we judge not, that we do not condemn, yt we strive and co^tende not in the
law, that we do swear in no case, to turn the left cheek to him which has
smotte the on the right, not to demand again that which is taken from the,
to give to him also thy cloak which would take thy cote, to love our enemy,
to do good to them which hate us, to renounce and forsake al our goods, to
give to every man that asks ought of us, to sell all that we have and to
distribute it to the poor: to bid to our feasts the poor, feable, halte,
lame, blind, not our friends, brethren, Kynsfolke, neighbors, and rych men,
which can bid us again, which can do as much for us again, to give that
thing freely which we have freely received, not to possess, neither silver
nor gold, to bear and carry no money in our gyrdesses about us, to have no
wallette nor shoes, nor two garments, and such other. If these and such
other like precepts of Christ should be laid against the honest, necessary
and prefitable ordinances made according to reason, there should nothing
remain untroubled and in order in a commune wealth, all good acts and civil
laws should be taken away, because that the laws do stablishe and confirm
judgments, require the oaths of men, allows ye propriety of goods, they
permit a man to use his defense showing how he shall defend him, they
teach how we may defend both our bodies and goods they commend civil
justice, they command to render thanks for good turns received, they do
monishe us that we ought and are bound to recompense with like benifite him
which is benificiall to us: and finally they do teach us that we ought to
show our selves in all our-deedes gentle and louinge, and always requitte one
good turn for an other.

To this judgment and mind of the civil laws and ordinances, the precepts
of the Lord are not repugnant and contrary: if they be understand as they
ought to be: being referred to such kind of men as the Lord dydpreach and
speak to them. The Lord by his precepte does not abrogate the public
judgments: he forbyddeth not oaths lawfully made, he takes not from the
Magistrate the authority of punishment of transgressors: he does not forbid
private men to defend them selves according to right and to the order of
laws: but he commands that christian men should not use extremity: but
some thing releasynge of their right to follow those things which charity
does lead us to: not to aue^ge their own quarrel after their own will and
mind, nor to do any thing else which is not to be seen or noted in a
christian man, unworthy the sobrenes which we ought to have in Christ. Saint
Paul in the first epistle and sixth Chap. to the Corhinthians declares openly
that the judgments, by laws are not of God prohibited among christian men,
he did no more but reprehende and rebuke that christian men to the great
dishonor of Christ his religion, would co^tende and strive in the law
before wicked and unbelieving Judges, that they would one touble and vex an
other wrongfully. Moreover the Lord does not prohibit against the commune
laws, and law also of nature, that men should have any thing of their own
propre, as their own goods: but he commands us that we do not set our
hertes on our goods, that we also do healpe our neighbor with such goods
as God has given us, in his necessity. How is this saying (you have recryne
freely, give freely) to be understand
And whereas Christ says, you have received freely, give it therefore again
freely, it is to be understand of the gift of power and of healynge, which
the Lord did from heaven above give to his disciples and Apostles to the
stabishment and confirmation of his Euangelical doctrine.

Whereas we are commanded not to possess gold or silver nor money in our
girdels, You shall not possess at. how is it me^t
not to have a wallet, not two cotes, not a rod not shoes in the way or
journey, it is not against the commune laws of private possessions, it does
not take away possessions from the ecclesiastical ministers and rulers: but it
teaches and shows that they which be disciples, hearers, and scholars,
should give both meat and drink to their masters and teachers, and it is
not requisite that they which do teach and preach the word of God should
find them selves. For every work man by the law of nature is worthy to have
his reward and fyndyng. Who soever does ley these precepts of Christ against
the laws which do allow propriety of goods and against other honest
civil ordinances for the gyuynge of stype^des to them which do ministre in
the church, he does not only impounge and infringe the law of nature and
politic ordinances and acts, but also he does improve and disalow the
doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, which in his church has constituted and
ordained diverse ordres of ministers, which has commanded that by the commune
charges of the church they should be found and maynteyned. As it is a great
and a foul error to make these laws by me rehearsed to serve for all kind
of men without respect, and so to ley them as laws contrary to the commune
laws and honest profitable and necessary ordinances of Magistrates and
rulers: so it is a very pernicious error to hold and persuade that those
precepts of liberality in gyuynge and of lendyng freely without profit and
usury do perteyne to all manner of men, and to lay them against the honest
politic ordinannces of co^tractes, of purchasing of lands or teneme^tes, and
of enterest. Every precepte must be accommodate and made to serve for this
kind or that kind of men, according to the state and degree that they be of.
For likewise as the Magistrate does not sin and offend in iudgegyng,
condemnynge, resistynge of evil and in recoueryng of stolen goods. etc. if he
do use his authority and power as he ought for to do: even so does he not
transgress which does bye and purchase any thing of them with whom he may
lawefully contract and bargayne for profit and gain. And as the precepts of
Christ do not bind all men indifferently or a like, so by this precepte of
lendyng, to lend to all sorts of men we are not bound. For by that which we
have declared, it is manifest that the precepte of Christ concerning lendynge
and alms deed does not perteyne to the third sort of the three sorts of
men which we have rehearsed. Wherefore if any man do either give for ever (as
the common saying is) or else do lend any thing to any of these men which
be of the third sort: he does it of his own free will without necessity or
compulsion of the law of God, for frindshippe sake, to whom he may without
grudge of conscience, if him pleases: neither give nor lend: the law byndyng
him not thereto. For as much then: by the precepte of gyuynge and lendynge we
are not bound, to the third sort of men, that is to say, to the rich and
substantial men, so is it not prohibited and forbidden to them among them
selves, that is to say: such as they be themselves, rich and substantial to
bargayne and make contractes for honest gaynes and laweful l^cre: nor yet the
profit and gain, which for the use either of money or any other thing is
receyned and taken with reason, not excessiuely of those men which are of the
third sort: is not to be named usury. For usury perteyneth and depends
only on that thing which is lent, which lone is due without denial by the
law of god to the needy, and not on other manner of occupiynges by contractes
and bargaynes which is propre to the third sort of men. Wherefore byinge and
yurchasing of land and tenementes, not with to great damage and loss of the
seller: is no usury. Contrary wise sith yt in the precepte of Christ of gyuyng
and lendinge, is commanded, that men of the first and second sort should be
succored and helped, either by free gift or lendynge, without any hope of
vantage, it shall not then be lawefull in no case to take little or more for the
gain and profit of that which thou haste either given or lent to such men
as they be. For nature teaches and byddeth us to help him yt needs freely,
the which thing Christ him self also does command If any thing be taken
of such men as they be: it is vsuty: for as much as it is unlawful to bargayne
with them any manner of ways for lucre and vantage. And the magistrate what to
ever he be which does permit contractes and bargains to be made for lucre
and vantage with any of these two sorts of men, does wickedly: for he does
permit that thing which is forbidden by the law of God, which the law of
nature condemns. And yet, for all that the magistrate does thus permit and
suffer: they which so do, can not be excused thereby before God, which do take
of the^, which are in neces^^ti, any lucre or gain for the use of any thing
which they do give or lend.

By this declaration of the precepts of Christ, concerning liberality in
gyuing and lending: and by the exposition of the laws of Moy ses concerning
vsuries: and by the conferring of the laws together: I doubt not but it is
manifest and open that the purchasing ofla^des or housynge, is no vsurary
bargain, nor reproved by the co^mau^ dementes of God, if it be done according
to reason and conscience: with the third sort of men: with who^ the law of
God permits to bargayne for profit and gain.

It is allowed and also confirmed by the Emperor his majesty, The Parliament
at worms.
and authority of the whole Empire to purchase and to bye land according to
right and conscience. Twenty years purchase is apyroued by all laws.
It is also in ye counsel had at Worms by the decree of the whole Empire, that
he which will purchase so much rent as will come to five florens by the year:
shall pay for the purchase thereof, one hundredth flore^s, which is after twenty
years pur chase. This manner of purchasing the authority of the empire does
nu^bre among those co^tracts, which are both profitable, lawful and
ind^ffere^t, co^firminge and defe^ding it b^ the common judgment and decree
of the said Parliament, discha^ging it of the sclau^dre and naught report of
all vsurary bargaynes co^tractes. Bisydes this the Emperor with all his
nobility with fuco^sent and agreement of the whole n^bre assembled together at the
say Worms, have and do pronounce tha^ man or men what so ever they (...) to
commit usury and to be usurers which do purchase for one hu^dret that is, To
^ye under xr. years pur chose is vsurp
five score florens, abo^ five flore^s by the year, and of year ^ rent. This
moderation which the empire has taken in purchasi^ is according to reason and
equiti^ declaring yt in purchasing of re^te^ there is a certain equality and an
i^ different order to be observed, ne^ ssary and profitable for the fellow: ship
of men and conversation of man. Therefore that same ordinance men may use, as
just and profitable, being the co^stitution and decree of a lawful Magistrate.
Wherefore it ought not to be taken as an vsurary and unlawful contract: for
as much as it has been and is decreed and ordained by the authority of the
public Magistrates and rulers. This co^stitution and order taken and demanded
by the authority of the whole Empire, is not contrary to the law of nature:
for it is not against the commune profit, it is not with the hurt and hinder
aunce of any man, but to their healpe and succor, it is indifferent and equal
for the seller, as well as the byer, it is not against the love which we do owe
to our neighbor: therefore it ought not to be improued. The consciences of
those men which d^ purchase after this order ought^ not to be disquieted,
doing their feate with a good conscience and without filthy desire of
unlawful sucre and gain.

Also for ye honest mainteining^ of occupiynges, in bying and selling and other
manner of trades which are used among substantial and rich me^, the use of
other men's m^ney is necessary, for without tha^ no business ca^ be done: and who
tha^ does take that away from among^ me^, he does detract and pluck much from
the co^mu(...) says that men (I do mean thos^ men of the third sort, to who^
nether gift, nor lone by the law o^ God is dew) ought not to ba^ gain
among the^ selves for a m^derate and lawful gaynes to be tak^ for the use of
their money does err and kicketh against the common profit. For it is right
yt that ma^shoulde have some gain, with whose money an other man does get
profit and va^tage. Moderate pr^ite and gayn^ it may be tak^ among the rich
for the use of their money.
Wherefore sith that every man can not nor ought not to esteem and judge after
his own mind and will, what is right, indifferent and equal to be taken for
the use of money, let us follow the minds, judgments and se^te^ces of
Magistrates lawfully ordained, concerning such manner of bargaynynge, wherein
the use of money is bought and sold.

The Eua^gell of Christ does require in all worldly business and civil matters
a just and an equal order for all parts to be observed, but how and after
what facion it shall be observed and kept: it shows no form nor exe^ple:
neither generally in all manner of co^tractes, nor yet specially or sauerally by
them self, as what is just or contrary, equal or unequal, it declares
nothing at all. Therefore it is necessary in all civil and temporal matters,
to follow the common ordinance made and ordained by Magistrates and rulers
agreing to reason, equity, and conscience, being not lawefull for any man to
excede and pass the limittes and bond of those public ordres confirmed and
approved by the authority of superiors. Thewhiche laws and ordinances of
the public Magistrates we are bound to obey, not only for fear of the
pains for the transgressors in the laws contained: but also for conscience
sake. Therefore those me^ do offend which do bye and purchase of yearly re^t
above the some of five florens for an hundredth florens: for they do against the
order and decree of the whole Empire which can not excuse them selves though
they do lay for them the possession and propriety of the thing saying, They
do not offend which de purchase a^^et. x. or vi^ years, purchase I warrant
you.
yt the laud was his own which did sell it, that he might do therwyth what
him lists and such other words.

For although that every man is proprietary and lord of his own goods: yet
no man may use the^ at his own pleasure and will against the order of the
law. For the Lord and the magistrate which is his ministre, are the lords
and heads both of our body and goods, we are but the dispensers and stuardes
thereof. Therefore it is necessary that in the stuardshippe to us, of the Lo^rde
committed, and in the administration of our goods, that we do behave our
selves after the will of the Lord and the ordinances of the lawefull
Magistrates and gouerners.

For as much then as the purchase of house and land, and the gain thereof
remains and also does yearly fructify and bring profit to him which bought
the purchase, By (...) ^^^^o^ he pr^ueth (...) no usury to purchas^ land^^
the thing which was sold does not by the use thereof consume and wast.
Therefore it is not against nature for the use of the thing which was sold to
take profit^ and gain according as the laws have ordained. For, to sell the
use of a thing which does not consume, is of him self no sin: if it were,
then should it be unlawful, to let forth any thing to hyar, and such
other co^tractes: wherein both the use of our goods and also of our
personages and bodies for a time are sold. To sell the use of our money, the
circumstances thereof do make it sin and grievous, of it self it is none. As
to sell the use of thy money to him which is in necessity, being of the two
first sorts of me^ which we have declared and also because it is sold against
the commune law. The state, condition and quality of ye person declares this
contract to be lawful or unlawful: when a man from riches falls to pou^^tie.
In this contract a man with conscience ca^ not demand any gain or va^tage:
because this manner of contract of bying the use of money in courts of
conscience is not called bying and sellyng, but takes an other name of it, and
is called a lone or money lent, in the which thing lent and borrowed, the use
of ye thing ought not to be sold. Also it is against naturyt, yt thing, which
is spent, consumed or lost, and of it self increases not, nor brings any
manner of fruit of his own nature to the detter, should bring lucre and gain
to the creditour, that is to him, which delivered the money. For it is sin
and repugnant to the law of nature, in this cause to sell the use of any
thing: when with the use of the thing, the thing also it self is wasted and
consumed of his own nature, or to speak more plainly, when the use of the
thing is the spendyng and wastyng of the thing whose use is sold. These
things well weighed and considered, it is manifest and clear yt the purchasing
of lands is allowed by the authority of the whole Empire, yt it is not
contrary to the law of nature, nor none other law, nor yet repugnant to the
maynteynaunce of fellowship and amicable society of man in this life, all manner
suspication of usury by the authority of the said counsel being taken away
from it.

Some men there be which do doubt, Interest.
whether a man may look and demand amends and recompense, for the damage
and loss which he has sustained in forbearyng the money which he did lend,
longar then the time yt it was lent for: or when the man which did borowe the
money, did not according to his promise pay it again, but differred the
payment thereof lo^gar the^ w^as promised to the loss, hinderaunce and hurt of
the le^der, whether in this case it should be usury to demand any
recompense, yea or nay. For as much as this is about the question of
lendynge, which ought to be free without vantage and gain, it is thought
that it should be usury. Although that enterest as well as usury is bought,
that thing which is lent, yet there is great difference between them. For an
action which is taken for interst, is for the damage and loss which the
creditour does sustain that he may be saved harmeles. Contrary wise anaction
of usury, is for no damage which the creditour has had or sustained, but for
gain and va^tage which he would have. In this matter the mind and
judgment of the civil law must give to us light, what is to be done, which
allowe^h reco^pensation and making of amends for so much damage and hurt as
the creditour has sustained, which recompense is called the interest, which
sentence and mind is co^fourme and agreeable to reason. For it is against all
reason, that the thing lent should be damage to the lender, and that the good
wy^ of the lendar, and his good deed should be reco^pe^sed with an evil turn
and hurtes. Matk^
How be it I would counsel every godly man (what soever the law does permit
grant and suffer) for to follow that thing which shall stand with equity and
charity. For this is the most surest and best way. This have I spoken of
usury, and of purchasing of lades and tenementes. Now let us return again
to the text.

The text
And has not taken any gifts or rewards against the innocent.
Those gifts and rewards, which are given for tokens of love and friend
ship among friends and lovers, are not meant, nor blamed by these words of
the Psalmist, but such gifts and rewards whereby the innoce^tes dosuffre
damage and hurt, whereby also, right, equity and justice are abused and
perverted. B^^ynst i^dg^s which, do take gifts whereby the ^nnocentes a^^
(...) (...)
Therefore it is spoken openly and manifestly of those gifts which are taken to
the hurtes and wrong of the innocent and of him which is with out blame. By
these sentences and words of the Psalm al they are judged to eternal
damnation, which for their own profit and vantage do give sentence against
right and justice which do mayn teyne and prolonge unjust suetes which do
counterfeite just causes and quarrels for their own lucre and vantage, and
finally who so ever does wrong and hurt the innocent for to get any gain or
profit thereby. It is generally spoken it perteyneth to al states, degrees and
ordres of life to all manner of men, and not to Judges and rulers only.
Likewise as he is guilty of eternal damnation which has received any reward
against the innocent, The giver as well as the ^eceyuer is thr^^tened.
so is he also which has given the reward to do the innocent harm, which
does give (I say) yt by his brybes he might corrupt justice and ryghtuousnes
to yt hurt of his neighbor. This man does against the precepte of god, which
precept does command brotherly love with all purity and sincerenes, which
commands us to love our neighbor as our own selves, and to do to him as
we would be done to. The Lord does not permit to quite evil for evil, hurt
for hurt, one evil word for an other, much les does he permit and suffer
that we shall sclaunder the innocent, yt we shall seek to hurt him with our
brybes. For as much as we now do talk of rewards and gifts, it is often
times had in question, when there ye magistrates or any other officer, Whether it
be lawful for a Judge to take any gi^^^ at (...)
before whom causes being in controversy use to be decided and to be made an
end of by judgments, with a good conscience, without the wrath and
ve^geau^ce of God: either before the cause is heard, or after the sentence is
given and pronounced: may take of both or either of the seuters any rewards
and gifts. In answeryng to this question the crafty and ungracious
imagination of men may obiecte many things, which shall seem and appear to
be according to right and equity. but the doubt and question of this matter
ca^ not be dissolved and concluded with uncertain, dark and mistie opinions
of me^ with their co^iectures and persuasions, devised to maynteyne their
fylthy lucre and gain, but by the manifest scriptures and open laws which are
co^fourme and agreeable to reason. This is without all doubt that al manner of
Judges and magistrates are forbidden to take gifts and rewards, for this
cause and end, that they should not being corrupted give no wrong judgment
and sentence, that they should not have any occasion craftily ^to prolo^ge and
co^tinewe the suit to the hurt and damage of any of the parties, or to
color and devise any crafty and unjust matter to the hinderau^ce of the
other part, either accusar or defendar, in recompense of y^ rewards which
they have received. It is an open commandment of God, to judge justly and
ryghtuously. The very natural reason of man does both know and judge it to be
an unlawful thing for to abuse and corrupt the authority of rightuous
judgment. About the which question the mind of man does reason with it
self, asking: whether that a good and godly Judge and Magistrate (which for no
reward wyldo wrong or peruerte the right order of justice) may take gifts
of the sueters, before the cause be heard or after the sentence is given, yea
or nay? Concerning this question I will speak some thing in this place briefly
and with few words to satisfy yt mind of the^, which do put it forth for no
il intent or purpose: for no manner of covetousness, whose mind their conscience
does move and also gives warning of the health of their soul, and of the
glory of the Lord. The use of such gifts which seuters do give to the
magistrate or Judge, in no common wealth can be just, profitable, good or
godly, nor yet the end or intent wherefore the gift or reward is given can be
laudable, comme^dable and good: but clean contrary to all common wealths full
of peril, danger and dis^ruction. Therefore it is not laweful nor mete, that
any magistrate should suffer or permit to any other, nor to him self for to
take any gifts and rewards of any man which does sue before the^ for any
matter in controversy, because they are worse then poison to all justice. The
Lord him self does forbid the magistrates to take any rewards, the causes
whereof, which are natural causes he does annex and join to his precept and
commandment. The which causes being joined to his precepts are general,
being taught us also of the law of nature. Wherefore they do perteyne to all
magistrates, and to al them which have any authority of judgment. For as much
then as the precepts and the causes of the precepts are general, universal
and natural: the Lord therefore does forbid all magistrates through out all the world to receive gifts or rewards of them which have any matter
dependyng before the^ to be determined by judgment. The precepts of the
Lord which do forbid the taking of gifts and rewards thou do find in
Exodus xxiii. Gifts do make wise me^ ^lynde.
Thou shalt take no gifts which do make blind those which are wise men, and
turn the words of just me^. Also in Deutero. xvii. Thou shalt not considre
the personage of any man, nor any gifts, which do blind the eyes of wise
men, and change the words of the just me^. Thou shall execute justly that
thing which is just and ryghtuouse. The Lord knew well enough, how weak
and wicked the nature of man is, how easy and light to fall, as oft^n as any
manner of occasion is given, and how much gifts and rewards do prevail and
weigh among men. For that cause the Lord did forbid the magistrates yt in no
manner of wise they should receive and take any gifts, not leaving forth the
cause of his prohibition, saying: because they do blind the eyes of men, and
change and alter the words of wise and just men, making the^ to speak other
wise then they would. It is a poisonous and a foul vice in a magistrate for
to covet, gape and hunte after gifts and rewards. Hereby a great part of
these execrable and cursed lice^tious liberty of al mischief is brought in,
which rages every where in common wealths. This, day by day, more and more,
does corrupt, infect and weakeneth public judgments and ministration of
justice, which are the sin^wes and stre^geth of common wealths.

The desire of gifts and rewards, is a detestable and a very pernicious vice
in them which be set in rule and authority, which does bring with it the
ruin and decay of al good things and godly ordres. For that cause the
magistrates and rulers, yea among the gentiles had a very ylname: Being evil
spoken and reported of for their gredines in receyuyng of gifts. Hesiodus a
greek Poet does give to those magistrates which are takers of rewards, an
odious and a very contumelious name: calling them gift takers. Of other wise
men among the greeks: they are named gift gluttons, or gift bealies. Always
among al nations this corruption of Judges and rulers has been odious, as
well in the receyuers and takers as in the gyuers. Al godly magistrates and
rulers have always abherred this vice, refusing to receive and accept gifts at
the hands of any man which has had any cause before them. Moses before God,
in the sedition of the people, reioysed and bosted him self of that he had
taken no gifts of any man at any time. Numeri. xvi. Samuel also (when Israel
dernaunded a king) was praised, because he never did take any reward of the
subjects which were under his governance and judgment, the first book of
the kings. xii. Chap. and Ecclesiasticus. xlix. Chap.

These two godly me^, Moses and Sainuell by their exe^ple do teach us, that
magistrates ought not to take or receive any manner of gifts of those persons
which do co^tende before them in judgment, and that al magistrates are bound
to obey the precept and commandment of God, without any manner of denial or
grudge, in yt they are forbidden to take and receive rewards of men stryuyng
before the^ in the law. The causes added unto the said precept of the said
prohibitio^ are so reasonable and just that no man, which has any wit at al
ca^ deny but it is most co^fourme to justice and to the law of nature, and
very alowable and expedient. David in the.xxvi. psalm, among other kinds of
wyckednes and impiety does count, nu^bre and rehearse the taking of rewards
and gifts, reputyng the^ to be wicked, which do receive and accept them,
worthy of great rebuke and blame, saying. Lord, let not my soul be cast
away and lost among the wicked, nor my life among men which delight in
blood: whose hands are full of iniquity. Their right hand is filled with
gifts and rewards. But I good Lord have entered in, in innocence and
pureness. Esaie also in the first Chap. sharply and wythsore words and bitter
chekes does rebuke them, which do take rewards while they be in office, If
the gifts which Judges do receive be theft by the law of God: then Judges are
thieves which do receive them and the gyuers also.
making the gifts which they so received, no better then theft and robbery,
speaking after this manner. Thy princes and rulers are unfaithful, fellows and
companions to thieves and robbers, they do love gifts, they do follow after
rewards for their unrighteousness. There be many (great pity it is) which do
think that they may heap up great nu^bre of gold and silver: that they may
get to them great riches by the taking and receiving of such corrupt gifts,
which do deceive and begyle their own selves with their own folishe thoughts
and cogitations, co^sideringe not yt the Lord does put forth and spend al
his riches and substance out of his own treasure, and that he makes no man
rich, with the hurt of any other man's health and welfare. They do not pondre
with them selves, that the Lord does punish all wicked thoughts and
damnable desires of getheryng together of riches, they do not weigh the old
proverb and saying (which is said of long experience) that evil got goods
are equal and fellows to the hurtes and injuries of other me^ nay they be no
les then hurtes and griefs in deed, not like and equal: but of the^ selves,
not several nor different, but al one thing. This one thing is so sure and
certain that nothing ca^ be more sure and certain, that goods and riches
gethered together by ungodly crafts and deuelishe ways prohibited of God, ca^
not be stable, firm, and of long continuance. They ca^ not last and endure
many years. What so ever is heaped together against the precept and
commandment of God, it shall at the last shamefully consume and vanishe away
like unto smoke, and as the Prophet Aggeus says, it is cast into a
bottomless bag, which does fall through and abides not.

The Lord does command all magistrates and all other to who^ any matters
being in controversy, are committed, for to be ended, that they do take no
gifts, threatenyng to the^ great pains for doing the contrary: therefore they
are foul deceived, which do think that they and theirs may be enriched and
grow to great substance by receiving and accompting of gifts with such brybery
and corruption.

The Lord him self, which is Lord and owner of ye gold and silver, with all
yt is contained in the earth bears witness, that riches and substance by
taking of gifts do not increase and grow, but minishe being scatered abroad
and lost. As it is to see in Job the.xx. Chap. Fire shall devour the
tabernacles of the^, which love to receive and take gifts. And the Proverbs,
xx. He does bring his house out of order which follows avarice and
covetousness: But he ye does hate and abhor gifts shall live. And
Esaie.xxxiii. Cha. He that walks in justice and ryghtuousnes and speaks the
truth: he that abhors gaynes won by violence and deceit, which does
pluck his hands from gifts. etc. that man shall dwell on high, whose safgarde
shall be in bulworkes of rocks, to him shall be given meat, and his waters shall
not fail. How manifest is it by these sentences that it is not only wicked
and ungodly for a Magistrate to take gifts: but also that the Lord does
punish it from above with the loss and perishyng of the goods.

Although there be many good and godly me^ in every place, some being
Magistrates and rulers, which had rather suffer great damage and hurt, then
for any manner of profit and lucre would pronounce a wrong sentence against
justice, yet for all that in no wise they may receive gifts or rewards:
because the Lord has forbidden it, and because also it is a very naughty
exemple, whereby the gredy and covetous sort of cormorantes would lightly take
occasion to bye and sell justice, to pyl and suck the juice of their flesh or
goods from them which are in law before them. One ca^^ exemple of a good man
does more hurt then a thousand of the wicked
The good men can not so sone do an evil deed, though it be against their
will: but the wicked quickly will do the same, and the more gladly, because
they take exemple of them, which are good. Therefore it is necessary that the
godly do voied all such evil exemples, which the evil men follow to the hurt
of many and to the utter destruction of commune wealths.

But forasmuch as they which are the magistrates and Judges are burdeined with
public matters of the common wealth having many and diverse cares in their
heads, being also occupied and let with other men's business, are constrained
to leave their own business and study for their own propre family, to their
great dii profit, aparte and undone, to take in hand other men's causes: for
as much (I say) as their lyuynges which they have given to them forth of the
treasure and coffers perteyning to the common wealth, are very small or almost
nothing at al for the great labors which they do take, for their great pains
and studies in seruinge of the commune wealth. It should or might seem to
stand with equity and conscience, that the magistrate or Judge of right
might take and receive rewards of those, in whose causes they do take pain,
since that nature does teach us, that one hand ought to wash an other, and one
benifite and good turn to be rewarded with an other, and finally that no man
ought to serve in war or other wise, as the Proverb is, on his own propre
costs and charges.

But if the thing be weighed and considered as it ought for to be: it may
sone be understand and perceived, that it is contrary to equity to take any
gifts of either part, either of the playntyffe or defendant. What cloak or
color so ever they can make or imagine for to defend it, not only because
that the Lord has forbidden it: but also for that it is a very pernicious
exemple in a common wealth to see a Judge to be a taker of gifts, and also
because that the parties, playntyffe and defe^dant are not bound of their own
propre expenses and charges to maynteine and find those ministrations and
offices which perceyne to the whole communaltie. Public officers ought not
to be maynteyned of private persons, but of the commune purse, and that the
co^munes are bound t^ provide sufficiently for thy that they shall not need to
bryde.
It is the duty and part of the co^munes upon their common purse to
maynteyne their public courts and common officers which are put and set in
office and rule to see equity and justice to be observed among al men in
their common public wealth. The parties which are suitors, sekyng to have
their matters decided have nothing to do therwyth. Moreuer although it be
against reason and conscience, that the magistrates and commune rulers should
be denied to have salaries and stipendes for their labors of the common purse
of the whole communaltie, yet they may not (because they do see and find
such ingratitude in the communes) do that thing which the Lord does
forbid, whereby the integrity and pureness of judgments might be corrupted.
For the fault of an other man can not excuse before God our delict: if we do
tra^sgresse his commandment. Judgments are ordained for to defend justice
and verity: indifferent for all men. The Magistrate is the ministre and
servant of al men together: not of any private man. Therefore they ought not of
right to be bought and sold of any private man: nor yet the expenses and
charges of the officers for their duty doing in ministryng of justice,
which is commune for all men, ought not to be gethered up of the parts which
be in the law before them: for as much as those parties are not the whole body
of the common wealths but several and private members of the whole body.

This is not my mind and sentence only: but it is the mind and sentence of
the old ancient godly and right writers. Saint Auste^ to Macedonius did
write these words. It is not lawefull for a Judge to sell just judgment, that
is, either to pronounce a ryghts sentence for reward, or to judge
vnryghtuously: or to teach the witness to say and depose, ye thing which
shall make for his purpose, although that the advocate may lawefully sell his
labourr and diligence, Advocates and counselers gave their ly^yng by sue^ers.
and the counseler his counsel. For the Judges are set to hear both parts
indifferently, the advocates and counselers do serve but for either of the
parts, either for the playntyffe or for the defendant: the playntyffe and
defendant having each of the^ their advocate and counsel for their money.
Gregory also does write. He that does judge ryghtuously: and looks for
reward: does commit fraud and gyle against the Lord: because he did sell
justice for money: which he is bound to ministre freely. They do use good
things naughtly, which for such lucre do ministre right judgment. For such
Judges as these be: it is not the defense and desire to mainteyne righteousness:
but the love of gifts and rewards, which causes them to do right: which
hope of lucre taken away: that they have no more trust of gifts: straight
way they will turn to the contrary. Receite of gi^ is a cortuption of justice.
The acception of gifts, is the preuarication and alteration of verity. To be
short, it is not laweful for ryghtuous and upright magistrates (which have
fully decreed and purposed with them selves not so much as one hear breadth to
swerve from justice, though the parties would give them never so much) to
receive any manner of gifts of the^ which are suitors, sith that the Lord has
forbid it expressly with threatenynge of pains to the doers of the contrary.

The exemples also of the ancient godly magistrates: do cry out against it.
Moreover it is against equity, that the public ministers of the whole
communaltie shall sell their ministry, and maynteyne their office with the
costs, charges, and expenses of the suitors which have their causes in
controversy before the^ Biside this: it is so naughty and euyi^an exemple in a
common wealth, that there can be none more pestilent, more poisonous, more
full of infection to the undoing of all public judgment, to the overthrowing
of al justice: The sentence (...) suspecte where a judge exceyueth gyf^rs
either before or af^^^.
and finally which makes (be the causes never so just and right, be the
sentence never so truly and ryghtuously given) yet both the cause and also the
sentence shall be suspected because of the receyuynge of rewards and gifts,
bisyde that also many foul sclaunders and controversies do rise and come
thereof.

That which I have said of rewards and brybes, is to be taken and
understand of al manner of benifites and pleasures, as well as of the rewards
and gifts, which of these parts that be in suit, are or may be given to the
magistrates, judges, or arbitrary Judges, either before the controversy be
ended, or afterward. This much have I said of the corruption in gyuynge of
gifts and doing of pleasures to those which are Judges, and those in whose
hands the ministration of justice does lie to be given by the^ which are
sueters.

The text
He that does all these: shall never fall.
The Prophet in this Psalm does not teach us, whereby and how we be
justified: but what manner of men they be which are justified, as I have in the
beginning of this Psalm declared ple^tifuly to you. The sense and mind of the
Prophet is: that all men which do fear God, and do walk through a pure and a
perfect faith in his precepts, shall come to eternal bliss and life
everlasting, for to such men the price of our redemption, and of the
forgyuenes of our sin is laid up of God in our Lord Jesus Christ. To them
which do live after the flesh, the salvation and health promised in Christ
does not perteyne.

The Prophet says that the godly can never fall, nor be moved nor changed,
although that every day, they be besette round about and also shaken with
tribulations and euyls: although I say they do sometime of the fragilitie of
this flesh stumble and fall. It is not the mind of the Prophet that godly and
virtuous men, are perfectly good without all spotte of sin: he says not,
that they be clean voyed of al human affections, and that no salt which is
in man can be found in them: but this is his meaning: that the godly can not
so be moved, can not so stumble and fall that they shall perish thereby. The
obedience of the godly being not perfect: but a new begone and an
imperfect obedience: the Lord does commend, allow and take for a perfect
and full obedience, suppliyng of his own goodness, that which lacks on their
part, which he does not lay to their charge: but keeps and preserves
them against death and hell in this life with his grace, in the life to come
with the glory which is promised. This is the mind herein of the Prophet
that no creature living, can be hurtful to them which do persevere and
continewe in the obedience of the Lord, and that they are steadfast, stable,
firm, immovable and sure against al manner of assaults, that Satan can do no
more harm with all his power against them, he can no more shake, steare and
move them, then can the storms of wind move, steare or cast down a house
which is strongly builded on a rock.

Thus ends the commentary of John Epinus upon the.xv. Psalm of David.

Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling in Sepulchers parish, at the sign
of the Resurrection, a little above Holborne co^dite.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


