ORIGO CASTI CORDIS.
Ego dormio et cor meum vigilat. cant. 5. Ego sto ad ostium et pulso, si quis
aperue: rit ianuam, intrabo ad illum. Apoc. ^.

Hieronymus Wier^ ferit et excud. Cum Gratia et Priuil. Piermans.



INSTRVCTIONS AND ADVERTISEMENTS, HOW TO MEDITATE THE Mysteries of the Rosarie
of the most holy Virgin MARY.

Written in Italian by the Reverend Father Gaspar Loarte D. of Divinity of the
Society of JESUS. And newly translated into English.

IHS



Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed Nomini tuo da gloriam.

THE AUTHOR to the devout Reader.
ALBEIT THE PROFIT and importance of holy prayer, and meditation of heavenly
things, has not been so well understood heretofore, yet is it now through
Gods good grace so much the better known, as it is more used. And amongst
other things which they are wont and may meditate that give themselves to
this holy exercise, the devotion of the holy Rosarie is one that is very
commendable, very easy, and almost exercised of each one; wherein the most
high and divine mysteries are contained: especially being instituted by the
glorious Patriarch S. Dominike, who received it by revelation of our Lady, as
his Religion does witness and observe. And having in like manner been confirmed
by many Popes, and enriched with many graces, prerogatives, and indulgences;
namely, by Pius Quintus of holy memory, as appears by the authentical
privileges which the Fathers of the said Religion have in Rome, Bononia,
Naples, and other places. Howbeit, because al know not how to meditate these
Mysteries (as it bohoueth) and by this lack they loose a great part of the
fruit which might well be gathered thereby, for their help this present
Treatise has been composed; wherein is showed, in what manner they ought to
meditate with greatest profit and consolation of their souls. And that thou,
well-beloved Reader, may the better understand, how fruitful this holy
devotion is to every sort of people, and how it behooves thee to exercise thy
self therein, thou may read the Chapter following wherein this matter is so
amply entreated of, as I hope thou will not grudge to read the rest of the
book, meaning to embrace this so holy an exercise, which thou may assuredly
believe, shal-be more profitable and pleasant, then painful and yrksome to
thee.

Monstra te esse Matrem.

Monstra te esse Filium.



Conditor Omnipotens, coeloque, saloque, soloque
Sanctius hac nullu^ Virgin fecit opus.
THE AUTHORS Preface touching the great profit and utility that may be
gathered by meditating upon the life of our Savior Jesus Christ; and in what
manner we ought to meditate the mysteries of the Rosarie (which are entreated of
in this Treatise) and contain in them the principal part of this most holy
life.
LIKE AS THE Son of God vouchsafed to come down from heaven to earth, and to
make himself man for the welfare and life of man, according to that the self
same word incarnate Ioh. 10. b Gal. 4. a.
says; I am come that men may have life, and that they may have it
plentilully: even so, for the conservation of this life of grace, and spiritual
consolation of man, one of the things that may most chiefly help him
herein, is the often meditating of the life of the said word incarnate Jesus
Christ our Savior, and the imitation of his most marvelous examples; since,
the celestial Father having given him to the world for a Luc. 2. c. Ioh. 1. a.
3. c 8. b. 12. f Act. 13. g
light, for a guide, and for a Schoolmaster and teacher of men; and the Son
himself assuring us, that 1. Ioh. 1. a. 2. b. Ioh. 13. b 1. Petr. 2. d
al, whatsoever he did, was done to give us an example, that we should do the
same; what should such do, as could not enjoy his vifible presence here in
earth? how should they be illuminated, guided, and instructed of him, if they
had not this remedy of the meditation of his most holy life? by means
whereof, he even at this day illuminateth, guides, and teaches us, as though
he were present, with that he erst did (wandering corporally in this world)
speak, work, endure, and teach.

IT BEHOOVES therefore, that this meditation serve us as a mirror, wherein, by
eftsons looking and taking view, we may with the eyes of our soul see that,
which with the eyes of our body we neither could nor can see; and according to
it direct and frame our life, since Romans 15. (...) 1. Pet. 2. d
al Jesus Christ his actions were done for our institution and instruction;
yea, as S. John the Apostle 1. Ioh. 2* (...)
says: Who so says that he dwells in Jesus Christ, that is to say, that he
is a member and servant of Jesus Christ, ought to walk as he has walked. As
if he had said: Who-soeuer says, that he is a member of Jesus Christ, must be
lowlye Mat. 11. d
and meek, as Jesus Christ was; must contemn al delights, honors, and
woorshipp of this world, as he did, seeking in all things the only glory of
God, Ioh. 7. c 8. g
and not regarding in any thing his own peculier estimation; he must love
friends and Mat. 5. g.
foes, do injury to none, and if any be done to him, Luc. 6. d 1. Pet. 2. d.
bear it patiently; desire rather to serve others, the^ to be Mat. 20. d
served him self. To be short, he must so love his neighbor, Mar. 10. g
as if need require at any time, he be ready to lose his life for his welfare
and salvation.

How is it then possible for a true Christian to do these and so many mo
things as be necessary to be done, to imitate Jesus Christ a-right, but if he
know that Jesus Christ himself did first practice and do them most
exactly? and how shall he wot them, but by eftsons meditating his life, and the
lively and perfect examples, which of such like works he left us? and how may
a man learn the lessons of charity, patience, poverty, obedience, and of al
other virtues, but if he know the life of the Lord of al virtues? and
therefore, as says glorious S. Bernard: Ber. sub fine^ sermon. 22. in Can.
In vain trauaileth he to attain virtues, that hops by any other means
then by the Lord of al Ps. 23. b. 79. 83. 88.
virtues to attain them; whose doctrine is a nurcerie of prudence; his mercy a
work of Justice; his life a mirror of temperance; his death a lively pattern
of prowes. Thou see, Reader, by this holy Doctor his words, confirmed by
the testimony of so many other famous men, how necessary the continual
meditation of Christ's most holy life is, to the obteining of such virtues as
be needful for all those that covet to participate of the true and everlasting
life.

Moreover, besides this so great a profit, which proceeds necessarily out of
this most laudable exercise, weigh well, good Christian Reader, what other
fruits, graces, and store of spiritual treasure do associate this holy
meditation. Tell me, I pray thee, what thing more sweeter, and of greter
consolation may any man desire, that has not wholly lost his taste, then to
meditate, discourse, and think upon the words, works, examples, and life of
our Savior Jesus Christ? Of whom we find Sap. 8. d.
written, That his conversation was without al sournes, and his company had no
encombrance, but joy and consolation: What time may we deem better spent,
then that which is employed in such profitable meditation? what exercise can
there be more meritorious or acceptable to Christ, then this, wherein the soul
is busied, in performing Mary Magdalen that most worthy penitent her function
and office, who Luc. 10. g Aug. 1. de Trinit. init ca. 10. to. 3.
chused the best part, in sitting her down at our Lords feet, and listening
to his words. The like did our Souerain Lady the blessed virgin Mary, Luc. 2. g
marking well, and reuoluing the same words in her heart: What thing may there
be more valable to gain mercy, grace, and the familiarity of Jesus Christ?
what more sovereign remedy to come by little and little to the contemplation of
his infinite majesty, then is attentive and serious meditation? Seeing the same
our Lord assures us himself thereof, Ioh. 10. b
saying: If any enter in by me he shal-be saved, and shall find most sweet
feedings. In fine, what thing may there be more easy or more pleasant for all
sorts of people, then is this holy meditation? since in meditating the life of
Christ, we must needs meditate withal the life of his blessed mother, as also
call the Apostles and other holy Saints to mind, that lived and conuersed
with him: yea, all the blessed Angels too, who greatly delight in this kind of
exercise, and therefore, no doubt, but favor greatly al those that use it. In
such wise, as if thou were not to receive any other guerdon, nor to reap any
other commodity by this so holy an exercise, yet ought this only thing to
allure, yea, constrain thee, to frequent and practice it; to wit, the pleasure
and sweetness which thy soul shall feel, in contemplating so holy a life, in
remembering his so absolute and wonderful works, in beholding with the eyes of
thy soul so beautful Ps. 44. a Sap. 13. a Bern. initio Ser. 2. de Epiph.
and amiable a Lord above all the sons of men.

What thing can be more sweet, then to consider his most holy behauiours? how
humble he was in his conversation; how affable in his words; how mild in
his answers; how fervent in his preaching; how severe in reprehending vice;
how zealous in procuring divine honor; how patient in putting up injuries;
how diligent in seeking the sauegard of souls; how full of compassion, in
bewailing others annoyes; how courteous in receiving sinners; how merciful in
pardoning offenders; how liberal, in granting that which was required him;
how mighty in his miracles; how modest in his going; how temperate in his
eating; how great a lover of poverty; how prone to pains; how frequent in
watching and praying; how gracious and amiable toward al men: he despised
none, although a sinner; he shunned none, were he sick or a lepre; he flattered
not the rich, ne drove the needy out of his company; he fledd al worldly
honors, and was not careful for temporal treasure; he was common to al; and to
Sic Paul 1. Cor. 2. d.
win al, conuersed with all. Briefly, he was so delectable, so sweet, and so
amiable, as it is not possible to find, wish, ne yet imagine, a more gracious,
exact, and perfect life then his was. What is he therefore that wil-be so
senseless, and of so corrupt a taste, as will not be delighted therewith, and
feel a singular sweetness in meditating of this so holy a life?

Nevertheless, think not, that in saying, that the meditation of Christ his
life is of so great importance, I mean to exclude his passion and death,
neither yet his Resnrrectio^ and Ascension; since under this word of life, al
these mysteries are comprehended; and out of the^ al ought thou to gather,
as it were, a pretty posie, to bear always about thee in thy bosom, like to
that of mirrhe, which the Spouse Can. 1. d
said in the Cantikes, she carried continually in hers. Good Ber. init. Ser. 43.
in Cant. and ger. 12. de d^lect. dei, in tract. de (...) be. viu.
S. Bernard said, how he had gathered such a one, out of all the distresses
and annoyances our Lord had in his infancy, the pains he abidd in preaching,
the toiles he endured in his voiages, the temptations he surmou^ted in fasting,
the tears he shedd in praying; and to say al at once, out of all the injuries,
outrages, scorns, spittinges, blows, nails, with all the other torments; and
amongst so many branches of this most sweet smelling mirrhe, he says, how he
left not that out of the sour drink which was given him on the Roode, nor yet
that wherewith he was anointed in the sepulcher. By which words this holy Saint
declares, how in meditating our Saviors life, al these things are to be
considered.

Howbeit, forasmuch as it is not long agone, that being commanded by my
superiors, I made a small Treatise that was published abroad, touching the
matter of the Passion, wherein were certain instructions and aduertisementes
given, both of the principal points thereof, and in what manner they were to be
meditated; mine intent was in this Treatise (being in like manner commanded me)
to have principally entreated of such other mysteries of this most holy life,
as had not been spoken of in the other Treatise. Notwithstanding, when I
afterward had perceived, how to write all that might be gathered out of the
holy Gospels touching the life, preaching, and miracles of our Lord, would be a
very long thing, and require a just volume, I determined with my self to write
only upon the mysteries of the Rosarie of the most blessed virgin Mary;
since, besides is so godly, renowned, and approved, a devotion as is
abouesaid in the Prologue; therein, in my fancy, are the chief points of the
life of Christ contained, from the time of his incarnation, until the sending
down of the holy Ghost; in-somuch as, who-soeuer he be that shall meditate
these well, may assure himself to have meditated the greater and more
principal part of his most sacred life.

This is the thing therefore, my derelye beloved brother, which I here present
unto thee; to wit, the meditations of the mysteries of the aforesaid Rosarie,
whereof each one, (as was done in the other meditations of the Passion) is
distinguished into three points, as-wel for the perfection Aug. ca. 16 lib. 2.
de doct. Chris. to. 3. and li. 2. q. euan. cap. 6. to. 4 and in psalm. 6. tom. 8
and devotion of this number, as also, that each one may meditate them more
amply, and with less confusion.

But because the points which I noted in the other meditations of the sacred
Passion were no whitt amplified and dilated, but only a bare text set down of
the matters that were to be meditated upon (the which was done, supposing that
each one would themselves, according to their devotion have dilated and
amplified the same) understanding since, that if some do make this discourse
and dilatatio^, yet, al for lack of capacity do it not; for this cause have I
done mine endeavor in this book, to content both the one and the other;
acknowledging my self, as S. Paul Romans 1. b.
says, to be indebted both to the learned and the ignorant. For the learned
therefore, I have thought good, after a text wise, first to set down that which
they may meditate upon in every mystery, leaving each one to pause therein,
and to dilate the same, according to their capacity and devotion: now for the
ignorant, that know not how to do this, without some further help, I have
showed the^ the manner, how to interteine the^-selues, and to discourse upon
each point, which soever they may think good to meditate upon; out of which
manner of amplification they may gather these commodities following.

1. First, they shall better understand the historye of that point, whereon they
purpose to meditate.

2. They may conceive the document or example, which sometimes is intermedled
for their iustruction.

3. They may learn, how other-whiles to ask our Savior such things, as
the point whereon they meditate, may most fitly minister occasion of;
other-whiles to yield thanks for such graces and mercies as they may be put in
mind to have been done unto them, and to this purpose may they apply the
vocal prayer set down at the end of every misterye.

4. They may with the reading of these amplifications, help the^-selues to
avoid the distractions and wandering of mind, which other-whiles, yea,
eftsons, happeth in time of meditation.

5. The Apostrophes and familier speeches which I have now and the^
intermedled in this method and manner of dilatation, may serve to excite and
kindle devotion, being weak or wanting, as happeth many times to be.

6. After they have read more then once the foresaid manner of amplifications
upon each point, they shall perceive themselves so sufficiently instructed, as
that of themselves they may either altogether, or in part, be able to amplify
such articles as they are minded to meditate upon; and when they found nothing
suggested of their own brain and peculier devotion, yet may the readinge of
these points that are here propounded the^, with their amplificatio^s well and
leisurly considered, serve for a sufficient meditation, whiles nothing else were
granted them. And of these, and such like fruits which the simple sort may
suck and gather out of the fore-saide amplifications, the learned may in like
wise help them selves ther-withal at some times, when best shall like them; so
that, as-wel to the one as the other they shall not be unprofitable.

Moreover, this manner of distinguishing and entertaining a man's self upon
every article, may serve for all sorts of people; for who so minds to
discourse upon all the three points of the mystery, whereon he meditateth, well
may he so do; and who fancied not to pause in each point so long time, may
make choice of that point that shall best like him; serving his turn, if he
think good, with the meditating of one only point, and the amplification
thereof, if he list; which he may right easilye find out, seeing every point is
so plainly distinguished apart, as one hangs not of an-other, but each one is
absolute in his own conclusion. I think it good besides, to advertise thee in
this place, that the instructions which I have given thee in the 6. 8. and 11.
Chapters of, The exercise of a Christian life; as also those aduises that I set
thee down in the Tretise I wrote of the meditation of the Passion, at the end
of the instruction, may greatly help thee to the better meditating of these
mysteries; all the which documentes I here omit for brevity sake, referring
thee only to the foresaid places in the books above especified.

Finally, I think it meet to advertise thee, that for-somuch as in the
institution of the Rosarie it is ordained that tenn Aue Mary's and one Pater
noster be recited upon every mystery, these may be said in three sundry
manners. The first is, to recite them before thou enter into thy meditation. The
second is, to say them in the very time of meditation. The third is, to say
them after a man has finished his meditation. And this last way is, in mine
opinion, the best, since the soul does commonly after meditation find it self
more supple, and better disposed to pray with attention and devotion. Yet
mean I not hereby to make a law, but that each one may say them, at such time
as best shall like them.

These particularities have I thought good to touch, minding thereby to help
nouices, and such as are smallye acquainted with this exercise, a labor that I
have willingly laid my handss to, as-wel, for that it was appointed me by
those that have authority to command me, as also, in regard of the hope I
have conceued that it shall benefit the brethren of our company, for whose
profit and commodity, this pamphlet was principallye composed: whom I exhort
and pray as earnestly as I can, to give them selves diligently to this holy
exercise of meditation, considering that for so small pain they are promised so
great a gain, and so singular consolation, as I am persuaded al those shall be
able to testify, who with a willing and fervent desire shall for some time give
themselves to assaye and prove the same: For verily do I hope, that such shall
by experience find his life to be the guide of their life, who is the way,
Ioh. 14* (...)
the truth, and the life; to whom, with the Father and the holy Ghost be
eternal and everlasting glory.

Amen.
TOTIVS LIBRI SVMMA.
Nunciat, inuisit, Parit, Offertur, Reperitur:
Orat, Flagra, Vepres, Fertque, Subitque Crucem:
Viuit, and Ascendit, Paracletum mittit ab alt^^
Mors Mariae, Redimit sacra Corona Caput.
THE FIFTEEN MYSTERIES OF THE ROSARIE OF OUR LADY.

WHEREOF THE FIVE FIRST ARE CALLED IOYFVL; THE SECOND DOVLFVL; THE THIRD
GLORIOUS.

THE ANNVNTIATION.


Hic Maria Gabriel Superi Consulta Senatu^
Nunciat, implentur viscera Casta Deo.
THE FIRST IOYFVL MYSTERY IS OF THE INcarnation of the Son of God; and of
the Annunciation of our Lady; where upon thou shall meditate these three
points following.
FIRST, that Cordial charity of God, who 1. Ioh. 4. c Ioh. 1. b. 3. b
vouchsafed to be incarnate, and to make himself man, as we are, to repair
thereby the fall of miserable mankind, delivering us by this means from the
slavery of Satan, and this without any merit of ours going before, Tim. 1. b
Ad Tit. 3. (...)
worthy the receeuing of so great a benefit.

SECONDLY, Consider, how for the accomplishment of this mystery, he sent that
celestial Embassage to the most sacred virgin, the which Gabriel the Angel
carried, according as the Evangelist S. Luke Luc. 1. c.
reports. Wherein thou may contemplate the circumstances of the
Ambassador, and of the great Lady, to who^ the Embassage was sent; as also the
words of those most amiable speeches that passed betwixt them twain.

THIRDLY consider, how presently after the most sacred Virgin had yielded her
consent to the message that was delivered her by the Angel, this divine
mystery was forthwith accomplished. Here may thou meditate, what
marvelous matters were done in that instant.

THE FIRST Article may be amplified, by meditating the pitiful estate which
the world was in, when God vouchsafed to bestow this his so bountiful a
benefit upon it; how many sins did every where bear sway; how many errors,
how great blindness, how many dangers, how slender a desire, ne yet any
imagination to receive so great a benefit; and yet, such was the love of God
toward the world, as without any good desert of our part, yea, with an
infinite number of most enormous crimes; the dai being come, which his majesty
had before al days ordained, Gal. 4. a. Leo Papa Ser. 2. de Natiuit. D^m.
he remembered them that had forgotten him, and with most rare clemency
vouchsafed to visit them that deserved most severely to be chastised; and to
redress the endless evils and miseries that reigned round about the world;
albeit so beetle blind were men, as they knew them not, nor any whit perceued
the^. And for the doing of this matter, he disdained not to join himself to
the misery of humane nature, making himself man for us, and thral to
thousands of annoyes, for our salvation. O inestimable Charity? O infinite
liberality? Lord, thou liberally departest with more to the world, the^ it
either durst crave or wish for at thy hands. What did thou epsy in us, O
Lord, to constrain thee in such lowly wise to visit us? what were our merits
toward thee? what services had we performed to thy divine majesty? thy mere
goodness it is, that only provoke thee thereto; that thy mere clemency causes
thee to descend from heaven to earth, and to take humane flesh in the blessed
virgins womb for our welfare, which made thee erst to descend down Exodus 3.
a Deuteronomy. 33. b. Mar. 12. b Luc. 20. f. Act. 7. d Ber Ser. in verba. 12. Apoc.
signu^ magnum apparuit.
into the bushe, taking pity of thy peoples affliction, and to procure their
deliverance, as then thou saidest to Moises; whereby thou figuredst this thy
second descent of clothing thy self with the mantel of our humanity. All the
Angels praise and thank thee for this thine ineffable mercy; seeing man can-not
condignely thank thee therefore, nor yet acknowledge it sufficientlye.

IN THE second point thou shall have a plentiful subject to dilate upon,
considering on the one side the quality of the Ambassador which God sent down
for the dealing in this affair; his high estate, being one of the Luc. 1. b.
Ber. non long a princ. hom. 1. super Missu^ est*
principal Angels of heaven; the beauty and brightness of body, wherein he
appeared to the most sacred virgin; the humility and reverence, wherewith he
saluted her; the gracious speeches, replenished with all consolation, which he
used toward her; the great skill and wonderful wisdom he showed in reporting
his Commission to her, declaring by degrees the divine mystery of the
Incarnation. In this manner may thou likewise discourse upon all the other
circumstances.

On the other side, weigh well the excellency and souerain dignity of her, whom
this embassage was sent to; her modest countenance in harkening; her grave
prudence, in pondring the words that were spoken to her; that wel-beseeming
bashfulnes which made her blush, in hearing her own praises; the fervent zeal
she carried to virginity, which made her make answer, meaning to be assured
thereof; the lively faith, wher-with she firmly believed all that was on Gods
behalf announced her, for the which she was of her cousin S. Elizabeth Luc. 1.
(...)
singulerly co^me^ded; and lastly, the profou^d humi with she resigned and gave
up her self as our Lord his obedient servant, he having chosen her for his
beloved mother. If thou discuss diligently al these particularities, as al
other the like circumstances of this divine mystery, thou shall find thy
self rapt into such an admiration, as shall make thee cry out with the Roial
Psalmist Ps. 138
David: Great and wonderful is thy wisdom O Lord, it is so high, as I cannot
comprehend it. It surpasses my retche and understanding; since of what side
soever thou turnest thee in this Embassage, thou shall find great, and right
miraculous meruailes. Great is the message; great the Lord that sent it; great
is the personage, to who^ it was sent; great the Ambassador that brought it;
great is the affair that is intreted of; great and marvelous the manner of
proceeding in it. Our Lord be lauded every where, Dan. 6. g
that does so great matters both in heaven and earth.

IF THOU desire to stay upon the third point, thou shall never want matter,
meditating the things that took effect presentlye after the Queen of heaven
had given her consent, Luc. 1. d.
saying: Fiat mihi secundum verbum tuum. Be it done unto me according to thy
word. Since in that very instant the most sacred body of Jesus was by virtue
of the holy ghost formed of the most pure blood of the blessed virgin Mary; and
in the self same instant was his glorious soul created and infused in his
body; and in the ^ame instant was his most holy humanity united with the
eternal word of God in one self-same person. And thence-forth was the blessed
virgin mother of God, Queen of Angels and men, full of grace, replenished with all the gi^tes and prerogatives meet for so incomparable a dignity. O Fiat
most puissant and effectual? with an-other Genesis 1. (...).
Fiat God did erst make the heavens, earth, and all the creatures of the world;
yet were there far greater and more important matters made with this Fiat*
seeing that by means of this Fiat, the same God made him-self man, and man was
made God; with all the other right wonderful works that proceed out of this
change and most miraculous metamorphosis.

O mighty Lady, thou have not said without cause in thy Luc. 1. c.
Canticle, That he which is mighty has done great things unto thee; and what
greter matters might there be, then to have made thee his mother, thou enjoying
still thy pure and immaculate virginity? what greter matter, the^ to have made
thee his temple, Vide Litaniam B. Maria in fine huius ^^bri.
and the sacred tabernacle of the holy Ghost? what greater matter, then he who^
the cope of heaven can not contain, to have vouchsafed to shut him-self up in
thy sacred womb, it being made thereby a celestial Paradise, wherein the
Angels delight to adore their Maker. Verilye the Almighty has done great
matters to thee, whereby thy spirit may rightly rejoice, and without
intermissio^ magnify him, who has so highly magnified thee. And we al may
rightly for the same cause co^gratulate with thee, and praise and reverence
thee perpetually, endeavoring our selves al we may, to be thy true and faithful
servants.

A PRAYER.
GREAT and ineffable was the joy, O most sacred virgin Mary, which thy most
holy heart was seized with, when being saluted by the Angel Gabriel, and
understanding the cause of his Embassage, thou with a most profou^d humility
resignest thy self into our Lord his hands, and Aug. ca. 5. lib. 2. de*
Symb. ad Catech. Chrisol. Ser. 143.
were presently thervpo^ made the true mother of thine own Father and Creator.
I beseech thee Lady, by this thine incomparable dignity, that with thy worthy
prayers thou will obtein me abu^da^t grace, whereby I may co^ceue spiritually
the self-same Lord, and know always how to keep him in my soul. Amen.

THE VISITATION.


Visitur Elizabeth, Christumque salutat ab alu^
Infans, qui geminae legis alumnus erat.
THE SECOND IOYFVL Mystery is touching our blessed Lady her visiting of S.
Elizabeth; whereupon thou may meditate these three articles or points
following.
THE FIRST is, how our Lady having Luc. 1. (...)
by the Angels revelation understood, how her Cousin was now six months
gone with child, she with an exceeding charity and diligence went to visit
her.

SECONDLY, Consider the passing joy which S. Ibidem.
Elizabeth felt presently after she had seen the blessed Virgin, and heard the
voice of her salutation, as also the words which she spoke in her praise and
singular commendation.

THIRDLY, contemplate, how our Lady hearing the words that S. Elizabeth
spoke, and understanding the secret things that were revealed unto her, she
was s^rceased with a great joy and exultation of spirit; and being whollye
inflamed in divine love, pronounced that most mistical Canticle of Luc. 1.
(...)
Magnificat anima mea Dominum.

MINDING to pause in the consideration of the first Article, meditate the
charity which caused the most sacred mother to enterprise so long and
laborsome a journey, only to visit, and to do some service to that holy
old woman Saint Elizabeth, woting well, that by her presence she might be
greatly comforted and helped.

This Amb. in Luc. lib. 1. and. 2. de virginibus.
may serve thee for a lesson to endeavor thy self, according to her example,
to exercise the works of charity and mercy with a willing and ready heart.
Ponder likewise her most profound humility, wherewith albeit she received so
high a dignity, as to be made the mother of God, yet did she not for all that
refuse to humble and depresse her-selfe, in going to do that office, which the
mener sort is wont to perform unto their betters. O most holy and most humble
mother, how far art thou estraunged from al arrogant hawtines; how far
abhorring from the pestilent presumption of men and women of this world, which
being but vile and abject in the sight of God, will exalt themselves, and
couete to be visited, courted, and served of al others, not knowing that, most
sovereign Lady which thou knew so well, to wit, Eccle. 3. (...) Phil. 2. a.
that to find favor in the face of God, and to be respected of his divine
Majesty, look how much any one is greater, and more worthy renown, and so
much ought he the more to humble and submitt himself to others.

Thou may extend thy self in the consideration of the second point,
meditating, how great efficacy the presence and speech of the most sacred
virgin is of, and how happy those are to be deemed, who^ graciously she
favors, seeing S. Elizabeth (immediat-after she was visited and saluted of
her) received, both she, and the child she bore in her entrals, so great a
joy and marvelous illumination of spirit; Sithe^s the mystery of the
Incarnation of the son of God (at that time utterly unknown to the whole
world) was revealed unto her. And by the words which she uttered the^ unto our
Lady, plain testimony did she give, what other graces and favors she had
received, the which ought mightily to move thee to enforce thy self al thou
may to be a devout and zealous servant of this great Lady, by honoring her
continually in thine heart; whereby thou shall merit to be spiritually visited
and favored of her; in such wise, as thou may have an assured hope, never
at any time to be destitute of God his divine gifts and graces.

TOUCHING the contemplation of the third Article, thou shall have a large scope
to walk in, imagining how this most sacred soul of the Luc. 1. d.
holy mother was affected in hearing what her cousin S. Elizabeth said unto
her; how gracious, how glittering, how gladd she was, and replenished with all
consolation; how she blusshed, to hear her own praises spoken of; how lowly
she humbled her-self, attributing all the virtues she was adorned with, to the
bountiful goodness of our Lord that gave her the^; with how inflamed an
affection she thanked God, for this his so singular a benefit done both to
her, and to all the whole race of mankind. In so^me, as not able any longer to
repress her inward exultations, she discovered her-selfe at last, and gave the
fervent flames of divine fire leave to burst out, which burned secretlye within
her holy heart, revealing to the world what tresures God had endowed her with,
and this by the divine Canticle full of mysteries, which she then pronounced,
Luc. 1. e.
magnifying thereby that Lord, who had so greatly magnified her, and confessing
plainly, that her lowlines and humility was occasion of this her so high a
dignity.

O sacred virgin both great and little; great in thy holiness, great in the
graces and favors which thou haste received from God; great, in the gretest
dignity that was ever imparted to any pure creature. Little in thine own eyes;
little, in respect of thy profound humility; little, in regard of thine
innocence and simplicity of an infant, which is a very necessary and mat.
18. a and. 19 b. Mar. 9. e Luc. 9. f 1. Cor. 14. d.
requisite virtue to enter into the kingdom of heaven with* Right woorthely
said one, Ber. ho. 1 super Missus est.
that with thy virginity thou pleasedst God; but with thine humility thou
made thy self his mother. Alas! why can-not I learn of thee, and of the
blessed fruit of thy womb, to be humble in heart; seeing that, as thou
affirmest, and thy son has confirmed, Luc. 14. c and. 18. c
the humble are those only that shal-be by him exalted.

A PRAYER.
RIGHT delectable and plentiful was the joy thou had, O most sacred virgin,
and mother of God, when being replenished with charity, thou wentest to visit
thy holy cousin Elizabeth, and did understand the miraculous effects, which
by means of thy salutatio^ God eternal wroght, both in her-self, and in the
child which she bare with in her womb. I beseech thee, O blessed Lady, by that
exultatio^ thou feltest then, and did manifest by thy celestial Canticle,
that it may please thee to make me partaker of thy spiritual visitation, by
means whereof I may contemn al worldly consolations, and rejoice me only in
God mine only Savior. Amen.

OF THE NATIVITIE.


Nascitur, and iacet in Stabulo qui torquet Olympum:
Pastorum, and Superum cantibus antra sonant.
THE THIRD IOYFVL Mystery is of the Nativity of Jesus Christ our Lord,
whereupon thou may meditate these points following.
THE FIRST is, how our Lady meaning to obey the Emperor Caesar Augustus his
proclamation, went from Nazareth to Bethleem, Luc. 2. a.
where not finding any convenient lodging, she withdrewe her self into the
public and common Inn, or (if you think good) into the houel and shroud that
was there made with bows for poor folks.

SECONDLY, consider how the hour of the glorious childbirth of the most
sacred mother being come, she brought forth the Savior of the world, and with
a wonderful great reverence adored him, swaddled him up in such poor cloutes
as she had, and laid him in a manger.

THIRDLY, consider the Angels songs, Luc. 2. b
and the joy and triumph they made in this most happy childbirth, whereof one
announced the same to the Sheppardes that in that coast did watch over their
flocks; who speedily came to see and adore this celestial Infant.

TOUCHING the first point, thou may amplify thy meditation, by weighing the
circumstaunces that happed in the voyage which our Lady undertook; whereby is
plainly showed, what pains and trouble she endured therein, albeit, what-soeuer
it was, she passed it over with exceeding patience. First, the sharpnes of the
season did greatly augment her annoyes, since this journey was performed in the
very heart of winter, when as we see it is very painful travailing. Secondly,
her poverty, which forced her to suffer many discommodities, especially,
being great with child, and so tender and delicate as she was. Thirdly, the
lack of lodging, which could not be provided her in all the whole City of
Bethleem, albeit (well may we believe) that good Joseph took great pains in
seeking it very diligently; and how seeing themselves thus refused, it could
not be, but that they felt great shame and confusion. O what a sovereign solace
and singular comfort should this be for poor folks that are in this world
distressed, despised, and forsaken, if they considered, how the most worthy,
noble, and most holy creatures, which ought to have been more honored and
reuere^ced then all the whole world again (to wit, the Queen of heaven, and her
most blessed Infant) were the most distressed, annoyed, and pained of al others.

THOU may pause in the second point, beholding with thy spiritual eyes, in
what state the most blessed virgin found her-selfe the day of her most sacred
deliverance; and here shall thou see in her so virtuous a disposition, so
holy a devotion, so grave a modesty, so singular a beauty, so great an
elevation of spirit in God, as no man's tongue can possiblye declare it.

Thou shall find, how in counterchange of griefs Genesis 3. c.
which other women feel in childbirth, she felt a strange and ineffable
solace, a singular joy and divine consolation; and being therewith wholly rapt
and eleuate, the celestial bridegroom issued miraculously out of her womb, as
out of a most precious Aug. initio tract. 1. ^n Ioh. to. 9
bride-cha^ber, without any alteration or detriment at al to her most perfect
virginity. O virgin mother, and mother-virgin; A privilege never granted to
any other creature! O divine excellency, and dignity due to thee alone, to be
the mother of God, and mother of thine own Father and Psa. 18. a Aug. in
principio cap. 5. li. 2 de Symb. ad Catech. Tom. 9.
Creator! Who can possibly conceue what thy heart felt, when with thy bodily
eyes thou beheldest the Prince of heaven lying naked in earth; and him
shiuering for cold, who does clothe and warm al other creatures? O with what
reverence did thou prostrate thy self, to adore that infinite Majesty,
masked under the veil of so great distress and misery! Oh, with what
compassion did thou associate with thy tears those, which thy dear young
son shed, feeling his so great annoiances! Oh, with what cordial love
endeuouredst thou to lul and lapp him up in such poor swaddling cloutes as
thou had, giving him thy sacred breasts to suck upon, which were at that
time miraculouslye replenished with milk! Matters sufficient to melt any
flintie heart that would with leisure ponder and discuss them.

THE MEDITATION. of the third point will furnish thee of fit matter to move
compassion, if thou consider, how this most mighty monarche, this King Coll.
2. b 1. Tim. 6. c. Apoc. 17. d. and. 19. c
of al kings, he whom neither the heavens nor earth can hold and comprehend,
has in such wise debased, humbled, and thrown himself down in a hard
manger upon a little hay; he, whom the Angels do adore, and in whose presence
the powers of heaven do quake again, lies quaking him-self for cold betwixt
two brute beasts. O divine darling, what means this geere? what humility
and baseness is this, O Sovereign Ps. 23. b Ad Tit. 2 d
King of glory? what have thou to do with the crib, thou that have thy throne
above the 2. Re. 6. a. 1. Par. 13. b
Cherubins? how art thou made thus dombe, O Ioh. 1. a
eternal word of the Father? why weepest and wailest in such sort, thou, that
art the joy of all the holy Angels? verily, thou haste masked thy divine nature
with our humane nature, to be the King and Savior of Israel, and of the
universal world. The desire which thou have to redeem us, moves thee to do
these strange matters; the love which made thee wel-^are descend from heaven for
our wal-fare, causes thee now to be borne, and to Ber. ser. 3 in Natius.
Domini.
cloak thy puissance with such penury and extreme want of al things, that we
should thereby learn to meek and humble our selves, and to detest al pride,
al pamperinges and delicacies of the flesh, loving the lowlines, the penance,
and the poverty, which thou did choose and teach us, and would for this
cause have thy nativity announced Luc. 2. b
to poor Sheppardes, of whom thou wast visited and adored, the which their
visitation and adoration we ought attentively to ponder, and diligently to
imitate.

A PRAYER.
WHAT tongue can woorthely tell, O most woorthye Queen of Angels, the
ineffable joy and exultation which thou were seized with in thy most sacred
and virginal childbirth? When thou saw the Redeemer of the world borne of
thee, and adoring him with great reverence, did swaddle him up in poor
cloutes, and laid him in a manger, where he was announced of the Angels, and
visited of poor shepperds: I beseech thee, O most happy mother, by this his
most holy nativity, that seeing he was borne for us, and given unto us, thou will obtain me of him, that he vouchsafe to be borne in my poor soul, with
whom I may be borne anewe, and lead henceforth such a new life, as may
continually be grateful to his divine Majesty. Amen.

OF THE PRESENTATION.


Lustratur Genetrix, and templo sistitur Infans:
Anna Deum, atque hominem, cum Simeone canit.
THE FOVRTH IOYFVL Mystery is of the Presentation; to wit, when our Lady
presented her blessed Son in the Temple, whereupon thou shall meditate, as
follows.
FIRST, how the Luc. 2. c.
forty days that the Virgin Mother had staide in Bethleem, being now fully
expired, she went from thence to Jerusalem, there to present her most sacred
Son in the Temple, meaning to accomplish that which the law commanded al
w^men to do Exo. 13. a Number. 8. a Leu. 12 b
in like case.

SECONDLY, consider how our Lady carrying her most sweet Son to the Temple,
that holy old Father S. Simeon took him in his arms, who for that cause
came at that time to the Temple by inspiration of the holy Ghost; weigh also
the consolation he received by doing thus, and the most devout speeches which
Luc. 2. d.
he uttered.

THIRDLY, contemplate the deuoti^ and joy of that old woman Ibid. c
S. Anna (that never tarried out of the Temple) when she saw this most precious
present, which the most sacred mother brought. Behold also, with what
reverence and spiritual consolation the well beloved Son was offered up to his
celestial Father, being accompanied with so holy and reverent persons as were
there present.

AS FOR the first article, thou may intertaine thy self therein,
meditating, how rightly the virgin mother does imitate her blessed son;
especially, in such things as concern humility (a virtue so highlye
commended and practiced of them twain) since the son vouchsafed to be Luc. 2.
(...) Ber. Ser. 3. de Circu^si.
circumcised, albeit he were not bound thereto, nor had any need at al of
Circumcision (which appertained to sinners Genesis 17. b Leuit. 12. Romans 4. b
alone;) and the mother, she vouchsafed to fulfill the precept of Purification
(which obliged only the unclean women) albeit she were whollye pure, and
deuoide of al Ber. init. Ser. 3. de Purif.
uncleanness. O most sacred mother, why will thou obey this ordinance, which
neither touches thee, nor makes any mention of thee? for like as for thy
sanctity thou differest from al thy sex, and surpassest al women in thy most
wonderful virtues; even so is the conception of thy blessed child far different
from that of al other women, and without comparison exceeds al other
conceptions: Since others are wrought by humane society, and thine is
accomplished by the operation of the holy Mat. 1. d Luc. 1. d.
ghost. What is it therefore, whereof thou will purify thy self, O blessed
Lady? Seeing the holy Ghost witnesses of thee in this wise: Cant. 4. b
Thou art al fair, my Lover, neither is there any blemish at al in thee;
for so much as thy most sacred childbirth, so far was it from defiling thee, or
distaining the most pure virginity, as it adorned, exalted, and renowned thee.
What other thing makes thee then fulfill this law (whereout thou art exempted)
but the selfsame reason that made thy dear son to suffer circumcision;
that is to say, the desire thou had to be by this means a glittering
mirror of most obedient humility. As he therefore vouchsafed to be taken for
one of the common sort of children, so have not thou disdained to be thought
like to other women. This thine humility and charity, with that of thy sacred
sons, be hallowed and imitated of us al for ever.

IN THE second Article thou shall have great cause of consolation, if thou fix
thine imagination of the inestimable offering which the most gracious mother
brought to the temple, there to present unto her Lord. Contemplate
attentively, the modesty, gravity, and comely reverence, wher-with the
blessed virgin entered into the temple, carrying in her arms that most precious
fruit of her virginal womb. O what an inestimable joy was it, to see the
son thus borne, and to behold the blessed mother that bare him! whose
presence rejoiced the Angels, and enriched the whole Temple in such wise, as
the glory thereof was then far greater, then when king 3. Re. 5. 6 7. and
sequ. ^ap.
Solomon caused it to be builded.

Consider also what the good old father Simeon felt, at such time, as (being
instructed of the holy Ghost) he saw and knew that to be come to pass, which
he so long time had wished for, and so often had craved at Gods hands with
continual tears and prayers. Behold with how great zeal he beclippeth him
in his arms, with how great reverence he adoreth him, with how sweet
embracinges he closes him against his breast, never being contented with
kissing, and beholding him. All the which his amiable intertainmentes this most
sweet babe liked very well of, as a lover of al those that love him, and did
with his gracious looks perce and melt the poor old man's heart, who beheld
him al rapt in admiration, as he most apparantlye testified by the tears he
shedd for joy, and by the fervor of the words he uttered in his most
excellent Canticle Luc. 2. d
of Nunc dimittis seruum tuum Domine. etc. whereby he plainly declared, what
singular consolation and contentment his soul received by having seen with
his corporal eyes the Savior of the world. Ah, how happy were they that
merited with their mat. 13. b
corporal eyes to behold so gracious a spectacle; yea, and happy are they,
who with the eyes of a lively Ioh. 20. b.
faith do devoutly behold the same; since they in like manner shal-be partakers
of the same joys and consolations.

THOU MAY IN the third point interteine thy self with great profit and
consolation of thy soul, weighing the fervor of Anna the Reverent matrone,
who through her auster fastes, and the perpetual prayers which she made with
great devotion in the temple, as S. Luke the evangelist Luc. 2. f.
reports, merited to be an assistant at this so glorious a spectacle, and to
receive souerain comfort through the sight of such a son and a mother; of
whom, all the mysteries were reveled unto her, which she confessed and published
to al those devout persons that were in the temple, and gave ear unto her.
Whence thou may learn, that but if thou keep the Church with religious
devotion, addict thy self to often prayer, and with rigorous abstinence do^pt
the disordinate desires and concupiscence of the flesh, as chaste S. Anna did,
thou shall then be made partaker of the sight and divine solace, of the favors
and other graces that were at that time so bountifully bestowed upon her.

Meditate besides the ineffable consolation, wher-with the sacred virgin was
surceased, understanding the marvelous matters that were then spoken of her
dearly beloved son, who by the speeches of S. Simeon and S. Anna was
apparently revealed and known what he was, to al those that were then present
in the Temple. Contemplate with-al, the most devout Ber. ser. (...) in Purif.
de mod^ process.
procession which all that holy assembly made, going up to the Altar to offer
up to Almighty God this the most precious, the most worthy, and most
acceptable present to his divine Majesty that was presented him til that day,
from the beginning of the world. Ponder also, with what devotion, charity, and
reverence, with what a cheerful and willing heart the most happy mother offered
up her wel-beloued Infant to the celestial Father; who had of his infinite
favor given him for her son; and did by that means make her his own
mother, who was her own and natural Father. O great Lady, what did thy heart
feel at the time, and at al times after, when thou vnbethoughtest thee of this
Mystery! how zealous thanks did thou breath forth to God, for the gift
he had bestowed upon thee, and upon al mankind! with what affection, and
with what inflamed desire did thou present this most sacred oblation to
God! which thou knew well, was only sufficient to reconcile man to God his
maker, and to cause him to recover again the blessings, which he had erst so
lewdlye lost. And how did thy son in like manner conform himself to thy
piety and devout intent, he at that time offering him-self with a frank heart
to his eternal Father as Nu* 28. a
a morrow sacrifice, whiles the evening sacrifice came, which he was afterward
to offer upon the Altar of the Roode. O my soul, if thou would
attentively consider all this, offering thee wholly to this Lord, who was
offered for thee, what gifts, and what spiritual riches should be imparted
unto thee?

A PRAYER.
THY HEART, O most blessed mother of God, thy heart was seized with surpassing
joy, when (the forty days after thy childe-birth being at an end) thou
wentest to the Temple of our Lord, there to offer up the selfsame Lord
thereof, who was thy first thy first begotten and only Son, and the only
son of the Father everlasting. O what a consolation did thou feel, seeing
the things that S. Simeon did and spoke, taking him in his arms, kissing and
adoring him with great reverence. I beseech thee, O most sweet Lady, in
favor of this sacred mystery, that I may by thy holy intercession have the
virtue of perfect charity granted me, wher-with I may in such sort love thy
blessed Son, as I may be woorthye to be presented to him in the Temple of the
celestial Jerusalem, which is our true home. Amen.

OF THE FINDING.


Disputat in templo, dum quaeritur inter amicos:
Masta Parens notas itque reditque vias.
THE FIFTH IOYFVL Mystery is of the consolation which our Lady received, when
having lost her son, she found him in the Temple, whereupon thou shall
meditate these three points.
FIRST the great devotion wherewith our Luc. 2. f
Lady went every year with her affianced husband Joseph to celebrate the
Pascal solennities, and carried with her, her sweet son Jesus. By means
whereof he remained there behind in the Temple, unwitting to his most loving
mother.

SECONDLY imagine the extreme Ibidem.
sorrow which the sacred mother felt, when the holy days being now at an
end, the returned back again to her house, and found not there her most
loving son, whom she thought to have been erst returned in company of her
holy affianced husband Joseph.

THIRDLY meditate, with how great diligence she went seeking him, where she
deemed he might be, not resting any whitt at al, until she had found him, and
ponder the ineffable joy she received, when at last she found him in the
Temple amidst the Doctors.

MEANING to pause in the first point, consider how our blessed Lady is the
Amb. li. 2 de Virgin. Hier. initio ser. 1. de Assump. tom. 4.
lively pattern of al virtue and perfection, which shines forth in every one
of her actions; and thus was she a fulfiller of the law, not only when she was
thereto obliged, but also, when she might justly have excused her-selfe; and
therefore, albeit men Exo. 23. d and. 34. c
alone were bound to go to the Temple of Jerusalem, to celebrate the Pascal
solennitie, yet did she for her devotion sake go thither too, as also her
affianced husband Joseph, and her sweet son Jesus; giving us an example
herein, of the care, wherewith we ought to observe the solennities of the
Church, and of the devotion and reverence, wherewith we ought to mat. 21. a
Ioh. 2. c Ierem. 7. (...).
go and remain in our Lords Temple. O how sacred were those solennities,
where such persons were present, who adored the celestial Father in spirit
and truth, as he 2. Cor. 3* d
commands those which adore him, to do. O how odoriferous was the Temple
at that time, wherein was so great abundance of the most sweet Apoc. 8
incense of their prayers! O how much more did the glory of our Lord fill at
that time all that holy house, the^ when king 3. Reg. 5. and sequ.
Solomon made his prayers therein! O sacred virgin, who can possibly comprehend
what thy prayers were which thou made in that temple, how fervent, how
devout, how effectual, how they pierced the heavens, and mounted up to the
throne of Gods divine Majesty; how grateful were to his goodness the most
zealous thanks thou gave him, for having vouchsafed to make thee the mother
of such a son; of whom depended the welfare and redress of the whole world!
O, I would it were his holy will, that some one spark of so fervent prayers
and thankes-geuinges might fall into the frosen coldness of our devotions.

IN THE second point thou may dilate, meditating, how the solemnity being
now ended, the virgin mother returned back to her own house, with great
desire to see her dear son, whom she thought to have been returned before
with Joseph, not having seen him her-selfe all that day; and finding
afterward that the desired of her soul was wanting, here may thou deem,
in what a case she was, what Luc. 2. (...)
dagger of woe did wound her heart, what pitiful tears she shed, what sighs
and doleful sobbes she fetched, to ease by that means the internal anguish
which she felt in her afflicted heart; how many fears did fright her; how many
imaginations did amase her; not woting on which side to turn her; and for that
it was already night, she resolved to stay until the morning, remaining in
that anxietie and heuines which thou may well imagine. O most innocent
virgin, how long and Ier. 13 c Thren. 1. a.
dark a night was that to thee, wherein thou weptst with woe, and thy tears
never left trickling down thy cheeks, and nothing was able to afforde thee
any comfort, since the true comforter being absent, all the creatures could not
yield consolation. Thy greatest ease all this long night were thy prayers, thy
sighs and tears, the thinking of thy beloved son, thy talking to him, as
though he had been present, the beholding of his beauty, his sanctity, his
virtues and perfections; the vnbethinking thee of his gracious words, and of
the works which thou had seen him do; albeit al these things, as they
did on the one side yield thee contentment, so on the other side did they
increase thy woe, when thou consideredst that he was absent, and knew not
when thou should merit to enjoy his presence again. Finally, this day and
night thou feddest thee with thy tears in stead of bread, when thou
enquiredst of thy self, Psalm. 41. and. 111. ^
where was thy God? Herein may thou well suppose, that the blessed Virgin did
pass over the time without sleep or rest until the third day.

IN THE THIRD point thou may pause also, considering, how presentlye after
the dauning day once appeared, the most sacred Virgin went with great
diligence to seek the treasure she had lost, where thou may meditate, with
what zeal and fervor she asked those that she met with, if they knew any
thing of him whom her soul did love; and how great grief and sorrow she
felt, when they could tell her no tidinges of him. She could neither find him
amongst his kinsfolks nor acquaintance, where she went seeking of him very
diligently. Since JESUS is not to be found Job. 28. b
where the daliances and delights of the flesh and blood do reign; yea,
there is he wont to be lost, and therefore did she return to the Temple of
Jerusalem, where she had erst left him; and therein did she find him standing
in the midst of the Doctors, giving ear to the^, and questioning of them to
Luc. 29 Mat. 7 d Mar. 1. b Luc. 4 c Ioh. 7. b
their great admiration. O most happy mother, who can possibly declare the
ineffable joy thou receauedst at such time as thou saw thy desired son,
whom with so great sorrow thou soughtest for! the^ did thy heart rejoice which
was before oppressed with dole; the^ did thy troubled and ecclipsed mind
through his absence, grow calm and clear again through his presence; then
al anguish, fears, and suspicions departing, was the peace and tranquillity
restored, the which thou wantedst, then were the tears of sorrow changed into
tears of solace; the^ might Luc. 15. a
thou well call upon the quires of Angels to congratulate with thee, for having
found the precious jewel, which with such sorrow thou soughtest. Consider then
how the obedient son seeing his dear mother, does most graciously come unto
her, and with what passing love she receaueth him, how she embraces, how she
entertaineth, how she holds him, and will not let him go, with what piety
she complains of him, for that he had so many days deprived her of his
desired presence. Be merry therefore O Aug. ser. 2. de Assump. qui est. 35. de
Sanctis. tom. 10. Ber. Ser. (...) de Assu^pt.
Queen of heaven, and forget thy former sorrows, since now thou have found, and
possessest him, whom thy soul desired, and according to the greatness of
dolours past, art now surceased with present consolation.

A PRAYER.
WHAT pleasure and contentment did thy soul feel, (O most sacred Queen of
heaven) when having lost thy deerly beloved son, thou foundest him again in
the Temple amongst the Doctors. None can possibly conceue it, but he that well
weieth with how great grief, desire, and diligence, thou wentest those three
days seeking him amongst his friends and kinsfolks: I beseech thee therefore, O
mother of Ans^lm. lib. de excel B. virg. cap. 12.
mercy, as well by the extreme annoy, wherewith thou soughtest him, as by the
inexplicable joy, wherewith thou receuedst him having found him, that thou will
vouchsafe to help me, that I deserve not through my sins and offenses, to
lose the same Lord; and if at some time he should absent him self from me, I
may know how to seek him, and how again to find him. Amen.

THE SECOND MYSTERIES ARE CALLED DOLOROVS, THROVGH THE GREAT dolours which the
most sacred Virgin Mother FELT, WHEN such things happed, as thou shall
MEDITATE THEREIN; whereof some she saw with her CORPORALEYES, and some with
her spiritual.

OF THE PRAYER.


Expauet, ingeminatque preces, and sanguine m^nat:
Dum socij fugiunt impia vincla subit.
THE FIRST DOLOROVS MYSTERY is of the prayer which our Lord made in the
garden of Geth-semani: where upon thou shall meditate these points in manner
following.
FIRST, how our mat. 26 (...) Mar. 14. d. Luc. 22. d
Redeemer comforting his Disciples, and exhorting them to pray and watch with
him, pronounced this most doulful speech, My soul is heavy, even til death.

SECONDLY, how withdrawing him self from his Disciples about a stones cast, he
prayed with most profound humility and reverence to his Father, saying: mat.
26. d
My Father, if it be possible, pass over this cupp from me; howbeit not my will
be done, but thine.

THIRDLY, how he came to visit his Disciples, and finding them asleep,
awaked and commanded them to pray, as he did twice more himself, with the
same words; and swett drops of blood, which trickled down Luc. 22. d
to the ground, and then did an Angel descend from heaven to comfort him.

AS TOUCHING the first point, thou may pause therein, meditating, how our
Redeemer fore-knowing the hour of his most holy Passion to draw nigh, (whereto
he through his most fervent charity, Isai. 53. b
freely offered up himself) got him to the garden of Geth-semani, where he was
Ioh. 8. a
eftsons wont to pray, that Judas the Traitor, and the other which he brought
with him, might know where to find, and to apprehend him. Howbeit, before
they came, our Lord had prayed a long time, and commanded, that his
Disciples should do in like manner. wherein he meant, to give both to the^ and
us an example, that against all the perils, temptations, and tribulations that
may befall us in this life, and that in any matter of importance whatsoever it
be that we have to do, that we first arm and fortify our selves with the
armor of holy prayer; by means whereof we shal-be illuminated to know what we
ought to do, and comforted to endure patientlye the afflictions which we are
to suffer.

Meditate also, how our Savior finding him-self sore afflicted inwardly
through the consideration of so many sorts of griefs and torments as were
prepared for him, he showed the most vehement affliction and heaviness which he
felt by those woeful words he uttered to his mat. 26 a Cyril. Alex lib. 9.
These. cap. 3 and Leo ser. 3. de Pass.
Disciples; My soul is heavy, even til death. The which ought to perce to the
very depth of our hearts, seeing we have been the cause, that he should
suffer such sorrow, who is the joy of Angels. And how can it be, O Lord, but
my heart, be it never so hard, shal-be heuie, and melt again, contemplating
thy heart so extremely anguished and distressed! What solace can my soul
receive, seeing thee, who art the Son that illuminatest and reioicest it thus
oppressed with dole and sorrow? If thou which art the joy of Angelical quiers,
art thus grieued^, what thing can suffice to rejoice and comfort man, but to
think, that thine infinite charity which brings thee to thy death, does make
thee heavy even to death, to the end, that as thy death is cause of our life,
so in like manner thy heaviness might be cause of our consolation, and deliver us
from that mortal heaviness, wherein we should perpetually have remained, if
thou had not vouchsafed to have been made sorrowful and heavy for our sakes.
This thy heaviness, O King of glory, shall continue eue^ til thy death, for that
even to death shall thy travail endure, wher-with like a most loving mother
thou deliuerest us; but when we shall by thy death be borne a-newe, then shall
thou not think any more of heaviness, by reason of the joy of our new birth,
and this Heb. 12.
may somewhat mitigate his sorrow, who contemplateth this sorrowful passage.

AS FOR the second point, thou may stay therein, considering the
circumstaunces that happed in this our Lords prayer, and the words he uttered.

First the text says, how he withdrewe him-self from his Disciples to pray;
and this withdrawing or separation does S. Luke declare by this word, auulsus
est; which signifies plainly, with how great difficulty he withdrewe
himself from them through the love he bare them, and that to pray: which must
be done in solitarines, Mat. 6. a Act. 10. b 4. Reg. 4 Ber. ser. 86. in Cant.
silence, and attention: and he withdrew himself from the^ but a Luc 22 Mat.
26. d. Mar. 14 Luc. 22. d Tert ^i de orat.
stones cast, so that he might easily see and hear them being called, yea, he
came eftsons to visit the^ to wake them, and to warn them of that they had to
do, instructing al Pastors and Curates, how they ought to behave themselves
toward their flocks, by these his particularities. Learn also of the
profounde humility, wher-with he threw himself on ground to pray, what
humility is necessary for thee when thou praiest; since thou presentest thy
self before the face of the self-same infinite Majesty, before whom the
Potentates of heaven do tremble again. In like manner thou may out of the
words which he used in his petition, learn the form which thou ought to
observe in thy prayers, not craving such temporal things as thou desire,
absolutelye; but remitting al things to his divine will, whereto thou ought to
conform thy will. Here may thou contemplate also, how with the silence and
obscurity of the night, and with the words which our Lord pronounced in his
petition, this inward heaviness he felt in his heart, increased and grew
greater, finding nothing that might possibly afforde him comfort. Ah! my most
sweet Savior, the only comfort of the comfortless and afflicted, how is it,
that I see thee this night without any comfort or ease at al, neither is there
any of al thy dear friends to comfort thee, for whose sakes thou art fallen
into such heuines and anxietie. O that I had heard those pitiful sighs and
groans, which eftsons issued out of thine annoyed heart, to the end, that now
I am not able any ways to comfort thee, I might yet at least taste some part
of thy heaviness and affliction, wherewith I might wail the occasion that I have
given thee to be heavy, and that my tears might serve for bread Ps. 41. a.
and 79. a
to sustain me in this my miserable pilgrimage.

IN THE third point thou may consider many things; first, by the
diligence, wherewith mat. 26 d Mar. 14. d.
our Lord went from his prayers to visit his Disciples, and returned from
them back again to his prayers, thou may note the charity and fatherlye
care he had of them, whom he visited thus often; Secondly, consider the grievous
anguish and inward pain he suffered, which permitted him not to rest in any
place: Thirdly, weigh the perseverance and often prayer which he taught us, and
is most necessary so to be, to be fruitful and effectual. Fourthly, consider
the grief it is like he felt, (fore-thinking the torments which he was to
endure) seeing that by the imagination only thereof, he swett in so strange and
miraculous a manner. O my Lord, if the bare apprehension of thy future
torments do so sore afflict and make thee sweat so strangely, what shall the
impression of the self-same torments do! right evidently does thy ready and
willing heart show it self, wherewith thou will redeem us with the inestimable
price of thy precious blood, since thou beginnest so ple^tifully to shedd it
before those manifold wounds and strokes, wherewith it shall hereafter be whollye
drawn out of thy body. O my soul, learn to set by thy self, and do not sell
thy self so vilely, as for the filthy pleasure of sin; seeing here, how
greatly thou art set by of thy Redemer, who with so great a price has bought
thee, and has begone to pay the same, so long time before the day. Occupy
thy self a while in contemplating the marvelous vision of this garden, which
is far surpassing that that Moses saw in the Ex^. 3. c
mountain; and shake off the shoes of thy carnal concupisce^ces, approaching to
behold this beautiful face al bathed in bluddie streams of sweat, wherein all the Angels take singular delight to look. Gather me those doleful drops that
fall on ground, by the virtue whereof thy pains shal-be assuaged, and thy
wounds recured; since the celestial Physician has thus vouchsafed to sweat
them for thy welfare.

Lastly meditate, how our Lord being in this pitiful extremity, an Luc. 22. c
Angel came down from heaven to comfort him. O Prince of Angels, how have
thou thus exceedingly abased thy self for us, that thou stand in need to
be comforted by one of thine own Ps. 103. a Heb. 1. b Epiph. lib. 3 in Arria.
tom. 2.
servants? All the Angelical quires yield adoration and thanks unto thee,
who wot much better then we do, how greatly we are bound to thee, for
having vouchsafed thus to humble and abase thy self for us thy most vile
creatures. O sacred virgin, if thou had with thy corporal eyes viewed this
ruful spectacle (as it is likelye thou did see it with thy spiritual eyes)
well had thou stood need of an-other Angel to have come and comforted
thee. For well may we deem, that thy woes should not have wanted, nor any
anguishe and affliction to have tormented thee. And albeit thou did not
then bedewe the ground with thy blouddie sweat, as did thy sweet son; yet
happily did thou bedewe it with tears trickling from thine eyes, and
filledst the air with lamentable sighs, and heaven with fervent prayers.
Howbeit, all this was little in comparison of that which remained behind, both
for thee to see, and for him to suffer.

This vigilant Ioh. 10. b Zach. 13. c Mar. 14. (...)
Shepparde being now lastly of al returned to his sleapie sheep, thou may
meditate, how he remained with them, expecting the furious arriual of those
Psa. 21. b
mad dogs that came to seek him, by whom he was cruellye assailed, bound, and
carried to the houses of Ioh. 18. c Mat. 26. f Mar. 14. f Luc. 22. f
Anna and Caiphas.

A PRAYER.
LIKE AS, O most sacred virgin and mother, thou were partaker of the joys and
co^solations of thy most holy son, eue^ so did thou likewise participate of
the pains and griefs of his most bitter passion, since that which he suffered in
body, did cruciate thy blessed soul; and therefore, at such time as he prayed,
and sweat drops of blood thorough the great anguishe he felt in the garden of
Geth-semani, the^ were thou by imagining the same, whollye surseased with
vehement sorrow. I beseech thee therefore, by this thy dolor, and his and thy
heaviness, that it may please thee to make me partaker thereof, that praying
with bitter tears, and wailing my former manifold and grievous trespasses, I
may obtain a full forgeuenes of the same. Amen.

OF THE WHIPPING.


In virgas, in flagra datur, rigat atria sanguis,
Verbera deficiunt, non patientis amor.
THE SECOND DOLOrous Mystery is of the whipping of our Lord, concerning the
which thou shall meditate these points following.
FIRST, how Pilate ordained, that our Luc. 23. (...) Ioh. 18. a
Redeemer should be whipped, supposing, that by this chastisement he might
somewhat appease the fiendish fury of those cruel Jews, who with such
obstinacy mat 27. c Mar. 25. b Luc. 23. (...) Ioh. 19. a
required him to condemn him to be crucified.

SECONDLY, with what diligence and cruelty those barbarous executioners carried
our Lord into the Palace; and stripping off his clothes, bound him fast to a
pillar, there to beat him.

THIRDLY, thou may consider the extreme dolor, which this most mild Lamb
felt, whiles they whipped him; his most delicate flesh being with so many and so
cruel scourges and strokes wholly torn and wounded.

UPON the first point thou may amplify, by considering the shifts that
Pilate sought to excuse him-self from condemning him to death, who is the
author of life; for first he Luc. 13. a. and. c. Ioh. 18. g Luc. 23. a
protested, that he found no cause in him why he ought to dye; secondlye, he
sent him to Herod, that he might pronounce judgment of him; thirdly, he Mat.
27 b Mar. 15. a
compared him with Barrabas the thief, persuading him self, that the Jews
having choice to save one of their two lives, would rather take innocent Jesus,
then the seditious thief and murderer; fourthly, this being not sufficient,
he determined for a last remedy to make him be Luc. 23. c Ioh. 19. a.
whipped, weening that by this punishment he should mittigate their felonious
madness. Where note that al these means, whereby Pilate sought to deliver him,
(woting well his innocence) were occasion, that our Redeemer was more tormented
and afflicted; for by this means he Luc. 23. b
added to the death of the Cross, which they required, and was afterward
granted them, the pain and Luc. 23. b
shame he suffered going and coming from Herod, and being accounted worse then
Barrabas, and afterward most cruelly whipped and crowned with thorns, in such
wise, as not only they which are his open enemies, cause him to suffer, but he
also, who desired to deliver him, increased his annoyes. And thou, most loving
Lord, let every thing redounde to thy greater grief, to the end, that to
those that love thee, every thing may redound to their greter benefit.
Blessed be thine infinite charity for evermore, which makes thee respect more
our profit then thine own peculier torment. Consider also, Ioh. 19. (...)
how many mischiefs a vain love and fear of the world is cause of,
wherewith this miserable Luc. 23. a and. c. Ioh. 18. d
Pilate let himself be overcome; since that (confessing himself, that he
found no Luc. 23. a and. c. Ioh. 18. d
fault in our Savior, and knowing that he was accused of mere Luc. 23. b.
malice) yet for all this did he condemn him iniustly to this torment, and
afafterwardes to death, making more account of his own interest, then of
justice and of truth.

IN THE second point thou may entertain thy self, meditating with great
compassion the cruelty, wherewith those vile and wicked ministers stripp the
most innocent Lord of his clothes, and bind him with hard cords fast unto a
pillar. Consider that his mildnes, more then of a Lamb, wher-with he suffers
him self to be stripped and tied, without making any resistance, for ought that
they could do to him. Behold with the eyes of thy mind that most sacred body,
more beautiful then Niceph. cap. 14. li. 1 hist. Eccle.
al men's, how it stood al naked, full of shame, with neck, arms, and feet
fast bound unto the pillar, in manner of a slave, waiting for that grievous
punishment, which he was forthwith to receive; and weigh that his ready and
prompt will, wher-with he happily said inwardly that verse of the prophet Ps. 37.
^.
David: I am ready to be whipped, and my grief is always in my sight. O most
sweet Redeemer, me thinks I see thee fast bound to that hard pillar; howbeit,
these cords, be they never so strong, would little avail to hold thee, if
thou were not more straitlye bound thereto with the bands of thy most burning
charity, the which tied thee much faster, with the desire which thou had
to warm and mollify our hearts harder a great deal, and more frosen then
the pillar of marble, whereto thou art thus bound. They stripp thee like a
slave, that being stark naked, they may more cruelly scourge thee, and thou
willingly consentest thereto, that by this means thou may vesture with thy
graces, and set at liberty those, who had erst with their vices made
themselves the slaves of Satan.

IN THE third point thou may pause very conveniently, since therein thou
shall find more ample matter to melt thy heart with, considering that cruel
rage, wherewith those wicked executioners beginn to beat this most sacred
virginal body, causing that white flesh to turn to a sanguin hew, and how
with the violence of their blows they flea his tender skin in such pitiful
wise, as his most precious blood gushed out al over his body; the which was so
barbarouslye torn and wounded, that he might well pronounce that which was
written Psa. 37. a (...). 1. a
of him: There is no soundnes in my flesh. Behold now, O my soul, behold
attentively this most ruful spectacle, and take compassion of such a Lord, who
has vouchsafed to suffer such pains for thee; behold that Reverend visage
made pale and heavy, lening against that hard pillar, whereto he presses
himself close through the most vehement pains he suffers, which made him to
breathe very short, and to sound out most lamentable sighs. Behold, how he
stands fast tied and bound unto the pillar, shedding his blood on earth, his
eyes lifted up to heaven, offering those most grievous torments to his
celestial Father, which he endured most willingly for our trespasses. Consider
how all this punishment and affliction which he suffered, sufficed not to
disquiet, or make him lament at al; yea, the tormentours waxing weary through
the infinite number of blows which they had laid on him, yet was not he for all that weried with suffering; and his body being al torn and rent, yet was his
soul and courage always sound, and ready to abide greater torments through
his insuperable charity. Ioh. 1. d Apoc. ^. b
O immaculate Lamb, how do I see thee al forlorn, besprinkled and died with
thy most precious blood; and thou not only stand without wailing, like
other Lambs, Isa. 53. b. Act. 8. f.
before them that shere thee, but also before them that strike and whipp thy
virginal body, thou neither speak, nor complainest thee at al. O most sacred
Virgin, if thou had seen the pitiful plight wherein thy most sweet son
stood bound, naked, covered with blud and blows, how would thy heart have
been covered and wounded with mortal woe; seeing him, not only bereft of that
robe, which with thine own hands thou had wouen for him, but also without
a great part of the skin and blood, which he had taken in thy virginal womb!
O how much more iustlye might thou have lamented then Jacob did, and upon
greater cause have said that which he Ge. ^7. g. and. 44. g
said: Envy, that most cruel beast has devoured my son, she it is that has
thus wounded and ill entreated him. Behold, O my soul, how marvelous is the
mercy and charity of thy Lord, that has mat. 27 b
endured al these things, to shadow thee with his Ps. 90. a.
shoulders, and with his wounds Isai. 53. a
to heal thy woes, vouchsafing to take the correction and chastisment due to
thee upon him; that thou might present this satisfaction to the eternal
Father, craving humblye, that it may please him, for these so great and cruel
beatinges of his beloved son, to divert from thee the whipp of his wrath,
which thou through thine offenses have most justly merited.

A PRAYER.
O MOST holy Lady, who can possibly conceive, how grievous was the sorrow of thy
soul, when the virginal body of thy most sweet son fast bound to the
pillar, was with most cruel scourges whipped. O how did his cords gripe thy
heart, how did his wounds occasionate thy woes! I beseech thee therefore,
holding up my hands to thee in humble wise, O mother of mercy, by the most
vehement anguish of this his and thine affliction, that since he has been
tied for my trespasses, I may be losed by means of thy sacred intercessions;
and that I may for the merit of so many his blows, escape the punishment due
unto my most grievous sins. Amen.

OF THE CORONATION.


Spinea serta caput pungunt, illudit amictus
Purpureus, turbis, Ecce homo, Praetor ait.
THE THIRD DOLOrous Mystery is of the Coronation, when our Redeemer was
crowned with thorns, about the which thou shall meditate these points.
FIRST, how these cruel ministers having beaten our most patient Lord until
they were werie, they then unloose him from the pillar, and how he, having very
hardly made shift to get on his clothes, they stripp him mat. 28 d Mar. 15. b
Ioh. 19. a.
anewe to put on that cote of scorn.

SECONDLY, how Pilate his soldiers scorned him, putting on his back an old
purple garment, crowning him with a crown of sharp thorns, and giving him in
his hand a reed in stead of a scepter; how they adored him in mockery* Ioh.
1. d Apoc. 5. b.
saying: Al hail king of the Jews: smote him with the reed, and gave him
many blows.

THIRDLY, how having thus scorned and mocked him a good while, Pilate caused
him to be brought forth, and showed him to the Jews, Isai. 53. b Act. 8 f.
saying: Ecce homo, Behold the man; that by this means they might be moved to
pity, seeing him thus scornfully and cruelly handled, albeit nothing sufficed
to mitigate their diabolical obstinacy.

IN THE first point thou may pause, meditating how with the same
barbarousnes and cruelty, wher-with these wicked ministers had bound our most
merciful Lord, they now unloose him, and use no kind of plasters and pity
toward him, who is toward al men the most pitiful. Behold how he stands
freight full of griefs, and from top to Isai. 1. a Psalm. 37. a*
toe al torn with scourges, with the printes of the cords deep rooted in his
tender flesh, which caused his no small annoy; since he was fastened with such
force, as (according as diverse do contemplate) the cords were al covered with
his very flesh; and with this grief went he up and down seeking his garments,
which they had thrown here and there on the ground; and thus humblye
gathering them up, put them on him with very great pain, no one vouchsafing
to help him, or to afford him any comfort, but most ready were they, al of
them, to torment and afflict him.

Ah my Lord, where be now the thousand thousands, that Daniel in spirit
saw, Dan 7. c. Apoc. 5. c
do thee dutiful service; and ten hundred thousand thousands which assisted
at thy throne, and yielded thee due adoration? Here is no one of those high
Angels of heaven to be seen, that might adore and serve thee; but
contrari-wise, so many contemptible men of earth, which command thee, and
tread thee under their feet; and thou art well contented here-with, since mat.
20 d Mar. 10. f.
thou art not come into the world to be served, but rather to serve others, and
therefore does every one abandon thee, and no one afforde thee help, like as
thou alone, without others help, have perfected our Redemption.

In the second point thou have just cause to stay, pondring that new devise,
which these deuilish executioners contriue to mock, and withal to torment our
blessed Savior.

What greater spite and ignominy might there be invented, then to set him
thus out with mat* 27 d Mar. 15. b. Ioh. 19. a
those counterfeit ensigns of a king which they put upon him? meaning thereby
to signify that he was ambitious, and usurped the Title and Regal dignity,
which was not due unto him? and what greter torment then that which they gave
him, in crowning him with such a crown? the pricking thorns whereof did perce
his head very deeply, and mat. 27 d Mar. 15. b
smiting of him with the reed, which in liew of a Regal Scepter they had put
into his hands; in such wise, as his eyes and face were al covered with the
blood which they caused to issue out of him; and yet do thou see, how he
abides all this with an inexpugnable patience; since with his torments and
annoiances, he vouchsafed to satisfy for our disordinate delights and
dissolutio^s; and with his scorns and mockeries to pay for our pride and
ambition.

O King of heaven, O supernal Majesty, Psa. 99 b Heb. 1. b
adored and reverenced of Angels, and mocked and scorned of men! I know not
well, what I should most marvel at; whether at the blindness and most cruel
mood of them that know thee not, and thus do beat thee, or at the piety and
patience, wher-with thou abidest them, making far greater account of our
welfare and satisfaction, then of thine own contempt and most bitter sorrows.
Great, no doubt, is their impiety, which did thus torment thee; great also is
the malice of our offenses, which did occasionate the same; but far greater
is thy bounty and clemency, which is infinite, wherewith thou were ready to
suffer more dolours and afflictions then al they could lay upon thee. O my
soul, contemplate devoutly this most worthy spectacle, and imprint it in thy
heart, seeing thou have been the occasion of al these torments and reproaches,
which thy Lord has suffered: Let that his most ignominious robe, warm and
heat thy coldness; let that horrible crown penetrate thy bowels; those sharp
and pricking thorns let perce thy head; let that be to thee an occasion of
continual love, which was to him an occasion of excessive grief.

IN THE third point it is right meet thou interteine thy self, beholding and
adoring this thy most merciful Lord so lately crowned with that most cruel
Diadem, and the other roial ensigns, which his pitilesse adversaries have
given him, wherewith Pilate made him be brought forth be fore all the people,
that by seeing this his so ruful a figure, their furious might be som-what
pacified; and for this cause did he show him unto the^, saying: Ioh. 19. a.
Aug. tract. 196. in Ioh.
Ecce homo; as if he had said: Behold the man, whom you unjustly persecute,
and whose death you so greatly desire; Behold him, whom ye say, would have made
himself your King, how greatly to your liking do you now see him crowned and
attired? Behold him chastised, in such wise, that hardly can he be taken for a
man, so far is he from being reputed a king. And seeing neither these words
which they hear, nor that lamentable figure which they behold, is sufficient
to make their adamantical hearts relent, behold thou him, O Christian, and
let thine relent, yea, rent and burst in twain for sorrow, considering, how
for thee it is, that he is thus scorned, and vilanously entreated. For thy
pride and hautines, is he crowned with these pricking thorns; for thy
superfluous and dishonest decking, is he thus vestured with this ridiculous
robe; for thy folies and most vain vanities, does he bear this scepter of
reed in hand; for thy beastlines and abominations, is that most beautiful
face defiled and beraide with filthy spittle; Isai. 50. (...) Lact. lib. 4.
Inst. de vera sap* cap. 18.
for thy dissolutions and wanton toys, are those hands, and that neck fast
tied with hard cords to the pillar. See, O thou miserable and wicked man, see
what God a most righteous and merciful man has suffered for thy justification;
procure thou therefore to be grateful to such a benefactour, and not to renew
his griefs with thy new sins. And to the end, that for the doing of this,
thou may have a more abundant grace granted thee, present this pitiful
figure to his eternal Father, beseeching him, that he will look upon Psa. 83.
^*
his Christ's face, as it was the^ disfigured. when Pilate showed him to the
people; and serve thy turn with the selfsame words he then spoke, saying:
Behold the man, O celestial father, which thou so long have Eze. 22. g
sought for, to oppose himself against thy wrath, and to be a Mediator
betwixt thee Romans 5. a. Heb. 7. d and* 12. f. 1. Ioh. 2. a Heb. 1. a
and sinners. Behold him, who is the brightness of thy glory, and the figure of
thy substance, how greatly he is obscured and difformed, to restore by this
means the beauty, which my soul through so great a number of sins had
lost. Behold the man, who with his divine blood has sufficiently satisfied
thy justice. Look therefore, O most merciful Father, look upon the lamentable
face of this man, who is both God, and thy Son, and for the honor of that,
which he, being most innocent has paid for me, pardon the manifold sins,
which I have committed against thy Majesty.

Finally, thou may in this point consider the incomparable sorrow, which his
most sacred mother felt, if (as it is thought) she were there present, and saw
with her bodilye eyes this most woeful Spectacle; which (albeit were not
sufficient to move those Jewish pitilesse hearts to compassion) yet sufficed
it to rent the most sorrowful Virgins bowels in twain, and to perce through her
most heavy and dolorous heart. O most sacred mother, look well, whether this
man that Pilate shows, be thy sweet son or no; since hardly can thou know
him with this attire and hew, so far different from that thou wast wont to
see him in. Thy beloved son is white and Can. 5. c.
ruddie, the fairest that was ever seen amongst the Ps. 44. a
sons of men, the brightness of the eternal light, and Mirror without mole,
as the Sap. 1. d
sacred writ does call him; but now, seeing him al bathed him al bathed in
blood, defiled with spittle, al wanne and pale with woes, how can thou
possibly know him? Thy son, O Lady, is king of heaven, before whom all the
powers celestial do quake, and the Dominations do adore him; what has that
crown of most cruel thorns to do with him, that scepter of reed, and that
robe of irrision, wher-with those caitiues do thus scorn him? yet
nevertheless, albeit by his outward appara^ce thou can hardly know him, yet
may thou right easily do it by his invincible patience, by his profound
humility, by his infinite charity, wher-with he condescended, to be thus
crowned like a counterfaite king, and mocked here in earth, that we may merit
to be crowned with glory, and to reign with him in heaven.

A PRAYER.
THY HEART was whollye wounded with woe on every side, O most doleful mother,
when thou saw thine only son king of heaven and of earth, crowned with
pricking thorns, arraied like a counterfeit king, made a spectacle and mocking
stock of men, and that all this cruelty sufficed not to move or melt those
flintie hearts; I humbly beseech thee, O most merciful Lady, by this thine
ineffable grief, that thy merciful entrals take compassion of my great
misery; and seeing thou see well, how the thorns of mine offenses do prick
and wound my soul, obtein me by thine intercession, that the succor of divine
grace be aboundantlye granted to me. Amen.

OF THE CARRYING OF THE CROSS.


Pondera dum trahit, and trahitur, dum terga^ laborant
Sub cruce, puniceo rore cruentat iter.
THE FOVRTH DOLOrous mystery is, when our Lord carried the Cross on his
back, whereon he was to be crucified, whereupon thou shall meditate the
points following.
THE FIRST is, how miserable Pilate being vanquished with a worldly fear,
through the Jews Ioh. 19. (...)
threatninges, mat. 27 (...) Act. 19. d Mar. 15. ^. Luc. 23. c*
wasshing his hands, adjudged him to be crucified, whom he confessed to be
innocent; the which his sentence our Lord and Redeemer accepted very humbly,
desiring greatly to dye for our life.

SECONDLY, contemplate, how that most heavy Cross was laid upon his
shoulders, which he embraced very willinglye, and did what he could to bear
it, albeit with great grief and pain, which made him eftsons to fall flatt
unto the ground.

THIRDLY, how the King of heaven having carried the Cross a good space, not
being able to go any further with that haste which they made him do, they,
not for compassion sake, but for the desire they had to put him the sooner to
death, took the Cross from him, and caused mat. 27* (...) Mar. 15. (...) Luc.
23. d
Cyreneus to bear it; and then did our Lord speak to those Luc. ibid
devout women, which followed him with weeping eyes, amongst whom well may we
deem that his most holy Mother was.

AS TOUCHING the first point, thou may consider the rage and diabolical
obstinacy of those wicked Jews, who seeing our Redeemer thus weakened and
afflicted, and in so pitiful a plight, as had been sufficient to make al other
hearts to relent, although they had been harder then the very stones; yet
were they no whitt at al appeased, nor any deal moved to compassion; yea, they
cried out with a terrible fury, Luc. 23* c Ioh. 19. c Mar. 15. d Mat. 27. c
Crucify him, Crucify him: The^ might that have been well said by them which
Jacob had prophesied, saying: Ge. 49. a
Woe worth their so obstinate furye, and their indignation so hard and cruel.
Where note, how great a mischief it is, for a man to let himself be blinded
and possessed with the Devil; for after he is once come to this point, then
does he participate of the same properties and conditions that the Devil
himself is of, and by that means is his envy, his fury, and al his other
vices rather hellish the^ humane. Note also to the same purpose, the blindness
and injustice of miserable Pilate, who having so many times confessed, that he
found Luc. 23* a
no cause wherefore to condemn our Lord, yea, that he was just; knowing also,
that upon a spite the Jews had accused him, and delivered him into his hands,
yet did he for all this, being vanquished with their importunity, and a worldly
fear, condemn the innocent to suffer death, and weeneth (wretch that he is)
mat. 27* (...)
how by the wasshing of his hands, his conscience should be cleared. They are
like to Pilate, who for fear of the world, and of losing their commodities,
do defile their consciences, and ween to wash themselves with certain works
and outward apparances; wherewith albeit they may other-whiles cast a mist
before men's eyes, yet are they once sure, they can-not deceive the eyes of God,
who 1. Re. 16 b Psalm. 6 b 1. Par. 28. b
looks chiefly at the heart and meaning of each one. Do thou therefore (good
brother) considering this point, take heed of falling into such like errors,
and think, how it sufsiceth not to begin well, as Pilate did, but it
behooves thee to be constant, and to persevere until the end, mat. 10. c
if thou will be saved.

Lastly, thou may in this Article consider the great patience and humility,
wher-with the innocent Lamb accepts so iniust a sentence of death,
pronounced against him, by the which he merited, that the just sentence of
eternal death set down against us for our sins, should be revoked; and that
the sentence of absolution and pardon pronounced by the vicar of Jesus Christ,
when we rightly confess our selves unto him, might be valable and effectual.

IN THE second point thou have great occasion to be sorry, meditating the
cruelty, wherewith the wicked Jews (presentlye after sentence was pronounced
against him, which they so earnestly desired and craved) do then take our
Redeemer, and handle him much more spitefully then they did tofore, Pilate now
having given him to them, to execute freely their furious rage upon him. And if
heretofore they handled him so cruelly, having him but as a prisoner, alas,
what may we suppose they did to him being now condemned, and given wholly over
into their most sacrilegious hands. Contemplate, with what inhumanitie they
stripp off his robes of Mar. 15 b Mat. 27. d. Ioh. 19. a.
mockery, wherewith they had erst scorned him, and put his own clothes on
again, that he might by that means be known of every one; heping grief upon
grief, and ignominy upon ignominy. Behold how lay that most heavy Cross
on his weak shoulders, which they had with great diligence prepared in such
wise for him; ponder well, how greatly his pain was increased by that so
unmerciful a weight, being so sore weakened with his former torments, and the
blood which he had lost already. Consider how they make his condition worse
then that of the two thieves, whom they carye with him to suffer the like
death; since neither of them carries his Cross, as they make our most mild
Savior to do. This is the scepter, (O my King) which these Infidels, and
rebellious servants of thine give thee in sign of the soueraintie Isai. 9. b
and. 22. f. Tertul lib on Iudaeos.
which thou have over the^; the which answers very well to the crown,
wherewith they have alredie crowned thee; and thine inestimable charity
dissembleth and embraces al with the great desire thou have to conduct them by
this way to thy celestial kingdom. This is the staff whereon thou leanest,
and go therewith like an-other Ge. 23. ^.
Jacob, to pass the flood of Jordan, to wit, of death; to return anon after
thy resurrection, associated with those infinite legions of souls, which thou
deliueredst out of Limbo, and cariedst up to heaven with thee. With this staff,
and 1. Re. 17. (...)
with the five stones, which thou tookest in the mount Caluarie, that is to
say, thy five most sacred wounds, thou foughtest like an-other David against
that proud giant Lucifer, and subduedst him, delivering by this means thy
people from the hellish host, which did on every side enuirone them. This is
the wood which thou bear on thy back like an-other Ge. 22. b.
Isaac, to offer thy self thervppon for us in this most acceptable sacrifice
to thine eternal Father, being burned with the ^ire of thy most fervent
charity. Consider besides, how the Redeemer going thus laden with the grievous
weight of the Cross, fell to the ground through the unmerciful weight that he
bare; and how they smiting him then a-fresh most tirannously, make him rise up
and go an end; where thou may meditate, how not only the weight of the
Roode did grieve and torment him, but also both thine and the whole world their
manifold and enormous offenses, which he then bare upon him, going for the^ in
this wise to be crucified. So did the Prophet Isai. 53 b
Esaias affirm, saying: How the eternal Father had laid upon him al our
iniquities, that he should stisfie for all, like as he had offered himself for all. O my most sweet Redeemer, how grievous a burden did the 1. Pe. 2. d
multitude of mine abominations occasionate thee, which thou berest on thy
back, and pain thee much more then the Cross it self does. O, how great
reason is it, that I weep and wail with thee, for the pain which I have
caused thee to endure; and with-al, yield thee thanks, that thou like a good
Sheppard have vouchsafed to carye upon thy sacred shoulders this (...) c. 15. a
Man. 18. b.
miserable strayed sheep, which thou did come to seek in the wilderness of
this world. All the quiers of Angels, which thou leftest behind thee in heaven,
adore and bless thee, who know much better then we do, how greatly the
clemency meriteth to be thanked, which moved thee to come, carye, and cure so
vile a sheep, as is that of humane nature, which thou did bear upon thy
back, in carrying of thy Cross.

IN THE THIRD point thou may also interteyne thy self, contemplating, in
what a pitiful plight our Lord and Savior was in, when the Cross was taken
from him, and given to mat. 29 d Mar. 15. b. Luc. 23. d
Cyreneus, because he was not able to go so fast as those wicked helhoundes
would have had him. How greatly he was pained and afflicted, sweting through
the wearines of the viage he had made, how wounded and annoyed through the
heaviness of the Cross, shedding his blood anew, which intermedled with sweat,
did bedew the ground he went upon; how freight with the shame and vilanies
they did unto him, how bruised with the blows and strokes which they gave him
to make him go on end. O my God, what a countenance is this, enough to burst
his heart with compassion, who had never so little of humane piety. O my soul,
if thou could thoroughly consider this passage, how great cause should
thou find to take compassion and grief, at so many griefs, so many and
outrageous spites, as thou see him suffer for thy sins, 1. Pe. 2. d
who never sinned, nor ever was any falshod found in his mouth; and how
greatly ought thou besides to wail the hardness of thy heart, which is not
rent in twain with the remembrance of such a ruful countenance. O, if thou
did love this Lord with such love as thou art bound to do, he loving thee so
dearlye, with how great fervor would thou desire to gather up those
precious drops of blood and sweat, which did fall on the ground, wher-with
thou might wash out thy stains, and beautify thy beastlye blemishes. Ah!
what a spite should thou bear that Cyreneus, who eased in some wise the
pain of this Celestial Monarche, carrying Luc. 23. d
his Cross hefore him as a Royal Standard; and that which he bore then
perforce, Amb. li. 10. in Luc. ca. 99. post Hieron in Mat.
and maugre his will, Orig. hom. 35.
thou should bear on thy back with a willing and cheerful courage, Theoph.
and Euthy cap. 67. in mat Mat. 27. d. Mat. 16. d Mar. 8. d Luc. 9. c vbi
quotidie additur.
woting how the same Lord has said: That if any will follow him, he must take
up his Cross and follow him. And seeing thou have not deserved to carry that
Cross, which Simon Cyreneus did, carye at least thine own, like as thou art
commanded, that is to say, the toils and tribulations, which in this life shall
befall thee. Carye also the Cross of compassion, vnbethinking thee of that
which thy Lord vouchsafed to suffer for thee; since in this sort, thy service
which now thou do, shall be much more grateful to him, the^ that which
Cyreneus erst performed.

Meditate also in this Article the pitiful plaintes of those devout women that
Luc. 22. d.
followed him, who al of them wept full bitterlye, seeing the cruelty, wher-with
the most patient Lamb was handled; but above al, take compassion of those
tears, which the most mournful mother shed, who, like as she loved her son
more then did all the other women, so did she weep more bitterly then the
other, lament more then the other, and feel more grievous corseys then the
other. O sacred virgin, who can possiblye conceive the excess of thy most
vehement griefs, when thou saw him whom thy soul loved so tenderly,
lodened with that importable weight, weakened with so many woes, pained with so
many wounds, contemned with so many injuries, felowed with thieves, and
adjudged to the death of the Roode, which they caused him with such reproach
and pain to carye. Even such was thy soul then, as was the figure which thou
beheldest with thy weeping eyes; neither did the thorns of sorrow perce thine
entrals less, then those of woodd pearce his most Reverend head. This only
anguish, O my Sovereign Lady, had been sufficient to have made thee dye, as
it sufficed to make thee sown, were it not thy life had been supernaturally
pre^erued, to see the other torments which remained, for him in body, and for
thee in soul, to suffer. O how much more willingly then Cyreneus did, would
thou have performed his office, in carrying of the Cross; since the strength
which thy te^dernes and sorows denied thee, love did make supply of, and the
desire thou had to bear some part of the afflictions, which, without al
pity they gave unto the afflicted, and grieved thee no less then they did
himself. Lastly consider the words, which our Redeemer Daughters of
Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your own faults, and for those of
your children.
spoke, Luc. 23. d
turning him to the weme^ that wept, which ought to make thee careful, and
desirous to bring forth some good fruit; since otherwise, if thou be a dry
tree and barreine, think what punishment thou shall deserve, if he be thus
tormented for thy sins, which was a green tree, so precious and so fruitful.

A PRAYER.
HOW grievous and paineful was that viage to thee, O most sacred virgin, when
thou did accompanye thy dear son to the monnt Caluary, carrying the
Cross on his back, whereon he was condemned to suffer death; well did thy
manifold sighs give testimony thereof, as also the pitiful sobbes, and
abundance of tears which thou sheddest with the other women that wept with
thee, and accompanied him. I beseech thee, O most doleful mother, by the dolor
and affliction which thou feltest in that hour, that by thine intercession I
may have such grace granted me, as that I may always faithfullye accompany
the same Lord, in carrying of my Cross; and that no worldly thing, be it
prosperous or contrary, may ever separate me from him. Amen.

OF THE CRVCIFYING*


In Cruce dum pendet tenebris obnubit Olimpu^*
Expoliat tumulos, and iuga celsa quatit.
THE FIFTH AND LAST dolorous Mystery is of the crucifying of Jesus Christ our
Redeemer, touching the which thou shall meditate these points following.
FIRST, how being arrived to the mount Caluary, which was the place where they
commonly did execute offenders, those wicked tormentours stripped our Lord out
of his clothes, to nail him naked upon the Roode.

SECONDLY, consider the incomparable torment, which the most mild ^ambe
received, when they racked him out upon the Cross, and that his most holy
hands and feet were perced through with great nails, as also the wonderful
patience wher-with he endured every thing.

THIRDLY, thou shall meditate the shame which increased his other annoyes, when
being thus naked and crucified, he was lifted up upon the Cross, and placed a
betwixt two thieves; and ponder here, mar. 15. c Luc. 23. e. I^h. 19. c.
what his most heavy mother felt, when she saw him in this case, and heard
the words which he spoke being on the Roode.

IF THOU wilt dilate the meditation of the first point, consider, in what case
our most loving Lord was, having finished this his last and most dolorous
procession, how great the wearines was, which he felt, having made so long and
laboursome a journey on foot, and lodened a great piece of the way with the
heavy burden of the Cross. How great his weakness, which made him almost to
sown, having shed so great a quantity of blo^dd out of the manifold wounds
he had received. How great the affliction was, that oppressed his most sacred
soul, vnbethinking him of the extreme torments which he looked for, besides
those that he had alredye endured; and for the mitigation of so many pains and
griefs, the bed which they had prepared for him, was that hard and narrow
Cross, whereon they minded to crucify him; and the drink which they presented
to comfort him withal, was that wine mingled with gal, to the end that no of
his senses or members might go scot-free without their peculier torment. O
sweet Jesus, thou which art a most pleasant hony-combe descended from heaven
to Mat. 22 d. and f. Mar. 15. b. Luc. 23 c Ioh. 19. (...) Psalm. 98. c Cyril.
Alex li. 12* in Ioh. ca. 29. li. 1. histor. Eccl.
sweeten the sournes of men, and to ease their annoyes and griefs, find no
one amongst them that will take compassion of thee, nor give thee any moment of
rest, yea, co^triue new means how to afflict thee, and to heap Ps. 68. d.
sorrow upon sorrow. O ungrateful world, how ill a counterchange is this thou
geuest to thy maker and benefactor, which for honey affordest him gal; and for
solace, sorrow; and hatred for the love wher-with he created thee, and came to
redeem thee; and this thine ingratitude and most blame-woorthye blindness is
cause of thy so barbarous cruelty, as meaning to crucify him; thou will
stripp him out of his clothes, that he may go naked to suffer death, who came
naked into the world to give thee life. Consider then, with what inhumanitie
those cruel hangmen pluck off his clothes, and withal pluck off his tender
skin, and part of the flesh which did cleave thereto. Behold, how the most
beautiful of al men stands naked, and freight full of shame, amongst so great a
multitude of people, bleeding anewe al over, through the rauing of his former
wounds; and ponder the intolerable grief of his most heavy mother, when she
saw him bereft of the Ioh. 19. d.
robe which with her own hands she had woue^ for him, and without part of the
skinn and flesh which she had given him in her entrals; and clothed only with
dolours, heaviness, and confusion, with which kind of attire his soul was also
covered. Learn here to love poverty, seeing he loved it 2. Cor. 8. b Ber. Ser.
1. de Vig. Natiuit.
so greatly, Amb. ca. 13 instit. virg.
who was given to us for a teacher; and was borne poor, lived poor, and poor
and naked departed this ungrateful world.

IN THE meditation of the second point thou may pause in like manner,
considering, how above all the dolors and torments, which the most innocent
Lamb endured, they passed, which he felt, when his most sacred hands and feet
were with huge nails fastened hard unto the Cross. Consider the cruel blows
wherewith they nailed him; and how the blows missing many times through the
fiendish fury, wherewith they were enraged (as we may godlily meditate) they
fell many times upon the palms of his hands, and upon his fingers and toes,
with such a force, as those delicate parts were wholly crusshed in sunder, and
wounded with intolerable torment. Behold like wise, how to make his members
stretche out to the holes which they had already bored in the Cross, they rack
the^ out so vehemently, as they pluck the bones out of the joints with
incomparable grief; whereby was that fulfilled, which David had prophesied,
Psa. 21. b
saying: They have bored through my hands and my feet, and have numbered al my
bones. Behold then, how these sacred arms of our most loving Lord are thus
stretched out upon the Cross, ready August.
to embrace al those, that will draw nighe unto him; even like to that his
infinite charity, wherewith he suffered for all. Behold these most puissant
hands that erst created heaven and earth, and wherewith he had wrought so many
miracles, how they are now Zac. 13. (...)
nailed fast to the Roode, and distill forth that precious liquor of his most
sacred blood, sufficient to cure al their spiritual infirmities that will gather
thereof; since this is the wholesome and most approved mirrhe, which the Spouse
Can. 5. a.
says in the Canticles, that her hands and fingers did distill. Consider also,
how those huge nails were not only driven through the most holy Son his
hands and feet; but also perced the entrals of his blessed mother being there
present. O what a horrible sound made those vehement blows of the hammers in
her ears, which, no doubt, did more torment and wound her woeful heart, then
if in very deed her holy hands had been stricken through. And this was a cause
of doubling our most merciful Lord his torments, who wist it well enough, and
loved her so tenderly, and took great compassion of her pains; in such sort,
as besides the torment which these outward nails did occasionate in his body,
he had other inward nails which afflicted more vehemently his most sacred
soul. O most patient Jesus, how art thou on every side environed with
annoiances? Rightlye may thou say, Ps. 68. a.
that the waters of tribulation are entered into the very botome of thy soul;
and thine invincible patience abides al, which makes thee become dombe, and
to stand like a Lamb, Isai. 53. (...)
before those that shere thee and torment thee. And if happily thou openest thy
mouth, it is only to Luc. 23. (...) Beda ca. 94 in Luc. Leo Ser. 11. de Passio.
Theoph. Anselm.
excuse and to pray for the^, for so much as thine infinite charity is that
which holds thee surer nailed and fastened to the Cross, then do those
material and iron nails, minding with this so great cost, to confect a
sovereign medicine to our salvation.

CONCERNING the third point, thou have a more ample matter to enterteine thee,
pondring how our Redeemer being crucified, was exalted on high upon the Cross,
that as he died for all men, so he might be seen of al men. This exaltatio^ had
Nu. 31. (...) Ioh. 3. b
Moises erst prefigured, when he raised up the Serpent of brass in the
wilderness; since like as the^ al they were healed of their corporal wounds
which looked upon the Serpent; even so they, which with a lively faith behold
this Lord exalted upon the Roode, receive cure of their spiritual infirmities,
which are far more dangerous. Pause therefore (O my soul) pause and shroude
thy self under the shadow of this Cant. 2. a
tree of life, if thou will rightly repose thee, and cure thy festred wounds.
Behold the wholesome fruit that hangs Deu. 28 g
thereon; which albeit thou see naked, conte^ned, blasphemed, and reproved of
this miscreant nation, yet is he most sweet, most high, and of infinite
Majesty; God hidden, who vouchsafes thus to disse^ble and cloak his
puissance, to make his mercy so much the better known. Gather then this
precious fruit, and trial shall teach thee the marvelous virtue thereof. Make
thy nest like a simple dove, in the crannies and holes of this Can. 2. c Ier.
48. d.
rock, that is to say, in Ber. Ser. 61. in Can.
his most sacred wounds, since he gives thee leave, yea, inuiteth thee so to
do. Weigh well the throne which this day the eternal King has chosen amidst
two thieves and trespassers, in the same mount where such accustomably were
executed; meaning to signify by this, that as for sinners and offenders he
descended from heaven, and was borne in the world; so did he for sinners and
thieves dye in that place betwixt thieves, paying by this means that he had
not Ps. 68. a.
stolen, and taking away the filth and Abac. 3. d*
infamy of that stinking place, with the most sweet incense of the sacrifice
which he offered. Learn moreover in this point to do according to the example
which is showed thee in the Exo. 25* d Heb. 8. b Act. 7* f
mountain, crucifying thy flesh with her vices and concupiscences, as the Gala.
5. ^ Romans 6. a Colos. 3. (...)
Apostle does admonish thee; since it is not meet that thou seek after
delicacies and superfluous pamperings of the flesh, seeing thy Lord his flesh
thus cruelly handled, as from the sole Isa. 1. a. Psa. 37. a
of his foot unto the crown of his head there is no one free spot in him; And
very indecent should it be, that under Bernard.
a head crowned with thorns the other parts should not be nice and delicate.
Contemplate lastly in this point the extreme dolors which the most ruful mother
felt, at such time, as standing by the Cross, she saw him heaued up thereon,
naked, racked, al wounded, having his hands and feet perced through, whereout
those four floods of blood did issue, being far more precious then the Genesis
2. b Eccl. 24. c
four floods that issued out of terrestral Paradise; when she beheld those
gracious eyes wanne and pale, wherewith he was wont to comfort al those that
were heavy and afflicted; that beautiful face, wherein the 1. Pet. 1. c
Angels desire to look, difformed and withered; that divine head full of
thorns, which had Mat. 8. (...) Luc. 9. g
not where to rest it. O Queen of heaven, what dolor was ever like to thine,
when with thy weeping eyes thou beheldest this woeful figure! O, how much more
were thy anguishes sufficient to darke^ thy most heavy heart, the^ was the Luc.
23. f
darkness which came then upon the earth, sufficient to darke^ it. To whom may I
compare thee, or to whom may I liken thee, O most sacred virgin, thine
affliction and tribulation, being so great as is the Ocean Sea! If the Angel,
when he first saluted thee, did call thee, Luc. 1. (...)
full of grace, at this instant he may call thee, full of griefs and sorrow, so
great a part of the bitter cupp, which thy dear son drank, being fallen to
thy share; to whom, I humbly beseech thee, to offer those grievous dolors,
which thou then enduredst, like as he offered al his bitter griefs, and the
blood he shed, to his eternal Father for the redemption of the world. And thou,
O celestial Father, behold, in all humility I beg it, behold the Ps. 83. c
face of thy Christ, and smell the sweetness of the sacrifice which he offreth
thee. Regard those outstretched arms, that represent the bow which thou
promisedst to place in the clouds Genesis 9. b Eccle. 43. b Haba. 3 b
in sign of peace and frendshipp, which thou vouchsafedst to make with
mankind. Listen that sweet music he makes with the words he speaks on
the Cross, where his head is al to torn, and his members and sinews
stretched out like David's harp, whereon when he played, 1. Re. 16 d
he made the fiend to fly; and seeing all that he has done and suffered, has
been to appease thee, and to obtain mercy for us, accept the same, O Lord,
and send us from heaven thy holy benediction.

A PRAYER.
WHAT grief was ever like to thine, O Virgin and most woeful mother, when thou
saw thy dearly beloved son exalted on the Cross, fastened thereto with
huge nails, from topp to toe al wounded like a lepre; having gal and vinegre
given him to drink, and blasphemed and mocked of that wicked nation! O how in
very deed did then the dagger of woes, which Luc. 2. (...)
Simeon had foretold thee, pearce through thy most afflicted soul! I beseech
thee humblye, O most woeful Lady, with joined hands, that for thy son his most
bitter passion, and thy compassion sake, thou will obtain me graces to feel
the taste of his so strange torments, and of thy excessive sorows, that being
touched with a true compunction, I may crucify b mine old man with all his
vices and concupiscences. Amen.

THE FIVE LAST MYSTERIES ARE CALLED GLORIOUS,
FOR THAT THE MOST HOLY VIRGIN MARYE RECEIVED THEM, AFTER HER SON WAS WHOLLYE
GLORIOUS, TO WIT, BOTH IN BODY AND SOVLE.

OF THE RESVRRECTION.


Post triduum sospes repetit data membra sepulchro:
Tartareaque refert rapta trophea dom^.
THE FIRST WHEREOF is of his triumphant Resurrection, about the which thou shall
meditate these points following.
FIRST, how our Redeemer being dead, his most sacred soul descended down to
Ps. 15. b
Limbo to comfort Zac. 9. c. Col. 2. c.
and deliver thence those holy fathers, which had so long time looked for him;
with whom he stayed til Sundaye morning, when very early he returned to the
sepulcher, and taking again his most holy body, he rose up glorious, and
issued out of his closed sepulcher.

SECONDLY, thou may meditate, how our Lord being thus risen up, he appeared
first to his most holy Niceph. cap. 32. li. 1 Hist. Eccl.
mother, who received an incomparable gladness, seeing him risen up so beautiful
and so glorious.

THIRDLY, meditate, how after he had remained some space with his most blessed
mother comforting and rejoicing her* he went afterward to perform the same
office to his Luc. 24 b and. f. Act. 1. a
Disciples, and his other devout servants; amongst the which, he first
appeared to good mat. 28 b Mar. 16. b
Mary Magdalen, who loved him most fervently, and with greatest desire did
seek him.

IN THE first point thou may entertain thy self, meditating, how al those
holy Fathers, Patriarchs, and prophets, with all the other Aug. li. 20 de
Ciuit. ca. 15. Hier. in ca. 4. ad Ephe.
righteous persons which had been dead from the beginning of the world, were al
detained in Limbo, expecting the happy coming of our Savior, who with the
same charity and humility, where with he had humbled himself, in suffering
Phil. 2. b
death upon the Cross, vouchsafed also to humble him-self, in discending down
to Limbo, and visiting that blessed congregation, which with such fervent zeal
had long time desired to see this happy day. I leave thee now to think, what
surpassing joy those sacred souls received, when they saw this most sacred
soul of Christ Aug. Ser. 137. de tempore.
united to the Divinity enter with such triumph and puissance into their
prison, and with his brightness to illuminate those mistie dongeons; and
understood besides what he had done and suffered in the world, and then,
wherefore he was descended thither to be only to deliver them out of their
imprisonment, and to make them endless happy.

What tongue can woorthelye tell their consolations, their joys, their songs,
praises, and benedictio^s, which they sounded forth in praise of their glorious
benefactour? Nevertheless, albeit the joy of these redeemed souls were so
exceeding great, yet far greter was that of their Redeemer, beginning now to
see the glorious fruit of his great pains, and the great good, which his
grievous passion had wrought. O, with how great reason might each one then Ps.
117. d
say: This is the day that our Lord has made, let us rejoice and be gladd
therein: Where note, that albeit it may seem other-whiles, that our Lord has
forgotten his elect, and that which he has promised them; yet does he not so,
but expects the fittest time, wherein he knows how to fulfill the same, like
as we see he has here done toward these good holy Fathers. We must not
therefore waver in our belief, but abide and wait with patience for his most
holy coming. Sithe^s as the Prophet Abacuch admonishes us: Aba. 2. a
Our Lord, whom thou have so greatly called on, will come at length, and will
not lie; if he tarry, expect him; for he that comes, will come, and will not
tarry long. Consider also in this point, how our Savior having staide al
Saturday with those holy Fathers, rejoicing and co^forting the^, as well thou
may imagine, his most blessed soul did on Euang. vbi supra Act 10. f and.
13. (...) Romans 4. d and. 8. f. 1. Cor. 15. a* 2. Tim. 2 Nic. ca. 37. li. 1.
Sunday morning return to revive his most sacred body, which lay in the
sepulcher; wherinto he entering, made it become so beautiful and glittering as
the Sun; and that body which erst through the torments of his passion was
al wounded, al black, and al difformed Luc. 24. f Ioh. 20. (...)
like a Lepre, presently after it was united to the most sacred soul, and by
it revived, became the most beautiful of al bodies; and the blacknes being now
changed into brightness, the wounds and deformity converted into an
incomparable beauty, he reserved only the Luc. 24. f Ioh. 20. (...)
five most sacred wounds of his hands, feet, and side, in memory of our
redemption, the which do wonderfully shine forth, and beautify the same; and
the fight thereof causes a singular contentation to the blessed Saints, and
moves his eternal Father to mercy in our behalfes, when for this intent it
pleases him to show them. O, happy are those ever, that shall enjoy such a
sight! O what a Mirror is this so clear and beautiful, wherein we may
eftsons take view of our selves, to know our defects, and to rejoice our
hearts, like as his disciples did rejoice each time, mat. 28. b Luc. 24. e. f
Ioh. 20. e
that the same Mirror did show it self unto them; and at this day are they
never satiated with beholding it in heaven.

IN THE second point thou may enterteine thy self, meditating and beholding
with the eyes of thy soul, how our Lord and Redemer did presently after he
was risen up, visit his most holy Niceph. ca. 32. lib. 1. Sedul. in carm. Pas.
ca. 20. de Resur. ver. 4. a fine.
mother, whom thou may well believe, to have been the first, albeit in the
Gospel there is no mention made thereof; for, that being a commandment of
his, which the wise man reports, Eccl. 7. c. Tob. 4. a
Honor thy Father, and forget not thy mothers sorrow, how were it possible for
the most obedient son to forget his mother, who loved him so dearly, and had
so bitterly wailed, wept, and sorowed his passion and paineful death? Why
should not she be visited and comforted before al others, which was more
afflicted then al others? If, as the Evangelist Lu^. 24. e Niceph. cap. 34. and
35. lib. 1.
reports, our Lord did, after he was risen up, appear to S. Peter that had
erst denied him, why shall not we believe, that he appeared first to his blessed
mother, that never did deny him? yea, continuallye confessed him, and loved
him above al; and in whom alone the faith remained firm and incorrupted.
Admit therefore it was so, as reason requires it should be, force thy self
to meditate a little, what joy this blessed Lady felt, when, being solitary in
her chamber, weeping, waiting, and longing to see the son of Mal. 4. a
righteousness rise up, to lighten and clear her dark and doleful heart, she
saw her self in a moment environed with the glittering beams of the beautiful
light thereof. How great her gladness was, when she saw that body which she
had lately left in the sepulcher dead, al wounded and deformed, now living,
whole, glittering, and glorious. How great contentatio^ she received, when she
saw the sovereign beauty and brightness restored to that face full of al
graces, and those divine eyes, wher-with he looked upon her so clear and so
lovely. What pleasure her sense received, when with her ears she heard the
most sweet voice, wherewith he saluted her. How sovereign her exultation
was, when she saw those most sacred arms embrace her so louinglye, and how
with those most sacred hands which she had so lately seen fastened to the
Roode, he with such piety wiped Isai. 22. (...) Apoc. 7. d and. 21. b
off the trickling tears of her reverend face; then might she say, and that
with great cause, that sentence of the Prophet Ps. 93. d
David; According to the multitude of griefs that my heart has suffered, thy
cons^lations have rejoiced my soul. Consider then in the best wise thou can
the sweet communication that passed betwixt the blessed mother and the Son,
the the which, well may we believe, did occasionate no less comfort to the
mother, then did his sight, albeit she could utter but few words, by reason
she was wholly rapt in beholding that glorious vision which she had before her
eyes, and in viewing every particular fealty of that body, and that amiable
countenance, whose brightness and beauty did so greatly delight her now, as
did the seeing of it black and wounded heretofore torment her, in the time of
his painful passion. In like manner, beholding those wounds, which in his death
had perced her virginal heart with sorrow, now became so fair and so
glittering, she was thereby replenished with so great a joy, as she remained
like one astonished, not being able to pronounce scarce any one word. Rejoice
therefore, O Queen of heaven, since thou have so great causes to rejoice thee;
Let thy spirit now Luc. 2. (...)
be glad in God thy Savior, who has fully satisfied the lo^ging desires of
thy soul? Now thou see him risen up again, whose death thou erst
lamentedst. Can. 2. (...)
Now is winter, and the storms of his persecutions, ignominies, and torments
clean passed over; now lives he, and death shall have no more Romans 6. ^
any dominion over him. Thou see him now far more exalted then he was
before depressed; now is he a conqueror of Death, of Hell, and of the Devil;
now is neither he to suffer any more, nor thou to have any further fear.
Rejoice therefore, O Lady, and let thy soul receive solace through his triumph
and Resurrection, as it was before made sorrowful, eue^ almost to death, through
his painful death and passion.

IN THE THIRD point thou may in like manner enterteyne thy self, being a
matter of great consolation, considering how our Lord, look what office he
had performed to his most blessed mother, and the same vouchsafed he to do to
Mat. 28 b Luc. 24. b Ioh. 21. a. b Act. 1. a Nic* ea. 34 and. 35. li. 1*
his Disciples, and other devout servants; wher-with we may well believe, that
the loving Lady replenished with charity, was very well contented, yea,
desired him so to do; since, like as when he was borne, she laid him in a
manger, signifying thereby, that albeit she alone did bear and bring him
forth, yet would she not have him for her-selfe alone, but for all; eue^ so
would she not have all the joy of his glorious resurrection to her-selfe alone,
but would in any wise, that others were made partakers thereof. Meditate
therefore, how he first appeared to good mar. 16 b
Mary Magdalen, according to the testimony of the holy Evangelists, who went
with the other devout women to Ibid. 16. a Luc. 24. a
anoint him with precious ointments (which they carried with the^) in the
sepulcher; where not finding of him (albeit her companions went away) yet would
Ioh. 20. ^
not she depart, since love held her fast linked to the place where she had
erst left him, whom she so dearly loved, and remaining there weeping, she with
a desire she had to find him dead, merited to see him alive and risen up,
albeit in Gardners weed, Ibid. d
in such sort, as she saw him and knew him not, our Lord aunswering herein to
the disposition of her soul; for she loved and doubted, as he for the same
reason appeared Luc. 24. b
in pilgrims show to those two disciples that went to Emaus; where thou may
note, how this Lord knows at one time* how both to comfort, instruct, and
manifest the defects of his elect, and how such are best favored of him as
most fervently do love him, like as we here see by good Mary Magdale^, to who^
for her fervent love sake was this prerogative given, that she might first see
her deerlye beloved master, Ioh. 20. d
and that she might be the messenger to announce the joy of his Resurrection
to those that little thought thereof, by reason of the heaviness they were in,
through the remembrance of his death and doleful passion.

Think now, (good Christian) think attentively, what joy that most denout
gentlewoman did feel, when she both saw and knew her so dearlye beloved
master. Ah Lord, how that heart leaped again for joy, when our Savior called
her Ioh. 20. d
Mary, and she answered him forthwith with this loving word of master. O what
a sudden change is this, how present an alteration? What did thy heart feel
(O good Mary Magdalen) being thus in a moment delivered from thy surpassing
sorows, and surseased with such a wonderful consolation? What a boiling heat of
heart was Ioh. 20. d Mat. 28. b
that, that made her so impotent over her self, be about to embrace him, like
one drunk in love, whereby she quite forgot her-selfe of his most sacred
Majesty. O most happy tears, wherewith she bedewed the ground of that garden;
which made her so soon to reap so sweet a fruit; happy the perseverance,
which made her tarry still in that place, whereby she was so singulerly rejoiced
and comforted of our Savior. O happy love, Can. 8. b
more strong the^ death, which made her to find the author of life revived
and risen up, in the very place of death. Contemplate afterward, how she
hied her to tell these joyful tidinges to the Apostles, Mal. 4. a
whom, every one of them, this Son of righteousness minded to white, confect,
and illuminate; for like as he was borne for all, and died for all, so did he
rise up again for all, and vouchsafed to communicate the joys of his
Resurrection to al; forgetting neither Luc. 24. c Nic. ca. 34 and 35. li. 1
Peter, who denied him, nor the other mat 28. c Mar. 16. c
Apostles, who were now for woe and distrust departed from Jerusalem; Ioh. 20.
f Nic. ca. 35. li. 1.
neither Thomas, who continued so long time in his obstinate incredulity;
whereby is showed us, how much more this Lord is inclined and prone to comfort
and to favor, then to afflict and punish; seeing how in counterchange of those
few days, wherein he permitted them through his death to be scandalized,
troubled, and afflicted, he did afterward comfort and rejoice them far more
with his desired presence, appering many times to them, during the Act. 1. a
Nic. ca. 34 lib. 1. hist. Eccl.
forty days; mening there by to ascertaine the^ the better of the verity of
his Resurrection: where out thou may learn to put thy trust in this most
faithful Lord. And albeit thou feel thy self other-whiles afflicted and
grievously tempted, despair not yet, for he will have care to comfort and
visit thee in due time, and will deliver thee out of al thy temptations and
afflictions, according as it is Tob. 3. d
written: After a storm he sends a calm, and after sobbes and tears, he
gives consolations.

A PRAYER.
AFTER a storm the air grow eth commonly clear again; even so is it happed to
thee, O most Souerain Queen of heaven, for after the stormy and woeful time of
thy dear Son his passion, the bright and calm day of his Resurrection appeared
to thee, wherein thy heart was incomparably rejoiced, seeing him risen up
glorious, immortal, and impassible. I beseech thee, O glorious Ladi, by that
ineffable exultation which thou receauedst on this most happy dai, that it may
plese thee to make me partaker thereof, obteining me that I may dye to mine old
life of sin, and may rise up again with a new life of grace, by means whereof
I may afterward attain to the true and perpetual life of glory. Amen.

THE ASCENSION.


Victor agit spolijs auctos in sydera currus:
Et Patris aeterna dexter in arce sedet.
THE SECOND GLOrious Mystery is of the Ascension of our Lord, concerning the
which thou may meditate these points following.
FIRST, how our Lord appeared the Act. 18. a Nic. ca. 34 lib. 1.
forty day after his Resurrection, to his Disciples then being mar. 16 (...)
Luc. 24. f
at table; and blamed their slacknes and difficulty in believing his
Resurrection, and afterward taught them what they ought to do after his
Ascension, and commanded them to go to Mount Oliuet, there to see him ascend.

SECONDLY, thou shall meditate, how al our Lord his Disciples being gathered
together in the Mount Oliuet, as also the most holy mother our Lady, and the
other devout women there with them, our Savior came to the place where they
were, having with him those blessed troops which he had erst delivered out of
Limbo; and after he had spoken to them, and bidd them al fare-wel, he began
in their sightes to mount up to heaven with great triumph and exultation,

THIRDLY, consider, how the blessed mother, with the Disciples, and other
devout women, as they were al-together looking up to heaven, where they saw our
Lord ascend, there descended Act. 1. b
two Angels down cladd in white, aduertising them to make no longer abode
there, and then they al of them returned back to Jerusalem.

IN THE first point thou may meditate the exceeding clemency and lowlines
of this our Lord; who being that he was, did neither disdain, ne was ashamed
to visit his poor servants, and to stay with them in any time, place, or
disposition whatsoever. Since as the Gospel mar. 16 b
tells, he appeared to them when they were at table, and peradventure did Luc.
24. f
eat with them, thereby to do thee to wit, that thou may at al times, and
in all places securely call upon him, and how thou ought to enforce thy self
to order al thine actions in such sort, as if every hour thou did expect
his holy visitation. Note moreover, how his checkes and scoolinges be of a
Father that loves us right tenderly, and is greatly desirous of our profit.
Like as thou see here, how after he had found fault with his Disciples
incredulity, he forthwith taught and instructed them of that they ought to do
in going round about the world, besides other mat. 18 d mar. 16. c. d Luc. 24.
g Ioh. 20. (...)
graces and favors which he did impart unto the^. At what time therefore thou
feel either inwardly his rebukes, or outwardly his rods, be not troubled
thereat, nor any deal discouraged, but believe assuredlye, that in thus
exercising his whipp, he does like a loving Father, who, as holy writ does
Heb. 12. b Apoc. 3. d Pro. 3 b Job. 5, c.
witness, Chastises him whom he loves, and scourges him whom he takes for
his child. Contemplate then the singular joy wher-with the holy Apostles were
surseased, in beholding their most loving Master; and and with what attention
they gave ear to his divine words; and if the most holy mother were the^
present amongst them (as with godly devotion we may believe she was) how much
more she desired to behold and hear her son, then to taste any corporal
food: and if at other times when she was at table with him, she forgot to eat
her meat, as we may well believe she did, through the contentatio^ she received
by looking of him, how much more did she so this last time, woting, how
presently after he was to depart this world. O sacred virgin, who can possibly
conceue, with how sundry cogitations thy heart was at that instant occupied!
for on the one side thou wast delighted with beholding his so amiable presence,
on the other side thou languishedst, vnbethinking thee, how, not many hours
after he should be taken from thee, and that thou should remain here in
earth, he ascending up to heaven, whose absence could not choose, but be
greatly grievous to thee; in such sort, as the self-same cause and object did
make thee both glad and sorrowful; howbeit, this did in the end chieflye comfort
thee, that thou knew such to be his will and pleasure, whereto continually
thou did conform thy self.

IN THE meditation of the second point thou may intertaine thy self, being a
matter of great devotion, considering the wonderful Ascension of our Lord, and
beholding with the eyes of thy mind every particularitie of the manner of his
ascending; the which will, no doubt, afford thee great comfort and spiritual
fruit. For if the 4. Re. 2. b Eccl. 48. b.
Prophet Elias promised to give his Disciple Heliseus the gift of his spirit
which he required, if so be he saw him ascend in that fiery chariot, where-in
he was transported into earthly Paradise; how much more justly may thou
hope to obtain a greater gift, if thou contemplate and view with the eyes of
thy mind devoutly and with attention, how, not the Prophet Elias, but the
Lord of all the prophets ascends; not in a chariot of fire, but by his own
virtue and power; not into terrestral Paradise, but into the Emperial heaven,
where he Ps. 109 a Mat. 22. d. Mar. 16. b. Luc. 22. d Act* 7. g Aug. lib. de
fide and Symb. ca. 7.
sits on the right hand of his eternal Father; and if, as S. Paul Ephesians. 4.
b Psalm. 67. b.
says, Christ when he ascended into heaven, gave many gifts to men, well
may thou believe he will do the same even now toward them that do
spirituallye contemplate the same Ascension. Open therefore thine internal
eyes, and with great faith and attention behold how the most holy Virgin
with all that blessed company that associated her, being arririued to the mount
Oliuet, her most sweet son came also to the same place with the sacred
spoils of so many souls as he had erst delivered out of Limbo. Do now
contemplate, with how great sweetness and affability he talked to every one;
with how great benignity he embraced every one; with how great charity he
Luc. 24 ^
blessed and comforted every one; and if he did thus to al, consider in what
manner he behaved himself toward that his most sacred Mother, who loved him
more then al, merited more then al, and was more tenderlye moved then al with
his departure. O how much more sugared words may we think he spoke to her,
how much more singular favors he did her, and how much more amiably he
embraced her. The blessed mother desired to accompany her most dear son,
without whose presence and company her life was loathsome and painful to her;
how-beit, it was not granted her, our Lord vouchsafing, that she for Vndecim
annos a morte Christi Maria vixisse dicitur apud Niceph. ca. 3. li. 2. hist.
Eccl. ex Euodio.
some time should remain here in the world, as a Keeper and comforter of that
little flock, which the good Sheppard left comfortless with his departure;
neither thought he it meet, that in one day they should be made Orphans, being
deprived of such a Father and a mother; the which this Lady understanding,
quieted her-selfe, and like an humble and obedient handmaid resigned her will
to his divine will, saying happily the same words in the Ascension, which she
uttered in the incarnation; to Luc. 1. d
wit, Behold the hand maid of our Lord.

Having then in this wise talked with every one, and taken his leave of them
al, behold, how by little and little he begins to eleuate him-self from earth,
and to mount vpwardes into the air with his hands lifted up on high, wher-with
he Luc. 24. g
blessed the^, and with his eyes fixed on them, did amiably behold them. Here
may thou meditate, what the most sacred virgin, with all that holy assembly
felt, seeing him mount up thus triumphantly; how their hearts did rent in
twain through love, and how they melted again with tears, seeing him go
further and further from them; and how they withal were incomparably rejoiced,
by beholding the triumph and Majesty, wherewith he ascended, and hearing
that heavenly melody, which the Angels and blessed Saints did make, who al
of them sounded forth most melodiously the praises of this triumphant
Conqueror; so that the hearing and seeing of these things could not choose,
but make them for joy and tenderness of heart pour forth plentiful streams of
tears. O glorious day, O Soueraine-sweet solemnity, O most renowned triumph!
thus is he honored Esther 6. c.
whom the King of heaven will honor; thus is he exalted, mat. 23. b Luc. 14. c
and. 18. c
who humbled himself so profoundly; thus meriteth he to triumph, who has
obtained so glorious a victory. Behold, O King of heaven, thy exaltation, and
the name above al names that was given thee for being thus humbled and made
obedient to the death of the Cross. Behold, how thou beginnest now to reap
the abundant fruit that was promised thee, for having Isai. 53. d
lost thy life for our sins. Behold the noble triumph thou have attained,
for having with such prowes overcome so dangerous and difficult a day. Get
thee therefore, O Lord, get thee now to thy Ps. 131. b 2. Par. 6. g.
rest, seeing thou have taken so great pains, and carye with thee the arc of
thy sanctification, that is to say, thy most sacred humanity, which is the
most rich arc, whereout was taken that precious treasure of our redemption. Be
Psa. 107.
thou exalted above all the heavens, O my God, and thy glory be over all the
world; Al Angels, and al men yield thee due adoration and reverence, seeing thou
have enriched and rejoiced them al with this thy glorious and most miraculous
Ascension.

IN THE THIRD point thou may in like manner enterteyne thee, meditating,
how the most blessed Mother remained with that holy flock in the mountain,
where she saw her most glorious Son ascend up to heaven; who al of them
accompanied him with their corporal eyes whiles they might possiblye discern
him, and did after he was once out of sight (being receued into a white Act. 1.
b.
cloud) associate him with their souls.

Contemplate a while here, how she with the other lookers on, being al of them
devoutly on their knees, fixed their eyes on heaven without any looking a-side
or shifting of places, being bereft, as it were of al their senses, and wholly
ravished with this most glorious vision.

Meditate besides, the solemn pomp and rejoicing, wherewith this glorious
triumpher king of heaven and of earth was received into heaven; think as-wel as
thou can, with what music, with what songs, with what praises, and with
what reverence every celestial order did receive and adore him; how the
Angels rejoiced; how the Archangels wondered; how the Scraphins burned in love;
how the inferior orders enquired of the superior that which the Prophet Isa.
63. a.
Esaias had so long time before foretold: Who is this that comes from Edom?
to wit, the world; Who is this so beautiful and so attired in new garments,
that ascends with so great puissance and triumph? with other like words and
questions, whereof thou may meditate according to thy devotion. Contemplate
lastly, how this most humble Lord being arrived to the Emperial heaven (who,
as touching Ioh. 14. d
his humanity was less then this Father) bowed himself down, repeting, it
may be, the same words which in his prayer of the last supper he had used in
the world; that is to Ioh. 17. a
say, My Father, I have preached and announced thy name upon earth, and have
perfected the work which thou commaundedst me that I should do; now therefore,
do thou clarify me, O Father, with the clearnes of the glory which I had
with thee before the world was made And then may thou meditate, how his
heavenly Father made him sit in that high throne, on his right hand, where he
now Romans 8. f. Ephesians. ^. d Collos. 3. a 1. Pet. 3. d
sits; that is to say, that he exalted him, and made him partaker of the
greatest goods and excellencies that either have been, or ever shal-be
granted to any other; yea, that no creature can possiblye comprehend; which is
to be understood, in as much as he was man; for as he is God; Ioh. 10. f
he is equal with his Father, and has the same glory and Majesty that his
Father has. The Prince of glory being then received in this manner, (who never
forgets them that love and put their trust in him) sent Act. 1. b
two Angels down to earth to visit his most dear mother, with all the other
company, as also to inform them of his arriual into heaven, and to deliver
such other speeches as he spoke to them; by whose coming thou may well
ween, how great consolation they al received, what praises and what blessings
they yielded unto their Lord, whom after they had with most profound humility
adored, they returned with great joy to Luc. 24 g
Jerusalem: Since albeit they were sorrowful and heavy, as being left
Orphans in great solitarines through the absence of such a master and a
Shepparde, yet for because they loved him better the^ themselves, Charity
(which seeks 1. Cor* 13. b.
not her own things) made them to rejoice more at the prosperity and glory
of their most loving Lord, then to sorrow the want of their own consolations.
This is that which thou may meditate touching the history of this most
glorious Ascension; and learn withal to desire, seek and sigh for celestial
things, and to loathe al transitorye trashe, endeavoring, that thy conversation
be in heaven, where Christ remains Collos. 3. (...)
sitting on the right hand of his eternal Father.

A PRAYER.
LIKE AS, O most sacred mother, thou louedst Jesus thy most sweet son better
the^ thy self, even so did thou make more account of his joys and happiness
the^ thou did of thine own. And therefore, albeit thou remainedst behind him
here in earth, yet did thou rejoice greatly, when thou saw him ascend up
to heaven, accompanied with the Angels and Saints he carried with him, with
such iubilation, power, and Majesty, as was convenient for so glorious a
triumpher. I beseech thee, O most holy Lady, by this thy joy, that seeing thou
then remainedst in the world, for the succor and consolation of man, that I
may never be destitute of thy protection, to the end, that by means thereof I
may know my self to be a pilgrim in this world, and that my thoughts and
conversation may be principally Collos. 3. a
in heaven, where the self-same Lord reigns in the glory of God his Father.
Amen.

OF THE COMING OF THE HOLY GHOST.


Iam Mariae socijsque datur Paracletus Olymp^:
Munere quo magno munera magna parant.
THE THIRD GLORIous Mystery is of the coming of the holy Ghost, concerning
the which thou shall meditate these points following.
FIRST, how the most sacred Virgin, and that holy assemblye which was present
at our Redeemer his Ascensio^, remained together in the dining chamber or
refectorie of Jerusalem, expecting the coming of the holy Ghost, like as the
same Lord Luc. 24 g Act. 1. a
had commanded them to do.

SECONDLY, consider, how on Act. 2. a Nic. cap. 2. li. 2.
Whitsonday, al of them being in the same place, and devoutly at their prayers,
the holy Ghost came in form of fyrie tongues, which were seen over ^che one of
the Apostles heads, who were greatly retoyced and comforted with this coming.

THIRDLY, consider the marvelous effects, which the holy Ghost wrought in
them, since they which before were shutt close up for fear of the Jews,
presently after they had received the holy Ghost, issued forth, preaching with
great fervor in the streates and marketplaces, by the which preachinges a
great multitude of people was converted.

IN the first point thou may entertain thy self, meditating, how the most
sacred Virgin, with all the Apostolical Society remained secret in the great
hal of Sion, expecting, in great peace, charity, and union that celestial
Co^forter, which our Lord had Ioh. 14. b 25. d. 19. a
promised them. Think what sighs, what sobbes, and what store of tears they
shedd, and how fervent and continual prayers they made in this behalf; and
learn thou, that if so be thou covet to have the same comforter come to thee,
it behooves thee necessarilye to have the same disposition; that is to say, to
be united with all in perfect peace and charity, estranged from al strife and
contention; since this divine spirit will, that such as dwell in the house where
Ps 67. a
he is to come, be of this disposition; like as contrariwise, the wicked
spirit, where-soeuer he soiourneth, does what he can to mat. 13. d
sow furious debates and enmities.

This L. will also be greatly longed for, and invited with often prayer,
according to that our Savior said once with a loud Ioh. 7. f
voice: If any be athirst, let him come to me and drink Which he meant by the
holy Ghost; which al they were to receive that would believe in him. Note
moreover in this point, how the Apostles went not forth to preach before they
had received the holy Ghost, like as their Luc. 24 g Act. 1. a
Master had warned the^ tofore; whence such as are to exercise the same office,
may learn, how before they begin, it behooves them to withdraw themselves,
and to pray for the receiving of the same spirit, without the which, the word
they preach shal-be of small efficacy and avail.

Here may thou meditate in like manner, how fervent and devout were those
prayers which our Lady made in this place, who understood much better then the
rest, the cause of this their retyring, and of how great importance and
woorthines was the spirit which they required, by whose means the Gospel was
to be preached through the universal world. O happy was that habitation where
such worthy persons remained; more happy the exercises whereto they addicted
themselves; but most happy the tresure and the consolation which they looked
for. O Harbor far more excellent and delicate then is the terrestral Paradise!
how justly might that be applied to it which Jacob had erst Ge. 28. c
said: Verily our Lord is in this place, this is the house of God, this is the
batche of heaven. Since here there was nothing thought of but God, nothing
spoken of but God, nothing desired and wisshed for but only God himself.

AS TOUCHING the second point thou have a plentiful subject to warm thy soul
with, entertaining thy self in meditating the coming of the holy Ghost. Thou
may therefore think with godly zeal, according to thy devotion, how after
that sacred College had been thus assembled together certain days, giving
them selves diligently to the exercise aforesaid, and seeing how the holy
Ghost stayed longer in his coming then they desired, they began to be
heavy; for as it is Pro. 13. (...)
written, The delaied hope afflicts the soul; yea, and some did happily
begin to doubt. Our Lady understanding their affliction, like a true mother
and comforter of the afflicted, endeavored al she might to comfort and harten
them, persuading them to persevere in their prayers with greater fervor and
Iac. 1. (...)
faith, assuring them, how they should be sooner visited and comforted of the
holy Ghost then they looked for, and to animate them the better, fell her-selfe
to her prayers with them.

Contemplate now, how the pitiful mother kneeling on the ground, with her
hands and eyes eleuate up to heaven, wholly inflamed in divine love, pouring
forth abundant streams of bitter tears, did with great instance and fervor
crave, that the celestial Comforter whom they expected would vouchsafe to come;
and amongst other devout speeches, whereof thou may meditate, she uttered,
likely enough, that sentence of the royal Prophet Ps. 103. d
David: Send Lord thy holy spirit, and they shall be created: to wit, new
affectes, new thoughts, new words, new force, in these thy servants which
desire and crave thee; Ibidem.
And so shall thou renew the face of the earth. O how great consolation did the
prayers and speeches of this most blessed Lady give to this holy Congregation;
how exceedingly did she comfort them, how did she inflame the^, how did she
animate and stir them up to do the same. A most pleasant and devout thing is
it to meditate and view with our spiritual eyes this prayer which the most
holy mother made in earth, but much more to co^template that which the most
sacred Son, as man, made in heaven, like as he had promised to his Disciples,
saying: Ioh. 14. (...)
I will pray my Father, that he will give you an-other Comforter. Whose prayer
thou may well think, how fervent, how gracious, how effectual and acceptable
it was to his eternal Father, especially, when he presented to him those most
sacred wounds, which so lately he had received, and reserved to this end.
Thus so many devout prayers, so many sighs, wishes, sobbs, and tears having
been made before, on whitsonday, at the Act. 2. (...) Nic. li. 2. cap. 2. hist.
Eccl.
third The third hour is about nine of the cloak in the morning, according to
our account.
hour, which was the selfsame day and hour, wherein the old law had erst
been given in the mount Sinai, Exo. 20 a and 34. d Leuit. 19. a Deuteronomy. 4. a. 5.
a. 10. a
they received the holy Ghost in the mount Sion, who engraued the new and
Euangelical law, not in tables of stone as Exo. 31. d Deuteronomy. 9. b
before, but in their 2. Cor. 3. a
hearts of flesh; and those tongues of fire which were seen over the Apostles,
signifying the fire of divine love which he kindled in their hearts, and the
eloquence which he gave to their tongues to preach with efficacy this
Euangelical law, like as they did over all the whole world. O happy were they
which merited through the grace of God to be instructed of such a Master, and
comforted of such a Comforter; since that good part befell to them, which the
prophet David wished for, when he Psa. 93 b
Blessed is the man whom thou shall instruct, O Lord, and to whom thou shall
teach thy law.

IN THE third point thou may like-wise enterteine thy self, if thou list,
considering the great matters which the holy Ghost wrought in the Apostles, in
such sort, as one might well Psa. 76 b
This is a change wrought by the right hand of God; seeing in one instant, he
made them, of feeble, strong; of ignorant, learned; of indeuout, fervent;
joyful of sadd; and of terrestral, celestial. Well says the Evangelist S. Luke,
that at the coming of the holy Act. 2. (...)
Ghost, There was suddenly a sound made from heaven, as of a great wind, which
filled all the whole house where they satt. It was no noise or sound of
trompett which might move any fear or horror, but a sound as of a sweet
music, and harmonious melody, which comforted, encouraged, moved,
ascertained, and gave sign of the abundant graces that were infused. And
therefore is it said, that it filled all the whole house, it filled their
hearts which was the chief house wherein this heavenly gest came to lodge;
it filled al their senses and powers, their understanding with wisdom, their
will with love, their memory with assurance, their eyes with modesty, their
tongues with eloquence, their hands with liberality, their feet with
diligence, and al their souls with all kind of virtues. Thus behooued it that
they should be filled, who were to fill others, and that they should receive al
manner of gifts, who received them for the whole Church. And therefore
presentlye after they were filled, they began to spread and sow what they
had receued, and to show the strength which was given unto them; since they
which were before shutt up for fear, and durst scarce mutter the name of Jesus
Christ, or make any mention at al of his most holy mysteries, do now
coragiouslye come abroad in public show to preach, to reprehend, to Act. 4. b
dispute, and to show, that there is no other name, wherein they might be saved,
but only that of Jesus, who^ they themselves had crucified, to whom they thus
preched. And this did they with such fervor and efficacy, as S. Peter in the
very first Sermon Act. 2. f Nic. ca. 2* li. 2. hist. Eccl.
he made converted almost three thousand of his audience. O divine power, O
marvelous virtue, O celestial force! This is the new wine, which, as our
Savior Mat. 9. b Mar. 2. c
said, should be put into these new vessels which were prepared for this
purpose.

O my soul, if thou would dispose thy self to taste of this sweet wine,
how sour would al worldly things be to thee, which at this instant seem so
sauourie? If thou were so happy, as that this holy wind might breath upon
thee, refresh thee, and guide thee, O, how much more securely might thou
sail and arrive to the desired port? This is that wind which the Spouse
desired and craved in the Can. 4. d.
Canticles, when she said: Get thee gone thou wind of North; and come thou
wind of South; breath upon my garden, and it shall become odoriferous and
fruitful Thou may contemplate lastly in this point the ineffable joy which
the blessed Lady received, who was more then al other replenished with the
graces and gifts of the holy Ghost, seeing and hearing the prosperous
beginning and success of the holy Church, and the abundant fruit that begann
to rise of the sacred blood which her blessed Son had shedd; which did so
much the more rejoice her, as her desires were more fervent, her charity more
inflamed, her grace more plentiful, with all the other gifts she had received.

A PRAYER.
GREAT was the joy and comfort which thou had, O sacred mother of mercy,
when being assembled with the holy Apostles and Disciples of thy blessed Son,
the holy Ghost descended in form of fire, and illuminated, inflamed, and
comforted them al to go and preach the sacred Gospel with great fervor.
Wherefore, I beseech thee most sweet and bountiful Lady, by this joy common
to thee, and to al them, that thy effectual prayers may help me, to the end
that I poor and comfortless wretch may also be made a partaker of the graces
and gifts of the same celestial Comforter, whereby I may fervently love him,
announce him, and praise him everlastingly. Amen.

OF THE ASSVMPTION.


Quae vitam peperit, moritur; sed reddita vit^
Scandit, vbi Nati Regia celsa sui est.
THE FOVRTH GLOrious Mystery is of the Assumption of our Lady; that is to
say, of her happy death; when her most holy soul being separated from her
body, went to enjoy the endless joys of heaven; about the which thou may
meditate these points that follow.
FIRST, the great desire which our Lady had to depart out of this vale of
tears, and to go see her most sweet son, and how great the joy was which her
soul felt, when the understood, how the hour was now at hand, wherein she was
to abandon this temporal life.

SECONDLY, thou may meditate, in what manner the most holy virgin prepared
her self for this last hour, and the company which she had with her at the
time of her most happy departure.

THIRDLY, consider the purity and innocence of that most blessed soul which
we may well think was carried up to heaven in her Lord his arms, the
Hierarchies of heaven, accompanying her with most sweet songs and ineffable
exultation.

IN THE first point thou may entertain thy self, meditating, Nic li. 2
ca. 21. et. 22
as some do, how after the Apostles were gone abroad into diverse places of
the world to preach the holy Gospel, according as was mat. 28 c Mar. 16. c.
Luc. 24. g
commanded them, our Lady remained in Jerusalem, and went afterward to
Nazareth, where her principal exercise was, to attend diligently to
contemplation, and to pray for the holy Church; and other-whiles through the
great devotion, and continual remembrance which she had of the things that her
most sweet son had done and suffered, she went most devoutly to visit those
holy places, wherein he had wrought any particular Mystery, and shed there
great abundance of devout tears. Thus passed she on her most holy life with a
most zealous desire which she had to see him whom her soul loved. For if S.
Paul Phil. 1. c
desired to dye, to live with Jesus Christ, how much more is it to be thought,
that she should desire this, who loved him much more feruentlye. If the Royal
Prophet Ps 119. a
lamented greatly his so long abode in this obscure world, and Ps. 41. a
said: As the panting dear desires the fountains of water, even so desires
my soul to come to thee, O Lord* how much more should the Queen of heaven
lament her abode in earth; where she thought her-self detained as in a long
exile? and how much more should she desire her God, then any dear the
fountain of water? O most sacred Virgin, who can possibly tell, with what
inflamed desires, with what pitiful tears, with what continual sighs thou
crauedst and desiredst to see an end of thy pilgrimage, and to be delivered
from thy bodily prison? How often did thou happily with weeping eyes say to the
Angels that came to comfort and visit thee, that, which the Spouse said in
the Canticles: Can. 5. b. (...)
I adjure you, that if you meet my lover, you tell him from me, that I languish
in his love. How often did this love and languishing desire wholly ravish thee,
and transport thee out of thy self, not being able to eat, speak, sleep, or
attend to any other thing; since thy soul was rather there where it loved, then
where it lived. This being so, contemplate then the ineffable gladness which our
blessed Lady felt, when by revelation she knew the day to approach, wherein
she should have that granted her which she so gretlye desired. If the holy
Prophet David Ps. 121. a.
rejoiced so greatly, when it was told him, that he should go to our Lords
house; what was the joy, think thou, of this great Lady, when she
understood, how she was presently to go to our Lords house; and that she
should see our Lord, and dwell perpetually with our Lord, and be more made of
and favored of our Lord, then al other creatures what-soeuer. O blessed day,
O happy tidinges; so much more joyful, as more desired. Well might the most
blessed mother Lu. 2. d
say then with Simeon: Now thou leauest thy servant, O Lord, contented and
comforted, with the assurance, that mine eyes shall see thee who art my Savior.

IN THE second point thou may meditate, how our Lady, so much the nearer as
she drew to her happy departure, so much more fervent were her desires, so
much more zealous her prayers, and al her powers so much more quickened. For
like as her death proceeded not of any natural infirmity (according as we
believe) by reason of the excellency of her complexion, like to that of her
most sacred sons, so could not the functions of her senses and powers be in
any wise impeched. Woting therefore, that her death drew nigh, some do
contemplate, how before her departure, she Nic. li. 2. ca. 21. and, 22. hist.
Eccl.
desired to see the Apostles (whom she so greatly loved and were dispersed
abroad in diverse regions of the world) that they might accompanye her in this
her last hour, giving us an example hereby, how we ought to desire and
procure to have some Iac. 5. c
devout and spiritual persons to accompanye and comfort us in this hour of so
great peril. Our Lord therefore most bountiful, condescending to her desire,
caused the Apostles Nic. vbi supra. and Mich. Sing post med. encomij in Dion.
Are opagit.
miraculously to meet together (such as yet were living In domo Iohannis
Euangelista, vt ait Nic. cap. 3. and. 21. li. 2.
in the world) in the house where his most holy mother dwelt, who were present
at her departure, as the great Dion. Areop. 3. ca. ad Timot. vt re^ert Nic,
initio ca. 22. li. 2. hist.
Denis Areopagita affirms. Consider then, how great was the Apostles
consolation, finding the^-selues thus assembled together, and seeing their most
holy mother and Lady, whom they loved so dearly, and desired once to see; with
what reverence may we deem did they salute her? with what reverence did they
kiss her garments as most precious relics? with what admiration did they
consider her dignity, which they knew far better then any other? with what
co^^tentation did they behold that reverend visage, supposing that in seeing
her, Nt. c. 40 lib. 2. hist.
they saw their most derely beloved Lord and Master? How sweet was the
communication that was used there, how fervent the divine praises that were
there celebrated; how sweet the tears of tenderness and joy that were shed
there. Think then with what confidence and contentment this blessed Lady
assisted with so notable a company, and assured of her conscience, expected
death, which is to others so Arist. ca. 6. li. 3. Ethic.
dreadful. Thou must not think therefore, that she was before her death in any
agony and pain, as others are wont to be, but how in mild manner and with a
cheerful countenance that most holy soul departed out of her body more
glittering and more fair then the clear moon. O most pure Virgin, how truly
may we say, that in every thing the Luc. 10. g Ber. Ser. 3 de Assu^pt.
best part has been given thee. The best, in thine immaculate conception and
Nativity, which was most pure and free from al sin; the best in thy life,
which was al holy, and a Mirror of al perfection; the best in thy death, which
made thee no whitt afraid, as it does sinners, yea, was to thee a passage to
true life. The best part therefore has been given thee both in earth, and in
heaven, whether thou wentest to reign eternally.

IN THE third point thou may pause, delighting thy self with the
consideration, how that most sacred soul departed out Maria obijt anno
aetatis suae 59. a Christo passo. 11 Nic. ca. 3 li. 2.
of this life the most beautiful, the most gracious, the most holy of al pure
and simple creatures, how replenished with merits, with gifts, with virtues,
with excellencies, and spiritual riches, the greatest that may be possibly
imagined, proportionable to the incomparable dignity which was bestowed upon
her. Amb. li. 2. de virginib. Aug. 2. Sermon. de Assumpt.
Consider a while the manner how this most blessed soul accompanied with quires
of Angels was conducted up to the Celestial Court; neither are we to doubt at
al hereof; for if we read of S. Apud Sulpitiu^ Seuerum sub fine^ li. 1. de
trans. B. Mart.
Martin and many mo Hier. de Paulo. 1. Eremit. in ipsius vita.
Saints of both de Catharina constat ex Mataphrast.
sex, who leaving this life, were accompanied with Angels, and honored with
their heavenly songs, I see no reason why this favor and honor should be
denied the holy of holies, and more holy and worthy then al? Yea, we may not
only affirm this to be most true, but believe with godly devotion, that not
only the Angels, but that which is more, the king of Angels in proper person
vouchsafed to come and do her this honor. Hereupon is it, that some do
contemplate, how the most holy mother being upon the last hour of her blessed
departure, her most sweet son descended from heaven, associated with the
celestial powers, and entered Apud Io. Euang. cui commendata fuerat. Io. 19. c
Vide Nic. ca. 21. lib. 2 and Hier. ser. 1. de Assumpt. ^om. 4.
into that blessed house where she lay; and beholding her with those his
amiable eyes, spoke that with a most sweet voice to her, which the husband said
to the spouse in the Can. 4. b.
Canticles; Thou art al fair, my friend, and there is no blemish at al in
thee; come from Liban, my Spouse, come from Liban, and crowned shall thou be.
That is to say, Come receue the recompense of thy deserts, the treasure which
thy most holy works have merited, the crown that is due to thy so excellent
virtues; Cant. 2. c.
Get up, my Dove, it is now high time to issue out of this exile; no toiles,
no tears, no sobbes or sorrows any more. Come to enjoy the pleasure of those
wounds, which when they were given, did occasionate thy so great woes; come
now and rest thee for the pain which thou have taken. Come, now be merye,
for that thou have wailed and wept, and for that thou humbledst thy self so
lowlye, come now to reign perpetually. Aug. ser. 2. de Assu^pt. to. 10. and
Hier. epist. 1. de Assumpt. ad Paula^ and Eusto. to. 4.
These and such like words may thou according to thy devotion meditate to
have been spoken unto her; since there is no Gospel nor other sacred writ,
wherout we may gather the certain Storye of her departure; and therefore each
one may lawfullye meditate that which shall cause him to have best devotion.
Do thou therefore contemplate, what consolation, what joy, what iubilation
this most holy soul received with such words, with such a sight, and with
such a company; with what considence and security did she depart this life,
the most Sovereign King of heaven, taking her in his most sacred arms, Ber.
paulo post medium Ser. 1 de Assu^pt. virg.
kissing and cherishing her most lovingly according as S. Bernard meditateth. O
glorious Lady, what tongue can possiblye declare the joy thou feltest, seeing
thy self thus highly honored, and thus embraced betwixt those sacred arms of
thy dear son. If the Spouse Can. 5. b
says, that her soul was melted when her lover spoke unto her, how fared thy
soul, I beseech thee, having heard thy best beloved his words, seen his
amiable countenance, and tasted of his courtesies. How much more was it melted
with love, Aug. initio ser. 2. de Assumpt. qui est. 35. de Sanctis. to. 10.
and transformed into her lover, and replenished with such delights. Behold
now, O most blessed mother, al thy desires fulfilled, now have thou obtained
that which thou requiredst; now have thou found that which thou soughtest for;
now do thou possess that which thou desiredst. Sweet were the kisses thou
gave him, and the loving intertainment thou use toward him, when thou
Mat. 1. c.
borest him being a little one in thine arms into Egypt; Ber. ser. c de Assump.
Aug. Ser. 2. de Assu^p.
but far sweeter were those which thou receauedst of him, when now being a
great one he carried thee to heaven, to enjoy the greatest goods, the greatest
riches, the greatest felicity that was ever granted to any creature. For if
so be no 1. Cor. 2. c. Isai. 64. a
eye has seen, nor care heard, nor humane understanding can possibly conceive
the goods that God has prepared for those that love him. Who can possibly
co^ceue or imagine those which he has prepared for thee, which did not
only love him more then al, but did engender him of the most pure blood in
thy body? a privilege granted to thee alone, and worthy thee alone.

A PRAYER.
WHAT spirit can possiblye conceive, O most blessed Queen of Angels, that
incomparable joy, wherewith thy heart was filled, when that happy hour being
come which thou with so great desire had longed for, thy most holy soul
was delivered from the bonds of the flesh, and went to enjoy those
inestimable treasures which were prepared for thee in the Celestial Region. I
humbly beseech thee, O most glorious Lady, by this most happy day of so
sovereign consolation, that thou will vouchsafe to remember me most unworthy
sinner that remain in this vale of tears, subject to so many miseries and
perils, from the which, I beseech thee, that by thy holy intercession I may be
always defended and preserved. Amen.

OF THE CORONATION OF OUR LADY.


Virginis auricomo cingit diademate frontem
Hic Deus, excelso datque sedere loco.
THE FIFTH AND LAST glorious Mystery is of the Coronation of our Lady, that is
to say, when being risen up (according as we do holily believe) she was
glorified both in body and soul, and crowned with glory of the most holy
Trinity, concerning the which thou shall meditate the points following.
FIRST, how within a few days after that the soul of the most blessed virgin
was assumpted into heaven, it descended to take her most holy body, by entering
into the which it rose up glorious, immortal, and impassible, with all the other
glorious prerogatives, which shal-be granted to the elect when they shall rise
up in the day of judgment,

SECONDLY, consider the glory, triumph, and joy, wher-with that great Queen
accompanied with Saints, and quires of Angels, went up to heaven, above all the
which she was exalted in the celestial kingdom.

THIRDLY consider that most rich and precious crown wherewith she was
crowned of the most holy Trinity, and placed in that most high throne which
was given her, where she remains making intercession for them that recommend
themselves unto her.

UPON the first point thou may pause, meditating in what manner that
glorious Virgin Mother was raised up, being a thing very just and convenient,
that we affirm this of her; sithe^s it is more then likely, that like as our
blessed God would, that the soul of this Lady should be free from sin, so
would he in like manner, that her most holy body should be free from al
corruption, and not permit that flesh to turn to ashes, whereof the word
eternal had taken his flesh. For if our Lord would not that Iosue. 6 d Heb. 11.
f
Raab the harlots house should be rased with the other houses of Ierico,
because she had received and lodged for one only day the spies of Iosue: how
much more reason is it, that the house of the blessed Virgin Mary which had
received our Lord himself, yea, and lodged him therein nine months, should
not be destroyed and turned into ashes. Let us believe therefore, that as God
gave to the first Genesis 2. d. 1. Cor 11. c. Mat. 19. a.
Adam a companion like unto him, to the end he might not be alone in terrestral
Paradise: so was it convenient, that such a like companion should be given to
the second Adam, who being risen up and glorious, might reign with him risen
up and glorious in the celestial Paradise. And seeing it is said of other
Saints, that being now risen up they do reign in mat 27. f Hier. epist. 1. de
Assu^p to. 4.
heaven; much more meet is it, that we both say and believe this of her, who in
sanctity surpasses al Saints, and in dignity al pure creatures. The which
being presupposed, consider, how with the very same solemnity, with the same
joy, with the same honor and triumph, wherewith that most happy soul was
assumpted into heaven, it descended down to earth, and came to the sepulcher,
where her virginal body lay, which, as it is said, was in the vale of Iosaphat,
and by operation and divine virtue, Hier. ib^ vbi vallem Iosaphat inter monte^
Sion and monte^ Oliuetu^ esse scribit.
did not raise her self up, as the son of God and hers did himself; but
was of her son raised up. Ponder now the state of this virginal body being
reunited to the glorious soul, how beautiful, how glittering, immortal,
impassible, D. The. q. 82. 3. p. and q. 95
and adorned with the other glorious parts, which the elect being rise^ up,
shall be endued with. And if the mat. 13. f. Sap. 3. b Dan. 12. a
Gospel tells us of the other just persons, how they shall shine like the
Son in the kingdom of their Father, how ought this Lady, being risen up, to
shine, which is the most righteous of al righteous, the most holy of al holies,
the most gracious of al gracious? how shall that bodi glitter, which was the Ps.
14. a. Apoc. 21. a. Jacob in Liturg.
tabernacle and habitation of the son of God? what shall the beauty of that
body be, which was never defiled nor subject unto sin? If living in mortal
flesh, it was so fair, Amb. li. 2 de virgin. Ber. Hom. 3 sup. Miss.
that it sufficed to make God himself take pleasure therein, what shall the
excellency thereof be, being risen up with all the most absolute gifts, graces,
and excellencies that are added thereunto.

O with how great reason are al devout souls allured to behold this glorious
spectacle by those words that say thus: Cant 3. c Ber. Ser. in verba. 12.
Apoc. Apparuit.
Come out ye daughters of Sion, and see your Queen, whom the morning stars
give laud unto: At whose beauty the Son and Moon do marvel again. But
what marvel is it, if the Son and Moon do marvel at her beauty, if the
Angels the^-selues do marvel thereat, as also at her other riches and
favors, and as amassed at such matters, do say: Cant. 8. a Ber. initio ser.
4. de Ass.
Who is this that ascends from the desert, replenished with such delicacies,
and leaning upon her lovers shoulder? What is she this so glittering, so fair,
so gracious, that mounteth up thus Cant. 3. b.
odoriferous, as the fragrant smell of her virtues does delight and fill all the
whole Court of heaven? Howbeit, marvel not, O ye Angels of to see in earth a
creature so fair and glittering, being vestured with the Apo. 12. (...)
Son, and having the Moon under her feet. Meruail not to see such riches
and excellencies in a house which the eternal wisdom has thought good to Pro.
9. a. Amb. li 2. de virgin.
frame for him-self; And this day has he made an end to give it the last and
entier perfection, fulfilling that which the Isai. 16. b Exodus 15. c.
Prophet Esaie he had Isai. 16. b Exodus 15. c.
foretold: I will glorify the mansion of my Majesty.

IN THE second point thou may pause, assisting with thy spirit the most
solemn triumph that was celebrated in the celestial court, on that day that
the most sacred virgin being risen up, was both in body and soul assumpted
into heaven.

We read in holy writ of two solemn festiual days that were kept at the Arc
of the old Testament. 2. Re. 6. c. Exodus 15. (...)
The first, when king David carried it from Obeded on his house to the City,
and to his palace; and this did he with such rejoicing, both of his own part,
and of all the people, that it is a wonderful matter to consider the great
sole^nitie which the Scripture tells to have been celebrate that day, in so
great a multitude of sacrifices as were offered, such variety of musical
instruments as were played upon, such store of Canticles, himnes, and divine
praises, as were there sounded forth, yea, and king David himself did sing,
play, and dance (being araied with new robes made for the same purpose)
through the great fervor and devotion which he felt inwardlye in himself.
Yet for all this was the festiual and solemn day that his son 3. Re 8 a
Solomon made far greter, when he carried the same Arc into the famous Temple
which he had erected for it. These two solemn festiual days that were thus
celebrate in the honor of that holy material Ark, do foreshew in figure the
far more solemn festiual days that were celebrate in the honor of the
mistical Arc, that is to say, of the most sacred virgin mother, which was a
far more worthy and more precious Arc then the other (albeit it were of
souerain sanctity and worthy great woorshipp) for that a far more rich and
precious Christus omnes thesauri sapientiae Dei. Colos 2. a
treasure was kept in this Arc mistical, the^ in that Duae tabulae lapideae.
3. Re. 8 a
material. The first sole^nitie was celebrate in her honor, when in soul she
was assumpted up to heaven, whereof I have already spoken in the former mystery:
And the second it was solemnized, when being risen up in body and soul, she
was placed in that celestial throne that was prepared for her. And albeit the
first solemnity were of so surpassing joy, as no humane eloquence can
possibly express it, yet was the second, without al comparison far greater.
How may therefore any humane capacity suffice to comprehend the solemn
reception and intertainment, that was made unto this glorious Queen of all the
celestial Court, when with her most beautiful and glittering body she ascended
into heaven in so great a Majesty? What store of musical instruments yielded
forth a most melodious harmony? Amb. lib 2. de virg.
what Canticles, Himnes, Psalms, and praises were there sounded forth unto
her? how great the joy and iubilatio^ was, which all the blessed spirits
showed? how sovereign the contentment and consolation which al those ancient
Fathers and other Saints of both sex felt? O how much more justly might they
say to this most blessed Lady what they had said tofore to the chaste and
valiant Judith: Iud. 15. c.
Thou art the glory of Jerusalem, thou art the joy of Israel, thou art the
honor of our people. Ibid. 13. c
O daughter, thou art blessed of our Sovereign Lord God, for by means of thee
we have obtained the fruit of life, blessed art thou therefore amongst al women.
Now, if all the Saints and Angelical spirits did rejoice so greatly, and make
so exceeding triumph for the Assumption of their Queen; what may thou
think was the exultation of her most puissant Son, and th'onour and
interteinment he used toward her, vouchsafing to accompany her, Ber. Ser. 1.
de Assumpt.
and to lodge her him self, in counterchange of the lodging which he had
received of her in her entrals and virginal womb. O most woorthye mother, thou
alone have merited to receive such favors! Thou alone wast worthy of such
interteinmentes! Thou alone could tell thy plesures and sugared tastes, thy
delights, and sovereign iubilation, and upon new causes might thou recite
and sing a-newe that divine Canticle which thou pronouncedst erst before thy
holy Cousin S. Elizabeth, for that he has done great things to thee which is
mighty, whose holy name be blessed everlastingly.

REASON requires, that thou pause in the last point, meditating, how the
glorious Queen of Angels going with them, and with all the blessed Saints thus
accompanied, thus reverenced, and thus honored, arrived to heaven, where she
presented her-selfe before the high throne of the most sacred Trinity, who
received her most lovingly, and exalted her so much the more as she had humbled
her-selfe more profoundly living in the world, like as our Savior had many
times fore-tolde, mat. 23 b Luc. 14. c and. 18. c.
saying: Who so humbles himself shal-be exalted. The celestial Father
received her as his most dear daughter, The son receued her as his most
worthy mother; the holy Ghost receued her as his most holy spouse; and the^
was she of all the three divine persons crowned with a most precious crown, and
placed in a most sumptuous throne on the right hand of her son. Then was that
fulfilled which the royal Prophet had with divine spirit Ps 44
fore-tolde: The Queen has assisted at thy right hand in a garment of gold
environed with varieti. By the which words he signified her souerain^ie, her
dignity, her beauty, the diversity of gifts, virtues, prerogatives, riches,
and excellencies that were granted unto her; since she neither wanted the faith
of Patriarchs, nor the charity of the Apostles, nor the constancy of Martirs,
nor the wisdom of Doctors and Confessors, neither the chastity of Virgins,
nor the purity of Angels; nor the knowledge of Cherubins, nor the most
inflamed love of Ceraphins, and besides, the virtues and graces that were given
to other by peece-meal and measure, were al given to her together, and heaped
in all fulness one upon an-other. And like as her virtues and excellencies
exceeded far those of all the Saints and blesded spirits, so in like manner
merited she to be exalted in heaven above the^ all This is the woman that S. John saw in his Apo. 12. a Ber. Ser* in illa eadem
verba.
Revelation clothed with the Son, and having a crown of twelve stars on her
head, whereby are denoted the prerogatives of plentiful graces, wherewith she
was adorned, whereat we are rather to wonder, the^ to go about to write them.

O most blessed Lady, and most worthy of al praise, who can tell what thy
merits were, but he that considers thy reward? who can conceive what thy
grace was, but he that contemplateth thy glory? who can know what thy
perfection was, but he that beholds thy Crown? Rejoice therefore, O noble
Lady, rejoice for having achieved so Sovereign a felicity as shall never in all
eternity be taken from thee; And remember them that remain in this vale of
tears; Seeing also, that thy greatness can not make thee forget thy profounde
humility, incline thine Ber. 4 Ser. de Assumpt.
eyes of mercy toward us, and make intercession for us. Cease not to
continue thy office of being our Advocate, since thou art now more mighty, and
of greater credit and Ber. ser. 1 de Assu^pt.
authority then thou wast tofore. Procure, O Queen of heaven, procure, that
by thy means we may be pardoned our offenses; and that the same most sacred
Trinity which has enterteined and crowned thee so liberally, vouchsafe to
receive us like-wise to his favor and mercy; To the end, that when we shall
depart out of this exile, we may merit to remain in thy company, praising,
adoring, and enjoying the said most Sovereign and sacred Trinity perpetuallye
in the celestial Kingdom. Amen.

A PRAYER.
WHO so loves thee best, O most sovereign Queen of heaven, has best cause to
rejoice at thy last and most inexplicable joy which gave the perfect
accomplishment to al thy felicities, when being now risen up, and in body and
soul assumpted into heaven, thou wast crowned with a precious crown of the
most holy Trinity, and placed above all the quires of Angels in that most high
throne which was prepared for thee, where now thou sit as Queen on the
right hand of thy most loving son king of glory, who sits on the right
hand of his eternal Father. I humblye beseech thee, O most happy Lady, by this
thy glorious exaltation, that by how much the dignity is greater which thou
have obtained in heaven, by so much the favors may be greater which by thee
both I and al others may obtein here in earth. Ame^.

The most sweet name of JESUS, and of his most holy Mother the Virgin MARY, be
praised for evermore. Amen.
FINIS.
Diuini diuina patet vis nominis: vnum
Orco, est poena: polo, gloria: vita, solo.


Dulce tuum nostro scribas in pectore nomen,
Namque tuo constat nomine nostra salus.
Monstra te esse Matrem. Monstra te esse Filium.



LITANIAE DEIPARAE VIRGINIS EX SACRASCRIP tura depromptae, quae in alma domo
Lauretana omnibus diebus Sabbati, Vigiliarum, and Festorum eiusdem B.
Virgiginis musice decantari solent.
KYRIE eleison. Christ eleison. Kyrie eleison. Christ audi nos. Christ
exaudi nos. Pater de coelis Deus. Miserere nobis. Fili Redemptor mundi Deus.
Miserere nobis. Spiritus sancte Deus. Miserere nob. Sancta Trinitas vnus Deus.
Miserere nobis. Sancta MARIA. Ora pro nobis. Sancta Dei Genetrix. ora. Sancta
Virgo Virginum. ora. Matter viuentium ora. Genes. 3. d.
Matter pulchrae dilectionis. Eccl. 24. c
ora. Matter sanctae spei. ora. Paradisus voluptatis. Genes. 2. c.
ora. Lignum vitae. ora. Domus sapientiae. Prou. 9. a.
ora. Porta coeli. Gene. 28. d.
ora. Desiderium collium aeternorum. Genesis 49. d.
ora. Vrbs refugij. Number. 35. b.
ora. Gloria Jerusalem. Judith. 15. c
ora. Sanctuarium dei. Exodus 15. c
ora. Foederis arca. 2. Reg. 6. b
ora. Altar thy miamatis. Exo. 30. a.
ora. Scala Jacob. Gen 28. b
ora. Speculum sine macula. Sap. 7. d
ora. Lilium inter spinas. Cant. 2. a
ora. Rubus ardens incombustus. Exodus 3. a
ora. Vellus Gedeonis. Iudic. 6. g.
ora. Thronus Salomonis. 3. Reg. 1. d.
ora. Turris eburnea. Cant. 7. a
ora. Fauus distillans. ora. Hortus conclusus. Cantic. 4. c
ora. Fons signatus. ora. Puteus aquarum viuentium. ora. Nauis institoris de
long portans panem. Prou. 31. b.
ora. Stella matutina. Eccl. 50. a
ora. Aurora consurgens. ora. Pulchra vt Luna. ora. Electa vt sol. Cantic. 6. c.
ora. Castrorum acies ordinata. ora. Solium gloriae dei. Isai. 5. d.
ora. A cunctis periculis. Resp. Libera nos virgo gloriosa. Per salutarem
conceptionem tuam. Libera nos. Per sanctam Natiuitatem tuam. Lib. Per
admirabilem Annunciationem tuam. Libera. Per immaculatam Purificationem tuam.
Libera. Per gloriosam Assumptionem tuam. Libera nos. Versus. Peccatores. Resp.
Te rogamus audi nos. Vt veram poenitentiam nobis impetrare digneris. Resp. Te
rogamus audi nos. Vt Societates tibi peculiari obsequio deuotas conseruare, and
augere digneris. Resp. Te rogamus audi nos. Vt Ecclesiae sanctae, cunctoque
populo Christiano pacem, and vnitatem impetrare digneris. Resp. Te rogamus audi
nos. Vt omnibus fidelibus defunctis requiem aeternam impetrare digneris. Resp.
Te rogamus audi nos. Matter Dei. Resp. Te rogamus audi nos. Agnus Dei qui tollis
peccata mundi. Resp. Parce nobis Domine. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi.
Resp. Exaudi nos Domine. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi. Resp. Miserere
nobis. Versus. Ora pro nobis sancta Dei Genetrix. Resp. Vt digni efficiamur
promissionibus Christi.
OREMVS.
PIetate tua quaesimus Domine nostrorum solue vincula peccatorum, and
intercedente Beata Maria, cum omnibus sanctis tuis, nos famulos tuos,
benefactores, Praelatos, atque loca nostra in omni sanctitate custodi:
cunctosque consanguinitate, affinitate, and familiaritate nobis coniunctos a
vitijs purga, virtutibus illustra: pacem and salutem nobis tribue: hosts
visibiles, atque inuisibiles remove: carnalia desideria repelle: aerem salubrem
indulge: Inimicis nostris charitatem largire. Regnum etiam Angliae, vrbemque
nostra^ N. vna cum vniuersis in ea commorantibus ab haereticoru^ feritate
convert. Omnibus fidelibus viuis, atque defunctis in terra viuentium requie^
aeternam concede: and benedictio tua sit super nos semper. Per Christum Dominum
nostrum. Amen.

QVI VOLET, HAS QVOQVE IN DEIPARAE virginis laudem recitare poterit.
SECVNDO DIE
ANcilla and Matter Domini. Luc. 1. d.
Columba Christi. Cant. 2. c.
Vas electionis. Act. 9. c.
Arca Testamenti. Apoc. 11. d.
Lectulus Salomonis. Can. 3. c.
Tabernaculum dei. Apoc. 21. a.
Tabernaculum Cedar. Can. 1. a.
Domus aurea sancti sanctorum. 2. Par. 3. a.
Turris Dauidica. Canti. 4. b.
Turris Libani. Cantic. 7. b
Terra Domini benedicta. Psalm. 84.
Terra sacerdotalis libera. Gene. 47. c.
Cypressus in monte Sion. Eccl. 24. b
Plantatio rosae in Jericho. Palma in Cades exaltata. Oliua speciosa in campis.
Cedrus exaltata in Libano. Lilium in aquae transitu. Eccle* 50 a.
Flos rosarum in diebus vernis. Thus ardens in igne. Thus in aestate redolens.
Arcus refulgens inter nebulas. Luna plena. Sol refulgens. Cantic. 1. a.
Nigra, sed formosa. Mulierum pulcherima. Cantic. 5. d.
Benedicta inter mulieres. Luc. 1. d.
Gratia plena. Ianua coeli. Psalm. 77. c.
Regina varietate circundata. Psalm. 4. 4. c.

TERTIO DIE.
Altar dei. Psalm. 42. a.
Ambros. li. 2. de Virginib. Arca Noe. Genes. 7. a.
And. Hieros. in salut. Angelie. Aula regalis spei nostrae. Psalm. 59. b.
Ambr. in instit. virg. cap. 12. Ciuitas Dei. Psalm. 86. a.
Bruno ser. de laudibus Mariae, and Aug. sub finem ca. 16. li. 17. de Ciuit.
Dei. Decora sicut Jerusalem. Cant. 6. a.
Bruno Carth. vbi supra. Forceps carbonis ardentis seraphica. Isai. 6. b.
And. Hieros in salut Angel. Lapis abscissus sine manibus. Daniel. 2. c.
Damasc. sub f. carm. de Annunciat. Magistra gentium. 2. Tim. 1. c
Aug. sub. f. ser. 6. de Natali. Mons Ephraim. 1. Reg. 1. a
Greg. pp. initio ca. 1. li. 1. in lib. 1. Samueli^. Mons pinguis. Psalm. 67. b.
And. Hieros. in salut. Angel. Mulier fortis. Prou. 31. b.
Bern. hom. 2. super Missus, and Innocent. 3. ser. 2. de Assumpt B. Mariae.
Mulier amicta sole. Apoc. 12. a.
Bern. ser. in verba ca. 12. Apo. signum magnu^ apparuit. Nubes leuis. Isai.
19. a.
Hier. in ca. 2. Zach. to 6. and li. 7. comment. in 19. Isa. and Amb. ca. 13.
Inst. Virg. Oleum effusum nome^ tuum. Cantic. 1. a.
Amb. ca. 13. in instit. virginis. Porta clausa Orientalis. Ezec. 44. a
Hier. in fine Apolog. pro li. ad Pamachium. Aug. ser. 2. de Assumpt. and
Damasc li. 4. ca. 8 and Amb ca. 7. 8. and. 9. Instit. Virginis. Bruno Carth.
ser. de laud Mariae. Beda lib. 4. in cap. 11. Luc. tom. 2. Sepulchrum nouum
Christi. Hier. li. 1. cont. Iouinian. Mat. 27. g.
and in fine Apologiae ad Pamach. Soror, Cantic. 4. c.
and sponsa Dei. Aug. ser. 6. in natali. 10. de temp. Stella Jacob, Number. 26. c.
Bern. sub finem homil. 2. de laudibus Mariae. Templum misericordiae dei. Psalm.
47. b.
Aug. ser. 2. de Assumpt. Terra irrigata font. Genes. 2. a.
Beda in cap. 2. Genes. tom. 1. Terra promissionis. Gene. 12. a.
Aug. ser. 1. post Dominicam. 1. Quadrag. Thalamus sponsi. Psalm. 18. a.
Bern. ser. 2. de Aduentu, and Beda lib. 4. in cap. 11. Luc. tom. 2. Thronus
dei. Apoc. 14. a.
Aug. in praefat. li. 1. de Assump. to. 9. and Bruno sermon. de Annunciat.
Thuribulum aureum. Apoc. 8. a.
Ephraem in orat. de Laudibus Mariae. Vas solidum auri splendidissimum. Eccl.
50. a
Vas ornatum omni lapide pretioso. Ephr. ibidem. Virgo florens Aaronis. Number.
17. b
Damasc. li 4. cap. 8. et Bern. homil. 2. super Missus, et Ephr. vbi supra.
Virga Iesse. ^sai. 11. (...)
Hier. epist. 22. ad Eustoch. de cust. virg. et in epitaph. L. Betici ad
Theodoram: et Ambr. in instit. virg. cap. 9. et Tertul. cap. 6. de probat.
Natiuit. Christi li. contra Iudaeos: et Leo PP. 1. init. ser. 4. de Not.
Domini. Virgo sancta corpore, and spiritu. ^. Cor. 7. f
Hieron. post initium Ser. 1. de Assumpt. tom. 4 et Bern. homil 2. de laud.
Mar. Bruno ser. 1. de laud. Mariae. Vrna aurea habens Manna. ^^Heb. 9. a
And. Hieros. in salut. Angel. Ephr. quoque in orat. de B. Virgin.
EX NONNVLLIS PAtribus nonnullae aliae compellationes perhonorificae.
QVARTO DIE.
VIRGO Maria semper gloriosissima.Jacob. Apost. in sua Liturg. Ab aeterno dei
consilio praeuisa. Damasc. li. 4. cap. 8. Electa a seculo. Altissimo
praeparata. Ab Angelis seruata. A Patribus praefigurata. Promissa prophetis.
Virgo admiranda. Bern. hom. 2. de laudibus B. Mariae super Missus est. Virgo
beata. Aug. ser. 2. de Annunciatione. Virgo benigna. Virgo clemens. Ephr. in
orat. ad B. Virginem. Virgo deuota. Ber. homil. 3. super Missus. Virgo dei
Genetrix gloriosa. Aug. Ser. 2. de Assump. Virgo Deipara intemerata. Virgo
inuiolata. Ephe. in orat. de laudib. Mar. Virgo impolluta. Virgo misericors.
Ephe. in orat. ad B. Virginem. Virgo obediens. Ireneus li. 3. cap. 33. Virgo
prudens. Bern. hom. 3. sup. Missus. and sermon. de Natiuit. Mariae. Virgo regia.
Ber. ser. 2. de aduent. Virgo sacra. Leo pp. 1. sermon. 3. de Natiuit. Domini.
Virgo sancta. Cyrillus lib. ad Reginas de recta in Christum fide, and lib. 8.
in Iulianum. Virgo sincera. Ephr. in orat. ad B. Virg. Virgo sapiens. Rupertus
in ca. 3. Math. li. 2. Virgo castissima. Greg. Naz. in Christ. pat. Virgo omni
honor dignissima. Bern. hom. super Messus. Virgo omnium pulcherima. Greg. Naz.
in trag. Christi patientis. Virgo sanctissima. Athanas. in Euang. de sancta
nostra Deipara. Virginum Corona. Ephr. in orat. de laud B. Mariae. Virginum
gloria. Iacobus in Liturgia. Virginum matter. Hier. li. 1. aduersus Iouinianum.
Virginitatis imago. Amb. li. 2. de Virgint^. Filia superni Regis nobilissima.
Bruno ser. de Natiuit. B. Mariae. Puella gratiosa. Basil. hom. 25. de humana
Christi generatione* ^t Nazianz. in Christo patiente.
QVINTO DIE.
Matter, and virgo perpetua. Hieron. in Apol. ad Pammachiu^ pro li. contra
Iouinianum. Matter Dei pura. Matter integra. Matter inculpata. Bern. ser. 2.
dominicae. 1. post oct. Epiph and ser. 1 de Assumpt. Anselm. etiam lib. de
excellentia^ Mariae. cap. 12. Matter Dei penitus incontaminata. Matter omnibus
modis irreprehensa. Matter honoratior quam Cherubim. Matter gloriosior quam
Ceraphim. Jacob. frater Domini, and Chrisost. in suis Liturgiis. Matter
celeberrima. Ephr. in orat. a^ laud B. Mariae. Matter sacrosanctissima. Bern.
ser. 2. dominicae 1. post oct. Epiph. and Ser. 1. de Assump. Anselm. quoque de
excel. Mariae. cap. 12. Matter Dei nostri beatissima. Jacob and Chrisost in
Lit. Matter salutis. Bern. sermon. de aduentu. Matter sempiterni gaudij. And.
Hieros. in salut. Angelic. Matter misericordiae. Bern. ser. 2. dom. 1. post
Epiph. and ser. 1. de Assumpt. and Anselm. ca. 12. lib. de excel. Mariae.
Matter gratiae. Anselm. ibidem. Matter and genetrix vitae. Athan. in Euangelio de
nostra Deipara; and Bern. ser. 2. de aduentu. Genetrix Dei beata. Aug. ser. 2.
de Annunciat. and Beda. lib. 4. in cap. 11. Luc. Genetrix Genitoris tui. Nutrix
nutritoris omnium viuentiu^. Chrysola^us sermon 143. in Euang. de Annunc. Deipara
semper immaculata. Jacob. and Chris. in Liturg. Puerpera sublimis. Aug. ser. 2.
de Assumpt. refertur etiam inter opera Hieronimi. tom. 4. Foemina singulariter
veneranda. Foemina supra omnes admirabilis. Bern. homil. 2. de laud. Mariae
super Missus est. Foeminarum restauratio. Aug. ser. 11. de Natali, qui est 15.
de sanctis, et Fulgentius ser. de laud. B. Virginis. Domina super omnes
benedicta. Domina gloriosa. Domina immaculata. Chris^^n Liturg. Domina
piissima. Ansel. lib. de excellentia B. Mariae. cap. 12.
SEXTO DIE.
AVLA REGIS aeterni. ora. Aug. init. Ser. 1. de Assumpt. tom. 9. Thronus dei
coelis amplior. ora. Jacob. in Liturg. Sacrarium spiritus sancti. ora. Cyp.
ser. de Natiuit. Christi. to. 2. et Bern. sub finem ser. de Assumpt. Coelum in
quo Rex gloriae splendet. ora. Palatium Regis sacrosanctum. ora. Domicilium
coelo praestantius. ora. Habitaculum illius qui nusquam capitur amplissimum.
ora. Templum diuinae gloriae ornatissimum. ora. And. Hieros in salut.
Angelicam. Templum sanctificatum. ora. Paradisus spiritualis. ora. Iacobus in
Liturgia. Hortus delitiarum. ora. Bern ser. de Natiuit. B. Mariae. Thalamus
sanctimoniae. ora. Cyprian. ser. de Natiuit. Christi. Ianua filij Dei. ora.
Aug. ser. 14. de Natali qui est. 18. de tempore. Via regia Saluatoris. ora.
Bern. ser. 2. de aduentu. Fenestra coeli. ora. Aug. ser. 11. in Natali, and
post medium ser. 2. de Assumpt. Fulgent. and ser. de laud. B. Virg. Stella
maris. ora. Bern. hom. 2. super Missus, and Hier. in inter. Hebraic. nominum,
et Beda in ca. 1. Luc. lib. 1. Stella fulgentissima. ora. Ephraem in orat. de
laud. B. Mariae. Typus ecclesiae sanctae. ora. Aug. sub finem ser. 6. de Natali
qui est. 10. de tempore. Exemplum perfectionis. ora. Forma disciplinae Christi.
ora. Hier. non long a princ. ser. 1. de Assumpt. to. 4. Species castitatis.
ora. Secretum verecundiae. ora. Vexillum fidei. ora. Obsequium deuotionis. ora.
Forma virtutis. ora. Disciplina omnium. ora. Ambros. li. 2. de virginibus.
Reparatrix parentum. ora. Purificatrix posterorum. ora. Bern. hom. 2. de laud
Mar. super Mis. Inuentrix benedicta gratiae. ora. Bern. ser. 2. de Aduent.
Mediatrix mundi. ora. Auxiliatrix praesens. ora. Ibid. Bern. et Ephr. in orat.
de laud. Mar. Causa salutis humani generis. ora. Irenaeus li. 3. contra
haereses. ca. 33. Praeses vitae nostrae. ora. Greg. Naz. in Christo pa^.
Aduocata nostra. ora. Bern. ser. 2 de Aduent. Aduocata Euae. ora. Iren. li. 5.
aduersus haereses.
SEPTIMO DIE.
COntritio prauitatis haereticae. Bern. sermon. in verba Apoc. 12. Signum magnum.
Gratiae plenitudo. Chrysolaus ser. 143. in Euang. de Annunciat. Obses fidei
nostrae apud Deum. ora. Aug. ser. 6. de Natali. Scala coelestis. ora. Aug. ser.
11. in Not. et. 2. de Assumpt. et Fulg. sermon. de laud. Mar. Scala peccatorum.
ora. Bern. ser de Not. B. Mariae. Studiosorum lumen. ora. Clausorum Liberatrix
celeberrima. ora pro nobis. Orphanorum susceptio. ora. Adiutrix destitutorum.
ora. Vexatorum portus. ora. Solatium mundi. ora. Redemptio captiuorum. ora.
Egrotantium exultatio. ora. Ephr. in orat. de lau. B. Mariae. Subsidium
oppressorum. ora. Christianorum profugium. ora. Spes desperantium. ora. Idem
Ephraem in orat. ad B. Virg. Spes vnica peccatorum. ora. Spes veniae
delictorum. ora. ^ug. ser. 2. de Annunc. qui est. 18. de sanctis tom. 10. Spes
Christianorum sanctissima. ora. Ephr. in orat. ad B. Virg. Expectatio
praemiorum nostrorum. ora pro nobis. Aug. ser. 2. de Annunc. Gaudium mortalium.
ora. Greg. Naz in Christ. patient. Laetitia Sanctorum. ora. Omnium salus. ora.
Ephr. in orat. de laud. Mariae. Regina mundi. ora. Gregor. in Christ. pat. and
Hieron ser. 1. de Assumpt. to. 4. Regina coelorum. ora. Aug. ser. 2. de
Assumpt. 35. de sanctis. Decus Patriarcharum. ora. And. Hieros in salut.
Angelic. Gloria Prophetarum. ora. Praeconium Apostolorum. ora. Honor Martyrum.
ora. Ephr. in orat. de laud. B. Mar. Lux alma Virginum. ora. Greg. Naz. in
Christ. patiente. Matter, and Virgo singulis insignita titulis. ora. Cyprian.
ser. de Natiuit. Christi. tom. 1.
Cum Litanias dicimus, non humanis verbis, sed oraculis spiritum Deum placamus.
Basil. ep. 63. anno Domini. 300.

THE MANNER HOW WE ought to examine our conscience.
WHAT we ought to do in the morning after we are got up
FIRST, to thank God generally for benefits receued, and particulerly for
having preserved us the night past.

SECONDLY, to offer our selves wholly into the hands of his divine Majesty,
and to pray him that he will keep us, and give us grace to do every thing
that day according to his holy and divine will.

THIRDLY, to consider what vices and sin we are most inclined to, purposing
to eschew the same, and to begin presently to renew our selves according as
our Lord Jesus Christ has taught us.

FOURTHLY, to crave help for the doing of this of the blessed Virgin, and of
our Guardian Angel; recommending our selves to all the whole company of the
blessed Saints in heaven.

FIFTHLY and lastly, to say three Pater nosters and three Aue Mary's for all the
faithful living and departed, procuring to go devoutly to hear holy^Masse, and
to offer that sacrifice to God for our own sins, and for all the necessities
of holy Church.

WHAT we ought to do at night before we go to bed.
FIRST, to thank God generally for all benefits received heretofore, and
especially of that present day.

SECONDLY, to require grace and true light, to know and hate our sins.

THIRDLY, to call our souls to an account, wherein they may on that day have
offended God, having a special consideration of such defects, whereto we are
most inclined.

FOURTHLY, to crave pardon humbly of God for all the defects whereof we find
our selves guilty.

FIFTHLY, to have a firm purpose thorough Gods grace to beware of sin
hereafter, with a purpose to confess the^ which we may have already
transgressed in. Lastly, to say the Pater noster, Aue Mary, and the Creed,
making then the sign of the holy Cross upon us.

THE faults escaped in printing are to be corrected in this wise.
The first figures signify the leaf, the letters following the page, the
figures next after, the line.
Fol. 16. page a. lin. 17. for resignest, read resignedst.] 68. a. 12. read,
this his so great cost.] 69. b. 7. read, should be nice] 71. a. 19. read,
grace.] 72. b. 1. read, The first glorious Mystery is of his triu^phant. etc.]
73. b. 3. read, and the end wherefore. etc.] 74. b. 19. read, happy are those
eyes that. etc.] 75. b. 14. wailing.] 76. b. 7. read, particular feauters.]
Ibid. lin. 17. read, become so fair.] 87. a. 2. Edon.] 93. a. 8. contemplate
that.] 93. b. 7. signified.] 107. a. 11. read, Esaie had. etc.


