Prosopopeia CONTAINING THE TEARS OF THE holy, blessed, and sanctified Marie,
the Mother of GOD.

Luke 2. And moreover, the sword shall pearce thy soul, that the thoughts of
many hearts may be opened.

LONDON, Printed for E. White. 1596.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE, THE MOTHER COUNTESS, COUNTESS of Darby, and the virtuous
and devout Countess of Cumberland, Charity in life, and eternity after death.
Right noble Madames (and more noble in that devout) I have made you
patronesses of a just cause, the tears of a matchless mother, shed for a
Savior and a son: If to begin your new year you shall but peruse these in
devotion, I doubt (...) but they will prove holy motives of meditation: in
shedding one tear with Marie, you shall confess with Barnard, that you
purchase much interest in Jesus. I join you in this greatest of your honors,
not for your births sake, (for we may disparage our selves) neither your
wealth sake, (for riches are as the deaw in April) but for your virtue sake
(which retains this quality of the Sun, communicating his beams to all
things, enriching every one without impouerishing himself.) Good Madames,
accept these tears in their nature, and hold it better to weep many times
with Jesus and Marie, than to laugh with Belial and the world for the world
has deceived you long, but piety will eternize you for ever. If you shall but
grace what I give, my desires are satisfied: if give what you owe, you shall
grieve when you read, if as you read you consider, you have the end of true
consideration. For to lament sin, is to redeem sin.

Noble Ladies, use not these gifts as the Roman Matrones their puppies, spit
not in their mouths to make them wait at your heels: neither cocker them at
your breasts, least Caesar hold you more careful of your whelps than your
sons: but use them as the goldsmith his metal, try them at the test of your
contemplation, and so prise them. God work that in your hearts, that my
devotion intends to your souls, and bless you in giving me grace to serve
him.

Your Honors most bounden, T. L.

To the Readers.
IT was a custom amongst the Cretans, (gentle readers) when they intended to
use their most bitter and vehementest execratitio, to desire that those whom
they hated, should fix their whole delights and likings on an inueterate and
evil custom. This Cretan course, I fear me, is fallen upon our age, wherein
men are so accustomed to vanity, that nothing is pleases which is not
pleasant, nothing is sought after which is not amorous. Which lamentable error
and sickness of our time, being so ordinary, I almost wax in despair of the
happy issue of my devotion: for some I know will condemn me, and that justly,
for a Galba (who begat foul children by night, and made fair pictures by
day:) To whom I answer, that I paint fair things in the light of my
meditation, who begot the soul forepassed progeny of my thoughts, in the
night of mine error. Some other, (and they superstitiously ignorant) will
accuse me for writing these tears, desiring rather with Brentius, to impair
the honor of the mother of God, than with Bernard to inhance it. To whom I
answer, that it is better imitating many holy men's devotion, than cleaving to a
few men's foolish and graceless contemptes. For other that have wept (as Peter
his apostasy, Marie her loss and miss of Christ,) their tears wrought from
them either for repent or love. But these tears of Marie the blessed, are not
only ratified by a motherlie compassion, a working charity, and unstained
love, but by a manifest prophecy, wherein Zachary told her, Et tuam ipsius
animam pertransibit gladius, And the sword of sorrow shall pearce thy heart.
And the reason is anexed, To the end that the hearts of many may be opened. This
sword of grief, says Beda, is the sword of sorrow for our Lords passion,
Chrysostom and Bernard, the sword of love. To good men therefore let this
suffice, that in imitation of no less than five and twenty ancient, holy, and
Catholic Fathers of the Church, I have enterprised this Prosopopeia: to the
bad I yield no reason at all, who wanting devotion, can have no feeling at all.
Some there be that will not only gybe at this complaint, but impair the
person, drawing from Mary's demerite all that which the fathers in her life
held marvelous, to whom beside the special testimones of John Damascene,
and holy Gregory, who have written largely of her dignities, I oppose that of
Bernards, Quod seminae obtemperat, humilitas sine exemplo, quod faemina Deo
principetur, sublimitas sine modo. Some there be that will accuse the style, as
to stirring, some the passion, as too vehement. To the first I will be
thankful, if they amend mine errors: to the next I wish more judgment, to
examine circumstances. Some (and they too captious) will auowe that Scriptures
are misapplied, fathers mistaken, sentences dismembered. Whom I admonish (and
that earnestly) to beware of detraction, for it either shows mere
ignorance, or mighty envy, for the detracter first of all shows himself to
be void of charity, and next of all extinguisheth charity in others. To leave
them satisfied therefore, let this sussise, I have written nothing without
example, I build no wares on mine own ability. If therefore they hold it
mistaken which they have not read, let them acquaint me with their mislikes, I
will further their readings and establish their judgments.

Finally, whosoever Turk like, seeks to kill me with reproves, for
cherishing him with meditation, let him beware of ingratitude, least according
to the opinion of the Platonikes, he prove Corpus obliuiosum, a forgetful and
fantastike body.

Having thus prevented the captious, I turn to you courteous and virtuous
readers, to whom I commit and commend these labors, wherein if you exercise
your selves you shall govern your senses, which as Gregory witnesses, are
certain windows, whereat the waters of temptation do enter. In meditating
with Marie, you shall find Jesus: in knowing Christ's sufferance, you shall be
instamed in his love: in hearing his words, you shall partake his wisdom,
which who inioteth, leaves the world as transitory, and seeks after heaven
for immortality. Heereon Augustine exclaimeth, Unhappy is he that knows all
things, and knows thee not: blessed is he that knows thee to despise all
things. If these stirreanie fire of devotion in you, then shall I not grieve to
see the Baalits, my reprouers, mangle themselves for shame, whilst the fire of
Gods entire love consumes and dries the sacrifice, Briefly, our Lord send a
plentiful harvest of tears by this meditation, that the devout hereby may
wax more confident, the incredulous believing: the indifferent, more zealous,
that now at last after I have wounded the world with too much surfeit of
vanity, I may be by the true Helizeus, cleansed from the leprosy of my lewd
lines, and being washed in the Jordan of grace, employ my labor to the
comfort of the faithful.

Yours T. L.

ERRATA.
Io A 4: page, li. 18 for son has died, read son died In the 6: p, li:14,
for son, read syen: in the 7, li, 4 for rest read rest, l, 19: for lost read
lest: p 8, l. 8: for queen read quiet, p. 9, l: 16 and 17, read, one indiuided
grave, might bury two indiuid, p, 10, l, 16, heart, read hearse p, 12, l, 4,
for dissolution, read desolation: In C p, 8, li, 3, for a tree, read five p,
10, li, 11, read them, being reproved, p, 13 l, 17, desires, read disasters In
D p, 16 Od^tus read Odilus; E, In p, 1, l, 20, mortuam, read mortuum.

THE TEARS of MARIE the mother of Christ.
AS soon as our Savior had paid the tribute of our redemption on the tree
of the Cross, and suffered in the flesh, for the offenses of fleshly men, just
and compassionate Joseph, (with his associates, who had begged the body, and
taken the true Isaac from the pile of the sacrifice) wrapped the prison of
Christ's eternity in fair linen clothes, addressing himself to bear him to
his sepulcher, but Mary the maiden mother, who during the time of his passion
had welnigh emptied all the rivers of her compassion, and rifled the treasures
of her remorse, to lament her sons most tragike martyrdom, accompanying her
devotion with their duty, as they wrapped him, she wept him; as fitie zeal
assisted their hands sounding grief wrought on her heart; her eye grudged at
that their hands did execute, and her eyes only grief was so vehement, that
they executed themselves in executing grief.

Ahlas (amiable Lady) how satest thou like the desolate turtle weeping thy
make? How many legions of miseries were armed against thy sole and singular
patience? Thy dead joys gave thy sorows f^^ck, and sorrow was so active in
thee, as if thou had bin wholly resolved into sorrow. They that beheld thy
grief were amazed to behold it, yet thou in suffering it, thoughtest all to
little for him thou sufferedst. Chrisost. in Genes. Bernard Homil. 2. de virgin.
Thou flaming bush replenished with fire, yet never burning, thou flourishing
rod of Aaron swiftly springing, thou lock of Gedeon filled with celestial dew,
how near neighbors were thy lips to the dear lips of thy son? How ready were
thy hands to discover thy cause of grief, to the end thou might cover
those lims which did comfort thee in life. Thorns could not let thee from
kissing his torn face, from his dead countenance grew thy disconsolate
comfort: The suppose of what he was, made thee grieve, that so he is, and the
hope of that he would be, governed and bridled the sorrow wherein thou would
be. Ah fair among the daughters of Sion, he that had seen thy cheeks (like
clusters of grapes in Engaddi) become more pale than the frosty face of
Apennine: he that had seen the mother imbrued in the blood of her Son, the
Son bedewed with his mothers tears, could he leave off tears, except he
had for sworn them? Oh ye Angels of peace weep with this virgin, mourn
heavens, droup stars, the Lord of heaven has suffered, and Marie sigheth for
him: the Son has dyed for all, the mother deads her heart with sorrow, for
the Lord of all: his dead body is the mirror of her loss: her lively griese
is the motion and spirit of her love: she exclaimes on cuerie sense, but they
forsake their offices: his eyes will not behold her, his tongue will not
salute her, his hands will not embrace her, his ears will not hear her, yet
yeldeth her charity such vigor to all her senses, that in looking on him,
she seems to give his dead eye a second sight; his deaf ear, a relenting
attention; his senseless arms and hands, a habit of embrace, only seeing the
tongue the vnkindest member in requiting her, she betrothed her tongue to
complaint, and thus most pensiuely lamented.

O my God, Jeremy 9.
lend mine eyes a well of tears, for they must weep a world of wrongs. Let
the voice of my complaints pearce the heavens, and let the center shake, to
hear my shriks.

Ahlas this day must I be tender, 1: Reg: 30
having as many sorrows to weep for, as days to live; and no day to live,
that has not his legion of sorrows. Mine eyes break my heart, when I
consider what my heart must discharge by mine eyes. Oh Lord thou see my
wrong, take thou my cause upon thee, for an infinite passion is required to
lament my infinite loss. I am the tygresse deprived of her young whelp, the
sacred tree that have lost my son, that altar of heaven, who want my
sacrifice, the throne of Solomon, Chri: ho^de Io: Baptist Hier. in 44 Ezechiel
Greg: Nissen de not: Dom Bernard super missus hortum condusum, etc
who fail my king: the oriental gate, who lack the bridegroom. I am the root
of Iesse, the high mountain, the ladder of Jacob, the propitiatory, the tower
of David, the terrestrial paradise, yet am I not in this, that I want my
branch, I lack my increase, I fail of my Angel, I am'depriued of my tenant,
I am robbed of my keeper, and rest of my citizen.

Come ye daughters of Jerusalem, and weep with me, behold, he that leads
captivity captive, is now a captive, and I in looking on am a caitiue:
Behold the gold that was bright, is become dim: the doves eyes are grown
dark: the growing Lillye is quite choked by thorns: weep ye foolish
virgins, your bridegroom is parted. Feed with poor Marie on the bread of
tribulation, for I have lost a son, and you lost your Savior.

Ah look with me you judicial eyes of Israel, behold riches apparelled in
pouertye; beauty obscured in darkness, charity exemplified in death, death
crucified by charity. Behold him whose beauty the Sun and Moon admire,
whose majesty the heavens and earth reverence, whose wisdom yeeldes wisdom
to the queen of Angels, by whose beauty the college of all happy souls are
maintained: behold him liuelesse, to get you life, breathless, for your
benefit, naked, to give you clothing, wounded for your weal, bleeding, for
your behest, and can you choose but weep with the mother the loss of such a
son? Red wax in the Sun becomes white: hard diamondes in vinegar wax
soft: Bernard. Granaten. li. meditationu^
one Summer ripes many fruits: since then the Sun of justice has shined
upon you, be ye mollified like wax, lenyified like diamonds, tipened like
fruit: that the water of angels may drop from your eyes, that the fire of
charity may cause compassion distill from your brains, so that weeping with
me so great a loss as I weep, the world may know the want of him we weep for.

I lift not up my voice with Esau to weep, he found a brother, I have lost a
son. Jacob kissed Rachel and wept for joy to see her: I kiss the body of my
son, and weep because I see him not: Oh would my Rachel might be his
wounds, would my concubine were his cross: would his winding clothes were
my wedding coats, and indiuided grave might bear to indiuided hearts. The
daughters of Israel wept over Saul, and he a wicked king: 2. Reg. 1
O ye daughters of Jerusalem weep, houle, and lament, a Savior is departed
from you, a just king has suffered. Let your faces be swollen with weeping,
for I will water my couch with tears. Let the voice of my mourning be heard in
your streets, for the noise of tribulation is harbored in my heart. Weep
discomfortable tears, and I will mingle my drink with weeping: salme 102
with weeping conduct that Lord to the grave, who weepingly bewailed, and be
wailingly wept over your City.

Enforce your selves to weep, em. 14
whilst my eyes fail me thorough weeping: power your tears on his heart,
whilst I feed on tears day and night. I will power all my tears into his
wounds, ^salme 50
he will put all your tears into his bottell.

Let your tears run like a river, and let my tears be seas to suck them up,
only assist me in my strong weeping and tears, and he will wipe away all your
tears. Why claim I partners in my grief, who have no partners in my love? No
creatute loved thee deerer in thy life, and shall I seek associats in bewailing
thee? Ah my son, could ought but death depart thee and me? Nay, could there
be one step betwixt me and death, who only in death may now seek thee?

O Jesus my Father, my Son, see here an indissoluble Enigma, Enigma
inextricabil-Maria est virgo, matter, sponsa, filia. Benedictus in vita Marie
I a Virgin, had thee a Son; thou a son, had me a spouse; my son is my
father, and I am the daughter of my son. I will then weep for thee as my
father, sigh for thee as thy daghter, die for thee as thy spouse, and grieve
for thee as thy mother: and as thou art wonderfully mine, so will I weep such
a labyrinth of tears, as no mortal mourner shall be able to tract them. I will
dissolve my relenting, and yelding passions with all their fruits, to lament
thee as a son, I will put on the roabes of dissolution to mourn for thee as
my spouse, I will gather and ingrosse al grief, to weep for thee as my father,
and beginning where I end, and ending where I began, I will make my tears
famous in their continuance, and my love more inflamed by thinking on thee.

I conjure you ye daughters of Jerusalem to look on me, but weep no more with
me, I lament a son lost, to teach you to weep for the sorrows of your
children to come: but if the entrails of your pity, and springs of
compassion must needs break out, weep you only his harms in life, and let
me bewail the loss of him by death: my confident mind and firm constancy,
when the world was disturbed at his passion, made me peremptory: when the
earth trembled, I was not troubled, Bernard in Medit.
when the pilets of heaven were shaken, I sounded not, they sell, I stood: now
am I drowned in the sea of bitterness, his eye of compassion (the pilot in those
seas) has left me, the helm of my hope is broken, Granatensis lib de vita
Christi.
the sun of my comfort is eclipsed, he has past the brierie and thornie
paths, the scourges has registered his patience on his back, the nails have
tied his triumphs, our sins, his body to the cross, I niurie has spit her
venom, Infamy has done his worst, Justice has ransackt his right: wayle
this ye daughters of Jerusalem, for your children shall wring for it, I only
exclaim on death, death has triumphed over life, til glory overcome death, the
holy one has perished, fished, and sees no corruption: one days, one
hours, one minutes want of that I love, maks every day an age, every hour a
million of ages, every minute an eternity of sorrow, for that I want.

O you that pass this way and behold this body, you that look on these
wounds, and see these lims; tell me, Is not beauty oppressed? Majesty
imbased? Innocence martired? Come near and judge if any grief may be
compared with mine? The fairer children we have the dearer we love them, and
should I who bare the mirror of all beauty in my womb, cease to weep for him?
You men of Israel that behold this, be not amazed at my grief, my love was
extreme, my grief must not be extenuate: the grace was great to bear Christ,
the courage is as great to bewail him his beauty was infinite, and shall my
moanes be definite? These thorns which martyrize his beauteous brows, this
blood which bedeweth his bloudlesse face, these wounds that disgrace his
blessed body, this humility in so great and mighty a monarch, 'are pricks
and spurs to egg you unto repentance; springes to wash you from your
wickedness, gates to bring you to glory: all these are but stinges to stir you
to love God, mirrors in which you see his beauty, books in which you read his
wisdom, and preachers which teach you the way to heaven. Oh thou paschall
lamb, Ambrose in Math.
whose blood has bin sprinkled on the timber of the cross! Oh thou by who^ men
are delivered from ye thraldom of Egypt, and the captivity of the prince of
this world, whose death killed their death, whose sacrifice satisfied for their
sins. Whose blood delivers them from the chastising Angel, whose meeknes
pacifieth the ire of the father, and whose innocence deserves for them true
security and justice.

Thou book which the Prophet saw written both within and with out, sech. 2
why strive not men by their sighs to breath life into thee? And why should not
my cries of compassion recall thy spirit? Ahlas my God, sin has gotten the
upper hand, these Jews are amazed, thy mother unable, their zeal cold, my
power small, the unbelieving are many, and penitents have too few tears to
bewail thee: yet while tears yield me any tribute, sighs vouch safe me any
succor, tongue afford me any words, I will weep for thee, sigh for thee, and
talk of thee, desiring rather to surfeit in words, than to shroude my zeal,
and rather die in bewailing thee to much, than live to lament thee too little.

O thou glass of grace, who has bespotted thee? who has brought thee into
the shadow of death? Ah dear soul, what northwind of sin has blown hither
all this tempest? meekness could not offend, patience did not insult,
innocence was faultlesse: the wolf should have suffered, not the lamb: the
guilty, not the guiltless. Oh the immeasurable reach of thy mercy, I have
spied the insearchable bent of the same, thou have left life to revive them
that loath thee: suffered death, for such as detracted from thee, borne man's
infirmities, and satisfied his sins.

O grace beyond all conceit, O marucilous mystery: Thou diedst for man, man
declineth from thee: thou sufferedst for his sins, he sigheth not for thy
death. Proverb. 6
O men swift footed to run to wickedness, have you no affects to bewail him who
suffered for your defects? Will you not weep for the prophet that died for your
profit? Have you no tears to spend for him, whose life is spent for you? O
ungrateful, O injurious, draw near and behold a mother bewailing your
ingratitude: a son dead for your redemption: and though you lament him not for
the plentious consolations you have reiceiued by him, yet grieve for him for my
plentious grief sake, who have lost all my joy for your general comfort.

Behold these lips are closed which were wont to utter oracles of comfort:
those eyes are shut which never beheld your infirmities without floods of
compassion, the hands are maimed which were liberallye opened to all good
works, the feet are wounded that brought you tidinges of peace, each part
of him is thus mangled, to amend you: hurt, to heal you: galled, to do you
good: pierced, to work your profit: And have you no one tear to tender for
his kindness?

Ah ungrateful that ye are, and more insensible than beasts, more cruel
than tigers, more hard than stones: the Sun put on mourning garments, when
my son suffered, and shall not the swoorde of afflictions pearce your
entrayles to behold this tragedy? The veil of the Temple rent from the top
to the bottom, and will you not rent your hearts with ruth, to regard his
rent body? The earth trembled for fear, and will you not weep for pity?
Stones break in sunder, and shall not your stony hearts wax tender? The dead
for sooke their graves, to grieve for him, and shall not the living despise
their delights to lament him?.

Ah just Abel, ^^^aeseos
thy blood cries for revenge, and has pierced heaven, but it is dispersed and
despised on earth. ^enes. 37
Ah holy Joseph, thy bloody coat has broached a spring of remorse in Jacobs
eyes, though thy brethren lament thee not. The chosen Israelites mourn for
their Sampson, ^id. 6
though the Philistians afflicte thee. Oh men, the Saints in heaven bless this
body, you sinners on earth will not bewail it: the heavens show his greatness,
yet men on earth acknowledge not his goodness, the stars declare his
divinity, men decline not to see his dead humanity: the flowers of the fields
testify his beauty, but the worms of the earth sorrow not his obscurity.

O you race of Adam, he that created all things without travel, governed them
without care, sustained them without thought, and possessed them without
necessity, now lies here dead, traveled by sorrow and death, blind to make
you see, senseless to make you feel, subject to make you sovereigns, and
shall he have so much care of you, and you so little compassion of him? Oh you
hardened in heart, blinded in understanding, surfeted in sensuality, will not
then your stony hearts otherwise suffer ye to weep, come gather tears from the
wel-head of his benefits, that you may assist me to bewail him: he has drawn
you from your bannishment to your blessing, from obscurity to life, from death
to eternity. What he punished in the angels, he pitied in you: what he
persecuted in himself, ^^. 14
he has pacifid for you. In the old law whosoever had fallen into the
uncleanness of leprosy, was thus cured and thus cleansed, the priest taking two
sparrows, when he had slain the one, dismissed the other, and anointing the
sick of the leprosy with the blood of the dead one, he thereby recured the
sick, and purged the uncleanness. And what figure is this, o ye sons of
vanity, but the tipe of your own imperfections: you are spiritually fallen
into the leprosy of sin, this noble sacrifice, this sacred priest has taken
two sparrows, his body and soul, to cleanse you of your leprosy, his body
has he suffered to die, to be rent, to be torn, to be whipte for you, his
soul he has dismissed, and by the blood issuing from his wounds he has
clensd your leprosy, Anima^ nullus potest occidere. Math 10
ratified his covenant, shut you in the arms of mercy, shuted you with your
wedding garments. Oh then though his sufferance touch not your hearts let his
benefits turn them: weep, weep on him that prays for you as your priest,
prays in you as your head, and must be entreated by you as your God. Behold
your physician whom desire of gold has not drawn to you, Ierem. 107
but intirenes of mercy has provoked to assuage your misery. Behold that
Christ that has united you to God, reconciled you with his blood, and urged
compassion for you with his tears: your sins have separated you from him,
Ierem. 59
his death has alied you to him. O hard hearted men cannot this move you, the^
harke^ to further motives, and let them amend you. God in the first law
appointed a free city of refuge for the afflicted, and privilege for the
offenders, whereto whosoever had grace to approach before he were apprehended,
he was assured of safety, and defended from justice. In this new law, this
Christ (oh true tipe of charity) has made these cities in himself,
established this privilege in his body, and walled the same with his wounds.
Hither, o you sinners, repair, here shall you have mercy for tears, life for
repentance, remission of sins, for confession of sin. Oh contrite sinner,
dwell in these cities, let your memory inhabit them, thy meditation embrace
them, thy pity bewail them. Think on these wounds, they will heal thee,
forsake them, death will follow thee, forget them, mercy will deny thee.
Abuse not the privilege of wounds, death, and passion, least thou bewail too
late the horror of hell, death, and damnation. Will none weep with me? Will no
reasons wound you? Are tears so scant, for mercies so plentiful? Come, come
and learn what tears be, that you may know their benefits. The sinners tears
are Gods mirrours: their penitent sighs, his incense: God hears prayers, but
beholds tears: prayers move God to hear, Esaias 38 Ambrose
tears compel him to have mercy. Silent tears are speaking aduocats. It was
not Mary's anointing with sweet balm, Mary's drying, with fair hair, Mary's
attention with humble heart, but Mary's tears, they wrought my compassion. Oh
come and weep then, and if not weep, yet consider. Proud man, see here the
pattern of humility: humble, learn here whereof to relieve thee: irefull,
learn here the benefit of sufferance, ^ust.
patient, receive here the crown of durance: covetous, learn here to affect
poverty: poor, receue here, how thou have Christ thy companion: the only son
of God, has made many sons of God, he has bought him brothers with his
blood, approved them, and being approved, redeemed them being sold, (...)
honored them by suffering dishonours, and given the^ life by suffering death.
Let him therefore be wholly infixed in your hearts, who wholly was crucified for
you on the cross. O men loose not these blessings, forget not these bounties.
This Christ subjected himself to the power of death that he might deliver you
from the yoke and power of the devil: he took servitude upon him, that he
might give you the liberty of eternal life, hear what he cries in your
souls, and respect his summons.

O man see what I suffer for thee, Ambrose.
there is no grief like to mine, I cry unto thee who died for thee. Behold the
pains wherewith I am afflicted, see the nails wherewith I am pierced, and
although the exterior grief be so great, yet the inward sorrows are more
vehement, when I behold and find thee so ungrateful for my passion. Behold man
whom you crucified, behold God and man whom you would not believe, Hicrome
behold the wounds which you inflicted, acknowledge the sides which you
wounded, all which were opened for you, but you will not enter: I gave my self
for you, that I might redeem you from all iniquity, Ad Tu. 20
I suffered with entire love to win your entire love, being God I became
man; being the fountain of all plenty, I suffered hunger, I the well spring
thirsted, I the light, was darkened, I the rest of al, was wearied for all,
false witness outfaced verity, I the judge of the living and the dead, was
judged by a mortal creature, Justice was condemned by the unjust, ^^gust.
discipline was beaten, the cluster of grapes was crowned with thorns, virtue
was weakened, health wounded, and life made death, my heart for sooke me in
torments for you, they wounded my hands and feet, so that al my bones were
broke asunder, (...). 5
even in that weakness I dyed for you being wicked. Why therefore fasten you
me to a more grievous cross of your sins, tha^ that whereon I was crucified?
^^gust in ^^dam ser^^em de Iudicij.
The cross of your crimes is more irksome unto me than the cross whereon I
lately suffered. Taking compassion on you, I willingly ascended. Oh then weep
for me, because I suffered for you. Thou that runnest after delight, surfetest
in pleasure, desire ease, come to this school, and learn thy lesson, let my
grace draw thee from disgrace, my sufferance, from thy sensuality, my charity
from thine uncleanness. Behold the law is satisfied in my blood, and your
infirmities are covered by my cross. I a man praide to me a God, Innocentius
Iaiudge wept over you being condemned: to ease your temptation I was tempted
for you: yet for all these dolorous deserts, you yield me no tears of true
sorrow. I was spit upon to wash you, I was covered, to the end that the vale of
sin and ignorance should be taken from your hearts: my head was wounded, Hiero.
super Matthew.
to the end that your head Adam should be restored to health, I was buffeted
with fists, and mocked with words, to the end that you should applaud me with
your lips, lift up your hands unto me, and worship me both in deeds and
words, thus loving you, and washing you from your sins, disdain not to be
reconciled to me in repentance. Hear the three things figured in my passion,
my head was bowed down, in sign of remission of sins: water issued from my
sides, in token of the cleansing of your faults: blood, in sign of the
redemption of your punishment. Oh let the effects of these signs force you, I
am a medicine to the sick, a rule to the depraved, a dwelling place to the
desolate, and a light for the darkened. Oh come unto me you hard hearted, for to
be turned from me, is to fall: to be converted to me, ^^gust. lib. ^^put.
is to rise: to be grounded in me, is to flourish: o turn unto me, whom no man
loses, except deceived, no man seeks vnmonished, Bernard
and no man finds unpurged. I am the first that come to you, and the last
that go from you, I being just, came unto you sinners, that of sinners I might
make you just: I being holy, came to the unhallowed, to the end I might make
you whole: I being humble, came unto you being proud, that I might make you
humble: I came not for the just sake, but to correct the reprobate: I came not
for the strong, but to heal the weak: I came not for the resolved, but to
strengthen the doubtful: my melody is the amendment of sinners, my triumph
the constancy of martirs, my desire the immortality of yt faithful. Thus sat
^ blessed mother, sometime personating her son, to persuade more mouingly,
sometime soliciting the assistance by great motives to bewail him earnestly,
sometime weeping, while sorrow stopped her speech, sometime persuading whilst
charity quickened her tongue, sometime bemoning her while she beheld her dead
son, sometime recomforting Marie that fate weeping at her feet, so that those
that disdained her fortune, were amazed at her constancy, for though she
bewailed like a natural mother, yet endured she like a confident martyr,
Bernard
and therefore says Chrysostom, she was vexed with an intolerable agony of
grief, because she was touched with an unspeakable affection of love, whereby
being united to God, we seem to be converted and made one with him. Oh my
soul consider a while, whilst the solitary maid sits over her son,
what she is that bewaileth him? This is the blessed amongst women that was
salu ted by the Angel with Auc, as being delivered, Libro de natura rerum.
ave, from al curse: This is that Marie that by interpretation being the sea,
retains six qualities of the same. Of the sea it is said, that it is the
collection of al waters, either sower or sweet, the head and hosterie of all
floods, a help in necessities, a refuge in perils, an ease in travels, a
gain to laborers: of her it is said, Let all the waters under heaven be drawn
into one place, which gathering of waters, is the accomplishment of natures:
Anselmus Gen: 1
the sea is the head and hostery of floods, the head by the flux of waters, the
hosterie by the refluxe: so the blessed virgin is the mediation and head of
grace, and whatsoever good we receive, it flows from the fruit of her womb.
Thirdly, ye sea is a help in necessity, Fourthly, as ye sea is a refuge in
perils when in her maine body we escape shipwreck: so the immaculate maid
bringing forth the fullness of our redemption, delivers us from the
shipwreck of our souls. So testifies Bernard of Marie. Quia aperit sinum
pietatis uniuersis. Fifthly, the sea is a help to shorten the way of the
traveler: so in this great sea of this world this holy maiden directs us and
shortneth our way by the staire of her humility. Sixthly, it is a gain to
laborers, making the^ rich by trafique: so he that trafiqueth with this
blessed maid in meditation, imitateth her in devotion, accompanyeth her in
sorrow, shall receive the gain of his labor, and the fruits of immortality.
This is she of whom Ambrose speaks in his book of virginity, Virgo erat.
She was a virgin not only in body but in mind, for no circumuention of decit
could adulterate her sincere affect: in heart humble, in words grave, in mind
wise, in speech sparing, in readings studious. This is the rose without
prickles, the flower of the rose in the prime: for as the spring is the cause
of gladness, so was her fruit the cause or redemption. This is she whose
humility has raised us, whose virginity has enriched us, and whose devotion
has relieved us. O how wonderful was the fruitfulnes of this virgin, says
Bonauenture, Anselme
which no sooner receives salutatio^, but conceiueth salvation. Before the
virgin (says Oditius) conceived Christ, it was winter, but after she had
conceived the word of God, it became Summer. Finally, thorough the vapor of
the holy Ghost the flower sprung: A branch shall spring out of the root of
less, and a flower shall ascend from the root, as faith Esaie. And what
other is this branch (O thou blessedst amongst women) but thy self the
virgin of God: what this flower but thy son? O crimson rose Jesus how in all
thy body shine the perfect signs of thy love? Ahlasse there is no little
space left without impression of love or grief. Hark what Ambrose faith
further of this virgin, She fixed not her happiness in uncertain substance,
but fastened her hope to her son Christ, intentive in her works, modest in her
sayings, whose purpose was not to satisfy man, but to seek after God: to
hurt none, but to succor all: to salute every one, to reverence her elders,
not to hate her equals: to sly boasting, to follow reason, and to love
virtue. When did this virgin hurt her parents with disobedient looks? When
dissented she from her friends? When despised she the humble? When decided she
the weak? When shunned she the needy? Accustoming her self to converse only
with that company of men, whose conversation she might not be ashamed of?
Whom past she by without modesty? having nothing crabbed in her looks,
nothing crooked in her sayiugs, nothing immodest in her actions, not wanton in
gesture, not insolent in gate, not foolish in voice, but such she was, that the
very beauty, portraiture, and form of her body, was the image of her mind,
and figure of her honesty. The beauty of this temple of the Deity, was
expressed in the Canticles, where it is said: O how fair art thou my love?
Cant: 4
How fair art thou? Thine eyes are like doves eyes, yet is there far more
hidden within. This is the paradyce which God prepared to put the second Adam
in. This is that virgin of whom Hierome speaks, which passed the night in
contemplation and watching the thief: in love of God the most learned, in
humility the most humble, in the psalms of David the most elegant, in charity
most fervent, in purity the most pure, and in all virtue the most perfect: All
her words were always full of grace, because she had God always in her mouth,
she continually praide, and as the Prophet said, meditated in the law of God
day and night. Psalm 1
This is the virgin of virgins, the humble of hu^blest, in whom humility
greatned virginity, and virginity adorned humility. This is she whose
humility adorned her fecunditie, and whose fecunditie consecrated her
virginity. This is that Marie, into whose arms the fair unicorn Jesus
retired himself after a long pursuit, by the prayers, tears, and sighs of the
fathers.

This is the exalted, according to the Hebrew, or the star of the sea, as
Hierome translateth it: or the mistres of mankind, according to the Siriake.
Hier. de nomimbus. Sibil Erichea Et breuis egressus Maria de virginis aluo.
Exaita est nouatua.
This is she of whom the Sibils prophesied. This is she whom Euodius, Peter's
successor, calls immaculate, without spot, glorious in humility. This is
she appointed before all ages, to bear the great fruit.

This is the animated arc of the living God, which brought many blessings to
Zachary and Elizabeth, 2, Reg. 6
as the Arc of the covenant did to Obed Edom. This is she of whom Albumazar
prophesied, Albumazar li. 6 in inter.
who speaking of the sign of the Virgin, said that there should an
immaculate virgin be borne, sayre, elegant, and modest, that should norish an
infant in Judea, who should be called Christ. Of this virgin there was found a
testimony on the tomb of a pagan; where in a plot of ground these words were
written, and found in Constantine and his mother Irenes time, An infant named
Christ shall be borne of a virgin, and I believe in him. O son thou shall
see me again in the time of Constantine and his mother Irene. The like
Zonoras reports of a certain Jew, who in a certain ancient book written in
three languages used these words: This is she in whom Nestorius denying the
uniting of the humanity with the divinity, our Lord in justice caused worms
to devour and eat out his tongue. This is she in whom all virtues did
concur, all learning abound, all devotions flow, all comforts depend. This
is she, as Gregory testifies, which foretold the Jews of their destruction,
and the desolation of their city. This is the true celestial Pandora, decked
and enriched with the whole gifts of God, the father, the son, and the holy
Ghost. This is she whom the Moors reported to surpass in excellence, this
is the perfectest of all perfections, as the Turks and Arabians testify. This
is she whom all the fathers in devotion, the Mahumetists in their Alcoran,
set forth with praises, and enrich with titles. Oh sweet mother of God, who
so speaks of thee as Hierome says, speaks insufficiently: humane ability
cannot attain it, humane industry is too weak for it. Whether art thou
transported my soul? O my heart be no more ravished with joy, intentive to
praise: look back to the foot of the cross, there is more cause of
meditation, more cause of moan.

Ahlasse, what see thou? Nay, what see thou not to bewail? If thou see
the virgins lap, it is bloudied with the streams that fall from her Sons
wounded head. If thou see her modest eyes, they are almost swollen and sunk
into her head with tears. If thou look for her pure color, it is decayed
with extreme sorrow, her breasts are defaced with often beating of her
hands, her hands are wearyed by often beating of her breasts.

If she look on the one side, she sees Marie the sinner washing her sons
feet with her tears: if on the other, she beholds Joseph woefully preparing
his funerals: if on the other, she sees virgins mourning: if on the other,
she beholds soldiers mocking: if any ways, she sees sorrows plentiful:
knowing therefore in her self, that true grief corrects the mind, salueth
the offense, and maintains innocence, she began renew her tears, and thus
tenderly bewailed her.

If it be a custom in nature, that fountains return from whence they first
issued, bodies be resolved to that whereof they were first created, ahlasse why
should not the same law be in my tears, which first springing from love, must
be buried in love, and no sooner buried but renewed: nothing before his fullness
has his fairness, his ripeness, his strength, his perfection, his praise.
Why then delaie I my tears, which can never receive their excellence, till
they be wept to their vtteraunce. Ahlasse, ahlas, tears are sweet weapons to
wound and to win hearts, I will use them, I will inuit them, I will maintain
them, I will triumph in them: Come my son, what now shall I weep in thee? Not
thy death, for it is thy triumph: not thy conte^pts, for they were thy
co^tents: but thy martyrdom, which wrought my misery. O sinful souls, behold
two altars raised by one massacre, one in the body of Christ, the other in the
heart of the virgin: on the one is sacrificed the flesh of the son, on the
other the soul of the mother: such a death no creature has suffered, such a
sorrow no heart has contained. Philosophy concents to my sorrow, Cic Famil. 6
for mine eyes increase in grief, my passions are intolerable, being
afflicted in all my senses, my love quickens my passions, my devotion nourishes
my love, my tears beautify my affection. Woe is me, nowe'am I rightly
compared to the Moon; for my sun is eclipsed, and I am confounded: now
justly am I counted a peele, being sed no ways better than by the deaw of
tears: now am, I'improperly taken for a cedar, for the sweet sent of my
blossom is vanished, my fruit is decaid, the leaves of my delight are fallen,
only in this I retain thy nature, by reserving my grief in force, and my
compassion to eternities. Oh what a woe is mine? What a sorrow is mine? If the
Angels behold this face, they bewail him; if the heavens look on this cruelty,
they weep for him: if the air discover it, it loureth: if the earth eye it,
it renteth: What shall the mother then do, that has beheld her son
martyred, and could not succor him: naked, and could not cloth him: thirsty,
and could not comfort him: iniuried, and could not defend him: defamed, and
could not answer for him, spit upon, and could not wipe him: finally,
weeping, and could not comfort him. Out alas, for tears I will pay tears,
tears for former tragedies, tears for after passion: tears for present
misery: tears in abundance, Gregory
tears with usury. Oh thou so excellent in holiness, so mighty in power,
and so merciful in piety, how shall I more righfully bewail thee, than in
considering the wants I have, being divided from thee? I want thy presence to
repair my delights, I want thy counsel to enrich my soul, I want my joy by
wanting thee. Nay, what wants not the world by thine absence? The humble are
turned to proud: the faithful fallen to Apostasy, Barnard
the poor are despised: the just, reviled: the patient, spit at: the
faithful, afflicted: devotion, now is clothed with dissimulation:
sanctimonie, with simonie: conscience, with covetousness: hypocrites will be
humble without contempt: poor, with out defect: flatterers unseen: envious
unsuspected: slanderers, without cause: crafty as foxes within, humble as
lambs without. Ahlasse, what confusion? What error? Thy scholars in humility
have forgotten their lesson, they will not learn of the bird, which before he
soareth toward heaven, humbles his body to the earth, they will enter by
thee as the gate, and will not learn of thee because thou art humble. Thou
hu^blest thy self to thy equals, they despise their superiors. Bernar. li. de
disp. and prec.
The tree the more it abounds in fruit, the more it abaseth his bows
toward the earth: but man the more he is raised by thy graces, the more he
resists against thy humility. Thy glory is to submit, serve, and obey: man's
desire is to govern, rule, and command. Thou say that all thing perishes,
if it be not kept with humility: they say that nothing more breeds contempt
than observance. Thou biddest them fly honors: they affect them. Thou biddest
them possess their souls in fear: they deem nothing assured but in honor.
Oh sweet Jesus, thou say that the gate of heaven is so straight, that no man
laden with riches, no man fatned with delights, no man decked in purple can be
possessed thereof before he be dispossessed of these vanities: but the worldling
says, that wealth breeds happiness, delights lengthen life, rich clothing
brings credit: so that they that possess these, they utterly despise heaven.
What shall I say? the world is so fraught with pleasure, and avarice is so
full of profit, that it is held good policy to hear thee preach: but no
wisdom to follow thy poverty. Oh dear Lord, thou give thy self wholly
unto them, and they wholly fly thee: if they are hungry, thou art bread to
them: if they are thirsty, thou art water to the^: if they are in darkness,
thou are light unto them: if they be naked, thou cloathest them: yet are they
(...) grounded in ingratitude, that they forget thee. They know that what so
ever the world is, Deuteronomy. 32
is either the desire of the flesh, or the desire of the eyes, or the pride of
life, yet prete^ding to fly the world, they fancy nothing more earnestly.
They know that a fatned, thick, and dilated body leaves God, and forgets
his creator: yet follow they sensuality, and forget thee, ea^mque mortuam;
says the Psalm, neither cordially record they thy benefits. They know with
Hermes, Libro de logostileos.
that thy acceptable and best incense is thanksgiving, yet have they learned
with Judas, to crucify thee ungratefully. They know that they are blessed
that have not seen, John 20 Apoc: 20 John 8
and believe, yet having beheld thy passion, they despise it. They know the
book of life is opened, but they will not read. They know that those which
follow thee shall not walk in darkness se, yet take they pleasure to stumble in
the day time. Finally, they know that thou have spread the light of thy
countenance on them, yet prefer they darkness before light, to their own
damnation. The Naturalistes write, that Bats have weak sight, because the
humor Christaline, which is necessary for the eye to see with, is translated
into the substance of the wings to fly with, whereupon they have leatherne
wings, and so for their flight sake, have lost their sight, because that is
subtracted from the eyes, which is employed in the wings: These bats betoken
these proud neglecters, who by how much the more they strive to fly, by so
much more are they deprived of the grace of the divine light, because all their
intention, which ought to be in consideration of heavenly things, is
translated into the feathers of ambition, so that all their thought is how
they may ascend by degrees the steps of dignity, not descend in imitation of
thee, to the bosom of humility. O man, the cause of the Angels fall was
negligence, the cause of Adams fall was negligence: why then art thou summoned
so sweetly, and neglectest so carelessly? If men and angels created by God, had
used his gifts orderly, the angels had never striued to surpass God in
excellence, neither had man listened to the serpents persuasion, but because
they were careless of his graces, he suffered the^ to fall into error by the
sin of negligence, and from the error of negligence, into the sin of pride
and disobedience. Beware man, by man's first falling, fly man the Angels
negligence, least by both thou win apostasy, and with apostasy, perdition.
Will thou be frind of this world: thou art enemy to God? Will thou follow
Beliall? thou art not for Jesus. Oh cast down thy self, proud soul,
whatsoever thou hopest, trust not the weakness of thy power, since strength it
self has been oppressed. Know that chastity is hardened in delights, truth
in riches, and humility in honors: just, fear to fall: merciful, fear
obduration: continence, fear lust: devout, fear negligence: with fear and
trembling wax you rich in Jesus, who with grief and agony has endured for
you.

Oh sinners, though nature cannot m^^e you to sighs, (which is affecte^ ^y her
objects) let me win you by reasons, to ratify your remorse. If your friends
come from far countries to visit you, you embrace them: if they give you
gifts, you thank them: if they counsel you, you consent unto them: What then
will you return your savior and my son for his courtesies? He coming into
the world, has showed you three principal signs of love, mercy, and
piety. First, he condescended to your mortality. Secondly, he provided
messengers of your salvation. Thirdly, he gave you precepts and admonishmentes
of your welfare. He came from heaven, to comfort you on earth: he suffered on
earth to carry you to heaven: he became the lowlyest amongst men, to make you
the highest among creatures, he has visited you with his graces, giving ease
to your labor, comfort to your afflictions, salve to your infirmities: he has
presented you with gifts, not gold and silver, which are corruptible, not pomp
and honor, which seduce the senses, not security and vanity, which corrupt
the heart, but he has broken his body on the cross for you, he has broken
his body in the Sacrament for you, he has given you the cup of atonement
(his' precious blood) he has made you one with God, by being generally
condemned by the world, he has counseled you to rise from sins, to make your
bodies vessels of the holy Ghost, to sanctify your souls in the blood of his
testament, being made and approved just: therefore you ought to love him wholly,
Americus Card: in prol: suo lib
to who^ you owe al what you are wholly. If you see an earthly king before you,
you fall before his throne you humble your self before his judgment, you
subscribe to his law, and obey his ordinances: why despise you then the king of
heavens? Math: 8 Phil. 2
to whom princes stoop, and whom the wind and sea obeys, to whom all knees
both in heaven, earth, and hell are bowed. If you respect works, he made heaven
and earth: if the manner, of nothing: if the purpose, for ungrateful man, who
being lord of all by him, will not acknowledge his due homage to him: if you
dispose your affections by the wisdom of your governors, who more wiser than
Jesus? Where the Psalmist says, Great is the Lord our God, and mighty his
virtue, and his wisdom is beyond number. And again, God is the God of sciences,
1, Reg. 2
and our thoughts are prepared unto him: Who therefore is so wise and mighty
as her that by wisdom discovers al things and by power punishes all
offenses? How much wisdom and seuetitie is in this Judge? Who discovers the
thoughts of the heart, Rom: 1i
knows whereunto our imaginations are intended, measures the weight of our
sins, and how iniquities are chained together. Fnally, all are of him, by
him, and in him. If wonders draw your affections, who were wonderful, look
on his birth, it is wonderful above nature, without man, of a sole virgin:
look on his name, it is wonderful: ( Jesus) by interpretation, a savior. Yet
more wonders, a frail man, and a strong God: a poor man's son, and the
prince of peace, borne in time, and the perpetual father of succeeding ages.
Yet three more wonders. First, in those things which were spoken of him.
Secondly, in those things which were spoken by him. Thirdly, in those which
were forespoken of him by the Patriarks and Prophets. Jacob prophesied his
coming long before, The scepter shall not be taken from Judah. Balaam called
him the star out of Jacob: they called him the flower, and the branch, on
which flower the holy Ghost should have his resting place. And is not this
admirable? Will you more wonder? Hear Elizabeth prophecy, hear Zachary
prophecy, the shephearde prophecy, the Sages prophecy. Yet more wonders. In
his infansy his answers were admirable, all testify of him, marvel at his
answer, applaud his prudence. John 1 Luke 4 Mirabantur ludei quomodo literas
seisset Mark 20
Will you more wonders. The people marvelled at him, saying, He has done all
things well, he has made the deaf hear, and the dombe speak. Love him
therefore as your Lord, honor him as your king, who is admirable in his
conception, admirable in his birth: admirable in his preachings, admirable in
his passion, admirable in his death, admirable in his charity.

And to this love (O remorselesse lookers on) add tears, for no man can
truly love, that is not affected, to see his beloved afflicted.

Come, Anselme
come and weep bitterly with me, for you have much cause of lamentation. If
love can divorce you from ingratitude, come and weep of pure love: for my son
has therefore suffered, because he loved: if in justice; come mollify your
hearts, behold an innocent reprochfully crucified: if consanguinitie can affect
you, behold your father which has begotten and chosen you before all
eternities, reckned amongst thieves, rent by bloudthirstie men, scourged by the
guilty: if you be abashed to see God so mightily bruised, bewail your deadly
sins, the causes of his detriment: if you wonder at his humility, blame your
pride: if you admire his patience, condemn your wrath. As the member that
feels no grief, is said to be dead, and the disease which is insensible,
is always incurable: so unless you partake in passion with Christ, lament to
see him crucified, sorrow to behold his wounds, you are no living members,
but dead ones: no true sons of his, but bastardes: if you suffer with him,
you shall reign with him: if you associate him in his passions, you shall
partake with him in his consolations.

The Philosophers write, that the Harpie is a bird (having a man's (...)) so
fell, cruel, and furious, that being pressed and assaulted with hunger, she
inuadeth and kills a man: whom when she has devoured, and whose body when
she has torn, being assailed with thirst, she flies to the water to drink,
where beholdin^ (...) own face, and remembering the similitude of him whom
she slew, she is confounded with so much grief, that she dies for dolor.
Oh careless worldlings, except there be less remorse in you than in this
creature, look into the spring of your consciences, lodge in your memory how
much you have crucified this Christ with your sins, and slain him by your
offenses. and though you die not through extremity of grief, yet let fall some
tears to bewail him tenderly.

Oh let not sin take hold of you, idleness prevent you, or pride consound
you, for trees that have broadest leaves, do soonest loose them, and men that
have proudest thoughts are soonest deceived by them. Foolish that thou art,
can thou bewail thy dead father that begot thee, thy sick son that
delights thee, thy lost riches that maintained thee, and wilt not thou weep
for Jesus that redeemed thee? Can thou grieve to see thy flocks perish, thy
houses burnned, thy wise slain, thy daughters defloured: and will thou not
weep to see thy God, who gave these, confounded with torments, thy comforter
that created these, suffer on the cross: thy Jesus that lightneth thee,
clothed with death? Oh let not your gronings be hidden from him: pray with
Job, that thou may a little bewail thy dolours, push forth thy tears of
grief, and make them flow in abundaunce, for laughlng thou descendest to hell,
but murning thou ascendest to heaven: Will thou have Christ dwell with thee,
Amb. hom: 1. lib. 1
mourn? Will thou have Christ dwell in thee? mourn. Will thou have sin
mortified in thee? mourn: Will thou have grace plentyfull in thee? mourn. O
remember that Peter after he had bewailed his apostasy, found greater grace
by his tears, than he lost by his denial.

Look on David the adulterer, he weepeth, and is restored: Look on Agar the
desolate, she weepeth, and is comforted: Look on weeping Anne, she recouereth
her barrenness.

Look on mourning and weeping Job, he overcomes his temptations: mourning
Jeremy prophesies, the mourning Publicane is justified, and mourning Joseph
is delivered.

Oh tears of great worth, working great things with GOD. By tears Marie
obtained the pardon of her sins: by tears she obtained the resurrection of
her dead brother: for her tears sake, the Angels came and comforted her:
for her tears sake our Savior first appeared and showed himself unto her.

Great is the virtue and power of tears, which tie the hands of the
omnipotent, overcome the invincible, appease the wrath and indignation of the
Judge, and does change and convert it into mercy.

He that stands on a profound and deep pit, says the Philosopher, sees
the stars at noonstead: where he that stands on the face of the earth, sees
not one star in so great a light: In like manner, he that is placed in the
deapth of humility, tears, sighs, and tribulation, sigheth to heaven, and
summoneth God by his cries: but he that stands in the light of this world,
and in the brightness of worldly lasciviousness, can see no star, or retain
any grace. 1 Dionisius.
Shall I teach you how to bewail Christ? First love him, for love unites
things together, drawing all man's interest from himself, and placing it in
another: when thou art converted into Christ, then may thou truly bewail
him. For the loss of things then nearest touch us, when they are best knowee
unto us. Those that are one in affection, are one in passion, one in desires,
one in tears, one in love, one in sorrow, one in mind, one in martyrdom:
mockers martyr Christ, penitents weep for him, blasphemeis crucify him, the
sorrowful are comforted by him, O men, learn and understand this, our Lord
suffered of will, not of necessity, and he endured of commiseration, we in
condition: his voluntary passion therefore, is our necessary consolation,
that being afflicted as he was, we may be confident as he was. Will you know
the hunger and thirst of this advocate? Ahlasse, he scarce found one these on
the gallows whom he might taft: his Apostles are fled from him, and hid them
in the throng: Peter that promised to persevere till death, has denied him.
Whereupon then shall he feed, if all souls fly him? Nay, how can he hope
orf love, where none weep for him? Oh man thou art made just by the justice of
God? Thou art saved gtatis, and not by thy graces: thou have none to fly to,
but to him in necessities, thou have no life but it proceeds from him: under
the Sun thou have nothing but watching, sleeping, eating drinking, hunger,
thirst, growth, weakness, infancy, childhood, youth, age, and all these he gave
thee. Above the Sun, thou have invisible faith, August in Psalm 38
invisible hope, invisible charity, invisible bounty, invisible fear in
holiness, which he willingly offers thee. Oh then give him tears for his
treasures, a small interest for so great riches. Oh ye sinful race of men,
what are you but a sack of necessities? Ahlasse, what necessities are these?
Not to know another heart, to think ill oftentimes of a faithful friend, to
think well oftentimes of a dissembling enemy? O hard necessity! yet another
harder. Thou know not what thou shall be tomorow. O greatest misery! yet
another harder. Thou must needs die: O hard necessity! not to will that
which thou can not escape? In this confusion what can thou man? Whether art
thou carried? How art thou bannished? Cry and cry out, unhappy man that I
am, who shall deliver me from these? Who shall answer thee? Who shall help
thee? Not ambition, for it is blind: not lust, for it hastens death: not
wrath, for it subdueth reason: not the infirmities of the world, for they are
all frail: It must be humble Jesus then, that must heal these imperfectious,
recover these necessities, and determine these dangers, to whom thou no sooner
can offer tears, but he suddenly sends remedies. Oh what heart can be so
hardened? August in Psalm 10
What mind so obdurate? What soul so sensles, that beholding a prince in his
own kingdom, amongst his own subjects, massacred by his own son, will not
grieve at it: by how much reason then (o^ you bond slaves of sin) should you
be sorrowful, that see a prince, not slaughtered in his own kingdom, but
unjustly murthred in the world, not among his subjects, but his brethien: not
by his sons only, but sons, servants, and liegemen: nay, which is more,
not for his own offense, his own default, his own error, but for their
sins only who persecute him only. Oh wonderful charity, Christ spreads
his arms to embrace those that spit at him, opens his wounds to intertain
those that will enter, offers his blood to ran some them that shed it,
gives his flesh to be eaten, to those that mangled it: he prays for their
offenses that fastened him to the cross, August in Psalm 41
he made their sins his sin, that he might make his justice their justice.
Oh if there be any kindness in thee (man) think on these benefits: look,
look about thee, consider the weight of thy offenses, which stops the Fathers
cares, though the son cries, Make Christ sweat water and blood for very
agony in bearing them, make heaven, and earth, and all creatures break out in
miracles to behold them. Job upon the devils request, Job i
was left to him to be tempted, and after his long patience received
blessings two fold: but our Lord was whipte, and no man helped him: foulely
spit upon, and no man succored him: lewdly buffetted, and no man regarded
him: crowned with thorns, and no man pitied him: nailed to the cross, and no
man delivered him: he cried, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and
was not succored. Why oh good Jesus, whence came these things? For what cause
sufferedst thou all this? To what end are all these torments? Why cried the
Jews, Crucify, crucify? Why were thou poured out like water? Why were all
thy bones dispearsed? Why became thy heart like melting wax? Why cleaued thy
tongue to thy roof? Why divided they thy garments and cast lots on thy vesture? O
Christ, the son of God, if thou would not, thou should not have suffered:
show us therefore the fruit of this thy passion: It was thy sin (O sinner)
that caused this, it was thy disobedience to God that was punished in Gods
son: to show the horror of thy offense, power was made desolate. Oh stony
heart be not so obstinate, let tears drop from thine eyes to recompense the
blood pouring from his wounds: sigh bitterly with him that prayed earnestlye
for thee. What is this sin, say thou, that inforceth such a sacrifice?
That which makes all men in the world fly from their salvation, August. li:
12 de ciuitate Dei
and run after their own concupiscences without any fear: that which
leads men down to hell, that which blinds the understanding, that which
makes men like unto foolish beasts: for as beasts incline themselves to
earthly pleasures, so sinners betroth themselves to worldly desires: that which
makes men seek only those things which are of the flesh, that which makes
men esteem their belly for their God. Sinners are compared to hogs by their
detracting, for as the hog deuoureth doung, so detracting and sinful men,
other men's sins and filthiness: For lechery they are compared unto a horse:
Phil 30 Rom: 8
for folly and slownesse to an ass: for their solicitude and worldly care, to
an ox: for their curious co^uersations, to an ape: for their inconsiderate
boldness, to a lion: for their cruelty, to a bear: for their vanity, to
libards: for their craft, to a fox. Sin is the trangression of the laws of
God, Numquid potest Athiops mutare pellem suain aui paidus varietate (...)
and the disobedience of his commandments: Sin, is the contrary to nature:
sin draws us from the sovereign good, to make us subject to brittle,
frail, and mutable pleasures. Ambrose li. de pa^ad: ho. 32 quest. 133 art. 1
^^ay ^9 Plato in Gorgia
Sin divides us from God. To conclude, (as the Ethnike witnesses) the
sinner is only miserable: Sin depriueth man of eternal beatitude, banisheth
him from heaven, confineth him with hell, despoileth him of graces, exileth him
from paradise. Briefly, it makes him the most miserable amongst miserable.
Sin peruerteth the order of nature, impugneth our reason, vigeth our
sensuality: sin blinds the spirit, darkneth the understanding (ordained to
contemplate spiritual things:) Sin soileth and infecteth the solue,
depriueth it of her nuptial garment, and makes it filthy and loathsome:
according to that of the Prophet, Denigrata est super carbones facies eius.
Sin after it has blinded the understanding, hardens the heart, and makes
obstinate in iniquity: whence comes the habitude of sin, which is the
extremity of sin, and as Philosophers conclude, another nature. He that
sins, whatsoever he be, either king in his diadem, Abissus abissum inuocat
Psalm 41 Ex frequentatione actu um genetatur habitus Arist Categ Romans 6 John 8
prince in his purple, poor, in his misery, he is the slave of sin: who
therefore by sin is given over as a pray to vices, loses his liberty, and
cannot resist his unhappiness. See sinner, see, what horror, what confusion?
Look with what foes you are environed, that you may know the greatness of your
deliverance: you are incurable by sin, and Christ heals you: you are
separated from God, from the Angels, from the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
and Martyrs, by sin, and Jesus restores you: you are impouerished by sin,
and he inricheth you: you are made abominable, and he blesses you.

O if you knew how abiecte and wretched a sinful soul is, you would resist
it, (says a father,) even unto the death. Waries, plagues, famine (the whips
of God) sickness, dishonours, and adversity, (the tools of his correction)
how light trifles are these in comparison of loathsome sin? Tyrannies,
injuries, oppressions, the fury of the fire, the danger of water, the contagion
of air, the trembling of the earth, finally, all the complements of evils
which persecute man, proceed from sin: so that rightlye it may be said,
Quicquid patimur peccata nostra merue^^^t
all that which the wretched suffer, their sins have deserved it. Oh the
horror of sin, oh the terrible issues thereof: wretched men take heed and
look about you, let your hairs stand upright for very fright, and let your
blood fly to your heart, to comfort it in the extremity of your thoughts, no
punishment can satisfy for it, no death can recompense for it, but the flames
of hell eternal in their extremity, extreme in their eternity.

Oh hard hearted souls, sold and quite given over to your own sensualities,
behold the issues of your evil lives, behold your martirdomes for crucifying
Christ, if you reconcile not and weep with him you shall have perpetual
darkness without light, you shall be deprived of Gods presence, (a greater
torment to the damned than may be expressed) fire shall burn you vnquenchably,
darkness shall blind you unseparably, conscience shall accuse you incessantly,
devils shall persecute you eternally, cries, cursinges, and blasphemies shall
hant you continually, desolation and discomfort shall detain you perpetually.
Finally, without remorse in life, there is no redemption after death. O Jesus
my son, how rich art thou in compassion, thou only healest these wounds, and
recouerest these harms. It is thou only that can dull the sting of this
death, thy blood only satisfies for these defaults. Ah dear Lord, thou art
worthy of tears, thou deseruest remorse, thou have purchased compassion. Oh
woeful spectacle for men to weep at, for angels to sigh at. Oh sacrifice for
sin, O atonement for offenses, oh seal of redemption. O contemplation to
extort tears, to behold innocence martired with so many and grievous wounds.
Oh liberty taken prisoner, oh truth accused, oh innocence whipped, oh justice
condemned, oh glory discruciate, oh life dead and crucified: oh highness of
charity, oh baseness of humility, oh greatness of mercy, oh excess of
bounty. Thou have wept for all, Granaten.
and art bewailed of none: thou have borne many hurts, to cure a few hearts:
thou have been a corrosiue to thy mother, to be a cordial to men: but men
weep thee not, they pass by wagging their heads at my woe, and hiding their
faces, least they should be enforced to bewail thee. Their hearts are become
adamants, and loathing to spend tears themselves, they grieve to grace my
tears by harkening to them. Ah heavenly father, let me consume with sorrow
till I see him: let my life pass like a tale that is told: let my soul (that
mourns within me) give a libel of divorce to this flesh, that I in spirit may
seek him out, who in the flesh did glorify me. Thou that rainedst upon the
earth forty days, to revenge thee on the rebellious, open the clouds of thy
compassion over me, that they weeping on me, and I with them, I may be
drowned in them, innocence may be quickened by me. All Judah and Israel mourned
for Iosiaz, Paral. 15
and shall tears want to bewail Jesus? See my son, I will bear thy cross
on my shoulders, imprint thy passisions in my heart: I will beat so long upon
my breast, that the echo thereof shall pearce all ears: I will sigh so long,
till the furnace of my charity steame out my heart, and the winged chaste
affections of my soul, soar heavens, search earth, find my son, or forsake
my soul. Ah my son, no Absolon a sinner, but Jesus a savior. The root of my
hope is waxed old, and the stock thereof is dead in the ground; When shall
these closed eyes open to warm him as his son? When shall thy breath quicken
and cheer my barrenness, the days of my desolation are come. The blessedst
amongst women, is now the miserablest amongst mothers. Grief has brought me
to deaths door, (my son) but death will not let me enter, oh then show thy
deity to help thy mother, and let me die in this desolate flesh, to live in
thy divine body, the joy in possessing the one, shall temper the loss of the
other, and dying in my self to give thee life, I shall live in death by reason
of thy life. O Lord Lord of my life, how has zeal made me presume? no soul
meriteth to dwell in this body but thine own: thus impatience in love, makes me
too much presume for love: Fruits long time shut in their buds, by rain,
deawe, and sun are made to blossom: rivers closde in then bounds by huge
winds, are forced to ouerlope the banks. The Ostridge by help of the Sun and
sand, breaks the shell: ripen then (thou root of mine) for the rain of
remorse has watered thee, the deaw of compassion has wet thee, the sun of
my zeal and charity has looked on thee, and inflamed thee: rise and rouse
thy self thou river of God, for the winds of my sighs have summoned thee:
ouerbeare death, holy spring of happiness, and let the waters of life issue
from thee. Break the shell of death, thou that fastedst in the desert, and let
the sun of my desire quicken the sun of understanding, be not to long in
conquering death, least I loose life in wailing thy death. How long o Lord,
how long will thou delay? Shall death never have end, because my life may be
devoured in death? Will thou not awake like a strong warrior, to conquer
these passions with combat with thy mothers heart? Set thine axe to the tree of
my sorrow, let mine eyes which bewail thee dead, behold thee living; let
mine ears, which are scard with mine own clamors, be consolated by thy
counsels: let me smell thee the rose, and see thee the lilly richly clothed:
let me taste how sweet the Lord is: let me touch him, whose absence touches
me at the heart: let my imagination be the usher, to present thee, my memory,
the painter, to describe thee, my consideration the fire to kindle love. Let
hell, hunger, thirst, weep and wail, come thou and joy with Israel, thou have
not to do with Egypt. Come thou corner stone, and let me build on thee, wed
me to death, so thou return to life, I cannot want thee. I will not miss
thee, my love is so fervent, as it neither measures judgment, or regards
counsel, or is brideled by shame, Bernard
or subject to reason: come yield me peace with a kiss of thy mouth, and let
my importunacy work more with thee than all expectation can require. Le^d me
the cloak of thy presence, to divide the waters of my woes: let thy mother be
as strong as thy prophet, that by praying to our Lord with tears, by putting
my mouth on thy mouth, 4: Reg. ^
by fastening mine eyes to thine eyes, by closing my hands in thy hands, I may
make the flesh of my son wax warm: as he warmed the flesh of the Sunamites
child, then gasping seven times I would kiss thee seue^tie times seven, and
seem more thy lover than thy mother. I would expostulate with thee of thine
absence, and if thy wounds fell new a bleeding, I would wash them with my
tears; my hairs should dry them, my lips should suck them, thou should make
me more than a mother, in recovering me an absent son. Well Lord, if thou
denyest that I want, I will rejoice in that I have, I will symbolise thy body
with mine, and quicken thy passion by my sufferance: There shall no sorrow be
hid from mine eyes, till I see thy eyes open, and till the eyes of our Lord
quicken me, the eye of poor Marie shall see no comfort: mine eye shall only
see by supposing thine eye sees: all pleasures shall be smoke to mine eyes,
till thy eyes do behold them: till thy eyes be waking, mine eyes shall be
weeping, and unless they grow open, Eccles. 21
I will shut mine eyes with sorrow. I will set a sure seal upon my lips,
(...) 4
till thy lips salute me, and my lips shall become white as the lilly, til thy
lips grow crimson like a rose colored riband. 1. b 5
My unsained lips shall be tired with prayer, till such time I may enjoy thy
desired presence: my hands shall never unfold, till the hands of my Lord be
extended: I will never deliver thy body out of my hands, till thou deliver my
soul out of her sorrow: I will lay my hand upon my mouth, till thou speak,
and never will I cease to lift up my hands to heaven, till thy hands have
embraced me on earth: till thou put forth thy hand, I will lean my head upon
my hand, and till thy fingers touch me, my heart shall be touched with
sorrow: the wings of the cherubines touched one another, o let the wings of my
charity touch the wings of my life, both are allied, both love. They that
touched the hem of thy vesture, recovered from their sickness, shall not I
touch thy body to recover me of my sorrow? The body which liueles touched the
bones of Elisa, 4. Reg: 13
were restored to life; and shall my hands touch thee, my lips kiss thee, my
love importune thee, and thou not live? Arist. libro Phil. 1
All heavy things by nature search the center, I am in the abundance of my
heaviness, and cannot descend into the grave: I will glory in tribulation, 2
Corint. 12
so thou grace me in thy life. My soul is in bitterness, and heavy
captivity, oh make my burden light, by once looking on me. Jeremy 6
The Jews by smiting have wounded thee, thou by absence have wounded me,
sorrow and wounds are ever in my sight: touch I thy browe, thorns have wounded
it: kiss I thy cheeks, crimson has forsaken them, thy sides are wounded, thy
hands are wounded, thy feet are wounded, my wounds cannot be hid till thy
wounds be healed, Mark 11
and til thou live to recure me, I shall die thorough wanting thee. Thou have
promised that whatsoever we shall faithfully ask in thy name, thou will grant
it us. Then o Jesus, my son, my co^forter, I conjure thee by thine own name
Jesus, to blunt and abate the sting of death, to break up and dispearse the
clouds of darkness, and appearing like a fair morning star, quicken the dead
comfort of thy mother, and give a light to this desolate and dismaide world.
Show the light of thy countenance, and I shall be whole. O Lord my redeemer,
tarry not, my soul thirsts after thee my son, and as the heart desires
the heart desires the water brooks, even so my soul longs after thee my
God. Appear then thou chief shepherd, 2: Pet: 5
thy flocks saint without thee. Apparel thy self with life, to apparel our
hearts with joy: my eyes long fore for thy sight, oh when will thou comfort me.
Psalm: (...) Ies^^ 9


O who will give my head water enough, and a spring of tears for mine eyes,
that I may weep day and night for the absence of my son? Ahlas, ahlas, sorrow
increases in me, and heaviness swalloweth up my soul: my tears are like
seed in a barren ground, the garden of my delight is become a desert of
sorrow, I am like a mother bemourning her child, because he is not. Oh thou
angel of peace, come and succor me: Ah my son, the happiness in bearing
thee, is buried through the heaviness in missing thee: and the hope I
conceived of thy life, is prevented by thy lamentable death. Woe is me, I am
sick to the death, to see thee dead, I am sick for love, and desire to hasten
thy life. Will thou lift the poor out of the dust, Phil.23
and leave thy mother in desolation? Oh lift up thine eyes, and see how the
mother lifts up her voice and weepeth! Cant: 8
Oh love, if thou art mightier than death, now show thy power, lighten the
lamp of his life, at the candle of my charity: Pour the oil of thy
compassion into these wounds, and heal them, breath the breath of life into
him by embraces and kissing: as I claspe mine arms, let him gasp and breath:
as I weep on his face, let him suck up my tears: O death, if thou be more
pitiful than love, imprison thy dart in my heart, and ransom my son. Ahlas
the fairest among men, love will not lend him me, death will not grant him me,
his mother must be only kind, and her best tributes are but tears, prayers,
kisses, and wishes. Ah Bethelem, mourn with me, and you inhabitants of Judah,
put on sackcloth, for sorrow is come upon you, and the voice of the mourner
must ring in your streets, houle and lament Jerusalem, weep the tears of
contrition, sigh, sob, and complain you, he that loved you lost his life, he
that wept for you, is dead for you: he that prayed for you, is plagued for
you. Ah cross that have made my son a martyr, and me a mourner! Ah cross
that art the mean of my grief: Ah cross, the cause of cross, I must kiss
thee, and accuse thee. See, see, thou art honored by my Jesus name, his purple
drops of blud dwell in thee, thou did kiss his body, his warm body, and
for these causes I kiss thee. But cruel cross, since all thy trophies are
cause of my trouble: thy titles, the occasions of my tears: let me accuse
thee, which have honored thy self, and left me comfortless: yet art thou
kind to me in listening my complaints, and but in bearing the name of Jesus in
thy front, thou have already recovered my favor. O cross, the image of
mortification, Bernard
the tree of redemption, the bond of peace, the seal of the covenant, I will
cross mine arms to embrace thee. Cross, all my joys to contain thee, I
will be a cross to mine own soul, if it seek thee not, and count every
comfort a cross, that is not crossed by thee. I will cross the seas of
tribulation to encounter thee, and whilst I hold thee holy cross I will count
no cross too cruel: I that bare my son, will hold it for no base benefit
to bear his cross, (...): 4
and the only glorying in the cross of Christ crucified, shall be my best
blessing: my love shall fasten me to my sons cross, and in that he
vouchsafed a cross, Col: 1
I will esteem no glory but in his cross. O son, the words of thy wisdom
were pricks and nails to my meditation: these fastened thee unto me in all
assaults of sorrow, and those nails which nailed thy hands and feet to the
cross, shall nail my soul and thoughts to thy cross, and with my nails I
will dig my own grave, before I forsake those nails which forced thy hands:
Like as a nail in the wall sticks fast, so fastly shall the nails of thy
martyrdom stick in my heart: Eccle. 27
I will nail up my soul from all joy, because the nail that issued from Judah
is broken: my flesh is torn with thorns, Zach: 16
because thy forehead is rent with thorns: the thorns of tribulation
persecute me, because the thorns of martyrdom pearceth, I will hedge in my
heart with thorns, because they have hemd in thy brains with thorns. Whether
unto extends my sorrow? If it was thy love that made thee suffer, it
becomes my love to suffer with thee: Job 81
and since thou give me an example of patience, why should I not preserve
the same? Though the shadow of death ouerspred thine eyes, hope says they
shall be lightened: though thy life be now like the dark night, it shortly
shall be as clear as the noone day, yea, thou shall shine forth and be as
the morning.

The shepherds after great storms wait for fair weather: the soldiers after
dreadful war, expect happy peace: the sentinel after his cold watch,
attends, and intends his desired and wished sleep: pleasures are the
heirs of displeasures, and comfort treads on the heel of care. Why
expostulate I then with death? who having a time to tyrannize, shall at last be
lead in triumph: the storms of afflictions shall be calmed, the wars of
rufull wailing, shall have a peaceful delight: these watchful complaints and
attendings to see my love, shall at last be quieted, and I shall lay me down
and take my rest, for my Lord shall come, and cause me to dwell in safety.
Brieftie, all tears shall be wiped from mine eyes, deaths sting shall be
dulled, life's triumph shall be established, sorrow shall be disinherited, and
majesty revived.

Oh my charity, how much do thou help me in this? my faith only
presents me with all these hopes, as it were under a veil, my hope
beholds my son (and these future prophesies of him (as the chiefest good
(which as yet vnpossessed she hops to enjoy) but thou my charity make all
these joys present, so that I behold effectuallye things before thy be, and
crave no interest in belief, whereas my love assures me all is present. Ah
that the adversity of an hour should make me thus forget the pleasures I
had in life? when I lulled thee in my lap my son, fostered thee at these
teates, followed thee in travels, fed with thee in Egypt: Then, o then what
sweetness inioyed I in thy presence: what comfort in thy counsels, what courage
in extremes? Ah but if it be true, that things the dearer they are loved,
breed the more heart grief by their loss: how can I choose but wail, that
having had pleasure to wrappe thee in thy swathing bands, must now to my
discomfort, close thee in thy winding sheet: Can the want of thy company, the
lack of thy counsels, the muficke of thy preachings, the miracles in thy
life, the charity in thy death be expiated but with another death, or answered
with a few sighs? Ah this adversity of an hour (in other men's thoughts) is an
age in mine. Compare the age of thy pleasure, to one minute of the grief, and
it exceeds it. The earth for a little travel rewards the husbandman with a
huge crop, Tul * Offi. 1;
and shall I be more unkind than the earth, to the king of the heavens (who as
the beam in the glass, has enriched my womb, and anointed me with the oil
of gladness above my felows) shall I requite his kindness and great mercies
with a few faint tears? No my charity shall not let me, my love shall suffer
my grief to exceed her, and reason shall surrender his Lordship to passion,
suffices it my son, that in spirit I assure me of thy life; yet in flesh
whilst thou art absent, and dwell with death, let me bewail thee, (for
humane weakness requires a little more weeping. Of one spark, (says the wise
man) is made a great fire, of one kernel a large tree, of one grain of mustard
seed, a great and gross number: why then should not one care beget another, one
tear produce multitudes, one sighe enforce storms, wherethorough my grief
might be endless in lamenting, my tears ceaselesse in weeping, and my sighs
incessant in their doubling? Hanna was troubled in her mind, and wept sore to
get a son, and should not Marie be tormented in soul, and weep instantly that
has left a son? Achsah married to Othouiel, humbled her self before her
father, and said, Give me a blessing, thou have given me a South land, give
me also springes of water. As Achsah to Caleb her father, so I to she my God;
Greg. libro ^ Dialog.
thou have given me a South land of desolation, wherein the fruits of hope are
bar, the blossoms of joys are blasted: Oh give me therefore a well spring
of tears, to water this wast, that my hopes may ripe by my ruth, and my joys
may bloome after their blasting. Josiah considering the long absence and
concealment of the books of the law, rent his garments for grief, and wept
bitterly: Wonder not therefore o ye men of Israel, though Marie rent her heart,
rent her hairs, rent her clothes, for the has lost and long wanted, the Lord
of the law, the maker of Moses, the father of the people, the passover and
pledge of man's redemption. As the hand which is filled with oue thing, can
receive and contain no other thing, August.
so my heart being filled with the love of this absent Christ, the grief in
wanting him, and the wounds that wound him) can love nothing better than to
lament him: can grieve at nothing else but his want: finally, my eyes
presenting his wounds to the consideration of the same, my thoughts are
wounded, by dwelling in my heart, my heart is wounded by containing my
thoughts, and both are wounded in imagining his wounds: yea, they are so filled
with compassion, that they yield no place to consolation. Why then begette not
these griefefull thoughts more griefefull thoughts: these tears, more tears:
these sighs, more sighs: which having only emperie in my heart, may give
place to no joy, but break the circumference that incloseth them in in the
center of care, and getting better freedom to produce more, they may in their
eternity make me more miserable, and my moan more fruitful', my sorrow more
plentiful, thorough the foisons of my misfortune. Ah Marie, thou can not
make thine ability aunswerable to thy will, thy life has limits, and must
limite thy tears. He that binds the floods that they ouerflow not, boundeth
thy tears. Thou have wept to the utterance, thou have no more to utter: the
darkness must once come to an end, the clouds must at last be dissolved, and
every thing must end at his appointed time, and as there is a time to bemoane,
so likewise there is a time to be merry.

If thou weep till thou weep away life, and cry till thy days be consumed
and quite wasted, a day shall come to determine both? What shall I become a
comforter? or give a law to my remorse, who cannot comprehend my loss? No
mine eyes weep on, whilst I have a time to live, give no term to your
tears: as fast as you weep them, my brains shall distill them, the fire of my
love shall help to distill them, they cannot cease till I die, and being
dead, what need I seek to bewail, his absence, being assured of his presence?
Th^e til I die I will not cease to weep, that being dead, I may behold him, and
whilst I live, I will count all food vain, till I feed on his presence. If
mine eyes grow weary, my sighs shall assist them, and when both of them are
infeebled, my cries shall be enforced: in the hollow of his sepulcher I will
execute these drirements, and I will exclaim so long on death till I make him
deaf with hearing me. Make him deaf poor Marie? Ahlas, he is always deaf
and insensible, it were a second death to assault him: he is not tamed by
entreaties, tempted by persuasions, bribed by benefits, or allured by
lamentations, terms please him not, tears pearce him not, it were an endless
labor, a fruitless work. Oh my son, how am I discruciate for thee, I
would work, I know not what, to win thee I know not how, I would end my
sorrow, and desire to begin it, I would bear thee to thy grave, could I cease
to embrace thee, I would complain of my desires, so I might appease them, and
conquer my affections, so I might command them: but flames that are 'quickly
kindled, are hardly quenched, and where oil seeds the lamp of sorrow, it
will hardly be extinguished. My sighs prevent my tears, and enforce them to
issue, my tears prevent my thoughts, and make them impatient, my thoughts
prevent my reason, and admit no moderation, my reason would prevent all this,
but love preuenteth it: my love being of it self fiery, will not cease
burning till it embrace thee, flaming, till it find thee out: my charity is
sovereign of all my delights, she wills me die to live with thee: And as in
Salomons temple there, there was nothing that was not covered with gold, so is
there not any part, sense, motion, or action in me, or the living temple of
my soul, which is not invested with love, clothed with charity, which having
the nature of fire, (which is the most active of all elements) is never idle,
but reuiueth tears when they are extinct, quickneth sighs when they cease:
armeth thoughts, when they are dismaide: and forces reason when she
faints. As the root is to the tree, the soul to the body, the sun to the
world: such are thou to me, O my son: the boughs are not clothed with
green, except they be united to the root: the members inioye no life, except
they be imformed by the soul: the world partaketh no light, except the Sun
illuminateth and lightneth the same: so my body inioyeth no life except thou
live in me, mine eyes no delight, except thou loooke upon them, my thoughts
no clear and perfect understanding, unless thou beautify and behold them.
Briefly, I cannot be mine own without thee, I cannot live, thou being dead,
I cannot leave weeping tears, until thou come and wipe away my tears. He
that truly loves (says the Philosopher) is dead in his own body, and
lives in another: then how comes it to pass my son, Arist: Polit: 1
(if this reason do hold) that I live not in thee, who love thee so dearly?
If it be true, that there are two terms in all motions, the one from whence the
thing parts, the other whether it is resorted: why is it not this life that
has left thee, incorporated in my body? and my life which should forsake my
body, possessed of thine? Our loves are in the highest degree perfect, why
have not then these causes their effects? Why live thou not my son? Why
move not these hands with mine? Why stirs not this heart with mine? Why open
not these eyes with mine? Why speaks not this mouth with mine? Oh my God,
except it be imperfection of my body, I know nothing can withdraw thy life
from me. By it I live, by thy spirit my spirit breaths, only my life is not
in thy body, because it is unworthy to express it, unworthy to animate thy
heart, open thine eyes, quicken thy hands and tongue: and thy life is not in
mine, because my body is unable to contain it: yet a spark of thy spirit is
my love, and a beam of this love is my desire, which by kisses I breath into
thy lips, which though it actually work not in thee, yet by effectual will,
I wish it in thee. What I can give of my life, I lauishly have spent on thee,
my life lives in my body, though my body live not, til thy body enjoy life,
the life of my body is liuelesse, only my charity which is in me, taken from
thee (who art the tree' of life, and fountain of charity) makes my body
living in spite of my will, and inforceth all my senses (through vehemency of
my spirit,) to work their offices in a liuelesse body, and a hartlesse
creature, which lives only by thee, and cannot live but in thee: so if I
live, I live forcibly, till thou live. And to verefie this philosophy (in that
I love thee truly) I leave my self to live in thee, and only by the living
charity which is in me, my hands embrace thee, as they do, mine eyes bewail
thee with tears, and every other part works as thou would. Ah Lord now
see I the reason of my deadly life, and thy wounding death: thou the hope of
the disconsolate, art crucified. thou the fountain of life, art troubled: how
can my life then be fruitful, who was ingraffed by thee, Or thy death be but
wounding, when thou the fountain (by whom I live) art dried up by death? If of
contraries, there grow a contrary reason, why should I fear? The wicked
(says Job) shall never depart out of darkness, the flame shall dry up their
branches, with the blasts of Gods mouth shall they be taken away. What then
shall become of the godly? If the wicked dwell in darkness, they shall inioye
light? If the flame dry up their branches, the children of the righteous shall
be like Olive branches: if the godless be blasted by Gods mouth, the innocent
shall be blessed with his benefits: Then what should I fear? And what not
hope? Thou know me (o Lord my father) how I have conceived in' innocence,
and hated the works of darkness: thou know my son has suffered in
innocence, let therefore the fruit of my womb flourish, let thy promises be
accomplished in Jacob, and thy covenant in Israel.

Though death has blasted the branch, by a winter of others sin, let the
spring of thy mercy comfort the root, and animate the bows, so shall thy
terrors and promises be acco^mplished in both sorts. The weight of their
shames shall weigh down the evil: the works of the just shall prevail
before thy mercy seat. There are two tears, O Lord, wherewith thou art
pleased, the one of joy and praise, the other of sorrow and lamentation: I wept
the tears of joy when thou blessedst my womb, I weep the tears of sorrow,
because the hope of my days is decaid. Quicken him O Lord, and encourage me,
and as I received him with delight, nourished him with care, wept for him with
joy, and lost him with grief: so let me recover him with comfort, who wept
for him through discontent and loss, and behold him in his resurrection, and
triumph in his ascension, that pleasing In either sort of tears, I may praise
thee for both sorts of mercy. O my body, thou have passed the wilderness of
woe, no rock has been so kind to yield thee an echo, my only breast by
often beating on, has ecchoed my stripes, so that in my self I have had the
cause of complaint, and report. Oh my soul, thou have been sifted by incessant
sorrow, all thy intellectual powers and discurfiue parts, have been plagued by
themselves, and supposing their weal lost, they intertaine no hope to come.

Thus plagued in body and distressed in soul, sat poor Marie (a holy and
happy virgin) enacting her grief with her arms, when she had ouerforced both
her tongue and eyes with compassion: briefly, her pain and impatience being
so great as her words could not express it, her desires so importunat, as
they exceeded all her delights. The image of her grief before her, and the
damage of her loss within her, she sownded on the senseless earth, and being
conveyed to her oratorie by the holy assistance, the sacred body of Christ was
bound up and borne to the sepulcher.

FINIS.

