The pilgrimage of Princes, penned out of sundry Greek and Latin aucthours,
by Lodovvicke Lloid Gent.

At London Printed by William Jones, and are to be sold at his nevve long
Shop at the West door of Povvles.

C Call on God, with CICERO crave, thy country good to vvish.
H Have PHOCION learned Greek in mind that ioyed of Athe^s bliss.
R Remember CAESAR'S saying in Rome, each day to win a friend:
I In word and deed most DAMON like, that will endure the end.
S Seek with care, serve with faith, think PLATOES saying on earth
T To serve thy God, thy Prince, thy soil, did nature point thy birth.
O Offend no man, deserve due praise, the poor do not deny:
F Forget not PHILIPS Page that said, O PHILIP thou must die.
O Obey the laws, hurt no man, hate not the siely Groom:
R Right so in England shall thou have, as POMP had in Rome.
O Of CVRTIVS faith, of CODRVS care, of Roman SCIPIO think:
S Shun subtle SINONS savvcie sleyght, flee cursed CACVS link.
H Hat' on each vice, each virtue love, thy state with CHILO know*
A Avoid raging wrath with patience mild, PERIANDER teaches so.
T Time does BIAS wise affirm, to make most men offend:
T Time SOLON says does try al things, and time does judge the end.
O Order must with measu^e rule, each state says PYTTACVS plain:
N Nothing must abound to much CLEOBVLVS biddes again.
V Virtue buildes her blasing bovver, in sacred breast to breed:
S Such praise as shall advance your fame, if sages sayings you read.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL and his singular good M. Master Christofor Hatton
Esquier, Captain of the Queens Majesty's Guard, and Gentleman of her
highness privy Chamber.
THAT NOBLE PHIlosopher Plato (right Worshipful) had not attempted so often
the seas from Athens to Sicilia, had it not been for his friend Dion, neither
had learned Apollonius sustained the heat of Ripheus, nor the cold of
Caucasus, to travel from Rome unto India, had it not been for his companion
Hiarchus. Such is the force of affection, the attempt of friendeshippe, and
the secret search of nature, that were it possible that the same (says
Cicero) might ascend the skies to view the glory of the Sun, the state of
the Stars, and to behold the beauty of the heavens, vnsvveete were the
admiration thereof, unless it might be imparted to friends. Such is the
violence of hidden love, after long lurcking in the intrailes of the heart,
that by force seeks means by some outvvard show of service to reveal the
fostered flames thereof to his professed friend: by whose continual mocions
and restless rage I was more alured by good will than by wit or learning
persuaded to manifest the fruit thereof unto your VVorshippe, as to the only
Mecaenas and chosen Patron of this my enterprise, which though more bold than
wise, more rash than learned, yet I hope more vvilling than able of your
worship adjudged, which like a Greek Demetrius, or a Roman Scipio, by some
secret sleight of virtue moved in me most ardent love, incredible desire and
singular affection to accomplish some charge, as a public pleadge of my true
and faithful heart. So for the clemency of countenance, the facility of
speech, the excellency of nature, which in some are more apparaunt than in
others, do even as the Adamant dravve up the heavy and lumpishe iron, inflame
the barren and luntish braineman to a far further charge, than other learning
may suffice good will therein* Most vvilling to avoid the gulf of
Charibdis, perfor^ he slideth in Scilla: and seeking to shun Semphlagades,
he sincketh in Syrtes. Howbeit, good will the worthiest reward, the
chiefest treasure and the greatest gift that the servant can yield unto his
master, the subject unto his Prince, or one man unto another, which as
Demosthenes says, ought as keis of treasures, bulvvarkes of Cities, defense of
countries, and stay of states, be vvaied and esteemed. Such did Phocion
only accept in Athens, when he refused the offered treasures of the great
Alexander. Such did Epaminondas require in Thebes, when he renounced the
princely gifts of Artaxerxes. Such did Fabritius crave in Rome, when he
denied the vvelthye rewards of King Pirrhus: And such I trust your
vvorshippe do way of your well vviller, though of others better are
tendered: for more wholesome it is (says Plini) for some to drink small wine
out of Samos earthen vessel, than strong poison out of the golden cup of
Nero: better it is to drink Ci^us cold water out of faithful Sinaetes hand,
than svveete Nectar out of the infected cup of Cirses: and far more sure is
the good will of the faithful, than the tendered treasure of the flatterer,
which like a Melitian dog fauning on every man, altering himself unto all
kind of colors with the Camaelien, and shifting himself unto sundry shapes
with Protheus, will hault with Clisophus before Phillippe dissemble with
Aristodemus before Antigonus, fl^tter with Aristippus before Dionisius: and
in ^ine deceive Caesar with Curio. These ravening Harpeis, these tame Tigers,
these sucking Serpents, deceived the wise, overcame the mighty, and devoured
the quick: they will deprave Homer of his verses with flattery, they will
spoil Hercules of his clubbe with flattery, and they will dispossess
Jupiter of his thunder and lightnings with flattrey. O had noble natures in
leau of false flaterers, such faithful friends as Agamemnon had of Nestor,
Telemachus of Menelaus, Achilles of Chiron, Hector of Polidamus, Ulysses of
Alcinus, or had Princes such councellers as Alexander had of Aristotle, as
Augustus had of Athenedorus, Antigonus of Zeno, Alcibiades of Socrates, and
Cicero of Apollonius, flattery should be espied, deceytes avoided, envy
prevented, and death often escaped, then had not Sinon with flattery
vanquished Troy, Zopirus with dissimulation, destroyed Babylon, neither
Lasthenes with fair words overcome Olinthus. But in examining the state of
Princes, vvaying their pilgrimages in this toyling Labyrinthus, we see their
fortune as variable, as they themselves are mutable. We read that some from
base birth were advanced unto imperial dignity, as Gordius from the Plough
became King in Phrigia, and Giges from a Shepherd was made King in Lidia: So
we read that some from regal seats were exiled their kingdom, as Torquinius
Superbus from Rome, and Dionisius from Sicilia. It is not strange to the
learned, that Tullius Hostilius from keeping of Cattle became a King in Rome,
and that famous Zerxes the great King of Persea was vanquished by that simple
manne Artabanus. What vvoonder is it if Cirus was nourished by a Bytche to be
a King in Persea, since Prutias from a king in Bithinia, beecame a beggar in
Asia. If Romulus from an abject brought up by a wolf was buried so princely
in Rome, what marvel is it that Pompeius being so renowned, should be
buried in the sands of Egypt? If Alexander the great, Julius Caesar, Hanibal,
Iugurth, with infinite more were suppressed and dejected from their high
thrones unto misery and penury? It is not strange that Agathocles, the
potter, Iustinius the svvinehearde, yea, Archilaus borne of a bond-vvoman
should be advanced unto regal seat. That sage Greek therefore Pittachus in
the temples of Mittilena, depainted a broad ladder where some did ascend and
some descend, to notify the state of fortune. Some hongry feeding at the Table
of Tantalus. Some toyling to roll the stone of Sisiphus. Some striving with the
burden of Atlas. Some busy to fill the empty buckets of Belides: and some
careful to turn the wheel of Ixion, vvhereat I know not whether the
wise may laugh rather at the folly of the same with Democritus, Democritus
laugh at the solly of the world.
or weep at the misery of the same with Heraclitus. How happy is he that
sayleth by Scilla without danger, that passes by Ciclops dens without
peril, that goes unto Lotophagos and not hindered, Heraclitus wept at the
misery of the same.
that drinks with Cirses, and not infected, that hears the Cirenes and not
allured: In fine, that enters unto hell and not convicted: yea twice happy
is that contented man, who having nothing, possesses all things, and having
all things, possesses nothing. By this only Biton the siely argiue was
preferred before Cirus king of Persea by Solon: Biton better esteemed then Cirus.
By this Aglaus the poor Arcadian was advanced before Cressus King of Lidia
by Apollo. And by this only was Gangeticus wont to say that having but
bread and water, he vvoulde not change life with Jupiter, Pirrhus.
for had that renowned Pirrhus been contented with the kingdom of Epire, he
had never been slain by a simple woman at Argos. Siphax.
Had Siphax been satisfied with all the dominion of Numidia, he had never
died a captive in Rome. Alexander.
And had that great conqueror Alexander been sufficed with one world, he
had never wept when he heard that there were diverse worlds. Such gredy
desire of wealth, such vain ostentation of life, that al Athens could not
abide two Alcibiades: All Sparta might not suffer two Lisanders: nor all the
world might maintain two Alexanders. Such vain glory of self love, such
felicity in the world, yea such ambition of honor with men that poor
Temison a Gardener vvoulde be called Hercules in Cipris, simple Menecrates a
Physician would be called Jupiter in Greece, and foolish Hanno a Citizen,
vvoulde be called a God in Carthage. So that some put their chief felicity
with Crisippus in the world, some with Antisthenes in fame after death.
Many with Themistocles in descending from a hie lineage. A number with
Simonides to be well beloved of the people. Diverse with Palemon in eloquence,
others with Euripedes in a fair woman, and others with Sophocles in getting
of children. Seely Herostratus burned the temple of Diana to become famous.
Pausanias slew Philip King of Macedonia to be spoken of. Desire unto fame made
Julius Caesar to envy the marshall monumentes of Alexander in Gades, made
Alexander weep at the fame of Achilles in Phrigia, made Achilles cry out at
the renovvme of Theseus in Greece, and made Theseus stark mad at the
enterprises of Hercules in all places. Wherefore that learned Philosopher Plato
termed envy Serra animae. Why was Perdicca envied? for his noble
magnanimity. Why was Lysimachus hated? for his approved experience. And why
was Antigonus disdained? for his politic vvisdome: so that Plini says most
true, that there is no light without shadovve, nor no virtue without envy.
Which if your worship sometime bestovv your self to read some book or
other, you shall in reading diverse books, know and perceive the causes
thereof, for as the Be gathers of some herb Gum, of another the refuse
of Wax, of an other Honye: so in reading diverse books, diverse profits, of
Rethoricke, the way of persvvation of Logic, the sleight of reason, of
histories, the orders of countries, of Philosophy, the secrets of nature, and
of divinity the path of life: wherefore Alphonsus the great King of Aragon
being a long time sick in Capua, giving him self to read Titus Liuius, of
the marshall feats of Romans and Q. Curtius of the noble acts of Alexander
the great, having thereby recovered his health, was wont to say that he
never heard better Music then he heard in Liuie, nor never had better
Physic then he had in Curtius. Augustus Caesar therefore would never be
without Virgil in hand, nor Alexander the great without Homer under his
Pillovv. Happy was Pompeius when he had Cicero in his bosom, and glad was
Scipio when he had Enneus in his sight: yea Dionisius the tiraunt vvoulde
honor Plato, and Antigonus the cruel, give place to Zeno. So as Alphonsus
said, there is no sweeter Music then in reading, there is no better
Physic then in reading, and there is no sounder counsel then in reading.
There is mirth, there is sadness, there is wisdom and knowledge, there is
persvvasion, and there is warning: which if your worship do follow but
Appelles sayings unto his scholars, that no day should pass without the
reading of one line, or to imitate Hortensius* sometime of the day either to
read, ask, or to learn something. I know you will say with Solon, Indies
senesco multa discens, trusting to call to mind that short and svveete
sentence of Epaminondas unto his friend Pelopidas, that no good nature ought
to go out of his house in the morning, but before he returns home, he will
win one friend or other, forgetting not the saying of Tiberius the
Emperor, who thought that day ill spent in the which he did good to no body,
or profited no man. Thus doing your worship shall increase in knowledge,
multiply your friends, advance your fame, and enjoy felicity of life.

Your servant, Lodovvicke Lloide.

TO THE READER.
Unwise much were I being base and barren, if I thought to escape that which
Homer that sweet and sugared Mecaenas of Greece might in no wise avoid. Simple
were I to seek to avoid that which the wisest and the learned Socrates, and
Architas, could not shun: therefore even as the Rhodians and the
Lacedaemonians in the games of Olimpia, were taunted of Diogenes, the one for
their bravery, the other for their raggedness: so these Cinikes sorts find
fault with the good as well as the badde. Lucullus a noble Roman demanded of
the Philosopher Seneca, what best he might do to please Nero the Emperor, and
not to offend the common people, had in answer, to do much service unto
Princes, and to use little taulke, and to show humanity unto the commons:
Knowing well gentle Reader, how ready the most part are to accuse the learned,
and how few are willing to excuse the ignorant, I am contented rather to be
reprehended for my good will in penning this pilgrimage of Princes, than to be
commended by that which may prove my idle life by silence. Being mindful of
the youth of Egypt how they should make account unto their magistrates of
pain and travel, most willing to accomplish something that might discharge
the same, I took this labor in hand, in that, that I could to the
uttermost to benifite my country, to pleasure my friends, and to show my
self more willing than able in performing the same: and though I in my
rashenesse presume to write of the lives of Princes, yet I trust in gathering
the fragments and broken sentences, as a beginning unto others that are better
stored, it will be of the wise and learned considered, though of others
defamed and taunted. For there is no book says Plini so simple, but it
profits some body, for in books said Chilo the Philosopher are the fame of
vvorthie men eternized, and the verity of things etere unknown wvritten,
which two things neither time can consume, nor fortune destroy, and for this
cause were the bones of Homer sought and contended for of seven Cities in
Greece to be buried and kept as a monument of so great a writer, and for this
was Euripides dying in Macedonia sent for by ambassadors of Athens, to be
had in memory as a praise unto Athens by his burial For the Greeks
supposed the greatest honor of all to have educated such men as were studious
and careful for their country. For greater is the attempt of any simple book
writer to hazard himself to present peril to encounter with diverse men with
a pen in his hand, then that that valiant Perithus with Cerberus, or Theseus
with Minotaurus, yea, or Hercules with Antheus, iollie champions with swords
drawn: for that they fought with one a piece, and that before their faces,
and the simple writer with thousands, and they behind his back slander him.
Architas the Philosopher, whom the Tarentines made a general in their wars
six several times, he I say was in no such dangers in his vvarres, as he
was resisted for his rules and laws in Tarentum. Plato was not in such peril
at the besieging of Tanagra, and Corinth amongst all his enemies, as he was
envied in Greece by Zenophon and Aristotle his own scholars by his
Philosophy. Neither was Socrates in such hazard of life being in arms in
Delphos, as he was in Athens by vvriting of books put to death by the
Greeks. Zeno the poor Philosopher could resist the violence of the great
king Antigonus and Demosthenes could vvithstand the force of Philip, and yet
neither of them could avoid the snares of those that defamed their labor,
envied their diligence in vvriting and making of books. Simple men must not
therefore be discomfited to write because the wise and learned were herein
evil spoken: For the Gimnosophistes in India, the Prophets in Egypt, the
Sages in Persea, the Ephori in Lacedemonia, the Chaldeans in Babylon, and the
Philosophers in Greece, are now more famous and renowned being dead, then
they being a live were envied and slaundered, their writings and books more
read now, than alovved or known then, they rtrauell now is commended,
though their lives then were despised. And therefore I vvish all learned
Cla^kes were as vvilling to write, as the most part of ignorant are studious
and careful to find faults. Wherefore craving the good will of the learned
reader as a bovvlster and defense to my simple travel, I end, vvishing that
both the Printers faults and mine might less move occasions of offense.

CHRISTOFORVS CARLILVS IN FLODVM.
GEstiunt Musae, Charites triumphant,
Gestit insignis lituis Apollo,
Pallas, ac Orpheus, monumenta Flode,
Cernere tanta.
Ipse ne ditem videar bear,
Aureis nummis, Calabrosue pomis,
Vel redundantem Bromeum racemis.
Dicere cesso.
Est opus dignum solido Cupresso,
Et Cedro suaui, simul atque laud
Maxima: Flodi celebrate famam,
Anglica pubes.
Si legis librum, furiosa philtra
Non t^bi possunt, n^camara Circes
Vasa, non atrox rabies Megerae
Vlla nocere.
ED. GRANT. IN LOD. FLO.
QVae a tuere difuruis immersa tenebris,
aeduntur patrijs condecorata sonis.
Quae prius (...) fuerint been cognita paucis
nunc venient cunctis percipienda viris.
Postera Floyde tuam nascentia secula laudem
cantabunt, praesens nomen in astra feret.
Quicquid est in mellis, quicquid liberiste leporis
continet, omne tuum, laus tribuenda tibi.
Liuide mendaces compescito Zoile voces,
tela licet vibres, non violabis opus.
Inclita mordaci non laedes facta libello,
florescit Floydus docta perora virum.
IN LIBRVMDE PRINCIPVM periginatione, Iohannis Coci, scholae Paulinae magistri,
hendecastichon cum versu quodum Homerico, ad lectorem.
STato domi, nullis terre iactatus in oris,
quem patrium subijt noscendi sola libido.
Sin mores hominum varios tibi nosse voluptas,
ingenijque vagas ediscere nobilis arts:
Non perigrinanti deerunt monimenta laboris,
que memtemque, manumque parent ad talia promptas.
Quod liber hic regum referens quae facta priorum,
tuta, domi cupido, praestabit vota, manendi.
Hinc licet ingenij praesignes discere cultus,
quos aditu regum prouisa pericula monstrent.
Nam liber hic peragrans, tibi quae viscenda fuissent,
(...).
IN LAVDEM LODOVICI FLODI, Thomas Dranta, Archdiachonis Leuuicensis.
PRincipibus placuisse viris, non vltima laus est,
sic ais, and summis placuisti leuis horati
Principibus placuisse viris si tam bona laus sit,
Principibus fuisse viris precepta, quid hoc est?
Atque ipsos mutos, ipsos formare loquentes,
consilium totis sanumque adscribere vitis,
Hoc tu ( Flode) facis, quedam tua dogmata vidi,
caetera cum visis si quadrant congrua membra*
(Quod facile credo) quid tmultis te tibi tollam:
es bonus ingenioque and bis bonus argumento.
THOMAS CHVRCHYARD, Gent. of Lodo. Fl.
IF learning had no laud, man's lyking vvoulde decay, (away.)
And fevv would write or knowledge seek, if praise were plucked
The laborer has his hier, to quite his careful pains:
The noble mind for vvorthie works, a crown of glory gains.
The horse toils all the day, at night some rest to find:
The havvke in hope of wished pray full hie does bear the vvinde.
Than he who made this book, of right must reap renoume:
Since through the trumpet he has blovvne, a famous fact does soune.
He shows by learned lines, our painful pilgrims state:
And how the Prince and people both, drives out their dreery date.
A pilgrimage we go, in paths of perilles great:
And through the shades of suerties shoe, we pass to burning heat.
That all consumes by flame, of deep desire in breast:
Whose kindled cooales like Aethna smokes, in sulphur void of rest.
Whose sparks do flee so far, they cannot quenched be:
Except that vvisdome water cast, when fire most hot we see.
What humor leads me thus, I meant to praise this man:
(As far as pen and skill may stretch) that first this work began.
And though the swelling svvannes, that svvimes in povvting pride:
By skovvling brows tells world that they, this work cannot abide.
I careless stand of that, and vvishe those birds so well:
(In greatest glory that they make, that down their feathers fell.
For if at verteous acts, their vices vainly strive:
The good shall grow, the bad shall quayle, and sure the best shall thrive
I mean such men as this, that well does work and will:
And labors for his countries gain, and so he shall do still.
Shall were a garlande gaye, of flovvers that flourish fair:
When painted vveedes that wants good sap, shall perish in the air
Thus as my cunning serves, and cause requires in deed:
I praise the work and like the man, that gives you this to reed.
Of the slipperie state of fortune, and what Princes, and where they were
advanced one way, and how they were oppressed another way.
FOrtune, the Treasurer of the world, that rules realms, overcomes
kingdoms, oppresses kings, exalts Tyrauntes, and does to whom she will
give life, and to whom she hates appoint death. She calls some to renown
and some to shame. What honor she gave to some, what honor she took from
others. How she exalted base me^, how she oppressed proud Princes Histories do
record. All the Kings that ever reigned in Rome, almost from base birth and
slender progeny, were advanced by fortune to sit in royal Rome, Romulus*
and enjoy princely Scepters. Romulus the first King and builder of Rome, borne
of Rhea, a Uestall Uirgine, and daughter unto Amulius, left as a pray unto
beasts, forsaken of all Rome, hated of his own grandfather, that he found
more friendship in a she Woolfe then he had at his grandfather Amulius: more
kindness of the Woolfe for his nourishment, then love of his mother, though he
was borne of her. Notwithstanding, contrary to the expectation of Amulius, not
thought of in Rome, by fortunes favor, he was by the Woolfe preserved, and by
a poor sheep brought up to be a King of Rome. Cyrus,
The like happened unto Cyrus at three days old, when he was commanded by
his grandfather king Astiages to be drowned and delivered unto Harpagus chief
officer about Astiages, by King Astiages own hand to be killed and destroyed:
yet by fortune, a Bitche (being likewise left as Romulus was) fed him, and
mylkt him, gave him life when his parents appointed death for him, brought up
by a Bitche (being a banished infant) to be the first and most renowned King
that ever reigned in Persia. Paris.
Even so of Paris King Priamus son, called likewise Alexander, the like
commanded he should in all haste being borne, be killed: which being
preserved by fortune, was brought up by a bear, to be a famous Phrigian
Prince. Thus Cirus by fortune found friendship more in a bitch the^ in his own
mother: Romulus more love in a Woolfe then in all Rome: Alexander more
kindness in a Bear then in his father Priamus. Telephus.
To speak of Telephus the son of Hercules, Camilla.
fostered by a Heart. To speak of Camilla and Semyramis, Semiramis
the one brought up by a Mare, the other by birds of the air, to be such
famous Queens, as the one ruled the Volskans, the other ye Babylonians. How
fortune appointed little Antes to feed King Midas, and Bees to feed Plato, the
wealth of the one, the eloquence of the other did certify the same: but to
declare first the extolling and advancement of simple and base men unto
princely seats. Torquinus Priscus.
Torquinus Priscus, a stranger borne in Corinth, the son of one named
Demaratus, a banished marcha^t from his country, became a famous King in Rome:
yea so famous I say, that he enlarged the confines of Italy, amplified the
wealth and state of Rome, augmented the number of the Senators, increased the
order of Knighthood, and left Rome so happy at his death, that the Citizens
thereof would twice have trauailde as far as Corinth to speed of so noble a
Prince. Tullius Seruius.
Tullius Seruius, a poor stranger, likewise advanced unto the same place by
fortune: and Tullius Hostilius, a shepherd, and from feeding of beasts,
extolled to be likewise King of Rome. Thus fortune to show her might, exalts
the poor, and oppresses the proud. Thus from banished strangers, from
simple sheepheardes, appointed she famous Princes and noble Kings: fortune
elected Senators, appointed Consuls, made Tribunes and Censors. Fortune as
Seneca says, from low birth, and base conditions, made Princes: Fortune had
them from the Plough to sit in seat of Kings: Gordius.
Fortune took Gordius from his Plough to be a King in Phrygia: Agathocles
Fortune took Agathocles from his fathers Shop being a Potter, and made him
King in Sycilia: Darius.
she brought Darius from the Stable of Cyrus to be a King in Persia: Giges.
she brought Giges from a sheepehearde to be the welthiest king that ever
reigned in Lydia: She spared no place, without respect to any man. Justinius a
swineheard, Justinius.
from feeding of his swine, became a mighty Emperor of Constantinople. And
Carpenters likewise may brag of Telephanes, Telephanes.
which fortune advanced to the kingdom of Lydia. Shall not husbandmen extol
fortune, Valentianus
which made Valentianus Emperor in Rome? How much fortune favored learning,
how she brought the greatest Princes in the world to honor simple men, and
caused the cruel tyrauntes to esteem and reverence the same. That king
Dionisius the wicked tyrant of Sycilia, when he heard that divine and noble
Philosopher Plato was coming unto Sycilia, Plato.
made certain of his Nobles to go meet him on the Sea, in a Ship so bravely
appointed, so gorgeously dressed with sails of purple silk to bring him a
land, where Dionisius him self tarried his coming in his golden Chariot, with
four white Horses trapped over with gold, took him unto his own Chariot
princly, talked unto him reverently, used him honorably, and so entertained
him, that if Jupiter had descended from Sky, greater honor could he not get
in Creete, then Plato a poor philosopher Aristons son of Athence got in
Sicilia. Aristotle.
Aristotle borne in Stagira, a poor Physicians son named Nichomacus merited
such fame by fortune, that not only Philip King of Macedonia, thanked God
that his son Alexander was borne in his time, under whose tuition Alexander
five years learned Philosophy, but also Alexander the great conqueror of the
world honored and saluted him as his Master, unto whom he said that he was
no less bound for his learning unto Alexander and virtuous education, then he
was unto king Philip his father for his birth, he showed the same being in
India, a country far from Greece, and in the midst of his great wars
unto his master, writing the state of India, the success of his iourneys, the
prodigious and monstrous sightes that Alexander saw unto Aristotle. That
mighty Artaxerxes king of Persia hearing of the fame of that learned
Hippocrates, Hippocrates.
did send unto the chief governor of Hellespont earnest letters for
Hippocrates, promising in writing great honors, equality to the chief rulers
of Persea, fellow and friend to myghtie Artaxerxes. Thus fortune was not
only honored as a goddess in Antium, but also worshipped in all the world:
thus every man toyleth for fortune, goes a pilgrimage for fortune. I remember
of a worthy History of one Rhodope, Rhodope.
a fair and a gorgeous strumpet in Egypt, which fortune so favored for her
beauty, that she being a washing her self in a well, an Eagle fled with one
of her shoes unto the famous City of Memphis, ^^anus. libr. 14.
where then the king of Egypt kept his Court, named Psamnetichus, before whom
the Eagle let the shoe fall. The king dismaide at the beauty of the shoe,
amazed of the working thereof, musing much how nature might frame so fine a
foot, made open proclamation throughout all Egypt to seek such a woman whose
foot served that shoe, and being found, to bring her to the king: and being
brought to the king, she was married unto the king. Thus from a common woman,
fortune appointed an Eagle to make her a Queen in Egypt. If fortune favored
such that was naught of life, slanderous of report, ignominious and infamous
in all Egypt, to be a Queen in that kingdom where she was a queen, who
should make much of such a dame, in whom neither constancy was ever found,
or truth ever tried. I judge that man most fortunate, that is of all least
fortunate: and since fortune is deceitful to her own friends, she can not be
true unto her foes: Bion.
therefore, very learnedly did wise Bion answer being demanded, what was
most dangerous in the world, Phocion.
to be most fortunate. Phocion, that learned Athenian was wont to say, that
better it were to lie careless upon the ground, safe and sound, then to lie
carefully under cloth of states in danger and peril. A certain wise prince,
before he should be crowned king, took the Crown first as Valerius says in
his hand, saying after looking and musing a while: O Crown, more noble than
happy, whose peril to enjoy (if men knew) no man would take thee up from the
ground, though thou did offer thy self. What felicity happened unto
Alexander the great, Alexander.
which fortune so advanced to be a King of kings, a conqueror of
conquerours: yea, to be worshipped as a god, and to be called the son of
Jupiter, whose fame compassed the whole earth, in so much that Thalestris
Queen of the Amazons came from Sythia unto Hircania with three hundred
thousand women to lie with Alexander thirty days, to be with child by him:
and yet in Babylon that fortune that so exalted him, did likewise oppress him,
being in his chief fame but thirty and two years, poisoned by his kinsmen and
friends, left and forsaken of all men, that he was thirty days unburied, as
a beggar, not as a king: as a beast, not like Jupiters son. The like fortune
served Julius Caesar, Caesar.
which after thundering clang of the like fame, was in his own City of Rome,
and in the Senate house amiddest his Councillors slain and murdered so
tyrannouslye with Bodkins and Daggers of his most trusty friends Brutus and
Cassius, that he had twenty and three wounds in his body. Thus was the
misfortunate end of so fortunate a beginning. How did fortune deal with famous
Zerxes, Zerxes.
whose huge armies dried up rivers, whose infinite numbers of Nauayes covered
over the Ocean Seas, whose power and force all Greece trembled at: fortune that
promised al Greece unto him at a beck, she I say, gave him over to the hands
of Pericles his enemy, to be vanquished, unto the force of Artabanus to be
slain. A little better she used Mithridates King of Pontus, after many
victories in diverse countries, noble tryumphes sundry times, which forty
years and more she mainteyned against the invincible Romans, to the great
detriment and loss of Rome: and at length to his great discomfort, after he
had lost wife, children, and all his friends, left him in his old age a pray
unto Pompeius. This is the friendship of fortune, to plague and to punish those
which oftentimes she shows her self most courteous unto. Therefore was Plato
wont to thank God that he was borne a man, and not a beast: in Greece, and not
in Barbary, and thanked fortune, that he was a scholar unto Socrates, which
ways despised fortune and her force: for fortune never does a good deed, but
she requiteth ye same with an evil turn. Pyrrhus.
Pyrrhus that valiant king of Epyres, whom so famously fortune guided, that he
was counted by Hanibal the second soldier and Prince for his magnanitie and
courage unto Alexander the great, whose end by fortune was such, that a siely
simple argiue woman kilde him with a little Tilestone. Hanibal.
Hanibal, whose name was so terrible unto Rome, by fortune.xvj. years, was by
the same driven to exile, a banished abject from his country, and weery of his
life, ended his days with poison in Bithinia Alcibiades, Alcibiades. Val. lib.
7.
which fortune so favored one way, that he excelled all men in personage and
birth, in wisdom and honor, in strength and wealth, and in all kind of
virtues, surmounting all Greece: again, was brought to such banishment and
penury, to such infamy and reproach, that he was compassed and taken of his
enemies, and burned in his bed with his whore called Timandra. Cambises, and
Nero, whose cruel and unhappy days, both Rome and Persia long time felt:
their fawning fortune, after much tyranny and bloodshed of others, was such,
that being weery in murtheryng others, they sieve them selves, that was the end
of their fortune. Polycrates.
Polycrates, who ever sailed with prosperous winds of fortune, that he was
taken and named fortunate Polycrates, at length so served of fortune (as other
Princes were) he was hanged by one Orontes, an officer of king Darius in open
sight of Samos, where he a long time flourished, and in the end hanged on a
high hill named Mycalensis mount. These euyls happen by fortune, yet we see
them not: she gripes us with her hands, and yet we feel not: she treads us
down under her feet, and yet we will not know it. Happy is he that
accompanies not with fortune, though diverse think them selves happy that be
fortunate, Giges and Cressus.
as Giges and Cressus, two Kings of Lydia, so wealthy, that they judged no man
as happy as they were: and yet was Aglaus the poorest in all Arcadie, and
Byton the simplest of all Greece: the one by the sentence of Solon, the other
by the oracle of Apollo judged far more happy then they. The very tyrant
Dionisius, being banished from his kingdom of Corinth, would often say in his
misery, that happy twice were they that never knew fortune, whose fawning face
in the beginning, does purchase cruel death in y^ end^. Diagoras.
Wherefore, a certain Lacedemonian said, Diagoras, who being in the games of
Olimpia in Greece, having his children, and his childrens children crowned with
Garlandes of fame, for their virtuous acts and qualities that time, that it
were great hap unto him to dye presently at such a sight of his childrens
fortune: and being asked the cause, he said that fortune never pleased that
man so much with fame, but she would in time displease the same as much with
infamy, and most true it was spoken unto one of the thirty tyrauntes, which
being in banquet with diverse nobles and gentles when the house fell, Fulgosius.
lib. 7. cap. 2.
and slew them all: yet he, this tyrant escaped, braggyng much of his fortune
that he so saved him self: a simple man said unto him, Never boast of fortune
at any time, for that she spares thee now, she will the next time more
sharply plague thee, which so came to pass, that his flesh was made a food
unto his horses, and his bloodde drink appointed for them, that in sparyng
his death then, when the house fell, he was afterward requited as you heard.
If fortune, whose waueryng steps are never certain, were as little trusted
of the most part, as she is most deceitful and false unto all men, then
Cicero would not have spoken that they that seek fortune, are blinder then
fortune, she never advanced any to dignity, but she suppressed the same
again unto misery, Tarquinius.
as Tarquinius the proud, a King that fortune made famous diverse ways, of
princely progenye, of passing parsonage, of incredible beauty, and of all
noble qualities, to whom she presented Lucrecia, Collatin^s wife, as the
only snare to catch him, and to take him, by whom he was deprived from his
government, left his kingdom and banished out of Rome, to raunge countries in
misery and pain, after long felicity and pleasure: Dionisius.
even so Dionisius king of Siracusa, after many princely pleasures, renowned
fame, great glory, yet in the end, banished his country, and driven to keep
school in Italy. In the like sort, she deceived that noble and valiant
Scipio, Affricanus, whose prowess and magnanimity augmented much the fame of
Romans, by conquering of Affrike and Carthage, and notwithstanding, driven to
exilement and miserye, where he dyed after many triumphs and victories like a
poor beggar. O uncertain state, and slippery wheel^ of fortune. And because
fame follows fortune, and proceeds from fortune, as the smoke comes from
the fire: for as fortune is variable, so is fame diverse. If we seek histories,
we find the fame of poor men for their poverty, as well as the rich, for all
their riches: poor Codrus, Codrus Irus.
and ragged Irus, are as famous in respect being beggars, with Poets* as
Mydas or Cressus, two famous and welthie Kings of India, are mentioned of
Plutarch. Does not Aristophanes make as much mention of Cleonimus the Coward,
Cleonimus. Achilles. Poliphemus Enceladus. Conopas. Molon.
as Homer does make of Achylles the stout, Poliphemus and Enceladus, two huge
monstrous Giaunts: are not so famous in Virgill for their bigness, as Conopas
or Molon, two little dwarfes of two foot length, are renowned in Plini for
their smalnesse. Iuuenall, and Claudian, report no less of the little Pigmeis,
than Ovid or Maro of the huge Ciclopes. If fame proceed of poor men for
poverty, of dwarfes for their smalenesse, of cowardes for their cowardenesse,
as much as it does flow of rich men, for their wealth, of Giauntes for
their bigness, and of stout men for their courage: What is it but a
pilgrimage, we live and travail here, for fortune and fame run together as
diverse as they are uncertain. Plini that famous Histographer, writes of one
named Messala, Messala.
which was so forgetful and weak of memory, that he forgot his own name, and
yet as famous for his obliuiosnesse, Hortensius.
as Hortensius was renowned for that he could pronounce out of hand with his
tongue that which he wrote with his pen. Seneca the philosopher commends
one called Caluisius, that he likewise was so obliuious, that he could not
often name those daily friends that he used company withal. Cyneas.
What greater fame could Cyneas have for all his memory when he was sent
from King Pirrhus as Ambassador unto Rome, where the second day, in the
Senate house before all the people of Rome, he named all the Senators by name.
What greater renown could King Cirus have for his noble memory, Cirus.
for naming every soldier of his by name, being in ye Camp? Mythrydat^s.
What fame has King Mithradates for his diverse and sundry languages, which
without an interpretour could speak unto.xxij. nations, being his soldiers,
but only that they are recorded in books, where likewise Caluisius, Messala,
and such obliuious men that forget their own names, are put in writing. Does
not Homer, the Trunpettour of fame, write of Melitides an Idiote, that would
after the destruction of Troy, and after King Priamus, and all his were slain,
yet he then would come to succor ye Troyans. Homer I say does not forget
Melitides, no more then he does Agamemnon. What should I speak of siely and
simple Herostratis, which for burning of the Temple of Diana, is everlastingly
remembered, and myllyons more of the like, which are mentioned of ancient
writers. What is fame then, but a memory of things past.

Of magnanimity of Princes, and fortitude of mind, where and when it was
most esteemd.
Even as Justice without temperaunce is often counted injury, so magnanimity
without respect unto prudence is tirannye. This virtue proceeds from a
valiant and a sober mind, joining both the body and mind together, that
wisdom and pollicye of the one, the strength and courage of the other, be
always redye to defend the cause of his country, the quarrel of his Prince,
and society of freendship: unto this therefore, unto his Prince, country, and
friends, any good man is borne, preferryng common commodities before private
wealth. Hercules, Hercules.
being yet a young man, musing much what he might best do, thus studiyng and
pondering to what he should apply his noble mind, appeared unto him two
taule goodly women, the one as Zenophon does describe, very gorgeous and brave,
ringes of gold on her fingers, a chain of gold about her neck, her hears
set and frisled with Pearls, and Diamondes hangyng at her ears: the other in
sober and comely apparel of modest behavior, of shamefaste countenance,
stood before him. The first said, Hercules, if thou will serve me, thou shall
have gold and silver enough, thou shall feed daintily, thou shall live
princely, thou shall enjoy pleasures, possess mirth, In fine, thou shall have
all things at thy will to live with ease and rest. The other said with comely
countenance, if thou will serve me Hercules, thou shall be a victor of
conquerers, thou shall subdue kingdoms, and overthrow kings: thou shall be
aduaun^ed unto fame, renowned in all the world, and shall deserve praise of
men and women: Which when Hercules saw and heard the offers of these two
launcing Ladies, understanding the idle service of the first, and the exercise
of the second, took her as his maistrisse, to whom he wyllyng became her
man. Whereby, according unto promise made, enjoyed fully the fame and praise by
due deserts. That magnanimity had Hercules that overcame Lions, Dragons,
Bears, and such monstrous huge wild beasts, that did destroy kingdoms and
countries. That fortitude of mind had Hercules, that conquered Giauntes, and
subdued Tyraunts, enlarged liberties, set free captives and prisoners: and
briefly, that magnanimity was in Hercules, that he never offended just men,
he never hurted innocent men, he preserved diverse kings and countries, he
never spoiled good country, nor subdued a just king: therefore, wholly addicted
to merit fame, In destroying the Serpent Hydra, the D^agon Priapus, the Lion,
the wild Bore and terrible Bull. In conqueryng Gereon, Angeus.
Cerberus and Diomedes, cruel Tyrauntes: In taking the gylted Heart, in
vanquishing the Centaures, and the rauenyng Birds named Stymphalides: was
there any tyranny or cruel attempts in this his.xij. enterprices? Well, let
Hercules pass, who was as they say, more aided of the gods then helped of man.
With these princely acts and renowned feats of Hercules was noble Thesius
much enamored, Theseus.
insomuch he aemulated the virtuous life of Hercules, that he tamed wild
beasts, slew monsters, overcame cruel Creon^ tyrant of Thebes, went down as
the Poet says unto hell, to imitate Hercules feats, to resemble Hercules
magnanimity, to augment Theseus fame, creating alters, appointyng sacrifice in
memory of Hercules, hoping that others would do unto Theseus, as Theseus did
unto Hercules. Next unto Theseus, for antiquity of time, Achilles.
that valiaunte and renowned Greek Achilles, the only stay and comfort of his
country, the very hope of all Greece, whose magnanimity, valiant courage,
worthy acts, and famous life is at large set forth in Homers Iliades, which
Homer, Alexander the great, by the reading of the manhood of Achilles,
Alexander.
being yet in his fathers days brought up in school, with that learned
Philosopher Aristotle, so esteemed, that he never went to bed, but that he had
Homer under his pillowe, and there fell in love with the prowess of Achilles,
honored his life, and magnified his death: in so much he went unto Ilion in
Phrygia, where that famous City of Troy sometime stood, to see the grave of
Achilles, where, when he came and saw the worthy monumentes, his marshall
chivalry, his famous feats and renowned life depaynted about the Temple,
environed and compassed about his sumptuous tomb, he brake out in gushing
tears, beholding the tomb, saying: O happy Achilles, to happen on such a
Homer, that so well could advance thy fame. And thus Alexander being moved
by Homer to imitate Achilles, wayed nothing else but magnanimity and courage
of mind, as Curtius, and Diodorus Siculus, can well testify, whose life
though it was but short, was a mirror unto all the world, that being but
twenty years when he began to envy the acts and feats of Achilles, that in
twelve years more, which were his whole time of life, he became King over
Kings, a conqueror over conquerours, that he was named an other Hercules, for
his prosperous success in his enterprises: insomuch, that Julius Caesar the
first and most valiant Emperor that ever was in Rome, at his great co^quests,
Julius Caesar.
entering into the Temple of Hercules in Gades, reading the life of Alexander
printed round about the Temple, his worthy fame depainted, his noble deeds
set forth, his victories and conquestes in every place described, such
monumentes and myrrours in memory of his noble life, that Caesar fell unto the
like tears for Alexander, as Alexander did for Achilles. Thus one in love with
the other for magnanimity sake, each one desirous of others fame, as Caesar
thought him self happy if he might be counted Alexander, Alexander judged
himself renowned, if he might be named Achilles, Achilles sought no greater
fame then Theseus, Agesilaus.
Theseus ever desired the name of Hercules. Therefore Agesilaus, King of the
Lacedaemonians, wondering much at the singular magnanimity and force of
Epaminondas, Prince sometime of Thebes, who with one little City could subdue
all Greece. This Epaminondas having wars with the Lacedaemonians, people no
less renowned by war, then iustlye feared by Epaminondas, after great
victories and triumphs had by this Prince, was after this sort prevented by
Agesilaus, in the wars of Mantinia, that all the people of Sparta were counceled
either to kill Epaminondas, Epaminondas.
or to be kilde by Epaminondas, whereby the whole force and power of
Lacedemonia were fully bent by commandment, given by Agesilaus their King, to
fall upon Epaminondas, where that valiant and noble Prince by to much policy
was wounded to death, to the spoil and murder of all the people of Thebes,
and yet a live carried unto his tent, demanded of his soldiers the state of
the field, whether Thebes or Sparta was conquered, being certified that the
Lacedaemonians fled, and that he had the victory, he forthwith charged the
end of the spear to be taken out of his side and wound, saying, Now your
Prince Epaminondas begins to live, for that he dies a Conqueror: we read
not skant of Epaminondas mate, which being compared unto Agamemnon for his
magnanimity, was angry therewith, saying, Agamemnon with all Greece with him,
was.x. years about one town, the City of Troy, Epaminondas with little
Thebes, in one year conquered all Greece. This order was amongst the
Lacedaemonians, before they should go unto wars, they were by law charged to
make solemn sacrifice unto the Muses, and being demanded why they so did,
since Mars has no society with the Muses: Eudamidas then their King answered,
for that we might attain as well of the Muses, how to use victory gently,
Lacedaemonians.
as of Mars to become victors manfully. These Lacedaemonians were so valiant
that having banished their King Cleonimus for his passing pride and great
violence, making Areus to reign as a King. This Areus, being in Creete ayding
the people of Corcyra, in wars with the most part of the Citizens of Sparta,
Plutarch. lib. 27.
this Cleonimus their exiled King, consulted with Pirrhus King of Epyre,
persuading then or never to conquer Sparta, considering Areus was in Creete,
and that Sparta was not populus to defend any strength, came both and pitched
their field in open face of Sparta, assuring themselves both to be at supper in
Cleonimus house. The Citizens perceiving the great army of Pirrhus, thought
good by night to send their women unto Creete to Areus, making themselves
ready to die manfully in resisting the host of the enemy: and being thus in
the Senate agreeing, that the womankinde should pass away that night, least
their nation at that time should be quite destroyed by Pirrhus, then rushed a
great number of women in harness, Archidamia
of the which Archidamia made an Oration to the men of Sparta, much blaming
their intent, and quite confounded their purpose, saying, Think you (O
Citizens of Sparta) that your wives and daughters would live if they might,
after the death of their husbands, and destruction of Sparta, behold how
ready we are, how willing the women of Sparta will die and live with their
husbands, Pirrhus shall well feel it and know this day. No maruayle that
the brood of these women should be valiant and stout: Demosthenes saying.
If Demosthenes, who so much, was esteemed in Athens, had said in Sparta that
which he wrote in Athens, that they which sometime ran away should fight
again: he should have the like reward that Archilogus had for that he wrote
in his book, Archilogus.
that it was sometime better to cast the buckler away, than to die, he was
banished the confines of Lacedemonia. At what time the City of Sagunto was
destroyed, against promise of the people of Carthage. The renowned Romans
though league was broken and peace defied: Romans.
yet the Senators did send Ambassadors, Eabius Maximus with two Tables
written, the one contaynnig peace, the other wars, which was sent to
Carthage, either to choose peace or wars: the election was theirs, though the
Romans were iniuried, and though they could best defend their own, yet would
the noble Romans suffer often offenses. Hardy then were the Romans, Scaeuola.
when Scaeuola went alone armed unto the tents of Porsenna King of Hetruria,
either to kill Porsenna, or to be kilde by Porsenna: greater fortitude of mind
could be in no man, more valiant in heart no man seen than in Cocles,
Coclies.
who only resisted the whole army of of King Porsenna, until the Citizens of
Rome came to take up the draw bridge, and then leapt in all his harness from
his enemies, unto the midst of the river Tiber: and though he was sore in
diverse places wounded, yet neither his fall hurted him, neither his harness
priest him, neither water drowned him, neither thousands of his enemies could
kill him, but swimmed through the river Tiber unto Rome, to the great
admiration of king Porsenna, and exceeding joy of Rome: so that one poor
Roman, gave the repulse to the whole army of a king. Ualiaunt was Rome,
Popilius.
and Romans feared, when Popilius was sent Ambassador to Antiochus the great
King of Syria, when Antiochus either for pride or pomp of his person, or
contempt of Popilius, refused to answer the Roman Ambassador, was then
presently enforced to answer the state of Rome, and demanded of the
Ambassador before he might go out of a little round circle which Popilius
made wih his ryding Rod. Pomponius.
Then faithful was Rome, when Pomponius a Roman Knight and soldier under
Lucullus, general in the field against Mithridates King of Pontus, by whom
Pomponius being taken as a prisoner sore wounded and mangled. The King
demanded, if he would help him to life, would he be true to Mithridates?
to whom the poor wounded Roman answered, Pomponius will be unto Mithridates
as Mithridates will be unto Lucullus: so true and faithful were Romans, as
they were stout and valiant, in so much that Scypio being threescore years
almost, and being sought of a young soldier to bye a brave Buckler and a fine
Target, said that a true Roman must not trust unto the left hand, where the
Buckler is, or to hyde him self under a Target: but must trust unto his
right hand, and show him self in field in open sight. This magnanimity
had the people of Sithia, Scythian^ stoutnesse.
at what time Darius King of Persia was marching with his army toward
Scithia, they having understanding thereof, like people of great magnanimity,
sent certain Ambassadors to meet Darius, to signify his welcome unto Scithia
by presents sent by the Ambassadors: when therefore the Ambassadors met with
King Darius, Brusonus. lib. 3. ca. 33*
they began to tell their message, and opening a privy place, a wallet where
their presents were, they took out a mouse, saying, Unless you creep like
this mouse, to some country, or swymme like this frogge, or fly like this
bird, The presents of Scythia.
these arrows shall pierce your hearts: the presents were a Mouse, a Frogge, a
Sparrow, and five arrows, gyuing to understand by the Mouse, earth: by the
Frogge, water: by the Sparrow, flight: by the arrows, death: rare presents
sent unto a King, simple gifts; small charges, but it contained valiantness,
fortitude, and contempt of Darius, rather to move him to wars, than to
entreat of peace. Though Scythia was bare, yet was she stout: though rude
and barbarous, yet valiant and manful* It is not in the nature of the place, or
in the number of the persons that magnanimity con^isteth, but in the valiant
heart, and noble mind: Leonides.
wherefore Leonides King of Sparta was wont to say unto his soldiers, that he
had rather have one Lion to lead a whole band of Deers, Iustine. lib. and
Herodotus. lib. 7
than to have a whole band of Lions ruled and led by one Dear, applying his
meaning unto King Zerxes, who having ten hundred thousand ships on seas
sailing toward Greece, so many as all Greece could scant receive, so many
that diverse rivers and flowdes were dried up by his huge army, a proof says
Iustine more of his wealth then of his magnanimity. Leonides knowing well the
manner of Zerxes, that he was seen first fled, and last in field: whose
glorious pomp and show of men, was not so famous, and terrible, at his coming
to Greece, as his departure from Greece was shameful and ignominious, began to
persuade the Lacedaemonians, being but four thousand in number, willinglye to
live, and to die for the renown of Sparta in Thermopyla: exhorting them to
dine as merilye with Leonides their Captain, as though they should suppe
with Pluto: but persuasions unto these that were persuaded, were superfluous:
spurs unto those that might not be stopped with bridles, were needelesse, as in
Thermopila well seen and proved to the noble fame of Leonides, and great
shame of Zerxes. It is not in multitude of men that magnanimity of men
consists, but in wise and valiant hearts, for wit and will joined
together (says Salust) make manne valiant: wherefore Agamemnon that most
renowned Emperor of all Greece appointed at the siege of Troy, Agam^mnon his
saying of wise men.
would often say, that he had rather have sometime ten wise Naestors, then
ten strong Achilles: ten Vlisles, then ten Ajax: wisdom in war
auayl^th much, Plutarch recites four famous and renowned princes, and either
of these four had but one eye, to the aduansing more of their passing port,
Philippe.
the first was Philippe King of Macedonia, and Father unto Alexander the great,
whose wisdom in wars, whose policy in feats, whose liberality unto his
soldiers, whose clemency, and humanity to his enemies: in fine whose
success in his affairs were such, that his son Alexander after doubted
whether the valiantness of his father, would leave any place to Alexander
unconquered. The second was Antigonus King in the same self place, Antigonus.
succeeding after Phillippe, whose wars with Mithridates King of Pontus, and
Pirrhus King of Epire, fully set forth in Plutarch, do yield due honor and
renown for his force and magnanimity: The third Hanniball Prince of
Carthage, Hanniball.
the whole stay of all Libia, for sixteen years, the whippe and scurge of
Rome and Italye, whose name was so terrible for his ^ourage and hardenesse,
that both Antiochus king of Siria, and Prusia, king of Bithinia, rather for
fear, than for love being then but a banished man received unto honor.
Sertorius.
The fourth Sertorius a Roman Prince borne in Sabina, whose thundering clang of
fame was nothing inferior to ye proudest. These were not so famous by their
prowess and chiualry one way, as they were notorious and spoken of, for that
either of them had but one eye. These renowned Princes and singular
soldiers, excelled all men in wisdom and prowisse, as proved is in
Plutrarch by their lives. Phillip for temperaunce of life, Antigonus for faith
and constancy, unto his friend, Hanniball for truth and patience for his
country, Sertorius for his clemency and gentleness toward his enemies,
which for their passing courage, inuinsible stoutnesse, and worthy enterprises,
happened to be deprived of their eyes as Philip lost his eye at the siege of
the City of Methon, Antigonus at Perinthia, Hanibal in Hetruria, Sertorius in
Pontus. When the people of Thasius had erected alters, appointed sacrifices for
to honor Agesilaus in their Temples, Agesilaus.
for his fame of fortitude, they send Ambassadors to certify the king thereof,
which say yt as Apollo was in Delphos honored as a god, so Agesilaus was in
Thasius: but the King as he was valiant, so he was wise, much detesting
assentations and flattery of people, demanded of the Ambassadors, and
required them if that their country could make gods, to make some first of
their own country, saying: Agesilaus had rather be king in Sparta, then to be
a god in Thasius. O renowned Sparta, O famous Greece, While hidden hatred was
exempted, while civil wars were not known, while Athence sought no
supremacy over Sparta, while Sparta sought no maisterie over Thebes, then all
the power of Persea, the force of Macedonia might not stain one little town
in Greece: but the insolency of princes, the desire of fame, the felicity of
renown, the honor of glory was such, Alexander.
as Alexander the great answered King Darius Ambassadors, who coming from
Persea unto Macedonia to entreat of peace, tendering unto Alexander the
daughter of Darius in marriage, with all the country of Mesopotamia, and twelve
thousand talentes yearly beside, with such princely promising of the kingdom
of Persea after Darius days, as there wanted no princely liberality in Darius
offering, nor princely stoutnes in Alexanders answer, saying unto ye
Ambassadors, Dodorus. lib. 1.
Tell your master Darius king of Persea, that as two Suns may not be in ye
firmament, so two Alexanders may not rule the earth. Such valiant minds
could be subject in no wise, neither Darius unto Alexander, nor Alexander unto
Darius. Such stoutnesse reigned in Princes, to mainteyne states, that as
Archestratus the Athenian was wont to say, Alcibiades in Athence* Alianus.
lib. 11. Lysander might not suffer another Lysander in Sparta.
that in the City of Athence two Alcibiades might not rule: so Ethocles the
Lacedemonian did likewise speak, that two Lisanders might not agree in Sparta.
So contrary and diverse were Princes, so high and lofty of courage, so
valiant of heart, so noble of mind, that though fortune could not so often
fawn and favor the states of Princes, but that she which is most uncertain,
could undo in a day, that which was gotten in a year: yet in no wise could
fortune take valiant minds from men, nor spoil magnanimity of Princes, nor
diminishe courage of old men, as that worthy and most ancient soldier
Mithridates King of Pontus, after he had plagued the Romans with forty years
long wars, Mithridates.
during the which time, he showed him self no less hardy and stout in
resistyng the strong force of Romans, and valiant and courageous in
attemptyng the fortitude of Romans. And though by fortune forsaken in his
latter days, and spoiled of all health, friends, children, countries,
kingdoms, and all worldly wealth: yet to spite fortune his mortal foe, went
to Celta, thinking with them to pass over unto Italy, to let the Romans
understand, that though friends and countries by fortune were spoiled: yet
neither fortune with her spite, nor all ye Romans with their force could
subdue King Mithridates valiant heart. In this ioyed Princes only, then not to
be conquered. In this only triumphed they, because they might not be
vanquished. In this gloried they most, in that they were free from subjection.
Cercylidas, Cercilidas.
being one of the wise men named Ephori in Sparta, hearing the thundering
threatenings of King Pirrhus Ambassadors, the slaughter and murder tha^ King
Pirrhus intended upon men, women, and children: the cruel destruction and last
confusions of the Lacedaemonians, answered no less stoutly then wisely the
Ambassadors of the King, saying: If Pirrhus your Master be a god, we have not
offended him, and therefore we doubt him not: but if Pirrhus be but a man, tell
your Master that the Lacedaemonians be me^ likewise, and therefore we nothing
fear him at all. Pirrhus.
This valiant Pirrhus thought so well of him self, felt him so ready and
judged al men inferior in enterprices unto him, that being at the victory of
that noble City Tarentum, where he saw such feats attempted, such acts
done, such stoutnesse showed by the Romans, that he being dismayde at the
manhood and boldness of Romans, thought if magnanimity were lost, Lu.
Florus. lib. 3.
the moulde thereof should be found in a Romans heart: insomuch, that long
looking and vewing of Romans, he cried out and said: O how soon would
Pirrhus conquer all the world, if either he were King in Rome, or Roman
soldiers subject unto Pirrhus. Of these Romans was Haniball wont to say to
King Antiochus of Siria, being enforced to forsake Carthage, that Rome might
not suffer equality, either Prince over all, or subject unto all. Rome was
compared unto Hidra of Lerna, that having so many heads when one was cut off,
an other sprang up: insomuch that all the world might not destroy Rome, being
injured, or ouercommed of the enemies as fortune often permitted, they were not
to be entreated before the like fortune happened unto them, as happened against
them, Licinius.
as Licinius Emperor having lost diverse of his soldiers unto Perseus king of
Macedonia, which aftewarde was subdued by that valiant Roman Pompeius the
great, this Perseus having taken diverse of Licinius soldiers, did send
certain Orators to speak for peace, which eloquently persuaded with Licinius
to consent thereto: after long talk, learned council, pithy persuasions by
the Orators, it was answered, as briefly, plainly, and simplye by Licinius,
that the best way for king Perseus to crave peace at the Romans, was first to
restore the prisoners of King Perseus, which were Romans home again, and
then to send his Ambassadors to the Emperor Licinius, otherwise the whole
country of Macedonia should feel the force and magnanimity of the Romans.
To speak of the conquest and victories of Julius Caesar, of the audacitie of
Metellus, of the fortune of Silla, of the sharp dealing of Marcellus, being
thereby the spur of Rome called, of Fabius likewise named the Tergat of Rome,
of diverse more valiant Romans, it were infinite the reading thereof, but I
mean not to molest the reader, and yet one little history to prove the
renowned Romans most worthy of this valiant virtue magnanimity, written in
Claudian, of one Camillus a noble Roman, who having a long time laid siege at
Philiscus, and could not prevail. The Shoolemayster of the City having his
Scholars under pretense of walking out of the town, Camillus^
came and offered his scholars unto Camillus, saying: by this means you may
do what you will unto Philiscus, for here be their children, whom I know to
redeem, they will yield up the town. Camillus having regard to the fame of
Rome, and loathing much to show villanye, rewarded the Schoolemayster after
this sort, he did set him naked before his scholars, fast bound with his
hands on his back, and every one of the scholars with a rod in his hand,
saying unto the boys: bring him home to your parents, and tell your friends
of his falshoode, and the poor boys having a good time to requite old
beatings, were as glad as he was sorrowful, laying on load, girckt him with
so many stripes, as loytering Treuauntes may best be boulde to number, until
they came unto the City, where they toulde their parents the cause thereof,
which wayde the clemeccie and humanity of Camillus to be such, that they
gladlye and* willingly yielded themselves and their City unto the hands of
Camillus, knowing well that he that would use them so being his enemies, and
foes, could not use them ill, by yielding all unto his courtesy, who might
have had all by tyranny. Now since this virtue was often seen in diverse
Queens, Ladies, Gentlewomen and others, I may not omit the pilgrimage of
their lives. We read of two Queens of the Amahones a country of Scythia,
Penthesilia.
Penthesilaea the first, and Hippolite the second, Hippolita.
the one so valiant against the Greeks, at the destruction of the noble City
of Troy, that in open field she feared not to encounter face to face with that
valiant Greek Achilles: the other so hardye, that she shrinkt not at the
force and stoutnesse of that renowned Champion Theseus, which being convicted
by Theseus for her singular stoutnesse and courage married her, which
certainelye had happened unto Penthesilia had she not been convicted by
Achilles. Camilla.
Camilla likewise Queen of the Volskans, beside her princely profession of
sacred virginity which she vowed unto Diana, was so famous for her
magnanimity, that when Turnus and Aeneas were in wars for the marriage of
Lauinia, King Latinus daughter, she came bellona like unto the field,
resisting the violence and puissaunce of Troyans with the Rutiles, as an aid
unto Turnus. That noble Zenobia, the famous Queen of the Palmireians, Zenobila.
a Princes of rare learning, of excelent virtues, of most valiant enterprises,
after that her husband named Odenatus had died, took the empire of Syria, and
attempted the magnanimity of Romans, that a long time she withstoode in
wars that noble and renowned Emperor Aurelian, by whom the Emperor was
wont to say when it was objected unto him, that it was no commendacions for a
prince to subdue a woman: that it is more valiant to conquer a woman being so
stout as Zenobia, than to vanquishe a King being so fearful as Zerxes. The
ancient Greeks, Artimesi^.
as Herodotus does witness were much amazed at the magnanimity of Artimesia
Queen of Caria, after that the king her husband died, did show such
fortitude against the inhabitauntes of Rhodes, that being but a woman she
subdued their stoutness, she burned their Nauies, wasted their wealth,
vanquished and destroyed the whole I Will, entered into the City of Rhodes,
caused her image to be made and set up for a monument of her chivalry and
pertuall memory of her victory: O renowned Ladies, O worthy women that with
feaminine feats, merited manlye fame. Teuca.
How famous Teuca Queen of the Illiryans, governed her subjects after the
death of her husband king Argon, which being warred on diverse times by the
Romans, infringed their force, broke their bonds, discomfited their armies to
her perpetual fame and commendacion: she governed the people of Illeria, no
less wisely, then she defended the puissaunt force of the Romans stoutly,
she lived (as histories report) as soberly and chastely without the company of
man, as she governed her country wisly and stoutelye without the council of
man: it were sufficient to repeat the ancient histories of two women, to
prove fullye an everlasting praise and commendacion unto all women: the one
written by Herotus in his first book of Queen Tomyris of Scythia, Tomyri^.
the other mentioned by Valerius and Iustine, of Cleopatra queen sometime of
Aegipt. The first, after that Cirus had trespassed much in her kingdom of
Scithia, killing, destroying, and burning, without regard to princely
clemency or respect unto a woman's government: yet vnsufficed though he slew
the Queens own son named Margapites, thirsted more and more for blood,
that then the valiant Queen being much moved to revenge Margapites death,
waying the greedy rage of Cirus, came Lion like to field, either to loose her
own life, or else to revenge her sons death, pressed unto Cirus more like at
that time to a grimme Gorgon, than to a silly Scythian, slew him in the
field, haled him up and down the field, cut of his head, and bathed it in
a great Tun full of bloudde, appointed for that purpose, saying: Now Cirus
drink thy belly full of that which thou could never have enough: this
valiant Tomyris revenged tyranny, requited the death of one Scythian
Margapites, with the death of two hundred thousand Persians. The other Queen
Cleopatra, Cleopatra.
after that Julius Caesar was murdered by Brutus and Cassius, and that Marcus
Antonius being by Augustus warred on for his perjury, and fas^oode showed unto
his Uncle Caesar: she, I say, Cleopatra having the most part of Arabia and
Siria, confederated with her friend and lover Antonius against Augustus, being
then the second Emperor of Rome, that she aided him a long time, until that
she perceived that Augustus prevailed, and that Antonius was vanquished: then
least she should be conquered by Augustus, she conquered her self, yielding
rather her body a pray unto Serpents, than a subject unto Augustus.
Hanniball could no more but to poison himself rather then to yield to Scipio.
Well let Semiramis with her valiant force and stoutnesse, be commended at
Babylon, where she reigned forty years a wydowe, after King Ninus her
husbands death. Let noble and famous Atalanta with her Bows and Spears and
feats of arms be praised in Archadia* Atalanta.
Let Hipsicratea that followed her husband King Mithridates unto wars as a
Lackie unknown, Hipsicratea.
be extolled in Pontus. Helerna.
Let Helerna, Ianus daughter, with all her fortitude be spoken of in Latin:
Delbora.
And let Delbora be famous amongst the Isralites. These women were no less
famous for their pilgrimage, then the worthy Conquerours and Champions of the
world, they were in no point inferior unto men, in diverse points far
excelling Princes and Kings: either the world then was very weak or slender,
or else women then were valiant and stout. And to omit perticulerly to touch
women, I will open and declare the nature of Countries, The women of Lacenas.
the women of Lacena would together with their husbands go unto the field:
yea, they went soldier like unto Missenios to fight in field. The women of
Cimbria would kill those that first fled the field, Of Simbria
though they were nigh friends or kinsemen unto them. The women of Saca had
this custom, Of Saca.
either at their marriage to be conquered by their husbands the first day, or
else to be conquerours over their husbands all the days of their life: their
combat says A^lianus was for victory, Of Persea.
and not for life. The women of Persea would meet their housbandes and sons
flying the field, lifting up their clothes, showing their priuities, saying:
Whither flee you, O Cowardes, will you again enter into your mothers wombes,
will you creep into your wives bellies, as they did in the wars betwixt
Cirus and his Grandfather Astyages. Of Sparta.
The women of Sparta would go unto the field to see in what place their
Husbands and friends were wounded, if it were before, they would with
gladness and joy show the same unto every man, and bury the body
solemnly: if their wounds were behind, they would be so ashamed of the
same, that they left them unburied in the field. The women of Scithia called
Amazones, Amazon^
lived as conquerours over men, and not conquered by men, until Alexander the
great destroyed them and their country, which before were so valiant, that
they wayed not to encounter with Hercules in the field, and after with Theseus
in open battle, they blushed not to meet the valiant Greeks at the
destruction of Troy. Magnanimity which was then for defense of countries, is
now tyranny to destroy (...) that at their banquettes and drinkinges they
had their Garlandes on their heads: for as the world grew in wealth, so it
grew in sumptuousness: for the triumph of Romulus was far inferior unto
the gorgeous triumph of Camillus, and yet Romulus was a king, and Camillus was
but an officer. Time brings things unto perfection. In time Rome waxed so
wealthy y^ Camillus I say was carried in a chariot al gilded and wrought over
with gold, having all white horses trimly decked, a crown of pure gold on his
head, all the Senators and Consuls of Rome going a foot before him unto the
Capitol of the City, and thence unto the temple of Jupiter: where to honor
the triumph further, they slew a white Bull as sacrifice unto Jupiter: and
thence to bring him triumphantly through the City of Rome, unto his own
house: even so in Greece and in Carthage, in time grew unto such pomp and
sumptuous triumphs, that there was as much study to invent brave shows, and
solemn sightes in triumph, as there was care and diligence to have moved the
enemies. When Epaminondas ruled stately Thebes. When Hanniball governed proud
Carthage, when Laeonidas bare sway in warrelike Sparta: then Greece and Lybia
were acquainted with solemn and brave triumphs. In Ninus time triumphs were
in Assyria. In Arbaces time the triumphs flourished amongst the Meedes. In
Cyrus time the triumphs were in Persea. In Alexanders time it was in
Macedonia. In Caesar's time it was in Rome: and thus always from the beginning
of the world, triumphs followed victories. And here I mean a little to
entreat of the triumphs of the Romans, which far diverse ways surmounted
the rest, whose fame was spread over all the world: And yet imitatyng in all
things the Greeks, insomuch that Rome always had Athence as a nource or a
pattern to frame their laws: for when their Kings were banished as well in
Athence as in Rome, yet they ruled and triumphed more by Orators in Athence,
by Consuls in Rome, then by Kings. Therefore as Plini says, they exercised
such feats of arms, they practiced such policies of wars, they used
such solempnitie in triumphs, that Rome then was noted to be the lamp and
lantern of Mars. They had I say diverse garlandes made only for the triumph
of wars: Plini compteth seven sorts of garlandes which the Romans had:
the first made of pure gold, appointed only for the triumphs of Princes: the
second of Laurel, which of all was most ancient in Greece, and in Italy
appointed for the triumphs of Pallas soldiers: the third of all kind of
sweet flowers made, and appointed to him that restored Cities unto their
liberties again: the fourth made of Oaken leaves, to him that defended
Citizens from death: These two garlandes were of great honor in Rome, and
specially in Greece, the one Cicero ware in Rome, for his inuectiues against
the conspiracies of wicked Catelin: the other Fabius Maximus did wear for that
he saved Rome from the second wars of Carthage, where Haniball was
Captain. The sift Garlande was appointed for him that assaulted the walls of
the enemies first, and entered the town: the sixth, for him that first
attempted the tents of the enemies: the seventh bestowed upon him that
boorded first the Name of the enemy. These three last Garlandes mentioned for
the skaling of walls, the boording of ships, and attempting the tents, were
made all of Gold, and given by the Princes or Senators to the aforesaid
soldiers. There was likewise in Rome concerning the triumphs, that none
might triumph unless he had been before some officer in Rome, as Dictator,
Praetor, Consuls, or such like: and if any (without they were sent by the
Senators) had won any victories, though there conquest were never so great,
and their victory never so famous, as Pub Scipio for all his victories in
Spain, and Marcus Marcellus for all that he took captive Siracuse, because
they were not sent nor appointed by the Senators, they might in no wise by law
made, claim triumphs thereby. Then Rome flourished, then Rome was defended
from diverse offered injuries, and saved from enemies. At what time M. Curious
triumphed over the Samnites. Mae. Agrippa triumphed over the Sabines.
Pau^aemilius over the Lygurians. Marius over the Numidians. Pompeius over
Armenia and Pontus. Scypio surnamed Affricanus over Carthage and al Lybia.
Julius Caesar over all Europe and Affrike, then Rome was feared of all the
world, and now Rome is despised. Then Rome might say, Roma vincit: now Rome
may say, Roma victa. Then Roma armata: now inermis. Then Roma: now Ruina, but
time consumes all things. That victory that was not manfullye gotten, and
^aliauntlye won by force of arms in the field, was rather counted among the
Romans, tyranny, then victory: for when Lucius Pius in a banquet that he
made, had filled the people of Sarmatia full of Wine, and made them so drunken
that all the nobles and captains of Sarmatia, yielded them selves as subjects
unto the Empire of Rome, for the which Lucius Pius at his return home to
Rome, required according to the custom, to have a triumph done unto him for
the victory of Sarmatia: which when the Senators had fully heard of the
victory, how and after what sort Lucius Pius subdued the Sarmatians, he was
openly beheaded by decree of all the Senate, and a slau^derous Epitaph set upon
his grave, to manifest the deceit he used in steed of magnanimity, to deceive
them by Wine, which he ought to subdue by force. The Romans were not in those
days contented that any of their Captains should use vicious dealyng, or
show any fraud or guile in wars unto their enemies: but at last as wars
grew common in all countries, so deceit and craft was thereby augmented, and
triumph exiled: then the Assyrians warred on the Perseans: the Perseans on the
Argineans: the Argineans on ye Athenians: the Athenians on the Lacedaemonians:
the Lacedaemonians on the Sydonians: the Sydonians on the Rhodians: and the
Rhodians on the Scithians, with all kind of policy, right or wrong, forced
they not so that victory might be gotten: so that triumph then, is turned unto
captivity now: magnanimity then, unto craft and deceit now: In fine,
victory then, unto tyranny now. And so with Caesar I end, Ex bonis
principijs mala orivnter. Such is the state of life, the pilgrimage of man,
that daily worse and worse it waxes to the end: for in the beginning, renown
and honor was the cause that all men attempted dangers and great peryls: and
now in the end, gain and profit moves wars: Then was their desire to
overcome Lions, Bears, Elephantes, Tigers, Panthers, Rinocherons, with such
wild and savage beasts, that might honor their victory.

Of the first finding out of Laws and orders, and of all invention of things
general, and of time.
AFter in sundry places, diverse men have found means to set things which at
the beginning were rude and barbarous in Civil orders, as amongst the
Athenians, Draco: amongst the Aegiptians, Mercury: amongst the Argiues,
Phoroneus: In Arcadia, Apollo: In Tire, Charandes: in Italy, Pithagoras: other
things no less necessary for the manners and civility of men, then for the
life and food of men were found. And for that time is the beginning and the
end of all things terestriall, I think it well for the purpose to declare
how then at all places time was counted: Egyptians.
for with Aegiptians, at the first, they counted their years by the Moon,
attributing unto every year thirty days, as both Herodotus and Macrobius do
agree. Arcadians.
The Arcadians as Plutarch in the life of Numa does write, had three months
in every year appointed. The people of Caria, finished and ended their year
every sixth month. The greeks.
The Greeks did number three hundred fifty and four days in their years,
which want of our years a eleven days, and six hours. The Romans at the
beginning in the time of Romulus, The Romans.
which was their first king, had their year in ten months compted:
counting their first month March, and giving that name unto it, after his
fathers name Mars. April was named of Aphros in greek, which is Foam, whence
Venus was borne. May was called a Maioribus, of the elders. June of the youth
called Iuniores, these four was of Romulus named. The fifth month was then
called of Romulus Quintill, which Julius Caesar in his time, named Iulij: and
August, Augustus Caesar did name: and so orderly by number Sextill, September,
October, November, and December, until Numa Pompilius, who succeeded Romulus,
who added Ianuarij, and Februarij, and so named them according to the name of
Ianus, which was the first king of the Latenes: and Februus which was supposed
to be the inuentor of Lustrum. For as the Greeks did count all things by
their Olimpiades: so did the Romans number their time by that Lustru^. Then
was the use of the Clockes unsought, and unknown: insomuch, Authors herein do
much varye and seem to be ignorant of the inuentors hereof. First, some think
that Hermes in Aegipt, found out by a beast sacrificed unto Serapis: some
again unto Anaximines in Lacedemon, found out by a shade: some unto Scipio
surnamed Nasica in Rome by water, the clockes were found: but how uncertain
it is, by whom, and by what means Clockes first were found, writers do
witness the same. Some again do count their days which is four and twenty
hours, from Sun rising, unto Sun rising: as the Babilonians use: some from
Sun setting, unto Sun setting as the Athenians: some from midnight unto
midnight, as the Egyptians: some again from middaye unto noone again, as the
Vmbrians do. Thus diuersely they count their hours and days. Now after
laws were invented, and orders made, and time divided, men as yet rude and
raw, leading their lives beastly, and brutishly, for want of civility, having
neither houses, towns or Cities, to enhabite, but some in caves of the ground
had their chief mantions, some of green bows and branches of trees had
their best garments made, some covering themselves with shadows of woddes:
some again in dens like wild beasts, until nature first by reason
invented away and a mean unto further civility. Then howses were made, and
Cities builded, hie towers raised, strong walls invented: as King Cicrops made
Athens: Atgence. Argos. Diospolin.
Phoroneus builded Argos: Diospolin in Egypt which Thrason made. Likewise by
Nemroth, the first Tower after the deluge of Noah was made. Then Temples were
builded, as Pythias in Prerenna made a temple unto Minerua: Romulus in Rome
builded a temple unto Jupiter, and thus diverse men in sundry countries have
been the doers and travelers of things* By this means came Pallas unto great
fame, Pallas.
for that she was supposed to be the first that invented science, amongst the
Grecians: in Athens, for this purpose was Ceres in Sicilia renowned, Ceres.
for yt she was thought to be the first that sowed corn, and taught
husbandrye: for this only were Typhis and Jason so worthyly commended, Tiphis.
that they amongst the Greeks were the first that sailed the seas. Then was
money found in mount Pangaeum, AEgineta.
quoyned of Aegineta, which as Plini says had been better unknown then
found. Then money being found, wars ensued by Ninus, which was the first
that ever warred after the deluge. Then Idolatry sprung up by Melissus King of
Creete: Images and pictures were first made by Epimitheus. Tribute was
appointed first by Darius: Fighting on horseback by the Centaures, was first
practiced. Immediately things were found apt and necessary unto wars after
that Mars first inverted the way thereunto. Then the Lacedaemonians, people of
great antiquity, found first the Helmet, a sword, and a spear. The
Scithians found first the use of bows and arrows. The Thrasians most
ancient in this, for that Mars as they supposed was borne with them, being
honored as the God of wars, found and sought diverse things necessary for
the wars. Happy was that man that might then invent some thing or other to
profit his country: insomuch the wit of man sought so deep, studied so
painefully, that from a rude and lumpish Chaos, the world waxed beautiful,
men waxed Civil, and all things became ripe and perfect by the industry of
man. After that the world grew unto such ripeness that liberal sciences
were found and used in all places, as things necessary unto man, and that
there was nothing unsought as might induce profit: both herbs, stones,
trees, and all things within the compass of the earth were searched to what
end they were, and used accordingly unto some purpose: Vulcanes.
yea as soon as Vulcanus or Prometheus found out the profit of the fire.
Anacharsis the Scythian found first belowes to blow the same: Anacharsis.
Ceres. Argeus. Urania. Ertato. Clio.
as soon as Ceres taught the way to till and plowe, straight did Argeus invent
the dounging of the same. As Soon as ever Urania found first Astrology, the
people of Chaldea straight practiced the same. As soon as Errato had the use
of Geometry, the people of Egypt straight exercised the^ same. To be brief,
after that Clio found first Histories, Melpomen.
Melpomen Tragidies, Thalia co^medies, Polyhimnia Rethoricke, Callipe poaetrie:
yea, Palles herself whom al ye Greeks supposed to be first founder of
sciences and arts. Simonides straight invented the art of memory as the
register and sure recorder of knowledge to keep the same. When the virtue of
herbs were found of Mercury, of Cheron, and of others. Then Hyppocrates and
Auicena practiced Physic therewith, though the most part do attribute unto
Apollo the first exercise in Physic and unto his son Asculapius the
practice of Surgery. Dedalus. Amphion. Tages.
Dedalus in Creete was the first Carpenter. Amphion the first Musition in
Thebes. Tages the first Soothsayer in Hetruria. Nothing escaped man's industry,
in so much that Aristeus king of Arcadia first found the use of Honye, and
the nature of Bees. The Lydians to die Wool. The Egyptians the first use of
Flax. The Phrygian^ to sewe first with needles. The Hetruscans weauyng. Nature
left nothing unsought for her own profit, as Plautus says, she is always
desirous to invent and to know new things. Uictories and triumphs were first
invented by Dionisius. Crassus made the silver Garlande first to be worn in
Rome. The Phrygians made the Chariot first. Huntyng by Artaxerxes was made, and
laws thereunto appointed. Epeus.
Epeus for that he invented the brazen Horse in Troy for the Greeks, is
famous. Perillus for that he made the brazen Bull in Agrigentu^ unto the
Emperor Phalaris is renowned, Perillus.
though the one was made to satisfy tyranny, and the other to accomplish
treason: yet such was the desire that men had to fame, that always they
studied and coniectured what best might advance them thereunto, which was and
might be a perpetual memory of their attempted travail. What thing it was to
see in ancient time the invention and policy of men in all countries, what
orders, what laws were in all places, to observe that by wit, which
afterward they destroyed by wars, before Antigonus shaued and spoiled
Macedonia: before Ninus empouerished all Asia: before Alexander destroyed the
whole world. What was invented in Rome before Julius Caesar and Pompeius
altered it, before those wicked members Silla and Marius spoiled it: before
that rebel Catelin disturbed it: before Marcus Antonius and Augustus quite
destroyed it: so that policy of men in observing laws and orders, their
wisdom in framing them, their magnanimity in defending them, were topsey
turuey thrown down afterward by cruel tyrauntes and wicked princes: as
Caligula, Nero, Tiberius, Heliogabolus with others: so that time finds all
things, and ends all things: time makes, and time destroys.

Of sumptuous and wonderful buildinges.
I Thought it best to place other strange and wonderful buildinges, which
were made by men's hands, together with the merueylous works of nature: and
because some amongst the rest, are so famous, that for the renown thereof,
they are named in number the seven woonders of the world. The first was called
Pyramides, Pyramide^*
which the Kings of Egypt made by the city of Memphis, a miracle so made that
twenty and two years, sixty thousand were occupied and trauayled in the same:
either as Plini to embusie the vulgar people lest they should be idle, or else
to show and brag their superfluous wealth in making so huge a work. The
second were the walls of Babylon, The vvalle^ of Babylon.
which Queen Semiramis unto her perpetual memory has made as a monument
amongst the Perseans In making of these walls, she kept three hundred thousand
men at work, until these Walls were made of two hundred Cubits height, and
fifty Cubits broad, having a hundred gates, wrought all of brass round
about, to come and go unto the City, and from the City: And upon the Walls
were made three hundred Towers: She brought Euphrates one of the four floods
of Paradise to pass through the midst of Babylon. The third in order was
the sumptuous tomb of Mausolus King of Caria, Mausolus tomb.
which Queen Artimesia his wife made so gorgeous, that it was twentye and five
Cubits long of height, in compass four hundred and eleven foot, and wrought
round about with six and thirty pillars and broad beams: hence all the
monumentes and brave buildings of Emperors and kings took their pattern, for
it was so curiouslye wrought, that upon the East side, that famous workman
Scopas showed his skill: upon the Weast side that renowned Leocares wrought his
cunning: upon the North side Briax a man of great name applied his part: and
upon the South side Timotheus did what he could to win fame. These four
famous workmen had more fame by making the tomb of Mausolus, then for all the
works that ever they made before. These two noble Queens cannot be blotted
out of memory all the while that the names of Babylon are readde of in books,
or the Tomb of Mausolus spoken of with tongues. Now to pass further to
speak of that monstrous monument, and huge miracle which excels all the
world for work, I mean the great Temple of Diana amongst the Ephesians, The
temple of Diana.
which all Asia were occupied withal two hundred and twenty years, almost
with all powers of the world at the building thereof. This Temple was made nigh
the seas for fear of earthquakes: it was four hundred twenty and five foot
long, two hundred and twenty foot in breadth, it had a hundred twenty and
seven pillars, which for the wealth thereof, every one after another was made
by a king. The chief master of this work, was Ctesiphon, whose fame thereby
was spread over all the world. The fifth was the hie Tower, which King Ptholome
made in the I Will of Pharos, Pharos town.
to ease the sailors upon the Seas. This Sostratus made so high that in the
night time there hanged a Candle for a light and a mark unto poor Maryners,
which could be seen for ye height of the tower almost every where. The other
two and last of the seven woonders, The fi^uler of Jupiter.
were two Images, the one for Jupiter, made by Phydias, of Iuory in Olimpia The
other made for Phoebus in Rhodes, by Cha. Lindius, whose hugeness was such, The
image of Phoebus.
that it was threescore and ten Cubits high: so great was this Cofussus, that
when it fell down by an earthquake, it seemed a wonder to the beholders:
every finger that he had was more then a man of this age. These seven huge and
monstrous works were called the seven woonders of the world, which Plini and
Plutarch* speaks of in diverse places. Some suppose that Cirus regal Pallaice
which that cunning workman Memnon made, might be justly numbered with these
worthy and famous works. But to proceed to other sumptuous buildinges, though
not counted of the seven woonders, yet allowed amongst the best for the stately
work of the same, and of no inferior fame: as Labirinthus, made by Dedalus in
Creete, of such difficulte work, that he that came in, could not without
guide come out again. Three others were made like unto them, the one in Egypt
which Smilus made: the other in Lemnos which Rholus wrought, and the third in
Italy which Theodorus made. Labirinthes
These.4. Labirinthes were so curiously wrought, that Porsenna king of Hetruria
took hence example to make him a monument after death, to bury him self.
Again, after these there were other wonderful works made by the Kings of
Egypt, called Obelisci, Obellisci
famous and renowned buildings, that when Cambyses, King of Persea, at the
siege of the city of Sienna saw but one of them, he was in such an admiration
that he thought them invincible. Phyus made one of forty cubits. King
Ptholomeo made another of fourscore Cubits in Alexandria: and diverse others
which for their fame were then counted as marvelous as any of the seven
woonders. But let us speak of sundry buildings, as well of Cities and Towns,
as also of Temples, Houses, and Pallaices, whose fame thereby long flourished:
Romulus. Cadmus
as Romulus by building of Rome. Cadmus by building of Thebes, a City of
Beotia in Greece. Ogdous.
And Ogdous by the buildyng of the famous City of Memphis in Egypt. Neither
may I escape any, since I took upon me to recite all, whose renowmes and names
by these their works do yet live. I must not escape Alexander the great,
Alexander.
which in his business and great wars, made a City of his name, named
Alexandria. I must not forget King Darius, Darius.
which likewise builded up Susa, a city in Persea. These two Kings, though
they destroyed thousands of cities, yet they builded some cities. Neither may
I omit Caesar Augustus, Augustus.
which made a famous City in memory of the great victory over Antonius and
Cleopatra, and named it Nicopolis, that is in english: the city of victory.
King Ninus, Ninus.
an ancient King, made the City of Niniue, within two hundred years after the
flood of Noah. Sichem made Sidon: Sichem. Agonor.
Agenor made Tire. Then the world waxed populus, and Kings began to build
every where for the furtheraunce of civility and increase of policy and
wit, which the world in the beginning was very raw: for as the world grew
unto civil order and perseueraunce of things: so with all, Cities and Towns
were builded, Castles fortified, and hye walls raised for a Bulwark and a
defense unto the same: so by little and little the world was full of Cities. Then
Siracusa was made by Archias. The City of Argos was made by Phoroneus.
Phoroneus. Antiochus.
Laodicea by King Antiochus. And so briefly to recite them over, the noble and
famous City of Troy in Phrygia, Dardanus.
was made by Dardanus. Arpos, Diomedes. Telegonus.
a Town in Apuleia, was built by Diomides: and so Telegonus builded Tusce in
Italy, being the son of Vlixes, a Greek. Capis likewise made the City
Capua, which Hanniball laid long siege at: but lest I might be to long in
rehearsing the builders of famous Cities, having just occasions to respect the
time, I will end with Cities and Towns, always considered that women ought
not to be forgotten, as Semiramis Queen of Persea, which builded up the City
of Babylon. Queen Dido, which made the warlyke city of Carthage King Acrisius
daughter. Danaes, which builded in Italy a great Town called Arde. Diverse
Queens, and noble women, are for the like no less famous then men were. Now
pausing a while, we will repeat those that increased the common wealths, and
beautified with other kind of buildinges. Amongst other miracles, and
woonderous works, Mount Atho^ was made of Zerxes Nauigable, even unto the sea,
eleven years he kept thirty thousand men to bring his mind to pass. Caesar
made in one day two famous Bridges: the one over the river called Rheum, and
the other over the river called Ara in one day, which was almost incredible.
Alexander the great made such a Tabernacle at the maryages of the nobles of
Macedonia with the women of Persea, as Alianus does witness, that a thousand
Perseans, and a thousand Macedonians, and five hundred with swords and silver
Targets lodged in that house, while the marriages continued. Trayan the Emperor
made such a Bridge in Danubia, that for length, breadth and height, all the
world could not show the like. What should I rehearse the Temple which
Salamon made in Jerusalem, unto the which, must needs the Ephesians, with
the Temple of Diana, and the Carthagineans with the Temple of Juno, creep and
give place, for princely pallaices and royal dwelling: needs must Alexander
for all his bravery, and Clodius house, which was the spectacle of of Rome,
yield unto the golden Hall of Nero: but if finenesse of works, if the
rareness of skill, if I say the worthiness of woonders might claim place,
and challenge justly fame, I should praise Spintharus for the making of ye
Temple of Apollo in Delphos, or Meleagenes for his work in Prienna, in making
ye Temple of Minerua. Should I commend Epeus for his cunning about the brazen
horse in Troy? Should I commend Perillus for his brase^ Bull in Agrigentu^?
yea, or Vulcanus, whom the Poets feign for his skill and knowledge in working,
he was appointed by Jupiter to work only for the celestial gods: or the image
of Diana in Chios: who was so skilfully made, that unto those that came unto
the Temple, she seemed glad and joyful: and unto those that went out of the
Temple she seemed sad and angrye? Should I praise the artificial golden
birds made by ye Sages of Persea? or the curious work of Pallas Temple in
Ilion? No certainly, but the work and invention of noble nature, unto the
which, nothing is hard: It pierces the Clouds, it vadeth the Seas, it
compasses the whole world: that is the cunnyng workman, the skillful
Carpenter, which says Cicero, guides every man as a Captain. I might here
have occasion in this place to speak of the work of nature but that it is
needelesse, consyderyng how familiarly she instructs any man unto her
works, which is most strange and marvelous.

Of Painting.
HOrace, that learned Poet, affirms that the like power and dignity is given
unto a Poet, as unto a Painter: naming the one a speaking picture, and the
other dumb poesy. For painting unto the ignorant, was as printyng unto the
learned. Where the one vewed with the eye, and the other read with ye tongue.
Paintyng and grauing were the ancient monuments of Greece, and so much
esteemed, that Phydias waxt so famous amongst the Greeks as Plini does witness,
for that he made the Image of Minerua in Athence, so artificially and so
subtly, with a great Target in her hand, wherein were graven the wars of
the Amazones, and the Combats of Giauntes: the rebellion of Centaures and the
Lapitheans, that all Greece mused much thereat. Nealces in like sort did set
forth ye wars betwixt the Egyptians and the Perseans, so lively to behold,
and so worthily wrought, that the beholder thereon might be as well instructed
in sight, as the learned in reading the History thereof. That cunning
Philoxenus did also effectually set forth the wars between Alexander the
great King of Macedonia and Darius King of Persea in colors, as either Curtius
or Diodorus did express it with writing. The noble Painter Timantes, at what
time that worthy Greek Agamemnon at the siege of Troy, was enforced by an
Oracle to sacrifice his daughter Iphigenia, to mitigate the fury of the gods:
he beholding the woeful hap of Agamemnon, and the sorrowful state of the
Greeks: the selemne sadness of the sacrifice, the order and state of
Iphigenias death, did set forth in colors more lamentably to behol^e in
colors, then rufully to read it in letters. A science belonging unto noble
mind: and so sometime esteemed of the Greeks, that their fame much thereby
was augmented. What was skant done or written in Greece, but it was straight
set forth in colors? No wars any where, but it was painted out in Greece.
No strange history of any thing, but it was expressed in common colors: in
so much Philosophy it self, which was so honored then in Greece, was set
forth in Tables. Zeuxes.
That learned Zeuxes did paint in a Table the picture of Jupiter, sitting in
his throne, with the rest of the gods about him: where likewise was showed the
history of Hercules, how he yet in his cradle slew the two great Snakes, or
rather Dragons, where his mother Alcumena, and his supposed father Amphytrion
did fearfullye behold the death of the two Dragons, and the escaping of young
Hercules their son, being a child. Nychomachus dd lively express the
boldness of Theseus and Perythous in attemptyng their voyage to King Plutoes
region, blasing in tables their large enterprise, in rauishing and taking away
queen proserpina from her husband Pluto. Licias. Philiscur.
So skillful was Licias. So cunnyng was Philiscus, that they made so subtle a
Chariot, wherein Apollo, and his sister Diana, and his mother Latona were
perfectly graven, and the nine Muses orderly set, and that upon one stone.
Praxiteles excelled all men in the like, Praxiteles.
for he graued in a Marble stone, the Image of Uenus so perfectly and so lively
in each point, that a certain young man says Plini fell in love with the image,
and came often in the night when none knew, to kiss and to clip the image of
Uenus, as sometime we read of Pigmalio^ that cunning Greek, Pigmalion.
which likewise fell in love with his own handy work, in garnishing and
decking with fresh flowers and green leaves his own work. Apelles.
Pirgoteles.
To speak of Apelles, Pirgoteles, and Lisippus, whose fame was spread over the
whole world, Lisippus.
in so much that Alexander the great commanded that none in Greece should
paint him in colors but Apelles: none to grave him in stones but Pyrgoteles:
and none to feign any part of his princely person but Lisippus. It were to much
to speak of Callycratis, Phycaerides, and diverse famous men more, wherewith
Greece sometime flowed: whose fames and worthy reports, made Paulus Aemilius
that noble Roman, from Rome to send unto Athence for two kind of men: the
one a Philosopher to teach his sons, the other a Painter, to set forth in
Tables the great triumphs and victories which he got over the Lygurians and
Perseans. And one man being a learned Philosopher, and an excellent Painter,
named Metrodorus, was sent from Athence unto Rome for the purpose. Poets and
Painters were much set by in ancient time: for even as these aforesaid
Painters were famous and renowned, Homer.
so were Poets honored and esteemed. For we read that Alexander the great
would never go unto his bed without Homers Iliades and his dagger under his
Pillowe. Pindarus.
He so much esteemed Pindarus the Poet, that he spared a whole street in
Thebes from burning for Pindarus house, Virgill.
which was in that street. That renowned emperor Augustus so honored Uirgil,
that being dead, his books were worthily honored and embraced of Augustus. So
that noble Emperor Gratianus advanced the Poet Ausonius unto the office of a
Consul for his learning and knowledge in Poetry. Ausonius.
The fable of Chaos, the deluge of Deucalion, the rebellion of Giauntes, with
innumerable mo, which under the shadow of fables have great wisdom and
knowledge. At what time King Philip of Macedon, the long enemy of Athence, had
demanded upon condition of peace, ten Orators of Athence to serve him, and
to remain with him in Macedonia. Demosthenes that sugared Orator, Demosthenes
his fable
made an open Oration before King Philip, where he brought the fable of the
Woolfe and the sheep, that as the Woolfe did offer peace unto the sheep upon
condition the dogs should tarry at home: so King Philip offered peace unto the
Athinians upon conditions that the Orators, which as dogs do bark at the
Woolfe, bark at him, should be taken away: and so soon he would destroy
Athence being spoiled from their Orators, as the Woolfe would spoil the
sheep without dogs. This fable much edifieth the Uulgar people. Agrippa his
fable.
Menenius Agrippa, a Roman Counselor, reduced often times the fable of the
belly and members, when that he went to make any foes friends, to bring rude
rebels against their Prince and their country, until amity again. With the
which fable he reduced and brought again those that offended most against
their country, to be chief aid and helpers unto their country. Thucidides
does witness that by a fable, that noble Captain Pericles yielded courage
unto the Athenians: The fable of Pericles.
being sore oppressed and vexed, in a manner a spoil unto their enemies, the
Lacedaemonians manfully to resist their violence again, and to win victory,
where before they were almost convicted. Tullies fable.
That noble Consul Cicero, by a fable of Giges ring, how he went invisible
unto King Candales wife, and made him a Cocolde, would apply the same unto
those glorious persons that often delight in their own folly and ill
behauiours: as sometime the Poets feign of Ixion, who braggyng and boastyng of
Juno, he got the Centaures, engendered of a Cloud in steed of Juno. Quintilian
says, that fables contain under fained words, most excellent wisdom: for
Erasmus does often repeat the fable of Grasshoppers and the Antes, to exhort
men to travail and to labor with little Antes. Plato that divine and noble
Philosopher, in his second book, De Rep. does use fables. Aristotle in his
rethoricall proves is not without fables. Mark how fables ease the
Philosopher in his study, helps ye Orator in his perswacions, garnisheth the
divine in his sermons: and in fine they pleasure in any thing. Thus I thought
good to write in the commendacio^s of Painting, and Poetry, which for the
secret friendeship and for the affinity one with another, much more might be
spoken, I mean not those fond foolish and fantastical fables, fostered by
women and old men sitting at the fire, where often the idle bra^^e is
occupied: but those wise and prudent fables of Poets which contain wisdom in
sense, though they seem light in words, which durst not be opened plain in
those days, for the tyranny of Princes which then would not have their
faults touched in any, but that learnedly with fables poetical: As the fable
of Sphinx, of Cirses, of Tantalus, of Acteon, and of others.

Of Eloquence.
PYrrhus, King of the Epire, and defender long of the Tarentines, was wont to
say of Cineas his Orator, that he wanne more victories through the eloquence
of Cyneas, Cyneas.
then he through the force and puissaunce of all his Epirotes besides, for
through eloquence would Cyneas make the stout enemies to yield: and by
eloquence would Cyneas move the cowardly soldiers to victory. Valerius.
Valerius a noble and an eloquent Roman, at what time the Kings of Rome were
expelled, and their names quite banished: and now the populer state having
such liberty thereby, that the whole City through sedition and late sprung
liberty, was like to come to civil wars between them selves: had not I say
Valerius appeased the fury of the people, being ready in hearts to become
enemies unto their country, finding them triumphing much and reioysyng within
them selves, dividing one from another to maintain discord. He reduced them
not only through his eloquence unto peace and quietness: but also unto such
state brought them, that where Rome was like then to fall to ruin, Rome at
that time began to flourish and prosper. Great was the force of eloquence in
Marcus Antonius, M. Antonius
which with his sugared and sweet persuasions turned the furious rage and
tyranny of the soldiers of Marius and Cinnanus being sent of these two cruel
Captains to kill him, unto such lenity and mercy, that having their swords
naked drawn, ready to accomplish promise with Marius having heard Antonius
his eloquence, as men convicted with words, could never keep promise with
Marius though they had great rewards appointed: nor could of them selves,
though enemies they were unto Antonius, find in their heart to kill him.
Pericles wanne such renown in Athence by his eloquence, Pericles.
which sometime was scholar unto Anaxagoras, that he had the government and
rule of Athence committed unto him, as unto one the people reposed more credit
or trust in Pericles words, then they had in the force and strength of Athence
beside: Insomuch that when he would speak any thing unto the people, such
mellifluous words and sugared sentences proceeded forth of his mouth, that
they were amazed or astonished to hear him willing always, never weery of his
counsel. We read that the eyes did water to see him the ears allured to hear
him, ye heart convicted to yield unto him. Cowardes are made courageous, and
stout tyrauntes are made gentle and merciful. Cities preserved, victories
gotten, and all by eloquence. What is it but man is able through comely
gesture, and apt pronunciation bring to pass? Cicero. Demosthenes.
What could escape Cicero in Rome? What might have avoided Demosthenes in
Athence? whose known eloquence, whose learned persuasions, whose sweet and
sugared words, could as well move enimitie in Athence toward King Philip, as
it could kindle love in Rome toward Pompeius. Such is the excellency of
eloquence, that it moves as well men to the sight, for the gesture,
countenance, and pronunciation, as it does enforce men to hear for the
majesty and sweetness of words. For Hortensius was not so eloquent in
words, Hortensius.
but he was as comely in gesture, and so exc^llent in either of them that when
he spoke before the people, Senators, and Citizens of Rome, they were no less
enamored with his sight, then they were allured and entised with his words:
for he labored no less outwardly to please (...) night became very darcke,
all the soldiers of Paulus, yea, Paulus himself being their General and
Captain, were dismayde and quite discomfited, thinking it had been some
prodigious show to prognosticate mishappe to come, and ready to yield in
heart and courage, until Sulpitius began to persuade the rude Soldiers with
reason, Sulpitius.
opening the causes unto the soldiers, and declaring the effects of the
superior bodies so eloquently, that then being ready to yield for fear,
they were ready to fight valiauntly by eloquence of Sulpitius: and where
through fear of that sudden sight and change of the Moon, they were ready
to yield as Captives to King Perseus, they were stirred and moved by the
eloquence of Sulpitius, to become conquerours and victours over King Perseus in
the same self night. The like Pericles sometime amongst his soldiers of
Athens, Pericles.
at what time the Sun so darckened, that great terror and fear came upon the
soldiers: he eloquently persuaded his soldiers, and toulde them even as he
heard of his Master Anaxagoras the cause thereof, and quight expelled fear
from the soldiers by reason, and made them boulde again through his
eloquencie. In Afric there was in the time of Anascarimis a philosopher named
Afranio, Afranio.
being demanded what he did learn all the days of his life, answered: to
speak well, the second time being asked, what he taught unto others,
answered likewise to speak well: at the last he was demanded what he knew
in any science, he said I know nothing but to speak well: so that this old
Philosopher Afranio learned nothing, taught nothing, nor knew any thing but to
speak well: and most certain it is, that he that consumes all the days of
his life, to learn to speak well, and knows nothing else but to speak
well, spends his time very well.

Of those that had their pictures and Images for a shovv of their deserved fame
erected.
THE greatest honor that both Greeks and Gentiles use toward those that
deserved well in the common wealth, was to advance them by pictures painted,
and images gorgeously graven: thinkyng thereby either to inflame them further
to do good, or else to discourage them again in doing evil, by banishing and
neglecting their pictures: Fauorinus.
which when Fauorinus the Philosopher heard that the City of Athence had
rejected his picture, because Adrian the Emperor was angry with him, said: I
am right glad thereof, for better said he had it been for Socrates to have had
his brazen picture broken and thrown away for some show of displeasure by the
Athenians, then to be deprived of his life for nothing by the Athenians, for
the surest state of all is not to be known. Agesilaus therefore, King of the
Lacedaemonians, Agesilaus.
understanding that the inhabitants of every country in all Greece, had
decreed to put up the picture of Agesilaus for a memorial of his virtuous and
noble acts, to be as monumentes of his life after death. Returnyng then from
Egypt unto Greece, being very sick a little before he dyed, wrote letters
unto Greece, that they should make no pictures, no Images, no painted shows,
no graven work of his person, Ca^o.
ne yet of his life, saying: If I have done well in life, the virtue thereof is
a sufficient monument when I am dead. Cato Senior was of that opinion, that he
had rather that men should ask, why has not Cato his picture set up? then to
ask, why has Cato his picture up? A number of sage Philosophers, of wise
Princes, (...) Rome: the one dyed in Assiria, the other in Egypt. Paulus
Aemilius dyed in Cinna. T. Gracchus
T. Gracchus in Lucania. Augustus Caesar in Nola. Trayane the Emperor in the
East part of the world, with diverse other famous men borne within the City of
Rome, as these gentlemen, Cornelij. Scipiones, Catones, Dicij, noble families,
who dyed like pilgrims of the world, scattered one from another. So in
Athence where Themistocles, Theseus, Solon with others: yet in Syrus, Cyprus
and Persea were they buried. King Iugurtha borne in Numidia, Iugurtha.
buried in Rome. Again, King Aegeus borne in Athence, Pharao in Egypt, Ajax in
Greece, Leander in Abidon: yet their graves and buryall was in the bottom of
the Sea. Mark how puissaunt princes of the world, and mighty Kesars were
subjects unto fortune. And see again the learned and sage Philosophers, which
as I said before, had their names advanced, their persons esteemed, their
pictures erected, yet not able to avoid the furious frets of fortune: as
Pythagoras, borne in Samos, dead in Metapontus. Virgil, borne in Mantua, buried
in Brandusium. Terence borne in Carthage, brouhht up in Rome, and ended his
life in Arcadia. These Princes and noble men, had notwithstanding in diverse
places their fame spread, their name advanced, and their pictures every where
erected. Gorgias Leontinus was the first amongst the Greeks for his wisdom
and eloquence that had his picture set up in Delphos, in the Temple of Apollo.
His scholar Isocrates had for his wit and passing eloquence in Olimpia his
picture erected. Demetrius, Theophastrus scholar, after he had ten years
with all diligence and industry governed the state of Athence, having three
hundred and threescore pictures in Greece, erected and set up for his fame and
renown in administration of the common wealth: yet were they all broken and
taken down of envy afterward, which when Demetrius heard of the
inconstancy and envy of the people in showing their malice therein, he said:
Though they exile my pictures, yet can they not banish the virtuous cause of
the pictures. Mithridates
Mithridates king of Pontus made a worthy monument at Sylo unto Plato, about
the which as Plutarch says was written this sentence. Mithridates made this
picture of Plato, and dedicated the same unto the Muses. M. Scaeuol^
Mutius Scaeuola had his picture in Rome, for that he delivered the City of
Rome from Porsenna King of Ethruscan, for the like Cocles was not forgotten of
the Romans. It were unto small purpose to speak of Lucullus, of M. Attillius
and Octauius, whose fame and renown made their pictures to be monumentes
thereof? What should I embusie my self with infinite names of men, since women
well deserved the same? as Tanaquil, Tanaquil. Cloaelia.
Torquinius wife. Cloaelia a Uirgin of Rome: yea, as Quintilian says, Phryne
for her beauty wanted not to be commended by pictures, so common were they for
all men, that I refer those that will read further of this, unto Plini,
where he may at large satisfy him self in that point. I should be over much
charged to recite the places, persons and time, that pictures were only erected
to advance their fame, and to stir them further in such proceedinges as were
the cause of these their pictures. Therefore as before is spoken, they shall
find in Plini store of them.

Of those that defended diverse from deaths, from Serpents, Dragons, Lions,
and of cunning Archers.
Even as by these valiant and noble conquerours, not only Towns, Cities, and
countries, were defended, Serpents, Dragons, Lions, and other monstrous and
wild beasts were slain: but also diverse and sundry captives and Prisoners:
were delivered from deaths unto life. Hercules.
How many did famous Hercules that offspring of the Gods, save from the gulf
of Auentin, where that Cacus both day and night murdered the passers by? How
many delivered he from the huge monster Chimaera, which continually with
flashing flames of fire, feared and slew diverse valiau^t men, for he had three
heads, one of a Lion, the second of a Dragon, the third of his own
monstrous proportion. He again slew Sphinx a terrible beast in Ethiopia, which
with his sight destroyed men: How he overcame Gereon, Cerberus, and Diomedes,
and diverse other enterprises, it is before rehearsed. Perseus after that Neptune
had defloured Medusa in the temple of Pallas, Perseus.
the Gods being displeased therewith, turned every here of her head unto
snakes, whose sight was so venomous, that whatsoever he was that beheld her,
died presently. Perseus I say, slew the same, whereby he delivered diverse that
should else perish. Cappadox.
Cappadox being then tribune of the soldiers in Africa under the Emperor
Dioclesian, vanquished a huge serpent, and delivered a young Phrigian, made
even for mouth a pray. Even so Alcon a noble Archer of Creete, shot at a
Dragon which had his own son in his claws ready to be devoured, and slew
him, whereby his fame shall never die, and saved his Son vnhurted. But I
pause here from the skillful Archers, and speak a little more of these famous
and renowned conquerours of wild beasts, of monsters, and of Serpents, as
Bellorophon, King Glaucus son of Corinth, Bellorophon.
being accused of fornication with Queen Stenobia King Praetus wife of Argyue,
he was judged to die, and to be devoured of the monster Chimaera, which he
valiauntlye subdued in prison. Lysimachu^
The fame of Lysimachus is spread over all the world, for that he kilde a
Lion being but a soldier under King Alaxander. Chorebus.
The name of Coraebus shall not be forgotten amongst the Peloponesians, for the
overthrowing of that terrible monster in Greece. The renown of Atti Regulus
shall always be revived, Regulus.
when any man does think of the great serpent that he slew by the floode
Bragada, which as Plini says, was a hundred and twenty foot long. Lib. 8.
ca. 14
Did not these noble fellows profit their countries much in saving
thousands lives, which should have been destroyed by these monsters? The
Poets feign that Cadmus, Agenors son, Cadmus.
did kill a Serpent whose teeth engendered and brought forth out of the earth
harnessed men which fought and destroyed one an other. Again such were the
hap of young maids, Balsaria.
as Balsaria when Carphurrinus Crassus was taken Captive of the Messalines, and
should be offered for a sacrifice unto Saturn, she delivered Crassus from
death and made him conqueror; where before he was conquered: unto her
everlasting fame. Caluce.
Calluce, a young woman, after Troy was by the Greeks destroyed, when her
father King Lycus sailing unto Libia, had appointed to kill Diomedes, for a
sacrifice to appease the Gods for wind and weather, she delivered him from
the King her father, and from present death. Plutarch writes of these two
maids, that their fames hereby may not be forgotten. To speak here of them
that delivered men from death, from captivity, from perpetual prison, it were
necessary, howbeit short histories are sweet, and few words are pleasant:
Lucullus.
therefore I will not speak of Lucullus which being in wars with Mithridates
King of Pontus delivered Cotta from thousands about him. I will not write of
Lucilius a Roman soldier, Lucilius.
which when he saw that Brutus at Phillippos was compassed round about with
enemies, he himself ran with few soldiers with him amongst the enemies,
because Brutus in the mean while, might save himself. Neither will I make
much mention of Quintius Concinnatus being then Dictator in Rome, which
delivered Quintus Minutius from the hands of the Sabins and Vulscans: but
according unto promise, I will touch partlye those that deserved fame an
otherwaye, for fame is not bound unto one kind of quality or chances, but
unto diverse and sundry virtues. Therefore to join with these renowned
conquerers and defenders of countries, most excellent and expert Archers, which
likewise have done noble acts, Ilerdes.
worthy feats and merueylous things, as Ilerdes was such an Archer, that he
would kill the flying birds in the air. Catenes.
And likewise Catenes could do the like, appoint the flying fowls to dye,
this does Curtius in his sixth book affirm. Alexander.
Alexander the son of King Priamus, when neither his brother Hector with his
courage, nor Troilus with force, nor all the strength of Phrigia could resist
that noble Greek Achilles, he I say with his arrowe slew him. Acastus.
Acastus won immortal renown for killing of the wild huge Boar, that
spoiled Calidonia with his dart. Toco.
Toco, a fine soldier, and an excellent Archer, is much commended for that
he could do with his bow. Princes in times past were taught to do feats
with archerye, for Hercules himself was taught of Euritus the science of
shooting, Hercules.
that he could kill any flying foul, or swift beast, as sometime he killed
the birds called Harpeis, and slew the swift Centaure Nessus. We read in the
first of Herodotus, Comodus.
that Commodus the son of Marcus, surnamed Aurelius Emperor sometime of
Rome, begotten of the Empress Faustina, was so skillful in shoting, that what
soever he saw with his eyes, the same would he kill with his bow, insomuch,
that upon a time Herodotus does witness, that he slew a hundred wild beasts
with a hundred shot, missing nothing at any time: even so the Emperor
Domitianus was so expert in his bow, that he could shoot (when any heald up
his hand, betwixt his fingers a great way of. The people of Creete passed all
men in this faculty. The Perseans were so cunning in shooting and throwing of
darts, Perseans.
that backewarde as they fled, they would spoil and destroy their enemies.
Arimaspians. Scithians^ Getes.
The Arimaspians excelled the Perseans. Again, the Scithians and Getes were
most famous for this point. And thus having occasion to travail as pilgrims,
some slew great wild Tigers, huge Bears, terrible Lions, and such monstrous
beasts, that advanced the fame of such that attempt the peril.

Of diligence, and labors.
AS Horace that ancient Poet affirms, that the worthyest and greatest
virtue is to avoid vice: so is it I judge the greatest commendacion unto any
man to embrace diligence and to eschew idleness, for such is the virtue of
man's mind, that rare gifts, and excellent talents, which God and nature
bestowed on man, that to see the excellency and virtue thereof with external
sight, if (...) could be seen, it would says that divine and noble
Philosopher Plato, inflame great desire, incredible love unto virtue, and
would on the contrary, kindle such a hatred unto vice, that the sight thereof
would fear any beholder thereon. When yet says Cicero, the world was raw,
and nothing ripe, no laws made, no Cities builded, no order set, no commonwealth framed, but all things confusedly on a heap, without deuicions and
limittes, most like to Poetical Chaos, before the elements were di^euered
water from earth* Cicero de fini^us.
and the fire from the air: then I say, we lived brutishlye and beastly,
without civility and manner, without learning and knowledge: but when reason
began to rule, when Lady prudence began to practice with policy, when wit
began to search and to seek by diligence and travail the nature of things:
The^ diverse men in sundry countries sought means by diligence to profit
their countries, as Moses first found by diligence lettters amongst the
Hebrews, Moses. Me^no. Rhadamanthus.
Menno first found letters amongst the Egyptians. Rhadamanthus, amonst the
Assirians: Nicostrata, amongst the Romans: Phaenices, Ph^^nices.
amongst the Grecians, that by diligence and study of men, from time to time,
raw things waxed ripe: strange things became familiar: and hard and
difficult things, waxed facill and easy. Then Solon made laws in Athens,
Solon. Lycurgus. Zaleucus. Minoes. Philo. Zalmosis.
Licurgus in Lacedemonia, Zaleucus in Locresia, Ninus in Creete: and so orderly
all the whole world was bewtified with laws, exornated with wit and
learning. Then began Philo to make laws unto the Corinthians. Then Zalmosis
began to reform the rude and barbar^us Scythians. Then Phaleas amongst the
Carthaginneans, Phaleas.
practiced policy, and limited laws. Then I say laws began to order
things, and reason began to rule, that learning and knowledge was sought far
and near, wit exercized, policy practiced, and virtue so honored, that
well might Tullie say, O Philosophy the searcher of all good virtues, and the
expeller of all vices. Then was that common wealth noted happy, that enjoyed
such a prince to rule, as a Philosopher that would extol virtue, and
suppress vice: reward the good, and punish the evil: esteem the wise and
learned, and neglect the foolish and ignorant. I will omit to speak of
mighty and famous Princes, whose care, diligence, study and industry were
such, whose numbers were so infinite, that I might well seem to tedious to
molest the reader therewith. I will recyte the diligence and travail of poor
men, which by their study and labor became lamps, and lantornes of the
world. And to begin with Plato and Socrates, Plato. Socrates.
two base men of birth, whose diligence in life time, made them most famous now
being dead: the one the son of a poor Citizen of Athens, named Ariston: the
other the son of a poor Marbler surnamed Sophroniscus. Might not poor
Perictione the mother of Plato be glad of such a son, that the greatest
tyrant in the world, that proud prince Dionisius, would honor and
reverence Plato for his and knowledge, and take him into his Chariote as a
Prince, and not as a poor Philosopher? Might not that poor Midwife named
Phanaerata rejoice to have such a son as Socrates, who being proved of all
men best learned, counted of all men most ancient, taken of all men most
modest, and grauest: and judged by the Oracle of Apollo to be wisest in all the
world. How happy was Elbia? Elbia.
How famous was Creithes, that noursed two such sons, as Cicero and Homer?
the one the lamp and lantern of Rome, the other the sugared and sweet
Mecenace of al Greece. Thus diligence and travel brought them to fame, that
being poor men, were honored of rich men: being base men, were exalted of
Princes. O happy countries of such women: Oh happy women of such children: O
wise happy children of such learning and knowledge. The poor smith which was
Demosthenes Father, Demosthenes.
and the silly Potter which was Virgils Father, are more renowned by their
children this day being dead, then known by their own wealth being alive.
Thus much happened unto the silly Smith, and unto the poor potter, their
names shall never die, while either Demosthenes is read, Virgil.
or Virgill heard. What might be spoken of that poor Physician Nichomachus
son, I mean that famous and learned Philosopher Aristotle, Aristotle
which King Phillippe of Macedonia so esteemed, that he counted him self
happy to have his son Alexander the great, borne in Aristotle's time, whose
diligence and study were such, that he had the guard and tuition of that
renowned conqueror Alexander, five years together, which was honored of
Alexander, and so esteemed of King Phillip, that Athens being destroyed by
Alexander, was restored by Aristotle. Such was the diligence of men, their
care and industries, that their large volumes and infinite books, are witness
of their well occupied minds. Plutarch.
How became Plutarchus master unto Traian the Emperor? Seneca
How was Seneca appointed the Tutor and Schoolmaister of the Emperor Nero?
Zeno.
How came Zeno unto such favor with King Antigonus? by diligence, and not by
idleness: by travail, and not by slothfulness: by learning, and not by
ignorance. Why did that great and famous Roman Scipio, surnamed Affricanus,
esteem so much the poor Poet Aennaeus alive, ^ennaeus
that being dead, he caused his picture to be set before his eyes, as pledge of
his great love and earnest good will? Forsooth, for pain and travail that
Aennaeus took with Scipio. Why did Augustus Caesar, that wise and godly
Emperor, make so much of Maros books? Mar^.
but because he was in his time ye lamp of Rome, he honored no less his
books after he was dead, than Octauian embraced him alive. The great King
Artaxerxes thought him self half dead, Artaxerxes.
without the company of Hippocrates: Pomponius Atti. thought him happy, when
either Cicero was in his ^ight, or some of his books in his bosom. Alexander
never went to bed, without Homer under his pillowe. Who will not praise the
diligence of poor Cleanthes the Philosopher? Cleanthe^.
Who will not commend the travail of Plautus ye Historiographer: Plautus
the one with a Baker, the other with a Bruer, brought up with such care, and
pain in the day time, that they might study in the night time. Such was
their poverty and necessity, that they were urged to travail in the night
time: such was their desire and affection unto learning, that they were willing
to study in the day time. Who will not extol Euclides to take such pain,
Euclides.
and to encur such danger, to go in the night time in the apparel of a
woman, because he might not be known, to hear Socrates read Philosophy? Oh
paineful men, oh worthy members of their country, that so sought by
diligence, that so trauayled by study and industrye: and in fine so found by
wit and reason the redress of things, to disperse that defused Chaos, which
time then said Cicero had skant opened the door thereunto. Then after private
pain and speciail study of sundry men in several countries, it came to that
perfection, that from one man in one place, diverse grew learned and pollitick^
by diligence and travail: Romulus.
that from Romulus the first builder and King of the Romans, Rome in short
time had wise and discreet Councelles to govern the City. From Solon the
first law setter (after Dracog) amongst the Athenians: Solon.
by and by, learned and eloquent Oraratours flowed in Athens. Licurgus.
From Licurgus amongst the Lacedaemonians, straight grew modest and grave
Senators called Ephori. And thus from one in the beginning diverse proceeded
forth in the end: as the Prophets amongst the Egyptians: the Gimnosophistes
amongst the Indians: the Chaldeans amongst the Babilonians: the Sages called
Magi, amongst the Perseans: And so of others in other countries. And thus by
diligence, first commended were all men by pilgrimage, and labor of life, and
well recorded in memory, for the pain and study that each famous man in life
did for his country, his Prince, and his friends, that having finished his
pilgrimage of life, meriteth such fame, as shall be to his perpetual memory
after death.

Of the first inuentours of arts, and of the use of Soothsaying.
THE world being raw and not ripe, ignorant and not learned, rude and
barbarous, without all civil policy: Nature of it self moved first men to
mende manners, instructed ye ignorant to seek and search things unknown,
which nature wrought in diverse men in sundry countries a desire to knowledge,
whereby men practiced therewith, to the advancement and commendation of their
Countries: imitatyng as Cicero says, nature as a good guide, and a Captain to
find out which was not known. And because nature was always desirous to be
acquainted with art, as a thing to exornate and beautify her self with
knowledge, she first invented letters as the foundation and the ground; whence
all learning do proceed. After first letters were invented amongst the Hebrews
by Philo, Philo. Cadmus Mennon. Hercules.
brought unto Greece by Cadmus, practiced first in Egypt by Mennon: from Egypt
unto Phrygia, brought by one named Hercules, an Egyptian borne. Again, amongst
the Hetruscans letters were first inverted and written by Demaratus a
Corinthian. Demaratus.
Amongst the Romans, as both Plutarchus and Solinus do affirm, the Pilagians
brought letters, Pilagia^*
and first found the use thereof. And some aucthours of great credit, affirm
that Nicostrata, the mother of Euander the Arcadia^ invented letters first in
Rome. Rhad^ma^thus.
So Radamanthus in Syria, and so others in diverse places of the world were
studious and careful to search a way by reason to practice the ^ame by wit, to
dispearce that lumpish Chaos, which yet for want of knowledge had no perfect
form. And now letters being invented, Gramer
came Grammar worthyly to claim the second seat of fame. Whose beginning and
enteraunce was celebrated by Epicurus unto Rome, Epicurus. Crates.
brought by one Crates, being sent as Ambassador from king Attalus, unto the
Senators, at the time of the second wars of Carthage. This being the Well,
whence flow all other sciences, for from the faculty of writing and the art
of speaking, do the rest proceed. Marcobius prefers Dydimus for his
excellency herein. Dydimus.
Cicero commends one named Antonius Enipho, Antonius.
whose schole and reading Cicero long frequented. The force of Grammar cheefely
consists in histories and poetry: Moses. David.
for poetry is so commended, that both Moses that mighty ruler of the Hebrews,
and David that wise prince of Israel, the one in reducyng his people from
Egypt, Poetry.
the red Sea opening a way and geuyng place unto Moses to pass through, made
exemetron verses in good meters, to thank God for his good success and
fortune: the other with diverse Hymns in Meter, and sweet songs to assuage
the just anger of God for his offenses. In poetry excelled Homer and Hesiodus
for antiquity, the one in setting forth the fame of Mars, I mean wars: the
other in commendyng the pain and diligence of Ceres, whch is husbandry, though
Linus, Orpheus, Marcellus and others were of great antiquity, yet not of so
great a fame. Histories and the profit thereof being had, as Plini writes by
Cadmus Milesius, the first history which was written of any Philosopher, was
by Zenophon: but the excellent and worthy fame of historiographers in Greece
afterward were justly noted in Thucidides and Herodotus, amongst the Romans
in Liui and Salust. Thus from a rude beginning, became famous and learned
writers. As for Rethoricke, Rethorick. Mercurius.
it was first invented by Mercury as Horace says: but as Aristotle and
Quintilian do think, it was Empedocles, Empedocles
then from time to time: from age to age, it came unto that perfection at
length, that Rethoricke was as necessary to be learned euerywhere, as it was
profitably to be used any where. The prince of this faculty in Greece, was
Demosthenes, who with eloquence long guided Athens, Isocrates, Aeschines, and
others flourished in great fame by this art in Greece. In Rome was Cicero and
Salust, the fountain and welspring of all sugared eloquence. For the beginning
of Music, diverse opinions and sundry assertions are made, where first Music
was found. The Greeks suppose that Dionisius found first Music. The
Hebrews think that Tubal. Music. Dionisius. Tuball.
Polibius says, that Music first was found in Arcadia. Solinus says, that
it was first in Creete. The most do agree and judge, that Orpheus and Liuius,
some again think that Amphion found Music: but how, where, and when it was
first found, it is uncertain. But unto what perfection at length Music
came, we read plain that the Greeks thought that man not well learned,
unless he had some skill in Music. Philosophy
The golden study of Philosophy which as Cicero says searches wisdom,
hates follye, the only seeker of virtues, and the scurge of vices. Some
suppose that Philosophy was first from the barbarous people brought unto
Greece, for amongst the ancient Egyptians, Philosophy was first studied and
opened by Vulcanus. Amongst the Perseans it was found by them that were called
Magi. Vulcanus. Magi. Gymnosophistes.
Amongst the Indians by Gymnosophistes. Amongst the Babylonians and Assyrians
by the Chaldeans, which as Laertius does witness, were called all wise men. This
art was sought with great industry, and much honored in all the world, for
that it contained all sciences and faculties in it self, as well the life and
manners of men, as also the obscure and difficulte nature of all things, with
the subtle search of the same in reasoning thereof. Astrology.
Great contention of Astrologers, which was he that first found the orders and
mocions of the heavens: Prometheus. Belus. Atlas.
some attributyng the first invention thereof unto Prometheus, some unto Belus,
some unto Atlas, as Plini in his seventh book affirms. Wherefore the Poets
feign that Atlas does sustain the skies with his shoulders: some unto
Mercurius: some unto Actinus. And thus every country contendyng about the
antiquity thereof. The Egyptians brag of their antiquity in this point. The
Assyrians boast no less of their knowledge in this art. The course of the
Moon was first found by Endimion. The eclipse of the same by Anaxagoras. Thus
first nature sought such means as might set forth her privy desire by seeking
and trauaylyng for knowledge. And because Physic is not so little to be
esteemed, Physic.
but it ought here well to be mentioned, considering the common profit thereof,
and how painfully was the same studied and trauayled of others in time past.
Physic is either healed with diet, Apollo.
medicine, or surgery. In the first Apollo was most honored, Asculapius.
in the last Asculapius was chiefly commended, which the Greeks supposed first
that healed wounds. Hippocrates.
Afterward Hippocrates, borne in the Isle of Cous, made a law, that whosoever
recovered health, should write his name in the Temple of Asculapius, whereby
it seems that Asculapius was one of the first Physicians. The first Physician
that ever came to Rome, came from Peloponesus named Archagathus, when L.
Aemilius and Marcus Liuius were Consuls in Rome: which when he came first to
practice there Physic, he was called for the rare sight thereof, first a
Butcher, at last a murderer. To repeat several herbs, by sundry men found
out for this art, it were over long. Passing over briefly, touching nothing
but the first dealers and searchers of arts, and so come unto Magic, Magic.
Zoroastes.
which was found as Plini says of Zoroastes, first King of the Bactrians,
eight hundred years before Ilion was made. This says Plini might have been
better unsought then found, for that we see every man desirous to be
acquainted with devils, and to be taught of Simon the secret counsels of
deuyls: in so much that women go unto school with Cirses or Calipso, to learn
some sorcery withal. The Egyptians had great felicity in this art, insomuch
that Pharao commanded the priests to show some feats before him, deridyng
Moses and his doings. In presence of Moses, they converted a rod unto a
Dragon, which when Moses saw, to suppress vain incantations and human
knowledge, with divine shows and examples, and to show how much the one
excel the other, he threw his rod unto the ground, and it was translated
unto a Snake, and devoured the Dragon that the Egyptians enchanted. Salamon the
wise, Josephus. lib. 8. Antiquitate.
which at the beginning God so advanced and favored, that made and invented
ways to expel deuyls. Eleazalus as Josephus does write, used these ceremonies
in expelling and coniuryng of devils away from any man, to put a ryng in his
nosthrilles, having a certain herb, or a root appointed and named of
Salamon within the ring, which root with his smell driued out devils,
coniuring them not to return at any time to that man more. This art in short
time grew to that credit, and at this time in diverse places is in such
honor, that a coniurer is more esteemed then a Preacher. There are such
branches in this art, that do well merit praise, for there are diverse kinds
of these Magicks, whereby they brag and boast that they are able to do any
thing, and that they know hereby all things. The first part or rather kind of
Magic is called Nigromancie, which is a kind of coniuryng of the dead bodies
to tell things, as at the wars in Pharsalia betwixt Caesar and Pompeius, it
was for^shewed by the ghost of a dead man unto Sextus, Negromancy.
the whole chance and euert of that wars, and how his father Pompeius
should loose his head. The second kind of Magic is called Pyromancy, which
is a certain divination by fire, Pyromancy Dionisius. ^ib. 4.
as Tanaquil, Torquinius Priscus wife, when she saw the flames playing about
Seruius Tullius head, she affirmed thereby that he should be king in Rome. The
third is Aeromancy, which uses to prognosticate things by the air,
Aeromancy. Plin. lib. 2.
as by flying fowls, and tempest of weather, as when it rayned Iron in
Lucania, it did praesage said they, the death of Marcus Crassus amongst the
Parthians, or as Liui writes, when it rained stones in Picen at the second
wars of Carthage, it was to show the slaughter and murder that Hanibal
should do in Italy. Hydroma^cy
The.4. is Hydromancy, to judge things to come by sight of water, as Varro does
report of a boy that saw ye picture or image of Mercury in the water,
pronouncyng and recityng all the wars of Mithridates King of Pontus, that
should follow in verses. There are two other kinds of Magic, the one named
Giomancy, Gyomancy.
to declare and expound things by the openyng, gapyng, and moouyng of earth:
the other Chiromancy, Chiroma^cy.
to judge by lines of hands cauled Paulmestry. These are they that Cicero
makes mention of in his first book of diuinations, where he says, Cum non
sibi sapiunt semitam alijs tamen monstrant viam: they will teach others that
way that they know not them selves. They will teach others how to have money
and substance, and yet they are them selves poor beggars always in the house
of Codrus, hangyng at the sleeue of Irus. There is again a kind of
Soothsaying which was first practiced in the land of Hetruria, where a certain
husbandman plowed. In the field called Tarquimen, a certain man appeared in
^ight, which sprang up from the ground which then was plowed, named Tages, in
face and countenance much like a young child: Cicero. lib. 2. de diuination^.
but in wisdom and discretion, far surmountyng any sage Philosopher. This
taught all the land of Hetruria. Plini says that one Delphos first enuented
Soothsaying, and Amphiraus enuented first Soothsaying by fire. Polidorus
describes another sort of Soothsayers, which were wont to conjecture and
foreshowe by beasts slain to be sacrificed, whether the heart, the liver, or
such like did perish, as Caesar, which when he sacrificed an Ox unto Jupiter,
which had no heart, whereby ye Soothsayers prognosticated the infelicity and
mishap of Caesar. Afterward, likewise king Zerxes in his wars against the
Greeks, Herodotus. liber. 7. historia.
a Mare being a stout and warlike beast, brought forth a Hare, a timorous and
fearful thing, whereby they declared the overthrow of Zerxes, and his huge
army, the flight and cowardnesse thereof. Again there is a kind of
southsaying by lightning, thunders, and tempests. The follye of men were such,
that they thought nothing to be in the world, but had hidden knowledge
concerning m^n. They would take nothing in hand, without some Oracles of
Jupiter, or Apollo. They reposed more trust in flying fowls, in their chirping
notes, concerning any attemptes which they took in hand, then in their own
force and strength. They had more confidence in beasts of the field: they
trusted I say more in elementarie sightes. In fine there was nothing almost,
but they had more respect either unto the color, the voice, the proportion,
and such like toys, than they had in them selves, as before mentioned in the
worshipping of their Gods, and institution of Religion. These foolish toys,
were first observed amongst ye Chaldeans: from Chaldea, Chaldea. Greece.
Hetruria. Rome.
unto Greece, from Greece, unto Hetruria, from Hetruria, unto Rome, from Rome,
unto all Europe, they were scattered. Wherefore Moses that wise Hebrew, and
the singular instrument of God for his people, commanded that no man should
consult with these wicked and abominable faculties, saying unto his people,
You shall not believe southsayers, neither shall you trust unto dreams. The
Jews were so aduced to observe these augurations, that they would not unto
war at any time, without some warnings and conjectures had by some bird or
beast: insomuch, that one Mossolanus, Mossolanus.
a Jew borne, a wiseman noted in his country, and making his voyage unto
wars, as Josephus in his first book of Antiquity does write, was commanded
and all his host to stay, until a certain southsayer would go to consult
and know the success of the wars: which then they had in hand, with a
bird hard by the army, which when this wiseman Mossolanus perceived how
they were inclined and wholly bent to be instructed by divination, he took his
bow and an arrowe, and slew this bird, whereat the soldiers were so amazed,
and the southsayers so angry, that had not Massolanus persuaded with the
people wisely, he had been like, though he was their Captain, to have been by
his own soldiers slain: which after long tumult made, and great anger
threatened, Mosolanus spoke after this sort unto his soldiers: Do you think
that birds, beasts, and such like dumb things, can forshew things by you
which know nothing of them selves: for behold, the bird which you trusted
most unto, and likewise your southsayers could not see nor know to avoid my
purpose when I slew him. Do you trust that thing for your lives, which is
ignorant of his own death? O blindness of people, which yet remains in
this age. And having briefly past the inuentors of Sciences, in sundry
countries men were much given to find other necessaries for to live by,
studious to make things profitable for their countries, careful to augement
the state and life of man unto such perfections, that the Cyclopians were the
first workers of Iron work: The Lacedaemonians the first inuentors of harness,
spears, swords and bucklers for wars: people thereby most renowned. The
Atheniaus taught first to plant trees and Uineyardes. The Phrigians made first
the Chariotes and wagons: The, Lydians used first to dress woolles: And so the
people of Caria practiced first Bows and arrows: And the Phenitians the
Crossebowe. Then other particular matters were likewise sought out by diverse
special men, in special countries for the use of man, as Oil and honye, by
Aristeus: Keys by Theodorus the Samian: Ships to sail, by Jason: Ericthonius
Silver: Cadmus Goulde. Thus then every where each man in his pilgrimage did
some things worthy of memory. Thrason renowned for his lofty walls and hye
towers: Danaus for his wells, and digging water: Cinira, for finding out
Copper, brass, lead, and such other mettell: Ceres for sowing of Corn: And
Baccus for planting the Uine, that the world in time waxed not so populus one
way, but it grew skillful in things, and plentiful of laws, for the
redress and safegarde of man.

Of Patience.
PAtience is such a virtue (says Cato the wise) in all adversities, the best
medicine to a sickeman, or the surest plaster to any sore, is patience: it
comfort the heavy, it rejoices the sad, it contenteth the poor, it
heals the sick, it eases the painful, it hurts no man, it helps all
men: therefore said the wiseman Byon, that the greatest harm can happen unto
man, is not to be able to sustain, Tiberius.
and abstain. For this was Tiberius Caesar much commended of Suetonius, that
he suffered in free Cities and towns, Philippe.
free tongues. Philippe King of Macedonia, when certain Ambassadors of Athens
came to him, he requiring them if he might stand in any steed to Athens, to
certefie him of the same: to whom Demochares one of the Ambassadors
answered, that the greatest pleasure that he could do to Athens, was to hang
himself. The King most pacient in such skoffes and tauntes, said: The
reprochefull sclaunder of the Athenians do make King Phillippe better able to
revenge their malice by wars, then to move him to answer their backebiting
in words. A Prince not only pacient in hearing, but also wise in aunswering.
As sometime the Emperor Alexander Seuerus in Rome, Alexander Seuerus.
when it was signified unto him (after Antonius was dead) that the barbarous
nations were ready to enter the City of Rome, and that he was much rebuked of
the people, and blamed of the Senators, for the slender care he had unto the
City: he (as Herodianus affirms) answered, that it belongs to Princes,
to revenge the good, and not to answer the evil: for wisemen will speak
evil of no man in the beginning, least they should be judged fools in the
end, where into all things are directed, and whereby all things are proved.
Anaxagoras
So pacient was Anaxagoras, when it was toulde him that his son was dead, to
answer merrily, I know my son was mortal. So pacient was King Antigonus,
Antigonus.
being certefied of his son Alcionus death, to answer, I looked no other
than for his death. Pericles.
So pacient was Pericles, when he heard that both his sons dyed in one day,
to keep his countenance merry, his cheer unchanged, and his business
about the state of his country not delayed. But Harpalus was of passing
patience, Harpal^s.
being bydden of Astiages King of Persea to supper, where he had two sons of
his ready dressed, and lay in a silver dishe before him on the table, to be
eaten of their own father. The king, nay the tyrant, marked the countenance
of Harpalus, perceiving him not to be moved much at the matter, asked him how
he liked his supper, he without alteration of color, change of countenance,
framed himself to answer the King merrily, commending much the supper, as one
that knew that patience was the only remedy in tirannie. A second Iobe in
patience, he passed Iobe, for Iobe knew how his God did suffer Satan to punish
him for love he had to Iobe, but Harpalus perceived that this tyrant did this
to him of tyranny and evil will, far from christianity, for in this vale
of misery, we count him wise, and certain we may call him most wise, that can
in prosperity be gentle, and in adversity be pacient. Both these examples
were seen in one man in one day at Rome. Paulus Aemilius, having his two
sons, the hope of Rome, and comfort of the father, the one dead four days
before the triumphs of Macedonia, the other, three days after ye triumph,
returning from Macedonia with that noble victory, with such triumphs unto Rome
that no man could find in his heart to tell this noble Roman of the
heaviness in Rome, Paulus Amilius.
and of the death of his children, a ruthful thing it was to join to such
great joys, victories, and triumphs, such woeful chance, sadness and
mourning, but fortune accompanies the one with the other: This noble Roman
perceiving the people of Rome to be so sad, and he so merrye, they so heavy
with sobbes and sighs, he so glad of his triumphs and victories, demanded
the cause, but being at length known, he then comforted them, that should
comfort him, saying: I thank the Gods more to give me victories over my
enemies, to the glory and fame of Rome, then I accuse fortune to spoil me of
my children, which by nature were borne to dye: and though much it be to my
grief, yet wish I the gods to tender ye like to the father, as they did to the
son, so that the like conquest and glory happen to Rome. In this was both
magnamitie and patience. Some men are pacient in things, as in a corporal
pain: some in torments: another is pacient of injuries done, I commend them
both, but to be pacie^t in all kind of afflictions and adversity, heaven and
earth commends him. That is a kind of patience, Anarchus. Laena.
which Plini applied to Anarchus, saying: Of all men, one man Anarchus Augustus
most patient in torments. Of all women Laena, to keep silence. So were the
Egyptians people of great patience, 4 (...). 7.
they had rather die in torments with patience, than to betraye any man. The
Gimnosophistes of India were so patient, that from Sun rising until night,
upon the hot sand, without meat and drink (says Plini) from one seat to
another, to behold the heavens, the Sun, the Moon. etc. The Lacedaemonians
most pacient in travail, pain, wind, weather, and wars. The people of
Sparta, at what time certain men of Chios come to pilgrimage, understanding
the wise men of Sparta, called Ephori, to be in all things most pacient, to
move them to anger, they vomited before them, and then went where Ephori sat
in judgment, and used it as a common stool to discharge and ^ase nature. When
they came to Chios again, they said that the wise men of Sparta were fools
and blocks, that they could not move them to be angry, but not so angry as
they were beastly. In this kind of patience was Mithridates King of Pontus:
was Agesilaus King of the Lacedaemonians, was Masinissa king of Numidia most
pacient. So pacient was that Emperor Augustus, that he suffered a young man
of Sicilia to answer him as bouldly, as he had demanded merrily, that where
the Emperor asked him being like in countenance and preportion, whether ever
his mother had been in Rome, meaning thereby that he might be his father if
she had been there: but the young man perceiving the sleight of Augustus,
answered boldly and said: My mother was never in Rome, but my father has
been diverse times in Rome: meaning that the Emperor might be his brother
rather that way, then he to be his son the other way by his mother. Because
patience is better known by reading of diverse Princes anger and wrath, I will
them to read the chapter of anger, where they shall see what hurt was done,
what wickedness was committed by impaciencie, which might have been redressed
and saved by patience: wherefore avoiding prolixitie, it shall be spoken in the
one, what wants in the other.

(...) read said he, that severity waxed unto tyranny, and tyranny in a
Prince works his destruction: and that lenity is the most soundest state in
a Prince, who sees not the experience thereof. Certainly Nero, Caligula, and
Heliogabolus, were never so cruel as these three noble Emperors Augustus,
Tr^ian, and Seuerus were gentle and meek. Alphonsus.
Alphonsus the great king of Aragon, geuyng care a long w^ile to his friends,
to find fault with his often pardonyng and forgeuyng those that offended much
his own person said, Alphonsus had rather save many by lenity and
gentleness, then loose any by cruelnesse and tyranny. This King being moved
to wars against the Uenetians and Florentines people, very stout in Italy,
and ready from Naples to march forward to meet his enemies, certain
Ambassadors in that time coming from the Florentines to entreat of peace
with Alphonsus upon humble suites and conditions. No conditions said Alphonsus
that noble prince, but to them that seek peace: But frankly and freely to
grant the same, his humanity was such, that the Ambassadors were not so
ready to ask peace, but he was as ready to grant peace. Herodotus does write
that there was a law amongst the Perseans, that no man should be punished for
one (...), but first they would examine whether his good de^des were to be
rewarded, or his evil life to be punished. The clemency of a prince, the
singular wisdom of a noble mind, does foresee the cause that sometime
subjects offend their prince therein. Nicanor the Macedonian, after he used
ill speech euerywhere against Philip, Alexanders Father, he was complained of
unto the King. When the King knew thereof, he answered gently, that poverty
caused Nicanor to speak that against King Philip: therefore he did send him
money to ease his mind, and pardoned withal his offenses. How worthy of
memory is Theodosius Junior, after he was persuaded by his friends, to
revenge those backbiters that spoke ill of him, to answer in this sort. A
Prince ought not to bend him self to revenge faults, but ready to pardon
offenses, saying moreover: Would God that Theodosius were able to make his
enemies alive again. And to prove that a Prince ought not to revenge, Adrian
the Emperor showed a noble example thereof, he having great enimitie with a
certain worthy Roman, and being in great hatred toward this man, before he
became Emperor, the self same day that Adrian was made Emperor of Rome,
meeting his enemy in the street, said loud to him before all the people,
Euasisti, thou have won the victory: meaning that he then being a Prince
elected, might in no point revenge the wrongs that he received before. O
passing humanity and clemency in Princes. It was Alexander the great his
saying* as Pontanus in his first book affirms, It was more meet for a
Prince to do good for evil, then to add evil for evil. We read that cruel
Nero in the beginning of his Empire was so gentle, that he wished often that
he could not read, because he should not put his hand (according unto the
custom of Rome) to the libels, for the punishment of the offenders. And
Domitianus in the beginning, did so abhor tyranny and cruelnes, that he
would forbid to kill any beast for sacrifice, though they in the latter years
forget this natural clemency. What a noble virtue is humanity in a Prince? what
excellency in a noble man? what an ornament in a gentleman? what commendation
in all men: insomuch that the Snakes of Syria, the Serpents of Terinthia, the
Scorpions in Arcadia want no due deserved praise of Plini for their
gentleness, and sparyng of their native soil, though they wax cruel in
others. What humanity was in Scipio, having taken captive Hasdrubal, King
Masinissa his nigh kinsman, to restore him whom again without ra^some? What
clemency used Demetrius to Cilla, a Captain of King Ptolome, even as before,
Ptolome showed to Demetrius him self being taken prisoner, ye like showed he
to Cilla? Such has been ye lenity of some princes, yt thereby they augmented
fame, purchased great honor, won victories: and such has been the tyranny of
others, that they have defamed them selves, won hatred, lost their estates, and
in fine, Philippe.
destroyed themselves. For this purpose was Philip king of Macedonia wont to
instruct his son Alexander, to behave him courteously with the Macedonians, to
use lenity and clemency unto his equales, and to show him gentle unto all
men, while his father Philip yet lived, that he might the better in that season
win favor, and find friendeshippe with his subjects: for then some came by
heritage, some by the sword, and the most came by election. Nothing says
Plutarch, does stablishe the state of a common wealth, as the clemency of a
Prince toward his subjects, and the love of the subjects toward their
Prince, Darius.
the one is never seen without the other. King Darius therefore understanding
that his subjects were taxed sore with Subsedies, blamed his council, revoked
their law, and made an open Oration unto his commons, to signify how loath he
was to molest his subjects, and that he was as loath to take any from his
poor commons, as he knew them to be willing in giving all that they had to
pleasure their prince: his care therein showed, his speech so affable, his good
will so opened, with such courtesy and lenity, tendered unto his subjects,
enflamed such benevolence, kindled such a love, caused such a readiness; and
made them through gentleness so benificiall, that both goods, lands, and
lives, were at Darius commandment. Antigonus.
Plutarchus in the life of king Antigonus, does recite a famous history,
concerning the alteration and change of Antigonus, who with tyranny a long
while, fomed in blood, delighted in murder, given altogether to wickedness
of life, spoiling at all times every where, sparing no place at any time, that
at length, having obtained the kingdom of Macedonia, became so gentle, so
meek, so liberal, so quiet toward his subjects, that being of all men
woondered at for his sudden change: from so cruel a Tirant, to be so gentle
a Prince: from a spoyler of all places, to be a sparer now of his subjects:
Being demanded the cause thereof, answered: Then I trauayled for the Kingdom
of Macedonia, which was to be won with wars, and tyranny: and now I labor
to get the good will of my subjects, which is to be gotten with gentleness.
The only remedy, the sure way to win good will at the subjects, is
always for Princes to be courteous and gentle. Pity in a Prince, Aurelian.
causes love in the subjects. Such pity was found in that gentle Emperor
Aurelian, when he would have entered unto the City called Tiaena, the gates
being shut against him, he did send his Herauldes to signify, unless the
gates should be opened, he would not leave one dog alive within the City.
The City more stout then wise, refused to open their gates, until with force
of wars, the walls were battered down, and the City in the hand of the
Emperor to do what it lyked him. The soldiers greedy of the spoil, were
by the gentle and merciful Emperor, charged not to meddle with any within the
City until they had license. The Emperor being charged by the soldiers of
promise, to kill and to spoil all, and not to leave a dog alive: Kept
promise being a Prince, destroyed all the dogs of the City, and restored
again the City unto the inhabitauntes thereof. This noble Aurelian, had
rather his soldiers should want, than that they should not show mercy,
Zerxes.
according unto his custom to the comfortless. Zerxes, the great King of
Persea, with lenity and gentleness toward his brother Arimenes, with whom
before he was a great enemy, made his foe his friend, brought his enemy
before, to be his natural brother then. Porus. Brusonius. lib. 3. cap. 13
Porus a famous Prince of India, being conquered by Alexander the great,
fearing that pity might not have place in the heart of such a great
conqueror, sought nothing else of Alexander (which willed him to ask any
thing, and he should have it) but clemency, this virtue long waited upon
Alexander, until pride the root of al mischief corrupted his gentle heart,
until he was by the Medes and Perseans, persuaded to be the son of Jupiter.
So gentle before, Darius.
that King Darius did wish either to conquer Alexander because he might show
courtesy unto Alexander: or else to be conquered by Alexander. Aeneas Siluius
was wont to say, the saying of Sigismonde the Emperor, that happy are those
Princes that foster up clemency in Court, and prudent is those Princes that
uses humanity in their cities. It was no small proof of humanity in the
Senators of Rome, at the burial of Siphax King of Numidia, Siphax.
which being taken by the Romans, and kept in Tiberius house according to
marshall law, and before he was raunsomed by the Numedians, dyed at Rome,
where such solemnity, honor, and pomp was showed at his funeral: such
gifts given, such liberality used, as if Siphax had died amongst his own
subjects, he might have wanted to have such glorious burial in Numantia being
their king, as he had in Rome being their Prisoner. That is worthy humanity,
that is showed unto me^ in adversity: and that is mere clemency that is done
unto those banished strangers, as the Romans sometime did unto Prusias king
of Bithinia, Prusia.
who being driven to exile by his son Nicomedes, came unto Rome, where
humanity and clemency were fostered, and nourished in the Senate, being met
at Capua (a City sometime by Hannibal conquered) of Scipio, and Cornelius and
brought unto Rome, not like a banished man, but like a noble Prince, with such
triumphs and honor done unto him, with such passing courtesy, and liberality
of Senators, that though he was banished Bithinia his kingdom, and by
Nicomedes his own son, yet was he received unto Rome of strangers, and that
to the fame of Rome. Thereby the Romans grew to that admiration with all
people, that for their lenity, and surmounting courtesy, they were of all men
beloved: and for their valiantness and magnanimity, they likewise were of all
the world feared. Syphax.
For as unto Siphax and Prusias wonderful clemency and humanity were by the
Romans tendered: so unto Ptholome King of Egypt, being of his own brother
banished, and by the Romans received, and restored again unto his kingdom,
the like was showed. Rome then was called the haven of succor, the Anchor of
trust, the keye of courtesy, where all succourlesse Princes, and noble
Cappitaines fled. Rome flourished then, while pity and mercy continued, Rome
prospered: while humanity and clemency were fostered, Rome excelled all men
in gentleness and pity. When Marcellus and Matellus, the one Captain of
Siracusa, the other in Celuberia: The noble Captain Marcellus was so
pitiful, Marcellus.
that after his soldiers had conquered Siracusa, with great slaughter and
murder of men, women, and children: he mounted up into a high Tower of the
Castle, and there with weeping and lamenting the ruefull sight of Siracusa,
more like to one conquered, than a conqueror: to a Prisoner, than a Prince:
that any that saw him the^, might rather judge Marcellus a Siracusan captive,
than a Roman Captain. Happy was Siracusa (since fortune was no better) to
happen on such a gentle conqueror, which was so glad for his own victory, as
he was sorrowful for the fall of Siracusa. That renowned Roman Maetellus,
^etellus.
besieging the great City Centobrica, in the country of Celtiberia: when he
perceived their bulwark^s broken, their walls ready to fa^l, and victory nigh
at hand, he began to be moved with pity, and mercy possessed chief place
in his heart, that when the women of the City brought their children on their
arms to crave mercy at Maetellus hand, he avoided the calamity and misery
that was ready to fall on Centobrica, spared the City, removed his camp,
being with pity and mercy of the ruthful women, and innocent children quite
conquered. Thus gentle Maetellus where he might have been a Conqueror over
men, he suffered himself to be conquered by little infantes. O Rome, happy
were those golden days, wherein through clemency and gentleness, thou wast as
much loved and honored, as thou have been by valiant Capitaines trembled and
feared at. Pompeius.
Pompeius the great, when Tigranes King of Armenia, being by him conquered,
had kneeled before Pompeius face, yielding his crown and scepter at Pompeius
his foot, and himself unto his gentleness as a captive: Took him in his
arms, embraced him, put his Crown on his head, and restored him to the
kingdom of Armenia again. The like courtesy used he toward Mithridates King
of Pontus, being dead, for his royal burial, though the knew well the great
hatred that Mithridates had forty years against the Romans, yet in steed of
just reuengement, Pompeius used princely clemency. Fulgo. lib. 5. cap. 1.
The gentleness that was then used in Rome, yea betwixt foes, was such, that
Julius Ceasar that valiant Emperor and Conqueror, Caesar.
was as willing to revenge the death of his great enemy Pompeius, upon Photina
and Bassus, who slew Pompeius and sent his head unto Caesar, as L. Paulus was
courteous and favorable to his most mortal foe Persen. Hanniball, though he
was counted the most and greatest enemy that ever Rome felt, yet moved with
that clemency, that he won more commendations for the burial of P. Aemilius,
Gracchus, and Marcellus these noble Romans, then he wan fame by ouercoming
three thousand Romans in field. Hanibal.
The chief fame that Hanibal was worthy of, was for humanity and gentleness,
as proved by these two noble Romans before mentioned, Val. lib. 5.
which Hanibal caused their carcasses diligently to be sought for in the
feelde, and solempnely to be buried with honor and renown though they were
his enemies: and as Hanibal was much commended in Rome, and wel-beloued of the
Romans, only for humanity: so was he feared much in Rome for his prowisse and
valiant deeds of arms. Polycrates, that tiraunt of Samos, was cheefely
commended for his gentleness and courtesy showed toward women which were the
wives and mothers of the dead soldiers, in restoring them unto liberty, in
giving them wealth to live, and great charge that no man should do them any
wrong. Augustus the Emperor, when he beheld in the City Alexandria, the
sword wherewith Marcus Antonius slew him self, could not refrain tears to
show his humanitye, in opening his clemency of nature unto his enemy,
commanded he should be honorably buried with his dear freende Cleopatra in
one grave. Cicero in his first book of Tusculan, commends much the clemency
of Cleobulus and Biton, in showing such love and obedience to their mother,
which being in her Chariot, ready to go to the solemn feast of the goddess
Juno, the horses suddenly dyed: having no other remedy, lest their mother
should go a foot, yoked themselves to draw the Chariot ten miles, to their
immortal praise and commendations. I remember of a history in Patritius,
Simonides.
of one Simonides, which for that he was moved with pity to bury a dead
corpse, left in the way where no man would put him unto the earth, as he was
passing with his fellows over Seas, that night before they should sail in the
morning, appeared unto Simonides the self same man which he had buried upon
the way, warning him that day not to go to Sea: which when he should take
shipping, he remembering his dream, told it unto his fellows, desiring them to
stay that day: but his company laughing him to scorn, leaving Simonides on the
shoores, sailed unto the Seas, where in sight of Simonides, the Ship and all
his fellows were lost. The like pity seen in Simon, the son of that valiant
Greek Miltiades, Simon.
who being elected General over the Athenians, against the great might and
force of puissaunt Zerxes, in the wars of Marathon, which was nothing
inferior unto his renowned father in prowess, but far passed him in
clemencye and courtesy. A young man for his lenity and pity, joined with
valiantness, appointed by the people of Athens to encounter with Zerxes, whom
his father Miltiades often plaged: he then at the first time of his magnanimity
tried, enforced Zerxes, after spoil of soldiers and victory of field, to
fly unto Persea: So pitiful that he paid a great some of money, to have his
father buried. Milciades, which after many conquestes and fawning fortune in
victories, died in prison, whose death and burial, proved no less love and
faythfulnesse toward his father in Simon, then it showed euidentlye the
pity and mercy he had in redeeming his fathers corpse to be buried. Wherefore
that pitiful Emperor Alexander Seuerus, being demanded what is that, which
is chief felicity in this world, said, to foster friends with benifites
and gentleness: and to reconcile foes with pity and rewards. Alphonsus,
Alphonsus.
at what time certain dogs barked at him, took a toaste out of his cup, and
cast it to the Dog, then saying: gentleness and clemencye shall make foes
friends. I know not what greater humanity could be in Vaspasianus the
emperor, after that Vitellus had kilde his brother Sabinus, and had long
persecuted Vaspasians son: yet he being subdued, spared not to show gentleness
to Vitellius his daughter, with a great some of money toward her marriage.
Aegesilaus King of the Lacedaemonians, after he had the victory of Corinth, was
not so glad of his conquest, as he lamented the deaths of so many Athenians
and Corinthians, said as Plutarch does witness, weeping: O Greece, thou
spillest more men with civil war^es by discord, than would defend thy state
against all the world with courage. To use victory gently, is more famous,
than to conquer cruellye. As that Emperor Adrian was wont to say, that
Princes ought rather with Pity to say: this I can do, then with tirannye to
say: Augustus.
this I will do. Augustus that most pitiful Prince, after he had conquered
that famous City Alexandria, which the great conqueror Alexander had made,
and named it according to his own name, being moved with pity, stirred
with mercy, in sight of the Citizens, which hoped to have nothing but death,
said: for the beauty of your City, and memory of Alexander, for the love I
have unto Prius your Philosopher, and for the pity I bear unto you all, I
spare unto you, your City, and grant you life. O sweet sounding words,
from a pitiful Prince, not much unlike his predicessor Julius Caesar, Caesar*
his own mothers brother, who after vanquishing of Pompeius, at Pharsalia,
sent letters unto Rome, of love professed, of such friendship promised, that
though Pompeius was the only joy of Rome, the long delight of Romans, the
defender and meintainer of their name, and fame: yet being convicted, they
received Caesar as an other Pompeius, for that he used humanity, and showed
gentleness, even unto his enemies, for noble hearts ought to contemn
cruelty, princes minds ought to abhor tirannye. A simple sparow, which to
avoid ye griping paws of a hungry Sparhaucke, that would have prayed upon
him, fled unto Artaxerxes bosom being in camp, where after long panting
as well for fear, as for weariness in Artaxerxes bosom, he said: It is as
little masterie unto a Prince, or commendation to a valiant Captain to
destroy that which of it self does yield, as it is a fame unto Artaxerxes,
Artaxerxes.
to kill this poor Sparow, that fled for succor: saying again, beholding the
Sparrowe: As I will not betraye thee (thou little Sparrowe, for that thou have
fled for help unto Artaxerxes, so will I never deceive any man that will
have confidence in me. If this pity of Artaxerxes was showed unto a Sparrowe,
how much ought Princes to show the same unto men? Antigonus.
Antigonus though he was a great enemy unto Pirrhus, as Princes be during the
time of war, being slain of a silye woman in Argos, and his head brought by
Alcyoneus unto his father King Antigonus, thinking to please his father much to
bring King Pirrhus head, Plutarch. Lib. 27.
which long had molested Antigonus alive: but the king perceauing the cruel
tyranny of his son, to delight in dead men's heads, took the staff whereon
his son Alcioneus carried the head, and in steed of thanks which he looked
for at his fathers hands, he was well and worthily rewarded with stripes,
took Pirrhus head very honorably, decked and covered it, and after long
looking thereon, he commanded his son Helenus to carry it unto the kingdom of
Epire, where Pirrhus in life time was King, and there to be buried according
unto the custom of ye Epirotes by king Alexander his own brother. The like
history is written in Herodotus, Darius.
of King Darius, which yielded thanks unto those that brought Histeus head, as
Antigonus did unto his son Alcioneus, saying: I do as little joy to see
Histeus head, being dead, as I do lament much such tyranny and cruelnesse to
be in you, who never saw King Darius so cruel to any man alive, as you are
cruel unto Histeus being dead. As Darius was gentle of him self, Histeus.
so he greatly esteemed those that were gentle: insomuch he being at the
point of death, even at that time when he was so weak that he knew not
Polistratus that gave a little water to refreshe his heart, said: Whosoever
thou be I know thee not: Plutarch. lib. 37.
and for that I am not able to thank thee, Alexander shall and will requite
thy gentleness: and the gods shall thank Alexander for his clemency and
humanity toward my mother, my wife and children, and with that he stretched
forth his hand, and said: Have me recommended unto Alexander, and bring him
this my right hand, and tell him that Bessus killed Darius, whom thou did
see dying. Which when it was told by Polystratus unto Alexander, Darius.
Polystratus.
he much lamented his death, caused his body to be brought with great honor,
and precious clothes: and with all solempnitie that might be made unto his
mother named Sisigambis. Thus works clemency and humanity, that those two
famous Princes, Alexander and Darius, two mortal enemies always: and yet not
forgetting each others courtesy, at deaths door either of them in love with
the other: For their humanity one to another, Darius at his death, repeating
Alexanders gentleness toward him, and Alexander requiting Darius gentleness
being dead. The greatest fame or commendation that may happen unto any man, is
to be counted gentle and courteous, therein are diverse virtues knitted and
joined in freendship, as pity, mercy, wisdom, and affability, with others:
so that the property of those men are always, though they can hurt, yet never
to hinder. It is proper to an evil man to offend: so is the nature of the
good and gentle, to forgive. Pisistratus showed both wisdom and courtesy unto
certain dronkardes, who having in their drink used wanton speech unto his
wife, and being sober the next morning, came to Pisistratus to ask him
forgiveness for their lewd talk unto his wife: he gently said, learn to
be more sober another time. I know my wife was not out of her house
yesterdaye, excusing his wife wisely, and pardoning them gently. How gently
did Alexander Seuerus use Camillus, though he rebelled against him, and by sleight thought to be Emperor of Rome, and for that being condemned to die by
the Senate, yet he was pardoned by Alexander. How courteous was Fabius
Maximus, to forgive Marsius one of his chief Capitaines, his treasons and
snares that he used against his master Fabius with the enemies. Such
gentleness did Zerxes the great, show unto certain Greeks, who were as
espialles to view the host and power of King Zerxes, sent from Athens: and
being taken and brought before the king, he not only gently dismissed them
without any punishment, but showed them courteously all his host and force of
soldiers. The greatest victory is lightly always gotten by gentleness, as
Alphonsus King of Aragon, by gentleness won Careta: Marcellus won
Siracusa: Metellus, Seluberia as you have heard before mentioned. Plutarch
resiteth a passing history of great courtesy and humanity in king Belenus,
toward his son Antigonus, who being married to a fair woman, fell in love
with his fathers wife (for his mother was dead) and his father married the
daughter of Demetrius King of Macedonia, named Estrabonica, a young woman of
excellent beauty: for this therefore the Kings son languished in love, that
he was like to die, unknown unto his father: which when his f^ther knew of,
he caused his own wife to be married unto his son Antigonus: rare clemency
and great gentleness for a man to give his wife to please his friends:
Pity accompanies this excellent virtue clemency, that we read in holy
scriptures, that diverse good men ceased not to bewail and weep ever the
state of their enemies. I need not here to recite Pericles the Athenian,
Pericles.
who willed that the dead soldiers should be buried in the wars of
Peloponesus, nor of Hanibals courtesy in the wars of Carthage, for the
burial of Roman enemies. But Moses, that man of God brought with him from
Egypt, the boanes of Joseph.. Tobias. Machabeus* Iehu.
Tobias and Machabeus, merciful men commended likewise solemn burial for the
dead soldiers. And Iehu King of Israel, caused his enemy Iezabelem to be
honorably buried, but as white is better discerned by the black, than by any
color else, so shall humanity and gentleness most appear excellent in
reading the title of tyranny, where by conferring both together, the
excellency of the one is manifest, the terror of the other is odious. The
gentleness and pity that our Savior Jesus Christ showed unto Marie
Magdelen, the lewd woman, unto the prodigal child, unto Peter that denied
him, unto the Thief that hanged with him, unto Daniell in the den, to
Susanna in the fire, to Jonas in the water, was nothing else, but examples left
for our learning* to be gentle one unto another, even as Jesus Christ was unto
us all, thus ending as Cicero said of Caesar, that Caesar extolling Pompeius
being dead, and setting up his pictures, did extol his own name: so that the
clemency that men use to show unto others, does advance their own fame.

Of sober and temperate Princes, and where temperaunce and sobriety were most
used.
SO much was this noble virtue of temperaunce esteemed with ancient people,
that they thought the greatest pleasure and the happiest life was to abstain
from desired meat and drink. So much was this sobriety of life commended of
learned Philosophers, that Anacharsis that famous Scithian, was wont to write
about the painted pictures of Princes, this little lesson, Rule lust: Temper
tongue: And bridle the belly. Whereby the Philosopher diligently persuaded
Princes to be temperate of life, to be sober in talk, and to abstain from
filthy feeding. For, to subdue appetites, to vanquishe lust, to suppress
pleasure is a worthy conquest. He is a worthy Uictour, a famous conqueror, a
puissaunt Prince, that can overcome his own affections: for even as Fishes are
taken with hooks, so men, says Plato, are alured with pleasure. It is the
greatest virtue that can be in man says the Poet, to abstain from pleasure.
To avoid these baytes, these sweet pleasures, wise Princes have lothed
banqueting and drinking: Caesar. Plutarch of Caesar's life.
in so much that Julius Caesar, that famous Emperor of Rome, for his singular
sobrietye and passing temperaunce, the very lamp and lantorne of Europe, for
his abstinence the only mirror of Italy, who by ouercomming of himself,
overcame all Europe. Of this Emperor would Cato of Vtica say, though he was a
mortal enemy unto Caesar, for that Caesar used the company of Cato sister
Seru^lia, that one sober Caesar should subdue Rome: his abstinence was such
(says Plim) that most rare or never would this Emperor drink wine.
Agesilaus.
Agesilaus king of the Lacedaemonians passing through the country of Thasius,
being met with the nobles, and saluted the people with diverse dainties, and
rare banquets, to welcome the king unto the country: notwithstanding, he
touched not their daineties, fed only with bread and drink, to satisfy
the expectations of the Thasians. And being earnestly requested, Brusoniu^.
lib. 3. cap. 1
and humblye sought, and in manner enforced (least he should seem ungrateful,
not to eat their meats) he commanded his footmen and slaves, Helotes, to
feed if they would on such* cheer, saying, that princes might not so pamper
the^ selves with damtie cheer and wines, but with abstinence and temperancie:
The one is incident (said he) unto vice, and shame, the other a nource unto
virtue and fame: for in eating and drinking, lies hidden that sucking Serpent
named forgetfulness. To avoid therefore gluttony and drunkenness, which are
often tendered unto Princes. Constantius
Constantius that most temperate Emperor, kept him always so hungry, that he
would take of a poor woman, a crust of bread to satisfy hunger. It was
Licurgus law in Sparta, and Zaleucus rule in Locresia, to abstain from fine
meat, and sweet wine, as from an enemy unto Princes: for wisemen were wont
to say, that meat is only good to expel hunger, and drink to break thirst.
Cirus.
King Cirus in wars, being demanded of his host, what he would have
provided against dinner: bread said Cirus, for drink we shall not want,
meaning as Amianus says, water. This virtue of abstinence was so honored
then, that Princes which were given to wine, were odious vn^^ the world.
Leonidas* Epaminondas*
A great shame it were in Thebes, in Leonidas time, to make banquetes, for when
Epaminondas, that passing Prince of temperaunce, was willed of a rich Citizen
being his friend, to come to a supper: where he found such superfluous
cheer, such excess of meat and drink, that he said (being much offended
with his friend) that he thought he was willed to come to eat like a man, and
not to feed like a beast. This Prince knew the inconvenience of feeding, and
again knew the commodity of abstinence. A number of excellent virtues do
follow abstinence, as continency, chastity, sobriety, and wisdom. A heap
of vices wait on pampering Princes, as glotonye, lechery, drunkenness, and
such others. Such was the temperaunce of great King Porus of India, Porus.
that bread and water was his accustomed cheer. Such was the abstinence of
Massinissa King of Numidia, Masinissa.
being four score years old, that he fed hungerly always, and not daintily
at anytime. Such was the temperaunce of that noble Pericles, Pericles and
Tymon.
and of that Greek Tymon, that Aelianus in his book of diverse histories,
commends the abstinence of the one, and Cicero in his book of friendeshippe,
extolleth the temperaunce of the other: and so jointly these two noble Greeks
did avoid always banqueting and belly cheer, forsook and fled the company
of drinkers, as things more noisome than profitable: more dangerous then
helthie: more filthily than friendly. Dometrius.
Demetrius king sometime of Macedonia, and son unto Antigonus, being much
given to feeding and pampering of him self, grew to that lust and lechery,
that being not sufficed with diverse stately strumpetes, and curious
Curtezaunce, as with that renowned Lamia, Plutarch de vita Demenij.
famous Crisidies, diamonde Dama, and such other dainty dames, fell to lust of
a young Gentleman of Greece, of amorous countenance, of passing beauty, and
of such a princely port, with seemly shamefastenesse endued, that then coming
from Athens unto Macedonia, to serve as a soldier unto king Demetrius, sought
diverse means to accomplish his inordinate lust by eating and drinking with
this young Democles, and with diverse attemptes to have his purpose, followed him
privily where Democles went a bathing unto a close chamber, where Demetrius hid
himself until the young man was naked, and then on a sudden enterprised his
lust: which when Democles, saw the King, and perceived his wicked intent, to
avoid the shameful act and filthy lust of the king, and to maintain
temperaunce of life, and everlasting fame of abstinence, he lept naked into a
great seething vessel, of whote boiling water, and finished his noble life,
with famous death. O renowned Democles! O vile and shameful Demetrius! thy
death is famous, his life is infamous: thy temperaunce and virtue commended,
his lust and wickedness, justly of all men condemned. The like history does
Plutarch write of Trebonius, Trebonius.
a young soldier, of a younger Captain named Lucius, and Nephew unto that
noble Roman Caius Marius. This Lucius having a charge over certain
soldiers appointed of his Uncle Marius then General, having a long while
devised means to bring his purpose to pass, in accomplishing his lust with
Trebonius happened on such a season, that he found Trebonius by him self
alone, and offering violence unto him, Trebonius understanding his Capitaines
desire, made as though he should speed, came embracing him, and thrust him to
the heart with Lucius own dagger, and so slew his Captain to avoid infamy:
which when it came to Marius his ear, that his nephew was slain by Trebonius,
the cause thereof being demanded by Marius, and being orderly declared by
Trebonius, where as it was thought he should be hanged, drawn, and quartered,
and suffer most ignominious death, he was rewarded with a crown of Gold upon
his head, written about with this sentence. This crown and garlande won
Trebonius by temperauance. Had Demetrius King of Macedonia embraced sobrietye
of feeding, Democles, had not been so famous by abstinence as Demetrius might
have been renowned with temperaunce. Had that Roman Lucius loved continency,
as Trebonius honored chastity, Trebonius had not had of Marius his Uncle
Lucius the praise, the garlande of commendacions, and he so vilde and shameful
a death. Certainly, Athens.
when the people of Athens fed with figs: the Arcadians with Acornes or with
Walnuts: the Argiues with Pearsley: Arcadians. Argiue.
the Terinthians with Pears: the Scithians with herbs, Scythians.
the inhabitauntes of Carmenia and Meotica, with poor fare: yea, before corn
was sown, the whole world fed with fruits, which our old mother the earth
naturally brought forth. Then kingdoms and nations were ruled by law of
Nature, to embrace temperauncie, to honor abstinencie, and to observe
chastity: which since grew to that aboundancie and excess, that the law of
God, which was first, the law of nature which was the second, and the law of
Princes which was the last, could not keep men from excess of meat, which
only was the cause of the sinking of Sodom and Gomorrhe, the often plague of
Israelites, the just confusion of gluttons and drunkardes. When the
Gymnosophistes of India, Gymnosophists of India. The priests of Egypt. The
Sages of Persea.
fed only with Apples, when the Priests of Egypt abstayned from flesh and
wine, fed with bread and Oil, when the sages of Persea, fed with fruits
and herbs: Then temperance bear rule, then sobriety governed, then
abstinence was honored, then Egypt flourished through temperaunce, and now
spoiled with gluttonye. Then India prospered through continency and sobriety,
and now vanquished by drunkenness and temeri^y: Then Persea was famous, and
conquered kingdoms by abstinence, and now convicted and conquered by
aboundancie and excess. Where is learned Athens, famous Sparta, sttately
Thebes? Athens. Sparta. Thebes.
while temperaunce did rule, feared of all Kings, and after by means of
excess, hated and destroyed of all Princes. All the while that the
Lacedaemonians observed the law of Licurgus, in abstayning from brave
banquettes and excess of cheer: yea, when they might not pass unto Asia, for
fear they should be alured and entised with the sight of the iunkets of Asia:
then says Cicero were the people of Sparta so temperate, that the men did
never sit with women, nor the women with the men. When the Milesians had
made a law, as Theophratus does witness, that neither their wives, their
daughters, nor their maids might taste wine, neither durst any man by the same
law praise any wine in presence of women: for wine causes heat, heat,
moves lust, lust causes murder. Wherefore wise men write that it is
dangerous to praise three things in presence of people. The history of King
Candales.
A man to praise the beauty of his wife, for fear of fornicatours, for so did
king Candales of Lidia praise his wife unto his friend Giges, that he was
murdered thereby, and the Queen his wife afterward married unto Giges. To
brag of his riches and substance, Sichaeus.
for so did Sichaeus show his substance unto Pigmalion King of Tire, married
the kings sister named Eliza, Iustine. lib. 18.
and yet slain by the self same Pilgmalion, king of Tire, and his own
brother in law: Even so to commend sweet wine in presence of people,
breeedeth a desire unto lust, and lust unto death. The famous Romans for a
long while kept a strait order to observe temperaunce, Plini. lib. 13 cap. 23.
that the Ladies and matrones of the City of Rome, might in no wise be
suffered to drink wine, for abstinence is the only keye of temperauncy: so
straight was this law looked unto, Eg. Maecenius.
that Eg. Maecenus slew his own wife, as Plini records, for that she loved
wine, and was by the law of Romulus made for that purpose, saved from death.
In the same place of Plini it is read, Romans.
that a certain matrone of Rome was judged to die, for that she had a privy
keye unto a Celler of wine. So nie did they observe this temperaunce, that Cato
the Censor appointed by law certain men to kiss the women of Rome, to know
whether they smelled of wine by their breath. ^lianus. lib. 2.
No man of what degree so ever he was, Consul, Censor, Tribune, or Senator
might drink wine in Rome, before he was thirty and five years of age. The
people of Messaliotica.
The people of Massaliotica made and ordained, that the women should drink no
other drink than water. Amongst the Egyptians there was by a law appointed,
how much wine their Princes might drink and no more. The Perseans fed only
then with bread, sault, and water. The Prophets of Jupiter in Creete,
abstain from flesh and wine. In Rhodes he was taken a gross braynd man, that
fed on any thing else but on fish. The Lacedaemonians most hateful unto
those that were fat by feeding, insomuch they would punish their own children
with hunger, if they waxed fat, either by feeding, or by Idleness. This
abstinence was fostred as a nourse unto chastity, and temperaunce, then
Princes lothed vice, and loved virtue: then they abhorred gluttony and
dronkenesse, and honored abstinence and sobriety. The Philosophers of most
continency.
The learned and sage Philosophers, and men of passing abstinence and
sobriety, being no less studious than careful of temperaunce, despised
banquettes, refused feasts, lothed and defied belly cheer, that being allured
of Princes, entised of noble men, sought of all men, forsook and fled from
the same, saying: we eat to live, we live not to eat. A worthy and golden
sentence to be observed, Rather had Diogines feet and lick dishes at
Athens, Diogines.
than to feed daintilye at Alexanders table. Rather had that learned Greek,
noble Zeno, Zeno.
drink water, and feed poorly as an example unto his Scholars unto
temperaunce, to come by abstinence, than to pamper his belly at Antigonus
Princely table, to show them the way unto glu^^^^ and drunkenness. Plato.
Rather had Plato forsake Dionisius table, Plato.
than to abstain from his woonted philosophical cheer. This virtue of
abstinence was of noble Socrates maintained with bread and milk only,
Socrates.
and learned Homer honored it with potage made of herbs: Homer.
Of ancient, Pithagoras with beans. Pithagoras. Anacharsis saying.
Anacharsis, a Scithian Philosopher, Anacharsis saying.
being demanded of his estate how he fed, how he did lie, and how he was
clothed, answered: I feed on hunger, I lie on the ground, and am clothed
like a Scithian. Plutarch lib. 22. Aristid^^.
The famous Athenia^ Aristides, at what time King Dionisius made suite for his
daughter to marriage, though he was a puissaunt Prince, a mighty king, yet for
his gluttonny and prodigal drinking, for his tirranny and excess, Aristides,
who abhorred such vices in Princes, soberly and temperately answered: that he
had rather kill his daughter with his own hand, then to give his daughter in
marriage unto Dionisius. So odious unto good Princes was that excess of eating
and prodigal drinking, and so highlye esteemed was abstinence and temperaunce,
that in Athens a long while in the temple of Ceres, that of all the laws of
Triptolemus, three only commandments as Zenocrates says, were highly
observed. The first their Gods to be worshipped, the second, their parents
to be honored, and the third to abstain from flesh and feeding. O most
temperate life, when abstinence was observed. Vestas temple.
O most goulden world, when neither wine nor banquets were known: then
chastity was honored in the temple of Vaesta, then temperaunce frequented the
Capitol of Jupiter, Capitol.
then lust knew no way to the palace of Caesar's, then abstinence walked in
the market place, then all Rome was chaste. Then Rome triumphed, when kings
were deprived for lechery toward Lucretia, Then Rome merited fame, when the
princely office of December viri were banished for the rape of Virginia. When
Scipio Affricanus had ouercommed the famous city of Carthage, and Numantia,
Scipio affricanus worthy co^mendacio^s.
he was not so valiant by his great and renowned conquest, as he was famous by
abstinence: for when he triumphed as a valiant victor, a certain noble young
Uirgin, Gellius. lib. 6. cap. 8.
that for her passing beauty and great admiration of person, was presented unto
Scipio as a rare gift, whose beauty and excellency though Scipio, a long time
was amazed thereat, yet had such respect to abstinence, as a thing belonging
unto a prince, specially unto a conqueror, that overcame kingdoms, and
countries, not to be subdued by lust, trusted not his soldiers to guide and
guard this Uirgin, but with his presence, brought her home to her father unto
Campania saying: were it not that I am a conqueror, I had not been able to
bring thy daughter home. A greater conquest surely it was of Scipio to overcome
himself, tha^ to subdue Numantia, or Carthage* That lesson worthy of a prince
he learned of Alexander the great, who thought it a shame unto a conqueror of
men, to be conquered by women: and though in diverse aucthours and places, this
prince is noted a glutton and drunkard, yet of woonderful abstincence toward
women, which is rare found in a drunken Prince: Alexander absteined from
women.
For when Alexander came unto Illyria, unto the Temple of Jupiter, where he saw
a passing fair woman, of comely beauty: vewing still the comely state of her
person, and feeding him self a long season with the sight thereof, his
counselor and great freende Ephaestion, perceyuyng that Alexander was taken
in the Briers of beauty, said: It is not meet that Alexander should want any
thing that he wishes for, to whom Alexander answered: neither is it an
honor unto Alexander that overcame al men, to be overcome by one woman. The
modesty and continency of Princes have been such, that they refused the
company of their own wives, ^lianus. 3.
and went to wilderness solitarily to live, to avoid the occasion of lust,
Amaebeas and Dionisius forsook their vviues to live temperately.
and to embrace the cause of temperauncie, as Amoebeas and Dionysius surnamed
Histrio, being married both to fair women. Clitomachus was of such modesty,
that he might not abide in place, whether he were at supper or else where
filthy talk was ministered, clitomachus
but he would avoid the place and the person as Plini says where any
inciuility was: and true it is, ill language corrupt good manners. I read in
Valerius, a worthy Roman historye of one Spurina, a young gentleman of the
City of Rome, whose amorous countenance, wonderful beauty, and passing
state of person, surmounted all the Ladies of Rome, but not so beautiful
outward, as he was modest and temperate inward: and lest he should seem
with his outward beauty to inflame the Roman Ladies and Uirgines of the
City to lust, he so deformed his body, and mangled his face with his own
hand, that from the fear creature that was in Rome, he became the most
deformed man in all the world, in so much all Rome knew him not. Spurina.
Spurina is more famous by his modesty therein, then he is now renowned for
his beauty: the one passes like a flower in short time, the other without
prescription of time has immortal fame. Men have been in the world that
subdued lust, overcame them selves: yea, and though attempted with great
allurementes, yet temperaunce saved and preserved them, that Valerius says
that Phrine, a passing fair woman, Zenocrates.
came unto Zenocrates, the Philosophers bed, and being all night in bed
with him could not win the Philosopher with all her tricks to venery, that
the next day being demanded where she lay all night, with an image of a man
she said, Socrates.
or with a man's picture. The like of Socrates, though he were married to two
wives, does Zenophon report, that on a certain time Socrates being in taulke
with a renowned and famous Courtezaune named Theodora, a woman of great
bragges, and boasting much what she could do unto princes before Socrates,
saying that she could make any to come from Socrates unto her, and that
Socrates could not make any of her men to come unto him. Aesianus lib. 13.
It is no marvel said Socrates, to draw men to vice is most easy: and to
draw them unto virtue is most heard. I might here bring forth diverse
histories for the proof of modest and temperate Princes: to avoid prolixity
of reading, and to embrace compendeous histories I omit to speak further of
men, I will turn my style unto women, where such infinite numbers appear in
histories, that I will touch but two or three, for that I should be ouercharged
otherwise. The chaste life of Lucrecia, Lucrecia. Sophronia.
and noble temperancy of Sophronia, two noble Matrones of Rome, the on^
ravished to requite the tyranny of the Emperor Torquinius, by whom she was
deflowred, after that she made her husband privy that his bed was defiled
by Torquin, slew her self with her own knife: the other in like sort because
she could not resist the violence of Decius, to make Decius more odious, and
his deed more shameful, Medullina.
ended her life as Lucrecia did. Even so Medullina being oppressed by her
father in the darcke, got his ring from his finger to know him in the morning,
who had so villain like de^^owred her virginity in the night: which when she
knew by the ring, that it was her own father, she spared not to revenge her
temperauncie with the death of her father: and for that she little esteemed
her own life, her honestye being stained, with that knife that she slew her
father, she also killed her self, as a witness of her own truth, and
proof of her honest life. This has made Rome famous, how well was
temperauncie regarded in Rome when Virginius slew his daughter Virginia,
Virginius slew his own daughter.
for that she was deflowred of Appius Claudius, so greatly was it esteemed, so
highly honored, Sempronius Ceruius.
and so straightly looked unto, that Sempronius slew Gallius, that Ceruius gelded
Pontus the Roman, both being taken in adultery. How happy and renowned was
Rome when Sulpicia Paterculus daughter, and wife to Fuluius flaccus, Sulpitia.
the lamp of Rome, and lantern of the world, preferred for his temperauncie,
by the verdite of Sibilla, Plini. lib. 7. cap. 35. Claudia.
to excel all Asia, and Europe. The like temperauncie proved by Cibeles the
mother of all the Gods to be in Claudia, that heaven and earth extolled the
name of Rome, was not then temperance honored, when Uirgines and young women
bought temperauncie with death? some killing themselves, some burning, some
drowning, and thus by death their lives were known. Hippo, Hippo.
a woman of Greece, says Valerius, that travailing unto Rhodes on the seas,
perceiving the Mariners to be greedy and ready to spoil her honesty,
understanding that they went about to defile her temperate and chaste mind, to
avoid their purpose and filthy lust, leapt from boorde unto the surging seas,
whose terror she less feared to die, then she was willing to live, as a woman
stained and corrupted* what way finds not modesty of life to requite shame?
How escapes dishonestye and lust of ill life from the snares and baits of
temperaunce? Timoclea.
Timoclea, a woman of Thebes, being violated by a certain Prince of Thracia,
against her will, requited this prince, and eased her molested mind after this
sort says Sabellicus, she went in an evening unto this Thracian Prince, and
told him privily, if he would follow Timoclea, she should bring him where
such store of substance and such wealth is hidden, as would make him the
richest Prince in all Asia, to whom he greedily consented, went willing and
gladly, thinking to speed of one thing, he found an other thing, and being
brought unto a deep well, she said: In this well said Timocla, is infinite
treasure, which when he stoupt to look unto the bottom of the Well, she
threw him in headlong, and a mighty huge stoane she roulde after him.
Atalanta, the mirror of all Ladies, a second Diana, refusing the company of
men, living in wilderness, abstayning from wordlye pleasure, and ending her
life in pure virginnitie in the desartes of Arcadia. Since I may better begin,
and sooner end, with aledging kingdoms and countries for a proof of
temperaunce, folly it were in so large a scope, in so ample a matter, to deal
with particular histories* therefore to begin with women, Teutonica.
of Teutonica where temperauncie so much esteemed was, so well thought on, that
hearing their husbands to be slain and taken Captives by a valiant Roman,
then Capitane for Rome, named Marius, they came kneeling before him, be sought
him courteously and humblye since their husbands were slain, as women willing
to lead a chas^e life, that they might go and serve the Vestall Uirgins in
Rome, to avoid the greediness of Marius soldiers and there to end the rest
of their lives in service of Vesta: but being denied of Marius, clean
contrary unto a Roman heart, and to a noble Gentleman: the next night
following, the women of Teutonica hanged themselves, least they might be a pray
unto the Roman soldiers, to be defiled by unchaste dealing. The like did
the fifty Uirgins of Sparta, The fifty virgins of Sparta.
going a pilgrimage to Messena, and being set for their Uirginities certain
hooks and baits of purpose by the Gentlemen of Messena* and now ready as
they were appointed every one of them being then maids, to be made women that
night, they all prevented it with death, rather to lose life honestly, then to
live shamefullye, knowing what a reproach and infamy it would be unto Sparta,
and to all the country of Lacedemonia, if that they esteemed life more than
honesty: killed themselves being Uirgins to honor their country, and to
defame Messena. Hence proceeded terrible and long wars betwixt the
Lacedemonias and Messenians, to the last confusion, and utter destruction of
the country of Messaena: and this wars continued ten long years, that of
pleasure so short, the Messaenians, felt so grievous pain. We read of a
passing good history of Alexander and king Amyntas son, brother to king
Philip of Macedonia, which when he perceived the Ambassadors o^ Persea to wax
wanton with his sisters, Patritius. lib. ^^
and desirous to do villannie unto the King his father, promised the
Ambassadors that they should accomplish their lust and pleasure with fayrer
Uirgins then those were, which the Persean Ambassadors would meddle with* they
being glad of the promise, expecting the time, and their coming, being then
in their beds ready for them, Alexander to note such vilanye, and to open the
same unto others, caused certain young men to array themselves like women, and
such a night to go unto the Perseans, as though they should seem to be
women, and to bring either of them a knife priuilye: who being in bed, they
were commanded by Alexander to kill the Ambassadors, Aspasia.
and his company. Megapirus, when he hear^ that his Ambassadors were slain
in Macedonia, waxed mad a long time, and ready to raise wars, until he had
understanding of the cause and order of their deaths: for Alexanders
temperauncie therein he married Amyntas daughter Alexanders sister: this is the
sacrifice that the Priests of Isis did use to abstain from flesh and wine:
Isis.
this is the temperaunce that Numa Pompilius showed most often in Rome, from
women and wine to abstain. Numa Pompilius.
This abstinence used Sara the daughter of Raguel to do her feats: this used
Judith, to have Holofernus head off: And this used Queen Esther to king
Ahasuerus. Worthy examples we read of Kings sometime, that being most
thirsty, refused to drink, Alexander.
as Alexander the great, before he fell amongst the Perseans to dronkennes, was
so temperate that having a cup of water brought unto him in his extreme
thirst, would not drink the same in the sight of his soldiers, least the
sight thereof should augment the thirst of his soldiers, being most thirsty
already. Cato Junior, Cato.
leading a great host of soldiers over the whot sands of Lybia, having no
drink nor water nigh them, waxed so thirsty, that when one of his soldiers
brought him in his headpeece a draught of water by chance, he would not
drink him self and leave his soldiers thirsty, but threw the water down
upon the ground, because he might impart their thyrst with abstinence, which
was such ease unto the soldiers, to see his temperaunce one way, and his
humanity another way, that they felt their thirst much thereby aswaged. King
David being besieged by the Palastines, David.
was desirous to drink of the water called Bethlehem, some stout soldiers of
his named Eleazarus, Iesebes, and Semera, ventured life for the kings sake
through the enemies, which when the water came, David drank it not, as one
that could abstain from that he liked best: but because it was brought with
great peril, he offered that water as a sacrifice unto God, for the three
soldiers that ventured their lives for it. A great virtue to abstain from
that which a man likes best: and great temperaunce there is in abstaining,
Romulus being bidden to supper to a Citizen of Rome, drank no Wine all supper
time, but two or three drops after supper, Gellius. lib. 2. cap. 4.
unto whom the host spoke merely. Romulus said he, if all men would drink
no more than you, Wine would be nothing esteemed: to whom Romulus answered
soberly, and said: Wine would be more precious and dear if every man would
drink as I did, for I drank as much as I would: and if all would do so,
Wine would be skant. Noting his temperauncie in a little, and the gluttony of
the most part in drinking. Hanniball, Scipio, Mithridates, Fabritius,
Sempronius, and Papirius had no less praise for their temperancie in
abstayning from offered pleasure, than fame for their victories and triumphs.

Of Taciturnitie and Silence, and of the virtue and commodity thereof.
SOcrates, a famous Philosopher, and Master unto that noble and divine Plato,
was wont to charge his scollers to honor and to embrace these three excellent
virtues: Silence of tongue, shamefastenesse of countenance, and wisdom of
heart, places appointed most fit for such noble virtues. The wisdom of a fool
lies in his tongue, which is the key of his council: and the tongue of the
wise lies hidden in his heart, for of the abundancie of the heart the tongue
will speak: so that silence in tongue is a proof of wisdom in heart.
Wherefore that learned Philosopher Zeno, Zeno.
said, that nature appointed two ears to hear much, and one tongue to talk
little. In ancient time the Egyptians thought silence such a virtue unto
people, Egyptian^.
that they caused an image to be made says Plini, with her finger on her
mouth, and a table written on her breast with this sentence: hear, see, and
say nothing, to represent silence. The renowned Romans so esteemed silence
says the same Plini, Romans.
that she was sacrificed unto once a year in Rome, Persea.
imitating the old Egyptians, erecting up an image naming the same Angerora,
as a great Goddess for the purpose to honor for silence sake. The Perseans
honored nothing so much as silence, and hated nothing so much as inordinate
speech. The famous Lacedaemonians, Lacedaemonians.
had silence in such reverence, that their wisemen named Ephori, at what time
they met in places to be merry, fearing in drink to forget silence, the
signeours should speak to the company before they sat down at drinking,
poynting unto the door with his finger, saying: Let nothing done or spoken at
this table, pass yonder door. O worthy order, and renowned law, to think of
that before sitting, that should do them no harm after rising. The
Lacedaemonians used such short speech, that when one of Charillus demanded why
did not Licurgus appoint more laws then he did unto his country? he
answered: to few words, few laws will serve. The silence that Mary
Magdalen, the woman found in adultery, pleased much God for that she went not
with words, but with sobbes, sighs, and silence she came to Christ. Better
says Zeno, it is to fall from foot or horse, than to lie in tongue. Even so
the learned Athenians observed silence in such estimation, Athenians.
that though Athens was counted the well of wisdom, the flower of Philosophy
where all the world came to learn to speak: yet learned they silence in such
sort, as that worthy Greek Themistocles, at that time he was banished
Athens, and enforced to go into Persea, where he was much esteemed, and
honorably received: and being entreated of the King to show the state of his
country, Themistocles.
Themistocles besought the king to grant him one year to learn the Persean
tongue, and then the king should be certefied in all points that he would
demand of Themistocles. O famous Greek, though banished from Athens, yet
observed he the law of Athens, forgot not silence, which was so honored in
Greece, though he was in Persea, a place says Curtius where silence was so
magnified, that sharp punishment was provided for tongue taulking. The people
of Sparta were noted as men given most unto silence, hating so superfluous
words, that when the Ambassadors of the Abderites as Plutarch makes mention,
had made a long and a tedious oration before King Agis of Sparta, Sparta.
and after much time spent, and many words in vain bestowed (as tongue
talkers do) taking their leave from Agis, willing to have an answer to their
King of Abderites: salute your king (says Agis) from me, and tell him, as long
as you spoke, so long held Agis his peace, letting them to understand of
their much folly in babbling. The like answer received the Ambassadors of
Samos, after a long Oration and tedious talk of Cleomenes King of the
Lacedaemonians, saying: the first part of your Oration I forgot, the second
part I understand it not, and the third part I do not well allow. That
Tailor is not expert that makes Hercules hose to a childs leg, nor that
Shoemaker can be good says Agisilaus, that frames Titor^^us shoe to that
little Molons foot: neither may he be counted wise that speaks much to none
effect. Wherefore the first thing which that ancient and learned Pithagoras
taught his Scholars, Pythagoras
was carefullye to keep silence. It was Pythagoras law, that none of his
scholars might speak any thing in five year space after their first coming
unto school. It was no less careful unto Pythagoras to teach them silence,
than it was painful for them to learn silence. Most hard and most
difficult, is that silence unto a young man, that one Messius pined and
tormented himself three years as Plini says for silence sake. Messius lib.
28. cap. ^
But Simonides said sometime to a still man amongst a number of wisemen: If
thou be a fool said he, thou do the part of a wiseman to hold thy peace:
but if thou be wise, thou art a fool that thou do not speak to wise men,
and so I end: silence to follye is great wisdom, and silence to wisdom is
mere folly. Cleanthes therefore being desired of a Gentleman, some short wise
sentence to instruct his son with all, said: learn only this word to thy
son: Siga, that is silence. That noble and renowned philosopher Zeno, at what
time he had prepared a banquet in Athens, to receive the Ambassadors of
Antigonus, King of Macedonia, where certain learned Philosophers, and eloquent
Orators were present: after many large and subtle disputations, and great
ostentation of Rethoricke betwixt them had at supper, Zeno being demanded of
the Ambassadors why he kept silence all that while, zeno.
answered: that to keep silence is greater knowledge than to speak, for
silence said Zeno is most difficult to obtain, and most hard to keep, and
therefore most rare found. A Gentleman in that company then named Agatho,
hearing Zeno so commending silence, being no less desirous to leare silence,
then being learned to keep it, prepared a great stone, and healde it in the
roufe of his mouth three year to avoid idle words and superfluous talk, and
to learn sober silence, and virtuous taciturnitie. Alexander the great, when
his mother Olimpias did send letters from Macedonia unto India, Alexander.
where then he was at wars, wherein were written much concerning the state
of Macedonia, Plutarch in vita Alex.
and great complaynts made on Antipater, with diverse more secret councelles
sealed, he reading these news, his friend Hephaestion, who knew all the
secrets of Alexander, looking and reading the letters with the King unto the
end, then Alexander took his signet from his finger after perusing of these
letters, joined it close unto Ephaestions mouth, saying: Since in friendeship
you fail not, in silence break not. A show of silence in Alexander honored,
but of Princes which honored silence, Julius Caesar most esteemed the same:
(...).
he may justly challenge for sobriety in drinking, and modesty in taulking,
the garlande of praise: Who after long wars with Pompeius the great, sometime
his especial friend, yea, and married to Iulia Caesar's daughter, being
convicted in Pharsalia, and enforced to flee unto Egypt, his treasures,
substance, and wealth, being brought unto Caesar in a great cheast, Plutarch in
Caesar's life.
where diverse sealed letters and great councelles Caesar found, which he never
opened for silence sake, took them all together and threw them into the fire,
for that all men might learn how much he esteemed silence: this done unto
Pompeius at Pharsalia, and the like unto Scipio at Thescus, he said unto his
soldiers, that it behooued a Prince to find out friends, rather than s^arch
out foes. The noble Emperor knew well by reading of Pompeius letters he might
be moved to diverse injuries, by opening of Scipios secrettes, he might accuse
diverse wrongfully: therefore he had rather purchase by silence friends, than
by breaking of counsel move enmity. How sure and safe is the reward of
silence, hystories of Greek and Latin can well report. Had Calisthenes
followed the council of his Master Aristotle, Calisthen^s
either merrily or never to speak unto a Prince, he had never found fault with
Alexander, by speaking to anger Alexander, and to harm himself. Had not
learned Seneca so reproved the Emperor Nero and tyrant of Rome with words,
Seneca.
he had not been rewarded with death. If the Poet Neuius had not written his
mind unto Metellus. Neuius.
If Chius had not been familier in talk with king Antigonus, Chius.
they had saved life by silence, which have purchased death by talking.
Therefore Phocion that wise Greek, which sugared Demosthenes called the rasor of
Athens, Phocion.
was always afraid as Plutarchus says, least any sudden syllable or
foolish word might escape his tongue imprudentlye: 39.
So that silence gayneth life, Linus.
and words causes death, as Linus the ancient Musition, at what time with
Hercules he found fault, for that he was Linus scholar and taught him on
instruments, for words speaking of Linus unto Hercules, he was slain of his
own master, so that silence unto Princes is most n^cessarie. O noble silence,
O rare virtue, O most worthy Iuell, thou hurtest no man, thou betrayest no
body, thou deceyuest no friend. Phillippides a noble man of Athens, which for
his singularity of learning, and dexterity of wit, Brusonius. lib. 1. cap.
5.
King Lisimachus made most account of, most desirous to please him, most ready
to advance him unto honor, willed him to ask what he would, and he should
have it: Philippides most humbly kneeling upon his knees, be sought Lisimachus
the king in any wise not to open his secrets and council unto him: The king
demanded the cause thereof of Philippides, because said he, I know not
whether I am able to keep council or no. How much it repugneth the nature of
man to keep silence, Cicero in his book of Offices does manifest the same:
for were it possible says he, unto man to ascend up the skies, to see the
order of the bodies superiors, and to vewe the beawtie of the heavens:
unsweet were the admiration thereof, unless he might show it unto others.
And again he says: There is no such case unto men, as to have a friend to
whom a man may speak as unto himself, letting to understand the grief of
silence, and that nature loves nothing which is solitary. It may seem that
silence one way is not so benificiall, as it is another way most grievous, as
proved by the history of Secundus the Philosopher, Secundus.
who having company with his own mother in the night time, either of them
most ignorant of the other, his mother in process of time having knowledge
thereof, for very grief and sorrow slew her self. The Philosopher likewise
having understanding of his mothers death, knowing the cause thereof, knew not
what to do for that he was ashamed of the filthy act one way, and most
sorrowful for the sudden death of his mother another way: to dye, to hang,
to burn, to drown, him self he though it to short a torment for so heinous a
fact, knowing his mother being a woman, stayed not nor feared not to kill her
self to ease her sorrowful heart: but he being a Philosopher, stood him
upon to find out the painefullest torment in all the world, to plague him
justly for his grievous offense: he vowed unto God never to speak one word
during life, such plague or torment he thought was most odious and painful
unto nature, and thus by silence to consume life. Since silence is such a
burning disease, so heavy in the heart of man, so hard to keep in, so
dangerous to utter out, how worthy of commendacions, how merit they the fame
and praise, that can rule their tongues and keep silence? Papyrius.
Therefore a noble Senator in Rome sometime, brought his eldest son named
Papirius, unto the Senate house, to hear the council pleading, the sage
Senators determining laws, charging him what ever he should hear in the
house amongst the wise Senators, to keep it in silence: for the order was in
Rome, that the young men should say nothing unless he were a Consul, a
Tribune, a Censor, or such like office, whereby he might speak. This young
Papirius on a time being sore set on of his mother, and charged him of her
blessing to tell the cause and business that the Senators had so often to come
together: Thus the young man being threatened, waying his fathers charge to
avoid words one way, and his mothers displeasure to keep silence another
way, said: Since you are so importunate Mother, to know the secret of the
Senate, you must keep council, for I am charged therewith. There is a hard
hold, and a great election in the Senate house to agree on this conclusion,
whether it be more expedient for one man to have two wives in the City of
Rome: or one woman to have two husbands, and most like it is, that the
election goes with the men. Straight ways she went into the City, certefied
the Matrones and women of Rome what the Senators were about to consult,
appointed certain of them to accompanye her the next morning unto the Senate,
where when she came, as one dismayde, began to declayme against the purpose and
decrees of the Senators, proving what inconvenience might rise for a man to
have two wives, laying before them the dissension that should be in that house
where two women were married unto one man, and what comfort and consolation,
were it for one woman to have two husbands: the one to be at home in Rome to
see his children brought up, and to see the City defended, when the other
should be far from whom at the wars in other countries. The Senators
being amazed at her talk, not knowing what it meant, and all the whole Senate
astonished at the women's presence, young Papirius demanded license to speak,
which being granted, he declared orderly the cause of her coming, how and
after what sort as before mentioned. The Senators commendid much Papirius wit,
as well for his obedience to his mother, as for silence toward the Senate, they
recompensed his silence and secret wisdom with a Consulshippe of Rome.
Silence was so observed in Rome, and honored of Romans, that Demetrius the
Philosopher, would often say, Demetius the philosopher.
that the birds can flee where they will, and the Grasshoppers sing where they
will: but in the City we may neither do nor speak. Euripides.
Euripides, a learned Greek being objected that his breath did stincke,
answered nippingly the party, saying: so many things have so long hidden in
my heart, that being putrified, they stink. I would all men had such a breath,
that by long keeping of silence, Cato.
it might taste thereof. Cato the wise Roman perceived the commodity of
silence to be such, that it was one of the three things (as he him self
would say) that most repented him to tell his council unto another. Plini
does commend of all men, one man named Anaxarchus: Of all women, he praised
one woman named Leaena, Leaena.
which the tyranny of Nycocreon with all the torments and punishments that
this tyrant could devise, might make them both to speak that out, which they
thought good it should be kept in, which Anaxarchus had rather die by
torments, than to break concealde words, saying and spitting in the tyrant
Nicocreons face: Anaxarchus
spare not Anaxarchus carkas, thou troublest no part of my mind. Epicharis
amongst other Conspiratours, against that cruel Nero, she being diversely
tormented to show and to open the treason against Neros person, would by no
means break council, as Laaena for all that tyranye used toward her, she
would not betraye the secrets of Harmodius and Aristogiton, which only was
the cause that she had her picture erected in Greece. Even so Pompeius the
great, Pompeius.
being sent as an Ambassador from the Senators, and being charged by the King
named Gentius, who prevented Pompeius in his message to declare him ye secret
of the Senators and council of Rome, he stretching forth his arm, held his
finger in the flame of the candle, Val. lib. 3. cap. 3.
saying: when I draw my finger from the candle, I will break the council of
the Senators, that so steadfastly he held his hand, and so long, that King
Gentius wondered no less at his patience, than he honored him for his silence.
O rare silence, O passing patience, Isocrates.
and that in a Prince. Isocrates an excellent Orator sometime of Athens, lest
he should be ashamed of his scholars by their speech and talk, for tongues
bewraye the heart, he would never receive unto his school, but those that
would pay double hyre, first to learn silence, and then to learn to speak,
and to speak nothing, but that which they knew most certain, and that which
of necessity must be spoken: this was the order of Isocrates School. If
silence was of such dignity, of such estimation, that it possessed place in
princes hearts, Tiberius.
that Tiberius Caesar Emperor of Rome, would often say, that Princes ought
not to import their secrets, nor to make any privy to their council
considering how hard is silence to be observed. If silence was of such credit
and of such force, that Metellus used to be so close in the wars of
Macedonia, that if he knew his own coat to be privy of his secrets,
Metellus.
he would straight cast of his coat and burn it: for in him to whom
secrets of life are revealed, in the same also is danger of death, for in
committing secret, is life and death also committed. Had not that famous
Hercules, the impe of great Jupiter, and offspring of Gods, revealed his
counsel and opened his heart unto his wife Dianira: Had not that mighty
Sampson, so greatly in Gods favor, that he was a Judge in Israel, showed his
secrets unto his wife Dalida, they had not been conquered by two women, which
Serpents, Dragons, Lions: yea, all the whole world could not annoye. The
just punishment of Princes for tongue talking. Conquerours of the world, of
kingdoms, of countries, and yet conquered by a woman: yea, by a lesser thing
than a woman, a little member never seen, but alas two often heard, the
tongue only. Tantalus is punished in hell, Tantalus.
for that he opened the council of the gods after this sort. Dainty meats,
pleasant wines before his face, and yet may not touch them, having sight of
all things, and yet tasting nothing, the hungrier he is, the better and brauer
his banquet before him shines: the more desirous he is to eat, the further he
is from his victualles. Ixion for his telling of tales upon Juno, is no less
tormented in turnyng of his wheel in Hell, than is Sisiphus in rowlyng of his
stone, or Danaus daughters in fillyng of their empty Tubbes. The pain of
Prometheus in Caucasus, the punishment of Titius is duly appointed, and of the
Gods say the Poets provided truly to those that be braggers and boasters
of secrettes. I must in this place not forget a worthy history of King
Demetrius, Antigonus son* which being sent by his father unto Pontus where
Mithridates was king, being sworn by his father to keep council, of that
which vision moved him, that he sowed gold in Pontus, and that Mythridates
should reap it: and therefore commanding him with his army to pass unto
the kingdom of Pontus, and without any word to kill Mythridates. His son
Demetrius very sorrye for the great friendeship which was of late sprung
betwixt Mithridates and him, obeying his father, went unto Pontus, commanded
his people to stay until he went to know where Mithridates was, who when he
came in place, he wrote with the end of his spear upon the earth in dust:
Flee Mithridates, and straight turned unto his soldiers, spoke nothing unto
the King according to his oath for keeping silence, but wrote a warning to
flee, whereby he kept his fathers council one way, and maintained faithful
friendeship toward king Mithridates another way. A young man of Helespont
prating much in presence of Guathena a strumpet in Greece, she demanded of
him whether he knew the chief city of Helespont, to the which the young man
said: Yea forsooth: What? me thinks you know not the name of it, for it is
Sigaeum, which is the City of silence, a meet taunt for such tongue talkers.
Aelianus does write when the Cranes from Sicila, take their flight to flee over
mount Caucasus, they stop their mouths with stones, to pass with silence the
dangers of the Eagles.

Of liberality, and liberal Princes.
TO deface further the vice of avarice, I mean to show the virtue of
liberality. To put the churlishe covetous out of countenance, I will extol
the liberal, which in taking is shamefast, in gyuing joyful: for a measure in
taking and in giving, is the true nature of liberalitye. Neither can he that
takes all things, though he give much be named liberal in nothing. Agesilaus
King of the Lacedaemonians, Agesilaus.
so observed the laws and rules of Licurgus, that he was wont to speak unto
the Citizens of Sparta, that gifts are more dangerous sometime to be
received, than hurtefull to be refused. Which Phocion, Phocion.
the whole credit of Athens, at what time Alexander the great had sent him
great gifts, welthie presents, Iuels, and treasures from Persea, did show an
Example thereof in refusing the same, saying: I will not learn to take, least
I forget to give. The like answered Zenocrates the Philosopher to the self
same Alexander, Zenocrates.
when that he did send great sommes of gould and silver for love and affection
unto Zenocrates, he said he wanted neither gold nor silver, which when it was
toulde. unto Alexander, he said: has Zenocrates no friends that want money?
Alexander has more friends then either the substance of Darius, or the wealth
of Persea can suffice. A question to be demanded, whether of them both was
most liberal: the Prince in giving, or the Philosopher in refusing. When
certain Ambassadors of the Samnites came unto Rome, Fabritius.
and being at Eabritius house at soiourne, they perceiving the liberality of
Fabritius to be such as should want wealth, to so noble and frank a Gentleman,
at their return from Rome unto their country, not forgetting the free
dealing of Fabritius at Rome, these Ambassadors thought to gratify Fabritius
with the goulde of Samnites, did send gifts and presents very rich unto
Rome for their noble entertainment, which being refused, with an answer that
Fabritius had rather rule and govern them that were ruled by goulde, then to
be subject unto goulde: alleging the answer of M. Curious unto the
Ambassadors of Macedonia, M. Curio.
offering large gifts and treasurs after the like sort, that to possess much
is no wealth, but covetousness: to desire nothing, and to give, is perfect
wealth and liberality: A sound proof of two liberal gentlemen. When such
ruled Rome, then the Romans excelled all the world, frank and free unto
most, beneficial unto all, covetous unto none. When L. Lucullus house was a
common hospital to all the poor Greeks that trauayled from Athens, Sparta
and Thebes, yea, from all Greece unto Rome: Then Rome was liberal. Pompeius
Atticus.
When Pompeius Atticus did send unto Cicero being banished, two hundred
thousand sesters, unto Voluminous and Brutus as much: then Rome was
beneficial. When the Senators restored Faucula, and Oppia, The Senate*
two poor women of Campania, not only unto their ancient liberty, but
dubled their wealth and richesse, for their true meaning and service to the
Romans: the one praying and sacrificing for their good success, Val. lib. 5.
the other toyling and travailing about the soldiers business at the siege
of Capua where Fulinus was Captain: then Rome was merciful. Liberality in
noble persons is most commended, for in liberal giving, and beneficial
doings, are princes compared unto Gods. Fabius M.
Fabius Maximus having certain of his soldiers taken by Hannibal in the wars
of Carthage, did send unto the Senators of Rome for money to deem from
Hannibal, according unto Marshall laws, the Roman soldiers which being
denied of his suite, commanded his son straight to go to Rome to sell all
the lands and livings that he then possessed about the City of Rome, and to
bring him money. The money being brought, paid Hannibal, redeemed his
soldiers, brought them frank and free unto Rome upon his own charges, and
being blamed of the Senators that he soulde his land, answered: that he had
rather want patrimony in his country, than love toward his countrymen: he
had rather be without living in Rome, than to want good will unto the poor
soldiers. Alphonsus the great king of Arrogon was wont to rejoice more of one
little sentence that Titus Vespasianus would often say, Alphonsus.
than of all the reading he did all the days of his life. This Emperors
goulden sentence was, that day to be unhappy in the which he neither gave or
granted any thing to no man, saying: that no man ought to depart from a
Prince sad. He judged time lost, when no body fared the better by him, and
thought no time should escape without some benefits done, or gifts given to
some or others. Liberality does purchase to the Prince, faith and love: to the
noble man, service and homage: unto all men, benefittes and good tournes.
Alexander.
Wherefore Alexander ye great, not so desirous to take, as willing to give, was
wont to say to any that demanded where his treasures, wealths, and
substance that he got in the wars were kept, he poynting with his finger
his friends, it is hidden said he in the hearts of my subjects. What can be
more commended in a subject toward his Prince, than faith and truth? what may
be more praised in a Prince toward his subjects than liberality and lenity?
The liberality of the poor is good will. A poor scholar sometime of Greece,
Erasmus. lib. 4. Aroth.
bring in Rome, thought good to salute Caesar the Emperor coming from the
Capitol toward his palace in a few Greek Uerses, thinking thereby his
penury should be somewhat looked unto of Caesar, but Caesar surnamed Augustus,
answered the scholar in writing again the like in Greek Uerses, which when
it was delivered to the poor Greek, he delighted much in the reading,
commended highlye the verses and approached unto Caesar where he was in his,
Chariot, opened his purse, and gave unto the Emperor.iiij. single halfepence,
saying: Hold, not according to thy dignity and calling, but according unto my
ability and poverty I give this reward: Certain the poor scholar was more
commended for his small gift to the Emperor, then the Emperor himself was
praised for his liberality of all people in Rome. Antilochus.
The poor Poet Antilochus, was as liberal in his power for his Uerses made
unto King Lisander, Lisander.
as Lisander was in his calling to give him his hatte full of silver. Simple
Sinaetes was as liberal in offering a handefull of water of the river Cirus
unto the great King Artaxerxes of Persea, Artaxerxes.
for want of better ability, as Artaxerxes was princely in gifts: benefitiall
unto Sinaetes, in rewarding liberally the liberality of Sinaetes, Sinaetes.
with Phiala aurea cum mill Daricis. Cirilus.
Chirilus had no better present for a proof of his liberality toward
Alexander the great, Alexander.
than to show his good will unto him in writing, whereby he showed him self
more willing than able which being accepted and liberally rewarded, for every
several verse a piece of goulde. What greater gift can any man give, than that
which proceeds from the heart. Of all treasure says Aristotle, the mind of
a man ought most to be esteemed: the Mite of the poor woman offered unto
Christ, was no less made of and esteemed, than the goulde Mirre and
Frankencense of the great Sages of the world: for the gift makes not the
giver liberal, but the giver makes the gift liberal. A Student of Paris.
Wherefore a poor Student of Paris going home to his country Sicilia, and
being urged through penurye wanting monye to go to a great learned man's house
(as though he might go to some of the Bishops of England, tarying there a long
while without either meat or drink, perceiving the house to be gorgeous,
fair, and brave without, and full of hunger thirst and could within, wrote
with a coal on the waule a sentence of Cicero, Non domo Dominus, fed domus
Domino, honestanda est. As though he might say, fair buildings want more
liberal dwellers, then liberal Lord^e fair houses, for the house is praised
by the man, and not the man by the house: Fair houses and wealth do scant make
men liberal. It is said that fair things are coupled with pride, and wealth
joined with covetousness. In the beginning all men were liberal, until
private wealth began to practice with money, coueteousnesse was not known, for
as money did increase, so covetousness grew. In Rome says Plini money was
not seen four hundred years and more, after the building of Rome. Then was
Rome true and benefitiall by reason of liberalit^, which after waxed welthye
and false, by means of covetousness. That City was most famous chiefelye
for her liberality wherein Rome excelled all the world, If the death of
Princes, of noble men, yea, of all men can sufficiently bear witness of their
lives, considering virtue and fame shall prove that by death, which life scant
may utter, for no man is well known during life. Epaminondas.
The death of Epaminondas that most renowned Prince of Thebes and Conqueror of
all Greece, was a sure and a certain show of his liberal life. The last days
of P. Aemilius which triumphed in life time over the proud Macedonians, P.
Aemilius.
and ^igurians was a true token of his frank and free dealing in life. In like
manner of Maenenius Agrippa and Scipio Affricanus, the one victor over the
Saminites, M. Agrippa. Affricanus.
the other triumpher over Carthage and Numantia, whose renowned lives, made
their deaths famous: whose worthy deaths, do revive their noble lives. Their
beneficial dealing and liberality in life, was well known by their deaths:
so liberally they lived, that their friends found no money hidden, no goulde
kept, no treasure preserved, no Iuell in store, no hurded muck in Coffers. In
fine, no wealth at all, though diverse times by victory and triumphs, by
conquest and fortune they possessed kingdoms and countries in life. The
greatest Prince in his time Cirus, Cirus.
the first king that brought the Monarchy unto Persea, slain by Tomyris, had
on his grave an Epitaph made, being buried in Scithia, in no gorgeous Temble,
having no sumptuous tomb, but in an open field, and a stone upon his grave,
with this Epitaph: Here lies Cirus the great King of Persea, contented now
with seven foot, which could not be satisfied some time with seven
kingdoms: what Kesar, King, or Prince so ever thou art, spare this place unto
Cirus: Which when Alexander the great, passing with his army unto Scithia and
India, Curtius in vita Alexander.
had read this Epitaph, and perceiving the slipperie state of Princes, the
uncertainty of life, and mutabilitie of fortune, he much doubted the state of
his own life: howbeit, at that voyage he quite forgot by means of Mars, the
Epitaph of King Cirus, until he returned from India from his wars unto
Babylon, Alexander.
where he married Statyra King Darius daughter, whom before he conquered: where
such liberallitie was showed, Justinius lib. 20.
such magnificencie done, such gifts given, such banquettes kept, that
Alexander upon his own charges married the most part of the nobles of
Macedonia, unto the Ladies of Persea, the feasts during five days, surmounted
unto the some of three and twenty thousand Talentes, every Talent valued at
fourscore pounds, repeating often the Epitaph of Cirus, would suffer none,
though diverse Princes were present, to be at any charges but him self only,
saying that which fortune gives unto Alexander, the same will Alexander give
unto his friends, for Cirus grave is appointed unto Alexander, in this
Alexander passed all Princes, in taking all and giving all: Private faults may
not deprive open virtues, every man has a fault. Alexander was known to be a
drunkard: Julius Caesar was noted to be ambicious: Antiochus the great King of
Siria blamed for lechery: Alcibiades of pride: Pirrhus of incredulity:
Hanniball of falshoode: Dionisius of tyranny, and so of infinite Princes, which
for one vice may not be forgotten for their diverse virtues: Virtue must not be
hidden for that vice is manifest. Phrine a Courtezaune sometime of Greece,
Phryne.
though of her slanderous life worthy reprehention, yet for her liberalitye
ought she well to be remembered, for after Alexander the great had subdued that
famous City of Thebes, and made the walls thereof even with the ground: she
offered to redifie the same upon this condition, that upon every gate of the
City, this sentence should be set. This City Alexander the great threvve
down, and this City Phrine the Curteizaune builded up again. Rhodope.
The like of Queen Rhodope sometime a Curtezaune and a lewd woman, made up a
brave and sumteous work called Piramides in Egypt, where such liberality she
used, such frank and free dealing of money, that for her noble liberality,
she was well worthy to be commended, though for vicious living otherways she
was to be blamed. Men and women were desirous then to be liberal: Then Princes
were as liberal and benefitiall with such lenity and humanity unto the
poor, as they grew afterward to be hard and covetous with severity and
cruelnesse. Therefore Anaxilaus a liberal Prince, was often wont to say,
that the chiefest commendacions and noblest virtue could be in a Prince, was
not to be ouercommed in beneficial doings. A^talus.
Attalus King of Asia, languishing in sickness, and ready to die, bequeathed
his Kingdom and Scepture of Asia, unto the noble Romans by testament, for
that they were so liberal and benefitiall sometime toward him, while yet
fortune favored him not, fully and freely to bestow to whom he would. A
liberal Prince can not be void of love. Antigonus.
Antigonus was wont to answer Aristodemus, one of his council and brought up
of a boy in his Kitchine, when he spoke any thing against princely gifts, and
found fault with Antigonus liberality, that his talk did smell of the
Kitchen: a meet reprehension for such a sawsie servant, who let Kings to
do good, and move Princes to do evil, I would such Sycophantes should be
so answered of Princes, as Aristodemus was of King Antigonus: Worthy of
perpetual memory was Artaxerxes for his passing liberality toward the
poor soldiers that came from Lacedemonia to war with him, Artaxerxes.
he made them that came a foot unto him, to go home a horseback: he that
came a horseback, he did send him home in a Chariot: Plutarch in vita eius.
and he that had a village before he came unto him, he gave a City at his
going away from him. A Prince worthy of subjects, and a Captain most fit
for fit Soldiers. What made Julius Caesar beloved of his soldiers? Julius
Caesar.

Alexander.


What caused Alexander to be honored of all men? magnificencie and liberality.
The one in the great wars at Pharsalia, at what time he conquered Pompeius
the great, having all the treasures and substance of Pompeius brought before
him, took nothing from the soldiers but Pompeius letters: The other after he
had vanquished King Darius, having a great chest full of treasure, where he
found in present coin two hundred thousand pound, beside other inestimable
treasures, and iuels, took nothing from his soldiers, but a little book
named the Iliades of Homer, wherein he delighted more in reading the noble
acts of Greeks, the worthy feats of Troianes, than in all the wealths of
Persea. This liberality maintained their fame: Thus their magnificente
benefits spredde forth their noble names, that happy was he that could be a
soldier unto Caesar or to Alexander. I remember me of a certain King in
Siracusa, Ihero.
named Ihero, understanding the liberality of the Romans, and perceiving the
penurye of victuales, which then the Romans sustained in the wars of
Thrasimenos, did send three hundred thousand bushels of wheat, two hundred
thousand of barley, with great sommes of gold and silver to ease the Roman
souldidours: and fearing that his gifts would not be taken, nor his presents
received, considering the nature and liberality of the Romans, he willed the
Embassaders to say that it was an homage and service of good will, sent to
honor the Romans from Ihero King of Siracu^a. O passing policy to practice
beneficence, with manifest examples of a liberal heart. O Rome, how happy
have thou been, that through thy liberality haste won the hearts and good
will of all kingdoms and countries. Ninus.
Untyll Ninus time, all things were common, no division of ground, no hurding
of money, no covetousness known, no greediness of kingdoms, no desire of
welthes: in fine for the space of two hundred and fifty years, for the
simplicity, innocence and true dealing of people, worthily called the goulden
world, and then a man could not find a covetous person, and now a man can not
find a liberal friend: then no man kn^we to do evil, and now no man
knows to do good: then no man did take, and now no man does give: in
fine, then one for another, and now all for themselves. What made Cimon a
liberal gentleman of Athens, Cimon.
to be so famous in Greece? his liberality amongst nigardes, he only counted
liberal, and all Athens besides covetous, whereby he deserved renown and
glory, amongst so many nippers of money, he only to show him self frank
and liberal. What caused Flaminius to be so much spoken of amongst the
Romans? Flaminius.
his liberal gifts amongst so many greedy takers, his open benifites,
amongst their private wealth and hidden hatred? What moved the Agragentines to
honor so much that man Gillias? to advance his fame, to extol his name? His
liberality. Such covetousness then was in Athens, Rome, and Agrigente, that
then worthy were these of admiration and praise, to avoid the cankered state
of avarice. Thus from the golden world, it came unto the silver world, and
then to that hard metal Iron world, for the covetous people can never be
sufficed. The greediness of this age, the restless estate of this time can
never be satisfied. The young Partriche by nature is ready to flee as soon as
she comes out of the shell, the wild Duck to swim, the Lion to go, and man
only borne ready to seek and travel for money. Aelianus, lib. 10.
Where might a man find out such a man as Aristides was in all Greece now?
who was so liberal, Aristides.
that having all the state of Athens under his government, gave all to the
poor Citizens, save that scant that brought him unto the ground. Where should
one meet with such a one as Pelopidas in all Sparta? Zelopida^
being blamed of his friends and councellers, for his large gifts and
liberality, exhorting him to make much of money, Aelianus. lib. 11.
considering how nec^ssarie money is to Princes: yea said Pelopidas, to such
Princes as Nicomedes, a lame man, both dumb and deaf. Where should a man
seek in Thebes for such a man as Epaminondas? who when he heard that he
which carried his Target after him, Epaminondas*
had taken money for the dimission of certain prisoners taken in the wars,
give me said he my Target, and go you to keep an Inn, for if you love
money, you are not fit to carry Epaminondas Target. Every man is liberal in
talk, but few frank in giving: all men speak against envy and malice, and
yet one hate another: we exclayme against tyranny, and yet we are merciless:
we despise pride, and yet we love not humanity: we abhor gluttony and
drunkenness, and yet we are always feasting and bibbing: we disprayse
Idleness, and yet we are slothful: we thunder against slanderous tongues,
and yet we can not speak well of no body: in brief, we speak against all
vices, and yet we can not be acquainted with any virtue. Diogines.
Even as Diogines a Philosopher nipt a certain Lacedemonian, which used often
to repeat in a place a Greek verse of Hesiodus the Poet, Aelianus. lib. 9.
that an Ox or no beast else should perish unless evil neighbors be the
cause of it: Diogines demanded of him, how happened it, that both the people
of Messena, and all their goods and cattelles did miscarye, and you being
their nigh neighbors in Sparta? So may it be spoken to these glorious
talkers, how is it that men love avarice so well, and yet commend liberality
so often.

Of age, and the praise thereof.
BYon that wise man, would say often that age was the Haven of rest, for that
it was the end of misery, the gate of life, the perfourmaunce of all
pilgrimages: And since age is wished of all men, what folly is it to hit any man
in the teeth with that which he chiefly desires. Wherefore when King
Archelaus had appointed a great feast for his friends, Archelaus.
amongst other talks then at the Table, Euripides declared what great love he
bare unto Agathon, an old tragical Poet. Agesilaus.
Agesilaus demaundyng why should an old man be so well esteemed of
Euripides? he said: Though the Spring time be pleasant, yet the Harvest is
fertile: though flowers and herbs grow green in the Spring, yet wax they
ripe in Harvest. The ages of man is compared unto the four seasons of the
year: his growing time unto the Spring, his lusty time unto the Summer, his
witty time unto the Harvest, and his old time unto the Winter, which does make
an end of all things. Frederike, Emperor of Rome, Frederike.
after he had appointed an old man to rule the City of Scadmenna, was often
moved, that he for his age was not meet to govern such a City, consyderyng
the multitude and number of people that were within that City, they thought
that a young man should better discharge the office: But the wise Emperor
perceauyng how bent and prone were the youth of that Town, to have a young
man to rule over them, answered them after this sort: I had rather said he,
commit the governance of the City unto one old man, then the governance of
so many young men unto the City. Better it is an old man to rule the City,
than the City to rule the young men, meaning no otherwise then the aged men
should only be admitted rulers in Cities, for that it belongs unto them
experience of things and care of youth. Such was the homage and reverence
which was amongst the young Romans, Romans.
toward the Senators or old men of the City, as both head and leg, did
acknowledge the same, Perseans.
in doing duty unto age. They had this confidence in age, that no man might
be chosen unto the number of the Senatoures, before he should be threescore
years of age. The like custom had the people of Chalcides, Heraclid. in Polit.
that no man before he were fifty years should either bear office within
their Cities, or be sent Ambassador out of their country. Amongst the
Perseans, no man could be admitted to be one of the sage rulers, which they
called Magi, unless perfect age had brought him thereto perforce. Amongst the
Indians, their wise men which ruled their country, Indians.
which were named Gymnosofistae, were aged and ancient, for time gives
experience of governance. Amongst the Egyptians the like credit was given unto
old men, Egypt.
that youth meeting them in the way, would go out of the way to give place
unto age: so that their Counselors, which were called prophets, were men of
much time and experience. Herod. lib. 2
Even so the Babylonians elected their sage Chaldeans: the ancient French men,
there wise men called Druydes: In fine, noble Geekes did observe the like order
in choosing their Rulers and Councellers of aged men as before spoken. The
Lacedaemonians youth, were by the law of Licurgus no less charged to reverence
age, than their own parents. The Arabians in all places without respect of
person, honor, dignity or fortune, preferred their old men before. The
people called Tartesij had this law to honor age, that the younger might
bear no witness against the elder. The reverence said Chylon, that should
be showed unto age, by young men, ought to be such, that they then being
young, doing obedience unto age, might claim the like when they waxed old of
youth. Agesilaus King of Sparta, Agesila^^.
being an old man, would often go in the cold weather, very thin in a
torn cloak, without a coat or doublet, only to show the way unto young men,
to be hardy in age, by contemning of pleasure and gay apparel in youth.
Masinissa.
Massinissa king of Numidia, being more than threescore years of age, would
lively and valiauntly as Cicero says, without cappe on head or shoe on
foot, in the cold or frostye weather in the winter time, travail and toil
with the soldiers only unto this purpose, that young soldiers should be
hardened thereby in their youth, and practice the same for the use of others,
when they came to age them selves. Ihero King of Sicilia the like example in
his old age, Ihero.
being.lxxx. years showed to train youth and to bring them up so in young
years, that they might do the like in their old ages. For this judged these
wise princes, that all men covet to imitate Princes and Kings in their
doings. Gorgias.
Gorgias the Philosopher, and master unto Isocrates the Orator, and to diverse
more nobles of Greece, thought him self most happy, that he being a hundred
years and seven, was as well in his senses, as at anyetime before: made so
much of age, that being asked why he so delighted in age, made answer:
because he found nothing in age that he might accuse age. Cirus.
So said King Cirus a little before his death, being a very old man, that he
never felt him self weaker, than when he was young. The like saying is
reported of that learned Sophocles, Sophocles.
who being so old, that he was accused of his own children, of folly, turned
unto the Judges and said: If I be Sophocles, I am not a fool: if I be a fool
I am not Sophocles, meaning that in wisemen, the senses waxed better, by use
and exercising the same unto the use of young men: for we praise says Cicero
the old man, that is somewhat young, and we commend again the young man, that
is somewhat aged. The old is commended that has his young and fresh wit at
commandment, and the young is praised that is sober and sage in his doings.
When M Crassus a noble Captain of Rome, Crassus.
being a very old man, took in hand to war against the Parthians, strong
and stout people, being by Ambassadors warned of his age, and admonished to
forsake wars, he answered stoutly the Ambassador of the Partheans, and
said: when I come unto Seleutia your City, I will answer you. One of the
Ambassadors named Agesis, Agesis.
an aged man, stretched forth his hand, and showed the palm of his hand unto
Crassus, saying: Before thou shall come within the City of Seleutia, bristles
shall grow out of this hand. The stoutnesse of Marcus Crassus was not so
much, but the magnanimity of Agesis was as much: and yet either were old men.
What courage was in Scaeuola, to withstand that firebrande of Rome Silla,
which after he had urged the Senators to pronounce Marius enemy unto Italy,
he being an old aged man, answered Silla in this sort: Though diverse be at
the commandments of the Senators, and that thou art so compassed with
soldiers at thy beck: yet thou nor all thy soldiers shall ever make
Scaeuola being an old man, for fear of loosing some old blood, Scaeuola.
pronounce Marius by whom Rome was preserved, and Italy saved, to be enemy
unto these. The like history we read that when Julius Caesar had by force of
arms aspired unto the off^ce of a Dictator, and came unto the Senate house,
where few Senators were together, the Emperor Caesar desirous to know the
cause of their absence, Considius an aged father of Rome said, Considius.
that they feared Caesar and his soldiers. Whereat the Emperor musing a
while, said: Why did not you in likewise tarry at home fearing the same?
because said he age and time taught me neither to fear Caesar, nor yet his
soldiers. For as Brusonius says, there are young minds in old men, for
though Milo the great wrestler, in the games of Olimpia waxed old, and wept in
spite of his dead limbs and bruised bones: yet he said his mind flourished,
and was as young as ever it was before. Solon has immortal praise in Greece,
for his stoutnesse in his age: for when Pisistratus had taken in hand to rule
the people of Athens, and that it was evident enough that tyranny should
proceed thereby: Solon.
Solon in his latter days having great care unto his country, when that no
man durst refuse Pysistratus, came before his door in harn^sse, and calde the
citizens to withstand Pysistratus, for age said he moves me to be so
valiant and stout, that I had rather lose my life, than my country should
lose their liberty. What virtue then we see to be in age, what wisdom in
time, what courage in old men, The examples of these old men stir and
provoke many to imitate their steps, insomuch diverse wished to be old, when
they were yet young, to have the honor as age then had, wherefore King
Alexander the great, spying a young man couloring his hears gray, said: It
behooves thee to put wits in color, and to alter thy mind. The
Lacedaemonians, people that past all nations in honoring age, made laws in
their Cities, that the aged men should be so honored and esteemed of the young
men, even as the parents were of the children, that when a stranger came unto
Lacedemonia, and saw the obedience of youth toward age, he said: In this
country I wish only to be old, for happy is that man that waxes old in
Lacedemonia, for in the great games of Olimpia, an old man wanting a place,
went up and down to sit some where, but no man received, but the
Lacedaemonians, which not only there young men and also their aged, gave place
unto his graye hears, but then also the Embassaders of Lacedemonia being there
present, did reverence him, and took him unto their seat, which when he came
in, he spoke a loud: O you Athenians, you know what is good, and what is
badde, for that which you people of Athens said he, do profess in
knowledge, the same does the Lacedaemonians put in practice. Alexander.
Alexander being in his wars with a great army in Persea, and meeting an old
man by the way in the cold weather, in ragged and rent clothes, lighted from
his horse, and said unto him: Mount up into a princes saddle, which in Persea
is treason for a Persean to do, but in Macedonia commendable: letting to
understand how age is honored, and old men esteemed in Macedonia, and how of
the contrary, wealth and pride is fostred in Persea: for where men of
experiences and aged years are set naught by, there cannot be that wisdom
bears rule. How many in the Empire of Rome, ruled the City, governed the
people, of those that were very aged men? as Fabius Maximus, who was threescore
years and two in his last Consulship: Valerius Cor.
Valerius Corunnus, which was six times a Consul in Rome, a very old man,
which lived a hundred and odd years: Mettellus.
Metellus of like age, called to the like function and administration of commonwealth, being an old man. What should I speak of Appius Claudius, Appius Clau.
of Marcus Perpenna, of diverse other noble Romans, whose age and time was the
only occasion of their advancement unto honor and dignity? What should I
resite Arganthonius, who was three score years before he came unto his
kingdom, and after ruled his country fourscore years unto his great fame,
and great commendations of age? To what end shall I repeat Pollio, who lived
in great credit with the people, Pollio.
unto his last years, a man of worthy praise, of renowned fame, which lived a
hundred and thirty years, in great authority and dignity. To speak of
Epimenides whom Theopompus affirms that he lived a hundred and almost
theescore years in great rule and estimation: Epimonides.
small it were to the purpose to make mention again of Dandon amongst the
Illirians, Dandon.
which Valerius writes that he was five hundred years before he died, and yet
of great memory and noble fame. Naestor.
Nestor which lived three hundred years, of whom Homer does make much mention,
that of his mouth proceeded forth sentences sweeter than honey: in his latter
days, yea almost his strength corespondent unto the same. That renowned Prince
Agamemnon, General of all Greece, wished no more in Phrigia, but five such as
Nestor was, which with their wits and with their courage, he doubted not but
in short time he were able to subdue Troy. Sweet are the sayings of old
men, perfect are their councelles, sound and sure their governance. How
frail and weak is youth? How many Cities are perished by young council? How
much hurt from time to time have young men devised, practiced, and brought to
pass? And again of age, how full of experience, knowledge, and provision,
painful and studious unto the grave, Plato.
as we read of Plato, that noble Philosopher, which was busy and careful for
his country, writing and making books the very year that he died, Isocrates.
being fourscore and two. Of Isocrates, which likewise being fourscore and
fourteen, compiled a book called Panathenaicus: Gorgias.
of Gorgias, which made the like, studious and careful to profit his
country. I say a hundred and seven years, was altogether adicted to his
books, Zeno. Pythagoras Democritus
to his study. So of Zeno, Pithagoras, and Democritus might be spoken, men of
no less wit, travail, and exercise, than of time and age: For as Cicero
says, the government and rule of common wealths, consists not in strength
of body, but in the virtue of the mind, wayghtie and grave matters, are not
governed with lightness of the body, with swiftness of the foot, with
external qualities, but with authority, council, and knowledge: for in the
one says he there is rashness and wilfulness, in the other gravity, and
prudence. As Themistocles, Themistocles. Aristides.
and Aristides, who though not friends then at Athens, both rulers, yet age
taught them when they were sent Ambassadors for the state of Athens, to become
friends to profit their country, which youth could never have done. Solon.
That sage Solon, was wont often to brag, how that he daily by reading,
learning, and experience waxed old. Apelles that approved painter, Appelles.
and renowned Greek, in his age and last time, would have no man to pass the
day idle without learning of one line. Socrates.
Socrates being an old mar, became a scholar to learn music, and to play
upon instruments. Cicero.
Cicero being old himself, became a perfect Greek with study. M. Cato.
Cato being aged, in his last years went to school to Enneus, to learn the
Greek. Terentins Varro was almost forty year old, before he took a Greek
book in hand, and yet proved excellent in the Greek tongue. Clitomachus
went from Ca^thage unto Athens, after forty years of age, to hear Carneades
the Philosophers lecture. Lucius as Philostratus does write, meeting Marcus the
old Emperor with a book under his arm going to school, demanded of the
Emperor whether he went, like a boy with his book in his hand: the aged
Emperor answered, I go to Sextus the Philosopher, to learn those things I
know not: O God said Lucius, thou being an old man, go to school now
like a boy, and Alexander the great, died in thirty years of age. Alphonsus
King of Cicilia, was not ashamed at fifty years old to learn and to travail
for his knowledge, and least he should lose the use of the latten tongue, he
occupied him self in translating Titus Liuius unto his vulgar tongue, though
he was a King. I do not hold with age in diverse men, which for want of
discretion and wit, wax childishe again: but of perfect men, in whom age
seemed rather a warraunt of their doings. For even as he that plays much
upon instruments, is not to be commended so well, as he that plays
cunningly, and artificially: So as all men that live long, are not to be
praised as much as he that lived well: For as apples being green, are yet
sour, until by time they wax sweet: so young men without warraunt of time,
and experience of things, are to be misliked. If faults be in old men says
Cicero (as many there be) it is not in age, but in the life and manners of
men? Some think age miserable, because either the body is deprived from
pleasure, or that it brings imbecilitie or weakness, or that it is not
far from death, or quite called from due administration of common wealths,
these four causes says Cicero, make age seem miserable and loathsome. What
shall we say then of those that in their old age, have defended their
countries, saved their Cities, guided their people, and valiauntly triumphed
over their enemies? Paulus, Scipio. Fabius. Curious. Fabritius. Coruncanus.
Appius.
as L. Paulus, Scipio, and Fabius Maximus, men of wonderful credit in their
old years. What may be spoken of Fabritius, Curious, and Coruncanus, aged men
of great agilitie, of famous memory, in their last days? How might Appius
Claudius be forgotten, who being both old and blind, resisted the Senators
to compounde with king Pirrhus for peace, though they and all the Consulles of
Rome, hereunto were much inclined? If I should pass from Rome, a place where
age was much esteemed unto Athens, amongst the sage Philosophers? if from
Athens to Lacedemonia, where age altogether bare swaye and rule? if from
thence, unto the Aethiopians, and indians, where all their lines are ruled and
governed by old men? if from thence, unto any part of the world, I should
trauile, I might be long occupied in reciting the honor and estimation of age.
Herodotus does write, that the Aethiopians, and Indians, do live most commonly
a hundred and thirty years. The people called Epeij, Epeij.
do live in the country of Aetolia, two hundred years naturally: and as it is
by Damiates reported, Lictorius.
Lictorius a man of that country, lived three hundred years. The kings of
Arcadia, were wont to live three hundred years. Hyperboreij
The people of Hyperborij, lived a thousand years. We read in the old
Testament, that Adam our first father lived nine hundred and thirty years: and
Eua his wife as many. Seth nine hundred and twelve years. Seth his son called
Enos, nine hundred and five. Cainan the son of Enos, nine hundred and ten.
Malalehell the son of Cainan, right hundred fourscore and fifteen. So Enoch
the son of Iared, lived nine hundred theescore and five years. Enoch his son,
named Mathusalem, lived nine hundred threescore and nine, with diverse of the
first age: I mean until Noah's time, Noah.
which began the second world, after the floode, and lived as we read, nine
hundred and five years. Sem.
His son Sem six hundred years, and so lineally from father unto son, as
from Sem unto Arphaxad, from Arphaxad unto Sala, from Sala unto Heber, the
least lived above three hundred years. This I thought for better credit and
greater proof of old age, to draw out of the old testament, that other
profane autorities might be believed: Tithonius.
as Tithonius whom the Poets feign that he was so oulde that he desired to
become a Grasshopper: But because age has no pleasure in the world,
frequenteth no banquets, abhors lust, loves no wantonness, which says Plato
is the only bayte that deceive young men: so much the happier age is, that age
does loath that in time, which young men neither with knowledge, with wit, nor
yet with council can avoid. What harm has happened from time to time by
young men, over whom lust so ruled, that euersion of common wealths, treason
of Princes, friends betrayed, countries overthrown, kingdoms vanquished all
ye world almost through pleasure perished. Therefore Cicero says in his book
entitled of old age, at what time he was in the city of Tar^ntu^, being a
young man with F. Maximus, that he bare one lesson from Tarentu^ unto the
youth of Rome, where Architas the Tarentine said, that nature bestowed nothing
upon man so hurtful unto him self, so dangerous unto his country, as lust
or pleasure: C. Fabritius.
For when C. Fabritius was sent as an Ambassador from Rome unto Pirrhus king of
Epire, being then the Gouerner of the city Tarentum, a certain man named
Cineas, Cineas.
a Thessalia^ borne, being in disputation with Fabritius about pleasure, saying
that he heard a Philosopher of Athens affirming that all which we do is to be
referred unto pleasure, which when M. Curious, and Titus Coruncanus heard, they
desired Cineas to persuade the King Pirrhus, in that to yield unto pleasure,
and make the Samnits believe that pleasure ought to be esteemed, whereby they
knew (if that King Pirrhus or the Samnites, being then great enemies unto the
Romans) were adicted unto lust or pleasure, that then soon they might be
subdued and destroyed. For that nothing hinders magnanimity, or resists
virtuous enterprises, so much as pleasure, as in the treatise of pleasure it
shall at large more appear. Why then how happy is old age, to despise and
contemn that which youth by no means can avoid, yea, to loath and abhor that
which is most hurtful unto it self: For Cecellius contemned Caesar, with all
his force, saying unto the Emperor, that two things made him nothing to
esteem the power of the Emperor: Age and wit. Castritius wayed nothing at
all the threatening of C. Carbo being then Consul at Rome, which though he
said, he had many friends at commandment, yet Castritius answered and
said: that he had likewise many years which his friends, might not fear.
Therefore a wiseman sometime wept, for that man dies within few years, and
having but little experience, in his old age, he is then deprived thereof: For
the Crow lives thrice as long as the man does. The Heart lives four times
longer than the Crow. The Raven thrice again lives longer than the Heart. The
Phaenix nine times longer than the Raven: And therefore because birds do live
longer time than man does, in whom there is no understanding of their years:
But man unto whom reason is joined, before he comes unto any ground of
experience, when he begins to have knowledge in things, he dies, and
thus ends he his toyling pilgrimages and travail, in fewer years than
diverse beasts or birds do.

Of the manners of sundry people, and of their strange life.
THe sundry fashion and varitie of manners, the strange life of people, every
where through the world dispersed, are so depainted and set forth amongst the
writers, that in showing the same, by naming each country, and the people
thereof orderly, their custom, their manners, their kind of living, something
to signify, how diverse the manners of men be. Therefore I thought briefly to
touch and to note every country in their due order of living, and to begin
with the Egyptians, people most ancient and most expert in all sciences, that
Macrobius the writer, calls the country of Egypt, the nourse and mother of
all Arts: for all the learned Greeks, Egypt.
have had their beginning from Egypt, even as Rome had from Greece. This people
observe their days by account of hours, from midnight unto midnight: They
honor the Sun and the moon for their Gods, for they name the Sun
Osiris, and the Moon Isis: Their feeding was of fish broyled in the heat of
the Sun, with herbs and with certain fowls of the air: They live a
thousand years, but it is to be understood, that they number their years
by the Moon: The men bear burdens upon their heads, and the women upon
their breasts and shoulders: The men make water sitting, the women standing:
The Crocodill is that beast which they most esteem, that being dead they
bury him: A Sow is that beast, which they most detest, that if any part of
their clothes touch a Sow, they straight will pull of their clothes, and
wash them over: They are black people, most commonly slender, and very
hasty. Curtius call them sedicious, vain, very subtle in invention of
things, and much given to wine. The Aethiopians, people that live without
laws and reason, Ae^hiopia.
servants and slaves unto al men, selling their children unto merchauntes for
corn, their here long with knottes, and curled. The Indians people of two
much liberty, as Herodot says, accompanying their women in open sight,
neither sow they nor build, neither kill they any living beast, but feed of
barley bread and herbs: They hang at their ears small pearls, and they
deck their arms, wrestes, and necks, with gold: Kings of India are much
honored, when they come abroad, their ways set and decked with fresh flowers,
sweet odours, and men in arms following their Chariots made of Margarits
stones, and men meeting with frankincense: And when their king goes to bed,
their harlottes bring them with songues and mirth, making their prayers unto
their Gods of darckenesse, for the good rising of their King: Again, the
children kill their parents when they wax old: Their maids and young
damoselles of India, are brought abroad amongst the young men, to choose them
their husbands: When any man dies, his wife will dress her self most brauest
for the funeral, and there both they are buried together: Hercules is much
honored in that country, and the river Ganges. Sythia^.
The Sythians, pale and white, for the coldenesse of the air, and full of
courage: Amongst these people all things are almost in common, saving no man
will have his sword and his cup common, their wives they way not, common one
for another: For drunkenness they pass all nations, for in their solemn
banquettes, their may no man dr^nke of that appointed cup, which is carried
abroad unto great banquettes, unless he had slain one or other, for it was
accounted amongst the Scithians no honesty for a man to live, unless he had
killed one or other: They have no Cities nor towns as Egypt was full, for it
is written, that when Amazis raygned a King in Egypt, there were twenty
thousand Cities numbered within the country of Egypt. Amazis.
But Scithia, a most barren and rude country, living and feeding beastly: A
country most cold, for that no wood grooweth in the country: No religion,
no temples for their Gods, but unto Mars: Their chief weapons are bows and
arrows: When their Kings dies in Scithia, fifty men, and fifty of his best
horses, must bear him company, and be slain, for that they judge they shall
go one way. Parthians.
The Parthians people most thyrstie says Plini, for the more they drink, the
more thirsty they are, their chief glory they seek by drincking, given so
much to surfittes and drunkenness, that their breath for their inordinate
drinking, does stink and wax so strong, that no man can abide them: Their
kings likewise is so much honored of them, that when he comes in place, they
ever kneel and kiss his foot: He has many Queens, with whom the King must
lie one after another: The King has about his Chariot ten thousand
soldiers, with silver spears in their hands, and the end of their spears
all gold: they honor their King with the Sun, the Moon, the fire, the
water, the wind, and the years, unto these they sacrifice and honor as their
Gods: To lie, is most horrible with the Parthians, insomuch they instruct
their young children only to avoid lies, and to learn to speak truth: Of
all men they hate ungrateful men, they judge it most dishonest to speak any
thing filthily, and loath cheflly that which is shamfull, either in taulke or
in doing, in so much that they will spit or make water but in one place, where
either a floudde, or a river, or some other water is: riding, dancing, and
tenice, do they exercise most. The people of Arabia are long heared, Arabia.
with shaven beardes, save that they spare the upper lips vnshauen: Their
women commen for all men at al times to meddle, leaving a staff at the door in
token unto an other, that she is with one already, and to let understand that
he must tarry until that man go out. In Arabia, it is not thought amiss for
any to lie with his mother, and if any that is not kin take that in hand,
it is adulterye: They worship as their Gods, Urania and Dionisius. They are
like unto the Babilonians, Babilonia^s.
people of most corrupted life, and most given unto filthy peasure. In so
much, that their daughters, and their wives are hired unto every man, walking
in the streates, going unto the temples, meeting and offering themselves unto
any stranger. With the Arabians and Babilonians, we may well compare the
Lesbians, Lesbians. Sibarites.
and the Sybarites, passing people in that wickedness, nothing given but unto
sleep and venerye, in so much that they worship them selves with all kind of
pleasures: and that the excess of their banquettes, and the brauerye of their
women were such that made all the behoulders to muse, and wonder at their
excess, as well in clothing, as in feeding, wherein they took glory: They
expelled all sound and noise that might trouble their sleep, insomuche, that
they suffered no clock within their Cities, least they should wake them from
their sleep: So filthy were these nations, that hand, foot head and all
parts of the body were naturally given to polute themselves with venery.
Arcadia.
Arcadians people of such antiquity (as they supposed) that they are before
the Moon, of this they brag most: They worship Pan as their God: This people
never triumphed over their enemies, nor kept wars with any nations, but
oftentimes served under other Princes. These Arcadians were like unto the
people called Auerni, for their bragges of antiquitye, for even as the
Arcadians brag of the Moon, so Auerni boasted of their stirpe and stock,
the ancient Trojans, wherefore they would be called brethen unto the stout
and ancient Romans. Boetians.
The Boetians are the rudest people in the world, so that the Athenians call
them as Plutarchus reports, bold baiardes and blocks, for their gross
understanding. Bactrians
The Bactrians, most puissaunt and warlike soldiers, detesting much the
excess of the Perseans, are of such gross sense notwithstanding that they
give and bestow their old men, and also sickmen unto dogs to be devoured,
which dogs for the purpose they nourish and bring up in their country. The
Agrige^tines, people given unto such buildings and banqueting, that Plato the
Philosopher said: Agragentins.
The Agregentines builded as though they should live for ever, and banquet as
though they should die daily. The manners of the Assyrians were to bring their
sick friends abroad unto the high ways, to seek, to ask, and to know
remedies for their sickness of all kind of men that passed by: And if by
chance without remedy the sick should die, they would bear him home, and
bury him solempnly, annointyng over the corpse with honey and wax. This people
did wear for their weapons, Daggers, and Targets, and Clubbes: they did
worship Adad for their God, and Adargatin for their goddess. The people of
Crete were most expert Sea men, and well practiced in wars, absteyning not
only from flesh, but also from any sodden meat: their chief infamy was in
venery masculin, otherwise for their manners of living, much like unto the noble
Lacedaemonians, which for their modesty in feeding and contempt of wealth, for
their wisdom and study in warfares passed all nations: for a token thereof
they printed in their Targets the Greek letter L named Lambtha, They brought
up their youth as Lycurgus that ancient lawsetter taught them, in all kind of
study, pain, and labor, with hunger, thirst, cold and heat, wherewhereby
they may be able to suffer any chance happened, or injury offered.
Lacedemostians.
Then were they again brought up in wrestling, leaping, running, swimming,
riding, and such other qualities as might profit their country in time of
service: for their nature was either to win and conquer, or else to die and
yield. Learning and science they little esteemed, in so much that Athens and
Sparta could never agree, for that the one was addicted to serve Minerua or
rather the Muses, the other given unto Mars. Lycurgus made a law in the City
of Sparta, that no man might accompany with his own wife, but with
shamefastnes of that filthy act. The candles might not be lyghted in that
house, where the man was, when that he would go unto his wife. When the King
would go unto wars, before he should go unto the field to encounter with
the enemies, he offered two solemn sacrifices: Minerua.
the one unto Minerua, otherwise named Bellona, to kindle flames of stoutnesse
in his suldiours manfully to fight: the other unto the Muses, to moderate their
doings in victory, as might be commendable and praise worthy therein: They
passed al men in patience, for as before they brought their children in such
hardiness, that their parents would have them whipped, scourged, and wounded
unto the flesh to harde^ them in their young years: They suffered theft to be
unpunished, for that the exercise thereof, does represent a kind of boldness
in wars. The natures of the Lydians was to delight in superstitious
diuinations, in invention of plays, and in theft: for the Art of dicing, and
playing diverse kind of games upon tables, the Lidians first invented the same.
Lydia.
They also were much inflamed by luxurious life, and filthy venerye, which they
neither spared day nor night. Plini writes of a certain nation called Esseni,
which abstain from all kind of pleasure, in so much, that they
neuer-accompany with women, never eat flesh, nor drink wine. And thus by
custom of fasting, they became natural chaste: For custom and use says
Aristotle, is an other nature. In that country no man possesses any thing,
of his own, all things are indifferent between them, and live as companions
one with an other: For in these their virtues they excel all men in vehement
and most ardent love toward God: Virtue most diligent with great care and
study wayed: their neighbors wonderful beloved and made of, so that by this
their precept of life, they have great fame and commendations. Cities few they
have, neither Towns, and for that they take the earth as a common mother, they
have all one respect unto all kind of men. The Getes have no division of
lands, no limittes of ground, nor any particions of their good: they drink
blood mingled with milk, they eat no flesh, and they rejoice much when any
of their friends dye, even as the people called Trauses in Thracia do when any
is borne into the world: they mourn and lament with weeping eyes that the
little child then borne, should know the misery and state of this wretched
world: and when any of their friends are dead, they rejoice and be glad with
melody and all kind of mirth, for that he has past this toyling life. Thracia.
The Thracians, people of great antiquity, famous warriors, bragging much
that Mars the God of war, was borne in their country, much addicted unto
drunkenness, selling their children in the market, and their maids and
daughters common to lie with every man: they judge and count it most
commendation to live only by spoil, theft and wars: they brag if any
have a wound, they think it a fame unto the person: And of the contrary, if
they have no mark in the forehead, no wound in the body, they will judge
those idle men and cowwardes. The common people worship Mars and Diana for
their gods: Their King only does worship Mercury, by whom the King uses to
swear. Psilli.
Psilli, people of so great follye, that when the southern wind blows so
long and strong, that their lands perish, their water dry, that they arm
themselves with common council to sight against the wind, even like as the
people of Celta, Certa.
do use to draw their swords, and shake their spears at the waves of the
seas, to revenge the injuries and wrongs done by the seas unto them. Bithini
were much of this follye, that they would assende, and climb up unto the top
of hie mountains, either to thank Jupiter for his furtheraunce toward them,
Pigmaei.
or else to ^urse Jupiter for his cruelnes toward them. The Pygmeians, being
sore troubled and molested with Cranes, do ride on Rams and Goats backs,
with their bows and arrows, a whole band, in the spring time toward the
sea banckes to break their Eggs, to destroy their neastes, and to fight with
the cranes, every third month they take this journey in hand, else would the
Cranes destroy them, for that they are little dwarfes, of a cu^itte long*
Their houses are made of dirt and feathers, most like unto birds neasts, so
that they are somewhat more and bigger. I know not unto what purpose I do
recite these countries, since the more I write, the more I have to write. What
should I recite the people, that eat the flesh of Lions, and Panthers, called
Agriophagi? or recite those that eat Lice in Scithia, called Budini? Or them
that eat Serpents, Ophiophagi. Anthropophagi.
called Ophiophagi? or those that feed on men's bodies, called Anthropophagi?
yea, of those that eat their own parents, as the Caspians did. Unto what
purpose should I name As^omi, a nation in India, without mouths, which only
live with the air that comes unto their n^sthrels, where they receive
breath: they can neither ea^e nor drink as Plini says in his seventh book,
they live the longer with the sweet smell and odours of flowers? Unto what
end likewise should I speak of those blind Andabates that fight without eyes?
Monopods.
or of those great eared people that Fanesij, whose ears shadowed and covered
their whole body? Arimaspi.
or of the Monopods, which in like manner shadow their whole body with one
foot? or of Arimaspi, people in Scithia, having but one eye in the midst of
their forehead, like the great Ciclope Poliphenus, which Ulysses destroyed?
Yea, of millians more, whose deformity to depaint, whose ouglinesse to write,
were to much a charge unto the writer, and to much tediousness unto the
reader. I might speak of people in some part of India, which live two hundred
years and more, whose hear upon their heads in their young age is white, and
in their old age black, Pandorae.
called Pandorae. I might likewise recite a people in Libia, whose horses may
not be guided nor governed with bridles, be the bittes never so strong: but
with rods most gently are they tamed, be the rods never so simple.
Herodotus, a famous Greek writer, Selenetidae.
is not ashamed to show how the women Selenetidae, brought forth eggs,
whence men were borne, of such height, length and stature, that I am partelye
abashed to aleadge his authority therein. Sorbotae. Troglodit^.
Again, the people called Sorbotae of Aethiope, are spoken to be eight
Cubittes long. To speak of the Troglodites which live in caves of the ground,
feeding of Serpents, people of wonderful swiftness, which out run any
horse in Aethiope, Massagetes.
which cannot speak but hiss: To speak of Massagettes, of the people
Nasomones, I will according unto promise omit the proilixity thereof, touching
all countries by the way, or some of the chief, as Egypt which bragges and
vaunts of their antiquity. Carthaginean. Babilonia^s.
The Aethiopians and the people of Caria, with simplicity and slauerye. The
Carthaginean false and deceitful. The Babilonian wicked and corrupted. The
Persean, a drunkarde and a glutton. The Sycilian warye and trustye: so the
cruelnesse of the Caspians: the filthiness of the Lesbians: Caspians.
Lesbians. Corinthians
the drunkenness of the Scythians: the fornication of the Corinthians: the
rudeness of the Boetians: the ignorance of the Symmerians: the beastliness
of the Sybarites: the hardiness of ye Lacedaemonians: the delicacie of the
Athenia^s, and ye pride and glory of the Romans. Thus we read that the
Spaniards be the greatest travelers, and the greatest despisers: The Italian,
proud and desirous to revenge: The Frenchman pollitike and rash: The Germain
a warrior: The Saxon a dissembler: The Sweuian a light talkatiue person: The
Brytaine, a busy body: The Cimbrian, sedicious and horrible: The Boemian,
ungentle, and desirous of news: The Vandall a mutable wrangler: The Bauarian,
a flouter and a scoffer. Thus much are incident unto the aforesaid nations by
nature: But because in this place it were somewhat unto the purpose, to delare
the glory and state of Rom^ which of all the world we esteemed and feared: And
for that Rome had more enemies, than all the whole world beside, to show
briefly how they flourished, how their fame spread, and their glory grew, I
think it expedient, not meddling with the antiquity thereof in the time of
Ianus and Cameses, but touching their fame by doing of wars, in the time of
Romulus, which being begotten of Mars, and of Rhea a Uestall Uirgin, was the
first builder of that City, and also King thereof. This king Romulus warred on
the Sabins, after he had elected a hundred Senators, to discern and judge
causes of the City, to defend Justice, and practice the same, and to punish
vice and wrongs, according to the law of Plato, who willed every commonwealth
to be governed with reward unto the virtuous, and punishment unto the vicious.
Again, he appointed certain soldiers, unto the number of one M. to be in a
readiness always to defend the City. After Romulus succeeded Numa Pompilius
the second King, a man very religious and pitiful: he in his time made laws
to observe rites, sacrifices, and ceremonies, to worship their gods: He made
Bishops and Priests, he appointed the Uestal Uirgines, and all that belong
thereunto. T. Hostilius
Thirdly came Tullius Hostilius to be king in Rome, whose felicity was only
to teach the youth of Rome the discipline of warfare, stirred them
woonderfully to exercise and practice the same. Then fourthly succeeded An.
Martius, An. Martius.
with the like industry and care for the further and surer state of the City,
in raising the hie walls of Rome, in a Bridge upon the river Tiber, in
amending and beautifiyng all the streets in Rome. Tor. Priscus
The fifth King was Torquinius Priscus, which though he was a stranger borne
of Corinth, yet he increased the policy of the Romans with the wit of
Greece, he triumphed over the people of Tusk, and enlarged the fame of Rome
much more then it was. Tul. Seruius
To this came next Seruius Tullius which was the sixth, and Torquinius superbus
the seventh and last King of Rome, who for his misgouernment and lust in the
City against the chaste matrones, for the pride and infringement of the
liberty, having withal ravished Lucrecia Collatinus wife, was at length after
long rule and government, banished Rome. The first alteration and change of
state was then after these seven Kings governed Rome, two hundred years and a
half, which was the first infancy of Rome. Then Collatinus and Brutus, after
these kings were exiled, a just reuengement of their liberty and honest life,
were the first Consuls in Rome: they I say, altering the government of the
City, from a Monarchy unto a kind of government called Aristocratia, which
continued in Rome from the time of Brutus and Collatinus, Appius Cladius.
until the time of Appius Claudius, and Quintus Fuluius, which was two hundred
years. In this season, during this two hundred years was Rome most assailed of
all kind of enemies, stirred unto wars of all nations, for the space of two
hundred years and a half. Then Appius Claudius forgetting the law that he him
self made in Rome against fornication, forgetting the rauishment of Lucrecia,
and the banishment of Torquinius for breaking of the same, against all right
and reason willyngly and wilfully ravished Virginia, the daughter of Virginius,
which after that her own father slew her in the open sight of Rome, the cause
being known unto all the City, the power of Virginius, and the populer state
which always had the government of Rome under them, with straight in arms to
revenge the wrongs and injuries against laws committed, and to defend
likewise the laws. Even as the Kings before named were exiled and banished
Rome for the rauishment of Lucretia: so now the ten Commissioners called
Decemviri, were likewise excluded and rejected for the rauishement of Virginia.

Of the strange natures of waters, earth, and fire.
IN diverse learned Histories we read, and specially in Plini, of the woonders
of waters, and of the secret and unknown nature of fire: which for the rare
sight thereof, and for that it does degenerate from things known, therein are
noted things to be marueyled at, as certain water in the country of Campania,
where if any mankind will enter therein, Plini lib. 21 Cap. 103.
it is written that he shall incontinent be reft of his senses. And if any
womankinde happen to go unto that water, she shall always afterward be
barren. In the same country of Campania there is a lake called Auernus,
Auernus.
where all fleeing Fowls of the air that flee over that lake fall presentlye
therein and die. A Well there is in Caria called Salmacis, Salmacis.
whose water if any man drink thereof, he becomes chaste, and never desires
the company of a woman. The river Maeander does breed such a kind of stone,
Maeander.
that being put cloase unto a man's heart, it does straight make him mad. There
are two ryuers in Boetia, Melas.
the one named Melas, whose water causes staight any beast that drinks
thereof, if it be white, to alter color unto black: Cephisus.
the other Cephisus, which does change the black beast unto a white beast by
drinking of the water. Again, there is in India, a standing water, where
nothing may swim, beast, bird, man, or any living creature else drowneth:
this water is called Silia: Silia. Apustidamus.
In Africa on the contrary part, there is the water named Apustidamus, where
nothing, be it never so heavy or unapt to swim that drowneth, but all kind
of things does swim: lead or any heavy metal does swim in that lake, as
it is in the Well of Phinitia in Sicilia. Infinite waters should I recite if I
in this would be tedious, in repeating their names, whose strange natures,
whose secret and hidden operation, whose force and virtue were such as healed
diverse diseases: Auaria*
as in the Isle of Auaria, there was a water that healed the collicke and the
stone. By Rome there was also a water called Albula, Albula.
that healed green wounds. Cydnus.
In Sicilia the river called Cydnus was a present remedy unto any swelling of
the legs. Not far from Neapolis there was a Well whose water healed any
sicknesses of the eyes The lake Amphion takes all scur^es and sores from the
body of any man. What should I declare the natures of the four famous floods
that issue out of Paradise: the one named Euphrates, Euphrates.
whom the Babylonians and Mesopotamians have just occasion to commend. The
second is called Ganges which the Indians have great cause to praise. Ganges.
Nilus.
The third called Nilus, which the country of Egypt can best speak of. And
the fourth is called Tigris, Tigris.
which the Assyrians have most commodity by. Here might I be long occupied if I
should orderly but touch the natures of all waters. The alteration of the
Seas, and the woonders that thereof appear, as ebbing and flowing, as
saltenesse and sweetness, and all things incident by nature unto the Seas:
which were it not that men see it daily, practices the same hourelye, and
mark things therein continuallye, more woonders would appear by the seas,
then skant reason might be aleaged for, saving that God (as the Prophet says)
is wonderful in all his works. The five golden Rivers, which learned and
ancient writers affirm that the sands thereof are all glistering gemmes of
gold, Tagus. Hermus. Pactolus.
as Tagus in Ispaigne, Hermus in Lydia, Pactolus in Asia, Idaspes in India,
Idaspes. Arimaspus.
and Arimaspus in Scythia: these I say are no less famous through their golden
Sands which their weltering waves bring unto land in these foresaid
countries, then Permessus in Boetia, where the Muses long were honored, or
Simois in Phrygia, where Venus was conceived by Anchises. To coequat the number
of these five last and pleasant rivers, Styx.
there are five as ougly and painful, as Styx in Arcadia, whose property is to
kill any that will touch it, and therefore found of the Poets to be consecrated
unto Pluto, for there is nothing so hard but this water will consume, so cold
is the water thereof. Again, the river of Phlegeton is contrary unto this,
Phlegeton.
for the one is not so cold, but the other is as wh^t: and therefore called
Phlegeton, which is in English fiery or smoky, for the Poets feign likewise
that it burns out in flashing flames of fire. Lethes. Acheron.
Lethes and Acheron, two rivers, the one in Africa, the other in Epire: the
one called the river of forgetfulness, the other the river of sadness. The
fifth called Cocytus, Cocytus.
a place where mourning never cease. These five rivers for their horror and
terror that proceeded from them, for the strange and woonderous effects
thereof, are called infernal lakes, consecrated and attributed unto King Pluto,
which Virgil at large describes. Diverse wells for the strangeness of the
waters, and for the pleasantness thereof, were sacrificed unto the gods, as
Cissusa a Well where the nources of Bacchus used to wash him, and therefore
consecrated unto Bacchus: so Melas unto Pallas, Aganippe unto the Muses and so
forth, not molesting the reader further with natures of water, but briefly I
mean to touch the strange nature of the earth. Plini affirms that there was
never man sick in Locris, nor in Croton, neither any earthquake ever heard in
Licia, after an earthquake they had forty fair days. By Rome in the fields
called Gabiensis, a certain plotte of ground, almost two hundred akers would
tremble and quake as men rode upon him. Gabiensis
There are two hills of strange natures by the floudde called Indus, the
nature of the one is to draw any iron unto it: insomuch, as Plini says, that
if nails be in any shoes, the ground of that place draws the sole of. There
is a piece of ground in the City Characena, Charecena.
in the country of Taurica, where if any come wounded, he shall be straight
healed: And if any enter unto diverse places, as in a place called Hirpinis,
Hirpinis.
where the temple of Mephis is builded, or in Asia, by Iheropolis, Iheropolis
they shall incontinently die. Again there are places by the virtue of
ground, in that place, that men may prophecy. Diverse where we read that one
piece of ground devoured another, Ciborus.
as the hill Ciborus, and the City hard by called Curites were choked up of
the earth. Phaegium, a great mountain in Aethiopia, Sipilis
and Sipilis, a hie hill in Magnesia, with the Cities named Tantalis and
Galanis. There is a great rock by the City Harpasa in Asia, which may be
moved easy with one finger, and yet if any man put all his strength thereunto,
it will not stir. To speak of mount Aetna in Sicilia: of Lypara, in Aeolia:
of Chimaera, in Lycia: of Vesbius, and Aenocauma, five fiery mountains, which
day and night bourne so terrible, that the flame thereof never reasteth. If
any man will see more of these merueylous and woonderous effects of
Elements, let him read the second book of Plini, where he shall have
abundance of the like examples. There he shall see that in some places it
never rayned, as in Paphos upon the temple of Venus: In Nea a town in Phrigia
upon the Temple of Minerua, Nea a town of Ph^gia.
and in diverse places else, which is the nature of the ground. About Babylon a
field burns day and night. In Aethiopia certain fields about mount
Hesperius, shine all night like stars, as for earthquakes and woonders that
thereby happened, I will not speak, for that it is forced of matter: but of
those strange grounds that never alter from such effects before mentioned,
beside the mettalles, the stones, the herbs, the trees, and all other
things, are so miraculous and strange, that Plini in diverse places does
speak of. And as for fire, it is to great a wonder that the whole world is
not burned thereby, since the Sun, the Stars, the Elementarie fire, excel
all miracles, in keeping the same from damage, and hurt unto manne, if God had
not prevented: yea, appointed that the heat of the Sun should not kindle
strawes, stubbles, trees and such like, which the heat thereof (as we daily
see) burns stones, lead, and the most hardest substance out: since
specially that fire is in all places, and is able to kindle all things,
insomuch, that the water Thrasimenos burns out in flames, Thrasimenos.
which is unnatural and strange, that fire kindles in water: And likewise in
Egnatia, Egnatia.
a City of Salentine, there is a stone which if any wood touch, it will
kindle fire: In the Well called Nympheus, there is a stone likewise, whence
flames of fire from the stone it self burns the water. A greater wonder it
is, that the fire should be kindled by water, and extinguished by wind. Fire
flashed about the head of Seruius Tullius being then a boy in sleep, which
did prognosticate that he should be a king of the Romans. Fire shined about
the head of L. Marcius, in Spain, when he encouraged his soldiers to revenge
manfullye the deaths of those noble and famous Romans, named Sipians. The
meruellous effects of fire, are most woonderous and most straungest.

Of the world, and of the soul of man, with diverse and sundry opinions of
the Philosophers about the same.
AMongst diverse Philosophers and learned men, grew a great controversy of the
beginning of the world: some of the best affirming that it had no beginning,
nor can have end, as Aristotle and and Plato, applying incorruption, and
perpetual revolution to the same. Some with Epicurus thought the world should
be consumed: Of this opinion was Empedocles and Heraclitus. Some of the other
side did judge with Pithagoras, Pithagoras.
that so much of the world should be destroyed as was of his own nature.
Thus held they several opinions, concerning the making, the beginning, the
ending, and the numbers of the world. Thales.
Thales said there was but one world, agreeing with Empedocles. Democritus
Empedocle^.
Democritus affirms infinite worlds, and so judged Metrodorus the
Philosopher, worlds to be innumerable. What child is of this age but smileth
at their folly, reasoning largly one against another, in applying the cause and
the effect of things unto their own inventions. And as they have judged
diversely of the world, concerning the frame and nature thereof: so were they
as far from the true understanding of the creation of man. Some grossly
thought that mankind had no beginning. Some judged that it had a beginning by
the superior bodies: And for the antiquity of mankind, some judge Egypt to be
the first people, some Scythia, some Thracia, some this country, and some that
country, with such fantastical inventions, as may well appear unto the most
ignorant an error. And alas how simple are they in finding out the
substance of the soul, what it should be, where it should be, and by what
it should be, some say that there is no soul, but a natural moving, as
Crates the Theban, Crates.
some judge the soul to be nothing else but fire or heat, between the
vndeuidible parts. Others thought it an air received into the mouth, tempered
in the heart, boiled in the lights, and dispersed through the body. Of this
opinion was Anaxagoras and also Anaximenes. Anaxagoras
Hippias judged the soul of man to be water. Thales, and Heliodorus, affirm
it to be earth. Empedocles is of opinion that it is hot blood about the heart:
so that they varye in sundry opinions, attributing the cause thereof either to
the fire, or else unto water, either unto the earth, or unto the air, and some
unto the complexion of the four Elements: others of earth and fire: others of
water and fire: Some again reason that the substance of the soul is of fire,
and of the air. And thus of approved Philosophers, they show themselves
simple innocents: How ignorant were they in defining the soul of man? so far
disagreeing one with an other, that Zenocrates thinks again the soul to be
but a number that mooues it self, which all the Egyptians sometime consented
unto. Aristotle himself the Prince of all Philosophers, Aristotle.
and his master Plato, showed in this their shifting reason, which both agree
that the soul is a substance which moves it self. Some so rude and so
far from perfection in this point, that they thought the heart to be the
soul: some the brain. How ridiculous and foolish seems their assertion
unto this age concerning the soul, and as childishly they dispute and reason
again about the placing of the same, where and in what place of the body the
soul rests: For Democritus judges the head to be his seat: Parmenides in
the breast: Herophilus in the ventricles of the brain: Herophilus.
Strato does think that the soul was in the space between the eye browe:
Strato.
yea, some were so foolish, to judge it to be the ear, as Zerxes king of
Persea did: Epicurus in all the breast: Diogines supposed it to be in a hollow
vain of the heart: Empedocles in the blood: Empedocles
Plato, Aristotle, and other that were of the best and truest philosophers,
judged the soul to be indifferent in all parts of the body: Some supposed of
the wisest, that every piece and parcel of the body had his proper soul.
In this again they were much in seeking a proper seat for the soul deceived,
even as before they erred shamefully, and lied manifesty about the essence and
substance of the soul: so now were they most simplye beguiled in placing the
soul, as you have heard. And now after I have opened their several opinions
concerning what the soul is, and where the soul is, you shall here likewise
hear, whither the soul shall go after death, according unto the Philosophers,
which as diversely vary and disagree in this, as you before heard their
diversity of opinions concerning the substance, and the place. And first to
begin with Democritus, who judges ye soul to be mortal, and that it shall
perish with the body: to this agree Epicurus and Plini. Epicurus. Pithagoras.
Pythagoras judged that the soul is immortal, and when the body dies, it
flees unto his kind. Aristotle is in this, that some parts of the soul
which have corporal seats must dye with the body, but that the understanding
of the soul which is no instrument of the body, is perpetual. The people
called Drynda were of this judgment, that souls should not discende unto
Hell, but should pass unto another world, as the Philosophers called Essei,
Ess^i.
which suppose that the souls of the dead do live in great felicity beyond
the Ocean Seas. The Egyptians, Aegiptians.
ancient people, judged with Pythagoras that the souls of men should pass
from one place unto another, and then to enter unto another man again. Stoiks.
The Stoics are of that opinion that the soul forsakes the body in such
sort, that the soul which is diseased in this life, and advanced by so
virtuous death together with the body, but they judge it if it be adurned with
noble and heroical virtues, that it be accompanied with everlasting natures.
Diverse of the Pagans hold that the soul is immortal, Pagans.
but yet they suppose that reasonable souls enter into unreasonable bodies, as
into Plants or Trees for a certain space. There were again some frivolous
Philosophers as Euripides and Archelaus, which say that men first grew out of
the earth in manner of Herbs, like unto the fables of Poets, which feign that
men grew of the sown teeth of Serpents. Nine mansions for souls in hell.
Some again very childishly affirm that there be nine degrees of punishment,
or rather nine Mansions in Hell appointed and prepared for the soul. The first
seat is appointed for young Infantes: The second for idiotes and fools (I
fear that place will be well filled:) The third for them that kill them
selves: The fourth for them that be tormented with love: The fifth for those
that were found gyltie before Judges: The sixth appointed for strong men and
champions: The seventh is a place where the souls be purged: The eight seat
is where the souls being purged do rest. The ninth and last is the pleasant
field Elis^us. And to join these Legendes of lies of old women with
frivolous figmentes of Poets, which likewise affirm the like folly of fiery
Phlegeton, of frostye Cocytus, of the water of Stygia, of the flood Lethes, and
of Acheronta with other such, when all Paganicall rites, and fond foolish
observations first grew, I mean of fables of the Poets, and not by the
reading of the holy Scriptures. O blind baiardes, in seeking that which they
could never find so. And as they could prove and say that the body came out
of the earth, the moisture out of the water, ^he breath of man by the air, and
the heat of man by the fire: so could they not know the worker thereof, how
wit and wisdom came from God, how all things was made by him of nothing. This
knew they not, not that they wanted learning, but that they wanted grace. The
Planets placed in man's body.
They could appoint planets in their several places, in their due seats and
just Mansions, as Jupiter in the liver, Saturn in the spleen, Mars in blood,
Sol in the heart, the Moon in the stomach, and Venus in the reins: but they
could not agree in appointing a place for the soul. They could likewise
appoint seats for the bodies superior in man, as the Ram in the head, the
Bull in the neck, and the Crab in the heart, the Lion in the breast, and the
fish in the foot, and so of others: but they could in no wise find a seat
for the soul. True is it said, that God reuealeth wisdom unto babes, and
hides the same unto the sages of the world* Hence grows the beginning of
all heresies according unto the proverb: The greatest Philosophers, the
greatest Heretics: Hereby I say grew almost the invention of Philosophy,
coequall unto the verity of the gospel, from the which Paul the Apostle
cries upon all men to take heed of flattering Philosophers. If in this place
I should show their opinions concerning our God and Creator, I should seem
tedious: Diagoras.
For Diagoras and Theodorus affirm that there is no God. Epicurus judged that
there is a God, but that he had no care over earthly things. Thales.
Thales said that God was a mind which made all things of water. Cleanthes
supposed God to be the air only. Cl^anthes.
Alcineon judged the Sun, the Moon, and the stars to be only God.
Parmenides makes God to be a continual circle of light, which is called
Stephanen. Crisippus names God a divine necessity. Anaxagoras supposes God
to be an infinite mind, mooueable by it self, so does Pythagoras likewise
judge: Yea, Aristotle imagined God to be of proper nature, as the world, or
the heat of the Heavens, or the divinity of the mind, which either of these
three he names God, and so infinite are they, that so simply conceive the
majesty of Godhead, that far wiser had they seemd unto us by silence therein,
then by uttering of such fond fantastical opinions, where too much error
and folly are unto all men evident.

Of worshipping of gods, and religion of Gentyles.
NVma Pompilius, Numa*
the second king of Rome, being studious to draw the ignorant and rude
people to some profession of religion, was the first that appointed sacrifices
unto Jupiter, and unto Mars. In Rome even he elected vi^gines unto Vesta,
Vesta.
and appointed certain orders in choosing of the same. None by the law of Numa,
might be taken under sixe-yeres old, and none above term to be a Vestal
virgin, which virgins should be thirty ^e^e^ religious, and vowed unto Vesta:
of the which thirt^ years, the first ten years* they should learn the
or^^der and fashion of the sacrifices and religion of the goddess Vesta. The
second ten years they should sacrifice and employ the ceremonies with rites
and ^onours belonging unto Vesta* The third ten years they should as grave
Matrones, learn the others (...) chosen, to be perfect in the rites and
ceremonies of Vesta* Then if any of them would marry, they might after thirty
years continuance so do. If any of these Vestal virgins were convicted of
whordome, the law was* in open sight of the City of Rome she should be
brought unto the gate called Collina, and there alive be burned. Again, if the
fire at any time in the Temple had gone out by any means, their kepers with
scurges should whip and scurge them almost unto death. The same Numa, to make
the people more religious, appointed twelve men called Salij, with painted
garments, singing verses in the praise and commendations of God Mars, Mars.
with solemn dancing and playing round about the City. Amongst other sacred
orders, he made certain Priests called Feciales: these punished offenders:
these revenged the wrongs of Legates: these redressed all injuries offered and
committed within the City of Rome: these Priests appointed rites and
ceremonies, made sacrifices unto the goddess Bona Dea in a Temple erected unto
their goddess upon mount Auentine: Bona Dea.
here might no men come to do sacrifice, but all women. Of this goddess Bona
Dea, does Cicero make often mention in diverse of his orations and inuectiuos made
against diverse pernicious and wicked of the City, as Cutelin, Clodius, and
others. There was in Rome another kind of religion dedicated unto Flora, Flo^^
the sacrifice whereof was called Floralia. This Flora, as both Liuius and
Dionisius do report, was a common strumpet, which for that she made the whole
city of Rome her h^yre* being wealthy at her death, she was therefore thought
to be of the Romans, the goddess of fruits, and was honored of all the
lewd women in brave garlandes, decked with all of flowers, in gorgeous
apparel; and this was done in the month of May. Ceres.
The goddess Ceres began then to be famous, for she had her feas^es and
sacrifices named Cerealia, by the Priests appointed, she was thus honored, the
Priests in white garments, and with lanternes and firebrands in the night time
would come unto the Temple, they abstayned from Wine, and avoided venery for a
certain time, they had appointed every fifth year a great fasting. Minera.
Minerua likewise began to have such honor in Rome, that she had three several
kinds of sacrifices, one of a Bull, the second of a Crane, the third of a
Weather. The Romans did celebrate in the beginning of the spring, Berecynthia.
such feasts and sacrifices unto Berecynthia, called the mother of the
goddess, that every man did offer of the chiefest thing that he did possess
to pleasure their goddess. There were diverse other kinds of sacrifices, and
vain supersticious ceremonies observed then in Rome, whose beginninges
proceeded from the invention of deuyls, which of long time were honored as
gods: for then men sought no help but of their gods, which were rather deuyls
as Polidorus in his fourth book affirms of a certain rich man in Rome which
had three of his sons sore sick of the plague, Valesius.
this man was named Valesius, who every night at whom in his house, besought
his household gods called Penates, to save his children, and to plague him
for the fault of his sons. Thus every night praying unto his gods for the
health of his children, a voice was heard, that if he would go with his
three sons unto Tarentum, and wash his sons with the water which was
consecrated unto Pluto and Proserpina, they should recover their health.
Valesius thought the way was far, yet for health unto his children, he took
his journey, and being ready shipped in Martius field hard by the river Tyber,
he was desired of the master of the ship, to go unto the next Uillage called
Tarentum for a little fire, for the fire was out in the ship, and the Mariners
bus^e about other things: when Valesius hard the name of Tarentum, he knew
straight that it was that place that his gods appointed him to go to, for the
City of Tarentum was in the furthest part of all Italy, Calabria*
in the country of Calabria, he willyngly went and brought both fire with him
for the Master of the ship, and water for the children, which being given unto
his sons, they recovered health. Wherefore, in memory of this, he
recompensed his Gods with this sacrifice: He in the night appointed solemn
plays to honor Pluto and Proserpina each several nights every year for so many
sons he had that recovered health, erecting up alters, and offering
sacrifices in honor and solempnitie of Pluto. These oracles and divine
aunsweres which the diuyls were w^nt to give in idols to deceive men withal:
These I say were they that blinded and allured the people to idolatry. Cicero
says that the chiefest. Priests of Rome, the Bishops, for that the sacrifices
and feasts, ceremonies and rites, belonging unto new made Gods, grew to
such a number that they appointed three men called Triumviri, to be rulers of
the sacrifices, and appointed other three that should keep the sacred Oracles
of Sibilla. The Oracles of Sibilla were written in books, Sibilla.
where they resorted oftentimes for council and adm^nition fifteen men
appointed to know what was to be done in any peril or necessity, as at the
wars between Caesar and Pompeius. Such prodigious sightes were seen, such
unnatural working of the heavens, such terrible sightes on the earth, such
portentuous miracles then seen in Rome, that the Senators came unto Sibilla
to know the effects* and ends of these monstrous shows, and to be
instructed of the state of the City, unto whom she gave six letters in
writings, three R. and three F. to be expounded of their wisemen, which when
the meaning was found, that three R. was this, Regnum Romae Ruet: and three F.
was Flamma, Ferro* and Fame, that is as much to say, that the monarch of Rome
should perish with fire, sword, and hunger. Dionisius in his fourth book
says, that an aged woman brought nine books unto Torquinius Superbus, being
the seventh and last King of the Romans, which she would have sold for
three hundred Crowns to the King, letting Torquinius understand that those
books were full of oracles and divine aunsweres, but he making a jest of her
books, did burn three of them before her face, demanding of her again what
he should pay for the other six, she answered: three hundred Crowns, then
he burned other three, and asked what he should pay for the three books that
were left, she answered as before three hundred Crowns: the King marueyling
much at the constancy of the woman, bought the three books for three hundred
crowns, and after that time that woman was never seen in Rome, wherefore it is
thought of the Romans that she was Sibilla. Therefore these three books were
observed in Rome as aforesaid under the custody of.iij. men appointed for the
purpose, and she so honored and worshipped, that sacrifice upon sacrifice was
offered unto Sibilla in Rome. Thus the Oracles of Sibilla in Rome: The Oracles
of Apollo in Delphos: The Oracles of Jupiter in Ammon, were the instructors to
the Gentiles, and teachers of the Greeks. Moreover they had such solemnities
of feasts, such celebration of banquettes, either called pontifical feasts
for that it was ordained by Priests, or else triumphant banquettes after
victories made of the Emperors, and given unto the people, or else funeral
feasts, where honor and solemnity was had for the dead: As for games and
plays to sacrifice and to honor their Gods, they had Lupercalia, Floralia,
Baccanalia, Cerealia, with diverse and sundry others to pleasure their Gods,
and to mitigate their furies and wrath: For in time of Torquinius the proud,
for that diverse women of Rome being great with children, got surfettes in
eating of Bulls flesh, they appointed certain sacrifices unto the Gods
infernalles cauled Taurilia, to appease their anger therein again for them
that were sick. Valerius Publicola, which was the first Consul in Rome,
appointed banquets and feasts in the temple of the Gods, to aswage likewise
their fury, as Jupiter and Juno, and Minerna, which were with banquettes
reconciled to restore health unto the sick. The homages and services, the
sacrifices and solemnities, the banquettes and feasts, the mirth and melody,
the pastime and sport, the great games and plays that always Greeks and
Gentiles have used to their Gods to be past number. The honor, the reverence
that Jupiter had in Creete: The worship and fame that Apollo had in Delphos:
The sacrifices and ceremonies that Mars had in Thratia, are in books
written, are by auctorities recorded, I fear it be in the hearts of men to
deep printed. Pallas had her seat in Athens, Juno was staulde in Samos, Diana
in Ephesus, Cibeles in Phrigia, Venus in Gipris, Ceres in Cicilia: Again Pan
amongst the Arcadians, Osiris amongst the Egyptians, Bacchus in the I Will of
Naxus, Vulcan in Lemno^, In fine, blocks and stones, dogs and cattes, Oxen
and Calves, honored and worshipped as Gods. Thus wandering in this vale of
misery like pilgrims far from the country that we ought to travail unto,
where that true and living God, the God of salvation and health which is
without end to be worshipped: He is the God of all men, and yet of the fewest
worshipped: he is the savior, and yet he is neglected: yea, and more rejected
of us that be Christians, then the blocks and stones were honored of the
Gentiles. And for the proof I mean to show the severe laws that were both
in Athens and Rome, the two lanterns of the world, for observing of their Gods
and religion, whom neither Philosophers in Athens, nor Senators in Rome nor ye
magistrates and Princes of the world then would in no wise permit injuries
toward Gods, suffer any evil report toward their religion, in such care were
they lest they should offend their Gods and break their laws, L. P^^^li^s.
certain husbandmen found in the lands of L. Petilius by plowing therein, two
stones, whereupon an Epitaph of Numa Pompilius was written in one, in the other
there found they fourteen books: Valerius. lib. 1.
seven latin books, entitled Ius pontificum, the law of bishops concerning
religion and sacrifices of their goddess: Th^se books with great diligence
and care were not only commanded to be kept, but also in all points to be
observed. The other were Greek books, entitled Disciplina sapientiae, the
rule of wisdom, which for that they tasted of Philosophye, and contempned the
vain superstitious religions of their goddess* Petilius fearing lest by
reading of wisdom and Philosophy their folly and religion should be
destroyed, being then praetor in Rome, at what time Cornelius and Bebius were
Consuls by aucthority of the Senate in open sight of all the city of Rome
burned the Greek books, for the old and ancient men would have nothing
kept within their city that might hinder their Gods, for before all things,
their gods and their religions they preferred, and so honored their Priests
their sacrifices and their vestall Uirgines before the Emperors and Senators,
as it appears by a History in Valerius, that when Rome was taken and
conquered first by the Frenchmen, and the vestal Uirgines enforced every one
burdened with sacred things belonging unto the gods Uesta, to bear those
things away, shifting more for the sacrifices and rites of their religion, in
carrying their books, their garments, their gods, and their things
belonging thereunto, they cared for their countries, friends, children, and
gooddes: Insomuch that L. Aluanius when he saw the Uestall Uirgins taking
pains to maintain the honor of Vesta undefiled, her sacrifices vnpoluted, in
saving the ceremonies and religion of their Gods from the enemies, as one
that had more regard and respect to their vain religion, then careful of his
wife and children, which then being in a Chariot to be carried and conveyed
from Rome, commanded by Aluanius, to come down from the Chariot, and go a
foot, where he placed where his wife was and his children, the Uestal Uirgins
with all their burdens belonging unto Uesta, their sacrifices and other
necessaries, and brought honorablye unto the country of Creete where with
great honor they were received, and for memory hereof until this time the
people of Creete for that they did succor the vestal Uirgines in adversity,
Vesta the goddess recompensed them no less for their humanity in receiving of
her maids unto their town, then she gratified Aluanius for his consideration
and waying of her religion: In so much, that the coches where her Uirgines and
her sacrifices were carried, was afterward more honored and esteemed, than any
triumphant or imperial chariot. In the self same time and perturbation of
Rome, when the Capitol was besieged with the enemies Caius Fabius, perceauing
how religion was then esteemed, Caius Fabius.
girded himself like a sacrificer, carried in hand an host to be offered unto
Jupiter, was suffered to pass through the midst of his enemies to mount
Quirinal, where solempnities and sacrifices were done unto Jupiter: and being
accomplished, he likewise went unto the Capitol through the midst of the
army with all his company, and by this means got the victory over his
enemies, more by religion then by strength. So much was superstition and
idolatry honored and observed euerywhere, that the Perseans sailed with a
thousand Nauyes to ^o sacrifice and solempnity unto Apollo at Delos* Val. lib.
1. Perseans. Athenians.
The Athenians slew and destroyed all those that envied o^ repugned their
religion. Diagoras was exiled for that he wrote that he doubted whether any
gods were or no, and if gods were, what were they? Socrates was cond^mpned for
that he went about to translate their religion and speak against their
Gods. Phidias that noble and cunning workman was no longer suffered at
Athens, but all the while he wrought the picture of Minerua in marble, for that
it was more durable than yuorie, which when Phidias thought to draw her in
yuorie, Phidias.
he was threatened to death, to vilipende so great a goddess, to make her in
yuorie which was woonte to be honored in marble. The Romans made laws at the
distructio^ of Canna, for that great slaughter of Romans which at that war
happened, that the matrones of Rome bewailed and lamented the deaths of their
husbands, their children, their brethren, and friends incessantly, that they
should not pass thirty days in mourning, least the Gods would be angrye,
ascribing all fortunes good and badde unto their Gods. Wherefore it was
decreede by the Senators, that the Mothers and Wives, the sisters and the
daughters of them that were slain at Canna, at the thirty days end, should
cast away their mourning apparelles, and banishe their tears, and come
altogether in white garments to do sacrifice unto the Goddess Ceres, for it
was thought and truly believed among the Gentiles and Heathens, that the
Gods would justly revenge those that would at any time neglect their
sacrifices and religions. Apollo
Apollo for that stout Brennus went to Delphos and spoiled his temple, and
neglected his godhead, Brennus
was plagued grievously, and worthyly revenged: Zerxes.
even as king Zerxes whose Nauyes covered the whole Seas, whose armies of men
dried up riuerrs, and shadowed almost the whole earth, for that he sent four
thousand soldiers unto Delphos to rob Apollo, he was therefore
discomfited in his wars, forsaken of his soldiers, prosecuted of his
enemies, and compelled to flee like a vagabonde from hill to hill, until he
came unto his kingdom of Persea, unto his great infamy and shame. The like in
Carthge when the City was oppressed by the Romans, his Temple neglected, and
he him self not esteemed. Apollo revenged the same, for the first that laid
hand upon him, lost his hand and his arm: Thus in Delphos and in Carthage
did Apollo revenge his injuries. Asculapius.
His son Aesculapius, a great god in diverse countries, for that Turulius
chief ruler of the Nauyes of Antonius, hewed his wooddes which was consecrated
unto his temple, Aesculapius revenged it after this sort. When Antonius and
Caesar were at wars, after that the host and army of Antonius were
vanquished, Turulius.
and Caesar a victor, he brought Turulius to be murdered unto that place in
the wooddes where he neglected Aesculapius. Ceres.
Ceres when the city Mileton was taken by Alexander the great, and her Temple
therein spoiled and robbed of the soldiers, she threw flames of fire into
their faces, and made as many blind as neglected her godhead and majesty.
Dionisius king of Siracusa, for that he spoiled the temple of the goddess
Proserpina, Proserpina.
and robbed this goddess of her golden garments, flouting and scoffing her
rites and ceremonies, nothing esteeming her sacrifice. And again for that he
commanded his soldiers to pluck and take away Aesculapius beard in Epidaurus
a City in Peloponeso in Greece, because his father Apollo had none. He was
brought by the gods from a king in Siracusa to be a poor scholemaister in
Corinth, and wretchedly to end his life by the just indignation of the
goddess Proserpina. Juno showed her anger upon Fuluius Flaccus for that when
he was Censor of Rome, he caused the Marble Tiles to be brought from the
Temple of Juno in Lacinia, unto the Temple of fortune in Rome. He having his
two sons in Illyria at wars, the one by the wrath of Juno slain, the other
by her pleasure plagued and tormented unto death, having news hereof, dyed for
sorrow and grief: And the Senators knowing the cause, restored to the Marble
Tiles with Ambassadors unto Lacinia again. Hercules.
The wrath of Juno was the cause of the unhappy success of that noble Consul
Varro in the wars of Canna. Hercules forgot not to revenge the contempt and
despising of his ceremonies and laws by Pontitius, which once he and his name
received as their god, but by Appius persuaded, who then was Censor in Rome, to
neglect him, was destroyed, he and all his name, which was in number above
thyrtye, and Appius for his counsel made blind. Thus the Gentiles and
Heathens thought that nothing could escape unrevenged of their gods. Masinissa.
This made Masinissa king of Numidia to send back the Iuory teeth that the
Master of his ships brought from the Temple of Juno in Meleta unto Meleta
again. This made the Senators of Rome to send back again the money which
Pleminius the messenger of Scipio took away from the Temple of Proserpina unto
Proserpina again, Pleminius.
fearing the anger and displeasure of the gods. Thus were the people blinded
with vain ceremonies of the Priests, Bishops, and Magistrates. Thus were the
rude people deceived by dissimulations of the potentates, Numa.
as Numa Pompilius and the first idolaters that was in Rome, would make the
people believe that he had warnings and admonions of the Nymph Aegeria, to
whom he said he had access in the night time to be instructed in the
ceremonies of Rome. Licurgus,
Licurgus, a law setter amongst the Lacedaemonians persuaded the people that
what law soever he made, it was done by the oracle of Apollo. Zaleucus made
the Locresians believe that his doings and proceedinges was done by the
counsel of Minerua. Zaleucus.
Pisistratus deceived the people of Athens through dissimulations by a woman
named Phia, Pisistratus.
whom he dressed like Pallas: he was brought often times by this woman unto
the Castle of Pallas, which the rude people thought that she was Pallas her
self, and judged thereby that Pisistratus might do what he would, and have
what he craved of Pallas. Minoes.
Minoes king of Creete, was wont every ninth year to go unto a secret place
by him self, and there a long time staying to consult with Jupiter what law
he should make unto the people of Creete, as he informed the people,
deceived them craftily. Thus we see how Licurgus amongst the Lacedaemonians,
Zaleucus amongst the Locresians, Pisistratus amongst the Athenians, Numa
amongst the Romans, and Minoes in Creete have deceived the ignorant people
with counterfaite talking with gods, making them to believe that the gods
councelled them and warned them to do all things that they did then. Thus by
craft they invented false gods, framed ceremonies, Sertorius.
and observed vain orders. Sertorius that famous Sabin, and Ruler long in
Rome, was wont upon the hye Rocks of Lusitania, to consult with a white
Heart, of whom he was warned to avoid things, and to do things, to take
things, and to refuse things: insomuch, to blind the people, he would
attempt nothing until he would consult in the rock with this white Heart. L.
Silla.
L. Silla when at any time he went unto wars, would in open sight of the
Soldiers embrace a certain remembrance, a sign which he brought from
Delphos with him unto Italy, requiring that to keep promise, as Apollo had
commanded him. Scipio Astric.
Scipio would never take any public affairs in hand, before he had gone
unto the Capitol unto the secret altar of Jupiter, and there continued a
while, to deceive the people. Thus were they thought to be the ofspringes of
Gods of the common soldiers, which they deceived with false shows, and to
this effect, that the people would flatter and obey them in all things: And
as Liberius did use to feed Julius Caesar with flattery, saying, that mortal
men ought to deny nothing, unto those whom the Gods do grant all: so did
these fornamed Princes hunt for such honor as Caesar or Alexander had. Mahomet
a great Prophet amongst the Jews, and a mighty God amongst the Gentiles,
whose laws until this day the most part of the world observe, had his
beginning as aforesaid, dessembling with the people, that two Dooues that he
taught to come euerydaye upon his shoulders, to feed on certain graynes of
wheat, which he always did bear in his ears were the holy Ghost, and
persuading the people, that his doings and laws were appointed by the holy
Ghost, which daily came to consult and to make orders amongst the people. Reg. 4
We read in diverse places of the scriptures, that the men of Judah did build
aulters and make ydols upon every hie hill, and under bows of trees. The
ydolatrie of the people of Israel, with the daughters of Moab, using their
sacrifices, and worshipping their gods, that GOD the true Mesias did loath
and abhor. Such ydolatrie I say grew amongst the Israelites, Reg. ^2
that Jeroboam commanded two Golden Calves to be made, and to be worshipped,
saying: Behold* O Israel, behold thy gods, which brought thee out of the
land of Egypt. These were they that God most esteemed, and they lest regarded
it: these were his own people, and yet they sought other Gods, saying unto
Aaron: Make us gods to go before us. Manasses king of Judah, erected and made up
aulters unto Baal to go before him. Holofernus said that there was no God but
Nabuchadonosor, Nabuchodonosor.
Nabuchadonosor commanded that all people, tribes, and nations, should kneel
and worship the goulden Image. Solomon having great wisdom of God, Salamon.
that no prince in Israel had the like, fell in his latter years to ydolatrie,
to worship the Gods of strange women. Antiochus.
Antiochus commanded ydols to be worshipped, aulters to be erected, temples
to be made, swine to be sacrificed, and his own children to be uncircumcised.
Thus was ydolatrie maintained, that Calves, Dragons, Serpents, Sun, Moon,
all the Stars of heaven were honored and worshipped as Gods: Insomuch, that
when Saint Paul went to Athens, and saw the City so addicted unto all kind
of ydolatrie, his spirit was troubled therein. Thus they made unto themselves
Gods most like unto those that made them. For as they heard not the true God
and savior of the world, persuading them unto amendment, threatening them of
correction: Even so their feigned Gods having ears heard not, having eyes saw
not, having hands felt not, having nostrels smelled not, for all the
worshipping sacrifices, and kneeling that they did unto them. O miserable man,
to forsake him which is the only savior and redeemer of man, and to worship
those gods which work the only confusion of man. I doubt least some with ye
rich glutton make their bellies their gods. Some honor their bellies as Gods.
I fear least some with Simon make money their gods: nay I doubt most of all
least some make themselves gods with Lucifer, or with Darius king of Persea,
who by a law made an edict, that no man might ask any thing of other Gods
for thirty days, Darius.
but of king Darius. The original beginning of ydolatie, as learned writers
affirm, that the prince of this world, which is the Devil exercising his
Art, practicing his diuinations, shifting such sundry shows, that such errors
were poured in men's hearts, for that prodigious acts and miracles, which
diuelles, and men by diuelles wrought were seen, that men were blinded with
the shifts of Satan, which as Saint Paul said could change him self like an
Aungel of light, that some by sorcery, some by coniuring, some by this craft,
and some by that devil, which goes about like a roaring Lion to increase his
kingdom, became gods on earth: some again for strength, some for building
of Cities, some for inventions of things, were had and counted in the number
of Gods: as Isis amongst the Egyptians, Gabyrus amongst the Macedonians,
Mithra amongst the Perseans: Even so with the Rhodians, and Massagetes was the
Sun honored, amongst the Latins Faunus, with the Romans Quirinus, with the
Babylonians Belus, with the Sabines Sabius, with the Moors Vranios, and so
Jupiter in Creete, Apollo in Delphos, as beforesayde. They had certain beasts
appointed for their sacrifices, and consecrated unto them, as an Owl unto
Minerua, a Heart unto Diana, a Sow unto Ceres, a Swan unto Venus, a Cock unto
Aesculapius, The Peacock unto Juno.
a Bull unto Neptune, a Goat unto Faunus, an Ass unto Priapus, a Hog unto
Bacchus, a Goose unto Isis: Besides this, the Perseans offer unto Phoebus a
Horse for a sacrifice, the Carthaginians even until the destruction of
Carthage, offered a child unto Saturn. The Eagle was appointed for Jupiter,
the Phaenix for the Sun, the Raven for Apollo, and the Pie for Mars. A
further superstition was amongst the Gentiles, that trees, blocks, and such
dumb things were likewise consecrated and hallowed unto their gods: as the
Oak unto Jupiter, the Baye unto Apollo, the Uine unto Bacchus, the Poppley unto
Hercules, the Olive unto Pallas, the Pine tree unto Cibeles, the Myrtle unto
Venus, and the Cypress tree unto Pluto. Thus with beasts, birds, blocks and
stones honored the Gentiles their gods. There was almost nothing in all the
whole world, but it had the name of a god. Amongst the Gentiles, Dogs,
Cattes, Horses, Oxen, Calves, Serpents, Dragons, and such others.

Of the first beginning of shauing, and of the use thereof, with much making
of the hears of the head.
THE Lacedaemonians were wont to excel all other nations in letting their
hears of their heads and beards to grow, as an ornament and a comely setting
forth of man. Wherefore Licurgus did defend the same, saying that as the
hears of the head were comelye and seemelye unto beawtifull men: so were they
a terror and a fearful sight upon the deformed man for the enemies to look
unto. Nicander, therefore being demanded why did the Lacedaemonians and the
people of Sparta esteem their beards and hearie locks of hears upon their
heads: Sparta.
he said, Because it is a most natural garment, and most comelye unto man, to
have that which is best in sight, and least in charges. The ancient Greeks,
and specially the people of Athens, Athens.
as soon as any past fourteen years of age, the custom and law was that
they should be brought unto Delphos, to offer their fair hears, their gaye
and friseling bushes of their head unto Apollo, as a sacrifice of their first
fruit, and a pawn or pledge of their homage to God Apollo. So much esteemed
they their hears, that they thought nothing to be so acceptable unto Apollo,
as that which was most grateful unto them. Thracia.
The Thracians likewise had such regard unto their hears of their heads,
that they kemmed it, and decked it upon their foreheade, with curling knots
upon long hears, that their chief care and study was to trim those which
they esteemed most. In India the subjects in all things obeyed their Prince
and the laws, but in shauing their hears, which by no means they would
agree unto. Argiui.
The Argiues loved so well their hears, that being convicted by the
Lacedaemonians at Tiria, shaued their hears, bewailed and wept their misfortune
so much, that they vowed never to let their hears grow before they would
recover again Tiria. The Greek^
The Greeks honored their long hears, and so esteemed their beardes, that
Homer was wont to call them Carecomoontas, that is to say: fair heared. It
should seem that the Macedonians made to much of their hears and beardes,
for at what time Alexander the great, had gathered all his power and force to
take his conquest in hand, being demanded of his soldiers whether in them
were any thing to be amended, the wise prince considering the great hurt and
inconvenience that should happen chiefly in wars unto those that were long
heared or long bearded: And again being loath to offend his soldiers, for
that he knew well that they much esteemed their beardes, he smiling merrily
spoke, I see no want in you nor no vntowardenes: but I wish your beardes and
long hears were at home until your return. They meruayling much at his
request, Parmenio.
Parmenio answered and said: that the Macedonians woot not what you mean
thereby: then Alexander perceiving that his soldiers were angry for his
desire and wish, said, because long hears is dangerous, and specially
amongst the enemies, no better hold then by beardes or hears, but it seeme^
that they had rather to be conquered like men in their beards, then to be
conqerers like boys without beards. As for the Romans, hears delighted them
so much that there was no shauing seen, no Barbers known, until Pu. Ticinius
brought certain Barbers out of Sicilia unto Rome, Plini. Lib. 7 Cap. 59
which for the space of four hundred and four and fifty years, Rome nourished
their long hears before, as that which they best delighted in for the time.
Affricanus was the first that ever delighted in Barbers, and next unto him was
Augustus Caesar successer of Julius Caesar, besides these countries and famous
kingdoms, diverse others were that so made of their heeres, that to observe
orders, and to avoid dangers of wars, they did shave diverse parts of their
heads much against their will: yet for custom sake Maxies people in Aphrica,
Maxies*
do use to shave the right side and to let the hears grow upon the left
side. Again, the people which Strabo called Anases, Anases.
do shave their former hears upon their forheades, and yet they make much of
the hinder part of the head, where they suffer their hears to grow very
long. Maca.
The Maceans shave little hears upon the crowns of their heads like
Priests sometime, and yet suffer all their hears to hang down in order about
their faces. Herodotus in his fourth book does name people which is called
Machleis and Abantes, which for that they be warriors and always in the field
face to face with their enemies, they shave their hears before, and suffer it
to grow behind. The Euboians even so let their hears grow behind upon their
backs very long, Euboians.
and yet enforced of necessity to cut it before for fear of the enemies. It
seemed that either Barbers were skant, or not known in those days, or else
hears much set by, and esteemed of all men: for Suetonius that writ the lives
of Emperors does report that the Emperor Caligula, Caligula.
was wont for envy to those he met, to shave their hears of behind, knowing
well that nothing might molest them so much, as to have their hears of: for he
was so envious, that if he saw any that had fair golden hears, he would
have it of straight with his own hands. Beards were so set by, and so
esteemed were hears in those days, that women kind were so forbidden by the
law of the twelve tables to shave any part of the face, to prove whether
hears might grow or no. Occasions were ministed unto them said they by their
long hears, and beardes, to know them selves and the state of their body: for
of an old man in the city of Sparta being asked why he ware his bearde so
long, Sparta.
he answered that in behoulding the graye hears in my bearde, I may do
nothing unseemly nor unworthy of such graye hears, for a good man is always
pricked with stinges to live verteously. Demonax.
Demonax was known by his beard to be some grave Philosopher of him that
demanded him what kind of Philosophy he professed, not knowing him otherwise
than by his bearde. The tyrant Dionisius to spite the Citizens of Epidaurus,
took the goulden beard of Aesculapius away out of the temple, to move them to
greater displeasure. At what time Aristippus was brought unto Sinius house the
Phrigian, Aristippus*
which was so dressed with cloth of Arras, and precious hangings, that the very
flowers so gorgiously shined, that he could not find in the house a place to
spitte, without some offense, he spit in his handenapkin, and thrue it into
Simus face, who was all bearded, he being angry therewith, demanded the
cause why he so little esteemed him, for that said Aristippus, that I saw
not in all the house so foul a place as that which should have been most
clean, meaning his bearde, and though it was merilye done of Aristippus, yet
it was not so merrily thought of Simus, which more esteemed his bearde, than
Aristippus esteemed all his precious clothes, and goulden hangings. The like
did Ieronimus surnamed Rhetus make of his bearde, Rhetus.
for when I see said he my beard, than I know right well that I am a man, and
not a woman: and then knowing my self to be a man, I am ashamed to do any
thing like a woman, either in word or deed: Much more might be here
alleged, for the actorities of beardes, and for esteeming of long hears, for
there is no country be it ever so ciuyll, but it is addicted unto some peculiar
qualities, neither is there any man be he ever so wise, but does glory in one
thing more then in another: as the wise man in his wisdom, the learned man in
his knowledge, the ignorant man in his folly, the proud man in his person,
the self lover in some place more than in other, either in his face, body,
leg, middle, foot: yea, in hand and here, and specially many do make much
account of their beards, kembing, decking, handlyng and setting it in order
always: But because people are mutable and full of change, and that time
alters all things, we will no further proceed in this, though men may
misiudge of others concerning their long heeres and beardes: yet I say
judgment is not safe in this point, for it may be that they prefer the
rustye rude country Poet Hesiodus, before the warlike and eloquent Homer,
Panis. Midas.
as Panis king of Calcides, or as Midas did judge Pan the Piper before Apollo
the god of Music. Hard it is to judge of men, whether the bearded man, or
the beardlesse man is to be preferred, the long hear or the short hear to be
esteemed: for under strange habit lurcke hidden qualities, for under a ragged
cloak (as the Greek proverb is) lies wisdom secretly, as under a Ueluet
Gown.

Of diverse kinds and sundry fashions of burial amongst the Gentiles.
THE aunciente Egyptians waying the shortness of man's life, little esteeming the
time, does provide such sepulchrees against they die, that they account their
graves an everlasting habitation. Wherefore in life time they studied how to
make them such gorgeous graves as should be perpetual monumentes after
death: In so much that three hundred and threescore thousand workmen were
twenty years in building a huge and a monstrous work to bury their bodies,
Diodorus* Lib. 2
which for the bigness thereof, was counted one of the seven woonders,
Pyramides.
named at this day the Pyramides of Egypt. Plini says that three Piramides
were made in Egypt betwixt the City of Memphis and Delta, which king Ceopes as
Herodotus affirms, Ceopes. Cephus. Micerinus.
began to make the first, and as Diodorus says, his brother Cephus began the
second, and the third by king Mycerinus, as both Herodotus and Diodorus
agree. Some say that Rhodope a harlot and a strumpet, but being married unto
king Psamnetichus and left a widow, she made as Strabo says the third
Pyramides: but to this effect they were made as common sepulchrees, to receive
dead men as gestes to dwell always therein, with such ceremonies first, that
being dead they fill the scull of his head with sweet odours, and then they
rip his body with a sharp stone of Aethiop which the Egyptians have for the
purpose, The orders of the Aegiptians buri^^
and pourge his body, and then being stopped with fragrant odours and sweet
spices, they sewe up the body, which being done, they put him in fine sindon
cloth, having his likeness made upon a holow work, wherein they put the body,
with many other such ceremonies, only to save the body from any putrefaction,
for they think as the Stoics do: So long say they shall the soul flourish and
live, as the body is vnputrified, for as the bodies perish, so does the
Egyptians believe that the souls decay. Ethiopians.
The Aethiopians have such care of the dead, that being dressed with all kind
of odours, they put them in such sumptuous tombs, and gorgeous graves, that
the sepulchrees are compassed and made over with fine glass. Scythians.
The Scythians when their kings and noble men die, they must have to bear them
company unto the grave, one of their concubines, one of their chieefe
servants, and one of their friends that loved them best alive: they I say must
accompany and follow them unto the grave being dead. The Romans had this
custom, Romans.
that if any man of countenance and credit should die, his sons and
daughters, his nigh kinsmen and best beloved friends as Cicero does write of
Metellus, should put him in the fire made for that effect and purpose, unless
he were one of the Emperors, Merodianus. Lib. 4
whose funeral pomp was much more sumptuous, for then his body should be
carried by the Senators unto the market or common Hall of Rome: Then the
second day he should be carried by certain young noble men unto Martius
field, where a Tabernacle was made much like a Tower, all of dry Wood, and
there after much solemnity and ceremonies done, he that succeeded him as an
Emperor, should first put fire in that work, and then all men busy to see
the body burned: And when they had burned him unto ashes, they would let an
Eagle flee from the top of some high Tower, which as they supposed should carry
his soul into heaven. Assirians
The Assyrians did use to annoint the dead bodies with honye and wax, and with
study and care to reserve it from any putrefaction. Indeans.
Such strange order of burial was in India, that the women of that country
thought no greater fame nor worthier renown, then to be burned and buried
together with their husbands. Thracians.
The Thracians are much to be commended herein, which at the birth of any of
their friends children, they weep and wail the misery of and calamity that
he is borne unto, and at the death of any of their friends, they so rejoice
with such mirth and gladness, that they past these werldly miseries, that at the
burial thereof, even when the corpse does go out of the house, they altogether
say with one voice: Far well freende, go before, and we follow after: And so
the corpse goes before, and all his friends follow after him with trumpets,
music, and great mirth for joy that he is gone out of this vale of misery.
Athinians.
Plato that divine Greek and noble Philosopher, made the like laws in Athens,
that when any of the chief officers should die, he appointed that no
mournyng weeds should be there, but all in white apparel, and that fifteen
young maids and fifteen young boys should stand round about the corpse in
white garments, while the Priests commended his life unto the people in an
open Oration, then he should be brought very orderly to the grave, all the
young children singing their country Hymns, and they with the ancient men
following: and the grave should be covered with fair broad stones, where the
name of the dead, with his virtuous commendations and great praise were set
upon the stone. The like grave the Italians use at this day, and diverse other
countries. And as these and others had the like ceremonies to the praise and
commendations of the dead: So others little esteemed and regarded such things,
in so much that the Perseans were never buried until Fowls of the air and
Dogs should eat some part thereof. Massagetes.
The Massagetes thought it most infamous that any of their friends should die
by sickness, but if the parents waxed old, the children and the next kinsmen
they had should kill them, and being killed to eat them up, supposing that
their flesh was more meet for them to eat, than of worms or any other
beasts to be devoured. The people called Tibareni, Tibareni. Albans.
those that they loved best in youth, those would they hang in age: Even so
the Albans certain inhabitants about mount Caucasus, thought it unlawful for
any to care for the dead, but straight buried them as the Nabathaeans do
bury their kings and and rulers in dunghilles. Nabathaei.
The burial of the Parthians was nothing else but to commend them unto beasts
of the field, Parthians.
and fowls of the air. The Nasomones when they bury their friends,
Nasomones.
they set them in the grave sitting. But of all cruel dealings the Caspians,
Caspians. Hircanians.
and the Hircanians, which kill their parents, their wives, their brethren, their
kinsemen, and friends, and put them in the hie way half quick, half dead,
for to be devoured of birds and beasts. The fashion and custom with the
Issidones, Issidones.
rude people of some part of Scithia, as Plini in his fourth book affirms,
is to call their neighbors and friends together where the dead lie, and there
merili^ singing and banqueting, they eat the flesh of the dead, and make the
skull of the dead a drinking cup, all covered with gold, to drink with all.
Again the people called Hyperborei, think no better grave for their friends,
Hiperborei.
when they be old then to bring them to some hie bank of water or great
rock, and thence after much feasting, eating and drinking, in the midst of
their mirth, their own friends throw them down unto the water headlong. To
seek and to search histories, to many such burials might be found amongst
such rude and beastly nations. Notwithstanding in diverse regions so esteemed,
that the greatest infamy, the seuerest punishment was for any offender, was
not to be buried: this the Athenians used toward those that were traitors to
their country. And the Egiptians if any lived a miss, he should be carried
dead to the wilderness to be devoured of wild beasts. The Persea^s likewise
brought ye bodies of men condemned to be eaten of dogs. The Lybians think
them most worthy of solemn burial that died either in wars or were kyld by
wyld beasts. The Macedonians had great care in burning the dead soldiers that
died in field. Amongst the Gentiles there were certain days appointed for
mourning after the death of their friends. Licurgus law amongst the
Lacedaemonians was that they should mourn but eleven days. Numa Pompilius
decreed that the children after their parents death, the wives, their
husbands. etc. should mourn ten months, though by the Senators it was
enacted at the wars in Canna that the Romans should mourn but thirty
days. Amongst the Egiptians they had a custom to mourn after their kings
threescore and twelve days, but generallye the most custom was to bewail the
dead nine days. In some places mourning was forbidden at their burial, as at
Athens by the law of Solon, in Locretia, in Thracia, in Cous, in Libia, and in
diverse other places. The diversity of mourning was such, that amongst the
Greeks they shaued their heads and beardes, and threw it to the grave with
the dead. Amongst the Lacedaemonians, when the kings of Sparta died, certain
horsemen were appointed to travail over all the whole kingdom, certefiyng the
death of the king, and the women in every city, do beat their brazen
pottes, and make great heavy noise for the same. The Egyptians do mourn
after this sort, they rent their clothes, they shut their temples, they eat no
meat, they smeere their faces with dirt, and thus abstaining from washing
their faces three score and twelve days they lament and bewail the death of
their kings and friends. The Carthagineans cut their hears of, mangle their
faces, beat their breasts. The Macedonians likewise shave their hears to
mourn the death of their friends, as we read of Archelaus, king of
Macedonia, who shaued his hears at the burial of his friend Euripides. The
Argiues and the Siracusans accompany the dead to the grave, in white clothes be
spotted with watter and claie. The Matrones of Rome threw of their fine
apparel, their ringes and cheynes, and did wear black garments at the burial
of their friends: but I burn candle in the day time, to write of such
infinite ceremonies that the Gentiles had at their burials. Therefore better to
end with few examples, then to weery the reader with too many histories, for
this cause, since all men know that all people have their several manners, as
well living as dying, for co^tinuaunce of time, and distaunce of ground alter
the same.

Of Spirits and visions.
Sundry and many things happen by courses of nature, which timorous and
fearful men, for want of perfection in their senses, suppose to be spirits.
Some so feeble of sight, that they judge shadows, beasts, bushes and such
like to be spirits. Some so fearful of hearing, that they think any
sound, noise, whistlings and so forth, to be some bugges or deuyls. Hereby
first spread so many fables of spirits, of gobblins, of bugges, of hagges, and
of so many monstrous visions, that old women and aged men schooled their
families to believe such things, who judged it sufficient aucthorities, to
aleadge the old tales told by their parents in their aged years. The
Gentiles because they were given much unto idolatry and superstition, did
credit vain and foolish visions, which oftentimes by suggestion of devils and
by fond fantasies conceived, did lead their lives by persuasion of spirits,
either in attemptyng any thing, or in avoiding any thing: for Suetonius does
write, that when Julius Caesar stayed in a maze at the river Rubico in Italy,
Triton appeared unto Caesar.
with waueryng mind, musing what were best, to pass the water or no, there
appeared a comely tall man, piping on a Reed, unto whom the soldiers of
Caesar flocked about to hear him, and specially the trumpetters, of whom he
suddenly snatched one of their trumpettes, and leapt forthwith into the river
Rubico, and straight sounded out with a lusty blast a larum, wherewith Caesar
was moved and said, good luck mates, let us go where the Gods do warn
us. Plutarch in the life of Brutus
It is written in Plutarch, where Brutus was determined to transport his army
out of Asia unto Europe, being in his tent about midnight, he saw a terrible
monster standing fast by him, without any words, wherewith he being sore
afraid, ventured bouldelye and demanded of him what he was, unto whom he
answered and said: I am thy evil ghost, which at Philippos thou shall see
again: where when Brutus came, being vanquished by Augustus Caesar, Brutus
slew him^selfe Cassius slew him self.
remembering the words of his forseene vision, to avoid the hands of his
enemies slew himself to verify the same. The like happened unto C. Cassius,
which by the like sight was enforced to kill himself, for he was warned that
the murder of Caesar should be revenged by Augustus his Nephew. Sightes were
so seen amongst the Gentiles, and so feared and esteemed, that all the actions
of their lives were thereby ordered. Tacitus as Fla. Vapiscus reports when it
was told him that his fathers gr^^e opened of it self, Tacitus makes
himself ready to die by the sight of his mother.

Pertinax.


and seeing as he thought his mother appering unto him as though she had been
alive, knew well that he should shortly after die, and made himself ready
thereunto. There appeared unto one Pertinax as I. Capitolinus* reports, three
days before he was slain by a thrust, a certain shadow in one of his
fishepondes, with a naked sword in hand, thretning to kill him. Neither may we
so little esteem the authority of grave and learned men in diverse of their
assertions concerning sightes and visions, though diverse fables be aleaged and
aduouched for truth, with simple and ignorant men. We read in the sacred
scriptures diverse sights seen, diverse visions appearing and sundry voices
heard. We read that King Balthazar, being in his princely banquettes,
Balthazar savv a hand vvriting in a wall.
saw a hand writing upon the wall over against where he sat at table, what
his end should be. It is read in the third chapter of the second of the
Machabes, that a horse appeared unto Heliodorus, Heliodorus savv a horseman
thretning him.
which was servant unto Seloucus king of Assyria, as he was about to destroy
the temple at Jerusalem: and upon the horse seemed to be a terrible man, which
made toward him to overcome him, and on each side of him were two young men of
excellent beauty, which with whippes scourged Heliodorus. The like appeared
unto Machabeus, a horseman in shining armoure all of gold, shaking his spear,
to signify the famous victory that Macabeus should obtain. Many such like
visions in scriptures we read of, but let us return unto the Athenians,
Athenians.
who thought when Miltiades addressed his people against ye Perseans, hearing
terrible noise, with sight of certain spirits before the battle, to have
victory over the Perseans, judging those sightes and visions to be the shadow
of Par. Likewise the Lacedaemonians before they were vanquished in the battle
at Leuctris, Lacedaemonians.
their armor moved, and made exceeding great noise in the Temple of Hector,
so that at that time the doors of the Temple of Hercules being fast shut
with bars, opened sodaynely of their own accord: and the armor which hong
fastened on the wall, were found lying upon the ground. Plini writes in the
wars of the Danes, and Appianus affirms in the wars at Rome, what signs
and woonders, what miserable cries of men, clashing of armor, and running of
horses were hard, in so much that the same day that Caesar fought this
battle with Cn. Pompeius, the cry of army, the sound of trumpets were
heard at Antioch in Syria: but I will omit to speak of such things, and take
in hand to entreat of spirits, which were both seen and heard of wise and
learned men, and of visions supposed of the wisest to be the souls of dead
men: for Plutarch writes in the life of Theseus, Theseus appeared after death.
that diverse and sundry men which were in the battle of Marathonia against
the Medians, affirmed that they saw the soul of Theseus armed before the host
of Greeks, as chief general and captain, running and setting on the
barbarous Medians, which the Athenias afterward for that cause only honored
him as a God. It is reported by historiographers that Castor and Pollux have
been seen often in battayles after death, Castor and Pollux appe^ared after
death.
ridyng on white Horses, and fightyng against their enemies in camp: in so
much Plutarch testifies that they were seen of many in the battle against
Torquinius. Hector besought Achilles after he was slain by him, Hector
appeared after death.
not to throw his carcass to be devoured of dogs, but rather to deliver his
body to be buried unto his old father Priamus and his mother Hecuba: Even so
King Patroclus appearing in like manner after death unto Achilles, Patroclus.
desired him to bestow upon his body all funeral solemnities. Palinurus.
Deiphobus.
Virgil testifies how Palinurus and Deiphobus appeared unto Aeneas: the one
being his shipman, the other his brother in law. There wandryng ghostes never
ceased until such exequies were done unto them as Aeneas had promised. It is
thought that the Witch Phetonissa of Endor, Phetonissa supposed to raise the
soul of Samuel.
raised the soul of Samuel at the commandment of King Saul, to foreshew the
success and end of the battle of the Philistines. It is read in Lucan the
Poet, of a Witch named Erictho dwelling in Thessalia, that revived and restored
to life a late soldier dead, at the request of Sextus Pompeius, to know the
end of the wars at Pharsalia. One History I must repeat, which Plutarch
recites in the life of Cimon that one Pausanias after he had taken the City
of Bizance, being in love with a fair damsel named Cleonices, a maid of
noble parentage, he commaundyng her father which durst not resist him, to
send his daughter unto him to use at his pleasure: which when the maid came,
he being fast a sleep in his bed, the Uirgin being shamefast and fearful,
putting out the candle, coming in the darcke toward Pausanias, stumbled at
the stool, which with the fall, suddenly waked Pausanias from sleep, thinking
some foe or mortal enemy of his to be there, having his sword hard by, slew
the Uirgine: but she being so slain, would never after suffer Pausanias to
take any quiet rest, Pausanias.
but appearing unto him always, saying: Recompense the injury and wrong thou
did unto me, by equity and justice, following him as he fled, from place to
place, from Bizance unto Thracia, from Thracia again unto Heraclea, from
Heraclea unto Sparta, where he famished for hunger. Matthaewe in his seventeen
Chapt. bears record that Moses and Elias after they were dead many hundred
years before Christ's incarnation, yet appeared bodyly and ghostly in mount
Tabor unto Christ, where they spoke and communed with our Lord and Savior.
The soul of Lazarus did not only appear as John says in his second chap.
but came again both body and soul in a true token of our sure resurrection:
but as the appearing of those sightes at Gods appointment were most true, so it
is most horrible to give credit that the souls of men after death, do either
by visions or by bodyly apparaunce, but the devil is well beaten in experience
of things, and knows best how he may deceive the wisest sometime, for he is
subtle and crafty. If the Mariner know when storms and tempest arise? if the
Physician judge of one by the Urine, the state and danger of the patient? if
the skillful Astronomer can many years before exactly foretell the Eclipse of
the Sun and moon? if in fine the practiced soldier knows straight where
the victory shall happen? No marvel it is that the devil an old soldier
can forshew things to come: And make things apparent of nothing. Theodoricus
was over co^^py a (...)
What made Theodoricus to epsy the terible and threatening countenance of
Symmachus, which he slew before in a fishes head being brought before him on
the table at supper, at the which sight he fell for fear in a grievous
sickness, and so died? the Devil. Bessus was betrayed by Svvallovv^^*
What caused one Bessus of whom Plutarch makes mention in his book de sera
muminis vindicta, after that he had killed his own father, and a long while
hyding himself as a murderer, at last being by the Devil moved to throw
down a swallows neast with his spear, and killing the young swallows, he
was of the company about him misliked for his cruelnesse unto poor birds, and
taunted of his companions for his tyranny therein: but he answered and excused
himsefe, saying: why should I not kill those that accused me of my fathers
death, and cried out upon me a long while that I should kill my father? They
which were present being amazed at his taulke, toulde the king thereof, which
caused him to be apprehended and examined by that evidence, he confessed the
murder. These are the driftes of diuelles, the shifts of Satan at all times,
and in all countries. Paulina the chaste wife of Saturnius a Roman, was of such
excellent beauty, of such noble parentage, and of such godly life, that when
Decius Mundus, Paulina. Mundus.
a young knight of Rome, who being so enamored with her beauty, with diverse
compassions a long time to none effect: for neither gold nor treasure could
alure this sober and chaste Paulina to consent to sin: he perceauing how she
was bent to temperancye, and to renounce all filthy lust, gave him self
willing to die, in the mean time the devil practiced a feat with I Would, a maid
which dwelt in house with Mundus father, to bring this purpose to pass: this
maid knowing well the constancy and honest life of Paulina, and how religious
she was to serve the Goddess Isis, invented this fraud: she went and talked
with some of Isis Priests, opening the whole matter in secret unto them,
promising a great reward to feign that their God Anubis had sent for Paulina
to lie and to accomplish love with him: This being done by the elder Priests,
her husband Saturnius was very joyful that the great God Anubis had
vouchsafed to send for his wife, she being as glad, boasted and bragged of
the same amongst her neighbors unto the temple of Isis where likewise Anubis
was worshipped, Paulina was sent by her husband very brave and gorgeous, where
the young and lusty knight Mundus by the advice of the Priests hid himself
until Paulina came, which embrasing her in the darcke accompanied with her
till he had satisfied lust all the night. Then in the morning the matter being
known, she rent her hears and clothes, and told her husband Saturnius how
she was dealt withal: her husband then declares the whole matter unto the
Emperor Tiberius, who having through knowledge by diligent examination, did
hang the Priests and the mother of ye mischief I Would, commanded the image of
Isis to be ^unke in the river of Tiber, and banished Mundus out of Rome, so
that under the color and pretense of holiness, diverse Matrones and maids
were de^^owred men's wives and daughters, as Ruffinus testifies of a certain
Priest in Alexandria in Egypt named Tirannus, Tyrannus.
who used such shifts, and practiced such feats to have his desire
accomplished, and his lust satisfied, with such women and maidens as he thought
good, saying, that the great God Saturn whose Priest he was, sent for them to
come unto the temple to Saturnus, and there until his wickedness was known
he used under pretense of the great Saturn which was honored in that City,
his filthy lust and horible life. We read the like almost of Numa Pompilius,
that he bare the people of Rome in hand, Num^ Pompilius.
that he had familiar company with ye Goddess Aegeria, because he might
purchase ye more credit and auctority unto his laws and orders. These are the
works and shifts of wicked men, which deceived always the rude people with
vain religion and superstitious holiness, which the devil the father of lies
did bewitch and allure them to believe fantastical visions to be the souls of
dead men, the deuyls appearing them selves like men, letting them to understand
that they were the souls of such men as they appeared like unto: Romulus a God
after death.
as Romulus the first King and founder of Rome, appeared after his death,
walkyng up and down by Atticus house unto Julius proculus, charging him to
erect him up a Temple in that place where he walked, Cicero lib. 1 de legibus.
Remus canonized a God.
saying that he was now a god, and that his name was Quirinus. Remus likewise
king Romulus his brother, appearing unto Faustulus and to his wife. Laurentia
sometime his nource, complaining of his miserable death, desiring them to make
labor that the same day wherein he was slain, might be accounted amongst
their Holidays, for that he was canonized amongst the gods. We read in
Lucan how that the souls of Silla and Marius, Silla and Marius seen after
death.
two famous and renowned Romans were always walking and appearing unto men
before they were purged by sacrifice: for the deuyls made the people believe
when the bodies should be buried with all funeral due thereunto belonging,
the souls should have rest to practice superstition amongst them, as you
heard a little before. What complaint made Hector and King Patroclus unto
Achilles? What request made Palinurus and Deiphobus unto Aneas, which Homer and
Vergil write of, for the burial of their bodies. Suetonius writing of the
lives of Emperors, Caligula.
shows how Caligula sometime Emperor in Rome, after he was dead, being half
burned and buried, for that he wanted due solempnity of burial, appeared in
the Gardens of Rome called Lauriani to the keepers, troublyng and molestyng
them very much, until his sisters caused him to be taken up, and commanded he
should be thoroughly burned, and solemnly buried. There was in Athens by
report an excellent fair house to sale, for that no man durst dwell within it,
for about midnight continuallye there was heard sound, noise, clashing of
armor, and clattering of chains, and there appeared an image or shape like an
old man, lean and loathsome to behold, with a long bearde, staring hears,
and feattered legs. This house having a piece of paper upon the door,
written of the sale thereof, for that no man would venture to dwell.
Athenodorus a Philosopher returnyng from Rome, where he aboode a long time
with the Emperor Augustus Caesar unto Athens, and reading the writing upon the
door, he hired the house, and commanded his servant to make his bed in the
highest chaumber in the house, where he setleth him self to mark and behold
things that would happen: being thus in study, first he heard the sound and
rattling of chains, and then he an old man begging toward him to follow, the
Philosopher went after him with his candle in his hand into an inner court,
where the image left him alone and vanished. Athenodorus the next morning
caused the rulers of the City to dig up that place, where they found diverse
bones of dead men, these were commanded by the Philosopher to be burned
solemnly, which afterward was quiet and still without either noise or sight.
Thus the devil sows the seed of supersticion, and makes oftentimes his
angels to work miracles. What strange works did that coniurer Bileam bring
to pass by the means of deuyls? What woonders wrought that wicked Appolonius
by the help of Satan? What maruayles, shows, and sightes did Simon Magus use
by the industry of false spirits? What did not Pharoes sorcerers oftentimes
attempt by persuasion of devils? mark their end, and judge of their life: the
one breaking his neck, the other drowned in the red Sea, and so the rest ended
their lives miserably. To many have been, and I fear are yet, that give
credit unto such vain illusions and fantastical sightes.

Of dreams and warnings.
AMongst the Gentiles dreams were so observed, Bruso. lib. 6 Cap. 8.
that the vain superstition noting of the same, was the whole trust and hope
of their countries, friends and lives, that when the kings of India take their
rest, they are brought to bead with all kind of melody and harmony every
man kneeling upon his knees, beseeching Morpheus the God of sleep, to reveal
those things unto their King, that should be commodious and profitable unto
the subjects. They thought themselves well instructed when either by Oracles
they were persuaded, Pirrhus.
or else by visions suggested. King Pirrhus knew well that his dying day was
at hand, Plutarch. lib. 27
when he besieged the City of Argos, and saw in the market place a brazen
Woolfe, and a Bull, which the Argyues for memory of things past, and ancient
monumentes had put up, for he by an Oracle had to understand, at what time he
should see a Bull and a Woolfe fighting together, he should then prepare
himself to die. Alexander.
Alexander the great after that the Oracle of Jupiter Ammonius was pronounced
that he should be unconquered, he doubted not but to subdue the whole
world, and so trusted more unto the Oracle of Jupiter, than he mistrusted the
mutability of Fortune, took upon him the conquest of all the world, attempting
nothing at al without some Oracle or dream had warned him thereunto, for
before the great conqueror Alexander had seen Hercules in his sleep,
reaching out of the wall his hand promising him his aid and help in his
wars: he had not so boldly attempted so hye an enterprise without fear and
dread of his enemies. Hannibal.
Unto Hanibal after long perturbation of mind, with great industry and study
how he might annoye and destroy the Roman Empire, appeared a young man of
wonderful beawtie, who warned him that Jupiter sent him as a Captain before
Hanibal into Italy, whereby straight he was encouraged the rather to take the
charge in hand, hoping thereby to enjoy triumphant victory over his enemies.
Caesar.
Caesar that mighty Prince and Monarch, and the first Emperor that ever
possessed Rome, thought in his sleep that he committed fornication with his
mother, which when it was opened by Southsayers, that it was the earth that was
his mother, and that he should suppress all the Princes of the earth under
him even as he thought in his sleep of his mother, he was he was enflamed
thereby to raise wars, and most cruelly allured to murder, either persuading
himself to be subject unto all men, or else a conqueror over all the world.
After that noble and renowned Greek Themistocles was exiled from Athens,
Themistocles.
and banished quite the confines of Greece, having done such service and
honor unto his country, as Plutarch worthilye mentions for the subduing of
proud Zerxes king of Persea, the great enemy of all Greece, being in great
peril and danger of life in strange country, he seemed to see in his
sleep a Dragon creaping upward from his belly toward his face, which as soon
as the Dragon touched his face, he was changed as he thought unto an Eagle,
and carried by the Eagle a great way thorough the air unto a strange country,
where the Eagle gave him a golden staff in hand and so left him: whereby
straight he was informed that he was not only delivered from all dangers, but
also should be sought for of all Greece, to the increase of fame, and
augmentation of honor. Brutus.
Brutus clean contrary after much good success and prosperous fortune, after
he murdered Caesar, at length he was in his sleep by a vision warned to make
himself ready to die at Philippos, where he was enforced in the wars
between Augustus Caesar and him, to kill himself. Thus* were they alured and
entised by shifting dreams, to order and rule all their doings, for as the
Poet Aeneus says: what they studied and pondered in the day time, the same
dreamed they in night time. Dreams moved them unto tyranny, L. Silla.
for L. Silla, the firebrande of Italy his own country, was warned in sleep
by Bellona the goddess of wars, to murder, kill and destroy, all that ever
he might find in his way, giving him in his hand, fire, in token he should
burn and overcome Rome and Italy. Eumenes.
Likewise Eumanes King of the Lacedaemonians, having wars with Antipater King
of Macedonia, was fully persuaded by a dream to obtain victory: for he
dreamed that two Alexanders were with great host and army of men ready in
field to fight, the one having the goddess Minerua as a leader, the other
having the goddess Ceres as their Captain, which after long conflictes and
much murder of both parties, he thought that the soldiers of Ceres had the
victory, and that they were crowned with the ears of corn in the honor of
Ceres, which is the goddess of corn: and because the country of Lacedemonia
was more fertile than Mocedonia, the wise sages opened the dream, and said
that Eumenes should have the victory over Macedonia. Besides these dreams,
they had a kind of credit in Fowls of the air, in beasts of the field, in
wind and weather, and in diverse other things, where soothsaying, oracles and
consultations were had. When Zerxes the great king of Persea with so many
miriades of men had purposed and decreed with him self to destroy all Greece,
Zerxes.
until a Mare, a stout and a proud beast had brought forth a Hare, the
fearefullest thing out, whereby it presaged the flight of Zerxes from Greece
with shame and reproach. And afterward purposing again before he would lay
siege unto Athens to destroy Sparta and all the country of Lacedemon, a
strange warning happened unto this Prince at supper: for his wine before his
face, was converted unto blood as it was filled in the Cups, not once, but
twice or thrice: Whereat he being amazed, consulted with wise men, of whom he
was then admonished to forsake his first intent, and to give over the
enterprise which he took in hand against the Greeks. Midas.
Midas being yet in his cradle, the Antes were seen to carye greynes and
victuals to feed him withal: whose parents being desirous to know the effect
thereof, were certified by the soothsayers that he should be the wealthiest
and richest man in all the world: he should be the most monyed Prince that
ever should reign in India. Plato.
Plato that noble and divine Philosopher, while he was an infant in like sort
in his cradle, the Bees with honey fed his sugared and sweet lips, signifiyng
the eloquence and learning in time to come of Plato. They were not Bees of
mount Himettum, where honye (as writers think) was first found: but rather of
Helicon, where the Muses and Ladies of learning delighted to dwell. This was
that Plato of whom his master Socrates before he knew him, dreamed of, that
he held fast in his hand a young Swanne, which fled from him away, and
mounted the Skies, whose sweet voice and songs as a wonderful melody and
harmony replenished the whole Skies. They thought it a sufficient admonition to
see any thing happen between birds or beasts, as a sure and certain show
of their own fortune to come. Brutus.
M. Brutus when he was in camp against Caesar and Antonius, and saw two
Eagles fighting together: the one coming from Caesar's tent, the other from his
own: He knew well when his Eagle took flight and was vanquished, that he
should loose the victory. Cicero understanding well enough his death to be at
hand when the Raven heald him fast by the hem of his gown, and made a noise
and ever plucked at him, until the soldiers of M. Antonius came unto the very
place, where he at that time was beheaded by Herennius and Popilius. For in the
night before Cicero dreamed, being banished from Rome, that he wandered diverse
strange countries, where Caius Marius a noble Roman as he thought met him,
demanding of Cicero why and what was the cause of his sad countenance, and
wherefore he travailed such strange countries: the cause being known unto
Marius, he took him fast by the right hand and brought him to the next
officer where he thought in his sleep he should have died. So that Zerxes by
a Hare had warning: King Mydas was by Antes admonished: Plato by Bees: Brutus
by an Eagle: Cicero by a Raven: Themistocles by an Owl of death. Pericles by
the head of a Ram was fully persuaded and taught by the soothsayers, that he
should win the people of Athens from Thucidides, with whom then he was in
controversy. Agamemnon.
And was not Agamemnon and his brother Menelaus with all the Princes of Greece,
certefied by the Dragon that climmed a tree where he slew a she Sparrowe, and
eight young ones beside, signifiying that they should be nine years in wars
with the Troyans,, and that the tenth they should destroy and quite vanquish
Ihon. Caesar.
And was not Julius Caesar admonished of his wife Calphurnia by a dream that
if he would unto the Senate that day he should dye? Alexander.
And was not that mighty Monarch Alexander warned by a vision to take more
regard unto his life then he did, and to take heed of Antipater, who
afterward poisoned him. Alcipiades.
And was not Alcibiades that noble Greek certified by a dream of his
miserable death, how he and his hoore Timandra might diverse times see before
what after followed if they had had so great a desire in following good things,
as they were bent and prone to seek evil. Such prodigious sightes, such
strange miracles were seen, that might well allure them to more perfect life.
The Sun, the Moon, the stars, and all the hosts of heaven wrought great
miracles to reduce Princes from evil enterprises and to give warning unto
others to avoid the tyranny of wicked Princes: For the heavens appeared
blouddy at that time when Philip king of Macedonia, Philip. Au Caesar.
Plutarch. lib. 38.
with tyranny invaded Greece. At what time Augustus Caesar after his uncle
Julius was murdered, ^ame unto Rome as the second Emperor, there were seen
starers wandering about the circle of the Sun, great lightnings, and strange
impressio^s, like men fighting in the skies, yea and birds fell down dead in
the City of Rome, and Liuius writes that an Ox spoke under plowgh these
words unto the plowman, that not only corn should want* but also men should
perish, and therefore said the Ox thou ^egest me in vain to travel, and his
horse abstayned from food. Nero.
When that wicked tyrant Nero began his Empire in Rome, trees, pastures,
meadows, and certain ground about the City (a strange miracle) altered
places, and changed seats one with an other, the ground moving from one
place unto an other: Even so it happened at the exilement of King Dionisius,
Dionisius.
after much tirannye and bloodsheding when he was banished from his kingdom,
the salt Sea the same day that he was driven from Corinth altered his
saltenesse unto sweetness. These two tyrauntes Nero and Dionisius, the one
coming unto his Empire what woonders the earth it self showed: the other
departing from his kingdom, what miracles the Sea showed. When Darius besieged
the City of Babylon, Darius.
a voice was heard out of the strong walls of Semiramis, that Babylon should
be conquered at what time a M^le should engender, at the which the soldiers
of Darius were discomfited, until Zopyrus Mule accomplished the forshewed
Oracle. Likewise when Pompeius was vanquished of Caesar, a green bow grew in
the temple of victory under the image of Caesar, and Hiues of Bees darckened
the ancient of Pompeius, foreshewing he should be subdued at Pharsalica. The
city of Rome had these warnings a little before the first civil wars,
there were seen fire shining suddenly about men, Spiders, Mise and Worms
consumed the gold and substance of their Temples, Rauons devoured and did
eat their young ones, the noise and sound of trumpettes were heard in the
air, with such other terible warnings as might well move amendment. Again
before the second wars of Carthage an Ox spoke, and said: Rome take heed
of thy self. It is noted likewise when Torquinius the last king of the Romans
was driven away from Rome, and banished the kingdom, that a dog then spoke,
and a Serpent barked. To many are of these to be read if we read histories,
for signs and tokens were seen and marked in the heavens, according unto the
natures and doings of Princes, Tiberius.
for when Tiberius came unto the Empire of Rome, there happened such great
earthquakes that twelve famous Cities of Asia fell prostrate unto the ground,
two mountains moved, ran, and fought together in a place by Rome called
Mutinenses field, in the time of L. Martius, and Sextus Julius Consulshippe.
It is written that in the City called Sagunthus before it was conquered by
Hanniball, Hanibal.
a child borne, entered again unto his mothers womb. And in Plini, Clepidus
bears witness, that trees spoke: and though it seem fabulus unto diverse,
that envy things by nature should speak, yet we see the trial of this
clean contrary to set forth the wonderful works of GOD, whereby he might
the more be magnified by these his creatures: for we read in the sacred
scriptures, that an Ass spoke, whereby the more credit may be given unto
Plutarch, Pini, and Liui, which mention that dogs, trees, Oxen, Serpents, and
other creatures of God did speak for a wonder and warning as well of things to
come, as things past. For before the famous City of Jerusalem was destroyed
by Vespasian the Emperor, Vaspasianus.
there appeared a star in manner of a sword in the sky, there were likewise
seen Chariettes running up and down the skies, and men in harness fighting
in the clouds right over the City. Diverse woonders by nature wrought, which
for the rareness thereof are worthy to be noted: Agrippa.
as Caecilius Agrippa, the first day that he was borne of his mother, he went
a ^oote without help. zoroastres.
Likewise Zoroastres, where all children cry at their birth, he the self same
day laughed. It was strange that Telephus the son of Hercules was nourished
of a Heart. Telephus.
Romulus the first king of Rome fostered up of a Woolfe. Romulus. Cirus.
Alexander.
Cirus the first King of the Perseans brought up by a Bitch. Alexander and king
Priamus of a bear. Jupiter.
Jupiter of a Goat. Midas of Antes. And Plato of Bees, and so diverse other:
But certain more strange it was that little beasts, yea small creeping
worms should be able to vanquishe and destroy famous Cities and countries,
as in Spain a City was overwhelmed by Coneyes. In France a City destroyed
by Frogs. In Thessalia a City overthrown of Mouldewarys. In Africa a City
spoiled of Locustes. Gyara an i will of twelve miles conquered of Mise, and Abdera
a City in Thracia of Mice likewise, and Amyclas of Serpents. Peradventure
these seem scant credible unto diverse readers, the learned may read the same
in the eight books of Plini, and twenty and ninth chap. where he may be
satisfied. The works of nature were so wonderful in all places, at all
times, that learned writers for memory of the same, diverse where recite the
effect thereof. Ammonius.
It is written that Ammonius the Philosopher had an Ass frequenting his
school with Porphirius to hear his lectures. In the Isle called Cos, in the
ground of a certain tyrant named Nicippus, Nicippus.
a Sheep brought forth a Lion in steed of a Lamb. Plini does witness that
he saw in a City of Africa, a man changed unto a woman in the same day he
was married, Cossicius.
whose name was Cossicius, a citizen of Tisdria. Pontanus and diverse aucthours
affirm that Tiresias the Theban, Tiresias. Ceneus. Iphis.
Ceneus and Iphis were changed from men unto women, from males unto females by
alteration of kind. Again, some think that as Anaxogoras never laughed,
Anaxogoras Zenopha^tus L. Pomponius. Antonia.
Zenophantes never wept: things wonderful and strange unto nature. And as
L. Pomponius never helcht, so Antonia never spit. There was a Poet sometime
dwelling in Cous, of such small growing and slender body, that lead was put in
the sole of his Shoes, lest the wind should bear him from the ground, and
blow him unto the air. And as he was small and light of substance by
nature: so by the self same nature was found in a certain hill of Creete, the
body of Orion, which was forty and six cubits in length. What Albertus
Magnus wrote of the woonders and secrets of nature, I will omit: better it is
I suppose to be ignorant in some things, then to be skilful in all things. He
says amongst other things, that there was a woman in Germany that had
threescore sons, five every time at a burden: and there was another woman
named Agrippina, in Colonia, that did neither eat nor drink for the space of
thirty days. Besides these, there was a man named Philinus, that never ate nor
drank all the days of his life but milk only. Cicero says that all the
Iliades of Homer was written and placed within the shell of a Nut. Plini
reports that there was an herb called Acheminis, if it could or were
thrown amongst the enemies, they straight would take their flight thereupon.
Mermecides
Mermecides made a Wagon so artificially and so small, that a Flee might cover
it with her wing. Strabo did see so well that he could see the ships that
departed from Carthage from a promutory in Cicilia, which was above a hundred
and thirty miles. Cornelius Agrippa in his first book of hidden Philosophy,
writes a history of one Cippus King in Italy, who being in sleep, dreamed of
Bulls fighting all night, that in the morning he had two horns growyng in his
head. The learned hold opinion, that imagination and vapors of dreams may
alter things into some kind of other substance, as Caieta and Aenulia, two
married women, became men, and that Medea by a dream waxed so whot in love with
Jason: and so imagination by operation of natural vapors do effect things
woonderfully: as some do by sight assure them selves most certain, and some by
conjectures af^irme things to be true, but because imagination is a thing that
needs at large to be spoken of, considering how diversely it works in
diverse men, I will in another place speak of it.

Of the beginning of Marriages, and the sundry use of the same.
AFter that God had made the world in full perfection, and so beautiful that
the Greeks did call it Cosmos: which is, fair, framing all things for the use
of man, as well the world, as also all that move or grow in the world: he
then made a woman which should be likewise a further solace unto man. And
where he made the world, and all living creatures beside in several and
sundry proportions, yet he framed man like him self to behold the heavens,
to measure the elements, and to rule the very Globes, and to this end he
might multiplye the world, saying unto Adam after he blessed all things on
earth: Go and multiply. This multiplication and the use thereof was so diverse,
that diverse countries had sundry orders, as well in single life, as in
matrimony. And as concerning antiquity of marriage, we read in Trogus that
noble Historian, that Cecrops the first King of Athens before the time of
Deucalion, to have first framed and appointed Matrimony in Greece: But such
was their orders in diverse places, such was their liberty in Matrimony,
Aegiptians. Indians. Thracians.
that the Egyptians, the Indians, and the Thracians might marry as many as they
would, according unto the ability of the man: some ten, some twelve, some
more, some less. Again, the Scithians, Scithians. Perseans. Barbarians.
Massagets.
the Perseans and all Barbary, there marriages and wives were common one for
another like brute beasts. The Massagetes had this law, that it was not to be
suffered that any of their country should marry but one wife, but it was
lawful for any man to take another man's wife, and to make an exchange, for so
were their wives common unto all, but married unto one. Libians.
In Libia the people called Augylas, and the people called Nasamones, had this
order in their Matrimonies, that ye Bride the first night after she was
married, should lie with every ghest before she should go to bed with her
own husband. Arabians.
The Arabians law was, that one women was married unto all her kinsmen, and at
all times lawful for any of her kin to challenge and claim her as his wife,
using this policy, to leave a staff at the chamber door to give to
understand that one was in bed with her: And when the staff was not there,
then they knew that no body was within: in so much if any were found of
another kinrede, it was adultery, and by law he should dye. Polidor recites
a historye for the purpose to be noted, that there was a Kings daughter of
great beauty, which had fifteen tall men unto her brethren, with whom
severally often times she did accompay, and being almost weryed, desirous to
take some rest, for she was so fair, and they were so many that always she
had company: she used this policy, to make a staff much like unto the chamber
staff, which was as it were a Porter appointed. And upon a time after that one
of her brethren had left her in the chaumber, and was gone out, she straight
laid the staff at the door, thinkyng thereby somewhat to ease her self, and
to rest from venery: but one of her breth^n came from the market, where he
left the rest of his brethren together, and when he saw the staff at the
door, went straight unto his father, and accused his sister of adultery,
saying that all his brethren were in the market, and that there was a
fornicator with his sister: but the matter being known, he was punished of
his father for that he slaundered his ^ister. The like liberty in matrimony
was sometime amongst the Meedes, and with the people called Magi, Meedes. Magi.
Antropophagi. Ethiopians. Arabians.
Anthropophagi, and with diverse others. Some of Ethiopia, and some of Arabia,
that married their own mothers and Sisters. Thus people diverse where did lead
their lives, and do lead their lives so horriblye and filthyly, that better
it were not to know it, than to know it: but though it be a play and a sport
unto the ungodly and wicked, yet it is a horror and ougly monster unto the
godly and wise: For to know all things profits the good. Herodot in his
fourth book does make mention of certain inhabitants called Poeni, Poeni.
approaching the confines of Egypt, whose order and law of matrimony was, that
the King of that country should have the first taste of the Bride before her
husband: this order was once observed of the ancient Scotts, that the Lord
of the soil should have the virginity of the married woman. Scotts.
Assirians. Babilonians
The Assyrian: and Babilonians, did sometime marye those that hired their
bodies unto all men. The people called Centabri gave money as a dowry with
their wives unto other men. Lidians. Ciprians.
The Lidians and the Ciprians, their daughters might not marye until they had
gained by the hier of their bodies as much as should pay their dowry. In the
mean time did they go from City to City, from town to town, gyuing them
selves an offer unto every man upon the high way: and when they had gained
sufficientlye for their dowry, then might they mary and not before. And thus
sundry orders and several laws in maintayning the same. Some again leading
a swinishe life without women, as Esseni, which Plini affirms that they live
most sober and chaste without women all their life time. And certain people of
Thracia called Ctistae, which likewise avoided the company of women. Rome.
The Romans after Rome was builded five hundredth years and and more, kept
matrimony inuiolated, until Spurinus a noble Roman for that his wife was
barren had dyuorcement in that time that Pomponius and Papirius were Consulles
in Rome, that was the first diuorcement in Rome. Moses perceiving the Jews
much to be given unto extreme several vices, some unto covetousness some
unto lechery, that for reformation of domestical quietness, for that the
Jews were so desirous of other women either for beawtie or for wealth, their
own they punished and plagued unto death, Moises.
they had a diuorcement of Moses to mitigat the furye and hardness of their
hearts rather to avoid the tyranny of the Jews which they used toward their
wives by sufferaunce then by commandment. For as the world in most places was
too wicked concerning the liberty of Matrimony: so were they in diverse
countries very strait concerning marriages, in so much the Ethnikes observed
that sentence of Catullus the Poet, Catullus.
that virginity ought to be ruled by the parents, since one part is the
father, the second is the mother, and the third and last is in the child.
The solemnity in matrimony in diverse places imported unto us wise morals, and
did as it were presage a duty and an obedience unto things, as both Plutarch
and Plini write of the Venetians, that when a marriage was solemnized in Venice,
the Bride after that day brings her distaffe and her spindle, and Flax
ready, as one after that day never to be idle, but occupied always in the
affairs of her house. The Greeks and the Romans also had this custom, they
girded the loins of their daughters always until the day of their maryages,
and then that night her husband should loose the knot, and unbind that which
of long time the Uirgines of Greece kept fast bond. Amongst diverse countries,
where sundry solemnities in matrimony is used, I read not in any historye so
solemn a state, and so worthy ceremonies as we do see in England, which if
you mark in all points, you must needs confess that outward ceremonies do
import a great Majesty and dignity of Matrimony. Again, they had laws in
diverse places that none should mary without some reverence showed unto their
gods before: as the Athenians suffered no marriage without sacrifice first done
unto Diana. Athens. Rome.
In Rome a law there was, that she that should be married, should sit in the
seat of Faunus before she might see the Bridegroom her husband. The like was
observed in Boetia and Locresia, Boetia. Locrecia.
that before their youth should marry, they should drink one unto another at
the alter consecrated unto Euclia. In Hetruria they used to kill a Hog to
sacrifice their gods, and to call upon Juno for good success to come.
Lusitania.
In Lucitania the Bride goes to the Church with a distaffe and a spindle in
her hand, and one of her kinsmen going before her with a firebrande of Pine
tree. In Sparta by the law of Licurgus, the maids that should mary, Sparta.
should shave the heeres of their heads, and wear man's apparel: and by the
same law they were forbidden to give any substance with their daughters, but
that love and good will should be the whole cause of marriage. Moreover, they
used these ceremonies, to divide a piece of bread in Macedonia, and in the most
part of Greece for the Bride and Bridegroom to eat before they should be
married. The like in Rome in Romulus time was used, so that they had water more
to their bread then the Greeks had. Galatia.
In Galatia they should drink first of one Cup appointed for that purpose
only, and so forth in diverse countries they used diverse ceremonies, Carmenia.
as in Carmenia no man might mary without he brought the head of some enemy or
other to the King, as a proof of his love toward his country. ^aeotis.
In Maeotis no maid might mary without she had subverted one enemy or other
of her country: but in some country they married not, as Esseni, people much
given to abstain as well from Wine as from women. Socrates.
Wherefore Socrates being demanded what was best, to mary or no, answered: To
mary you shall suffer brawling and chiding, to be single you shall be solitary
and comfortless. Therefore Pompeius the great coming among the Massagets,
Pompeius.
who used once a week to company their wives, demanded the cause thereof,
they aunswering said: because we should not hear their chidings in the day
time, nor their complayntes in the night time. But to end, let every man
have his own wife, if he cannot live chaste, for better it is to marry than to
burn.

Of likeness and similitudes.
Because comparisons are odious amongst diverse men, yet for that Plini and
Plutarch do use them chiefly for necessaries, I shall show how like diverse
princes were one unto another, not in countenance and outward proportion
only, but in life and conversation: Also by comparing the ancient Greeks and
the latter Romans one with another, as most certain the Romans imitated the
Greeks in all points: we shall see and perceive by their acts, doings, and
life, who were most like one unto an other. And first begin with Romulus the
first king of Rome, Romulus. Theseus.
how he in all his doings imitated that valiant Greek Theseus, King Aegeus
son of Athens, that Plutarch in his first book declares that by comparing
their lives one with an other, a man may easily judge how like in state and
fortune they lived: the one having occasion to war with the Sabins, the other
with the Centaures, the one in augmenting the state of Italy and building of
Rome, the other in delivering all Greece from tirannye and bondage: of equal
travel both, and of like state, for then Italy was in Romulus time, as Greece
was in Theseus days. The next was in Rome Numa Pompilius, which for his pity
unto the poor, Numa
his love toward his country, his gravity and severity in law making, his
zeal and religion to the service of their temples: In fine for all virtuous
doings in all respects like unto Licurgus that famous law maker amongst the
Lacedaemonians: Licurgus.
the care that these two princes had for their friends and countries, clean
contrary unto Theseus and Romulus before mentioned. It is set forth by
Plutarch in his fourth book. Licurgus was not so studious to call the
Lacedaemonians from vice and sin, But Numa was as careful to instruct the
Romans in all goodness and virtue, so that Rome bare witness of Numa, and
Sparta of Licurgus, which for their several and sundry laws, their virtuous
lives and doings compared by Plutarch, they may well for their contempt and
neglecting the honors and dignities due unto them, and for care they had either
of them for their people, be like one unto an other: and even as Publicola did
not only imitate Solon in all points, but also translated Solons laws in
Rome, so that one was counted most sage and wise in Greece, the other thought
to be most happy in Rome. So did Numa likewise follow Licurgus in all doings,
imitating his laws and orders in Rome. What comparison is made between noble
Scipio and Haniball, the one defending the state of Rome, the other Carthage,
Hanibal. Scipio.
and either of them in open war with the other, that to read their lives and
fortunes about the affairs of their countries, what is it else but to see two
noble Capitaines one like unto an other in magnanimity and courage, whose
fortune after strong and stout service toward their countries was such that
they both were banished Rome and Carthage: And as they in life were most like
of Plutarch compared, so did they embrace their death likewise. Even so was
that stout Greek Alcibiades, Alcibiades. Martius Macoriolanus. Pericles.
Fabius Maxcimus.
which Thucydedes most worthyly prayseth, and Macoriolanus that famous Roman
compared for the like magnanimity and state of fortune. Pericles that renowned
Greek, and Fabius Maximus the Roman, whose doings Athens and Rome did long
rule, were likewise noted one to be like an other. Plutarch in his book
entitled the lives of Emperors, compares Silla the Roman unto Lysander king
of Sparta: Silla. Lysander. Pompeius. Agesilaus.
compares Sertorius unto Eumenes, and likewise Pompeius the great, unto
Agesilaus king likewise of Lacedemonia. If respect be duly had unto the
marshall feats and noble acts of Greeks and Romans? If their lives,
honors, and dignities be waied? If on the contrary, mishappe, evil fortune,
banishement, and such like be considered, we must think and judge truly of
Plutarch in comparing these jolly champions and puissant Princes as Alexander
the great and Julius Caesar, Alexander. Caesar. Nicias and Crassus. Demosthenes
and Cicero.
Demetrius and Antonius, Nicias and Crassus, men in all their doings in all
enterprises most like one unto another, some for wisdom again and eloquence
compared as Cicero unto Demosthenes: some for justice and equity likened one
unto the other, as Cato the senior, likened unto Aristides the Athinian: For
gentleness and clemency was Pelopidas King of Sparta compared unto
Epamino^das Prince of Thebes: Some again compared one unto an other for their
liberality and frank giving, as that famous and liberal Phocion, was judged
to be like unto that free and frank Athinian Cimon: some likened by misfortune
and chances, as Dion who governed Sicilia a long time in favor and great
honor with Dionisius then ^ing, to Brutus which likewise might command Caesar
to (...) long therein occupied, with small pleasure and dilectation unto the
reader: and therefore I think it better to observe measure in things, then with
prolixitie of writing or tedious examples to molest the reader: for when it was
told Caesar Augustus, Augustus.
that there was a young man of Sicilia that was very like unto the Emperor in
countenance and person, he commanded the young man to be brought before
him, where when he came, the Emperor demanded meryly whether his mother had
ever been at Rome, the young man answered and said: My mother was never at
Rome, but my father was oftentimes at Rome: and so the Emperor was cut of with
the like equivocation unto him, as unto the young man he meant, giving to
understand that the young man's father might be as bold with the Emperors
mother, as he thought he should with the young man's mother.

Of Music and mirth.
GReat controversy there is for the antiquity of Music, some do attribute
it unto Orpheus, Orpheus.
as the Thracians, which with Horace affirm that the Music of Orpheus could
move stones, rocks, and trees: some unto Amphion as the Thebans do, Amphion.
which honor Amphion for the first musition, for that with his Harp he
caused stones and trees to follow him, wherewith he builded the town of
Thebes: Dionisius.
some unto Dionisius, as the Greeks which say that he first invented harmony:
Solinus affirms that Music was first found in Creete: Polibius says that
Music was found first in Arcadia: Diodorus thinks that Apollo found first
harmony: Apollo. Tubal.
Josephus judges that Tubal amongst the Hebrews was the finder first of
Music: And thus ancient writers diversely do vary herein. But since Music is
but a sound within number and measure as Cicero says, and that by diverse
means found of men, and from time to time augmented by man: for first when
Mercury the son of Maia had found after that the floode Nilus had watered
all Egypt, amongst diverse other drowned creatures, a sea Snayle, the flesh
being withered, and yet the synewes still remained, which being stricken, made a
sound: Thus did Mercury make first a Harp with seven strings to coequat the
number of Atlantides, and then he added two more and made them nine, just with
the number of the Muses. Thus was the first Harp made by Apollo, though some
say it was made by Orpheus, some by Amphion, Lirus.
some by Lirus: yet it is most like that Apollo made it for in Delos, the
picture or simulacre of Apollo is there set up, having in his right hand a
bow, and in his left hand the three Graces, and either of them having in their
hands several kind of instruments, the first a Harp, the second a Pype,
the third a Flute. In the chap. of the invention of things you shall at large
find more concerning Music. But now to declare the harmony of Music, the
mirth and melody that proceeds from music, the love and affection that
ancient Princes and grave wisemen bare unto Music, Themistocles.
that Themistocles though he was wise and discreet in other things, yet for
that as Cicero says in his first book of Tusculan, in that he refused to
hear one play upon the Harp in a banquet where he was, he then of the
wisest men in Athens was though and judged to be of learning less than they
supposed him to be: For the Greeks judged none to be learned, unless he were
seen in music. Socrates the father of all Philosophy, Socrates.
and Master of all Philosophers, being by Oracle of Apollo named and judged
the wisest man in all the world, became in his latter years an old man to be
taught to play upon the Harp, and often found amongst little children which
being taunted of Alcibiades for that he found him playing with a litte infant
called Lamproce answered: ^lianus. 12.
it is good being to be in good company. Even so that wise and discreeete
prince Agesilaus king sometime of the Lacedaemonians spiyng one of his men to
laugh at him for that he rode upon a long reed with one of his children,
Agesilaus.
said: hold thy peace and laugh not, and when so ever thou will be a father,
thou must do as a father. We read the like of noble Architas the Tarentine,
Architas.
which when he was married, having a great number of servants in his house,
he would play with their children, and delighted much in the company of
young infantes. Certainly either of these three last mentioned Socrates,
Agesilaus, or Architas, were in those days most renowned for their wisdom
and knowledge, and yet refused they not the company of young infants. That
mighty and strong Hercules, Hercules.
though he was the son of Jupiter, and counted in all the world most
famous, rather a God taken than a man, as Euripides does testify, would be
often found amongst children and young innocent infantes playing, saying this
sentence with a child in his hand: I play with children which for the change
thereof is so grateful unto me, as though I were in the games of Olimpia. The
self same famous Hercules went to schole unto Liuius to learn to play upon the
Harp to solace him in his sadness, and to make him merry when he was compelled
to mourn. In the midst of his triumph went that great conqueror Alexander
likewise to learn music. That divine and godly Prophet David played upon his
Harp and served his God with merry songues and godly ballades. It is written
that in the marriage of king Cadmus the son of Agenor which builded Thebes in
Boetia, the Muses played on instruments. In Greece music was so esteemed
that their sages and wise Philosophers addicted themselves wholly to music.
The Arcadians, the Lacedaemonians, and the Thracians people, though they were
much given to wars, severe in dealing, hardy in all trauayles, and in
learning most rude: yet would they acquaint themselves with music until
they were thirty years old. The people of Creete brought up their youth in
all kind of melodye and harmony. The most part of the world did learn
music save in Egypt, as Diodorus in his second book affirms, that music
was forbidden, least the tender and soft minds of their youth should be
intised to too much pleasure. And though some contemn music with Diogines,
and say that it were more profitable to mende manners than to learn music:
And some that will with Alcibiades taunt music, who was wont to say that the
Thebans were meet men to learn music, for that they could not speak, but
that the Athenians should hate such wanton tunes, for that they spoke without
instrument. Likewise King Pirrhus being demanded which was the best musition,
Python or Charisius, he despising them and their music, preferred a great
warrior according to his own mind named Polysperches. Though these I say with
diverse others despised music sometime, yet we read again as wise as they,
as stout as they used much music, as Achilles, Alexander the great, Nero,
Silla, M. Cato, Socrates, Cimon. To many might I repeat that were as wise as
they were merry, as learned Ioppas, whose songues in Virgill are expressed: as
Salij, whose pleasant pamphletes Rome a long while embraced and much esteemed.
For as music is doleful, pleasant, full of harmony and melody: so is
music terrible and fearful, full of life and courage. For we read in the
old age while yet the world was raw, that Aliates King of Lidia* in his
wars against the Milesios, Lidians.
had musitions for his Trumpetters, Pipers and Fiddlers, as Herodotus in his
first book affirms, to move the people with music unto wars. Cree^.
The people of Creete as Gellius writes, had Gitternes and Cithrones playing
before them, as they went unto the field to fight. The Parthians used as
Plutarchus in the life of Crassus reports, Parthians.
the ringing of belles at their going unto field. The Ethiopians used songs of
diverse tunes, and dancing before they went to wars. The Sirians before they
met their enemies would sing Balades to honor the same, with all kind of
dancing to solace them selves. The Cimbrians did make melodye with dry
skins, Cimbrians.
beating the skins with sticks at the very entrance unto the enemies, Cirus
the great King did with his soldiers sing unto Castor and Pollux, before he
took his voyage to the enemies. The Athenians would sing Hymns unto Jupiter
before they would go to the feelde. The first noise and sound that the
Lacedaemonians had, as Thucidides says, in steed of Tru^pettes were Flutes,
until by an oracle they were warned of Apollo that if they thought to have
victory ever Messena, they should appoint a man of Athens for their Captain:
the Athenians being right glad of the oracle, for that the Lacedaemonians and
Athenians were always enemies one unto another, they sent unto Athens for a
Captain, where they appointed unto them a lame and a deformed man named
Dircaeus, Dircaeus.
in reproach and a mock of the Lacedaemonians. This Dircaeus being appointed and
made a Captain over all the people of Sparta, Sparta.
he first then invented the trumpe, and taught all the Lacedaemonians to sound
the trumpe, ^^st lib. 4
which was such a terror unto the enemies the people of Messaena, that at the
first sound of the trumpets they fled, and so the Lacedaemonians got the
victory. Thus was the ancient music in the beginning so necessary, that
every country endeavored to have skyll in music: then Mars claimed music
in the feelde, now Venus occupies music in Chaumbers, that kind of gentle
and soft music the Egyptians forbad the youth to be taught therein, lest
from men they would become again women. But shall we join the old ancient
games, the mirth, the solace and the plays that they used in those days,
together with their music, to prove the agilitie of that time, and the
actiuities of that age to be much esteemed amongst the Greeks and Gentiles.
The Greeks at some time had four great games appointed: the first in mount
Olimpia in Arcadia, Olimpia.
hard by the City Pisa, which Hercules invented first to honor Jupiter. This
was so famous amonst the Greeks that even as the Romans used to account the
^ime by their Consuls, so did the Greeks use to number by the games of
Olimpia, which was appointed every first year: Unto this game came all the
youth of the world both on horseback and on foot to do maisteries, the
reward was appointed for the victors a Garland made of Olive leaves, for they
came not there for money, but for mirth and exercise, in so much that when
Tigranes King Artabanus son hard of the fame thereof, and of the Garlandes of
Olive, he said: Well worthy were the Greeks to be spoken of, that so little
esteemed money, that Olive was preferred for the chief reward in Olimpia. This
same moved first King Zerxes to war against the Greeks to his loss and
decay. The second games were called Pithij, Pithij.
and invented of Apollo in memory that he killed the great Serpent Python,
which was of Juno sent to kill Latona Apollo his mother: Here was appointed for
the victories either a foot or a horseback, a Garlande made of Oken leaves.
Here likewise all the youth of Greece exercised feats, practiced policies,
used maisteries, and proved them selves in any thing that they felt them apt
to do: as in running, leaping, wrestling, riding, swimming or such like as then
we used. Isthmia.
The third was called Isthmia, invented of Theseus in the honor of Neptune.
In this play was appointed for ye victors, certain garlands made of Pine leaves
having the name of Isthmos, a place in Achaia where Neptune is worshipped,
where the Temple of Neptune is compassed. The fourth game is called Nemea,
which the Argiues make in memory of Hercules, for that he killed a great and a
fearce Lion in the woods of Nemea, Nemaea.
according unto the name of the play. Here do likewise the Argiues come to
exercise youth, and practice feats as the rest do. These four plays were
long in Greece observed, as causes and occasions for men to come together, to
show feats and to try qualities. The first in Olimpus for Jupiter, the
second in Delos for Apollo, the third in Isthmos, a place in Achaia for
Neptune, the fourth amongst the Argiues to Hercules. In the first play the
Garlande of victory was of Olive, in the second play the Garlande of victory
was of Oak, in the third play they had their Garlandes of Pine, the fourth
play of Poply, and thus then they triumphed in their mirth, they bragged of
their victories, they gloried in their garlandes, while yet Laurel as Ovid
said was not known. Besides these four famous plays, there were diverse
others, as Pirrhus play which he invented in Creete, Pirrhus.
for the soldiers to exercise them selves in arms, wherein he taught diverse
iestures and sundry shifts in moouings, Plini. lib. 7.
whence first proceeded much the use of wars: this was a kind of dauncyng in
arms, as Dionis^ and Hali. in his seventh book says, which was of the people
called Curetes, mainteyned in the memory of Pirrhus. Licaon likewise invented
other kind of plays, Licaon.
where naked men contrary unto Pirrhus games did use feats. Diverse others
were had in great estimation in Greece, made and invented by several men, but
the first inuentour of mirth was as Diodorus says, Mercurius, which only was
invented to recreate the people, and to practice agilitie and feats of bodies.
Others there were of less name, but of as great mirth, as diverse kinds of
playing at the Ball, which is an ancient game, as it seems in Vergil, it was
much used sometime amongst the Troyans, for when Aeneas incontinent after the
destruction of the City of Troy came unto Italy, where he first taught
skipping and frisking at the Ball, before he married Lauinia King Latinus
daughter, the youth of Troy had playing at the Ball for their chief mirth and
recreation, and at this day much used in diverse countries. Again, for further
recreation, they used sundry kinds of Dice plays. Herodotus does witness
that the old and ancient Lidians did first find out the Dice and Ball,
though Plini does report that one named Pythus first found the play at the
Ball: but for the certainetie thereof, since so many kind of Balls be, and
the playing likewise so variable, both Plini and Herodotus may well agree, for
the people of Lydia at a certain time being oppressed with great dearth, The
Lidians invented Diceplay^.
and sore plagued with hunger, they invented then diverse kinds of diceplay, as
Herodotus said, to pass the time in playing, and to forget hunger, for they
fed one day, and they came together the second day to play: thus eating a
little one day to satisfy nature, they played the second day to avoid
hunger. Again, there was amongst the ancient Greeks a play much like unto
our Cheasse play, Zerx^e^ game.
which one Zerxes a wiseman first invented, to warn a tyrannous Prince which
he then served to avoid his tyranny, and to let him understand by his play,
that a Prince ought to watch and to use his subjects as his force and
strength, even as the play is in moving the Pawnes, the Knights, the Bishops
for the defense and bulwarks of the king, that as the player, I mean Zerxes
did show his master the King the effect of the play, how the king was
preserved by playing wisely of the men lest they be lost, so the tiraunt him
self understood by the play of Zerxes, how dangerous that Prince is that
uses not well his subjects, that will not discreetly see and watch for their
commodities, which is the Princes safety. Another play was used then in
Greece, either upon the Dice, or else closelye in hand: called even and odd.
This play came from Greece unto Rome, in the time of Augustus Caesar the
second Emperor of Rome, as Suetonius does write in the life of Augustus,
where the Emperor Augustus wrote a letter unto his daughter in Rome, after
this sort: Daughter I send thee two hundred and fiftye pence, which I give
amongst thy ghestes to play after Supper the Greek play called even and not
even, whether they will at Dice or cloase in hand. Lottes likewise were much
used for recreation and mirth, with diverse other sundry games and plays to
recreate the mind of man, which both the Greeks and Gentiles did practice
then, as well to try their wits, as also to use pastime and mirth to draw
company together to be merry. I leave the Greeks a while, and will something
speak of the Roman pastimes and sportes, which in nothing were inferior to
the Greeks, but rather excelled Greece and all the world in all qualities.
And lest I should seem tedious, I will speak of no more but of four
principal games, correspondent unto the Greeks, and coequall unto their
number. Luparcalia.
The first called Lupercalia brought out of Arcadia by Euander, and sacrificed
unto Pan upon mount Palentine. And as Siluanus does write, the sacrifices were
made in the Month of February after this sort, by Euander the first inuentor
thereof. The youngmen of Rome should gather together, every one bearing in his
hand a scurge or a whip made of Goats skins, running one unto another, and
he that was most swift of foot escaped stripes: for every one should run
unto another in order, every one his length before the other: and thus they
made them swifter in running by reason of his stripes, for he that was
overtaken by the way, was sure to speed: Every man ran naked, to this end,
that they might use to be swift. The women likewise thinkyng thereby to become
more fruitful and fertile, offered them selves wyllyngly to receive stripes.
These scurges and whippes that they had in their hands, made such rattling
noise by reason they were made of dry skins, that it made him that ran
before to strain him self, hearing the noise, and fearing the stripes. The
second game that the Romans used, Circenses.
was called Circenses, as some say sprung up first amongst the Romans them
selves, a place appointed by Rome, environed about with huge and strong walls:
Here all kinds of pastime and sportes were used, running with Horses and
fighting on Horseback in the one end, in the midst the champions were
placed in arms a foot to fight, in the other end wrastlers, leapers, runners
and such like games were appointed: so that the place was framed accordingly
long and large, that they might have room enough in both ends, and in the
midst. This was the chief and the auncientest play amongst the Romans
saving Saturnalia: this sport did Ianus which then did reign, together with
Saturnus as Macrobius says, invent and frame in memory and monumentes of
Saturnus his fellow. Saturnalia
This play was celebrated in the month of december with such mirth, pleasure
and pastime, that it far surmounted all other. In this month of December every
man saluted his friend with rewards, tokens, presents or with any treasure
that they had to pleasure one another. And because all things were common in
Saturnus time, and called the golden world, there was such mirth used as
would make some men of this time i^lous to see it. I believe none of this age
would be content to see his servant in bed with his wife, which in Saturnus
time was tolerable. Some say this play sprung first among the Pelagians, some
again affirm that it began amongst the Athenians, but how and where it began
first in other countries it is no matter, but in Rome it was first framed and
invented by Ianus. The fourth play amongst the Romans was then called
Gladiatoria, Gladiatoria.
where the youth of Rome came to learn how to behave them selves among the
enemies: In this play should they fight one with another at the long Spear,
the long Sword, the staff, and such as then they used in fight for to
embolden them selves: in that play being naked without arms against they came
to fight with their armed enemies. Thus by this play were the Romans taught
boldly to fight with their enemies, and hardened at home, little to esteem
wounds and strokes abroad. Thus games and plays were cheefely esteemed of the
Romans, though diverse others as Cicero in his office affirms, the Romones
had in Martius feelde hard by Rome, to exercize the youngmen to practice
feats, to become ready and prompt in marshall offayres, which they only most
esteemed.

A comparison between the love of men, and beasts.
IF men be diverse in affection one toward another, as we daily see and try
by experience: how much ought the siely and simple beast which wants use of
speech to be commended, that so cares and provides for him and his. And
though as Cicero says that it is common unto all living creatures to multiply
and to be careful over those that nature procreated, and to differ in no part
from a beast therein: yet by reason we are to excel all kind of beasts, all
things in subjection unto man, as well the heavens above, and all that shines
therein, as earth beneath and all that live thereon. And hence I maruayle much
though thd secret working of nature, in fearce and raging beasts be
tolerable, yet in a reasonable man, in whom says the Philosopher nature only
moves unto the beast such enimitie, variaunce and discord should proceed.
It is thought that the Eagle and the Swanne be not friends, the Dolphin and
the Whale can not agree, the Woolfe and the Fox at variaunce: so of the Dog
and the Cat, of the Crow and the Kite may be spoken, but it is well known
that man is most odious unto man, and though it be spoken Homo homini Deus, yet
is it proved Homo homini Demon. The Lion fears the Cock.
If nature made the mighty Lion the most valiant beast in the world to fear
the little crowyng Cock? If nature do cause the huge and monstrous Elephant, to
tremble at the sight of a sielie simple Sheep? And if nature move the
Panther, a strong and a strange beast, to quake at the presence of a Hind?
If nature work so subtly, that the strongest, mightiest, and valiauntest
beast, should fear the most innocent and most simple beast? how much more
might reason rule in us to fear our God and his mighty works? which we
altogether either forget his glory, or despise his power. Though in beasts the
heavens have dominion: yet said David, man by reason and fear of God rules
the heavens. But I will omit to speak further of that, and will return to that
which I mean a little to discuss. I will not speak of the love and affection
of men general, but of the love mutual betwixt man and wife, betwixt brother
and brother. And as it is a virtue not to be forgotten, so is it a virtue most
rare to find: for every thing in his own kind is most to be accepted. And
first to entreat of the exceeding love, of the woonderful affection that men
bare toward their wives: We read of that noble Roman Anthonius Pius,
Anthonius. Pius.
who loved so well his wife Faustine, that when she died, he caused her
picture to be made, and to be set up before his face in his bed chamber, to
ease some part of his grief with the sight thereof. M. Plaucius sailing with
his wife unto Asia, with threescore Nauayes came very gorgeously unto the city
of Tarentum, Marcus. Placius.
where in the midst of his pomp and great glory, for that his wife Orestella
by sickness dyed, he slew him self with one dagger, saying: Two bodies shall
possess one grave. The like we read of two young men in Plutarch, the one
named Aemilius, the other Cianippus, Cyanippus. ^milius.
which for mere affection and passing love toward their wives, after long
torments, panges and pains conceived by inward griefs, that their wives
were dead, to solace their sadness and to end their woofull hap, offered their
pined bodies a sacrifice unto death, for a pledge of their true and faithful
love. What means does love seek to save it self, to avoid grief and
lastyng pain, and to be acquainted with ease and pleasure? to embrace death.
How rufully the Greek Poet Antimachus bewailed the death of his wife
Lisidides, Antimachus
in such mourning verses and woofull plaintes, that whosoever read them, he
should be as ready to weep in reading the doleful Epitaph of Lisidides, as
was Antimachus her husband sorrowful of her death. Pericles was so loving unto
his wife, being a noble captain of Athens, and so chaste, that when Sophocles
spied a marvelous beautiful young man, saying: Behold a passing fair young
man. Pericles answered and said: Not only the heart and the hands of a
Magistrate must be chaste, but also his eyes must refuse the sight of any but
his wife. It is read that Pericles being at Athens, he was found kissing and
making much of his wife, and being from Athens, he was found more sad to depart
from his wife, then unwilling to die for his country. Orpheus.
Orpheus loved so well his wife Euridices, that as the Poettes feign he feared
not the power of King Pluto to redeem his wife, with hazard and danger of
his own body. Innumerable are they that deserve the like fame, so that these
few may be a sufficient proof of others. And now a few examples to prove
the like good will and love from the wives showed toward their husbands, as
hitherunto you heard the great love of husbands toward their wives. Alcestes a
noble Queen of Tessalie, Alcestes.
at what time King Admetus her husband should die, having by an Oracle given
an answer, that if any would die for the King he should live: which when all
refused, his wife Queen Alcestes offered her self to die to save her husbands
life. Iulia the wife of Pompeius the great, and only daughter to that famous
and renowned* Iulia.
Julius Caesar Emperor of Rome, she was no less obedient unto her father
Caesar, then she was loving unto her husband Pompeius, who though they both
were enemies one unto an other, yet she showed her a loving daughter unto her
father, and a true wife unto her husband: and so true that when she saw her
own Pompeius coming blouddy from the field, as his apparel made a show a
great way of, she supposing that her husband was slain, being great with
child, trauayled straight and died before Pompeius had yet come in. The love
of Artimesia Queen of Caria toward her husband king Mausolus, Artimesia.
is as well declared by the sumptuous Tomb and gorgeous glistering grave which
she made for him when he died, compted for the excelencie thereof one of the
seven woonders, as also truly verified by ceremonies at his death, in making
the skull of his head her drinking cup, in drinking all the ashes of his
body as sugar unto her wine, and in eating of his heart unto her body, saying:
though bodies be departed yet our hearts shall never be a sunder. That noble
Greek Laodamia looued her husband so well, Laodamia.
that when she heard that her husband Prothesilaus was slain by Hector at
the siege of Troy, she desired only of God that she might see his shadow
or likeness once before she died: which when she saw embrasing the lykenes
of Prothesilaus as she thought in her husbands arms, she then presently
dyed. We read that Queen Ipsicratea loved her husband king Mythridates so
entirely, Ipsicratea.
that she shaued all the hears of her head, and ware man's apparel, and
followed him like a Lacky, for that he should not know her to be his wife,
she had rather go unto the wars with her husband like a lackie, than tarry
from her husband in Pontus like a Queen. Paulina when she heard that her
husband Seneca was put to death by that cruel Emperor and Tyrant Nero, whom
Seneca sometime taught him in his youth Philosophy, and at the length requited
him with death: Paulina.
which when I say Paulina hard thereof, she enquired what kind of death her
husband suffered, which being known, she ministered the like plaster unto
her self, as was appointed for Seneca her husband. Likewise that noble
Portia, Portia.
daughter unto Cato, and wife unto Brutus, hearing that her husband was slain
at Philippos, for that she might not speed of a knife, she choked her self
with coals. The like history is read of Triata, which when she knew by
letters that her husband Vitellius was so environed of his enemies and no way
able to escape, his wife rushed into the Camp and pressed near her husband
ready to die or to live in field with him. What can be so hard to take in
hand, but love will hazard it? what can be so perilous but love will venture
it? neither water can stay it, nor fire stop it. Sulpitia.
Sulpitia the wife of Lentulus the daughter of that worthy Roman Paterculus,
when she perceived that her husband was appointed by the Magistrates of Rome
to pass unto Sicilia as an Ambassador, and there to continue for a season,
though her mother had great charge over her, and very careful and studious she
was to comfort her daughter in the absence of her husband: Valerig. lib 6.
Cap. 7
yet she deceived her mother, she changed her apparel and caused her two
maids likewise to be disguised and took two men in the like apparel, and went
all by night from Rome unto Sicilia. Aemilia.
Aemilia the wife of Affricanus and mother unto that noble Cornelia which was
mother unto those famous Romances called Gracchi, she perceauyng her husband
to be in love with one of her maids in the house, and often to use the maid
as his wife, though Aemilia knew well of it, yet she never hated the maid, nor
opened it to her husband: but after that her husband died, she gave to this
maid a great sum of money, and married her wealthyly in Rome: A rare thing in
a woman found. Penelope.
To speak of Penelopes love in Greece, Lucrecia.
toward her husband Ulysses, or to show the constancy of Lucrecia in Rome
toward her husband Collatinus, the one twenty years was proved of diverse
noble Greeks, and yet remained she true unto Ulysses, the other through force
being ravished by proud Torquinius son named Aruntius, would not be false
unto Collatinus, but opened the same and revenged it with her own death. Now
again to prove how well did Queen Tomiris love her son Mesgapites, Tomyris.
the death of great Cirus King of Persea with two hundred thousand of his
soldiers beside can testify: or how Ageus loved his son Theseus, which
when he had perceived the black sail, Ageus.
contrary unto promise made before when Theseus went unto Creete to the monster
Minotaurus, that his as he supposed was slain in Labirinthus, he threw him
over a high rock into the sea. What should I molest the reader herein, since
an end can scant be found, but only recite one worthy history out of
Valerius of a servant unto one named Panopion that hearing that certain
soldiers came unto the City of Reatina in purpose to kill his Master, he
changed apparel with his master, and conveyed his Master first a way safe
and sound from the enemies, and he went unto his Masters bed as though he
had been Panopion, Panopion.
and suffered himself to be slain in steed of his Master. A man would
think that greater love could be found in no man, then a man to die for his
friend: and truth it is. But to find such love in beasts toward men, a
meruell great it were: Insomuch, that in Leucadia, a Peacock loved a young
Uirgin so well, that when she dyed, the Peacock also dyed. And Plini says
that in the City of Seston an Eagle being brought up by a young maid loved
the maid so well that it would flee a broad and kill fowls and bring them
whom to the young maid: and when the Uirgine died, the Eagle flewe unto that
same fire where the maid was appointed to die, and also died with her. The
Perseans were wont for favor and affection they had unto their Horses, to
burye them and the people named Molossi made brave sepulchers for their dogs.
Alexander the great made a tomb for his horse Bucephalus: So did Antiochus,
and Caesar likewise. Such tried love and faithful trust was found in Dogs,
that the great King Masinissa of Numidia never went to bed but had a dosen
dogs in his great chamber, as his guard to keep and watch him from his
enemies, for sure he was that money might not corrupt them, friendship might
not alure them, threatenings might not fear them. There was a Dog in Athens
named Caparus, Caparus.
unto whom the tuition of the temple Aesculapius was committed, with all the
wealth and treasure therein, which being in a night trained unto a snare, the
temple was robbed, the substance and the richesse thence was stolen, but in
the morning the dog found out the falshoode thereof, and made all Athens
privy of the thieves by reueng and running toward them. We read in Plini
that Ulysses Dog which Ulysses left at home when he went with Agamemnon unto
Phrigia to the wars of Troy, and being twenty years absent, he found
Penelope his wife, Durides.
and his dog faithful and loving at his return. That noble Greek Lismacus
had a dog named Durides, that loved him so well, that even at Lismachus death,
the Dog died also. Hiero had another Dog that died even so, ran willingly
unto that flame of fire where his master did burn, to die with him. I might
well speak of Alcibiades Dog, which where so ever he came, no man might or
durst speak any evil of Alcibiades in presence of his Dog. Titus Sabinus
Dog never forsook his master in prison, and when any man gave him bread
or meat, he brought it unto his Master in prison, and when he was thrown
into the river Tiber, the Dog was seen as Fulgotius says, to do what he
could to lift up his masters head out of the water, thinking his master had
been alive. At what time Pirrhus subdued the City of Argos, there was in that
wars an Elep^ant which after he perceived that his Master was slain, went
up and down amongst the dead soldiers to seek his Master: which being
found dead, the Elephant brought his body being dead to a safe place, where
the Elephant after much mourning died for sorrow. The like Examples we read in
Plini of horses, and specially of three, the one Alexander the great King of
Macedonia had: Alexanders horse. Caesar's horse. Antiochus horse.
the second Julius Caesar Emperor of Rome had: the third Antiochus king of
Siria had: These three noble Horses suffered no man to ride or touch them, but
their own masters, and so gentle unto them, that they kneled to let them
mount on their backs. Thus beasts bear fancy unto men, obey and love men,
most true and trusty unto men, and such love as neither Seleucus to his son
Antigonus, or Pericles to his son Parialus, nor in Socrates to his son
Lamproces did never show. Romulus.
How gentle was a Woolfe unto king Romulus, to nourish him in spite of his
Grandefather Amulius? How loving was a Bear unto Alexander, to bring him up
against his fathers will King Priamus? How kind was a Bitch unto King Cirus,
Cirus.
to foster him unawares unto his Grandefather king Astiages? The Bees came unto
Plato his Cradle to feed him with honye being an infant. The little Antes
brought greynes to feed king Mydas being likewise in his Cradle. O what is man
said the Prophet David that thou art so mindful of him, that thou have
brought all things in subjection unto him, beasts of the field, fowls of
the air, and fishes of the Seas, all things made to fear and to love him,
and yet he neither to fear God nor to love himself. We read in Q. Curtius
of an Elephant that King Porus of India had, Porus.
which Alexander the great took captive afterward, when this Elephant saw the
King first, he kneeled down and showed such honor and homage as was
marvelous to the beholders. It is read in Caelius of a king in Egypt named
Merthes, Merthes.
that had a Crow taught to carry his letters any where that ye king would
command her, she knew where to fly, and to whom she was sent, how to
deliver the letters, and how to bring answer in writing whom again. Lib.
10. Cap. 29.
Plini does write that a Nightinggale loved Stesicorus so well, that it would
always sing at the beck of Stesicorus to pleasure him. Stesicorus.
Heraclides the Philosopher had a Dragon taught to follow him every where.
Ajax likewise had in Locresia a Serpent taught and brought up to honor him as
his master. Agrippina the Empress and wife unto Claudian, had a Thrush that
never departed from her during the Empress life. Plini has in his book of
natural histories infinite such example to prove the love that all moving
creatures do owe and show unto man: as the wild Bull in Tarentum, the raging
Bear in Daunia, which Pithagoras so tamed, that all places, al countries, and
al persons were sure and safe from any damage or hurt by these wild beasts.
This comes by no virtue that is in man, but only by that which god made for
man, that all living creatures fear man and love man: So that if comparisons
be made, it shall be evident that there has been more love in beasts
toward man, than in man toward man: yea then brother unto brother, than the
husband to the wife, or the wife toward her husband, considering the nature
of man and beast together.

Certain ethical Arithmologies drawn out of divine and profane auctorities.
AMongst other examples of man's life, I thought it chiefly necessary to note
few Arithmologies which Solomon the wise, and Ihesus the son of Syrach with
other learned writers, have amongst their chief writings noted: And because
they are divided innumbers, for the ease of memory, and for the delectation of
mind, the rather worthy they are of the reading, very pleasant and very
necessary unto any godly, wise, and discreet man to be marked: and first from
the wise sayings of Solomon, these examples are to be read as follows.

There are six things which God hates, and the seventh he utterly abhors:
Lusting eyes, a deceitful tongue, hands embrewed with blood, feet swift to
commit evil, a heart that imagines wickedness, false witness, and he that
s^weth debate amongst brethren.

There are also three things never satisfied, and the fourth never says ho: A
woman that is intemperate, the earth that is dry, hell is never satisfied, and
the fire has never Wood enough.

There be likewise three things that may not be known, and the fourth no
man is able to understand: The steps of an Eagle fleeyng in the air, the
way of a Serpent over a rock, the path of a Ship in the Sea, and the life of a
young man in his youth.

For three things the earth is often plagued, and the fourth is intolerable:
When a servant is made lord over his Masters substance, when a fool is
pampered with all kind of meats, when a woman is addicted to filthy lust, and
when a handmayde is made heir unto her Maistresse.

Three things pleases both God and man: Concord between brethren, amity
between neighbors, and a man and his wife that agrees well together.

Three things again clean contrary displeases both God and man: A poor man
proud, a rich man a liar, and an old man that doteth in his latter years.

Two things says Syrach troubles my mind, and the third makes me angry:
When wisemen are despised, when expert soldiers are in poverty, when a man
declineth from virtue unto vice: And thus far of Salamon and Sirach. Now to
pass orderly unto profane auctorities where the like sentences are noted.

Three things can never want due commendations: Good wine when it is drunk, a
wise sentence when it is spoken, and a good man in adversities.

Two things can suffer no equality: Love, and principality.

It is hurtful to make haste unto four places: Unto a fray, unto a drunken
company, unto a feast unbidden, and unto talk with a fool.

Four things hurt much the sight of man: Tears, smoke, wind: and the worst
of all, to see his friends unlucky, and his foes happy.

Take heed that thou move nor stir these that follow: A murderer, a hasty
tongued man, a woman that is willing to play the drab, and a horse that runs
mainly in a dangerous place.

Trust not to much five things, lest thou be deceived: A strange Dog, an
unknown horse, a talkatiue woman, a bragging servant, and a holow banck.

Be not angry in no wise with three things: With the truth, with good
counsel, and with crowing of the Cock in the morning to stir thee from too
much sleep.

There are amongst men three kind of men very grievous: He that is arrogant in
drink, an idle ietter in the streets, an unlearned poor man made rich upon
a soddayne.

Three kind of things shall never enjoy the fruits of their trauayles: Seed
sown upon the Sea bancks, he that does good unto evil men, and he that
judges that he serves God well, when afflictions and calamities constrayneth
him so to do.

Again, three sorts of men do always want wit and are quite void of reason:
He that trusts lies, he that can not convince his wrath, and he that eats
much and does nothing.

These three kind of men see nothing: The blind without eyes, the fool
without discretion, and he that is delighted with worldly pleasure, without
fear of death.

And three kinds of men that be deaffe and hear nothing: The first is he that
daily hears godly sayings, and mendeth not, the second is he that is given to
filthy talk, and to hear slander, the third is he that is desirous to hear
the secrets of all men: Th^se men though they hear, yet are deaffe for that
they hear not good things.

There be four such slippery ways that no man can stand on but always fall:
The first upon moysty places, the second upon slippery Ise, the third upon
glory and ambition, and the fourth upon the beauty of a woman.

There be six things that will never hide them selves: A scab in the hand, a
cough in a feast, an awle in a bag, a strumpet in a window, poverty in pride,
and wantounesse in lust.

There is no society between five things: Between the Woolfe and the Lamb,
between light and darkness, between life and death, between godliness and
wickedness, between a freende and a flatterer.

Three things to no effect: To hold water in a Sieue, to run after fowls
of the air, and to weep after the death of any man.

A man ought not to brag of three things: Of good Wine, lest any man be
allured thereby to ask^ of it, of the beauty of his wife lest men burn in
desire toward the same, of his wealth and substance, lest thieves will spoil
the same.

The two greatest victoryes, is to overcome a good man in good deeds, and to
overcome him self in evil motions.

Keep thy ears from other men's secrets, thy eyes from other men's writings,
and thy hands from other men's purses.

Six things are always mutable: The favor of Princes, the love of a woman,
the chance of Dice, hunting of Fowls, Time, and the spring of Flowers. Four
necessary things in a house: A Chimney, a Hen, a Cat, and a good wife.

These five things are rare seen: A fair young woman without lovers, a young
man without mirth, an old usurer without money, a great Faer without thieves,
and a fat Barn without Mise.

Thou shall never find truth in an hypocrite, faith in a flatterer, sobriety
in a drunkarde, virtue in the slothful, nor money with the prodigal.

Truth is often uttered by five kind of persons, by a child, by a fool, by a
dronkard, by a slaunderer, and by him that sleeps.

There be.iij. kinds of freendship: The one amongst philosophers and learned
men by knowledge, the other amongst common men by mutual society and help, the
third amongst beasts by pleasure and copulation.

The misery of men are known and seen by four means: By death, by vexation
of mind, by grief of body, and by wrong judgment.

I will not molest the reader with many of these, which are as it were in
repeating all that might here be spoken: to count the waves of the Seas, to sow
seed in the Sea, to speak unto the deaffe, I thought thus much to write ^o
solace the reader with brief sentences.

Examples of justice.
A Skillful Painter beholding an exceeding fair Image wanting only eyes and
hands, thought to show his cunning therein, and taking his pencell in hand to
paint hands and eyes correspondent unto the other members: An other perceiving
the Painter to go about to make up that which wanted, said these words: Si
manus affuerit latro, si lumina scortum, fiet si neutrum virgo premis erit. If
you make hands he will be a thief, if you make eyes he will be an adulterer,
having neither eyes nor hands, no offenses are committed.

A Thief bound himself apprentice with the Devil upon condition that in
necessity and great danger he should help him and aid him. The thief
being taken and brought before the Judge, was condemned to die, did often call
for the Devil to help him according unto his promise: to whom the Devil at
length appeared, and gave him a great mass or wedge of gold, saying: Give
this to the Judge, and desire him to show thee friendeshippe accordingly: The
thief being glad hereof, thought it long ear he could priuilye speak with
the Judge, to whom secretly he delivered this wedge of gold, saying: I pray
you show me such favor as this gift deserves, supposing it to be the wedge of
gold: the Judge privily loking what the thief gave him in his hand,
perceiving a halter to be there, the judge turning him a side unto the thief
and said: forsooth it shall be done without tarying, and commanded straight
with that haulter which the thief gave him, to hang him.

THe Emperor Trayan with his army passing unto wars, a poor Widdowe
meeting him in the way, ^rauing justice at his hand, for that his son did
hurt her son, that he was not able to do his mother service as before, to whom
the Emperor said: that at his return from wars she should have justice, but
the widdowe replied and said: what and if you never return from wars, shall I
never have justice? the Emperor said: my successor shall use justice to you,
the Widdowe answered: there is no man in my debt but the Emperor Trayan,
which if he go to wars without doing of Justice before with me and with
all men, he sins much against heaven and earth, which words caused the
Emperor to give his own son to serve the Widdowe in lewe of the others
service.

Examples of Usury.
A Certain Usurer hearing a Preacher in his sermon say, that the Devil will
carry all Uusrers upon his bark to hell, departed out of the church
disdainefully, and met one of his own friends in the streate, to whom he
told what the preacher said in Pulpet of Usurers: yea, said his friend come
back with me again unto the Church, and I will make him recant of his
saying: when they both came unto the Church, this man demanded of the preacher
whether he spoke such words of Usurers, that the Devil would ^arie them all
upon his back unto hell, the Preacher confessed and said: yea, that is a lie
said he, the Devil will not do them such reverence to bear Usurers on his
back, but he will hale and lugge them in chains after him like slaves unto
hell.

AN other Usurer being dead, no man would bear his corpse to be buried by the
law of that City but such as were of his own faculty, all the just and good
men of the City could not heave up the coffin, at length came four of his
own science (I mean Usurers) and easily took up the Coffin and bare it, to
whom one of the City said: Behold four Devils can carry the fifth easily,
and being brought to church, the Priest knowing his lewd life and wickedness,
said that he should not be buried in the Church, for that the Church is the
house of God, and not a grave for wicked men, his friends carried him unto the
^ye way, thinking to make his grave there, there the Kings officers withstoode
that, and said: that the Kings hie way was not meet to bury any man. In
striving between them selves the Devil appeared and said: If they would
give leave he would bear him unto a meet place, they being well contented
therewith, the Devil took him out of sight, and buried him where he uses to
bury in his chief Chapel in hell.

AN Usurer dying in such a country as was not lawful to bury any man
without some commendations of his life, being a long time stayed without
burial, for that no man knew how to praise him: A Harbor at length said:
surely I praise this man for one thing, I never saw softer hears to shave then
this man was wont to have, by this commendation of the Harbor, he was buried,
having according unto the custom that Epitaph upon his grave.

Examples of honor.
SInce money said Seneca possessed the seat of honor, true honor was
banished. A certain King being envied of his nobles, because he much esteemed
poor men, therefore willing to show his nobles and counselors the difference
between one man and another, caused two Coffers to be made in one place, in
the one he did put great substance and wealth, and covered the same with a
simple or ragged cover: in the other he put nothing in, but covered it with
cloth of gold and precious vesture, called his counselors and nobles before
him, demanded of them which was the better Coffer: they iudgyng the brave and
gorgeous Coffer much to excel the other, the King laughing at their folly,
opened both the Coffers, and said: Behold how much you esteem the outward
man, and how little you regard the inward virtues.

AMongst the Romans was cert^n discord or variaunce between two families:
the one called Columnenses, the other named Vrsini. The common people
understanding the family of Columnenses to be of greater honor and of more
power and wealth than Vrsini were, cried out with the stronger part (as they
had thought) with these sayings: Viuant Columnenses, and moriantur Vrsini. But
being convicted by the simpler sort, by the family of Vrsini, and thrown unto
subjection. The next field the people cried clean contrary to their first
cry, saying: Viuant Vrsini, and moriantur Columnenses. But then according unto
fortunes custom, the victors before, were vanquished then: which when the
people saw, in the third cumbat, fraryng the slippery state of honor, cried
out, Viuant qui vincant. naming neither of the families, but where it would
happen honor and victory, there to extell and commend. Even like the Lion
when he waxes old, he is of all beasts that honored him before, despised
and hated: And when he is in force and strength, he is feared and obeyed of
all other beasts.

Examples of envy.
TWo servants in service with one man, having obtained of their master that
whatsoever they would ask, they should have it, upon condition that what the
first demanded, that should be double unto the last: These servants being
fellows, the one being covetous would not ask first, for that the other
should have twice as much, the other being envious, wylled for very envy unto
his fellow that one of his eyes should be pulled out, that both his fellows
eyes might be put out also according unto promise made: And thus the master
knowing the natures of covetousness and envy, like a wise Philosopher promised
that liberally in word, which he knew should not be hurtful or chargeable in
deed.

A Poor man after the like sort willing to bear certain fruits unto Frederick
the Emperor, that the Emperor was wont to love well. The Porter being
covetous, said unto the poor man that he would not suffer him to come within
the gates, without he would promise him half the gain that the Emperor
would give him: the poor man being urged to demand some benifits for his good
will of the Emperor, understanding that half the gain, must be given according
unto his promise unto the Porter, for very envy asked in a gift of the
Emperor a hundred stripes, that the Porter being so covetous should receive
the half hundred: the Emperor Frederick knowing well the matter, made the
Porter to be well laid on for his covetousness, and the man that brought the
fruits, for his envy somewhat gently to be handled.

ANother example how two fellows serving one man, one of them being envious
unto ye other for that his master made much of him, persuaded with his fellow
that his breath did stincke, and that his master might not abide the smell
thereof: the young man being loath to displease his Lord at any time, when he
gave his master his cup to drink, did turn away his face least his breath
should annoy his Master, and told his Master likewise, that no man could
abide his fellows breath, and that he willed his Master to mark him when he
reaches him the cup, how he turned his face away: his master the next
time, understanding how he turned his face a side when he gave him drink,
consulted with his other servant what he should do: he being full of envy
toward his fellow, councelled his Master to send him upon some message unto
certain Colliers in the wood, which burned wood to make coals, sending word
unto them, that the first man that should come unto them the next, they should
throw him into the fire: this man caused his Master to call his fellow very
early to go to the wood: and being sent, having occasion to stay in a
certain Church by the way all service time, the envious Servant came after
very glad of the chance, thinking his fellow had been gone a long time
before, and that he was thrown into the fire as his master willed, came
first him self unto the place where he himself tasted of that sauce which he
had provided for his fellow.

Examples of covetousness.
A Rich man very penciue and sad, taking thought who should possess his
wealth after his death, being a very covetous man, hard a voice saying: thy
goods shall Troilardus the Kitchen Boy have, and also thy wife, and so clean
contrary unto covetous expectation things happen: as one, a covetous man did
hide in a Church a great pot, besought God always in his prayers that he
should not die before he had filde that pot with money, which prayer obtained,
he dyed, leaving the pot full of money behind him. An other marying his
wife, and finding by chance this money which his predicessor had hid, made
his prayer unto God that he might never die before he had spent all that
money which he found. The Covetous gathers not for him self, but for an
other, which he knows not.

A Covetous man musing and studying always how he might live, being
constrained to move from one bed unto another, for pain and toil he took
in mind, his wife demanding the cause of his restless state, to whom he
said: Wife, I study how I may end this year, and I see that I have
sufficient for all the year saving for one day, and for that day only I
vex and molest my self to know how I may discharge that day: his wife
comforted him with all means she could, but he could not be at rest: At
length he found this slight, calling his wife up unto him, privily said:
what I have determined to do thou shall understand wife, that day which I
have told you of, I will take upon me to die, that thereby with weeping and
sadness without meat and drink we will escape the charges thereof, which
being done of his wife and laid under the Table, the servants and the
family coming fro the field, astonished at the sudden chance saying their
Pater noster; after long sadness, at length called for meat (the wife weeping
answered them) that they should mourn that day for their master, but
hungry servants greedy of vittayles, would needs have meat, the man
heauing his head up, and putting by the Carpet to see whether they were at
meat, one of the servants espied him, and supposing him to be the Devil,
that was with his Masters corpse, he took a great staff and brainde his
Master in steed of the Devil: the good wife cried and said, that he had
killed her husband, he denied and said it was the devil: The matter being
brought before the Judge, who understanding the life of that covetous man, was
persuaded that the Devil watched with the body, and that the good wife was
deceived.

ANother being sick of the palsy and like to die, was admonished of his
kinsmen and friends to receive the sacrament, and to think of his soul, the
sick man being so weak, could not speak nor make no signs unto his
friends for all that they could do. At length one of the house which well knew
his nature, said: that if any life were in him, he would make him either
speak or give signs, took the Keye from his beds head, and went about to
open his Coffer which stood at his beds foot full of money, the covetous
sick man with head, feet, and with all his body made tokens and signs that
his soul was there, and that if his money should be taken away, he should
presently dye.

THe like examples of another covetous man, which when the priest according
unto the custom in those days, would anoint him being sick and like to
dye, he perceiving scant that he was touched for his imbecilitie and
weakness, his mind more occupied on his purse then on his sickness, was
wont to say feeling the Priests hand: Who touches my purse?

ANother great Prince was so covetous that being besieged in a certain City
called Baldac, of a strong King having money sufficient, wealth and substance
abundant within the City, for very desire he had to keep the money, he lost
the City, and being taken captive was demanded of the King why he suffered his
city to be subdued, his soldiers slain, and himself to be taken, having so
much wealth within the City as might defend the City, save the men, and
keep himself from Captivity: he being not able to answer the cause, held
his peace. The King perceiving his covetous mind to be the cause of all
destruction, said: Come tell me where thy money is, and being brought to a
huge tower, where he carried his money to save, showed the King where the money
was. The King took the keye, and locked him fast with his money in the hie
Tower, saying: I will never do thee that injury to take thee away from that
which thou love better than thy life, commanding no man upon pain of death
to bear him either meat or drink, and so most wretchedly suffered him to die
for hunger, having gold and silver enough lying by him.

Examples of hearing.
VAlerius recites a History of a certain young man of Athens named Polemus,
given much to ^anqueting and drinking, being allured unto all pleasures, having
his felicity in eating and drinking, and fine clothing, coming unto the
school of Anaxagoras being so well charged with Wine, and so brave in
apparel, that the scholars of Anaxagoras stomaked him for his drunkenness to
come there: but Anaxagoras perceiving the case of Polemus, left to speak of
that which he then had in hand, and turned his talk to speak of that
temperancie and sobriety, which when Polemus heard so learnedly and
skilfullye, he threw down his Garlande from his head, he changed his
countenance, wayled his former life, and from that time forewarde Polemus
lived honestly.

Ulysses willing to avoid the sweet songs of flattering Cirses, fearing lest
the like should happen unto him as it did unto diverse others, stopped his ears
and his servants with wax, and so avoided the danger thereof: So to hear
good and wholesome things with Polemus, it is fruitful, and to hear flattery
let all men stop their ears with Ulysses.

Examples of discord.
IN a certain I Will there dwelt some Hermettes, which for discord and inward
contention, the Mise of the I Will consumed their victualles, that they were
enforced to make agreement of them selves: in so much Apollonius willing to
travel in making some friends that were foes, one of the parties said that
he had rather die, than to be made friends: Well said Apollonius, and die
thou shall, and thy grave shall be the bellies of wild beasts, and flying
fowls, and even that night he died suddenly, and was devoured of beasts, as
Apollonius said, for his Tigrishe and cruel mind.

Examples of friendship.
THere were two friends, the one an Egyptian, the other a Citizen of Baldac:
this Egyptian making much of his friend, and so well loved him, that nothing
which he had, wanted him. By fortune this Egiptian waxed poor, and so needy
that he was enforced to come unto the City Baldac to know what his friend
would do for him, and being ashamed of his poor estate, watching a
convenient time to present him unto his friend, went all night unto a Barn to
sleep, that night a murder was committed, and a man slain, and carried by
chance into the Barn, where being found in the morning, this poor Egyptian
was accused before the Judges that he murdered the man, and being judged to
die, his friend being on the bench, calling to mind that it was he that made
much of him in Egypt, forthwith rose and said: that it was not that man that
slew the man, but even he himself: The other denayed, affirming that he was
justly condemned, and that he only ought to die: They both striving which of
them should die: the murderer in deed being in place, seeing the perfect
amity of these two young men, merueyling much thereat, was compelled of love
to confess the murder, and that he kilde the man. The Judges musing much at
the amity of these men, pardoned them all three.

A Young man passing through wilderness where wild beasts were, hired a
skillful fellow which promised such amity that he would bring him safe and
sound without peril of limb and life: being in the midst of the wood, a
Bear came toward them, the fellow that professed him friendeshippe, took his
feet and ran and climmed up to the top of a hye tree. The stranger
perceiving that his friend was fled, and that he himself as not able to
escape, fell down unto the ground upon his bellye: for it is said that the
Lion or the Bear will spare their yielded prays, and specially the Bear, if
a man hold his breath as though he were dead. This man taking upon him to die,
the Bear felt and smelt about his mouth and his ears, whether any breath were
in him or no, perceiving at last that he was dead, the Bear went away: The
other that was in the top of the tree asked him when he came, what did the
Bear speak unto him in his ear when he came unto him: Marie said he that I
should not trust such a Knave as thou art to go with in company where
dangers were.

Examples of flattery.
KIng Zerxes marching toward the Greeks with a huge army of soldiers, called
his counselors unto him, demanded of them what was cheefely to be feared in
that journey, one of them said: I fear most of all that when the Greeks do
hear of your power, force and magnanimity, that they will flee and not abide
your band. The second said, that ho doubted most that all Greece was not
able to lodge them or to receive them unto their Cities. The third said,
that he feared most the Ocian seas, was not enough for his nauies to pass
over. The fourth feared that the air had not rome enough for their arrows
that they would shoot off. The King being puffed up with pride, hearing his
councellers pleasing him so well: demanded at last of a certain Philosopher
named Damaserus which he carried with him, what he doubted most in that wars: I
fear chiefly said the Philosopher, lest you be shamfully deceived by these
filthy flatterers.

Examples of gluttony.
KIng Cirus going unto Scithia where Queen T^myris reigned, understanding the
poverty of that Country, and the beggerie to be such, that he caused all his
soldiers to flee from their tents, leaving their meat and victualles
behind them, unto the Scithians, which for greediness more unto the meat,
then desirous to pursue King Cirus, applied their bellies so much, that Cirus
being in ambushement for the nonce, knowing how well that it should come to
pass, came upon them sodainelye as they were eating and drinking, and slew
and murdered them like Dogs.

Exampels of rape and spoil.
DIonides a Pirate upon the Sea, being taken by Alexander the great, and asked
of the same why he robbed upon the Seas, answered in this sort: why robbest
thou upon the lands? I, because I am a young Pirate upon the Seas, am called a
thief: and thou which dooest rob land and seas, art called a king and a
Conqueror. I steal a little in the night time, thou spoylst all things in the
night and day time: I am enforced to steal to live, and thou do willingly
steal to destroy: Dionides cannot have worse fortune, nor Alexander cannot
have better, for that I hope daily better and better, and thou have need to
fear worse and worse.

A Certain poor woman came unto a covetous Judge to demand justice at his
hand, complaining a long time very pitteously, at length the Judge said that
he was deaffe, the poor woman having a supplication made, the next time came
again to tender the same unto the Judge, unto whom the Judge said I am
blind: the woman perceiving his mind, came the third time, and brought
twenty Florentine Counters in her hand, saying softly: My Lord said she,
I pray you show me favor, here is twenty Crowns for you to by a saddle:
The Judge as soft as she said it, heard her, and stretching forth his hand
received the Counters, which as soon as he saw, he said, that they were no
gold but Counters: My Lord said the woman, now I know well that there is
great virtue in Gold, that can make deaffe Judges to hear, and blind Judges
to see.

A Bishop passing through a great City* a poor man begged one penny of him
for Gods sake, which he could not obtain, the poor man perceiving that he
could have never a penny at the Bishops hand, desired the Bishop to
bless him: The Bishop straight up with his hand and blessed him. A woman
seeing how frank the Bishop was of his blessing, and how hard he was of a
penny, said merrily: Alas poor man said she, if his blessing had been
worth a penny thou had not had it, but because it was nothing worth thou
have it.

Examples of mercy.
TIgranes King of Armenia, being vanquished and taken by Pompeius the great,
when that he came in place before Pompeius, he threw down his Crown unto
the ground, and kneeled at Pompeius feet, saying: Mercy I crave, straight
Pompeius took him up by the hand, and put his Crown on his head, and said:
I take it more honorable to make a King, than to destroy a King.

Examples of Love.
A Poor scholar begging his dombe at a Noble woman's gate, besought the Porter
for the love of God a piece of meat. The Porter having showed unto his Lady
that a poor scholar was at the gate begging some meat for Gods sake: The
Lady said he should have nothing there for his sake: The scholar then desired
for our Lords sake some meat, he was again denied: The third time he
prayed to have some meat for his own sake: The Lady then commanded her
Porter to bring the Scholar unto her chamber, which when she perceived him to
be ragged, and not seen of her before, she asked him why he was so boulde to
ask meat at her gate for his own sake which was not known of no man:
because said the scholar you have denied me for Gods sake, being the Creator
of all things, I thought to ask for mine own sake, being the simplest wretch
of all men.

A Young Uirgin refused to have a welthie husband which her parents had
ordained her, being demanded the cause why she so young a maid denies to
lead her life in marriage, said: when I am married, my husband, and my children
will claim that love at my hand then, which now God only has at my hand,
and therefore I will not mary. Surely in my opinion, that was perfect love to
the Creator, above any creature.

Examples of death.
IT is written in the lives of the fathers, that a young man serving an Hermet,
being sent of his master unto a village hard by, where a certain great Usurer
and a vicious man being dead, was carried honorably and buried with solempnitie,
with the Bishop of that Diocese, which when the boy saw, he wept out that so
evil a man, and so wicked an Usurer should have such solemn burial: and
returning whom, he found his master devoured of a Lion, which so moved him
almost to be beside him self, saying: The wicked Usurer dies with great
honor, and is buried with great pomp, that lived all the days of his life in
sin and wickedness. My master being fifty years in the wilderness an
Hermet, is eaten up and devoured of a Lion, which studied and traueyled to
fight with sin, and with the devil. An angel appeared unto the boy, saying:
The devil can no more hurt thy master, for he has done his worst, and now
thy master has conquered the devil. The devil spared the Usurer in his life
time, that he might possess him after his death.

SOcrates therefore dying, heeing constrained for that he refused their gods
(and said that he would rather worship a Dog than the gods of Athens) and to
drink his last draught, perceiving that his wife wept, demanded the cause of
her weeping, his wife answered and said: the innocence of Socrates death is
the cause of my weeping: Nay rather said Socrates laugh and rejoice at that,
and weep at him that deserved death. The like examples have we of King
Antigonus and Anaxagoras the Philosopher, hearing both that their sons dyed
in the wars, the one said, I know I had my son borne to die: the other
without vexation or change of countenance, made him be buried out of hand,
saying: It is no strange thing to hear of death, as well unto Princes, as unto
poor men happened.

A Great King being admonished by his Physicians of death, began to lament much
his state, saying: Alas Myser that I am, how many princelye Palaces, regal
Courts: how many Kingdoms and countries must I depart from? and go unto
those quarters I know not where? How many Princes could I command to come
with me any where? How many Noble men might I cause to go before to provide
my places and seats? and now not one poor man in all the world will bear
me company to my grave, saying thou world enemy of my soul.

THE DEATHS OF CERTAIN Noble Princes in english verse.
Alexander the great his death.
WHat sound assurance is of man?
what certain lotte of life?
When Atrop cuts which Lachese spinnes,
with cruel cursed knife.
He yesterday renowned Prince,
and King of Kings so brave:
To day in mouldred mossie mire,
laid in his fatal grave.
Yesterdaye the son of Jove,
might all command at will:
To day starcke naked in the earth,
with worms his belly full.
Julius Caesar's death.
I Long that ruled Rome at will,
in midst of Rome am spilde:
And in the Senate house amongst
the Senators I am kilde.
Who Countries, Kingdoms, Castles strong,
who Europe all did quell:
To Brutus hand, and Cassius snares,
unawares I Caesar fell.
With Bodkins, Daggers, Swords and Staves.
I Caesar there was slain:
Of fostered foes which friendeshippe fainde,
as Abel was of Cain.
Cirus King of Persea his death.
WHat Kesar, King, or Prince thou art,
that passes here this way:
Suffer Cirus seven foot,
to rest his Corpse in clay.
Whose greedy mind and raging race,
whose fortune frowning wild:
That Cirus should be in Scithia slain,
by Tomyris, Queen in field.
Whose head was off and bathed in blood,
to whom the Queen spoke first:
Drink cruel Cirus blood enough,
that long for blood did thirst.
Agamemnon his death.
Whom ten years wars in Phrigian fields,
nor Troyans force subdue:
Who me wind, nor Seas, nor tempest hurt,
this Clitemnestra slew.
This famous Prince and Captain graunde,
of all the Geekes in field:
Whom fame in Phrigia so advanced,
his only spouse him kilde.
Thus fortune friendly flowed fast,
and favored fame to sound:
Till frowning fortune foylde the state,
which fawning fortune found.
King Pirrhus his death.
HEre Pirrhus Prince of Epire lies,
whose force Tarentum knew:
At Argos was by a woman slain,
with a Tilestoone that she threw*
Whom thousand Princes could not hurt,
nor Romans all annoy:
Whom shot of Gunnes ne dreadful dart,
might Pirrhus Prince destroy.
This second soldier counted was,
to Alexander King:
A sielie Argiue woman lo,
to grave did Pirrhus bring.
Hanibal his death.
THe fostered fame the glory great,
that was in Carthage coast:
The honor long that Lybia had,
again in time was lost.
He that was the scurge of Rome,
and Romans often offend:
He that saved his native zoile,
and Carthage did defend.
The same at last to Siria fled,
to crave Antiochus aid:
Unto Bithinia thence he went,
to Prusias King dismayde.
And there to void Flaminius force,
he poison drank did die;
Thus hauty Hanibal ended life,
and there his bones do lie.
Pompeius death.
POmpeius fleeing Pharsalia fields,
from Caesar, life to save:
Whom then Photinus feigned friend,
to Egypt soil did laue.
And there by slaightes of faythlesse frindes,
for gold and silver lo:
Pompeius head was sent to Rome,
to Caesar for to shoe.
His body left unburied lies,
in Egypt slimy sands:
Who sometime King of Pontus pressed,
and all Armenia lands.
Cicero his death.
Whom Cicero saved off from death,
the same did Cicero kill:
Pompilius proud to please the rage,
of Mar. Antonius will.
Whose head was set in sight to see,
Antonius mind to please:
Whose tongue did Fuluia prick with pinnes,
Her stony heart to ease.
Who when he was for Clodius sake,
exiled Rome to raunge:
Twenty thousand Romans mournde,
in mourning weeds the change.
He three times Consul was in Rome,
now in Caieta slain:
Whose noble name and lasting fame,
shall still on earth remain.
Demosthenes death.
THe sugared sap the solace long,
the guide of Athens then:
That stout withstoode king Philips force,
in spite of Philips men.
Of whom king Philip in his wars,
was forcde to say at length:
He feared more Demosthenes tongue,
then all the Athinians strength:
Such is the end of mortal wightes,
such is the misery of men:
That how to die, the time the place,
he knows not where nor when.
Achilles his death.
THe hope of Greece, and countries care,
Achilles strong of force:
Like stout Alcides fought on foot,
like Mars himself on horse.
But last that ruled Gods sometimes,
did then Achilles move:
To walk to Troy to feed desire,
for Priamus daughters love.
Who by a Dart that Paris driude,
Achilles had his end:
Whose worthy acts and marshall feats,
in Homer well is pende.
Hectors death.
HEctor stout whose strokes full stern,
the Greeks did girde so grim:
And foiled foes in Phrigian fields,
death happened thus to him.
In spoiling of Patroclus king,
Achilles faithful friend:
Came strong Achilles to the place,
to see Patroclus end.
Then Hectors harness quite was of,
supposing none so nie:
When great Achilles watched in place,
in Hectors face to fly.
And with his spear he thrust him through,
from Hectors side to side:
Thus famous man and Phrigian Prince,
thus Troyan Hector died.
Thimistocles death.
THat noble Greek Themistocles,
by Artaxerxes forcde:
To fight against his native soil,
in harness brave was horsde.
But mark a valiant mind,
behold a famous deed:
To hurt his soil this noble Greek,
did feel his heart to bleed.
To void this wrath of Perseans Prince,
he blood with poison drank:
And so to die, that so did live,
he gladly God did thank.
Marcellus death.
MArcellus in his glory great,
triumphant Uictor often:
The Spur of Rome, and Roman guide,
in state advanced loft.
Who by the Senate sage was sent,
to Massinissa King:
And charged that from Africa fields,
an answer he should bring.
On surging Seas, of wambling waves,
unto his business bent.
Dame Fortune does with flattering feats
such lofty mates prevent.
Nero his death.
IN lust who leads life,
with Tyrant Nero here:
Must with Nero end his life,
as did in Rome appear.
Who slew his Master Seneca,
who did his mother kill:
Who spoiled all, who spared none,
who last him self did spill.
Whose death as joyful was to Rome,
as Rome his life detest.
That into Tiber he being dead,
the Romans threw this beast.
Hercules death.
WHich Dragons, Lions, Tigers wild,
which beasts so fierce did tame:
Which Castles, Countries, Towns, and Towers,
lo death subdued the same.
What Hercules had at Nessus hand,
the same with flames did fry:
Wherein that offspring great of Gods,
and impe of Jove did die.
Herod's death.
WHen Herod reigned in Judah King,
his loathsome life to led:
On sucking babes and infantes blood,
this cruel tyrant fed.
To seek our Savior Christ he kilde,
the babes of Judah land:
And thought our God could not escape
his fomie blodie hand.
Of Worms this Herod was deuourde,
of vermin lo and mise:
His bones, his flesh, was all consumde,
and eaten up of Life.
Seleucus king of Siria his death.
SEleucus King of Siria lo,
Antiochus son the great:
To whom in midst of joyful state,
did fortune use this feate.
That mounted high on stately steed,
with princely port to ride:
From pomp, from pride, from horse he fell,
and there Seleucus died.
That erst in Siria had such fame,
and lived long in mirth:
With crawling creeping worms he lies,
starcke naked in the earth.
Traians death.
WHen twenty years had Traian rainde
in Roman Empire lo:
In City called Seleucia died,
from Persea coming fro.
Whose noble days and happy years,
while yet in Rome he dwelt:
Both Rome and Romans then reioycde,
no grief in Rome was felt.
He rightly ruled Rome by law,
he Roman safegarde sought:
To punish vice and hate each sin,
Plutarchus him has taught.
King Anceus death.
WHo thinks to joy shall hap to woe,
who thinks to live shall die:
Who thinks to speed shall often miss,
thus fortune friends does try.
As Anceus King of Samos sought,
to slay a savage Bore:
Was by the Bore he thought to kill,
constraynde to die before.
Heliogabalus Emperor of Rome his death.
Behold another Gorgon grim,
a monster Cyclop lo:
Whose loathsome life and wicked ways,
all Rome did fear I know.
The sincke of sin, the shape of shame,
the beast of Rome was calde:
The cruelst scourge, the sorest plague,
that ever Rome have stalde.
This monster murdered in a iakes,
and halde through Rome in steetes:
And after thrown to Tibers streams,
shut in his shrowding sheets.
FINIS.
Of Memory, and Oblivion.
SOme hold that opinion, that in the ancient time whiles yet the world
flourished not in learning, that memory then was most set by and esteamed,
for what so ever was seen or heard, was then committed unto Memory, and not
recorded in books, which Socrates said, after the use of letters were had
the virtue of Memory decayed, for the care which then was in heart and
memory; with fear and diligence to observe, is of all now put in books, that
now our memory is put in writing, and then was it fixed in mind, Themistocles.
in so much that noble Athenian Themistocles passing by Simonides school,
Simonides.
who as some suppose taught first the art of Memory, being demanded,
whether he would learn the art and faculty of Memory answered, that he had
rather learn how to forgette things, then to keep things in Memory, for I
can not, said he, forgette what I would, and I have things in Memory, which
feign I would they were out of Memory. Seneca*
Seneca does so report of himself, that he was of such perfect Memory, that
he could rehearse after one, by hearing two hundred verses: yea, a greater
marvel of Memory, he could recite two thousand names of men, being
repeated once before him, with as good a Memory, as he that first named them.
The like we read of Aelius Adrianus a capitain, Aeli^s*
that having a great army under him of soldiers, if any were absent in any
place about any business, he had in Memory the name of the person, the name
of the place, and the cause of his business. Of this excellent Memory, to
their perpetual fame was king Cirus and Scipio, Ci^us. Scipio.
the one a Persian, the other a Romain, which had this fame by Memory: that
either of them could severally call their soldiers by name, every one after
an other, which is most rare, yea, most maruailous, having so many always
under them, as both Rome and Persia were chiefly in their days by them
defended, to be able to name so many soldiers, as either of them both had in
army. Their Memory was such th^n, that they may not be forgotten now:
Caesar.
Julius Caesar was as much renowned, for that Pliny reported, that he could
do such things by Memory, as in readyng, in talkyng, in hearing, and in
aunsweryng at one time, that no fault could be found in either of these four
qualities at one time practiced, whereby he deserves no less praise by his
Memory, then fame by his acts. Diverse excelled in time paste in Memory,
Hor^ensius.
as Hor^ensius a noble Orator of Rome, was able to speak in any place, any
thing which he premidated privately, without study openly, he had more trust
in his Memory, then in books. Carmid^s.
Carmides of Greece was so famous for this faculty, that he never heard any
readyng, but he could repeat it word by word without writing, were the
writing or readyng never so long, he would not miss a syllable. Cineas.
Cyneas a noble and a famous Orator, one of the counsailours of king Pirrhus,
being sent from Epire unto the Senators of Rome as an Ambassador, he but
once hearing the names of the Senates, before he came unto the Senate house,
where when he came he named them orderly by name, every one after an other,
that all the Senators were in a great admiration of his Memory, in repeatyng
so many names, in openyng so many matters, in co^cludyng so many things,
which when he came unto king Pirrhus his master whom from Rome, he recited not
only his doings and orations, but also their aunsweres and replies, every
word by word as then was spoken, done, or written by the Senators. This
Cyneas was not so excellent of Memory, but also of passing eloquence, of whom
king Pyrrhus was wont to say, that he got more cities, tounes, and
kingdoms by the eloquence of Cineas, then with all the force and strength of
all the Epyrotes beside. It is written in Laertius lib. 8. that Pythagoras had
charge of God Mercury, to ask what he would (saving immortality) and he
should have it, and he willed to keep in Memory all things that he heard and
saw, and to forgette nothing being dead, of that which he saw being a live,
which being granted, the soul of Athalides being slain of Menelaus, entered
in Euphorb^^: Hermonius.
Secondly took place in Hermonius thirdly in Pyrrhus: and fourthly in
Pithagoras, which had such Memory thereby, that he could describe the state
of the live, and the dead. Diverse were famous for Memory emongst the Greeks,
as Archippus, Lysiades, Metrodorus, Carneades, Theodectes, and others. Many
emongst the Romans were renoumed for their Memories, as Julius Caesar, L.
Scipio, Portius, Claudius Hortensius, with infinite number. What great fame
had Mythridates king of Pontus, Mythridates.
that having as Plini and Gelius both report.xxij. strange Nations, that
were soldiers always in wars under him against the Romans, that he could
speak xxij. languages, with out interpreter to open his mind unto the^. A
strange thing it is now to find a man in this our ripe years, that can
speak half a dosen speeches. If a man can but smatter in six or seven
languages, he is noted to be a rare fellow, and yet king Mythridates had.xxij.
A note of great Memory, for some there be in learning one speech, that they
know not, they forget an other that they know. Lucullus.
That worthy man Lucullus is remembered of Cicero in his fourth book of
Achademicall questions, for his passing and noble Memory. The Aegiptians used
notes and figures for their Memory, in so much they marked the well memoried
man, with the figure of a Hare, or a Fox, for that the Hare hear best, and
the Fox of greateste Memory, and if any wa^ted Memory, they compared him to
the Crocod^le. We read of Esdras a Priest, Esdras. Portius.
that had all the laws of the Hebrews upon his fingers end. We read of
Portius, that he never forgot any thing that he once read before. He again
would never read that, which once he wrote, but straighte out of hand, his
Memory was such, would speak it and pronounce it in order, even as he wrote
it before. Memory therefore is likened unto a Net, which takes and staieth
great fish, and lets through the little fish: and even as books that be
not occupied wax rustie, and cleave together, so memory which is not
occupied, says Seneca wax dull and obliuious, as we oftentimes see how
forgetful men wax, either with sickness, age, or such like, that lets the
Memory of man to be occupied: Orbilius.
as Orbilius by extremity of age, forgot his alphabetes and letters Hermolaus
had a friend, which in his youth was a perfect Grecian, and yet in his latter
years waxed so obliuious, that he could not read: Greek. Plini says Messala
surnamed Coruinus waxed so forgetful by long sickness, Messala.
that he forgotte his own name. And Seneca does write of one Caluisius,
Caluisius.
that was so weak of memory, that he did forgette the names of those, that he
was daiely in company, as Achilles Vlixes, and Priamus, whom he knew very
well What is it else for a man to want Memory, but to want the name of his
known friend, for he is no man that knows not that man, as Augustus Caesar,
sometime Emperor of Rome, his beade is very obliuious, when he should come
unto the Senate, he demanded of the Emperor, whether he would command him to
do any thing that he could do? why said the Emperor, take this letter with
thee, that men may know thee, for thou know no man, for thou want
memory. Cicero does make mention of one Curio, that was so obliuious being a
judge, that he forgotte the case; which he should give judgment upon. Atticus.
Likewise Atticus the soonne of Sophista, was of frail Memory, that he could
never keep in mind, the names of the four Elements, Bamba a certain king
of the Gotes, Bamba.
by a draughte of drink given by Heringius his successor lost his Memory:
it may well be that drink cutteth of Memory For the Poets feign, that there
is a river in hell named Lethes, whose water if any man taste thereof, he
forgets any thing done, or past before. In this were the Thracians so dulle
of Memory, Thracians.
that they could not compte above the number of four. Now that memory is
praised in some, and obliuiousnes dispraised in others, that there want no
testimony therein, what may be spoken of those, that then were compted the
famous clearkes, and the renowmest Orators in all the world, which did not
only stay in their oratio^s but also quite were beside their matters:
Demosthenes.
as Demosthenes and Cicero, two noble Orators, upon who^ depended the state of
Athens and Rome, such imperfection was in them* notwithstanding that
Demosthenes was dismayed at the presence of Philip king of Macedonia, and
Cicero astonished at the presence of the Senators, that both tongue and
countenance failed these noble clearkes. Likewise Theophrastus that grave
Philosopher, and successor unto Aristotle many times was put to silence in the
midst of his Oration, before the people of Athens. Heraclitus.
So was Heraclitus Seuerus do^be before the Emperor. Herodes Atticus before M.
Antonius quite out of countenance, so that the presence of princes, the
dignity of places, the majesty of states, abate and change the worthiness
of the person. Some again challenge unto them selves, which altogether they
are as void of as Hipparchion, Hipparchion. Ruffinus.
when he would have contended with Ruffinus, he had not a word to speak, in
so much that a proverb grew by him, applied unto him that is more talkatiue
then wise Hipparchion is dooen, Cassius Seuerus.
Some again with Cassius Seuerus, which though all his books were burned by
the Senators, said that he carried all his learning in mind and Memory,
which could not be taken away, unless his life likewise should be taken
away: For my lernyng said he, is in my mind, and not printed in books. The
greatest excellency that can be in man is Memory, the best iuell that manne
has is Memory, and the next thing that approaches immortality is Memory,
and so nigh that if a man could but remember the end of things, he should
never taste death, but he should live for ever.

Of the pilgrimages of Princes, and misery of mortality.
THere is no beast upon earth, no foul in the ear, no fish in the Sea, that
seeks his own decaie but man, as by experience we see all things to have a
care of his own life. Lion.
The Lion when he feels him self sick, he never cease until he feeds
upon an Ape, whereby he may recover former health. The Gotes of Creet feedyng
on high upon the mountains, The Goats of Creete.
when any of them is shot through with an Arrowe, as the people of that
country are most excellent archers they seek Dictamum and herb as soon, as
they eat any thing of the same, the arrowe faleth down, and the wound waxes
whole incontinent. There are certain kinds of Frogs in Egypt, Frogs of
Aegypts.
about the flood of Nilus, that have this perseueraunce, that when by chance
they happen to come where a fish called Varus is, which is a great
mourtherer and a spoyler of Frogs, they use to bear in their mouths
overthwart a long reed, which grows about the banks at Nilus, which when
this fish does gape: thinkyng to feed upon the Frog, the reed is so long
that by no means can he swallowe up the Frogge, and so save their lives. If
the Gotes of Creet. If the frogs of Egypt have this understanding to avoid
their enemies, how much more ought men to be circumspect of his life, Swine.
which has I say millions of enemies nether seen nor known. We read in the
first book of Aelian, that the rude swine, if at any time by chance, they eat
of that herb called Hioscyamus, which draws by and by the veins together,
that skant they can stir, yet they strive for remedy sake to go unto the
water, where they feed upon young Crabbes to recover health. ^ sea Snaill.
In the same book ye may reed of a Sea Snaill which from the water does
come unto land to breed, and after she has egged she diggeth the earth and
hides her eggs, and retourneth unto the sea again, and there continues.xl.
days, and after.xl. days, she comes unto the same self place where she
hid her eggs, and perceives that they are ready to come out of the shell,
she opens the shell, and takes her young ones with her, unto the sea. And
thus have they care and charge not only of their own states and lives, but
also of others, and by some show of sense they amend that which is most
dangerous and hurtful, for the sely and simple mise have this kind of fore
knowledge, Mise.
that when any house waxes old and ruinous, they forsake their old dwelling
and creepyng holes, they flee and seek refuge in an other place. Auntes.
The little Antes have foresightes, that when penury and want of relife draws
nier, they wax so painful and laborious, toilyng and trauailyng in gatheryng
together victualles as may serve them during the time of famine. If these
small crepyng worms, seely and simple beasts provide for them selves, what
shall we say of man, the king and ruler over all beasts, who has not only
a body to provide for, but also a soul to save. More happy are these worms
and beasts in their kind, then a number of Princes are. For that they by
nature only are taught their foes to avoid, neither we by nature neither by
God the cause of all goodness, can love our friends. Therefore very well it is
said of the wise man, that either not to be borne, or else being borne straight
to die is the happiest state that can chance unto man. For living in this vale
of misery, we see the Pilgrimages and travel of life to be such, that better
far it were be a poor quiet man, then a busy proud Prince. And since death
is the last line of life, as well appointed for princes as for poor men, who in
reading the lives of Emperors, Kings and Princes, the nobles of the world
sees not their unhappy states, which coming unto the world naked, and
departing from the same naked, yet like proud pilgrims busy one to destroy
another, not contented with countries and kingdoms, go from one place unto
another, from one country unto another like Pilgrims, to be acquainted with
misery and to seek death. Alexander.
Alexander the great conqueror taking his voyage from his kingdom of
Macedonia unto India, to destroy all the world, he was in the city of
Babylon prevented by Antipater and Iola his taster and kinsman with poison, and
there he died. Philopomen,
Philopomen a great Emperor sometime in Greece, being in prison in Messena,
taken in the wars, and being so cruelly handled, that he besought Dinocrates
which then was Prince of that country and conqueror over him, one draught of
poison, he could not be content to be Emperor and ruler of Greece, but moved
to seek death in a strange country amongst his foes. Ladislaus.
Ladislaus king of Apulia endeuouryng to subdue the Florentines, and seeking to
be king over the Florentines, he lost the kingdom of Apulia. For by them was
he at length poisoned, and so berefte from his own kingdom and life, with
this unhappy kind of death were many princes prevented, no less thretened are
these princes of their own household friends, then of foren foes, no less do
their children, their wives brethren and kinsmen, study to destroy them,
sometime for the kingdoms sake, some time for hatered hidden, and most often
provoked of these to spoil them, as it is written, that Claudius Caesar an
Emperor of Rome, Antiochus.
was poisoned of his own wife Agrippina. Antiochus king of Siria was poisoned
of his Queen Laodice, for that he was in love with Berenices King Ptholomeus
sister. Constantin^us.
Constantine the Emperor, the soonne of Heraclius, being but one year a ruler
of his empire, was poisoned by his mother in law named Martina. Conradus.
The very cause of the Emperor Conradus death, which was Frederikes soonne
was the Empire and rule of Rome, which Manfredus his successor made the
phisicions for money to poison him, that then he being the successor of the
empire, might bear rule. L. Vectius.
O unhappy state of Princes, whose lives are desired of friend and foe. How
sore was L. Vectius set on of Caesar, to betraie Pompeius the great, which
for the love and zeal that Pompeius had in Rome, Caesar began to malice
Lucullus, Curio, Cato and Cicero, for their private love toward Pompeius, no
less danger it is to be in favor with princes sometime, then perilous, to
be princes, we read of a Queen named Rosimunda, Rosimunda.
the daughter of king Cunimunda of Gepida after that she poisoned Albonius king
of Longobardes her first housebande, she married a prince of Rauen^a named
Helinges, which likewise she thought to poison, but being warned in ye midst
of his draught, he caused his wife to drink the rest, which drink was the
cause of both their death, how many noble Princes in the midst of their
Pilgrimages died that death, as Diocletian the Emperor of Rome, Lotarius king
of France, Carolus. A^istobulus. Hanibal.
Carolus the eight of that name, with diverse others, as Hanibal prince of
Carthage Aristobolus king of Judah, and Lucullus Emperor of Rome, Princes and
noble men do sometime poison theimselues, lest they should be enforced of
their foes to do what they would, Themistocles.
as Themistocles being banished from his country Athens, when he did deserve
well life and honor, being in service with Artaxerxes king of Persia, poisoned
him self with the blood of a Bulle, in presence of all the Persians, lest he
should be compelled to fight in wars against Greece his country. Even so
Aratus Prince of Sicionia, Aratus.
perceiuyng Philip the younger, should banishe and exile him out of his
country, was enforced to drink his own death, out of his one hand. Even
after this sort, after long administration of common wealth, after great
honor had, and after Princely dignities possessed, with worthy renown and
same received, did noble Socrates, learned Anaxagoras, worthy Seneca, and
famous Demosthenes poison them selves. Thus their pilgrimages were ended, and
their lives finished, their honor and dignity, their fame and renoume did
purchase them death. Happy the^ are those, whom the world know not, ne yet
desire to be acquainted with the world, but quiet and contented do travail
their Pilgrimage. Iugurtha.
Had not Iugurtha thrusted for the kingdom of Numidia, he had not slain his
two brethren Adherbales and Hiemphales, which were partakers of the croune, for
the which, vengeance sell upon him, he had not comen unto cruel Marius hand
to be subdued, neither had he died in prison. Had not king Syphax thursted the
Empire of Rome, Syphax.
he had never been taken captive and prisoner with Tyburus, where he at length
out of his kingdom died in prisone. Henry the third was of his own soonne,
Henaicus. Aristonicus.
named Henry again put in prison, where he died. Aristonicus for all his
business and great doings, was vanquished by the Consul Aquilus, and put in
prison where likewise he died. In prison diverse princes ended life in foreine
countries, diverse kinds of deaths, sondrie plagues happen upon princes, more
then upon man else, as orderly I mean to prove by their Pilgrimages and lives.
Phalaris.
Some by fire, as the Emperor Phalaris of Agrigentin, who was burned with all
his children, and his wife in the brazen Bulle, Perillus.
which Perillus made for others, and when Perillus first assaied this new
invented work before all others, and after him the Emperor him self was put
therein. By fire was the Emperor Valentine burned of the Goths: by fire was
that famous Greek Alcibiades destroyed in Phrigia, Alcibiades.
burned in bed with his woman Tymandra, after he had ruled Athens and all
Greece a long while, thus was his end. Sardanapalus that great king, and
last prince of Assiria, fearyng to fall unto the hands of Arbactus, and
detestyng to die by his enemies, made a solemn fire, where he after long
leude life, wantoning in lust, and followyng his desire burned him self, it
was the end of that renoumed man Hercules which conquered Monsters, subdued
Serpents, Lions, Dragons, and wild beasts, to dye by wearyng of Nessus
therte the Centaur, which burned him a live. To speak of Prince Boges, the
dear friend sometime of king Xerxes, which when he knew that he could not
escape the hand of Cimon, and the power of Athens, he made great fire, where
he caused his wife and concubins, his children and family to be burned, and
then his gold, silver, and treasure, and last of all burned him self.
Empedocles, Catulus, Luctatius, Asdrubal, and Portia died this death. I may
not be tedious in recityng to many names, but some to show and to write, that
did take a part of sondrie plagues, and diverse deaths. So desirous were men
always to become princes, so ambitious of honor, so gready of wealth, that
having the name of a king, they thought to avoid and escape that, which
always wa^teth hard at the heels of Princes, I mean death, were not Princes
hanged of their own subjects, which is the vilest and most ignomious death
that can be. Achaeus.
Achaeus king of Lidia, for that he troubled his subjects with new taskes and
Subsidies, he was hanged of his own Subjects over the river Pactolus
Bomilchar, Bomilchar. Iusti* lib. 2.
a Prince of Libia, being suspected of his own country men the Carthaginians,
that he had conspired with Agathocles, unto the annoyaunce of the subjects,
was hanged in the city of Carthage, in the midst of the Markette. Policrates.
Policrates who was supposed to be the happiest Prince, that ever reigned in
Samos, who never sustained any loss by Fortune, at length was by Oroetes the
Persian, king Darius general, hanged in open sight of Samos. Herodotus does
affirm, Leonides.
that Leonides that famous king of Sparta, that long ruled the Lacedaemonians
with great fame and renown, was by Xerxes king of Persia, after his head was
smitten of, commanded notwithstanding to be hanged. Hanno*
Trogus does write of Hanno, a Prince of Carthage, which flourished in the
time of king Philippe, father to Alexander the great, which for his
prosperous success, Fortune, and luck that he had in all his attemptes, he
waxed to be such a tyrau^t that his own people first bound him with
coardes, whipped him with rods, plucked out his eyes, brake his legs, cut of
his hands: and at last to recompense his Tyranny, they hanged him up in
Carthage. These were no mean men, that thus were hanged in their own
Country, of their own people: But honor which is always ambitious, does
bring this to pass every where. These Princes were in the middeste of life,
arrested by death, and by diverse kinds of death. Some as you have heard with
poison, some with fire, some with hangyng have ended their Pilgrimages, some
again were devoured of their own horses, as Diomedes king of Thracia was
food him self unto those beasts, Diomedes.
which before he fed with men's bodies. The king of Eubaea for his tyranny
in Boaetia, was given by Hercules to be eaten of his own horses. Lucinius the
Emperor, Licinius.
at what time he had appointed his daughter Herina, should be given unto his
horses to be eaten, he him self ministryng her as fode unto them, Neocles.
was torn in pieces. It happened that Neocles the son of that noble Greek
Themistocles, was by a horse likewise devoured. This plague was not strange
unto Princes, for they were always subject unto all kind of deaths. After
that famous Prince Metius Captain of the Libians, Metius.
had broken with the Romans promise of truce and amity, he was afterward, as
Liui does witness, taken and drawn of four great horses a live, at the
commandment of Tullus Hostilus being then king of Rome. King Theseus soonne
Hippolitus, Hippolitus.
being then falsely of his Mother in law Queen Phaedra accused, fliyng to
avoid the fury and rage of his Father at the request of the Queen, was
torn in pieces of wild horses. But let us pass further, and then we shall
read, that some again, even as they before said Princes were devoured of
horses, were of Serpents stonged unto death, as Laocon that worthy Trojan,
Laocon.
was in open sight of two Serpents destroyed, yea, that famous and warlike
woman Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, Cleopatra.
after her lover and friend Marcus Antonius was convicted by Augustus Caesar
the Emperor, she had rather to be ouercomed with Serpents, then subdued by
Caesar. With this death was Opheltes Lycurgus son king of Menea vanquished.
Opheltes.
Again some of wild Bores, and ragyng Lions perished, as Anceus king of S^mos,
and Paphages king of Ambracia, perished in the like misery, the one by a
Boore, the other by a Lion. Some by Dogs, Linus.
as Linus Apollos son. Plini in his seventh book, makes mention of a Queen
in Bythinia, named Cosinges, Cosinges. Euripides.
king Nicomedes wife, whom her own dogs slew, and tare in pieces. Euripides
that learned Greek, coming in the night time, from Archelaus king of
Macedonia, with whom he had been at supper was by an ill willer of his met,
named Promerus, which set his dogs to mangle him unto death. Eue^ so were
Heraclitus and Diogines both Philosophers, by dogs likewise dead. I may
not forget so great a Prince as Basilius the Emperor of Macedon, Basilius.
which in huntyng amongst his lords and nobles, yea, emo^gest thousands of
his Commons, he only meetyng a Heart in the chase, was pricked in the leg,
and so died. As for Seleucus king of Siriae, Seleucus. Bela.
soon unto Antiocus, surnamed the GOD, and Bela king of Pannonia, they were
both thrown by their horses, and so died. If these mischaunces happen unto
princes in the midst of their glory and state, what is it then but misery
of mortality, and pilgrimages of Princes, sith nothing expels fate, nor
can avoid death. Some so weary of life, some so fearful of death, that they
threw them self unto waters to be drouned, others for all diligente fear,
watchyng for death, were most shamfully, notwithstanding by death prevented.
Frederick*
Frederick the Emperor marchyng toward Jerusalem, after that he had taken
Cities and Tounes in Armenia, in passing through a little river, Decius.
he was drouned. Decius that noble and stout King, enforced to take his
flighte from the Goths, with whom he then was in wars, was drouned in the
Marishe ground. Marcellus.
Marcus Marcellus after that he had been a Consul in Rome three times, before
the third wars betwixt the Romans and the Carthagians, was likewise by a
shipwreck cast away. How many noble Princes were drouned with Pharo king of
Aegypte in the red sea, we read in the sacred scriptures. How many again that
seas and waters spoiled from life, we read of, which altered the names of
the seas and waters, when they were drouned, with their own names. Aegeus.
As by Aegeus king of Athens death, Tirrheus.
the sea Aegeum was called. By Tirrhenus death king of Lidia, the sea was
called Tirrhen: And so king Tyberinus, Tyberinu^*
altered the river named Aelbula by his death, to be the River of Tiber. Again
the Sea Hellespo^t, by a woman named Hell. The sea Hesperides, by the maids
called Hesperides: Icarus.
So by Icarus and Myrtilus, Myrtilus.
the sea of Icarus, and the Sea Myrton were spoken. To many were by waters
spoiled, as we se daily by experience. As for honger diverse Princes again
died, Erisicthon.
yea, compelled to eat their own flesh, as Erisicthon and Neocles a Tyrant
of Scycioma, which for his cruel tyranny unto Athens, he tasted of the same
feast him self. It is written in Curtius, that Queen Sysiga^bis king Darius
mother died of honger. Sisigania.
Who so reads Chronicles shall find diverse mischau^ces happen unto princes,
from time to time, for that they be envied at, for Vlixes the Greek, lest any
ofspryng of Hector should rise in Phrigia, to revenge the fall of Troy, and
his country cast Hectors son Astianax over the walls a live. Eue^ as
sometime Lycurgus king of Thracia was of his own Subjects, thrown headlong
unto the sea, for that he first mingled water with wine. How many famous and
noble princes were stoned, and by stones dead, Pyrrhus.
as valiaunte Pyrrhus king of the Epirotes, being in wars with Antigonus, was
slain by an old woman with a Tile stone at Argos, Pyra^der at what time the
Athenians warred against Eumolpus, Pyrander.
for that he feared famine, hidden the wheat from his soldiers, was therefore
of them stoned to death: Even so was Cinna the Romain, at the wars betwixt
the Fre^chemen and Rome, for the like thing stoned unto death stout Cebrion,
Cebrion.
king Priamus son was slain by a stone of Patroclus, at the siege of Troy,
so was Cignus of Achilles at the same time. Cygnus.
O unsteadfast Fortune, that little stones should end so many famous lives of
Princes, O vnprudente Princes, that know not how nigh always ye are unto
death. How many did God punish, and plague with sudden death for their
offenses and misliuyng: Mythridates.
as Mythridates king of Pontus, Nicanor.
Nicanor the soonne of Parmenio king of Macedonia, as Curtius in his v. book
do write, died suddenly. Sertorius.
Sertorius was slain suddenly at a banquette by Vpenna. Heliogabalus.
The Emperor Heliogabalus was killed upon his stool at his easemente, and
thrown unto Tiber. Carbo a noble Roman after that sort, Carbo.
while he was easyng him self upon his stall, was commanded to be murdered
by Pompeius. That renowned and famous Conqueror Julius Caesar, Caesar.
was in the midst of the City of Rome, where he was Emperor, yea, in the
Senate house murdered and ma^gled of Brutus and Cassius. Diverse Consuls in
Rome died this death, as Fabius Maximus, Gurges. Manlius.
Gurges the Senator, and Manlius Torquatus, eue^ at his supper died presently.
Thus some with Thunderboltes did God likewise punish, as Prince Capaneus
slain at the wars of Thebes. Capaneus. Tullius Hostilius.
Tullius Hostilus king of Rome, was with a Thunderbolt, for his insolency and
pride ^laine. Zoroastes king of the Bactrians, the first inuentour of Magique,
was likewise by that kind of death over taken. Pride in princes was the only
cause of their falls, in so much the Poets feign that the great, monstrous,
and huge Giaunt named Euceladus, for his proud enterprise against Iuppiter,
was thrown with a Thunderbolte, unto the bottom of Aetna, a fiery and
flaming Mountain. The uncertain state of Princes, the flattrie before, and
the envy behind, is seen and tried by their death. Who lives so short a
time as a Prince? Who dies so strange a death as a prince? Who lives in
care? Who dies living but a prince? was not Sergius Galba, Galba. Commodus.
and Commodus the son of Marcus, surnamed Anbilius, two Emperors of Rome,
the one by Otho strangled in the Markette place of Rome, the other by Marcia
his own Concubine, after he ruled Rome xiij. years. Lentulus.
Was not, I say, Lentulus being taken in conspiracy with that wicked
Cateline, slain and mangled at the commandment of Cicero, who then was
Co^sull at Rome. Likewise Cethegus, Gabinius, Ceparius, and Stabilius, for that
they rebelled with Catelin, were appoincted by the Senators to be strangled
in prison. Nothing so uncertain as the state of princes, nothing more
deceiptfull then princes again as well proved by histories: Minoes.
For Minoes king of Crete trauailyng after Daedalus unto Sicilia, was there of
his great friend king Cocalus, as he supposed, slain through deceit, even so
was Alebas chief governor of Larissa, Alebas.
a city in Thessalie, murdered of his own soldiers. The desire that men
bear unto honor and dignity, is such that accompaneth with death, Spu*
as Spu Cassius, and Spu Melus for the gredines unto the Empire of Rome, were
both worthily beheaded. God has showed just vengeance upon princes for their
iniquity, with plagues and Pestilences, which spoiled the Emperor
Constantine, Constantine.
and the Empress his wife Zoae, and by this was Marcus Antonius, Alphonsius,
Alphonsius.
and Domitius justly and worthily punished. God has wonderfully punished the
pride of princes, even with shameful and horrible death, that Lice and Uermine
consumed their bodies a live: As Maximilian the Emperor, Arnulphus.
Arnulphus, Honorificus king of the Vandoles, Honirificus.
and Herod king of Iewrie, were eaten up a live with vermines and worms. Plini
and Plutarche, says that proud Silla, Silla.
which sore plagued Rome and Italy, was converted all his flesh unto lice
and so died. Herodotus does like wise report of one Pheretrina a Queen of
Barcaeans, that of this filthy and horrible death died. GOD gave them over in
the middeste of their pleasure, even eating and drinkyng, as Septimus and
Valentianus, two famous Emperors died of surfette, for want of disgestion.
Archesilaus died presently with one draught of wine. What is the life of
Princes, but an uncertain Pilgrimages, which scante sees his days fully by
nature granted as we see how, and after what sort they die daiely every where.
There was great difference between the Pilgrimage of Vlixes and his fellows,
which Cirses the Witch did change them unto diverse kinds of beasts, for
that they knew not what Pilgrimage meante, and Vlixes him self kept his
naturatl shape and frame. And for that in his pilgrimage he was wise and
painful in his life, he did learn of Aeolus Physic, of Cirses Magic, of
Calipso Astronomy, and that under color of fables. Pitha.
That pilgrimage is only appointed unto manne, to know him self, and to serve
his God, diverse learned Philosophers, as Pithagoras, Democritus, Anaxogaras
travailed from Greece unto Aegypte, unto Persia, unto Caldea, and to diverse
other countries for knowledge sake. Anachassis from cold Scythia, Apollo.
made his voyage to Athens for learning. Appolonius from Rome went over
Caucasus unto India, unto Assiria, to know more Philosophy. Yea, women are
famous for their pilgrimage therein, Saba.
as Saba came from Aethiope, the farthest part of the world, to hear Salamons
wit, Cornelia.
and to learn wisdom. Cornelia from Rome being a noble woman, went unto
Palaestina to hear saint Hierome teach Christians. The Pilgrimage that
Solon made for Athe^s, that Lycurgus made for the Lacedaemonians, that Architas
made for Tarentum are commended. Pittacus.
The travail that Pittacus took for the people of My^tilaena, that that
Cleobulus took for the Rhodians, that Bias and Thales took for the people of
Ionia are praised. We are borne not for our selves, but for our country and
friends, for them we ought to travail. Plato.
For this cause became Plato, from a famous orator in Athens, to be a
renoumed souldior at the besiegyng of Corinth, and Tenagra: For this went
Socrates Platoes master to Amphipolis, Socrates.
and Potidaea a two great cities in Delos, to fight for their Country.
Philosophers were not always occupied with books, but when time served, they
were seen in arms, Architas.
as Architas was six times general amongst the Tarentines. Tirtaeus.
Tyrtaeus elected gyaunde Captain amongst the Lacedaemonians, Xenophon.
Xenophon which Thucidides highly advance, one of the chief Soldiers of
king Cirus. What caused the Philosopher Zeno to resist the princely power of
king Antigonus? What moved Bias to withstand the force of king Aliates. In
fine what made Phocion, Aristides, Themistocles and others to become
soldiers, to stand in arms against their enemies, the love of Athens. The
pilgrimage of this our life is nothing else, but a continual trauaill until we
come to our last journey, which is death, then is the end of all pilgrimage,
and just accoumpt to be made for the same.

Of Dissimulation and Craft, of Subtlety and Deceipte.
Diogenes.
DIogenes that Cinike Philosopher, making him self ignorant sometime in that,
which he knew best was wont in banquettes and feasts, to say if any manne
had demanded what kind of meat, were there I can not name, but I ca^ eat it,
and so would pass to answer any thing truly with dissimulatio^s, in so much
that Sigismonde the Emperor would say, that he that could not dissemble,
Galba.
could not rule. At what time Galba a Citizein of Rome, had bidden a gentleman
named Mecaenas unto Supper, perceiuyng the gentleman to be in love with his
wife, fained him a sleep, for that Mecaenas might show some part of his will,
and love in the mean season, Mecaenas.
while his wife and Mecaena were in talk, and he him self in dissemblyng
slept, came one of his servants, to take some things away from the table,
supposyng his master had been a sleep, unto whom his master said, well you
varlet, though I see not Mercaenas, yet I see to you, I sleep unto him, and
not unto you. The like dissimulation was between Demosthenes and Archias,
Demosthenes Archias.
at what time he fled Athens, for fear of Antipaters displeasure, and went
unto the Isle Calauria, where in the Temple of Neptune he hid him self until
Archias came, and promised him what honor and dignity he should have, if he
could come unto Antipater, and with fair words he dissembled with
Demosthenes, that he came for the purpose from the king unto him, Demosthenes
perceiuyng his dissimulations, and crafty means, answered plainly, to move
him unto anger, where truth is oftentimes opened, and said: Thou of all men
could never play upon the stages, plaiyng thy part then, and now at this
time, thou can not be an Orator to persuade me, whereat Archias waxed
angry, and threatened to hale him out of the Temple, unto whom Demosthenes
answered. Now perforce thy dissimulation is chaunsed unto truth. I might
hereon stay, to note the great dissimulations between Metellus and Scipio,
which was so great that Metellus feigned that Rome was happy, Metellus
dis^imulation.
that Scipio was borne therein, and yet his mortal enemy all the days of his
life, and therefore Frederick an Emperor sometime of Rome, at what time the
Senators would go sit about the state of the city, would say, before you
go unto the Senate house, cast away from you two things that you carry with
you, and being demanded of the Senators, what two things were they, he
said, Simulations, and Dissimulations. In this Philippe of Macedon did differ
much from his soonne Alexander, Alexander,
in so much that Alexander would consent to nothing, but to magnimitie and
truth, and his father to all kind of falsehood, as seen by subduyng of the
Sarunsians, and the Cities of Thracia, who under color of peace, commanded
his Soldiers to bring under their clokes, every one a coarde, Philippe.
that at what time king Philippe made silence to speak, the enemies being
attentife to hear, he retched for the his right hand, for a watch word to
his Soldiers, suddenly to bind with their coardes their enemies, and to
bring them captives to Macedonia. The like craft used Alcibiades amongst the
Agrigentines, Alcibiades.
fainyng that he had to speak for the common profit, as well of Athens, as
of Agrigentu^, calling the^ in place, as though he would open some thing
necessary unto them, had the Greeks ready in the mean time to take the city,
and to possess their substance by this craft. Such craft used Thrasillus,
to take the City Byzantium, such deceipte used Zopirus, to overcome Babylon.
Tarquinius.
Such did Tarquinius the soonne of Sextus Tarquinius practice against the
Gabians, who when he perceived, that his father might by no means subdue them,
he imitated Zopirus craft, making the enemies to believe that he was ill
handeled, and cruelly used of his father, and that he knew well how to deceive
his father, and to betraie him unto them, they being ready to believe
Tarquinius, made him chief of their company: he straight sent to his father
messengers, to signify unto him, that he might do his pleasure with his
enemies. The old Tarquinius understanding the craft, and subtlety of his
soonne, brought the messenger unto a fair garden, mistrustyng like a wise
prince the matter, gave this subtle warning unto his sons ambassador.
Walkyng up and down the Garden with diverse noble men, he with his staff
beat the chief flowers of the Garden, saying unto the messenger fare well,
tell my soonne what I do, and bid him do accordyngly, which young Tarquinius
perceiuyng his fathers mind, slew the best of the enemies, oppressed the chief
men, and betrayed the City unto his father. By this means the craft that
Conon the Athenian, Conon.
deceived the Persians in Ciprus. The subtlety that Pysistratus used, to
begile the people of Megaera, and Haniball in Italy are of like effect, that
subdued Tarentum, in so much that Hanibal was wo^t to say, when the Romans
had again won Tarentu^. Eadem art qua prius ^aepimus Tarentum amifimus: For
by craft Hanibal vanquished the Tarentines, and by craft did the Romans win
the same again. Antigonus deceived the Citizeins of Corinth, Antigonus.
under the color of marriage, betwixt his soonne Demetrius, and Alexanders
wife, who then was a widow, and a Queen in Corinth, that in the midst of
triumphs, and preparations to the marriage, Antigonus by deceipte took the
Castle, commanded his soldiers in arms, and proclaimed him self king in
Corinth. In the same book of Poliaenus, the like history is written of
Lysander of Sparta, Lysander.
and Nearchus of Crete, the one promisyng to the inhabitauntes of Miletum, his
aid and help, in defending their liberties, the people giuyng credit unto a
kings promise, trusted to have Lisander their special friend, they found him
their mortal foe, for he deceived them thereby, and took the city of
Miletum unto him self. The other sailyng unto the Haven of Telmessus, to renew
friendship with Antipatridas, who then governed the city of Telmessus, under
the color of frendshippe, he had his men of arms ready on the Sea, to
destroy his friend, to take the city unto him self. This deceit was not
only seen in wars, where much falshoode and perjury are practiced, but in
all things men use craft, according to the proverb, There is craft in
daubyng. To speak of Theodectes craft toward his master Aristotle, to
spoil him privily of his glory. To speak of Sertorius deceipte, in winnyng
authority among the common people. To describe the means that Dionisius used
to get money amongst the Siracusans, or how Pythius deceived Cannius in his
bargain of Fish. Or how Darius became king of Persia, by nisyng of a Mare and
a million more such deceiptes and crafts, I will that the reader read
Poliaenus, when he shall have enough of falshode, because craft is used
diversely, I will somewhat touch those that used craft, in altering the^ selves
in form, and shape of women, some for filthy lust, some for virtue sake,
some for vice. What kind of dissimulation was in Sardanapalus King of Si^ia,
Sardanapalis.
to forsake the Empire, to forgo his kingdom, to become from a Prince, like a
woman to spinne and card with his concubines, and so from the shape of a man,
to dessemble him to be a woman. What kind of dissimulation did that renowned,
even the ofspryng of Gods, and soonne unto Jupiter, Hercules.
that mighty Hercules, after that he tamed monsters, slew Giantes, overcame
Dragons, Lions, wild beasts, and yet to translate him from a champion and a
conqueror, in a woman's apparel, formed him self a woman, with such cautell
and crafty dissimulations, that he served Omphale Queen of Lidia like a woman,
in the apparel of a woman at the whele, at the cards, at Omphales
commandment. What kind of craft used Clodius, to bring his purpose to
pass, with Pompeia, Caesar's wife likewise dissemblyng him self to be a woman,
as Cicero tanteth him in an epistle that he writes unto Lentulus, where he
says that Clodius dissembled with the Nymph Bona dea, as he was wont to use
the three sisters Thus Clodius would at all times go unto Pompeia, Clodius.
in the apparel of a woman to use such feats, that made Caesar to deuorse his
wife Pompeia. Dissimulations, cautelles, crafts, as they are most evil to
practice wicked things, so are they of the contrary, most necessary to do
good, Euclides.
as Euclides, which used the like craft as before, but to the better purpose,
where they practiced this feate, to feed lust, to pleasure affection, he used
it to see Socrates, read Philosophy, and to learn wisdom, for there was a
Law between Athens and the Megaris, for the great hatered that the one bare
unto the other, that who so ever came from Athens unto Megaris, should die. And
who so ever would go from Megaris unto Athens should likewise die. This death
feared not Euclides so much from his purpose, but love that he bare unto
Socrates, unto Philosophy, and unto wisdom, was as much that he would in the
night travail from Megaris unto Athens. In the apparel of a woman, lest he
should be known, and return before day from Athens, unto Megaris again.
This dissimulation and craft of Euclides was far better, and more to be
commended, then the doings of the fore renowned Princes. Semiramis. Iusti.
lib. i.
Better is Semiramis Queen of Babylon thought of that she perceiving her young
son Ninus, to be too tender to govern the stout Babilonians and Assirians,
knowing the nature of the people to be impaciente of a woman's gouernemente,
she became in apparel like a man, and rule the kingdom, until her son came
unto ripe age. More praise ought Pelagia have a woman of Antioch though she
fained him self to be a man, Pelagia.
and dissembled with the world in that case, yet this was to avoid pleasure
and lust, and to live chastely and solitary, without the company of men.
Marina.
For this cause is the Greek virgin Marina, and Euphrosina a maid of
Alexandria worthy preferred before Cleocritus and Clisthenes, Euphrosina.
for that they went in the apparel of men, Clisthenes.
to live in the wilderness, to avoid lust and sensuality: the others went
in the apparel of women, to begile women. Caelius does report certain women
as Mantinea, Lasthenia, Axiothea, and Phliasia would come in their apparel
like men, Phliasia.
to hear Plato read Philosophy in school. The cause of their dissimulations
was virtue and honest life: The cause of the others crafts and dissembling
feats, was vice and ill life, so that dissimulation is either good, or bad.
For we read at what time the launcyng laddes of Greece, had determined to
fetch home again fair Helene Menelaus wife from Troie, where she was
ravished by Paris king Priamus soonne, that then Achilles the stoutest, and
worthieste of all the Greeks, while yet he slepte in the tente of Chiron his
mother Thetis, Chiron.
which the poets fain to be a Goddess, suddenly took him from Chirons house,
Thetis
and changed his apparel like a woman, and appoincted where he should hide him
self with the daughters of king Lycomedes, where he got of one of them with
child, which was Pyrrhus, which was Deidamia soonne, and commanded him to
betraie him to no man, for she knew that her son Achilles should die in
Troie, Achilles
if he would go thither. There Achilles a long while, at the commandment of
his mother Thetis, was until the oracle was given that the city of Troie
should never be destroyed without the help of Achilles, Vlixes.
Vlixes being most subtle and crafty, took upon him to seek out Achilles,
took a little coffer full of fine wares meet for women, Dissimulation
and a strong bow and arrows, which when Vlixes came unto king Lycomedes
daughters, knowing Achilles to be there, but because he was in the apparaill
of a woman, he knew him not, and therefore showed his fine ware unto the
kings daughters, a strong bow bente by him, while Deidamia and the rest of
her sisters, viewed the glisteryng ware of Vlixes, Achilles stepte by, and
took Vlixes bow in hand, and drew it, whereby Vlixes straight perceived, by
the drawing of so strong a bow, that he was Achilles, and thus one craft
beguileth an other, one deceipte deceives an other, and one dissemblyng manne
finds out an other, for by this means of crafty Vlixes, was the
dissimulation of Achilles known. I might have just occasion here, to speak
of those that were much given unto soft clothyng, Aristotle.
gaie apparaill, and delicate fare, as Aristotle the Prince of Philosophers,
delited to go brave in gorgious apparel, with chains and ringes, and had
herein great felicity. Hortenfius.
Demosthenes and Hortenfius, two famous and noble Orators, the one of Athens,
the other of Rome, went so trim and fine, in their clothes, with such neat
and wanton gesture, that L. Torquatus would often call Hortensius Dionisias
soonne, for that she had great pleasure in dauncyng, and gestures of bodies,
but I will omit such, and speak of dissemblyng persons, which thought to
hurt others, destroyed them selves, as that strong Golias contempnyng all
Israel in force and strength, Judith a selie woman overcame him. Hammon was
hanged upon that galowes, that he prepared for Mardocheus, even Absalon going
about to destroy his father king David, hanged by the hears of his head, by
Gods appoinctement.

Of Famine.
CICERO in his first book of Tuscilane questions does note the saying of
Socrates, that hounger was the best sauce for meat, and thirst the best
occasion to drink. Wherefore King Dionisius the tyrant, hearing much report
of the Lacedemonia^s fare, and specially of their Poddage, which was called
Ius nigrum, the black Poddage, bought a Cook of the country as her servant,
to diet him in the ordinary fare of the Lacedaemonians, which after much
pain taken of the Cook, in making these foresaid Poddage was had, he brought
a measse thereof unto the king, which sore longed for it, which as soon as he
tasted of it, he powered it again out of his mouth very angry unto the
Cook, saying: Is this the famous fare and Princely Poddage, that the
Lacedaemonians so much brag of, my dog should not, said Dionisius, eat this,
the Cook perceiuyng the glottonie, and excess fare of the king, said: O
Dionisius when so ever thou eat of this Poddage, thou must bring fit sauce for
this meat, which is Lacedaemonians stomach, for the Princes of Sparta have
more pleasure in this kind of fare, then ever king Midas had in his golden
banquettes. What makes any meat sweet, hounger? Or what causes man to feed
pleasauntly, hounger? What causes any drink pleasant, Darius.
thirst? For at what time Darius enforced of mere thirst to drink of a
lake, all defiled with stinkyng carkases of dead soldiers, Ciceronis. lib. ^.
Tusc.
being then in wars, and compelled then to take his flight, he said after
his draught, that he never drank sweter drink in his life. Though this king
was a proud prince over the Persians, and had all kind of wines at
commandment, yet his excess and abundance then, his want and penury now,
his small stomach then, and his thurstie stomach now, was the only cause of
this noble drink, which he so much commended, and preferred before all the
wine that ever he drank before. Even so reported king Artaxerxes in his
wars, Artaxerxes.
when his victuales, Brusonius. lib. ii. Cap. xli.
and all were spoiled by the enemies, of few dry Figs, and of a piece of a
Barley loffe, upon which he fed so hongerly, that he spoke after this sort.
O good Lord, of how great a pleasure have I been this while ignoraunte.
Lisimachus.
Lisimachus like wise being in wars in Thracia, Domicianus the Emperor,
where he and all his soldiers were kept so long without drink, until he
was so thurstie, that he was enforced and all his host, to yield as captives
to the Emperor Domitianus, and now being in captivity, having a draught of
drink of the Emperor, he said: O GOD that I should make my self from a king
to be a captive from a noble prince of Greece, to be a bond slave unto the
Romans, for one draught of drink. Se what honger and thirst is? how it has
made kings to yield, princes to be vanquished. Yea, and has made King
Ptholomie in his own kingdom and country kingdom of Aegipte, Ptholemie.
to commend a piece of bread, which was given him in a poor cottage, to say
that he never eat better meat, nor more comfortable cheer in his life, thou
that piece of bread was. It was the very order of that noble Emperor Julius
Caesar in all his wars, Julius Caesar.
more with famine, then with sword, to vanquishe his enemies: For this famous
warrier would often say, that even as the Physician would use his pacie^tes,
so would he use the enemies. The rule of ye physician is, to make his paciente
fast to recover his health. The order of Caesar was, to keep the enemies from
victual, to make them yield. Great is the force of famine, as by histories
we read, Cambyses.
that when king Cambises marchyng toward the Aethiopians, had fallen unto
scarceness of victualles, and unto such penury, and want of food unto the
soldiers, that they agreed within them selfs to kille the tenthe throughout
all the host, to assuage honger, in so much that it continued so long, that
Cambises the king was in great fear, lest the lotte should at length happen
upon him, and so to be eaten of his soldiers. Saguntus a City in Spain,
Saguntus.
sometime as Eutropius does witness, in great amity with the Romans, and
being besieged of the Carthagineans so long, that all the city was brought
unto such famine, that the lords and the captains of the city, made a great
fire in the Markette place, and there brought all their wealth and substance,
and threw it into the fire, and after made their wives, and then their
children to be burned, and last of all the chief lords and capitaines, ended
their lives in flaming fire, lest they should come unto the enemies hand, so
great was that famine, that it was before Prognosticated by a woman brought to
bed, whose child as soon as he was borne, entered unto his mothers womb
again. The like calamity happened in Caligurium, a City where Quintilian was
borne, who being likewise long besieged of Cn. Pompeius, to bring them in
subjection and to keep promise with the Emperor Sertorius, that they lack
victual, and waxed so hongrie after, that all kind of beasts were slain,
they were enforced to eat their own wives and children. It was seen in
Jerusalem, when that it was destroyed by Vespasian the Emperor of Rome,
Vespasian.
by the Roman soldiers, how that the mothers were compelled to eat their
own children, Cap. 57.
for very honger, for their small and tender bones, were left as a show of
their misery. Plini in his eighte of natural histories, that when Hanibal
laid siege unto the City Casilinum, the Romans soldiers were in such
honger, that one Mouse was sold for two hundred pieces of silver, and he that
sold the Mouse died him self for honger. Athens.
The Athenians likewise were brought unto such honger by Silla, which
afterward was Dictatour in Rome, that one Bushel of wheat was sold emongst
the soldiers for a thousand Drachmis, the common soldiers being poor, for
want of money one way, and sore plagued with honger an other way were
compelled to eat the green grass of the fields, about the City of Athens,
and to gather the Moss of the walls of the City and eat it. This City of
Athens was often times brought unto that misery, as by king Demetrius, king
Philippe, and his son Alexander the great: So much was famine feared
emo^gest the aunciente Greeks, that they used in the time of aboundancie, to
scourge famine with rods out of their houses saying: For as famen intro
diuitias, away penury, come in ple^tie. Alexander.
We read in Q. Curtius, that Alexander was driven by honger to eat his
Cameller, Elephantes, and other huge beasts that carried the trains for the
wars. Such honger and famine did happen among the Lacedaemonians, that the
Citizeins of Sparta were so hongrie, that they eat the very Serpents that
were dead a long while, which mutitude of Serpents, which before were
drouned, did presage this great calamity to come, of whom the people of
Sparta, though they were dead a long time, yet most hongerly fed them self,
and mitigated the rage of famine. Doda king of Siria besieging a great famous
city in Iewrie called Iora, Doda.
where the miserable mothers were of mere honger, enforced to feed of the
bowels of their own children. Not much unlike unto that horrible and cruel
famine, in the country of Apulea, being driven of the Frenchemen, then their
enemies in wars, that the soldiers were compelled to take the skins from
their Bucklardes, and to warm and boil the hard horns, and to eat them. To
entreat of the wou^derfull calamities, misery, and plague that happened
through honger, it were to much the charge thereof, too many aucthorities are
manifest in this behalf. Antonius whom Augustus Caesar could never vanquishe
with force of arms, he was driven to yield in Etruria, Perusia.
in a City called Perusia, by honger and famine. Wherefore that noble Athenian
Nicias, always thought the easieste way, the spidiest cause of yeldyng unto
the enemies was Famine, which he showed at Melos, a City of Thessalie,
whereby he made the Citizeins to yield by honger. O ragyng force of Famine, O
terrible misery of man, which compel the parents to eat the children, the
children to kill their pare^tes: what beast was spared ever, when this
happened. The people named Hymmi through ho^ger were constrained to eat their
own Dogs, Hymmi.
as the Macedonians sometime fed them selves with Camelles, Elephantes,
Horses, and such like. What herb was unsought? what root was not found, to
feed this cruel monster. The fields of Piceni.
As Sabellicus does witness, of dearthe that chanced in his time, that in
some parts of the country of Flaminia, and about the fields called Piceni
the common people did live by grass and herbs, and by such like that
proceeded from the earth. This was the world ever plagued with Famine, as with
that monster that spoileth and deuoureth it self, as we read of diverse that did
eat their own arms and flesh. Again in the sacred scripture, diverse
examples we have of the like sent from God, to plague man. But because honger
one way is most excellent, if meat may be had, so hounger an other is
most terrible, if the same fail. Stratonicus.
Therefore Stratonicus never went to bed without a Cup of drink by him, not
for that he thrusted, when he went unto bed, but lest he thursted in the
bed, which should compel to do some injury with one or other, Alphonsus.
for that he wanted drink. So did Alpho^sus king of Arragon, when he saw the
poor country man, greedily feedyng on Grapes said, for that he could not be
hongrie. O would the gods had framed me to be such one as this is. So that
hounger is good unto those that want the same. Gnefactus.
For Gnefactus king of Egypt, having his men of arms in the deserts of
Arabia wantyng victuales waxed so hongrie, that the poor fare and simple
cheer, that he got amongst the country men, was so acceptable unto him, that
he caused a table for a monumente of the same, in the temple of Jupiter in
Thebes. Of diverse famine we read in scripture, that Abraham fled from the
land of Chananea unto Egypt: and Isaac driven by famine unto Abimelech king of
the Palestines, and all the soonnes of Jacob, were enforced to go to king
Pharao, where their own brother Joseph ruled as chilef officer. Famine is
appoincted for a just scourge to sin* as appears by the filthy sin of
king David, toward Urias wife, he had to choose either plague, famine, or
wars, which are the instruments to punish offenders.

Of wariness.
WE leave Apollo in Delphos, and Jupiter in Boetia, with their wise answers
and Oracles, we will not speak of Socrates, Solon, and thousands such as
were coumpted and known wise* and discrete amongst Greeks and Gentiles, we
will only entreat of those worldly and natural wisdom, which by their
prudent policy, and wary practices have aduau^ced their fame thereby, as well
in discoursyng and vanquishyng their enemies, as also by inuentyng such
sleightes and snares, for the obtainyng of the same, as their wits thereby
were worthily commended, as Hanibal perceiuyng the courage, and strength of
the Romans, used this witty feate: gathered a great number of Serpents,
and put them in huge vessels, and made them to be brought unto the field
amongst his soldiers, commaundyng the Capitaines and chief officers, to
throw the same unto the force of the enemies, who being thereby astonished,
forsook and fled the field, as men bereste of wits* spoiled of sense,
and almost in despair of them selves, thinkyng Deuels, and not men to be
the soldiers of Hanibal. Hanibals sleightes.
Of the like wisdom was king Cirus, who being in his tents, Cirus craft.
and ready to pitche field the next day with the Messagetes, commaundyng his
soldiers to be in a readiness, that night to flee their tents, leaving
behind their victuales and substance, that the enemies being busy of the
spoil, and giuyng open to banquettyng, and Carousyng of wine, he with all his
army might unawares return, and findyng the Messagets more greedy of the
spoil, then ready for their enemies destroy and kille them, as it came to
pass. So that in wars, says Salust, wit does as much good as
strength, policy better accepted then power, and as Virgill says, so that
victory be gotten, way not whether it be through courage, or through
policy. For Sertorius that worthy Emperor and captain of Rome, was wont by
lies and letters, by dreams and outward religion, by all means possible,
fainyng and inuentyng thousand ways, to stir his soldiers to courage. The
inventions of wit is much, and so diverse, that to much it were to repeat.
Sicyonius.
How Sicionius deceived Xerxes with all his soldiers through policy. How
Pisistratus moved the Athenians, Pysistratus.
to revenge his false wrongs upon the chief officers of Athens. How Darius
after Cambises death became king of Perse, Darius.
by means of a horse, and such like. But lettyng pass infinite nombers of
such, and to declare what Nature wroughte in selie and simple beasts, in
^iyng fowls, and in the very fish swimmyng in the water. The lion.
The lio^ by nature is taught being very sick, to find out an Ape, which
by outward sportes and pastyme, does heal his great sever and grief. The
Elephant.
The huge Elephante is so subtle when he is like to die, will seek by all
means the cameleon bow, which he so estemeth, that his sickness forsakes him
straight. The Panther.
The Pa^ther knows by nature his ready salve for this sore, for feelyng him
self not well, he straight seeks out the dounge of man, which by the sent
thereof, he heals him self. The stircken Heart feedyng on high Mountains,
The Heart.
has that consideration, at what time he is shot through with any darte or
arrowe, by feedyng of an herb called Dictamum, their blood stanche, and their
wounds heal. The Bear.
And the Bear is so crafty, that by the same he is taught being sick, to
lick and eat up little Antes for her appoincted Physic. Even so fliyng
fowls do know their appoincted salve, for their sores by nature taught. The
Raven. The Ducke. The Dove: The Swallow.
The Raven, the Ducke, the Swallowe swift, yea, the sely Mice do before hand
presage their ruinous state by Nature, and know well the decaie of any house,
barn, or place where they be, and will change hospitality before the time,
if necessity happen upon them. The little Antes full of toil and travail, to
gather in the Summer, to serve them in the Winter. These with diverse others,
Plini in his.8. book. Chapter.27. and Aristotle in his book De natura
animaliu^, do make mention. W readee in Aelianus diverse worthy histories of
the like, The Cranes of Cicilia.
but specially of the Cranes of Sicilia, which when they be about to take
their slightes from Sicilia, to fly over mount Caucasus, they are so crafty,
and subtle by nature, that they bear in their mouths certain stones, to
stop their cry and noise, which Craines most commonly use in flight, lest
by hearing of their voice and cry, the Egles of Caucasus should destroy them.
The Goats of Crete, when they be shot through with darts and arrows, are
of the^ self moved to feed on a certain herb, which straight stencheth the
blood, heals the wound, and expels out the venime of the wound. There is
such craft and subtlety in a little Frogge of Nilus, that when the huge and
monstrous Troute comes toward him, to destroy him, the Frogge by and by out
of hand* bears a long reed ouerth warte his mouth, and so marches
forward toward this great champion, that by no mean he can destroy him, for
that the reed is longer, then his mouth can swalowe the same, and so the
little Frogge escapes the terror of this great beast. What a slight has a
fish called Polipos, which being desirous to feed on any fish, he goes and
hides him self under some shrubbe, or rock, or any other means, whereby he
seems to be, as though he were a tile or a stone, until the fish come to
that place, then he leapeth upon him, and kills him. So that there is no
beast, no foul, no fish, but has as it were a certain privilege by nature
to defend him self and to foil his foe, and that craftily by nature taught.
There is again a kind of knowledge in beast to know their friends, and to love
them, and to fear their enemies, and to avoid them. As the Serpents in
Terinthia, the Scorpio^s in Arcadia, and the Snakes of Siria, which Plini
affirms, that they will not hurt their country men, and known friends,
though they found the^ him a sleep, as diverse and sondrie times, histories
make mention thereof. Strange therefore is the work of nature, which
mightily displaieth her self in all living creatures, and for the proof
thereof, I will note one history written of Quintilia^ in his 14. book of
histories, that in Achaia there was a city named Patra, in the which a
certain young man bought a little dragon, which with great care and diligence,
he nourished until it waxed big liyng in one chamber in the night time, and
plaiyng all the day time. At length the Magistrates of the City fearyng, that
some hurt should be done by this Dragon, considering the fierce and cruel
nature of them, did let him to go unto the wilderness, where diverse other
dragons were. And there being a long time, this young man that brought up this
Dragon with diverse of his fellows passing by, where this dragon was, certain
thieues assailed them, and he by his voice was known by this Dragon, which as
he was heard, came out of the woddes, and seeing him with diverse of his fellows
like to be murdered, flewe unto the very faces of the thieues, and so strongly
fought with them, that some the Dragon flue, some sore hurt, and some
constrained to fly, saved him and his fellows, in recompense of his former
courtesy. Surely I judge it a better benefit bestowed upon such a Dragon,
then upon some ungrateful persons that be in the world.

Of reuengemente.
THe best way to revenge any injury offered, is to suffer quietly the same,
and to show virtue toward vice, goodness toward evil, honesty toward
scurrilitie, which is the only poison unto the enemy, as for an example.
Laertius does manifest the same by comparisons of things: Who is he that
sees his enemies fields green, his pastures well grassed, his house
furnished, and all things in comely order, but he is a grieved therewith, how
much more said he, when the envious sees his foe adorned with all virtuous,
compassed with all patience, yea, prosperyng in all goodness, he is therewith
molested. And in that place of his sixte book, he recites a worthy history,
and a noble example, of due reuengement by Diogines the Cinicke Philosopher,
who by chance came, where diverse young men were at banquet, making merry, his
head being balde, by reason of age, he was so flouted and scoft of most part
of the company, that with stripes and strokes, they threw him out of the
house: the poor old Philosopher revenged his wrong in this wise He took a
piece of white Chalk, and wrote the names of all those that so used him upon
his cloak, and so opened his cloak, that all men might read their names, and
know how wickedly they had used him, and what scoffs and floutes he had
suffered of those persons, whose names were to be read upon his cloak, and so
brought them in such blame with all men, that they wished in heart that they
never had seen Diogenes, that made all the world to se their folly, that
afterward they were noted as ridiculous persons, not worthy of honest
company, and so were they excluded from the good men, banished from civil
men, and quite forsaken of all honest and virtuous men. Agesilaus.
Agesilaus king of the Lacedaemonians, when he had heard of certain foes of
his, that always spoke ill of his person, and of his state he after this sort
revenged him: he chused and elected them, chief capitanes over his men of
arms, and committed all the charge of his hooste unto his enemies, whereby he
made his foes to become his friends, yea, his servants and slaves, to do
what he would command them. For so Demosthenes did when he was provoked, and
injuriously handled of him, that was in a banquet disposed to fall out, and
fight with him, no said Demosthenes, I will never take that in hand, which
the victor thereof, thereby sustaineth shame. O worthy sentence, and most
aptly aplied unto a wiseman. We read in Brusonius of Dion of Alexandria: Dion.
who with silence revenged more his foes, then with words, for being provoked
unto anger by a vilaine, and abiecte, which followed him through the streate,
chidyng and threatenyng him, answered not one word, but bade him good night,
when he came unto the very door of Dion, which when the enemy saw, he
would not be moved unto anger, to do him hurt, whereby he might do the
like unto him again, he went unto the next tree and hanged him self. Thus did
Socrates, Socrates.
being blamed of his friend for his silence, in that he was injuriously handled
of his foe, answered and said, that his enemies saying could not damage him,
since he was not that manne, that the words did importe him to be, and being
stricken and spurned by the same man, Socrates,
Socrates was cou^sailed to call the same unto the Law before the Judges, unto
the which he answered: which of you if an Ass strike him, will call that
Ass before any judges, since he is no better that thus uses me For by this am
I known to be Socrates, and he known to be an Ass. The greatest reuengemente
unto a fool, is to let every man know his folly: and the greateste hurt
unto a wiseman, is to revenge folly, for it was all the reuengemente of
Socrates, when any man spoke ill of him, to say thus, he never was taught to
speak well. So courteous was that Fabius Maximus, that when he had heard that
one of his chief soldiers, was about to betraie him unto his enemies, he
called the party before him, not making him privy what he knew of him, but
demaundyng of Marsius what he wa^ted, and willing him to ask any thing he
should have, and so made him chief capitain of the army: By this means he
became most true unto Fabius, being before most false. This was far from
such reuengementes, Alexander.
as Alexander the Great did, who after he had subdued diverse Kingdoms and
Countries, he went unto the Temple of Ammon, to know by the Oracles of
Jupiter, whether yet any were a live that slew his father king Philip, whereby
he might show more tyranny, Brutus.
and practice murder further. This was far from M. Brutus rage, which being
not content to usurp Caesar, yea, to kill him in the Senate house: but also
when power failed, when soldiers decayed, and he almost vanquished, made his
prayers unto Jupiter, and unto the host of heaven, to plage Caesar and his
posterities. This I say, was far from Liuius Salinator, who being warned of
Fabius Maximus, not to revenge malice upon Hasdruball, before he knew, the
state of the matter, the power of the field, and the end of the victory,
where it should happen: But he more rashely to revenge, then wise in sufferyng,
said that either out of hand kill, or be killed. Antheus.
And in this place I will recite 3. or 4. histories fit for this purpose.
With Antheus a noble gentleman of Halicarnassus, being in pledge left with
Phobius, chief Ruler then of Millesia, fell Phobius wife in love, vsyng all
means possible to allure Antheus in love with her. But he partly for fear,
and partly for love of Phobius her housebande, Cleoboea.
would in no wise consent to any filthye desire, of this Cleoboea Phobius
wife, which she took in so evil part, that she began mortally to hate
him, inuentyng what way best she might revenge his cruel incurtesie, in
refusyng her love. She fained on a time, that she had quite forgotten her old
love toward him, and thanked Antheus very much for the love, and great
zeal that he bare unto her housbande Phobius, in not consentyng to her folly
then, when she was in love with him. Thus talkyng with him, Cleoboea brought
her old lover Antheus over a Well, where for that purpose only, she threw a
tame Partriche, desiryng him to aid her to have her Partriche out of the
Well, the young gentleman misdoubtyng her in nothing, as one willing to
pleasure his friend and old lover, went down into the Well to have the
Partriche out, but she revenged her old love, and requited his service then
after this sort: She threw a great stone after him, and there killed him,
and straight for sorrow, calling to mind the old amity, and hidden love
between them, hanged her self. The reuengement yt Cleonimus, Cleonimus.
that noble and famous Lacedemonian, who having his own wife in such
admiration, of impacient love, that he was as much hated of her, as she of him
was honored and esteemed, for she loved only king Acrotatus son so dear,
that her housebande Cleonimus understanding the same, went to Epire to king
Pirrhus, perswadyng him earnestly to come to Peloponesus, and to move wars
against king Acrotatus, whereby he might revenge the spite done of his wife, in
killyng him whom she loved best, a great reuengemente as he thought unto her,
then to revenge upon her own person, to spoil him whom she love better then
her self. Valerius Torquatus.
Valerius Torquatus, for that he might have Tuscus daughter in marriage moved
wars out of hand, and revenged the same with blood. Progne.
For what cause did Progne king Pandions daughter of Athens kill her own son
Itis, and gave him to be eaten unto his father, and her housebande king Tereus
of Thrace, nothing but to revenge her sister Philomela, whom her housebande
defloured her. Why did Nero that cruel Emperor kille Seneca his master, Nero.
and teacher in all his youth: for nothing but to revenge old stripes, which
he received at his master, being a boie. For what purpose did Cateline Silla,
Damasippus Marius and other, take quarelles to plage Rome, to punish all
Italy, to destroy the country, for nothing, but for that they could not
abide one above an other. Darius.
Darius after that he had taken the City of Babylon, he revenged his old
malice after this sort, as Herodot in his third book affirms: He made three
thousand of the best within the City be hanged. Attila.
Attila King of Pannonia slew a leven thousand virgins, at the besiegyng of
Colonia. So diverse were reuengeme^t amongst men, Xerxes. Herodotus^ lib. 7.
so cruel, yea so foolish that Xerxes and Cirus, two great kings of
Persia, that when the water of Hellespont molested Xerxes, and troubled his
soldiers, he forth with commanded that the sea Helespont should have three
hundred stripes: and willed three hundred pair of Featters to be thrown unto
Hellespont, to bind the sea. Even so did Cirus for that the river Gindes, did
droune one of Cirus best geldynges, he made his soldiers to divide the river
unto a hundred, and four score small parts, to revenge Gindes rage toward
Cirus, thinkyng that by breaking of the great rage of so great a stream,
that he well and worthily requited the injuries of Gindes. These are cruel
reuengers, too many are of these, in so much that women revenge their malice
after this sort. As Tomiris Queen of Scithia, Tomiris.
who to revenge her soonne Mergabites death slew king Cirus, and two
thousands of his soldiers: Too great a slaughter for one man's death, and
not yet satisfied, until she bathed Cirus head in a great vessel full of
bloudde. Beronice. Poll. a.
This Beronice Pollia, and diverse cruel women beside could do, the one is
dooen with anger and sin, the other is dooen with virtue, and aduisemente.
For princes must use aduisement in revenging, and must use wisdom in
sufferaunce. For as Frederick the Emperor, was often wont to say, that
Princes that revenge hastily, and specially wrongfully, are like fair marks
for good archers to shoot at High towers and lofty buildings, are sooner
fiered with lightenynges, then low houses, and small cottages. Tiberius.
For Tiberius Caesar Emperor of Rome, being in the Senate house, to punish
those evils, and to revenge those harms, that were by some of the city
threatened toward his estate. God forbid said he, that Tiberius should have
so much idle time, to hear evil spoken, much less to revenge evil done.
Antigonus king of Macedonia, Antigonus.
besiegyng a Castle in Greece, wherein a number of bold Greeks used for their
pastyme and sport, to scoff this king, knowing the situation of the Castle to
be in such a place, that might not be subdued. They therefore laughyng him
to scorn, as well for his enterprice therein* as also for his slender person,
and crooked nose, which king Antigonus had said, he would revenge all their
doings, with sufferaunce, and hoped thereby to moleste the enemies double.
Diverse Heathen princes were acquainted with this reuengement: as Lisander,
Agesilaus, and others, for unto God only belongs vengeance. I will not
speak here of such reuengyng, of Princes, of Countries, of friends that al
men know. But of rare reuengement, Socrates.
which Philosophy taught unto Socrates, toward Xantippe, who being at
supper, having a strange geste named Enthidemum, his wife Xantippe began to
take her housbande up, with tauntyng and opprobrious words, which because he
would not auswere, and be moved by her chidinges, she ouerthrewe the table with
all the meat and the Cups, which when Enthidemum saw, he was amazed at the
ragyng of Xantippe, beholding Socrates in the face, to see how he thought of
the matter, but Socrates understanding that his geste did marvel at his wife,
said: have not you sometime at home a Hen, that will after long clockyng
with a sudden flight, throw down your cups with her wyng, wherewith
Enthidemum was fully satisfied, with the wise answer of Socrates, in
reuengyng so great a fault. Phocio^.
Phocion a learned man of Athens, was wont to say, that he had rather suffer
injury wrongfully, then to revenge injury sometime rightfully. This man
Phocion, by whom Athens long flourished, at what time he was put to death
most wrongfully of the Athenians, even a little before he should die, being
demanded whether he would command any thing unto his soonne, standing
thereby to see his father end: Spoke unto his son after this sort: My son
said he, this I charge and require thee, and moreover beseech, that thou will
never revenge the wrongful death of thy father Phocion upon the Athenians.
Solon a noble learned Athenian, Solon.
was wont to revenge his wrongs with these words. If the fissherman suffer
the salt water of the Sea, to sprinkle upon his face, and upon his clothes, to
weate him for to take Fish, how much more ought Solon suffer to speak, to
win the^ to be friends. Surely these three Philosophers, deserve more praise
and commendation I mean Socrates, Phocion, and Solon for the reuengyng of the
evil with goodness and virtue: Then ever Alexander the Great, or Julius
Caesar, or Theseus, which revenged evil with evil. Wherefore Chilon the
Lacedemonian, being one of the officers called Ephori, in the City of Sparta,
his brother demaundyng why he might not be likewise one of the five Ephori, as
well as his brother: said unto his brother, because I can suffer wrong, and
thou canste not. Therefore princes ought not to do wrong nor yet revenge wrong
with wrong, but with paciente sufferaunce and goodness, and doing good for
evil, they shall make foes to become friends, evil men to become good, by
preuentyng evil with lenity and gentleness. It behooves not a wiseman to
revenge injuries, neither does it become a prince to requite evil with the
like, but overcome rather the evil with good. Therefore was it truly spoken
of the wiseman Sapit qui sustinet, he that can suffer is very wise.

Of Theft and Sacrilege.
AFTER that greedy desire unto wealth had possessed a place in man's heart, and
after that the world was altered from a wealth in common, unto a private
wealth, every man with study and industry to augment his own, with the
spoil of others. And because Princes began one to suppress an other, to
spoil and destroy either others dominion, mouyng first noble men to imitate
them in stealyng and taking away perforce others wealth, thought it be not an
apt epitheton for princes to be called thieves, and spoylers, yet truly by
Princes it began, by nobles imitated, and by all the world at length practiced,
that some became Pirates upon the Seas, some Sacriledges of Temples, and some
graunde Thieves of countries and kingdoms. For after the deluge of Noah, there
was neither theft or sacrilege known almost 300. years until Ninus the
third, Ninus.
king of the Assirians who first began to play the Theif in Asia, Dionisius.
Dionisius, king of Sicilia and tyrant of all the world, the greatest robber
that ever reigned upon earth, being not satisfied with spoil and theft upon
Lands and Seas, but also became a Sacrilege in the Temples of the gods, which
he so neglected, that after he robbed the Temple of Iuppiter in Olimpia, he
passed forth unto Locris to spoil the Temple of Proserpina, and from thens
unto Epidaurus to steal the golden beard of Aesculapius. This Tyraunte king
would not suffice him self, until he worthily had merited the name of a thief a
pirate, Xerxes.
and a sacrilege. Xerxes spared not emongeste others wicked spoils, to send
four thousand of his soldiers to Delphos, to rob the Temple of Apollo,
Spartacus a great prince, Spartia*
and a maintainer of thieues, gathered a whole army of fugitive persons,
vagaboundes, thieues, and robbers, and marched toward Rome, with wars either
to conquer Rome, or to be conquered by Rome, but there was he, and all roges
vanquished by Pu. Crassus. The City of Rome was often in peril by Thieues and
robbers, as by Silla Catilin, and Marius famous spoilers of Italy. And as
Cercion did rob and spoil after the Country of Athe^s, so Tittigias in
Arcadia was renoumed. For theft I might in this place, speak of the robbery of
the Emperor Nero, Nero. Heliogabal^^. Caligula.
of the spoil and waste of that beastly Emperor Heliogabalus, and of the
sacrilege and theft of Caligula. These three Emperors stale alwais, spoiled,
and took from Rome, more then ever they gave to Rome. Marcellinus writes,
that there was sometime a King of the Parthians named Arsaces, Arsaces.
which in the beginning of his reign, was then named the master of thieves, a
teacher and a schoolemaister unto all robbers and spoilers, which afterward he
subdued Seleucus Alexanders successoure, he became famous and renoumed in
marshall feats, and civil policy. Herodotus likewise does report of one
Amazis, Amasis.
a King of Egipte, who when at any time money wanted, he was wont to spoil,
waste, and take a way all that ever he might, either by stealthe, or force.
Thus the names of Princes first was corrupted, that the Poets judged well and
worthily, Mercury to be the God of Thieves And for the antiquity of theft,
it is thought that Prometheus Duealions Father, as Poets do faigue, by the
aid of Minerua, stool first fire from Phoebus, for the which fact, was
punished in mount Caucasus, after this sort he was bound fast, by all the
Gods and an Egle appoincted to eat up his heart, and to hale his puddynges a
long, in furtheraunce and memory of his theft. Hercules and Jason, two of the
most famous princes that ever Greece fostered, went unto Cholcus, to steal the
golden Fleece. Theseus and Perithus went unto the kingdom of Pluto, to steal
Proserpina away. But I will not speak of such Theft, for too many examples
should be read in that behalf. If I might use such scope of writing, but I
will briefly pass over, and speak only of aunciente, and famous Thieves,
which for that the number is infinite, I (omittyng tediousness) speak of
few for a proof of my matter. There was dwelling in a rock nigh Athens* a
famous Thief named Sciron, which was wont to throw headlong, strangers
that were gestes, over a rock unto the sea, and after that he had continewed a
long time in spoilyng, and murtheryng of men that passed by, in taking their
gooddes, and lives away, he was in the same sort of Theseus put to death on
the rocks unto the Seas, as he was wont to do with others. Cacus whom Virgil
makes mention, the son of Vulcanus was so crafty a thief, that having a
den in mount Auentine, he used to draw any thing bacwarde by the tail, unto
his cave where he spoiled it, whether it were manne or beast, there should he
be brought, Cacus.
by sleight of Cacus to be destroyed, until he attempted to spoil Hercules
by stealthe, which after long wrastlyng in his den, Hercules with his clubbe
slew him. Scinius.
The famous Thief Scinius used such feats, and theftes about Corinth, that
he would bind any passer by or strangers unto trees, and there would hew
them unto small gobbettes for their money and substance. These three last
renoumed Thieves, are much mentioned of writers, for even as Capiton kept him
self fifty years in a den, as a common robber to steal and to spoil, so
did they consume their time severally, and in sondery countries, as graund
Thieves. The Argiues were men most noted infamous, for this fault, in so
much that a Proverb grew of the Argiues, Argiuifures, that is, Argiues are
Thieves. With the Persians there were certain thieves called Cardaces,
permitted without punishment, to steal and to rob. The old Germans and
ancient Egiptians might sometime by law, and liberty of their country
likewise steal. Lycurgus made laws in Sparta, emo^gest the Lacedemonia^s,
that he which did steal without reprehentions, or taking with the theft,
should be free, and he which could not artificially steal, and attempt
Theft being taken, should be punished, in so much Brusonius in his second
book, Brusonius.
does entreat of a young man, that stole a young Fox, the owner thereof
followyng after, demaundyng whether the young man, saw any where a little
Fox, he denied, chidyng the Fox under his cloak, but the Fox a subtle
beast, willing to show him self unto his master, did bite and scratche the
yongman so sore, that his puddynges gusshed out of his side, because he
suffered him self so to die, by reason that he would not manifest his theft.
The yongman then deniyng, answered and said: I had rather die, then to be
taken with theft. Wherefore Theophrastus a noble Philosopher, Theophrastus.
having the examinyng of a subtle Thief, demanded whether he could blusshe
or no, to the which the thief answered that he could not, for he need not
to blushe, in a true matter: Therefore says Theophrastus, thou art the liker
to be a Thief, for truth always bears before a shamefaste, and a blushfull
countenance. Wherefore the wise Cato the Senior was wont to say, that
yongmen that waxed redd, were better to be trusted, then those that would wax
pale, for the one signifies shamfastnes, and the other deceit. For Pithias
Aristotle's daughter being demanded, what color was best in man or woman, she
answered, that color that shamefastnes brings, which is a bluffull
countenance. But to speak of Pirates, Sextus Pompeius the son of Pompeius
the G^eate, kept under him diverse and sondery Pirates, about the borders of
Italy, and Cicilia, to rob and spoil upon the Seas, unto his great infamy
and reproach, being the soonne of so famous a Roman, whom Rome a long time
so esteemed, that Caesar skante might have the like. To write of King Pirrhus,
Pirrhus. Verres.
and Caius Verres, whom Cicero for his sondery theftes and spoil, and by
diverse sacrileges by Verres committed, compared unto Dionisius the aforesaid
tiraunt, it were but superfluous. To speak of infinite Pirates, and diverse
Sacrileges, it were to none effect for that it is a common practice in all
countries. Therefore as Diogines the Philosopher said, when he saw a poor
manne lead between the Magistrates, to the place of execution, behold said
he, a little Thief between a great number of Thieves. God grant that it may
truly be spoken of diverse magistrates in sundry places.

Of lust.
THE spoil and slaughter of lust, did always far pass all other vices, it
has suppressed Castles and countries, it has vanquished Kings and Kesars,
ouerthrown the po^pe of Asia, Africa and Europe, and almost depopulated the
whole world. This vice of all vices is to be abhorred and detested, for there
is no vice but it is addicted of it self to apply those, which it does best
fancy, as pride chiefly has her seat appoincted in puisant Princes and Noble
men. Coueteousnes with old men that be magistrates and officers. Envy with
men of sciences and faculties. Usurie with Citizens, Symonie with Bishops and
Priests, Hypocrisy with religious men, Deceit with Merchants, but lust
common unto all men, as well to the subject as to the Prince, to the learned as
to the ignorant, t^ the wise as to the foolish. David.
For David and his son Salamon, Solomon.
unto whom God gave singularity of wisdom, dexterity of wit to govern the
Isralites, yet the sacred scriptures does witness of their horrible lust.
David lusted for Bersaba, and that so wickedly, that he appointed away to
spoil her housbande Vrias, Salamon lusted so much that he did forget his GOD,
that did guide his steaps all the while he ruled justly and lived godly in
Israel. Aristotle. Socrates.
Aristotle and Socrates in spit of their Philosophy and great knowledge, then
became a slave to Hermia, the other a subject unto Aspasia. Samson. Hercules.
Samson and Hercules for all other strength and conquest of Giauntes and
Monsters, the one yealded his Clob at Dianiras foot, the other committed his
strength unto the beauty of Dalida. The renoumed and sugared Orators
Demosthenes and Hortentius, Demosthenes. Hortensius.
the one from Athens came unto Corinth to compounde for a nights lodgyng with
Lais, the other in Rome with nicenes and wantonness was judged more subject unto
lust, then lord over himself. If then witty and wise men, if learned and
discreet men, if eloquent and subtle men, if strong and mighty conquerours
have been ruled by lust, deceived by beauty, overcome with women, what should I
speak of Heliogabalus not well named Emperor, Heliogabolus.
but worthily called the beast of Rome. What should I recite that monster and
tyrant Nero, Nero.
what should I rehearse that filthy and vile Emperor Caligula, Caligula,
the only stincke of sin and shape of shame, not Emperors, but monsters,
not Princes, but Tyrauntes, not men but beasts which defile their own
sisters, kept open stews and brothell houses, maintained Hoores and
harlottes, made laws at their banquettes every man to his woman first, and
then to his meat, and at the change of every dishe, every man again
commanded by law to go to his woman, and thus from meat to women, from women
to meat, beastly and brutishly consumed their Epicuriall lust, wherein these
Gorgo^s reposed their chief felicity. Certainly if Queen Semiramis of Babylon
had been matched with Heliogobalus Emperor of Rome, Semiramis.
it had been as meet a match, if time had served as one beast should be for
another, for he was not so filthy but she was as shameless, not only in
procuryng diverse to lie with her, but in alluryng her own soonne Ninus to
lust, and as writers report being a beast, matched her self with a beast a
horse. Phasiphae.
Had Phasiphae queen of Crete been well matched, she had forsaken king Minoes
and come to the emperor Caligula, where she might been as boulde with others,
as she was with Mynotaurus father, Messalina.
had the Empress Messalina been worthily according unto her lief married she
had been more meet for Nero, then for Claudius, for his life and her life did
well agree together, for she past all the Courtezaunce of Corinth, all the
Strumpets of Athens, and all the hoores of Babylon, for she was only mistress
and ruler of all the stews and brothell houses in Rome, what wickedness
proceeded from lust, what ungodly incest is brought to pass by lust, what
secret vengeance comes by lust, lust allured queen Cleopatra to use her
brother Ptholomeus as her housband. Lust deceived King Cynare to lie with his
daughter Mirrha, lust brought Macareus unto his sisters Canaces bed, by luk
did Menephron Defile his own mother. O wicked monster, O beastly rage, O
fearce feinde thus to bewitche wise men, to deceive learned men, to subdue
strong men, and to overcome all men, lust staieth the purpose of all men,
hinders and hurts all kind of persons, Antiochus.
lust stayed king Antiochus of Siria in Chalcidea a whole winter for one maid
he fancied there, lust stayed Hanniball in Capua, Haniball.
a long season to his great hurt. Caesar.
Lust stayed Julius Caesar in Alexandria a long time unto his infamy, lust
was the first cause of wars between the Romans and the Sabines. Romulus.
For Romulus skant builded Rome, but he lusted to ravish the women, and to
steal the Sabine maids unto Rome whereby war first began. The great wars
between king Cambises of Persea, Cambises.
and king Amasis of Aegipt, Amasis.
wherein a great slaughter and morther of men, were grown of lust unto one
woman. The tennne years betwixt the Thebans and the Phoceans, was for the lust
of one young man in Phoca toward a young woman in Thebes. The cruel conflictes
between the Trojan prince Aeneas and stout Turnus was lust that either of
them bare unto Lauinia king Latinus daughter. Aeneas. Turius.
What blood, what tyranny was between the Aegiptians and the Assirians,
Ptholom^^
between Ptholomeo and Alexander the one king of Aegipte, Alexander.
the other king of Assiria, and all for one woman Cleopatra* Augustus.
Augustus the Emperor kept long wars for Octauia his sister which
Anthonius through lust defiled to the spoil and murder of many Romans,
Anthonius.
had Ixiona King Priamus sister not lusted to go with Thelamonius Thelamonius.
from Troie unto Greece, Paris.
had likewise Hele^ Menelaus wife not lusted to come with Paris from Greece
unto Troy the bloody wars and ten years siedge between the Greeks and the
Trojans had never been written of Homer. Had not lust ruled the five cities
called Pentapolis, where Sodom and Gomer were, the earth had not swallowed
them up, to the destruction of all the people, saving Lot and his children. If
lust had not ruled all the world, the deluge of Noach had not drouned the
whole earth and all living creatures, saving Noach his wife and his children.
Thus lust from time to time was the only Monster and Scourge of the world.
And in this our age lust is nothing diminished, but much increased, and
though not to be plagued with water according unto promise, yet to be
punished with fire most sure we be, unless we detest and abhor this vice.
There is a history worthy to be noted of Princes in Iustine that will not
punish these offenses. Pausanias a noble gentleman of Macedonia, being a very
fair young man, which Attalus for lust much abused, and not contented
wickedly and ungodly to handle the young man, so brought him unto a banquet
where in his winkyng Attalus would have used him as before, making all men
privy how Pausanias was king Attalus paramour as a woman, thus the young
manne being ashamed, often complained unto Philip king of Macedonia, which
Philip had married then of late the suster of Attalus, Attalis.
and had divorced and put away Olimpias the mother of Alexander the great,
for some suspicion, Pausanias I say after many and diverse complaints made
unto king Philippe, having no redress thereof, but rather was flouted and
scoft at Philippes hand, Pausanias took it so grievously, that Attalus was so
esteemed with the king, being the cause of his complaints, and he so neglected
that was so minded, he after this sort requited his shame and injuries. At the
marriage of Cleopatra, king Philippes daughter, and Alexander King of Epire, in
great triumphs and pompes, King Philippe in the middeste of joys, walkyng
between his own son Alexander the Great, who then was but young, and
Alexander king of Epire his soonne in law, being married then unto his
daughter Cleopatra, Pausanias thruste him unto the heart, saying: minister
Justice, and punish lust. Thus died that mighty Prince, as well for the
bearyng of Attalus fault, as also for his own wickedness, vsyng the same
sometime with a brother in law of his, natural brother unto his first wife
Olimpias. Lust and intemperancie, are never escaped without just
punishemente, and due vengeance. Ammon.
Ammon the soonne of king David, for that he misused his own sister Thamar,
Absalon.
was afterward slain. Absalon for that he did lie with his fathers Concubine,
died for it. David was plagued for Urias wife. Diuid.
The two Elders that would rauishe Susanna, were put to death. This sin is
the only enemy of man. For all sins says saint Paul, is without the
body, but uncleanness and lust, synneth against the body. Therefore to
avoid sight, oftentimes is to avoid lust. Had not Holofernus seen the beauty
of Judith, Iudic. 101
yea, marked the comlines of her slepeares, he had not lost his head by it.
Had not Herod seen Herodias daughter dauncyng, he had not so rashely granted
her Ihon Baptiste head. Mark.
Had not Eua seen the beauty of the Aple, she had not eaten thereof. Genesi. 3.
We read in the Genesis, that when the sons of men, viewed the beauty of
women, many evils happened thereby. By sight was Pharaos wife moved in lust
toward Joseph her servant. By sight and beauty was Solomon allured, Regum. 2.
to commit Idolatry with false Gods. By sight was Dina the daughter of Jacob
ravished of Sichem. These evils proceed from sudden sightes. Therefore does
the Prophet say, turn away thine eyes, lest they se vanities. The
Philosopher likewise says, that the first offer or motion is in the eye,
from sight proceadeth motions, from motion election, from election consent,
from consent sin, from sin, death. Wherefore with the Poet I say, resist
the violence of the first assault, I mean the eyes, the evil that happened
thereby, too long it were to write. Lust again has an entrance by hearing,
as Iustine in his.xij. book does testify of Thalestris Queen sometime of
the Amazones, Thalestris.
which having heard the great commendations, the fame, and renown of
Alexander the Great, ventered her life to hazard to come from Scithia unto
Hircania, which was as Iustine says xxv. days iourneis, in great danger
and peril of life, as well by wild beasts, waters, as also by foreign foes.
She had three hundred thousands women of Scithia in company with her. I say
for the fame she heard of this great Prince, she came from her country, where
she was a Queen, to lie with a stranger by lust. And when she had accomplished
her mind, and satisfied her lust: after thirty nights liyng with him, she
thought she was spead of some ofspryng of Alexander, she returned unto her own
country again. For as Cicero does write, we are more moved by report
oftentimes to love, then by sight. For as by report, Queen Thalestris came
to lie with Alexander, for children sake, from Scitha unto Hercania, for his
magnanimity, victories, and courage. So by report came Queen Saba from
Ethiope unto Solomon, Saba.
to hear, and to learn wisdom. O golden world, Oh happy age, when either
for simplicity men could not speak, or for temperauncie men would not
speak the innocence of the^ then, and the subtlety of us now, the
temperancie of their age, and the lust of our age, being well waighed, and
thoroughly examined, it is easily to be seen, how virtuously they lived in
ignorauncie, and how viciously we live in knowledge. For before Aruntius
proud Torquinius soonne, Aruntius.
was by lust moved toward Collatinus wife. There was no alteration of states,
nor change of Common wealths, no banishement of princes in Rome, and being
changed for that purpose only from a Monarchy, unto an other state called
Aristocratia, it continued so long in that form, Appius.
which was the first change, until Appius ravished Virginius daughter,
which banished the order called Decemuiri, which was the second change. And
thus the popular state, which had chief rule always of Rome, changed states
of the City diverse times, for that lust so reigned. Thus might I speak of
diverse other countries, which lust was the just cause of the subversion
thereof. For of one Venus a stru^pet in Cipres, al Cipria was full of hores. Of
one Semiramis in Babylon, all Persia length grew full of Queen's. Of one
Rhodope in Egipte, at the beginning, all the country became full of
strumpettes. Floralie.
In Rome Flora was honored like a Gods, having such solempnitie played on
Theators called according unto her own name Floralia, In Thebes was Phrine so
magnified, that her name was put in print upon every gate of the city. For
Lais in Corinth* and Lamia in Athens, their fame was more heard, then their
honesty known. It grew in fine to that strength, that all the Princes of
the world, were as bulwarks, and defenders of lust. Yea, learned
Philosophers, and wise law setters, seemed to defend the same in writing. As
Licurgus and Solon, two famous wisemen, the one a law setter amongst the
Lacedaemonians people, in the beginning more axperte in the banners and flagges
of Mars, then studious or desirous, to hunt the palaces of Venus. The other
law setter in Athens people likewise, more frequentyng at the first, the
school of Minerua, then the lurkyng dens, and secret caves of Cupide. These
two famous men, made laws to maintain lust, under this color and pretexte
of issue, every young woman being married to an old man, they might for
children, take choice what young man they would of their housebandes name. So
likewise migt an old man elect, being married to an old woman. Aristotle,
Aristotle seems to defend this law after a sort, for seed sake. So
Abraham's wife Sara after a sort, Sara.
willed her housebande to accompany with a young maid, for that he might have
children. Sempronia. Sappho.
As for Sempronia a woman excellently well learned in the Greek, and Latin. And
learned Sapho, a woman of no less fame, then of learning, defend lust by
writings. I might have a large scope herein, to prove lust a lord to rule,
and to govern every where. I have sufficiently I hope, declared the effect of
lust. For as princes wise, stout, and learned, have been herein a subject.
So the Poets feign, that the Gods them selfs, have yielded to the might of
lust. What I pray you, Jupiter. Neptune. Mercury. Apollo. Bacchus. Pan.
translated Jupiter unto a Bull. Neptune unto a horse. Mercury unto a Goat:
Lust. What moved Apollo to be in love with Daphnes? What caused Bacchus to
favor Gnosida? What made Pan to yield unto Sirinx lust? This I mean, what
moved wise, learned, stout, and strong, as well as the foolish, the
ignoraunte, the weak, and the simple, but only that corruption of Nature,
that seed, fexe, and dregs of Adam, which equally without grace, move all
men to sin. For there is no man, but he is privy unto lust, moved by lust,
and sore assaulted by lust. Yet there be some that subdueth lust, some that
rules lust, and none that va^quishe lust. For as some are borne chaste, so
some do make them selves chaste, and some are made chaste, and yet not
without lust. I speak not of Proculus the Emperor, which kept at his
pleasure a hundred maids of Sarmatia. Proculus.
Whether do I think herein of Sardanapalus king of Siria, Sardanapalus*
which was always wearied with Venus, but never satisfied with Venus. But I
speak of those that fight, and wrestle against nature: of those I say, that
are in common combats with the world, the flesh, and the Devil. For lust
said Ovid, is I wot not what, and comes I wot not whence, it takes root^
without breakyng of flesh, and pearceth the very entrails of the heart,
without any cuttyng of vain, the only business and travail of idle men. The
young Roman knight Estrasco at mount Celio, Estrasc^*
beholding the beauty of lady Verrone, either of them by Nature dombe, one
fell in love with the other so sore, that Estrasco would often go from Rome to
Salon, and Verrone would as often travail from Salon unto Rome, one to see the
other, and continued thus thirty years the dombe love, until it fortuned that
the wife of Estrasco died, and the housebande of lady Verone died also.
Whereby these lovers thirty years without words, did both manifest their
long desire by a marriage. Masinissa.
So was Masinissa king of Numidia, and Sophonissa a Lady of Carthage, one
inflamed with the other, by a sight that king Masinissa had of Sophonissa. The
like is written of that most valiaunte Captain Pirrhus, Pirrhus
the long defender of the Tarentines, and king of Epirotes, when he came from
Italy unto Neapolis, being but one day there, he fell in love with a fair
lady called Gamalice, to the great infamy of so famous a prince, and to the
great shame of so noble a Lady. The like lust a rested that noble and
renoumed conqueror Alexander, Alexander.
that when he thought to give battles unto the queen of the Amozons, having a
sight of her at a River side, where they both, the King and the Queen, had
appoincted to come to talk concerning their wars, their fury and rage before
bent to fight, and murder was by a sight, changed unto wanton pastyme and
sport. We do read that when Queen Cleopatra made a banquet for Anthonius
her lover, Cleopatra.
in the Province of Bithinia, in the wood Sechin, where the young virgins were
not so wily to thide them in the thick bushes but ye youthful Romans were
as crafty in finding them, so that at that instant of sixty young virgins,
fifty and five speade of the names of mothers. Thus we perceive that by
sight, we are moved to lust, and by consent we wilfully sin, the one in the
eye, the other in the heart, therefore better it is with Sophocles, for a man to
turn his back from a fair woman, and to say a mad dog, then with Nero
to behold beauty, who looking to earnestly upon Pompeias here, was moved
thereby to lusts.

Of Ielowsie.
A Question refused of all the Gods to be answered whether man or woman is
more ielowsie, for as the poets feign, there sprung a contention between
Jupiter and Juno, concerning Lechery and Ielowzy, and having no equal judge to
speak of this matter, it was posted, after great controversy unto one
Tiresias an ancient and learned Poet sometime in Thebes, The history of
Tiresias,
which Tiresias on a certain time metyng two Snakes accompanyng together,
and according unto kind engenderyng together, having a white rod in his
hand, departed them with sharp strokes. Wherewith Juno being moved with
anger, transformed this poor Poet Tiresias, from a man to be a woman, and
being in the shape of a woman seven years, was reduced by Jupiter unto his
first form. This Tiresias was thought most meet of Jupiter and Juno, by the
consent of all the Gods, for that he had been a woman seven years, and now
a man again to Judge of this question. And being called unto the Bar to give
his Uerdite, Juno*
he preferred Juno for Ielowsie, whereby Juno waxed angry, and made him
blind, and Jupiter to recompense his truth, made him a Prophet. And then he
proved that when Jupiter fell in love with Iolla, Juno being suspicious and
full of Ielowsie, caused one named Argos with an hundred eyes to watch
Jupiter, which for all his eyes was deceived, Juno thereby was so furious and so
angry with Argos, that she translated his hundred eyes unto a Pecockes tail,
and transformed Iola unto a white Cow. There is no such rage nor anger in
Ielowsie, as there is wilines and craft in love, so that the straight pinning
and keeping of Danaes king Acrisius daughter in Towers and Castles, cold never
keep her from valiant Perseus, neither the hundred eyes of Argos might spy the
craft of Jupiter unto Iola. We read of a womanne named Procris, Procris.
who was in such Ielowsie of her housbande which was called Cephalus, and
having him in suspicion for his often going a huntyng, on a certain time she
followed him privily unto the woddes, thinkyng there to find her housbande at
his pray, and hiding her self in a thick bush, to see the end of things,
her housband passing by the bush, perceiuyng somthyng there, to steer, thinkyng
it had been some wild beast, thrust his wife unto the heart with his darte, and
thus Procris was slain of her own housbande, for her importunate Ielowsie. The
like happened unto Aemilius wife, which for her suspicious mind and ragyng
ielowsie, never quiet, but busy always to find some fault in her housband,
following him every where, and watchyng still in every secrette seat and
spiyng in privy places, thinking to find him with the manner, until she spead
of the like chance as Procris did, she could never rest. Cyampus wife named
Leuconoa, was devoured of dogs in stead of a wild beast, hidyng them self in
the woddes, to follow and mark her housbandes viage, Ielowsie this moved her,
that she could no otherwise. A strange kind of sickness, that so infecteth the
mind, that vexes the spirits and molesteth the heart, that the head is full
of invention, the mind full of thought, and the heart full of reuengement. So
Ielows was Phanius that invented this in his head, Phanius*
and thought this in his mind, that the doors being shut, the windows
cloase, all privy and secret places prevented, every where as he thought
stopte, his wife could not deceive him, never thought that love could pearce
Tile stones to come unto his wife, but he was deceived, for the lurkyng dens
of love, the Lion caves of fancies, the secret search of affection have more
privy paths whereby that Cupide may come to his mother Venus, then
Labiranthus had chambers for Minotaurus, king Acrisius thought he was so sure
of his daughter Danaes, when that she was close bulwarkt with a great castle,
Juno thought to prevent Jupiter by the hundred eyes of Argos, Phanius thought
that his wife was sure when the doors were shut and the windows cloase. But
since the ielowsie of Juno might not prevent it, nether the eyes of Argos spy
it, neither the straight pinning of Danaes avoid it, neither the narow stopping
of Phanius defend it. I must needs commend one called Cippius, Cippius
that would oftentimes take upon him to sleep when he did wake, and he would
be ignorant though he knew it, I wish wise men to sleep with Cippus, and
to say with Cicero, Non omnibus dormio, I sleep not unto all men, and to be
ignorant though they know things. And likewise I wish wise women to imitat
Aemilia ye wife of noble Scipio, Aemilia.
who although she knew things evident, by her housbande Scipio, made as much
of his Paramour, as she made of her housband, and al for Scipios sake. For they
say ielowsie proceadeth from love, and love from God, but I say it comes
from hatered, and hatered comes from the Devil. And because we read in the
sacred scripture, that Abraham was in ielowsie of his wife Sara, saying, thus
unto his wife, I know that thou art fair, and that they will kill me to have
thy love, the manners of the Parthia^s were to keep their wives in pruie places
of their houses, over whom they were so jealous that their wives might not go
abroad but with covered faces. The Perseans were so suspicious of their wives,
that they had no liberty to go in sight, and they durst not go a foot but in
Wagons covered over lest they should see or be seen. The Thracians with such
care and study keep their wives, that as Herodotus affirms, they trust no man with them in company but their parents. The old and ancient Romans
in times past kept their wives so straight, that their wives as Valerius
Maximus says, did after kill, poison or with some snare or other destroy
their housbandes diverse times, and by a young manne of the City of Rome all
things being discloased, there was a hundred three score and ten that so
killed and destroyed their housbandes, for that their housbandes were so ielous
over them, but because it is a common disesse in all places, I need not
further to write, wishyng my friend never to be encombred therewith but rather
with silence to pass it with Cippius, and so he shall find ease thereby.

Of Idleness.
AS nothing can be more difficult unto a willing mind, so is any thing a
burden unto the Idle member. For as labor and exercise of body in one manne,
industry and diligence of mind in an other man, are sure fortes, and strong
Bulwarckes of Countries, so Idleness and negligence, Alexander the Great,
the cause of all evil. We read that Alexander the Great, least he should
be acquainted with Idleness at any time, even in the night time used this feate,
to hold a silver balle when he went unto bed in his hand, Marcellini lib.
xvi.
having a silver basen upon the ground, straight under his stretched arm,
that when the batle should fall, he being fast a sleep, the shrill sound
thereof should wake him, and make him mindful of his enemies: so fearful was
this noble prince of Idleness, that to shake of sleep and slothfulness, he
studied and travailed, how he might avoid it. For in two things Alexander
the Great, being called the son of Jupiter, and fully persuaded with him
self, that he was of lineage of the Gods, yet in sleep and venerie, where to he
was much subject, he knew him self to be a man, wherefore he oftentimes
wrasteled with Nature in that behalf. In the self same place of Marcellinus it
is read, Caesar.
that Julius Caesar the great and most renowned Emperor, that ever reigned
in Rome, to have followed this order, and to have practiced this policy, least
he should be idle at any time, First, when this Emperor went to bed, he to
suffice nature, slepte a certain time appoincted. Secondarely, he would be
occupied in the affairs of his country. Thirdly, to travail in his private
study. Thus lest he should be idle, naie rather lest he should lose any
time, he divided every night in three parts, even as you heard first unto
nature, secondly to his country, thirdly, about his own business. That mighty
prince Philip of Macedon, Lib. vi. Capi. 8.
as we read in Brusonius, was of such care and diligence, when his soldiers
slept, he always watched. Again, he never slept before his friend. Antipater
would watch. Philippe. Antipater.
That between king Philip and Antipater, diligence was as much honored and
embraced, as slothfulnes was feared and hated. Epaminondas.
Epaminondas that renoumed prince of Thebes, being studious and careful to
profit his country, so hated slothful idleness, that findyng one of his
capitaines in the camp, in the day time slepyng, slew him straight with his
own hand, and being reprehended of his nobles and counsel, for that cruel
fact: he answered the^ in few words, I left him as I found him, comparyng
idle and drousie men, unto dead men, for men are borne to trauaill and watch,
and not to pleasure and sleep. How did Scipio Afric overthrow the tents of
king Siphax? Scipio. Siphax.
How vanquished he his host of soldiers, slew his army and how he has taken
king Siphax captive him self. Liuius says, that the diligence of Scipio, and
the slothfulnes of Siphax being a sleep, when he should had been waken,
Demosthenes.
was the cause thereof. Had Demosthenes loved idleness, he had never been able to
prevent, that famous prince Philip king of Macedon, he was so careful and so
diligent about the state of Athens, that that worthy captain and great
conqueror Philip was wont to say, that he doubted more the diligence of
Demosthenes, then he feared all the force of Athens. Had Cicero slepte, during
the conspiracy of Catilin, he had never been able worthily to speak of him
self. O happy Rome, that ever I was elected Consul, whose studious trauaill,
saved oftentimes Rome from diverse enemies. Quintilia^ recites a worthy
history, of a famous clearke named Hippias, Hippias.
who to avoid idleness, after long studiyng at his books, would exercise him
self in some thing or other, lest he seemed to be idle, in so much he applied
his mind to diverse faculties, at void hours, he used to practice the
faculty of a Goldsmith, of a Tailor, of a Shoemaker, that at length he became
his own Tailour, his own Shoemaker, yea, to make his own rings so
artificially, with pearls and precious stones, so curiously wroughte with
letters of gold, as though he had been brought up in the school Pirgoteles.
What is so hard, but diligence will try it? What is so deep, but trauaill
will wade? What is so strange but study will know it? If labor, if diligence
be thus commended, that wisemen do much commend the Be, that is so busy
and careful, and knows how to profit her self and others. If the little
Auntes be so practiced, for that the toil in the Summer, to provide against
Winter. If these selie simple worms, do provide things necessary for them and
theirs. How much more ought man, which is borne to profit his Country, his
prince, his friends and his parents. Consider the commodity of diligence, and
the danger of idleness but as before mentioned, vic^s are covered with names of
virtues, as the Idle man is noted to be a quiet man, the ignoraunte termed an
innocent. Caelus does write of a certain Emperor named Attalus, Attalus.
which loved so well idleness, that he gave the government of the Empire, to
his friend named Philopenes, for that he would be idle. We read again of one
Vatia, a great ruler and a Magistrate in Asia, that loved Idleness so well,
that the people used a Proverb, when they saw any man idle, Lucinius. Vatia.
saying: Vatia situs est, here is an idlescholer of Vatia. The Emperor
Licinius and Valentianus, were such enemies unto learning, so ignorant were
they, as Egnatius does report, that they called learning the only poison of
the world, and named them that were learned, the Asses of Cuma. Who hated
learning so much as Heraclides, Heraclides.
and Philonides which are so ignoraunte, that they were coumpted, as Caelius
does testify, as laughyng stocks, and had of the common people in great
derision, for their ignorance and folly. These blind baiardes, and bold
bedlemes, call others Asses of Cuma, when that they themselves are far
inferior to any Ass of the world. For diverse Asses had more reason then
Philonides, Philonides.
or Heraclides had. We read that Ammonius a great Peilosopher of Alexandria
had an Ass, that would accompany with Origin, and Porphiri, to frequente the
school of Ammonius, to hear him read Philosophy unto his scholars. This
Ass was taught to know the reader, and all the schoolers, to know the Schole
and the time of readyng. The sacred Scripture commends unto us the Ass of
Balam, who was likewise taught to speak and to show the Prophette Balaam the
will of God. But the Idle and ignoraunte, will neither learn to know time,
place, nor person, neither to profit them selves, nor others. These lasie
members, these idle and ignoraunte beasts, Morpheus the God of sleep.
the children of Morpheus, slepyng always in the cave of Pamedes, to whom it
well may be spoken, as Aurelian sometime an Emperor of Rome spoke unto one
Bonosius, that he was borne to drink, and not to live. The Romans hated
idleness.
The Romans used to punish idleness so sharplye, that the Housebande manne,
that had his ground barraine, that had his Pastures, Meddowes, fields
unoccupied, an other manne should be there placed, and he put out. The
gentleman that had not his horse ready, and in good likyng, with all things
thereunto belongyng, should be suspected to be an idle member unto his
country, should be hated and exchued of the people. The common people might
use no kind of private pleasure, as play, pastyme, or any other idle sport,
Gellius lib. 3. Capi. 2.
but at times appoincted. The gates of Rome were opened day and night, to
come, and to go. For the state of the Common, and as Plutarch does write, the
life and manners of all men, were diligently examined, whether they lived idle
or no. And if any would resist the ordinance of the Magistrates, his head
should be cut of, and offered unto Jupiter, in the Capitol of Rome, his
family unto the Temple of Ceres, his soonnes and daughters, sold as bondmen
unto the Tribunes and Censers. Lacedemonias.
The Lacedaemonians people, most studious to expel Idleness, brought their
children up always in hardness, to practice them in diligente doings, hated
Idleness so much, that if any in the City of Sparta, waxed gross or fat,
they suspected him straight of Idleness, and if any young manne waxed fat,
they had appointed laws that he should fast, and live so poor, until he
were again changed unto his first state. The Aegiptians.
The Egiptians aunciente people, when the Country of Egypt began to be
populous, to avoid idleness, as Plini does report, they made a great huge,
and monsterous buildyng called Pyramides, which for the mightiness and
strange workyng thereof, it was named one of the seven wonders, having lx.
thousand of young men, and continued a long time in the making thereof, and
only to avoid, and banishe idleness. The Athenia^s.
The Anthenians so abhorred, and detested idleness, when a certain man was
condemned to die, for that he was found idle in Athens, a citizein thereof
named Herondas, as Plutarch does testify was as desirous to se him, as though
he had been a prodigious monster, so strange and so maruailous was it to
hear, or to see any idle man in Athens. The people called Massilie^ses,
Massilienses.
would suffer no trauailers, neither Pilgrim, nor Sacrificer, nor any other
stranger to come within their City, lest under color of religion, or of
pilgrim, they might corrupt the youth of the city, with the sight thereof
to be idle. Indians.
The Indians had a law made by their wisemen, named Gimnosophist, that after
their meat was set on the table, the youth should be examined, what they had
done for their meat, what pain, what labor used they that whole morning
before, if they could make accoumpte of their trauaill, they should go to
dinner, but if they had been idle, they should have no meat, without they
deserved the same, with some kind of exercise, either of body or of mind. The
like did the young men of Argis, Argiues.
made accoumpte unto their Magistrates, of their occupations and works, of
their trauaill and pain. Ariopagites.
Even the Areopagites, as Valerius affirms, did imitate the Athenias in
making decrees, in setting of orders, in commaundyng their youth to avoid
Idleness, and exercise travail, then most necessary unto any common wealth,
the other most dangerous. So that some Countries are naturally given to
trauaill, as the Lidians, Phrigians French men, with others. Some again given
to Idleness, as the Persians, Corinthians, Englishemen with others. Some by
law forced to fly idleness, some by punishemente feared, some by death
enforced to labor for their living. Thus this Monster Idleness is beaten
every where, and yet embraced in most places, every man speak against
idleness, and yet a number is in love with it, magistrates and officers
appoincted to punish it, but yet they after favor it.

Of wrath and anger, and the hurts thereof.
THe famous and noble Philosopher Plato, did charge his Scholars always being
in anger or wrath, to behold them selves in a glass where they might see
such alteration of countenance, pale in color, tremblyng hands, foltred
tongues, staring eyes. In fine void of wit, deprived of reason, and being
before reasonable men, now brutishe beasts. Wherefore that great Philosopher
perceiuyng the furious and hasty nature of Alexander, Alexander.
wrote from Athens unto India, where this noble conqueror was at wars with
king Po^us, to take heed of wrath and anger saying. Anger ought not to be in
any Prince toward his inferior, for that may be mended with correction, nor
toward his equal, for it may be redressed with power, so that anger ought
not to be but against superiors, but Alexander hat no coequales, yet in vain
was Aristotle's doctrine unto Alexander in that point, for being in a banquet,
when Clitus his dear friend and foster brother, commended his father king
Philip of Macedone to be the worthiest and most renoumed prince then living,
Valerias. lib. 9. Cap. 3.
Alexander waxed upon a sudden so angry, to prefer any man before him,
though Philip was his own brother which was commended, and Clitus his
especial friend that did commend him, thinkyng rather to deserve praise at
Alexander hand, then to spead of death was thrust unto the heart with a Spear.
So hasty was this prince, that Calisthenes and Lismachus, the one his
philospher and councelour, the other his companion and friend, for few words
spoken either of them slain. Silence says Aristotle is the surest reward unto
a prince. And being sorry afterward and angry withal, yt he had likewise killed
himself, had not Anaxarchus ye philosopher stayed and persuaded him. Tygranes.
We read that king Tigranes of Armenia whom Pompeius the great did conquer,
after waxed so angry by a fall from his horse, because his son was present
and could not prevent his fathers fall, thrust him in his anger with his Dagger
unto the heart. Anger in a prince says Salamon is death, terrible is the
countenance of a king when he is oppressed with wrath, hurtful unto many,
odious unto all is the anger thereof. Nero was so furious in anger, Nero.
that he never heard any thing if it were not to his liking, but he would
requite one way or other with death, in so much in his rage and anger he
would often throw down Tables being at dinner, cups of Gold wrought with
pearls against the walls dashed, fling meat and drink away, more like unto
a furious Gorgone of hell, then a sober Emperor in Rome. Such fury reigns
in anger, Orestes.
that Orestes Agamemnons soonne slew his mother suddenly in his wrath
Clitemnestra. Such madness reigns in anger, Ajax Thelamonius.
that Ajax Thelamonius that famous and valiaunte Greek, after that Achilles
was slain in the Temple of Pallas by Paris, at the destruction of Troie, waxed
so mad and angry because he might not have Achilles harnes, which was given
before to Vlixes, that he beat Stones and blocks, fought with dead trees,
killed beasts, thinkyng to meet with Vlixes amongst them. If anger make men
murderers, if wrath make me^ mad without wit or reason to know themselves or
others, Plato.
let them imitate Plato in his anger, which being angry with any of his
scholars or servants, would give the rod to Xenocrates to correct them, for
that he was angry the learned Philosopher misdoupted himself, that he could
not use modest correction, (...).
even so Architas would always speak unto his servants which had offended
him. Happy art thou that Architas is angry, lettyng his man understand how
dangerous wrath is, for as Aristotle says, the angry man sees not the thing
which lies under his feet* Augustus.
Agustus Caesar Emperor of Rome desired Athenedorus a philosopher of Greece,
which a long time accompanied Augustus in Rome, and now ready to depart
unto Athens, his native zoile, of some sentence that the emperor might think
of him. The philosopher took a pen, and wrote in a little Table this
sentence. Caesar when thou art moved to anger speak nothing until thou haste
recited the Greeks Alphabets, a worthy lesson and a famous sentence, well
worthy to be learned of all men. There is nothing or what can be more vgglie
to behold, more terrible to look unto, then man's face when he is angry, and
the more to be feared for that he has no rule over him self. All the painters
of Persea had much to do to draw in colors the terrible countenance and
fiery face of Queen Semiramis, Semiram^s.
who like Maegera or Medusa grime Gorgons and frettyng furies of hell, when she
heard that her City of Babylon was besiedged of the enemies, being then
dressyng of her head, came with hears hangyng and fleeyng in the wind half
amazed of the news unto babylon, whose ugly and fearful image, most like
unto her at that time stood as long as Babylon continued as a monument and a
terrible mirror to marvel at. We read of the like history of Olimpias,
Olimpias.
whose anger was such when she thought of her son Alexander, she straight
ways like a ragyng Lion or a cruel Tiger, dug up the body of Iola
Alexanders taster, who was thought to be one of the conspiratours, and being
dug up, teared his body in small pieces, and being torn in pieces, gave it
to the birds of the air. Marcus Antonius.
Such anger was in Marcus Antonius toward Cicero, that he was not contented of
Ciceros death, but commanded his head to be set before him on the Table,
to feed his wrathful heart and greedy eyes, Fuluia.
and his wife Fuluia showed her anger, pulled out his toungue, pinned it unto
her Bonnette, and wear it on her head, in token and open show of her cruel
and Tigrishe heart. The noble roman Maetellus was much inflamed for to show
such hatred and anger unto Pompeius, for at what time Pompeius the great was
appointed by the Senators of Rome, Maetellus.
to succeed Maetellus in his office of proconsulship in Spain. Maetellus
perceiuyng that he was discharged, and Pompeius charged, they brake for very
anger all the furnitures of wars, he destroyed all the victualles, he
famished the Elephantes, he permitted his Soldiers te do what injury they
could against Pompeius, so much was his anger against Pompeius, that to
hinder only Pompeius, he iniuried his native city of Rome. The propretie of
anger is, to hurt diverse in seeking to offend one. As he is not wise that
can not be angry, so is he most wise that can moderate anger. The fame and
renoume that both Themistocles and Aristides, in vanquishyng their anger one
toward an other, for being sent both as ambassadors for the state of Athens,
trauailyng over a high hill, like wise men that subdued affection, and
conquired anger, Themistocles said unto Aristides, shall we both bury our
anger in this hill, and go as friends and not as enemies, and there though the
cause was great, at Athens they became friends one unto an other, forgetting
and forgeuing one another fault. Anger and wrath are the only poisons of the
words where hidden hatered does proceade, for to norishe the one is to feed
the other. Therefore it is written, that hidden hatered, private wealth, and
young men's counsel, has been the very cause of diverse destructions.
Manlius Torquatus, after he had conquered Campania, and triumphed over the
Lateus, retournyng unto the City with noble fame, and renoumed victories,
though the Senators and Elders of the City, Val. lib. 9. ca. 3.
met him in a triumph and honor of his victories: yet the young men of
Rome more disdainefull, then courteous, more odious then loving, more willing
to have his death, then desirous of his life, kept them rather his enemies
lurkyng in Rome toward him, then friends, the cause is known in Valerius.
Hidden hatered, which bear swaie in diverse places, envy and malice which
proceed from anger, and maintained with hidden hatered, is all the mischief of
the world. I will omit to speak of Caligula, Caligula.
whose anger and hatred was such, that he wished Rome but one neck, that with
one stroke he might strike it of. Neither I will recite Heliogabalus, which
emo^gest writers, is named the beast of Rome, and not the Emperor of Rome. The
histories of Catelin, Silla, and Appius, for their hatered and anger toward
their country, and native city, are extante in Plutarch and Salust, by this
anger and wrath, proceeded inuectiues and decleratio^s, and then envy and
malice, began to build their bowers, by their chief Carpe^ter anger, then
one mischief and vengeance, does always depend of the other. And because
anger is the only cause of all evil and mischief, I will speak of those two
monstrus Gorgons as things incident, and always hidden in anger, I mean
envy and malice, and therefore I apply to Envy and Malice, which might be
spoken here.

Of Perjury and Faith, and where either of these were honored, and esteemed.
Sith Faith is the foundation of Justice, and Justice the chief means, as
Aristotle says, to preserve a public weal, for we se after much fomyng
and frettyng of seas, after clustryng clouds, after long lowryng looks,
there do often appear calm weather, clear air, and gentle countenance,
which to observe, and to maintain Justice, is the worker thereof, and to note
how faithful and just some have been, and how wicked and false others showed
them selves, for the commodity and benefit of that one, and for the
discommoditie and injuries of the other, good it were to show the examples
thereof. There are not so many virtuous in one, but there be as many vices in
an other. Clodius and Cicero.
For some from foes become friends, as Clodius and Cicero two great enemies a
long time, and yet in time two faithful friends. Tiberius likewise, and
Affricanus from mortal foes, Tiberius and Affricanus.
grew to be such perpetual friends, that Affricanus gave his only
daughter Cornelia in marriage unto Tiberius. Even so some again from friends
became foes, yea, from tried friendship, Dion.
unto mortal enemitie, as Dion of Siracusa of his most assured friend (as he
thought) with whom always before he found frendshippe and faith, was slain
and cruelly killed of Callicrates. Calicrates.
Polimnestor likewise, though king Priamus supposed great trust and confidence
in him, that he committed his own soonne Polidorus unto his custody,
Polymnestor.
yet falsely slew him, and murdered him: though beside frendshippe, he was his
nigh kinseman. How well says Socrates, that faithefull friends do far
excel Gold, for in danger faith is tried, and in necessity freindes are
known. Such is the secret force of Faith, and such is the hidden subtlety
of falsehode, that the praise and commendations of the one, shall be seen and
proved in a history of Sextus Pompeius, Pompeius.
soonne and heir unto Pompeius the Great, the slander and shame of the
other, shall be manifestly known by Hanibal Ar^^l^ar son of Carthage.
Haniball.
The Faith and Justice of Pompeius, at what time he had appoincted a banquette
for Augustus Caesar* and Marcus Antonius upon the seas, was well tried, for
being moved of diverse at that time, to revenge his fathers death Pompeius the
great, and specially often stirred by his friend* and Master of the Ship.
Menedorus to requite old malice, for killyng of Pompeius, to destroy Caesar
and Antonius, which Sextus, in no ways would suffer, saying: that Faith and
Justice, ought not to be turned unto perjury and falshed, for as it is
perjury, to omit faith and promise made unto these Emperors, so this is
tyra^nie and not justice, to revenge my fathers death upon innoce^cie. And true
it was that Augustus Caesar was then but a boie, brought up in School in
Apulia, when his uncle Julius Caesar vanquished Pompei. And as for Marcus
Antonius, rather a freinde he was unto Sextus Father, then a foe, and therefore
no less Faithful was Sextus in performyng, then just in waiyng innocence.
Far unlike unto fal^e Haniball, which under pretense of peace with the
Romans sent Ambassadors unto Rome to entreat thereof, where they were
honorably received: but well requited he the courtesy of Rome toward his
Ambassadors. For when that noble Romain Cornelius came from Rome, as an
Ambassador unto Haniball, his welcome was such* that he never went a live
unto Rome again, for most cruelly and falsely was he slain by Haniball. In
this falshed and perjury was Haniball much defamed, not as much corrupted by
vileness of his own nature, which always in this, was not to be trusted,
but by the falshode and corruption of the Country, of which it is
prouerbially spoken Poeni perfidi, false Carthaginians for the people of
Carthage delited in falshode* practiced perjury, and used all kind of crafts,
as the people of Sarmatha were most false in words, most deceiptfull in
deeds, and most cruel one toward an other. The Scithians being much
molested with wars, and driven to leave their wives at home, in the custody
of the slaves and servants, they having occasion to be absent iiij. years
whose wives married the servants, Carthage.
brake their former Faith with their own housbandes, until with force and
power their servants were slain, and so recovered their countries and wives
again. Apollonius.
Apollonius the chief governor of Sam^os. whom the commons of the Country,
from low estate had exalted unto dignity unto whom they committed the
government and state of Samios, was so false of his faith toward his
subjects, that having their goods, lands, livings, and lives in his own
hand, he betrayed them unto Philip king of Macedonia, their most mortal
enemy. That proud periurer Cocalus king of Sicilia, Cocalus.
slew king Minoes of Crete, though under color of frendshippe, and pretense of
talk he had sent for him. Cleomenes.
Cleomenes brake promise with the Argiues, with whom he took truce for
certain days, craftily betrayed them in the night, slew them being sleping,
and emprisoned against his former faith, Thracians periuries.
and promise made before. Even so did the false Thracians with the Boetians,
brake promise, violated faith, destroyed their countries, depopulated their
cities, and of professed friends, and vowed faith, became wicked foes, and
false traitors. But of all false periurers, Zopirus. Lasthenes.
and unnatural foes, shall Zopirus amongst the Persians, and Lasthenes
amongst the Olinthians to their perpetual slander and reproach, be
mentioned, of the one borne in the famous city of Babylon, deformed him self
in such sort, with such dissimulation of forged faith, that having the rule
and government in his hand, he brought king Darius to enjoy that, through his
perjury and falshode, that with long wars in many years, he might not
va^quishe nor subdue: The other as falsely, I being ye only trust of the
citizens, delivered Olinthus their city, unto the hands of their long and
great enemy, Philippe king of Macedonia. What fraud has been found always
in friendship? What falshode in faith? What deceipte in trust, the murtheryng
of Princes, the betraiyng of kingdoms, the oppressyng of innocents from time
to time, in all places, can well witness the same. When Romulus had appoincted
Spu Tarpeius, to be chief captain of the Capitol, the chamber of Rome, where
the substance and wealth of Rome did remain. Tarpeia.
Tarpeia Spurius daughter, which in the night time, as she went for water out
of the city, metyng Tatius king of ye Sabins though he was then mortal enemy
unto Rome, and in continual wars with Romulus, yet by false Tarpeia brought
to be lord of the Capitol, thus Tarpeia being as false unto Rome, as king
Tatius was, likewise false unto Tarpeia: for she loking to have promise kept of
Tatius, found him as Rome found her. She was buried a live of Tatius by the
Capitol, which was called Saturnus mount and by her death and burial, there
named Tarpeius rock until Torquinus Superbus time, which first named it the
Capitol, by findyng a man's head in that place. There was never in Rome such
falshode showed by any man, Galba.
as was of Sergius Galba, which caused there famous cities of Lusitania to
appear before him, promising them great commodities, and diverse pleasures,
concerning the states and government of their city, yeldyng his faith and
truth, for the accomplishment of the same, whose professed faith allured to ye
number of ix. M. young men, piked and elected for some enterprises, for the
profit of their country, which when false Galba had spoiled these three
cities of al flowers of their youths, against all promise and faith, slew the
most part of them, sold and enprisoned the rest, whereby he most easily
might conquire their Cities, men are never certain nor trusty in doing, when
they are fautie in faith^, For as the Sun lighteneth the Moon, so faith
makes man in all things perfect, for prudence without faith, is vain glory
and pride. Temperaunce without faith and truth, is shamefastnes or sadness.
Justice without faith, is turned unto injury, and fortitude unto slouthfulnes.
The orders in diverse countries for the observation of friendship, and for
maintenance of certain and sure love one toward an other, were diverse oaths.
Romans custom in sweryng.
The noble Romans at what time they swear had this order he or she, to take a
flint ston in his right hand, saying these words. If I be gilty or offend any
man, betraie my country, or deceive my friend willingly. I wish to be cast
away out of Rome, by great Jupiter, as I cast this stoan out of my hand, and
withal threw the stoan away. Scythians.
The ancient Scithians, to observe amity and love, had this law. They powered
a great quantity of wine in a great Boule or a Cup, and with their knives
launced some part of their bodies, letting their blood to run likewise, one
after an other, unto that cup, and then minglyng the wine and blood together,
tipped the end of their Spears* and there Arrows in the wine, taking the boule
in hand, drank one unto another, professing by that draught, faith and love.
Arrabians.
The Arabians when they would become faithful to any, to maintain love
thereby, had this custom, one should stand with a sharp stoan in his hand,
betwixt two, and let blood in the palm of their hands, and taking of either
of them a piece of their garment, to receive their blood, anointyng and diyng
seven stones in the blood, Urania. Dionisius.
calling Urania and Dyonisius, their Gods to witness, and keepyng the stoanes
in memory of friendship, would depart one from an other. The like law amongst
the Barctians, going unto a diche, and standing thereby, Herodotus.
saying, as Herodotus affirms, as long as that holowe place or diche, were
not of it self filde up, so long desired the Barcians amity and love. In
readyng of histories, we find more certentie to have been in them by profane
oaths, then truth often in us by Evangelist and Gospel oaths, less perjury
in those Gentiles, swearyng by Jupiter or Apollo, then in Christians swearyng
by the true and living God, more amity and friendship amongst them, with
drinkyng either of others blood, then in us, by acknowledgyng and professyng
Chistes blood. When Marcus Antonius had the government of Rome, after Caesar
was murdered by Brutus and Cassius, and having put to death Lucullus for his
consent therein, Voluminous.
Voluminous hearing of his friend Lucullus death, came weepyng and sobbyng
before Antonius, requiryng on his knees one grant at Antonius hand, to send
his Soldiers to kill him upon the grave of his friend Lucullus, and being
dead, to open Lucullus grave, and to lay him by his friend. Which being denied
of the emperor then, went and wrote upon a little piece of paper, carried it in
his hand until he came where Lucullus was buried, and there holdyng fast the
paper in one hand and with his dagger in the other hand, slew him self upon
the grave, holdyng the paper close being dead, where this sentence he wrote.
Thou that kneweste the faithefull friendship betwixt Voluminous and Lucullus,
join our bodies together being dead, as our minds were always one being a
live. Nisus.
The like history is written of Nisus, when his faithful friend Eurialus, was
slain in the wars betwixt Turnus and Aeneas, he having understanding thereof,
unknown unto Aeneas, and unto the rest of the Trojans, went up and down the
field, tomblyng and tossyng dead carkeses, until he found out Eurialus
body, which after long lookyng and embrasyng of his dead friend, drew out
his swearde and heald it in his hand a little while, saying, as my body shall
never depart from thy body, so shall I never fear to follow thy ghoost, and
laiyng the Pommel of his swearde on the ground, fell upon his swearde, having
the body of his friend Eurialus betwixt his arms. This love was great
betwixt Princes, which might live honorably to die willingly. A strange thing
for men that so love their friends, to way their deaths more then their one
lives. Orestes faith and friendship toward Pylades was such, that being come
unto a strange Region named Taurica to diminishe the dolors, to assuage the
grief, and to mitigate the furious flames of Orestes, because he slew his
mother Clitemnestra, and being suspected that they came only to take away the
Image of Pallas, their goddess in that country. The king understanding the
matter, made Orestes to be sent for, and to be brought before him to have
judgment of death. For Pylades was not mentioned nor spoken of, Orestes.
but only Orestes, he it was that should steal their Gods away unto
Greece. Orestes therefore being brought, Pylades.
and his fellow Pylades with him. The king demanded which of the^ both was
Orestes, Pylades that knew his friend Orestes should die, suddenly steapt
forth and said, I am he, Orestes denied it, and said he was Orestes, Pylades
again denied that, and said that it was even he that was accused unto the
king, thus the one deniyng, and the prouyng, either of them most willing to
die for the other. The king dismaide at their great amity and love, pardoned
their faults, much extemed their company, and greatly honored their
natural love and faith, so many like histories unto this there be, that then
Princes would die for their friends, Alexander:
even that great conqueror Alexander, would have died then presently with his
friend Haephaestion, had not his counsel let him, he loved alive so well,
that he was called of all men, an other Axander, in so much so esteemed his
friend, when Sisiga^bis king Darius mother had saluted Haephaestio^ instead of
Alex. being therewith angry with her error, he said blushe not to honor
Haephaestion, Hephaestion.
as an other Alexander. What was it that Anaxogoras wa^ted, that prince
Pericles could get for him? Pericles.
Whether went Aeneas that Trojan duke at any time, Aeneas.
without Achates with him, was there nothing that Pomponius had, Pomponius.
but Cicero had part of it. Scipios friendship never wanted unto Cloelius Though
Rome could alter state, though fortune could change honor, yet could neither
Rome nor fortune alter faith, or change friends. After the Senators had
judged Tib. Gracchus for diverse seditions in the city to die, Gracchus.
Blosius.
his friend Blosius having knowledge thereof, came and kneled before the
Senators, besought Laelius (whose counsel the Senators in all things
followed) to be his friend, saying unto the rest after this sort. O sacred
Senate, and noble counsailers, if yet remain in the city of Rome, any sparcle
of justice, if there be regard unto equity, let me crave that by law, which
you injuriously apply unto an other, and sith I have committed the offenses,
and factes of Gracchus, whose commandment I never resisted, whose will to
accomplish I will during life obaie, let me die for Gracchus worthily, which
am most willing so to do, and let him live justly which so ought most truly.
Thus with vehement inuectiues against him self, craving death most earnestly
unto Blosius, and life worthily unto Gracchus, made the Senators astonished with
his rare desire of death, saying: the Capitol had been burned by Blosius, if
Gracchus had so commanded, but I know that Grachus thought nothing in heart,
but that which he spoke by tongue unto Blosius, and that which he spoke by
tongue unto Blosius, that Blosius never doubted to do: and therefore I deserve
rather death than he. The faith and love betwixt Damon and Pythyas was so
woondered at of King Dionisius, Damon and Pythias.
that though he was a cruel Tiraunt, in appoynting Damon to die, yet was he
most amazed to see the desire of Pithias, the constant faith, the love and
friendeship professed in Damons behalf, striving one with an other to die,
enforced in spite of tyranny to pardon Damon for Pythyas sake. Theseus and
Perithous became such faithful friends, that they made several oaths one
unto an other, never during life to be departed, neither in affliction, pain,
punishment, plague, toil, or travail to be disseuered: insomuch the Poets
feign that they went unto the kindome and region of Pluto together. I will not
speak of the great love of that noble Greek Achilles toward King Patro^lus^:
Neither will I recite the History of that worthy Roman Titus toward
Gisippus. In fine, I will not report Palemon and Arceit: Alexander and
Lodowicke, whose end and conclusion in love were such, as are worthy of
memory, famous in writing.

Of envy and malice, and so of tyranny.
AS malice drinks the most part of her own poison, so envy says Aristotle
hurts more the envious it self, than the thing that it enuieth. Like as the
slothful in war, or Darnell amongst Wheat, so is the envious in a City:
not so sad of his own miseries and calamities, as he lamenteth the hap and
felicity of others. Wherefore the wise Philosopher Socrates calls envy
serram animae, the sauce of the soul, for that it cutteth the heart of the
envious to see the prosperity of others. For as it is a grief to the good and
virtuous man to see evil men rule: so contrarily to the evil most harm is it
to see the goodman live. Therefore the first disturber of common wealth, and
last destroyer of good states: the beginning of all sorrows, the end of all
joys: the cause of all evil, and the only let of all goodness is envy. How
prospered Greece? how flourished Rome? how quiet was the whole world before
envy began to practice with malice, two daughters of tyranny, never seen, but
hidden in the hearts of flatterers. Then I say Greece was glorious, Rome was
famous, their names were honored, their prowisse feared, their policy
commended, their knowledge known, their fame spread over the whole world: but
when envy began to soiorne in Greece, and malice to build her bower in Rome,
these sisters like two monsters or two grimme Gorgons, oppressed Castles,
destroyed Countries, subdued kingdoms, Hanibal. Iugurth.
depopulated cities: in fine, triumphed over all Greece and Italy. Hanibal of
Carthage, Iugurth of Numidia, Pirrhus of Epire, Pirrhus.
most valiant puissaunt and mighty Princes, with long wars, and great
slaughter withal. Their force and powers might not then hurt Rome half so
much as hidden hatred between them selves in Rome. Alexander. Cirus. Xerxes.
Again, Alexander the great, valiant Cirus, famous Zerxes, most mighty
conquerours, with all their strength of wars, could not annoy Greece half
so much as inward envy between the cities of Greece. What caused Julius
Caesar to war against his son in law Pompeius? Caesar.
Envy. What made Adrian the Emperor to despise ye worthy fame of Traian?
Adrian. Cato.
Envy. What moved Cato surnamed Vtica, to kill him self? Envy unto Caesar,
hidden hatred, working for private gain, and rash counsel of flatterye, which
is hard most often in the envious mouth, have destroyed kingdoms. Envy
entered first into the hearts of Princes, arrested the worthyest conqueror of
the world, waded the bowels of the wise, blushed not to attaint the learned
Philosophers in the mydst of Athens. Hercules in killing the great Dragon
Priapus that watched in the garden of Hesperides, Hercules.
in destroying the ravening birds Stimphalides, in conquering the raging and
furious Centaures, in vanquishing terrible monsters as Gereon, Cerberus and
Diomedes: in ouercomming the Lion, the Boore, and the Bull: in ouertaking the
gilded Heart: and last for his conquest of the huge and prodigious Hidra, in the
service of Lerna: won no less envy of some, than justly he deserved fame of
others. Theseus to imitate the hauty attempts of Hercules overcame Thebes,
Theseus.
slew Minotaurus in the dens of Labirinthus, subdued Creon the tiraunt, with
diverse other large enterprises, as one more wyllyng to envy the fame of
Hercules, then desirous to deserve fame by lenity and quietness. Caesar.
Alexander. Achilles.
So might I speak of Julius Caesar that envied Alexander the great, and
Alexander likewise that envied Achilles. And thus always envy was fostered
with Princes. With the wise and learned envy bare great sway, as betwixt Plato
and Zenophon, the best and grauest Philosophers in their time: betwixt
Demosthenes and Aeschines, betwixt Aristotle and Isocrates, one despising the
other. Such slaughter grew of envy, that one brother killed another, the son
the father, and the father likewise the son: as Romulus slew his brother
Remus of envy, Romulus Cambis^^
lest he might he king in Rome. Cambises King of Persea killed his brother
Mergides as Herodotus does write of envy. Envy caused Anacharsis the
Philosopher to be slain of his own brother Caduidus. Caduidus Iugurtha.
King Iugurth murdered both his brethren Hiempsalis and Adherbales, that he
only might reign King in Numidia. Cain.
Cain did kill his brother Abel, the scripture does testify that his sacrifice
was once accepted. Thus envy was seen and known to be betwixt brethren,
betwixt the parents and their children: the like we read that envy committed
horrible and terrible murder as well betwixt the husband and the wife, as the
children toward their Parents as in short examples verified. Clitemnestra.
Clitemnestra slew her own husband Agamemnon, and she again slain by her
son Orestes. Semiramis
Queen Semiramis kilde likewise her husband king Minus, and she kilde even
so by her son called Minus. Agrippana.
Agrippina murdered her husband Tiberius, and she was even so murdered of
her son Nero. O cruel tyranny that envy should ever cause such unnatural
murder, as one brother to kill another: the Father to destroy his son, the
son to slay his father: the husband to murder his wife, the wife to make
away her husband. We read in Plini of a certain king in Thebes named
Athamas, that gave both his sons, the one named Learchus, the other Euriclea,
to be devoured of ramping Lions. So many monsterous tirauntes brought up in the
school of envy, so many deformed Centaures, that all countries have been full
of them. When Antiphiles saw Apelles in great favor with King Ptholeme, he
so envied the matter that he told the king of spite unto Apelles, that
Apelles was the very cause of the long wars between the Tirians and Egypt,
to discredit Apelles for very envy that he was great with the King: but the
matter being known, and his envy wayed, Appelles was rewarded of the King
with a hundred Talentes, and Antiphiles for his envy commanded afterward all
the days of his life, to be the slave and bondeman of Appelles. Themistocles
was so grieved to see Miltiades so honored for his great conquest and triumph
in Marathea, that being demanded why he was so sad, he answered:
Miltiades triumphs will not suffer Themistocles to be joyful. There was no
country but envy bare swaye: there was never no great virtue, but it was
accompapanied with envy. Caesar.
Caesar was envied in Rome by Cato: Turnus was envied in Rutil by Drances:
Ulysses was envied in Greece by Ajax: Demetrius was envied in Macedonia after
king Cassander dyed: what envy bare M. Crassus toward Pompeius it is known:
what hidden hatred had Pollio toward Cicero: it is read in Brusonius the
third book the 7. chapter, Pollio.
where Pollio says to Messala that he might not abide Ciceros voice. The like
we read of Aristotle, who envied Isocrates so much, that he was wont to
say, it were a shame unto Aristole to hold his peace, Socrates.
and let Isocrates speak. For as thereis no light says Plini without
shadow, so is there no virtue or glory without envy. The wavering state of
the vulgar which ruled always Rome and Athens, was so mutable and so
uncertain, that after wise and sage. Socrates was condemned to die b^ing
dead, the Athenians repented, his accusers were banished, and Socrates now
being dead, had his pictures erected, which being alive, the rude and
uncertain people esteemed nothing* Aristides
Even so was Aristides and Themistocles, banished unto Persea, Iphicrates unto
Thracia, Conon unto the province of Corporos, Conon.
Chabrias unto Egypt, Chares.
and Cares unto Sigeum, men of excelent virtues, of noble service, of renowned
fame: yet by the envious people banished their own countries to raunge abroad
the world. Again Homer was envied by Zoilus, Homer.
Pindarus by Amphimanes, Simonides by Timocreon: yea, learned Maro and Horas
were most envied and backe-byted by Maeuius and Suffenus. What do I? to speak
of envy, why waste I time to write of envy? wherefore seem I so sound to
touch a special matter, being so common with all men, being so nourished in
all countries, being known from the beginning of the world, and being first
practiced by the Devil, who envying man's state, the felicity, joy, and
pleasure he was in, least man should possess the place, where sometime the
Devil raygned as an Angel, deceived man. This envy took root then in the
first age, Cain.
for Cain envied so his brother Abell that he slew him, for that God accepted
Abels sacrifice and refused his. Joseph was of his own brethren likewise sold
unto Egypt for envy that he was better beloved of his father the^ they were.
Saul did so envy King David, Saul.
that he gave his daughter Michol in marriage to David, for that she being his
daughter, might betray her husband to the Philistines. Dathan and Abiron had
great envy toward Aaron. Daniell was much envied in King Nabuchadonosors
Pallacies. What should I be long in this? The Apostles, the Prophets, the
Martires, yea Christ himself was envied at by Jews and Gentiles: Insomuch that
tyranny and murder was the sequel of envy, as from time to time tried, from
age to age seen, and from man to manne practiced, even unto dead men showed:
as Achilles unto Hector, haling and drawing his body about the fields of
Troy in open sight of King Priamus his father, as M. Antonius unto Cicero,
having Ciceros head set before him to ease his Tigrishe mind, permitting
his wife Fuluia to wear Ciceros tongue in her Bonet: As Cambises unto the
Judge Sisamenes being dead, to flea him: being fleane, to cut him in pieces:
being cut in pieces, to give him to be devoured of beasts and birds. I might
well declare the tirany of Tullia showed toward her father king Ser. Tullius
being dead, to cause her Chariot and horse to tread her fathers body in the
streates. Of Tomyris Queen of Scithia toward King Cirus being dead, to
strike of his head and to bathe it in blood. Of Silla toward Crassius being
dead to burn his body, more to show her tyranny. To note the tirannie of
Alexander in Thessalia: Alexander. Busiris. Dionisius.
Of Busiris in Egypt: To open the wicked life and state of Dionisius in
Siracusa: Of cruel Creon in Thebes of Periander in Corinth: Of Pisistratus in
Athens, I should be tedious to amplify that which may be briefly examined.
And this we read and see daily by experience that the end of Tirants is to
die in tyranny, and as they deal with others, Diomedes. Busyris.
so are they dealt with all: As Diomedes and Busyris were wont to feed their
Horses with men's flesh, and to break their thyrst with men's blood: so were
they themselves vanquished by Hercules, and made food to be eaten and devoured
of their own horses, which they before fed with other men's flesh. Likewise
the great tiraunt Phalaris and that cruel Perillus, Phalaris. Perillus.
were both destroyed with those new invented torments that they made for
others: I mean the brasan Bull which Perilles made to satisfy the tirannye of
Phalaris, Thrasillus and Scyron, Thrasillus. Scyron.
the one teaching the way of tyranny, was first of all in that which he
taught unto others, tormented and slain: the other thrown hedlong into the
sea by Theseus, even so as he was wont to do with others. To speak of the
great cruelty of Aemilius, which as Aristides in Plutarch does testify, that
he used to recompense any man, that would and could invent new torments
to punish the innocent, and to pleasure his tigrishe mind: He I say
dwelling in Agesta a City of Sicilia, made a brazen horse to vex and torment
the people, wherein through the commaundem^nt of Arminius Paterculus chief
magistrate of the City, he first suffered the assaye of his new invented
works. We read again of the fifty sisters, King Danaus daughters, Belides.
called Belides, which being married to the fifty sons of Aegistus, sieve all
their husbands in the first night, save Hipermestra: one of them so named,
spared the life of her husband Linceus. The like we read of the thirty
Sisters of Albina, Albina his sisters.
which after the self same sort, made an end of thirty husbands in one
night. The sequel of tirannye was such, that what wanted in the father, was
fully employed in the son, for amendment is rare seen: and that which is
more often tried and very well considered of a simple woman named Ihera, who
when she perceived that the people of Siracusa did wish ye death of Dionisius
the tiraunt, she straight kneeled upon her knees, and besought the Gods
that he might live: and being demanded why she prayed for such a tyrant?
she said: I knew three kings in Syracusa, every one a tyrant, the second
woese than the first, the third worse than the second, and now Dionisius
being the fourth, worse than the third, and he that shall be fifth I fear
least he be worse than Dionisius, and therefore I pray the Gods he might
live: for of two euilles the less is to be chosen. Mark how in a simple
woman, in a silly person, truth often does soiourne. The like of a certain
husband man we read, that digging in the ground, Brusonius. lib. 6. cap. 21.
when the murderers that slew king Antigonus passing by in haste, taking their
flight into Phrigia, demanding a husband man, why he dug so deep: I dig
up (said he) an other king Antigonus to rule Macedonia: letting them to
understand the true Proverb, that seeldome comes the better, that he that
would come after, should be far worse than King Antigonus. O happy age, O
golden world, while tyranny was not known. The great Monarchies of the world
were gotten with tirannie, and likewise through tyranny lost. The first Monarch
after the great deluge, was that of the Assyrians, Ninus the first mo^arche.
which began under Ninus the third king of the Assyrians, and continued in
slaughter and tyranny, until Sardanapalus time the last king, which was a
thousand two hundred nine and thirty years. From the Assyrians it was woonne
with the sword, and brought with violence and tyranny by that cruel and
blouddie Arbactus unto the Meedes, Arbactus.
and remained there until king Astiages, which was the ninth king and las^
king of the Meedes, two hundred and fifty years: from the Meedes it was had by
tyranny away by king Cirus unto Persea, Cirus
and there stayed until the time of king Darius, which was two hundred and
thirty years: from the Perseans it was with blood and great slaughter taken
away by Alexander the great unto Macedonia, Alexander.
and there maintained until Perseus time, which was a hundred and seven and
fifty years: from the Macedonians it was posted unto Rome, where under Julius
Caesar the prowdest Monarche in all the world, Caesar..
fomed in blood, flourished in tirannye a long while. Thus tirannie was fed
and fostered from one country unto an other, until almost the whole world
was destroyed. The murder and tirannye that long flourished in Greece betwixt
the Thebans and the Lacedaemonians, again betwixt the Lacedaemonians and the
Athinians, betwixt the Athinians and all Greece: Who reads it not in
Thucidides. Tamburlanus the great murderer, King sometime in Scithia, got
through tyranny Medea, Albania, Mesopotamia, Persea and Armenia, passed over
Euphrates, subdued Asia the lesser, and took Pazaites king of the Turks.
Zerxes called all the Princes of Asia in his voyage toward Greece, where such
tyranny was used, that not only Cities and countries were destroyed, but also
their Temples and their Gods neglected and spoiled. The huge tyranny betwixt
King Darius of Persea, Darius Miltiades
and Milciades Prince of Athens, who slew a hundred thousand of Darius men.
The slaughter of King Cirus after he had exiled his Grandfather King Astiages
from Persea, Cirus
vanquished the Babilonians, and overthrew Cressus King of Lydia, after he had
(I say) subdued the most part of Asia, ceased not of his tirannie until he
came to Scythia, where he and two hundred thousand were slain of one woman
Tomiris Queen of Scythia, who after she had slain him, she caused his
head to be cut off, and made it to be bathed in a great Tun of blood,
saying these words: now Cirus drink enough of that which thou have always
sore thirsted for. Blood does require blood, and tyranny will have cruelnesse.
Antiochus.
Antiochus fomed in tyranny, brought in subjection Egypit, and India, with
other confines. Hanniball excelled all men in tyranny, as both Rome and Italy
can well testify thereof. To speak of King Philippe and his son Alexander
the great, Alexander.
their tyranny, their conquest, and bloody wars it were superfluous, as
Thessalia, Thebes, Larissa, Olinthians, Phoceans, Lacedaemonians, Athenians,
Perseans, and Indians, all Asia are witness thereunto: Pirrhus Antigonus,
Pompeius the great, Pirrhus Antigonus. Pompeius.
with infinite more bloody Kings and Capitaines, which more rejoiced with
tyranny to offend others, then with justice to defend their own. For the
triumphs of cruel Capitaines is to joy in tyranny: the wish and desire of
the ungodly tyrant, is to destroy all, thirsty always of blood, hungry
continually of murder and slaughter. What wished Caligula the Emperor to his
own City of Rome? Caligula.
forsooth one neck, that with one stroke he might strike it of. The
difference betwixt a gentle and a godly Prince, and a cruel tiraunt, is, and
has been always seen. Codrus.
King Codrus of Athens, how far excelled he cruel Caligula? when by an
Oracle it was told unto the Athenians, that they should never have victory
during the life of Codrus their King, which when the king knew, he clothed
him like a common soldier, nay rather as the history says, like a poor
beggar went unto the midst of his enemies to be slain to save Athens.
Curtius. Detius. Sila. Marius.
How much did noble Curtius and famous Decius surmount that cruel and
Tigrishe L. Silla, and that wicked impe C. Marius, they through the like Oracle
moved, were ready in harness to mount on horseback, to offer themselves
alive, unto an open dampe and gulf to save Rome: the other with sword and
fire no less willing to destroy Rome, then studious to spoil their native
zoyle and country of Italy. Again Thrasibulus was not so beneficial unto
Athens, Thrasibulus Catilina.
but Cateline was as hurtefull unto Rome. Diverse Princes and noble men have
been no less studious how to keep and defend their countries, than they
were loath and unwilling to trespass other countries. Happy were those places,
and most happy are they that speed of such Princes. How famous was Thebes
while Epaminondas lived? How renowned was Sparta while yet Agesilaus ruled?
How happy was Rome when Fabius Maximus bare swaye? How flourished Athens when
Pericles with his magnanimity, when Themistocles with his worthiness, when
Demosthenes with his wisdom defended their state? The virtuous lives of godly
Emperors which time advanced to fame, and fame spread over the whole world,
as of Traian, Constantine, Augustus, Alexander Seuerus, with others, which were
to be honored and worthylye had in memory. The cruel tirannye of other
wicked magistrates, which neither time can take away, nor any good nature
forgette, as that very shape of shame, sinck of sin, that beast
Heliogobalus, that tiraunt Nero, that monster Caligula, Calig^la. Dionisius.
with Domitian, Dionisius, and others, which are to be detested, and utterly
lothed. Laertius in his third book does write, that the people of Agineta,
had a law written, that if any of Athens should come unto their great City
Agni, he should by law loose his head. When Plato the Philosopher had
happened to come to that City, it was told Carmendius, who then was chief
Judge for that year, that a man of Athens was in Aeginia, which ought by law
to die, and he calling Plato before him in a great assembly, demanded what he
was, and he said a Philosopher: a certain envious man unto learning hearing the
name of a Philosopher said: this is no man but a beast: then said Plato, I
ought to be free by our law, being a beast and not a man, and so pleaded the
matter, that by the name of a beast, Plato was demissed, appliyng the sense and
moral thereof, that with tyrauntes and envious people, beasts are better
esteemed then men. Such is the furious rage of tyranny, that without mercy and
respect of person, he feeds his fury. King Atreus, Atreus.
brother to Thiestes, and son to King Pelops, slew without pity the three
sons of his brother Thiestes, whose blood he caused Thiestes his brother,
and their father to drink unawares (I say) after he had hidden their bodies
in a cave, he cut of their members, and made their father to eat thereof. The
like History we read in Iustine that king Astiages made Harpagus to eat his
own children, Astiag^s.
dressed ready and made to be served at the Kings table, in two silver dishes
before Harpagus the father: Of which as one ignorant of such tyranny, he
fed thereof. Mithridates the bloody king of Pontus, slew his three sons,
and three daughters, kilde his wife Laodices, and married an other straight
named Hipsicratea. Tyranny lurcketh in the hidden veins and secret bowels of
envy: Mithridates.
for even as Mithridates slew his wife Laodices: Constantine. Nero
so Constantine the great Emperor slew his wife Fausta: and Nero murdered his
wife Poppea. To speak of Cleander, Aristratus, Strates, Sabillus, with
innumerable more, I should weary any reader with the prolixity thereof. The
state of Rome where such change was by means of tyranny, that now they reign
under Monarchia, and then under straight Aristocratia. And thus the common
seeking by change the amendment of Princes, kept always the chief rule and
government of the City of Rome under Democratia, which is the popular
government, considering the corruption of Princes, to the immortal fame and
perpetuity of credit. Though it be a hard question to know where tirannye
is least showed, either in that commonwealth, where the people bare swaye, or
where elected number do rule, or where one does govern, which is hardely
discussed and disputed of the learned, for the maintenance of either of these:
but that shall be touched in the Chapter of common wealths and government of
Princes.

Of flattery.
Flattery is the sweet bayte of envy, the cloak of malice, the only
pestilence of the world, a monster ougly to behold if it could be seen,
very terrible to trust if it might be known: with as many heads as Hidra, to
invent wickedness: with as many hands as Briareus to commit evil: with as
many eyes as Argos, to behold vengeance: with as swift legs as Thalus to go
to naughtiness, entering into every man's house with a tongue as sweet as
honey, hyding in every man's heart as bitter as gall, of whom the old poem is
spoken, Mel in ore, verba lactis: fell in cord, fraus in factis. Of whom
Antisthenes that learned Athinian was wont to say, Antisthenes
that he had rather have Ravens in house with him, than flatterers: for Ravens
said he devour but the carcass being dead, but the flatterer eats up the
body and soul alive. For even as tyranny is hidden in the secret bowels of
envy, so is envy cloked under filed phrase of flattery, and very well compared
to the Crocodils of Nilus, or to the Cirenes of ye seas, the one weeping and
mourning, the other singing and laughing: the one with moan, the other with
mirth study how to annoy ye poor Mariner. The flattering Parasite as Ovid
says, denies with the negative, and affirms with the affirmative, weepeth
with him that is sad, and laugheth with him that is merry: as sometime Clisophus
when his master Philip King of Macedonia, and Father unto Alexander the great,
would hault because he had the gout, he would hault likewise: when the king
would be merry at his drink, Clisophus would not be sad: In fine, what soever
Philip took in hand, the same Clisophus did maintain. Aristippus the
Philosopher could better please King Dionisius with adulation, then Dion the
Syracusan could pleasure him with truth. Cleo could better accomplish the
desire and lust of Alexander with forged flattery, then Calisthenes his
Counselor could satisfy him with Philosophy and truth. Who might move
Caesar to do any thing as much as Curio the Parasite, not Pompeius his son in
law: nor yet his only daughter Iulia, nor all the Senators of Rome might make
Caesar friend or foe as much as Curio. Flatterers are dangerous unto the
most part, hurtful unto all, profitable unto none, and yet of Princes most
accepted. In Court like furious Centaures, by formed Scilles, Apt epithetons of
flatterers.
huge Ciclops, grime Gorgons, fretting Furies, and monstrous Harpeis: yea, with
thousand more deformities, under the shape of humanity, the swaye and rule.
For who is more made of, than he that ought least to be esteemed? who is
trusted more, than he that deceyueth sonest? who is heard more at all times,
than he that ought least to come in sight at any time? who has more of all
men than he that deserves least of all men? In fine, who is more beloved any
where, than he that ought most to be hated every where? The common people of
the Meedes and Perseans, for that they kneeled unto Alexander, and made him the
son of Jupiter, were more esteemed for their flattery therein, than the
nobles of Macedonia for their truth and plain dealing. What is it, but
flattery brings to pass? That which the famous and renowned Prince Agamemnon
with all the force and power of Greece, could not with ten years siege subdue:
I mean Ilion in Phrigia, that noble city of Troy, one suttell Sinon a simple
and a sillye Greek allured the mind of King Priamus, deceived with flattery
the nobles, and entised the Citizens through adulations to their utter
destruction and last confusion. That ancient and renowned City of Babylon,
which King Darius with all the power of Persea, with long wars and loss of
men: yea when all his strength failed him, and all his force never able to
vanquish any part of that noble City, Zophyrus.
one Zopirus a Citizen borne in Babylon, through forged faith and fyled
flattery I say betrayed his native City unto King Darius. That famous city of
Olinthus, which the valiant Conqueror and puisaunt Prince Philip king of
Macedonia could never destroy with his great army and strong host, yet one
dessembling Lasthenes with flattery conquered them, Lasthenes.
and gave them unto the enemies hand king Philip. To speak of the ancient
Lacedaemonians, the most famous and worthiest people in the whole world for
their wars: whom neither Meedes, Perseans, Macedonians, nor all Greece again
might vanquishe before Phrinicus with flattery deceived them. Phrinicus.
The people of Samos were deceived by false Apollonius. Menelaus was beguiled
with the flattery of Paris. Apollonius. Paris. Calicrates.
Dion of Sirecusa was slain by his flattering friend Calicrates. O sucking
serpent of cancred malice, whose small fruict is terrible death. If King
Antigonus had known the flatterye of his fained friend Apollophanes, he had
not been deceived as he was. Apollophanes. Harpagus.
If king Astiages had thoroughly known Harpagus his servant, he had not
been slain of king Cirus If that noble and famous Roman Crassus had not
wayed the flattery of Carenus, Carenus.
he had not been so shamfully murdered amongst the Perthians. What flattery
was between Jason and Medea? Jason. Theseus.
what deceit followed? what adulation was betwixt Theseus and Ariadne? what
falsehood ensued? the one king Oetes daughter of the land of Cholcos, helping
Jason unto the golden fleece: the other king Minos daughter of Creete,
delivering Theseus out of the dreadful dens of Labirinthus from the monster
Mynotaurus, but both deceived by flattery? how the Troyan Prince Aeneas
deceived Queen Dido with flattery? Aeneas. Demophon.
how the Grecian Demophon beguiled Queen Phillis with adulation? how diverse
such Queens, Ladies and others, have been allured and entised by fair
speech, the daily experience with policy and practice therein, is a certain
and sure proof of the same, which because they are common histories I will
omit to speak of. But pass we forward in the pilgrimages and affairs of
Princes. Who murdered Caesar that worthy Emperor, in the Senate house of
Rome? Brutus and Cassius.
Brutus and Cassius those flatterers that Caesar loved most: who poisoned that
mighty Conqueror Alexander in the midst of his triumphs at Babylon? those that
flattered him most, his own cup taster Iolla and his kinseman Antipater. Iolla
and Antipater.
Who betrayed that famous Roman Cicero unto his mere enemy Marcus Antonius?
even he whom Cicero before defended and saved from death Pompilius. Pompilius.
Finallye, who betrayed Christ both God and man unto the Scribes and Pharisees?
Judas.
his pursebearer, that flattering Judas with fair speech, saying: Aue rabbi,
embracing and Kissing him as flatterers use to do. Where is their greater
tyranny showed, then where flattery is most used? Where is there greater deceyt
practiced, than where curtezie is most tendered? Where is more falshoode tried,
then where trust is most reposed? The first thing that deceived man was
flattery, which the Devil the serpent put in ure to deceive Eve, flattering
her, saying: if thou eat of this fruit, thou shall know good and evil, and
you shall be as Gods on earth. As the Devil is the only aucthor of all lies,
so is he the only father of flattery, attempting always the best and not the
worst: accompanying the hiest and not the lowest, freque^ting the court more
than the country, approaching nier stately princes, than poor beggars. And no
meruell when Christ was assaulted with flattery of the Devil, promising him
all the world if he would kneel and flatter him. Would to God that all
Princes would speak unto flatterers, as Christ spoke unto the Devil: Avoid
Satan: Away flatterer. Or else I wish that wise men, which are sonest of all by
flattery allured, to imitate the example of a noble man of Thebes named
Ismenias, who being sent Ambassador from Thebes unto Persea, Ismenias.
understanding the manners and fashions of the proud Perseans, that nothing can
be gotten without flattery, no body can be heard without kneeling, did let
down his ring to the ground, whereby he might stoop before the King, not
unto the King, but to take up his ring. Or else I would wish all men to
answer flatterers, Diogenes.
as Diogines answered Aristippus, who speaking unto Diogines, that if Diogines
could be content to flatter Dionisius the King, he needed not to lick dishes,
or to live poorly in Athens, unto whom he answered: if Aristippus could be
content to lick dishes or to live poorly in Athens, Aristippus.
he needed not to flatter Dionisius. It is read in Caelius, that the women of
Cipria were most given to love flattery, insomuch they kneeled down to bow
and bend their shoulders, as a footestoole unto their Ladies to mount unto
their Chariots: surely the men of Persea, and the women of Cipria, engendered
such brood of flattering Parasites, that glorious Masters never want
flattering servants. The scholars of Gnato frequent always Thrasonical
places. Have we not many now a days that will speak unto their friends as
Nicesias was wont to say to Alexander the great, Nicesias.
being wounded and his blood gushing out? O what noble blood is this? this
blood comes from some God and not of man, that I say flattering Nicesias
would affirm that, that Gnat which happened to taste of the blood of
Alexander must needs far surmount other Gnats. The wiseman says that five
things ought of all men to be mistrusted: a strange Dog, an unknown horse,
a holowe banck, a talkatiue woman, and a flattering servant. Fair words make
fools feign: yea flattering speech overcome wise men. Demetrius.
Demetrius having then obtained victory in the wars at Salamina, being so
joyful and glad of his hap, Aristodemus.
did send Aristodemus a very subtle and a cunning flatterer, to certify his
father King Antigonus of his prosperous success, giving in charge unto him to
show the King his father orderly the triumph and victory in large manner.
Aristodemus no less joyful of the message, then skillful in flatterye,
leaving his Nauay and his company in Cipris, went on land toward King
Antigonus, who having understanding that Aristodemus was come from his son
Demetrius being desirous after long looking of news, Plutarch. in vita
Demetrij.
to hear of the wars and success of his son, sent diverse to meet him on
the way, to know the truth and effect of his coming: he saluting all men as
one very sad, and so sad that all men judged that either Demetrius was slain,
or else lost the field. The King being certified that Aristodemus was very
sad, and that there was no likeness of good news, came hastily to meet him:
which when Aristodemus saw, he cried out with a loud voice a far of, saying:
Most happy art thou King Antigonus commended of the gods, saluted of Demetrius,
and this day feared of all the world. Thy son is conqueror over conquerers,
and King over Kings, triumphant victor in the wars at Salamina: thus
artificially Aristodemus used such flattery before King Antigonus, that the
King had as great a delight to hear Aristodemus flattering phrase, as he had
joy and gladness of the prosperity of his son Demetrius. Thus Aristodemus
with flattery won the heart, and waded the bowels of King Antigonus, that his
reward was as much by his flatterye, as his thanks was for his news. Marcus
Antonius delited so much in the flattering speech of the Athinians, at what
time he was enforced to forsake Rome by means of Augustus Caesar, who to
revenge the death of his Uncle Julius, threatened. Antonius that the Citizens of
Athens went to meet him out of the City, having an Oration in commendation of
his wisdom, saying: that he was well worthy to have Minerua in marriage. He
ioyed so much of their adulation that they won this Roman by flattery to do
more honor unto Athens, then nature could crave at his hand to love Rome. Such
force has flattery, that when Alexander the great would have dyed for sorrow:
yea would have killed him self, for that he slew Clitus his foster brother in
his anger* yet Anaxarchus with fair words and sugared sentences assuaged his
sorrows. Anaxarchus*
Aristippus when he might not obtain his purpose at Dionisius hand with
flattery and fair words, he would kneel down embrasing and kissing his
feet, and being accused of his friends for that he was a Philosopher, to be a
flatterer, he answered them in this sort: Aristippus is not in fault to speak
unto any man where his ear is, Aristippus.
Dionisius rather is to be blamed to hear at his feet, or to have his ears
at his heels. Diogines therefore being demanded what beast was most hurtful
unto man: of wild beasts said he, a tyrant: of tame beasts, a flatterer.
What greater hurt happened unto that noble and famous Alcibiades, Alcibiades.
then flattery of fained friends, to take him away from his master Socrates
with whom he was instructed in Philosophy to know him self, to be
acquainted with self love, and to glory in flattery, that at length with
Timandra his harlot, Plutarch. lib. ^.
who a long time beguiled him with flattery, ye house being fired, he was
forced to flee naked from his foe unto the midst of his enemies to be slain.
And thus this valiant Greek was shamfully slain by flattery, whom ye learned
Thucidides could never sufficiently praise his virtues otherwise: what subject
is he that deliteth not in flattery? what prince is he yt is not pleased with
adulation? What God is he says the Poet that loves not his commendation and
praise? Hercules. Bacchus.
Hercules was glad to hear the adulation of Cercopes. Bacchus was joyful to
hear the flattery of Silenus: Even Jupiter himself the king of gods, Jupiter.
was delighted in Vulcan. The remedy therefore to avoid this Gorgon, to
expel this monster, to exile this murderer, is as Cato the wiseman says, to
use truth: for he that uses to hear good talk always, will never speak
evil any time. The nature of flattery was so known, that it was so hated of
Augustus the Emperor, Augustus. Tiberius.
that he lothed kneeling of his household servants. Tiberius the Emperor
likewise would in no wise suffer any of his own men, to call him Lord, for
that there is but one Lord. Flattery was so abhorred in Athens, that when
Timagoras was sent as an Ambassador unto Darius king of Persea, Timagoras.
for that he flattered the King in talk at his return, he was beheaded*
Even so Euagoras for that he called Alexander the son of Jupiter, was
punished unto death. Lacedaemonians the Romans.
The Lacedaemonians feared flattery so much, that they banished Archilogus,
only for his eloquence in a Book that he made. Flattery was so odious in
Rome, that Cato the Censor gave commandment to expel certain fine Orators of
Athens out of Rome, least with fair speech and flattery they might annoy the
state of Rome: what is it but flattery can compass? what may not sugared
Orators move? what could not Demosthenes do in Athens? Demosthenes. Cicero.
what might not Cicero persuade in Rome? King Pirrhus was wont to say of
Cineas his Philosopher, that he won more Cities, Cineas.
Towns, and countries, through the flattering style of Cineas, than he ever
subdued with the strength and force of all the kingdom of Epire. But to avoid
two much iarring of one string, which as Plutarch says is tedious to the
reader, for nature is desirous (says Plantus) of novelties. Leaving flatterye
as counsaylour unto Princes, hayle f^llowe with noble men, chamberlain with
Ladies, chief governor of the common people. To speak a little of those that
fled flattery, it was the only cause that Pithagoras that noble Philosopher
forsook his country Samos: the whole occasion, Solon. Licurgus.
that worthy and learned Solon fled from Athens: the chief matter, that made
Licurgus to renounce Lacedemonia, and the only cause that made Scipio Nasica
forsake Rome: Scipio.
for where flattery is esteemed, there truth is banished: where flattery is
advanced and honored, there truth is oppressed and vanquished: In fine,
flattery finds frindeshippe, when truth gets hatred, Seneca.
as proved in the histories of Senica and Calisthenes, two famous
Philosophers: the one Master unto Nero Emperor of Rome* the other appointed
by Aristotle to attend upon Alexander the great King of Macedonia, which
Philosophers because they would not feed the corrupt natures and insolent
minds of these proud Princes, with adulation and flatterye, they were both
put to death: Seneca by Nero, for his pain and travel taken with the Emperor
in reading him philosophy, while Nero was young: Calisthenes by Alexander, for
that he inueyed against the Meedes and Perseans, who used such flattery that
Alexander commanded all men to call him the son of Jupiter. Even so of
Cicero and Demosthenes: the one the sovereign Orator and Phaenix of Rome, the
only bulwark of all Italy: the other the sugared Anchor, the patron of
Athens, and protector of all Greece: After they had sundry and diverse times
saved these two famous Cities, Rome and Athens, the one from the pernicious
coniurations and privy conspiracy of that wicked Catelin and his adherentes,
the other from the proud attemptes and long wars of that most renowned
warrior Phillip King of Macedonia: yet were they after many virtuous acts
done in their countries, and for their countries, from their countries quite
banished and exiled. Cicero for Clodius sake, Demosthenes for Harpalus, which
the Romans took so heavily, that twenty thousand ware mourning apparel with
no less heaviness in Rome, than tears for Demostenes in Athens. Flatterye
then was of some so hated, that noble Phoceon and learned Athinian was wont to
say to his freende Antipater that he would take no man to be his freende that
he knew to be a flatterer. Phocion.
And most certain it is, that he at this day that can not flatter, can get no
freendship, according unto that saying of Terence, obsequium amicos. etc. For
even as Aristides of Athens for his manifold benefit^s unto the Athenians was
by flattery prevented, Aristides.
and for truth banished: so likewise was Thucidides being sent as an
Ambassador from Athens unto Amphipolis, Thrasibulus
a City betwixt Thracia and Macedonia which King Philip kept by force, by
flattery prevented and exiled. True service is often rewarded with anger and
wrath of Princes, as Thrasibulus a noble captain and famous, for his truth was
banished out of Athens. Lentulus. Dion.
Lentulus the defender of Italy, exiled from Rome. Dion of Siracusa hunted out
of his country by Dionisius: even that renowned Hanibal the long protector of
Carthage, Hannibal
compelled after long service to range abroad like a pilgrim every where to
seek some safegarde of his life: Too many examples might be brought of Greek
and Latin histories for the proof hereof. The cheifest Ancker and the
strongest bulwark of common wealth says Demosthenes is assured faith without
flattery, and good will tried in the Commons, plainness without deceit,
boldness and trust in the nobles. Flattery is the only snare that wisemen are
deceived withal, and that the Pharisees knew well, when that they would take
our Savior Christ tardie in his talk, they began to flatter him with fair
words, saying: Master, we know that thou art just and true, Math. 25.
and that thou came from God: Even so Herod willing to please the Jews, in
kyllyng James the brother of John, in prisoning Peter, in pleasing the people
with flattery, that when Herod spoke any flattering phrase, the people
straight cried out, saying: this is the voice of God, and not the voice of man:
Acta apost. 12.
so sweet was flattery amongst the Jews. The flattering frindes of Ammon
knowing the wickedness of his mind, and his perverse dealing toward
Mardocheus, did not persuade Ammon from his tyranny, but flattered with fair
words, and made him prepare a huge Gallows for Mardocheus where Ammon and his
children were hanged. Likewise the young man that came to flatter king David,
saying: Saul and his children are dead, was by David for his flattery
commanded to die. Tertullius.
Tertullius when he was brought to dispute with Paul, first he flattered Faelix
the President of the Jews, because with flattery he thought to win the
hearts of the hearers. In fine, flatteres will as the false prophets sometime
that did persuade Achab king of Israel of great fame and luck in the wars to
come: I say, they even so will flatter their friends of all good success to
come, and pass with silence the truth present.

Of Pride.
PRide is the root of all evil, the sink of all sin, the cause of all
wickedness, the ancient enemy to the seat of GOD, before man was made, it
did attempt the angels. The outward pomp and vain ostentations of shiftyng
shows from time to time, from age to age may be a suffient proof how prone,
how bent and how willing we be to honor pride. Domitianus.
Eusebius does report, that Domitianus the Emperor, by an order of law
charged al men to call him Dominum and Deum Domitianum, That is, to name him
Lord and GOD Domitian, certenlie to heigh a style though he was an Emperor to
be called a God. Likewise we read of a certain king in India named Sapor,
Sapor.
which would be called king of kings, brother unto the Sun and Moon,
fellow unto the stars. Aelianus a Greek historiographer, in his 14. book,
entitled of diverse histories, does write of one Hanno borne in Carthage,
which was so proud, that he caught certain birds, and kept them in a dark
place, where he often preuily resorted to teach them to speak. The birds
being brought up day and night, with one lesson after much pain and travail
taken, when the birds could speak, he did let them fly abroad every
where, to chirpe and brag that proud lesson, which he taught them, which
was this Deus est Hanno. Hanno.
Hanno is a god, be there not (suppose you) some of Domitianus court that
think that there is no God but themselves, be there not some of king Sapors
mind, that make them coequall to the Heavens, and far superior to the yerth
whence they came. Are not diverse brought up in the schole of Hannon, which
invent diverse ways how they mighe seem to be otherwise then they are. God
grant there be not to many like proud Suffenus, Suffenus.
flatteryng themselves in their own folly, deliting too much in their own
doings, ensuryng themselves to be some ofspringes of Gods. We read in
Iustine, that Alexander would not be called the soonne of Philippe, Alexander.
persuaded with him self, that s^^ne God was his father, wherefore he went
unto Rhodes, where the temple of Jupiter Ammon was, to know his progeny,
where and when it was, by Oracle of Jupiter, and false flatteryng Prelates of
the Temple, he was saluted as a son unto Jupiter, which after he commanded
every man to call him so, he waxed not proud herby him self, but corrupted
diverse others, as Perdicca and Craterus, triumphed in ostentations of vain
shows. The manner of pride is, to suffer no equality, for as Archestratus the
Athenian was wont to say, that Athens was not able to suffer two Alcibiades,
Alcibiades.
so Ethocles the Lacedemonian did often use to say of Lisander, Lysander.
that Sparta might not abide two Lisanders, notyng the insolency and pride of
them both, of Alcibiades in Athens, and of Lisander in Sparta. Such is the
ambition of pride, that it coueteth superiority over al, and suffers
coequality of none, as Diodorus in his second book does report of Alexander
the great, who aunsweryng the Ambassadors of king Darius entreating for
peace, seeking friendship and amity of Alexander, promisyng his daughter
therefore in marriage with diverse large promises, said, as the heavens can not
suffer two Sons to rule, so the earth may not suffer two Alexanders, this
proud prince forgot that little sentence. Terra ex terra in terram, and
quaeuis terra sepulcrum. There was sometime a certain Physician named Menecrates,
Menecrates.
so glorious and so proud, that when he wrote any letter unto king Agesilaus,
he used this style, Menecrates soonne unto great Jupiter does salute thee
Agesilaus king of Sparta. This proud Physician never took money of his
patientes, but after this sort he endented with them, that when they
recovered health, they should swear unto him to call him master, and to
certify the people abroad, that he was one of the sons of Jupiter. Likewise
in Rome there was (as Agrippa does witness, a scholemaister and gramarian
named Palaemon, Palaemo^. Appius.
and an other in Alexandria named Appius, the one of such arrogancy and
pride, that he promised immortality and everlasting felicity, unto any that
he dedicated any book of his, the other of such glory and self love, that
all learning (as he supposed, had a beginning by him, and should have an end
by him likewise. See the arrogancy of simple men, and mark the folly which
follows pride, was it pride or folly in Empedocles the Philosopher, Empedocles.
to mount the top of the high hill Aetna, thinkyng he might thence with wings
of pride ascend easily to the skeis to rule the heavens, and to govern the
states of the stars: what pride had Milo in himself: What glory had
Polidamas in his strength, Milo.
the one supposyng he was able to pluck up great trees from the ground, huge
Oaks from the roots, the other thought him strong enough to resist great
hills, to withstand with his Soldiers, monstrous Ockes. Such is the fond
fancy of men, and self love which some conceive of them selves, that some
are to proud with Palaemon in Gramer, some to heigh minded with Menecrates of
phisik, some to glorious with Empedocles in philosophy, some to ignorant with
Naestorius in divinity, some to bold with Polydamas of their strength In fine
some men are in any thing proud, for pride is often placed in a ragged cote,
as in a Ueluet Gown. Diogenes.
Therefore as Diogenes was wont to say unto Plato, because he went brave in
apparel, Calco fastum Platonis. Even so Plato answered Diogenes, for that he
went ragged. Et ego calco fastum Diogenis. Plato.
And as pride is often in the simple, so it is found oftentimes in the
ignorant, and blind, for Seneca, Sparsus.
does write a pretty history of one Sparsus, which was wont when he came
amongst ignorant men, to be a notable scholar, reasonyng and disputyng in all
sciences, and when he happened to come where wisemen, and learned men were,
then he would feign madness, as though he were not ignorant in any thing, but
rather subject unto infirmities, whereby he said he could not reason during the
rage of his sickness. A shift used of diverse, for who is more bold in some
place, the^ blind baiard, who speaks more then he that knows least, who
takes more upon him in all things, then he that can least judge of any thing,
Herodotus in his fourth book, and Gellius in his sixtene, do write of certain
people called Psylli, who are so foolish, that they with weapons harnessed on
horsbake, march orderly in battle arraie unto the filde to fight with the
Southern wind, Psilii.
for that they think the Southern wind to be the only cause of their loss
and great damages, and because it is hurtefull unto their country, their
lands, their beasts and their people, they arm them selves to requite the
injury, in field with manhood. The like is read of the people of Celta,
which likewise are so proud and hardy, Celta.
that oftentimes they draw their sweardes and shake spears at the surging
waves of Seas. There is a kind of mere madness in pride, as Chares which
Plutarche writes of, waxed so proud, because he hurted king Cirus in the knee,
that for very pride that he hurted such a great king, became stark mad,
so glorious and so proud waxed this foolish Chares of such a chance. Ajax
Thelamonius, Chares. Ajax,
a stout and a valiant Greek, which because he might not have the Harneis
of Achilles, being given before by Agamemnon unto Vlixes, at the siedge of
Troie, waxed so mad thereby, for that he thought no man worthy to wear
them, but only he himself, that he beat Blocks and Stones, he fought with
great trees cut down their bows and branches he killed heardes of beasts,
supposing Vlixes to be amongst them, thinking to kill him and Agamemnon, which
was general and chief prince over all the Greeks, the one for that he
presumed to wear Achilles harneis, which was only meet for him, the other
for that he gave unto others, which he ought to have given unto him, and thus
only proceaded of self love, which is the nourse of pride. Diverse there be
that be proud of their evil doings as Chares was, and some as ignorant as
Sparsus, and some as mad as Ajax, thinkyng no man worthy of any thing but
themselves. I write as a Poet, I mean as a christian, bouldnes and rashenes,
ar hand maids of pride, for what is it but pride takes in hand, self love
and arrogancy are chief Councillors unto pride, the only Nourshes which
feed and maintain Pride. How bold was Lucifer to presume through Pride,
Lucifer.
to sit in the Sacred seat of GOD, to attempt his majesty's throne, though
an Angel great, provoked by Pride to be a GOD: so ambicious his imppes are,
to mount unto the seat of Princes. How presumptuous sometime the great
Giauntes were, Gyauntes.
to throw mighty stones, and huge rocks up to the heavens, to strike down
the Stars, and as they thought, to move Jupiter unto war. So impudente are
their dispersed brood, with wicked and violente darts of Pride, against
heaven and earth? Phaaeton.
How rash was Phaaeton to mount the lofty skeis, attemptyng to rule the
glorious Globe of mighty Phoebus. So arrogant some are to challenge that by
pride, which they ought most to abhor by reason. Icarus.
How saucie was Icarus to enterprice beyond his reach, to ascend through
Pride above his father Dedalus, and to mount higher to the heavens, so false
are they, which beyond their nature and art, do enterprise that, which
their wit and reason can not comprehend. Actaeon. Bellerophon. Perithon,
How proud was Actaeon, to prease in place, where sacred Diana was? How bold
Belleropho^, to ride on Pagasus? How mad was Perithus, to attempt the most
dangerous and perilous rivers, Acheronta and Phlegeton, yea, to pass unto
Erebus, to steal Proserpina king Plutos wife away. Some are by pride, that
either to wickedly to win, or to shamfully to lose, they hasarde life. But
the proverb is true pride will have a fall. Lucifer fell from the height of the
heavens, unto the very bottom of hell, his Impes shall follow him. The
Giauntes were destroyed, and conquered by Jupiter, their broude shall be likewise
vanquished, Phaaeton burned, Icarus drouned, Actaeon eaten of his one Dogs,
Bellerophon brake his neck, Perithons devoured of Cerberus, Milo slain,
Polidamas killed, Caesar murdered, Alexander poisoned, Hercules vanquished. In
fine, all proud persons justly plagued. The cause of pride is to forgette
GOD. The frisselyng and frompelyng of hears, the paintyng and coloring of
faces, the staryng and roulyng of eyes, are outward shows of immoderate pride,
such braggyng in gesture, such countenance in lookyng, such bearyng of
body, that pride it self seems therein to soiourne. Such washyng in sweet
waters, such smellyng of sweet odours, such desire to see, and to be seen,
to speak, and to be spoken unto* that under the banner of Pride, they triumph
and glory. O stinkyng seed of man from the beginning O house of dunghill,
in the midst of his glory. O worms meat, in the end. That man or woman,
says Euripides, smell well when they smell of nothing, but of inward
cleanliness, and not of outward shows, That manne, that woman says noble
Thucidides, is most to be commended, that is neither praised, nor dispraised,
the smell of pride is the worst savor of stinch And here I think good to
recite a history, which is written in the lives of the holy fathers, that an
Angel kept company with an Eremite, who passing by a dead stinkyng carkase,
the Eremite stopped his nose, to avoid the ill savor and smell of the Carren,
where at the Angel smiled: A little further they passed by a fair garden,
where satte a very fair woman richly apparelled, be decte with fragrante
flowers, and sweet odours, in a grene harbor, with her Lute in her hand,
where at the Anngell stopped his nose: The cause being demanded, why he smelled
not the stinkyng dead carren, and stopped his nose, at the sight of a very fair
woman: The Angel answered, that pride and vainglory do stincke worse before
the majesty of God, then all Carrens of the world. Clopatra.
The pride of the Queen Cleopatra, that she had in her draught of drink unto
M. Antonius. The arrogancy of the Emperesse Poppea, Poppea.
in making her horses to be shodde with pure Gold. The vainglorie of Queen
Semiramis, Semiramis*
in crauyng at her housebandes hand king Ninus, the Sceptor rule and
government of Siria unto her own hands five days, were justly plagued, the
first stinged unto death by Serpents, the second slain of her housbande
Nero. The third killed by her son Ninus, so that some women likewise be so
proud, that diverse advance them self with proud Niobes before the Goddess
Latona. Niobes.
Diverse prefer themselves with arrogant Antigona, Antigona.
before the Goddess Juno, and diverse therebe that will set them selves with
self love with Lichione, Lichione,
to go before the Goddess Diana. In fine, the most part prone in comparisons
with king Praetus daughters, to match themselves with the learned Muses, but
justly rewarded were they, according unto their pride and presumption. These
unequal proud Comparisons, breed much discention, Pan. Monus.
every peuishe Pan will compare with learned Apollo, every Momus will assail
Minerua, and every Zoilus will bark at Cicero, Zoilus.
though the words be Poetical and dark, yet I hope the sense thereof is
plain to be understood, every manne is with proud Narcissus in love with
his own shadow, Narcissus.
desirous to view him self in the Glass of foolish Accon, Accon.
studious and careful to find out the curious box of Phaon, Phaon.
Pride the ring leader unto hell, has as many shifts, so many shows, so many
chaunges, so diverse shapes on earth of the devil, as the Poets affirm, that
Periclimenus had of Neptune upon the seas. Is not the proud man shifted unto a
clean man, a fine man, a handsome man. Is not the coueitous man changed unto a
subtle prudent man, Periclimenus.
a wary wise man. Is not the Lecherous called an amarous man, a loving, and a
courteous gentleman. Is not the idle man named a quiet and harmles man. Is not
the flattrer compted an eloquent person, learned and witty in his talks, thus
vices are covered with names of virtues, whatsoever is done of envy, is done
of good will, and whosoever is a dronkarde, is a good fellow, and what is even
dooen under tyranny, but it is applied unto justice, so that dronkennes is
changed unto good fellowship, gluttony unto hospitality, envy unto good will,
and tira^ny unto justice. For now these mo^sters which can shifte them selves
to so many chaunges like Protheus: I might compare justly the menkynde by their
shiftyng change of names unto Achelous, Achelous,
who when he would fight with Hercules, he would shift him unto a Serpent, and
from a Serpent, he would change him self unto the liknes of a devil, or being
a devil, he could change him self to what form and frame he would, so the
proud women likewise vsyng as many names of virtues unto vices. I might well
think them to be of the brood of Metra, Maetra.
the daughter of Erisithon, which the Poets feign she would alter her self
sometime unto an Ox, sometime unto a Mare, sometime unto a Heart, and sometime
unto a fliyng foul, but the true show, the natural Metamorphosis of Pride
is, to change unto a devil, the father and grand aucthour of pride. Pride
would feign climb unto the skies, the nature of the proud manne is, to be
exalted though he never be so simple, Temison*
for poor Temison a Gardener would be called Hercules, and Menecrates the
proud Physician would be called Jupiter, we ought to rejoice in nothing but
the Cross of Christ. But we rejoice of the disguised shows of this wicked
world. So proud was Cressus king of Lidia, Cressus.
of his wealth, that he went to Delphos to know of Apollo, whether any man
were so happy as he was in all the world, but for all his pride and wealth,
Aglaus.
pore and simple Aglaus of Arcadia, was preferred before king Cressus by
Apollo, and in the midst of his pride, destroyed he was by Cirus king of
Persea. Caudales.
So proud was king Caudales of the beauty of his wife, that he to whom he
showed his Queen naked, and bragged of her beauty, I mean Giges the same
spoiled him from his wife, and from his pride, slew him and married his wife
afterward, even so Alexander Phaereus, Alexander Phaereus.
for the pride he had in tyranny, was slain of his own wife, whom often unto
all he bragged of her beauty. Fabia.
Fabia a woman sometime of Rome, waxed so proud of a young man that loved her
named Petronis, that she slew her own housbande Fabritianus. Pride in any
thing provoke vengeance in all men. Alexander.
The Pride that Alexander the great had after his tyranny in Persea, Alanus.
lib. 8. de va. hist.
king Darius being vanquished, was seen and proved in the Marriages of the
nobles of Macedonia, unto the women of Persea, where he married first
Stratonica, the daughter of king Darius, and made.lxxx. and ten marriages in the
same day when he was married himself, where such pride was used, that hundred
tables wrought with Gold of Arabia, with engines of Barbary, and every table
having silver Trestles, and Alexanders table had Trestles of gold. This the
wealth of Darius caused first pride, and then tyranny in Alexander. What is it
but the proud man thinks he may do. Antiochus.
Antiochus was so proud, that he had that admiration of himself, that he
judged him able to sail on the earth and to go on the Seas, Nicanor likewise
said of his insolente and arrogante pride, Nicanor.
that as God was mighty in heaven, so Nicanor was mighty on earth, pride is
never seen long unrevenged, for Nabuchodonosor, Nabuchod.
that mighty and proud prince, Aesaie
commanding him self to be called a God, was made a beast to eat grass
seven years, for his pride he would ascend up unto heaven, and be made like
the height, and he was thrust down unto Hell, most like a beast, Herod.
Herod shinyng in his royal Robes, preached with such pride unto the people,
claimyng unto him the due honor and glory belongyng unto God, Acts. 12.
in the midst of his pride, while yet the people said, this is the voice of
God and not man, behold the Angel of the Lord stroke him, that with worms
he was consumed, and with lice eaten to death Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, for
their proud insurrection against Moises, were swalowed up unto the bothom of
the earth. The proud Philistian Golias, Golias.
bragging out his own strength, trustyng in his own power, was convicted by
little David a boie, at that time keeping sheep. God does detest pride, that by
the mouth of his Prophet Esaie, he treads down the pride of the daughters
of Syon, for that they walk in their own ways, for he has no pleasure in
man's legs, nor in any outward painted show, but in the root of the humble
men's heart is his dwelling. Atchidemus the son of Agesilaus, being
convicted by Philip king of Macedonia, understanding that he waxed proud
thereof, and gloried much of the victory, wrote an Epistle unto Philippe,
saying: If thou measure thy shadow now, being a victour, with thy shadow in
time paste, when thou waste convicted, thou shalt find no longer, now then
in those days, this Prince was wont always to taunte Pride, in so much he
esteemed a proud manne, as a Gorgon, or a Ciclop, or deformed Monster, who
perceiuyng an old man named Ceus, coming unto Lacedemonia, to be very
proud in his apparel, gesture, countenance, aidyng Nature, and setting
forth him self unto the vttermoste, his head being white, he could not tell
how to help it, but to satisfy his proud desire, he died his hears yellowe,
unto whom Archedamus said: O Ceus art thou not contented, that thy mind is
infected with false colors, but thou must have the hears of thy head also.

Gf Coueteousnesse.
Covetousness the privy searcher of hidden gains, the gredie gulf of ill
gotten goods, most painful in sekyng, and most careful in keepyng, whose
one day of death, is better tha^ all the days of his life. The only misers
and wretches of the world are they, Auarus men the only misers of the world.
whom neither shame can reprove, for that they are impudent, neither reason
rule in that they are unsatiate, neither death may fear, in that they think
to live for ever. For even as the infected member of man, is vexed with an
itche, Comparisons.
is always clawyng, so says Plutarche, is the covetous mind restless in
seeking. As fire is never sufficed with wood, nor earth with water, so the
auarous is never satisfied with money. Like as the grave is open to receive
dead Carkases, even as hell is never full, so is the coffer of the covetous
never contented. Alexander most desirous of glory and worlds.
After that Alexander the Great, had conquered all Persia, Greece, India,
Scithia, all Asia, almost all the world brought unto subjection. And having
a cause to come to the School of Anaxarchus the Philosopher, who affirmed by
the authority of Democritus, that there were diverse worlds, which when
Alexander heard, he began to weep, and being demanded the cause thereof of
his counsailers, answered, O Anaxarchus, are there so many worlds to be had,
and I skant have half one world yet. O unsatiate desire that could not suffice
him with all the kingdoms of Macedonia, nor satisfied with all the world, but
wept and cried out, because he might not possess more worlds then one. The
like history of Pirrhus king of Epire, after diverse good success of fortune,
could not suffice his gredie desire with a kingdom. This prince had an
excellent orator named Cineas, which for his eloquence and wit, king Pirrhus
did often use to send as Ambassador to the Romans, Plutarche lib. 27.
to the Macedonians, and to other countries, with whom he had then wars: By
this Orator the king was wont to speak, that he got more countries, cities,
and triumphs by the eloquence of Cineas, then ever he wanne by his force of
wars. This Cineas perceiuyng the king to be very covetous, and most
desirous of wealth, in so much that he longed sore for the spoil of the
city of Rome, considering the wealth of the Romans, he said to king Pirrhus
after this sort: What if Fortune would send, and God permit you to be king of
Rome? What would you the^ do, Pirrhus said Italy is a fertile country, and
full of wealth, I should sone subdue Italy, if I were king of Rome. Then
Cineas demanded again, what after you had Rome and all Italy, would you do?
Pirrhus answered, there is a famous Isle called Sicilia, adioynyng hard unto
Italy, very populous and rich, meet for the king of Rome, Cineas asked the
third time, what then will you do, Pirrhus said, being king of Rome, of
Italy, and of Sicilia, I would sone subdue Carthage and then might I well
conquer all Libia. Cineas being almost weary in demaundyng this coueteous
Prince, the end of his desire, asked the fowerth time, what would king Pirrhus
do then. The king answered, all Greece then should be at my commandment.
Cineas understanding, that there was no end of his unsatiate and greedy
mind, asked of King Pirrhus what if you were lord over all the world, Pirrhus
said then I and thou would be merry, and would live at rest. So there is no
end prescribed to the desire of the auarous, M. Crassus.
until he has all him self. Proved by Marcus Crassus, the wealthiest and the
coueteous Roman that ever dwelte in Rome, so wealthy was this man, that he
adjudged no man rich, Cice. lib. offic. parad. 6.
but he that might with money, keep an army of soldiers in the field, so
covetous was this Roman again, that he was not sufficed with all his huge
wealth, and monstrous riches, but thursted for more, in so much that after he
was slain amongst the Parthians people of great wealth having knowledge of
his greediness to gooddes, they melted gold, in reproach of his avarice upon
his head, and willed him to drink his bealie full, of that which he long
thursted for. Galba.
Even as the head of Galba, a coueteous Emperor sometime of Rome, was smitten
of, and filled full of gold, and offered at the Sepulcher of Nero, in obloquie
and slander of their filthy and greedy lives, both for that which the
covetous man, does honor a live the same, dishonors him being dead. The
Subject that is auarous, is perilous to a Prince: And the prince that is
covetous, is odious to his subjects. Acheus.
Acheus a wealthy king in Lidia, taryng, molestyng* and always most cruelly
vexyng his subjects, waxed so hateful to his own subjects, that through his
auarous dealyng, by popular sedition was murdered, and hanged over the River
Pactolus, with his head douneward, where gold was so plenty, that the waves
thereof offered Sands of gold, in token he could not moderate his desire a
live, he was set being dead, over the golden River Pactolus, to feed his
avarice. What greater infamy can happen to a Prince, then coueteousnesse.
Darius most auarous to open Semira. grave for money.
King Darius having obtained the City of Babylon, through the falshode of
Zopirus, possessyng all the wealth, substance, and treasures of the kingdom
of Persia, having all the spoil of the city, readyng the Epitaph of Queen
Semiramis, which she caused to be set on her grave, to try only coueteous
Princes that should succeed her, she made to be written this little sentence.
What King or Prince so ever thou art, wantyng gold or silver, open my tomb
and thou shal^e find to suffice thee. Darius, I say, not contented with all
the kingdom of Persia, caused the grave to be opened, sought and searched
every where within the tu^be, until he saw written in the inside of the stone
this verse. O thou wicked and wretched prince, if thou had not been most
coueteous, thou had never opened Graves, to come to dead folks for money.
The like repulse had this Xerxes, Xerxes.
King Darius soonne, after he made the grave of king Belus, to be opened for
money, Aelianus li. 13
and finding nothing but the like sentence, written on a short Table, as his
father king Darius found before in the tomb of Semiramis, which sentence
said, that he which should open king Belus grave, and would not fill that
glass with oil, which was in his grave, should have an evil end, which
happened to king Xerxes afterward, for that he was coueteous, to spoil quick
and dead for money, and not so liberal as being a Prince, as to fill up king
Belus glass with oil. Thus auarous princes, sought for money with dead men.
There is no respect to place with the coueteous man, sith he has no regard
to any person for money sake. L. Septumileius corrupted with avarice.
What respect had L. Septumilius, to his assured and dear friend C. Gracchus,
when Opimius then Consul in Rome, and great enemy unto Gracchus, allured him
with money to betray him, his manifest faith before unto his friend by
covetousness, was altered unto open enemitie for money, he sold his friend for
money, Plutarc. lib. 33. and Val. lib. 9. Cap. 4.
he murdered his friend for money, he lugged his friends body, round about
the streates of Rome. O how infamous art thou Septumilius for thy avarice.
What respect had Ptolomeus, to his singular and often approved friend
Pompeius the great, who to avoid the force of Caesar the Emperor, fled for
succor unto Egipte, where the king his supposed friend, caused one named
Bustus, to strike of his head and made his officer Photinus to sell Pompeius
head for money unto Caesar. Appianus li. 2*
What regard had Polimnestor king of Thracia, to his friend and nigh kinsman
Polidor: At what time Polidors Father king Priamus, sent him in trust to his
cousin Polimnestor, Polimnestor.
for old acquaintance and affinity, with great substance and wealth of
Troie, to keep to the use of king Priamus, who perceiuyng the state of Ilion,
and royal sceptor of Phrigia, ready to yield the fatal flames. Coueteous
Polimnester, without regard of frendshippe before, or respect of kindrede,
either unto king Priamus, or to his son Polidor, slew his friend and kinsman,
to possess the wealth, which Polidor had. Oh unhappy metal that thus move
men to tyranny. O wicked money that make men murder friends. O most cruel
coueteous, to persuade men to betraie men, to kille father and mother, to
deceive Cities and Countries, to forsake faith, L. Silla passed all men in
covetousness*
to subvert kingdoms. L. Silla a most wicked and coueteous, far to be
hated and lothed before Crassus, that wicked and auarous Impe of Rome, passing
all men, both in wealth and coueteousnesse, that in so much he became
through greedy desire of his usual mind so cruel, that he was called an
other fire brande of Italy, such tyranny proceadeth from his coueteousnesse,
that not only in foreign Countries, became a cruel enemy in spoilyng and
robbing, but also in Rome and Italy, his native zoile, a terrible tyraunte,
burning and murtheryng, both Countries and the people. This Silla could never
have to suffice his mind, until at length he was consumed with lice him self,
as his money was corrupted with Mothes. They enjoy nothing, though they have
all things, they possess nothing, though they be Lords of Countries, true is
that golden sentence of the Stoickes, that the wise manne is only rich, for
contentation is perfect wealth. That wiseman Bias, at what time the City of
Prienna was besieged, and subdued by the enemies, the Citizeins thereof
commanded, and suffered with bags of their treasures to depart, every manne
loded him self with silver and gold, but Bias who took nothing but a book in
his hand, and being demanded of the enemies, why he carried not his goods
with him, he said, that all his wealth and richesse, was in his heart,
meaning knowledge and wisdom, a place most fit to lay, and to keep
treasure, saying, I have all my wealth about me, which you can not spoil me
of. Herodotus a noble Historiographer, writes a noble history of one
Alcmaeon, Alcmaeon.
which because he was wont to welcome often the Ambassadors of Cressus king
of Lidia, as they went to Delphos, to consult with the Oracles of Apollo, was
thus rewarded of King Cressus, for his clemency therein, that Alcmeo^ should
have as much gold and silver, by the kings treasurer, as he would be able
to carry, or bear away, which delited so much the coueteous mind of
Alcmaeon, that he was as willing to take all the substance of the King, had he
been able, and being so heavy loded, that his bodily strength failed, to
suffice his gredie mind, would in no wise deminishe any part of his desire,
though he could augmente the ability of his strength by any means, and so
to satisfy his auarous mind, he could never lode him self with a fit
burden, either to heavy that he could not carry, or else to light that he
would not carry, and thus as one not so able in strength as he was willing in
mind, could not prescribe measure to his desire. Had Alcmaeon learned of
Plato, how to deminishe rather desire, to increase his strength, then to
study for riches, he had been able to carry a good burden of gold from king
Cressus Had Demonica learned that lesson of Socrates, Demonica.
that money and desire of wealth is dangerous. At what time Brennus the
Captain and Prince over Senona, laiyng siege to Ephesus, she had not straight
consented, as one more covetous unto money, the^ faithful to her country,
betrayed the City for money, who according unto promise, demanded of Brennus
her deserved reward, brought her to a great heap of gold, and waiyng her
importunate desire unto money, loaded her so heavy with gold, that she died
under her burden, for want of equal strength to her coueteous mind. The
golden Sands of Tagus, all the glisteryng gemmes of Ganges, all the treasures
of Hydanspes, can not suffice coueteous Princes. Such inordinate desire of
wealth, of glory, of fame, reigning in Princes from time to time, that diverse
dreamed in their sleep, how they might satisfy their greedy guts in the
day time, toumblyng and tossyng their brain, how they might possess
kingdoms and Countries. Darius dream
For Darius dreamed that al Macedonia should be at his beck, and that
Alexander the Great, should serve him in such homage and clothes, as he some
time did serve king Ca^bises. Alexander dreamed that Hercules appeared to him
every where, Alexanders dream.
and commanded him to pass unto Tire, and to the Isle of Pharo, promisyng
help and assistaunce, to have wealth and honor above al men. Hanibali was so
coueteous and desirous of Rome, Hannibals dream.
that a young manne of wounderfull beauty, appeared unto him in his sleep,
commaundyng him to make his army rieadie, to pass unto Italy, assuryng him
to become lord of Rome and Italy. Thus in sleep did they study, how to feed
coueteousnesse. Thus by dreams did they conjecture, how they might be famous,
glorious, and renoumed. Thus through fond fantasies of visions, did at
length become murderers, and tyrants of the world. What was the only
death, of that noble Trojan Hector, the greedy desire to spoil king
Patroclus* What was the end of that renoumed Greek Achilles, his auarous
dealyng with king Priamus; for his soonne Hectors, avarice never lodges but
with princes, noble men, and rich men, the poor of necessity is enforced
to seek his living. Midas history
King Midas was not contented with all the kingdom of Lidia, made his desire
and wish of GOD Bacchus, to be a mean unto Jupiter, that what so ever he
touched, should be gold, which being granted, even at diner his bread that
he touched, became gold, his drink he took in hand, converted unto gold,
and being privy to his misery and wretchedness, that he was in almost
famish^e himself, for that he could not digeste gold, as well as meat and
drink, which could not perceive his estate before, and suffice him with all
things, being the wealthiest king that ever was in Lidia, now through his
coueteousnes, enforced by hunger to die. O hongrie panches of gold: O cursed
desire of money. What has not been done by thee? What place was not sought by
thee? Euriphile.
Euriphiles was so coueteous that she betrayed her own housebande Amphiraus,
to Adrastus king of the Argiues, for a bracelet of gold, that the king did
wear about his arm. Ochus.
If Ochus king sometime of Persia, had observed the rule of noble Plato, which
said, that a king which deliteth in avarice, can not prospere. He had not
stayed from the City of Babylon, for sparing of some silver, which he should
give to the poor women of the city, for it was a Law made by king Cirus,
that what king so ever of Persia, had comen unto Babylon, he should give a
piece of gold, unto every poor woman in the town, for the which cause king
Ochus would never come unto Babylon. These commodities follow coueteousnesse,
toil and trauaill in gettyng, care and thoughts in keeping. Had Euclio thought
of that saying of Plutarchus, Euclio.
that riches for the most part, are hurtful to those chiefly, that do
desire most, he had not hidden under the ground such Treasure and wealth of
gold and silver, that he durst not go out of his house, for fear of
robbing, nor yet as Plautus says, abide in his house, for fear of killyng.
Uerie well is it described of wisemen, the chariotte of coueteousnes, the four
wheels named faint courage, contempt of God, forgetfulness of death, and
ungentleness, the two horses that drew the Chariot are named rauine, and
nigardshippe, the driuer of the horses, is called desire, the two cords that
rule the horses, are appetite to get, and fear to forgette. A whole volume
might be written upon these names, but sith the most part know well the
manner, and motion of avarice, superfluous it is to commente, or gloss to the
smalleste noumber. The Princes are not ignorance, for slaughter, murder, and
tyranny teaches them the order of this chariotte. The noble man desires
always, to ascend unto higher honors, and dignities, by sundry study and
seache of coueteous desire. The gentleman in heauyng his rentes, in spoiling
his tenauntes, in taking all from, and giuyng nothing unto. The merchants
attempt the slipperie Sands of Sirtes, they sail over Charibdus and Silla,
through surgyng seas, to hasarde life for the Pearls of India, and thus all
for money. O wicked world, what profited Cirus to be king of Persia, Ciru^.
of great fame and glory, and then by coueteousnesse, to be vanquished by a
woman, Tomiris Queen of Scithiae, and two hundred thousand soldiers beside
him, his head being smitten of, and cast unto a barell of blood, to drink
that, which avarice compelled him to attempt. What did it avail king
Antigonus, Antigonus.
to name him self the Rasor of Asia, the Shauer of Macedonia, preferryng his
own unsatiate desire, Alexander the great.
before Alexander the Great, upon a brag of his avarice, boastyng Alexander
to be but a Reaper of Asia, and Antigonus the sharp shauer, and spoiler
thereof, the one poisoned in Babylon, in the midst of his triumphs, and
left thirty days unburied, without regard or honor, yea, without any to
put in the ground: The other slain and cut in pieces, emongeste his
mortal foes, Alexander king Pirrhus soonne. What should I recite sondrie
Princes, private persons, wholly addicted to this vile avarice, but Kingdoms
and Countries, altogether drowned in this miserable Coueteousnesse.
Lacedemonia^s.
The Lacedaemonians, the renowned people of the whole world, after their long
banishemente of money and manly contempt of wealth, Lisander.
at length corrupted by Lisander to embrace coueteousnes in Athens, Athens.
the sacred aucthor of learning, the Well of Philosophy, after they had
despised King Philip of Macedonia, and all his wealths in fine brought in
subjection, by money valiant Thebes while Spaminondas lived subject to no
desire, Thebes.
desirous of no riches, but yet allured to yield to money, in so much they
waxed so covetous, they began one to war against another, that in seeking
to be Lords and chief one over another, they became slaves and subjects to
foreign princes, which all the while they were not moved by covetousness, they
resisted the violence of their enemies, but even as Aesopes dog was not
contented with the meat that he had in his mouth, but being greedy to snatche
at the shadow thereof, he lost that which he carried in his mouth. Haniball.
Had not Hanniball been covetous of Rome and Italy, he had not lost Carthage
and Libia. Pirrhus.
Had not Pirrhus been desirous to possess Macedonia, he had not been
dispossessed of Epyre. If Mithridates had been contented with ye whole kingdom
of Pontus. Mithridates.
If the great king Antiochus had not thursted for Aegipt, Antiochus.
he had not been banished from Assiria. Such coueitousnes grew on a sodden in
the city of Rome, that Iugurth king of Numidia would often say that Rome
would have been sold for money. If Biers and Sellers could have happened to
me. So covetous waxed Rome, that all things were soulde for money, in so
much that when Antiochus had prepared a great army sumptuously appointed,
with Helmets, Spears and Targats of Silver, and demau^dyng of Hanniball
whether he was well appointed to fight against the Romans, Haninball
understanding the wealth and substance of the Soldiers of Antiochus one way,
and not ignorant of Romans force, for that he.xvj. years had famous wars
against them, perceauyng the desire and greedines of the Romans to
substance, another way answered king Antiochus after this sort. There is
sufficient at this time for the Romans, Rome famous
though they be ever so coueitous. O Rome the Lamp and Lantarne of the world,
while money was not known. Sparta renowned.
O Sparta most renowned, while yet the laws of Licurgus was observed, when
hard Iron was coined for money, then Rome flourished, then Sparta prospered,
then Romans were feared, and Lacedaemonians dreeded. O golden world, before
the coin of Iron, when shamefastnes ruled the people, and justice governed
princes. It is seldom seen when wealth increases that avarice abateth, for as
the world grew unto wealth, so it grew unto covetousness, when gold was found
first by Cadmus in Mount Pangaeum, Cadmus found first money in Mount
Pangaeum.
as both Pliny and Herodotus affirm, then was no earth dug, no Seas saild,
no countries travailed unto for money, but now they have dug unto the very
bottom of Caucasus, unto the depest part of the earth, and like to dig
Pluto out of hell, if they continue says Phalerius. There is no dangerous I Will
on earth, no gapyng Gulf in Seas, but money has sought it out. Would to GOD
some ofspringes of king Agis, Agis fire.
who sometime in Sparta commanded all the rich Citizins to bring their Books
and Bills of accoumptes unto the common Haull, where and when he perceived the
Lacedaemonians to be much given unto avarice, the City of Sparta unto usury,
he called for all the bills of deptes, the creditours, assuryng themselves of
paime^t, was rewarded after this sort, al their bills and books of deptes
burned before their face, with a full sentence of the king and the wisemenne
Ephori, Agesilaus was wont to speak, that king Agis fire was the best that
ever was in Sparta, far better then Neros fire, who burned and would have
often flamed the noble city of Rome, where he was Emperor and governor of,
Agis burned the scroules of Usurie and coueitousnes, in respect of his tender
love toward the people of Sparta. Nero set afire the whole City in
consideratio^s of his hatred toward his own Subjects, trustyng more the
spoil and the wealth of Rome, then ready to govern the state of the Empire
with wisdom and virtue. King Agis exclamed with famous Maro, against money
and coueitousnes, the Emperor Nero, did always cry out and procure that
verse of Horace, saying. O Citizins, first seek money and then trauaill for
virtue. Plini. 33.
There should no stranger inhabit Sparta that was either rich or desirous of
riches, but when they began to embrace wealth, to love money, to wear Golden
Ringes on finger, Pearls hangyng at their ears, Bracelettes about their
arms, Chains about their necks, at length they wear Gold and precious
stones on their shows, then wantonness and lechery were first chambered, then
glotonie and dronkennes were fostered, then vices and wickedness began to
prevail, Virtue and Godliness began to be oppressed. Thus Avarice first began
by princes, and maintained by all sort of men, Desire of fame.
then of covetousness sprung up desire of fame and glory, not only in Kesars and
Kings, but in mean and simple persons, how simple a slave, a vile abject,
most desirous of fame. Heroaeratus.
Herostratus by name burned the great Temple of Diana, coumpted one of the
seven wonders for her monstrous and huge buildinges, detected himself of the
crime, to become famous. Pausanias a mean man in respect, Pausanias.
demaundyng of his friend Hermocles, how he might be famous, was councelled to
kill king Philip, king of Macedonia, father unto Alexander the great, which
as willing he did accomplish as he was desirous of fame. Xenophon.
Xenophon a noble and a wise Philosopher, perceauing his wife named Aspasia,
more given to avarice, more alured with gourgeous sightes, then others were,
having opportunity demanded of his wife, if her neighbor had better apparel
then she had, which would she have if she might change, his wife said her
^eigbours. Again Xenophon merrily disposed, would know of his wife if her
neighbor had more Gold, Silver, Treasure, or wealth would she change if she
might, to whom she answered most willing she would, what said Xenophon if
your neighbor has a finer fellow to her housbands then you have, would you
change with her, silence with shame was her answer. Thus Xenephon tauntyng
his wife with such nippes, brings me in memory of one Pythius, Pythius.
borne in Lidia, and commoraunt, in a City of Phrigia called Caeleius, a
notable rich manne and not so rich as coueitous, toilyng and tramplyng all
the day time in pain and travail, seeking and searchyng money, tomblyng and
tossyng all the night time, restles without sleep, thinkyng always on money,
his wife understanding his grief and want of rest. At what time Pithius her
housbande had appointed certain strangers to come to dinner, to prove whether
they might being his gestes make him merry or no, caused and willed his wife to
make such good cheer for him, as would make him merry and his gestes, his
wife understanding that nothing might make her housebande merry but money,
prepared the Tables ready, furnished them over all with Gold and Silver, his
house hanged with clothe of Arreis, every place settled with wealthy
treasures, which when the Gestes came, they were amazed of so much Gold and
silver, dismayed quite at the gorgeous sight and wealthy Tables. Pithius
feedyng himself a long while with the sight thereof, enamored with the portly
shows of Gold and Silver called for meat, his wife before all the strangers
being bidden Gestes by her houseband, answered her housba^d that she provided
for no meat. Pithius being angry with his wife, said unto his wife, what have
I willed you this morning to do, to provide said she such cheer as could
make you merry, where is it said Pythius, behold said his wife on the tables
there is king Midas dinner, these things housebande do make you most mearie
and nothing else do you exteeme. Certain Xenopon the great Philosopher tanted
no better his wife Aspasia, then this seely and simple woman nipped her
housebande Pithius. Gold is the delight of the auarous manne, spoil and
catching still is the desire of the covetous. All is fish that comes in his
Net, Adrian.
as by that auarous Adrian surnamed Sophista, proved when a gentleman a
neighbor of his had sent him a few dainty fishes for a present, covered
very fair on a great silver dishe, he took both the silver dishe and the
fishes, saying to the messenger thank thy master, and tell him I take his
fish for novelties and dainties, and that I take his silver dishe for a gift
and a present. Such impudency reigned in covetousness, that like ravening
Harpeis, they spoil rob and catch every where such greedines lurk in
avarice, that like hongrie dogs they devour any thing. The poets feign that
Jupiter though he be king of kings, Jupiter contented with the Sky.
is yet contented with the Skies. Neptune with the Seas, Eolus with the Lands,
Pluto with Hell. If the Poets affirm that immortal Gods live by measure,
contented with Lottes, agree with Fortune, why are Kings not sufficed with
Kingdoms, Lords with Lordshippes, men mortal never satisfied with any
thing, how greedy of Gold, how desirous of Silver, how covetous of countries
the wealth of some, the penury of others can well declare it. This private
wealth apply the place where avarice is honored, the blood of the covetous is
his money, to seek to borowe or to ask money of the covetous man, is nothing
else but to crave blood out of his body, for sooner says Plato shall a man have talk of a dead man, then receive benefits of the covetous man. The
Purse of the covetous is shut up and sealed, his hand is ready to take, his
Cofer to receive. Simonides.
Simonides at what time any man would demand him to write, to read, or to
pleasure the poor any way for thanks, he would answer that he had in
his house two Cofers, the one shut up for thanks, the other open always for
money, in the one said Simonides I find somethyng always, in the other I
find nothing at all times, he heald his hands ready to take with Vespasianus,
Vespasianus.
sometime in Rome an Emperor, when he had hard by his friends, that a silver
Image of great substance should be made for a monument of his worthiness, in
memory of his chivalry, he straight healde out hand, saying: behold, here is
a place ready to set the Image, a sure foundation from falling. The coueteous
Prince, was more greedy to have the money unto his own purse, then to thank
his friends for their love, and good will in honoring him, with a perpetual
monument. How happy judge they them selves to be, that are wealthy, and how
contemteously despise they others that be poor. We read that Craesus a
wealthy king sometime in Lidia, Craesus thought him most happy by wealth.
ioyed so much of his substance and riches, that he thought no man so happy
as he was. This king to brag and to boste of his gold and silver, thought
good to send for Solon the Sage, and wise Law maker of Athens, to show unto
Solon his fortunate estate, which being demanded of Craesus, when he came to
Lidia, whether any manne in the world, was in better estate then he was:
answered, that a poor Greek called Cleobes, was far more fortune then he
was: Cresus being dismayed, and half angerie with Solon. Demanded again, who
was of like Fortune, or whether any man was coequall in wealth unto him. Solon
preferred before him again, for Fortune and wealth, one Biton. The third time
he asked the like, Plutarchus in vita Solonis.
and Solon commended before him one Tellus. Then king Caesus commanded Solon
to depart his presence, with great wrath and anger, and where he had
thought to give him plenty of gold and silver, if Solon had preferred his
fortune: he gave him great checkes, showed him hidden hatered, that he
despised his estate, and wealth. But at last, this worthy and rich king,
being convicted, and taken in wars by Cirus, when that he should die, at the
solempnitie of his funeral, he thrice called Solon happy, for that Solon
despised most, which he honored chief: That name which I had thought to
claim to my self happy, by my wealth, I surrender it to him most worthily,
by dispraisyng of the same commended me unto Solon, said he a little before he
died: and tell him that now I am satisfied with death, which could never be
content in life. Giges.
The like history of braggyng Giges, who only for such a purpose, went unto
Apollo to Delphos, to know by Oracles, whether any manne in all the wide
world, was as rich as he, and there after long bragges of his Kingdoms, and
vain ostentations of wealth: an answer was made unto him by Apollo, out of
the secret place of the Temple, that Aglaus a poor manne of the Country of
Arcadia was far richer, and more fortunate then he was. Thus are they most
misers, noted of wise men, having all things, and yet having nothing for that
they are never contented with any thing. When Alcibiades had much bragged of
his fortune, wealth, and substance, boasted very much of his lands in
Athens, a certain Philosopher showed a little Table, wherein the whole
Country of Athens was described in a very little room, desiryng Alcibiades
to show him there his livings and lands in Athe^s, which when Alcibiades
might not, Alcibiades.
nor could in any wise show the same: No more said the wise Philopher, can
any coueteous manne show any part of his substance, for that they have
nothing, though they have much. Thus Craesus and Giges, though they were most
wealthy kings in Lidia, yet were they both by Apollo and Solon, adjudged
misers. So odious was usury and coueteousnes that when it was demanded of
Cato the wise, what usury was, he answered, what is to murder a man? It
robs and kills poor men, it murthereth innocents. This is that false
fellow that will sell all things with Simo^. This is he that will betray Christ
with Judas. To this it is said, that sooner a Camel shall go through the eye of
a Nedle, then he should go unto heaven. Wherefore the memory of death is
better, to him that has pleasure in possessions.

Of Prodigality and Dronkennes.
THE great delight, the Epicureal felicity that Princes have had in excess
of eating and drinkyng, from time to time, in all places, are not only in
profane Histories regestred, but also in Divine Scriptures* mentioned. The
Poets make songs of prodigal Princes, the Histriographers defame them, the
Philosophers abhor their company, how could the Poet Sidonius omit the
prodigal draught of Cleopatra Queen of Egypt without a song, Cleopatra.
how might Pliny forget the sumptuous excess of the Empress Poppea without
a taunt. Poppeia.
How should Martial let pass the impudency of proud Bassa, Bassa.
without worthy scoffs of her too much prodigality. The first preparyng a
banquet to her friend and lover Antonius, where one dishe of meat stood her
in two hundred thousand Crowns. The second so sumptuous and prodigal, to set
shows of glisteryng Gold under her Horses feet. The third most proud and
impudent to appoint vessels of Gold, wrought with Precious stoanes, to receive
her excrementes in stead of her stool of ease. Their sumptuous prodigality,
excess and pride must not be unspoken, to show the horror thereof, as an
example to other proud prodigal Princes. Therefore to match these sumptuous
Ladies, I will travel no further then the city of Rome, where three Emperors,
one succeedyng in a manner the other, not only comparable to these dainty
dames, but far surmountyng them in each respect. Caligula the only Dregs
and Faex of Emperors and Princes for prodigality, Caligula.
and excess spending and spoilyng the whole revenues of the Empire of Rome,
upon Hoores and Queanes, a Sacrilege of churches, a spoiler of the City, a
robber of all the Country, so filthy was this Emperor, so odious for his
excess, that he wished that all Rome had but one neck, that he with one
stroke might strike of the head, to the end he might have to suffice his
prodigality, his Acts perticulerly to touch it were tedious, for he never did
a good turn to the City of Rome. The second Nero, Nero.
surnamed the tyrant Caligula his sisters son, most like his own son,
for that he was known to be naught with Agrippina his sister Neros mother,
this Emperor past Caligula his uncle, in all excess of glotonie and
dronkennes, wasting and spendyng with strumpets and queanes, consuming day and
night with riotous and infamous persons, using the company of Minstrels,
frequentyng feastinges and banquets, accompanyng the fellowship of Thieves and
Tyrauntes, that Nero himself was called the firebrande of Rome. The third
Heliogabalus, Heliogabalus.
the very sincke of shame, the only rotten member of the world, who past all
the slaves of the world in prodigality, tearyng all to pieces in bravery,
Precious clothes, commaundyng Nauies to sink before his face in the river of
Tyber, his house with all precious odours and sweetness, his Galeries strowed
over with Saffron, his Stool of Gold, his Chamber pottes of Onix stoan, his
Slippers wrought with precious Margarites. I will omit to speak of his
monstrous lechery, of his cruel tyranny, of other prodigious and terrible
acts, but let the learned read Suetonius of Heliogabalus life, let the
unlearned judge of his life by his death, who being kilde on a Iakes, and
thrown to the River Tiber, and lest any ofspryng might succeed him, the
Citizins of Rome through his mother Scemides alive to bear him company, for
that she brought up such a Gulf of mischief. I am amazed to thynk wherein the
wide world I might find his mate, because that all writers do agree, that in
excess and drunkenness only, Alexander the Great.
for that fault Alexander the great, the conquirour of the whole world, is
much defamed. I am urged amongst so many virtues, that Alexander had this
only filthy and abominable vice to note wherein he had great delight, making
certain garlands and brave Crowns of Gold, appointyng great gifts and rewards
for them that excelled in drinkyng. Calanus when he should die at the gorgeous
pomp of his funeral, and solemn exequies, he desired Alexander to make a
memorial of his death, by some sacrifice of drinkyng, Calanus Dirige.
which Alexander accomplished, made three Garlands of pure gold, the best
valued lxxx. pounds. The second.xxx. Pound. The third.x. Pound. And then
prepared a sumptuous feast, with such Diriges of drinkyng for Calanus, that
Alexander wan the best and first Garlande. Promachus the second* The third a
hundred made claim by law. Thus Alexander having such felicity in
drunkenness. Androcides a gentleman of Greece wrote unto Alexander being in
Babylon, perceiving the prone and propensed mind of this Prince to win, a
letter, wherein was a Table written one with this little Sentence in letters of
Gold. Remember Alexander when thou do drink wine, that thou do drink
the blood of the earth, he never hurted any but in his wine, famous in all
things, infamous in that, exteemed and honored of all in all things, lothed
and abhorred in that thing in all the world. Such cruelty he showed in
drunkenness, that he slew his own sisters brother Clitus, killed Calisthenes
his philosopher and councelour, murdered his dear friend Lisimachus. Cambises
king of Persea, Cambises.
and Father unto Cirus the great, such tyranny he would commit in
drunkenness, Seneca lib 3. de ^ra and Brolonius lib. 1. ca. 5
as being either spoken or counceled, he would reward with death and
torments. At what time Praxaspes, one of his councelours, willed him to
abstain from wine, which makes Princes not only subjects to infamy and
reproache, but would also deprive Princes of senses, declared the propriety
of wine unto Cambices, as to make the feet to stamber, the eyes to stare, the
hands to shake, and all the wit of man to be banished. The king commanded
Praxaspes to bring his only son, which he had before him, which being
brought, he took him by the hear of the head with the left hand, and his
dagger drawn in the right hand, saying Now Praxaspes thou shall know whither
my feet will sta^ber, or my eyes stare, or whither my hand will fail of thy
sons heart, and with all he thrust Praxaspes soonne unto the heart. So
dangerous is dronkennes, so filthy and beastly is this Uice, that Cleomenes a
famous king sometime of Sparta, Cleomenes.
being much given to imitate the dronken Scithians, and Thracians people of
shameful life, became from a stout and a strong king over the famous people of
Lacedemonia, to be a Rascoll and belly slave, subject unto all Greece. Suetonius
does make mention of two prodigal brethren, either of them then named
Vitellius, whose sumptuous estates of filthy life, with such enormitie of
drinkyng and excess of glotonie, that almost comparable they were to that
monstrous Beast of Rome Heliogabalus. What infamy is, or can be more unto a
man, much more unto a prince then dro^kennes: When Philippe King of Macedonia,
and father unto Alexander the Great, had heard that a certain Macedonian had
appealed from him unto king Philippe, he demanded of the manne what king
Philippe was he that he did appeal unto. The manne answered, I appeal from
king Philippe the drounkard to day, Philippe.
to king Philippe sober to morrow: Yet this king for all this taunte, commended
the boldness of the woman, revoked his false sentence with shame, being
given before when he was in wine, and Judged right being sober. Too true is
that sentence of the wiseman, that who so ever he be, Keisar or King, that
thinks to drink always, and not to be dronken sometime, let him then
think to drink poison, and not to die of it. Beasts never drink says
Plini, but when they are thurstie, A log will be dronken. The Raven. The
Olephant and the Ape. Aelianus. 2.
manne only bibbyng always. The Dog will be dronken, if he drink wine,
and the Rauons likewise, if they taste the same. If the great and huge
Elephant drink wine, he loses straight his strength, knows not his force,
and is easily convicted. If the Ape drink wine, she forgets her pastyme and
tricks, and can do nothing but sleep. And therefore naturally all beasts
abhor wine, as enemy unto their strength. Drunkenness is a privy
murderer, that spoileth life on a sudden. Archesilaus.
Archesilaus as Hermippus does report, Domitius.
and Domitius surnamed Apher, which Eusebius makes mention of, in his
triper^ite histories, the one by superfluous feedyng, suddenly at supper
choked: The other Caroussyng a draught of wine, died presently. This was so
abhorred of the wise, that when king Antigonus came kissing and clipping of
Zeno the Philosopher, whom the king so loved, that he willed Zeno to demand
what he would, and he should have it. Zeno perceiuyng the state of king
Antigonus, took him a side, besoughte him in his ear to go vomit, and to
purge his stomach, whence such sent and smell proceaded, that Zeno could not
abide the breathe of king Antigonus. Antiochus.
King Antiochus of Siria, having wars with the people of Rhodes in Chalcides,
by occasion of wine and drinkyng, fell in love with a young maid of the City,
consumyng a whole Winter, drinkyng and feastyng with glottonie, and
drunkenness in the day time, wantonnyng and chambring with her the night
time, neglectyng greater affairs, whereby honor and fame might be gotten, to
obaye bealie, and to accomplish lust, whereby infamy and shame grew unto
him. These greedy gluttons want not their parasites, to flatter them in their
drunkenness, to feed them in their vicious and filthy life, yea, to
maintain them to do evil, and to let them to do good. Had not Dionisius
the tyraunte Aristippus? Had not Caesar Curio? Had not Alexander the Great
Promachus. Yea, even as Terence says, where ever Thrasonicall masters be,
there be also appoincted out of the School of flattryng Gnatho unto these
Princes, glorious Parasticall servants. To this Epicuriall pamperyng of
bealies, to this inordinate cramming day and night. To this continual
feedyng, Tapyrum.
was the people of Tapirum, a nation so much given to wine, Aelianus. 3.
that when they could drink no more wine, they wash them selves over naked
with wine and oil, then they went to sleep until they were able again to
drink. Byzantias.
To this drunkenness the Bizantianes were so addicted, that they sold their
lands, set out their houses, to apply the Tauernes, leauyng their wives as
common to others at home, as wine was to them at Tauernes, forgettyng all
honesty of life, mindful only of glottonie and drunkenness. Argiues and
Corinthians dronkardes.
The Argiues and Corinthians, says Maenander, people beyond measure given to
prodigality, of drinkyng, banquettyng riottyng and feastyng, to one from an
other, that in surfette of eating and drinkyng, they end their s^launderous
life, with reprochefull death. O brutishe and beastly life, to hurt that at
all times, that sought all men's distructions, always to live in shame, and
to die in misery. The law of Pyttachus.
The law of that wiseman Pittachus was amongst the people of Mittilena that
glotto^s and dronkardes, should be double punished. For as Laertius says,
when they do evil, they blame the drink, and so excuse one fault with a
greater fault. The saying of the Emperor Aurelian, unto the great drinker
Bonosus, that he was borne to drink, and not to live, may be well applied to
a great noumber of this age. The Scithians and the people of Thracia, The
^cithians, and Thracians most given to wine.
the welspringes and parents, whence all drunkenness and glottonie proceade:
much like unto the Agrigentines people, always in great excess, in so much
says Plato, that they build continually, as though they should live for
ever, they eat and drink day and night always, as though they should die
the next day. The people called Batilli annointe them, and wash them with
wine, in and out, even as says Plini, the Ciprians and Parthians do, which
are so dry, that the more they drink, the more thurstie they are. What should
I recite the Beotians* which were noted of the learned Athenians as rude
blocks, witless people, and gross fools, for that they were greedy to
glouttonie, and drunkenness. But speak of the aunciente Greeks, which did
mingle their wines with Oil, to make it sweeter, whereby they might drink the
more, Athens corrupted.
and carouse the better In time Athens it self, as Aristophanes bears
witness, grew unto such daintenesse of feeding, and prodigal clothyng,
Aelianus. lib. 12.
in so much that Isocrates did compare Athens, unto a curious harlotte, who
would much rejoice of her brave apparel, sekyng and alluryng every manne, to
fall in love with her finenesse, that Diogenes the Philosopher, going from the
City of Sparta unto Athens, being demanded on the way, by certain
gentlemen of Greece strangers, whence he ca^, and whether he would go,
answered and said, I came from men, and I go unto women: Notyng the
valiant hardiness of the Lacedaemonians, and tauntyng the daintiness and
finenesse of the Athenians. Rome prodigal.
This prodigality of eating and drinkyng, was so honored, this finesse of
feedyng was so accepted, that a little fish, says Plutarche, was more
accepted in Rome, then a great ox. What wickedness proceeded from dronkennes?
What lust moved dronkards. Secundus.
Secu^dus the Philosopher being dro^ken, did lie with his own mother, as an
ignorant beast by wine, being a learned philosopher, which she knowing being
sober, slew her self therefore, and he for shame of the act, and for sorrow of
her death, pined and tormented him self, all the days of his life. The huge
and mighty Holifernus being drounken, Holifernus.
was beheaded by Judith a selie woman. The monsterous Ciclops Poliphemus,
Poliphemus.
being overcome with wine, sleping in a cave, was slain by Vlixes a simple
Greek. The pugill and Champion Alexander, Alexander.
the conqueror of all the whole world, was betrayed and murdered with wine.
If such reproach happen by wine, if such perilles and dangers accompany
drunkenness. If sudden death always wait for glottons and dronkardes, hence
marvel much men may, that all men every where at all times, do embrace
this prodigious monster. Lacidis.
If Lacidis the Philosopher fell into a palsy, by drinkyng of wine, and by
drunkenness died. Why did Mar. Antonius make a book in defense of wine, M.
Antonius.
to maintain his dro^kennesse, which book was as odious unto Rome, as
drunkenness was esteemed of Antonius. If Philostrates by drinkyng of wine,
Philostratus.
was made dro^ken, and brake his neck from a ladder, by a fall, to his great
infamy and shame: Timocreon.
Why did Timocreon cause an Epitaphe to be set on his grave in Rhodes, for a
brag of his ignomious life, saying: Here lies Timocreon of Rhodes, that in
life time eat much meat, drank much wine, spoke much evil. Thus vice
begins sweet, it ends sower: It begins with pride, it ends with
shame: It begins with wealth it ends with poverty. Licinius Crassus.
Even as Licinius Crassus was flouted sometime in Rome, scofte in Italy, mocked
of all men, because from a wealthy man, he became a poor beggar, by prodigal
expenses. So are they laughed to scorn as bealie slaves, waied as infamous
persons, regarded of no man, that are compted dronkardes. Even as Gnosius was
contempned in Greece, Gnosius.
that the Citizeins of Athens commanded their children, to avoid his
company, for that he was noted such a glotton, and a dronkarde, that when he
went in the street^ every one pointed his finger at him, when he would go to
any house every manne would avoid his company. Plini does repete the
benefits of dro^kennesse. Plini. lib. 24. Cap. 2^.
Thence says he, proceed the dropsy, the swollen visage the pale color, the
queueryng hands, the foulteryng tongue, staring eyes, read nose: hence says
Plini proce^de furious dreams, stinckyng breath, and beastly behavior: hence
the gout and palsy, and all kind of diseases, these come of immoderate
drinkyng of wine, modesty in drinbyng of wine, reuiueth the spirits,
comfort the heart, sharpeneth the wit, and makes glad the heavy mind.
Homer.
As Homer the sugered and sweet Mecaenas of Greece, was much revived by a
draughte of wine. The aunciente Poet Enneus, could best apply his study
after a cup of wine. Aristophanes and Cratinus, felt them selves most apt,
and ready to versifie after little wine So that Pithagoras said true, that the
Uine has three granes: the first of pleasure, the second of drunkenness, the
third of madness: The first draught is pleasant, the second is dangerous,
the third is madness. Some write that it has seven granes: the first as
before said, of pleasure, the second of company, the third of farewell, and
thus free, then the fowerth of slander, the fifte of braulyng, the sixte of
blows, the seventh of madness: then it weakeneth the senewes, it kills the
memory, it dulleth the wit, and spoileth all the sense of man, and of a man makes a beast, vomityng and spuyng both wine and the secret, for in
wine there is no silence. There were certain soldiers in Tarentum, Tarentum.
a city sometime under the Romans, and all that time defended by Pirrhus
king of Epire, who being drounken, and ouercomed with wine, began to slander
and to defame Pirrhus with obloquie, and ignomious talks and being demanded
by Pirrhus, Pirrhus.
why they so spoke of him, one answered and said, more had been spoken, had
not wine wanted. Three things there are that much are to be lamented: the
mariner in a tempest, the poor manne in debte, and the prodigal person with
money. Thus Demosthenes would often repeat in his Orations, to move the
Olinthians and the people of Athens, Polido. lib. 3. Ceres in Sicilia honored
by Triptolemus.
to abhor prodigality and drunkenness. There was sometime a Temple in
Sicilia, consecrated unto Ceres, where Triptolemus appointed solemn sacrifice
great honor, with glottonie, and access of eating and drinking. Mela^pus
likewise as Herodotus does write brought first from Egipte unto Greece, the
excess order of drinkyng* called the feast of Bacchus, from Greece not long
after it was brought unto Hetruria, from Hetruria unto Rome, from Rome unto all
the world. Thus glottonie and drunkenness grew, hail fellows with Princes.
Aelianus lib. de vary histo.
In Pontus with king Mithridates. In Lacedemonia with Cleomenes. In Sicilia
with Dionisius. In Lidia with Cambetes. Plini lib. 14. Cap. 22.
Timolaus in Thebes, And as Plini affirms, in Greece with Alcibiades and
Diotinus: In Rome with Piso and Torquartus. In Aegipt, Herodotus prefers
king Amazis. These princes and noble fellows were Soldiers under the banners
of Bacchus and Ceres, maintainyng glottonie and drunkenness, two vile vices,
for two noble virtuous. Worthy were the people of Sparta and Lacedemonia, of
immortal commendatio^s of perpetual fame. Plutar. lib. 4^. Sparta.
They so abhorred this vile vice of drinkyng, that they made their slaves and
captines named Helotes, at their feasts appointed dronken, that their children
might see the beastliness thereof, that they might mark the shameful state
of drunkenness, thereby rather to abhor the filthiness and brutish behauour of
dronkards by using their household servants, in so much that if any of their
children waxed fat or gross in Lacedemonia, they should fast it out with
bread and water. Wherefore Anacharsis the Scithian, being demanded how a man
might exchue dronkennes, answered in beholding the uncomely gestures of
drunkenness, for some dronkards will brag much of their drinking, and not be
dronken, Aristippus.
as Aristippus hearing a certain Greek boastyng much, that he could drink
much and not be dronken, said even so can a Mule likewise, co^paryng his
great bragges to the beastly Mule. Uery fittly does Cirus touch his grandfather
Astiages, when he was asked how it chanced that he quaffed wine no better,
because said Cirus I fear to suppe up Poison with wine, which spoileth the
right use of body and mind. We use to excuse dronkards sometime being
wisemen, even as Demosthenes excused king Philip of Macedonia, of whom
Philocrates and Aeschines, after they had returned unto Athens from their
Legacy, said that king Philip was a beastly quaffer, then said Demosthenes,
virtue has her proper spung, I say no more but that vice has some Bulwarks
and defenses every where.

Of Magike and witcherie.
THE aduenturous searchers, and privy prudent Philosophers, have sought by
influences of the heuens, to bring things fourth like unto the works of
nature as beasts to speak, dead bodies to go. In this faculty some of the
best in every Country travailed, Buda. Hermes. Zimolxides. Numa.
as Buda amongst the Babilonians, Hermes amongst the Egiptians, Zamolxides
amongst the Thracians, and Numa Pompilius amongst the Romans, and amongst
the Perseans was this Magic exteemed; that their Kings therein were
instructed, as an art necessary to be knowem for Princes. For that wise and
learned Socrates went unto Gobrias an excellent Magician, Socrates. Gobrias.
to be taught in this Art, and to learn the punishment of souls, and their
restyng places after death, which was instructed as Crinitus says, in.5. lib.
and Cap. 2. in all things according unto his expectation. Pliny says, that
Moises used a kind of Magic, Moises. Salamon.
which was likewise granted by God unto Salamon, as Josephus in his eight
book of antiquity affirms. Pithagoras. Empedocles. Democritus.
Likewise Pithagoras, Empedocles, Democritus, and diverse other Philosophers
travailed unto the furthest part of the world, to be acquainted with this
faculty, and after forsakyng of their Country, at their return practiced the
same, and opened the hidden and secret nature of the same unto others.
Strange things may be brought to pass by ioinyng inferior things, with
superior qualities, which by curious search of natural and celestial
bodies, their hidden and secret powers are known, and by practisyng of the
same marvelous effects sometime appear, as by this means Architas the
Tarentine made a wodden Dove to flee. Architas wodden Dove.
And Albertus the Great made a brazen head to speak. Lactantius says, that
Appolonius was so excellent in this art, that when Domitianus the Emperor
would have had him punished, he suddenly being before the Emperors face, to
avoid the threatenynges and appoincted punishment, vanished out of sight, by
this art Arnuphus an Aegiptian Philosopher used to fly in the air, Arnuphus.
and made such a wonder in Rome, in the time of Marcus Antonius, when the
Soldiers wanted water to drink, he caused Lightnynges and Thonders to
provide rain, to satisfy the thurst of the Roman soldiers. By this likewise
does Pliny, report of a king sometime in Armenia, which allured more the
Emperor Nero being at supper with him, to be in love with the enticement of
Magic, then to delight in the Harmony and melody of music, and other shows
provided for the increase of mirth, for natural Magic was so exteemed, that it
was thought only to be the profoundnes and perfection of natural
Philosophy, making open the active part thereof, with the aid and help of
other natural virtues. The Indians and the Egiptians, because there was
abundance of herbs, Stones, and such necessaries as might serve this
purpose, excelled in this faculty. And because Astrology has some affinity,
and great conference with Magic it is conueniente in some poincte, to touch
what they have dooen from time to time. How strange was it that Anaxogoras
said, that a great stone should fall from the Sun the second year after.
78. Olimpiade in Egos, a River in Thracia, which came to pass as Plini
report in his second book and sixte Chapter. Pherecides was so skillful in
Astrology, Phirecides.
that when he saw water drawn out of a wall, he said then, that in that
place should be great earth quake. Sulla hearing much of the enormitie, and
lust of Caligula the Emperor sometime in Rome, send him in writing how, and
after what sort he should within sewe days die. Meson.
This by judicial Astrology did Meson, foreshewe to the Athenians, sailing
then unto Sicilia, the tempest that was to come upon the Seas, whereby he
feigned him self mad, to avoid the danger thereof. By this Sulpitius
Gallus, opened the effect of Eclipse of the Moon, unto the fearful soldiers
of P. Aemilius, which feared and doubted, to meet King Perseus and his army,
until they were certified of the cause thereof. The judgment likewise that
they have of men, by their faces, and contemplations, of the proportions of
Nature, iudgyng some to be Saturnist, others to be Marcialist: some to be
Iouialist, others Mercurians, appliyng some unto the Sun, others unto the
Moon: It is written, that the ancient Philosopher Pithagoras would take no
scholar, or admit any to come unto his school, without he judged him apt,
and meet by sight to receive learning. The Kingly Philosopher Socrates, was
judged by Zopirus, to be by Nature a drounkarde, a whoremonger, and most
vicious in diverse things, to the which Socrates by feelyng of the provocation
of Nature, agreed and said, that he was naturally given unto those vices, that
Zopirus judged him. Atlas.
Atlas was so excellent in Astrology, that the Poets do faigne, that he
vpholdeth the heavens with his shulders. Berosus.
Berosus had his Image in Athens, erected and put up of the common people, for
the skill he had in Astrology. Cynop^.
Mirandula does write of a famous Magicia^ in Pathmos named Cinges, which was
wo^t to reise ded bodies, and to work wonders in the time that Ihon the
Euangeliste preached the Gospel of Christ. The Egiptians believed that Amphion
was so connyng in Magique, Amphion.
that the Poets faigne that he made stones and Trees to follow him. These
conjectures which both Magiciens, and Augurers do gather from the heavenly
bodies, upon all inferior living things, by certain signs and tokens,
placed in their mouynges, standing, gesture, and goynges, are nothing else but
to search the hidden force, and secret woorkyng of natural bodies, which
was so esteemed in times past, that the Lacedaemonians did assign an Augurer, to
sit in royal seat in judgment with their kings, and to be every where
present at the Counsel of the City, to decerne things, and to instruct
them therein. The Romans had a whole company of these, ready to teach
them things to come. The Greeks flowed of these, for they took nothing in
hand without consultation, either with Amphiraus, Amphiraus. Tiresias. Mopsus.
Tiresias, or Mopsus. The Phrigians had such confidence in diuinations, that
Ascanius the son of Aeneas, asked counsel of Augurers before he went unto
the field against Mezentius In fine, the Cicilians, the Arabians, and the
Vmbrians followed Augurers devise and cou^sailes, in all their doings and
attemptes, Therefore from age to age, Astrologers were the Keys of the
Augurers, to practice their secrets by erection of their figures, and
conjectures of similitudes, to show the very way unto divination. There is an
other kind of Magic belo^gyng to Witchyng, that is done with charmed drinks,
and medecines, where herbs are most esteemed. As Virgill, of a certain
herb called Pontus, makes mention, how he saw a man named Moeris, changed
hereby unto the likeness of a wild wolf, by such means. It is supposed that
Apuleus could shifce and alter him self when he listed unto the likeness of an
Ass And here I mean to speak of those that were most renowned in
witcherie, I marvel much that women only excelled in this faculty. For
Circes dwelling not far from Caieta a City of Campania, at what time Vlixes
and his men passed unto Phrigia, she charmed the companions of Vlixes unto
Swine, with this went Medea king Oetes daughter of Cholchos, Mexea.
to learn the force and secret virtue of herbs, which excelled both men
and women in Charmyng, for after that she had tamed the Dragon, that kept the
golden fleece, and made him sleep with drink, for the love that she bare unto
Jason, with whom she took her voyage unto Greece, as his wife, and when Jason
came to Thassaly Aeson his father, her father in law being old, she restored
him unto his youth again by her art, notwithstanding, Jason afterward
forgettyng the benefits, received by Medea, in receiuyng the golden fleece, in
restoring his father again unto his former age, put her away, Creusa.
and married Creusa the daughter of Creon King of Corinth, where Medea had
just occasions tendered to work her art. She therefore dessemblyng the
matter, did send three smockes, as a present unto King Creons his wife, and
unto his daughter, which then was married unto her housebande Jason, which
were so Charmed, and enchaunted of Medea, that as soon as the King, the Queen,
and his daughter had put them on, immediately they burned with sudden fire:
she to avoid the sight of Jason, and to augmente his anger, took her two
soonnes which she had by Jason, and hewed them unto small pieces, and so was
carried straight unto the air, and fled unto Athens, where she married
again King Aegeus, Aegeus.
Theseus Father. From thence after that she bewitched Theseus, she fled
through the clouds from Athens unto Asia, with her soonne named Medis* These
and other feats Medea used, Cirses.
whose fame thereupon excelled far Cirses, or Calipso, whose cunnyng were
such, that Cicero doubted whether they were women, or devils, no less
prodigious then cruel. Things are brought to pass by these witches, whose
incantations and charmynges protende always unto great harm and hurt,
Eurephila was such a witch, that if she might se any body with her eyes, she
sought no further to hurt her enemies, then with sight. Which like wise is
written of Medusa, which for her skill therein, any body that had seen her,
should be converted unto a ston. We read of one named Pasetes, Pasetes.
which with his charmed incantations, could make when it pleased him
banquettes of sweet meats to appear before his friends, and when he would he
could make the same to vanishe away. Plini does say in his 28. book,
Exagonus.
that one Exagonus came unto Rome from Cipris, as an Ambassador, who was so
connyng of this art, that he to please the Senators, willed them after he had
long reasoned, of the force and virtue of herbs, to put him, yea, to throw
him headlong amongst a great noumber of Serpents, which were kept in Rome,
to stynge and to punish offenders: which when he was thrown, the Serpents
licked him about the lips, and showed such obedience and love toward him,
as moved much admiration in the Senators. Hercale,
We read that Hercale could at all times, enchaunte wild and ragyng Lions to
be so gentle, that he with his hands, would lead them up and down without
resistaunce. Atir.
We read that Atir as soon as he touched any Dragon or Serpent by incantation,
he would make them sleep. Pithagoras.
We read that Pithagoras used this pastyme, to write with blood in a Glass,
such things as he thought mete, which being turned directly against the
Moon, showed and appeared unto the^ that stood behind, things written in the
circle of the Moon. Hermes.
There are books extant of Hermes, of Numa Pompilius and others, Numa.
which practiced this kind of iugglyng. Simon.
Simon the Samaritan, which for his knowledge in this, had an Image made for
him in Rome, in the time of Claudius Caesar themperor with this inscription is
this picture erected, to Simo^ the holy God. To omit a while to speak of
private persons, which be infinite: but to declare of diverse Countries and
Kingdoms, which were over whelmed in this. Marsi.
As Marsi a people in Italy, which have their names of Marsus, the son of
the Witch Cirses, which studied and travailed in this kind of knowledge, that
they could tame all wild beasts: and make wounders by enchauntementes. Again
the people in Illiria could with sight, those that long looked upon the^,
bewitche unto death, if they hated them. There be women in Scithia, that can
do the like called Vitiae. Vitae:
Herodotus says moreover, that the people called Neuri in Scithia, are so
skillful in this fassination, that they can shift them at will, unto the
likeness of Wolves, wherefore the Persians, having trial in this knowledge,
for that it was much esteemed with them in times paste, had this Law at length
to punish that, Upon a great stone, the head of the Inchauntor, or of the
Witch should be put, and with an other sharp stone, should it be cut in
pieces. Hipparchus did banish Onomacritus out of Athens for that he used these
feats, too much and too often. In this wise men appear unto the enchaunted
eyes monsterous beasts, as Horses, Asses, and such like. There are so many
kinds of enchauntmentes, that some with herbs, some stones, some with
sightes, and some with words charm and bewitche things. As Orpheus with a
certain hymmes aswaged the stormy tempeste, which was like to happen to Jason
companions upon the seas. Vlixes.
And Homer witnesses that Vlixes blood was stented with words. These will
promise any thing to come to pass, that they take in hand, much like unto
that aunciente Serpent the Devil, which promised unto our forefather Adam,
the sciences of all things, which only it was to bring man unto destruction.
And so Coniurers, Magicians, Enchaunters, Sorcerers, and such like, will
promise golden hills, and yet are they not able certainly to perform any
thing. Where these arts first sprang, Plini in his thirty book and the
first Chapter, does at large declare. And most certain it is, that by
art diverse and sonderie strange miracles are seen, and tried, and no less
certain it is, but by the devil the most of their shiftyng shows are
apparaunte. Julius Caesar after he had a great fall from his Chariotte, was
wont to repeat at any time afterward, when he would go unto his Chariotte, a
certain verse three times together, lest the like luck should happen again.
By a little verse spoken does Theophrastus bear witness in Plini, that
Ischiadici were healed. In the same place does Cato report, that certain
words did help Luxatis membris. And Marcus Varro speaks even so of the
gout.

Of comparisons between wealth and poverty.
AN old saying there is, that comparisons be odious emongeste equalles, and
certain more odious is it emongst vnequalles, as between the rich and the
poor: But sith the state of man is so diverse, that some is contented with
little, and some never with much: Some toilyng and tramplyng, having all
things, as though they had nothing. And some again quiet and careless
having nothing, as though they had all things, considering that contentation
of mind, and quietness of heart is the chief felicity, and sovereign good
of the world, waiyng beside that poverty is sure and saufe every where, and
riches unsure and dangerous at all times: And that poverty is careless, and
wealth careful. I see not but by comparyng of the lives of Emperors, Kings,
and Princes of the world, unto selie poor men. But the state of the poor
is better then the state of the rich: as by Apollos Oracle, Aglaus. Cressus.
proved of one Aglaus, a poor manne in Arcadia, preferred for his contentation
before King Cressus of Lidia, which took him self the happiest manne in the
world for his wealth. Darius.
What profited king Darius to vanquishe the Persians, and to be King of
Babylon, and to have out of Asia five hundred, three score and fiftene thousand
Talentes, yearly paid of tribute, for he lost not only all his wealth, but
also his life, for his wealths sake, by Alexander the great. Alexande^.
What profited Alexander again after that, to have the wealth of Persia, the
substance of Macedonia, yea to have all India, and Asia, and almost the whole
world in subjection: and yet to be poisoned of Antipater, and left unburied
without regard, thirty days in Babylon, for wealth was the chief cause of
his death. Was not poor Plautus and simple Cleanthes, Cleanthes. Plautus.
more happy in life, then these two famous Kings: they quietely with bakyng,
and bruing and appliyng their books, lived a long time saufe and sound. These
Princes were never at rest, until one destroyed an other in their youth, and
prime time. King Xerxe^ and Cirus got such abundance of wealth by wars,
such substance, such treasures, that being thereby disquietted, and puffed
unto Pride, to take enterprises in hand, through persuasion of wealth, that
the one after he thought to spoil, and rob all Greece, was slain by
Artabanus, the other thinkyng to subdue all Scithia, was vanquished by Tomiris
Queen of Scithia a woman, and so both these proud Princes of wealth, lost
wealth, life and gooddes. Was not Philemon and poor Acaetes, which lived unto
the last course of Nature, quiet at rest, more wise happy then they. If
quietness of mind, if long years, if sauftie and soundness of life if
perpetual health may persuade felicity of life* If poor Faustulus a
Shepherd, Faustulus.
which sometime found in Romulus, left of all men, forsaken of his parents,
hated of his freindes, and nourished him. This Faustulus lived more merry years
in keeping of his Sheep, a Shepherd, then Julius Caesar did in rulyng of Rome,
Caesar.
an Emperor. For this Shepherde ended his life in old age: this Emperor was
murdered in the Senate house, within four years after he was elected
Emperor. Was not Codrus a poor Poet, Codrus. Procula.
and his wife Procula, more luckie and happy to end their days, after long
life quietly, then king Ninus and his wealthy Queen Semiramis that killed her
housebande, Ninus and Semiramis.
for the kingdom of Assiria, and after she likewise was slain by her own
soonne Ninus, for the obtainyng of the wealth and substance they had left
was lost. Examples are to many for the proof hereof. Solon a wiseman of Greece
did prefer before rich, and wealthy king Cressus, Biton and Cleobis
brethren, Biton Cleobis.
two poor men of Argi^e. The poor family of one Aelius in Rome, where
there were seuentene brethren, having but one poor field for their heritage,
lived longer, proved happier, and died more godly, and lived more co^tentiuely,
then the family of Caesar. What was the cause that the Indians, Babilonians
Arabians, and Lidians were spoiled destroyed, and murdered, their great
substance* treasures, and wealths of the Countries. If we examine well the
doubts and dangers of wealth, and weigh likewise the sauftie and surenesse
of poverty, we must needs prefer the quiet state of poor men (if they be
wise) before the state and Fortune of Princes. The worste luck that can happen
unto a poor manne, is to become rich, for then he comes from sure life, to
hasarde him with death: And the best that can happen unto a rich manne, is to
become poor, thereby is his life saved, though his wealth be spoiled. How
Fortune deals in this poincte, it is in diverse places, of this book
mentioned. Demosthenes. Cicero.
The worst thing that could happen unto Demosthenes and Cicero was, that they
were advanced from their sound state unto honor and dignity. Whereby their
lives were lost, the one being a consul of Rome, the other the patron of Athens.
The worst thing that could happen unto Tullius Hostilius, Tullius.
and unto Torquinius Priscus, Torquinius.
was that they were advanced, the one from a Sheparde, the other from a
banished stranger, to be kings of Rome. If I should rehearse in this place,
how many poor men by calling them unto wealth and honor, have been
banished afterward, slain and imprisoned, both in Rome in Greece, and in all
the world. I might seem well unto the reader more tedious then delectable. If
on the other side I should repeat how many Princes have escaped death, by
loosing their Crowns and Scepters, I were no less werie then fruictlesse.
Therefore I say there is care and danger in wealth, and there is quietness and
safety in poverty. Lucanus.
The pleasure that Lucanus had in this world, was nothing else, but a poor
Garden, where always in his life, he used to solace him self, and when he
died, he commanded his Grave to be made there, Mecaenas.
where being dead, he was buried. Mecoenas had such a Garden in Rome, where
all his feli-Citie was, Octauius.
the Emperor Octauius might in no wise allure Mecoenas out of his Garden,
Alexander. D^ogenes.
no more then Alexander the great could move Diogenes to forsake his Tun to
become wealthy, here again might be brought those wise men, that refused
wealth and substance, fled from honor and dignity, to live quietly in
poverty, but because I mean to be brief in all things, I will omit
prolixitie. Pliny does report, that Protogenes a poor Painter, Protogenes.
was content to live all the days of his life, in a little cottage that he made
him in his garden. Plutarche likewise in the lief of Nicia, does write, that
Lamachus was so poor, Lamachus.
that when the people of Athens would make him their king, he wanted I say
Shues on his feet, and yet had rather be poor Lamachus in safety, then to be
king of Athens in danger. For when a poor man named Hilarion, Hilarion.
met with certain Robbers and Thieves, and being demanded of the Thieves how
chanced that he feared not to walk alone in the night, because said he I am
poor, and therefore I fear no man, who sees not the danger of the one,
and the surenesse of the other, for Arison was wont to say, that poverty was
as it were a Lantarne to behold the wickedness of the world, for poverty is
the true Nourse of all good virtues. Licurgus being demanded of certain
Citizins of Sparta, how might men avoid their enemies, he answered by
poverty, wherefore Licurgus made laws and decrees amongst the Lacedaemonians,
that no Soldiers should spoil the enemies, though they were dead in the filde,
for he feared lest wealth should be the destruction of Sparta, For wealthy
men are envied at and hated, and every where sought by snares to be destroyed,
which poverty escapes. That wise Greek Solon was wont to say, that wealth
was the mother of excess, excess the mother of lust, lust the mother of
violence, and violence the mother of tyranny. Therefore says Pithagoras that
wealth must be ruled with wisdom, as the wild horse is tamed by the bridle.
Simonides when he was demanded, which was better wealth or wisdom, he said
after this sort, I doubt much said he, for I see so many wise men
frequentyng the rich man's company that I know not which.

Of Death.
DEATH is the last line of all thing, the discharge of all couenauntes, the
end of all living Creatures, the only wish of the good, and the very
terror of the wicked. And for that the life of man is diverse, so is Death
variable of sonderie sorts, and fashions, as by experience seen and known in
all Countries. Nothing is surer then death, nothing more variable then Death.
For Pindarus that wise and sage king of the Liricans, Pindarus.
being demanded of certain Beotians, what might best happen unto manne in
this world, even that said he, which chanced unto Trophoniu^, and Agamedes,
meaning Death: For these men after they had builded a new temple unto Apollo,
demanded of God Apollo, the best reward that he could give unto them: they
thinkyng to speed of some dignity, or some worldly substance, were rewarded
within seven days after with death. The like we read in the first book of
Herodote, Biton and Cleobes.
where the mother of Biton and Cleobes, tw^o young men of Argos, kneelyng
before the Image of Juno, besoughte the Goddess to bestow some excellent good
thing, upon her two soonnes, for their pain and trauaill that they showed
toward their natural mother, in drawyng the Chariot ten miles in stead of
horses: but the Goddess willing to show the best thing, that could be given
unto manne, the next night followyng, quietly in bed as they slepte, died.
Wherefore very well did Aristippus answer a certain manne, which asked how
Socrates died: Even in that order, that I wish my self to die* Giving to
understand, that any death is better then life. That noble Philosopher Plato,
a little before he died, as Sabellicus does write, lib. 10. cap. 13.
did thank nature for three causes, the first, that he was borne a man, and
not a beast: the second, that he was borne in Greece, and not in Barbary. The
third, that he was borne in Socrates time, Hermes.
who taught him to die well. Hermes that great Philosopher of Egipte even
diyng, so embraced death, that he called upon that divine spirit, which ruled
all the heavens, to take mercy upon him, being right glad that he passed this
toilyng life. Such is the snare of death, that some in half their days, in
midst of their fame and glory die. As Alexander the great in Babylon.
Pompeius in Egipte, and Marcellus which being a young man of great
towardness, and soonne by adoption to the Empire of Rome, Albius,
died. Even Albius a Roman knight, in flourishyng years ended his race. And
M. Caelius one of Ciceros scholars, a very eloque^t Orator, Caelius.
and of great fame, being in a manner a boie, died. It is strange to see the
shifts of death, in how diverse and sondrie fassions it happened unto Princes
always that some merry in their bankettes, and drinkyng were slain. Clitus.
As Clitus of Alexander the great, being his sisters brother, and his chief
friend. Ammon of Absalon being bidden unto a banquette, Ammon.
was slain of his own brother, yea, all the Ambassadors of Persia were
commanded to be slain, even drinkyng at the Table, by king Amyntas soonne of
Macedonia. Some end their lives wantonnyng with women, and plaiyng in
chambers, as that renoumed Greek Alcibiades, Alcibiades.
being taken in Uenerie with Timandra, was slain of Lisander Eue^ so Phaon
and Speusippus the Philosopher died likewise. Some bathyng them self, were
choked by their own wives: Agamemnon.
As Agamemnon that famous Greek, by his wife Clitemnestra. And Argirus
Emperor of Rome, by his wife Zoe. Diverse in prison as Captives died, as
Aristobulus, Emnenes, Aristonicus, Marius, Cleomenes, Iugurth, Siphax, famous
and renowned Princes. Diverse in Iacques slain, as that beast Heliogabolus, whom
Rome so hated, that he fled unto a Jacques, and there was killed, and after
drawn through the streates, and thrown unto the River Tiber Gneus Carbo a man of great dignity, Carbo.
and power of Rome, was commanded that he should be slain, as he was sitting
on his stool of ease, by Pompeius, in the third time of his Consulshippe in
Rome. Thus shamfull diverse died: and thus famously others died. The snares of
death, the hooks of time, the end of man was always unknown. Patroclus.
Patroclus knew not that he should be slain of Hector. Hector.
Hector never thought he should be killed of Achilles. Achilles.
Achilles never doubted his death by Paris. Paris.
Paris never judged that he should be vanquished by Pirrhus. Pirrhus.
Neither Pirrhus was certain that he should be ouercomed by Orestes, Orestes.
so that no man knows his end, where, how, and when he dies: and yet all
men are certain and sure, that they have an end, that they must needs
die. The fear of death has much overcome the stoutest and worthiest
soldier* We read that Asdrubal of Carthage, Fulgo. lib. 9. Capi. 13.
a noble and a famous Captain a long time, and yet at length being convicted
by Scipio, he for fear of death kneled before Scipio, embracyng his feet and
so fearful, that his own wife was ashamed of his doings. Yet had this noble
Captain rather be a laughyng stock unto the Romans, a bond manne unto
Scipio, runnyng a foot like a lackie before his triumph, then to die manfully
in the behalf of his Country, which valiauntly for a time he defended.
Perpenna.
Perpenna likewise a famous Roman, being taken in Spain after Sertorius was
dead, by the Soldiers of Pompeius, in a wooddie place full of Groves,
fearyng lest at that instante he should be slain by Pompeius soldiers, made
them believe that he had diverse things to speak unto Pompeius, that the
enemies had in hand, to bring to pass against Pompeius: rather had Perpenna
betrayed his friends and his fellows, yea, and all his Country unto his
enemy Po^peius, then that he should be in the fear of death. A greater fear
of death we read in that book of Fulgosius, Vitellius.
of that noble Vitellius, who after he had vanquished and slain diverse nobles,
and showed great wrongs unto the Emperor Otho, and unto Sabinus, brother
unto Vespasian the Emperor, being in fear of his life by Vespasian, and being
taken by the soldiers, he besought lest he should die presently, he might be
kept saufe in prison, until he might see and speak with Vespasian the
Emperor. Such was his fear, that he did hide him self in a chest like a
wretch, lest upon a sudden he should die. So fearful was Caligula, Caligula,
and Caesar of death every where, that he would never go abroad at any
Lightenynges or Thonder, but with his head covered with all kind of things,
which might resist the violence of Thounders and Lightenynges. Misa king of
the Moabites, and Ioram king of Iewrie, being besieged by the enemies, and in
danger of death, they invented all giles, all policies, and inventions right
or wrong, to save life, they sacrificed their children, to mitigate the rage
of the Gods lest they should die. The love that diverse had unto life, and
the fear the same self had unto death, were to be noted worthily, considering
how sore men are vexed with the fear of death* Antemon.
Antemo^ was so desirous to live and so fearful to die, that skante would he
trauaill out of his house abroad any where, and if he were compelled to go
abroad, he would have two of his servants, to bear over his head a great
brazen Targatte, to defend him from any thing, which might happen to do him
hurt. Theagenes.
Theagenes in like sort would not go out of his house, without he had
consulted with the Image of Hecates, to know what should happen to him that
day, and to understand whether he might escape death or no, Commodus.
Commodus the Emperor would never trust any Harbor to shave his bearde,
lest his throat should be cut of. Masinissa.
Masinissa king of Numidia, would rather commit his state and life unto
Dogs, then unto men, as his guard to keep and defend him from death. To
speak of Bion, of Domitianus, of Dionisius, of Pisander, of thousands more
which so feared death that their chief care and study was, how they might
avoid the same. The fear of death causes the soonne, to forsake the father,
the mother to renounce the daughter, the one brother to deny an other, and one
friend to forsake the other. In so much Christ himself was forsaken of his
Disciples for fear of death. Peter denied him, and all the rest fled from
him, and all for fear of death. Behold therefore how fearful some are, how
joyful others are. How loathsome some, and how willing others have been to die.
Some desperately die being weary of life. As Sabinus Iuba, Cleomenes, some
hangyng the^ self, some burning them selves, and some drouning the^ selves, and
thus with one desperate end or other they died. But fith every man must die,
it were reason that every man should prepare to die, for to die well is nothing
else but to live again. Wherefore certain Philosophers of India called
Gymnosophistae, being of Alexander the great, commanded to certain hard
questions, which if they could absolve they should live, otherwise they should
die, and the eldeste of their company was made a judge in that matter by the
said Alexander. The first question was demanded to know whether there were more
living or dead, Alexanders questions to the Philosophers of India.
to the which the first philosopher said, that the quick are more in number,
for that the dead have no being, no place, no number. The second question was,
whether the land engendered more, or the Sea, to this answered the second
philosopher and said, the Land did engender more, for that the Sea was but a
portion of the Land. The third question was, to know what beast was most
subtle, that beast answered the third Philosopher, that man can not discern.
Fourthly it was demanded why they being Philosophers, were so induced to
persuade the Sabians to rebellion, because said the Philosopher, it is better
to die manfully, then to live miserably. The fifte question was, whether the
day was made before the night, or the night before the day, to the which it
was answered the day. The sixte was to understand, how Alexander the great
him self might get good will of the people, in showing said the sixte
Philosopher thy self not terrible unto the people. The seventh to ask was
whether life or death were stronger, and it was answered life. The eight was to
know how long a man should live, until said the eight Philosopher a man thinks death better then life. The last question was proposed of
Alexander to know how might a mortal man be accounted in the number of the
Gods. In dooyng greater things said all the Philosophers, then man is able to
do. For that they knew this proud Prince would be a GOD, and that he would
learn of the sage Philosophers how he might void mortality, he was answered
sharply, for that he should know him to be a man, and being a man, he
should make himself ready to die, for death is the reward of sin, and death
is the beginning of life again unto the good, as Aulus Posthumous, Aulus.
in an Oration which he made unto his Soldiers, said, It is given both to
good and bad to die, but to die Godly, and gloriously, is only given unto good
men. For so Hector speaking in Homer, said unto his wife Andromacha, that she
should not be sorry for his death, since all men must die. Though some with the
Galathians do contempne death, that they fight naked, and are persuaded with
the Pythagoreans, that they shall never die, but passing from one body unto
another, yet some die joyfully, as the brethren of Policrita, being taken
captive by Diognitus* Emperor of Milesia, she being used very ill at the
Emperors hands, did send Letters to Naxus, unto her brethren, at what time
the people of Milesia were Feastyng, Drinkyng, and Banquetyng at their great
solemn feast. Then the brethren of Policrita came and found the Emperor
drinkyng, and all his people over charged with wine, slew the most part of
them, prisoned a number, and brought their sister home to Naxus, where as soon
as they came home died, for Joy of the victory. Even as Philarchus sometime in
his great triu^phe criyng out. O happy hours and ioifull days, was taken in
such a Fever, that brake his veins at that very instaunt for gladness. He is
coumpted most wise that knows himself. To joy to much in prosperity, to
be advanced and extolled when fortune favors, without all fear of ill happes
to come is folly. To be vanquished and subdued in aduersite, without hope of
solace and goodness to come, is mere madness. Therefore the Sages and Wisemen,
knowing that death was the last line of life, did endeavor in their lives, how
they might die well, and briefly for examples of lives, I means to note few
sentences of these wisemen, which they used as their Poesies, and thought good
to show their answeares unto diverse questions unto them propounded.

Bias dwelling in the City of Prienna, after the city by Nutinenses was
destroyed, Bias escaped and went to Athens, whose Poesy was Maximus improborum
numerus, he willed all young men in their youth to trauaill for knowledge, and
commands oulde men to embrase wisdom. This Bias being demanded what was
the difficulst thing in the world, he said, to suffer stoutly the mutabilitie
of fortune, being demanded what was the infamoust death that might happen unto
man, to be condemned said he by law, being asked what was the sweetest
thing unto manne, hope said he, what beast was most hurtful amongst wild
beasts, a Tyrant said Bias, and amongeste tame beasts a flatterer, and
being demanded what thing it was that feared nothing in all the world, good
conscience said he. And again in the second Olimpiad the Philosophers
demanded other Questions, as who was most unfortunate in the world, the
impacient man said Bias: What is most hard to judge, debates between
friends, what is most hard to measure, he answered time, that having fully
answered to diverse other questions, Bias was allowed one of the seven wise men
of Greece.

Chilo the second of the Sages being borne in My^tilena, being asked what was
the best thing in all the world, answered, every man to consider his own
state. And again being demanded what beast is most dangerous, he said of
wild beasts a Tyrant, of tame beasts a flatterer, being asked what is most
acceptable unto manne, he said time, and being asked of the Greek Myrsilas,
what was the greatest wonder that he saw, he said an old man to be a
Tyraunte, these with diverse other questions was he asked of the Greek, his
Poesy was N^ quid nimis.

The third was Chilo the Lacedemonian, being demanded what was a difficult
thing to man to do, he answered, either to keep silence or so suffer
injuries, what was most difficulst being asked of him, he said, for a man to
know him self, and therefore he used this Poesy, Nosce teipsum. This Chilo
being of Aesopus demanded what did Jupiter in Heaven, he said, he does throw
down lofty and proud things, and he does exalte humble and meek things.
Solon the Athenian had this short Sentence in his mouth. Nosce teipsum, know
thy self, for in knowing and considering what we are, how vile we are, we
shall have less occasion ministered unto us, to think well of our selves, for
there is nothing good nor bewtifull in man, as Solon being asked of king
Cressus, sittyng on his Stool of state with princely Robes, bedect with
Pearls and Precious stones, whether ever he saw a more bewtifull sight then
King Cirus sittyng in his majesty at that time, to whom Solon answered and
said, that he saw diverse birddes more gaie to behold then Cirus, and being
demanded of Cirus what birds were they, Solon said, the little Cock, the
Peacocke, and the Feasaunt, which are dect with natural garments, and
bewtified with natural colors. This Solon was wont to say, I wax daily
old, learning much, he noted nothing so happy in manne, as to live well,
that the same might die well, appliyng the cause unto the affect, as to live
well, then to die well. If I should molest the reader with the sage sayings
of Cleobulus, Thales, Periander, and others tending only for the amendmente of
life and readiness of death, I should seem tedious, here were a place to induce
diverse and sundry examples of death.

HAd Greek Calisthenes silence kept, had Neuius spared speech,
Had Theocritus busy brain, offended not his leache:
Calesthenes had not lost his life, nor Theocritus died:
Ne in Maetellus wrath, so long had Neuius poet abide.
The soundst reward, the surest gift should Memmius have in the end,
Had he to Caesar nothing said, that Caesar might offend:
But as I fear Chirilus stripes, and dread Aristos draught:
So with Antilochus to write I am, to some Lisander taught.
Some carpyng Crete, some peuishe Pan, and some of Colax kind,
Some of Gnatho school will scanne, some fla^trie here to find.
I will not haulte with Clisophus, I love not Curi^ style,
I hate Philoxenus forged faith, Aristippus phraise to file:
But with Sinaetes persean poor, with Cirus water crave,
Her princely pardone on my knee, with Cirill Poet have.
Who to avoid Charibdis gulf, I fall in Scillas band,
To seek to shun Semphlagades, I sink in Sirtes sand:
With wearied wings of Icarus, with Phaoetons charge in hand,
Most like Actaeon bound before, her noble grace I stand.
No Momus may Minerua sail, no Phaaeton Phoebus charge,
No wilful wings of Icarus, may Dedalus flight discharge:
Therefore yea Gods that guide the globes, the glisteryng glaryng sky,
The whirlyng spheres, the firmamente, and poales of heavens hie.
You starrie states and imps of Jove, your graces three attend,
Approach in place Pierides, my vain in verse to bend.
Each pilgrim Prince in prose is paste, each Queen must now in vearse,
Have honor due and fame deserude, the heavens hie to pearce.
Whose praise shall pearce the clusteryng clouds, and skale the empire sky,
Whose thunderyng clanges of bruted fame, on earth shall never die,
Each passing pearls Prince in place, from stools of states redounde.
Whom birds abroad on brakes do brag, their praise in skies to sound.
Who^ whirlyng winds and whispering woods, who^ brauling brok^ aduau^ce,
Whose ecchos shrill of fliyng fame, through surging seas do lance.
Who ruled people proud and fierce, and nations stout subdued,
That widows were, and virgin^ Queen's, with wisdom great endued
Who reads not Zinobias fame, who does not Mesa know,
Who hears not of Sabas name, that any where does go.
What worthy acts, what famous feactes, what virtues rare were seen,
When noble King Mausolus died in Artemesia Queen,
The noble Queen Semiramis, King Ninus famous wife,
Did rule Assiria saffe and sound, when Ninus lost his life.
When Constant Emperor died* his wife no less there love did l^ue,
Then pearl Penelope had in Greece, or Roman Lucrece have.
Amongst the Illireans to Teuca then, such worthy name did chance*
As in Arcadia Atlanta did her noble fame advance.
Queen Dido ruled Carthage cost, Helerna Tibur brave,
As sometime did Cloelia, the Roman scepter save.
Why seek I thus to shun the snares, and shifte with verses often,
Sith praise of force must press the place, where wisdom rules a lofte.
A Prince of port in silence kept, that does expecte the end.
Whose rule and royal race by course, needs not in books be pende.
In whom the Muses build their bowres, the graces make their forte,
With whom Sibilles sages sit, and sacred Nymphs resort.
Who Judith like with threatnyng swearde, Holofernus mates to spoil,
A second Susan sure she is, all Judges false to foil.
An other faithful Sara sad, with Aesters mace in hand,
In prinsely place Rebecca, like to rule her native land.
She in triumphant seat does sit, with Laurel leaves be decte,
With Olive branches brave on head, that do his fame detect
This to the Muses nine a tenth her grace, did Jove betake,
And with the Graces three, a fourth Apollo her did make.
The fame Aurelia had in Rome, by Caesar first did spryng.
The like Olimpias had in Greece, by Alexander King.
Who had known Cassandana, had Cirus fame not wine,
Or who had heard of Creusas name, had not Aeneas bin.
The force that Hector used in field, extolde Andromachs name,
The port that Traiane Emperor had, advanced Plotinas fame,
But she that has no sire no soonne, a second Delbora is,
To sit in royal room to rule, in joy and state of bliss.
Who is by Jove appointed, from divine Camaena school,
Like sad Cassandra for to sit, in sage Samberta stool,
Who with Euphem^s fostered was, in heigh Latonias tower,
Whose cradle long Melissa rockt, within dame Venus bower,
In sad Sibillas bower brought up, of sacred Vaesta taught,
Corinna learned though she was, her service Sapho sought.
Give Saba place, Zonobia yield, behold in place such one,
That learned Ladies link themselves, her grace to wait upon.
Whom Prudence teach, and Justice rule, whom temperaunce does profess,
All virtues rare and godly gifts, her noble mind possess.
Whom Gods by birth with one consent agreed her name should be,
Pandora for his galaunt gifts, in glory great to glie:
Whom if Cornelia were alive, and hard of this her fame,
She with Hortensia would from Rome, to England viage frame.
The haughty dames in warlike weeds, those Spartan Ladies lo,
And Mars himself with Thracia^s Queen's, to this would yeald I know
In Phrigian fields, in Trojan camp, was Penthisilea seen,
With strong Achilles force, in field to fight like valiaunte Queen.
In Rutill land on Turnus side, against Aeneas lo,
Came Queen Camilla armed to field, the Trojans force to know.
The Scithian stout Queen Tomiris, that bloody Cirus slew,
With CC. thousands soldiers slain, which Persea long did rue.
That noble Queen Antiopes, and Hippolite in band,
Durst both Alcides rage endure, and Theseus stout withstand.
Thus that women were such wightes, to fight in field with hand:
In Saca, Scithia, Cimbria zoile, and in Lacedena land.
Though spears and shield they shook, though harness they did bear,
Yet far inferior to this Queen, in Marshall feats they wear.
Minerua she from turrettes high, with regal Juno state,
Unto the sacred Nymphs above, elected sovereign mate.
With princely Perseus Pollax lo, she slew Medusas brood,
She cursed Cacus lincke did cut, with strong Alcides mood.
With sage Vlixes swearde I say, she Poliphemus slew,
And she with mighti^ mace of Jove, the ymps of hell subdue.
She dasseled Argos hundred eyes, and does Zopirus seed,
And shall each virtue plant in time, and vice in time out weed.
She Dragon, Lion, Bore and Bull, she Heart and Hidra killed,
She Gereon, Cerberus, Angeus have, the birds and Centaries spild.
She paste Cocitus frostie face, with fixed faith to zoile,
And sailed Letheus Loathsome lake, forgettyng foes to foil.
She waded fiery Phlegeton flud, with princely patience out,
And stayed not at Stigias stream, to end her Pilgrim out:
She from Lotophagus then retournd, she past the Ciclops dean,
She sailed safe by Scillas rock, she fled not Auernus fene.
No Gorgone grimme, no Ciclop huge, no fretyng furies fell,
No Cirses sight, no Cirens voice nor Plutos force in hell:
May move her Mast nor shake her Ship upon a rock so build,
On Acheronta where she sails toward Elizeus filde.
Enioiyng Sanges glisteryng Gemmes, possessing Tagus sands,
Hidaspes and Hiberus wealth, with Pactolus pearls in hands:
The buildinges brave and lofty wales, the princely Turrets hie,
Which Ninus wife in Persea plast, whose fame shall never die.
The sumptuous Tomb, the wondrous works, the gorgious glistryng grave,
Which Queen of Caria then did make, Monsolus bones to save:
The stately seats Piramydes, which in Aegipt land abode,
And Monstrous Phoebus shape I say, which Chares made in Rhode.
Dianas Temple Pharaos Toure, and Phidias frame in Greece,
In spect of this her buildings brave, their fame and glory lose:
Cadmus Thebes, Dardane Troie, and Ogdous Memphus made,
These with Carthage Didos Tonne, may nothing here persuade.
She builds New Jerusalem, and Sion up does rear,
And to the Vineyard on her back she daielie burdens bear:
The fletyng fame on earth have sought, she glory great in sky,
They through pomp and she through pain aduaunceth fame on hi^.
They liude to eat, they eat to die, they die in death to pain,
She eats to live she lives to die, she dies to live again:
Ariadne Minoes daughter taught, to Theseus stout the way,
From Labirinthus dreadful deans, where Minotaurus lay.
That wandryng Prince Aeneas then, in Cuma taught was so,
By sage Amalthea Auernus gulf, from limbo lake to go:
The soundrie shifts Medea assaide, her Jason sure to save,
In Colcus land with conquest great, the golden fleace to have.
Were now these worthy Greeks alive, and iolie champions lo,
As unto Delphos streigt they would unto his palace go:
She spoiled Labirinthus caves, she Minotaurus slew,
She princely does possess in place, the Golden fleace in vewe.
And though Perillus played his part, the brazen Bull to make,
Yet was Perillus forced him self, therein his death to take.
The Leaden horse Aruntius made, for others there to die,
To assaie the new invented work, Aruntius first did fry.
Thus saucie Sinon slight shall die, and Phalaris falshode end,
And from Zopirus subtle seed, her state shall God defend.
Triumphant Triton sound thy trumpe, though Neptunes rage did rore,
In spite of Boreas Boisterous blast, she sailed saffe to shore.
Where she like blasyng Phoebus beams, with silver shinyng face,
Bellona like in seat does sit, with fine Aglaias grace.
On whom the dreadful Driades wait, the Oriades high on hill,
The sacred Nymphs attend her grace, her service to fulfill.
Hebe and Calisto light, from starrie states discende,
A perles prince must pearce the clouds, whose fame the skies shall bend.
Whose fame shall flow from Nilus banks, through Euphrates to land:
From Tigris stragglyng stream, her state to golden Ganges sand.
From Pirens pathe to Helicon, from high Parnassus mount,
Unto Libethres well to wash with ladies nine were wont.
From East to Weste, from Southe to North, her fliyng fame does flow,
From Pole antartike fast with wings, to articke Pole to go.
Panomphes Gemme Caliope, thy step Melpomen stay,
Yield honor due Thalia now, her service Clio assaie.
Polihimnia with her Music must, and Errato tend in place,
Euterpe sound her troumpe of fame, her foes for to deface.
Discende Terpsichore from the skies, part thence Urania fro,
A Phoenix fine must mount the skies, and you away must go.
Surrender Cumea up thy seaete, now Samia Phiton flee,
No longer fame must Themis have, in Delphos now to be.
Yield stately Juno Samos up, flee Delos Dian fro,
Void princely Pallas Athens now, from Paphos Venus go.
Behold a branche from Brutus line, whose virtuous praise to paint,
My slender skill, my simple muse to think thereof do faint.
For had I Virgills vain in verse, and learned Homere skill,
To write Demosthenes sugared style, with noble Tullies quill.
Ouercharged I should be, her noble life to cite,
Her galaunt gifts, her talentes rare, her virtuous all to write.
If outward beauty moude the Gods, what inward virtue can,
Whose feutered form if eyes might see, should maze the sight of man,
If Daphnes might Apollo win, and Tyro Neptune move,
If Herce Cecrops daughter dear, might lure Mercurius love.
If Queen Aeginas beauty bright, could mighty Jove inflame,
In form of fire with Phoebus face, to honor beauties fame.
What love, what joy, what wisdom then, what wealth should men possess,
If sense of sight might virtue see, as Plato prince confess.
The tramplyng toil of Tantalus, his hongrie panche to please,
The rowlyng stone of Sisiphus, her virtuous sight would cease.
If Titius could, if Atlas might, might this Yxion see,
Titius toil Atlas load, Yxion easde should be.
The golden hears Pompeia had, forede Neros heart on fire,
Through wit and wisdom did our Queen, her subjects hearts desire.
Cleopatra wanne by a draught of drink, Antonius for her friend,
By counsel grave and sad advise, does she her zoile defend.
The curious shue made Rhodope Queen, in Egipte land to rule,
And virtue aduaunceth this her fame, in England long to endure.
But sith that beauty is a gift, which nature has bestowed.
I mean to pen dame beauties praise, as nature forth has showed.
Had skillful eyes of Xeuxes vued, had fine Philuseus seen,
Had learned ^o Lisippus sight, of this our noble Queen.
Dame Venus picture made in Cous, and Helens grace in Greece,
Latonas moulde, the impes of Jove, their painted port should leese.
If Phidias might had framde the like, or had Timan^es fainde,
Bellona in her bower had blushed, and I phigenia stainde.
Durst this Pigmalion grave in stone, or Theopompus painte,
They should have felt both sight and sense, both heart and hand to fain^
If prince Apelles cunnyng, could in colors draw by art,
The sight thereof would cause the Greeks from such a sh^we to starte.
Brag then no more you glorious Greeks, of beauties bower ne boste,
Sith England wanne victoriously, which Greece by fate has lost.
Retire you Romans from your race, your fame is lost I wene,
Such Lucrece reign in England now, as never erst was seen.
Give place you noble dames, throw of your garlandes gaie,
Lay prostrate down your crounes of fame, to her that bears the swaie.
Who in spite of dragging darte of death, in spite of Gorgons grief,
In spite of furies frettyng flames, in spite of Parcas knife.
Shall Triton sound her troumpe of fame, and Stentor strain to blow,
Through surging seas and clousteryng clouds, her name to stars to go.
And in Mauseolum brave her bones, and sumptuous Toumbe shall lie,
Whose sacred souls berefte from corpse, to heaven straight shall fly.
FINIS.
The Aucthour to his book.
Since Virgill lofty vain in verse, since learned Homers Quill,
Since Plutarch and Pithagoras, did practice often their skill:
To write of fightyng frogs, in filled of wandering bees and flice,
To extol the reeds and rushes long, with solemn muse advice.
Though skillful they with learned muse, in things so small to flow,
Yet willing I my faithful heart to native zoill to show:
For who in Athens idle were, by Dracos law should die,
As in Hetruria idle heads, by law were forcde to fly.
Whose ground in Rome was baren found, was put in prison fast,
And king of Egypt took account, of daily labor past:
The Spartan youth that waxed gross by law should fast it out,
And loitring Indians went vndinde, from place to place about.
Each labor well deserves hire, that Idleness does flee,
Each virtue must have due reward, each vice must punished be:
For rather had I venture fame, Chirilus stripes to have,
Then still with Vatia idle be, each filthy lust to laue.
Saill then by raging Scillas rocks, pass by Ciclops den,
On through Lotophagos tent full bold, fear not Auernus fene,
Trudge fast from flattryng Cirens face, make haste from Cirses sight,
Pearce Limbo through, possess the place where justice judges right.
Mauger of Maegera head, in spit of furies go,
Through Stigia stream and flaming fluds to fre^d thy self to show
Way not Momus nor his mates, exteme not Zoilus talk,
Void fond Suffenus busy brain, with wise Minerua walk.
The Scithian rude had rather here, a horse to ney or kike,
Then solemn sound of Orpheus Harp, with skillful stroke to strike
The Arcadian blind with Midas will, prefer the pipe of Pan,
Before Appollo sacred God, who judge of music can.
Had thou Briareus hundred hands, or hundred Argos eyes,
Suppose thy senses slack to serve, each reader to suffice:
And as Vlixes mates were changde, to shiftyng shapes of hoggs,
So like Actaeon thou shall be, devoured of some dogs.
Some will find in vearse thy fault, some will defame thy sense,
Some thy style and some thy state, will find in thee offense:
The learned loath I am to lose, of right their friendship crave,
Since thou and they were taught in place, true friendship seek to have.
A Crow sometime in Rome was taught, to speak to Caesar so,
Aue Caesar loud with voice, as Caesar by did go:
An Aegle was in Seston town, each day would never cease,
But mount to skey in flight to slay, some fowls his friend to please.
The Pecock proud the swellyng Swan, the Feasaunt gaie the Cock,
Do brag and bost themselves so brave, and other birds do mock:
Though these like Gorgons grim with eyes, thy tre^bling face behold
Yet tell that others see in them, which they of thee have toulde.
No force say thou if that may chance, Antimachus lot may crave,
In steed of sondrie diverse heads, one Plato friend to have.
FINIS.
A Table of the most principal, and chief parts contained within this book.
OF the slipperie state of Fortune, and what Princes, and where they were
advanced one way, and how they were oppressed an other way. Fol. 1. page 1.
Of magnanimity of Princes, and fortitude of mind, when and where it was most
esteemed. Fol. 6. pa. 1. Of Marshall triumphs, and the solempnitie thereof in
diverse countries. Fol. 14. page 2. Of the first findyng out of laws and
orders, and of all mention of things general, and of fame. fol. 17. pa. 2. Of
sumptuous and wonderful buildings. fol. 20. pa. 1. Of Paintyng. Fol. 23. page
1. Of eloquence. Fol, 25. pagi. 1. Of those that had their Pictures and Images,
for a show of their deserved fame, erected. Fol* 28. page 1. Of those that
defended diverse from deaths, from serpents, dragons, and of cunnyng archers.
fol. 30. pa. 2. Of diligence and labors. Fol. 32. page 2. Of the first
inuentours of arts, and of the use of sothsaiyng. Fol. 35. page 1. Of
pacients. Fol. 39. page 2. Of humanity and clemency of Princes. Fol. 41. page
2. Of sober and temperate Princes, and where temperance and sobriety was most
used. Fol, 49. page 2. Of taciturnitie and silence, and of the virtue and
commendation thereof. Fol. 57. page 1. Of liberality, and liberal princes.
Fol. 62. page 2. Of age, and the praise thereof. Fol. 68. page 1. Of the manners
of sundry people, and of their strange life. Fol. 74. page 1. Of the strange
natures of waters, earth, and Fire. Folio. 80. page. 1. Of the world, and of
the foul of man, with diverse and sonderie opinions of Philosophers about
the same. Fol. 82. page 2. Of worshippyng of Gods, and Religion of Gentiles.
Folio. 85. page 1. Of the first beginning of shauyng, and the use thereof, with
much making of hears of the head. fol. 92. p. 2 Of diverse kinds and sondery
fashions of burial amongst the gentiles. Fol. 95. page 1. Of Spirits and
visions. Fol. 97. page 2. Of dreams and warnynges. Fol. 102. page 2. Of the
beginning of Marriages, and of the soundrie use of the same. Fol. 107. page 2.
Of likeness and similitudes. Fol. 110. page 1. Of Music and mirth. Fol 112.
page 2. A comparison between the love of men and beasts. Fol. 118. page 1.
Certain Ethicall Arithmologies drawn out of divine and profane auctours. Fol.
122. page 2. Examples of Justice. Fol. 125. Examples of Usurie. eodem. Examples
of honor. Fol. 26. page 1. Examples of envy. Fol. 127. page 1. Examples of
coueitousnes. Fol. 127. page 2. Examples of hearing. Fol. 129. Examples of
discord. eodem. Examples of friendship. eodem. Examples of flattery. Fol. 130.
Examples of glotonie. eodem. Examples of rape and spoil. Fol. 13. page 1.
Examples of mercy. eodem. Examples of love. eodem. Examples of death. Fol.
131. The deaths of certain Noble Princes in English verse. Fol. 133. page 1,
Of memory and obliuiousnes. Fol. 137. page 1. Of the Pilgrimages of Princes
and misery of mortality. Fol. 140. page 1. Of Dissimulation and Craft, of
Subtlety and deceit. Fol. 146* page 2. Of famine. 150. page 1. Of warines.
Fol. 253. page Of reuengement. Fol. 155* page 1. Of Theft and Sacrilege. Fol.
158. page 2. Of lust. Fol. 161 page 1. Of Ielowsie. Fol. 165. page 2. Of
Idleness. Fol. 167. page 2. Of wrath and anger. Fol. 166. page 2. Of perjury
and faith, and where either of these were honored and esteemed. fol. 169. page
1. Of envy and malice, and so of tyranny. Fol. 177. page 2. Of flattery.
Fol. 183. page 1. Of Pride. Fol. 185. page 1. Of couetuousnes. Fol. 190. page
1. Of prodigality and drunkenness. Fol. 198. page 1. Of Magic and
witcherie. Fol. 200* page 1. A comparison between wealth and poverty. f. 203.
p. 2. Of death. Fol. 210. page 1. Of the pilgrimage of Queens in verse. Fol.
215. pa. 1.
FINIS.

