THE LEGEND OF Captain Jones:

RELATING His adventure to Sea: His first landing, and strange combat with a
mighty Bear.

His furious battle with his six and thirty men against the Army of eleven
Kings, with their overthrow and deaths.

His relieving of Kemper Castle.

His strange and admirable Sea Fight with six huge Galleys of Spain, and nine
thousand Soldiers.

His taking prisoner, and hard usage. Lastly,

His setting at liberty by the Kings command, and return for England.

LONDON, Printed for I.M. and are sold in Fleetstreet, in S. Dunstones
Churchyard. 1631.

To the READER.
REader, y' have here the Mirror of the times,
Old Jones rapt in his colors, and my rimes.
Receive him fairly (pray;) nor censure how,
Or what he tells: the matter he will avow.
And for the form he speaks in, I Will maintain it,
It comes as near his vain as I could strain it.
For 't were improper to set forth an Ass
Capparisond, and pannell a great-horse.
My part claims no inventions praise: for (know it)
Where ere there is fiction in 't, there he is the Poet.
His last deeds here epitomized, entreat
Some thundering pen to set them forth complete.
Let him whose lofty Muse will deigne to do it,
Drink Sack and Gunpowder, and so fall to it.
THE LEGEND OF CAPTAIN JONES.
I Sing thy Arms (Bellona,) and the Man's
Whose mighty deeds out-did great Tamberlans:
Thy Trump (dire goddess) send, The Invocation.
that I may thunder
Some wondrous strain, to speak this man of wonder.
When Fates decreed that Captain Jones should be
The life and death of men, they could not see
A place more suiting to bring forth this mirror
Of martial spirits, this thunder crack of terror,
Than some vast mountains womb, His birthplace.
whose rigged rocks
Might form him, and foreshew the hardy knocks
Which he should give and take: Nor were they nice
To think it base, that mountains bring forth mice,
Since, from a British mount and Mars his stones,
They sent this man of men, stern Captain Jones.
Wild Mares milk nursed him on the mountains gorse,
Which gave him strength and stomach like a horse;
Goats flesh matur'd him, killed on craggie tops,
Which taught him to mount Rampires like those rocks.
Ere eighteen Winters fully waxen were,
This imp of Mars began to do and dare.
With Reymond a stout brother of the sword
He first attempted Sea, and went aboard,
Two hundred strong, for the East Indies bound,
Fame was the only prize he sought or found.
Twice twenty days auspicious waves and winds
Lulled them: then AEolus and Neptune joins
To work great Jones his fall. Envy and ire
To see him more than man, made them conspire:
Rough Boreas whistled to the dancing ship,
The boistrous billows strove to over-skip
The bounding vessel. In this great distaster
His behavior in a storm at Sea.
Reymond, the soldiers, mariners and master
Lost heart and heed to rule; then up-starts Jones,
Calls for six Gispins, drinks them off at once.
Thus a^m'd at all points, yet as light as feather,
He ascends, and drew, and pist against the weather;
And are we borne (my hearts, quoth he) to die?
Shall we descend? Thy immortality
Neptune thou must resign, if I come thither:
One Sea may not contain us both together.
Nor waves nor winds could fright him with their motion,
Who thought he could contain and piss an Ocean.
His fatal Smiter thrice aloft he shakes,
And frowns; the sea and ship and canvasse quakes:
Then from the hatches he descends, and stepped
Into his Cabin, drank again, and slept.
When these rough gods beheld him thus secure,
And armed against them like a man pot-sure,
They stint vain storms; and so Monstrifera The name of his ship.

(So hight the Ship) touched about Florida,
Upon a desert Island called Crotone,
Where savage beasts and serpents live alone:
Here Jones would needs to land, though Reymond swore
Danger was in it: he laughed and leapt ashore. He goes ashore.

Danger (quoth he) to them whom danger fright,
My heart was framed to dare, my hands to fight.
Some six and thirty more put forth to ground,
These for fresh food, he for adventure bound;
They limit their return when three hours ends,
Which Reymond with the ship at Sea attends.
These sea-sick soldiers, range hills, woods, and valleys,
Seeking provant to fill their empty bellies;
Jones goes alone, where Fate prepared to meet him
With such a prey as did unfriendly greet him;
His encounter with a Bear.
A Bear as black as darkness, and as fell
As Tiger, vast as the black dog of hell,
Runs at him open jaw'd, so fierce, so fast,
That he no leisure had to draw for have
The name of his sword.
Kyl-za-dog his good sword; with fist he aimed
All armed a blow, which sure the Bear had brained,
But that between her yawning teeth it dings,
The gauntlet there stuck fast, his hands he wrings
Unarmed, unharm'd from thence; her foremost paws
The Bear on Jones his shoulder claps, and gnawes
The gauntlet wedged between her teeth: Jones claspt her
With both his arms, and strove by force to cast her.
And here they try a pluck, and graspe, and tug,
And foame; but Jones who knew the Cornish hug,
Heaues her a foot from footing, swings her round,
And with a short turn hurles her on the ground;
Then came his good sword forth to act his part,
Which pierced skin, ribs, and riffe, and rove her heart.
The head, his trophee, from the trunk he cuts,
And with it back unto the shore he struts,
Where Reymond was appointed to attend
His and the rests return: but he (false friend)
When they were once on shore and out of sight,
Hoist sails to sea, and took himself to flight.
Here Jones found fraud in man, and deeply swears
Revenge on Reymonds head, The rest he cheares;
He joins himself to the 36 soldiers.
All safe returned, but all in desperation
To see themselves left there to desolation:
Nor grain nor ground, but wild, nor man, nor beast,
But savage; yet (O strange) here Jones does feast
His six and thirty daily, 'twas with fishes
His taking of fish with his halberts point.
Tossed from his halberts point into their dishes;
Wherewith he took them standing on the shore
Out of the Ocean: whether it was the store
Frequenting this unpeopled coast, or whether
To see this wondrous man they shoald together
And so astonished, yield themselves a prey
To him from whom they durst not swim away.
B^e't so, or so, I Will not deside, but I
Know Jones tells this for truth, who knows no lie.
Thus from his weapons point, nine months they fed
Till fate Sir Richard Greenfield thither led,
Who to America transports with Jones
His six and thirty fish-fed Mermydons,
To Insip, were they brought and left; oh then
'Twas time, had they had meat, to play the men.
Their first encounter there with famine was,
A dry and desert soil, nor grain nor grass,
Nor drink, but water had they here, nor bread Capta'ne Jones encounters with
the great Giant Asdriasdust.

For thrice twelve months, but caves for house and bed.
Such living as that Country could afford
Bold Jones was forced to win by dint of sword.
Eleven fierce Kings possess the fertile tract
Of this great Coast, who all their powers compact
To vanquish Jones: a brave attempt it is true,
Yet more than twice eleven fierce Kings could do.
Two thousand choice and doughty men they chose,
To bid him battle, armed with darts and bows,
And arrows fadome long, well barb'd with bone
Of some strange fish, which pierced through steel and stone.
And thus they came prepared. When they drew near him,
He brought his soldiers fo^th, and thus did cheer them;
My five and twenty friends (for only those
Had fate and famine left) these darts and bows
Are fit to deal with fearful Crows and Dawes, His oration to his 25.
soldiers before their fight with the 2000. sent against him by the 11. American
Kings.

But us whose hearts of oak and empty mawes
Hungers sharp dart has pierced, (and yet we stand
To fright and foil our foes with sword in hand)
These weapons cannot conquer, nor the number,
Were they two thousand such as John a Cumber.
Does hunger bite you? bite your foes as fast,
Eat these men-eaters, (soldiers) kill and taste.
Would you gain glory? kill by six and seven;
If Crowns of Kings, then here behold eleven.
And ^his he spoke and drew. With stomach fierce
They give the first assault, Now for a verse
To speak great Jones his deeds, who headlong goes
His cou^age in fig^t
Amongst the thickest rancks, cuts, kills, and throws,
Some by the legs, some by the wast he makes
Shorter, another by the lock he takes,
Reapes off his head, wherewith he brains another,
Then at one stroke kills father, son, and brother;
Few escaped with life, but strangely happy those
Which escaped with loss of half a face or nose.
Nor may I pass his men, who cut and slash
Like those that fought for life, not Crowns or Cash.
Want made them seem (which sure their foes dismayed)
The very sons of death whose parts they played;
The Insips now no aim can take aright,
They think each foe they meet, a mighty Sprite;
And so they fly. Six kings he took, and killed;
5. Kings and 1200. soldiers slain.
Five with eight hundred soldiers left the field;
Twelve hundred fell: for those that went off safe
Their heels and not their hearts the praise he gave.
Unto their fullest towns when he had killed them,
He brought his ragged regiment and filled them.
Here on the river of Mengog they find
A Wear with fish of wondrous growth and kind,
Strange herrings
Where with a thousand herrings they were fed,
All two foot long besides the tail and head.
What became of the rich prizes.
Here some may ask what came of all the wealth,
(For Jones brought nothing home besides himself)
This conquest gained; Sure many precious things
Must neds attend the death of six such Kings.
I answer briefly; His heroic desire
Ascends above earths excrements as fire:
Nor can descend to Crowns. The soldiers found
Much wealth, which in their home-returne was drowned;
Still fortune fovours Jones: amidst this river
He spies a sail directly bearing thither;
He calls, and finds them English, homeward bound,
Who for fresh water thrust into the sound.
With these his men and he for England comes, He and his men come for England.

Had England known it, all her guns and drums
Had bin too little to express her joy,
As when victorious Hector entered Troy;
Yet ere he can attain his native coast
AEneas like he must be tired and tossed
With storms, till meat and water waxed so scant,
That Jones drank naught but piss one week for want.
At last when they had cast out all their goods,
(To save themselves) into the furious floods,
The ship all bruised with sands, and storms, and stones
At Ipswich does disburthen the sea of Jones.
England salutes him with the general joys
Of Court and country knights, squires, fools, and boys
In every town rejoice at his arrival,
The townsmen where he comes their wives do swive all,
And bid them think on Jones amidst this glee,
In hope to get such roaring boys as he:
Others this joy into a fury rapt
To sing his praise, though elegant and apt;
Yet mixed with fictions, which he scorns. It Is known
Jones fancies no additions but his own;
Nor need we stir our brains for glorious stuff
To paint his praise, himself has done enough,
And has prescirb'd that I shall write no more
Than his good memory has kept in store
Of what he did. Perhaps he has or can
Do more, but hides it like a modest man.
His British expedition makes me hie
From this vagary to his Chivalry.
This Dukedomes confines pointing on the South,
His raising of the siege of Kemper Castle.
Great Kemper Castle guards on Morligs mouth;
Which key of Brittayne (like great Brittaynes Dover)
Was well nigh lost by siege till Jones went over,
To dye or raise it; It Was begirt by land
With fifteen thousand. Four tall ships withstand
All succors from the sea: Against this force
He goes as boldly as an eyelesse horse,
With one small Bark (The Shit-sire 'twas) a hot one,
And save a hundred men was with him not one:
But these were Welsh blades, borne for hacks and hewing,
And cared not what they did so they were doing.
Thus like some tempest these four ships he frightens,
His guns roar thunder whilst his powder lightens,
And from his broad side poures a shower of hail,
Which rakes them through and through, ribs, masts, and sail.
Their shot replies, but they were rankt too high
To touch the Pinnace, which bears up so nigh
And plays so hot, that her opponents think
Some Devil is grand Captain of the Pinke.
One English Pirat with them, whilst he watches
His time to shoot, spies Jones upon the hatches,
And cries out, Ho, hoise Canvas all at once,
And fly, or yield, Zounds it is Captain Jones:
The man swore reason, and it was quicky heard,
For, not a Bullet like that name was feared;
They fly, he follows, but a partial wind
And wings of fear saved them, left him behind.
To Kemper he returns him, and supplies it
With fifty men, and victuals to suffice it
Six months: The foes by land lose hope and heart
To oppose this new supply, and so depart:
Then on the Gate this title was ingraved,
Jones rescued Kemper, and the Dukedom saved.
Thus plumed with Laurel, Jones for England came,
Where George of Cumberland, rapt with his fame,
Wooes him to be Vicegenerall of his fleet; He is made Vicegeneral under G. of
Cumberland, and fought against the Spanish Fleet.

Which Jones vouchsaft, because he was to meet
Men like himself, the doughty Dons of Spain,
Whose honor (or lose all) he vowed to gain.
And better fate in this design he wished not
Than to cope single with their great Don Quixot.
Stay Muse, and blush, and sigh and sing no more,
Here Jones his Mistress Fortune played the whore.
Yet, whilst thou loath'st her lightness to rehearse,
Let indignation make thee chide in verse;
Ah deity! and blindly to go on so
From thy dear minion Jones to John D' Alonso,
Whose out and inside is no better mettle
Than an old drum, or a base Tinkers kettle.
And take thou him for Jones? that glorious boy,
Whom Venus self would kiss (were Mars away.)
Well fickle goddess, if thou be divine,
I Will swear, heaven has like earth, light feminine.
It Was thus. This fleet cut through the Western main,
And so lay hovering on the coast of Spain:
Jones led the front (as it was his custom still)
The first in fight, last to be killed or kill:
His ship went swiftest too, as did his mind
On honors wings: But (oh) an envious wind
Filled all his sails, and wrapped him in a mist
From being seen, or seeing ere he wist.
And thus he lost his train, and cast about,
And beat these seas five days to find them out,
Till in his quest it was his fate to meet
Don John D' Alonso with the Spanish fleet.
This General bid amain, and Jones defied
From Canons mouth. The Don again replied
"With four for one. Ah Jones, had I my wish,
"Some godhead should have turned thee to a fish,
"To escape this dire assault; thou should not then
"Be taken like a tame beast in thy den.
Nine thousand soldiers was the force that fought
This day with Jones, whom six huge galleys brought;
The stoutest boats to make a bold Bravado
That were in Spaines invincible Armado:
Jones first commands his men to take their victual,
He souldier-like drank much, and prayed a little;
Then tells them briefly, Here Is no place to fly,
Come friends, let us bravely live or bravely dye.
By this the gallyes had enclosed him round,
And sought to board him; but they quickly found
The ship too hot to grapple with so soon,
And so bore off again, and paid her room.
Then each by turn present her the broad side,
Which she repayd with interest, and so plied,
That where her bullets pierce, whole streams of blood
Spout through the galleys ribs, and dye the flood;
The foes disdain thus long to stand in fight
Against one, and so press on with all their might;
And now the storm grew hot, and deep in blood,
"Mad rage had got the place where reason stood:
Guns, drums, and trumpets stop the soldiers ears,
From hearing cries and groans; and fury reares
This fatal combat to so strange a height,
That higher powers express the effects of fright.
Great Neptune quakt and roared, clouds ran and pist,
The winds fell down, and Titan lurkt in mist.
Then belch huge bullets forth, smoke, fire, and thunder:
Their fury strikes the gods with fear and wonder.
One gally which two hundred slaves did row,
Affronts the ship in hope to buldge her prow.
Jones gave her leave; but when she once came nigh,
Out burst his murdering shot; here doomed to dye
Down dropped the brave Viceroy of Saint Iago,
Don Diego de Cordona and Gonzago.
Stones, chains, and bullets tare their passage out
Through men and galley, which soon tack about
In hope to get aloof; but Jones sent after
Two lucky shots, which light twixt wind and water.
"In crept the quaking billow, where it spyde
"Those holes, in hope its fearful head to hide;
"The galley like afeard, worse hurt, does creep
"Into the trembling bowels of the deep;
"And so she sanke. Thus Diego whilst he tried
His force with Jones, with fifteen hundred died.
Now Jones all breathless sat to take his breath
Upon a But of sack, and drank the death
Of Don John de Alonso, which his men
Pledge in a rowse, and so they fight again.
Ninescore there were but threescore now remain
To do or suffer, for the rest were slain.
The Spanish force distract twixt hope and fear,
Yet by their fellows fall forewarnd, forbear
This hot assault, keep distance, and at Jones
Let fly their shot at random all at once,
Some half a Cable short and some flew ore
The top sail, some the stern and rudder tore:
One, all the rest in fatal fu^y past,
And all to shivers rove the master mast,
Down fell the tackle, and the vessel lay
An English prison and a Spanish prey.
Starboard and L^rboard side, from poope to prow
They all let drive and raked her through and through.
All now but Jones and one man more were killed,
Who cried, Now fight and dye or live and yield.
Io^es killed the first, the latter he besought him
Upon his knees, whilst by the knees he caught him
Begging for life, a bullet took away
His head, which when it was off still seemd to pray;
Out flew the head and bullet both at once
Between the manly thighs of Captain Jones;
Who looked behind him, Art thou gone (quoth he)
Still may they dye so that cry, Yield to me.
Now naught to him but blood and death appeard,
Death was his wish, captivity he feared;
Which to prevent This sword he won from the great and fearful giant Nereapeny.
Kil-za-dog forth he drew,
And thus he spoke; Brave Cato, Cato flew.
And when victorious Brutus could not stand,
He fell, but by his own victorious hand.
Brutus, I am a Brute, and have thy spirit,
Thy fortune and self death I will inherit.
Thus said, his sword unto his side he plyes,
His Genius deh^rts him from selfe-murder.
Which his good Genius stays and thus replies;
Hold Jones, reserved for thy Countries good,
Born to shed hostile not thy homebred blood,
And know that selfe-death is the Cowards curse,
For, he that dies so, dies for fear of worse;
The time will come when Irish bogs shall quake
Under thy feet, whilst great Oneale does shake.
I may not on thy future deeds dilate,
Thy sword must write what is involved in fate;
This know, in thy old age thou shall impart
Unto thy Countries youth thy martial art,
Teach them to manage arms, and how they must
Make bright their swords, which peace has wrapped in rust.
Now Jones vouchsafed to live, not for himself
But for his Countries good and Commonwealth,
His scarlet cap he dons, with crimson plume,
And he ascends the hatches all in fume.
The Musketeers ambitiously desire
To hit this mark, and all at once give fire:
Some Bullets raze his plume, his hair, his nose,
His velvet Ierkin, and his satin hose,
(The scars may yet be seen) yet draws he breath
Fearelesse and harmless in the jaws of death.
The Spaniard now conjectured his intent,
By seeking death to avoid imprisonment,
And so forbore to shoot, drew near and sought
To take the prey which they so dear had bought.
Then Jones all raging throws into the maine
That sword which men and wolves and bears had slain,
That sword which erst had drunk the blood of Kings,
Into the bowels of the deep he dings.
The Ocean thrild for fear, and gave it place,
And greedy Neptune snatched it for his mace.
Then from the ship he leaps amongst his foes,
And so undaunted to Don John he goes,
Who bid him Live, Don-like, but gave him breath,
Only to breath in greater pains than death.
This shock had sent to Styx six thousand men,
How he was used being taken captive.
Whose souls Don John to satisfy again
Inflicts more servile punishments on Jones,
Than countervailes six thousand deaths at once.
He beds on boards, is fed with bits and knocks
Ape like, barefoot with neither shoes nor socks,
Haire-shirt, blew bonnet, made a servile knave,
A lousy, dusty, nasty gally slave.
At last he brings Jones to the Spanish King,
He is presented to the Sp. King
And says: Great monarch, see this precious thing;
Six thousand of your bravest men he cost,
Who to gain him alive, their lives have lost.
Nor think the bargain dear, for here is a man
Can do and say more than your Viceroyes can.
This praise was given him by the crafty Don,
For fear his loss seemd more than what he won;
And so it did in deed for Philip thought
Jones inside by his outside dearly bought.
To try he asks him whither bound, and whence
He was, and Jones replies with little sense,
Whether through fear or faining, he affords
To all the King demands, not three wise words.
He is cast into a prison.
To try him further, in a Iaile they cast him,
Which served for nothing but to stink and fast in.
And here it was his destiny to light
Upon a learned priest, a Jesuit:
With him falls Jones to work. The sacred word
He disputed there with a Jesuit about Purgatory.
His weapon was, for he had drowned his sword.
Their Question was of purgatory, where,
And whether it is at all, if so, it is here
(Quoth Jones.) For he halse tired with pains would needs
Go straight to heaven: And thus the question breeds.
Jones was no Schooleman, yet he bore a brain
Which nere forgot what ere it could contain.
Yet this old Priest so wrests the letters sense,
Equivocates, denies plain consequence,
Sta^ts too and fro, and raises such confusions,
That Jones chief ward was to deny conclusions:
But, do this subtle Schoolman what he can,
Such was the vigor of this martial man,
Though he was no good disputant or Text-man,
Nor knew to spell Amen, to serve a Sexton;
Yet truth, with confidence and his strong fist
Does first convince and then convert the Priest.
Some talk of Garnets straw and Lipsius lasses,
Whose miracles made many Artists asses;
But here is a miracle transcends them all,
An Artist made wise by a Natural.
Now Englands Court rings all of Jones his fetters, Order taken in England for
his ransom.

And men of rank were soon sent ore with letters
To ransom him for gold, or man for man,
On any terms. The King with many a Don
Consults upon this point: One thought it fit
To deal upon exchange; some better wit
Thought it more fit to keep this second Drake,
For so he termed him wisely, and thus spoke; The point of his ransom debated
in Spain.

Armies are Englands arm, Captains the hand
Of this strong arm that rules by sea and land:
And of this arm and hand I think in sum,
This captive Captain is the very thumb.
This speech was short and sound, but could not go so
Without the opposing of old Don Mendozo;
Who loved and favored Jones, but knew not why,
(Nature it seems had wrought some sympathy)
Pardon (quoth he) (dread Sovereigne) Are we come
To talk of arms and hands and Captain Thumb?
From East to West our Arms and armies reign,
And fear we now for one to re-obtaine
So many Viceroyes in the Isle captived,
For us of light and almost life deprived?
Were Drake's and Candish spirit in this dragon,
Let not their future times have this to brag on,
That Englands Queen did prize one Captain more
Than Spaines great Monarch did his twenty four.
His speech prevaild, and so they all atone,
And twenty four were asked and given for one,
All which had led great armies to the field,
And never knew, but once, what it was to yield.
And thus was Jones dismissed; yet ere he go
The King, to grace him, made him kiss his toe.
Long may thou live old man, and may thy tongue
And memory, as thou grow'st old, wax yongue:
Then will thou live in spite of time, and be
Times subject, and time thine to imblazon thee.
Pardon my forward Muse, striving to soar
A pitch with thee at midday tired, gives ore;
For, who can speak thee all (thou mighty man?)
Not Greeces Homer, nor Romes Mantuan.
A touch of some other deed^ of chivalry by him performed.
Thy Irish wars, thy taking great Tyrone,
Whole herds of Wolves killed there by thee alone,
Thy several single duells with fierce men
And Bears, all slain; and that dry journey, when
Thou drankst but what thou pist for thrice seven days,
Which made thee dry ere since; then the amorous ways
The Queen of No-land used to make thee King
Of her and hers, (Oh) many a precious thing.
Thy London widow next in love half drowned,
Which thou refus'dst with forty thousand pound:
Thy daunting Essex in his rash bravado,
Raleigh's hard scaping of thy bastinado:
Lastly, thy grace with thy great Queen Eliza,
Who, had thou had the learning to suffice a
Man, but to write and read, had made thee able
To sit in Council at her highness Stable.
These trophies of thy Fame, and myriads more
Kept by thy fertile brain for time in store,
I leave unsung, and wish they may be writ
In golden lines by some more happy wit,
Whose Genius till some Fury does inspire,
Let me sit down in silence and admire.
THE END.
A copious commendation of a Red Nose.
LEt him that undertook to praise
The French Pox, and so many ways
Did prove that it is now-a-dayes
Commodious:
I say, let him a while give place,
For I will prove a fiery face
Is to the owner no disgrace,
Nor odious.
Who has a fiery face, that man
Is said to have a rich face, an
Rubies about his nose, none can
Deny it.
And all men know as well as I,
That what is rich, most eagerly
We covet, and no cost deny
To buy it.
Some sell their cloths from off their back,
And some their lands, and some will lack
Meat, rather than good sherry Sack
And Clarre^:
And they swear (and swear truth) yt those
Which drink small Beer, and wear good cloths
Do offer wrong unto their nose,
And mar it.
If in Romes Senate long nosed men
Were chose for wisest, tell me then
Why these should not be praised, when
All men know
A fiery face nere is without
A rich nose: and how far a snowt
That's rich exceeds a long, to doubt
Or call men to
Dispute or to capitul^te,
This matter's not so intricate
But any may expostulate^
And judge it:
And if judge truly, he will confess,
Fire-rich, exceeds long-wise, I guess,
No man that has true worthiness
Will grutch it.
Besides, the world knows this, that we
Affirm those gracious that we see
But blush, and call it modesty
In people.
A rich face always blushes, so
It does all faces else out-go
As far as S. Faiths is below
Paul's steeple.
He that reads this, and does not say,
A fiery face has won the day,
In judgment shows himself a boy,
And heedlesse.
Nor will I spend more words to show
What commendations men do ow
To Captain Jones his face, you know
It Is needless.
FINIS.

