THE THEATER of Gods Judgments: Or, A COLLECTION OF HISTOries out of Sacred,
Ecclesiastical, and profane Authors, concerning the admirable Judgments of
God upon the transgressors of his commandments.

TRANSLATED OVT OF FRENCH, AND AVGMENted by more than three hundred Examples,
by Th. Beard.

IL VOSTRO MALIGNARE NON GIOVA NVLLA.


LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip. 1597.

To the right Worshipful, Sir Edward Wingfield, Knight.
IT is a principle in natural philosophy (right Worshipful) that in every
natural body, as well the Elephant as the gnat, there is some property or
other to be admired and wondered at: and not only in philosophy, but also in
Divinity; for even the divine Singer of Israel anoucheth the same, when he
says, That the works of God are wonderful, and his judgments past finding
out: and not without great reason; for if we turn over every leaf of Gods
creatures from the tenth sphere to the center of the earth, we shall find, that
every leaf and letter of this great volume, is admirable and wonderful: and
such as does not only demonstrate a divine power to sit at the stern of the
world, but also our own weakness, which is not able to comprehend the least
part thereof. This wonderful workmanship as it does set forth the power of God
as he is the creator, and his wisdom as he is the governor of it; so
especially his mercy and justice appear therein, as he is a father in
preserving his children, and a judge in punishing sinners, and those that
rebel against him: and these two are fitly called the arms of the Almighty,
of which one is not longer and larger than the other; but he is so far
merciful that he is just withal, and so far just, that his mercy does also
show it self in the midst thereof: the right consideration whereof if it were
ingrafted in the hearts of men, they would learn both to admire and reverence
his mercy in creating and preserving the frame of the world, and stand in awe
of his judgments in correcting sin: but so it is, that the greatest part of
men go clean contrary, they dream upon mercy, mercy, and never think upon
justice and judgment; and that is the cause why more perish by presumption
than despair: for this cause it seemed to me most necessary to call into men's
memories the wonderful judgments of God, and to set before their eyes a view
of his justice manifested in the world upon sinners and reprobats, to the end
that the drousie consciences of Gods children might be awakened, and the
desperate hearts of the wicked confounded, when they shall see how vengeance
pursues malefactors to their shame and confusion in this life, and to their
destruction in the world to come. This I have performed (according to the
measure of my skill) in this present volume, which having partly translated out
of the French, and partly collected by mine own industry out of many Authors:
I dedicate and consecrate unto you as a monument of my dutiful love which I
owe and am ever bound to owe unto your self, your virtuous Lady, and all your
generation; desiring of you a favorable acceptance of my simple offering, and
for you a protection from all such judgments as are contained in this, and a
perpetual continuance of all happy and heavenly felicity.

Your Worships in all duty to command, Th. Beard.

The Preface.
IF to avoid and eschew vice, (according to the saying of the Poet) be a chief
virtue, and as it were, the first degree of wisdom; then it is a necessary
point to know what vice and virtue is, and to discern the evil and good which
either of them bring forth, to the end to beware least we dash our selves
unawares against vice in stead of virtue, and be caught with the deceitful
baits thereof. For this cause the great and famous Philosopher about to lay
open the nature of moral virtues (according to that knowledge and light which
nature afforded him) contented not himself with a simple narration of the
properties, essence, and object of them, but opposed to every virtue on each
side the contrary and repugnant vice; to the end that at the sight of them,
being so out of square, so hurtful and pernicious, virtue it self might be
more amiable and in greater esteem. And for this cause also God himself our
sovereign and perfect lawgiuer, that he might fashion and fit us to the mould
of true and solid virtue, uses oftener negative prohibitions than affirmative
commandments in his law: to the end above all things to distract and turn us
from evil, whereunto we are of our selves too too much inclined. And as by
this mean sin is discovered and made known unto us, so is the punishment
also of sin set before our eyes by those threatenings and curses which are
there denounced: to the end, that whom the promises of life and salvation
could not allure and persuade to do well, them the fear of punishment (which
follows sin as a shadow does the body) might bridle and restrain from
giving them over to impiety. Now then if the very threatenings ought to serve
for such good use, shall not the execution and perfourmance of them serve much
more? to wit, when the tempest of Gods wrath is not only denounced, but also
thrown down effectually upon the heads of the mighty ones of the world when
they are disobedient and rebellious against God. And hereupon the Prophet
says, That when Gods judgments are upon earth, then the inhabitants learn
justice. And doubtless it is most true, that every one ought to reap profit
to himself by such examples, as well them which are presented daily to their
view by experience, as them which have been done in times past, and are by
benefit of history preserved from oblivion. And in this regard history is
accounted a very necessary and profitable thing, for that in recalling to mind
the truth of things past, which otherwise would be buried in silence, it
sets before us such effects (as warnings and admonitions touching good and
evil) and lays virtue and vice so naked before our eyes, with the
punishments or rewards inflicted or bestowed upon the followers of each of
them, that it may rightly be called, an easy and profitable apprentiship or
school for every man to learn to get wisdom at another man's cost. Hence it
is, that History is termed of the ancient Philosophers, The record and
register of Time, the light of Truth, and the mistress and looking glass of
man's life. Insomuch as under the person of another man it teaches and
instructs all those that apply their minds unto it, to govern and carry
themselves virtuously and honestly in this life. Wherefore they deserve great
praise and commendation that have taken pains to enroll and put in writing the
memorable acts and occurrents of their times to communicate the same to their
posterity: for there the high and wonderful works of God do most clearly,
and as it were to the view, present themselves; as his justice and providence:
whereby albeit he guides and directs especially his own, to wit, those that
in a special and singular manner worship and trust in him, (as by the sacred
histories touching the state and government of the ancient and primitive
Church it may appear) yet he cease not for all that to stretch the arm of
his power over all, and to handle and rule the profane and unbelieving ones at
his pleasure: for he has a sovereign empire and predominance over all the
world. And unto him belongs the direction and principal conduct of humane
matters, in such sort, that nothing in the world comes to pass by chance or
adventure, but only and always by the prescription of his will; according to
the which he orders and disposes by a straight and direct motion, as well
the general as the particular, and that after a strange and admirable order.
And this a man may perceive if he would but mark and consider the whole body,
but especially the end and issue of things: wherein the great and marvelous
virtues of God, as his bounty, justice, and power, do most clearly shine;
when he exalts and favors some, and debaseth and frowneth upon others,
blesses and prospers whom he please, and on the contrary, curses and
destroieth whom he please, and that deserve it. It is he also which erecteth
principalities, and which maintains commonwealths, kingdoms, and empires,
until by the sum and weight of their iniquities, they sink themselves into
ruin and destruction. And herein is he glorified by the execution of his most
just and righteous judgments, when the wicked after the long abuse of his
lenity, benignity, and patience, do receive the wages and reward of their
iniquities. In this (I say once again) shines out the wonderful and
incomprehensible wisdom of God, when by the due ordering of things so
different and so many, he comes still to one and the same mark which he
once prescribed, to wit, the punishment of the world according to their
demerits. And this same is most manifest and apparent even in the histories of
profane writers, albeit in their purpose it was never intended nor thought
upon, nor yet regarded almost of any that read the same; men contenting
themselves for the most part with the simple recital of the story, therein to
take pleasure and pass away time, without respecting any further matter:
Notwithstanding the true and principal use of their writings ought to be,
diligently to mark the effects of Gods providence and of his justice: thereby
to learn to contain our selves within the bonds of modesty and the fear of
God, seeing that they which have carried themselves any thing uprightly in
equity, temperance, and other natural virtues, have been in some sort
spared: and the rest (bearing the punishment of their iniquities) have fallen
into ruin and destruction.

This consideration ought to persuade every man to turn from evil and to
follow that which is good; seeing that the Lord shows himself so incensed
against all them which lead a wicked, damnable, and perverse life. And this is
the cause why I having noted the great and horrible punishments wherewith the
Lord in his most righteous judgment has scourged the world for sin, according
to that which is contained as well in sacred as profane histories: having
gathered them together and sorted them one after another in their several
rooms, according to the diversity of the offenses, and order and course of
time, which as near as I could I endeavored to follow: To the end, to lay
down as it were in one table and under one aspect, the great and fearful
judgments of God upon them that have rebelled or repugned his holy will. And
this I do not with purpose to comprehend them all, (for that were not only
difficult but impossible:) but to lay open the most notable and markeable ones
that came to my knowledge: to the end, that the most wicked, dissolute, and
disordered sinners, that with loose raines run fiercely after their lust, if
the manifest tokens of Gods severity presented before their eyes, do not
touch them, yet the cloud and multitude of examples, through the sight of the
inevitable anger and vengeance of God upon evil livers, might terrify and
somewhat curb them. Periurers, idolatours, blasphemers, and other such wicked
and profane wretches; with murderers, whoremongers, adulterers, rauishers, and
tyrants, shall here see by the mischief that has fallen upon their likes,
that which hangs before their eyes, and is ready to lay hold of them also.
For albeit for a time they sleep in their sins and blindness, delighting in
their pleasures, and taking sport in cruelties and evil deeds, yet they draw
after them the line, wherewith (being more ensnared than they are aware) they
are taken and drawn to their final destruction.

And this may teach and advertise both those that are not yet obstinate in
their sins, to bring themselves to some amendment; and those that fear God
already, to strengthen and encourage them in the pursure and continuance in
their good course. For if God show himself so severe a revenger of their sins
that take pleasure in displeasing him: there is no doubt, but on the contrary,
he will show himself bountiful, gracious and liberal in rewarding al them
according to his promise which strive to please him, and conform their lives
unto his will. Great and small, young and old, men and women, and all other of
what degree and condition soever, may here learn at other men's charges, how to
govern themselves in duty toward God and betwixt themselves, by a holy and
unblameable life in mutual peace and unity: and by shunning and eschewing
sin, against the which, God (a most just judge) pours forth his vengeance,
even upon the heads of them that are guilty thereof. Beside here is ample
matter and argument to stop the months of all Epicures and Atheists of our
age, and to leave them confounded in their errors, seeing that such and so
many occurrents and punishments are manifest proofs, that there is a God above
that guides the stern of the world, and that takes care of humane matters,
and that is just in punishing the unjust and malicious. Again, whereas so much
evil and so many sins have reigned and swaied so long time, and do yet
reign and sway upon the earth, we may behold the huge corruption and
peruersitie of mankind, and the rotten fruits of that wormeaten root original
sin; when we are not directed nor guided by the holy spirit of God, but left
unto our own nature. And hereby true faithful Christians may take occasion so
much the more to acknowledge the great mercy and singular favor of God toward
them, in that they being received to mercy, are renewed to a better
conversation of life than others. In brief, a man may hear learn, (if he be
not altogether void of judgment and understanding) to have sin in hatred and
detestation, considering the wages and reward thereof: and how the justice of
God pursues it continually, even to the extremest execution, which is both
sharp and rigorous.

Touching the word Judgment, I have imitated the language of holy Scripture,
wherein as the ordinances and commandments of God are called Judgments,
because in them is contained nothing but that which is just, right, and equal:
so likewise the punishments inflicted by God upon the despisers of his
commandments are called by the same name, as in Exodus 6.6. 2. Chron. 20.12.
and 22.8. Ezech. 5.8. and 11.9. and elsewhere, because they also are as just as
the former, proceeding from none other fountain save the most righteous
judgment of God, whereof none can complain but unjustly.

The names of the Authors from whom the most part of the Examples contained in
this Book are collected.
MOses, and other sacred writers. Tertullian. Cyprian. Eusebius. Socrates.
Theodoret. Sozomenes. Nicephor. Ruffinus. Suidas. Chrysostom. Luther.
Jllyricus. Herodotus. Thucydides. Dion. Halycarnasseus. Diodorus Siculus.
Polybeus. Plutarch. Herodian. Dion. Procopius. Iornandes. Agathius. Aelianus.
Tit. Liuius. Salustius. Suetonius. Corn. Tacitus. Amni. Marcellinus. Justinius.
Eutropius. Lampridius. Spartianus. Flauius Vopiscus. Cuspinianus. Orosius.
Aimoinus. Gregor. Turonensis. Anton. Volscus. Paulus Diaconus. Luitprandus.
Olaus magnus Gothus. Sabellicus. Anton. Panormitanus. Aeneas Siluius. Rauisius.
Hieronymus Marius. Alexander ab Alexandro Pet. Praemonstratensis. Mich. Ritius
Neapolitanus. Fulgosius. Fran. Picus Mirandula. Bembus. Antonius Bomfinius.
Munsterus. Johan. Wierus. Platina. Nauclerus. Vincentius. Hugo Cluniacensis.
Benno. Baleus. Gagninus. Paulus Aemilius. Discipulus de tempore. Acts and
Monuments. Carrion. Chronicon. Beza. Josephus. Manly Collectanea. Stow Chronica.
Froyssard. Enguerran de Monstrelet. Philip le Comines. Nicholas Gilles.
Guicciardine. Paulus Iouius. Benzoin Milanois. Job. Fincelius. Centuriae
Magdeburg. Abbas Vrispurgensis. Philippus Melancthon. Sleidanus. Lanquet.
Chronica.
THE FIRST BOOK, OF THE WORTHY AND MEMOrable Histories of the great and
marvelous Judgments of God sent upon the World, for their misdeeds against
the Commandments of the first and second Table.
CHAP. I. As touching the Corruption and Peruersitie of this World, how great
it is.
EVen as one that takes pleasure to behold a pleasant and delightsome place, a
piece of ground covered and painted with all manner of fine flowers, a garden
decked, and as it were clothed with exquisite plants and fruitful trees, is
much grieved so soon as he perceives all this beauty and pleasure suddenly
to be withered and scortched by the violence of some outrageous tempest: or if
he be constrained to cast his eyes from them upon some other place by, all
craggie and parched, full of briars and brambles. In like sort, a man can not
choose, but be sore grieved and discontent when he beholds on the one side
the wholesome light of the sun, whereby the heavens do many ways distill
their favors upon this world, gloriously to advance it self: on the other
side, he perceives such an army of thick clouds and palpable darkness, from
whence such a number of disorders and hurliburlies do arise that most
strangely disfigure the face of the whole world: when that he which ought to be
gentle and peaceable, is become mischievous and quarellous: and in stead of
being true and single hearted, disloiall and deceitful: instead of being
modest, well governed, and courteous; is proud, cruel, and dissolute: in
steed of serving of God, serves his own humors and affections: which kind
of behavior is but too common and usual: for there is not any kind of
wickedness which is not found in this rank. Ungodliness vomiteth up his
fury together with injustice, in those men of whom it is said: There is none
that understands or seeks after God, their throat is an open sepulcher,
they use deceit in their tongues, the poysen of aspes is under their lips,
Psalm. 14.
they have nothing in their mouths but cursing and bitterness, their feet are
swift to shead blood: destruction and misery is in their ways: and they have
not known the way of peace; In sum, the fear of God is not before their
eyes. From whence it comes, that being not restrained by any bridle, like
untamed colts broke loose, they give the full swindge to their bold and violent
affections, running fiercely to all filthiness and mischief: and being thus
enraged, some of them with horrible blasphemies (most villainously) speak and
do in despite of God, and deny him that created them and sent them into the
world: others are not ashamed to be open forswearers of themselves, violating
and breaking every promise without regard of faith or honesty. Others as they
are of cruel and bloody natures, so they do not cease to exercise these
their natures by outrageous practices: to some of them whoredoms and
adulteries are no more esteemed then as sports and pastimes, whereof they boast
and vaunt themselves: to another sort, cousenings, extortions, and robberies
are ordinary exercises, whereof they make their best occupations. All which
evils are so common and so usual at this time amongst men, that the world
seems truly to be nothing else but an Ocean full of hideous monsters: or a
thick forest full of thieves and robbers: or some horrible wilderness
wherein the inhabitants of the earth, being savage and unnatural, void of
sense and reason, are transformed into brute beasts; some like tygres or
lions, others like wolves or foxes, others like dogs and swine: Oh sinful
nation (would the man of God say if he lived at this hour) a people laden with
iniquity, a seed of the wicked, Isay. 1.4.
corrupt children, they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the holy one
of Israel to anger. The noble and high minded are proud to disdain the lower,
and ready always to smite them; making their countenance pale with vices and
oaths: the magistrate partial and full of bribes, overthrows equity: the
merchant covetous and desirous of gain, remembers not his integrity: nor the
labourer his simplicity. And so virtue in most men lies buried, piety
banished, justice oppressed, and honesty trodden under foot: in such sort that
all things being as it were overthrown and turned vpside down, men speak
evil of good, and good of evil, accounting darkness light, and light
darkness: sower sweet, and sweet sower. And by such disorder it comes to
pass, that the most virtuous are despised, whilst naughty packs and vicious
fellows are esteemed and made much of.

CHAP. II. What the cause is of the great ouerflow of Vice in this age.
IF we would consider from whence it is that this great disorder and
corruption of manners does arise, we should find especially that it is because
the world every day grows worse and worse according to the saying of our
Savior and redeemer (Christ Jesus the son of God) That in the latter days
(which are these wherein we live) Iniquity shall be increased. Mat. 24.12.
And herein we shall perceive even the just vengeence of God to light upon the
malice and unthankfulness of men, to whom when he would draw near, to do
good unto by offering them the clear light of his favor, the more they strive
to alienate and keep them selves aloof from him, and are so far from being
bettered thereby, that they show themselves a great deal more malicious and
obstinate then ever they did before: not unlike to those who by nature being
bleare eied and tender sighted, are rather dazeled and dimmed by the sun
beams, then any ways enlightened: so men in stead of growing better, grow
worse, and every day ad some increase to their wickedness: to whom also many
great men give elbow-roome and permission to sin, whilst justice slumbereth;
and the not punishing of misdeedes, gives them liberty and boldness to
commit their wickedness: so that some of these mighty ones show themselves
but little better then the other. A mischief to be lamented above the rest,
drawing after it an horrible ouerflow of all evils, and like a violent stream
spoiling every where as it goes: when as they that ought to govern the stern
of the Commonwealth let all go at random, suffering themselves to be rocked
a sleep with the false and deceitful lullabie of effeminate pleasures and
delights of the flesh; or at least letting themselves be carried headlong by
the tempest of their own strong and furious passions, into emminent danger of
shipwrackes: when as their careful watchfulness and modesty accompanied with
the train of other good and commendable virtues, ought to serve them for fails
cables, ankers, masts and skutles, whereby to govern and direct the vessel
whose stearsmen they are appointed, and those that are their charge, to whom
they ought to give a good example of life, and be unto them as it were a
glass of virtue: for they are set aloft as it were upon a stage to be gazed
at of every commer. Their faults and vices are like foul spots and scarres in
the face, which cannot by any means be hid. And therefore they ought to be
careful to lead an honest and virtuous life, that thereby they might persuade
and move the meaner sort of people to do the like: for it is a true saying of
the Philosopher, Like Prince, like people: in so much, that every one desires
to frame himself according to the humor of his superior, whose will and
manners serve simply for a law to do evil: to the which men use by taking
any occasion too hastily to give themselves over with too much liberty:
whereupon follows an unrecoverable ruin, no less then the fall of a great
house, which for want of pillars and supporters that should uphold it, suddenly
falls to the ground; so this ship being deprived of her governor, is set
loose and laid open to the mercy of the waves, violence of winds, and rage of
tempests, without any direction or government, and so the body of man not
having any more the light of his own eyes, abides in darkness all blinded,
not able to do any thing that is right and good, but ready every minute to
fall into some pit. And this is the peruersitie and corruption of this world.

CHAP. III. That great men which will not abide to be admonished of their
faults cannot escape punishment by the hand of God.
IN this poor and miserable estate every man rocketh himself asleep, and
flattereth his own humor, every man pursues his accustomed course of life,
with an obstinat mind to do evil: yea many of those that have power and
authority over others, according as they are endued and persuaded with a
foolish conceit of themselves, make themselves believe that for them every
thing is lawful, and that they may do whatsoever they please, never imagining
that they shall give up an account of their actions to receive any
chastisement or correction for them, even as though there were no God at all that did behold them: and being thus abused by this vain and fickle security,
they swim in their sins, and plunge themselves over head and ears in all
kind of sensuality: giving hearty welcome and entertainment to all that
approve and applaud their manners, and that study to feed and please their
humor. As contrariwise none less welcome unto them, then they that tell them
of their faults, and contradict them never so little: for they cannot abide in
any case to be reproved whatsoever they do. And now a days every base
companion will forsooth storm and fume as soon, if he be reproved of a fault,
as if he had received the greatest wrong in the world: so much is every man
pleased with himself, and puffed up with his own vices and foolish vanities.
And what should a man do in this case? It is as hard to redress these great
mischiefs as if we should go about to stop and hinder the course of a mighty
stream, there where the bancke or causey is broken down: if it be not by
applying extreme and desperate medicines, as to desperate diseases, which are
as it were given over by the Physician, and to the which a light purgation will
do no good. For as for admonitions and warnings, they are not a whit regarded:
but they that give them are derided or laughed to scorn or reviled for their
labors. What must we therefore do? It is necessary that we assay by all means
to bring these men (if it be possible) to some modesty and fear of God, which
if it cannot be done by willing and gentle means, force and violence must be
used, to pluck them out of the fire of Gods wrath, to the end they be not
consumed: if not all yet at least those that are not grown to that height of
stubbornes, and of whom ther^^s yet left some hope of amendment. For even as
when a captain has not prevailed by summoning a city to yield up it self,
he by and by places his canon against their walls, to put them in fear; In
like sort must we bring forth against the proud and high minded men of this
world, an army of Gods terrible judgments thrown down by his mighty and
puissant hand upon the wicked, more terrible and fearful, then all the
roaring canons or double canons in the world, whereby the most proud are
destroyed and consumed even in this life, all their pride and power how great
soever it be being not able to turn back the vengeance of God from lighting
upon their heads to their utter destruction and confusion. As it is manifest by
infinite examples. Now because that the nature of men is fleshly and given to be
touched with things that are presented before their faces, or has been done
before time, it is a more forcible motive to stir them up, then that which as
yet cannot be made manifest, but is to come. Therefore I purpose here to set
down the great and fearful judgments, wherewith God has already plagued
many in this world, especially them of high degree: whose example will serve
for a glass, both for these that live now, or shall live hereafter. And to the
end that the justice of God may more clearly appear and show it self in such
strange events, before we go any further we will run over certain necessary
points concerning this matter.

CHAP. IIII. How the justice of God is more evidently declared upon the mighty
ones of this world, then upon any other and the cause why.
SEeing then that these men are more guilty and culpable of sin then any
other, they deserve so much a more grievous punishment, by how much their
misdeedes are more grievous: Psalm. 58 11.
for doubtless, There is a God that judges the earth, (as the Psalmist says)
who as he is benign and merciful toward those that fear and obey him, so he
will not suffer iniquity to go unpunished: This is he (says the Prophet)
that executes justice mercy and judgment upon the earth: for if it be the
duty of an earthly prince to exercise not only clemency and gentleness, but
also sharpness and severity, thereby by punishing and chastising malefactors
to suppress all disorders in the Commonwealth; then it is very necessary
that the justice of our great God to whom all sovereign rule and authority
belongs, and who is the Judge of the whole world, should either manifest it
self in this world, or in the world to come: and chiefly toward them which
are in the highest places of account, who being more hardened and bold to sin,
do as boldly exempt themselves from all corrections and punishments due unto
them, being altogether unwilling to be subject to any order of justice or law
whatsoever: and therefore by how much the more they cannot be punished by man,
and that humane laws can lay no hold upon them, so much the rather God
himself becomes executioner of his own justice upon their pates: and in
such sort, that every man may perceive his hand to be upon them. Let any
adversity or affliction light upon a man of low degree, or which is poor and
desolate, no man considers of it rightly, but talking thereof, men cease not
to impute the cause of this poor souls misery either to poverty or want of
succor, or some other such like cause. Therefore if any such be in grief, or
by chance fallen into some pit, and drowned, or robbed and killed in the way by
thieves: straight way this is the saying of the world, That it comes thus to
pass either because he was alone without company, or destitute of help, or
not well looked to and regarded: and thus they pass over the matter. But as
concerning great men, when they are any way afflicted, no such pretenses or
excuses can be alleged: seeing they want neither servants to attend upon them,
nor any other means of help to succor them: therefore when these men are
overtaken and surprised with any great evil, which by no means they can
eschew, and when their bold and wicked enterprises, are pursued and concluded
with strange and lamentable events, in this we must acknowledge an especial
hand of God, who can entangle and pull down the prowdest and arrogantest he
that lives, and those whom the world fears to meddle with all: these proud
gallants are they against whom God displaieth his banner of power more openly
then against meaner and baser persons: because these poor souls find
oftentimes to their pains that they are punished without cause, and tormented
and vexed by those Tyrants, not having committed any offense at all, to deserve
it: whereas (as Philip Comine says) who dare be so bold as to control or
reprehend a King and his favorites, or to make inquiry of his misdeedes: or
having made inquisition of them, who dare presume to inform the Judge thereof?
Who dare stand up to accuse them? Who dare sit down to judge them? Nay who
dare take knowledge of them? And lastly, who dare assay to punish them? Seeing
then in this case that our vvorldly justice has her hands bound behind her
from executing that which is right: it must needs be that the sovereign
Monarch of heaven and earth should mount up into his throne of judgment, and
from thence give his definitive unchangeable sentence to deliver up the most
guilty and heinous sinners, to those pains and torments which they have
deserved; and that after a strange and extraordinary manner which may serve
for an example to all others.

CHAP. V. How all men both by the law of God and Nature, are inexcusable in
their sinners.
NOw to the end that no man should pretend ignorance for an excuse, God has
bestowed upon every one a certain knowledge and judgment of good and evil,
which being naturally engraued in the tables of man's heart, is commonly called
The law of nature: whereby every man's own conscience gives sufficient
testimony unto it self, when in his most secret thoughts it either accuses or
excuses him: for there is not a man living, which does not know in his own
heart, that he does an evil deed when he wrongeth another, although he had
never been instructed elsewhere in that point. So although that in Tarquinius
Superbus time ( Cicero says) there was no written law established in Rome
forbidding the rauishing and deflouring of wives and virgins: yet the wicked
son of this Tarquine was not therefore less guilty of an heinous crime, when
contrary to the law of nature, he violently robbed Lucrece of her chastity:
for no man can be ignorant that it is a most grievous crime to lay siege to the
chastity of a married woman, with such outrage: and so the whole people of Rome
did esteem of it as a crime most wicked, strange, and intolerable, and worthy
of grievous punishment. Every man knows thus much, that he ought not to do
that to another, which he would not another should do to him: which sentence
the Emperor Seuerus made always to be spoken aloud and declared by the sound
of the trumpet, in the way of advertisement, as often as punishment was taken
upon any offender, as if it were a general law pertaining to all men. This is
that equity and justice, which ought to be ingrafted in our hearts, and whereof
nature herself is the schoolmistresse: from this fountain all humane and
civil laws are derived: if we had not rather say that they are derived from
that true spring of equity, which is in the law of God, which law he has given
for a plain and familiar manifestation of his will, concerning just, holy, and
reasonable things, touching the service, honor, and glory which is due unto
himself, and the mutual duty friendship and good will, which men owe one to
another: whereunto he exhorts and entiseth every one by fair and gracious
promises, and forbids the contrary, by great and terrible threatenings, (so
gentle and merciful is he toward us and desirous of our good.) This is that
law which was published before the face of more then six hundred thousand
persons, with the mighty and resou^ding noise of trumpet, with earthquake,
fire, and smoke, and with thunders and lightnings to make men more attentive to
hear and more prepared to receive it with all humility, fear, and reverence,
and also to put them in mind, that if they were disobedient and rebellious, he
wanted no power and ability to punish them, for he has lightning, thunder, and
fire, prepared instruments to execute his just vengeance, which no creature
under heaven is able to avoid, when by the obstinat transgression of wicked
men, he is provoked to anger and indignation against them. This is that holy
law which has been set forth by the Prophets: by the rule whereof all their
warnings, exhortings, and reprouings, have been squared: to this law the only
begotten son of God our savior and redeemer Jesus Christ conformed his most
holy doctrine; bringing men to the true use and observation thereof, from which
they had declined, and whereof he is the end, the scope, and perfect
accomplishment: so that so far it is that a Christian man may be ignorant of
it, and have it in contempt, that none can be counted and reputed a true
Christian, if he frame not his life by the rule thereof, if not fully, yet at
least as farforth as he is able: otherwise, what a shame and reproach is this
for men to call themselves by the name of Gods children, Christians, and
Catholics, and yet to do every thing clean contrary to the will of God, to
make no reckoning of his law, to lead a dissolute and disordered life, and to
be as evil (if not worse) then the vilest miscreants and infidels in the
world? God wills and requires that he alone should be worshipped and prayed
unto; and yet the greater part of the world are idolaters, and full of
superstition, worship Images, sticks and stones, and pray to creatures instead
of the creator. God forbids us to swear by his name in vain: and yet what
is more rife then that? so that a man can hear nothing else but oaths and
blasphemies. Many for the least trifle in the world stick not to swear and
forswear themselves. God forbids theft, murder, adultery, and false
witness bearing, and yet nothing so common as backbitings, slanders,
forgeries, false reports, whoredoms, cousenings, robberies, extortions, and
all manner of enuies and enmities. God has commanded that we love our
neighbors as our selves: but we in stead of love; hate, despise, and seek to
procure the hurt and damage of one another, not regarding any thing but our
own peculiar profit and advantage. Is not this a manifest and professed
disobedience, and intolerable rebellion against our maker? What child is there
that is not bound to honor and reverence his father? What servant that is not
bound to obey his master, and to do all that he shall will him? What subject
that is not tied in subjection to his Prince and Sovereign? Yet there is not
one which will not confess, yea and swear too with his mouth, that God is his
Lord and father; Which if it be true, what is then the cause, that instead of
serving and pleasing him, they do nothing else but displease and offend his
Majesty? Is not this the way to provoke his wrath, and stir up his
indignation against them? Is it any marvel if he be incensed with anger, if
he be armed with revenge, and send abroad his cruel scourges upon the earth to
strike and whip it with all? Is it any wonder if he pile up the wicked ones on
heaps, and shoot out his reuengefull arrows against them, and make them
drunken with their own blood, and make his sword of justice as sharp as a
rasor, Deuteronomy. 32.35.
to punish those rebels that have rebelled against him? For vengeance is mine
(says he) and belongs only unto me, whosoever therefore he be that
follows the desires and concupiscence of his own flesh, and this wicked
world, and shall lead a life contrary to the instruction and ordinance of the
law of God, yea although he never heard thereof, yet is he guilty thereof and
worthy to be accursed; for so much as his own conscience ought to serve for a
law unto himself, by the which he is condemned in those evil actions which
he commits (even as Paul says) all that have sinned without the law shall
likewise perish without the law. Romans 2.12.


CHAP. VI. How the greatest Monarchs in the world ought to be subject to the
law of God, and consequently the laws of man and of nature.
Every man confesses this to be true, That by how much the more benefits and
dignity he has received from another, by so much is he the more bounden and
beholden to him: now it is so that Kings and Princes are those upon whom God
has bestowed more plentifully his gifts and graces, then upon any other, whom
he has made as it were his Lieutenants in this world: for he has extolled
and placed them above others, and bedecked them with honor, giving them power
and authority to rule and reign, by putting people in subjection to them: and
therefore so much the more are they bound to reacknowledge him again, to the
end to do him all honor and homage which is required at their hands. Psalm.
2.11.
Therefore David exhorts them to serve the Lord even with reverence. This
then their high and superintendent estate, is no privilege to exempt them from
the subjection and obedience which they owe unto God, whom they ought to
reverence above all things. Psalm. 29.1.
Ye Princes and high Lords (says the Prophet) give you unto the Lord eternal
glory and strength: give unto him glory due unto his name: and cast your
selves before him to do him reverence. If they owe so much honor unto God as
to their sovereign, then surely it must follow, that they ought to obey his
voice, and fear to offend him; and so much the rather, because he is a great
deal more strong, and terrible then they, able to cause his horrible
thunderbolts to tumble upon their heads, they being not able once to withstand
his puissance, but constrained very often to tremble thereat. In all that
prescription and ordinance ordained and set down by God concerning the office
of Kings, Deuteronomy. 17.15.
there is no mention made of any liberty that he gives them to live after
their own lusts, and to do every thing that seems good in their own eyes:
but he enioineth them expressly to have always with them the book of his
law, delights to read and meditate therein, and thereby to learn to fear
and reverence his name, by observing all the precepts that are contained in
that book. As for civil and natural laws in so much as they are founded
upon equity and right, (for otherwise they were no laws) therein they are
agreeable to, and as it were dependents on the law of God, as is well declared
by Cicero in the first and second book of his laws: for even they also
condemn thieves, adulterers, murderers, parricides, and such like. If then
princes be subject to the law of God, as I am about to show: there is no doubt,
but that they are likewise subject to those civil laws, by reason of the
equity and justice which therein is commended unto us. And if (as Plato says)
the laws ought to be above the prince, not the prince above the laws: Dial.
4. ote legibus.
it is then most manifest that the prince is tied unto the laws, even in such
sort, that without the same, the government which he swaieth can never be
lawful and commendable. And if it be true, that the Magistrate is or ought to
be a Speaking law, (as it is said) and ought to maintain the authority and
credit thereof, by the due and upright administration of Justice: for if he did
not this, he were a dumb law and without life: How is it possible that he
should make it of authority and sorce with others, if he despises and
transgresses it himself? David did never assume so much to himself, as to
desire to have liberty to do what he listed in his kingdom, but willingly
submitted himself to that which his office and duty required: 2. Sam. 5.
making (even then when he was installed and established king over the whole
land) a covenant of peace with the princes and deputies of the people: and we
know, that in every covenant and bargain both parties are bound to each other
by a mutual bond to perform the conditions which they are agreed upon: the
like is used at the coronation of Christian Kings, where as the people is bound
and sworn to do their allegiance to their Kings: so the kings are also
solemnly sworn to maintain and defend true religion, the estate of justice,
the peace and tranquillity of their subjects, and the right and privileges
(which are nothing but the laws) of the Realm: whereas David was by the
Prophet Nathan reproved for the adultery and murder which he had committed, he
neither used any excuse, nor alleged any privilege whereby he was exempted
from the rigor of the law to justify his fact: but freely confessed without
any cloak, that he had sinned. Whereby it appears of how small strength and
authority their opinion and words be, which think or affirm that a prince may
dispense with the laws at his pleasure: by this opinion was the mother in law
of Antonius Caracalla seduced; who having by her lascivious and filthy
allurements, enticed her son in law to lust, and love her, and to desire her
for his wife, persuaded him that he might bring his purpose to pass, and that
it was lawful enough for him if he would, though for other it was unlawful,
seeing that he was Emperor, and that it belongs not to him to receive, but
to give laws: by which persuasion, that brave marriage was concluded and made
up, contrary to the law of nature and nations, and to all honesty and virtue.
So it was reported how Cambyses took his own sister to wife, Herod. lib 3.
whom notwithstanding a little after he put to death: which thing being not
usual then among the Persians, not daring to enterprise it (although he was a
most wicked man) without the advice of the magistrates and counselors of his
realm: he called them together, and demanded whether it was lawful for him
to make such a marriage or no: to whom they answered freely, that there was no
prescript law which did allow of it: yet (that they might sooth him up, fearing
to incur his displeasure) they said further, that though there was no law to
command it, yet such a mighty king as he, might do what he pleased. In like
manner that trencher Philosopher Anaxarchus after that he had told Alexander
the Great, Plutarch.
with a loud voice, that he ought not to fear the penalty of any law, nor the
reproach nor blame of any man, because it belonged only to his office to create
laws for all other to live by, and to prescribe the limits of lawful and
lawless things; and that it became him being a conqueror, to rule like a
lord and a master, and not to obey any vain conceit of law whatsoever; and
that what thing soever the king did, the same was sacred, just, and lawful
without exception: And by this means made his proceedings far more
dissolute and outrageous in many things then ever they were before. Dion in the
epitome of Xiphiline, reports how the Emperors were wont to usurp this
privilege to be exempted from all law, that they might not be tied to any
necessity of doing or leaving undone any thing, and how in no case they would
endure to be subject to any written ordinances: the which thing is manifest
even in the behavior of the chiefest of them, as well in regard of their life
and manners, as of the government that they used in their Commonwealths. For
first of all Augustus Caesar having kept in his own hand the office of the
Triumuir ten years (as Suetonius testifies) he also usurped the Tribunes
office and authority, and that til his dying day: and likewise took upon him
the Censureship, namely the office of correcting and governing manners and
laws, if need required: whose successors (a man may truly say for the most
part) trampled under their feet all sincere and sacred laws, by their
notorious intemperance, dissoluteness, and cruelties. And yet for all this
there wanted not a parasiticall lawyer, who to please the Emperor his lord
and master the better, and to underprop, and as it were seele over with a
fair show that tyrannical government used by other Emperors, foisted in
this as a law amongst the rest, Princeps legibus solutus est, That the prince
was exempted from all law. As for that which they allege out of Aristotle's
Politiques, makes nothing to set a color upon this counterfeit: for (says
Aristotle) if there be any man that excels so in virtue above all others,
that none is able to compare with him, that man is to be accounted as a God
amongst men, to whom no law may be prescribed, because he is a law unto
himself: all which, I grant to be true, if that which was presupposed could
take place: for where no transgression is found, there no law is necessary:
according as Saint Paul said, The law was not given for the just, but for the
unjust and offenders: but where is it possible to find such a Prince so
excellent and so virtuous, that stands not in need of some law to be ruled by?

Of the like force and strength is that which is written in the first book of
Institutions tit. 2. the words are these, The Princes pleasure serves for a
law, because the whole body of the people has translated all their
authority, power, and jurisdiction unto him: this is spoken of the Roman
Emperors, but upon the ground of so slender and silly reason, that upon so
weak a foundation it can never stand: for if it be demanded, whether this
action of the people of giving over their right and prerogative to their
Prince, be vvilling or constrained, what answer will they make? If it be by
constraint and fear (as it is indeed) who will not judge this usurping of
their liberty utterly unjust and tyrannical: when one man shall arrogate that
to himself which pertains to many, yea to the whole body of the people?
And admit that this reason was effectual: yet the gloss upon the place says
very notably, That the princes pleasure may be held for a law so far forth as
that which pleases him, be just and honest: giving us to know thus much
thereby, that every will and pleasure of a Prince, may not indifferently be
allowed for a law if it be in an unjust and dishonest action, and contrary to
the rule of good manners. Moreover it appears by the customs of many ancient
people, and realms, that Princes had never this license given them to do
what they listed: for let them be never so mighty, yea as mighty as Darius,
under whose reign, the Persian monarchy was abolished: yet he must be
content (according to the law of the Medes and Persians) not to be able to
infringe that law which was by the advice of his Peers and privy counsel
enacted, and by his own consent and authority established: no though for
Daniels deliverance sake whom he loved, Dan. 6.8.
he greatly desired and took pains either to disannull or at least to give a
favorable interpretation of it.

Such in old time was the custom of the Kings of Egypt not to follow their
own affections in any actions they went about, Diod. lib. 2. cap. 2.
but to be directed by the advice of their laws; for they had not so much
authority as to judge betwixt man and man, or to levy subsidies and such like
by their own powers: neither to punish any man through choler, or any
ouerweening conceit, but were always tied to observe justice and equity in
all causes: neither did it grieve them so to do, being persuaded that whilst
they obeyed their laws, nothing could better betide them but good. Thucyd. lib
1.
The Lacedemonian Kings were in such bondage to the laws of their country,
that the Ephori which were set up to none other end, but to be a bridle to hold
them back from doing what they listed, had absolure authority to correct them
when they had committed any fault: which subjection nothing displeased king
Theopompus, as it is apparent by the answer he made his wife, that reproved
him once in anger, saying by his cowardlinesse he would leave a less kingdom
to his children, then he had received of his ancestors: nay says he, a
greater, for so much as more durable and parmanent. Plutarch praising the
uprightness of King Alcamenes, who for fear to break the law refused diverse
presents that were sent him, bursteth into this speech, O heart worthy of a
King, that has preferred the authority of the law before his own profit.
Where are those fellows now that cry, Kings pleasures ought to be observed
for laws, and that a Prince may make a law, but is not subject to it himself:
and this is that which Plutarch says as concerning that matter, who lived
under Traian the Emperor.

Cornelius Tacitus discovering the beginning and original of the Roman civil
law, Lib. 3. Annal.
says that Seruius the third King of Rome after Romulus and Numa, was the only
man that most established those laws whereunto kings themselves ought to yield
and be obedient. And admit that the Emperors swaied with great power and
authority almost all the world, yet for all their fierceness and haughtiness
of mind, Pliny durst tell Traian very roundly, In Paneger.
that an Emperor ought to use to carry himself with such good government in
his Empire, as if he were sure to give up an account of all his actions: thou
must not (says he) desire more liberty to follow thine own lust, then any
one of us do, a Prince is not set over the law, but the law placed in
authority above the Prince, this was the admonition of that Heathen man.
Likewise Antonius and Seuerus two mighty Emperors, although by reason of an
opinion of their own greatness and haultinesse wherewith they flattered
themselves, bragged that they were not subject to any law: yet they added this
clause withal, That notwithstanding they would live according to the direction
of the law. Lib. 4. tit. 17.
This (says Theodosius and Valentinian, two no less mighty Emperors) is a
voice becoming the roial Majesty and greatness of a king, To confess
himself to live under a law: and in truth it is a thing of greater importance,
then the imperial dignity it self, Lib. 1. ^od.
to put sovereignty under the authority of law. Amongst many other good lessons
and exhortations which Lewis that good King gave unto his son on his death bed,
Nicol. Gil, vol. 1. Chronicl. franc.
this was one worthy the remembering, how he commanded him to love and fear God
with all his strength, and to take heed of doing any thing that should be
contrary to his law, whatsoever should befall him; and to provide that the
good laws and statutes of his kingdom might be observed, and the privileges
of his subjects maintained: to forbid judges to favor him more then others,
when any cause of his own came in trial. Thereby giving us thus much to
understand, that every good King ought to submit himself in obedience under
the hand of God, and under the rule of justice and equity. Wherefore there is
neither king nor Keisar that can or ought to exempt himself from the
observance of sacred and upright laws, which if they resist or disanull,
doubtless they are culpable of a most heinous crime, and especially of
rebellion against the king of kings.

CHAP. VII. Of the punishment that seized upon Pharoa king of Egypt for
resisting God, and transgressing the sixth commandment of the law.
WE have sufficiently declared in the premises, that the mightiest potentates
of this world are bound to range themselves under the obedience of Gods law: it
remains now that we produce examples of those punishments that have fallen
upon the heads of the transgressors of the same, according to the manner of
their transgression, of what sort soever: which that we may the better
describe, it behooves us to follow the order of the Commandments, as the
examples we bring may be fitly referred to any of them. And first we are to
understand that when God said, Thou shall have none other Gods before me, he
condemns under these words the vanity of men that have forged to themselves
a multitude of gods: he forbids all false religion, and declares that he
would be acknowledged to be the sole and true God; and that we should serve,
worship, love, fear, and obey him in and above al things. And whoseuer it be
that does otherwise either by hindering his worship, or afflicting those that
worship him, the same man provoke his heavy wrath to be thrown upon him to
his utter ruin and destruction. This is the indignation that lighted upon
Pharoa king of Egypt, as we read in the book of God: Exodus 3.
who being one of the most puissant Kings of the earth in his age, God chose
him for an object to show his wonderful power on, by the means of horrible
plagues and scourges which he cast upon him, and by destroying him with all
his armies at the length, as his rebellion well deserved: for he like a cruel
tyrant continuing to oppress the children of Israel, without giving them any
release or breathing time from their misery, or liberty to serve God,
although by Moses in the name and authority of God, who made himself well
enough known unto him, without the help of any written law, he was many times
instantly urged and requested thereunto: so many judgments and punishments
assailed him one in the neck of the other in such sort, that at length he was
overtaken and ensnared therewith. First of all the very waters of Egypt being
converted into blood, proclaimed war against him: then the frogs which
covered the face of the earth, climed up even to his chamber and bed, and
filling every corner of his land, sounded him an alarm: next a muster of lice
and gnats, and such other troublesome and stinking creatures summoned him to
combat: an handful of embers scattered in the air by Moses, were unto him
as the strokes of a stone or a shaft, which did vvoonderfully disfigure their
bodies with boiles and most noisome scabs: afterward the grasshoppers were put
in battle array against him, together with the pestilence, hailestones,
horrible thunders, and lightnings, wasting and spoiling, and running up and
down grievously though his whole land. After al these bitter blows the tyrant
being cut short, and being so besieged on every side with hideous and palpable
darkness that he could not tell which ways to turn himself: yet would he
not be brought to any reason, but continued obstinate and hardened against God,
though all the elements with heaven and earth had taken armor together and
conspired his destruction. Therefore while he remained in this wretched state,
Gods angel punished him in the person of his eldest son, which died suddenly
in one night, together with all the first borne of Egypt, wherewithal both he
and all his people being greatly moved and grieved, at length gave the
Israelites not only leave, but also hasted thm to depart: but anon as he saw
them going, like a man bestraught, he ran after them again, and pursued them
with a mighty army, until God in the mean while opening a passage to his
children overthwart the deep red sea, attended him in the midway: where he
surprised and ensnared him, overthrew and violently ouerturned the wheels of
his chariots, and put his whole army to a hurliburly, and that he might
utterly destroy him, caused the sea from each side to return to his channel,
which drowned and devoured him and all his army. And this is one of the
notablest and fearefullest judgments of God, that can be mentioned: and
therefore is very often recounted inmanie places of the scripture, as a thing
most memorable above others. Neither ought we to marvel, if so notable an
history as this, is not set down among the writings of profane authors: for
besides that their histories do not ordinarily stretch so far, as to record
such ancient acts: there is also no doubt but the successors of that Tyrant,
and all the Egyptians sought all means possible to cancel and blot out the
memory of their so great and horrible ruin. And if by chance any
historiographer make mention of the departure of the Israelits out of Egypt,
it is done in such sort, that the truth is not only disguised, but wholly
perverted by them, and in place thereof nothing but lies and falsehood foisted
in.

CHAP. VIII. Of the destruction of many other Kings for the like sin.
LIke as Pharaoh by his unjust and outrageous persecuting the children of God,
made him self so guilty of Gods wrath, that he deserved to be utterly
destroyed with the greatest part of his people: so also after th^^r miraculous
deliverance, whosoever labored either to hurt, hinder, or resist them, did no
less incur Gods displeasure and fierce wrath against them, wherewith they
were consumed: Whereof, the overthrow and discomsiture of Amalech is a plain
example: who admit, all the great wonders which God had done for the Israelites
in Egypt, and in the red sea; Exodus 17.
whereof the brute being blown into all corners of the earth, he could not be
ignorant of; yet was he so malicious and foolish hardy, as to take up armor
against them, and to meet them to bid them battle: but he and his wicked
accomplices were by Joshua and his poor people (though unwarlike and
unacquainted with such actions, lately crept out of bondage, wherein they had
been only exercised to make mortar and brick, and not to handle weapons)
discomfited and overthrown: for the Lord of hosts (who is the deuider of
victories to whom he pleases) at the fervent prayers of his servant Moses
fought for them, to the confusion of Amalech and all his train: And therefore
he commanded Moses to put this deed of his in writing, as a thing worthy to be
remembered: who also erected an altar in the same place, for a perpetual
monument of so noble a victory.

As Amalech, and for the like sin, Number. 2.1.
were Arad a king of the Canaanites, Sehon king of Amorites, and Og king of
Basan with their people and cities destroyed and rased down; So the Madianites
enterprising to withstand the foresaid Israelites, by the wicked and pernicious
counsel of Balaam, were subdued and put to the sword, Number 31.
even five kings of them together, not one escaping save the young virgins,
which had never committed fornication with man.

CHAP. IX. More Examples like unto the former.
AFter that the children of Israel had continued a season peaceably in the land
of Canaan which the Lord had bestowed upon them, Indg. 3.
then did Eglon king of Moab rise up and subdued them by war, and tyrannized
over them eighteen years. And although it was Gods will that they should be
thus chastised, because of their corruption and iniquities nevertheless this
Moabite (his rod) he caused (in regard of his love to his people) to be slain
by Ahud an Israelite, as he was taking his ease in his chamber. In like manner
was his wrath stirred up against Iabin king of Asor, who had oppressed Israel
twenty years; whose army though it was great and well appointed, was
notwithstanding by Baracs handful of men, under the conduct and rule of
Deborah the Prophetess, wonderously discomfited; in such sort, that of all the
multitude, there remained not one that felt not the edge of the sword, except
Sisera their captain: who escaping from the battle by taking him to his
heels, turned in by chance into the house of a woman called Iahel, who hating
him, as he slept with a hammer fastened a nail into his temples: and thus
escaping from those whom he feared, he was murdered by her whom he trusted.
And so this valiant warrior as he was overcome in battle by the conduct of a
woman so was he put to death by the hand of a woman.

That which happened to the Madianites in the time of Gedeon, Judge. 7.
is admirable and very strange; who, being furnished with a mighty army of
soldiers with the Amalekites and other their allies, to destroy Israel, were so
scarred and scattered at the sound of the trumpets and brightness of torches, of
three huudred men at the most that were with Gedeon, that through the
marvelous astonishment they were in, they turned their blades into their own
bosoms, and murdered one another till the greatest part of them were destroyed;
and the residue being put to flight and pursued by the men of Ephraim, two of
their kings Oreb and Zeb were taken and slain.

A while after it came to pass that the princes of the Philistims, Judge. 16.
who had oppressed the people of God by the space of 40 years, being assembled
together with all their people in the temple of Dagon their god, even then when
after their sacrifices they thought to make themselves most sport and pastime
with poor Samson, whose eyes in mockery and contemp^ they had put out, were
altogether massacred by the fall of the house which Samso^ by his strength
pulled upon their heads: which was the greatest overthrow that beforetimes by
his means they had received.

In the reign of Saul king of Israel, 1. Sam. 15.
Agag king of Amalech the posterity or those that laid wait for Israel in the
desert as they came out of Egypt, were by Saul (following the commandment of
the Lord) set upon, who running upon him and his people made a great slaughter
and butchery of them, not sparing man, woman, nor child, except the king only,
whom he took to mercy and led captive; which he ought not to have done. This
captain being thus spared by one that was but little better then himself,
could not so escape, for the Prophet Samuel became the executioner of Gods
vengeance upon him, since Saul refused it: and with his own hand slew him, even
then when he thought he should live.

A little while after, Golia a giant of the Philistims, who as well through the
hugenes of his stature and strength of body, 1. Sam. 17.
as thorough the horrible cruelty which appeared in him, seemed in man's eyes
invincible, proudly and presumptuously defied the army of the living God,
offering and daring any one man of Israel to enter combat with him: this proud
fellow, was notwithstanding all his brags, by young and unarmed David, save a
little stick and a few stones which he had in his hands, vanquished and trod
under foot: for he gave this great beast such a knock with one of his stones
on the forhead, that at the first blow he tumbled him groueling on the earth,
and quickly leaping upon him, caught hold of his huge sword, and therwithall
cut off his monstrous head: which the Philistims perceiving, turned their backs
and fled, and were pursued and slain by the Israelites.

CHAP. X. More examples like unto the former.
IN the time of Achah, Benhadad king of Syria accompanied with two and thirty
kings, 1. King 20.
came very proudly against Israel, as it were in despite of God to bid him
battle: but it turned to his own shame and confusion, being first
dishonourably put to flight by two hundred and thirty servants of the Princes
of Israel: (a small handful to encounter so mighty an army:) And secondly,
returning to seek revenge, found the loss of an hundred thousand footmen at
one clap, besides seven and twenty thousand which escaping by flight, were
crushed in pieces by the ruin of a wall in the city Aphec. And so this brave
gallant that erst bragged that the gold and silver of Israel, yea their wives
and children were his, was now glad to fly for his life among the rest, and in
his return to hide himself all dismayed in a little chamber; and from thence
(being advised thereto by his servants) to send to entreat Achab for his own
life, which a little before thought him sure of the lives of all Israel. Yet
for all this ere long he enterprised a new practice against the Prophet
Elizaeus, 2. King. 6. 2. King. 7.
and besieged also the city of Samaria so long, that certain women
(constrained by extreme famine) devoured their children: but in the end he was
compelled (through fearful terror which God sent into his army by the noise
of infinite chariots and horses which sounded in their ears, as if some
puissant host of men of war had been marching toward them) to forsake the
siege and fly with all his forces, leaving behind them their tents, horses,
cariages, vitailes, and munitions, to be a prey for them that pursued them not.
And lastly falling sick, Hazael one of his own servants that succeeded him in
the kingdom, 2. King 8.
to the end he might dispatch him quickly and without tumult, early in the
morning took a thick cloth dipped in water, and spreading it over his face,
stifled him to death.

2. Chron. 20.
When the Moabites and Ammonites rose up in arms against Iehosaphat king of
Judah, as soon as this good king humbled him self together with all his people
before the face of God by fasting and prayer, forthwith God sent such a
giddiness of spirit amongst his enemies, that they killed one another: and the
men of Judah without being troubled with fighting, gathered the spoil which
they had scattered, and enriched themselves with their relics.

Aman, Ester. 7. and 9.
promoted in honor and credit above all the Princes of the court of king
Assuerus, conceived so deadly an hatred against the poor dispersed Jews
(being at that time the only Church of God) that maliciously he conspired in
one day to destroy and put to death the whole nation, to the very women and
infants: and in accomplishing this his purpose, he mightily abused the
authority of the king, whom he falsely informed that this nation would not be
subject to his ordinances and laws, which his other people were subject unto:
and that therefore he ought not to permit and suffer them any longer. But God
that carries always a watchful eye over his Church, and knows how to break
and dash all the enterprises of his enemies, brought all this wretches purposes
to naught, by preserving miraculously those whom he would have destroyed, and
making him do reverence to Mardocheus whom he especially sought to bring to
infamy, and for whom he had of purpose provided a gibbet to hang him on, but
was hanged thereon himself, with ten of his sons: beside, all those which
had conspired with him against the Jews, were upon the same day which they had
set down for their massacre, by the kings commandment slain, by the hands of
them whom they had appointed to the slaughter.

Balthazar king of Babylon as he was feasting among his princes, Dan. 5.
commanded amidst his cups the golden and silver vessels which Nabuchadnezzar
had taken out of the temple of Jerusalem to be brought, that both he, his
princes, and his wives and concubines might drink therein, exalting himself
thus against the Lord of heaven, and boasting in his Idols of earth: therefore,
God being stirred up to wrath against him, appointed his destruction even
whilst he thus drank and made merry in the midst of his iolity, and caused a
strange and fearful sign to appear before his eyes: a bodilesse handwriting
upon the wall over against the candlestick: The words of which writing
portended the destruction of his kingdom, which presently ensued, for the very
same night he was murdered, and the scepter seized upon by Darius king of Media.

CHAP. XI. Of the kings which in hatred to the law and religion of God,
afflicted the Jews in the time of the Machabees.
1. Match. 2. and 6.
ANtiochus by surname Epiphanes or excellent (though by truer report of people
contemptuously entitled the furious) king of Asia, being venimously enraged
against the Jews, began at the first marueilously to oppress them, to rob and
spoil their temple, and to slaughter the people. About ten years after
deceiving the poor people with fair and smooth words, couers of most vile and
wretched treason, whilst they imagined no mischief, he set upon them in such
cruel sort, that the loss and desolation which they endured at that time was
inestimable: for besides the destruction of Jerusalem their city, the slaughter
of infinite multitudes of their people, and the captivity of women and
infants; as if all these were not enough, there was yet another misery to make
up the full sum, worse then all the rest, which was this: The cursed tyrant
seeing his purpose not to take the full effect, commanded every where that all
his subjects (I mean the Jews) should forsake and abjure the law of God, and
be united into one religion with the infidels. By means of which edict, the
religion of God was defaced, the books of his law rent and burned; and those
with whom any such books were found, rigorously put to death: Which fearful
cruelty when the Jews perceived, it caused many of them to wax faint hearted,
and to give themselves over to wallow in the durty fashions of the
uncircumcised idolaters: and in their madness to subscribe to the unjust laws
of the vile monster. Now after he had committed all these outrages, he was
repulsed with dishonor from the city Elymais in Persia which he went about to
spoil and rob, and forced to fly to Babylon, where after tidings of the
overthrow of his two armies in Judea, with grief and despite he ended his days.

Antiochus the son of this wretched father, 1. Match. 6.
succeeding him as in his kingdom, so in wickedness, perjury, and disloialty,
when, to the end to consult about his own affairs, he concluded a peace with
the Jews, and by solemn oath as well of himself as his princes, confirmed
the free exercise of their religion; behold suddenly he falsified his plighted
and sworn faith, and undid all that ever he had done: but it was not long ere
he also was overtaken by the army of Demetrius, and together with Lysias his
governor put to death.

A while after reigned Alexander his brother, 1. Match. 11.
who whilst he was encumbred with the troubles of Cilicia that revolted from
him, the king of Egypt his father in law came traitorously to forestall him of
his kingdom, took his wife, and gave her to his deadliest enemy, and
afterward gave him battle, discomfited his forces, and drove him to fly into
Arabia for safety: where, in stead of help he found an hatchet to chop off his
head, which was sent for a present to gratify the king of Egypt withal.

Not long after, Antiochus his son recovered, 1. Match. 13.
the scepter of his father: but alas his reign endured but a small space, for
being yet but a young child, he was slain by Triphon, in the way as he led him
to war against the Jews: and thus perished the cursed race of Antiochus, which
felt Gods wrath upon it, even to the third generation.

Antiochus the son of Demetrius, (of whom mention was made but a little before)
after he had chased Triphon from the kingdom of Asia, which he usurped, 2.
Match. 5.
and broken the league which he had made with the Jews, gave himself wholly
to work them misceiefe. Therefore coming against Jerusalem, he took it by
force, commanding his soldiers to put all to death that were within the same:
So that within three days there was such a massacre of young and old, men,
women, and children, that the number of the slain arose to fourscore thousand
carcasses. After this, having executed many more villainies against this people,
in so much as to make them renounce the law of God, putting them cruelly to
death that did not obey his commandment, It came to pass that this cruel
tyrant was first of all pur to flight by the inhabitants of Persepolis, a city
of Persia, for going about to rob their temple of their treasures: next
endamaged by an overthrow of his army in Judea: which he no sooner understood,
but he took counsel in his fury, how to be revenged on Jerusalem, and belched
forth bitter threats against it. But in the mean while the Lord stroke him
with a sudden and incurable plague, and surprised him with a horrible torment
of his entrails. Howbeit for all this, he ceased not his malicious enterprisse,
but hasted forward his iourny toward the Jews, with such egernesse, that in
the way he fell out of his chariot, and bruised so his body, that it became
putrified and so full of corruption, that very vermin scrawled out thereof, and
the rotten flesh dropped peecemeale away; no man, no nor himself being able to
endure the stinch thereof. Then was he constrained in the midst of his torments
to confess, that it was meet that he should submit himself unto God, that he
which is mortal ought not to exalt himself so high, as to compare with the
immortal God: and in this estate this reprobate ended his wicked days by a
strange and most miserable kind of death.

CHAP. XII. Of those that persecuted the son of God, and his Church.
IF they who in the law injured and persecuted the Church of God, were punished
according to their deserts, as we have already heard; is it any marvel then,
if the enemies and persecuters of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, which
labor by all means to discountenance and frustrate his religion, and to
oppress his Church, do feel the heavy and fearful vengeance of God upon them
for their wickedness and unbelief? No verily: for he that honoreth not the
son, honors not the father which sent him, and is guilty therefore before
God of impiety and profaneness. From this hamous crime king Herod in no wise
can be exempted, that caused all the infants of Bethlehem of two years old and
under to be cruelly murdered, Mat. 2.
in hope thereby to put the true Messiah and savior of the world to death. For
which deed accompanied with many other strange cruelties: This example
belongs also (in regard of cruelty) to the sixth commandment. Lib. 2. cap.
11.17. Book of the Jewish antiquity. chap. 8
as by killing the ordinary judges of the house of David, and his own wife and
children, this caitife was tormented with sundry intolerable griefs: and at
last devoured by an horrible and most fearful death. For (as Josephus
reports) his body was boiled, and his bowels gnawne in two by a soft and slow
fire fretting inwardly without any outward appearance of heat: besides the
ravenous and insatiable desire of eating, which so possessed him, that without
chewing, his meat in whole lumpes descended into his body, devouring it so
fast as it could be thrown into his mouth, and never ceasing to farse his
greedy throat with continual sustenance: moreover, his feet were so swollen and
puffed up with such a phlegm, that a man might see through them: his privy parts
so rotten and full of vermin, and his breath so stinking, that few or none
durst approach near unto him: yea his own servants forsook him. Now lying in
this wretched plight, when this wicked man saw no remedy could be found to
assuage his grief, he went about to kill himself, and being not able to
perform it, he was constrained to endure all the panges of a most horrible,
lingering, and languishing death, and at last mad and miserable bestraught of
sense and reason to end his days.

As for Herod the Tetrarch, Luke. 9, 7.
surnamed Antipas (who to please Herodias had caused John Baptist to be
beheaded) when he had likewise prepared snares for our Saviors feet, and being
sent to him by Pilate to quit himself and gratify him withal, had ieasted
and mocked at him his belly full, This example in regard of divorce belongs
to the seueth commandment. Lib. 2. cap. 29. Joseph of the Jewish antiquity,
book, 8. chap. 9.
behold his reproaches and mockes (was he never so subtle) turned into his own
bosom: For first after that his army had been discomfited by the soldiers
of king Aretas, whose daughter (in regard of Herodias his brother Philips wife)
he had repudiated: a further shame and dishonor befell him, even to be
deprived of his royal dignity: and not only to be brought into a low and base
estate, but also being robbed of his goods, to be banished into a far country,
and there to make an end of the rest of his life.

As touching Pilate the governor of Judea he did so excel in wickedness and
injustice, Eusebius.
that notwithstanding the restraint of his own conscience, the law of civil
equity, and the advertisement of his own wife; yet he condemned Christ Jesus
the just and innocent to the death of the cross: albeit he could not but know
the power of his miracles, the renown whereof was spread into all places. But
ere long having been constrained to erect the image of the Emperor Caligula
in the Temple of Jerusalem to be worshipped, he was sent for to make personal
appearance at Rome, to answer to certain accusations of cruelty which were
by the Jews objected against him: And in his journey being afflicted in
conscience, Eusebius. Eutrop. lib. 7.
with the number and weight of his misdeeds, like a desperate man to prevent
the punishment which he feared, willingly offered violence to his own life and
killed himself. The first Emperor that took in hand to persecute the
Christians, was Nero the tyrant: picking a quarrel against them for setting
the city on fire, Tertul. Nicephor. 8. Commandment. calumniation. Lib. 2. cap.
44.
which being himself guilty of, he charged them withal as desirous to find
out any occasion to do them hurt: wherefore under pretense of the same crime,
discharinging his own guilt upon their backs, he exposed the^ to the fury of
the people, that tormented them very sore, as if they had been common burners
and destroiers of cities, and the deadliest enemies of mankind: Tacit. Annal.
Lib. 5.
Hereupon the poor innocents were apprehended, and some of them clad with skins
of wild beasts, were torn in pieces by dogs; others crucified, or made
bonefires of on such heaps, that the flame arising from their bodies, served in
stead of torches for the night. To conclude, such horrible cruelty was used
toward the^, that many of their very enemies did pity their miseries. But at
last this wretch the causer of all, seeing himself in danger to be murdered
by one appointed for that purpose, (a just reward for his horrible and unjust
dealing) hastened his death by killing himself, Suet. Refer this also to the
24 chap. of this book. Suet. Eutrop.
as it shall be showed more at large in the 2. book.

The author of the second persecution against the Christians was Domitian, who
was so puffed up and swollen with pride, that he would needs ascribe unto himself
the name of God. Against this man rose up his household servants, who by his
wives consent slew him with daggers, in his privy chamber: his body was buried
without honor, his memory cursed to posterity, and his ensigns and trophies
thrown down and defaced. Traian, who albeit in all things else, and in the
government of the Empire also, showed himself a good and sage Prince; yet did
he dash and bruise himself against this stone with the rest, and was reckoned
the third persecutor of the church of Christ: for which cause he underwent also
the cruel vengeance of God, and felt his heavy hand upon him: for first he fell
into a palsy, Dion.
and when he had lost the use of his senses, (persuading himself that he was
poisoned) got a dropsy also, and so died in great anguish.

Hadrian in the 9 year of his Empire caused ten thousand Christians to be
crucified in Armenia at one time; and after that ceased not to stir up a very
whot persecution against the^ in all places: Mandat. 7. Liq. 2. cap. 12. Spart.
But God persecuted him and that to his destruction: first with an issue of
blood wherewith he was so weakened and disquieted, that oftentimes he would
feign have made away himself: next with the consumption of the lunges and
lights which he spate out of his mouth continaully: and thirdly with an
insatiable dropsy: so that seeing himself in this horrible torment, he desired
poiso^ to haste^ his death, or a knife to make quick riddance: but when all
those means were kept back, he was enforced to endure still, and at last to die
in great misery.

Whilst Marcus Antonius surnamed Verus, swaied the Empire, there were exceeding
cruelties set abroach against the poor Christians every where, but especially
at Lions and Vienna in Daulphine (as Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical history
records: Eusebius. Spart.
) Wherefore he wanted not his punishment, for he died of an apoplexy after he
had lien speechless three days.

After that Seuerus had proclaimed himself a professed enemy to Gods church,
his affairs began to decline, and he found himself pestered with diverse
extremities, and set upon with many wars: and at length assaulted with such
an extreme pain throughout his whole body, that languishing and consuming,
he desired often to poison himself: and at last died in great distress.
Vitellius Saturninus, one of his Leiutenants in those exploits, became blind:
Tert. as Scap.
another called Claudius Herminianus governor of Capadocia, who in hatred of
his own wife that was a Christian, had extremely afflicted many of the
faithful: was afterward himself afflicted with the pestilence, persecuted
with vermin bred in his own bowels, and devoured of them alive in most
miserable sort. Now lying in this misery, he desired not to be known or
spoken of by any, least the Christians that were left vnmurthered, should
rejoice at his destruction, confessing also that those plagues did justly
betide him for his cruelties sake.

Decius in hatred of Philip his predecessor that had made some profession of
Christianity, wrought tooth and nail to destroy the church of Christ, using
all the cruelties and torments which his wit could devise, against all those
which before time had offered themselves to be persecuted for that cause. But
his devilish practices were cut short by means of the war which he waged
against the Scythians: Eusebius. book 7. chap. 1. Ecclesi. hist.
wherein when he had reigned not full two years, his army was discomfited,
and he with his son cruelly killed.

Valerian albeit in the beginning of his Empire, he showed himself somewhat
mild and gentle toward the professors of religion, yet afterward he became
their deadly enemy: but when he had terribly persecuted them in his dominions,
it was not long ere he was taken prisoner in the Persian wars, being
threescore and ten years old, and made a slave to his conqueror all the rest
of his life: In the sermon of the congregation of saints. Eusebius. histor.
ecclesiast. book 7. chap. 30.
And whose condition was so miserable, that Sapor king of Persia, used his
back as a block or stirrup to mount upon his horse. Yea he dealt so cruelly
with the poor old man (as Eusebius testifies) that to make up the full number
of his miseries, he caused him to be flaine alive.

Aurelian being upon point to trouble the quiet of the church, which it a while
enioied under the Emperor Galien; even whilst he was devising new practices
against it, a thunderbolt fell from heaven at his feet, which so amassed him,
that his malicious and bloodthirstie mind was somewhat rebated and repressed
from doing that which he pretended: until that returning to his old bent, and
perseuering to pursue his purpose, when Gods thunder could not terrify him,
Vepis. Eutrop. Nicephor.
he stirred up his own servants to cut his throat.

Dioclesian went another way to work, for he did not set abroach all his
practices at one push, but first assaied by subtle means to make those that
were in his army to renounce their faith, then by open proclamation commanded
that their churches should be rased and beaten down, Ruffin.
their bibles burned and torn in pieces: that they that were Magistrates, or
bore any public office in the Commonwealth, if they were Christians should be
deposed: and that all bondmen that would forsake their profession should be
enfranchised. When he had thus left no devise unpracticed that might further
to abolish and destroy the religion of Christ, and perceiving that
notwithstanding all his malice and cruel rage, it every day (through the
wonderful constancy of Martyrs) increased and grew even against the hair,
with very spite and anger he gave up the Empire. And lastly when he had been
tormented with diverse and strange diseases, and that his house had been set
on fire with lightning, and burned with fire from heaven, and he himself so
scarred with thunder, that he knew not where to hide him, he sell mad and
killed himself. There was joined to this man in the government of the Empire,
one Maximian, whose cruelty and tyranny against the Christians was so
outrageous also, Mandat. 7. Lib. 2. cap. 12.
that upon a solemn feastiuall day, when infinite numbers of them were
assembled together at Nicomedia in a temple to serve God, he sent a band of
Atheists to enclose them and burn the temple and them together, as they indeed
did: for there were consumed at that bondfire (as Nicephorus writes) twenty
thousand persons. Eusebius. histor. ecclesiast. 7. and 8. chap. 16. Nicephor. lib.
7. chap 6.
In like sort dealt he with a whole city in Phrigia, which after he had long
besieged, he caused to be burnt to cinders with all the inhabitants therein,
But the end of this wretch was like his life, even miserable: for lying a while
sick of a grievous disease, the very vermin and such horrible stink came
forth of his body, that for shame and grief he hung himself.

Maximinus that reigned Emperor in the East, Nicephor. 7.22.
was constrained to interrupt and make cease his persecution which he had begun
by means of a dangerfull and grievous sickness, and to confirm a general
peace to all Christians in his dominions by public edicts. But (alas) it was
so brittle that it lasted but six months: for even then he sought all means
possible again to trouble and disquiet their rest, and sent forth a new edict
quite contrary to the former, importing their utter destruction. And thus being
nothing amended, but rather made worse by his sickness it assailed him afresh
in such sort, that every day growing in extremity, as he grew in cruelty: it
at last brought him to his death: his carcass being all rotten and full of
corruption and worms. Against the Gentiles.
S. Chrysostom writes of him that the apple of his eye fell out before he
died.

Macentius and Licinius the one Emperor of Italy, the other of the East,
perceiving how the Emperor Constantine that reigned in the West, was had in
great reputation, for maintaining the cause of the Christians, began also to do
the like: but by and by their malice and hypocrisy discovered it self when
they undertook to trouble and afflict those whom before they seemed to favor,
for which cause Constantine taking arms against them, destroyed them both one
after another, for Maxentius thinking to save himself upon a bridge on Tiber,
was deceived by the breaking of the bridge, and so drenched and drowned in the
water. Licinius was taken and put to death. And thus two tyrants ended their
days for persecuting the church of Christ.

Lanques chron.
In the tenth year of the persecution of Dioclesian, Galerius his chief
minister and instrument in that practice, fell into a grievous sickness,
having a sore risen in the nether part of his belly which consumed his privy
members, from whence swarmed great plenty of worms, engendered by the
putrefaction. This disease could not be helped by any surgery or physic:
wherefore he confessed that it justly happened unto him for his monstrous
cruelty toward the Christians, and called in his proclamations which he had
published against the^. Howbeit notwithstanding he died miserably, and as some
write slew himself.

CHAP. XIII. More examples of persecutors.
SAint Bartholmew one of the twelve Apostles after he had preached Christ
Jesus unto the Indians, and delivered them the Gospel written by Matthew, and
had converted many unto the faith: albeit the miracles which he wrought were
strange and supernatural, (for he restored many diseased persons to their
health, Hieron. in catalogo.
and cleansed king Polemius his daughter from an unclean spirit wherewith he
was possessed) yet in regard that he destroyed their idol Astaroth and
bewraied the subtilties of Satan, he was by Astiages, Polemius yoonger
brother, at the instigation of the idolatrous priests first cruelly beaten with
clubs, after flaied, and last of al beheaded. But within 30 days after both
the wicked king, and the sacrilegious priests were possessed with Devils and
brought to a wretched and miserable death. Theodoret. lib. 4. chap. 26.
Aphraates that heavenly Philosopher, going out of his cloister toward the
Temple to feed the flock of Christ with some wholesome food of sound
doctrine, and being perceived by the Emperor Valens and demanded whether he
went; he answered to pray for him and his kingdom. Tripartit hist. lib. 8.
chap, 4. Nicephor. lib. 11. chap. 25.
I but said the Emperor it were more convenient for thee that professest thy
self a Monk to remain at home in contemplation, then to stray abroad: true
answered this holy man, if Christ's sheep enioied peace: but as it becomes an
honest matrone to sit still within doors, nevertheless if her house were on
fire, and the flame environed her, should she not stir to help to quench it?
And should I lie still and see my country set on fire by thy persecution?
Whereat the Emperor being netled, threatened him with death: and one of his
chamberlaines taunting bim for his boldness, used him most currishly. But
presently as he went to the bathes to make them ready for the Emperor, the
hand of God stroke him with an apoplexy, that he fell down dead into the waters.

Under the Empire of Julian the Apostate, all they that either conspired or
practiced the death of Cyrillus a Deacon of Heliopolis situate near to
Libanus, Theodor. lib. 3. chap. 7.
came to a miserable end: for after that Constantine was deceased, by whose
authority the holy Martyr had broken down many of their Images and Idols, the
abominable idolators did not only murder him, but also devoured his liver
with bread, as if it had been the sweetest morsel of meat in the world. But
the alseeing eye of God, saw their villainy, and his reuengefull rod bruised them
in pieces: for their teeth wherewith they chewed that unnatural food, fell all
out of their heads; and their tongues wherewith they tasted it, rotted and
consumed to nothing: and lastly their eyes which beheld it, failed them, and
they became blind. And thus were they all served not one excepted, bearing
justly the marks of Gods wrath for so inhumane and unnatural a deed.

Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 7.
At Tire a city of Paenicia under the reign of Dioclesian, many Christians that
stoutly professed and maintained the faith and teligion of Christ Jesus, were
after many tortures and distractions exposed to wild beasts to be devoured,
as bears, libards, vvild bores, and bulls: but the savage beasts though made
fierce and furious by fires and swords, yet (I know not by what secret
instinct) refused once to touch them or to come near them, but turned their
teene upon the infidels that were without, and came to set them on upon the
saints, and tore many of them in pieces in their steads. Howbeit although they
escaped the chawes of vvild beasts, yet they escaped not the swords of them
that were more savage then any beasts: and though the bowelles of bears
refused to entombe them, yet were they emtombed in the floods: and crowned
with the crown of sacred martyrdom.

Processus and Martianus, keepers of the prison wherein the Apostles Peter and
Paul were enclosed at Rome, seeing the miracles which were wrought by their
hands, believed in Christ, and together with seven and forty other prisoners
were baptized: which when Paulinus the Judge perceived, he enioined them to lay
aside their conscience, and offer sacrifice to idols: But they readier to obey
God then man, Vincentius lib. 10. cap. 56. Petrus de natalibus.
could neither by threats nor violence be brought to it, but chose rather to
be beaten with clubs or consumed with fire, or scourged with scorpions as they
were, then to yield to deny their maker by doing worship to devilish and
monstrous idols. But that Judge the procurer of their martyrdomes, shortly
after became himself an object of Gods wrath: when his eye sight failed him,
and an evil spirit so possessed him and tormented him, that in the extremity
of terrors and grief he breathed out ere long his last and miserable breath.

Nicephorus reports how the Emperor Traian having caused five holy Virgins
to be burned for standing in the profession of the truth, Lib. 3. cap. 23.
commanded certain vessels to be made of their ashes mingled with brass, and
dedicated them to the service of a public bath: but the bath that before time
instilled a wholesome and heathfull vapor into men's bodies, now became
pernicious and fatal to them: for all that washed themselves therein, felt
presently such a giddiness in their brains, and such a dimnesse of sight, that
they fell down dead forthwith: The cause of which mischief being perceived by
Traian, he melted again the Virgin molded vessels, and erected five statues
to the honor of them, so choking as it were one superstition with another, to
his own eternal infamy and disgrace.

As Agrippus a young man of fifteen years of age, Bergomiensis lib. 8.
being apprehended by the inhabitants of Preneste, and grievously tormented for
refusing to offer sacrifice to their idols: and when all would not serve to
shake the foundation of his faith, which was builded upon a rock, he was
condemned and executed to death. Behold the Judge that pronounced the sentence
fell down dead from his throne, before the face of the world, even whilst the
young man was in the midst of his torments, and by his example made known to
all men how odious such cruel persecutors are in the sight of him that judges
the earth, and entrolleth the mighty Princes and potentates of the same.

In the Empire of Julian the Apostate, the Lord sent such horrible earthquakes
upon the world, that what for the fall of houses and ruptures of fields,
neither city nor country was safe to abide in; besides, such an extreme
drought dried up the moisture of the earth, that victuals were very geason and
dear. These plagues Theodoret avouches to have fallen upon the world for the
impiety of Julian and the miserable persecution of Christians. Lib. 4. cap. 4.


Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 21. and 22.
The Emperor Gallus had good success in his affairs whilst he abstained
from sheading the blood of Christians, but as soon as he gave himself over
unto that villainy, his prosperity, kingdom, and life diminished and
decreased at once: for within two years he and his son V^lusianus in the
war against Aemilian were both slain, through the defection of his soldiers,
who in the point of necessity forsook him. Beside the Lord in his time sent
upon the provinces of Rome a general and contagious pestilence, which lasted
whole ten years without intermission, to make satisfaction for the much
innocent blood which was spilled amongst them.

Phil. Melanct. chron. lib. 4. Sebast franc. chron. Polon.
Arnolphus the fourescorth Emperor raged like a Tiger against all men, but
especially against those that professed the religion and name of Christ Jesus,
for which cause the Lord stirred up a woman the wife of Guido to minister unto
him the dregs of his wrath in a poisoned cup, by means whereof such a
rottenness possessed all his members, that lice and worms issuing out
continually, he died most miserably in Oringe, a city of Bauarie, the twelfth
year of his reign.

Philip Melan. chron. lib. 5.
Baiaset the Turk, to what a miserable and ludibrious end came he to, for his
outrageous hatred against all Christendom, but especially against
Constantinople, which he had brought to so low an eb, that they could scarce
have resisted him any longer, had not Tamerlane the Tartarian revoked him from
the siege and bidden him leave to assail others and look unto his own?
Campofulus lib. 9. cap. 5.
And indeed he welcomed him so kindly, that he soon took him prisoner, and
binding him with chains of gold, carried him up and down in a cage for
aspectacle, using his back for a footstool to get upon his horse by. And thus
God plaugeth one Tyrant by another, and all for the comfort of his chosen.

Gensericus king of the Vandals, Phil. Melan. chron. lib. 3.
exercised cruel tyranny against the professors of the truth. So did
Honoricus the second also: but both of them reaped their just deserts; for
Gensericus died being possessed with a spirit: And Honoricus being so rotten
and putrified that one member dropped off after another. Greg. Taron. lib. 2.
cap. 3.
Some say that he gnew off his own flesh with his teeth.

Autharis the twelfth King of Lumbardie, Paulus Diaconus. lib. 3. cap. 18. de
gestis L^rgo bard.
forbad children to be baptized or instructed in the Christian faith; seeking
by that means to abolish and pluck down the kingdom of Christ; but he
reigned not long, for ere six years were complet, he died with poison at
Pauia: And so he that thought to undermine Christ Jesus, was undermined
himself most deservedly in the year of our Lord. 592.

When Arcadius the Emperor through the persuasion of certain envious fellows
and his wife Endoxia, Euagriur. lib. 5. cap. 34.
had banished John Chrysostom bishop of Constantinople into Bosphorus; the
next night there arose such a terrible earthquake, that the Empress and the
whole City was sore affrighted therewith, so that the next morrow messengers
after messengers were sent without ceasing till they had brought him back
again out of exile, Mandat. 9. Calumniation. lib. 2. cap. 44.
and his accusers were all punished for their vvrongfull accusation. Thus it
pleased God to testify the innocence of his servant even by terrifying his
enemies.

Smaragdus an exarch of Italy, was transported by a Devil for tyrannising
over Christians in the first year of the Empire of Mauritius. Paul. Diacon.
lib 3. cap. 12. de gestis Longab. Cent. 6. cap. 3. Anton. lib. 15. cap. 15.
Mamucha a Sarasen being equal to Pharao in persecuting the church of God, God
made him equal to him also in the manner of his destruction: for as he
returned from the spoil of the monastery of Cassime and Messana and the
slaughter of many Christians, the Lord caused the sea to swallow up his whole
army even an hundred ships, Paul. Diacon. lib. 21.
so that few or none escaped. Another time even in the year 719 they were
miraculously consumed with famine, sword, pestilence, water, and captivity,
and al for their infestious ranckor and tyranny toward Christians, for whom
the famine spared, the sword devoured, whom both these touched not, the
pestilence eat up: and they that escaped all three, yet perished in the
waters: and ten ships that escaped the waters were taken by the Romans and
the Syrians: surely an egregious sign of Gods heavy wrath and displeasure. To
conclude, there was never any that set themselves against the church of God,
but God set himself against them by some notable judgment: so that some were
murdered by their subjects, as Bluso king of the Vandals: others by their
enemies, as Vdo Prince of Sclauonia: some by their wives, Helmold. cap. 24.
Sclauon. and cap. 34.
as Cruco another Sclauonian Prince: others discomfited in war, as Abbas the
king of Hungaria: some destroyed by their own horses, Bonfinus.
as Lucius the Emperor; who had first put his own daughter because she was a
Christian, amongst the same horses. And generally few persecutors escaped
without some evident and markable destruction.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Jews that persecuted Christ.
BY how much the offense of the Jews was more heinous not only in despising
and rejecting the Lord of glory, whom God had sent amongst them for their
salvation, but also in being so wicked as to put him to death: by so much the
more has God shed his fearful indignation upon them: as at many other times,
so especially, by that great calamity and desolation which they abode at their
last destruction, begun by Vespasian, and perfected by Titus: which was so
great and lamentable, as the like was never heard of until this day: for if
the sacking and overthrow of Jerusalem, then when Jeremy the Prophet made his
book of Lamentations over it, was reputed more grievous then the subversion of
Sodom which perished suddenly: How much more then is this last destruction
without all comparison, by reason of those horrible and strange miseries, which
were there both suddenly and in continuance of time committed? Neither truly is
there any history which contains a description of so many miseries as this
does: as it may appear by Josephus record of it. For after that they had been
afflicted in diverse countries, and tossed up and down by the deputies a long
while, there were slain at Caesarea in one day, twenty thousand: at Alexandria
another time, fifty thousand: at Zabulon and Ioppe, eight thousand and four
hundred, besides the burning of the two towns: at Damascus ten thousand that
had their throats cut. As for Jerusalem, when it had a long time endured the
brunt of the war both within and without, it was pinched with so sore a
famine, Joseph. of the wars of the Jews, lib. 2. cap. 19, 21, 22, 23. Lib.
6. cap. 16. Lib. 7. cap. 7.8. Lib. 6. c. 16.
that the dung of oxen served some for meat: others fed upon the leather of
old shoes and buckles: and diverse women were driven to the extremity to boil
and eat their own children: Many thinking to save their lives by flying to
the enemy, were taken and slit in pieces, in hope to find gold and silver in
their guts: in one night two thousand were thus piteously dealt withal: and at
last the whole city was by force taken, and the holy Temple consumed by fire.
And this in general was the miserable issue of that lamentable war: during
which, fourscore and seventeen thousand Jews were taken prisoners, and
eleven hundred thousand slain: for within the city were enclosed from the
beginning to the ending all those that were assembled together from all
quarters of the earth, to keep the Passover as their custom was. As touching
the prisoners, some were carried to Rome in triumph: others were here and there
massacred at their conquerours wills: somes lot it was to be torn in pieces and
devoured of wild beasts: others were constrained to march in troops against
their fellows, and kill one another as if they had been enemies. All which
evils came upon them for the despite and fury which they used toward the Son
of God and our Savior: and that was the cause why he foreseeing this
desolation, wept over Jerusalem and said, That it should be besieged on every
side, and rased to the ground, and that not one stone should be left upon
another, because it knew not the time of her visitation. Likewise said he to
the women that bewailed him as he was led to the cross, That they should not
weep for him, but for themselves and their children, because of the days of
sorrow which were to come, wherein the barren and those that had no children,
and the dugs that never suckled should be counted happy. So horrible and
pitiful was the destruction of this people, that God would not suffer any of
his own children to be wrapped in their miseries, nor to perish with this
perverse and unbelieving nation: for (as Eusebius reports) they were a little
before the arrival of these mischiefs advertised from heaven by the especial
providence of God to forsake the city, and retire into some far country
where none of these evils might come near them. This example belongs also to
the contempt of the word, Lib. 1. cap. 34.
The relikes of this wretched people that remained after this mighty tempest of
Gods wrath, were dispersed and scattered throughout all nations under heaven,
being subject to them with whom they soiourned, without king, prince, Judge,
or magistrate to lead and guide them, or to redress their wrongs; but were
altogether at the discretion and commandment of the lords of those countries
wherein they made their abode: so that their condition and kind of life is at
this day so vile and contemptible (as experience shows) that no nation in the
world is half so miserable, which is a manifest badge of Gods vengeance yet
abiding upon them.

And yet for all this, these dispersed relics ceased not to vomit out the
foam of their malice against Christ, it being so deep rooted an evil, and so
inueterate, that time nor reason could revoke them from it. And no marvel,
seeing that God uses to punish the greatest sins with other sins as with
the greatest punishment: so they having shut their eyes to the light when it
shined among them, are now given over to a reprobate and hardened sense:
otherwise it were not possible they should remain so obstinate. And albeit
(God be thanked) we have many conuerts of them, yet I dare say for the most
part they remain in malicious blindness, barking against and despiting both our
savior himself and all that profess his name, although their punishments
have bin still according to their deserts: as by these examples following shall
appear.

The Jews of Inmester a town lying betwixt Calchis and Antioch, being upon a
time celebrating their accustomed plays and feasts, in the midst of their
iollity, as their use is, they contumeliously reviled not only Christians, but
even Christ himself: for they got a Christian child and hung him upon a
cross, and after many mocks and taunts, making themselves merry at him, they
whipped him to death. What greater villainy could there be then this? or wherein
could these devils incarnate, show forth their malice more apparently, then
thus, not content once to have crucified Christ the Savior of the world, but
by imitation to perform it again, and as it were to make known, that if it
were undone, they would do it? So also handled they a boy called Simeon, of two
years and an half old in the year of our Lord 1476, Job Fincel. lib. 3
and another in Fretulium five years after that. But above all, they massacred
a poor carpenters son in Hungary in hatred of Christ, whom they falsely
supposed to be a carpenters son: for they cut in two all his veins, and sucked
out his blood with quils. And being apprehended and tortured, they confessed
that they had done the like at Thirna, 4 years before; and that they could not
be without Christian blood, for therwithall they anointed their priests. But at
all these times they suffered just punishment, for being still taken, they were
either hanged, burned, murdered, or put to some other cruel death, at the
discretion of the magistrates. Moreover, they would at diverse times buy the
holy host of some popish priest, and thrust it through with their knives, and
use it most despitefully: this did one Eleazarus in the year of our Lord 1492,
the 22 of October, but was burnt for his labor: And eight and thirty at
another time for the same villainy, by the Marquess Ioachinus: for the caitiues
would suffer themselves to be baptized for none other end, but more securely
to exercise their villainies.

Casp. Hedius lib. 3. cap. 6.
Another Jew is recorded in the year of our Lord 147 to have stolen the
picture of Christ out of a Church, and to have thrust it through many times
with his sword, whereout when blood miraculously issued, he amazed, would have
burned it, but being taken in the manner, the Christians stoned him to death.
The truth of which story, though I will not stand to auow, yet I doubt not but
it might be true, considering that either the devil might by his cunning so
foster and confirm their superstition: or rather that seeing Christ is the
subject of their religion as well as of ours, though after a corrupt and
sacrilegious form, and that the Jew did not so much aim at their religion,
as at Christ the subject of it, the Lord might show a miracle, not to establish
their error, but to confound the Jews impiety, especially in those young
years of the Church.

But that their impiety may be yet more discovered, I will here set down the
confession of one of their own nation, a Jew of Ratisbone, converted to the
faith, one very skillful in the Hebrew tongue: This man being asked many
questions about their superstition and ceremonies, answered very fittely: and
being demanded why they thirsted so after Christian men's blood, he said it
was a mystery only known to the Rabbines and highest persons: but that this
was their custom he knew, when any of them was ready to die, a Rabbine
anointed him with this blood, using these or such like words: If he that was
promised in the law and prophets has truly appeared, and if this Jesus
crucified be the very Messiah: then let the blood of this innocent man that
died in his faith cleanse thee from thy sins, and help thee to eternal life:
Nay Epiphanius affirms, that the Jews of Tiberias did more confidently
affirm it then thus: for they would whisper into a dying man's ear, Believe
in Jesus of Nazareth whom our princes crucified, for he shall come to judge
thee in the latter day: all which declares how impious they are to go against
their own conscience, and upon how fickle ground all their religion stands.

CHAP. XV. Of those that in our age have persecuted the Gospel in the person
of the faithful.
AS the religion of Christ has been hitherto cruelly crossed and besieged by
the mightiest captains of this world (as has been partly declared) so it has
not been any better entertained by the potentates of this age, that ceased not
to disturb the quiet and pursue to death the lives of Gods children for their
professions sake, and to bring them utterly to ruin: to address all the
engines and subtleties of their malicious and wicked counsels, without leaving
any one devise unthought of that their wit could imagine, or their power
afford: they joined craft with force, and vile treason with horrible cruelty,
thereby to suppress the truth and quench that fair and clear light, which God
after long time of blindness and ignorance had caused of his infinite mercy to
shine upon us. Their fires were kindled every where with the bones of Martyrs,
whilst for the space of fottie years or thereabouts they never ceased to burn
those that were followers of that way. Now when they saw that all their
butcheries and burnings were not able to consume this holy seed, but that the
more they went about to choke it, the more it grew up and increased: they took
another course, and raised up troubles and seditions in all quarters, as if by
that means they should attain the end of their purpose. Hell vomited up all
her furies of war, the whole earth was in a tumult, young and old with tooth
and nail were employed to root out the Church of Christ: but God stretching
forth his arm against all their practices, showed himself not only a
conqueror, but also a most sharp revenger of all his adversaries. This is
most apparent in that which happened to Thomas Arondell an English man, History
of Martyrs first book.
Archbishop of Canterbury, an enemy and persecutor of the truth of Christ, who
having put to death diverse holy and upright men, thinking that all he did was
gain, was rooted out at last himself by a most strange and horrible death:
for he that sought to stop the mouth of God in his ministers, and to hinder the
passage of his Gospel, had his tongue so swollen that it stopped his own
mouth, that before his death he could neither swallow nor speak, and so
through famine died in great despair.

Foelix Eearle of Wartemberg one of the captains of the Emperor Charles the
fifth, Illiricus.
being at supper at Ausbourg with many of his companions, where threats were
blown out on every side against the faithful, swore before them all, that
before he died he would ride up to his spurs in the blood of the Lutherans.
But it happened in the same night that the hand of God so stroke him, that he
was strangled and choked with his own blood: and so he rode not, but bathed
himself, not up to the spurs, but up to the throat, not in the blood of the
Lutherans, but in his own blood before he died.

In the reign of Francis de Valoys of late memory, the first king of France of
that name, those men that showed themselves frowardest, sharpest, and most
cruel in burning and murdering the holy martyrs; were also forwardest examples
of the vengeance of God prepared for all such as they are. For proof whereof,
the miserable end of John de Roma, a monk of the order of the white Friars may
serve, who although in regard of his hood and habit ought not to be placed in
the number of men of note, yet by reason of the notable example of Gods
vengeance upon him, we may rightly place him in this rank. This man therefore
(at that time when the Christians of Cabrier and Merindol began to suffer
persecution) having obtained a commission from the bishop of Province and the
ambassador of Auignion to make inquisition after and seize upon the bodies of
all them that were called Lutherans, ceased not to afflict them with the
cruellest torments he could devise: Among many of his tortures this was one; to
cause their boots to be filled with boiling grease, and then fastening them
overthwart wise over a bench their legs hanging over a gentle fire, to sees
them to death. The French king advertised of this his cruelty, sent out his
letters patents from the parliament of Province charging that the said ^ohn de
Roma should be apprehended, imprisoned, and by process of law condemned: which
news when the caitiue heard, he fled back as fast as he could trot to
Auignion, there purposing to recreate and delight himself with the excrements
of his oppression and robbery which he had wroong out of the purses of poor
people: but see how contrary to his hope it fell out: for first he was robbed
of his evil gotten goods by his own servants, and presently upon the same
fell sick of so horrible and strange a disease, that no salve or medicine
could be found to assuage his pain: and beside it was withal so loathsome,
that a man could not endure his company for the stink and corruption which
issued from him. For which cause the white Friars (his cloisterers) conveyed
him out of their covent into the hospital, where increasing in ulcers and
vermin, and being become now odious not only to others but to himself also,
he would often cry either to be delivered from his noisomnesse, or to be
slain, being desirous but not able to perform the deed upon him self. And
thus in horrible torments and fearful despair, he most miserably died. Now
being dead, there was none found that would give sepulture to his rotten
carcass, had not a monk of the same order dragged the carrion into a ditch,
which he provided for the purpose.

The lord of Reuest who a while supplied the place of the chief president in
the parliament of Province, by whose means many of the faithful were put to
death, after he was put beside his office, and returned home unto his own
house, was attached with so grievous a sickness, and such furious and mad fits
withal, that his wife and nearest allies not daring to come near him, he
like a frantic bedlem enraged, and solitarily ended his life.

A counselor of the same court called Bell^m^nt, was so hot and zealous in
proceeding against the poor prisoners for the word of Gods sake, that to the
end to pack them soon to the fire, he usually departed not from the
judgment hall from morning to evening, but caused his meat and drink to be
brought for his meals, returning not home but only at night to take his rest.
But whilst he thus strongly and endeauourously employed himself about these
affairs, there began a little sore to rise upon his foot, which at the first
being no bigger then if a waspe had stung the place, grew quickly so red and
full of pain, and so increased the first day by ranckling over all his foot,
and inflaming the same, that by the judgment of Physicians and Chirurgians,
through the contagious fire that spread it self over his whole body, it seemed
incurable, except by cutting off his foot the other members of the body might
be preserved: which he in no case willing to yield unto, for all the medicines
that were applied unto it, found the second day his whole leg infected, and
the third his whole thigh, and the fourth day his whole body: in so much that
he died the same day, his dead body being all parched, as if it had been roasted
by a fire. And thus he that was so hot in burning poor Christians, was
himself by a seeret flame of Gods wrath, as by slow and soft fire, burned and
consumed to death.

Jews de Vain brother in law to Menier the president of the said parliament
of Province, History of Martyrs second book.
with the brother and son of Peter Durand, chief butcher of the city Aix,
the evening before their horrible cruelty was executed at Merindoll, fell at
debate amongst themselves, and the morrow as instruments of Gods judgments,
slew one another.

The Judge of the city Aix (one of that wretched crew) drowned himself in his
return, The same.
as he passed over the river Durance.

As for the chief Judge that was principal in that murderous action, The same.
touching the condemnation of those poor souls of Merindoll and Cabrieres, he
likewise suddenly died before he saw the execution of that decree which
himself had sed down.

John Mesnier lord of Oppede another chief officer of the foresaid parliament,
that got the leading of that murdering army against the poor Christians
aforesaid, committed such excess of cruelty, that the most barbarous heathen
in the world would have yearned to do. For which cause he was also summoned
to appear personally at the parliament of Paris, there to answer to those
extortions, robberies, and oppressions, which were laid to his charge: and
being convinced and found guilty thereof, was nevertheless released and set at
liberty; and that which is more, restored to his former state. Howbeit though
he escaped the hands of men, yet was he overtaken by the hand of God, who knew
well enough the way how to entrap and abate his proud intents: for even then
when he was in the height of worldly prosperity, and busier then ever, in
persecuting Christians, even then was he pulled down by a flux of blood,
which provoking his privy parts, engendered such a carnositie and thickness
of flesh therein, and withal a restraint of urine, that with horrible ourcries
and rauing speeches he died: feeling a burning fire broiling his entrails from
his navel upwards, and an extreme infection putrefying his lower parts: and
beginning to feel in this life both in body and soul, the rigor of eternal
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.

John Martin Trombant of Briqueras in Piemont, vaunting himself every foot in
the hindrance of the Gospel, cut off a ministers nose of Angrogne in his
bravery, 2 Books of martyrs.
but immediately after was himself assailed by a mad wolf that gnawed off his
nose as he had done the ministers and caused him like a mad man to end his
life: which strange judgment was notoriously known to all the country
thereabout: and beside, it was never heard that this wolf had ever harmed any
man before, Gaspard of Renia^me, one of the magistrates of the city of Anuers
that adjudged to death certain poor faithful souls, received in the same
place ere he removed, a terrible sentence of Gods judgment against himself;
for he fell desperate immediately, and was feign to be led into his house half
beside himself, where crying that he had condemned the innocent blood, he
sorthwith died.

CHAP. XVI. Other Examples of the same subject.
ABout the same time, there happened a very strange judgment upon an ancient
lawier of Bourges, one John Cranequin, a man of ripe wit natural, and a great
practitioner in his profession, but very ignorant in the law of God, and all
good literature, and so enuiously bent against all those that knew more then
himself, and that abstained from the filthy pollutions of popery, that he
served in stead of a promootour, to inform Ory the inquisitour, of them: but
for his labor, the arm of God stroke him with a marvelous strange frenzy,
that whatsoever his eyes beheld, seemed in his judgment to be crawling
serpents: In such sort, that after he had in vain experienced all kind of
medicines, yea, and used the help of wicked sorcerie and coniuration, yet at
length his senses were quite benumbed and deprived him, and in that wretched
and miserable estate, he ended his life.

John Morin, a mighty enemy to the professors of Gods truth, one that labored
continually at Paris in apprehending and accusing the faithful, in so much
that he sent daily, multitudes that appealed from him to the high court of the
palace, died himself in most grievous and horrible torment. The Chancellor
of Prat, he that in the Parliaments of France, put up the first bill against
the faithful, and gave out the first commissions to put them to death, died
swearing and blaspheming the name of God, his stomach being most straungely
gnawen in pieces, and consumed with worms.

The Chancellor Oliver, being restored to his former estate, Refer this
among Apostaraes. Lib. 1. cap. 18.
having first (against his conscience) renounced his religion: so also now (the
same conscience of his, checking and reclaiming) he spared not to shed much
innocent blood, by condemning them to death. But such a fearful judgment was
denounced against him (by the very mouths of the guiltless condemned souls)
that stroke him into such a fear and terror, that presently he fell sick,
surprised with so extreme a melancholy, that sobbing forth sighs without
intermission, and murmurings against God, he so afflicted his half dead body,
like a man robbed and dispossessed of sense and reason, that with his vehement fits
he would so shake the bed, as if a young man in the prime of his years with
all his strength had assaied to do it. And when a certain Cardinal came to
visit him in this extremity, he could not abide his sight, his pains
increasing thereby: but cried out as soon as he perceived him departed, that it
was the Cardinal that brought them all to damnation. When he had been thus a
long time tormented, at last in extreme anguish and fear, he died.

Sleidan. lib. 9.
Sir Thomas More, L. Chancellor of England, a sworn enemy to the Gospel, and
a professed persecutour by fire and sword of all the faithful, as if thereby he
would grow famous and get renown, caused to be erected a sumptuous sepulcher,
and thereby (to eternize the memory of his profane cruelty) to be engraven the
commendation of his worthy deeds: amongst which the principal was, that he
had persecuted with all his might the Lutherens, that is, the faithful: but it
fell out contrary to his hope, for being accused, convicted, and condemned of
high treason, his head was taken from him, and his body found no other
sepulcher to lie in, but the gibbet.

Cardinal Croscentius, the Popes ambassador to the Council of Trent, in the
year of our Lord 1552, being very busy in writing to his master the Pope, and
having labored all one night about his letters; behold as he raised himself
in his chair to stir up his wit and memory, ouerdulled with watching, a huge
black dog with great flaming eyes and long ears dangling to the ground,
appeared unto him; which coming into his chamber, and making right toward
him, even under the table where he sat, vanished out of his sight: whereat he
amazed and a while senseless, recovering him self, called for a candle, and
when he saw the dog could not be found, he fell presently sick with a strong
conceit, which never left him till his death: ever crying that they would drive
away the black dog which seemed to clime upon his bed: and in that humor he
died.

27 book of his histories.
Albertus Pighius, a great enemy of the truth also (in so much that Paulus
Iouius calls him the Lutheranes scourge) being at Bologne at the coronation
of the Emperor upon a scaffold to behold the pomp and glory of the
solemnization, the scaffold bursting with the weight of the multitude, he
tumbled headlong amongst the guard that stood below upon the points of their
halberds, piercing his body clean through, the rest of his company escaping
without any great hurt: for though the number of them which fell with the
scaffold was great, yet very few found themselves hurt thereby, save only this
honorable Pighius that found his deaths wound, and lost his hearts blood, as
has been showed.

Poncher, 2. Book of martyrs. The burning chamber was a court in France, which
adjudged the Christians to be burned.
Archbishop of Tours pursuing the execution of the burning chamber, was
himself surprised with a fire from God, which beginning at his heel, could
never be quenched, till member after member being cut off, he died miserably.

An Augustine friar named Lambert, doctor and Prior in the city of Liege, one
of the troop of cruel inquisitours for religion, whilst he was preaching one
day with open mouth against the faithful, was cut short of a sudden in the
midst of his sermon, being bereaved of sense and speech, in so much that he
was feign to be carried out of the pulpit to his cloister in a chair, and a
few days after, was found drowned in a ditch.

In the year of our Lord 1527, there was one George Hala a Saxon, minister of
the word and sacraments, Luther.
and a stout professor of the reformed religion, who being for that cause sent
for to appear before the Archbishop of Mentz at Aschaffenburge, was handled on
this fashion: they took away his own horse, and set him upon the Archbishops
fools horse, and so sent him back homewards, conducted by one appointed for
the purpose, who not suffering him to ride the common and beaten way, but
leading him a new course thorough by and uncouth paths, brought him into an
ambush of thieves placed there by the bishops appointment, who set upon him and
murdered him at once; but it is notoriously known, that not one of that wicked
rabble came to a good end, but were consumed one after another.

In a city of Scotland called Fanum Ianius, the chief mart town of that
country, four of the chiefest citizens were accused by a monk before the
Cardinal, for interrupting him in a sermon, and by him condemned to be hanged
like heretics, when no other crime could be laid to their charge, History of
martyrs, part. 7.
save that they desired the monk to tie himself to his text, and not to roue
up and down as he did, without any certain scope or application of matter. Now
as they went to execution, their wives fell down at the Cardinals feet,
beseeching and entreating pardon for their husbands lives: which he was so
far from granting, that he accused them also of heresy: and especially one
of them (whose name was Helene) for he caused her young infant to be pulled
out of her arms, and her to be put to death with her husband, for speaking
certain words against the virgin Mary, which by no testimonies could be
proved against her. Which doom the godly woman taking cheerfully, and
desiring to hang by her husbands side, they would not do her that last favor,
but drowned her in a river running by, that it might truly be said, that no jot
of mercy or compassion remained in them. But ere long the cruel Cardinal
found as little savor at another butchers hands that slew him in his chamber
when he dreamed of nothing less, and in his Cardinals robes hanged him over
the wall to the view of men. And thus God revenged the death of those
innocents, whose bloods never ceased crying for vengeance against their murder,
until he had justly punished him in the same kind, and after the same fashion
which he had dealt with them.

Theatrum historicum.
Thomas Blauer, one of the privy counselors of the king of Scots, was a sore
persecutour of the faithful in that land: for which cause, lying on his death
bed, he fell into despair, and said he was damned, Refer this also to
hypocrisy, Lib. 1. cap. 22.
and a castaway: and when the monks came about him to comfort him, he cried
out upon them, saying, that their Masses and other trash would do him no good;
for he never believed them: but all that he did was for love of lucre, and not
of religion, not respecting or believing there was either a God or a devil, or
a hell or a heaven, and therefore he was damned, there was no remedy. And in
this miserable case without any sign of repentance, he died.

But let us come to our homebred English stories, and consider the judgments
of God upon the persecutors of Christ's Gospel in Queen Mary's time: And first
to begin with Steven Gardener, who was one of the graund butchers in this land,
what a miserable end came he unto? Even the same day that B. Ridley, and M.
Latimer were burnt at Oxford; he hearing news thereof, reioiced greatly: and
being at dinner, eat his meat merrily. Acts and Monuments, page 1788.
But ere he had eaten many bits, the sudden stroke of Gods terrible hand fell
upon him, in such sort, that immediately he was taken from the board, and
brought to his bed, where he continued fifteen days in intolerable anguish,
by reason he could not expel his urine, so that his body being miserably
inflamed within (who had enflamed so many godly martyrs) was brought to a
wretched end, with his tongue all black and swollen, hanging out of his mouth
most horribly: a spectacle worthy to be beholden of all such bloody burning
persecutours. Bonner, Page 2114.
bishop of London, another archbutcher, though he lived long after this man,
and died also in his bed; yet was it so provided of God, that as he had been a
persecutor of the light, and a child of darkness, so his carcass was tumbled
into the earth in obscure darkness at midnight, contrary to the order of all
other Christians: and as he had been a most cruel murderer, so was he buried
among thieves and murderers; a place by Gods judgment rightly appointed for
him. 2099.


Morgan bishop of S. David's sitting upon the condemnation of the blessed
martyr, bishop Farrar, whose room he unjustly usurped, was not long after
stricken by Gods hand, after such a strange sort, that his meat would not go
down, but rise and pick up again, sometime at his mouth, sometime blown out
of his nose, most horrible to behold, and so continued to his death: Where note
moreover, that when master Leyson (being then sheriff at bishop Farrars
burning) had fetched away the cattle of the said bishop, from his servants
house into his own custody, diverse of them would never eat meat, but lay
bellowing and roaring, and so died.

Bishop Thornton Suffragan of Dover, another grand persecutor, coming upon a
Saturday from the chapter house at Canterbury, and there upon the Sunday
following looking upon his men playing at bowls, fell suddenly into a palsy,
and died shortly after. But he that will read more hereof, I refer him to
the latter end of the Acts and Monuments of the English Church, where he shall
find a whole catalogue of such like histories.

The overthrow of many mighty ones in our age serve for a looking glass to
represent the high exploits of the wonderful judgments which the king of
kings has sent upon those that have in any place or country whatsoever
resisted and strove against his truth: whereof some after great victories,
which their singular dexterity and worldly wisdom in the managing of their
affairs have achieved, by a perverse and overthwart end contrary to their
former prosperity, have darkened and obscured the renown and glory of all
their brave deeds, their good report dying with their bodies, and their credit
empaired and buried with them in their graves: Others in like manner having
addressed all their forces, laid their battery, and placed all their pieces and
canons against the walls of Sion, and thinking to blow it up and consume it to
ashes, have made many breaches into the sides thereof, yea they have so bent
all their strength against it, and afflicted it with such outrageous cruelty,
and unmerciful effusion of blood, that it is pitiful and lamentable to
remember: howbeit after all their policies and practices, their courage has
been at length abated, and themselves raked one after another out of this
world, with manifest marks of the just vengeance of God upon them. For though
it may seem for a time that God sleeps, and regards not the wrongs and
oppressions of his servants, yet he never fails to carry a watchful eye upon
them, and in his fittest time to revenge himself upon their enemies.

Along the verdant fields all richly did
With natures paintments, and with Floraes pride:
Whose goodly bounds are lively crystal streams
Begirt with bowres to keep back Phoebus beams,
Even when the quenchlesse torch, the worlds great eye,
Advanced his rays orethwartly from the sky,
And by his power of heavenly influence,
Reuiu'de the seeds of springs decayed essence:
Then many flocks unite in peace and love,
Not seeking ought but natural behoue,
Past quietly vncharg'd with other care,
Save of their feed within that pasture fair.
These flocks a shepherd had (of power and skill)
To fold and feed and save them from all ill:
By whose advise they lived: whose wholesome voice
They heard, and feared with love, and did rejoice
Therein, with melody of song and praise,
And dance, to magnify his name always.
He is their guide, they are his flock and fold,
Nor will they be by any else controld:
Well knowing that whom he takes care to feed,
He will preserve and save in time of need.
Thus lived this holy flock at hearts content,
Till cruel beasts all set on rauishment,
Broke off their peace, and ran upon with rage
Themselves, their young, and all their heritage:
Slitting their throats, devouring lambs and all,
And dissipating them that escaped their thrall.
Then did this jolly feast, to fast transform,
(So asked the fury of that ragefull storm)
Their joyful song was turned to mournful cries,
And all their gladness changed to welladaies.
Whereat heaven greeuing, clad it self in black:
But earth in uproar, triumphed at their wrack.
What profits then the sheepehooke of their guide?
Or that he lies upon a beacons side
With watchful eye to circumscribe their train,
And has no more regard unto their pain?
To save them from such dangers imminent
(Say some) as are so often incident.
It Is not for that his arm wants strength to break
All proud attempts, that men of might do make,
Or that he will abandon unto death
His own, dear bought with exchange of his breath:
Nor must we think that though they die they perish:
Death dies in them, and they in death reflorish:
And this lives loss, a better life renews,
Which after death eternally ensues.
Though then their passions never seem so great:
Yet never comfort wants to swage their heat:
Though strength of torments be extreme, in durance,
Yet are they quenched, by hopes and faiths assurance.
For thankful hope, if God be grounded in it,
Assures the heart and pacifies the spirit.
To them that love and reverence his name,
Prosperity betides and want of shame.
Thus can no tyrant pull them from the hands
Of mighty God, that for their safety stands.
Who ever sees, and ever can defend
Them whom he loves, he loves unto the end:
So that the more their fury over flows,
The more each one his own destruction sows.
And as they strive with God in policy;
So are they sooner brought to misery.
Like as the savage bore dislog'd from den,
And hotely chased by pursuit of men,
Runs furiously on them that come him near,
And gores himself upon the hunters spear.
The gentle puissant lamb, their champion bold,
So helps to conquer all that hurts his fold,
That quickly they and all their progeny,
Confounded is and brought to misery.
This is of Judah the courageous Lion
The conquering captain, and the rock of Sion,
Whose favor is as great to Jacobs line:
As is his fearful frwone to Philistine.
CHAP. XVII. Of Apostataes and Backsliders, that through infirmity and fear
have fallen away.
IT is a kind of Apostasy and Backsliding condemned by this first commandment
of the law, when as he that has been once enlightened by the word of God in
the knowledge of salvation, and nourished and instructed therein from his
cradle, does afterward cast behind his back the grace of Gods spirit, or
disallow thereof, and exempt himself from the service of God, to serve idols,
or make any outward show to do it: which kind of sin may be committed after
two sorts; either through infirmity and fear, or willingly and with
deliberation: when not being pressed or constrained thereto by any outward
means, a man does clearly and of himself abandon and forsake the true
Religion, to march under the banner of ^^than and Antichrist: and this also of
two sorts: either when a man does simply forsake the profession of the truth,
to follow superstition and idolatry, without attempting any thing beside the
mere denial of his faith; or when after his revolt he professes not only
the contrary religion, but also endeavors himself by all means possible to
advance it, and to oppress and lay siege to the doctrine of Gods truth in
those that maintain the same. By this it appears that there are three kinds
of apostasy: one as it were enforced and compelled, the second voluntary, the
last both voluntary and malicious: which though they be all very heinous and
offensive in the sight of God; yet the second and third sort are most
dangerous, and of them also one more hurtful and pernicious then the other, as
we shall perceive by that which follows. Now as all these kinds are
different one from another; so I will refer the examples of each sort to his
several place, that the efficacy thereof may be the better perceived. And first
of those which have fallen away through fear and infirmity, and afterward in
order of the rest. Although that they who by the conceit and fear of tortures
presented before their eyes, or of speedy and cruel death threatened against
them, do decline and slide back from the profession of the Gospel, may
pretend for excuse the weakness and feeblenes of the flesh, yet doubtless
they are found guilty before the throne of God, for presetting the love of
this transitory and temporary life before the zeal of his glory, and the
honor which is due to his only begotten son, especially at that time when
they are called out of purpose by their Martyrdom to witness his sacred truth
before man, and he desires most to be glorified by their free and constant
perseverance therein: to the which perseverance they are exhorted by many fair
promises of eternal life and happiness: and from the contrary terrefied by
threats of death and confusion, and upon pain to be discarded from the
presence of Christ before God, because they have denied him here before men:
which is the misery of al miseries, and the greatest that can happen to any
man; for what shall become of that man whom the son of God does not
acknowledge? Now to prove that God is indeed highly offended at this
fainthearted cowardlinesse, he himself has made known unto us by the
punishments which diverse times he has sent upon the heads of such
offenders. As in the time of the Emperor Valerian the eighth persecutor of the
church, under whose persecution albeit that many champions bestirred themselves
most valiantly in that combat of faith, yet there wanted not some whose hearts
failing them, and who in steed of maintaining and standing for their cause to
the death, as they ought have done, retired and gave up themselves to the
enemy at first assault. Amongst the number of which doubtie soldiers, there
was one that went up into the Capital at Rome in that place where Jupiters
temple in old time stood, Ciprian in his sermons de lapsu multorum.
to abjure and recant Christ and his profession, which he had no sooner done,
but he was presently struck dumb, and so was justly punished in that very
member wherewith he had offended.

A woman likewise having renounced her profession, Ciprian.
and feeling in her self no remorse of conscience for her fall, went as she was
wont to do in the time of her rest and prosperity to the bathes and whot
houses to refresh her self, as if al had gone well with her: but she was so
seized upon and possessed by an evil spirit, that in stead of pleasure which
she sought for, she fell to lamenting and tormenting her own flesh, and chopped
in pieces with her dainty teeth her rebellious tongue, wherewith she had spoken
wicked words and dishonored God, and tasted meats offered to idols: and so
this poor wretch whereas she should have washed her self in tears of true
repentance, and in the true bath of grace and mercy, because she had more care
of clensing her body from filth, the^ her soul from sin, became corrupt and
filthy both body and soul, by the means of that unclean spirit, which God
had given power to afflict her: and armed her own mouth which had tasted chewed
and swallowed that cursed food, furiously to rise against her self to destroy
her: so that she became her own murderer, for she suruiued not long, by
reason that her bowels and entrails were choked up to the throat with pain.

Ciprian.
Another woman well stricken in years, that in like manner had revolted from
the truth, thrust her self notwithstanding into the assembly of the faithful
as they were receiving the holy sacrament: but that holy food which nourished
the souls of them that believe turned to her bane; Contempt of word and
sacrament. lib. 1. cap. 34.
for she found there in steed of peace a sword, in steed of nourishment deadly
and mortal poison, in such sort that immediately after the receipt of that holy
supper, she began to be meruelously troubled and vexed in soul, and felt the
hand of God so heavy upon her for her offense committed in denying her savior
to shun persecution, that trembling and stamping she fell down dead.

Cyprian.
There was also in like manner a certain man that having renounced his faith,
did notwithstanding present himself at the celebration of the holy supper,
presuming to come eat at his table, whom he had a little before denied, and
received into his hand part of the sacrament as well as the rest, but thinking
to put it into his mouth, it was turned into ashes; whereupon he stood amassed,
Contempt of sacraments. Lib. 1. cap. 34.
and confounded in himself, God manifesting in him, that he that revoked his
faith, and recoiled from Christ Jesus, Christ Jesus would recoile from him, and
give him over to death, by depriving him of his grace, and spoiling him of the
power of his quickening and saving spirit.

These are the fearful examples of Gods Judgments which Saint Ciprian
reports to have light upon Backsliders in his time, adding moreover that
besides these, many were possessed with Devils, robbed of their wits, and
enraged with fury and madness, and all for this offense of Apostasy.

Amongst all the examples of our age of Gods severe justice upon Apostataes,
the examples of Francis Spiera an Italian Lawier, a man of credit and
authority in his country, is most pitiful and lamentable: who having
embraced the true religion with marvelous zeal, and made open profession of
the same, Sleidan lib. 21.1
feared not freely to declare his opinion of every point of doctrine that came
in question: and grew in knowledge every day more and more. But it was not long
ere he was complained off to the Popes Ambassador, which when he understood,
and saw the danger wherein he was like to fall. After he had long debated and
disputed the matter in his own conscience, the counsel of the flesh and
wordlie wisdom prevailing, he resolved at last to go to the Ambassador to
the intent to appease his wrath, and do whatsouer he should command: Thus
coming to Venice, and ouerruled with immoderate fear, he confessed that he
had done amiss and craved pardon for the same, promising ever after to be an
obedient subject to the Popes laws: and that which is more, when it was
enioined him that at his return home, he should in his own country openly
recant his former profession, he refused not, but performed his recantation in
due sort. But it chanced very soon after that this miserable man fell sick
of body and soul, and began to despair of Gods mercy toward him. His
Physician perceiving his disposition judged that the cause of his bodies
disease, was a vehement conceit and thought of mind: and therefore gave advise
to minister counsel to his troubled mind very carefully, that the cause
being taken away, the effect also might surcease: To this end many learned men
frequented him every day, recalling into his mind, and laying open before him
many express places of Scripture touching the greatness of Gods mercy:
which things he avouched to be true: but said that those promises pertained
not to him, because he had renounced Christ Jesus, and forsworn the known
truth, and that for this cause nothing was prepared for him but hell fire,
which already in soul he saw and felt. I would (said he) willingly if it
were possible love God, but it is altogether impossible: I only fear him
without love. These and such speeches used he with a steadfast countenance:
neither did his tongue at any time run at random, nor his answers savor of
indiscretion or want of memory: but advisedly warned all that stood by, to
take heed by his example how to listen too much to worldly wisdom, especially
then when they should be called before men to profess the religion of Christ.
And lying in this extremity he refused all manner of sustenance, rebuking and
being angry with his sons that opened his mouth to make him swallow some
food, to sustain him, saying, Since he had forsaken his Lord and master, all
his creatures ought to forsake him; I am afeard of every thing, there is not a
creature that has not conspired to work my destruction; let me die, let me
die, that I may go and feel that vnquenchahle fire which already consumes
me, and which I can by no means escape. And thus he died indeed pined to death
in despair and horrible torment of conscience.

Centur. 3 cap. 12
Nichomachus a man that stoutly professed Christ Jesus in prosperity, being
brought to his trial at Troas, and put into torments, he denied him: and being
delivered by that means, consented to offer sacrifice unto idols: But as soon as
he had finished his sacrifice, he was hoisted up by the spirit of darkness,
whose darling now he was, and dashed against the earth, so that his teeth
biting his profane tongue (wherewith he had denied his savor) in two, he
died incontinently.

Tamerus a professor of the true religion was seduced by his brother to
cleave unto Popery, Theatrum historicum.
and to forsake his first love: but for his defection from the truth the Lord
gave him up into a reprobat sense, so that falling into despair, he hong
himself.

Richard Denton a blacksmith, dwelling at Wels in Cambridgeshire, having been
a professor of the Gospel before time, when William Wolsey Martyr (whom the
said Denton had first converted unto the truth) sent him certain money out of
prison at Ely with this commendations, That he marvelled he tarried so long
behind him, seeing he was the first that delivered him the book of scripture
into his hand, Acts and monuments. page 1717.
and told him that it was the truth: his answer was this, I confess it is
true, but alas I cannot burn. But he that could not burn in the cause of
Christ, was afterward burned against his will: for in the year 1564 his house
was set on fire, and whilst he went in to save his goods, he lost his life.

There was also one Burton, Bailife of Crowland in Lincolnshire, who pretending
an earnest friendship to the gospel in king Edwards time, after the kings death
began lustily to set up the Popish mass again, and would have beaten the
poor Curate if he had not settled himself thereto: but see how the Lords
judgment ouertooke him; as he came riding from Fennebancke one day a crow
flying over his head, let fall her excrements upon his face, so that it ran
from the top of his nose, down to his beard, Acts and monuments. page 2101
the poisoned sent and savor whereof so annoied his stomach, that he never
ceased vomiting until he came home: and after falling deadly sick would never
receive any meat, but vomited still and complained of that stincke, cursing the
crow that had poisoned him: to be short within few days he died desperately
without any token of repentance of his former life.

Hither may we ad the examples of one Hendrie Smith, a Lawier of the middle
temple, Acts and monuments.
and Arnoldus Bomelius a student of Louaine, both which having professed the
truth a while, and after being seduced by evil company, the one of Gilford,
the other of Master Tileman, Smith afterward hanged himself in his chamber in
the temple in the year of our Lord, 1569. Bomelius murdered himself with his
own dagger. And thus these two Apostataes felt the heavy scourge of Gods wrath
for reuolting from the truth which they once professed.

CHAP. XVIII. Of those which have willingly fallen away.
THese kind of Apostataes which we are now to speak of, are such as without
any outward compulsion, threats, or likelihood of danger, forsake freely Gods
true Religion, and give themselves over to all idolatry, against whom there is
a decree ordained in the thirteenth of Deutronomie by the lawgiuer of heaven,
which is this, If the inhabitants of any city have turned from the Lord, to
follow after strange Gods, let them be destroyed with the edge of their sword,
and their city consumed with fire, that they may be utterly rased out and
brought to nothing. This was the sin of Solomon King of Israel (a brave and
mighty kingdom in his time) a man subject to none for power, 1. King. 11.
nor fearing any for authority: yet for all this so filthily recoiling from
the truth which he knew and had professed, that in stead of serving the true
God, he became a setter up of false Idols, and that of his own free will and
pleasure: he that had been so well brought up and instructed from his
childhood in true religion by his schoolemaister the Prophet Nathan, into whose
charge he was committed: and so often and earnestly admonished by his father
David, to observe diligently the law of God to direct his ways thereby: and
whom God vouchsafed this honor to appear twice unto, and to enrich and adorn
with such excellent wisdom, that the queen of Saba hearing his report came to
Jerusalem to be his auditour: even this Solomon in his old age, when he should
have been most steadfast and constant, suffered himself to be seduced by the
entisements of his strange wives and concubines, to offer service unto strange
gods, and to forsake the God of heaven to worship the Idols of the Gentiles.
And as his renown was great and famous before for building that sumptuous and
beautiful temple at Jerusalem: so was his obloquy and reproach the greater for
erecting altars and chapels, for the idols of his wives and concubines, even
for every one of their idols, to the intent to flatter and please their humors:
it was therefore just and equal that the Lord (his wrath being proueked
against him) raised up two strong enemies that wrought him and his people much
scath. Yea moreover Jeroboam one of his own servants (whilst he yet lived)
was by the ordinance of God designed king over ten tribes, and so God punished
him for his idolatry and backsliding, leaving him but a small portion of the
kingdom to continue to his successors: which had it not been for his father
David's sake had been also taken away. It is true that we read not that he ever
hindered the service of the temple, or compelled or persuaded any man to worship
an idol: yet he did enough to make him culpable before God of a grievous sin,
in that he being the head and soueraign magistrate of the people, committed
such wickedness and such Apostasy in Israel: beside it is a marvelous strange
thing that in all his history there is not so much as any token mentioned, or
to be gathered, of his true repentance after this notable fall. And he that well
weighs the nature and quality of this sin shall perceive it that some what
resembles that which is spoken of in the 6. cha. to the Heb. ver. 4, 5, 6, for
Solomon was not so ignorant and destitute of the knowledge of God, but rather
had the treasure of wisdom in fullness and abundance, and was endowed with
the gifts and graces of Gods spirit, that he was able to instruct others and
to discharge a Doctors place in the church, as he also did both by word and
writing. And although that the son of God was not as then yet manifested in
the flesh: yet the power and efficacy of his death being everlasting, and from
the beginning, whereof the law with the ceremonies and sacrifices thereof was
as it were a schoolemaister, could not be hidden from him: therefore so soon
as he adicted himself to his Idolatry, he forthwith abandoned the holy
ordinances and sacrifices of Gods law, and quitted himself of the promise of
salvation therein contained, disanulling and making of none effect as concerning
himself, the grace of the mediator ordained from the beginning, so that his
downfall was terrible and perilous: yet there be that think that after all
this he wrote the book of Ecclesiastes as a declaration of his repentance,
whose opinion I purpose not to contradict.

Roboam his son succeeded him as well in the likeness of his sin as of his
kingdom, 2. Chron. 12.
for after that the priests and Levites forsaking the part of Jeroboam because
of his Idols, and leaving their houses and possessions to strangers, had made
repair to him for fear of God and love of his holy service: and that he had
disposed and put in order his public affairs, for the ratifying and
confirming of his kingdom: presently he and all his people forsook the law
of God, and gave themselves over to Idolatry and other grievous sins:
wherefore the Lord also forsook and gave them over to the hands of Caesac
King of Egypt, that raised up a mighty power of men, even a thousand and two
hundred chariots, threescore thousand horsemen, with an infinite multitude of
footmen, to make war against him: So that all the strong Cities and
fortresses of Judah, no nor Jerusalem it self, was strong enough to repulse
him from sacking and taking them, and robbing the Temple of their treasures,
and despoiling the Kings palaces of his riches, and carrying back into Egypt
a rich prey of the best and beautifullest things that were therein. And this
was the first shake that ever this kingdom received since it was a kingdom,
whereby it began to waine and decline: Notwithstanding all this, yet the Lord
had compassion and pity of him and his people: and would not suffer his
dignity to be trodden under foot and quite suppressed, but restored him once
again into an honorable estate, because when he was reproved by Semeia the
Prophet, he humbled himself before the Lord, and his Princes also: which is a
manifest sign that his sin was not an universal Apostasy, whereby he was
wholly turned aside from God and all hope of grace, as his father Solomon was;
but it was a particular revolt, such as was that of his forefathers, the
children of Israel, when they immagined that God would be present with them in
the idolalatrous golden calfe, and in that figure to worship him; so gross and
senseless were they: although yet Roboams sin seems to exceed theirs in
greatness and guiltiness. The Jews that in the time of Ptolomey Philopater
abode in Egypt, and willingly renounced the law and service of God, in hope
thereby better to provide for their worldly commodities, enioied not long their
ease and prosperity: for the other Jews which had courageously stuck to their
profession, and had been miraculously delivered from their enemies, being
grieved and chafed at their recoile, made their supplications to the king
(whose heart God inclined to favor their suit) that he would permit them to
revenge Gods quarrel upon those Apostataes as they had deserved: Machab. 7.
alleging that it was hard for them to be true subjects to the king, who for
their bellies sake had rebelled against the commandments of God. The king
seeing their request reasonable, and their reasons which they alleged likely,
not only commended them, but gave them full authority to destroy all those
that could be found in any place of his dominion, without any further inquiry
of the cause, or intelligence of the kings authority: insomuch that they put to
death all those that they knew to have defiled themselves by filthy Idols,
doing them before all the shame they could devise: so that at that time there
were dispatched above three hundred persons: which when they had accomplished
they reioiced greatly.

CHAP. XIX. Of the third and worst sort of Apostataes, those that through
Malice forsake the truth.
IF so be that they of whom we have spoken in the two former chapters are in
their reuoltings inexcusable (as indeed they are) the^ much more worthy
condemnation are they, who not only in a villainous contempt cast away the grace
of Gods spirit, and his holy worship: but also of a purposed malice set
themselves against the same, yea and endeavor with all their power utterly to
race and root it out, and in stead thereof to plant the lies errors and
illusions of Satan, by all means possible. Against this kind of monsters,
sentence is pronounced in the thirteenth of Deutronomie to wit, That justice
should be executed upon the^ with all extremity, and no mercy and compassion
shown unto him, be he Prophet or what else, that goes about to seduce others
from the service of the almighty, 2. King. 11.
to follow false gods. This is the pitfall wherein Jeroboam the first king of
Israel slipped by the perverseness of his own conscience; who as he had by
his rebellion against Rehoboam and the house of David vpreared a new kingdom:
so by rebellion against God and his house (in hope by that means to retain
his usurped state and people in subjection) vpreared also a new religion: for
distrusting the promises of God which were made him by the Prophet Ahias, as
touching the realm of Israel which he was already in possession of, and
despising the good counsel of God in respect of his own inventions, he was
so besotted and bleared with them, that just after the pattern of his
Idolatrous forefathers, who by their Egyptian tricks had provoked the wrath
of God against themselves, he set up golden calves, and caused the people to
worship them, keeping them so from going to Jerusalem to worship God: nor yet
content with this, he also erected high places to set his idols in; and having
restrained the Priests and Leuits from the exercise of their charge, he
ordained a new order of priests to sacrifice and minister unto his gods, and
proclaimed a newer feast the^ that that was in Judah: eue^ the seventh day of
the 8 month; wherein he not only exiled the pure and sincere service of God, but
also perverted and turned vpside down the Ecclesiastical discipline and
policy of Gods church, which by the law had been instituted. And that which is
yet more, 1. King. 13.
as he was offering incense on the altar at Bethell, when the Prophet cried
out against the altar and exclaimed against that filthy idolatry, by
denouncing the vengeance of God against it and the maintainers thereof, Contempt
of Gods word. Lib. 1. cap. 34.
he was so desperate and senseless as to offer violence to him, and to command
that he should be attached: but the power of Gods displeasure was upon him by
and by, for that hand which he had stretched out against the Prophet dried up,
so that he could not draw it back again; and at the very instant for a more
manifest declaration of the wrath of God, the altar rent in pieces, and the
ashes that were within were dispersed abroad. And although at the prayer of
that holy man his dried hand was restored to his former strength and
soundness, yet returned not he from his unjust and disloiall dealing, but
obstinately continued therein till his dying day. Wherefore also the fierce
wrath of God hunted and pursued him continually, for first of all he was robbed
of his son Abia, dying through sickness: 1. King. 14.
then he was set upon by Abia king of Judah with an army of four hundred
thousand men of war: 2. Chron. 13.
and though his power was double in strength and number, arising to eight
hundred thousand persons, yet was he and his vast at my quite disco^fited, for
he lost at that field five hundred thousand of his men, beside certain cities
which were yielded to Abia in the pursuit of his victory: his courage was so
abated and empouerished ever after this, that he could never recover strength
to resist the king of Judah any more: And so God revenged at once the Apostasy
both of the king and people of Israel: and last of all so struck him after,
that he died. Ioram king of Judah although his father Iosaphat had instructed
him from his childhood with holy and wholesome precepts, 2 Chronicles. 21.
and set before his face the example of his own zeal, in purging the church
of God from all idolatry and superstition, and maintaining the true and pure
service of God: yet did he so foulie run astray from his fathers steps, that
allying himself by the marriage of Athalia to the house of Achab, he became
not only himself like to the kings of Israel in their filthy Idolatry, but
also drew his people after him, causing the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men
of Judah to run a whoring after his strange gods, for which cause Elias the
Prophet most sharply reproved him by letters; the contents whereof in sum
was this: that because he rebelled against the Lord God of his fathers,
therefore, the people that were in his subjection should rebel against him.
Presently the Arabians and Philistims rose up against him, wasted his country,
robbed him of his treasures, took away his wives, and put all his children to
the sword, except little Ochozias his yoongest son that was preserved: And
after all these miseries the Lord smote him with so outrageous and incurable a
disease in his bowels, that after two years torment he died thereof, his guts
being fallen out of his belly with anguish. Ioas also king of the same country
was one to whom God had been many ways beneficial from his infancy, 2.
Chron. 22.
for he was even then miraculously preserved from the bloody hand of Athalia,
and after brought up in the house of God under the tuition of that good Priest
Iehoiada yet he was no sooner lifted up into his royal dignity, but by and by
he and his people started aside, to the worship of stocks and stones, at that
time when he had taken upon him the repair of the house of God. But all this
came to pass after the decease of that good priest his tutour, whose good
deeds toward him in saving his life, and giving him the crown, he most
unthankfully recompensed by putting to death his son Zacharias; 2. Chron. 24.
whom he caused (for reproouing and threatening his idolatry in a public
assembly, incited thereto by the spirit of God) to be stoned to death in the
porch of the Temple. But seeing he did so rebelliously set himself against the
holy spirit, as if he would have quite oppressed and extinguished the power
thereof, by the death of this holy Prophet, by whom it spoke: God hissed for
an army of Syrians that gave him battle, and conquered his soldiers, who in
outward show, seemed much to strong for them: His princes also that had seduced
him, were destroyed, and himself vexed with grievous diseases: till at length
his own servants conspired against him for the death of Zacharia, and slew him
on his bed: yea and his memory was so odious, that they could not afford him a
burying place among the sepulchers of their kings. Amazias the son of this
wicked father, 2. Chro 25.
carried himself also at the first uprightly toward God in his service, but it
lasted not long; for a while after he was corrupted and turned aside from that
good way which he had begun, to tread after the by paths of his father Ioas:
for after he had conquered the Idumeans, and slain twenty thousand men of war,
and spoiled diverse of their cities: in stead of rendering due thanks to God,
who (without the aid of the Israelites) had given him that victory, he set up
the gods of the Edomites, which he had robbed them of, to be his gods, and
worshipped and burned incense to them: so void of sense and reason was he. And
being rebuked by the Prophet of his adverse dealing, he was so far from
humbling and repenting himself thereof, that quite contrary, he proudly
withstood and rejected the Prophets threatenings, menacing him with death if he
ceased not. Thus by this means having aggrauated his sin, and growing more
and more obstinate, God made him an instrument to hasten his own destruction:
for being proud and puffed up with the overthrow which he gave the Edomites,
he defied the king of Israel, and provoked him to battle also; but full evil
to his ease: for he lost the day, and was carried prisoner to Jerusalem, where
(before his face for more reproach) four hundred cubits of the wall was broken
down, the temple and palace ransackt of his treasures, and his children
carried for host^ges to Samaria. And not long after, treason was devised against
him in Jerusalem, so that he fled to Lachish, and being pursued thither also,
was there taken and put to death. 2. Chron. 28.
Likewise king Ahaz for making molten images for Baalim, and walking in the
idolatrous ways of the kings of Israel, and burning his sons with fire,
after the abominations of the heathen in the valley of Ben-Hinnon, was forsaken
of the Lord, and delivered into the hands of the king of Syria, who carried him
prisoner to Damascus: and not only so, but was also subdued by Pekah king of
Israel, in that great battle, wherein his own son with fourscore thousand
men at arms, were slain: yea, and two hundred thousand of all sorts, men,
women, and children taken prisoners: for all these chastisements did he not
once reform his life, but rather grew worse and worse. To make up the number
of his sins, he would needs sacrifice to the gods of Damascus, also thinking
to find succor at their hands: so that he utterly defaced the true service of
God at Jerusalem, broke in pieces the holy vessels, locked up the temple doors,
and placed in their stead his abominable idols for the people to worship: and
erected altars in every corner of the city to do sacrifice on. But as he
rebelled on every side against his God, so God raised up enemies on every side
to disturb him: The Edomites and Philistims assaulted him on one side, beat
his people, took and ransackt his cities: on the other side, the Assyrians
whom he had hired with a great sum for his help, turned to his undoing and
utter overthrow and confusion. What shall we think of Manasses? who reedified
the high places and altars, which the zeal of Ezechias his father, had defaced
and thrown down, 2. Chron 33.
and adored and worshipped the plannets of heaven, the Sun, the Moon, and
the Stars, profaned the porch of Gods Temple with altars dedicated to strange
gods, committing thereon all the abominations of the Gentiles: Idolatry, Lib.
1. cap. 26.
yea and caused his sons to pass thorough the valley of Benhinnon, and was
an obseruer of times and seasons, and gave himself over to witchcraft,
charming, and sorceries, and used the help of familiar spirits and
soothsayers: and that which is more, placed a carved Image in the house of God,
flat against the second commandment of the law: So that he did not only go
astray and err himself, in giving over his mind to most wicked and damnable
heresies: but also seduced the people by his pernicious example and authority,
to do the like mischief. And that which is yet more and worst of all, he
made no account nor reckening of the admonitions of the Prophets, but the
rather and the more, hardened his heart to run out into all manner of
cruelty and wickedness, that his sins might have their full measure. For
the very stones of the streets of Jerusalem were stained from one corner to
another with the guiltless and innocent blood of those, that either for
dissuading him from, or not yeeldihg unto his abominable and detestable
Idolatry, were cruelly murdered: amongst the number of which slain innocents,
many suppose that the Prophet Esaias (although he was of the blood royal) was
with a strange manner of torment put to death. 2. King. 12.
Wherefore the flame of Gods ire was kindled against him and his people: so
that they stirred up the Assyrians against them, whose power and force they
being not able to resist, were subdued, and the king himself taken and put in
fetters and bound in chains, carried captive to Babylon: but being there in
tribulation, he humbled his soul, and prayed unto the Lord his God: who for
all his wicked, cruel, and abominable Apostasy, was entreated of him, and
received him to mercy: yea and brought him again to Jerusalem into his unhoped
for kingdom. Then was he no more unthankful to the Lord for his wonderful
deliverance but being touched with true repentance for his former life,
abolished the strange gods, broke down their altars, and restored again the
true religion of God, and gave straight commandment to his people to do the
like. Wherein it was the pleasure of the Highest to leave a notable memorial
unto all posterity, of his great and infinite mercy toward poor and miserable
sinners, to the end that no man (be his sins never so heinous) should at any
time despair: for, where sin abounds, Romans 5.
there grace abounds much more. Admit that this revolt of Manasses was far
greater and more outrageous then was Salomons, yet his true repentance found
the grace to be raised up from that woeful downfall: for, God has mercy on
whom he will have mercy, Romans 9.15. Romans 11.33.
and compassion on whom he will have compassion. O the profound riches of the
wisdom and knowledge of God! How unspeakable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out.

2. Chron. 33.
Amon the wicked son of this repentant father, committed also the like
offense, in serving strange gods; but recanted not by like repentance:
Idolatry. Lib. 1. cap. 26,
and therefore God gave his own servants both will to conspire, and power to
execute his destruction, after he had swaied the kingdom but two years.

CHAP. XX. Of the third and worst sort of Apostataes.
BY how much the more God has in these latter days poured forth more
plentifully his graces upon the sons of men, by the manifestations of his
son Christ Jesus in the flesh, and sent forth a more clear light by the
preaching of his Gospel into the world then was before times: by so much the
more culpable before God, and guilty of eternal damnation are they, who being
once enlightened and made partakers of those excellent graces, come afterward
either to despise or make light account of them, or go about to suppress the
truth and quench the spirit, which instructed them therein. This is the sin
against the Holy Ghost, which is mentioned in the sixth and tenth chapter to the
Hebrews; and in the 12 of Luke, and in another place, it is called a sin unto
death, because it is impardonable, by reason that no excuse of ignorance can be
pleaded, nor any plaster of true repentance applied unto it. The Apostataes of
the old Testament under the law, were not guilty of this sin: for although
there were many that willingly and maliciously revolted and set themselves
against the Prophets of God, making war as it were with the holy ghost, yet
seeing they had no such clear testimonies of Christ Jesus, and declaration of
Gods spirit as we have, their sin can not be properly said directly to be
against the H. ghost, and so never to be remitted; according to the description
of this sin in those passages of Scripture, which were before recited: as it
may manifestly appear by the former example of king Manasses. The Apostle
himself likewise does auerre the truth hereof, when he says, If we sin
w^llingly after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sins: Heb. 10.26, 27, 28, 29.
but a fearful looking for of judgment, and violent fire which shall devour
the adversaries. If any man despised Moses law, he died without mercy under
two or three witnesses: of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be
worthy, which treads under foot the son of God, and counts the blood of the
Testament as a profane thing, whereby he was sanctified, and does despite
the spirit of grace? Here we may see, that this sin is proper to those only
that lived under the Gospel, and have tasted of the comfort and knowledge of
Christ. Judas Iscariot (that wicked and accursed varlet) committed the deed,
and feels the scourge of this great sin: for he (being a disciple, nay an
Apostle of Christ Jesus, moved with covetousness, after he had devised and
concluded of the manner and complot of his treason with the enemies sold his
Lord and master the Savior of the world, for thirty pieces of silver, and
betrayed him into the hands of thieves and murderers, who sought nothing but
his destruction. After this vile traitor had performed this execrable purpose
(by reason whereof he is called the son of perdition) he could find no rest
nor repose in his guilty conscience, but was horribly troubled and tormented
with remorse of his wickedness, judging himself worthy of a thousand deaths,
for betraying that innocent and guiltless blood. If he looked up, he saw the
vengeance of God ready to fall upon him and ensnare him: if he looked down,
he saw nothing but hell gaping to swallow him up: the light of this world was
odious to him, and his own life displeased him, so that being plunged into the
bottomless pit of despair, he at last strangled himself, Matthew. 27. Acts. 1.
and burst in twain in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out.

Suid.
There is a notable example of Lucian, who having professed Christianity for a
season under the Emperor Traian, fell away afterward, and became so profane
and impious, as to make a mock at religion and divinity, whereupon his surname
was called Atheist. This wretch, as he barked out (like a foul mouthed dog)
bitter taunts against the religion of Christ, seeking to rent and abolish it:
so he was himself in Gods vengeance torn in pieces and devoured of dogs.

Porphyrie also (a whelpe of the same litter) after he had received the
knowledge of the truth, for despite and anger that he was reproved of his
faults by the Christians, set himself against them, and published books full
of horrible blasphemies to discredit and ouerthtow the Christian faith. But
when he perceived how fully and sufficiently he was confuted, and that he was
reputed an accursed and confounded wretch for his labor, in terrible despair
and anguish of soul, he died.

Julian the Emperor, surnamed the Apostate, cast himself headlong into the
same gulf: for having been brought up and instructed from his childhood in
the Christian faith, and afterward a while a professed reader thereof to others
in the Church, as soon as he had obtained the Empire, maliciously revolted from
his profession, and resisted with all his power, Socrat. Theod. Sozom.
the says and Church of Christ, endeavoring by all means possible, either by
force to ruinate and destroy it, or by fine sleights and subtilties to
undermine it. And because his purpose was to do what hurt he could to
Christians; therefore he studied by all he could to please, content, and uphold
the contrary party, I mean the Painyms: he caused their temples first to be
opened, which Constantine his predecessor had shut up: he took from the
Christian Churches and their ministers, those privileges, liberties, and
commodities which the said Constantine had bestowed upon them: and not content
with this, he confiscated the Church revenues, Atheism, Lib. 1. cap. 25.
and imposed great taxes and tributes upon all that professed the name of
Christians, and forbad them to have any schools of learning for their
children. And yet more to vex and grieve them, he translated many ordes of the
Church discipline and policy into Paganism. After he had thus by all means
striuen to beat down the scepter of Christ's kingdom, it turned quite
contrary to his expectation; for in stead thereof, the scepter of his own
kingdom was broken and brought to naught: at that time when making war upon
the Persians, he was wounded with an arrow, which pierced his armor, and diued
so deep into his side, Socrat. lib. 3. hist. ecclesiast. cap. 20.
that he died thereof. When he undertook this voyage, he was furnished with
such bravery both of apparel and all things else, as it might seem it
appertained to him and none else to ouerwhelme and ouersway the world, still
belching out threats against poor Christians, whom he had determined at his
return from Persia utterly to destroy and leave none alive, as was afterward
reported by one of his counsel. The number of his soldiers was so
innumerable, and his strength so impregnable, that he made no other reckening,
but to be lord of Persia in a very short space. But lo how the Lord
ouerturneth the attempts of his enemies: this great army (as S. Chrysostom
reports against the heathen) in which he put so much confidence, seemed ere
long to be rather a vast and weak multitude of women and infants, then an host
of warriors: for by his evil and foolish conduct and government, there rose so
great a famine amongst them, that their horses which were provided for the
battle, served for their bellies, yea and for want of that too, many hundreds
died for hunger and thirst. Ever when he skirmished his own side came to the
worst, doing more scath to themselves, then to their enemies: and last (leading
them so indiscreetly) they could not by any means escape, but were constrained
after he was slain, to entreat the Persians to suffer them to retire: and so
as many as could, escaped and fled away to save their lives. And thus this
brave army was thus miserably dismembered and discomfited, to the everlasting
shame of that wicked Apostate.

One of the treasurers of this wicked Emperor, (who to please his master,
Theod. lib. 3. cap. 13. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 8. Contempt the word, Lib. 1. cap.
34.
forsook also the religion of Christ) being on a time mocking and deriding the
ministry of the holy word, died miserably on a sudden, vomiting his own blood
out of his mouth: and (as Chrysostom says) his privy parts being rotten and
putrified, and consumed with lice, for all that ever he could do to remedy the
same.

It is recorded of Trebellius the first king of the Bulgarians, that being
converted with his people to the faith of Christ, to the end to give himself
the quieter to the meditation and exercise of religion, resigned over his
kingdom to his eldest son: whom when he perceived to renounce the faith,
and to follow strange gods, he not only deprived of all his royal dignity, but
also caused his eyes to be put out for a punishment of his Apostasy, and
bestowed the kingdom upon his other son: showing thereby, that he that
abandoneth the true light of salvation, is not worthy to enjoy the comfortable
light of the world.

A Divine of Louaine, one James Latonus, who was well instructed at the first
in the knowledge of the truth: afterward renouncing the same, endeavored with
all his power to impugn and oppress it: this man being on a time mounted into
a pulpit to preach before the Emperor Charles the fifth, was at the very instant
so amassed and astonished, that no man could perceive what he said, and so made
himself a laughing stock to all that audience: seeing himself thus disgraced,
he returned from Brussels to Louaine, where he fell into such grief and sorrow
of mind for the dishonor which he had gotten, that it turned at length into
despair: and in his daily lectures these or like words oftentimes escaped him,
after that goodly sermon, that he had impugned the truth of God: which when
diverse of his own coat heard, they caused him to be shut up fast in a house,
where in desperation he died telling every man he was damned, and that he
could not hope for salvation or remission of his sins, because that of mere
malice he had resisted and made war with God.

Cardinal Poole an Englishman, had also sometimes professed himself to be well
seen in the sincerity of the gospel, yet contrary to his conscience he sent
into his country the trophies and ensigns of Antichrist the Pope, which
before had been rased out, and abolished the realm: but he died two or three
days after queen Mary, in horrible griefs terrors and fearfulness, without
any show of repentance.

Stephan Gardener bishop of Winchester, and afterward Chancellor of England,
showed in his young years some forwardness to withstand the Popish abuses and
superstitions: but as soon as he was exalted to honor he turned over a new
leaf, and began freshly and furiously to afflict and to rend the poor and
faithful servants of Christ, putting them to the cruellest deaths he could
devise. And yet more to discover his profanesse and rebellion, he wrote many
books against the pure religion of God: and being thus swollen with venomous
spite against the son of God, beside the extreme covetousness, whoredoms,
and extortions which reigned in him, behold the Lord laid his hand of wrath
upon him, and stroke him with so strange a malady, that before his death such
horrible stincke issued from him, that none of his friends and servants no not
himself could endure the savor thereof: his belly was swollen like a taber, his
eyes distracted and sunk into his head, his cheeks thin, and the appearance of
his whole face very terrible: his breath sauoured of a filthy and intolerable
stincke, and all his members were rotten, with continual griefs and sownings:
yet this vile wretch in the midst of al these torments ceased not to yell out
continual blasphemies, and infamous speeches, and so despighting and maugring
God, died.

Peter Castellan bishop of Maston having attained to great riches and renown
by the means of the gospel, turned notwithstanding his back to Christ, and
mightily inueyed in his sermons at Orleance against the profession of his
religion: seeking to make it known that he had not only abiured and denied
it, but also that he was a professed adversary unto it. This man sitting at a
time in his chair, fell into a strange disease which no Physician had ever
seen or could search out the cause of, for one half of his body was extreme
hot and burned like fire, the other extreme cold and frozen like ise: and in
this torment with horrible cries and gronings he ended his life.

A gray friar called Picard, who once was not ashamed of the Gospel,
afterward set himself to preach against that which he had professed, and
being in the pulpit at Orleance after infinite blasphemies which he disgorged
against the truth, at last said, That he protested before God and the whole
assembly that he would never preach more after that day, because he was an
Apostatae: which saying he by and by impudently and constantly denied to the
peril and damnation of his own soul: thinking by his horrible curses and
forswearings to abuse the poor ignorant and superstitious people: but he no
sooner came into the field, but the puissant hand of God ouerreached him and
stroke him speechless, so that he was carried thence half dead: and with in
short space died altogether without any appearance of repentance.

Among many other judges which showed themselves hot and rigorous in
persecuting and proceeding against the faithful prisoners of Valence in
Daulphin and other Romans, at that season when two ministers of the same city
suffered martyrdom: one Lanbespin a Counselor, and Ponsenas the Kings
attorney at the parliament of Grenoble, both two having been professors in
times past, were not the backwardest in that action: but God made them both
strange examples of his wrath; for Lanbespin falling in love with a young maid
was so extremely passionate therein, that he forewent his own estate, and
all bounds of civil honesty, to follow her up and down whether soever she
went: and seeing his love and labor despised and set at naught, he so pined
away with very thought, that making no reckoning of himself, such a multitude
of lice so fed upon him, and took so good liking of their pasture, that by no
means he could be cleansed of them, for they increased and issued out of every
part of his body in such number, as maggots are wont to engender in a dead and
rotten carrion. At length a little before his death seeing his own misery, and
feeling Gods heavy vengeance upon him, he began to despair of all mercy; and
to the end to abridge his miserable days, he resolved to hunger starve
himself to death: which purpose the lice furthered, for they stack so thick in
his throat as if they would have choked him every moment: neither could he
suffer any sustenance to pass down by reason of them. They that were eye
witnesses of this pitiful spectacle, were wonderously moved with compassion,
and constrained him to eat whether he would or not. And that they might make
him take cullisses and other stewed broathes, because he refused and strove
against them, they bound his arms and put gagges into his mouth to keep it
open whilst others poured in the food. And in this wise being gagged, he died
like a mad beast with abundance of lice that went down his throat: in so much
that the very Papists themselves stuck not to say, Persecution. lib. 1. cap.
15.
That as he caused the ministers of Valence to have gagges thrust into their
mouths and so put to death: so likewise he himself died with a gag in his
mouth.

As touching Pons^nas commonly called Bourrell, (a very butcher indeed of poor
Christians) after he had sold his own patrimony and his wives and friends
also to the end to buy out his office, and had spent that which remained in
house keeping, hoping in short space to rake up twice as much as he had
scattered, fell suddenly into a strange and unknown disease, and shortly grew
in despair of Gods succor and favor toward him, by a strong remembrance of
those of Valence and the other Romans which he had put to death, which would
never depart out of his mind, but still presented themselves before him:
Persecution. Lib. 1. cap. 15.
so that as one bestraught of reason and sense, he denied his maker and called
upon his destroier the Devil with most horrible and bitter cursings: which
when his clarke perceived, he laid out before him the mercies of God out of all
places of the scripture to comfort and restore his decayed sense. But in stead
of returning to God by repentance and prayer, he continued obstinate, and
answered his clarke (whose name was Steven) in this wife: Steven, Steven, thou
art black: So I am and it please you (quoth he) but I am neither Turk nor
Moore, nor Bohemian, but a Gascoigne of red hair. No, no (answered he) not so,
but thou art black: but it is with sin. That is true (quoth he) but I hope
in the bountiful mercy of God that for the love of Christ who died for me,
my black sins shall not be imputed to me. There he redoubling his choler,
cried mainely after his clarke, calling him Lutheran, Huguenot, villain. At
which noise his friends without rushed in to know what the matter was: but he
commanded that Steven his clarke should presently have a pair of bolts clapped
on his heels, and to be burned for an Heretic. In brief his choler and rage
boiled so furiously in him, that in short space he died a fearful death, with
horrible houling and outcries: his creditors scarce gave them respite to draw
his carcass out of his bed, before they seized upon all his goods, not leaving
his poor wife and children so much as a bed of straw to lie in: so grievous
was the curse of God upon his house.

Another great Prince having in former time used his authority and power to
the advancing of Gods kingdom: afterward being seduced by the allurements of
the world renounced God, and took part with the enemies of his church to make
war against it; in which war he was wounded to death: and is one notable
example of Gods just vengeance to all that shall in like manner fall away.

CHAP. XXI. Of Heretics.
AS it is a matter necessarily appertaining to the first commandment that the
purity and sincerity of the doctrine of Gods word be maintained, by the rule
whereof he would have us both know him and understand the holy mysteries which
are revealed to us therein: so also by the contrary, whatsoever tends to the
corrupting or falsifieng of the same word, rising from foolish and strange
opinions of humane reason, the same transgresses the limits of this
commandment: of which sort is Heresy, an evil of it own nature very
pernicious and contagious, and no less to be feared and shunned then the
heat of persecution: and by means whereof the whole nation of Christendom
has been heretofore tossed with many troubles, and the church of God
grievously vexed. But as truth got ever the upper hand, and prevailed against
falsehood: so the brochers and vpholders of falsehood came ever to the worse, and
were confounded as well by the strength of truth, as by the special judgments
of God sent down upon the most part of them.

Acts. 5.36.39. Eusebius. eccle. hist. lib 2. cap. 10. Joseph. antiq. lib. 18.
cap. 1. and lib. 20, cap. 2.
Theudas and Judas Galilaeus were two that seduced the Jews before Christ: for
the first of them said he was a Prophet sent from God, and that he could
divide the waters of Jordan by his word, as Joshua the servant of the Lord did.
The other promised to deliver them from the servitude and the yoke of the
Romans. And both of them by that means drew much people after them: so prone
is the common multitude to follow novelties, and to believe every new fangle
that is but yesterday set on broch. But they came both to a deserved
destruction: for Fatus the governor of Jury ouertooke Theudas, and sending his
trunck to the grave, carried his head as a monument to Jerusalem. As for Judas
he perished also and al his followers were dispersed, manifesting their ends
that their works were not of God but of men, and therefore must needs come to
naught.

Act. 13.
After Christ (in the Apostles time) there was one Elimas a sorcerer that
mightily withstood the doctrine of Paul and Barnabas before Sergius Paulus the
Deputy, and sowed a contrary heresy in his mind, but Paul full of the holy
Ghost set his eyes on him and said: O full of all subtlety and mischief, the
child of the Devil and enemy of righteousness, will thou not cease to
pervert the straight ways of the Lord? Now therefore behold the hand of the
Lord is upon thee, and thou shall be blind for a season. And immediately there
fell upon him a mist and darkness, and he went about to seek some to lead
him by the hand. And this recompense gained he for his erroneous and heretical
practice.

Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 6. Philip. M. chron.
A while after him under the Empire of Adrian arose there another called
Bencochab that professed himself to be the Messiah, and to have descended
from Heaven in the likeness of a Star, for the safety and redemption of the
people: by which fallacy he drew after him a world of seditious Disciples:
but at length he and many of his credulous rout were slain, and was called
by the Jews Bencozba (that is) the son of a lie, and this was the goodly
redemption which this Heretic brought upon his own head and many of his
fellows.

It is reported of Cerinthus an Heretic, that he denying and going about to
darken the doctrine of Christ's everlasting kingdom, Eusebius.
was overwhelmed by the sudden fall of an whote house which fell upon him and
his associates, as soon as Saint John was departed from it: for Ireneus says,
that he heard Polycarpus often report how Saint John being about to enter into
the bathes at Ephesus, when he perceived Cerinthus already within, departed
very hastily, saying to those that bore him company, that he feared that the
house would fall upon their heads, because of Cerinthus the Heretic that was
therein at that instant.

Manes, Eusebius. Socrat.
of whom the Maniches took their name and first oririginall, forged in his
foolish brain a fiction of two gods and two beginners, and rejecting the old
Testament and the true God which is revealed in the same, published a fifth
Gospel of his own forgerie, yea and was so besotted with folly (as Suidas
testifies of him) that he reported himself to be the holy Ghost: when he
had thus with his deuelish heresies and blasphemies infected the world, and was
pursued by Gods just judgment, at last for other wicked practices he had his
skin pulled over his ears alive, and so died in misery.

Montanus that blasphemous caitife, of whom came the Montanistes, or Pepuzian
heretics of a town in Phrigia called Pepuza, denied Christ our savior to be
God, and said he was but a man only like other men, without any participation
of divine essence: he called himself the comforter and holy spirit which was
forepromised to come into the world: and his two wives, Priscilla and
Maximilla, he named his prophetisses, and their writings prophecies: howbeit
all their cunning could not foretell nor prevent a wretched and desperate end
which befell him, for he hong himself after he had deluded the world a long
season, and proved by his end, his life to have been vile and damnable,
according to the Proverb, Nicephor. lib. 4. cap. 22. Centur. 2. cap. 8.
Qualis vita, finis ita, A cursed life and a cursed death.

Of all Heretics that ever troubled and afflicted Gods church, the Arians were
the chief: the author and ringleader of which crew, as by his vainglorious
pride and ambition he sought to extol himself above the clouds, bosting and
vaunting in his damnable error: Socrat. Theod. Sozom.
so by the just vengeance of God, he was abased lower then hell, and put in
everlasting shame and opprobrie: for he had long time as it were entered the
list and combated with Christ, and was condemned for an Heretic by the Nicene
counsel, and his books burned: and then afterward making show before
Constantine the Emperor with a solemn oath to recant his old errors, and
approve the profession of faith which the counsel of Nice had set forth
concerning Christ's divinity, whereunto also he subscribed his name: but all
that he did was in hypocrisy, to the end to renew and republish the more
boldly his false and pernicious doctrine. But when he thought himself nearest
to the attainement of his purpose, and braued it most with his supporters and
companions, even then the Lord stroke him with a soddaine fear in the open
street, and with such horrible panges in his guts, and vehement desire of
disburdening nature, that he was feign to come unto the public houses
appointed for that purpose, taking them which were next at hand for a shift:
but he never shifted from them again, for his breath went out of his mouth,
and his guts ran out of his fundament, and there lay he dead upon his own
excrements. As the Emperor Gonstantius was a great favorer and supporter of
this sect and maintained it against, and in despite of true Christians, and by
that means stirred up schisms and dissentions throughout all Christendom:
Socrat lib. 2. cap. 47.
so the Lord to requite him stirred up one Julian whom he himself had promoted
to honor to rebel against him: whose practices as he went about to suppress
and was even ready to encounter, a grievous apoplexy suddenly surcharged him
so sore, that he died of it before he could bring his purpose to pass.

The Emperor Valence was infected also with this poison, R ff. lib. 2. c. 13.
Iornand.
wherewith likewise he infected the Goths, who by his means were become the
greater part Arrians and not Christians: but neither went he unpunished, for
when he marched forth to repress the rage of the furious Goths, who were
spread over all Thracia, and had given them battle, he lost the day; and being
shamefully put to flight, was pursued so fiercely, that he was feign to hide
himself in a little house, which being set on fire by the Goths, he was burnt
therein.

As for Nestorius, which would maintain by his foolish and dangerous opinions,
that the divinity of Christ was divided from his humanity, making as it were
two Christ's of one, and two persons of one, Niceph. lib. 14. cap. 36.
and so turned vpside down the whole ground work of our salvation, escaped no
more the just vengeance of God, then all other heretics did: for first he was
banished into a far country, and there tormented with a strange disease: the
very worms did gnaw in pieces his blasphemous tongue, and at length the earth
opened her mouth and swallowed him up.

Concerning the Anabaptists, which rose up about five hundred years since, it
is evidently known how diverse ways God scourged and plagued many of them:
some of them were destroyed by troops and by thousands: others, miserably
executed and put to death in diverse places, as well for their monstrous and
damnable heresies, as for many mischiefs and outrages which they committed. By
all which things, God does exhibit and set before our eyes, how dear and
precious in his sight the pureness of his holy word, and the union of his
Church is: and how careful and zealous every one of us ought to be in
maintaining and upholding the same: when as he reuengeth himself so sharply
upon all those that go about to pervert and corrupt the sincerity thereof, or
which be breeders of new sects and divisions among his people.

Olympus, (by office bishop of Carthage, but by profession a favorer and
maintainer of the Arrian heresy) being upon a time in a bath washing himself,
Paul. Diac. in Anastas. hist. Sabel. lib. 5. c. 4. Blasphemy, Lib. 1. cap. 31.
Atheism, Lib. 1. cap. 25.
he uttered with an impious mouth, blasphemous words against the holy
Trinity: but a threefold thunderbolt came from above, and stroke him dead in
the same place; teaching him by his pain, and all other by experience, what it
is to blaspheme the Lord of heaven, or with polluted lips to mention his
sacred majesty: this happened in the year of our Lord God 510.

Cyrill has recorded unto us of his own knowledge, a more wonderful and
admirable wonder of God upon an heretic then all the rest, and such an one
indeed, as the like (I dare say) was never heard of, the history is this; After
the decease of S. Jerome, there stood up one Sabinianus, a perverse and
blasphemous fellow, that denied the distinctions of persons in the Trinity,
and affirmed the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost to be but one indistinct
person: and to give credit to his heresy, he wrote a book of such
blasphemies, tending to the confirmation of the same; and fathered it upon S.
Jerome, as being the author of it. But Siluanus the bishop of Nazaren mightily
withstood, and reproved him for deprauing so worthy a man now dead; and
offering his life for the truth, made this bargain with Sabinianus, that if S.
Jerome the next day did not by some miracle testify the falsnesse of his
cause, he would offer his throat to the hangman, and abide death: but if he
did that, then he should die. This was agreed upon by each party; and the day
following both of them accompanied with great expectation of the people,
resorted into the Temple of Jerusalem to decide the controversy. Now the day
was past, and no miracle appeared, so that Siluanus was commanded to yield his
neck to that punishment which himself was author of: which as he, most
willingly and confidently did, behold, an Image like to Saint Jerome in show,
appeared and slaied the hangmans hand, which was now ready to strike; and
vanishing forthwith, another miracle succeeded, Sabinianus head fell from his
shoulders, no man striking at it: and his carcass remained upon the ground
dead and senseless. Whereat the people amazed, praising God, claue unto
Siluanus, and abiured Sabinianus heresy. Wherein we may observe the
wonderful wisdom of God, both in punishing his enemies, and trying his
children whether they will stand to his truth or no: and learn thereby, neither
rashly to measure and limit the purposes of God, nor yet timerously to despair
of help in a good cause, though we see no means nor likelihood thereof.

Grimeald king of Lumbardie, was infected with the Arrian heresy, for which
cause the Lord punished him with untimely death, for having been let blood,
the eleventh day after as he strove to draw a bow, he opened the vain a new,
and so bled to death.

Cabades, Casp. head, lib. 3. cap. 10. and 15.
king of Persia when he saw his son Phorsuasa addicted to the Maniches, he
assembled as many as he could of that sect into one place, and there setting
his soldiers on them, slew them till there was not one left.

Photinus a Gallograecian, for renewing the heresy of Hebion, Platina sub.
Siricio 7.
and affirming Christ to be but an excellent man borne naturally by Mary, after
the manner of other men, excelling in justice and moral virtues, was by the
Emperor Valentinianus justly banished.

The Emperor Justinian, Niceph. l^b. 27. cap. 31.
favoring the heresy of the Apthardocites, when as he gave out one edict
whereby Anastasius the bishop and all other that maintained the truth should be
banished, Zen. com. 3.
suddenly he was stricken with an inward and invisible plague, which took away
his life, and forestalled his wicked and cruel determination from coming to
the desired effect. In all which examples we may see how God does not only
punish heretics themselves, but also their favorers and supporters, yea the
very places and cities wherein they lived and broched their blasphemies: Paul.
Dia^. lib. 5.
as by the destruction of Antioch is seen, which being a very sink of
heretics, was partly consumed with fire from heaven above, in the seventh year
of Justinius the Emperor, and partly overthrown with earthquakes below,
wherein Euphrasius the bishop and many other were destroyed

Moreover, besides those, there were under Pope Innocent the third, certain
heretics celled Albigonses, or Albiani, which being possessed with the same
spirit of fury, that the Maniches were, affirmed that there were two Gods; one
good, and another evil: they denied the resurrection, despised the sacraments,
and said that the souls of men after their separation, passed either into
hogs, oxen, serpents, or men, according to their merits: Contempt of the word,
Lib. 1. cap. 34.
they would not spare to pollute the temples appointed for the service of God,
with their excrements, and other filthy actions: and to defile the holy bibles
with urine in despite and contumely: This heresy like an evil weed, so grew
and increased, that the branches thereof spread over almost all Europe; a
thousand cities were polluted therewith: so that it was high time to cut it
short by violence and the sword, as it was: for they were oppressed with so
huge a slaughter, that an hundred thousand of them were slain, partly by
war, partly by fire at one time.

Gregory of Tours has recorded the life and death of an heretical monk of
Bordeaux, that by the help of Magic wrought miracles, and took upon him the
name and title of Christ, saying he could cure diseases, and restore those
that were past help by physic, unto their healths: he went attired with
garments made of goars hair, and an hood, professing an austerity of life
abroad, whereas he played the glutton at home: but at length his cousenage was
discovered, and he was banished the city, as a man unfit for civil society.

In the year of our Lord God 1204 in the Empire of Otto the fourth, there was
one Almaricus also that denied the presence of Christ in the sacrament,
Atheism, Lib. 1. cap. 25.
and said, that God spoke as well in profane Ovid, as holy Augustine: he
scoffed at the doctrine of the resurrection, and esteemed heaven and hell but
as an old wives fable: he being dead, his disciples were brought forth into a
large field near Paris, and there in the presence of the French king, degraded
and burnt: the dead carcass of Almaricus being taken out of the sepulcher and
burnt amongst them. It fell out that whilst they were in burning, there arose
so huge a tempest, that heaven and earth seemed to move out of their places,
wherein doubtless the souls of these wicked men felt by experience, that hell
was no fable, but a thing and such a thing as waited for all such rebels
against God as they were.

Anastasius, Emperor of Constantinople, being corrupted with the heresy of
Eutiches, published an edict, wherein all men were commanded to worship God not
under three persons as a trinity, but as a quaternitie, containing in it four
persons: and could not by any counsel be brought from that deuilish error,
but repelled from him diverse bishops with great reproach, which came to persuade
him to the contrary: for which cause not long after, a flash of lightning from
heaven suddenly seized upon him, and so he perished when he had reigned eight
and twenty years.

Justinius the second also, who after the death of Justinian obtained the
Imperial crown, was a man of exceeding pride and cruelty, contemning
poverty and murdering the nobility for the most part. In avarice his desire
was so insatiate, that he caused iron chests to be prepared, wherein he might
lock up that treasure which by unjust exactions he had extorted of the
people. Notwithstanding all this, he prospered well enough, until he fell
into the heresy of Pelagian, soon after which, the Lord bereft him of his
wits, and shortly after of his life also, when he had reigned eleven years.

Mahomet, by birth an Arabian, and by profession one of the most monstrous
heretics that ever lived, began his heresy in the year 625, his offspring
was but out of a base stock: for being fatherless, one Abdemonoples a man of
the house of Ismael, bought him for his slave, and loved him greatly for his
favor and wit: for which cause, he made him ruler over his merchandise and
other business. Now in the mean while one Sergius a monk, (flying for
heresy into Arabia) instructed him in the heresy of Nestorius: a while after,
his master died without children, and left behind him much riches, and his wife
a widow of fifty years of age, whom Mahomet married; and when she died, was
made heir unto all her riches. So that now (what for his wealth and cunning in
magic) he was had in high honor among the common people. Wherefore (by the
counsel of Sergius) he called himself, The great Prophet of God. And shortly
after (when his fame was published) he devised a law and kind of religion
called Alcaron, wherein he borrowed something almost of all the heresies that
were before his time: with the Sabellians he denied the Trinity: with the
Maniclies he said there was but two persons in the Deity: he denied the
equality of the Father with the Son, with Eunomius: and said with Macedone,
that the Holy Ghost was a creature: and approved the community of women, with
the Nicholaits: he borrowed of the Jews circumcision, and of the Gentiles
much superstition: and somewhat he took of the Christian verity, besides many
deuilish fantasies invented of his own brain: those that obeyed his law, he
called Sarazins. Now after he had lived in these monstrous abuses forty
years, the Lord cut him off by the falling sickness, which he had dissembled
a long time, saying when he was taken therewith, that the Angel Gabriel
appeared unto him, whose brightness he could not behold; but the Lord made
that his destruction, which he imagined would be for his honor, and setting
forth his sect.

Stow Chron.
Infinite be the examples of the destruction and judgment of private heretics
in all ages, and therefore we will content our selves with them that be most
famous. In the year of our Lord 1561, and the third year of the reign of Q.
Elizabeth, there was in London one William Geffery that constantly avouched a
companion of his, called John Moore, to be Christ our Savior, and could not be
reclaimed from this mad persuasion, until he was whipped from Southwarke to
Bedlam, where the said Moore meeting him, was whipped also until they both
confessed Christ to be in heaven, and themselves to be sinful and wicked men.

But most strange it is, The same.
how diverse sensible and wise me^ were deluded and carried beside themselves by
the subtilty of Satan in the year 1591, and the reign of Q. Elizabeth 33: the
memory thereof is yet fresh in every man's head and mouth, and therefore. I will
but briefly touch the same. Edmond Coppinger and Henry Arthington, two
gentlemen being associated with one William Hacket, sometimes a profane and very
lewd person, but now converted in outward show, though not in inward affection,
were so seduced by his hypocritical behavior and the devils extraordinary
devices, that from one point to another they came at last to think, that this
Hacket was anointed to be the Judge of the world: and therefore coming on a day
to Hacke^s lodging in London, Hypocrisy in regard of Hacket, lib. 1. c. 22.
he told them that he had bin anointed of the H. ghost: then Coppinger asked
him what his pleasure was to be done: Go your way (says he) and proclaim in
the city that Christ Jesus is come with his fan in his hand to judge the earth:
and if they will not believe it, let them come and kill me if they can. Then
Coppinger answered, it should be don forthwith: and thereupon (like mad men) he
and Arthington ran into the streets, and proclaimed their message aforesaid,
and when by reason of the concourse of people they could not proceed any
further, they got up into two empty carts in Cheap, crying, Repent, repent, for
Christ Jesus is come to judge the world: and then pulling a paper out of his
bosom, he read out of it many things touching the office and calling of Hacket,
how he represented Christ by partaking part of his glorified body, etc.
besides, they called themselves his prophets, one of Justice, another of mercy.
And thus these simple men were strangely deceived by a miraculous illusion of
Satan, who no doubt by strange apparitions had brought them into this vain
conceit. But let us observe the end of it, it was thus: The whole city being
in a maze, took Hacket the breeder of this devise, and arraigning him before
the Mayor and other Justices, found him guilty as well of this seditious
practice, as of speaking traitorous words against the Queen: Wherefore he was
shortly after hanged on a gibbet in Cheape-side, counterfaiting to his last,
his old devises, and at length uttering horrible blasphemies against the
majesty of God. As for his Prophets, Coppinger died the next day in Bridewell,
and Arthington was kept in prison upon hope of repentance. This though it be no
fit example for Heresy, yet because it comes somewhat near unto it, I
thought it meet to insert it in this place.

CHAP. XXII. Of Hypocrites.
AS God is a spirit and truth, so he will be worshipped in truth of spirit and
affection, and not in hypocrisy and dissimulation: for which cause he
commands us by the mouth of Moses in the sixth and tenth Chapters of
Deuteronomie, To love and honor him with all our heart, with all our soul,
and all our strength, which Hypocrites are so far from doing, that they have
nothing in them but a vain show of coined religion, and so by that means
break the first commandment, thinking to bleare Gods eyes with their outward
shows and ceremonies, as if he were like men to see nothing but that which is
without, and offers it self to the view: but it is quite contrary: for it is
he that descrieth the heart, 1. Sam. 16.
and searches out all the corners thereof, to see what truth and sincerity is
therein; and therefore hates and detesteth all hypocrisy, and abhors all
such service as is performed only for fashion sake or in regard of men: as
appears by the reproves and checkes which the Prophet Esaias denounces
against the hypocrites of his time: who made show of honoring God, but it was
but with their lips and vain and frivolous ceremonies, not in truth of heart
and affection: Mat. 23.
so our Savior Christ thundered out his curses against the Scribes and
Pharisees with the judgments and vengeance of God for their Hypocrisy. Number.
22.
With this sin was Balaam that wicked Prophet upon whom God bestowed a
certain gift of prophecy, infected: for when King Balac sent for him to curse
the Israelites, he made as though he would no^ enterprise any thing contrary to
the will of God, as if he had had him in great reverence and estimation:
nevertheless being allured and entised by the golden presents which were sent
him, he despised Gods commandment, and discovered his own secret impiety,
and became an hired fl^ue and enemy to the people of God: but as he was in
journey toward him, there happened a strange and prodigious thing, an Angel
met him by the way with a naked sword in his hand, ready to hew him in pieces,
whom when he himself being blinded with covetousness as with a veil, could
not perceive, his ass saw and was afraid; and that which was more strange the
poor brute and dumb beast, 2. Pet. 2.16.
speaking in anew language like a man, reproved his masters madness: whereat
he being sore amassed, and notwithstanding all the asses humbling before the
Angel, yet pursued his unhappy journey to his eternal shame and confusion,
as one of an obstinate and hardened heart: for he was forced by the spirit of
God to bless those whom he had purposed curse: and yet further discovering
his Hypocrisy and envious disposition, he was the cause why the Israelites
provoked the wrath of God against themselves, through the pernicious and
deceiuable counsel which he gave to the Madianites: for which cause he
himself was in the end slain. Number. 25. Number. 3.


In this range may we place, Geefie, Blizeus servant, who being as it were the
Disciple and professed follower both of his masters life and doctrine, the true
Prophet of God, by whom for the further assurance and confirmation of the grace
and blessing of God he had seen many notable and excellent miracles wrought:
2. King. 5.
yet notwithstanding was not true of heart, but drawn aside by desire of
lucre, that caused him secretly (unwitting to his master) to run after
Naaman the Syrian, Avarice lib. 2. cap. 35.
in his masters name, for the money and apparel which his master had before
refused: and supposing his knauerie to be so hidden that it could not come to
light, God discovered and pulled off his vizard, and punished as well the deed
as the manner of doing thereof, upon him and his posterity with a perpetual
leprosy. Saint Luke in the first chapter of the Acts does at large describe
the hypocrisy of Ananias and Saphira, who that they might seem zealous to
Godward, and charitable toward the Saints, having sold a certain possession
under pretense of giving the price thereof among the poor, retained covertly a
certain portion of it to their own use, being so impudent as to lie unto the
Holy Ghost, the president of the Church and sounder of all secrets: but being
attached by the mouth of Peter, a just and fearful judgment of God fell on
them both: even their sudden death at the Apostles feet one after the other.

Nicephorus tells of one Philip the first Emperor that undertook the name
and profession of Christ, but by the report of other writers, it proceeded not
from any zeal of religion or fear of God: but only to the intent to
counterfeit a kind of honesty and cover his foul vices and cruelties under
the cloak of religion. But God quickly espied and punished his deep
hypocrisy: for before he had reigned full five years, both he and his son
were slain at Verona by his men of war. Let us learn then this lesson, by
these examples to carry our selves in all pureness, sincerity, and good
conscience before God; that our thoughts, words, and deeds being estranged
from all hypocrisy and dissimulation, may be agreeable and acceptable in his
sight.

Moreover even as hypocrisy can wind and insinuate her self into the pure and
sincere service of God, as has been declared; so does she play her part with no
less bravery and ostentation in superstition and idolatry: for the truth
whereof (before I proceed further) I will set down a history not altogether
unworthy the reading and remembering: Two hundred years are not yet past since
there was in the reign of Charles the seventh king of France, certain
preaching Friar of Britain called Friar Thomas, Euguerran de monstr. and Vol.
2.
who by his dissembling customs and brags, under pretense of a certain
reformation of manners, so mightily deceived the whole world, that every where
he was reputed for a holy man: this Friar puffed up with a greedy desire of
vainglorie, used to go from town to town and from country to country,
finding exceeding honorable entertainment in every place, which he took
very willingly; and that he might ride at the more ease, he got him a little
young mule that would go very softly, and in this sort appointed, he was
accompanied with diverse of his own order, and many other Disciples that went
for the most part one foot by him: the people flocked together from all
quarters to see him, yea and many were so besotted as to forsake their fathers,
mothers, wives, and children to attend upon this holy man: always when he
came near to any city the Burgesses and Gentlemen and Clergy with one consent
came forth to meet him, doing him as much honor and reverence (says mine
author) as they would have done to one of Christ's Apostles if he were alive:
he was very well content that very honorable personages, as Knights and such
others, being on foot should hold his mule by the bridle, to be in stead of
pages and lacquies to lead him into the towns: his entrance into every City
was with great pomp and magnificence, and his lodging provided at the richest
and stateliest Burgess house. Now that he might the better play his part, they
prepared him in the best and convenient places of the city ascaffold richly
hung and garnished, upon the which his custom was first to say Mass, the^ to
begin his sermon, wherein he ripped up the vices of every estate, but reproved
especially the Clergies enormities, because of their concubines and whores
which they maintained: wherein he did say nothing but that which was good and
lawful: but in the same he used no discretion, but joined madness and
sacrilege with his Monkish nature in stirring up little children to exclaim
upon women for their attire: promising certain days of pardon to them, as if
he had been a God: so that ladies and gentlewomen were enforced to lay aside
for a season their accustomed trinckets. Moreover also toward the end of his
sermons he commanded to be brought unto him their chestbords, cards, dice,
nine pinnes, and such other trash, which he openly threw into the fire to be
burned before them all: and that he might give more strength and credit to
this his paltrie riffraffe he caused the men and women to be divided on each
side with a line drawn betwixt them as in a tennis court: and by this means
he drew together sometimes twenty thousand persons: so ready and zealous, is
and ever has been the world to follow after such hypocritical deceivers,
rather then the true preachers of Gods word.

But let us hear the issue of this holy hypocrit, it was thus, when he had in
the forenamed sort trauersed as well France and Flanders; it took him in the
head to pass the mountains and visit Rome: imagining that it was no hard
matter to obtain the Popeship, seeing that in all places where he went there
was equal honor given unto him: or if he should fail of that hope, yet at
least the Pope and his cardinals would entertain him honorably: but it
happened far shorr of his expectation, for Popes are not so prodigal of their
honors to do any such reverence to a poor silly Monk, but are very niggards
and sparing thereof even toward Kings; so far are they from leaving their
thrones of majesty to any other: neither must we think that the Pope cared
greatly for all those tricks and quiddities of Friar Thomas, seeing he
himself is the only Merchant of such trash. When he was arrived at Rome,
Pope Eugenius seeing that he came not according to custom to kiss his
holiness feet, sent for him twice, and understanding that he refused to come,
and that he fained himself to be evil at ease: sent his treasurer, but not
to impart to him any treasure, but to apprehend and attach him. The Friar now
perceiving that inquiry was made for him, and that they were at his chamber
door, leapt out at a window thinking by that means to escape: but he was
quickly taken prisoner by the treasurers servants waiting before the door, and
brought before the consistory of Cardinals: law proceeded against him, by
doom whereof though no erroneous opinions could be proved against him, he was
adjudged to the stake to be burned for an Heretic: but it was sufficient to
make him guilty, because he defamed the Priests in his sermons, and had
spoken so broadly of their gossips, and had been so bold to usurp the
authority of giving pardons, which the Popes claim for a privilege of their
own sea, and besides had made no more account of him that is a petty God on
earth: but had done all these things without his leave and license: it was an
hard matter to be induced of the bishops of Rome that a silly Monk should so
intermeddle with their affairs, and should derogate any whit from their
supremacy: seeing that they quit themselves so well with Kings and Emperors,
and can at every right occasion make them stoop: neither is it to be doubted,
but that Pope Eugenius was very jealous of the honor which Friar Thomas
attained unto in every place, and fearful least his presence might disturb
his present estate. By this means God who uses all instruments for his own
purpose, and can direct every particular to the performing of his will, did
punish and correct the hypocrisy of this Monk, that seemed to be holy and
wise being indeed nothing but foolish, stubborn and ambitious.

Moreover most notable was the hypocrisy of two counterfeit holy maids, Stow.
chron.
one of Kent in England called Elizabeth Barton, the other of France called
Ioane la Pucelle: the former of which by the procurement and information of one
Richard Master, person of Aldington, and Edward Bocking Doctor of divinity a
Monk of Canterbury, and diverse others, counterfeited such manner of traunces
and distortions in her body, with the uttering of diverse counterfeit virtues,
and holy words tending to the rebuke of sin, and reproving such new opinions
as there began to spread, that she won great credit amongst the people, and
drew after her a multitude of favorites: besides she would prophecy of
things to come, as that she should be helped of her disease by none but the
image of our lady in Aldington; whether being brought, she appeared to the
people to be suddenly relieved from her sickness: by means of which hypocrital
dissimulation, she was brought into marvelous estimation, not only with the
common people, but with diverse great men also, insomuch that a book was put in
print, touching her fained miracles and revelations. Howbeit not content to
delude the people, she began also to meddle with the king himself, Henry the
eigth: saying that if he proceeded to be deuorced from his wife Queen
Katharine he should not remain king one month after, and in the reputation of
God not one day: for which and many other tricks practiced by her, she with
her accomplices was arraigned of high treason, and after confession of all her
knauerie, drawn from the tower to Tiborne and there hanged; the holy maids
head being set upon London bridge, and the others on certain gates of the city.

Stow. chron.
The other named la Pucelle de dieu, maruellously deluded with her counterfeit
hypocrisy, Charles the seventh king of France, and all the whole French nation
in such sort that so much credit was attributed unto her, that she was honored
as a saint, and thought to be sent of God to the aid of the French king: by
her means Orleance was won from the English, and many other exploits
achieved, which (to be short) I will refer the reader unto in the French
Chronicles, where they shall find her admirable knauerie at large discovered.
But touching her end it was on this sort: as she marched on horseback to the
town of Champaigne, to remove the siege wherewith it was girt by the Duke of
Burgoine and other of the English captains, Sir John Leupembrough a Burgonian
knight took her alive, and conveyed her to the city of Roane, where she faining
her self with child, when the contrary was known, was condemned and burnt.
And thus these two holy women that in a diverse kind mocked the people of
England and France by their hypocrisy, by the justice of God came to deserved
destructions.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Coniurers, and Enchanters.
IF God by his first commandment has enioined every one of us to love serve
and cleave unto him alone in the conjunction and unity of a true faith and hope
unremovable: there is no doubt but he forbids on the other side that which
is contrary to this foresaid duty, and herein especially that cursed
familiarity which diverse miserable wretches have with that lying spirit the
father of error, by whose delusions and subtlety they busy themselves in the
study of sorceries and enchantments, whereupon it is forbidden the Israelites
in the nineteenth of Leuiticus, Leuit. 19.31.
to turn after familiar spirits, or to seek to soothsayers to be defiled by
them: and the more to withdraw men from this damnable crime, in the chapter
following there is a threat set down against it in manner of a commandment,
20.27.
That if either man or woman have a spirit of divination or soothsaying in
them, they should die the death, they should stone them to death, their blood
should be upon them: Exodus 22.18.
so in the twenty two of Exodus the law of God says, Thou shall not suffer a
witch to live: and Moses following the same steps, gives an express charge in
in the eighteenth of Deutronotny against this sin saying, Let none be found
among thee that uses witchcraft, Deu. 18.10.11.
nor that regards the clouds or times, nor a sorcerer, or a charmer, or that
counsels with a spirit, or a teller of fortunes, or that asks counsel at
the dead: for all that do such things are abomination unto the Lord: 1. Sam.
15. Isay. 8.19.20.
and therefore this sin in the 1. Sam. 15. Is reputed amongst the most
heinous and enormous sins that can be? When they shall say unto you (says
the Prophet) enquire at them that have a spirit of divination and at the
soothsaier which whisper and murmr: answer Should not a people inquire at
their God? From the living to the dead? To the law and to the testimony?
Wherefore it was a commendable thing and worthy the imitation when they that had
received the faith by Paul's preaching, Acts. 19.19.
having before used curious arts as Magic and such like, being touched with
the fear of God brought their books and burned them before all men, although
the price thereof amounted to fifty thousand pieces of silver, which by Budeus
his supputatio^ arises to five thousand French crowns. The counsels, as that
of Carthage, and that other of Constantinople kept the second time in the
suburbs, utterly condemned the practice of all coniurers and enchanters. The
twelve tables in Rome adjudged to punishments those that bewitched the standing
corn. And for the civil law, this kind is condemned both by the law Iulia and
Cornelia. In like manner the wisest Emperors, those I mean that attained to
the honor of Christianity, ordained diverse edicts and prohibitions under very
shape and grievous punishments against all such villainy: as Constantine in the
ninth book of the Cod. tit. 18. enacted that whosoever should attempt any
action by art Magic against the safety of any person, or should bring in or
stir up any man to make him fall into any mischief or riotous demeanor,
should suffer a grievous punishment: in the fifth law he forbids every man
to ask counsel at witches, or to use the help of charmers and sorcerers
under the pain of death. Let them (says he in the sixth law) be thrown to
wild beasts to be devoured, that by coniuring or the help of familiar spirits
go about to kill either their enemies or any other. Moreover, in the seventh
law he wills, that not so much as his own courtiers and servants, if they
were found faulty in this crime, should be spared but severely punished: yet
nevertheless, many of this age give themselves over to this filthy sin,
without either fear of God or respect of law: Some thorough a foolish and
dangerous curiosity: others through the ouerruling of their own vile and
wicked affections; and a third sort troubled with the terrors of an evil
conscience, desire to know what shall befall and happen unto them in the end.

Thus Saul the first king of Israel being troubled in himself, and terrified
with the army of the Philistims that came against him, would needs foreknow his
own fortune, and the issue of this doubtful war. Now whereas before whilst
he performed the duty of a good king, and obeyed the commandment of God, he
had cleansed his realm of witches and enchaunters: yet is he now so mad as to
make them serve his own turn, and to use their counsels in his extremity,
adding this wickedness to the number of his other great sins, that the
measure thereof might be full: he went therefore to a witch to seek counsel,
who caused a devil to appear and speak unto him in the shape of Samuel, and
foretell him of (Gods just judgment upon his wickedness) his utter and final
ruin and destruction.

Plutarch in the life of Romulus reports of one Cleomedes, a man in
proportion of body and cruel practices, Plutarch. Romulus.
huge and giantlike: who for that he was the cause of the death of many little
children, and was pursued, by the parents of those dead infants who sought to
be revenged on him for that cruel part, he hid himself in a coffer closing
the lid fast to him: but when the coffer was broken up, the coniurer was not
therein neither alive nor dead, but was transported by the malicious spirit the
devil, unto a place of greater torment.

Ancient histories make mention of one Piso, a man of credit and authority
among the Romans, Tacit.
whom the Emperor Tiberius gave unto his son Germanicus for an helper and
counselor in the managing of his affairs in Asia, so well was he persuaded
both of his sufficiency, courage, and loialtie toward him. It chanced a while
after that he was suspected to have bewitched to death the said Germanicus:
the signs and marks of which suspicion were, certain dead men's bones dug
out of the earth with diverse charms and curses, and Germanicus name engraven
in tables of lead, and such like trash which witches exercise to murder men
withal, were found with him: whereupon Tiberius himself accused him of that
crime, but would not have the ordinary judges to sit upon it: but by special
privilege committed the enquiry thereof unto the Senate. Pise, when every man
thought he was preparing himself for his defense against the morrow (like a
wise man to prevent all mischiefs) was found dead the day before, having his
throat cut: and as most likelihood was, finding himself guilty of the fact,
and too weak to ouerway the other side, forestalled the infamy of a most
shameful death, by killing himself: although there be that say, that the
Emperor sent one of purpose to dispatch him in this manner.

Lib. 3. cap. 4. Of the Northren people.
Olaus Magnus tells of one Meth^tin, a noble magitian in old time, that by
his delusions did so deceive and blind the poor ignorant people, that they
accounted him not only for some mighty man, but rather for some demi god; and
in token of the honor and reverence they bare him, Refer this also to the lib.
1. cap 24.
they offered up sacrifices unto him, which he refused not: but at last his
knaueries and cousenages being laid open, they killed him whom before they so
much esteemed: and because his dead carcass with filthy stink infected the
approchers, they dug it up, and broched it upon the end of a stake to be
devoured of wild beasts.

Chap. 18. of the foresaid book.
Another called Hollere (as the same author witnesses) played the like tricks
in abusing the peoples minds as strongly as the other did: insomuch that he was
reputed also for a god: for he joined with his craft, strength and power, to
make himself of greater authority in the world. When he listed to pass over
the sea, he used no other ship, but a bone figured with certain charms,
whereby he was transported, as if both sails and wind had helped and driven him
forwards; yet his enchanted bone was not of power to save him from being
murdered of his enemies. The same author writes, that in Denmark there was
one Otto a great rouer and pirat by sea, who used likewise to pass the seas
without the help of ship or any other vessel, and sunk and drowned all his
enemies with the waves which by his cunning he stirred up, but at last this
cunning practiser was ouerreached by one more expert in his Art then himself,
and as he had served others, so was he himself served, even swallowed up of
the waves.

There was a coniurer at Saltzbourg, that vaunted that he could gather together
all the serpents within half a mile round about into a ditch, and feed them
and bring them up there: and being about the experiment, behold the old and
grand serpent came in the while, which whilst he thought by the force of his
charms to make to enter into the ditch among the rest, he set upon, and
enclosed him round about like a girdle so strongly, that he drew him perforce
into the ditch with him, where he miserably died. Mark here the wages of such
wicked miscreants, that as they make it their occupation to abuse simple folk,
they are themselves abused and cousened of the devil, who is a finer iuggler
then them all.

It was a very lamentable spectacle that chanced to the governor of Mascon, a
magitian whom the devil snatched up in dinner while, and hoisted aloft,
carrying him three times about the town of Mascon in the presence of many
beholders, to whom he cried on this manner, Help, help, my friends: Hugo de
Clam.
so that the whole town stood amazed thereat, yea and the remembrance of this
strange accident, sticks at this day fast in the minds of all the inhabitants
of the country: and they say, that this wretch having given himself to the
devil, provided store of holy bread (as they call it) which he always
carried about with him, thinking thereby to keep himself from his claws: but
it served him to small stead, as his end declared.

About the year 1437, Charles the seventh being king of France, Sir Giles of
Britain, lord of Rays, and high Constable of France, was accused (by the
report of Enguerran de Monstrelet) for having murdered many infants and women
great with child, Vol. 2.
to the number of eight score or more, with whose blood he either writ or
caused to be written, books full of coniurations, hoping by that abominable
means to attain to high matters: but it happened clean cross and contrary
to his expectation and practice, for being convinced of those horrible crimes
(it being Gods will that such gross and palpable sins should not go
unpunished) he was adjudged to be hanged and burned to death, which was also
accordingly executed at Nantes by the authority of the Duke of Britain.

John Francis Picus of Mirand says, that he conferred diverse times with many,
who being enticed with a vain hope of knowing things to come, were afterward
so grievously tormented by the devil (with whom they had made some bargain)
that they thought themselves thrice happy, if they escaped with their lives. He
says moreover, that there was in his time a certain coniurer that promised a
too curious and no great wise prince, to present unto him upon a stage the
siege of Troy, and Achilles and Hector fighting together as they did when they
were alive: but he could not perform his promise, for another sport and
spectacle more hideous and ougly to his person, for he was taken away alive by
a devil in such sort, that he was never afterward heard of.

In our own memory the Earl of Aspremont and his brother lord of Orne, were
made famous and in every man's mouth for their strange and prodigious feats,
wherein they were so unreasonably dissolute and vainglorious, that sometime
they made it their sport and pastime to break down all the windows about the
castle Aspremont where they kept (which lies in Lorraine two miles from S.
Michael) and threw them piece meal into a deep well, to hear them cry
plumpe: but this vain excess prefaged a ruin and destruction to come, as well
upon their house, which at this present lies desolate and ruinous in many
respects, as upon themselves that finished their days in misery one after
another; as we shall now understand of the one, the Lord of Orne: Albeit the
author forget himself, for there is no more mention made of him in the whole
book.
as for the Earl how he died we shall see more at large in the second book
and 28 chapter, to which place his history properly belongs. Now it chanced
that as this Lord of Orne was of most wicked and cruel conditions, so he had
an evil favored look answerable to his inclination, and name to be a
coniurer: the report that went of his cruelty was this; that upon a time he put
the baker (one of his servants, whose wife he used secretly to entertain) into
a tun, which he caused to be rouled from the top of a hill into the bottom,
bounsing some times as high as a pike, as the place gave occasion: but by the
great mercy of God, notwithstanding all this, this poor man saved his life.
Furthermore, it was a common report that when any Gentlemen or Lords came to
see him, they were entertained (as they thought) very honorably being served
with all sort of most dainty fare and exquisite dishes, as if he had not spared
to make them the best cheer that might be: but at their departure they that
thought themselves well refreshed, found their stomachs empty and almost pined
for want of food, having neither eaten nor drunk any thing save in imagination
only: and it is to be thought that their horses found no better fare then
their masters. It happened one day that a certain Lord being departed from his
house, one of his men having left something behind returned to the castle, and
entering suddenly into the hal where they dined a little before, he espied a
Munkie beating the master of the house that had feasted them of late, very
sore: And there be others that say that he has been seen through the chinke
of a door lying on a table upon his belly all at length, and a Monkie scourging
him very strangely, to whom he should say, Let me alone, let me alone; Will thou always torment me thus? And thus he continued a long time: but at length,
after he had made away all his subhance, he was brought to such extremity,
that being destitute of maintenance and forsaken of all men, he was feign (for
want of a better refuge) to betake himself to the hospital of Paris, which was
his last mansion house wherein he died. See here to how pitiful and miserable
an end this man fell, that having been esteemed amongst the mighties of this
world; for making no more account of God, and for following the illusions of
Satan, the common enemy of mankind, became so poor and wretched as to die in
an hospital among creeples and beggars.

It is not long since there was in Lorraine, a certain man called Coulen, that
was overmuch given to this cursed Art, amongst whose tricks this was one to be
wondered at: that he would suffer Harquebouses or a pistol to be shot at him,
and catch their bullets in his hand without receiving any hurt: but upon a
certain time one of his servants being angry with him, hot him such a knock
with a pistol (notwithstanding all his great cunning) that he killed him
therewith.

Moreover it is worthy to be observed, that within these two hundred years
hitherto, more monks and priests have been found given over to these
abominations and deuilishnesses, then of all other degrees of people watsoeuer,
as it is declared in the second volume of Enguerran de Monstrelet more at
large: where he makes mention of a monk that used to practice his sorceries
in the top of a tower of an Abbey lying near to Login upon Marne, where the
devils presented themselves to be at his commandment: and this was in the
reign of Charles the sixth. In the same book it is recorded, that in the
reign of Charles the seventh, one Master William Ediline Doctor in Divinity,
and Prior of S. German in Lay, having been an Augustane friar, gave himself
to the denill for his pleasure, even to have his will of a certain women: he
was upon a time in a place where a synagogue of people were gathered together,
where to the end that he might quickly be (as he himself confessed) he took a
broom and rode upon it: he confessed also that he had done homage to that
enemy of God the devil, who appeared unto him in the shape of a sheep, and
made him kiss his hinder parts, as he reported: for which causes, A sweet
kiss doubtless.
he was placed upon a scaffold, and openly made to wear a paper containing his
own faults, and afterward allotted to live prisoner all the rest of his life
laden with irons, in the bishop of Eureux his house, which was accordingly
executed: this happened in the year 1453.

In the reign of the same king 1457, there was a certain curat of a village
near to Soissons, who to revenge himself of a farmer that retained from him
the tenths which were appointed to the knights of the Rhodes, went to a witch
of whom he received in gift a fat tode in an earthen pot, which she, had a
long while fed and brought up, which she commanded him to baptize, as he also
did, and called it by the name of John: Contempt of sacraments. Lib. 1. cap. 34.
albeit I tremble to recite so monstrous and vile a fact, yet that every man
might see, how deadly besotted those sort of people are, that give themselves
over to Satan, and with what power of error he ouerwhelmeth them, and beside
how full of malice this unclean spirit is, that as it were in despite of God
would profane the holy sacrament of baptism. This good holy curar after he had
consecrated the holy ghost, gave it also to the toad to eat, and afterward
restored it to the witch again, who killing the toad, and cutting it in
pieces, with other such like sorceries, caused a young wench to carry it
secretly into the farmers house, and to put it under the table as they were at
dinner, whereupon immediately the farmer and his chldren that were at the table
fell suddenly sick, and three days after died: the witch her self being
detected, was burned, but the Curat suffered only a little imprisonment in the
bishop of Paris house, and that not long, for what with frie^dship and money he
was soon delivered.

Froissard, who was treasurer and canon of Chymay, reports of another Curat
in the country of Bear (^nner Charles the seventh) that had a familiar
spirit, which he called Orthon: whose help he used to the disturbance of the
lord of Corasse, by causing a terrible noise to be heard every night by him and
his servants in his castle, because the said lord withheld his tithes from him,
and converted them to his own use.

In the year 15^0 at Nuremberg a certain priest studied Art magic, Wierus.
and being very covetous of gold and silver; the devil (whom he served)
showed him through a crystal certain treasures hidden in the city: he by and
by (greedy of this rich prey) went to that part of the city, where he supposed
it to have lien buried: and being arrived at the place with a companion whom
he brought to this pretty pastime, fell a searching and digging up a hollow
pit, until he perceived a coffer that lay in the bottom of the hole, with a
great black dog lying by it: whether he was no sooner entered, but the earth
fell down and filled up the hole, and smothered and crushed him to death: so
this poor priest was intrapped and rewarded by his master no other ways then
he deserved; but otherwise then he expected or looked for.

Naucler. vinc. etc.
Howbeit they are not only simple priests and friars that deal with these
cursed arts, but even Popes themselves. Siluester the second, who (as Platina
and others report) was first a coniuring friar, and gave himself to the devil
upon condition he might be Pope, as he was indeed; and having obtained his
purpose as it seemed, he began earnestly to desire to know the day wherein he
should die, which also his schoolmaster the devil revealed unto him, but
under such doubtful terms, that he dreamed in his foolish conceit of
immortality, and that he should never die. It chanced on a time as he was
singing mass at Rome in a Temple called Jerusalem (which was the place
assigned for him to die in) and not Jerusalem in Palaestina (as he made
himself falsely believe) he heard a great noise of devils that came to fetch
him away, A note worthy the noting
(note that this was done in mass while) whereat he being terrified and
tormented, and seeing himself not able any ways to escape, he desired his
people to rend his body in pieces after his death, and lay it upon a chariot,
and let horses draw it whether they would; which was accordingly performed:
for as soon as he was dead, the pieces of his carcass were carried out of
the Church of Laterane by the wicked spirit, who as he ruled him in life, so he
was the chief in his death and funerals.

By like means came Benedict the ninth to the Popedom, for he was a detestable
magitian: Benno. Balleus.
and in the ten years wherein he was Pope having committed infinite villainies
and mischiefs, was at last by his familiar friend the devil strangled to
death in a forest, whither he went to apply himself the more quieter to his
coniurings.

Gregorio the sixth, scholar to Siluester, as great a coniurer ^s his master,
wrought much mischief in his time, Bal.
but was at last banished Rome, and ended his life in misety in Germany.

John the two and twentieth, being of no better disposition then these we have
spoken of, but following judicial astrology, fed himself with a vain hope
of long life, whereof he vanted himself among his familiars, one day above
the rest at Viterbum, in a chamber which he had lately builded, saying, that
he should live a great while, he was assured of it: presently the flore brake
suddenly in pieces, and he was found seven days after crushed to pieces under
the ruins thereof. All this notwithhanding, yet other Pope eased not to suffer
themselves to be infected with this execrable poison: as Hildebrand, who was
called Gregory the seventh, and Alexander the sixth, of which kind we shall see
a whole legend in the next book and 43 chapter; do but mark these holy
fathers how abominable they were, to be in such sort given over to Satan.

Cornelius Agrippa, a great student in this cursed Art, and a man famous both
by his own works and others report for his Necromancie, Iouius in elogij^
vtrorum illustrium.
went always accompanied with an evil spirit in the similitude of a black
dog: but when his time of death drew near, and he was urged to repentance, he
took off the enchaunted collar from the dogs neck, and sent him away with
these terms, Get thee hence thou cursed beast, which have utterly destroyed
me: neither was the dog ever after seen: some say he leapt into Araris and
never came out again. Agrippa himself died at Lions in a base and beggarly
Inn.

Zoreastres, king of Bactria, is notified to have been the inuentor of
Astrology and Magic, Theat. hist.
but the devil (whose ministry he used) when he was too importunate with
him, burned him to death.

Charles the seventh of France, put Egidius de Raxa marshiall of his kingdom,
Fulgos. lib. 9. cap. 1.
to a cruel and filthy death, because he practiced this art, and in the
same had murdered an hundred and twenty teeming women and young infants: he
caused him to be hanged upon a f^^ke by a hot fire, and roasted to death.

Bladud the son of Lud king of Britain, now called England, in the year of
the world 3100, he that builded the city Bath (as our late histories
witness) and also made therein the hot bathes, addicted himself so much to
the deuilish art of Necromancie, that he wrought wonders thereby: in so much
that he made himself wings, and attempted to fly like Dedalus: but the
devil (as ever, like a false knave) forsook him in his journey, so that he
fell down and brake his neck.

In the year of our Lord 1578, one S^mon Penbrooke dwelling in S. Georges
parish in London, being a figure setter, and vehemently suspected to be a
coniurer; by the commandment of the judge appeared in the parish Church of S.
Savior at a court holden there: where, whilst he was busy in entertaining a
proctour, and leaned his head upon a pew a good space, the proctour began to
lift up his head to see what he ailed, and found him departing out of this
life, and straight ways he fell down rattling in the throat, without
speaking any one word: this strange judgment happened before many witnesses,
who searching him, found about him five deuilish books of coniuration, and
most abominable practices, with a picture in tin of a man having three dice
in his hand with this writing, Chance dice fortunately, and much other trash:
so that every one confessed it to be a just judgment against sorcerie, and a
great example to cause others to fear the justice of God. Now let every one
learn by these examples to fear God, and to stand firm and steadfast to his
holy word without turning from it on any side, so shall he be safe from such
like miserable ends as these wicked varlets come unto.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of those that through pride and vainglory, strove to usurp the
honor due unto God.
A Forgetful and unthankful mind for the benefits which God bestows upon
us, is a branch of the breach of this first commandment, as well as those
which went before: and this is, when we ascribe not unto God the glory of his
benefits to give him thanks for them, but through a foolish pride extol our
selves higher then we ought, presuming above measure and reason in our own
power, desire to place our selves in a higher degree then is meet. With this
fond and foolish affection (I know not how) our first fathers were tickled and
tainted from the beginning to think to empaire the glory of God: Genesis 3.
and they also were puffed up with the blast of ambition, that I know not with
what fond, foolish, rash, and proud conceit, went about after the flood to
build a city and tower of exceeding height, by that means to win fame and
reputation amongst men: Genesis 11.
In stead whereof, they ought rather to have praised God by remembering his
gracious goodness in their miraculous deliverance in their fathers persons,
from that general deluge and shipwreck of the world: but forasmuch as with a
proud and high stomach they lifted up themselves against God, to whom only
all glory appertains, therefore God also set himself against them and
against their over bold practices, interrupting all their determined
presumptuous purposes, by such a confusion and alteration of tongues which he
sent amongst them, that one could not understand another: so that with shame
they were constrained to leave their begun work. And besides, instead of that
strong and sure habitation which they dreamed on to maintain and defend
themselves by against all enemies, and the fortress and castle wereby they
went about to keep other in subjection to them, they were forced to forsake
the place by the just judgment of God, who scattered and dispersed them hither
and thither, that he might bring them to that estate and condition, which they
most of all feared and strove to shun; And thus God resists the proud, and
favors the humble: lo here the punishment wherewith God punished their
sin, remaining still upon them until this day, for a chastisement of their
proud spirits: with the stain of this sin, most commonly the mightiest
potentates of this world are defiled, who although both by word and writing
avouch and confess their power to be by the grace of God: yet for the most
part, they are very unthankful for the same, and so proud and high minded,
that they show themselves most obstinate and ungrateful of all men: for
oftentimes they rob him of the honor and glory which is peculiar unto
himself, and attribute it to themselves, in setting forth their brave and
sumptuous shows and triumphs: this is the sin whereof Nabuchadnezzar king
of Babell was reproved; for God having bestowed upon him a kingdom with such
pomp and renown, that he made whole nations to tremble before his face, and
putting many people in subjection under him, he (in stead of giving thanks
for these great benefits) exalted himself, suffering his heart to swell, and
his understanding to wax hard with pride, not regarding the Lord who extolled
him so high: and yet notwithstanding he was constrained to confess and
acknowleege him for the true God, to have an everlasting kingdom, and an
infinite power, as well by the forewarning of dreams which Daniel interpreted,
as by the miraculous deliverance of the three young men out of the burning
furnace: therefore as he walked one day in his royal palace at Babylon, and
vaunted of his greatness and magnificense, saying to himself, Dan. 4.
Is not this great Babel which I have built for the house of the kingdom, by
the might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty? Now whilst the word
was yet in his mouth, a voice was heard from heaven, saying, O king, to thee it
is spoken, Thy kingdom shall depart from thee: and according to the tenor of
the voice, he was immediately deposed from his royal seat, spoiled of all his
glory, driven from the society of men, deprived of sense, and made a companion
for the bruit beasts, and wild asses, eating grass like oxen, even so long,
until his hair was grown stiff like Eagles feathers, and his nails like
the claws of birds. In which estate, he continued the space of seven years:
even he, that a little before was so proud and arrogant, and he that had
conquered so many kingdoms and nations, that triumphed over Iewry and
Jerusalem, with the kings thereof. This is a most excellent looking glass for
kings to behold the fickleness and instabilitie of all their power and pomp,
when it pleases God to humble and bring them under: there is neither sceptet,
crown, stay, or strength of man that is able to hinder and turn aside the
hand of the Almighty, the King of kings, from abasing and weakening the most
high and strong of this world, let them be never so brave and jolly, and
bringing them unto a low, contemptible, and brutish estate.

Besides this which we have already touched, there is another kind of pride and
presumption most damnable and detestable of all: and it is, when a man does so
much forget himself, as to sease and take upon him that honor which
appertains only to God, ascribing to himself a certain deity: one would
hardly think that there were any such in the world, so proud as to commit this
sin, did not experience by certain examples teach us the contrary: As first
of all the king of Tire, whose heart was so exalted with the multitude of
^iches, and the renown and greatness of his house, that he doubted not to
esteem himself a god, and to desire majesty and power correspondent
thereunto: for which presumption, Chap. 28.1, 2, 3, etc.
God by the Prophet Ezechiel reproved him, and threatened his destruction,
which afterward came upon him, when by the power of a strange and terrible
nation, his goodly godhead was overcome and murdered, feeling in deed that he
was no god as he supposed, but a man subject to death and misery.

King Herod, surnamed Agrippa, which put James the brother of John to death,
Act. 12.
and imprisoned Peter, with purpose to make him taste of the same cup, was
puffed up with no less sacrilegious pride, for being upon a time seated in his
throne of judgment, and araied in his royal robes, showing forth his
greatness and magnificense in the presence of the Ambassadors of Tire and
Sidon, that desired to continue in peace with him, as he spoke unto them the
people shouted and cried, That it was the voice of God and not of man: which
titles of honor he disclaimed not, and therefore the Angel of the Lord smote
him suddenly, because he gave not the glory to God: so that he was eaten with
worms and gave up the ghost. Josephus reports the same story more at large on
this manner: Upon the second day of the solemnization of the plays which Herod
caused to be celebrated for the Emperors health, there being a great number of
gentlemen and Lords present that came from all quarters to this feast; Jewish
antiquities. Lib. 19. cap. 7.
he came betime in the morning to the Theater, clad in a garment all wouen
with silver of a marvelous workmanship; upon which, as the sun rising cast
his beams, there glittered out such an excellent brightness, that thereby his
pernicious flatterers took occasion to call him with a loud voice by the name
of God: for the which sacrilegious speech, he not reproouing nor forbidding
them, was presently taken with most grievous and horrible dolours and gripes in
his bowels, so that looking upon the people, he uttered these words: Behold
here your goodly god, whom you but now so highly honored, ready to die with
extreme pain: And so he died in deed most miserably, even when he was in
the top of his honor and iollitie, and as it were, in the midst of his earthly
paradise, being beaten down and swallowed up with confusion and ignominy, not
stricken with the edge of sword or spear, (for that had been far more
honorable) but gnawen in pieces with lice and vermin.

Simon Magus, otherwise called Simon the Samaritane, borne in a village called
Gitton, after he was cursed of Peter the Apostle, for offering to buy the
gifts of the spirit of God with money, went to Rome, Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 12.
Philip. in Chron. Cent. ^. lib. 2. cap. 11.
and there putting in practice his magical arts, and working miracles by the
devil, was reputed a god, and had an image erected in his honor with this
inscription, To Simon the holy God: besides, all the Samaritanes, and diverse
also of other nations accounted him no less, as appeared by the reverence and
honor which they did unto him: in so much, as they called his companion, or
rather his whore Helena (for that was her profession in Tire a city of
Phenicia) The first moouer that distilled out of Simons bosom. Now he, to
foster this foolish and ridiculous opinion of theirs, and to eternize his name,
boasted that he would at a certain time fly up into heaven, which, as he
attempted to do by the help of the devil, Peter the Apostle commanded the
unclean spirit to cast him down again, so that he fell upon the earth and
was bruised to death, and proved himself thereby to be no more then a
mortal, wicked, and detestable wretch.

Moreover, elsewhere we read of Alexander the great, whose courage and
magnanimity was so exceeding great, that he enterprised to go out of Greece
and set upon all Asia, only with an army of two and thirty thousand footmen,
Oros. lib. 3.
five hundred horse, and an hundred and fourscore ships: and in this
appointment passing the seas, he conquered in short space, the greatest part
of the world: for which cause, he was represented to the Prophet Daniel in a
vision, by the figure of a Leopard with wings on his back, to notify the
great diligence and speedy expedition which he used in compassing so many
sudden and great victories; with pride whereof, he was so soon infected, that
he would brook no equal nor companion in his Empire; but as heaven had but
one son, so he thought the earth ought to have but one monarch, which was
himself: Just. lib. 11.
which mind of his, he made known by his answer to king Darius demanding
peace, and offering him the one half of his kingdom to be quiet; when he
refused to accord thereunto, saying, He scorned to be a partner in the half,
and hoped to be full possessour of the whole. After his first victory had of
Darius, and his entrance into Egypt (which he took without blows, as also
he did Rhodes and Cicilia) he practiced and suborned the priests that
ministered at the Oracle of Hammon, to make him be pronounced and entitled by
the Oracle, The son of Jupiter: (which kind of iuggling and deceit was common
at that time) Having obtained this honor, forthwith he caused himself to be
worshipped as a god, Just. lib. 12. Curt. lib. 8.
according to the custom of the kings of Persia: neither wanted he flatterers
about him that egged him forward, and soothed him up in this proud humor:
albeit that many of the better sort endeavored tooth and nail to turn him
from it. It happened as he warred in India, he received so sore a wound, that
with pain thereof he was constrained to say, Though he was the renowned son
of Jupiter, yet he ceased not to feel the infirmities of a weak and diseased
body: finally, being returned to Babylon, where many ambassadors of diverse
far countries, as of Carthage, and other cities in Africa, Spain, France,
Sicilie, Sardinia, and certain Cities of Italy, were arrived, to congratulate
his good success, for the great renown which by his worthy deeds he had
gotten; as he lay there taking his rest many days, and bathing himself in all
kind of pleasure, one day after a great feast that lasted a whole day and a
night, in a banquet after supper being ready to return home, he was poisoned;
when before he had drunk his whole draught he gave a deep sigh suddenly, as
if he had been thrust through with a dart, and was carried away in a sown,
vexed with such horrible torment, that had he not been restrained he would
have killed himself. And on this manner he that could not content himself
with the condition of a man, but would needs clymbe above the clouds to go in
equipage with God, drunk up his own death, leaving as suddenly all his
worldly pomp, as he had suddenly gotten it: which vanished like smoke, none of
his children being any whit the better by it.

There was in Siracusa a city of Sicilia (which is now called Saragosse) a
Physician called Menecrates, whose folly and presumption was so great that he
accounted himself a god: and desired to be so reputed by others: insomuch
that he required no other wages and recompense of the patients which he took
in hand (as Aelianus witnesses) but that they should only acknowledge him to
be Jupiter, and call him so, and auow themselves to his service. Upon a time
Denis the tyrant desirous to make some pastime with him, made a feast and
invited him amongst others to be his guest: but because he was a god, to do him
honor answerable to his name, he placed him a table all alone, and set before
him no dishes, but only a censer with frankincense, which was a proper and
convenient service for the gods: this honorable duty pleased the Physician
very well at the first, so that he snuffed up the perfume most willingly: but
when this poor god saw the other guests eating and drinking indeed, and
himself not being able to be fed with smoke, ready to starve with hunger
rose up and went away all enraged in himself, and derided of others, having
more need to purge his own brain from their superfluous humor, then others
from their sicknesses.

Caligula the first Emperor, being become an ordinary despiser and open
mocker of all religion, it came presently in his brain to believe (so drunken
was he with a draught of his own foolish conceit) that there was no other God
but himself: therefore he caused men to worship him, and to kiss his hands or
his feet in token of reverence, (which honor afterward the Popes took unto
them) yea and was so besotted, that he went about by certain engines of art to
counterfeit thunder and lightnings: albeit in all this pride and arrogancy or
rather folly, there was none so timorous and fearful as he, or that would
sooner upon lighter occasion be dismayed. One day as he was by mount Aetna in
Cicilie hearing by chance the violent cracking of the flames which all that
season ascended out of the top of the hill, it stroke so soddaine and horrible
a fear into him, that he never ceased flying all night till he came to Phar
in Messina. Every little thunderclap put him in fear of death, for he would
leap up and down like a mad man when he heard it thunder, finding himself
not able by all his godhead to defend himself from the power thereof: but if
there chanced greater crackes then ordinary, then would not his whote bed hold
him, but needs must he run into the cold flower underneath the bed to hide
himself. Thus was he compelled against his will to fear him, whom
willingly he would not deigne to acknowledge. And thus it falls out with
all wicked miserable Atheists whose hearts imagine there is no God: and
therefore have so little assurance in themselves, that there need no thunder and
lightning to amase them: for the shaking of every leaf, is sufficient to make
them tremble. To conclude, this Atheist void of religion and fear of God, and
full of all profaneness, was according to his due desert murdered by one of
his own servants: of the which, will follow more at large in the next book.

Domitian likewise was so blinded with pride, that he would be called a god and
worshipped: Oros. lib. 7. ca. 7.
of whom also we will speak in the second book, and 34 chapter.

To these we may add them also, Dionys. Halie. Lib. 1. antiq. Roman.
that to the end to make themselves feared and reverenced as gods, have
counterfaited the lightnings and thunders of heaven, as we read of one Alladius
a Latin king that reigned before Romulus: who being a most wicked tyrant and a
contemner of God, invented a trick whereby to represent to the ear and eye,
the rattling and swift shine of both thunder and lightning; that by that means
astonishing his subjects, he might be guised of them for a god: but it chanced
that his house being set on fire with true lightning, and ouerthrown with the
violent strength of tempestuous rain, together with the ouerflowing of a pond
that stood nere, he perished by fire and water, burnt and drowned, and all at
once.

Did not the king of Elide the like, and to the same end also by the device of
a chariot drawn about with four horses, wherein were certain iron works,
which with wrinching about, gave an horrible sound resembling thunder, and
torches and squibs which he caused to be thrown about like lightnings in such
sort, that he oftentimes burnt the beholders: Diod. lib. 4.
and in this manner he went up and down brauing it, especially over an iron
bridge which he had of purpose built to pass and repasse over at his
pleasure; until Gods long suffering could not endure any longer such
outrageous and presumptuous madness, but sent a thunderbolt from heaven upon
his head, that all the world might see by his destruction, the exceeding folly
and vain pride which bewitched him in his life time: Which history the Poet in
the person of Sibilla sets down at large to this effect.

I saw Salmon in cruel torments lie,
For counterfatting thunder of the sky,
And Jove's clear lightning: whilst with torches bright,
Drawn with four steedes, and brandishing his light,
He rode triumphantly through Elis streats,
And made all Grecia wonder at his feats.
Thinking to win the honor of a god,
(Mad as he was) by scattertng fire abroad.
With brazen engines, and with courses faining,
A noise like that which in the clouds is raining,
And no where else: but God from thickest sky,
No torch, but such a thunderbolt let fly
At him, that headlong whirld him from his cell,
And tumbled down into the deepest hell.
Thus this arrogant king was punished according to the quality of his offense,
even in the same kind wherein he offended, which thing though it be found
written in a Poet, yet ought not be rejected for an old wives tale, seeing it
is not incredible that a king might make such pastimes, and iron crashing
noises, nor that he might be justly punished for the same; and the rather
because Caligula did the like, as we have heard before. And we read also that
one Arthemisius in the time of the Emperor Justinian, counterfeited by certain
engines and devises in his own house in Constantinople, Agath. lib. 5. bell.
Gothis.
such earthquakes, lightnings and thunders, that would astonish a wise brain
to hear or behold them on a sudden.

But above all others that by darkening the glory of God to increase their own
power have prowdly exalted themselves against him, the Popes are the
ringleaders, whose unbridled boldness has been so much the more impudent and
pernicious, for that in tearming themselves the servants of the servants of
God, in word; in deed, take unto them the authority and power of God himself:
as of pardoning and absoluing sins, creating laws and ordinances at their
pleasure in binding or unbinding men's consciences; which things appertain to
God only: nay they have been so brazen faced, as to command Angels and devils,
as Clement the fifth did in one of his bulls: so impudent, as to be carried like
idols upon their vassal^ shoulders, and wear three crowns upon their heads:
so proud and arrogant as to constrain kings and Emperors to kiss their feet,
to make them their vassals, to usurp Lordship and dominion over them and all
their lands and possessions: and to dispossess whom they like not, of
kingdoms, and enstall in their rooms whom they please: and all this by the
thunder of excommunication, whereby they make themselves feared and stood in
awe of. By which dealings of theirs they verify in themselves that which the
scripture speaks of Antichrist, which is the man of sin, the son of
perdition, 2. These. 2.3.
an adversary and one that exalts himself against all which is called God,
or which is worshipped, till he be set as a god in the temple of God, showing
himself that he is God. Wherefore also the heavy vengeance of God is manifest
upon them, by the great and horrible punishments they have been tormented
with; for some of them have had their eyes pulled out, others have died in
prisons, a third sort have been smothered to death, a fourth has been killed
with the sword, a fifth has died with hunger, a sixth been stoned, a seventh
poisoned, and yet there has not wanted an eigth sort whom the devil himself
has stifled.

This it is to ouerreach the clouds, Sabel Aenead. 9. lib. 7. John le Maire de
Besges. Ni^h. Giles, of the Chronicles of France.
and not content with earthly power, to usurp a supremacy and praeeminence
over kings: such was the pride of Pope Boniface the eigth, when he sent an
embassage to Philip the Fair, king of France, to command him to take upon him
an expedition against the Sarasens beyond the sea, upon pain of forfeiting his
kingdom into his hands: and when having his sword by his side he shamed not to
say, that he alone and none else was Emperor and Lord of all the world: in
demonstration whereof he bestowed the Empire upon Duke Albert, together with the
crown of France: and not content herewith, his insolency was so importunat,
that he charged Philip the Fair to acknowledge himself to be his subject in
all causes as well spiritual as temporal: and to levy a subsidy for his
holiness out of his Clergy, disabling his authority in bestowing church
livings, which prerogative he challenged to his sea: the conclusion of this
bull was in these words: Aliud credentes fatitos reputamus: as much to say, as
whosoever is of another mind then this, we esteem him a fool. Whereunto the
King answered in this wise, Philippus dei gratia Francorum rex Bonifacio se
gerenti pro summ^ pontifice salutem modicam sieve nullam. Sciat tua maxima
fatuitas, in temporalibus nos alicui non subesse, ecclesiarum and prebendarum
vacantium collationem ad nos iure regio pertinere: secus autem credentes fatuos
reputamus deuiantes, in English thus, Philip by the grace of God King of
France, to Boniface bearing himself for Pope little or no health. Be it known
unto thy exceeding great foolishness, that we in temporal affairs are
subject to none, that the bestowing of benefices belongs to us by our royal
right: and if there be any that think otherwise, we hold them for erroneous
fools. A memorable answer well beseeming a true royal and French heart:
immediately he assembling together a^^ national council of all the Barons
and prelates within his dominion at Paris, wherein Boniface being pronounced an
Heretic, a Simonist, and a manslaier, it was agreed upon by a joint consent
that the king should do no more obeisance, but reject as nothing worth,
whatsoever he should impose. Wherefore the king to tame his proud and malicious
nature, dispatched secretly two hundred men at arms, under the conduct of one
captain ^oguard toward Auian in Naples (whither his holiness was fled for
fear of diverse whose houses and castles he had caused to be rased down)
there to surprise him on a sudden: which stratageme they speedily performed,
and carried him prisoner to Rome, where he died most miserably. Peter Mesie a
Spanish Gentleman of Seuill, says in many of his lectures that he died in
prison enraged with famine. Nicholas Gilles in his first volume of French
chronicles, reports that he died in the castle Saint Angelo, through a flux
of his belly which cast him into a frenzy, that he gnew off his own hands:
and that at the hour of his death there were heard horrible thunders and
tempests and lightnings round about: this is he in whose honor this fine
Epitaph was made: Intrauit vt vulpes, regnauit vt leo, mortuus est vt canis:
Sabel. Aenead. 9. lib. 7.
He entered like a fox, reigned like a lion, and died like a dog. And this was
he that on the first day of Lent giving ashes to the bishop of Genes, in stead
of using the ordinary form of speech which is, Momento homo quod cinis es,
and in cinerem conuerteris, Remember man that thou art ashes, and into ashes
thou shall return: said in despite and mockery, Memento homo quia Gibellinus
es, and cum Gibellinis in cinerem conuerteris: Remember that thou art a
Gibelline, and together with the Gibillines thou shall be turned into ashes:
and in stead of laying the ashes upon his forehead, threw them into his eyes;
and forthwith deprived him of his Bishopric, and would have done worse if it
had been in his power: mark what little account this holy father himself made
of these ceremonies: and therefore it is no marvel if others mock at them,
seeing the Popes themselves make them but matters of pastime.

If it be so therefore that no man ought to arrogate to himself any title of
diety, then consequently it is no less unlawful to give that divine honor to
any other mortal creature: and therefore the people of Cesarea faulted greatly
when blasphemously they called King Herod a god, as has been declared before.
Likewise it was high and proud presumption in the Senate of Rome not to receive
any god to their Commonwealth without their own foreapprobation and consent,
as if that God could not maintain his dignity, nor stand without the good
liking and assent of men; or as if that man could deifie whom he listed, which
is a most rediculous and absurd thing. And thus the Romans in time of Tiberius
consecrating to themselves a whole legion, even thousands of false gods,
Tertullian apolog.
would not admit of the true God and his son Christ, but rejected him above
all others.

Among all the vanities of the Athenians this was one worthy noting, how they
ordained that Demetrius, Alexa^ders successor (for reestablishing their popular
and ancient liberty) with his father Antigonus should be called kings, and
honored with the title of Saving gods, and to have a Priest that should offer
sacrifice unto them: and moreover caused their pictures to be drawn in the same
ba^ner where the pictures of Jupiter and Minerua (the protectors of their city)
were drawn, in brodered work: but this goodly banner as is was carried about
in procession was rent in pieces by a tempestuous storm that arose soddainly,
God thereby manifesting how odious and displeasant both this new and old
superstition was in his sight: besides that do but consider the laudable
virtues that so commended this new god Demetrius, to make them honor him in
such sort: they were violence, and cruelties, intemperance, with all inordinate
lasciuiousnes, vilanies, and whoredoms: so that it was no marvel if they had
made him a God, being unworthy altogether of humane society. This new found god
having gotten a great victory by sea, as he triumphed and braued it with ships
after the same, was so shattered with a sudden tempest, that the greatest part
of his navy went to wrack, and afterward was vanquished by Seleuchus in a
battle, wherein his father Antigonus was slain: and when he thought to retire to
Athens, they shut their gates upon him, whom a little before they had canonized
for a god: for which cause he raised war against them, and so wearied them with
onsets on each side, and so enclosed them both by sea and land, that being
brought to extreme famine and necessity, they were compelled to entertain him
again, and to behold the horrible outrages of their own made god, to their
grief and confusion. But not long after Seleuchus once again damped his
courage, in so much that having lived three years in a country of Siuia like a
banished outlaw, for fear to be delivered into his hands, and weary of his own
life, he stuffed himself so with food that he burst in pieces. Therefore let
every man learn by these examples not to translate the honor and majesty of
God to any creature, but to leave it to him alone, who is jealous thereof, and
will not (as the Prophet says) give his glory unto another.

CHAP. XXV. Of Epicures and Atheists.
AS touching voluptuous Epicures and cursed Atheists, that deny the providence
of God, believe not the immortality of the soul, think there is no such thing
as life to come, and consequently impugn all divinity, living in this world
like brute beasts, and like dogs and swine, wallowing in all sensuality; they
do also strike themselves against this commandment, by going about to wipe out
and deface the knowledge of God, and if it were possible, to extinguish his
very essence; wherein they show themselves more then mad, and brutish, whereas
notwithstanding all the evident testimonies of the virtue, bounty, wisdom,
and eternal power of God, which they daily see with their eyes, and feel in
themselves, do nevertheless strive to quench his light of nature which
enlightneth and persuadeth them and all Nations of this, There is a God, by
whom we live, move, and have our being; Acts. 17.28.
who although in his essence is invisible, yet makes he himself known and as
it were seen by his works and creatures, and mighty government of the world,
that he that would seek after him, may (as one might say) handle and feel
him. Therefore they that would persuade themselves that this glorious heaven
and massy earth wanted a guider and a governor, have their understanding
blinded from sight of things manifest, and their hearts perverted from all show
of reason: for is there any substance of this world that has no cause of his
subsisting? Is there a day without a son? Are there fruits and no trees?
Plants and no seeds? Can it rain without a cloud? Be a tempest without wind?
Can a ship sail without a Pilote? Or a house be built without a carpenter or
builder? If then every part of this world has his particular cause of being
and dependence, is it likely that the whole is without cause to be to it a
furnishing and government? Say you hogs and dogs do you not believe that
which you see: or if your eyes be bored out that you cannot see, must you
think there is no son nor light, because your eyes are in darkness and
blindness? Can you behold all the secrets of nature? Is there nothing but a
voice, a singing of birds, or an harmonious consort of musical instruments in
the world? And yet who perceives these small things? Can you behold the wind?
Can you see the sweet smell of fragrant flowers along the fields? Can you see
the secrets of your own bodies, your entrals, your heart and your brain? And
yet you cease not to believe that there are such things, except you be
heartlesse and brainelesse indeed: Why then do you measure God by your own
fight, and do not believe there is a God because he is invisible, since that
he manifests himself more apparently both to understanding and sense then
either voice, smell, or wind? do not your own oaths blasphemies and horrible
cursings bear witness against you, when you swear by, despite and maugre him
whom you deny to be? does not every thunderclap constrain you to tremble at
the blast of his voice: if any calamity approach near unto or light upon you,
or if death be threatened or set before your eyes, do you not then feel in
spite of all your reason, that the severe judgment of God does waken up your
dull and sleepy conscience to come to his trial? There was never yet any
nation or people so harbarous which by the persuasion and instinct of nature
has not always believed a certain diety, and to think otherwise is not only
a detestable thing, but also most absurd and so contrary to humane reason, that
the very Paynims have very little tolerated such horrible blasphemy. The
Athenians are witnesses hereof, Cic. of the nature of gods. Lib. 1.
who banished Protagoras their city and country because in the beginning of
one of his books he called in question the diety: and caused his books to be
burned openly. Neither showed they any less severity toward Diagoras
surnamed the Atheist, Diodor. 13.
when being as some say injuriously and falsely accused of this crime, and for
fear of punishment fled away, they proclaimed that whosoever did kill him,
should have a talent of silver in recompense, which in value is as much as six
hundred crowns after the rate of 35 shillings French to the crown. How much
more then is the state of Christendom at this day to be lamented, which we
see in many places infected with such a contagious pestilence, that diverse men
inuenomed with this deadly poison, are so mischievous and wretched as to make
room for Atheism, by forbidding and hindering by all means possible the
course of the gospel: wherein they make known what they are and what zeal
they bear to the religion and service of God, and with what affection they are
led toward the good and safety of the Commonwealth, and what hereafter is to
be hoped of them: for where there is no knowledge nor fear of God, there also
is no bridle nor bond to restrain and hold men back from doing evil:
whereupon they grow to that pass to be most insolent and profane. This is the
divinity and goodly instruction that comes beyond the mountains from that
scientificall University and College of the right reverend masters, and from
the excellent holiness of some of their Popes: whose manner of life is so
dissolute, lascivious, dishonest and Sardanapal like, Vide lib. 1. cap. 20.
Lucian. Porphory, Julian. etc Bale.
that thereby their Atheism is evidently and notoriously known and talked of
by every one.

Hereof Pope Leo the tenth a Florentine by birth, may serve for an example: who
as he was a very effeminate person, given to all manner of delights and
pleasure, having no other care but of himself, and his own filthy carcasses
ease; so had he no more taste at all nor feeling of God and his holy word, then
a dog: he made the promises and threats contained in holy scripture, and all
else that we believe, matter to laugh at, and things frivolous and of no
weight, mocking at the simplicity, the faith and belief of Christians: for
one day when Cardinal Bembus (who also showed himself to be none of the best
Christians in the world, by his Venetian history, where as often as he speaks
of God he uses the plural number after the manner of Heathen writers)
alleged a place out of the Gospel, his damnable impude^cie was so great as
to reply, That this fable of Christ had brought to him and such as he, no
little profit. Oh stinking and cursed throat to belch out such monstrous
blasphemy! do not these speeches bewray a villainous and abominable Atheist,
if ever any were? Is not this to declare himself openly to be Antichrist?
For he is Antichrist which denies Jesus to be Christ, and which denies the
Father and the Son, 1. John 2.22.
according as Saint John says. Albeit in the mean while this cursed caitife
that had as much religion as a dog, made show to be the protector and defendor
of the Catholic faith, making war with all his power against Christ Jesus
in the person of his servant Luther. Now after he had by his pardons and
indulgences drawn out a world of money, and heaped up great treasures by the
maintenance of courtizans and Whores, and had enriched his bastards, one day
being at meat he received news of the overthrow of the French in Lumbardie,
whereat he reioiced out of measure, and for that good tidings doubled his good
cheer: suddenly he was constrained to turn his coppie from joy into
sadness, from pleasure into grief and gnashing of teeth, by a most bitter and
unlooked for death which deprived him at once of all his pleasures, to make him
drink the cup of Gods fierce wrath, and to throw him down headlong into
everlasting pains and torments which were provided for him. Pope Leo (says S.
Martin of Belay in his second book of memorable things) hearing of the great
loss which the French men sustained at Millan took so great joy thereat, that
a catar and an ague ensuing, killed him within three days after: a happy man
indeed to die with joy. Pope Julius the third was one of the same stamp, Bale.
Veag.
nothing inferior to the former in all manner of dissolute and infamous living
and vile and cursed talk, making known by his impiety, that he had none
other God but his belly, Vide lib. 1. cap. 21. Heresy.
and that he was none of Christ's fold but one of Epicures crew; he was such a
glutton, and so passionate in his lusts, and so profane a despiser of God and
his word, that once at supper being enraged and blaspheming because they had
not served in a cold pecock which he commanded to be kept whole at dinner,
though there were other hot on the table, a Cardinal that was present desired
him not to be so moved for so small a trifle: What (quoth he) if it pleased God
to be so angry for eating of an apple as to thrust Adam and Eve out of
Paradise, should not I which am his vicar be angry for a pecocke, which is far
more worth then any apple? See how this wicked wretch profaned the holy
scripture, and like an Epicure and Atheist mocked God: but he died of the gout
after he had been long plagued with it together with other diseases, leaving
none other good name behind him save the report of a most wicked and abominable
man.

Philip Strozze whom Paulus Iouius reports to have been commonly bruted to be
an Atheist, Tom. 2. lib. 36.
was an exile of Florence and afterward prisoner there, in the time of Cosimus
Medius the Prince of that Commonwealth (against whom this Philip had
enterprised to make war) and being in prison he killed himself with a sword
of a Spaniard his keeper which by oversight he had left behind, setting the
point against his throat and falling down upon it: so may all Atheists perish
and come to naught.

Francis Rabelais having sucked up also this poison, used like a profane
villain to make all religion a matter to laugh and mock at: but God deprived
him of his senses, that as he had led a brutish life so he might die a brutish
death: for he died mocking all those that talked of God, or made any mention of
mercy in his ears.

How miserable was the end of Periers, the author of that detestable book
entitled Symbalum mundi, wherein he openly mocked at God and his religion: even
he fell finally into despair, and notwithstanding all that guarded him killed
himself.

Iodelle also, a Frenel tragical Poet, being an Epicure and an Atheist, made a
very tragical and most pitiful end: for he died in great misery and
distress even pined to death after he had rioted out al his substance and
consumed his patrimony. Lignereles the courtier to make himself seem a man
of service made open profession of Atheism, but his end and destruction came
from thence, whence he looked for credit and advancement.

To bring the matter to an end, I will here set down a notable and strange
thing, that chanced in the reign of Lewis the ninth (as Enguerran de
Monstrelet in his second volume of Hystories records it:) upon the fifteenth
day of June in the year of our Lord God 1464 there happened a strange thing in
the palace at Paris: so it was that there was a matter in law to be tried
betwixt the Bishop of Angiers and a rich Citizen, whom the Bishop charged to
have spoken before many witnesses, that he believed not that there was
eithere God or Devil, Heaven or hell. Now whilst the Bishops Lawier laid to
his charge these things, the place began to tremble very much, wherein they
were, and a stone fell down from the roof amongst them all without hurting
any: yet every man was sore afraid, and departed out of the house until the
morrow: when the matter was begun again to be pleaded, which was no sooner in
hand, but the chamber begun afresh to shake, and one of the summers came forth
of his mortise hole, falling downwards two foot and there stayed: so that all
that were within the hall looking to have been slain outright, ran out so
violently that some left behind them their caps, others their hoodes, others
their slippers: summarily, glad was he that could get out first; neither durst
they plead any more causes in that place until it was mended. Thus much
reports Enguerran without mention of any decision of that matter: now for as
much as nothing happens by chance, it is most likely that God by that
accident would give us to understand both how monstrous and detestable all such
speeches are, as also how men ought to fear and abhor them, seeing that the
dumb and senseless creatures and wood, beams, planckes and stones, and the
earth at self, (by nature steadfast and fixed) are so far from enduring them,
that they are moved withal.

There was a certain blasphemous wretch that on a time being with his
companions in a common Inn carousing and making merry; Discipulus de tempore
Sermon. 132.
asked them if they thought a man was possessed with a soul or no: whereunto
when some replied, that the souls of men were immortal, and that some of them
after release from the body lived in heaven, others in hell; for so the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles instructed them: he answered and swore
that he thought it nothing so, but rather that there was no soul in man to
survive the body, but that Heaven and hell were mere fables, and inventions
of Priests to get gain by; and for himself he was ready to sell his soul to
any that would buy it: then one of his companions took up a cup of wine and
said, sell me thy soul for this cup of wine: which he receiving bad him take
his soul, and drank up the wine. Now Satan himself was there in a man's
shape, (as commonly he is never far from such meetings) and bought it again
of the other at the same price, and by and by bad him give him his soul: the
whole company affirming it was meet he should have it, since he had bought
it, not perceiving the Devil: but presently he laying hold on this soul
seller, carried him into the air before them all, toward his own habitation,
to the great astonishment and amazement of the beholders: and from that day to
this he was never heard of, but tried to his pain that men had souls: and
that hell was no fable according to his godless and profane opinion.

Pherecides by birth a Syrian, a tragical Poet and a Philosopher by
profession, Aelianus de var. hist. lib. 4.
boasted impudently amongst his scholars of his prosperity learning, and
wisdom, saying: that although he offered no sacrifices unto the gods, yet he
lead a more quiet and prosperous life then those that were addicted to
religion, and therefore he passed not for any such vanity. But ere long his
impiety was justly revenged, for the Lord struck him with such a strange
disease, that out of his body issued such a slimie and filthy sweat, and
engendered such a number of lice and worms, that his bowels being consumed by
them he died most miserably.

Theat. historicum.
At Hamburge not long since there lived an impious wretch that despised the
preaching of the Gospel and the ministers thereof, accounting it as a vain
thing, not worthy the believing of any man: neither did he thus himself only
but also seduced many others, bringing them to all Atheism and ungodliness.
Wherefore the Lord justly recompensed him for his impiety: for he that before
had no sense nor feeling of God in his conscience, being touched with the
finger of the almighty, grew to the contrary, even to too much feeling and
knowledge of God, that he fell into extreme despair, affirming now his sins
to be past forgiveness because he had withdrawn others from the truth as well as
himself, whereas before he thought himself guilty of no sin; and that God
was so just that he would not forgive him, whereas before he thought there was
no God: (so mighty is the operation of the Lord when he pleases to touch the
conscience of man) finally, continuing in this desperate case, he threw
himself from the roof of a house into a well, and not finding water enough to
drown him, he thrust his head into the bottom thereof till he had made an
end of his life.

Theat. historicum.
In the year of our Lord 1502 there lived one Hermannus Biswick, a grand
Atheist, and a notable instrument of Satan, who affirmed that the world never
had beginning, as foolish Moses dreamed: and that there was neither Angels nor
devils, nor hell, nor future life, but that the souls of men perished with
their bodies: besides, that Christ Jesus was nothing else, but a seducer of the
people; and that the faith of Christians, and whatsoever else is contained in
holy writs, was mere vanity. These articles full of impiety and blasphemy,
he constantly avouched to the death: And for the same cause was together with
his books burnt in Holland.

A certain rich man at Holberstadium abounding with all manner of earthly
commodities, Theatr. histor.
gave himself so much to his pleasure, that he became besotted therewith: in
such sort, that he made no reckening of religion, nor any good thing; but
dared to say, that if he might lead such a life continually upon earth, he
would not envy heaven, nor desire any exchange. Notwithstanding ere long
(contrary to his expectation) the Lord cut him off by death, and so his desired
pleasure came to an end. But after his death there appeared such diabolical
apparitions in his house, that no man daring to inhabit in it, became desolate,
for every day there appeared the image of this Epicure sitting at a board with
a number of his guests, drinking, carousing, and making good cheer; and his
table furnished with delicates, and attended on by many that ministered
necessaries unto them, beside with minstrels, trumpetters, and such like. In
sum, whatsoever he delighted in his life time, was there to be seen every
day, the Lord permitting Satan to bleare men's eyes with such strange shows, to
the end that others might be terrified from such epicurisme and impiety.

Not inferior to any of the former in Atheism and impiety, and equal to all
in manner of punishment was one of our own nation, of fresh and late memory,
called Marlin, Marlow.
by profession a scholar, brought up from his youth in the University of
Cambridge, but by practice a play-maker, and a Poet of scurrilitie, who by
giving too large a swinge to his own wit, and suffering his lust to have the
full raines, fell (not without just desert) to that outrage and extremity,
that he denied God and his son Christ, and not only in word blasphemed the
trinity, but also (as it is credibly reported) wrote books against it,
affirming our Savior to be but a deceiuer, and Moses to be but a coniurer and
seducer of the people, and the holy Bible to be but vain and idle stories, and
all religion but a device of policy. But see what a hook the Lord put in the
nosthrils of this barking dog: It so fell out, that in London streets as he
purposed to stab one whom he ought a grudge unto with his dagger, the other
party perceiving so avoided the stroke, that withal catching hold of his
wrest, he stabbed his own dagger into his own head, in such sort, that
notwithstanding all the means of surgerie that could be wrought, he shortly
after died thereof. The manner of his death being so terrible (for he even
cursed and blasphemed to his last gasp, and together with his breath an oath
flew out of his mouth) that it was not only a manifest sign of Gods judgment,
but also an horrible and fearful terror to all that beheld him. But herein
did the justice of God most notably appear, in that he compelled his own
hand which had written those blasphemies to be the instrument to punish him,
and that in his brain, which had devised the same. I would to God (and I pray
it from my heart) that all Atheists in this realm, and in all the world
beside, would by the remembrance and consideration of this example, either
forsake their horrible impiety, or that they might in like manner come to
destruction: and so that abominable sin which so flourishes amongst men of
greatest name, might either be quite extinquished and tooted out, or at least
smothered and kept under, that it durst not show it head any more in the worlds
eye.

CHAP. XXVI. Touching the transgressors of the second commandment, by
Idolatry.
We have hitherto seen how and in what sort they, that either by malice, or
impiety, or Apostasy, or heresy, or otherwise have transgressed the first
commandment, have been punished: Let us now consider the judgments that have
befallen Idolatours, the breakers of the second commandment. But before we
proceed, we must know, that as it is required of us by the first commandment
to hold God for our true and only God, to repose all our whole trust and
confidence in him, and call upon him, serve and worship him alone: so in the
second, the contrary to this is forbidden; which is, to do any manner of
service, honor, and reverence by devotion to Idols, forasmuch as he is a
spirit (that is to say, John. 4.
of a spiritual nature and essence which is infinite and incomprehensible) so
loves he a spiritual worship and service which is answerable to his nature,
and not by images or pictures, and such other outward and corruptible means,
which he has in no wise commanded: wherefore Isaiah the Prophet reproouing
the folly and vanity of idolatours says, Chap. 40.18.
To whom will you liken God, or what similitude will you set up unto him.
Therefore if it be not Gods will, that under pretense and color of his own
name, any image or picture should be adored, (being a thing not only
inconvenient, but also absurd and unseemly) much less can he abide to have
them worshipped under the name and title of any creature whatsoever. And for
this cause gave he the second commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self
any graven image, etc. which prohibition the Israelielits brake in the desert,
when they set up a golden calfe, and bowed themselves before it after the manner
of the Painyms, giving it the honor which was only due to God: whereby they
incurred the indignation of Almighty God, Exodus 32.
who is strong and jealous of suffering any such slander to be done unto his
name: wherefore he caused three thousand of them to be stricken and wounded to
death by the hand of the Leuits, at the commandment of Moses, to make his
anger against idolatry more manifest, by causing them to be executioners of
his revenge, who were ordained for the ministry of his Church, and the service
of the altar and tabernacle. Howbeit for all this, the same people not long
after, fell back into the same sin, and bowed themselves before strange
gods, and through the allurements of the daughters of Moab joined themselves to
Belphegor: Number. 25.
for which cause, the Lord being incensed, stroke them with so grievous a
plague, that there died of them in one day about twenty and four thousand
persons.

And albeit that after all this, being brought by him into the land of promise,
he had forbidden and threatened them for cleaving to the idols of the nations
whose land they possessed, yet were they so prone to idolatry, that
notwithstanding all this, they fell to serve Baal and Astaroth: wherefore the
fire of Gods wrath was enflamed against them, and he gave them over to be a
spoil and prey unto their enemies on every side, so that for many years,
sometimes the Moabites oppressed them, otherwhiles the Madianites, and ever
after the death of any of their Judges and rulers which God raised up for their
deliverance, some grievous punishment befell them: for then (being without law
or government) every man did that which seemed good in his own eyes, and so
turned aside from the right way.

Now albeit these examples may seem to have some affinity with Apostasy, yet
because the ignorance and rudeness^ of the people was rather the cause of their
falling away from God, then any wilful affection that reigned in them,
therefore we place them in this rank, as well as they that have been
always brought up and nuzled in Idolatry.

2. Chron. 22.
One of this crew was Ochosias king of Judah son of Ioram, who having before
him an evil president of his wicked father, and a worse instruction and
bringing up of his mother Athaliah, who together with the house of Achab
pricked him forward to evil, joined himself to them, and to their idols, and
for that cause was wrapped in the same punishment and destruction with Ioram
the king of Israel, whom Iehu slew together with the princes of Judah, and many
of his near kinsmen. And to be short, Idolatry has been the decay and ruin
of the kingdom of Judah, as at all other times, so especially under Ioachas
son of Josias, 2. King. 23.
that reigned not above three months in Jerusalem before he was taken and led
captive into Egypt by the king thereof, and there died: from which time the
whole land became tributary to the king of Egypt. And not long after it was
utterly destroyed by the forces of Nabuchadnezzar, king of Babel that came
against Jerusalem and took it, and carried king Ioa^him with his mother, his
princes, his servants, and the treasures of the temple, and his own house,
into Babylon. And finally, 2. King. 24.25.
took Zedechias that fled away, and before his eyes caused his sons to be
slain, which as soon as he had beheld, commanded him also to be pulled out,
and so binding him in chains of iron, carried him prisoner to Babylon: putting
all the princes of Judah to the sword, consuming with fire the temple with the
kings palace, and all the goodly buildings of Jerusalem. And thus the whole
kingdom (though by an especial prerogative consecrated and ordained of God
himself) ceased to be a kingdom, and came to such an end, that it was never
reestablished by God, but begun and confirmed by the filthy idolatry of
Ieroboams calves, Vide lib. 1. c. 19.
which as his successors maintained and favored more or less, so were they
exposed to more or less plagues and encumbrances.

Nadab, Ieroboams son, being nuzled and nurtured up in Idol worship, after
the example of his father, 1 King. 15.27.
received a condign punishment for his iniquity: for Baasa the son of
Ahijah put both him and all the offspring of Ieroboam^ house to the sword, and
reigned in his stead: who also being no whit better then those whom he had
slain, was punished in the person of Ela his son; whom Zambri one of his
servants slew. And this again usurping the crown, enjoyed it but seven days,
at the end whereof (seeing himself in danger in the city Tirza taken by
Amri, whom the people had chosen for their king) went into the palace of the
kings house, and burned himself. As for Achab, he multiplied idolatry in
Israel, and committed more wickedness then all his predecessors, wherefore
the wrath of God was stretched out against hi^ and his: for he himself was
wounded to death in battle by the Sitians, his son Ioram slain by Iehu,
and threescore and ten of his children put to death in Samaria by their
governors and chief of the city, sending their heads in baskets to Iehu.
Above all, a most notable and manifest example of Gods judgment, was seen in
the death of Iezabel his wife, that had been his spur and prouoker to all
mischief, when by her Eunuchs and most trusty servants at the commandment
of Iehu she was thrown down out of a window, and trampled under the horse
seer, and last of all devoured of dogs. Moreover, the greatest number of the
kings of Israel that succeeded him were murdered one after another, so that the
kingdom fell to such a low decline, that it became first tributary to the king
of Assyria, and afterward invaded and subverted by him, and the inhabitants
transported into his land: whence they never returned, but remained scattered
here and there like vagabonds, and all for their abominable idolatry: which
ought to be a lesson to all people, princes, and kings, that seeing God spared
not these two realms of Judah and Israel, but destroyed and rooted them out
from the earth; much less will he spare any other kingdom and monarchy which
continue by their images and idol worship to stir up his indignation against
them.

CHAP. XXVII. Of many evils that have come upon Christendom for idolatry.
IF we consider and search out the cause of the ruin of the East Empire, and
of so many famous and flourishing Churches as were before-time in the greatest
part of Europe, and namely in Greece, we shall find, that Idolatry has been
the cause of all: for even as it got footing and increase in their dominions;
so equally did the power of Saracens and Turkish tyrany take root and
foundation amongst them, and prospered so well, that the rest of the world
trembled at the report thereof; God having raised and fortified them, as
beforetime he had done the Assyrians and Babylonians as whips and scourges to
chasten the people and nations of the world that wickedly had abused his holy
gospel, and bearing the name of Christians, had become idolaters: for no other
name then this can be given them, that in devotion do any manner of homage to
images and pictures, whatsoever may superficially be alleged to the contrary.
For be it the image either of Prophet, Apostle, or Christ Jesus himself, yet it
is necessary that the law of God stand whole and sound, which says, Thou shall
make thy self no graven image, nor any likeness of things either in heaven
above, or in earth beneath: Epiphan. John Bishop of Jerusalem.
thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them, etc. Wherefore he
performed the part of a good bishop, that finding a veil spread in the
entrance of a Church door wherein the image of Christ or of some other Saint
was pictured, rent it in pieces, with these words, That it was against the
authority of the sacred scripture to have any image of Christ set up in the
Church. After the same manner, Serenus bishop of Marseilla, beat down and
banished all images out of his Churches, as occasions of idolatry: and to shun
them the more, it was ordained in the Elibertine council, that no image nor
picture should be set up in any Church: for which cause also the Emperor Leo
the third, by an open edict commanded his subjects to cast out of their temples
all pictures and statues of Saints, Paul. Diacon. Lib. 6. cap. 14.
Angels, and whatsoever, to the intent that all occasions of Idolatry might be
taken away: yea and he burned some, and punished diverse otherwise, that in this
regard were not pliant, but disobedient to his commandment. After which time,
when images were recalled into Greece and into Constantinople (the chief city
and seat of the east Empire) it came to pass by a great and dreadful, yet
just judgment of God, that this famous and renowned city, in the worlds eye
impregnable, after long siege, and great and furious assaults, was at length
taken by the Turks, who having won the breach and entered with fury, drove
the poor Emperor Paleologus (even till then fighting for the cities defense)
to that extremity, that in retiring among the prease of his own soldiers, he
was thronged and trampled to death; and his slain body being found, was
beheaded, and his head contemptuously carried about the city upon a lance. Now
after the massacre of many thousand men, to make up a complete and absolute
cruelty, they drew the Empress with her daughters, and many other Ladies and
gentlewomen to a banquet, where after many vile and horrible wrongs and
disgraces, they killed and tore them in pieces in most monstrous manner. In all
which, the execution of Gods most just wrath for idolatry did most lively
appear: which sin, accompanied with many other execrable and vile vices,
must needs draw after it a grievous and terrible punishment to serve for
example to others that were to come: neither was it a thing by chance or
haphazzard that the christians were made a mocking stock unto them in that
woeful day, when in their bloody triumphs they caused a crucifixe to be carried
through the streets in contempt, and throwing dirt upon it, cried in their
language, This is the gallant God of Christians. And thus did God license and
permit these savage Turks to commit eueryday grievous outrages, and to make
great wastes and desolations in all Christendom, till that they grew so mighty
that it is to be feared least the saying of Lactantius touching the return of
the Empire into Asia, be not verified and accomplished very shortly, if there
be no amendment practiced: for we see by woeful experience, that almost all
the forces which Christian Princes have mustered together from all quarters in
pretense to resist their fury and rage, have not only been bootlesse and
unprofitable, but also that which is worse, given them further occasion by
their bloody victories and wonderful slaughter of so many millions of men, to
make them more obstinate in their detestable Mahumetisme and Turkish religion,
then they were before: for they make their boasts thereof, and rear up
trophies of their cruelties, taking no more pity of the vanquished, then a
butcher does of sheep allotted to the slaughter. Whereof we have a pitiful
example in the overthrow of the French army which John the son of Philip
duke of Burgundy led against the Turk Pazaite, and by the treachery and
cowardice of the Hungarians, who in the time of battle turned their backs
and fled, was overcome: in that this wicked and cruel tiger expressly charged
that all the prisoners (in number many) should be murdered one after another;
which was readily executed before his eyes: so that saving the chief captain
and certain few lords of the company that were spared in respect of great
ransoms, there escaped not one alive.

Besides these general calamities, the Lord has particularly shown forth
his indignation against private persons and places for Idolatry: Cent. 4. cap.
3.
as in Spoletium at one rhyme there perished by an earthquake three hundred and
fifty, whilst they were offering sacrifice unto their Idols. At Rome under the
empire of Alexander Seuerus, after that the left hand of the image of Jupiter
was miraculously melted, Cent 3. cap. 14.
the priests going about to pacify the anger of their gods with Lectisterns
and Sacrifices, four of them together with the altar and Idol were stricken
in pieces with a thunderbolt, and suddenly such a horrible darkness ouerspread
all the City, that most of the inhabitants ran out into the fields all amazed.
Moreover did not the Lord send lightning from Heaven to inflame that notorious
Temple for Idolatry of Apollo, Theodor. lib. 3. cap. 9. and 10.
or rather the Devil of Delphos, in the time of Julian the wicked Apostatae,
whilst he was exercising tortures upon one Theodorus a Christian, and did it
not consume the image of Apollo to ashes? The famous and rich Temple of Jupiter
at Apamea, how strangely did it come to ruin and destruction? Nic^phor. lib.
12. cap. 27.
For when the President and Tribunes who had in charge to destroy it, thought
it a thing almost impossible by reason of the strength of the walls and matter
of it, Marcellus the Bishop undertook the labor and found out a man that
promised to shake and root up the foundation of it by fire, but when he had
put it in practice, a black Devil appeared and hindered the natural operation
of the fire, which when Marcellus perceived, he by earnest and zealous prayer
drove away the Devil, and so the fire rekindled and consumed it to nothing. In
all which examples we may see the wonderful indignation of God against
Idol-worshippers, when by such strange and extraordinary means he brings
them to destruction. And this doubtless is no new course, for even since the
beginning of the world (if we consult histories) we shall find, that well nie
all kingdoms, places, persons, and countries that have been any wise infected
with this sin have still come to some ruin or other, and to some great
overthrow, and their idolatry suppressed by some notable and strange accident,
whereof S. Jerome may may be a witness, who affirms that when Jesus being a
child was carried into Egypt for fear of Herod, all the Idols of Egypt fell
down, and all their Oracles became mute, Isai. 19.1.
which the Prophet Isaias foreseeing says, Behold the Lord rides upon a swift
cloud, and shall come into Egypt, and the Idols of Egypt shall melt in the
midst of her: Besides the general silence of the Devil in all his Oracles
throughout the world presently upon Christ's incarnation is a thing known and
confessed of all men. Notwithstanding al which the holy Pope will still
maintain his idolatry, albeit the Lord has made known manifest tokens of
his indignation against it. As appears by that which happened in the year
1451 being the Popes Jubilee, when such a concourse of people was made from all
quarters of the world to honor that superstitious day: for the people being
upon Adrians bridge were so thrust together that two hundred men and three
horses lost their lives being trampled upon and stifled to death* many fell
into the water over the bridge, and so perished: of whom an hundred and thirty
were buried at Saint Selsus: and these are the fruits of their indulgences
which are so much brought and sought for, and of their Iubilies, proceeding
from the Bishop of Rome his impious and sacralegious zeal. Now to eschew these
and such like misfortunes the true and only means is, an unfeigned diuersion
from all Idolatry and superstition, and whatsoever else contrarieth the pure
service of God, and a conversion unto him to serve him in spirit and truth as
the Scripture exhorts.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of those that at any time corrupted and mingled Gods religion
with humane inventions, or went about to change and disquiet the discipline of
the Church.
NOw seeing that God has set down a certain form of doctrine and
instruction, according to which he would have us to serve him, and established
a kind of discipline and policy to be observed and maintained of every man
inuiolablie, it behooves therefore every Christian to conform himself unto
this order: and not to be guided by every fickle imagination of his own
brain, or every rash presumption that arises in himself, but only by the
direct rule of Gods word, which only we ought to follow: by means of
neglecting which duty many vain and pernicious ceremonies and strange
superstitions have been brought in, and swaied mightily: by reason whereof,
great controversies and disputations are taken up at this day. Albeit indeed it
be a thing manifest, that being not grounded and propped upon the anchore of
the scriptures, they ought to be abolished, what brave outward show in
appearance soever they bear.

And that they that set abroch such things are not blameless and excusable
before God, Leuit. 20. Numb. 34.
it appears by the punishment of Nadab and Abihu, who being ordained Priests
of God to sacrifice and offer only those things which were commanded in the
law, yet were so evil advised as to offer strange incense, and perfume upon
the altar, received at the very instant of the fact condign punishment for
their presumption: for soddainly this their strange fire invaded them so
fiercely and so piercingly, that they were soon burned and consumed therewith,
and so they were not spared albeit they were Aarons sons even his first
borne, and Moses nephews; that by them all other might fear and take warning
how to enterprise any thing in Gods service contrary to his express ordinance.

This moderation also ought to be observed in the church discipline, to wit,
that every man contain himself within the precincts of his vocation, and that
none intrude themselves into any charge without being called of god thereunto:
wherein Corah greatly faulted, Numb. 16.
when being not content with the dignity of a Leuits office which God had
bestowed upon him, he ambitiously aspired to the priests office, and besides
this stirred up and drew to his faction Dathan and Abiram, and many others, to
the number of two hundred and fifty persons, against Moses and Aaron: but he
drew withal the vengeance of God down upon himself, and all that took his
part in most horrible and fearful manner: for some of them (to wit) the two
hundred and fifty, (who notwithstanding Moses reproof, were so hardy and
presumptuous as to present themselves the next morrow after the tumult, openly
before the tabernacle to offer incense as if they had been true priests) were
for their flame of ambition and pride set on fire and consumed with the flame
of Gods wrath: others (to wit Dathan and Abiram) for their audacious enterprise
against God in the person of his servants Moses and Aaron, and their high
mindedness and rebellion in not coming out of their tents at the commandment
of Moses were thrown down into the lowest pit, the earth opening her mouth and
swallowing them up alive with their tents and families and all that belonged
unto them, to the fearful amazement of the whole people that were beholders of
this spectacle.

Oziah king of Judah carried himself a long while uprightly and modestly in the
service of God: 2. Chron. 26.
but after God had given him many great victories over his enemies the
Philistims, the Arabians, the Amorites: and that his renown and fear was
spread not only to his neighbors, but also to strange nations, by and by his
heart was puffed up with pride and self conceit, that he dared to enter the
temple of God, and burn incense upon the altar, which belonged only to the
priests office to do: and not obeying the strong resistance and countermaund of
the good priests that had charge of the temple, he was stricken with a leprosy
and hastily carried out and sequestered from the society of men all his life
time. And so this proud king that foolishly took upon him more then was
lawful and convenient, was forced to recoile, and to be still, being humbled
under so grievous a scourge as never forsook him til his death.

When the arc of the covenant was in bringing from Abinadabs house in
Kyriathiarim in a cart guided by Vzza and Ahio, Abinadabs sons, 1. Sam. 6. 1.
Chron. 13.
it fell out by the way that it being shaken by the oxen (unfit seruitors for
such a work) Vzza put forth his hand to hold it, but therein he went beyond his
charge, and therefore was punished forthwith with present death, for his
inconsiderate rashness: for albeit he was both a Leuit and thought no evil in
his heart, yet in no respect was he licenced to touch the arc, being a thing
lawful for the Priests only. Let therefore every one be advised by these
examples to follow that rule in serving God, which is by him designed in all
simplicity, modesty, and obedience, without altering or declining, or
undertaking any thing above or beside their calling.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Periurers.
THe third commandment, which is, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy
God in vain, is first and especially broken by perjury, when God is so
lightly esteemed, nay so despised that without any regard had to his name (that
is to say) to his greatness, majesty, power, divine virtue and fearful justice,
(for these be his names) men by fraud and malice abuse their oaths, either in
denying that which is true, or affirming that which is untrue, or neglecting
their promises made and vowed to others: for this is neither to have respect
unto his presence who is every where, nor reverence to his majesty who is God
of heaven and earth, but rather to make him bear witness to our lie and
falsehood: as if he approved it, or had no power to revenge the injury and
dishonor done unto him. And therefore against such in threatening words he
denounces this judgment, that He will not hold him guiltless that takes
his name in vain. Howbeit very many ouerboldly give themselves over to this
sin, making little or no conscience to cosen one another even by
forswearings, whereby they give most clear evidence against themselves, that
they have very little fear of God before their eyes, and are not guided by any
other rule, save of their own affections, by which they square-out, and build
their oaths and pull them down again at their pleasures, for let it be a
matter of vantage, and then they will keep them, but straightway if a contrary
persuasion come in their brain they will cancel them by and by: wherein they
deal far worse and more injuriously with God, then with their known
enemies: for he that contrary to his sworn faith, deceives his enemy,
declares that therein he fears him, but fears not God; and cares for him,
but contemns God. It was therefore not-without good reason that all antiquity
ever marked the^ with the coat of infamy that forswore themselves. And
thereupon it is that Homer so often taunteth the Trojans by reason of their so
usual periuries. Diod. lib. 2. ca. 2.
The Egyptians had them in detestation as profane persons, and reputed it so
capital a crime that whosoever was convinced thereof was punished by death.
The ancient Romans reverenced nothing more then Faith in public affairs,
for which cause they had in their city a temple dedicated to it: wherein for a
more straight bond they used solemnly to promise and swear to all the
conditions of peace, truces and bargains, which they made, and to curse those
which went about first to break them: for greater solemnity and confirmation
hereof they were accustomed at those times to offer sacrifices to the image of
faith for more reverence sake. Hence it was that Attilius Regulus chief
captain of the Roman army against the Carthaginians was so highly commended
of all men, because when he was overcome and taken prisoner and sent to Rome,
he only for his oaths sake which he had sworn returned again to the enemy,
albeit he knew what grievous torments were provided for him at his return.
Others also that came with him though they were entreated, and by their
parents, wives and allies instantly urged not to return to Hannibals camp
could in no wise be moved thereunto: but because they had sworn to the
enemy, if the Romans did not accord to those conditions which were offered, to
come again: they preferred the bond and reverence of their promised faith,
though accompanied with perpetual captivity, before their private commodities,
and nearest link of affection. But two of those ten (for so many were they)
falsified their oath, and whatsoever mist they may cast to darken and disguise
their perjury with, yet were they condemned of all men for cowards, and
fainthearted traitors: in so much that the Censors also noted them with infamy
for the fact, whereat they took such grief and inward sorrow, that being
weary of their lives, they slew themselves. Now what can they pretend that
profess themselves Christians and Catholics to excuse their periuries, Cic.
offic. lib. 1.
seeing that the very Heathen cry out so loud and clear, that an oath and
faith is so sacredly to be kept toward our enemies? This is one of the
greatest virtues and commendations which the Psalmist attributes to the
faithful man, and him that fears God, and whom God avouches for his own,
Psalm. 15. Josh. 9.
not to falsify his oath that he sweared though it be to his damage. The
Gibaonites although they were so execrable a people that for their great and
horrible wickednesses and abominations they might be well esteemed for
Heretics, yet the Princes of Israel after they had sworn and given their
faith unto them, would in no wise retract or go against their oath, albeit
therein they were abused and deceived by them, for fear of incurring the wtath
of God, that suffers not a periurer to go unpunished. Upon what ground or
example of holy Scripture then may that doctrine of the counsel of Constance
be founded, the purport whereof is, That a man ought not to keep his faith to
Heretics? I omit to speak how these good fathers (by Heretics) meant those
men who fearing God, relied themselves upon his word, and rejected the foolish
and superstitious inventions of men. And under what color can the Popes usurp
this authority, to quit and discharge subjects of their oath wherewith they are
bound to their superiors? yet this was the impious audacity of Pope Zacharia,
pope Boniface the eight, and pope Benedict de la Lune, Platina.
who freed the Frenchmen from their duty and obedience which they ought unto
their kings. In like manner disgorged Gregory the seventh his choler and spite
against the Emperor Henry, by forbidding his subjects to be his subjects,
Enguerran de Monstrelet.
and to yield that obedience unto him, which subjects were bound to do.

Howbeit if an oath be made either against God, or to the damage and hurt of
our neighbor (it being for that cause unlawful) it behooves us to know that
we ought to revoke it, least we fall into the sin of Saul and Herod. 1. Sam
14. Marc. 6.
Now what punishments God has laid upon periurers, these examples that follow
shall make known unto us. Osee the last king of Israel being made (by Gods
just judgment for his sins) subject and tributary to Salmanazar king of
Ashur, without regard to the bond wherewith he was bound, 2. King 17.
and to his faith which he had plighted, conspired and entered league with the
king of Egypt against him: but he, discovering their seditions and privy
conspiracies, assembled his forces, spoiled his country, and bad them war on
all sides, laying siege to the chief city of his kingdom, after three years
took it, together with the forsworn king, whom he put in close prison and
kept very straightly, leading him and his whole nation captive into Assyria to
end their days in misery; of which evil, as of all others that happened in
that war, the disloialty and treason of Osee was the next and chiefest cause.

Among the beadroll of sins which Sedechias the last king of Judah is noted
withal in holy scripture, perjury is one of the count, for notwithstanding he
received his kingdom of Nabuchadnezzar, and had sworn fealty to him as to his
sovereign, yet brake he his oath in rebelling against him, which was the very
cause of his destruction: 2. Chron. 36.
for NabuchadneZZar to be revenged on his disloialty, sent a puissant army
against Jerusalem, which took, spoiled, and burned it, and ouertooke the
periurer in his flight, and first made him a beholder of the slaughter of his
own children, and then had his own eyes bored out, and was carried in chains
to Babylon, serving for a spectacle to all posterity of Gods wondrous
judgments upon periurers. And thus both the kingdoms of Israel and Judah were
for breach and falsifying their oath, quite extinguished and razed out.

Plutarch.
The greatest deceiuer and most treacherous person one of them that ever Greece
saw, was Lisander the Lacedemonian, a busy body full of cunning, subtilty, and
craft, and one that performed the most of his acts of war, more by fraud and
stratagemes, then by any other means: this was he that said, that when the
lions skin (meaning Fortitude) would not serve, it was needful then to sue
unto the foxes case (meaning subtilty:) he made so little reckening of
forswearing himself, that he would often say, that children were to be
cousened wirh trifles, as dice and cockals, and old men with oaths: but by his
deceitful tricks he was occasion of much evil, and diverse murders: but at
last this fox making war against the Thebanes, for that they had taken part
with the Athenians against him, and given them succor and means for
recovering their liberty, was taken in the trap and slain at the foot of
their walls.

Liuie.
Metius Suffetius, General of the Albanes, procured the Fidenates to enter war
against the Romans, contrary to his oath which he had sworn unto them, and
being called by the Romans to their succor and placed in an outwing to help
if need were, whilst the rest were fighting, he drove away the time in ordering
his men, and ranging them into squadrons, to see which part should have the
best, that he might join himself unto that side. But Tullus the Roman king
having obtained the victory, and seeing the cowardice, subtilty, and treason of
this Albane, adjudged him to a most strange and vile death answerable to his
fact: for as he had in his body a double heart swimming between two
streams, and now ready to go this way now that, so was his body dismembered and
torn in pieces by four horses, drawing four contrary ways, to serve for an
example to all others to be more faithful and true obseruers of their oaths
then he was.

In old time the Africanes and Carthaginians were generally noted for perfidie
and falsehood above other nations; Li^. Decad. 3. lib. 1.
the cause of which bruit, was principally that old subtle soldier Anniball,
an old deceiuer and a notorious periurer, who by his crafts and cousenages
which he wrought without religion or fear of God, raised up that evil
report. This subtle fox having made war in Italy sixteen years, and all
that while troubled and vexed the Romans sore, after many victories, wastings
of countries, ruins, and sackings of cities, and cruel bloodshed, was at
length overcome by Scipio in his own country, and perceiving that his
country men imputed the cause of their fall unto him, and sought to make him
odious to the Romans by laying to his charge the breach of that league which
was betwixt them, he fled to Antiochus king of Siria, not so much for his own
safeties sake, as to continue his war against the Romans, which he knew
Antiochus to be in hammering, because they came so near unto his frontiers,
but he found his hope frustrate: for king Antiochus for the small trust he
affied in him, and the daily suspicion of his treachery, would not commit any
charge of his army into his hand, although for valiantness and prowess he was
second to none in that age: It came to pass therefore, that as soon as
Antiochus was overthrown of the Romans, he was constrained to fly to Prusias
king of Bithynia, that took him into his protection: but being as treacherous
as himself, he soon devised a means to betray him to Quintius the general
of the Roman army, which when Anniball understood, and seeing that all the
passages for evasion were closed up, and that he could not any way escape, he
poisoned himself, and so miserably ended his treacherous life. And thus the
deceit which he practiced toward others, fell at length upon his own pate to
his utter destruction.

Albeit that periurers and forswearers were to the Egyptians very odious and
abominable (as we said before) yet among them there was one Ptolome, Iustine.
who to bereave his sister Arsinoe of her kingdom, stained himself with this
villainous spot, and thereby brought his purpose to pass: for pretending and
protesting great affection and love unto her in the way of marriage (for such
incestuous marriages were there through a perverse and damnable custom not
unlawful) and auowing the same by solemn oath before her ambassadors, did
notwithstanding soon make known the drift of his intent, which was to make
himself king: for being arrived in show to consummate the marriage, at his
first approach he caused his nephews (her sons which she had by her former
husband Lisimachus, and were come forth from their mother to give him
entertainment on the way) to be slain, yea and least they should escape his
hands, he pursued them even to their mothers bosom, and there murdered them,
and after (expelling her also from her kingdom) caught the crown and reigned
tyrant in her room: all which mischiefs, he committed by reason of the
faithless oath which he had taken: and although that in such a case no oath
ought to be of force to confirm so unlawful an alliance, (though it be
pronounced and taken by the name and in the temple of their idols:) yet
notwithstanding it being done with an evil conscience, and to an evil
purpose, he that did it can be no less then a periurer. But for this and
other vices it came to pass, that ere long he was conquered by the Gauls,
who taking him in battle slew him and cut off his head, and having fastened it
upon a lance, carried it in sign of victory and triumph up and down the host.

A most notable example of the punishment of perjury and falsehood in
Vladislaus king of Hungary and his army destroyed by the Turks, is set down
in Bonfinus his Hungarian history, after this manner. It fell out that the king
of Hungary had so well bestirred himself against the Turks, that Amurathes
was glad (upon unequal conditions and even to his own hurt, and their good)
to conclude a peace with him: wherein it was agreed, that certain provinces
should be restored to the Hungarians, which otherwise could not have been
recovered but by great loss of men: this league being made, and the articles
thereof engrossed in both languages, with a solemn oath taken on both parties
for the confirmation of the same: Behold the Cardinal of Florence Admiral of
the navy which lay upon the sea Hellespont (now called S. Georges arm, It is
so called by the French me^, but more commonly, The straights of Castill.
which deuideth Turkey from Greece) sends letters to the king of Hungary to
persuade him to disanull and repeal this new concorded peace: this practice
likewise did Cardinal Julian the Popes legate in Hungary with might and maine
help forward: which two good pillars of the Church inspired with one and the
same spirit wrought together so effectually with the king, that at their
instance, he falsified his oath, broke the peace, and sent to Constantinople to
denounce war afresh: and forthwith whilst their Ambassadors were retiring
their garrisons out of M^sia, to bring them into their hands again, and had
sent forty thousand crowns for the ransom of certain great men which were
prisoners, and had restored the realm of Rascia and al their captives,
according to the tenor of the late league, not knowing of this new breach, in
the mean while (I say) he set forward his army toward the Turks i^ all
expedition. Now the Turks secure and misdoubting nothing, were set upon
unawares by the king, yet putting themselves in defense, there grew a long and
sharp battle, till Amurathes perceiving his side to decline and almost
overcome, pulled out of his bosom the articles of the foresaid peace, and
lifting up his eyes to heaven, vtrered these speeches; O Jesus Christ, these
are the leagues that thy Christians have made and confirmed by swearing by thy
name, and yet have broken them again: If thou be a God as they say thou art,
revenge this injury which is offered both thee and me, and punish those
truce-breaking varlets. He had scarce ended these speeches, but the Christians
battle and courage began to rebate: Vdislaus himself was slain by the
Ianissaries, his horse being first hurt, his whole army was discomfited, and
all his people put to the sword, saving a few that fled: amongst whom was the
right reverend Ambassador of the Pope, who as soon as he had thrust in others
over the ears, withdrew himself (forsooth) far enough from blows or danger.
Then followed a horrible butchery of people, and a lamentable noise of poor
souls ready to be slaughtered, for they spared none, but haled them miserably
in pieces, and executed a just and rigorous judgment of God for that vile
treachery and perjury which was committed.

CHAP. XXX. More examples of the like subject.
But let us add a few more examples of fresher memory as touching this
ungodly perjury: and first, not to ouerpasse king Philip of Macedonie, who
never made reckoning of keeping his oaths, but swore and vnswore them at his
pleasure, and for his commodity: doubtless it was one of the chiefest causes
why he and his whole progeny came quickly to destruction (as testifies
Pausanias) for he himself being six and forty years old, In Arcad^cis.
was slain by one of his own servants; after which Olympias his wife made
away two of his sons, Anideus, and another which he had by Cleopatra Attalus
his niece, whom she sod to death in a cauldron: his daughter Thessalonicaes
children likewise all perished: and lastly, Alexander after all his great
victories, in the midst of his pomp, was poisoned at Babylon.

De Consessoribus.
Gregory Tours makes mention of a wicked varlet in France among the people
called Auerni, that forswearing himself in an unjust cause had his tongue so
presently tied, that he could not speak but roar, and so continued, till by
his earnest prayers and repentance, the Lord restored to him the use of that
unruly member.

Thete were in old time certain people of Italy called Aequi, whereof the
memory remains only at this day, for they were utterly destroyed by Q.
Cincinnatus, Liu. lib. 3.
these having solemnly made a league of friendship with the Romans, and sworn
unto it with one consent, afterward chose Gracchus Cluilius for their captain,
and under his conduct spoiled the fields and territories of the Romans,
contrary to their former league and oath. Whereupon the Romans sent Q. Fabius,
P. Voluminus, and A. Posthumous Ambassadors to them, to complain of their
wrongs and demand satisfaction: but their captain so little esteemed them,
that he bad them deliver their message to an oak standing thereby, whilst he
intended other business. Then one of the three turning himself toward the
oak, spoke on this manner: Thou hallowed oak, and whatsoever else belongs to
the gods in this place, hear and bear witness of this disloiall part, and
favor our just complaints, that with the assistance of the gods we may be
revenged on this injury. This done, they returned home, and shortly after
gathering a power of men, set upon and overcame that truce-breaking nation.

In the year of Rome built 317, the Fidenates revolted from the friendship and
league of the Romans to Toluminus the king of the Veyans, and adding cruelty
to treason, killed four of their Ambassadors that came to know the cause of
their defection: which disloialty the Romans not brooking, undertook war
against them; and notwithstanding all their private and foreign strength,
overthrew and slew them. In this battle it is said, that a Tribune of the
soldiers seeing Toluminus bravely galloping up and down and encouraging his
soldiers, and the Romans trembling at his approach, said, Is this the breaker
of leagues, and violatour of the law of nations? If there be any holiness on
earth, my sword shall sacrifice him to the souls of our slain Ambassadors;
and therewithal setting spurs to his horse, he unhorsed him, and fastening him
to the earth with his spear, cut off his perfidious head: whereat his army
dismayed, retired, and became a slaughter to the enemies.

Albertus Duke of Franconia having slain Conrade the Earl of Lotharingia,
brother to Jews the fourth, then Emperor, Melant. Chron. lib. 4.
and finding the Emperors wrath incensed against him for the same, betook
himself to a strong castle at Bamberg; from whence the Emperor neither by
force nor policy, could remove him for seven years space, until Atto the
bishop of Mentz by treachery delivered him into his hands. This Atto under show
of friendship repaired to the castle and gave his faith unto the Earl, that if
he would come down to parley with the Emperor, he should safely return into
his hold: the Earl mistrusting no fraud, went out of the castle gates with the
bishop toward the Emperor, but Atto (as it were suddenly remembering himself,
when indeed it was his devised plot) desires to return back and dine ere he
went, because it was somewhat late: so they do, dine and return: Now the
Earl was no sooner come to the Emperor, but he caused him to be presently
put to death, notwithstanding he urged the bishops promise and oath for his
return: for it was answered, that his oath was quit by returning back to
dine, as he had promised. And thus the Earl was wickedly betrayed, though
justly punished. As for Atto the subtle traitor, indeed he possessed himself
by this means of the Earls lands, but withal, the justice of God seized upon
him, for within a while after he was stricken with a thunderbolt, and as some
say, carried into mount Aetna with this noise: Sic peccata lues, atque ruendo
rues.

Campofulgos. lib. 7. cap. 3.
Cleomene^ king of Lacedemonia, making war upon the Argiues, surprised them
by this subtilty: he took truce with them for seven days, and the third night
whilst they lay secure and unwary in their truce, he oppressed them with a
great slaughter saying (to excuse his treachery, though no excuse could clear
him from the shame thereof) that the truce which he made was for seven days
only, without any mention of nights: howbeit for all this, it prospered not so
well with him as he wished, for the Argiue women (their husbands slain) took
arms like Amazones, Tolesilla being their captainesse, and compassing the
city walls repelled Cleomenes, half amazed with the strangeness of the fight,
after which he was banished into Egypt, and there miserably and desperately
slew himself.

The Pope of Rome with all his heard of bishops opposed himself against the
Emperor Henry the fourth, Chron. Carionis.
for he banished bim by excommunication from the society of the Catholic
Church, discharged his subjects from the oath of fealty, and sent a crown of
gold to Rodulph king of Sueuia to canonize him Emperor: the crown had this
inscription, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodulpho, that is, The rock
gave unto Peter, and Peter gave unto Rodulph the crown: notwithstanding
Rodulph remembering his oath to the Emperor, and how vile a part it was to
betray him whom he had sworn to obey and defend, at first refused the Popes
offer: howbeit by the persuasion of the bishops sophistry he was induced to
undertake the name and title of Caesar, and to oppugn the Emperor Henry by
arms, even by four unjust battles, in the last of which Rodulph being
overcome, lost his right hand, and was sore wounded otherwise: wherefore being
ready to die; when one brought unto him his hand that was cut off in the
battle, he in detestation of the popes villainy burst forh into these terms
(many bishops standing by) Behold here the hand wherewith I swore fealty to the
Emperor, this will be an argument of my breach of faith before God, and of
your traitorous impulsion thereunto. And thus he deceased, justly punished
even by his own confession for his perjury. Howbeit for all this manifest
example the pope and bishops continued to persecute the poor Emperor, yea and
to stir up his own sons, Conrade and Henry to fight against him; so
hardened are their hearts against all judgments.

Narcissus bishop of Jerusalem, Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 8
a man famous for his virtues, and sharp in reprooving and correcting vice,
was accused by three wicked wretches, of unchastity; and that falsely and
maliciously: for to prove their accusation true, they bound it with oaths and
curses on this wise: the first said, If I lie, I pray God I may perish by fire:
the second. If I speak ought but truth, I pray God I may be consumed by some
filthy and cruel disease: Calumniatio^. Lib. 2. cap. 44.
the third, If I accuse him falsely, I pray God I may be deprived of my sight
and become blind. Thus although the honesty and chastity of Narcissus was so
well known to all the faithful, that they believed none of their oaths, yet
the good bishop partly moved with grief of this false accusation, and partly
with desire of quietness from worldly affairs, forsook his bishopric, and
lived in a desert for many years. But his forsworn accusers by their death
witnessed his innocence, which by their words they impugned: for the first his
house being set on fire extraordinarily, perished in the flame with all his
family and progeny: The second languished away with an irksome disease that
bespread his body all over: The third seeing the woeful ends of his companions,
confessed all their villainy, and lamenting his case and crime, persisted so
long weeping, till both his eyes were put out. Thus God in his just judgment
sent upon each of them their wishes, and thereby cleared his servant from shame
and opprobry.

Chron. Ernosti. Brotanss.
Burghard, Archbishop of Magdeburg, though in regard of his place and
profession, he ought to have given good example of honesty in himself, and
punish perjury in others, yet he thrice broke his promise and oath with his
own citizens, the Senate and people of Magdeburg: for first he besieged them
with a power of men, and though they redeemed their liberty with a sum of
money (he swearing not to besiege them any more) yet without respect of truth
and credit he returned a fresh to besiege: but his perfidie was soon tamed,
for they took him prisoner at that assault: howbeit he so assuaged their angry
minds with his humble and lowly entreaties and counterfeit oaths never to
trouble them any more, but to continue their steadfast friend, that they not
only freed him from imprisonment, but restored him to all his dignities with
solemnity: nevertheless the traitorous Archbishop returning to his old vomit,
got dispensation for his oath from pope John the 23, and began a fresh to vex,
molest, and murder them whom he had sworn to maintain: but it was the will
of God that he should be once again caught, and being enclosed in prison,
whilst his friends sought means to redeem him, the Iailour beat him to death
with a door bar, or as some say, with an iron rod taken out of a window: and so
at last, though long, his perjury found it desert.

The small success that the Emperor Sigismond had in all his affairs (after
the violation of his faith given to John Hus, Theatr. histor.
and Jerome of Prage at the council of Constance, whom though with direct
protestations and oaths he promised safe conduct and return, yet he adjudged
to be burned) does testify the odiousness of his sin in the sight of God.
But above all, this one example is most worthy the marking, of a fellow that
hearing perjury condemned in a pulpit by a learned preacher, and how it never
escaped unpunished, said in a bravery, I have often forsworn my self, and yet
my right hand is not a whit shorter then my left: which words he had scarce
uttered, when such an inflammation arose in that hand, that he was constrained
to go to the surgeon and cut it off, least it should infect his whole body; and
so his right hand became shorter then his left, in recompense of his perjury,
which he lightly esteemed of.

In the year of our Lord 1055, Goodwine Earl of Kent sitting at the table
with king Edward of England, Stow Chron.
it happened that one of the cupbearers stumbled, and yet fell not; whereat
Goodwine laughing said, That if one brother had not helped another (meaning his
legs) all the wine had been spilt: with which words the king calling to mind
his brothers death which was slain by Goodwine, answered, So should my brother
Alphred have helped me, had not Goodwine been: then Goodwine fearing the kings
new kindled displeasure, excused himself with many words, and at last (eating
a morsel of bread) wished it might choke him if he were not guiltless of
Alphreds blood: but he swore falsely as the judgment of God declared, for he
was forthwith choked in the presence of the king, ere he removed one foot
from that place, though there be some say he recovered life again.

Stow Chron
Long time after this, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, there was in the city
of London one Anne Aueri^^ widow, who forswore her self for a little money
that she should have paid for six pound of tow at a shop in Woodstreet for
which cause being suddenly surprised with the justice of God, she fell down
speechless forthwith, and cast up at her mouth in great abundance and with
horrible stink that matter which by natures course should have been voided
downwards, and so died to the terror of all perjured and forsworn wretches.
There are in Histories many more examples to be found of this hurtful and
pernicious sin exercised by one nation toward another, and one man toward
another, in most profane and villainous sort, neither shaming to be accounted
forsworn, nor consequently fearing to displease God and his majesty. But
forasmuch as when we come to speak of murderers in the next book, we shall
have occasion to speak of them more, or of such like, I will refer the
handling thereof unto that place; only this, let every man learn by that which
has been spoken, to be sound and fraudlesse, and to keep his faith and
promise toward all men, if for no other cause, yet for fear of God, who
leaves not this sin unpunished, nor holds them guiltless that thus take
his name in vain.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Blasphemers.
AS touching Blasphemy, it is a most grievous and enormous sin, and contrary
to this third commandment, when a man is so wretched and miserable as to
pronounce presumptuous speeches against God, whereby his name is slandered and
evil spoken of, which sin can not choose but be sharply and severely
punished: for if so be that God holds not him guiltless that does but take
his name in vain, must he not needs abhor him that blasphemeth his name?
See how meritoriously that wicked and perverse wretch that blasphemed and
murdered (as it were) the name of God among the people of Israel in the desert,
was punished: he was taken, Leuit. 24.
put in prison, and condemned, and speedily stoned to death by the whole
multitude: and upon that occasion (as evil manners begat evermore good laws)
the Lord instituted a perpetual law and decree, that every one that should
blaspheme and curse God, of what estate or degree soever, should be stoned to
death in token of detestation: which sentence, if it might now a days stand in
force, there would not reign so many miserable blasphemers and deniers of God
as the world is now filled and infected with. It was also ordained by a new law
of Justinian, Cod. lib. 3. tit. 43.
that blasphemies should be severely punished by the Judges and magistrates of
commonweales: but such is the corruption and misery of this age, that those men
that ought to correct others for such speeches, are oftentimes worst
themselves; and there are that think, that they can not be sufficiently feared
and awed of men, except by horrible bannings and swearings they despite and
maugre God: nay it is further come to that pass, that in some places to swear
and ban be the marks and ensigns of a Catholic, and they are best welcome
that can blaspheme most. How much then is that good king S. Jews of France to
be commended, Nichol. Gil. vol. 1. Of French Chronicles.
who especially discharged all his subjects from swearing and blaspheming
within his realm, insomuch that when he heating a Lord of Ienville.
noble man blaspheme God most cruelly, he caused him to be laid hold on, and
his lips to be slit with an hor iron, saying, he must be content to endure that
punishment, seeing he purposed to banish oaths out of his kingdom. Now we call
blasphemy (according to the scripture phrase) every word that derogateth
either from the bounty, mercy, justice, eternity, and sovereign power of God:
of this sort was that blasphemous speech of one of king Iorams princes, who at
the time of the great famine in Samaria, when it was besieged by the Sirians,
hearing Elizaeus the Prophet say, that the next morrow there should be plenty of
victuals, and good cheap, rejected this promise of God made by his Prophet, 2.
King. 7.
saying that it was impossible; as if God were either a liar, or not able to
perform what he would: for this cause, this unbelieving blasphemer received
the same day a deserved punishment for his blasphemy, for he was trodden to
death in the gate of the city under the feet of the multitude that went out
into the Sirians camp forsaken and left desolate by them, through a fear which
the Lord sent among them.

2. King. 19.
Sennacherib king of Assyria, after he had obtained many victories, and subdued
much people under him, and also laid siege to Jerusalem, became so proud and
arrogant, as by his servants mouths to revile and blaspheme the living God,
speaking no otherwise of him then of some strange idol, and one that had no
power to help and deliver those that trusted in him; for which blasphemies he
soon after felt a just vengeance of God upon himself and his people: for
although in man's eyes he seemed to be without the reach of danger, (seeing he
was not assailed but did assail, and was guarded with so mighty an army that
assured him to make him lord of Jerusalem in short space) yet the Lord
overthrew his power, and destroyed of his men in one night by the hand of his
Angel 185 thousand men, so that he was feign to raise his siege, and return
into his own kingdom, where finally he was slain by his own sons, as he was
worshipping on his knees in the temple of his God.

In the time of the Machabees those men that were in the strong hold called
Gazara, 2. Match. 10.
fighting against the Jews, trusting to the strength of the place wherein they
were, uttered forth most infamous speeches against God: but ere long, their
blasphemous mouths were encountered by a co^digne punishment, for the first day
of the siege Machabeus put fire to the town, and consumed the place (with the
blasphemers in it) to ashes.

Holofernes, when Achior advanced the glory of the God of Israel, Judith. 6.7.
replied on this fashion: Since thou have prophesied unto us that Israel shall
be defended by their god, thou shall prove that there is no God but
Nabuchadonosor, when the sword of mine army shall pass through thy sides, and
thou shall fall among their slain: but for this blasphemy the Lord cut him
short, and prevented his cruel purpose by sudden death, and that by the hand
of a woman, to his further shame.

Nay this sin is so odious in the sight of God, that he punishes even them
that give occasion thereof unto others, yea though they be his dearest children,
as it appears by the words of the Prophet Nathan unto king David: 2. King 12.
Because of this deed (says he) of murdering Vriah and defiling Bathshabe,
thou have made the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child that is borne
unto thee shall surely die.

In the Empire of Julian the Apostata, there were diverse great men that for the
Emperors sake forsook Christ and abiured his religion: Theod. llb. 3. cap. 11,
and 12. Contempt of holy things. Lib. 1. cap. 3, 4.
amongst whom was one Julian uncle to the Emperor and governor of the East;
another Faelix, the Emperors treasurer: the first of which two, after he had
spoiled all Christian Churches and temples, pissed against the table whereon
the holy sacraments were used to be administered, in contempt, and stroke
Euzoius on the ear for reproouing him for it: the other beholding the holy
vessels that belonged to the Church, said, See what precious vessels Mary's
son is served withal. After which blasphemy, the Lord plagued them most
strangely; for Julian fell into so strange a disease, that his entrails being
rotten, he voided his excrements at his mouth, because when they passed
naturally, he abused them to the dishonor of God. Foelix vomited blood so
excessiuely night and day at his blasphemous mouth, that he died forthwith.

About the same time there lived a famous sophister and Epicure called
Libanius, who being at Antioch, Theatr. hist.
demanded blasphemously of a learned and godly schoolmaster, what the
Carpenters son did, and how he occupied himself? Mary (quoth the
schoolmaster, full of the spirit of God) the creator of this world (whom thou
disdainfully call the carpenters son) is making a coffin for thee to carry
thee to thy grave, whereat the sophister jesting departed, and within few days
dying, was buried in a coffin, according to the prophecy of that holy man.

Vide lib. 1. c. 21. Here Is. Philip. Chron. Abb. Vrusperg.
The Emperor Heraclius sending Ambassadors to Cosroe the king of Persia to
entreat of peace, returned with this answer, that he would never cease to
trouble them with war till he had constrained them to forsake their crucified
Christ and to worship the Sun. But ere long he bore the punishment of his
blasphemy, for what with a domestical calamity and a foreign overthrow by
the hand of Heraclius, he came to a most woeful destruction.

Michael that blasphemous Rabbine, that was accounted of the Jews as their
Prince and Messiah, Fincelius de miraculis lib. 2.
as he was on a time banketting with his companions, amongst other things this
was chiefest sauce for their meat, to blaspheme Christ and his mother Mary,
insomuch as he boasted of a victory already gotten over the Christians God.
But mark the issue; as he descended down the stairs, his foot slipping, he
tumbled headlong and broke his neck: wherein his late victory proved a
discomfiture and overthrow, to his eternal shame and confusion.

Three soldiers (amongst the Tyrigetes a people of Sarmatia) passing through a
wood, there arose a tempest of thunder and lightning, which though commonly it
makes the greatest Atheists to tremble, yet one of them to show his contempt
of God and his judgments, burst forth into blasphemy and despitings of God.
But the Lord soon tamed his rebellious tongue: for he caused the wind to blow
up by the root a huge tree that fell upon him and crushed him to pieces, the
other escaping to testify to the world of his destruction.

No less notable is the example of a young gyrle, named Denis Benifield of
twelve years of age, Acts and Monuments of the Church.
who going to school amongst other gyrles, when they fell to reason among
themselves after their childish discretion about God, one among the rest said
that he was a good old father; what he? (said the foresaid Denyse) he is an
old doting fool: which being told to her mistress, she purposed to correct
her the next day for it: but it chanced that the next day her mother sent her
to London to the market, the wench greatly entreating her mother that she
might not go, so that she escaped her mistrisses correction. But the Lord in
vengeance met with her: for as she returned homeward, suddenly she was so
stricken dead all the one side of her being black, and buried at Hackney the
same night. A terrible example (no doubt) both to old and young; what it is for
children to blaspheme the Lord and God; and what it is for parents to suffer
their young ones to grow up in blindness without nurturing them in the fear
of God, and reverence of his majesty, and therefore worthy to be remembered of
all.

In the year 510 an Arrian bishop called Olimpius being at Carthage in the
bathes reproched and blasphemed the holy and sacred trinity, and that openly:
Paul. Diacon. in the history of Anastatius. Sabell. Aenead. 8. lib. 2. Anton.
Panor. of the acts of Alphonsus Aeneas. Siluius of the acts of Alphonsus.
but lightning fell down from heaven upon him three times, and he was burnt
and consumed therewith. There was also in the time of Alphonsus king of Arragon
and Sicily in an Isle toward Africa, a certain Hermit called Antonius a
monstrous and profane hypocrite, that had so wicked a heart to devise, and so
filthy a throat to belch out vile and injurious speeches against Christ Jesus
and the virgin Mary his mother: but he was stricken with a most grievous
disease, even to be eaten and gnawne in pieces of worms until he died.

CHAP. XXXII. Of those that by cursing and denying God give themselves to the
Devil.
AS concerning those that are addicted to much cursing, and as if their throats
were Hell it self, to despightings and reuilings against God (that is blessed
for ever) and are so mad as to renounce him and give themselves to the Devil:
truly they worthily deserve to be forsaken of God, and given over to the devil
indeed, to go with him into everlasting perdition: which has been visibly
experienced in our time upon certain wretched persons, which have been carried
away by that wicked spirit to who^ they gave themselves.

Luther upon the 15 chap. of the 1 Epist. to the Corinth.
There was upon a time in Germany a certain naughty-pack of a most wicked
life, and so evil brought up, that at every word he spoke almost, the evil
was at the one end; if walking he chanced to tread awry, or to stumble,
presently the devil was in his mouth: whereof albeit he was many times reproved
by his neighbors, and exhorted to correct and amend so vile and detestable a
vice, yet all was in vain, continuing therefore this evil and damnable
custom, it happened that as he was upon a time passing over a bridge, he fell
down, and in his fall gave these speeches, Hoist up with a hundred devils; which
he had no sooner spoken, but the devil who^ he called for so often was at his
elbow to strangle him and carry him away with him.

Wietus 3. book chap. 17. of the delusion of spirits.
A certain souldior travailing through Marchia a country of Almaigne, and
finding himself evil at ease in his journey, abode in an Inn till he might
recover his health: and committed to the hostisses custody certain money
which he had about him. Now a while after being recovered of his sickness he
required his money again, but she having consulted with her husband denied the
receipt, and therefore the return thereof; and accused him of wrong in demanding
that which she never received: the souldior on the other side fretted amain
and accused her of cousenage; which stir when the good man of the house
understood (though privy to al before) yet dissemblingly took his wives part,
and thrust the souldior out of doors: who being thoroughly chafed with that
indignity, drew his sword and ran at the door with the point thereof: whereat the
host began to cry, thieves, thieves, saying that he would have entered his house
by force, so that the poor souldior was taken and cast in prison, and by
process of law ready to be condemned to death but the very day wherein this
hard sentence was to be pronounced and executed, the devil entered into the
prison and told the souldior that he was condemned to die, howbeit nevertheless
if he would give himself body and soul unto him, he would promise to deliver
him out of their hands: the prisoner answering, said that he had rather die
being innocent and without cause, the^ to be delivered by that means: again the
devil replied, and propounded to him the great danger wherein he was, yea and
used al cunning means possible to persuade him: but seeing that he lost his
labor, he at length left his suit, and promised him both help and revenge upon
his enemies, and that for nothing: aduising him moreover when he came to
judgment to plead not guilty, and to declare his innocence and their wrong and
to entreat the judge to grant him one in a blew cap that stood by to be his
advocate: (now this one in a blew cap was the devil himself) the souldior
accepting his offer being called to the bar, and endited there of felony,
presently desired to have his attorney who was there present to plead his
cause: the^ began the fine and crafty doctor of the laws to plead and defend
his client very cunningly, affirming him to be falsely accused, and consequently
unjustly condemned, and that his host did withhold his money and had offered
him violence: and to prove his assertion, he reckoned up every circumstance in
the action, yea the very place where they had hidden the money. The host on the
other side stood in denial very impude^tly, wishing the devil might take him if
he had it: then the subtle lawier in the blew cap, looking for no other
vantage, left pleading, and fell to laying hold of the host, and carrying him out
of the sessions house hoisted him into the air so high, that he was never after
seen nor heard of. And thus was the souldior delivered from the execution of
law most strangely, to the astonishment of all the beholders that were eic
witnesses of that which happened to the forsworn and cursing host.

In the year of our Lord 1551 at Megalopole near Voildstat it happened in the
time of the celebration of the feast of Pentecost, the people being set on
drinking and caroussing, John Wierus.
that a woman in the company commonly named the devil in her oaths: till that
he being so often called on came of a sudden, and carried her through the gate
aloft into the air before the^ all, who ran out astonished to see whether he
would transport her, and found her a while hanging in the air without the
town, and then falling down upon the ground dead.

About the same time there lived in a city of Sauoy one that was both a
monstrous swearer, and also otherwise very vicious, who put many good men to
much fruitless pains, that in regard of their charge employed themselves
often to admonish and reprove his wicked behavior, to the end he might amend
it: but all in vain, they might as well cast stones against the wind; for he
would not so much as listen to their words, much less reform his manners. Now
it fell out that the pestilence being in the city, he was infected with it,
and therefore withdrew himself a part with his wife and another kinswoman into
a garden which he had: neither yet in this extremity did the ministers forsake
him, but ceased not continually to exhort him to repentance, and to lay before
his eyes his faults and offenses, to the end to bring him into the right way.
But he was so far from being touched or moved with these godly admonitio^s
that he strove rather to harden himself more and more in his sins. Therefore
one day hasting forward his own mishap, as he was swearing and denying God, and
giving himself to the Devil, and calling for him with vehemency, behold even
the Devil indeed snatched him up soddainly, and heaued him into the air, his
wife and kinswoman looking on, and seeing him fly over their heads, being thus
swiftly transported, his cap tumbled from his head, and was found at Rosne, but
himself no man could ever after set eye on. The Magistrate advertised hereof,
came to the place where he was taken to be better informed of the truth,
taking the witness of the two women touching that which they had seen. Here
we may see the strange and terrible events of Gods just vengeance upon such
vile; caitifes which doubtless are made manifest to strike a fear and terror
into the heart of every swearer and denier of God, (the world being but too
full at this day of such wretches) that are so inspired with Satan, that they
cannot speak but they must name him, even him that is both an enemy to God and
man, and like a roaring lion runs and roueth to and fro to devour them: not
seeking any thing but man's destruction And yet when any pain assaileth the^,
or any trouble disquieteth their minds, or any danger threatens to oppress
their bodies, desperately they call upon him for aid, when indeed it were more
needful to commend themselves to God and to pray for his grace and assistance,
having both a commandment so to do, and a promise adioined, that he will
help us in our necessity, if we come unto him by true and hearty prayer. It
is not therefore without just cause that God has propounded and laid open in
this corrupt age a Theater of his judgments that every man might be warned
thereby.

CHAP. XXXIII. More examples of Gods Judgments upon cursers.
But before we go to the next commandment we will adioine a few more
examples of this devilish cursing. Martin Luther has left registered unto us a
notable example shown upon a Popish priest that was once a professor of the
sincere religion, Ex colliquij^ Lutheri.
and fell away voluntarily unto papisme, whereof Adam Budissina was the
reporter: this man thundered out most bitter curses against Luther in the
pulpit at a town called Ruthnerwald: and amongst the rest, wished that if
Luthers doctrine was true, a thunderbolt might strike him to death. Now three
days after, there arose a mighty tempest with thunder and lightning: whereat
the cursed priest bearing in himself a guilty conscience for that he had
untruly and maliciously spoken, ran hastily into the church, and there fell to
his prayers before the altar most devoutly; but the vengeance of God found him
out and his hypocrisy, so that he was stricken dead with the lightning, and
albeit they recovered life in him again, yet as they led him homewards through
the churchyard, another flash so set upon him that it burnt him from the crown
of the head to the sole of his foot as black as a shoe, so that he died with a
manifest mark of Gods vengeance upon him.

Homil. 26. in hist. passionis.
Theodorus Beza reports unto us two notable histories of his own knowledge
of the severity of Gods judgment upon a curser and a periurer, the tenor
whereof is this: I knew (says he) in France a man of good parts, well
instructed in religion, and a master of a family, who in his anger cursing and
bidding the Devil take one of his children, had presently his wish, for the
child was possessed immeadiately with a spirit: from which though by the
fervent and continual prayers of the church he was at length released, yet ere
he had fully recovered his health he died. The like we read to have happened
to a woman whom her husband in anger devoted with bitter curses to the devil;
for Satan assaulted her presently and robbed her of her wits, so that she could
never be recovered.

Discipulus de tempore, sermon. 116. Perjury lib. 1. cap. 29.
Another example (says he) happened not far hence, even in this country upon a
periurer that forswore himself, to the end to deceive and prejudice another
thereby: but he had no sooner made an end of his false oath, but a grievous
apoplexy assailed him, so that without speaking any one word he died within
few days.

Job Fincelius lib. 3. de mirac.
In the year of our Lord 1557 the day before good friday, at Forchennum a city
in the bishopric of Bamburge, there was a certain crooked priest both in body
and mind, through age and evil conditions, that could not go but on crutches,
yet would needs be lifted into the pulpit to make a sermon, his text was out of
the 11 chap. of the first epistle to the Corinthians touching the Lords supper:
whereout taking occasion to defend the papisticall errors and the mass, he
used these or such like blasphemous speeches: O Paul, Paul, if thy doctrine
touching the receiving the sacrament in both kinds be true, and if it be a
wicked thing to receive it otherwise, then would the devil might take me: and
(turning to the people) if the popes doctrine concerning this point be not true,
then am I the devils bondslaue, neither do I fear to pawn my soul upon it:
these and many other blasphemous words he used, till the devil came indeed
transformed into the shape of a tall man black and terrible, sending before him
such a fearful noise and such a wind, that the people supposed that the church
would have fallen on their heads; but he not able to hurt the rest, took away
the old priest being his devoted bondslaue, and carried him so far that he was
never heard of: the bishop of Rugenstines brother hardly escaped his hands, for
he came back to fetch him, but he defe^ding himself with his sword wounded his
own body, and very narrowly escaped with his life. Beside after this there were
many visions seen about the city, as armies of men ready to enter and surprise
them, so that well was he that could hide himself in a corner. At another time
after the like noise was heard in the church whilst they were baptising an
infant: and all this for the abominable cursing and blasphemy of the profane
priest.

In the year of our Lord 1556 at S. Gallus in Heluetia, Job. Fincelius lib. 2.
de mirac.
a certain man that earned his living by making clean rough and foul linen
against the sun, entering a tavern tasted so much the grape that his wits
were drowned, and his tongue so inspired that he vomited out terrible curses
against himself and others: among the rest he wished, if ever he went into the
fields to his old occupation, that the devil might come and break his neck: but
when sleep had conquered drink, and sobriety restored his senses, he went again
to his trade remembering indeed his late words, but regarding them not: howbeit
the devil to show his double diligence, attended on him at his appointed hour
in the likeness of a big sworthy man, and asked him if he remembered his promise
and vow which he had made the day before, and if it were not lawful for him to
break his neck? and withal stroke the poor man trembling with fear over the
shoulders, that his feet and his hands presently dried up, so that he lay
there not able to stir, till by help of men he was carried home; the Lord not
giving the devil so much power over him as he wished himself: but yet
permitting him to plague him on this sort, for his amendment and our example.

Albert Krantz, chron. (...), lib. 6.
Henry Earl of Schwartburge through a corrup^ custom used commonly to wish he
might be drowned in a privy: and as he wished so it happened unto him, for he
was so served, and murdered at S. Peter's monastery in Erford, in the year of
our Lord, 1148.

Cyriac. Spangenb. in elegantijs veteris Adami.
The like befell a young courtier at Mansfield, whose custom was in any earnest
asseueration to say the Devil take me if it be not so: the Devil indeed took
him whilst he slept and threw him out of a high window; where albeit by the
good providence of God he caught no great hurt, yet he learnt by experience to
bridle his tongue from al such cursed speeches, this being but a taste of Gods
wrath that is to fall upon such wretches as he.

Theat. histor.
At Oster a village in the Duchy of Megalopole, there chanced a most strange and
fearful example upon a woman that gave her self to the Devil both body and
soul, and used most horrible cursings and oaths, both against her self and
others: which detestable manner of behavior, as at many other times, so
especially she showed at a marriage in the foresaid village upon S. John
Baptists day, the whole people exhorting her to leave off that monstrous
villainy: but she nothing bettered continued her course, till all the company
were set at dinner, and very merry. Then lo the Devil having got full
possession of her, came in person and transported her into the air before them
all, with most terrible outcries and roarings, and in that sort carried her
round about the town, that the inhabitants were ready to die with fear, and by
and by tore her in four pieces, leaving in four several high ways a quarter,
that all that came by might be witnesses of her punishment. And then returning
to the marriage, threw her bowels upon the table before the Mayor of the town
with these words: Behold these dishes of meat belong to thee, whom the like
destruction awaiteth, if thou do not amend thy wicked life. The reporters of
this history were John Herman the minister of the said town, with the Mayor
himself, and the whole inhabitants, being desirous to have it known to the
world for example sake.

In Luthers conferences there is mention made of this story following: Luther.
diverse noble men were striving together at a horse race, and in their course
cried the devil take the last. Now the last was a horse that broke loose, whom
the devil hoisted up into the air and took clean away. Which teaches us not
to call for the devil, for he is ready always about us uncalled and
unlooked for: yea many legions of them compass us about, even in our best
actions to disturb and pervert us.

A cettaine man not far from Gorlitz provided a sumptuous supper, and invited
many guests unto it, Job. Fincelius.
who at the time appointed refusing to come, he in an anger cried, then let all
the Devils in hell come: neither was his wish frivolous; fot a number of those
hellish fiends came forthwith, whom he not discerning from men, came to
welcome and entertain, but as he took them by the hands and perceived in steed
of fingers claws, all dismayed he ran out of the doors with his wife, and left
none in the house but a young infant with a fool sitting by the fire; whom
the devils had no power to hurt, neither any man else, save the goodly supper,
which they made away withal, and so departed.

It is notoriously known in Oundle a town in Northamptonshire, amongst all
that were acquainted with the party, namely one Hacket, of whom more has
been spoken before, how he used in his earnest talk ever to curse himself
on this manner: If it be not true, then let a visible confusion come upon me.
Now he wanted no^ his wish, for he came to a visible confusion indeed, as
has been declared more at large in the 20 chap. of this book. At Witeberg
before Martin Luther and diverse other learned men, a woman whose daughter was
possessed with a spirit, confessed that by her curse that plague was fallen
upon her, for being angry at a time she bad the devil take her, and she had no
sooner spoken the word but he took her indeed, and possessed her in most
strange sort.

No whitlesse strange and horrible is that which happened at Neoburge in
Germany to a son that was cursed of his mother in her anger with this curse,
Theat. histor.
she prayed God she might never see him return alive, for the same day the
young man bathing himself in the water was drowned, and never returned to his
mother alive according to her ungodly wish.

Theat. histor.
But above all, this is most strange which happened in a Town of Misina in the
year of our Lord God 1552 the eleventh of September, where a cholletick father
seeing his son slack about his business, wished he might never stir from
that place: Let not the strangenes of this example discredit the truth thereof:
seeing we read how Lots wife was turned into a pillar of salt, Genesis 19. and
Corah with his company swallowed of the earth Number. 16 which are more strange
than this. Acts and monuments. page 2101.
for it was no sooner said but done, his son stuck fast in the place,
neither by any means possible could be removed, no not so much as to sit or
bend his body: till by the prayers of the faithful his pains were somewhat
mitigated, though not remitted: three year he continued standing with a post
at his back for his ease, and four years sitting, at the end whereof he
died. Nothing weakened in his understanding, but professing the faith, and not
doubting of his salvation in Christ Jesus. When he was demanded at any time how
he did: he answered most usually, that he was fastened of God, and that it was
not in man, but in Gods mercy for him to be released.

John Peter son in law to Alexander that cruel keeper of Newgate, being a
most horrible swearer and blasphemer, used commonly to say, If it be not true,
I pray God I may rot ere I die: and not in vain, for he rotted away indeed,
and so died most miserably.

Hither we may ad a notable example of a certain young gallant that was a
monstrous swearer, who riding in the company of diverse gentlemen, began to
swear and most horribly blaspheme the name of God: unto whom one of the company
with gentle words, said he should one day answer for that: the yonker taking
snuff thereat, why said he take thou thought for me? Acts and monuments.
page 2105.
Take thought for thy winding sheet. Well (quoth the other) amend, for death
gives no warning; as soon comes a lambs skin to the market as an old
sheep. Gods wounds (said he) care not thou for me, raging still on this
manner worse and worse, till at length passing on their journey they came
riding over a great bridge, upon which this gentleman swearer spurred his horse
in such sort, that he sprang clean over with the man on his back, who as he
was going cried, Horse and man and al to the devil. This terrible story
bishop Ridley preached and uttered at Paul's cross: and one Haines a minister
of Cornwall the reprehender of this man was the reporter of it to Master Fox
out of whom I have drawn it. Refrain then (wretches that you are) your
devilish tongues, leave off to provoke the wrath of God any longer against
you: forbear all wicked and cursed speeches, and acquaint your selves as well
in word as deed to praise and glorify God.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Punishments for the contempt of the word and the Sacraments:
and abuse of holy things.
NOw it is another kind of taking the name of God in vain, to despise his words
and sacraments; for like as among earthly princes it is accounted a crime no
less then treason either to abuse their pictures, to counterfeit or deprave
their seals, to rent, pollute, or corrupt their letter patents, or to use
irreverently their messengers, or any thing that comes from them: So with the
prince of heaven it is a sin of high degree, either to abuse his word
profanely, which is the letter patents of our salvation: or handle the
sacraments irreverently, which are the seals of his mercy: or to despise his
ministers, which are his messe^gers unto us. And this he makes known unto us
not only by edicts and co^mandeme^ts, but also by examples of his vengeance on
the heads of the offe^ders in this case: for the former look what Paul says,
That for the unworthy receiving of the Sacraments many were weak and sick
among the Corinthians, and many slept, how much more then for the abusing and
contemning the Sacraments? 1. Cor. 11.29.30
And the prophet David, That for casting the word of God behind them, Psalm.
50.16.17.
they should have nothing to do with his covenant: how much more then for
profaning and deriding his word? Exodus 16.8.
And Moses (when the people murmured against him, and Aaron says that their
murmurings were not against them which were but ministers, but against the
Lord; how much more then is the Lord engaged, when they are scoffed at,
derided, and set at naught? hence it is that the Lord denounces a woe to him
that adds or takes away from the word: and calls them dogs that abuse such
precious pearls. Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.22. Apoc. 22.18. Proverb. 30.6. Vide lib.
1. cap. 14. example of the Jews.
But let us come to the examples, wherein the grieuousnesse of this sin will lie
more open then by any words can be expressed. Denterius an Arrian bishop being
at Bezantium, as he was about to baptize one Barbas after his blasphemous
manner, saying, I baptize thee in the name of the father through the son in the
Holy Ghost. Which form of words is contrary to the prescript rule of Christ,
that bad his disciples to baptize al nations, In the name of the father the son
and the Holy Ghost; the water suddenly vanished, so that he could not then be
baptized: wherefore Barbas all amassed fled from thence to a church of purer
religion, and there was entertained into the church by baptism. Socrat. lib 7.
cap. 17.
Socrates in his Ecclesiastical history reports the like accident to have
happened to a Jew who had been oftentimes baptized, and came to Paulus a
Nouatian bishop to receive the sacrament again: but the water as before
vanished, and his villainy being detected he was banished the church.

Opiat. Meltuit. lib. 2. contr. Parenianum. Cent. 4. cap. 6.
Vrbanus Farmensis, and Foelix Iducensis, two Donatists by profession, rushing
into Thipasa a City of Mauritania, commanded the Eucharist to be thrown
amongst the dogs; but the dogs growing mad thereby, set upon their own
masters, and rent them with their teeth as being guilty of despising the body
of Christ: certainly a noble judgment to condemn the wicked behavior of
those miscreants, who were so profane, as not only to refuse the sacrament
themselves, Vide lib. 1 ca. 17.
but also to cast it to their dogs as if it were the vilest and contemptablest
thing in the world.

Theopompus a Philosopher being about to insert certain things out of the
writings of Moses into his profane works, and so to abuse the sacred word of
God, was stricken with a frenzy; and being warned of the cause thereof in a
dream, Joseph, antiq. lib. 12. cap. 2.
by prayers made unto God recovered his senses again: this story is recorded
by Josephus, as also another of Theodectes a Poet that mingled his Tragedies
with the holy Scripture, and was therefore stricken with blindness until he
had recanted his impiety.

In a town of Germany called Itzsith there dwelt a certain husbandman that
was a monstrous despiser and prophaner of the word of God and his sacraments:
Luther in coloquijs.
he upon a time amidst his cups railed with most bitter terms upon a minister
of Gods word, after which going presently into the fields to ouerlooke his
sheep, he never returned alive, but was found there dead with his body all
scorched and burnt as black as a coal, the Lord having given him over into the
hands of the devil to be thus used for his vile profaneness and abusing his
holy things. This D. Iustus Jonas in Luthers conferences reports to be most
true.

In the year of our Lord 1553 a certain cobblers servant being brought up
among the professors of the reformed religion, and having received the
sacrament in both kinds, Philip Melanc.
after living under Popery, received it after their fashion in one kind; but
when he returned to his old master and was admonished by him to go again to
the communion as he was wont, then his sleepie conscience awaked, and he fell
into most horrible despair, crying that he was the devils bondslaue, and
therewithal threw himself headlong out of the window, so that with the fall
his bowels gushed out of his mouth and he died most miserably.

When the great persecution of the Christians was in Persia under king Sapor in
the year of our Lord 347, Sozomen lib. 2. cap. 31.
there was one Miles an holy bishop and constant Martyr, who preaching, Vide
lib. r. ca. 16.
exhorting, and suffering all manner of torments for the truth of the gospel,
could not convert one soul of the whole city (whereof he was bishop) to the
faith, wherefore in hatred and detestation of it, he forewent it clean: but
after his departure the Lord made them worthily rue their contempt of his word,
for he sent the spirit of division betwixt king Sapor and the^, so that he came
with an army of men and three hundred Eliphants against it and quickly
subverted it, that the very appearence and memorial of a city was quite defaced
and rooted out: for certainly this is a sure position, where Gods word is
generally despised, and not regarded, nor profited by, there some notable
destruction approaches.

Philip Melanc. in collectaneis Manlij.
In a certain place there was acted a tragedy of the death and passion of
Christ in show, but indeed of themselves, for he that played Christ's part
hanging upon the cross was wounded to death by him that should have thrust his
sword into a bladder full of blood tied to his side; who with his fall slew
another that played one of the women's part that lamented under the cross; his
brother that was first slain seeing this, slew the murderer, and was himself
by order of justice hanged therefore: so that this tragedy was concluded with
four true, not counterfeit deaths, and that by the divine providence of God,
who can endure nothing less then such profane and ridiculous handling of so
serious and heavenly matters. In the University of Oxford the history of
Christ was also played, and cruelly punished: and that not many years since,
for he that bore the person of Christ, the Lord stroke him with such a
giddiness of spirit and brain, that he became mad forthwith, crying when he
was in his best humor, that God had laid this judgment upon him for playing
Christ. Three other actors in the same play were hanged for robbing, as by
credible report is affirmed.

Most lamentable was the judgment of God upon one John Apowel (sometimes a
seruingman) for mocking and jesting at the word of God: this John Apowell
hearing one William Malden, reading certain English prayers, mocked him after
every word with contrary gauds and flouting terms; insomuch that at last he
was terribly afraid, so that his hair stood upright on his head, and the next
day was found besides his wits, crying night and day without ceasing, The
devil, the devil, Acts and monuments. page 2103.
O the devil of hell, now the devil of hell, there he goes, for it seemed to
him as the other read Lord have mercy upon us at the end of the prayer that
the devil appeared unto him, and by the permission of God deprived him of his
understanding: this is a terrible example for all those that be mockers at the
word of God to warn them (if they do not repent) least the vengeance of God
fall upon them in like manner. Thus we see how severely the Lord punishes all
despisers and prophaners of his holy things, and thereby ought to learn to
carry a most dutiful regard and reverence to them, as also to note them for
none of Gods flock whosoever they be that deride or contemn any part of
religion or the ministers of the same.

CHAP. XXXV. Of those that profane the Sabbath day.
IN the fourth and last commandment of the first table it is said, Remember to
keep holy the sabbath day: by which words it is ordained and enioined us to
separate one day of seven from al bodily and servile labor, not to idleness and
loosenes, but to the worship of God, which is spiritual and wholesome. Which
holy ordinance when one of the children of Israel in contempt broke, as they
were in the wilderness, Numb. 15.
by gathering sticks upon the sabbath, he was brought before Moses and Aaron
and the whole congregation, and by them put in prison, until such time as they
knew the Lords determination concerning him, knowing well that he was guilty
of a most grievous crime: And at length by the Lords own sentence to his
servant Moses, condemned to be stoned to death without the host, as was
speedily executed: wherein the Lord made known unto them both how unpleasant and
odious, the profanation of his Sabbath was in his sight, and how seriously and
carefully every one ought to observe and keep the same. Now albeit that this
strict observation of the sabbath was partly ceremonial under the law, and
that in Christ Jesus we have an accomplishment as of all other, so also of
this ceremony; he being the true sabbath and assured repose of our souls:
yet seeing we still stand in need of some time for the instruction and
exercise of our faith, it is necessary that we should have at least one day in
a week to occupy our selves in and about those holy and godly exercises which
are required at our hands: and what day fitter for that purpose then sunday?
Which was also ordained in the Apostles time for the same end, and called by
them Des dominicus (that is) The day of our Lord: Because upon that day he rose
from the dead, to wit, the morrow after the Jews sabbath being the first day
of the week: to which sabbath it by common consent of the church succeeded, to
the end that a difference might be put betwixt Christians and Jews. Therefore it
ought now religiously to be observed, as it is also commanded in the civil law,
with express prohibition not to abuse this day of holy rest in unholy sports
and pastimes, Cod. lib. 3. tit. 12. leg. 10.
of evil example. Nevertheless in steed hereof, we see the evil emploiance,
abuse, and disorder of it for the most part: for beside the false worship and
plentiful superstitions which reign in so many places, all manner of disorder
and dissoluteness is in request and bears sway in these days: this is the
day for tippling houses and tauernes to be fullest fraught with ruffians, and
ribalds, and for villainous and dishonest speech, with lecherous and baudie
songs to be most rise: this is the day when gourmandise and drunkenness show
themselves most frollick, and oaths and blasphemies fly thickest and fastest:
this is the day when dicing, dancing, whoring, and such noisome and dishonest
demeanours, muster their bands and keep rank together: from whence foam out
enuies, hatreds, displeasures, quarrels, debates, bloodsheddings and murders,
as daily experience testifies. All which things are evident signs of Gods
heavy displeasure upon the people where these abuses are permitted, and no
difference made of that day wherein God would be served, but is co^trarily most
dishonored by the ouerflow of wciked examples.

And that it is a thing odious and condemned of God, these examples following
will declare. Gregory Turonensis reports, that a husbandman who upon the
Lords day went to plow his field; as he cleansed his plowshare with an iron,
the iron stuck so fast into his hand, that for two years he could not be
delivered from it, but carried it about continually to his exceeding great
pain and shame. Discipulus de tempore ser. 117.
Another profane fellow without any regard of God or his service, made no
conscience to convey his corn out of the field on the Lords day in sermon
time; but he was well rewarded for his godless covetousness, for the same
corn which with so much care he gathered together, was consumed with fire from
heaven, with the barn and all the grain that was in it.

A certain noble man used every Lords day to go a hunting in the sermon while,
Theatr. hist.
which impiety the Lord punished with this judgment, he caused his wife to
bring forth a child with a head like a dog, that seeing he preferred his dogs
before the service of God, he might have one of his own getting to make much
of.

At Kimstat a town in France, Job. Fincel. lib. 3. de mirac.
there lived in the year of our Lord 1559, a certain covetous woman, who was
so eager upon the word and greedy of gain, that she would neither frequent the
Church to hear the word of God her self, nor suffer any of her family to do
it, but continually abode laboring and toiling about drying and pilling flax,
and doing other domestical businesses: neither would she be reclaimed by her
neighbors who admonished and dehorted her from such untimely works. One
Sabbath day as they were thus busily occupied, fire seemed to issue among the
flax without doing any hurt: the next Sabbath day it took fire indeed, but
was quickly extinct: for all this she continued obstinate in her profaneness
even the third Sabbath, when the flax again taking fire, could not be quenched
till it had burnt her and two of her children to death; for though they were
recovered out of the fire alive, yet the next day they all three died. And that
which was most to be wondered at, a young infant in the cradle was taken out of
the midst of the flame without any hurt. Thus God uses to exercise his
judgments upon the contemners of his commandments.

Cent. 12. cap. 6.
The Centuriators of Magdeburge, entreating of the manners of Christians, made
report out of another history, that a certain husbandman (in Parochia
Gemilacensi) grinding corn upon the Lords day, the meal began to burn, Anno
Dom. 1126: which though it might seem to be a thing more casual, Ecclesiast.
hist. Cent. 12. ibid.
yet they set it down as a judgment of God upon him for breaking the Sabbath.
As also of that which they speak in the same place of one of the kings of
Denmark, who when as he (contrary to the admonition of the priests, who desired
him to defer it) would needs upon the day of Pentecost make war with his enemy,
died in the battle. But that may be better known to us all, which is written
in the 2 book of Machabes of Nicanor the Jews enemy, who would needs set upon
them on the Sabbath, from which when other the Jews that were compelled to be
with him could no way dissuade him, he was slain in the battle, and most
miserably but deservedly handled, even the parts of his body shamefully
dismembered, as in that history you may read more at large.

Council. Paris. lib. 1. cap. 50.
Therefore in the council at Paris every one laboring to persuade unto a more
religious keeping of the Sabbath day, when they had justly complained, that (as
many other things) so also the observation of the Sabbath was greatly decayed
through the abuse of Christian liberty; in that men too much followed the
delights of the world, and their own worldly pleasures, both wicked and
dangerous: they further add, Multi nanque nostrum visu, multi etiam quorundam
relatu didicimus, etc. For many of us have been eye witnesses, many have
intelligence of it by the relation of others, that some men upon this day being
about their husbandry, have been stricken with thunder, some have been maimed
and made lame, some have had their bodies (even bones and all) burnt in a
moment with visible fire, and have consumed to ashes, and many other judgments
of God have been, and are daily: whereby it is declared, that God is offended
with the dishonor of so high a day. And our time has not wanted examples in
this kind, whosoever has observed them, when sometimes in the faires upon this
day the wares have swom in the streets; sometimes the scaffolds at plays have
fallen down, to the hurting and endangering of many, sometime one thing,
sometime another have fallen out: and that which is most strange within these
late years, a whole town has been twice burnt, for the breach of the Sabbath
by the inhabitants. The just report thereof, because I probably know not, I
pass over here to set down, until such time as I shall be better instructed.

Famous and memorable also is that example which happened at London in the
year 1583 at Paris garden, where, upon the Sabbath day, were gathered together
(as accustomably they used) great multitudes of profane people to behold the
fport of bearbaiting, without respect of the Lords day, or any exercise of
religion required therein: which profane impiety the Lord that he might chasten
in some sort, and show his dislike thereof, he caused the scaffolds suddenly to
break, and the beholders to tumble headlong down: so that to the number of
eight persons men and women, were slain therewith, besides many others which
were sore hurt and bruised to the shortning of their days. Surely a friendly
warning to such as more delight themselves with the cruelty of beasts and vain
sports, than with the works of mercy and religion, the fruits of a true faith,
which ought to be the sabbath days exercise. And thus much for the examples of
the first table, whereof if some seem to exceed credit, by reason of the
strangenes of them, yet let us know, that nothing is impossible to God; and
that he does often work miracles to control the obstinate impiety and
rebellion of mortal men against his commandments. Besides, there is not one
example here mentioned, but it has a credible or probable author for the
auoucher of it. Let us now out of all this that has been spoken, gather up
this wholesome lesson, to love God with all our heart and affection, to the end
we may worship him, invoke his holy name, and repose all the confidence of
our salvation upon him alone through Christ Jesus, seeking by pleasing and
obeying his will, to set forth his glory, and render him due thanks for all
his benefits.

FINIS.
The second Book.
CHAP. I. Of rebellious and stubborn children toward their parents.
We have seen in the former book what punishments they have incurred, that
either maliciously or otherwise have transgressed and broken the commandments
of the first Table: Now it follows to discover the chastisements which God
has sent upon the transgressors of the second Table. And first concerning the
first commandment thereof, which is, Honor thy father and mother, that thy
days may be prolonged in the land which the Lord thy God has given thee.
Cham, one of old Noah's sons, Genesis 9.
was guilty of the breach of this commandment; who instead of perfourming that
reverence to his father which he ought, (and that presently after the deluge,
which being yet fresh in memory, might have taught him to walk in the fear of
God) came so short of his duty, that when he saw his nakedness he did not
hide it, but mocked and iested at it: for which cause, he was cursed both of
his father and of God in the person of his youngest son Chaanan, and made a
servant to the servants of his brethren; Number 33. Deuteronomy. 7.
which curse was fulfilled in his posterity the Canaanites, who being forsaken
of God, were rooted up and spued out of their land, because of their sins and
abominations.

Marvelous strange was the malice of Absalom to rebel so furiously against
his father David, as to wage war against him: 2. Sam. 15.
which he did with all his strongest endeauours, without sparing any thing
that might further his proceedings: insomuch that he grew to that outrage and
madness through the wicked and pernicious counsel of Achitophel, that he
shamed not villanously to commit incest with his fathers concubines, 2. Sam. 16.
and pollute his bed even before the eyes of the multitude: by which means
being become altogether odious and abominable, 2. Sam. 18.
he shortly after lost the battle, wherein though himself received no hurt
nor wound, yet was he not therefore quit, but being pursued by Gods just
judgment, fell unwittingly into the snare which he had deserved: for as he
rode along the forest to save himself from his fathers army, his mule
carrying him under a thick oak, left him hanging by the hair upon a bow
betwixt heaven and earth, until being found by Ioab he was wounded to death
with many blows. Whereby every man may plainly see, that God wants no means
to punish sinners when it pleases him, but makes the dumb and senseless
creatures instruments of his vengeance: for he that had escaped the brunt and
danger of the battle (and yet not having therefore escaped the hand of God)
was by a bruit beast, brought under a senseless tree which God had appointed to
catch hold of him, as an executioner of his just judgment: which if we
consider, is as strange and wonderful an accident as may possible happen; and
yet such an one as God himself provided to punish this wicked, proud, and
rebellious wretch withal: for seeing his outrage and villainy was so great, as
to rebel against his father, and so good and kind a father toward him as he
was, it was most just that he should endure so vile a punishment. Beside,
herein God would doubtless lay open to the eyes of all the world, a fearful
spectacle of his judgments against wicked and disobedient children, thereby to
terrify the most impudent and malicious wtetches that live, from this horrible
sin. And for the same cause it was his pleasure, that that wicked and false
Achitophel should fall into extreme ignominy and confusion for forsaking
David, and setting forward with counsel and presence young Absalom against his
father; for which cause with despair he hung himself. Now by this example it
is easy to perceive how unpleasant this sin is in Gods sight, and how much
he would have every man to hate and detest it, seeing that nature her self
teaches and instructs us so far, as to yield duty and obedience unto those
that begat, nourished, and brought us up.

Notwithstanding all this, yet is the world full of ill advised and ill
nourtured youth, that are little less disobedient unto their parents then
Absalom was, as Adramalech and Sarasar that slew their father Sennacherib as he
was worshipping in the temple of Nisroth his god: but whereas they looked for
the sovereignty, they lost the benefit of subjection, and were banished into
Armenia, their brother Esarhaddon reigning in their stead.

Gregory of Tours makes mention of one Crannius the son of Clotarius king of
France, Greg. of Tours 4. book.
who having conspired treacherously, and raised war against his father,
together with the Earl of Britain his supporter, were both vanquished and put
to flight; but the Earl was slain in the pursuit: the Prince himself also
(thinking to escape by sea, where lay provided certain ships ready to
receive him) was in the midde way overtaken together with his wife and
children, whom he purposed to make partakers of his fortune, and were all
together (by the express commandment of his father) shut up in a little
house, and there burned together. In this wise did Clotarius revenge the
treachery and rebellion of his son after a more severe, cruel, and fierce
manner then king David did, who would have saved his son Absoloms life,
notwithstanstanding all his wickedness, and malicious and furious rebellion: but
this man contrariwise being bereft of all fatherly affection, would use no
compassion toward his son, but commanded so cruel an execution to be
performed not only upon him but upon his daughter in law also and their
children, perchance altogether innocent and guiltless of that crime. A very
rare and strange example, seeing it is commonly seen, that grandfathers use
more to cherish and cocker their childrens children than their own. Therefore we
must think, that it was the providence of God to leave behind a notable
example of his most just and righteous severity against disobedient and
rebellious children, to the end to amaze and scare all others from enterprising
the like.

Philip Comineus in the reign of Lewis the twelfth, chap. 63.
Philip Comineus has recorded the treacherous tragedy of a most wicked and
cruel sun called Adolphus (for the world waxes every day worse then other)
that came in an evening suddenly to take his father the Duke of Gilderland
prisoner even as he was going to bed, and would not give him so much liberty as
to pull on his hose (for he was bare legged) but carried him away in all have,
making him march on foot without breeches five long Almaine miles in a most
cold weather: and then clapped him up in the bottom of a deep tower, where
there was no light save by a little window, and there kept him close prisoner
six months together. After which cruel fact, he himself was taken prisoner
in like manner, and carried bound to Namur, where he lay a long time, until
the Gaunts repriued him forth, and led him with them against Tournay, where he
was slain: in the while of his imprisonment, his father yielding unto nature,
disinherited him of all his goods, for his vile ingratitude and unnatural
cruelty, and left the succession of his dukedom to the Duke of Burgundy.

In the year of our Lord 1461, in a village called Iuchi near to Cambray,
Enguerr. de Monstr. vol. 2.
there dwelt a certain man (or rather a beast) that in a great rage threw his
own mother out of his doors thrice in one day, and the thitd time told her in
fury, that he had rather see his house on fire and burnt to coals, then that
she should abide there but one day longer. It happened that the very same day
according to his cursed speech his house was indeed fired, but how or whence no
man could judge: and the fire was so fierce that it consumed to ashes not only
that house, but also twelve other houses adioining, which was an evident figure
of Gods just judgment in punishing so vile and unnatural a deed with fire:
seeing he deserved at the least to loose his house for banishing her out of it,
that had borne him in her belly, and nourished him with the milk of her paps.

In this place I may fitly insert two memorable examples of the same subject,
Alex. ab Alex. geneal. dier. lib. 4. cap. 14.
gathered by an author of credit and fame sufficient to this effect. It is not
long (says he) since a friend of mine a man of a great spirit and worthy to
be believed, recounted to me a very strange accident which he said happened
to himself, and proved his saying by the testimony of many witnesses, which
was this; that being upon a time at Naples at a kinsmans and familiars house of
his, he heard by night the voice of a man crying in the street for aid, which
caused him to rise and light a candle and run out to see what the matter was:
being come out of the doors he perceived a cruel and ougly shaped Devil
striving with all his force to catch and get into his clouches a young man that
strove on the other side to defend himself, and for fear raised that outcrie
which he had before heard: the young man seeing him ran to him forthwith, and
catching fast hold by his clothes, and pitifully crying to God, would in no
case let go his hold until his cruel enemy forsook him: and being brought
into the house all dismayed and beside himself, would not let go his hold
until he came to his senses again out of that exceeding fear. The cause of
which assault was, he had led all his time a most wicked life, and had been a
contemner of God and a rebel against his parents, using vile railing and
bitter speeches against them, in such sort that in stead of blessing they had
laid a curse upon him: and this is the first example.

Concerning the second I will also set down the Authors own words as
follows: of all the strange things (says he) that ever I heard report of,
that which happened not long since at Rome is most worthy to be remembered, of a
certain young man of Gabia borne of a base and poor family, but endued with a
a terrible and furious nature, and addicted to a loose and disordinate life.
This gallant picking a quarrel with his own father in his anger reviled him
with most gross and reproachful terms: In which mad fits, as one wholly
given over to the Devil, he purposely departed to Rome to practice some
naughty devise against his father: but his ghostly father the Devil met with
him in the way under the shape of a cruel and ougly fellow with a thick bushy
beard and head hanging disorderly, and clothes al rent and tottered, who (as
they walked together) enquired of him why he was so sad. He answered that
there had passed some bitter speeches betwixt his father and him, and now he
devised to work him some mischief. The devil by and by like a crafty knave
soothed him up and said; that he also upon the like occasion went about the
same practice, and desired that they might pursue both their voyage and
enterprise together: it was soon agreed upon betwixt them, being like to like
as the Proverb goes. Therefore being arrived at Rome, and lodged at the same
Inn, one bed did serve them both, where whilst the young man securely and
soundly slept, the old malicious knave watching his opportunity caught him by
the throat to strangle him: whereat the poor wretch awoke, and cried for help
to God, so that the wicked spirit was constrained to forsake him without
performing his purpose, and to fly out at the chamber with such force and
violence, that the house roof cracked and the tiles clattered down abundantly.
The host of the house being awaked with the noise, cried out to know what the
matter was, and running into the chamber where this noise was with a candle in
his hand, found the poor young man all alone betwixt dead and alive, of whom
(recovered) he learnt out the whole truth as has been told: but he after this
terrible accident repented him of his wicked life, and was touched with the
sense of his grievous sin so nearely, that ever after he led a more
circumspect and honest life. Thus much we find written in that author.

Henry the fifth inspired with the furies of the Pope of Rome made war upon his
father Henry the fourth, Philip. Melanc. lib. 4. chron.
vexing him with cruel and often battles, and not ceasing till he had spoiled
him of his Empire, and till the bishop of Mentz had prowdly and insolently
taken from him his imperial ornaments even in his presence: but the Lord in
recompense of his unnatural dealing made him and his army a prey unto his
enemies the Saxons, and to fly before them, stirring up also the Pope of Rome
to be as grievous a scourge unto him, as he had been before time to his
father. Now as the ambition of a kingdom was the cause of this man's
ingratitude, so in the example following pride and disdain ruled, and
therefore he is so much the more to be condemned, by how much a kingdom is a
stronger cord to draw men to vice then a man's own affections.

There was (says Manlius) an old man crooked with age, In collectan.
distressed with poverty, and almost pined with hunger, that had a son rich,
strong, and fat, of whom he entreated no gold or silver or possessions, but
food and sustenance for his belly, and clothes for his back, but could not
obtain it at his hands: for his proud heart exalted with prosperity, thought
it a shame and discredit to his house to be born of so poor and base a
parentage, and therefore not only denied him relief, but also disclaimed him
from being his father, and chased him away with bitter and crabbed reproaches.
The poor old man thus cruelly handled let tears fall as witnesses of his
g^iefe, and departed comfortless from his Tygre-minded son. But the Lord
that gathers up the tears of the innocent, looked down from heaven in
justice, and sent a fury into the senses and understanding of this monstrous
son, that as he was void of nature and compassion, so he might be void of
reason and discretion for ever after.

Another not so cruel and disdainefull as the former, yet cruel and
disdainefull enough to pluck down vengeance upon his head, Manlius in
collectan.
would not see his father beg indeed, nor yet abjure him as the other did; but
yet undertaking to keep him used him more like a slave then a father, for what
should be too dear for him that gave us life? Yet every good thing was too
dear for this poor father. Upon a time a dainty morsel of meat was upon the
board to be eaten, which as soon as he came in he conuaied away, and foisted
in courser vittailes in the room. But mark what his dainties turned to: when
the servant went to fetch it again, he found in steed of meat, Fides fit apud
Authorem.
snakes; and of sauce, serpents; to the great terror of his conscience: but
that which is more, one of the serpents leaped in his face, and catching hold
by his lip hung there till his dying day, so that he could never feed
himself, but he must feed the serpent withal. And this badge carried he
about as a cognizance of an unkind and ungrateful son.

Moreover this is another judgment of God, that commonly as children deal
with their parents, so do their children deal with them: and this in the law
of proportion is most just, and in the order of punishing most usual: for the
proof whereof as experience daily teaches so one example or two I will
subioine. Theat. histor.
It is reported how a certain unkind and perverse son beat his aged father
upon a time, and drew him by the hair of his head to the threshold: who when
he was old was likewise beaten of his son, and drawn also by the hair of
the head not to the threshold, but out of doors into the dirt; and how he
should say he was rightly served, if he had left him at the threshold as he
left his father, and not dragged him into the streets which he did not to his:
thus did his own mouth bear record of his impiety, and his own conscience
condemn him before God and men.

Guiliel. Lugdi.
Another old man being persuaded by his son (that had married a young wife)
with fair and sugared promises of kindnesses and contentments to surrender his
goods and lands unto him, yielded to his request, and found for a space all
things to his desire: Discipulus de temp.
but when his often coughing annoied his young and dainty wife, he first
removed his lodging from a fair high chamber to a base under room, and after
showed him many other unkind and vnchildish parts: and lastly when the old man
asked for clothes, he bought four elnes of clothes, two whereof he bestowed
upon him, and reserved the other two for himself. Now his young son marking
this niggardise of his father toward his grandfather, hid the two else of
cloth, and being asked why he hid them, (whether by ingeniousnesse of wit, or
instinct of God) he answered to the end to reserve them for his father, against
he was old, to be a covering for him. Which answer touched his father so
near, that ever after he showed himself more loving and obsequious to his
father then he did before. Two great faults, but soon and happily amended.
Would it might be an example to all children if not to mitigate, yet at least
to learn them to fear how to deal roughly and crookedly with their parents,
seeing that God punishes sin with sin, and sinners in their own kind, and
measures the same measure to every man which they have measured unto others.
George Lanter. de disciplina liberorum.
The like we read of another that provided a trough for his old decrepite
unmannerly father to eat his meat in: who being demanded of his son also to
what use that trough should serve, answered for his grandfather: What (quoth
the child) and must we have the like for you when you are old? Which words so
abashed him that he threw it away forthwith.

At Millan there was an obstinate and ungodly son that when he was admonished
by his mother of some fault which he had committed, made a wrie mouth, Theat.
histor.
and pointed his fingers at her in scorn and derision. Whereat his mother
b^ing angry, Mandat. 3. Cursing. lib. 1. cap. 33.
wished that he might make such a mouth upon the gallows. Neither was it a
vain wish, for within few days he was taken with a theft, and condemned by
law to be hanged, and being upon the ladder was perceived to wryth his mouth in
grief, after the same fashion which he had done before to his mother in
derision.

Henry the second of that name king of England son of Geffrey Plantagenet and
Maud the Empress, Stow. chron.
after he had reigned twenty years, was content to admit his young son
Henry (married to Margaret the French kings daughter) into participation of
his crown, but he like an unnatural son to requite his fathers love, sought
to dispossess him of the whole; for by inciting the King of France and
certain other Nobles, he took arms and raised deadly war against his own
natural father: betwixt whom diverse strong battles being foughten, as well
in England by the Deputies and friends of both parties, as also in Normandy,
Poytou, Guyan, and Britain; the victory always inclined to the father, so
that the rebellious son with his allies were constrained to bend to his
fathers will, and to desire peace, which he gently granted, and forgave his
offense. Howbeit the Lord for his disobedience did not so lightly pardon him,
but because his hasty mind could not tarry for the crown till his fathers
death, therefore the Lord cut him short of it altogether, causing him to die
six years before his father, being yet but young, and like to live long.

Languet. chron.
Lothair King of Soyssons in France committed the rule of the Province of
Guyan to his eldest son Cramiris, who when (contrary to the mind of his
father) he oppressed the people with exactions and was reclaimed home, he like
an ungracious and impious son, fled to his uncle Childebert, and provoked him
to war upon his own father, wherein he himself was by the just vengeance of
God, taken and burned with wife and children to death.

Leuit. 20.
Furthermore it is not (doubtless) but to a very good end enacted in the law of
God that he which curses his father or mother should die the death, and that
rebellious children and such as be incorrigable, should at the instance and
pursuit of their own parents by order of law be stoned to death. As children
by all these examples ought not only to learn to fear to displease and
revile their parents, but also to fear and reverence them, least that by
disobedience they kindle the fire of Gods wrath against the^: so likewise on
the other side parents are here advertised to have great care in bringing up
and instructing their children in the fear of God and obedience to his will;
least for want of instruction and correction on their part, they themselves
incur a punishment of their careless negligence in the person of their
children. And this is proved by experience of the men of Bethel, 2. King. 2.
of whose children two and forty were torn in pieces by bears, for that they
had been so evil taught as to mock the holy Prophet Elizeus in calling him
bald pate. 1. Sam. 2.4
Heli likewise the high Priest was culpable of this fault, for having two
wicked and perverse sons, whom no fear of God could restrain, being
discontent with that honorable portion of the sacrifices allotted them by God,
like famished and insatiable wretches fell to share out more than was their
due, and by force to raven all that which by fair means they could not get:
And that which is worse, to pollute the holy Tabernacle of God with their
filthy Whoredoms, Contempt of holy things lib. 1. cap. 34.
in such sort that the Religion of God grew in disgrace through their profane
dealings. And albeit that it may seem that their father did his duty in some
sort when he admonished and reproved them: yet it is manifest by the
reprehension of the man of God, that he did no part of that at all, or if he
did, yet it was in so careless loose and cold manner, using more lenity the^ he
ought, or less severity the^ was necessary; that God turned their
destructions (when they were slain at the overthrow of Israel by the
Philistims) to be his punishment: for understanding the doleful news of his
sons death and the arks taking at once, he fell backwards from his stool, and
burst his neck, being old and heavy even fourscore and eighteen years of age,
not able either to help or stay himself.

Lib. 2. cap. 10. de in titut. christ. fami.
Ludouicus Viues says, that in his time a certain woman in Flaunders did so
much pamper and cocker up two of her sons even against her husbands will,
that she would not suffer them to want money or any thing which might furnish
their riotous life, both in drinking, banqueting and dicing; yea she would
steal from her husband to minister unto the^: but as soon as her husband was
dead, she was justly plagued in them both, for they fell from rioting to
robbing, (which two vices are commonly linked together) and for the same one of
the^ was executed by the sword, and the other by the haltar, she her self
looking on as a witness of their destructions, whereof her conscience told her
that her indulgence was the chiefest cause. Hither may we refer that common
and vulgar story, and I suppose very true which is almost in every child's
mouth, of him that going to the gallows desired to speak with his mother in
her ear ere he died, Cyriac. Spang.
and when she came unto him, in stead of speaking bit off her ear with his
teeth, exclaiming upon her as the causer of his death, because she did not
chastise him in his youth for his faults, but by her flatteries established him
in vice, which brought him to this woeful end: and herein she was doubly
punished, both in her sons destruction and her own infamy, whereof she carried
about her a continual mark. This ought to be a warning to all parents to
look better to the education of their children, and to root out of them in
time all evil and corrupt manners, least of small sprigs they grow to
branches, and of qualities to habites, and so either be hardly done of; or at
least deprave the whole body and bring it to destruction: but above all to
keep them from idleness and vain pleasures, the disco^modity and mischief
whereof, this present example will declare: At a town called Hannuel in Saxony
the Devil transforming himself into the shape of a man, Job Fincel. lib. de
miracu.
exercised many iugling tricks and pretty pastimes to delight young men and
maids withal; and indeed to draw after him daily great companies, one day they
followed him out of the city gates unto a hill adjoining, where he played a
iuggling trick in deed with them, for he carried them all away with him, so
that they were after never heard of. This history is recorded in the annals of
the forenamed city, and avouched to be most true, being a notable and fearful
admonition to all parents to set their children to learning and instruction,
and to withdraw them from all such vain and foolish pastimes.

CHAP. II. Of those that rebel against their Superiors.
NOw as it is a thing required by law and reason, that children bear that
honor and reverence to their natural parents which is commanded: so it is as
necessary by the same respect, that all subjects perform that duty of honor
and obedience to their Lords, Princes, and Kings, which is not derogatory to
the glory of God: and the rather, because they are, as it were, their fathers,
in supplying that duty toward their subjects which fathers owe their children:
as namely in maintaining their peace and tranquillity in earthly things, and
keeping them under the discipline of Gods Church, to which two ends they were
ordained. Romans 13.
For this cause the scripture bids every man to be subject to the higher
powers, not so much to avoid the punishment which might befall the contrary, as
because it is agreeable to the will of God. And in another place, To honor the
king; and, To give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, 1. Pet. 2. Matthew. 22.
Exodus 22.
as unto God that which is Gods. So also in Moses law we are forbidden to
detract from or speak evil of the magistrate, or to curse the ruler of the
people.

Yet for all this the children of Israel were not afraid many times to commit
this sin, but then especially when they charged Moses with conspiring the
murder of those rebels that (under Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, captains of that
enterprise) set themselves against him and Aaron; Number. 16.
whom not he, but God for their pride and stubbornness, had rooted out and
destroyed: and thus they backbited and slaundered Moses, and mutined against
him being their sovereign magistrate and conductour, that so meekely and
justly had brought them ought of Egypt, even by the special commission of
almighty God. But the fury of Gods displeasure was so stirred up against them
for this their fact, that they were scourged with a most grievous plague,
whereof died about four thousand and seven hundred persons.

In the time of king David's flight from Absalom, who pursued him to bereave him
of his kingdom, 2. Sam. 16.
there was one Semei a Ieminite, that in his wicked and perverse humor, in
stead of service due unto his sovereign, especially in that extremity, not
only presented not himself unto him as a subject; Mandat. 3. Cursers, lib. 1.
cap. 33.
but as a railer, cursed him with most reproachful terms, as of murderer, and
wicked man, and also threw stones at him and his followers in most despightfull
manner: for which his malicious and rebellious act, though whilst David lived,
he was not once called in question: yet was he not exempted from punishment
therefore: for in the end his wickedness fell upon his own head, and
destruction ouertooke him by desert of another fault, 1. King. 2.
at the commandment of Solomon.

2. Sam. 20.
The punishment of Shiba the son of Bichri tarried not all so long, who having
also with a proud and audacious heart stirred up the greatest part of Israel to
rebel against David then when he thought to have been most at quiet, enjoyed
not long his disloiall enterprise, for being speedily pursued by David's
servants, and besieged in the city Abell, his head was cut off by the
citizens, and thrown over the wall as a just reward for his rebellious act.

But let us pass over these sacred histories and come to profane, yet
probable and more near examples. When Camillus besieged the Phalischi, Liu.
lib. 5.
a people in Hitruria, near to mount Floscon, a schoolmaster of the city, who
had the rule over the chief men's sons, both touching instruction and
governance, led them out of the city gates one day in show to walk, but indeed
to betray them into Camillus hands: which unfaithful dealing Camillus did not
only mislike, but detest and refuse, thinking it an dishonest part by such
sinister means to bring even his enemies in subjection: And therefore
reproving the trustlesse schoolmaster, and binding his hands behind his back,
he gave every one of his scholars a rod with commandment to whip him back
unto their parents, whom he had pretended so to deceive. A most noble act in
Camillus (would we could find the like amongst Christians) and a most deserved
punishment of the schoolmaster (would no traitor might be served better.)
Neither might that worthy Roman repent his deed, for the Phalischi in
admiration and love of this notable justice, freely yielded themselves and
their city to him which otherwise in long time and without great effusion of
blood he could not have achieved.

Did Tarpeia the daughter of Sp. Tarpeius speed any better when she betrayed
the tower whereof her father was the ouerseer, to Tatius king of the Sabines,
Liu. lib. 1.
who at that season besieged Rome, upon condition of a sum of gold, or as
other writers say, of all that the soldiers wore on theit left hands? No
verily, for the Sabines (as soon as they had attained their purpose)
overwhelmed her with their left hand gifts, to wit, their shields, and not
their rings and bracelets which she hoped: to the end to leave an example to
the posterity, how no promise nor oath ought to be of force to traitors to
keep them from punishment.

Neither did those noble young men of Rome, Tit. Liu.
amongst whom were the consul Brutus sons, come to any better issue, when
they conspired to receive king Tarquinius into the city by night, who by the
virtue and valor of their father was worthily expulsed: for their secret and
wicked counsel being bewraied to the Consuls Iunius and Pub. Valerius, by
Vindicio a bondslaue, they were apprehended, having letters about them written
to Tarquinius to the same effect: and being condemned, were first shamefully
scourged with rods, and after executed to death.

Thucyd. lib. 1.
Pausanius king of Sparta, having conspited with the Persians against his own
country, and as it were, offered violence to his own bowels, fled into the
sanctuary of Pallas for relief, Aelian. lib. 9.
when he saw the Ephori to go about to call him in question for his treason.
Now whereas it was religion to take him from thence by violence, they agreed to
shut him up there continually, and so to pine him to death. Which when his
mother understood, she was the first person that brought a stone to stop up
the doors to hinder him from getting forth, and therein showed a notable
example of godly cruelty to her child, and cruel piety to her country:
approouing that saying of Aristippus, who being demanded why he neglected
his son being borne of his body? answered, Do we not cast from us lice and
phlegm which are also bredde of our bodies? insinuating, that they which have
nothing to commend them to their parents, but generation, are not to be
esteemed as children; much less they that degenerate.

When Brennus captain of the Gauls, brother to Belinus and son to Molnutius
king of Britain, besieged Ephesus, a deuilish woman enticed with the jewels
which Brennus wore about him, betrayed the city into his hands. But Brennus
detesting this abominable covetousness, when he entered the city so loaded her
with gold, that he covered and oppressed her therewith.

In like manner, Heradamon delivered up to the Emperor Aurelian his own native
city Tiana, in hope to save his own life by betraying his country. But it
fell out quite contrary to his expectation, for though Caesar had sworn not to
leave a dog alive within the walls, because they shut their gates against him;
and also his soldiers were instant and urgent upon his promise: Eras. in
Apoph. lib. 6.
yet he spared the city and destroyed the traitor, and quit himself of his
promise by hanging up every dog in the city contrary to his own intent, and
his armies expectation; yet agreeable to his words, and most correspondent to
equity and true fortitude.

In the year of our Lord 1270, the bishop of Colonea practicing to spoil the
city of her privileges, and reduce it under his own jurisdiction: Hermanus
Grinu consul and chief magistrate, withstood his power and authority with
all his force, so that he could not bring his purpose about. Wherefore two
Canons belonging to the Bishop, sought to undermine this their enemy by
policy, and to take him out of the way: for which end they invited him in
very kind manner to dinner, but when he was come, they brought him into a young
lions den (which they kept in honor of the bishop) and unawares shut the
doors upon him, bidding him shift for himself, thinking that it was impossible
for him to escape out alive. But the Consul perceiving in what great danger he
was, wrapped his cloak about his left arm, and thrusting it into the mouth of
the hungry lion, killed him with his right hand, and so by the wonderful
providence of God, escaped without hurt. But the two traitorous Canons he
caught right soon, and hung them at their cathedral Church gate, to their
own confusion and terror of all traitors.

It was a noble saying and worthy the marking, of Augustus Caesar to
Rhaemitalches king of Thracia, who having forsaken Anthony to take part with
Augustus, boasted very insolently of his deserts toward him: then Caesar
dissembling his folly, drank to another king, and said, I love treason, but I
can not commend nor trust a traitor. The same also in effect, Philip of
Macedony and Julius Caesar were wont to say, That they loved a traitor at the
first, but when he had finished his treason, they hated him more then any
other: signifying, that traitors deserved no retribution of thanks, seeing
their office was accepted for a time, yet they themselves could never be
counted less than naughty and disloiall persons: for no honest man ever
betrayed his country or his friend: and what greater punishment can there be
than this? But for manifest proof hereof, let this one example serve in stead
of many, namely of Theodoricke king of Francia, and Irminfride king of
Thuringia, Albert. Crantz.
who being professed foes, and having fought many cruel battles, at length the
latter was conquered of the former, by the luckie assistance of the Saxons.
This Irminfride thus subdued, sued for pardon and release at the conquerours
hand, but he was so far from pitying his estate, that he corrupted one
Iringus a noble man, and Irminfrides subject, to murder his master, which he
performed kneeling before Theodoricke, running him through with his sword at
his back: which traitorous deed, as soon as it was finished, Theodoricke
though the setter of it, yet he could not abide the actour, but bad him be
packing, for who could put trust in him that had betrayed his own master. At
which words Iringus (mad with anger and rage) ran at Theodoricke also with
purpose to have slain him too; but his hand missing the mark, returned his
sword into his own bowels, so that he fell down dead upon his masters
carcass. What more notable and wonderful judgment could happen? surely it is
an example worthy to be written in golden letters, and to be read and remembered
of every one, to teach men allegiance and obedience to their princes and
superiors, least more sudden destruction than this fall upon them.

Tit. Liuius.
After the death of Ieronimus king of Siracusa, Andronodorus and Themistius
provoked by their wives descending of the blood royal, affected an usurpation
of the crown, and wrought much hurt to the common wealth: but their practices
being discovered, the Pretours (by the consent of the Seniours) slew them both
in the market place, as rotten members of their common body, and therefore fit
to be cut off. And when they understood how their wives Damarata and Harmonia
were breeders and incensers of this mischief, they sent to kill them also: yea
and Heraclia, Harmonia her sister, guiltless and witless of the crime (for no
other cause, but because she was sister unto her) was plucked from the altar,
and slain in the tumult with two of her daughters that were virgins. And thus
is treason plagued not only in traitors themselves, but also in those that are
linked unto them in friendship and affinity.

The glory and reputation of Fabritius, the Roman is eternized by that noble
act of his, Cic. offic. lib. 9.
in sending bound to Pyrrhus a traitor that offered to poison him. For albeit
that Pyrrhus was a sworn enemy to the Roman Empire, and also made war upon
it, yet would not Fabritius treacherously seek his destruction, but sent back
the traitor unto him to be punished at his discretion.

What notable treasons did Hadrian the fourth, Pope of Rome, practice against
the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, yet all was still frustrate; for the Lord
protected the Emperor, and punished the traitor with a sudden and strange
death; for he was choked with a fly which went down his throat, and stopped
his breath, and could by no means be pulled out till it made an end of him.
Besides, many others that went abour the same practice, were brought to notable
destructions: as that counterfeit fool whom the Italians set on to murder
Frederick in his chamber, which had been performed, had he not leaped out of
a window into a river, and so saved his life: for the fool being taken, was
thrown headlong out of the same window, and broke his neck. As also an
Arabian doctor, a grand poisoner, who going about to infect with poison his
bridle, his saddle, his spurs, and stirrops, that as soon as he should but
touch them, he might be poisoned, was discovered and hanged for his labor.

In the year of our Lord 1364, Albert. Crantz.
when as the Emperor Charles the 4, and Philip duke of Austria, were ready to
join battle in the field, Charles distrusting his own power, undermined his
foe by subtilty on this fashion: he sent for three of duke Philips captains
privily, and persuaded them with promises of rewards to work some means to
terrify the duke and dissuade him from that battle, which they performed with
all diligence: for they told the duke that they had stolen into the Emperors
tents by night, and viewed his power, which they found to exceed his by three
parts, and therefore counseled him not to try the hazard of the battle, but
to save his soldiers lives by flight, which if they tarried, they were sure to
loose. Wherewithal the Duke mistrusting no fraud sore affrighted, took the
next occasion of flight, and returned home with dishonor. Now when these three
traitors came to the Emperor for their compacted rewards, he caused them to
be paid in counterfeit money, not equiualing the sum of their bargain by the
twentieth part, which though at first they discerned not, yet afterward
finding how they were cousened, they returned to require their due, and
complain of their wrong. But the Emperor looking sternly upon them, answered,
That counterfeit money was good enough for their counterfeit service, and that
if they tarried long, they should have a due reward of their treason.

CHAP. III. More examples of the same subject.
WHen Manuel the Emperor of Constantinople lay about Antioch with an army
prepared against the Turk, Otto Frisingensis de rebus Freder. prin. lib. 1.
cap. 47.
one of his chiefest officers, namely his Chancellor, put in practice this
notable piece of treason against him: he waged three desperate young men with an
infinite sum of money to kill him on a day appointed, and then with a band of
soldiers determined to possess himself of the crown, and of the city, and
to slay all that any way crossed his purpose. But the treason being discovered
secretly to the Empress, she acquainted her lord with it, who took the three
traitors and put them all to cruel deaths: and as for the Chancellor, he
first bored out his eyes, and plucking his tongue through his throat, tormented
him to death with a rigorous and most miserable punishment.

When the Turk besieged Alba Graca certain soldiers conspired to betray the
city into his hands, Bonfi^^us. lib 3. Decad. 5.
for he had promised them large rewards so to do, howbeit it succeeded not
with them, for they were detected and apprehended by Paulus Kynisius governor
of Hungary, who constrained the^ to eat one another flesh, seething every day
one to feed the other withal, but he that was last was feign to devour his
own body.

Scr bonianus a Captain of the Romans in Dalmatia, rebelled against the
Emperor Claudius, Lanquet. chron.
and named himself Emperor in the ^rmy; but his rebellion was miraculously
punished, for though the whole army favored him very much: yet they could not
by any means spread their banners, or remove their standerds out of their
places as long as he was called by the name of Emperor, with which miracle
being moved they turned their loves into hatred, and their liking into
loathing, so that whom lately they saluted as Emperor, him now they murdered
as a traitor.

To rehearse all the English traitors that have conspired against their kings
from the conquest unto this day, Lanquet.
it is a thing unnecessary, and almost impossible. Howbeit that their
destructions may appear more evidently, and the cutse of God upon traitors be
made more manifest, I will briefly reckon up a catalogue of the chiefest of
them. In the year 1275 Lewline Prince of Wales rebelled against King Edward
the first, and after much ado, was taken by Sir Roger Mortimer, and his head
set upon the tower of London. In like sort was David Lewlines brother served.
Ries and Madok escaped no better measure in stirring the Welchme^ up to
rebellion. No more did the Scots, who having of their own accord committed the
government of their kingdom to king Edward, after the death of Alexander (who
broke his neck by a fall from an horse, and left no issue male) and sworn
feaulty unto him: yet dispensed with their oath by the Popes commission, and
Frenchmens incitement, and rebelled diverse times against King Edward: for he
overcame them sundry times, and made slaughter of their men slaying at one
time 32000, and taking diverse of their Nobles prisoners. In like manner they
rebelled against King Edward the third, who made three voiages into that land
in the space of four years, and at every time overcame and discomfited them,
in so much that well near all the nobility of Scotland, with infinite number
of the common people were slain. Thus they rebelled in Henry the sixts time,
and also Henry the eights, and diverse other kings reigns, ever when our
English forces were busied about foreign wars inuading the land on the other
side most traitorously. And thus it is to be feared they will ever do, except
they degenerate from their old natures: and therefore it ought to be a Caveat
to us how we trust them in any extremity, but nevertheless they ever yet were
whipped for their treason, as the histories of our English Chronicles do
sufficiently record.

^^nquet.
In the reign of king Henry the fourth there rebelled at one time against him,
Sir John Holland D. of Excester, with the Dukes of Aumarle, Surrey, Salisburie,
and Gloucester: and at another time Sir Thomas Percie Earl of Worcester, and
Henry Percie son to the Earl of Northumberland: at another, Sir Richard
Scroope Archbishop of York, and diverse others of the house of the Lord
Moubray: at another time Sir Henry Percie the father, Earl of Northumberland,
and the Lord Bardolph. And lastly Ryce ap Dee and Owen Glendour two Welchmen:
all which were either slain, as Sir Hendry Percie the yoonger; or beheaded, as
the rest of these noble rebels; or starued to death as Owen Glendour was in the
mountains of Wales after he had devoured his own flesh.

In the reign of Henry the fifth, Sir Richard Earl of Cambridge, Sir Richard
Scroope treasurer of England, and Sir Thomas Gray were beheaded for treason.

No less was the perfidious and ungrateful treachery of Humfrey Banister an
Englishman toward the duke of Buckingham his Lord and master, whom the said
duke had tenderly brought up, and exalted to great promotion. For when as the
duke being driven into extremity, by reason of the separation of his army which
he had mustered together against king Richard the usurper, fled to the same
Banister as his trustiest friend to be kept in secret until he could find
opportunity to escape. This false traitor upon hope of a thousand pounds which
was promised to him that could bring forth the duke, betrayed him into the
hands of John Mitton sheriefe of Shropshire, who conveyed him to the city of
Salisbury, where king Richard kept his household: where he was soon after put to
death. But as for ungrateful Banister, the vengeance of God pursued him to his
utter ignominy: for presently after, his eldest son became mad and died in a
bores stie: his eldest daughter was suddenly stricken with a foul leprie: his
second son marueilously deformed of his lims, and lame: his yoongest son
drowned in a puddle: And he himself in his old age arraigned and found guilty
of a murder, and by his clergy saved. And as for his thousand pounds, king
Richard gave him not a farthing: saying that he which would be untrue to so
good a master, must needs be false to all other.

To pass over the time of the residue of the kings, wherein many examples of
treasons and punishments upon them are extant, and to come nearer unto our own
age, let us consider the wonderful providence of God in discovering the
notorious treasons which have been pretended so often and so many against our
soueraign now living Queen Elizabeth, and protecting her so fatherly from the
dint of them all. First therefore to begin with the chiefest, the Earl of
Northumberla^d and Westmerland in the eleventh year of her reign began a
rebellion in the North, pretending their purpose to be sometimes to defend the
Queens person and government from the invasion of strangers, and sometimes for
conscience sake to seek reformation of religion: under color whereof they got
together an army of men to the number of six thousand soldiers: against whom
marched the Earl of Sussex leiutenant of the North, and the Earl of Warwick
sent by the Queen to his aid: whose approach stroke such a terror into their
hearts, that the two Earls with diverse of the Archrebels fled by night into
Scotland, leaving the rest of their company a prey unto their enemies, whereof
threescore and six or thereabout, were hanged at Durham. As for the Earls,
one of them (to wit) of Northumberland, was after taken in Scotland and
beheaded at York. Westmerland fled into another country, and left his house
and family destroyed and undone by his folly.

A while after this what befell to John Throgmorton, Thomas Brook, George
Redman, and diverse other Gentlemen at Norwich, who pretended a rebellion under
the color of suppressing strangers, were they not discovered by one of their
own conspiracy Thomas Ket, and executed at Norwich for their pains? The same
end came Francis Throgmorton to, whose trecheries as they were abominable, and
touching the Queens own person, so they were disclosed not without the
especial providence of God.

But above all that vile and ungrateful Traitor William Parry upon whom the
Queen had poured plentifully her liberality, deserves to be had in
everlasting remembrance to his shame: whose Treasons being discovered he paid
the tribute of his life in recompense thereof. What shall I say of the Earl of
Arundell, and a second Earl of Northumberland? Did not the justice of God
appear in both their ends, when being attainted for Treason, the one slew
himself in prison, and the other died by course of nature in prison also?
Notorious was the conspiracy of those Arch-traitors. Ballard, Babington,
Sauadge, and Tylney, etc. yet the Lord brought them down, and made them
spectacles to the world, of his justice. Even so that notorious villain doctor
Lopus (the Queens Physician) who a long time had not only been an
intelligencer to the Pope and King of Spain, of our English counsels, but
also had poisoned many Noblemen, and went about also to poison the Queen her
self, was he not surprised in his treachery and brought to sudden
destruction? In sum the Lord has preserved her majesty not only from these
but many other secret and privy foes, and that most miraculously and contrary
to all reason, and has spread his wings over her to defend her from all her
enemies: the consideration whereof as it ought to stir up in every one a
thankful heart to acknowledge his mercies, and a fearful care not to
displease him that is so gracious unto us: so it ought also to incite every
one of us to pray incessantly for her further preservation, as being the soul
of our souls, and life of our lives: for surely if the Lord deprive us of her
life, our sins are the cause, and our smart will be the effect thereof.

Moreover there is yet another kind of treason, and another rank of traitors
as pernicious as any of the former, and as odious before God and man. Such are
they which either upon private quarrels, or received injuries, or hope of
gain, or any other silly respect, forsake their countries, and take part with
the enemies to fight against it: or they that in time of necessity refuse to
fight or dare not fight in defense of it: the former sort are called fugitives,
and the latter cowards. As touching the first they have been always in
detestation in well governed policies, and also evermore severely punished.
The Aeginates punished them with the loss of their right hand thumbes, to the
end they might no more handle a spear or a sword but an oar. The Mitylenians
with loss of their lives. The inhabitants of Samos marked them in the face
with the picture of an oule: and the Romans punished them after diverse
fashions: Fabius Maximus caused all those that had fled from the Roman
succors to the enemy to loose their hands. Africanus the former, though gentle
and mild by nature, yet in this respect he borrowed from foreign cruelty, for
having conquered Carthage and got into his power all those Roman rebels that
took part against his country, he hung the Romans as traitors to their
country; Valerius maximus.
and mitigated the punishment of the Latins, as but perfidious confederates.
Africanus the latter when he had subdued the Punicke Nation he threw all
fugitives amongst wild beasts to be devoured.

Lucius Paulus after the conquest of the king of Persia, committed these
fellows to the mercy of Eliphantes. Generally there is no Nation under the
sun which holds them not in execration; and therefore our English fugitives,
who under cloak of religion not only abandon their country, their kindred and
their Prince, but also conspire the undoing and swear the destruction of them:
are they not worthy to be handled like traitors and to have their quarters
spectacles of perfidie? The bridge and gates of London bear witness of the
woeful ends that these Jesuits come unto.

As touching cowards (I mean such as preferring their lives or liberty or any
other by-respects before their countries welfare, and either dare not or will
not stand stoutly in defense of it in time of war and danger) they deserve no
less punishment then the former, seeing that as they are open oppugners, so
these are close underminers of the good thereof. And therefore the Romans did
sharply chasten them in their government, as may appear by diverse examples of
the same: as first they were noted with this ignominy, never to eat their meat
but standing; and hereunto they were sworn: Nay they were in such hateful
account amongst them, Alex. ab Alex.
that when Anniball offered the Senate 8000 captives to be redeemed, they
refused his offer, saying that they were not worthy to be redeemed, that had
rather be taken basely then die honestly and valiantly: the same Senate dealt
more favorably with the captives which king Pirrhus took, for they redeemed
them but with this disgrace, degrading them from their honors and places,
until by a double spoil they had won their reputation again. L. Calpurnius
Piso handled Titius the captain of his horsemen in Sicilia (one who being
ouercharged with enemies delivered his weapons unto them) on this manner,
Valerius Max. lib. 2. cap. 2.
he caused him to go barefooted before the army wearing a garment without
seames, he forbad him society with any save such as were noted with the same
fault, and from a General over horsemen, he debased him to a common souldior.
How did the same Senate correct the cowardice of Caius Vatienus (who to the end
to privilege himself from the Italick war, cut off all the fingers of his
left hand) even they proscribed his goods, and cast him into perpetual prison,
that that life which he refused to hazard in defense of his country, he might
consume in bondage and fetters.

Fulgosius says, Lib. 2. cap. ^.
that among the Germans it was so dishonorable a part to loose but a shield in
the war, that whosoever had happened to do so, was suspended both from the
place of common council, and from the temples of religion: insomuch that many
(as he reports) killed themselves to avoid the shame. The people called Daci
punished cowards on this sort, they suffered them not to sleep but with their
heads to the beds feetward, and besides by the law they made them slaves and
subjects to their own wives: what viler disgrace could there be then this?
Plu. Agefilaus
And yet the Lacedaemonians plagued them more shamefully, for with them it was a
discredit to marry in the stock of a coward, any man might strike them
lawfully: and in their attire they went with their clothes rent, and their
beards half shaven. Thus are all kind of traitors continually punished of the
Lord by one means or other, and therefore let us learn to shun treason as the
vilest and the detestablest thing in the world.

CHAP. IIII. Of such as have murdered their rulers or Princes.
ZImri captain of half the chariots of Elah King of Israel, conspired against
his Lord, All this whole chapter in regard of murder belongs to the sixth
commandem^nt. 1. King 16.
as he was in Tirza drinking till he was drunk in the house of Arza his
steward, and came upon him suddenly and smote him till he died, and
possessed the kingdom in his room. Howbeit herein he was the Lords rod to
punish the house of Baasha, yet when the punishment was past, the Lord threw
the rod into the fire; for he inioied the crown but seven days: For all
Israel detesting his fact made Omri king over them, who besieged him in Tirza,
and drove him inro that extremity that he went into the palace of the kings
house, and burnt himself and the house with fire.

2. Kin. 12.21.
Iozachar the son of Shimeah, and Iehozabod the son of Shomer came to no
better end for murdering Iehoash King of Judah: for Amaziah his son after the
kingdom was confirmed unto him, caused them both to be put to death. But
their children he slew not, 2. King. 14.5.
according to that which is written in the book of the law, The fathers shall
not be put to death for the children, nor the children for the fathers, but
every man shall bear his own sin.

2. King. 15.
Neither did Shallum that slew Zacharia king of Israel, prosper any better, for
he reigned but one month in Samaria, when Menahim the son of Gadi rebelled
against him, and slew him as he had done his master.

Amon the son of Manasseh was slain by his own servants, but the Lord
stirred up the people of the land to revenge his death, and to kill all them
that had conspired against their king.

But to let pass the holy histories of the sacred scripture, wherein ever
after any treason, the Holy Ghost presently sets down the punishment of
traitors, as it were of purpose to signify how the Lord hates all such rebels
that rose up against his own ordinance. Let us consider a little the
consequents of these in profane yet credible authors, and apply them unto our
purpose.

I^lian. lib. 1.
Archelaus King of Macedonia had a mignion called Cratenas, whom he loved most
entirely, but he again required him not with love, but with hatred, and
stretched all his wits to enstall himself in his kingdom, by deposing and
murdering him: which though he accomplished, yet his deserts were cut short by
the vengeance of God: for he continued not many days in his roialtie, but he
was served with the same sauce, that he had made Archelaus before him to taste
of: even betrayed and murdered as he well deserved.

Ludouicus Sfortia to the end to inuest himself with the dukedom of Millain,
spared not to shed the innocent blood of his two nephews; the sons of
Galeachus, together with their tutors, and one Francis Calaber a worthy and
excellent man. But the Lord so disposed of his purposes, that he (in stead of
obtaining the kingdom) was taken prisoner by the king of France, so that
neither he nor any of his offspring enjoyed that which he so much affected.

When Numerianus was to succeed Carus his father in the Empire, Phil. Melanct.
chron. lib. 3.
Arrius Axer his father in law to the end to translate the Empire unto
himself, entered a conspiracy and slew his son in law, that nothing
mistrusted his disloialty: But the Pretorian army understanding the matter,
discharged Arrius and elected Dioclesian in his room, who laying hold upon his
competitor, laid an action of treason to his charge, and put him to death in
the sight of the multitude.

Theodericke and Frederick conspired against their own brother Thurismund
king of the Visigothes, Chron. Sigebert.
to the intent to succeed him in his kingdom: And albeit that nature reclaimed
them from the act, yet they slew him without all compassion. But after
thirteen years reign the same Theodericke was requited by his other brethren
with the same measure that he before met to his brother Thurismund. And so
though vengeance slept a while, yet at length it wakened.

Aelias Antonius Gordianus, the third Emperor of Rome, Phil. Melanct. chron.
Aventin. lib. 2.
though so excellent a young prince that he deserved to be called the Love,
and Jewel of the world, yet was he slain by one promoted by himself to high
honor, called Philip Arabs, when he was but two and twenty year old: after
whose decease this Philip got himself elected Emperor by the band, and
confirmed by the Senate. Ingratitude punished.
All which notwithstanding, after five years Decius rebelled, and his own
soldiers conspired against him, so that both he at Verona, and his son at
Rome, were slain by them about one time.

A^entin. lib. 2.
After the death of Constantine the Great, his three sons dividing the Empire
betwixt them, succeeded their father. Constantine the eldest had for his share
Spain, France, the Alps, and England. Constance the second, held Italy,
Africa, Graecia, and Illiricum. Constantine the younger, was king and Emperor
of the East. But ambition suffered them not to enjoy quietly these their
possessions: for when the eldest being more proud and seditious th^n the other,
not content with his allotted portion, made war upon his brother Constance his
provinces, and strove to enter Italy, he was slain in a battle by Aquileia,
when he was but five and twenty year old: by which means, all the provinces
which were his, fell to Constance, and therewithal such a drowsinesse and
epicurisme for want of a stirrer up after his brothers death, that he fell into
the gout, and neglected the government of the Empire. Wherefore in Auspurge and
in Rhetia they created a new Emperor, one Magnentius, whose life before-time
Constance had saved from the soldiers, Notable ingratitude punished.
and therefore his treachery was the greater. This Magnentius deprived and slew
Constance, but was overcome by Constantine the third brother in Illiricum, yet
in such sort, that the conqueror could not greatly brag, for he lost an
infinite company of his men, and yet missed of his chief purpose, the taking
of Magnentius, for he escaped to Lions, and there massacring all that he
mistrusted, at last growing (I suppose) in suspicion with his own heart, slew
himself also. And so his traitorous, ungrateful, and ambitious murder was
revenged with his own hands.

Ritius. lib. 1. regib. Hispan.
Victericus betrayed Luyba king of Spain, and succeeded in his place; seven
years after, another traitor slew him, and succeeded also in his place.
Mauritius the Emperor was murdered by Phocas together with his wife and five
of his children, he seating himself Emperor in his Rome: Howbeit traitors and
murderers can never come to happy ends; for as he had slain Mauritius, so
Priscus, Heraclianus, and Phorius, three of his chiefest captains, conspiring
against him, with three several armies gave him such an alarm at once at his
own doors, that they soon quailed his courage; and after much mangling of his
body, cut him shorter by the head and the kingdom at one blow.

In the time of Edward the second and Edward the third in England, Lanquet.
one Sir Roger Mortimer committed many villainous outrages in shedding much
blood, and at last king Edward himself lying at Barkley castle; to the end
that he might (as it was supposed) enjoy Isabell his wife, with whom he had
very suspicious familiarity. After this, he unjustly accused Edmond Earl of
Kent of treason, and caused him to be put to death therefore: and lastly, he
conspired against king Edward the third, as it was suspected, for which cause
he was worthily and deservedly beheaded.

Among this rank of murderers of kings we may fitly place also Richard the
third usurper of the crown of England, Stow.
and diverse others which he used as instruments to bring his detestable purpose
to effect: as namely, Sir James Tirrell knight, a man for natures gifts worthy
to have served a much better prince then this Richard, if he had well served
God, and been endued with as much truth and honesty as he had strength and
wit: also Miles Forest, and John Dighton, two villains fleshed in murders: but
to come to the fact. It was on this sort: When Richard the usurper had enioined
Robert Brackenbury to this piece of service of murdering the yo ^g king Edward
the fifth his nephew in the tower, with his brother the duke of York, and saw it
refused by him, he committed the charge of the murder to Sir James Tirrel, who
hasting to the tower by the kings commission received the keys into his own
hands, and by the help of those two butchers, Dighton and Forest, smothered the
two princes in their bed, and buried them at the stairs feet: which being
done, Sir James node back to king Richard, who gave him great thanks, and as
some say, made him knight for his labor. All which things on every part well
pondered, it appears that God never gave the world a notabler example, both
of the inconstancy of worldly weal, and also of the wretched end which
ensues such despitefull cruelty: for first to begin with the ministers, Miles
Forest rotted away peecemeale at S. Martins: Sir James Tirrell died at the
tower hill beheaded for treason: king Richard himself (as it is declared
elsewhere) was slain in the field, hacked and hewed of his enemies, carried on
horseback dead, his hair in despite torn and tugged like a dog: besides the
inward torments of his guilty conscience were more then all the rest, for it is
most certainly reported, that after this abominable deed done, he never had
quiet in his mind: when he went abroad, his eye whirled about, his body was
privily fenced, his hand ever upon his dagger, his countenance and manner like
one always ready to strike, his sleep short and unquiet, full of fearful
dreams, insomuch that he would often suddenly start up and leap out of his
bed, and run about the chamber: his restless conscience was so continually
tossed and tumbled with the tedious impression of that abominable murder.

CHAP. V. Of such as rebelled against their superiors, because of subsidies
and taxes imposed upon them.
AS it is not lawful for children to rebel against their parents, though they
be cruel and unnatural, so also it is as unlawful for subjects to withstand
their princes and governors, though they be somewhat grievous and burdensome
unto them: which we affirm, not to the end that it should be licensed to them
to exercise all manner of rigor and unmeasurable oppression upon their
subjects (as shall be declared in the 35 chapter of this book more at large)
but we entreat only here of their duties which are in subjection to the power
of other men, whose authority they ought in no wise to resist, unless they
oppose themselves against the ordinance of God. Therefore this position is true
by the word of God, that no subject ought by force to shake off the yoke of
subjection and obedience due unto his prince, or exempt himself from any tax
or contribution which by public authority is imposed: Give (says the
Apostle) tribute to whom tribute belongs, custom to whom custom
pertains, fear to whom fear is due, and honor to whom honor is owing.
And generally in all actions wherein the commodities of this life (though with
some oppression and grieuance) and not the religion and service of God, nor the
conscience about the same is called into question, we ought with all patience
to endure whatsoever burden or charge is laid upon us, without moving any
troubles or showing any discontentments for the same: for they that have
otherwise behaved themselves, these examples following will show how well they
have been appaied for their misdemeanors.

In the year of our Lord 1304, Nich. Gil. vol. 1.
after that Guy Earl of Flaunders having rebelled against Philip the Fair his
sovereign, was by strength of arms reduced into subjection, and constrained
to deliver himself and his two sons prisoners into his hands: the Flemmings
made an insurrection against the kings part, because of a certain tax which
he had set upon their ships that arrived at certain havens: and upon this
occasion, great war, diverse battles, and sundry overthrows on each side
grew, but so, that at last the king remained conqueror; and the Flemmings (for
a reward of their rebellion) lost in the last battle six and thirty thousand
men that were slain, beside a great number that were taken prisoners.

Two years after this Flemish stir, The same author.
there arose a great commotion and hurlyburly of the rascal and basest sort of
people at Paris, because of the alteration of their coins: who being not
satisfied with the pillage and spoilage of their houses, whom they supposed to
be either causes of the said alteration, or by counsel or other means any
furtherers thereunto, came in great troops before the kings palace at his
lodging in the temple with such an hideous noise and outrage, that all that day
after, neither the king nor any of his officers durst once stir over the
threshold: nay they grew to that ouerflow of pride and insolency, that the
victuals which were provided for the kings diet, and carried to him, were by
them shamefully throwed under feet in the dirt, and trampled upon in despite
and disdain. But three or four days after this tumult was appeased, many of
them for their pains were hanged before their own doors, and in the city
gates, to the number of eight and twenty persons.

In the reign of Charles the sixth, the Parisians (by reason of a certain tax
which he minded to lay upon them) banded themselves and conspired together
against him: they determined once (says Froissard) to have beaten down Loure
and Saint Vincents castle, Vol. 2. cap. 120.
and all the houses of defense about Paris, that they might not be offensive to
them. But the king (though young in years) handled them so ripely and
handsomely, Cap. 129.
that having taken away from them their armor, the city gates and chains of
the streets, and locked up their weapons in S. Vincents castle; he dealt with
them as pleased him. Cap. 130.
And thus their pride being quashed, many of them were executed and put to
death. As also for the like rebellion were at Troyes, Nic. Gil. vol. 2.
Orlean, Chalon, Sens, and Rhemes.

About the same time the Flandrians, and especially the inhabitants of Gaunt
wrought much trouble against Lewys the Earl of Flanders, Froiss. vol. 2. cap.
97.
for diverse taxes and tributes which he had laid upon them, which they in no
respect would yield unto. The matter came to be decided by blows, and much
blood was shed, and many losses endured on both sides, as a means appointed of
God to chastise as well the one as the other. The Gaunts being no more in
number then five or six thousand men, Cap. 98.
overthrew the Earls army, consisting of forty thousand, and in pursuit of
their victory took Bruges, whither the Earl was gone for safety; and lying in
a poor woman's house, was constrained (in the habit of a beggar) to fly the
city. And thus he fared till king Charles the sixth sent an army of men to his
succor, Cap. 125, 126.
(for he was his subject) by whose support he overcame those rebels in a
battle foughten at Rose Be^, to the number of forty thousand: and the body of
their chieftaine Philip Arteuill slain in the throng he caused to be hanged
on a tree. Nic. Gil. vol. 2.
And this was the end of that cruel Tragedy, the country being brought again
into the obedience of their old Lord.

A while before this, Froiss. vol. r. cap. 182.
whilst king John was held prisoner in England, there arose a great co^motion
of the common people in France against the nobility and gentilitie of the
realm, that oppressed them: this tumult began but with an hundred men that
were gathered together in the country of Beauvoisin, but that small handful
grew right quickly to an armefull, even to nine thousand, that ranged and
robbed throughout al Brie, along by the river Marne to Laonoise, and all about
Soissons, armed with great bats shod with iron: an headless crew without
governor, fully purposing to bring to ruin the whole nobility. In this
disorder they wrought much mischief, broke up many houses and castles, murdered
many Lords; so that diverse Ladies and knights, as the Dutchesses of Normandy,
Orleance, were feign to flee for safeguard to Meaux: whither when these rebels
would needs pursue them, they were there overthrown, killed and hanged by
troops.

In the year of our Lord 1525, Sleid. lib. 4.
there were certain husbandmen of Souabey that began to stand in resistance
against the Earl of Lupsfen, by reason of certain burdens which they
complained themselves to be ouerlaid with by them: their neighbors seeing this,
enterprised the like against their lords: And so upon this small beginning (by
a certain contagion) there grew up a most dangerous and fearful commotion,
that spread it self almost over all Almaine: the sedition thus increasing in
all quarters, and the swains being now full forty thousand strong, making
their own liberty and the Gospels a cloak to cover their treason and
rebellion, and a pretense of their undertaking arms (to the wonderful grief
of all that feared God) did not only fight with the Roman Catholics, but with
all other without respect, as well in Souabe as in Franconia: they destroyed
the greater part of the nobility, sacked and burnt many castles and fortresses,
to the number of two hundred, and put to death the Earl of Helfestin, making
him pass through their pikes. But at length their strength was broken, they
discomfited and torn in pieces with a most horrible massacre of more than
eighteen thousand of them. During this sedition, there were slain on each
side fifty thousand men. The captain of the Souabian swains called Geismer
having betaken himself to flight, got over the mountains to Padua, where by
treason he was made away.

In the year of our Lord 1517, in the Marquesdome of the Vandales, the like
insurrection and rebellion was of the comminaltie; especially the baser sort
against the nobility, spiritual and temporal, by whom they were oppressed
with intolerable exactions: their army was numbered to stand of ninety thousand
men all clownes and husbandmen, that conspired together to redress and
refourme their own grieuances, without any respect of civil magistrate, or
fear of Almighty God. This rascality of swains raged and tyranized every
where, burning and beating down the castles and houses of noble men, and
making their ruins even with the ground: Nay they handled the noble men
themselves as many as they could attain unto, not contumeliously only, but
rigorously and cruelly; for they tormented them to death, and carried their
heads upon spears in token of victory. Thus they swaied a while uncontrolled,
for the Emperor Maximilian winked at their riots, as being acquainted with
what injuries they had been ouercharged: but when he perceived that the rude
multitude did not limit their fury within reason, but let it run too lavish
to the damnifying as well the innocent as the guilty, he made out a certain
small troop of mercenary soldiers together with a band of horsemen to
suppress them, who coming to a city were presently so environed with such a
multitude of these swains that like locusts ouerspread the earth, that they
thought it impossible to escape with their lives; wherefore fear and
extremity made the^ to rush out to battle with the^. But see how the Lord
prospers a good cause, for all their weak number in comparison of their
enemies, yet such a fear possessed their enemies hearts, that they fled like
troops of sheep, and were slain liee dogs before them: insomuch that they
that escaped the sword, were either hanged by flocks on trees, or roasted on
spits by fires, or otherwise tormented to death. And this end befell that
wicked rebellious rout, which wrought such mischief in that country with
their monstrous villainies, that the traces and steps thereof remain at this
day to be seen.

In the year of our Lord 1381, Stow Chron.
Richard the second being king, the commons of England (and especially of Kent
and Essex) by means of a tax that was set upon them, suddenly rebelled and
assembled together on Blackheath, to the number of 60000 or more: which
rebellious rout, had none but base and ignoble fellows for their captains, as
Wat Tilour, Jack Straw, Tom Miller, but yet they caused much trouble and
disquietnesse in the realm, and chiefly about the city of London, where they
committed much villainy in destroying many goodly places; as the Sauoy, and
others: and being in Smithfield used themselves very proudly and irreverently
toward the king: but by the manhood and wisdom of William Walworth Mayor of
London, (who arrested their chief captain in the midst of them) that rude
company was discomfited, and the ringleaders of them worthily punished.

In like manner in the reign of Henry the seventh, Stow Chron.
a great commotio^ was stirred up in England by the commons of the North, by
reason of a certain tax which was levied of the tenth penny of all men's lands
and good within the land; in the which, the Earl of Northumberland was slain:
But their rash attempt was soon broken, and Chamberlain their captain with
diverse others hanged at York for the same. Howbeit their example scared not
the Cornish men from rebelling upon the like occasion of a tax, under the
conduct of the lord Audley; until by woeful experience they felt the same
scourge: for the king met them upon black heath, and discomfiting their
troops, took their captains and ringleaders, and put them to most worthy and
sharp death.

Thus we may see the unhappy issue of all such seditious reuoltings, and
thereby gather how unpleasant they are in the sight of God. Let all people
therefore learn by these experiences to submit themselves in the fear of God
to the higher powers, whether they be lords, kings, princes, or any other that
are set over them.

CHAP. VI. Of Murderers.
AS touching Murder, which is (by the second commandment of the second table)
forbidden in these words, Exodus 21.
Thou shall not kill: the Lord denounces this judgment upon it, that he which
strikes a man that he dies, shall die the death. And this is correspondent
to that edict which he gave to Noah presently after the universal flood, to
suppress that general cruelty which had taken root from the beginning in
Cain and his posterity, being careful for man's life, Genesis 9.
saying, That he will require the blood of man, at the hands of either man or
beast that kills him: adding moreover, That whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by
man also his blood shall be shed, seeing that God created him after his own
image: which he would not have to be basely accounted of, but dear and
precious unto us. Exodus 21.
If then the bruit and unreasonable creatures are not exempted from the
sentence of death pronounced in the law, if they chance to kill a man: How much
more punishable then is man, endued with will and reason, when maliciously and
advisedly he takes away the life of his neighbor? But the hainousnes and
greatness of this sin is most lively expressed by that ordinance of God set
down in the 21 of Deuteronomie, where it is enjoined, That if a man be found
slain in the field, Deuteronomy. 21.
and it be not known who it was that slew him, then the Elders and Judges of
the next town assembling together, should offer up an expiatorie sacrifice by
the hands of the priests, to demand pardon for that cruel murder, that the
guilt of innocent blood might not be imputed unto them. And if by oversight or
negligence without any malice, hatred, or pretense, one killed another, yet was
he not exempted from all punishment, Number. 35.
but suffered to fly to the city of refuge to be kept, and as it were,
enclosed until his innocence were made manifest, or at the least until the
death of the high priest. From this (it may seem) arose the custom of Painyms
in the like case, which was, that if a man unwillingly had committed murder,
he did presently avoid the country, and go unto some man of power and
authority of a strange nation, and present himself at his gate, sitting with
his face covered humbly, entreating pardon and reconciliation for his murder:
and for one whole year he might not return into his own counrrey. On this
manner was the son of a certain king of Phrygia entertained in king Craesus
court, Herod. lib. 1.
who unadvisedly had slain his own brother. Whereby it is manifest, how
odious and execrable in all ages, and all places, and all people, this homicide
and murder has been: insomuch that men did shun their very meeting and
company, and abandon them out of their temples and public assemblies, as
people excommunicate and profane. And yet for all this, mankind (for the most
part) like sauagde beasts has by the instigation of that wicked spirit, (who
was a murderer from the beginning) been too too addicted to this kind of
cruelty, not being afraid to offer violence to nature, and shed innocent blood.
Such was the frantic and perverse cruelty of the second man Cain, Genesis 4.
when without any occasion, but only through envy he slew his only brother
Abel, and that traitorously: which deed, albeit it was done in secret and
without the view of men, yet it could not shun the piercing eye of God, who
reproved him for it, saying, That the blood of Abell cried for vengeance from
the earth. And although this cursed and wicked murderer received not immediately
a condign punishment answerable to his crime, (God to the end to spare man's
blood, using undeserved favor toward him) yet escaped he not scotfree, for he
was pursued with a continual torment and sting of conscience, together with
such an incessant fear, that he became a vagabond and a runnagate upon the
earth: and seeing himself brought into so miserable an estate, he fell to
complaining that the punishment was greater then he was able to bear. Thus God
permitted this wretch to draw out his life in such anguish, that for a greater
punishment he might pine away the rest of his days without comfort. A man may
find in this world many such brother-murdering Cains, who for no occasion
stick not to cut their throats, whom (for the bond of common nature wherein
all men are linked together as branches of one root) they ought to acknowledge
for their brethren and friends: upon whom, the heavy hand of God has not
been more slack to punish either by one means or other, then it was upon
their eldest brother Cain. But seeing the number of them is so great, and it is
not so conuenienr to heap up here so huge a multitude together, it shall
suffice only to recount the most famous and notablest of them, as of those that
have been men of note and reputation in the world, or that through an ambitious
desire of reigning, have by arms sought to atchieue their purposes: for these
for the most part are the greatest murderers and butchers of all, that through
their wicked affections, worldly pomp, or desire of revenge, have no remorse of
making the blood of men run like rivers upon the earth, making no more
account of the life of a man, then of a fly or a worm.

Judge. 9.
Such an one was Abimelech, one of the sons of Gedeon, who to the end to
usurp the regiment of the people, (which his father before him refused) got
together a rout of rascal and vile fellows, by whose aid coming to his
fathers house, he slew seventy of his brethren, even all except Ioathan the
youngest that stole away and hid himself. After which massacre, he reigned in
iollitie three years, and at the end thereof was cut short by God, together
with the Sichemites his prouokers and maintainers, who were also guilty of all
the innocent blood which he had shed: for God sent the spirit of division
betwixt them, so that the Sichemites began to despise him, and rebel against
him; but they had the worst end of the staff, and were overcome by him: who
pursuing the victory, took their city by force, and put them all to the edge
of the sword. And after he had thus destroyed their city, put fire also to
the castle, wherein he consumed near about a thousand persons of men and
women, that were retired thither to save their lives. And thus God brought upon
them the mischief which they had consented and put their hands unto: For as
they had lent him aid and furtherance to the shedding of his breethrens blood,
so was their own blood with their wives and childrens shed by him: yet this
tyrant not content therewith, made war also with the inhabitants of Tebez,
and took their city, and would have forced the tower also wherein the citizens
had enclosed themselves, but as he approached to the wall, a woman threw down a
piece of a millstone upon his head, wherewith finding himself hurt to death, he
commanded one of his soldiers to kill him outright. And thus this wicked
murderer that had shed the blood of many men, yea of his own brethren, had
his brains knocked out by a woman, and died a most desperate death.

The bloody treachery of Baana and Rechab, 2. Sam. 4.
chief captains of Ishbosheth, Saul's son, in conspiring against and
murdering their master whilst he slept, abode not long unpunished; for having
cut off his head, they presented it for a present to king David, hoping to
gratify the king, Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3, and 4.
and to receive some recompense for their pains. But David being of an
upright and true kingly heart, could nor endure such vile treachery, though
against the person of his enemy; but entertained them as most vile traitors
and master murderers, commanding first their hands and feet to be cut off,
which they had especially employed as instruments about that villainy, and
afterward caused them to be slain, and then hanged for an example to all
others that should attempt the like.

For the like cause was Ioab (general of king David's host) for killing Abner
traitorously, (who forsaking Ishbosheth, had yielded himself to the king)
cursed of David with all his house, Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3.
with a most grievous and terrible curse. And yet notwithstanding a while after
he came again to that pass, as to murder Amasa one of David's chief
captains, making show to salute and embrace him. 2. Sam. 20.
For which cruel deed, albeit that in David's time he received no punishment,
yet it ouertooke him at last, and the same kind of cruelty which he had so
traitorously and villanously committed toward others, fell upon his own head,
being himself also killed as he had killed others; which happened in king
Salomons reign, who executing the charge and commandment of his father, put
to death this murderer in the tabernacle of God, 1. King. 2.
and by the altar, whither he was fled as a place privileged for safety.

CHAP. VII. A suit of Examples like unto the former.
Leaving the Scripture, we find in other writers notable examples of this
subject: Herod. lib. 1.
As first of Astyages king of the Medes, who so much swarued from humanity,
that he gave in straight charge that young Cyrus his own daughters son now
ready to be borne, should be made away by some sinister practice; to avoid by
that means, the danger which by a dream was signified unto him.
Notwithstanding the young infant finding friends to preserve him alive, and
growing up by means of the peers favor, (to whom his grandfather by his
cruel dealings, was become odious) obtained the crown out of his hands, and
dispossessing him, seated himself in his room.

This Cirus was that mighty and awful king of Persia, whom God used as an
instrument for the delivery of his people out of the captivity of Babylon, as
he foretold by the Prophet Isaiah, who yet (following kind) made cruel war in
many places for the space of thirty years: and therefore it was necessary that
he should taste some fruits of his insatiable and bloodthirstie desire, as he
indeed did: for after many great victories and conquests over diverse cuntries
achieved, Oros. lib. 2.
going about to assail Scithia also, he and his army together were surprised,
overcome, and slain, to the number of two hundred thousand persons: and for
his shame received this disgrace at a woman's hand, who triumphing in her
victory, threw his head into a sack full of blood, with these terms, Now
glut thy self with blood which thou have thirsted after so long time

Cambyses, Cyrus son, was also so bloody and cruel a man, Herod. lib. 3.
that one day he shot a noble man's son to the heart with an arrow, for being
admonished by his father of his drunkenness, to which he was very much given,
which he did in indignation, and to show that he was not yet so drunken but he
knew how to draw his bow. He caused his own brother to be murdered privily,
for fear he should reign after him; and slew his sister for reproouing him
for that deed. In his voyage to Aethiopia when his army was brought into so
great penury of victuals that they were glad to feed upon horse flesh, he was
so cruel and barbarous, that after their horses were spent, he caused them to
eat one another: But at his return from Egypt, the Susians his chief
citizens welcomed him home with rebellion: and at last as he was riding, it so
chanced, that his sword fell out of the scabberd, and himself upon the point
of it, so that it pierced him through, and so he died.

After that Xerxes by his ouerbold enterprise had distu^bed the greatest part
of the world, Diodor. lib. 11.
passed the sea, and trauersed many countries to the end to assail Greece with
innumerable forces, he was overcome both by sea and by land, and compelled
privily to retire into his country with shame and discredit: where he had not
long been, but Artabanus the captain of his guard killed him in his palace
by night: who also after that and many other mischiefs committed by him, was
himself cruelly murdered.

The thirty governors which the Lacedaemonians set over the Athenians by
compulsion, were such cruel Tyrants, oppressors, and bloodsuckers of the
people, that they made away a great part of them, until they were chased away
themselves violently: and then being secretly dogged and pursued were all
killed one after another.

Pirrhus King of Epire that reigned not long after Alexander the great, was
naturally disposed to such a quickness and heat of courage, that he could
never be quiet but when he was either doing some mischief to another, or when
another was doing some unto him: ever devising some new practice of molestation
for pastimes sake. This his wild and dangerous disposition began first to show
it self in the death of Neoptolemus who was conioined King with him, whom
having bidden to supper in his lodging under pretense of sacrifice to his gods,
he deceitfully slew: preventing by that means Neoptolemus pretended purpose of
poisoning him when occasion should serve. After this he conquered Macedonia by
arms, and came into Italy to make war with the Romans in the behalf of
the Tarentines, and gave them battle in the field, and slew fifteen thousand
of them in one day: he took their camp, revoked many cities from their
alliance, and spoiled much of their country even to the walls of Rome: and all
this in a trice without breathing. Again by Ascoly he encountered them the
second time, where there was a great overthrow of each side of fifteen thousand
me^: But the Romans had the worst and took their heels. When he was entreated
by the Sicilian Ambassadors to lend them aid to expulse the Carthaginians out
of their isle, he yielded presently and chased them out. Being recalled by the
Tarentines into Italy for their succor, he was conquered by the Romans after
he had made war upon them six years. At his return to Epire he reentred by
violence Macedonia, took many places, overcame the army of king Antigonus that
resisted him, and had all the whole Realm rendered into his hand. Being
entreated by Cleominus to make war upon Sparta, to the end to reinstall him
in his kingdom which he was deprived of: forthwith he mustered his forces,
besieged the city, and spoiled and wasted all the whole country. Afterward
there being a sedition raised in the city Argos between two of the chiefest
citizens, one of the which sent unto him for aid, he (what issue soever was
like to ensue, whether victory or vanquishment) could not abide in peace from
disquieting others and himself, but must needs go to take part in that
sedition; but to his cost even to his destruction. For first in his way he
found an euill-fauoured welcome by an Ambush placed of purpose to interrupt his
journey, amongst whom he lost his son: which mishap nothing dismayed him, nor
abated any whit of his purpose or courage from pursuing this journey to Argos,
though the citizens themselves entreated him to retire, and though he had no
business there save only to look over the town: being arrived by night, and
finding a gate left open for him to enter by, by the means of him that had sent
for him to his aid, he put his soldiers in, and possessed himself of the
town incontinently. But the city being aided by Antigonus and the king of
Sparta, charged and pressed him so sore, that he sought means to retire out of
the same, but could not. At which time being about to strike a young man of the
city that had done him some hurt, his mother being aloft upon the roof of an
house, perceiving his intent threw down a tile with both her hands upon his
head, and hat him such a knock upon the neck through default of his armor,
that it so bruised his ioints that he fell into a sudden sound, and lost his
sight, his raines falling out of his hand, and he himself tumbling from his
saddle upon the ground, which when some of the soldiers perceived they drew
him out of the gate, and there to make an end of the tragedy cut off his head.

The cruelty of the Ephori was marvelous strange, when being unwilling once to
hear the equality of lands and possessions to be named, Plutarch.
which Agis their king for the good of the Commonwealth (according to the
ancient custom and ordinance of Licurgus) sought to restore: they rose up
against him and cast him in prison, and there without any process or form of
law stra^gled him to death with his mother and grandfather. But it cost them
very dear: for Cleomenes who was joint king with Agis albeit he had consented
to the weauing of that web himself, to the end he might reign alone, yet
ceased he not to prosecute revenge upon them, which he did not only by his
daily and usual practices openly, but also privily, for taking them once at
auantage, being at supper all together, he caused his men to kill the^ suddenly
as they sat: And thus was the good king Agis revenged. But this last murderer
which was soullied and polluted with so much blood, he went not long unpunished
for his misdeeds: for soon after Antigonus king of Macedonia gave him a great
overthrow in a battle, wherein he lost Sparta his chief city, and fled
into Egypt for succor: where after small abode, upon an accusation laid
against him, he was cast into prison, and though he escaped out with his company
by cunning and craft, yet as he walked up and down Alexandria in armor, in
hope that through his seditious practices the citizens would take his part, and
help to restore him to his liberty; when he perceived it was nothing so, but
that every man forsook him, and that there was no hope left of recovery, he
commanded his men to kill one another as they did: In which desperate fury and
rage he himself was slain, and his body being found was commanded by king
Ptolomy to be hanged on a gibbet, and his mother, wives and children that came
with him into Egypt to be put to death. And this was the tragical end of
Cleomenes king of Sparta.

Alexander the tyrant of Pheres never ceased to mark and spy out al occasions
of war against the people of Thessaly, Plutarch.
to the end to bring the^ generally in subjection under his dominion: he was a
most bloody and cruel minded man, having neither regard of reason or justice in
any action. In his cruelty he buried some alive, others he clothed in bears
and bores skins and then set dogs at their tails to rent the^ in pieces,
others he used in way of pastime to strike through with darts and arrows. And
one day as the inahbitants of a certain city were assembled together in
counsel, he caused his guard to enclose the^ up suddenly and to kill them all
even to the very infants. He slew also his own uncle, and crowned the spear
wherewith he did that deed with garlands of flowers, and sacrificed unto him
being dead as to a god. Now albeit this cruel Tygre was guarded continually
with troops of soldiers that kept night and day watch about his body
wheresoever he lay, and with a most ougly and terrible dog unacquainted with
any saving himself, his wife, and one servant that gave him his meat, tied to
his chamber door, yet could he not escape the evil chance, which by his wives
means fell upon him: for she taking away the stairs of his chamber, let in
three of her own brethren provided to murder him as they did: for finding him
asleep, one took him fast by the heels, the other by the hair wringing his
head behind him, and the third thrust him through with his sword, she all this
while giving them light to dispatch their business. The citizens of Pheres
when they had drawn his carcass about their streets, and trampled upon it
their bellies full, threw it to the dogs to be devoured: so odious was his
very remembrance among them.

Iugurth, son to Manastabal brother to Micipsa, Salust.
king of Numidia, by birth a bastard for he was born of a co^cubine, yet by
nature and disposition so valiant and full of courage that he was not only
beloved of al men, but also dearly esteemed of by Micipsa, that he adopted him
joint heir with his sons Adhorbal and Hiempsal to his crown, kindly
admonishing him in way of entreaty to continue the union of love and concord
without breach between them, which he promised to perform. But Micipsa was no
sooner deceased, but he by and by not content with a portion of the kingdom,
ambitiously sought for the whole. For which cause he found means first to
dispatch Hiempsall out of his way by the hands of his guard, who in his lodging
by night cut his throat, and then by battle having vanquished Adherbal his
other brother, obtained the sole regiment without controlment. Besides he
corrupted so by bribes the Senators of Rome that had sovereign authority in
and over his kingdom, that in stead of punishment which his murder cried for,
he was by the decree of the Senate allotted to the one half of the kingdom.
Whereupon being grown yet more presumptuous, he made excursions and riots
upon Adherbals territories, and did him thereby much injury: and from thence
falling to open war put him to flight, and pursued him to a city where he
besieged him so long till he was constrained to yield himself. And then
having gotten him within his power, put him to the cruellest death he could
devise: which villainous deed gave just cause to the Romans of that war which
they undertook against him, wherein he was discomfited: and seeing himself
utterly lost, fled to his son in law Bochus king of Mauritania, to seek
supply of succor, who receiving him into safeguard proved a false guard unto
him, and delivered him into the hands of his enemies, and so was he carried in
triumph to Rome by Marius fast bound: and being come to Rome, cast into
perpetual prison, where first his gown was torn off his back by violence:
next a ring of gold plucked off his ear lap and all: and lastly himself stark
naked thrown into a deep ditch, where combating with famine six days, the
seventh miserably ended his wretched life, according to the merits of his
misdeeds. Orosius says he was strangled in prison. Oros. Sabel. Treason. lib.
2. cap. 3.


Methridates king of Parthia put to death the king of Cappadocia to get his
kingdom, and after under pretense of parlying with one of his sons, slew him
also: for which cause the Romans took up the quarrel, and made war upon
him, by means whereof much loss and inconvenience grew unto him as well by sea
as by land. After his first overthrow, where one of his sisters was taken
prisoner, and when he saw himself in so desperate a case that no hope of help
was left, he slew two other of his sisters with two of his wives, having before
this war given his fourth sister (who also was his wife) a dram of poison to
make up the tragedy. Afterward being vanquished in the night by Pompey the
Roman, and put to flight with only three of his company, as he went about to
gather a new supply of forces, behold tidings was brought him of the revolt of
many of his Provinces and countries, and of the delivering up of the rest of
his daughters into Pompeis hand, and of the treason of his young son Pharnax
the gallantest of his sons, and whom he purposed to make his successor,
who had joined himself to his enemy, which troubled and astonished him more
then all the rest: so that his courage being quite dashed, and all hope of
bettering his estate extinguished, his other two daughters he poisoned with his
own hands, and sought to practice the same experiment upon himself, but that
his body was too strong for the poison and killed the operation thereof by
strength of nature: but that which poison could not effect, his own sword
performed.

Though Pompey the great was never any of the most notorious offenders in Rome,
Pl^tarch.
yet did this stain of cruelty ambition and desire of rule cleave unto him:
for first he ioining himself to Silla dealt most cruelly and unnaturally with
Carbo, whom after familiar conference in show of friendship, he caused
suddenly to be slain without show of mercy. And with Quintius Valerius a wise
and well lettered man, with whom walking but two or three turns, he
committed to a cruel and unexpected slaughter. He executed severe punishment
upon the enemies of Silla, sepecially those that were most of note and
reputation, and unmercifully put Brutus to death that had rendered himself
unto his mercy. It was he that devised that new combat of prisoners and wild
beasts, to make the people sport withal, a most inhumane and bloody pastime
to see humane and manly bodies torn and dismembered by brute and senseless
creatures: which if we will believe Plutarch, was the only cause of his
destruction. Now after so many brave and gallant victories, so many magnificent
triumphs: as the taking of king Hiarbas, the overthrow of Domitius, the
conquest of Africa, the pacifying of Spain, and the ouerwelding of the
commotions that were therein, the clearing of the sea coasts from Pirates, the
victory over Methridates, the subduing of the Arabians, the reducing of Siria
into a province, the conquest of Judea, Pontus, Armenia, Cappadocia, and
Paphlagonia: I say after all these worthy deeds of arms and mighty victories,
he was shamefully overcome by Julius Caesar in that civil war, wherein it was
generally thought that he had undertaken the better cause in maintaining the
authority of the Senate, and defe^ding the liberty of the people, as he
pretended to do: being thus put to flight, and making toward Egypt, in hope
the king (for that before time he had been his tutor) would protect and furnish
him, that he might recover himself again: he found himself fo far deceived of
his expectation, that in stead thereof the kings people cut him short of his
purpose, and of his head both at once, sending it for a token to Caesar to
gratify him withal. Nevertheless, for all this his murderers and betraiers,
as the young king, and all others that were causers of his death were justly
punished for their cruelty, by the hands of him whom they thought to gratify;
for as Cleopatra the kings sister threw her self down at Caesar's feet to
entreat her portion of the kingdom, and he being willing also to show her that
favor, was by that means gotten into the kings palace: forthwith the
murderers of Pompey beset the palace, and went about to bring him into the
same snare that they had caught Pompey in. But Caesar after that he had
sustained their greatest brunt, frustrated their purposes and recovered his
forces into his hands, assailed them with such valor and prowess on al sides
that in short space he overcame this wicked and traitorous nation. Amongst the
slain the dead body of this young and evil advised king was found ouerborn
with dirt. Flor. lib. 4.
Theodotus the kings schoolmaster (by whose instigation and advise both Pompey
was slain, and this war undertaken) being escaped and fled toward Asia for
his safety, found even there sufficient instruments both to abridge his
journey, and shorte^ his life. As for the rest of that murdering fellowship,
they ended their lives some here some there, in (that merciles element) the
sea, and by (that boisterous element) the wind, which though senseless, yet
could not suffer them to escape unpunished.

Although that Julius Caesar (concerning whom more occasion of speech will be
given in the 39 chapter) did tyranously usurp the key of the Roman
commonwealth, Plutarch.
and intruded himself into the Empire against the laws, customs, and
authority of the people and Senate: yet was it accounted a most traitorous and
cruel part to massacre and kill him in the Senate, as he sat in his seat
misdoubting no mishap, as the sequel of their several ends which were actors
in this tragedy did declare: Treason. lib. 2. cap 3, and 4. Plutarch.
for the vengeance of God was so manifestly displaied upon them, that not one
of the conspirators escaped, but was pursued by sea and land so eagerly, till
there was not one left of that wicked cr^e whom revenge had not overtaken.
Cassius being discomfited in the battle of Philippos, supposing that Brutus
had been also in the same case, used the same sword against himself (a
marvelous thing) wherewith before he had smitten Caesar. Brutus also a few
days after, Eutrop.
when a fearful vision had appeared twice unto him by night, understanding
thereby that his time of life was but short, though he had the better of his
enemies the day before, yet threw himself desperately into the greatest danger
of the battle, for his speedier dispatch, but he was reserved to a more
shameful end; for seeing his men slain before him, he retired hastily apart
from view of men, and setting his sword to his breast, threw himself upon it,
piercing him through the body, and so ended his life. And thus was Caesar's
death revenged by Octauius and Anthony, who remained conquerours after all that
bloody crew was brought to naught: betwixt whom also ere long burst out a
most cruel division, which grew unto a furious and cruel battle by sea,
wherein Anthony was overcome, and sent flying into Egypt, and there taught his
own hands to be his murderers. And such was the end of his life, who had been
an actor in that pernicious office of the Triumuirship, and a causer of the
deaths of many men. And for as much as Cleopatra was the first motive and setter
on of Anthony to this war, it was good reason that she should partake some
of that punishment which they both deserved: as she did, for being surprised by
her enemies, to the intent she might not be carried in triumph to Rome, she
caused an aspe to bite her to death. Mark here the pitiful Tragedies that
following one another in the neck were so linckt together, that drawing and
holding each other, they drew with them a world of miseries to a most woeful end:
a most transparent and clear glass wherein the visages of Gods heavy
judgments upon all murderers are apparently deciphered.

CHAP. VIII. Other examples like unto the former.
AFter that the Empire of Rome declining after the death of Theodosius, was
almost at the last cast, ready to yield up the ghost: Procopius.
and that Theodorick king of the Goths had usurped the dominion of Italy under
the Emperor Zeno, he put to death two great personages Senators and chief
citizens of Rome, to wit Simmachus and Boethius, only for secret surmise which
he had, without probabilty, that they two should weaue some sly web for his
destruction. After which cruel deed as he was one day at supper, a fishes head
of great bigness being served into the table, purposing to be very merry,
suddenly the vengeance of God assailed, amazed, oppressed, and pursued him so
freshly, that without intermission or breathing it sent his body a senseless
trunk into the grave in a most strange and marvelous manner: for he was
conceited (as himself reported) that the fishes head was the head of Simmachus
whom he had but lately slain, which grinned upon him and seemed to face him
with an overthwart threatening and angry eye: wherewith he was so scarred,
that forthwith he rose from the table, and was possessed with such an
exceeding trembling and icie chillness that ran through all his ioints, that he
was constrained to take his chamber and go to bed, where soon after with
grief and fretting and displeasure he died. He committed also another most
cruel and traitorous part upon Odoacer, whom inuiting to a banquet, he
deceitfully welcomed with a mess of swords in stead of other victuals, to
kill him withal, that he might sway the Empire alone both of the Goths and
Romans without check.

It was not without cause that Attila was called the scourge of God: Iornand.
Greg. de Tours.
for with an army of 500 thousand me^ he wasted and spoiled al fields, cities,
and villages, that he passed by, putting al to fire and sword without showing
mercy to any: on this manner he went spoiling through France, and there at
one time gave battle to the united forces of the Romans, Vice-Gothes,
Frenchmen, Sarmatians, Burgundians, Saxons, and Almaignes: after that he entered
Italy, took by way of force Aquilea, sacked and destroyed Millan, with many
other cities, and in a word spoiled all the country: in fine being returned
beyond Almaigne, having married a wife of excellent beauty, though he was well
wiued before, he died on his marriage night suddenly in his bed: for having
well caroused the day before, he fell into so dead asleep, that lying upon
his back without respect, the blood which was often wont to issue at his
nosethrils finding those co^duites stopped by his upright lying, descended into
his throat and stopped his wind. And so that bloody tyrant that had shed the
blood of so many people, was himself by the effusion of his own blood
murdered and stifled to death.

Ithilbald king of Gothia at the instigation of his wife put to death very
unadvisedly one of the chief peers of his realm, after which murder as he sat
banqueting one day with his princes, environed with his guard and other
attendants, having his hand in the dish and the meat between his fingers, one
suddenly reached him such a blow with a sword that it cut off his head, so that
it almost tumbled upon the table, to the great astonishment of all that were
present.

Greg. of Tours. lib. 3. histor.
Sigismund king of Burgundy suffered himself to be carried away with such an
extreme passion of choler, provoked by a false and malicious accusation of his
second wife, that he caused one of his sons which he had by his former wife
to be strangled in his bed, because he was induced to think that he went
about to make himself king: which deed being blown abroad, Clodomire son to
Clodo^ee and Clotild king of France and cousin German to Sigismund, Refer this
properly to lib. 2. cap. 11.
came with an army for to revenge this cruel and unnatural part, his mother
setting forward and inciting him thereunto, in regard of the injury which
Sigismunds father had done to her father and mother one of whom he slew, and
drowned the other. As they were ready to join battle, Sigismunds soldiers
forsook him, so that he was taken and presently put to death, and his sons
which he had by his second wife were taken also and carried captive to
Orleance, and there drowned in a well. Thus was the execrable murder of
Sigismund and his wife punished in their own children. As for Cleodomire
though he went conqueror from this battle, yet was he encountered with
another desastrous misfortune: for as he marched forward with his forces to
fight with Sigismunds brother, he was by him overcome and slain: and for a
further disgrace, his dismembered head fastened on the top of a pike carried
about to the enterview of all men. He left behind him three young sons whom
his own brethren and their uncles Clotaire and Childebert notwithstanding
their young and tender years took from their grandmother Clotildes custody,
that brought them up, as if they would enstall them into some part of their
fathers kingdom: but most wickedly and cruelly to the end to possess their
goods, lands, and signiories, bereft them al of their lives, save one that
saved himself in a monestarie. In this strange and monstrous act Clotaire
showed himself more then barbarous, when he would not take pity upon the
youngest of the two, being but seven year old, who hearing his brother (of the
age of ten years) crying pitifully at his slaughter, threw himself at his
uncle Childeberts feet with tears desiring him to save his life, wherewith
Childebert being greatly affected, entreated his brother with weeping eyes to
have pity upon him, and spare the life of this poor infant; but al his
warnings and entreaties could not hinder the sauadge beast from performing this
cruel murder upon this poor child, as he had done upon the other.

The Emperor Phocas attained by this bloody means the imperial dignity,
Nicephor. lib. 18. cap. 58.
even by the slaughter of his Lord and master Mauricius, whom as he fled in
disguised attire, for fear of a treason pretended against him, he being
beforetime the leiutenant general of his army, pursued so maliciously and
hotely, that he ouertook him in his flight, and for his further grief, first
put all his children severally to death before his face, that every one of the^
might be a several death upon him before he died, and then slew him also. This
murderer was he that first exalted to so high a point the popish horn, when at
the request of Boniface, he ordained that the bishop of Rome should have
pre-eminence and authority oueral other bishops: which he did to the end that
the stain and blame of his most execrable murder might be either quite blotted
out, or at least wincked at. Under his regencie the forces of the Empire grew
wonderously into decay: France, Spain, Almaigne and Lumbardy revolted from the
Empire: and at last himself being pursued by his son in law Priscus with the
Senators, was taken, and having his hands and feet cut off, was together with
the whole race of his offspring put to a most cruel death, because of his cruel
and tyrannous life.

Among all the strange examples of Gods judgments that ever were declared in
this world, that one that befell a king of Poleland called Popiell for his
murders, is for the strangeness thereof most worthy to be had in memory: he
reigned in the year of our Lord 1346, this man among other of his particular
kinds of cursings and swearing whereof he was no niggard, used ordinarily this
oath: If it be not true would rats might devour me, Munst. Cosmog. Mandat. 3.
Cursing. lib. 1. cap. 32.
prophesying thereby his own destruction; for he was devoured even by the
same means which he so often wished for, as the sequel of his history will
declare. The father of this Popiell feeling himself near death resigned the
government of his kingdom to two of his brethren, men exceedingly reverenced
of all men for the valor and virtue which appeared in them. He being deceased
and Popiell being grown up to ripe and lawful years, when he saw himself
in full liberty without all bridle of government to do what he listed, he
began to give the full swindge to his lawless and unruly desires, in such sort
that within few days he became so shameless, that there was no kind of vice
which appeared not in his behauior, even to the working of the death of his
own uncles, for all their faithful dealing toward him, which he by poison
brought to pass. Which being done he caused himself forthwith to be crowned
with garlands of flowers and to be perfumed with precious ointments: and to
the end the better to solemnize his entry to the crown, commanded a sumptuous
and pompous banquet to be prepared, whereunto all the princes and lords of his
kingdom were invited. Now as they were about to give the onset upon the
delicate cheer, behold an army of rats sallying out of the dead and putrified
bodies of his uncles set upon him, his wife, and children, amid their dainties
to gnaw them with their sharp teeth, insomuch that his guard with all their
weapons and strength were not able to chase them away, but being weary with
resisting their daily and mighty assaults, gave over the battle: wherefore
counsel was given to make great coal fires round about them, that the rats by
that means might be kept off, not knowing that no policy or power of man was
able to withstand the unchangeable decree of God: for, for all their huge
forces they ceased not to run through the midst of them and to assault with
their teeth this cruel murderer. Then they gave him counsel to put himself,
his wife, and children into a boat and thrust it into the midst of a lake,
thinking that by reason of the waters the rats would not approach unto the^: But
alas in vain, for they swum through the waters amain and gnawing the boat,
made such chinckes into the sides thereof that the water began to run in, which
being perceived of the boatmen, amazed them sore, and made them make post have
unto the shore, where he was no sooner arrived, but a fresh muster of rats
uniting their forces with the former, encountered him so sore, that they did him
more scath then all the rest. Whereupon all his guard and others that were
there present for his defense, perceiving it to be a judgment of Gods
vengeance upon him, abandoned and forsook him at once: who seeing himself
destitute of succor and forsaken on all sides, flew into a high tower in
Chousuitze, whether also they pursued him, and climing even up to the highest
room where he was, first eat up his wife and children (she being guilty of
his uncles death) and lastly gnew and devoured him to the very bones.

After the same sort was an Archbishop of Mentz, called Hatto, Munsteer
Cosmographie.
punished in the year 940 under the reign of the Emperor Otho the great, for
the extreme cruelty which he used toward certain poor beggars, whom in time
of famine he assembled together into a great barn, not to relieve their wants
as he might and ought, but to rid their lives, as he ought not, but did: for
he set on fire the barn wherein they were, and consumed them all alive
comparing them to rats and mise that devoured good corn, but served to no
other good use. Mandat. 8. Avarice and unmercifulness.
But God that had regard and respect unto those poor wretches, took their cause
into his hand, to quit this proud prelate with just revenge for his outrage
committed against the^: sending toward him an army of rats and mise to lay
siege against him with the engines of their teeth on all sides: which when this
cursed wretch perceived, he removed into a tower that stands in the midst of
Rhine not far from Bing, whether he presumed this host of rats could not pursue
him: but he was deceived for they swum over Rhine thick and threefold, and got
into his tower with such strange fury, that in very short space they had
consumed him to nothing. In memorial whereof, this tower was ever after called
the tower of rats. And this was the tragedy of that bloody archbutcher that
compared poor Christian souls to brutish and base creatures, and therefore
became himself a prey unto them, as Popiel king of Poleland did before him. In
whose strange examples the beams of Gods justice shine forth after an
extraordinary and wonderful manner to the terror and fear of all men: when by
the means of small creatures he made room for his vengeance, to make entrance
upon these execrable creature murderers, notwithstanding al man's devises and
impediments of nature; for the native operation of the elements was restrained
from hindering the passage of them, armed and inspired with an invincible and
supernatural courage to fear neither fire, water, nor weapon, till they had
finished his command that sent them. And thus in old time did frogs, flies,
grasshoppers and lice make war with Pharoa at the command of him that has all
the world at his beck.

After this Archbishop in the same rank of murderers we find registered many
Popes, of all whom the notorious and markable are these two, Innocent the
fourth and Boniface the eight, who deserved rather to be called Nocents and
Malefaces than Innocents and Boniface, for their wicked and perverse lives: for
as touching the first of them, from the time that he was first installed in
the Papacy, he always bent his horns against the Emperor Frederick, and
fought with him with an army not of men, but of excommunications and cursings
as their manner is: and seeing that all his thundering bulls and canons could
not prevail so far as he desired, he presently sought to bring to pass that
by treason which by force he could not: for he so enchanted certain of his
household servants with foul bribes and fair words, Hieron. Marius.
that when by reason of his short draught the poison which he ministered could
not hurt him, he got the^ to strangle him to death. Moreover he was chief
sower of that war betwixt Henry, Lantgraue of Thuring, whom he created king of
the Romans, and Conrade, Fredericks son, wherein he reaped a crop of
discomfitures and ouerthrows: after which he was found slain in his bed, his
body being full of black marks, as if he had been beaten to death with cudgels.

Concerning Boniface, Baleus.
after he had by subtle and crafty means made his predecessor dismiss himself
of his Papacy and enthronized himself therein, he put him to death in prison:
and afterward made war upon the Gibilines and committed much cruelty:
wherefore also he died mad as we heard before. But touching the murderers of
Popes and their punishments for the same, we shall see more in the 43 chapter
following, whether the examples of them are referred that exceeding in all kind
of wickedness cannot be rightly placed in the treatise of any particular
commandment.

CHAP. XIX. Other memorable examples of the same subject.
IF we descend from antiquities to histories of later and fresher memory, we
shall find many things worthy report and credit, as that which happened in the
year 1405 betwixt two gentlemen of Henault, Eguerron. de monstr. vol. 1.
the one of which accused the other for killing a near kinsman of his, which
the other utterly and steadfastly denied: whereon duke William county of Henault,
offered the^ the co^bat in the city of Quesney to decide the controversy by,
when as by law it could not be ended: whereunto they being come and having
broken their spears in two, and incountred valiantly with their swords, at
length he that was charged with and indeed guilty of the murder, was overcome
of the other, and made to confess with his mouth in open audience the truth of
the fact: Wherefore the County adjudged him in the same place to be beheaded,
which was speedily executed, and the conqueror honorably conducted to his
lodging. Now albeit this manner of deciding controversies be not approved of
God, yet we must not think it happened at aladuentures, but rather that the
issue thereof came of the Lord of hosts, that by this means gave place to the
execution of his most high and soueraign justice, by manifesting the murderer,
and bringing him to that punishment which he deserved.

Eguerron. de monstr. vol. 1.
About this very time there was a most cruel and outrageous riot practiced and
performed upon Lewis duke of Orleance, brother to Charles the sixth, by the
complot and devise of John duke of Burgundy, who (as he was naturally haughty
and ambitious) went about to usurp the government of the realm of France, for
that the king by reason of weakness of his brain was not able to manage the
affairs thereof, so that great trouble and uncivil wars were grown up by that
occasion in every corner of the realm. As therefore he affected and gaped after
the rule, so he thought no means dishonest to attain unto it, and therefore his
first enterprise was to take out of the way the kings brother who stood betwixt
him and home. Having therefore provided fit champions for his purpose, he found
opportunity one night to cause him to come out of his lodging late by
counterfeit tokens from the king, as if he had sent for him about some matters
of importance: and being in the way to S. Paul's hostle, where the kings lodging
was in Paris, the poor prince suspecting nothing was suddenly set upon with
eighteen roisters at once, with such fury and violence, that in very short
space they left him dead upon the pauement by the gate Barbet, his brains
lying scattered about the street. After this detestable and odious act
committed and detected, the cruel Burgundian was so far from shaming, that
he vaunted and boasted at it, as if he had achieved the most valorous and
honorable exploit in the world (so far did his impudency outstretch the
bond of reason.) Nevertheless to cast some counterfeit color upon this rough
practice, he used the conscience and fidelity of three famous divines of
Paris, who openly in public assemblies approved of this murder, saying, That
he had greatly offended, if he had left it undone. About this devise he
employed especially M. John Petit a Sorbonist doctor, whose rashness and
brasen-facednes was so great, as in the counsel house of the king, stoutly to
auerre, that that which was done in the death of the duke of Orleance, was a
virtuous and commendable action, and the author of it to be void of fault, and
therefore ought to be void of punishment. The preface which this brave orator
used was, That he was bounden in duty to the duke of Burgundy, in regard of a
goodly pension which he had received at his hands, and for that cause he had
prepared his poor tongue in token of gratitude to defend his cause. He might
better have said thus, That seeing his tongue was poor and miserable, and he
himself a senseless creature, therefore he ought not to allow or defend so
obstinately such a detestable and traitorous murder committed upon a Duke of
Orleance, and the same the kings brother, in such vile sort; and that if he
should do otherwise, he should approve of that which God and man apparently
condemned, yea the very Turks and greatest Painyms under heaven; and that he
should justify the wicked and condemn the innocent, which is an abomination
before God; and should put darkness in stead of light, and call that which is
evil, good (for which the Prophet Esai in his 1 chapter denounces the
judgments of God against false prophets) and should follow the steps of
Balaam, which let out his tongue to hire for the wages of iniquity: but none of
these supposes came once into his mind. But to return to our history: The duke
of Burgundy having the tongues of these brave doctors at his commandment, and
the Parisians who bore themselves partially in this quarrel) generally
favorers of his side, came to Paris in arms, to justify himself as he
pretended, and stroke such a dreadful awe of himself into all men's minds,
that notwithstanding all the earnest pursuit of the Duchess the widow of
Orleance for justice, he escaped unpunished, until God (by other means) took
vengeance upon him: which happened after a while, after that those his
accomplices of Paris (being become lords and rulers of the city) had committed
many horrible and cruel murders, as of the Constable and Chancellor, two head
officers of the realm, whose bodies fast bound together they drew naked
through the streets from place to place in most despitefull manner: for the
Daulphin escaping their hands by night, and safeguarded in his castle, after
that he heard of the seasure of the city, found means to assemble certain
forces, and marched to Montereaufautyon with twenty thousand men, of purpose to
be revenged on the Duke for all his brave and riotous demeanors: hither under
color of parling and devising new means to pacify these old civil troubles,
he enticed the duke, and being come, at his very first arrtuall, as he was
bowing his knee in reverence to him, he caused him to be slain: And on this
manner was the duke of Orleance death quitted, and the evil and cruelty showed
toward him, returned upon the murderers own neck; for as he slew him
treacherously and cowardly, so was he also treacherously and cowardly slain,
and justly requited with the same measure that he before had measured to
another: Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3.
notwithstanding herein the Daulphin was not free from a grievous crime of
disloialtie and truth breach, in working his death without shame of either
faith-breach, or perjury, and that in his own presence, whom he had so often
with protestation of assurance and safety, requested to come unto him. Neither
did he escape unpunished for it; for after his fathers decease, he was in
danger of loosing the crown, and all for this cause. For Philip duke of
Burgundy taking his fathers revenge into his hands, by his cunning devises
wrought means to displace him from the succession of the kingdom, by
according a marriage betwixt the king of England and his sister, to whom he in
favor agreed to give his kingdom in reuersion after his own decease. Now
as soon as the king of England was seized upon the government of France, the
Daulphin was presently summoned to the marble table to give answer for the
death of the old duke: whither, when he made none appearance, they presently
banished him the realm, and pronounced him to be unworthy to be succeeder to
the noble crown: which truly was a very grievous chastisement, and such an
one, as brought with it a heap of many mischiefs and discomfitures which
happened in the war betwixt England and him, for the recovery of his kingdom.

Peter, son to Alphonsus king of Castill, Froiss. lib. r. hist.
was a most bloody and cruel tyrant, for first he put to death his own
wife, the daughter of Peter duke of Burbone, and sister to the Queen of
France: Next he slew the mother of his bastard brother Henry, together with
many Lords and Barons of the realm, for which he was hated not only of all his
subjects, but also of his neighbor and adjoining cuntries: which hatred moved
the aforesaid Henry to aspire unto the crown: which, what with the Popes
aduouch, who legitimated him, and the help of certain French forces, and the
support of the nobility of Castill, he soon achieved. Peter thus abandoned,
put his safest-guard in his heels, and fled to Bordeaux toward the Prince of
Wales, of whom he received such good entertainment, that with his aid he soon
reentred his lost dominions, and by maine battle chased his bastard brother
out of the confines thereof: But being reinstalled, whilst his cruelties ceased
not to multiply on every side, behold, Henry (with a new supply out of France)
began to assail him afresh, and put him once again to his shifts: but all
that he could do, could not shift him out of Henry's hands, who pursued him
so hotly, that with his own hands he soon rid him out of all troubles, and
afterward peaceably enjoyed the kingdom of Castill.

CHAP. X. Of diverse other murderers, and their several punishments.
MAximinus from a shepherd in Thracia, grew to be an Emperor in Rome by these
degrees: his exceeding strength and swiftnes in running commended him so to
Seuerus then Emperor, that he made him of his guard; from that he arose to be
a Tribune, and at last to be an Emperor: which place he was no sooner in
possession of, but immoderate cruelty (all this while buried) began to show it
self: for he made havoc of all the nobility, and put to death those that
he suspected to be acquainted with his estate: insomuch as some called him
Cyclops, some Busiris, others Anteus, for his cruelty. Wherefore the Senate of
Rome seeing his indignity, proclaimed him an enemy to their commonwealth, and
made it lawful for any man to procure his death: which being known, his
soldiers lying at the siege of Aquileia moved with hatred, entered his tent at
noone day, and slew him and his son together.

Justinian the younger (no less hateful to his subjects for his cruelty than
Maximinus) was deposed from the Empire by conspiracy, and having his nosthrils
slit, exiled to Chersona, Leontius succeeding in his place. Howbeit ere long
he recovered his crown and scepter, and returned to Constantinople,
exercising more cruelty at his return, then ever he had done before him: for
he not only put to death Leontius and Tiberius, but also all that any way
favored their parts. It is said of him, that he never ^^^w his mangled nose,
but he caused one of them to be executed to death. At last he was slain by
Philippicus to verify the word of the Lord, That he which strikes with the
sword, shall perish with the sword.

Albonius king of Lumbardy, drinking upon a time to his wife Rosimund in a cup
made of her fathers skull (whom he in battle had slain) so displeased her
therewith, that she (attributing more to natural affection then unity of
marriage) decreed with her self to hazard life and kingdom, to be revenged
upon this grievous injury; wherefore she thus practiced: A knight called
Hemichild was enamoured with one of her maids; him she brought into a secret
dark place by policy, in show to enjoy his love, but indeed to be at her
command, for she supplied his loves place: and then discovering her self,
put it to his choice either to kill her husband, or to be accused by her of
this villainy. Hemichild chose the former, and in deed murdered his lord in his
bed; and after the deed done, fled with her to Rauenna. But mark how the Lord
requited this murder, even most strangely; for they both which had been linkt
together in the fact, were linkt together also in the punishment; and as they
had been joint instruments of another destruction, so he made them mutual
instruments of their own: for Rosimund thinking to poison him too, made him
drink half her medicine; but he feeling the poison in his veins, stayed in
the midway, and made her sup up the other half for her part, so they died both
together.

The Electors of the Empire disagreeing in suffrages, Munst. cos^n. Philip.
Melan. lib. 5.
Adolphus duke of Nassauia, and Albertus duke of Austria, took upon them the
regiment and managing of the state: whereupon grew grievous wars in all
Germany, and dissension between the two statemen, so that Adolphus was slain
by the duke of Austria in battle by the city of Spire: whose death was thus
notably revenged. All that took part against him, or that were accessory to
the murder, perished most strangely, Albert Earl of Hagerloch was slain, Otto
of Ochsensteme hanged, the bishop of Mentz died suddenly of an apoplexy in his
sellar, the bishop of Stratsbrough was butchered by a butcher: the Earl of
Leimingen died of a frenzy, the duke of Austria himself was slain by his
nephew John, from whom he had taken the government of Sueuia, because of his
unthriftiness: generally they all came to destruction, so grievous is the cry
of innocent blood, against those that are guilty thereof.

After the death of Woldimirus king of Rhythenia, his son Berisus succeeded in
the kingdom, Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3.
who though he was a virtuous and religious prince, yet could not his virtue
or religion privilege him from the malice of his brother Suadopolcus, who
gaping and itching for the crown, slew his brother this good prince as he was
sleeping in his chamber, together with his Esquire that attended upon him:
Chron. Pol. lib. 2. cap. 10.
and not content herewith, but adding murder to murder, he assaulted another of
his brethren by the same impiety, and brought him to the same end. Whereupon
the last brother Ior^slaus (to be revenged on this villainy) set upon him with
an army of men, and killing his accomplices, drove him to fly to Crachus king of
Polonia for succor: who furnishing him with a new army, sent him back against
his brother, in which battle (his success being equal to his former) he lost
his men, and himself escaping the sword, died in his flight to Polonia, and
was buried in a base and ignoble sepulcher, fit enough for so base and ignoble
a wretch. And that we may see how hateful and ungodly a thing it is, to be
either a protector or a sauer of any murderer: mark the judgment of God that
fell upon this king of Polonia, though not in his own person, yet in his
posterity; Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3.
for he being dead, his eldest son and heir Crachus was murdered by his
younger brother Lechus as they were hunting, so disguised and torn, that every
man imputed his death not to Lechus (whose eyes dropped crocadiles tears) but to
some sauadge and cruel beast: Howbeit ere long (his treachery being
discovered, and disseised of his kingdom) he died with extreme grief and
horror of conscience. And thus we see that Crachus his kingdom came to
desolation for maintaining a murderer.

John the high priest of Jerusalem, son and successor to Judas, had a
brother termed Jesus, to whom Bagoses the lieuetenant of Antaxerxes army,
promised the priesthood, Joseph an^iq. Iudaic. l. r 1. c, 7
meaning in deed to depose John and install him in his room: upon which
occasion, this Jesus growing insolent, spared not to revile his brother, and
that in the temple with immodest and opprobrious speeches, so that his anger
being provoked, Profanatio^ of holy things, lib. 1. cap. 34.
he slew him in his rage; a most impious part for the high priest to pollute
the holy temple with blood, and that of his own brother, and so impious, that
the Lord in justice could not choose but punish the whole nation for it most
severely. For this cause Bagoses imposed a tribute upon them, even a most
grievous tribute, that for every lamb they offered upon the altar, they should
pay fifty groats to the king of Persia, besides the profanation of their
temple with the uncircumcised Persians, who entered into it at their pleasures,
and so polluted the sanctuary and holy things of God: this punishment continued
upon them seven years, and all for this one murder.

Gerhardus Earl of Holsatia, after he had conquered the Danes in many and
sundry battles, Treason, lib. 2. cap. 3.
was traitorously slain in the city Kanderhusen, by one Nicolaus Iacobus a
rich Baron, so that whom the open enemy feared in the field, him the privy
subtle foe murdered in his chamber. But the traitor and murderer albeit he
fled to the castle Schaldenburg, and got a band of soldiers to defend himself,
yet he was surprised by the Earls sons, who tormenting him as became a
traitor to be tormented, at last rent his body into four quarters, and so his
murder and treason was condignly punished.

Above all, the execution of Gods vengeance is most notably manifested in the
punishment and detection of one Parthenius an homicide, treasurer to Theodobert
king of France, Greg. of Tours, lib. 3. cap. 36.
who having traitorously slain an especial friend of his called Ausanius,
with his wife Papianilla, when no man suspected or accused him thereof, he
detected and accused himself after this strange manner: As he slept in his
bed, suddenly he roared out most pitifully, crying for help or else he
perished: and being demanded what he ailed, he half asleep answered, That his
friend Ausanius and his wife whom he had slain long ago, summoned him to
Judgment before God: upon which confession he was apprehended, and after due
examination, stoned to death. Thus though all witnesses fail, yet a murderers
own conscience will bewray him.

Pipin, and Martellus his son, kings of France, envying prosperity and ease,
Casp. head. lib. 6. cap. 17.
fell into diverse monstrous sins: as to forsake their wives and follow
whores, which filthiness when the Bishop of Tungria reproved, Dodo the
harlots brother murdered him for his labor: but he was presently taken with
the vengeance of God; even a lousie and most filthy disease, with the grief
and stink whereof being moved, he threw himself into the river Mosa, and
there was drowned.

How manifest and evident was the vengeance of God upon the murderers of
Theodoricke hishop of Treuerse: Martian. Scotus.
Conrade the author of it died suddenly, the soldier that helped to throw him
down from the rock, Hermanus contractus.
was choked as he was at supper: two other servants that laid too their hands
to this murder, slew themselves most desperately.

About the year of our Lord 700, Geilian the wife of Gosbert prince of
Wurtiburg, Casp. Head. lib. 6. cap. 10.
being reproved by Kilianus for incest, (for she married her husbands brother)
wrought such means, that both he and his brethren were deprived of their
lives: but the Lord gave her up to Satan in vengeance, so that she was
presently possessed with him, and so continued till her dying day.

A certain woman of Millaine in Italy hung a young boy, and after devoured him
instead of meat, when as she wanted none other victuals: and when she was
examined about the crime, she confessed that a spirit persuaded her to do it,
telling her that after it, she should attain unto whatsoever she desired: for
which murder, she was tormented to death by a lingering and grievous
punishment: This, Arlunus reports to have happened in his time. And surely
howsoever openly the devil shows not himself, yet he is the moouer and
persuader of all murders, and commonly the detector. For he delights in men's
bloods and their destruction as in nothing more.

At Winsheime in Germany a certain thief after many ^obberies and murders
committed by him upon trauailers and women with child, went to the shambles
before Easter and bought three calves heads, which when he put into a wallet
they seemed to the standers by to be men's heads. Theat. histor. Though strange
yet not incredible: since God can as well turn calves heads into men's, as a
rod into a serpent, or water into blood
Whereof being attached and searched by the officers, and found so indeed, he
being examined how he came by them, answered and proved by witnesses that he
bought calves heads, and how they were transformed he knew not. Whereat the
Senate amazed not supposing this miracle to arise of naught, cast the party
into prison, and tortured him to confess the villainy whereof the Lord would
have him detected, as he did indeed, and was worthily punished for the same:
and then the heads recovered their old shapes. Another thief at Tubing
betrayed his murder and robbery by his own sighs, 8. Mandat. lib. 2, cap. 35.
which were so incessant in grief not of his fact, but of his small booty,
that being but asked the question, he confessed the crime and underwent worthy
punishment. Another murderer in Spain was discovered by the trembling of his
heart: for when many were suspected of the murder, and all renounced it, the
judge caused all their breasts to be opened, and him in whom he saw most
trembling of breast, he condemned, who also could not deny the fact, but
presently confessed the same.

At Isenacum a certain young man being in love with a maid, and not having
wherewith to maintain her, used this unlawful means, he upon a night slew his
host, 8. Mandat. lib. 2. cap. 35.
and throwing his body into the seller, took away all his money, and then
hasted away; but the terror of his own conscience, and the judgment of God so
besotted him, that he could not stir a foot until he was apprehended. At the
same time Martin Luther and Philip Melancton abode at Isenacum, and were eye
witnesses of this miraculous judgment, who also dealt with the murderer, that
in most humble and penitent confession of his sins and comfort of soul he
ended his life. By all these examples we see how hard it is for a murderer to
escape without his reward. Nay rather then he shall go unpunished senseless
creatures and his own soul rises to give sentence against him.

In the year of our Lord 1546 John Diazius a Spaniard by birth, living a
student and professor in Paris came first to Geneua, and then to Strasbrough,
and there by the grace of Gods spirit saw his Sorbonicall errors and renounced
them, betaking himself to the profession of the purer religion, and the
company and acquaintance of godly men: amongst whom was Bucer that excellent
man, who sent him also to Nurnburge to ouersee the printing of a book which he
was to publish. Sleid. lib. 17.
Whilst Diazius lived at this Nurnburge (a city situate upon the river Dimow)
his brother a lawier, and judge lateriall to the inquisition, by name Alphonsus
came thither, and by all means possible endeavored to dissuade him from his
religon, and to reduce him again to Popery. But the good man persisted in the
truth notwithstanding all his persuasions and threats: wherefore the subtle
fox took another course and faining himself to be converted also to his
religion, exhorted him to go with him into Italy where he might do much good,
or at the least to August: but by the counsel of Bucer and his friends he
was kept back, otherwise willing to follow his brother. Wherefore Alphonsus
departed and exhorts him to constancy and perseverance, giving him also
foureteeene crowns to defray his charges. Now the Wolf had not ben three
days absent, when he hired a rakehell and common butcher and with him flew
again to Nurnburge in post have: and coming to his brothers lodging, delivered
him a letter which whilst he read, the villain his confederate cleft his head
in pieces with an axe, leaving him dead upon the floor, and so fled with all
expedition. Howeit they were apprehended, yet quit by the Popes justice, so
holy and sacred are the fruits of his holiness, though not by the justice of
God, for within a while after he hung himself upon his mules neck at Trent.

Duke Abrogastes slew Valentinian the Emperor of the West, and advanced
Eugenius to the crown of the Empire: but a while after the same sword which
had slain his Lord and master was by his own hands turned into his own
bowels.

Mempricius the son of Madan the fourth king of England, then called Britain
after Brute, Lanquet. chron.
had a brother called Manlius, betwixt whom was great strife for the
sovereign dominion: but to rid himself of all his trouble at once, he slew
his brother Manlius by treason, and after continued his reign in tyranny and
all unlawful lusts, the space of twenty years, but although vengeance all
this while wincked, yet it slept not, for at the end of this space, as he was
hunting he was devoured of wild beasts.

In the year of our Lord God 745 one Sigebert was authorized king of the
Saxons in Britain, a cruel and tyrannous Prince toward his subjects, and
one that changed the ancient laws and customs of his realm after his own
pleasure, and because a certain Nobleman somewhat sharply advertised him of
his evil conditions, he maliciously caused him to be put to death: but see
how the Lord revenged this murder, he caused his Nobles to deprive him of his
kingly authority, and at last as a desolate and forlorn person wandering alone
in a wood, to be slain of a swine-heard, whose master he (being king) had
wrongfully put to death.

In the year of our Lord 678 Childerich king of France, caused a Nobleman of
his Realm called Bolyde, to be bound to a stake and there beaten to death
without the pretense of any just crime or accusation against him; for which
cruelty his Lords and commons, being grievously offended conspired together and
slew him with his wife as they were in hunting.

In the reign of Edward the second and Edward the third Sir Roger Mortimer
committed many villainous outrages in sheading much humane blood, but he was
also justly recompensed in the end: first he murdered king Edward the second
lying in Barkley castle, to the end he might as it was supposed enjoy Isabell
his wife with whom he had very suspicious familiarity. Secondly, he caused
Edward the third to conclude a dishonorable peace with the Scots, by restoring
to them all their ancient writings, charters, and patents, whereby the kings of
Scotland had bound themselves to be feudaries to the kings of England. Thirdly,
he accused Edmund Earl of Kent uncle to king Edward of treason, and caused him
unjustly to be put to death. And lastly he conspired against the king to work
his destruction, for which and diverse other things that were laid to his
charge he was worthily and justly beheaded.

In the reign of Henry the sixth, Humfry the good duke of Gloucester and
faithful protector of the king, by the means of certain malicious persons,
and especially the Marquis of Suffolk (as it was suspected) was arrested, cast
into hold, and strangled to death in the Abbey of Bury: for which cause the
Marquis was not only banished the land for the space of five years, but also
banished out of his life for ever, for as he sailed toward France, he was met
withal by a ship of war, and there presently beheaded, and the dead corpse
cast up at Dover, that England wherein he had committed the crime might be a
witness of his punishment.

As the murder of a gentleman in Kent called master Arden of Feuersham was
most execrable, so the wonderful discovery thereof was exceeding rare: this
Arden being somewhat aged had to wife a young woman no less fair then
dishonest, who being in love with one Mosby more then her husband, did not
only abuse his bed, but also conspired his death with this her companion: for
together they hired a notorious ruffian one Black Will to strangle him to
death with a towell as he was playing a game at tables: which though secretly
done, yet by her own guilty conscience and some tokens of blood which appeared
in the house was soon discovered and confessed. Wherefore she her self was
burnt at Canterbury: Michael master Ardens man was hanged in chains at
Feuersham: Mosby and his sister were hanged in Smithfield. Green another
partner in this bloody action was hanged in chains in the high way against
Feuersham. And Black Will the ruffian after his first escape was apprehended
and burnt on a scaffold at Flushing in Zealand. And thus all the murderers had
their deserved dewes in this life, and what they endured in the life to come
(except they obtain mercy by true repentance) it is easy to judge.

CHAP. XI. Of Paricides or parent murderers.
IF all effusion of humane blood be both horrible to behold and repugnant to
nature, then is the murdering of parents especially detestable, when a man is
so possessed with the devil, or transported with a hellish fury, that he
lifts up his hand against his own natural father or mother to put the^ to
death: this is so monstrous and inormious an impiety that the greatest
Barbarians ever have had it in detestation: wherefore it is also expressly
commanded in the law of God, that whosoever smites his father or mother in
what sort soever, though not to death, Exodus 21.
yet he shall die the death. If the disobedience, irreverence, and contempt of
children toward their parents are by the just judgment of God most rigorously
punished as has been declared before in the first commandment of the second
table) how much more then when violence is offered, and above all, when murder
is committed. Diodor. Sic.
Thus the Egyptians punished this sin: they put the co^mittants upon a stack
of thorns, and burnt the^ alive, having beaten their bodies before hand with
sharp reeds made of purpose. Solon being demanded why he appointed no
punishment in his laws for Parricides; answered that there was no necessity,
thinking that the wide world could not afford so wicked a wretch. It is said
that Romulus for the same cause ordained no punishment in his Commonwealth for
that crime, but called every murderer a Parricide, the one being in his opinion
a thing execrable, and the other impossible. And in truth there was not for 600
years space (according to Plutarchs report) found in Rome any one that had
committed this execrable fact. The first Parricide that Rome saw, was Lucius
Ostius, after the first Punick war; although other writers affirm that M.
Malliolus was the first, and Lucius the second: howsoever it was they both
underwent the punishment of the law Pompeia, which enacted that such offenders
should be thrust into a sack of lether, and an ape, a cock, a viper and a dog
put in to accompany them, and then to be thrown into the water, to the end that
these beasts being enraged and animated one against another, might wreke their
teene upon them, and so deprive the^ of life after a strange fashion, being
debarred of the use of air, water, and earth, as unworthy to participate the
very elements with their deaths, much less with their lives: which kind of
punishment was after practiced and confirmed by the constitution of Constantine
the great. And albeit the regard of the punishment seemed terrible and the
offense it self much more monstrous, yet since that time there have been many so
perverse and exceedingly wicked, as to throw themselves headlong into that
desperate gulf. As Cleodorick son of Sigebert king of Austria, Greg. of Tours,
lib 2.
who being tickled with an insatiable lust of reign through the deceiuable
persuasions of Cleodouius king of France slew his father Sigebert as he lay
asleep in his tent in a forest at noone time of the day, who being weary with
walking laid himself down there to take his rest: but for all that, the
wicked wretch was so far from attaining his purpose, that it fell out clean
contrary to his expectation, for after his fathers death, as he was vewing
his treasures and ransacking his coffers, one of Cleodouius factors stroke him
suddenly and murdered him, and so Cleodouius seized both upon the crown and
treasures.

After the death of Hircanus, Joseph. antiq.
Aristobulus succeeded in the government of Judea, which whilst he strove to
reduce into a kingdom and to wear a crown, contrary to the custom of his
predecessors, his mother and other brethren contending with him about the same
he cast in prison, and took Antigonus his next brother to be his associate: but
ere long (a good grateful son) he famished her to death with hunger, that had
fed him to life with her teates, even his natural mother: And after persuaded
with false accusations caused his late best beloved Antigonus to be slain by an
ambush, that lay by Stratos tower, because in the time of his sickness he
entered the temple with pomp: but the Lord called for quittance for the two
bloosheads immediately after the execution of them: for his brothers blood was
scarce washed of the ground, ere in the extremity of his sickness he was
carried into the same place, and there vomiting up blood at his mouth and
nosthrils to be mingled with his brothers, he fell down stark dead, not
without horrible tokens of trembling and despair.

Nero that unnatural Tyrant surpassed all that lived, Corn. Tacit. lib. 14.
as in all other vices, so in this; for he attempted thrice by poison to make
away his mother Agrippina: and when that could not prevail by reason of her
usual Antidots and preservatives, he assaied diverse other means: as first a
devise whereby she should be crushed to death as she slept, Sueton. cap. 33.
a loosened beam that should fall upon her; and secondly by shipwreck: both
which when she escaped, the one by discovery, and the other by swimming: he
sent Anicetus the Centurion to slaughter her with the sword: who with his
companions breaking up the gate of the city, where she lay, rushed into her
chamber, and there murdered her. It is written of her that when she saw there
was no remedy but death, she presented her belly unto the murderer, and
desired him to kill her in that part which had most deserved it by bringing
into the world so vile a monster: and of himt, hat he came to veiw the dead
carcass of his mother, and handled the members thereof, commending this and
discommending that, as his fancy led him, and in the mean time being thirsty,
to call for drink: so far was he from all humanity and touch of nature; but
he that spared not to embrew his hands in her blood that bred him, was
constrained ere long to offer violence unto his own life, which was most dear
unto him.

Munst. Cosmog. lib. 3.
Henry the son of Nicolotus duke of Herulia had two wicked, cruel and unkind
sons, by the younger of whom with the consent of the elder he was traitorously
murdered, because he had married a third wise: for which cause Nicolotus their
cousin Germane pursued them both with a just revenge: for he deprived them of
their kingdom, and drove them into exile where they soon after perished.

Phil. Melanct. chron. lib. 5. Munst. Cosmog. lib. 4.
Selimus the tenth Emperor of the Turks was so unnatural a child, that he
feared not to dispossess his father Baiaset of the crown by treason: and next
to bereave him of his life by poison: And not fatisfied therewith, even to
murder his two brethren, and to destroy the whole stock of his own blood. But
when he had reigned eight years, vengeance found him out, and being at his
back so corrupted and putrified his reins, that the contagion spread it self
over all his body: so that he died a beast-like and irksome death, and that
in the same place where he had before oppressed his father Baiaset with an
army, to wit at Chiurle a city of Thracia, in the year of our Lord 1520 the
month of September.

Casp. Hedian. lib. 6. cap. 29.
Charles the younger by surname called Crassus, son to Lodouick the third,
was possessed and tormented with a Devil in the presence of his father, and
the peers of the realm; which he openly confessed to have justly happened
unto him, because he had pretended in his mind to have conspired his fathers
death and deposition: what then are they to expect that do not pretend but
perform this monstrous enterprise?

A certain degenerate and cruel son longing and gaping after the inheritance
of his father, which nothing but his life kept him from, wrought this means to
accomplish his desire: he accused his father of a most filthy and vnnameable
crime, even of committing filthiness with a cow; knowing, that if he were
convicted thereof, Theat. hist.
the law would cut off his life: and herein he wrought a double villainy, in
going about not only to take away his life (which by the law of nature he
ought to have preserved) but also his good name, without respecting that the
stain of a father redoundeth to his posterity, Mandat. 8. Calumniatio^, lib.
2. cap.
and that children commonly do not only inherit the possessions but also
imitate the conditions of their parents: but all these supposes laid aside
together with all fear of God, he indicted him before the magistrate, of
incest, and that upon his own knowledge: insomuch, that they brought the poor
innocent man to the rack, to the end to make him confess the crime, which
albeit amidst his tortures he did, as soon as he was out he denied again:
howbeit his extorted confession stood for evidence, and he was condemned to be
burned with fire, as was speedily executed, and constantly endured by him,
exclaiming still upon the false accusation of his son, and his own unspotted
innocence, as by the issue that followed, most clearly appeared; for his
son not long after, fell into a reprobate mind, and hanged himself: and the
judge that condemned him, with the witnesses that bare record of his forced
confession, within one month died all after a most wretched and miserable
sort: And thus it pleased God both to revenge his death, and also to quit his
reputation and innocence, from ignominy and discredit in this world.

Manfred, prince of Tarentum, Phil Melanct. Chron. lib. 4. No better fruit to
be expected of an^ bastard im^
bastard son to Frederick the second, smothered his father to death with a
pillow, because (as some say) he would not bestow the kingdom of Naples upon
him: and not content herewith, he poisoned also the heirs of Frederick, to
the end he might attain unto the crown, as Conrade his elder brother, and
his nephew the son of Henry the heir, which Henry died in prison; and now
only Conradinus remained betwixt him and the kingdom, whom though he assailed
to send after his father, yet was his intention frustrate, for the Pope
thundered out his curses against him, and instigated Charles duke of Angiers to
make war against him: wherein bastard and unnatural Manfred was discomfited
and slain, and cut short of his purpose, for which he had committed so many
tragedies.

Luther.
Martin Luther was wont to report of his own experience this wonderful
history of a locksmith, a young man, riotous and vicious, who to find fuel for
his luxury, was so bewitched, that he feared not to slay his own father and
mother with a hammer, to the end to gain their money and possessions: after
which cruel deed, he presently went to a shomaker and bought him new shoes,
leaving his old behind him, by the providence of God to be his accusers: for
after an hour or two, the slain bodies being found by the magistrate, and
inquisition made for the murderer, no manner of suspicion being had of him, he
seeming to take such grief thereat. But the Lord that knows the secrets of
the heart, discovered his hypocrisy, and made his own shoes which he had left
with the shoemaker rise up to bear witness against him: for the blood which
ran from his fathers wounds besprinkled them so, that thereof grew the
suspicion, and from thence the examination, and very soon the confession, and
last of all his worthy and lawful execution. From hence we may learn for a
general truth, that murder, never so secret, will ever by one means or other
be discovered; the Lord will not suffer it to go unpunished, so abominable it
is in his sight.

Another son at Bosil, in the year of our Lord God 1560, bought a quantity
of poison of an Apothecary, Casp. Head. 4. part. chron.
and ministered it to none but to his own father, accounting him worthiest of
so great a benefit: which, when it had effected his wish upon him, the crime
being detected, in stead of possessing his goods which he aimed at, he
possessed a vile and shameful death: for he was drawn through the streets,
burnt with hot irons, and tormented nine hours in a wheel, till his life
forsook him. As it is repugnant to nature for children to deal thus cruelly
with their parents, so it is more against nature for parents to murder their
children: insomuch as natural affection is of greater force in the descent,
then in the ascent, and the love that parents bear their children, is greater
then that which children redound to their parents, because the child proceeds
from the father, and not the father from the child, as part of his fathers
essence, and not the father of his: Can a man then hate his own flesh, or be a
rooter out of that which himself planted? It is rare: yet sometimes it comes
to pass. Howbeit as the offense is in a high degree, so it is always punished
by some notable and high judgment: as by these examples that follow, shall
appear.

The ancient Ammonites had an idol called Moloch, to the which they offered
their children in sacrifice: this idol (as the Jews write) was of a great
stature and hollow within, having seven chambers in his hollownesse, whereof
one was to receive meat, another turtle doves, the third a sheep, the fourth
a ram, the fifth a calfe, the sixth an ox, and the seventh a child: his hands
were always extended to receive gifts, and when a child was offered, they were
made fire hot to burn it to death; none must offer the child but the father:
and to drown the cries of it, the Chemarims (for so were the priests of that
idol called) made a noise with bells, cymbals, and horns: thus it is written
that king Achab offered his son, yea and many of the children of Israel beside,
as the Prophet David affirms: They offered (says he) their sons and
daughters to devils, and shed innocent blod, Psalm. 106, 37, 38.
even the blood of their children, whom they offered unto the idols of Canaan,
and their land was defiled with blood: this is the horrible crime. Now mark the
judgment touching the Canaanites; the land spued them out for their
abominations, Achab with his posterity was accursed, himself being slain by
his enemies, and the crown taken from his posterity, not one being left of his
offspring to piss against the wall: according to the saying of Elias: as for
the Jews, the Prophet David in the same place declares their punishment, when
he says, That the wrath of the Lord was kindled, Verse. 40.
and he abhorred his inheritance, and gave them into the hands of the heathen,
that they that hated them were lords over them.

In the year of our Lord 1551, in a town of Hassia called Weidenhasten, Job.
Fincel. llb. 1. de mirac.
the 20 day of November, a cruel mother inspired with Satan, shut up all her
doors, and began to murder her four children on this manner: she snatched up a
sharp axe, and first set upon her eldest son, being but eight years old,
searching him out with a candle behind a hogs-head where he hid himself, and
presently (notwithstanding his pitiful prayers and complaints) claue his head
in two pieces, and chopped off both his arms: next she killed her daughter of
five years old, after the same manner: another little boy of three years of
age (seeing his mothers madness) hid himself (poor infant) behind the gate,
whom as soon as the tygre espied, she drew out by the hair of the head into
the floor, and there cut off his head: the youngest lay crying in the cradle
but half a year old, him she (without all compassion) plucked out, and
murdered in like sort. These murders being finished, the devil incarnate (for
certain no womanly nature was left in her) to take punishment of her self for
the same, cut her own throat; and albeit she suruiued nine days, and
confessing her fault, died with tears and repenrance, yet we see how it
pleased God to arm her own hands against her self, as the fittest
executioners of his vengeance.

Theatr. hist.
The like tragical accident, we read to have happened at Cutzenborff, a city in
Silesia, in the year 1536, to a woman and her three children, who having
slain them all in her husbands absence, killed her self in like manner also to
make up the tragedy.

Concerning stepmothers, it is a world to read, how many horrible murders they
have usually practiced upon their children in law, to the end to bring the
inheritance to their own brood, or at least to revenge some injury supposed to
be done unto them: of which, one or two examples I will subnect, as a taste out
of many hundred, leaving the residue to the judgment and reading of the
learned.

Constantius, the son of Heraclius, having reigned Emperor but one year,
was poisoned by his stepmother Martina, Zonoras. tom. 3.
to the end to install her own son Heraclon in the crown; but for this
cruel part becoming odious to the Senate, they so much hated to have her or
her son reign over them, that in stead thereof, they cut off her tongue and
his nose, and so banished them the city.

Fausta the wife of Constantine the Great, fell in love with Constantine her
son in law, begotten upon a concubine, Zonoras. 3. Annal. Sex. Aur.
whom when she could not persuade unto her lust, she accused unto the
Emperor, as a sollicitour of her chastity; for which cause he was condemned
to die: but after the truth was known, Constantinus put her into a hot bath,
and suffered her not to come forth until the heat had choked her, revenging
upon her head, his sons death, and her own unchastity.

CHAP. XII. Of Subject Murderers.
Seeing then they that take away their neighbors lives, do not escape
unpunished, (as by the former examples it appears) it must needs follow, that
if they to whom the sword of justice is committed by God to repress wrongs and
chastise vices, do give over themselves to cruelties, and to kill and slay
those whom they ought in duty to protect and defend, must receive a greater
measure of punishment, according to the measure and quality of their offense.
Such an one was Saul the first king of Israel, who albeit he ought to have been
sufficiently instructed out of the law of God in his duty in this behalf: yet
was he so cruel and bloody minded, as contrary to all justice, to put to
death Abimelech the high priest, with fourscore and five other priests of the
family of his father, 1. Sam. 22.
only for receiving David into his house: small, or rather no offense. And yet
not satisfied herewith, h^ vomited out his rage also against the whole city of
the priests* and put to the merciless sword both man, woman, and child,
without sparing any. He slew many of the Gibeonites, who though they were
relics of the Amorites that first inhabited that la^d, yet because they were
received into league of amity by a solemn oath, and permitted of long
continuance to dwell amongst them, should not have been awarded as enemies, nor
handled after so cruel a fashion. Thus therefore he tyranizing and playing the
butcher amongst his own subjects (for which cause his house was called the
house of slaughter) and practicing many other foul enormities, he was at the
last overcome of the Philistims, and sore wounded: which when he saw, fearing
to fall alive into his enemies hands, and not finding any of his own men that
would lay their hands upon him, desperately slew himself. The same day three
of his sons, and they that followed him of his own household were all slain.
The Philistims the next day finding his dead body despoiled among the
carcasses, beheaded it, and carried the head in triumph to the temple of their
god, and hung up the trunk in disgrace in one of their cities, to be seen,
looked upon, and pointed at. And yet for all this was not the fire of Gods wrath
quenched: for in king David's time, there arose a famine that lasted three
years, the cause whereof was declared by God to be the murder which Saul
committed upon the Gibeonites: 2. Sam. 21.
wherefore David delivered Saul's seven sons into the Gibeonites hands that
were left, who put them to the most shameful death that is, even to hanging.

Amongst all the sins of king Achab and Iezabel which were many and great, 1.
King. 21.
the murder of Naboth stands in the forefront, for though he had committed
no such crime as might any way deserve death: yet by the subtle and wicked
devise of Iezabel, foolish and credulous consent of Achab, and false accusation
of the two suborned witnesses, he was cruelly stoned to death: but his innocent
blood was punished first in Achab, who not long after the war which he made
with the king of Siria, received so deadly a wound, that he died thereof, the
dogs licking up his blood in the same place where Naboths blood was licked,
2. King. 9.
according to the foretelling of Elias the Prophet. And secondly of Iezabel,
whom her own servants at the commandment of Iehu (whom God had made
executour of his wrath) threw headlong out of an high window unto the ground,
so that the walls were died with her blood, and the horses trampled her under
their feet, and dogs devoured her flesh, till of all her dainty body, there
remained nothing saving only her scull, feet, and palm of her hands.

Ioram son of Iehosaphat king of Judah, being after his fathers death
possessed of the crown and scepter of Judah, 2. Chron. 21.
by and by exalted himself in tyranny, and put to death six of his own
brethren, all younger than himself, with many princes of the realm, for which
cause God stirred up the Edomites to rebel, the Philistims and Arabians to
make war against him, who forraged his country, sacked and spoiled his cities,
and took prisoners his wives and children, the youngest only excepted, who
afterward also was murdered, when he had reigned king but a small space. And
lastly, as in doing to death his own brethren, he committed cruelty against
his own bowels, so the Lord stroke him with such an incurable disease in his
bowels, and so perpetual (for it continued two years, that his very entrails
issued out with torment, and so died in horrible misery.

Albeit that in the former book we have already touched the pride and
arrogancy of king Alexander the Great, yet we can not pretermit to speak of
him in this place, his example serving so fit for the present subject; for
although as touching the rest of his life he was very well governed in his
private actions, as a monarch of his reputation might be, yet in his declining
age (I mean not in years* but to deathward) he grew exceeding cruel, not
only toward strangers, as the Cosseis, whom he destroyed to the sucking babe,
but also to his household and familiar friends: Insomuch, that being become
odious to most, fewest loved hi^ and diverse wrought all means possible to make
him away but one especially, whose son in law and other near friends he had
put to death, never ceased until he both ministered a deadly draught unto
himself, Iustine.
whereby he deprived him of his wicked life, and a fatal stroke to his wives
and children after his death, to the accomplishment of his full revenge.

Phalaris, the tyrant of Agrigentum, made himself famous to posterity by no
other means, Oros.
then horrible cruelties, exercised upon his own subjects, inuenting every day
new kinds of tortures to scourge and afflict the poor souls withal. In his
dominion there was one Perillus an artificer of his craft, one expert in his
occupation, who to flatter and curry favor with him, devised a new torment, a
brazen bull of such a strange workmanship, that the voice of those that were
roasted therein, resembled rather the roaring of a bull then the cry of men: the
tyrant was well pleased with the invention, but he would needs have the
inuentour make first trial of his own work, as he well deserved, before any
other should take taste thereof. But what was the end of this tyrant? Cic. Off.
2.
The people not able any longer to endure his monstrous and unnatural
cruelties, ran upon him with one consent with such violence, that they soon
brought him to destruction; and as some say, put him into the brazen bull,
(which he provided to roast others) to be roasted therein himself; deserving it
as well for approouing the devise, as Perillus did for devising it.

Edward the second of that name, king of England, at the request and desire of
Hugh Spencer his darling, Enguerr. de Monstr. vol. 1.
made war upon his subjects, and put to death diverse of the peers and lords of
the realm, without either right or form of law, insomuch that Queen Isabell
his wife fled to France with her young son for fear of his unbridled fury,
and after a while finding opportunity and means to return again, guarded with
certain small forces which she had in those countries gathered together* she
found the whole people discontented with the kings demeanors, and ready to
assist her against him: so she besieged him with their succor, and took him
prisoner, and put him into the tower of London to be kept till order might be
taken for his deposition, so that shortly after by the estates (being assembled
together) he was generally and jointly reputed and pronounced unworthy to be
king, for his exceeding cruelties sake which he had committed upon many of his
worthy subjects: and so deposing him they crowned his young son Edward (the
third of his name) king in his room, he yet living and beholding the same.

John Maria duke of Millan may be put into this rank of murderers: Paulus
Iouius.
for his custom was diverse times when any citizen offended him, yea and
sometimes without offense too, to throw them amongst cruel mastiues to be torn
in pieces and devoured. But as he continued and delighted this unnatural kind
of murder, the people one day incensed and stirred up against him, ran upon him
with such rage and violence, that they quickly deprived him of life. And he was
so well beloved that no man either would or durst bestow a sepulcher upon his
dead bones, but suffered his body to lie in the open street uncovered, save
that a certain harlot threw a few roses upon his wounds and so covered him.

Alphonsus the second king of Naples Ferdinands son was in Tyranny toward his
subjects nothing inferior to his father, Sabel. Guicciard. lib. 1. Philip de
Com. Bemb. histor. Vent. lib. 2.
for whether of them imprisoned and put to death more of the nobility and
Barons of the realm it is hard to say; but sure it is that both were too
outrageous in all manner of cruelty: for which as soon as Charles the eight
king of France departing from Rome made toward Naples, the hatred which the
people bore him secretly with the odious remembrance of his fathers cruelty,
began openly to show it self by the fruits; for they did not nor could not
dissemble the great desire that every one had of the approach of the Frenchmen:
which when Alphonsus perceived, and seeing his affairs and estate brought unto
so narrow a pinch, he also cowardly cast away all courage to resist, and hope
to recover so hug a tempest: and he that for a long time had made war^ his
trade and profession, and had yet all his forces and armies complete and in
readiness, making himself banquerout of all that honor and reputation, which
by long experience and deeds of arms he had gotten, resolved to abandon his
kingdom, and to resign the title and authority thereof to his son Ferdinand:
thinking by that means to assuage the heat of their hatred, and that so young
and innocent a king who in his own person had never offended them might be
accepted and beloved of them, and so their affection toward the French rebated
and cooled. But this devise seemed to no more purpose then a salve applied to a
sore out of season, when it was grown incurable, or a prop set to a house that
is already fallen. Therefore he tormented with the sting of his own
conscience, and finding in his mind no repose by day, nor rest by night, but a
continual Summns and advertisement by fearful dreams, that the Noblemen
which he had put to death cried to the people for revenge against him, was
surprised with so terrible terror, that forthwith without making acquainted
with his departure either his brother or his own son, he fled to Sicily,
supposing in his journey that the Frenchmen were still at his back, and
starting at every little noise, as if he feared all the elements had
conspired his destruction. Philip Comineus that was an eye witness of this
journey, reports that every night he would cry, that he heard the
Frenchmen, and that the very trees and stones ecchoed France into his ears:
And on this manner was his flight to Sicily. King Charles in the mean while
having by force and bloodshed to terrify the rest taken two passages that were
before him, the whole realm without any great resistance yielded it self unto
his mercy: albeit that the young king had done what he could, to withstand
him. But at length seeing the Neapolitanes ready to rebel and himself in
danger to be taken prisoner, he fled from the castle of Naples, and with a
small company got certain brigandines wherein he sailed to the Island Ischia,
thirty miles from Naples, saying at his departure this verse out of the
Psalms: How vain are the watchmen and guards of that city which is not
guarded and watched by the Lord? which he oftentimes repeated, and so long as
Naples was in his view. And thus was cruelty punished both in Ferdinand the
father, and Alphonse the son.

Artaxerxes Ochus the eight king of the Persians began his reign with thus many
murders; Herodos.
he slew two of his own brethren first: secondly Euageras king of Ciprus, his
partner and associate in the kingdom: thirdly he took Gidon traitorously, and
was the cause of forty thousand men's deaths that were slain and burned therein:
beside many other private murders and outrages which he committed, for which
cause the Lord in his justice rained down vengeance upon his head: for Bagoas
one of his princes ministered such a fatal cup to his stomach, that it mortified
his senses, and deprived him of his unmerciful soul and life: and not only
upon his head, but upon his kingdom and his son Arsame also, for he was also
poisoned by the same Bagoas, and his kingdom translated to Darius prince of
Armenia, whom when the same Bagoas went about to make taste of the same cup
which his predecessors did, he was taken in his own snare: for Darius
understanding his pretense, made him drink up his own poison which he
provided for him: and thus murder was revenged with murder, and poison with
poison, Exodus 22.24.
according to the decree of the almighty who says Eye for eye, tooth for
tooth, etc.

In the year of the world 3659 Morindus a most cruel and bloody minded
Prince reigned here in England, who for his cruelties sake came to an unhappy
and bloody end: Stow.
for out of the Irish seas came forth a monster which destroyed much people,
whereof he hearing, would of his valiant courage needs fight with it, and was
devoured of it: so that it may truly here be said that one monster devoured
another.

There was (as Elianus Elianus.
reports) a cruel and pernicious Tyrant, who to the end to prevent all
practices of conspiracy and treason (as Tyrants are ever naturally and upon
desert, timorous) that might be devised against him; enacted this law among
his subjects, that no man should confer with another either privately or
publickely upon pain of death, and so indeed he abrogated all civil society
[for speech as it was the beginning and birth of fellowship, so it is the very
joint and glue therof] but what cared he for society that respected nothing but
his own safety: he was so far from regarding the common good, that when his
subjects not daring to speak, signified their minds by signs, he prohibited
that also: and that which is yet more, when not daring to speak nor yet make
signs, they fell to weeping and lamenting their misery, he came with a band of
men even to restrain their tears too: but the multitudes rage being justly
incensed they gave him such a desperate welcome, that neither he nor his
fellows returned one of them alive. And thus his abominable cruelty came to
an end together with his life, and that by those means (which is to be
observed) by which he thought to preserve and maintain them both.

Childericus who in the year 697 succeeded in the kingdom of France
Theodoricke (that for his negligence and sluggish government was deposed and
made of a king a Friar) exercised barbarous and inhumane cruelty upon his
subjects: Michael. Rit. l b. 1. de regibus Franc. Lib. 2. cap. 46.
For he spared neither noble nor ignoble, but mixtly sent them to their graves
without respect of cause or justice. One of the noble sort he caused to be
fastened to a stake and beaten with clubs not to death, but to chastisement:
which monstrous cruelty so incensed the peoples mind against him, that there
wanted no hands to take part with this clubbeaten man against the tyrant his
enemy. Wherefore they laid wait for him as he came one day from hunting, and
murdered him together with his wife great with child, no man either willing or
daring to defend him.

Tymocrates the king or rather tyrant of the Cyrenians will give place to none
in this commendation of cruelty: for he ^fflicted his subjects with many and
monstrous calamities, ^nsomuch that he spared not the priests of his gods,
which commonly were in reverent regard among the Heathen, as the bloody death
of Menalippus (Apolloes Priest) did witness, whom to the end to marry his
fair and beautiful wife Aretaphila, he cruelly put to death: howbeit it
prospered not with him as he desired; for the good woman not contented with
this sacrilegious contract sought rather means to revenge her first husbands
death, than to please this new lechers humor. Wherefore she assaied by poison
to effect her wish: and when that prevailed not, she gave a young daughter she
had to Leander the tyrants brother to wife, who loved her exceedingly, but with
this condition that he should by some practice or other work the death and
destruction of his brother: Which indeed he performed, for he so bribed one
of the grooms of the tyrants chamber, that by his help he soon rid wicked
Tymocrates out of the way by a speedy and deserved death. But to abridge these
long discourses, let us look into all times and ages and to the hystories of
all countries and nations, and we shall find that tyrants have ever co^^ to one
destruction or other. Diomedes the Thracian king fed his horses with man's flesh
as with prouender, Plut. in Dion.
but was made at last prouender for his own horses himself by Hercules.
Calippus the Athenian that slew Dian his familiar friend, and deposed Dionisius
the Tyrant, and committed many other murders among the people, was first
banished Rheginum, and then living in extreme necessity, Philip. Melanct. lib.
3. Valemar.
slain by Leptines and Polyserchon. Clephes the second king of the Lumbardies,
for his sauadge cruelty toward his subjects was slaughtered by one of his
friends. Damasippus that massacred so many citizens of Rome was cut off by
Silla.

Ecelinus that played the tyrant at Taurisium, gelding boys, deflouring
maids, maiming Matrones of their dugs, cutting children out of their mothers
bellies, and killing 1200 Patauians at once that were his friends, Sabel. lib.
8. c. 3.
was cut short in a battle. In a word if we read and consult hystories of
all countries and times, we shall find seldom or never any notorious Tyrant
and oppressor of his subjects that came to any good end, but ever some notable
judgment or other fell upon them.

CHAP. XXIII. Of those that are both cruel and disloiall.
NOw if it be a thing so unworthy and evil beseeming a Prince as nothing
more, to be stained with the note of cruelty: how much more dishonourall is
it, when with cruelty, disloialtie and falsehood is coupled? and when he is
not ashamed not only to play the Tyrant but also the traitor, dissembler, and
Hypocrite, to the end he may more freely pour out the foam of his rage
against those that put confidence in him. This is one of the foulest and vilest
blots that can be, wherewith the honor and reputation of a man is not only
stained, but blasted and blotted out, not ever to be recovered: for what
persuasion can one have of such? Or who is so fond as to put affiance in them?

2. Sam. 18.
This was one of the notorious vices of king Saul, when maligning the prosperity
of David, he cunningly promoted him to be general of his army, and married
him to one of his daughters, to this end, that by exposing him to the hazards
and perrils of war, he might bring him to speedy destruction; seeking
besides other unlawful means to put him to death by: but what was the end of
this unjust murderer we have declared in the former chapter.

But above all that by Treason and deceit made way unto their cruelty, Herodian.
the Emperor Antonius surnamed Caracalla, was the chief: who to revenge
himself more at full upon the Citizens of Alexandria in Egypt, faigne, as if
he would come see their city, built by Alexander; and receive an Oracle from
their God: which when he approached near unto, the Alexandrians prepared to
entertain him most honorably: and being entered, he went first to visit
their Temples, where to cast more colors upon his treachery he offered many
sacrifices, and in the mean while perceiving the people gathered together from
all quarters to bid him welcome, finding opportunity fitting his wicked and
traitorous enterprise, be gave commandment that all the young men of the city
should assemble together in one place, saying that he would acquaint them to
range themselves in battle after the manner of the Macedonians, in honor of
king Alexander. But whilst they thus assembled together in mirth and bravery,
he making as though he would bring them in array by going up and down amongst
them, and holding them in talk, his army enclosed them on all sides: then
withdrawing himself with his guard he gave the watchword that they should
rush upon them; which was performed with such outrage, that the poor credulous
people being surprised at unawares were all most cruelly massacred. There
might you see the most horrible, barbarous and incredible butcherie of men that
ever was heard of: for besides those that were actors in this bloody Tragedy,
there were others that drew the slain bodies into great ditches, and very
often haled in them that were scarce dead, yea and sometimes that were
altogether alive, which was the cause that diverse soldiers perished at the
same time, when those that having some strength of life left, being haled to
the ditch, held so fast by the halers, that diverse times both fell in
together. The blood that was shead at this massacre was so much, that the mouth
of the river Nilus, and the sea shore were died with the streams thereof, that
ran down by smaller rivers into those plain places. Furthermore being desirous
to obtain a victory over the Parthians, that he might get himself fame and
reputation thereby, he passed not at what rate he bought it: He sent therefore
Ambassadors with letters and presents to the king of Parthia, to demand his
daughter in marriage, though he never intended any such thing, and being
nonsuted at the first with a denial, yet pursued he his counterfeit purpose
with much earnestness: and with solemn oath protested his singular good
affection and love that he bore unto her: so that in the end the match was
condiscended unto by all parties, whereof the Parthian people were not a little
glad, in hope of so durable a peace which by this marriage was like to be
established betwixt the^. The king therefore with all his subjects being ready
to entertain this new bridegroom, went out with one consent to meet him in
the midway: their encounter was in a fair plain, where the Parthians having
sent back their horses, being unarmed and prepared not for a day of battle,
but of marriage and disport, gave him the most honorable welcome they could,
but the wicked varlet finding opportunity so fit, set his armed soldiers upon
the naked multitude, and hewed in pieces the most part of them: and had not the
king with a few followers bestirred him well, he had been served with the like
sauce. After which worthy exploit, Treason. lib. 2. cap. 3.
and bloody stratageme, he took his voyage backward, burning and spoiling the
towns and villages as he went, till he arrived at Charam a city in
Mesopotamia, where making his abode a while, he had a fancy to walk one day
into the fields, and going apart from his company to unburden nature, attended
upon by one only servant, as he was putting down his breeches, another of
his company ran in and stroke him through with his dagger. Thus God blessed
the world by taking out of it this wicked Tyrant, who by treason and treachery
had spilt so much innocent blood.

Seturus Galba, another bird of the same feather, exercised no less perfidious
cruelty upon the people of three cities in Lusitania, for he assembled them
together in color of providing for their common affairs: but when he had
gotten them into his hands unarmed and weaponlesse, he took nine thousand of
the flower of their youth, and partly committed them to the sword, and partly
sold them for bondslaues.

The disloiall and treacherous dealing of Stilico toward the Goths, how dear
it cost him and all Italy beside, Iornand. Paul. Aemil,
histories do sufficiently testify: for it fell out that the Goths (under
the conduct of Allaricus) entered Italy with a puissant and fearful army, to
know the cause why the Emperor Honorius withheld the pension which (by virtue
of a league, and in recompense of their aid to the Empire in time of war) was
due unto them: which by riper judgment and deliberation of the council was
quieted: and to preserve their country from so imminent a tempest, Treason,
lib. 2. cap. 3.
offer was made unto them of the Spaniards and Frenchmen, if they could recover
them out of the hands of the Vandales, which usurped over them; so that
incontinently they should take their journey over the Alps toward them, and
depart their coasts. Which offer and gift the Goths accepting, did accordingly
fulfill the condition, and passed away without committing any riot or any
damage in their passages. But as they were upon mount Cinis making toward
France, behold Stilico, Honorius his father in law (a man of a stirring,
stubborn, and rash spirit) pursues and charge them with battle unawares,
and dreaming of nothing less: whereat they, being at the instant amazed,
quickly gathered their spirits together, and putting themselves in defense,
fought it out with such courage and eagerness, that the traitors army was
wholly discomfited, and he himself with one of his sons slain. The Goths
having gotten this victory, broke off their voyage to France, and turned their
course back again to Italy, with purpose to destroy and spoil: And so they
did, for they laid wast all the country of Piemont and Lumbardy, and
elsewhere, and besieged Rome itself: so that from that time Italy never ceased
to be scourged and tormented with the Goths, for the space of eighteen
years. Moreover, whosoever else have been found to follow the steps of these
truce, peace, and promise breakers (void of truth and regard of reputation)
always underwent worthy punishment for their unworthy acts, and fell headlong
into confusion and ignominy, making themselves subjects worthy to be cursed and
detested of all men.

CHAP. XIIII. Of Queens that were Murderers.
IF these and such like cruelties as we have spoken of before, be strange and
monstrous for men, what shall we then say of wicked and bloody women, who
(contrary to the nature of their sex) addict themselves to all violence and
bloodshedding, as cursed Iezabel Queen of Israel did; of whom sufficient has
been spoken before.

Athaliah, Achabs daughter, and wife to Ioram king of Judah, was a bird of the
same feather; for she was possessed with such a spirit of fury and rage, 2.
King. 11.
that after the death of her son Ochosias (that died without issue) she put
to death all the blood royal, to wit, the posterity of Nathan, Salomons
brother, to whom by right of succession, the inheritance of the crown
appertained; to the end, that she might install her self into the kingly
diadem: after this cruel butchery of all the royal male children, except
Ioas, who (by Gods providence) was preserved alive, she usurped the crown and
scepter of Judah full seven years; at the end of which date, Ioas was exalted
to the crown, and she not only deposed, but slain by the hands of her guard
that attended upon her.

Brunchild (whom histories call Brunhault) a Queen of France by marriage,
Aimon. Nic. Gil. vol. 1.
but a Spaniard by birth, was a woman that bred much mischief in her age, and
that wrought many horrible and death-deseruing crimes: for partly with her
subtle devises, and partly with her own hands, she murdered ten kings of
France one after another: she caused her husband to slay his own brother, she
procured the death of her nephew Meroueus, whom against all equity and
honesty, she had secondly espoused for her husband; for he being hated of his
father for that vile incest, and perceiving himself in danger of taking, made
one of his own servants thrust him through. After she had committed these and
many other foul factes, she went about also to defraud Clotairius the son
of Chilpericke of the right of the crown, which pertained unto him, and to
thrust in another in the room: Whereupon arose great war, in the which as
she dealt more boldly and manfully then the condition of her sex would bear,
so she received the due wages of her brave and virtuous deeds, for she was
taken prisoner with three of het nephews, whose throats she saw cut before her
face, and after her self was set upon a camel, and led through the host three
days together, every man reuiling, mocking, reproching, and despiting her: and
at last by the award and judgment of the princes and captains of the army,
she was adjudged to be tied by the hair of her head, one arm and one foot to
the tail of a wild and untamed horse, and so to be left to his mercy to be
drawn miserably to her destruction: which was no sooner executed, but her
miserable carcass (the instrument of so many mischiefs) was with men's feet
spurned, bruised, trampled, and wounded after a most strange fashion: and this
was the woeful end of miserable Brunchild.

Let every one both great and small learn by these examples to contain
themselves within the limits of humanity, and not to be so ready and prompt
to the shedding of humane blood, knowing nothing to be more true than this,
That he that smites with the sword, shall perish with the sword.

CHAP. XV. Of such as without necessity or conference, upon every light cause,
move war.
AS in surgerie, so in a commonwealth we must account war as a last refuge,
and as it were, a desperate medicine, which without very urgent necessity, when
all other means of maintaining our estate against the assaults of the enemy
fail, ought not to be taken in hand: and indeed the chief scope and mark
that all those that lawfully undertake war, Cic. Off. lib. 1.
ought to propound to themselves, should be nothing else, but the good and quiet
of the commonwealth, with the peace and repose of every member thereof. And
therefore so often as any reasonable offers and conditions of peace are
propounded, they ought to be accepted, to the end to avoid the mass of evils
(as ruins, bloodsheds, robberies) which always accompany war as necessary
attendants: for whosoever does not so, but upon every light occasion runs to
arms, and to try the hazard of battle, they manifest their own foolish and
pernicious rashness, and their small conscience in shedding humane blood.

Amongst the good kings of Judah, Josias for piety and zeal in the service of
God, was most renowned; for he purged the realm from all dross of idolatry,
repaired the decayed temple, and restored it to the first glory: and yet for
all this, for committing this one crime, he lost his life; for as Nechao king
of Egypt was passing with an army toward the king of Babylon in Charcamis
beside Euphrates to bid him battle, he would needs encounter him by the way,
2. Chron. 35.
and interrupt his journey by unprovoked war: yea though Nechao had by
embassage assured him not to meddle with him, but entreated only free passage
at his hand: yet would not Josias in any wise listen (so opinionatiue and self
willed was he) but gave him battle in the field without any just cause, save
his own pleasure, which turned to his pain: for he caught so many wounds at
that skirmish, that shortly after he died of them, to ^he great grief of the
whole people, and the Prophet Iere^^e also that lamented his death.

King John of France (for refusing reasonable conditions of peace at the
English men's hands) was overthrown by them two miles from Poytiers, with a
great overthrow: Froiss. vol. 1. Nic. Gil. vol. 2.
for the Englishmen in regard of their own small number, and the huge
multitude of the French to encounter with them, timorously offered up a
surrender of all that they had either conquered, taken, or spoiled since their
coming from Bordeaux, and so to be sworn not to bear arms against him for
seven years, so that they might quietly depart. But the king that crowed
before the conquest, affying too much in the multitude of his forces, stopped his
ears to all conditions, not willing to hear of any thing but war, war, even
thinking to hew them in pieces, without one escaping: but it fell out
otherwise, for the Englishmen intrenching themselves in a place of advantage,
and hard of access, enclosed with thick hedges and brambles, disturbed and
overthrew with their archers at the first onset the French horsemen, and
wounded most of their men and horses with multitude of arrows: it tarried not
long ere the footmen also were put to flight on the other side, and the whole
army of threescore thousand men, by bare eight thousand English, discomfited:
diverse great lords were found slain in the field, and diverse others with the
king himself carried prisoners into England: which was a great shake to the
whole Realm, and the occasion of many tumults and disorders that ensued
afterward.

Moreover, as it is a rash part to hazard the doubtful event of battle
indiscretely, and without cause, so it is a point of no less folly to thrust
ones self voluntarily into any action of war without charge, not being
particularly called and bound thereunto, or having a body insufficient and
unfit for the same. And this was also one of the warlike points of discipline,
which the ancient Romans used; That none should presume to fight for his
country, before he had been admitted by some captain by a solemn oath.

Of all the histories that I ever read, I know none more strange in matter of
war, than this which I now go about to recite, of Henry of Luxenbourge,
Emperor of Germany, who when he heard that his son Charles king of Bohemia
was in the French army, Froiss. vol. 1. Cap. 130.
and that Philip of Valoys, king of France, was ready to give battle to the
English, albeit he was blind, and consequently unfit for war, yet would
needs take part with the French: And therefore commanded his men at arms to
guide him into the place where the field was to be fought, that he might there
strike one blow. They as foolish as himself, not willing to cross his mind,
and fearing to loose him in the prease, tied him fast to the raines of their
bridles, being by this means so coupled together, as if they meant al to
perish together if need were, as indeed they did, for they were overcome in
battle, and the next day found all dead, horse and men, fast bound together.
This accident befell at Crecy near Abreuile, in which journey the French king
sustained an inestimable damage, for he lost fifteen of his chiefest
princes, fourscore ensigns, twelve hundred knights, and about thirty thousand
men.

In the year 1455, the Hungarians without any just cause or pretense, Theatr.
hist.
made war upon the Emperor Otto, only moved with a desire of bringing under
their subjection the Germane powers, and the rather at this time, because they
supposed the Emperors strength of war to be weakened and his power of men
lessened, by those continual troubles and wars which he had been daily
occupied in: notwithstanding Otto, as by his former deeds of arms, he
deserved the surname of Great, so in this exploit especially, for he conscribed
eight legions of men out of Franconia, Bauaria, and Bohemia, and with that
small valiant handful, ouerturned and destroyed the huge unchristened
multitude of his enemies: for albeit the Bohemians being placed in the
rereward, were as suddenly and unexpectedly assaulted by the enemy that
craftily passed over the river Lycus to set upon them behind, as unhappily put
to flight with the loss of the carriages and vittailes, which they were set to
protect; yet Otto with his other legions renewing the battle and encouraging
his soldiers, gave the enemy such an encounter and repulse, that he put them
to flight, and slew them with a miserable slaughter: three of their kings he
took prisoners, and few of that vast army escaped with their lives. On the
Emperors side died many worthy men, among whom, Conrade the Emperors son
in law, and Burghard duke of Sueuia were two, beside many other. In this
successiue battle it is to be noted above the rest, how religiously the
Emperor both began and finished it: the day before the fight, he enjoined a
fast in his army, and directed his prayers to the Almighty, relying more upon
the presence of Gods help, than his own power: After the conquest gotten, he
caused solemn thanks to be given in all Churches to God for that great
deliverance. I would our modern Generals and Captains would learn by this
example to follow his footsteps, and not to make their prayers quaffings, and
their thanksgiuings carousings, as they use to do, even as it were purposely
to tempt the Lord, and to stir up his wrath against them.

Penda, king of middle England, Lanque^. Chron.
making war upon Anna king of East Angles, slew him in open field; with which
victory being puffed up in pride, he sent defiance to Osway king of
Northumberland also: who hearing of his approach, proffered him great gifts and
fair conditions of peace, which when Penda obstinately refused, he was slain
in battle with thirty of his most noble captains, although he had thrice
the number of people which Osway had. And thus the heathen and bloody Pagan
ended his cruelty, and paid dear for his too much forwardnes in war.

CHAP. XVI. Of such as please themselves overmuch in seeing cruelties.
THe Romans were so accustomed by long use of war to behold fightings and
bloodshed, that in time of peace also they would make themselves sports and
pastimes therewith: for they would compel poor captives and bondslaues,
either to kill one another by mutual blows, or to enter combat with sauadge
and cruel beasts, to be torn in pieces by them. The first (according to
Seneca Seneca.
) that devised and put in practice this unkindly combat of beasts and
malefactors, was Pompey, who provided an army of eighteen Elephants to fight
with men, and thought it a notable and commendable spectacle to put men to
death after this new and strange fashion. Oh how men's minds are blinded with
overmuch prosperity! he esteemed himself at that time to be higher in dignity
than all other, when he thus threw to wild beasts, people of far countries,
and in the presence of the people caused so much blood to be shed: but not long
after, himself was betrayed by the treachery of the Alexandrians, and slain
by a bondslaue, (a just quittance for murdering so many of that condition:)
thus much out of Seneca. Now it is manifest that this was an ordinary pastime
among the Romans, albeit it is strange, that any pastime or pleasure could
arise by seeing poor creatures interchangeably strike one another to death,
and humane blood to run like water along the streets.

It was not then without cause, but by a special will of God to revenge
cruelty, Flor.
that the bondslaues (conducted by Spartacus the fencer) rebelled against their
masters in Rome, after they had broken through the guards of Lentulus his
house, and issuing out of Capua, gathered together above ten thousand fighting
men, and encamped themselves in Mount Vesuvius, where being besieged by Clodius
Glaber, they sallied so rudely and boisterously upon him, that the victory and
spoil of their enemies tents, remained on their sides: after this, they ran
over all the land, forraged the country, and destroyed many villages and
towns, but especially these four, Nola, Nocera, Terreneuae, and Metaponte,
were by them sacked and spoiled with a strange and bloody overthrow: after all
which, having encountered two Consuls, they overcame Lentulus on mount Apennine,
and discomfited Gaius Cassius here Modene: all which victories and luckie
proceedings did so embolden and puff up the courage of captain Fencer, that
he determined to give an alarm to Rome, and to lay siege unto it: but the
Romans preparing and directing all their forces to withstand their practices,
gave him and his crew so sore a repulse, that from Rome they were feign to fly
to the uttermost borders of Italy, and there seeing themselves pent in on all
sides, and driven to deep extremity, they gave so desperate an onset upon their
enemies, that both their captain and they were all slain. And thus the Romans
made jolly pastime with their fencers and bondslaues, and more (I think at
this time) than they either looked or wished for: for four hundred of them
being taken by the bondmen, were enforced to show them pastime at the same
game, Oros. lib. 5. c. 24.
whereat they had often times made themselves merry at their costs, and to kill
one another, as they had beforetime caused them to do.

How curious and desirous the people of Rome was wont to be of beholding these
bloody and mischieiuous games, Cornel. Tacit. Annal. lib. 4.
Cornelius Tacitus in the fourth boooke of his Annals declares at large:
where he reports, That in the city of the Fidenauts (in the twelfth year of
the reign of Tiberius) the people being gathered together to behold the
fencers prises, were fifty thousand of them hurt and maimed at one time by the
Amphitheatre that fell upon them: ^ cruel pastime indeed, and a strange
accident, not coming by adventure (as some suppose) but by the just vengeance
of God, to suppress such pernicious and uncivil sports. The same story is
registered by Paulus Orosius in his seventh book, with this adiection, That at
that time were slain more than twenty thousand persons.

I can not pass over in silence two notable and memorable histories of two
lions, Senec. lib. 1. de benefic.
recorded by two famous Authors, Seneca the one, and Aulus Gellius the other.
The first of whom reports, that he saw on the Theater, a lion, who seeing a
slave that sometimes had been his keeper thrown among the beasts to be
devoured, acknowledged him and defended him from their teeth, and would not
suffer any of them to do him hurt. Aul. Gell. Noct. Attic. l. 5. c. 14.
The second brings the testimony of one Appianus, that affirmed himself to
have seen at Rome a lion, who for old acquaintance sake which he had with a
condemned servant, fawned upon him, and cleared him in like manner from the
fury of the other beasts; the history was this:

A certain bondslaue, too roughly handled by his master, forsook him, and
fled away, and in his flight retiring into a desert, and not knowing how to
bestow himself, took up a cave for his lodging, where he had not long abode,
but a mighty lion came halting to his den, with a sore and bloody leg: the
poor slave all forgone at this strange and ougly sight, looked every minute to
be devoured, but the lion in another mood came fawningly and softly toward
him, as if he would complain unto him of his grief: whereat (somewhat
heartened) he bethought himself to apply some medecin to his wound, and to
bind up the sore as well as he could, which he had no sooner done, but the
lion made out for his prey, and ere long returning, brought home to his host
and surgeon certain gobbets of raw flesh, which he half rosting upon a rock
by the sun beams, made his daily sustenance, for the time of his abode
there: notwithstanding at length wearied with this odd and savage life, and
hating to abide long in that estate, he forsook the desert, and put himself
again to adventure: now it chanced, that he was taken by his old master, and
carried from Egypt to Rome, to the end to be an actour in those beastly
tragedies, but by good chance his old patient the lion (taken also since his
departure, being ready amongst other beasts to play his part) knew him by and
by, and ran unto him, fawning and making much of him: the people wondering at
this strange accident, after enquiry made of the cause thereof, gave him the
Lion and caused him to lead him in a string through the city for a miracle: for
indeed both this and the former deserve no other name. Thus God reprooueth the
sauadge inhumanitie of men, by the example of the wild and furious beasts, at
whose teeth poor servants found more favor, than at their masters hands.

The Emperor Constantine, weighing the indignity of these and such like
pastimes, and knowing how far they ought to be banished from the society of
men, by a public edict abolished all such bloody and monstrous spectacles. In
like manner these monomachies and single combats performed in places enclosed
for the purpose, wherein one at the least if not both must of necessity die,
ought to be abrogated in a Christian policy, as by the Laterane council it
was well enacted with this penalty, That whosoever should in that manner be
slain, his body should be deprived of Ecclesiastical burial: and truly most
commonly it comes to pass, that they that presuming most upon their own
prowess and strength, are most forward in offering combat, either loose their
lives, or gain discredit, which is more grievous than death.

CHAP. XVII. Of such as exercise too much rigor and Severity.
FVrthermore we must understand, that God does not only forbid murder and
bloodshed, but also all tyranny and oppression, therein providing for the weak
against the strong, the poor against the rich, and bondslaues against their
masters: to the end, that none might be trod under foot and oppressed of
others, under pain of his indignation. Insomuch therefore as the Romans used
such rigor toward their servants, it came to pass by a just judgment of
God, that they being lords over all the world, were three sundry times driven
by their servants into great extremities. As first in Rome within the walls,
at the same time when they also were troubled with the seditious factio^s of
their tribunes. Secondly in Sicily, where they horribly laid wast the whole
country* the cause of which commotion was, because the Romans had chained a
multitude of slaves together; and in that order sent them to manure and til the
ground: for a certain Sirian first assembled two thousand men of them that came
next hand, then breaking up the prisons, multiplied his army to forty thousand,
and with them pulled down castles, razed up towns, and destroyed every where.
The third undertaken by a shepherd, who having killed his master, set at
liberty all the bondmen, and prepared an army of them, wherewith he spoiled
cities, towns, and castles, and discomfited the armies of Seru^lius and
Lucullus, who were Pretours at that time: but at last they were destroyed and
rooted out by little and little: and this good service got the Romans at their
servants hands.

As every nation has his proper virtue and vice ascribed to it, so the
Spaniards for their part are noted famous for cruelty toward their subjects
and vassals, insomuch that (as experience in many witnesses) they are
intolerable in that kind: for which cause they have borne the mark of Gods
justice, for their rigorous and b^rbarous handling of the poor west Indians,
whom they have brought to that extremity by putting them to such excessive
travels in digging their mines of gold (as namely in the island Hispagnola)
that the most part by sighs and tears wish by death to end their miseries:
Bonzoni. Milan. of the new world.
many (first killing their children) have desperately hung themselves on high
trees: some have thrown themselves headlong from steep mountains, and others
cast themselves into the sea to be rid of their troubles: but the tyrants have
never escaped scotfree, but came always to some miserable end or other: for
some of them were destroyed by the inhabitants, others slew one another with
their own hands, provoked by insatiable avarice, some have been drowned in
the sea, and others starued in the desert; in fine, few escaped unpunished.

Bombadilla, one of the governors of Hispagnola, after he had swaied there
awhile, and enriched himself by the sweat and charge of the inhabitants, was
called home again into Spain: whitherward (according to the commandment
received) as he embarked himself, shipping with him so much treasure as in
value amou^ted to more than an hundred and fifty thousand ducats, beside many
pieces and grains of gold, which he carried to the Spanish queen for a
present, whereof one weighed three thousand ducats: there arose such a
horrible and outrageous tempest in the broad sea, and beat so violently against
his ships, that four and twenty vessels were shiuered in pieces and drowned
at that blow; there perished Bombadilla himself with most of his captains,
and more than five hundred Spaniards, that thought to return full rich into
the country, and became with all their treasures a prey unto the fishes.

In the year of our Lord 1541, the eight day of September, ^he same author.
there chanced in the city Suatimala which (lies in the way from Nicaragna
Westward) a strange and admirable judgment. After the death of Auarado, who
subdued this province, and founded the city, and was but a little before slain
in fight, it rained so strangely and vehemently all this whole day and night,
that of a sudden so huge a deluge and flood of waters ouerflowed the earth,
streaming from the bottom of the mountains into the lower grounds, with such
violence, that stones of incredible bigness were carried with it; which tumbling
strongly downwards, bruised and burst in pieces whatsoever was in their way. In
the mean while there was heard in the air fearful cries and voices, and a
black cow was seen running up and down in the midst of the water, that did
much hurt. The first house that was overthrown by this tempest, was dead
Auarados, wherein his widow (a very proud woman that held the government of the
whole province in her hand, and had before despited God for her husbands death)
was slain with all her household, and in a moment the city was either drowned
or subverted: there perished in this tempest of men and women, six score
persons: but they that at the beginning of the flood fled, saved their lives.
The morrow after the waters were surceased, one might see the poor Spaniards
lie along the fields, some maimed in their bodies, other with broken arms or
legs, or otherwise miserably wounded. And thus did God revenge he monstrous
Spanish cruelties exercised upon those poor people, whom in stead of enticing
by fair and gentle means to the knowledge of the true God and his son
Christ, they terrified by extraordinary tyranny (for such is the Spanish
nature) making them think that Christians were the cruellest and most wicked
men of the earth.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Adulterers.
IT follows by the order of our subject, now to touch the transgressions of
the third commandment of the second. Table, which is, Thou shall not commit
Adultery; In which words, as also in many other texts of Scripture, Adultery
is forbidden, and grievous threatenings denounced against all those that
defiling their bodies with filthy and vnpure actions, estrange themselves from
God, and conioyne themselves to whores and ribauds.

This sin did the Israelites commit with the women of Midian, by means whereof,
they were to follow strange gods, and to fall into Gods heavy displeasure, who
by a cruel plague destroyed 24 thousand of them for the same sin. And
forasmuch as the Madianites (through the wicked and pernicious counsel of
Balaam) did lay this snare for them, and were so villainous and shameless, as
to prostitute, and be bauds unto their own wives; therefore they were by the
express commandment of God discomfited, their kings and false prophets with
all their men and women, except only their unpolluted virgins, that had known
no man, slain: and all their cities and dwellings, burned and consumed to
ashes. As every one ought to have regard and care to their honesty, so maids
especially, whose whole credit and reputation, hangs thereupon; for they that
make no account thereof, but suffer themselves to be polluted with any
filthiness, draw upon them not only most vile infamy, but also many great
miseries: as is proved by the daughter of Hippomenes prince of Athens, who
being a whore, her father shut up in a stable with a wild horse, giving him no
prouender, nor other meat to eat, that the horse (naturally furious enough,
but more enraged by famine) might tear her in pieces, and with her carcass,
refresh his hunger, as he did. Pontius Aufidian, understanding that his
daughter had been betrayed and sold into a leachers hands, by a slave of his
that was her schoolmaster, put them both to death. In like manner served Pub.
Attilius, Falisque his daughter that fell into the same infamy. Viues
reports, that in our fathers days, Lud. Viues.
two brothers of Arragon perceiving their sister (whom they ever esteemed for
honest) to be with child, (hiding their displeasure until her delivery was
past) came in suddenly, and stabbed her into the belly with their daggers, till
they killed her, in the presence of a sage matron that was witness to their
deed. The same author says, That when he was a young man, there were three in
the same country, that conspired the death of a companion of theirs, that went
about to commit this villainy, and as they conspired, so they performed it,
strangling him to death with a napkin, as he was going to his filthiness. As
for adulterers, examples are infinite, both of their wicked lives and miserable
ends. In which number, many of them may be scored, that making profession of a
single life, and undertaking the vow of chastity, show themselves
notwithstanding monstrous knaves and ribauds, as many of the Popes themselves
have done. Petr. praemonst.
As we read of John the eleventh, bastard son to Lando his predecessor, who
by means of his adulteries with Theodora then gouernesse of Rome came by
degrees to the Papacy, so he passed the blessed time of his holy popeship with
this virtuous dame, to whom he served in stead of a common horse to sati^fie
her insatiable and disordinate lust: but the good and holy father was at last
taken and cast in prison, and there smothered to death with a pillow. Benedict
the eleventh, dining on a time with an Abboresse his familiar, ^al.
was poisoned with certain figs that he eat. Clement the fifth, was reported
to be a common baud, and a protector of whores; he went apart into Auignion,
and there stayed of purpose to do nothing but whore hunt: he died in great
torment of the bloody flux, plurisie, and grief of the stomach.

CHAP. XIX. Of Rapes.
NOw if adultery which with liking and consent of parties is committed, be
condemned, how much more grievous and heinous is the offense, and more guilty
the offendour, when with violence the chastity of any is assailed, and
enforced? This was the sin wherewith Sichem the son of Hemor the Leuit is
marked in holy scripture, for he ravished Dina, Iaacobs daughter, Genesis
for which cause Simeon and Lui her brethren revenged the injury done done unto
their sister upon the head of not only him and his father, but all the males
that were in the city, by putting them to the sword. It was a custom among
the Spartanes and Messenians during the time of peace betwixt them, to send
yearly to one another certain of their daughters to celebrate certain feasts
and sacrifices that were amongst them, now in continuance of time it chanced
that fifty of the Lacedemonian Virgins being come to those solemn feasts,
were pursued by the Messenian gallants to have their pleasures of the^: but
they jointly making resistance, and fighting for their honesties, strove so
long, not one yielding themselves a prey into their hands, till they all died:
whereupon arose so long and miserable a war, that all the country of Messena
was destroyed thereby. Aristoclides a Tyrant of Orchomenus a city of Arcadia
fell enamoured with a maid of Stymphalis: who seeing her father by him slain
because he seemed to stand in his pu^poses light, fled to the Temple of Diana
to take Sanctuary, neither could once be plucked from the image of the
goddess until her life was taken from her: but her death so incensed the
Arcadians that they fell to arms and sharply revenged her cruel injury.
Appius a Roman a man of power and authority in the city, ^^us Liuius.
enflamed with the love of a Virgin whose father hight Virginius, would needs
make her his servant, to the end to abuse her the more freely, and whilst he
endeavored with all his power and policy to accomplish his immoderate lust,
her father slew her with his own hands, more willing to prostitute her to
death, than to so foul an opprobrie and disgrace: but every man provoked and
stirred up with the woefulness of the event, with one consent pursued,
apprehended, and imprisoned the foul lecher, who fearing the award of a most
shameful death, killed himself to prevent a further mischief.

In the year of our Lord 1271 under the reign of the Emperor Rodolphe, Nic.
Gil. vol. 1.
the Sicilians netled and enraged with the horrible whoredoms, adulteries and
Rapes, which the Garrisons that had the government over them committed, not
able to endure any longer their insolent and outrageous demeanor, entered a
secret and common conspiracy upon a time appointed for the purpose, which was
on Easter sunday at the shutting in of the evening, to set upon them with one
accord, and to murder so many as they could: as they did, for at that instant
they massacred so many throughout the whole island, that of all the great
multitude there suruiued not one to bear tidings or bewail the dead. At
Naples it chanced in the Kings palace, B^mb. lib. 3. hist. Venet.
as young King Frederick, Ferdinands son, entered the privy chamber of the
Queen his mother, to salute her and the other Ladies of the court, that the
Prince of Bissenio waighting in the outward chamber for his return, was slain
by one of his own servants that suddenly gave him with his sword three
deadly strokes in the presence of many beholders, which deed, he confessed
that he had watched three years to perform, in regard of an injury done
unto his sister, and in her to him, Benzoni. Milan. of the new found land.
whom he ravished against her will. The Spaniards that first took the Isle
Hispaniola were for their whoredoms and Rapes whhich they committed upon the
wives and Virgins, all murdered by the inhabitants.

The inhabitants of the Province Cumana, when they saw the beastly outrage of
the Spanish nation, The same author.
that lay along their coasts to fish for pearl, in forcing and rauishing
(without difference) their women young and old, set upon them upon a Sunday
morning, with all their force, and slew all that ever they found by the sea
coasts Westward, till there remained not one alive: And the fury of the rude
uncivil people was so great that they spared not the Monks in their
cloisters, but cut their throats as they were mumbling their Masses; burnt up
the Spanish houses, both religious and private, burst in pieces their belles,
drew about their Images, hurld down their crucifixes and cast them in disgrace
and contempt overthwart their streets to be trodden upon, nay they destroyed
whatsoever belonged unto them, to their very dogs and hens, and their own
Countriemen that served them in any service whether religious or other, they
spared not, they beat the earth and cursed it with bitter curses; because it
had vpholden such wicked and wretched caitifes. Now the report of this massacre
was so fearful and terrible that the Spaniards which were in Cubagna doubted
much of their lives also: and truly not without great cause, for if the Indians
of the Continent had been furnished and provided with sufficient store of
barks, they had passed even into that Island, and had served them with the
same sauce, which their fellows were served with: for they wanted not will, but
hability to do it. And these are the goodly fruits of their adulteries and
Rapes, which the Spanish nation has reaped in their new found land.

The great calamity and overthrow which the Lacedaemonians endured at Leuctria,
wherein their chiefest strength and powers were weakened and consumed, was a
manifest punishment of their inordinate lust committed upon two Virgins, ^i.
Mel. lib. 2.
whom after they had ravished in that very place they cut in pieces and threw
them into a pit, and when their father came to complain him of the villainy,
they made so light account of his words that in stead of redress he found
nothing but reproach, and derision, so that with grief he slew himself upon
his daughters sepulcher: but how grievously the Lord revenged this injury,
hystories do sufficiently testify, and that Leuctrias calamity does bear
witness.

Pausan. lib. 2.
Brias a Grecian captain being received into a Citizens house as a guest,
forced his wife by violence to his lust: but when he was asleep, to revenge
her wrong she put out both his eyes: and afterward complained to the citizens
also, who deprived him of his office and cast him out of their city.

Macrinus the Emperor punished two soldiers that ravished their hostess on
this manner: he shut them up in an oxes bowels with their heads out, and so
partly with famishment, and partly with worms, and rottenness, they consumed
to death.

Johan magnus.
Rodericus king of the Goths in Spain forced an Earls daughter to his lust,
for which cause her father brought against him an army of Sarasens, and Moors,
and not only slew him with his son, but also quite extinguished the Gothicke
kingdom in Spain, in this war, and upon this occasion seven hundred
thousand men perished, as hystories record, and so a kingdom came to ruin by
the perverse lust of one lecher, Anno 714.

At the sacking and destruction of Thebes by king Alexander, a Thracian
captain which was in the Macedonian army took a noble Matron prisoner, called
Tymoclea, whom when by no persuasion of promises he could entise to his lust,
he constrained by force to yield unto it: Plut. in vita. Alexand. Sabel. lib.
5. c. 6.
but this noble minded woman invented a most witty and subtle shift both to
rid her self out of his hands and to revenge his injury: she told him that
she knew where a rich treasure lay hid in a deep pit whether when with
greediness of the gold he hastened, and standing upon the brinke pried and
peared into the bottom of it, she thrust him with both her hands into the
hole, and tumbled stones after him that he might never find means to come
forth: for which fact she was brought before Alexander to have justice, who
demanding her what she was, she answered that Theagenes who led the Thebane
army against the Macedonians, was her brother: Alexander perceiving the
marvelous constancy of the woman, and knowing the cause of her accusation to
be unjust; manumitted and set her free with her whole family.

When Cn. Manlius having conquered the Gallo-Grecians, pitched his army against
the Tectosages (people of Narbonia toward the Piren mountains) amongst other
prisoners, a very fair woman wife to Orgiagous Regulus was in the custody of a
Centurion, that was both lustful and covetous: Liuiu^. lib. 38.
This lecher tempted her first with fair persuasions, and seeing her
unwilling, compelled her with violence to yield her body, as a slave to
fortune, so to infamy and dishonor: after which act somewhat to mitigate the
wrong, he gave her promise of release and freedom, upon condition of a
certain sum of money; and to that purpose sent her servant that was captive
with her to her friends to puruey the same: which he bringing, the Centurion
alone with the wronged lady, met him at a place appointed, and whilst he
weighed the money, by her counsel was murdered of her servants: so she
escaping carried to her husband both his money, and threw at his feet the
villains head that had spoiled her of her chastity.

Andreas king of Hungary having undertaken the voyage into Siria for the
recouety of the holy land, together with many other kings and Princes,
committed the charge of his kingdom and family to one Bannebanius, Chronica
Hungariae.
a wise and faithful man, who discharged his office as faithfully as he took
it willingly upon him: now the Queen had a brother called Gertrude that came
to visit and comfort his sister in her husbands absence, and by that means
soiourned with her a long time, even so long till he fell deadly in love with
Bannebanus lady, a fair and virtuous woman, and one that was thought worthy
to keep company with the Queen continually: to whom when he had unfolded
his suit, and received such steadfast repulse that he was without all hope of
obtaining his desire, he began to droupe and pine, until the Queen his sister
perceiving his disease, found this perverse remedy for the cure thereof: she
would often give him opportunity of discourse, by withdrawing her self from
them being alone, and many times leave them in secret and dangerous places, of
purpose that he might have his will of her, but she would never consent unto
his lust, and therefore at last, when he saw no remedy, he constrained her
by force, and made her subject to his will against her will: which vile
disgraceful indignity when she had suffered, she returned home sad and
melancholy, and when her husband would have embraced her, she fled from him,
asking him if he would embrace a whore, and related unto him her whole abuse,
desiring him either to rid her from shame by death, or to revenge her wrong and
make known unto the world the injury done unto her. There needed no more spurs
to prick him forward for revenge, he posteth to the court, and vpbraiding the
Queen with her ungrateful and abominable treachery, runs her through with
his sword, and taking her heart in his hand, proclaims openly that it was not
a deed of inconsideration, but of judgment, in recompense of the loss of his
wives chastity: forthwith he flies toward the King his Lord, that now was
at Constantinople, and declaring to him his fact, and showing to him his sword
besmeared with his wives blood, submits himself to his sentence either of
death in rigor, or pardon in compassion: but the good King enquiring the truth
of the cause, though grieved with the death of his wife, yet acquit him of the
crime, and held him in as much honor and esteem as ever he did, condemning
also his wife as worthy of that which she had endured, for her vnwomanlike and
traitorous part. A notable example of justice in him, and of punishment in her,
that forgetting the law of womanhood and modesty, made her self a baud unto
her brothers lust: whose memory as it shall be odious and execrable, so his
justice deserves to be engraven in marble with caracters of gold.

Equal to this king in punishing a Rape, was Otho the first, Albert. Krant.
lib. 3.
for as he passed through Italy with an army, a certain woman cast her self
down at his feet for justice against a villain that had spoiled her of her
chastity; who deferring the execution of the law till his return, because his
have was great, the woman asked who should then put him in mind thereof, he
answered, This church which thou see shall be a witness betwixt me and
thee, that I will then revenge thy wrong. Now when he had made an end of his
warfare, in his return, as he beheld the church, he called to mind the woman
and caused her to be fetched, who falling down before him desired now pardon for
him whom before she had accused, seeing he had now taken her to wife, and
redeemed his injury with sufficient satisfaction: Not so I swear (quoth Otho)
your compacting shall not infringe, or collude the sacred ^ but he shall die
for his former fault, and so he caused hi^ be put to death. A notable example
for them that after they have committed filthiness with a maid, think it no
sin, but competent amends, if they take her in marriage whom they abused before
in fornication.

Nothing inferior to these in punishing this sin, was Gonzaga duke of Ferrara,
as by this history following may appear: in the year 1547 a citizen of Comun,
Theat. histor.
was cast into prison upon an accusation of murder, whom to deliver from the
judgment of death, his wife wrought all means possible, therefore coming to
the captain that held him prisoner, she sued to him for her husbands life, who
upon condition of her yielding to his lust and payment of 200 duccats, promised
safe deliverance for him: the poor woman seeing that nothing could redeem her
husbands life, but loss and shipwreck of her own honesty, told her husband,
who willed her to yield to the captains desire, and not to pretermit so good an
occasion, wherefore she consented: but after the pleasure past, the traitorous
and wicked captain put her husband to death notwithstanding: which injury when
she complained to Gonzaga duke of Ferrara, he caused the captain first to
restore back her 200 dukats, with an addition of 700 crowns, and secondly to
marry her to his wife, and lastly, when he hoped to enjoy her body, to be
hanged for his treachery. O noble Justice, and comparable to the worthiest
deeds of antiquity, and deserving to be held in perpetual remembrance!

As these before mentioned excelled in punishing this sin, so this fellow
following excelled in committing it, and in being punished for it; Theat.
histor.
his name is Nouellus Cararius Lord of Pauie, a man of note and credit in the
world for his greatness, but of infamy and discredit for his wickedness. This
man after many cruel murders and bloody practices, which he exercised in
every place where he came, fell at last into this notorious, and abominable
crime: for lying at Vincentia he fell in love with a young maid of excellent
beauty but more ^ent honesty, an honest citizens daughter, whom he ^anded
her Parents to send unto him, that he might have his pleasure of her: but when
they regarding their credit, and she her chastity, more then the Tyrants
command, refused to come; he took her violently out of their house, and
constrained her body to his lust; and after to ad cruelty to villainy, chopped
her into small pieces, and sent them to her Parents in a basket for a present:
wherewith her poor father astonished, carried it to the Senate, who sent it to
Venice, desiring them to consider the fact, and to revenge the cruelty. The
Venetians undertaking their defense, made war upon the Tyrant, and besieging
him in his own city, took him at last prisoner, and hanged him with his two
sons Francis and William.

Diocles, son of Pisistratus, Tyrant of Athens, for rauishing a maid, Lanquet.
was slain by her brother; whose death when Hippias his brother undertook to
revenge, and caused the maidens brother to be racked, that he might discover
the other conspirators, he named all the tyrants friends (which by commandment
being put to death) the Tyrant asked whither there were any more; none but only
thy self (quoth he) whom I would wish next to be hanged, whereby it was
perceived how abundantly he had revenged his sisters chastity, by whose
notable stomach all the Athenians being put in remembrance of their liberty,
expelled their tyrant Hippias out of their city.

Mundus a young Gentleman of Rome, Lanquet. chron.
ravished the chaste Matron Paulina in this fashion: when he perceived her
resolution not to yield unto his lust, he persuaded the priests of Isis to say
that they were warned by an Oracle, how that Anubius the god of Egypt, desired
the company of the said Paulina: to whom the chaste Matrone gave light
credence, both because she thought the Priests would not lie, and also because
it was accounted a great renown to have to do with a god: and thus by this
means was Paulina abused by Mundus in the temple of Isis, under the name of
Anubius, which thing being after disclosed by Mundus himself, was thus justly
revenged; the Priests were put to death, the temple beaten down to the ground,
the image of Isis thrown into Tiber, and the young men banished.

In the year of our Lord 955 Edwine succeeding his uncle Eldred was king of
England: Lanquet.
This man was so impudent that in the very day of his Coronation, he
soddainely withdrew himself from his lords, and in sight of certain persons,
ravished his own kinswoman, the wife of a Nobleman of his realm, and
afterward slew her husband, that he might have unlawful use of her beauty:
for which act he became so odious to his subjects and nobles, that they jointly
rose against him, and deprived him of his crown, when he had reigned four
years.

CHAP. XX. Other examples of Gods Judgments upon Adulterers.
AMongst all other things this is especially to be noted, how God (for a
greater punishment of the disordinate lust of men) stroke them with a new (yet
filthy and stinking) kind of disease, called the French pocks; though indeed
the Spaniards were the first that were infected therewith, by the heat which
they caught among the women of the new found lands, Paulus Iouius. Ben. b.
and sowed the seeds thereof first in Spain, and from thence sprinkled Italy
therewith, where the Frenchmen caught it, when Charles the eight their king
went against Naples; Guicciardine.
from whence the contagion spread it self throughout diverse places of Europe.
Barbary was so ouergrowen with it, that in all their cities the tenth part
escaped not untouched, nay almost not a family but was infected. From thence it
ran to Egypt, Siria, and to the great Cair; and it may nerehand truly be
said, that there was not a corner of the habitable world, where this not only
new and strange (for it was never heard of in ancient ages) but terrible and
hideous scourge of Gods wrath stretched not it self. They that were spotted
with it, and had it rooted in their bodies, led a languishing life full of
aches and torments, and carried in their visages filthy marks of unclean
behavior, as ulcers, boiles, and such like, that greatly disfigured them. And
herein we see the words of S. Paul verified, 1. Cor. 6.18.
That an Adulterer sins against his own body. Now for so much as the world
is so brutishly carried into this sin, as to none more, the Lord therefore
has declared his anger against it in diverse sorts, so that diverse times he
has punished it in the very act, or not long after, by a strange death. Sabell.
Of which Alcibiades, one of the great captains of Athens, may stand for an
example, who being polluted with many great and odious vices, and much given to
his pleasures, and subject to all uncleanness, ended his life in the midst
thereof: for as he was in company of a Phrigian strumpet (having flowne
thither to the king of Persia for shelter) was notwithstanding set upon by
certain guards, which the king (induced by his enemies) sent to slay him; but
they though in number many, through the conceived opinion of his notable valor,
durst not apprehend him at hand, but set fire to the house, standing themselves
in arms round about it to receive him if need were: He seeing the fire, leaped
through the midst of it, and so long defended himself amongst them all till
strength failed in himself, and blows increasing upon him constrained him to
give up his life amongst them.

Pliny tells of Cornelius Gallus and Q. Elerius, Pliny. lib. 7.
two Roman knights that died in the very action of filthiness.

Theodebert, the eldest son of Clotharius, Mich. Rit. Neap.
died amidst his whores, to whom he was (though married) too too much addicted.
The like befell one Bertrane Ferrier, Lib. de obedi.
at Barselon in Spain, according to the report of Pontanus. In like manner
there was one Giachet Geneue of Saluces, Fulgos. lib. 9. cap. 12.
a man that had both wife and children of his own, of good years, well
learned and of good esteem amongst his neighbor citizens, that secretly
haunted the company of a young woman; with who^ being coupled one evening in his
study he suddenly died: his wife and children seeing his long tarriance, when
time required to go to bed, called him and knocked at his door very hard, but
when no answer was made, they broke open the doors that were locked on the
inner side, and found him (to their great grief and dismay) lying upon the
woman stark dead, and her dead also.

Claudius of Asses, counselor of the Parliament of Paris (a man very evil
affected toward the professors of the Gospel) committed villainy with one of
his waighting maids, in the very midst whereof he was taken with an
apoplexy, which immediately after made an end of him.

CHAP. XXI. Showing that Stues ought not to be suffered amongst Christians.
BY this which has been spoken it appears manifestly, how infamous a thing
it is among Christians to privilege and allow public places for adulteries,
albeit it is a common thing in the greatest cities of Europe, yea and in the
very bowels of Christendom, where no such villainy should be tolerated. There
is nothing that can cast any coulor of excuse upon it, seeing it is expressly
contrary to Gods edict in many places, as first: Thou shall not commit
Adultery. And in the 19 of Leuit. 29. Thou shall not pollute thy daughter in
prostituting her to be a whore, least the land be defiled with whoredom, and
filled with wickedness. And in Deuteronomy. 23.17. Let there be no whore of the
daughters of Israel, neither a whorekeeper of the sons of Israel: this is
the decree of God, and the rule which he has given us to square our
affections by, and it admits no dispensation. But some do object that those
things are tolerated to avoid greater mischiefs: as though the Lord were not
well advised when he gave forth those commandments, or that mortal men had
more discretion than the immortal God. This truly is nothing else but to reject
and disanull that which Saint Paul requires as a duty of al Christians: Ephesians.
5.
namely, That fornication and all uncleanness should not once be named amongst
us, neither filthiness, foolish talking, or ieasting, which are things not
comely; for so much as no whoremonger, nor unclean person can have any
inheritance in the kingdom of God. Dial 3.
Plato the Philosopher, though a Panym and ignorant of the knowledge of the
true God, forbad expressly in his Commonwealth, Poets and Painters to
represent or set to the view any unclean and lascivious counterfeit, whereby
good manners might be any ways depraved. Lib. 7. cap. 7.
Aristotle following his masters steps ordained in his Politiques, That all
filthy communication should be banished out of his city. How far were they
then from giving leave and liberty for filthy and stinking brothel-houses to
be erected and maintained? In this therefore the very Heathen are a shame and
reproach to those that call themselves Christians and Catholics. Besides, the
goodly reason which they allege for their upholding of their stews is so
far from the truth, that the contrary is ever truer, namely that by their
odious and dishonest liberty more evil arises to the world, than otherwise
would, in so much as it sets open a wide door to al dissoluteness and
whoredoms, and an occasion of lechery and uncleanness even to those that
otherwise would abstain from all such filthy actions. How many young folk
are there, as well men as women, that by this means give themselves over to
looseness, and undo themselves utterly? how many murders are, have been,
and still will be committed thereby? What a disorder, confusion, and ignomie
of nature is it, for a father to lie with her with whom his son had been but a
little before? Or the son to come after the father? and such like: but by the
just judgment of God it comes to pass that that which is thought to be
enclosed within the precincts of certain appointed places, spreads it self
at large so far, that oftentimes whole streets and cities are poisoned; yea
even their houses, who in regard of their place either in the law or policy,
ought to stop the stream of such vices: nay which is more marvel, they that
with open mouth vaunt themselves to be Gods Leiutenants on earth, Christ's
vicars, and successors to his Apostles, are so filthy and abominable, as to
suffer public bauds and whores to be under their noses uncontrolled; and
which is more, to enrich their treasures by their traffic. Cornelius Agrippa
says, that of all the hee-bauds of his time, Pope Sextus was most infamous,
for he builded a most glorious and stately Stues (if any state or glory can
abide in so bad a place) as well for common Adultery, as unnatural Sodomy, to
be exercised in. He used (as Heliogabalus was wont to do) to maintain herds
of whores with whom he participated his friends and servants as they stood in
need; and by Adulteries reared yearly great revenues into his purse. Baleus
says, that at this day every whore in Rome paies tribute to the Pope, a Iulle,
which amounted then to twenty thousand dukats by the year at least, but now
the number is so increased that it arises to forty thousand. I think there
is none ignorant how Pope Paul the third had by computation five and forty
thousand whores and courtizans, that paid him a monthly tribute for their
whoredoms; and thus also this holy father was a protector and vpholder of the
Stues, and deserved by his villainous behavior (for he was one of the lewdest
Adulterers of that time) to bear the name of the master and erector of these
filthy places: And herein both he and the rest of that crew have showed
themselves enemies to God, and true Antichrists indeed, and have not only
imitated, but far surpassed shameless and wicked Caligula in all filthy and
monstrous dealings. Deuteronomy. 23.
Thou shall not (says Moses) bring the hire of a whore into the house of the
Lord thy God for any vow: by what title then can these honest men exact so
great a rent from their whorish tenants, seeing it is by the law of God a thing
so abominable? truly it can no otherwise be but a kind of art of bauderie, as
may be gathered out of the law which is in F. de ritu nuptius: L. palam. Qui
habet mancipia, etc. the meaning whereof is, That he which for gain
prostituteth his slaves to the lust of men, and draws thereby commodity to
himself, is a baud: He is also stained with infamy by the law Athletas, that
pertaketh the gain or wages of a whore. How much more then is that law of
Justinian to be commended which commands all whores to be banished out of
the confines of Cities and Commonwealths? Socrates lib. 5. cap. 18. Eccles.
histor.
It was also a worthy and memorable act of Theodesius when he rooted the
Stues out of Rome; and of Saint Lewis king of France that pulled down the
Stues at Paris, and chased away as near as he could, all loose and whorish
women from his dominions. Cornel. Tacitus.
The ancient Romans permitted no woman to become an open whore, before she had
made a formal declaration of her intent before the Aediles; thinking by this
means to quench their hot lust, because they would be ashamed to make such
an open confession. And by a decree of the Senate it was enacted that no woman
coming of gentle stock should be suffered to give her self over to this
trade, it being a stain and blot to true Nobility.

CHAP. XXII. Of whoredoms committed under color of Marriage.
SEeing that oftentimes it falls out that those which in show seem most
honest, think it a thing lawful to converse together as man and wife by some
secret and private contract, without making account of the public celebration
of marriage as necessary, but for some worldly respects according as their
foolish and disordinate affections mispersuadeth them, to dispense therewith:
It shall not be impertinent as we go, to give warning how unlawful all such
conversation is, and how contrary to good manners, and to the laudable
customs of all civil and well governed people. For it is so far from
deserving the name of marriage, that on the other side it can be nothing but
plain whoredom and fornication: Lib. de pudi.
the which name and title Tertullian gives to all secret and privy meetings
which have not been allowed of, received, and blessed by the church of God.
Again besides the evil example which is exhibited, there is this mischief
moreover, that the children of such a bed cannot be esteemed legitimate, yea
and God himself accurseth such lawless familiarity, as the mischieues that
arise therefrom do declare, whereof this one example which we allege shall
serve for sufficient proof.

In the reign of Lewis the ninth king of France, and Julius the second Pope of
Rome, there was a Gentleman of Naples called Antonio Bologne that had been
governor of Frederick of Arragons house when he was king of Naples, and had
the same office under the Duchess of Malfi after she was widow, with whom in
protract of time, he grew to have such secret and privy acquaintance (albeit
she was a Princess and he her servant) that he enioied her as his own wife.
And thus they conuersed secretly together under coulor of marriage accorded
betwixt them, the space of certain years, until she bore unto him three
children: by which means, their private dealings which they so much desired to
smother and keep close, burst out and bewraied it self. The matter being come
to her brothers ears, they took it so to the heart, that they could not rest,
until they had revenged the vile injury and dishonor which they pretended to
have been done to them and their whole house, equally by the^ both. Therefore
when they had chased them first from Ancona, whether in hope of quietness they
had fled out of Naples, they drove them also out of Tuscane: who seeing
themselves pursued so hotely on every side, resolved to make toward Venice,
thinking there to find some safety: But in the midway she was overtaken and
brought back to Naples, where in short space she miserably ended her life:
For her brothers guard strangled her to death, together with her chambermaid,
who had served in stead of a baud to them; and her poor infants which she had
by the said Bologne. But he by the goodness of his horse escaping, took his
flight to Millaine, where he soiourned quietly a long while, until at the
instant pursuit of one of her brothers, the Cardinal of Arragon, he was slain
in the open streets, when he least mistrusted any present danger. And this was
a true Cardinal-like exploit indeed, representing that mildness,
mercifulness, and good nature which is so required of every Christian, in
traitorous murdering a man so many years after the first rancour was
conceived, that might well in half that space have been digested, in
fostering hatred so long in his cruel heart, and waging ruffians and
murderers to commit so monstrous an act: wherein albeit the Cardinals cruelty
was most famous, as also in putting to death the poor infants, yet Gods
justice bare the sway, that used him as an instrument to punish those, who
under the veil of secret marriage, thought it lawful for them to commit any
villainy. And thus God busieth sometime the most wicked about his will, and
makes the rage and fury of the devil himself serve for means to bring to
pass his fearful judgments.

CHAP. XXIII. Of unlawful marriages, and their issues.
NOw to redress all such evils as have before been mentioned, and to avoid
all inconveniences in this case, God of his bountiful mercy has ordained
marriage as a remedy to be applied to all such as have not the gift of
continency, least they should fall into fornication: which notwithstanding
many shameless creatures that blush not at their own filthiness, but rather
rejoice thererein, make no account of. Such are they, that making marriage one
of the sacraments of the Church, do nevertheless despise it as a vile and
profane thing; albeit that the Apostle says, That marriage is honorable
among all men, and the bed undefiled; but whoremongers and adulterers God will
judge. But they have it not in that estimation, seeing by authority they are
deprived of the use thereof, and not of adultery. That which is honest and
laudable is forbidden, and that which is sinful and unlawful, allowed of.
This (says Sleidan) is the custom of the Germane bishops, Lib. 4.
for money to suffer their priests to keep harlots, not exacting any other
punishment, saving their purses to privilege their knaueries. But these reins
of liberty were let more loose in certain villages of the Cantons of the
Switzers, Lib. 3.
where it was not only winked at, but also commanded, that every new priest
should have his private whore for his own tooth, that he might not intermeddle
with other men's. Neither was it without reason that John le Maire said, How
under the show and color of chastity, priests whoredoms did ouerflow, being
men abandoned to all dissolute and riotous living. Now then it were far
better to marry than to burn, yet in such sort to marry, that all giddiness
and inconsideration set aside, every one should match himself according to his
degree and age, with great respect and good aduisement had unto them both, to
the end to avoid those mischiefs and enormities which oftentimes happen, when
either by an over hardy, foolish, and rash presumption, a man would nestle
himself in an higher nest than his estate and calling requires, or by a
sensual and fleshly lust passing the bounds of reason, goes about to
constrain, and interrupt the law of nature. The chiefest thing that is
required in marriage, is the consent of parties, as well of themselves that are
to be joined together, as of each of their parents; the contrary whereof is
constraint, where either party is forced: Judge. 21.
as it happened to those two hundred maids, which the Beniamites took by
force and violence to be their wives.

This was a reproach to Romulus, the first king of Rome, when he ravished the
Sabine virgins that came to see their sports, which was cause of great war
betwixt them. Moreover, besides the mutual joint of love which ought to be
betwixt man and wife, it is necessary that they that marry, do marry in the
Lord, to serve him in greater purity, and with less disturbance; which can
not be, if a Christian marry an infidel, for the great difficulties and
hindrances that usually spring from such a root. Exodus 34 16, Deuteronomy. 7 3.
Therefore it was straightly forbidden the people of God to contract marriages
with Idolatours; yea, and the holy Patriarchs before any such law was given,
had carefully great regard (in the marriages of their children) to this thing,
as the example of Abraham does sufficiently declare. Therefore they that have
any manner of government and authority over unmarried folks, whether they be
fathers, mothers, kinsmen, or tutours, ought to have especial care and regard
thereof. Yea Christian princes and lords or rulers of commonwealths, should not
in this respect be so supine and negligent in the performance of their offices,
as once to permit and suffer this amongst them, which is so directly contrary
to the word of God; but rather by especial charge forbid it, to the end, that
both their laws might be conformable, and in every respect agreeable to the
holy ordinances of God, and that the way might be stopped to those mischiefs,
which were likely to arise from such evil concluded marriages. For what reason
is it, that a young maid, baptized and brought up in the Church of Christ,
should be given in marriage to a worshipper of images and idols, and sent to
such a country where the worship of God is not so much as once thought upon?
Is not this to pluck a soul out of the house of God, and thrust it into the
house of the devil? out of heaven into hell? than which, what greater
Apostasy or falling from God can there be? whereof all they are guilty that
either make up such marriages, or give their good will and consent to them, or
do not hinder the cause and proceedings of them, if any manner of way they
can. Now that this confusion and mixture of religion in marriages is unpleasant
and noisome to God, it manifestly appears by the sixth chapter of Genesis,
where it is said, That because the sons of God, [to wit, those whom God had
separated for himself from the beginning of the world to be his peculiar
ones,] were so evil advised, as to be allured with the beauties of the
daughters of men, [to wit, of those which were not chosen of God to be his
people; and to marry with them, corrupting themselves by this contagious
acquaintance of profane people, with whom they should have had nothing to
do,] that therefore God was incensed against them, and resolved simply to
revenge the wickedness of each party without respect. Beside, the monstrous
fruits of those profane marriages, do sufficiently declare their odiousnes in
Gods sight: for from them arose giants of strength and stature exceeding the
proportion of men, who by their hugenes did much wrong and violence in the
world, and gained fearful and terrible names to themselves: but God (provoked
by their oppressions) drowned their tyrannies in the flood, and made an end of
the world for their sakes. In the time of the Judges in Israel, the Israelites
were chastised by the hand of God for this same fault; for they took to wives
the daughters of the uncircumcised, and gave them their daughters also. Judge. 3.
In like sort framed they themselves by this means to their corrupt manners and
superstitions, and to the service of their idolatrous Gods: But the Lord of
heaven rained down anger upon their heads, and made them subject to a
stranger, the king of Mesopotamia, whom they served the space of eight years.
1. King. 11.
Look what happened to king Solomon for giving his heart to strange women that
were not of the household of Gods people: He that before was replenished with
such admirable wisdom, that he was the wonder of the world, was in his old age
deprived thereof, and besotted with a kind of dulnes of understanding, and led
aside from the true knowledge of God to serve idols, and to build them altars
and chapels for their worship; and all this to please forsooth his wives
humors, whose acquaintance was the chief cause of his misery and apostasy.

CHAP. XXIIII. Touching Incestuous marriages.
NOw as it is unlawful to contract marriages with parties of contrary
religion, so it is as unlawful to marry those that are near unto us by any
degree of kindred or affinity, as it is inhibited not only by the law of God,
but also by civil and politic constitutions; whereunto all nations have ever
by the sole instinct of nature agreed and accorded, except the Egyptians and
Persians, whose abominations were so great, as to take their own sisters and
mothers to be their wives, Cambyses, king of Media and Persia, married his own
sister, but it was not long ere he put her to death; a just proof of an unjust
and accursed marriage. Many others there were in protract of time, that in
their insatiable lusts, showed themselves no less unstaid and unbridled in
their lawless affections than he: One of which, was Antiochus king of Judah,
son of Herodes, surnamed Great; Joseph antiq. lib. 17. cap. 15.
who blushed not to marry his sister, the late wife of his deceased brother
Alexander, by whom she had borne two children: but for this and diverse other
hi^ good deeds, he lost not only his goods (which were confiscated) but was
himself also banished out of his country into a foreign place, from Judea to
Vienna in France.

Herod also the Tetrarch was so impudent and shameless, The same, lib. 18.
cap. 9.
that he took from his brother Philip his wife Herodias, and espoused her
unto himself: which shameless and incestuous deed John Baptist reproouing in
him, told him plainly how unlawful it was, for him to possess his brothers
wife; but the punishment that befell him for this, and many other his sins,
we have heard in the former book, and need not here to be repeated.

Anton. Caracalla, took to wife his mother in law, allured thereunto by her
fair enticements, whose wretched and miserable end has already been touched
in the tenth Chapter of this book.

The Emperor Heraclius, after the decease of his first wife, married his own
niece, the daughter of his brother, which turned mightily to his undoing: for
besides that, that under his reign, and as it were, by his occasion, the
Saracens entered the borders of Christendom, and spoiled and destroyed his
dominions under his nose, to his soul and utter disgrace: he was over and
above smitten corporally with so grievous and irksome a disease of dropsy,
that he died thereof.

Thus many men run riot, by assuming to themselves too much liberty, and
break the bounds of civil honesty, required in all contracts, and too
audaciously set themselves against the commandment of God, which ought to be
of such authority with all men, that none (be they never so great) should dare
to derogate one jot from them, unless they meant wholly to oppose themselves
as professed enemies to God himself, and to turn all the good order of things
into confusion. All which notwithstanding some of the Romish Popes have
presumed to encroch upon Gods right, and to disanull by their foolish decrees,
the laws of the almighty: Sleid. lib. 9.
As Alexander the sixth did, who by his bull approved the incestuous marriage
of Ferdinand king of Naples with his own Aunt, his father Alphonsus sister by
the fathers side, which otherwise (says Cardinal Bembus) had been against
all law and equity, and in no case to be tolerated and borne withal.

Henry the seventh, king of England, after the death of his eldest son
Arthur, caused (by the special dispensation of Pope Julius) his next son
named Henry, to take to wife his brothers widow called Katherine, daughter to
Ferdinando king of Spain, for the desire he had to have this Spanish
affinity continued: who succeeding his father in the crown, after continuance
of time, began to advise himself, and to consult whether this marriage with
his brothers wife might be lawful or no; and found it by conference both of
holy and profane laws, utterly unlawful: whereupon he sent certain bishops
to the Queen to give her to know, That the Popes dispensation was altogether
unjust, and of none effect to privilege such an act: to whom she answered,
that it was too late to call in question the Popes bull which so long time they
had allowed of. The two Cardinals that were in Commission from the Pope to
decide the controversy, and to award judgment upon the matter, were once upon
point to conclude the decree, which the king desired, had not the Pope
impeached their determination in regard of the Emperor Charles, nephew to the
said Queen, whom he was loath to displease: wherefore the king seeing
himself frustrate of his purpose in this behalf, sent into diverse countries
to know the judgment of all the learned Divines concerning the matter in
controversy, who (especially those that dwelt not far off) seemed to allow
and approve the divorce: thereupon he resolved (rejecting his old wife) to
take him to a new, and to marry (as he did) Anne of Bullaine one of the Queens
maids of honor, a woman of most rare and excellent beauty. Now as touching his
first marriage with his brothers wife how unfortunate it was in it own nature,
and how unjustly dispensed withal by the Pope, we shall anon see, by those
heavy, sorrowful, and troublesome events and issues which immediately followed
in the neck thereof.

And first and foremost of the evil fare of the Cardinal of York, with whom
the king being highly displeased, for that at his instance and request, the
Pope had opposed himself to this marriage, requited him (and not undeservedly)
on this manner: First he deposed him from the office of the Chancellourship:
secondly, deprived him of two of his three bishoprics which he held: and
lastly, sent him packing to his own house, as one whom he never purposed more
to see. Yet afterward being advertised of certain insolent and threatening
speeches which he used against him, he sent again for him: but he not daring
to refuse to come at his call, died in the way with mere grief, and despite.
The Pope gave his definitive sentence against this act, and favored the cause
of the divorced lady: But what gained he by it? save only that the king
offended with him, rejected him and all his trumperie, retaining his yearly
tribute levied out of this realm, and converted it to another use; and this
was the recompense of his goodly dispensation with an incestuous marriage:
wherein although to speak truly and properly he lost nothing of his own, yet
it was a deep check and no shallow loss to him and his successors to be
deprived of so goodly a revenue, and so great authority in this realm, as he
then was.

CHAP. XXV. Of Adultery.
SEeing that marriage is so holy an institution and ordinance of God, as it
has been showed to be, it follows by good right that the corruption thereof,
namely Adultery, whereby the bond of marriage is desolued, should be
forbidden: for the woman that is polluted therewith, despises her own
husband, yea and for the most part hates him, and foisteth in strange seed
(even his enemies brats) in stead of his own, not only to be fathered, but
also to be brought up, and maintained by him, and in time to be made
inheritours of his possessions; which thing being once known, must needs stir
up coals, to set anger on fire, and set a broch much mischief: and albeit that
the poor infants are innocent and guiltless of the crime, yet does the
punishment and ignominy thereof redound to them, because they can not be
reputed as legitimate, but are ever marked with the black cole of bastardy
whilst they live: so grievous is the guilt of this sin, and uneasy to be
removed. For this cause the very heathen not only reproved adultery
evermore, but also by authority of law prohibited it, and allotted to death the
offenders therein.

Abimelech, king of the Philistims, a man without circumcision, and therefore
without the covenant, Genesis 26.
knowing by the light of nature (for he knew not the law of God) how sacred and
inviolable the knot of marriage ought to be, expressly forbad all his people
from doing any injury to Isaac, in regard of his wife, and from touching her
dishonestly upon pain of death. Out of the same fountain sprang the words of
Queen Hecuba in Euripides speaking to Menelaus as touching Helen, when she
admonished him to enact this law, That every woman which should betray her
husbands credit, and her own chastity to another man, should die the death.

In old time the Egyptians used to punish adultery on this sort, the man with
a thousand ierkes with a reed, Diodor.
and the woman with cutting off her nose; but he that forced a free woman to
his lust, had his privy members cut off. By the law of Iulia, adulterers were
without difference adjudged to death, insomuch that Julius Antonius, a man of
great parentage and reputation among the Romans, Lib. 4. Annal.
whose son was nephew to Augustus sister (as Cornelius Tacitus reports) was
for this crime executed to death. Aurelianus the Emperor did so hate and
detest this vice, that to the end to scare and terrify his soldiers from the
like offense, he punished a soldier which had committed adultery with his
hostess in most severe manner, even by causing him to be tied by both his feet
to two trees bent down to the earth with force, which being let go, returning
to their course, rent him cruelly in pieces, the one half of his body hanging
on the one tree, and the other on the other. Yea and at this day amongst the
very Turks and Tartarians, this sin is sharply punished. So that we ought
not wonder that the Lord should ordain death for the adulterer. If a man
(says the law) lie with another man's wife, ^euit. 20.10.
if (I say) he commit adultery with his neighbors wife, the adulterer and the
adulteress shall die the death. Deuteronomy. 22.22.
And in another place, If a man be found lying with a woman married to a man,
they shall die both twain, to wit, the man that lay with the wife, and the
wife, that thou may put away evil from Israel. Yea and before Moses time
also, it was a custom to burn the adulterers with fire, Genes. 38.
as it appears by the sentence of Judah (one of the twelve Patriarchs) upon
Thamar his daughter in law, because he supposed her to have played the whore.
Beside all this, to the end this sin might not be shuffled up and kept close,
there was a means given, whereby if a man did but suspect his wife for this
sin, though she could by no witness or proof be convinced, her wickedness
notwithstanding most strangely and extraordinarily might be discovered. Numb. 5.
And it was this: The woman publicly at her husbands suit, called in question
before the priest, who was to give judgment of her after diverse ceremonies and
circumstances performed, and bitter curses pronounced by him, her belly would
burst, and her thigh would rot, if she were guilty, and she should be a curse
amongst the people for her sin; but if she was free, no evil would come unto
her. Thus it pleased God to make known, that the filthiness of those that are
polluted with this sin, should not lie hid. This may more clearly appear by
the example of the Levites wife, of whom it is spoken in the 19, 20, and 21
chapters of Judges, who having forsaken her husband to play the whore, certain
months after he had again received her to be his wife, she was given over
against her will to the villainous and monstrous lusts of the most wicked and
perverse Gibeonites, Rape, li. 2. c. 19.
that so abused her for the space of a whole night together, that in the
morning she was found dead upon the threshold, which thing turned to a great
destruction and overthrow in Israel; for the Leuit, when he arose, and found
his wife newly dead at the door of his lodging, he cut and dismembered her body
into twelve pieces, and sent them into all the countries of Israel to every
tribe one, to give them to understand, how vile and monstrous an injury was
done unto him, whereupon the whole nation assembling and consulting together,
when they saw how the Beniamites (in whose tribe this monstrous villainy was
committed) make no reckening of seeing punishment executed upon those execrable
wretches, they took arms against them, and made war upon them; wherein
though at the first conflict they lost to the number of forty thousand men, yet
afterward they discomfited and overthrew the Beniamites, and slew of them
25000, rasing and burning down the city Gabea (where the sin was committed)
with all the rest of the cities of that tribe, in such sort that there remained
alive but six hundred persons, that saved their lives by flying into the
desert, and there hid themselves four months, until such time as the
Israelites taking pity of them, least they should utterly be brought to
naught, gave them to wife (to the end to repeople them again) four hundred
virgins of the inhabitants of Iabes Gilead, reserved out of that slaughter of
those people, wherein man, woman, and child were put to the sword, for not
coming forth to take part with their brethren in that late war. And
forasmuch as yet there remained two hundred of them unprovided for, the Ancient
of Israel gave them liberty to take by force two hundred of the daughters of
their people; which could not be but great injury and vexation unto their
parents, to be thus robbed of their daughters, and to see them married at all
adventures without their consent or liking. These were the mischiefs which
issued and sprang from that vile and abominable adultery of the wicked
Gabaonites with the Leuits wife, One sin punished with another.
whose first voluntary sin was in like manner also most justly punished by
this second rape: and this is no new practice of our most just God, to punish
one sin by another, and sinners in the same kind wherein they have offended.

When king David, after he had overcome the most part of his enemies, 2. Sam.
11.
and made them tributaries unto him, and enjoyed some rest in his kingdom,
whilst his men of war pursuing their victory, destroyed the Ammonites, and were
in besieging Rabba their chief city; he was so inflamed with the beauty of
Bathshabe, Vriahs wife, that he caused her to be conveyed to him to lie with
her: to which sin, he combined another more grievous, to wit, when he saw
her with child by him (to the end to cover his adultery) he caused her husband
to be slain at the siege, by putting him in the vantgard of the battle at
the assault; and then thinking himself cocksure, married Bathshabe. But all
this while, as it was but vain allurements, no solid joy that fed his mind,
and his sleep was but of sin, not of safety, wherein he slumbered: so the
Lord awakened him right soon by afflictions and crosses, to make him feel the
burden of the sin which he had committed: 2. Sam. 12.
first therefore the child (the fruit of this adultery) was stricken with
sickness and died; next his daughter Thamar, Absoloms sister, was ravished by
Ammon one of his own sons; 2. Sam. 13. 2. Sam. 15.
thirdly Ammon for his incest was slain by Absalom; and fourthly Absalom
(ambitiously aspiring after the kingdom, and conspiring against him) raised
war upon him, and defiled his concubines, and came to a woeful destruction.
All which things (being grievous crosses to king David) were inflicted by the
just hand of God to chastise and correct him for his good, not to destroy him
in his wickedness: neither did it want the effect in him, for he was so far
from swelling and hardening himself in his sin, that contrariwise, he cast
down and humbled himself, and craved pardon and forgiveness at the hand of
God with all his heart, and true repentance; not like to such as grow obstinate
in their sins and wickedness, and make themselves believe all things are
lawful for them although they be never so vile and dishonest. This therefore
that we have spoken concerning David, is not to place him among the number of
lewd and wicked livers, but to show by his chastisements, being a man after
Gods own heart) how odious and displeasant this sin of Adultery is to the
Lord, and what punishment all others are to expect that wallow therein, since
he spared not him whom he so much loved and favored.

CHAP. XXVI. Other examples like unto the former.
THe history of the rauishment of Helene, registered by so many worthy and
excellent authors, and the great evils that pursued the same, Herodot. lib. 2.
is not to be counted altogether an idle fable, Thucyd.
or an invention of pleasure, seeing that it is sure, that upon that occasion
great and huge war arose between the Greeians and the Troianes, during the
which, the whole country was hauocked, many cities and towns destroyed, much
blood shed, and thousands of men discomfited; amongst whom, the rauisher and
adulterer himself (to wit Paris, the chief moouer of all those miserable
tragedies) escaped not the edge of the sword; no nor that famous city Troy
(which entertained and maintained the adulterers within her walls) went
unpunished, but at last was taken and destroyed by fire and sword. In which
sacking, old and gray headed king Priam, with all the remnant of his half
slain sons, were together murdered, his wife and daughters were taken
prisoners, and exposed to the mercy of their enemies; his whole kingdom was
entirely spoiled, and his house quite defaced, and well nigh all the Troiane
nobility extinguished: and as touching the whore, Helene her self, (whose
disloialtie gave consent to the wicked enterprise of forsaking her husbands
house, and following a stranger) she was not exempt from punishment; for as
some writers affirm, she was slain at the sack: but according to others,
Anton. Vols. upon Ouids epist. of Hermione to Orestes.
she was at that time spared, and entertained again by Menelaus her husband;
but after his death, she was banished in her old age, and constrained for her
last refuge (being both destitute of relief and succor, and forsaken of
kinsfolks and friends) to fly to Rhodes, where at length (contrary to her
hope) she was put to a shameful death, even hanging on a tree, which she
long time before deserved.

Tit. Liu.
The injury and dishonor done to Lucrece, the wife of Collatinus, by Sextus
Tarquinius, son to Superbus the last king of Rome, Rape, l. 2. c. 19.
was cause of much trouble and disquietnesse in the city and elsewhere: for
first she (not able to endure the great injury and indignity which was done
unto her, pushed forward with anger and despite) slew her self in the presence
of her husband and kinsfolk, notwithstanding all their desires and
willingness to clear her from all blame: with whose death the Romans were so
stirred and provoked against Sextus the son, and Tarquinius the father, that
they rebelled forthwith, and when he should enter the city, shut the gates
against him, neither would receive or acknowledge him ever after for their
king. Whereupon ensued war abroad, and alteration of the state at home; for
after that time, Rome endured no more king to bear rule over them, but in
their room created two Consuls to be their governors, which kind of
government continued to Julius Caesar's time. Thus was Tarquinius the father
shamefully deposed from his crown, for the adultery, or rather, rape of his
son; and Tarquinius the son slain by the Sabians, for the robberies and
murders which by his fathers advise he committed amongst them; and he himself
not long after in the war which by the Tuscane succors he renewed against
Rome to recover his lost estate, Plutarch in the life public.
was discomfited with them, and slain in the midst of the rout. In the
Emperor Valentinianus time, the first of that name, many women of great
account and parentage, were for committing adultery put to death, as
testifies Ammianus Marcellinus. When Europe after the horrible wasting and
great ruins which it suffered by the furious invasion of Attilia, Lib. 28.
began to take a little breath and find some ease, behold, a new trouble more
hurtful and pernicious than the former, came upon it, by means of the filthy
leachery and lust of the Emperor Valentinianus the third of that name, who by
reason of his evil bringing up, Procop.
and government under his mother Placidia, being too much subject to his own
voluptuousness, and tied to his own desires, dishonored the wife of
Petronius Maximus a Senator of Rome, by forcing her to his pleasure; an act
indeed that cost him his life, and many more beside, and that drew after it the
final destruction of the Roman Empire, and the horrible besacking and
desolation of the city of Rome: For the Emperor being thus taken and set on
fire with the love of this woman, through the excellent beauty wherewith she
was endued, endeavored first to entice her to his lust by fair allurements;
and seeing that the bulwark of her virtuous chastity, would not by this means
be shaken, but that all his pursuit was still in vain, he tried a new course,
and attempted to get her by deceit and policy; which to bring about, one day
setting himself to play with her husband Maximus, he won of him his ring,
which he no sooner had, but secretly he sent it to his wife in her husbands
name with this commandment, That by that token she should come presently to
the court, to do her duty to the Empress Eudoxia: she, seeing her husbands
ring, doubted nothing, but came forthwith as she was commanded; where, whilst
she was entertained by certain suborned women whom the Emperor had set on,
he himself comes in place, and discloseth unto her his whole love, which he
said he could no longer repress, but must needs satisfy, if not by fair
means, at least by force and compulsion, and so he constrained her to his
lust. Her husband advertised hereof, Rape, l. 2. c. 19.
intended to revenge this injury upon the Emperor with his own hand: but
seeing he could not execute his purpose, whilst Actius the captain general of
Valentinianus army lived (a man greatly reverenced and feared for his mighty
and famous exploits, achieved in the wars against the Burgundians, Goths,
and Attila) he found means by suggesting a false accusation of treason against
him (which made him to be hated and suspected of the Emperor) to work his
death. After that Actius was thus traitorously and unworthily slain, the
grief of infinite numbers of people for him, in regard of his great virtues
and good service which he had done to the commonwealth, gave Maximus fit
occasion to practice the Emperors destruction, and that by this means: He set
on two of Actius most faithful followers, partly by laying before them the
unworthy death of their master, and partly by presents and rewards to kill the
Emperor, which they performed as he was sitting on his seat of judgment in
the sight of the whole multitude; amongst whom there was not one found that
would oppose himself to Maximus in his defense, save one of his Eunuchs, who
stepping betwixt to save his life, lost his own: and the amazement of the
whole city with this sudden accident was so great, that Maximus having revenged
himself thus upon the Emperor, without much a do not only seized upon the
Empire, but also upon the Empress Eudoxia, and that against her will to be his
wife (for his own died but a little before:) Now the Empress, not able to
endure so vile an indignity (being above measure passionate with grief and
desire of revenge) conspired his destruction on this manner: She sent secretly
into Africa to solicit and request most instantly, Gensericus king of the
Vandals, by prayers mingled with presents, to come to deliver her and the city
of Rome from the cruel tyranny of Maximus, and to revenge the thrice unjust
murder of her husband Valentinian; adding moreover, that he was bound to do no
less in consideration of the league of friendship which by oath was confirmed
betwixt them. Gensericus well pleased with these news, laid hold upon the
offered occasion, which long time he had more wished than hoped for, and
forthwith (being already tickled with hope of a great and inestimable booty)
rigged his ships and made ready his army by sea, launching forth with three
hundred thousand men, Vandales and Moors, and with this huge fleet made
straight for Rome. Maximus mean while mistrusting no such matter, especially
from those parts, was sore affrighted at the sudden brute of their coming;
and not yet understanding the full effect of the matter, perceiving the whole
city to be in dismay, and that not only the common people but also the
nobility had for fear forsaken their houses, and fled to the mountains, or
forests for safety; he I say destitute of succor, took himself also his
heels, as his surest refuge: but all could not serve to rid him from the just
vengeance of God prepared for him, Mandat. 6. lib. 2. cap. 8.
for the murders which he had been cause of: For certain Senators of Rome, his
private and secret foes, finding him alone in the way of his flight, and
remembering their old quarrels, fell upon him suddenly and felled him down with
stones, and after mangled him in pieces and threw his body into Tiber. Three
days after arrived Gensericus with all his forces, and entering Rome found it
naked of all defense, and left to his own will and discretion: where (albeit
he professed himself to be a Christian) yet he showed more pride and cruelty,
and less pity than either Attila or Allaricus, two Heathen kings: For having
given his soldiers the pillage of the city, they not only spoiled all private
houses, but also the Temples and monasteries in most cruel and riotous manner.
All the best and beautifullest things of the city they took away, and carried
a huge multitude of people prisoners to Africa, amongst the which was Eudoxia
the Empress (with her two daughters Eudocia and Placidia) who was the cause of
all this calamity, but her treachery saved not her self nor them from thraldom.
Treason. lib. 2. cap 3.
And thus was Rome sacked and destroyed more than ever it was before, insomuch
that the Roman Empire could never after recover it self, but decayed every
day, and grew worse and worse. These were the calamities which the adultery of
Valentinian brought upon himself and many others, to his own destruction, and
the utter ruin of the whole Empire.

Paulus Aemil. Nichol. Gil.
Childericke king of France son to Merouee, for laying siege to the chastity
of many great ladies of his realm, the Princes and Barons conspired against
him, and drove him to fly for his life.

Paulus Aemil.
Eleonor the wife to king Lewis of France (he that first cut through the sea
furrows toward Jerusalem, against the Turks and Sarasens) would needs
courageously follow her husband in that long and dangerous voyage: but how?
Marry whilst he travailed night and day in perrill of his life she lay at
Antioch bathing her self in all delights, and that more licentiously than the
reputation or duty of a married woman required; wherefore being had in
suspicion, and evil reported of for her lewd behavior, it was thought meet
that she should be divorced from the king under pretense of consanguinitie to
the end she should not altogether be defamed.

Fulgo. lib. 6. c r.
The fair daughter of Philip the fair king of France escaped not at so good a
rate, for the king as soon as he smelt out the haunt of their unchastity,
caused them to be apprehended and imprisoned presently, howbeit one of them
(namely the Countess of Poyters) her innocence being known was set at
liberty, and the other two (to wit, the Queen of Nauar and the wife of John de
la March) being found guilty by proof, were adjudged to perpetual
imprisonment. And the Adulterers (two brethren of the country of Aniou) with
whom these ladies had often lien, were first cruelly slain, and after hanged.

Froysard. vol. 1. cap. 22.
Charles, son of the foresaid Philip the fair, had to wife the daughter of the
Earl of Artois that also offended in the like case, and in recompense received
this dishonor and ignominy to be divorced, and put in prison, and to see him
married to another before her face.

Froysard. vol. 3. cap. 45.
In the reign of Charles the sixth, there befell a notable and memorable
accident which was this: One Jacques le Grys of the country of Alanson being
enamoured with a lady no less fair than honorable, the wife of the Lord of
Carouge, came upon a day when he knew her husband to be from home to her
house, and faining as if he had some secret message to unfold unto her on her
husbands behalf (for their familiarity was so great) entered with her all alone
into a most secret chamber, Rape. lib. 2. cap. 19.
where as soon as he had gotten her he locked the door, and throwing himself
upon her, forced her unto his lust, and afterward saved himself by speedy
flight. Her husband at his return understanding the injury and wrong which was
done him by this vile miscreant, sought first to revenge himself by justice,
and therefore put his cause to be heard by the Parliament of Paris, where
being debated, it could not well be decided, because he wanted witnesses to
convince the crime, except his own wives words, which could not be accepted:
so that the court to the end that there might some end be made of their
quarrel, ordained a combat betwixt the^ which was forthwith performed; for
the two duellists entering the lists, sell presently to strokes, and that so
eagerly, that in short space the quarrel was decided; the Lord of Carouge,
husband of the wronged lady remained conqueror, after he had slain his enemy
that had wronged him so wickedly and disloially: the vanquished was forthwith
delivered to the hangman of Paris, who dragged him to mount Falcon, and there
hanged him. Now albeit this form and custom of deciding controversies has no
ground nor warrant either from humane or Divine law (God having ordained only
an oath to end doubts where proofs and witnesses fail) yet doubtless the
Lord used this as an instrument to bring the treacherous and cruel Adulterer to
the deserved punishment and shame, which by denial he thought to escape.

A certain Seneschall of Normandy, Fulgos. lib. 6. cap. 1.
perceiving the vicious and suspicious behavior of his wife with the steward
of his house, watched them so narrowly that he took them in bed together: he
slew the Adulterer first, and after his wife; for not all her pitiful cryings
for mercy with innumerable tears for this one fault, and holding up in her
arms the children which she had borne unto him, no nor her house and
parentage, being sister to Lewis the eleventh then king, could not withhold him
from killing her with her companion: Howbeit king Lewis never made show of
anger, Lanquet. chron.
or offense for her death.

Messelina the wife of Claudius the Emperor was a woman of so notable
incontinency, that she would contend with the common harlots in filthy
pleasure; at last she fell in love with a fair young Gentleman called Silius,
and to obtain more commodiously her desire, she caused his wife Sillana to be
divorced; and notwithstanding she was wife to the Emperor there living, yet
she openly married him: for which cause after great complaint made to the
Emperor by the Nobles she was worthily put to death.

Abusahed king of Fez was with six of his children murdered at once by his
secretary for his wives sake whom he had abused. Paulus Iouius. Tom. 2. lib.
38. Sleid, lib. 10.
And it is not long sithence the two cities Dalmendine and Delmedine were taken
from the king of Fez and brought under the Portugal dominion, only for the
rauishment of a woman whom the governor violently took from her husband to
abuse, and was slain for his labor.

CHAP. XXVII. Other examples like unto the former.
Munst. Cosm. lib. 3. Casp. Head. histor. Ecclesiast.
MAry of Arragon wife to Otho the third, was so unchaste and lascivious a woman,
and withal barren (for they commonly go together) that she could never
satisfy her insatiable lust: she carried about with her continually a young
lecher in woman's clothes to attend upon her person, with whom she daily
committed filthiness, who being suspected was in the presence of many untired,
and found to be a man, for which villainy he was burnt to death. Howbeit the
Empress, though pardoned for her fault, returned to her old vomit, and
continued her wanton traffic with more then either desired or loved her
company, at last she fell in love with the county of Mutina, a gallant man
in personage and too honest to be allured with her stale, though he was often
solicited by her, wherefore like a Tygre she accused him to the Emperor (for
extreme love conuerts to extreme hatred if it be crossed) of offering to
ravish her against her will; for which cause the Emperor Otho caused him to
loose his head: but his wife being privy to the innocence of her husband,
trauersed his cause, and required justice, that though his life was lost, yet
his reputation might be preserved, and to prove his innocence she
miraculously handled iron red with heat without any hurt: which when the
Emperor saw, searching out the cause very narrowly he found out his wives
villainy; and for her pains caused her to be burned at a stake, but on the
Earls wife he bestowed great rewards even four castles in recompense of her
husband, though no reward could counteruaile that so great a loss.

Rodoaldus the eight king of Lumbardie, Chron. Phil. Melanct. lib. 3.
being taken in Adultery even in the fact, by the husband of the adulteress,
was slain without delay, Anno 659 in like sort John Malatesta slew his wife
and the adulterer together when he took them amidst their embracements. So
did one Lodewicke steward of Normandy kill his wife Carlotta and her lover John
Lauernus, as they were in bed together

Hedion in his Chronicle tells of a Doctor of the law that loved his proctors
wife, Casp. Head. pars 4.
with whom as he acquainted himself over familiarly and unhonestly, both at
her own house, when her husband was absent, and at a bath in an old woman's
house hard by, the proctor watched their haunt so near, that he caught them
naked together in the bath, and so curried the lecherous doctor with a
curry-combe, that he scraped out his eyes, and off his privy members; so that
within three days after he died: his wife he spared because she was with
child, otherwise she should have tasted the same sauce. Another story like unto
this he tells of a Popish priest that never left to lay siege to the
chastity of an honest Matrone, till she co^discended to his desire, brought
him into the snare, and caused her husband to geld him. I would to God that all
that dishonor their profession by filthy actions might be served after the
same manner, that there might be fewer bastards and bauds and common strumpets
than there are now adays, and that since the fear of God is extinguished in
their souls, the fear and certainty of sudden judgments might restrain
them.

Wolfius Schrenk reported to Martin Luther how in Vaytland four murders were
committed upon the occasion of one Adultery; for whilst the Adulteress
strumpet was banqueting with her lovers, her husband came in with a hunting
spear in his hand and stroke him through that sat next unto her, and then her
also, other two in the mean while leapt down the stairs with fear and have,
broke their arms and shortly after died.

Theat. histor.
A certain Cardinal committed daily Adultery with a man's wife, that winked
and as it were subscribed unto it; wherefore her brother taking this dishonor to
his house in evil part, watched when the lecher had promised to come, but upon
occasion came not, and in the dark slew his sister, and her husband supposing
it to have been the Cardinal: but when he perceived his error, he fled the
country for fear of the law; howbeit before his departure he wrought such means
that whom he missed in his purpose of the sword, him he murdered by poison:
this judgment is not only for adulterers, but for wittals also, that yield
their consents to the dishonoring of their own wives; a monstrous kind of
creatures, and degenerat not only from the law of humanity, but of nature also.

Martin Luther has left recorded in his writings many examples of judgments
on this sin, but especially upon clergy men, whose profession as it requires
a more strict kind of conversation, so their sins and judgments were more
notorious, both in their own natures, and in the eye and opinion of the world,
some of which as it is not amiss to insert in this place, so it is not
unnecessary to believe them proceeding from the mouth of so worthy a witness.

There was (says he) a man of great authority and learning that forsaking his
secular life betook himself into the college of priests, Luther in epist.
consolat. ad Lucum Cranach.
(whether of devotion or of hope of liberty to sin, let the^ judge that read
this history) this new adopted priest fell in love with a Masons wife, whom he
so woed that he got his pleasure of her; and what fitter time but when Mass
was singing, did he daily choose for the performing of his villainy. In this
haunt he persisted a long season, till the Mason finding him in bed with his
wife, did not summon him to law, nor penance: but took a shorter course, and
cut his throat. Luther.
Another nobleman in Thuringa, being taken in Adultery was murdered after this
strange fashion by the adulteresses husband: he bound him hand and foot and
cast him into prison, and to quench his lust, seeing that Ceres, that is,
gluttony, is the fuel of Venus, that is, lust; denied him al manner of
sustinance, and the more to augment his pain set hot dishes of meat before
him, that the smell and sight thereof might more provoke his appetite, and the
want thereof torment him more. In this torture the wretched lecher abode so
long, until he gnew off the flesh from his own shoulders; and the eleventh day
of his imprisonment ended his life: this punishment was most horrible and too
too severe in respect of the inflicter, yet most just in respect of God, whose
custom is to proportion his judgments to the quality of the sin that is
committed. Luther affirms this to have happened in his childhood, and that
both the parties were known unto him by name, which for honor and charity sake
he would not disclose.

There was another nobleman that so delighted in lust, Luther. Mandat. 1.
Atheism. li. 1. cap. 25.
and was so inordinat in his desires, that he shamed not to say, that if this
life of pleasure, and passing from harlot to harlot might endure ever, he would
not care for heaven or life eternal: what cursed madness and impiety is this?
a man to be so forgetful of his maker and himself, that he preferred his whores
before his Savior, and his filthy pleasure before the grace of God, does it
not deserve to be punished with scorpions? Yes verily, as it was indeed, for
the polluted wretch died amongst his strumpets, being stricken with a sudden
stroke of Gods vengeance.

In the year 1505 a certain Bishop well seen in all learning and eloquence,
and especially skillful in languages, was notwithstanding so filthy in his
conversation, that he shamed not to defile his body and name by many
Adulteries: but at length he was slain by a cobbler whose wife he had often
corrupted, being taken in bed with her, and so received a due reward of his
filthiness.

Lanquet. chron.
In the year of our Lord 778 Kenulphus king of the West Saxons in Britain, as
he usually haunted the company of a a certain harlot which he kept at Merton,
was slain by one Clito the kinsman of Sigebert that was late king.

The same.
Sergus a king of Scotland was so foul a drunkard and glutton and so
outragiously given to harlots, that he neglected his own wife, and drove her
to such penury that she was feign to serve other noblewomen for her living;
wherefore she murdered him in his bed, and after slew her self also.

Arichbertus eldest son unto Lotharius king of France, died even as he was
embracing his whores.

In sum to conclude this matter, our English Chronicles report that in the
year of our Lord 349 there was so great plenty of corn and fruit in Britain
that the like had not ben seen many years before, but this was the cause of
much idleness, gluttony, lechery, and other vices in the land, for usually
ease and prosperity are the nurses of all enormitie, but the Lord requited
this their riotous and incontinent life with so great a pestilence and
mortality, that the living scantly sufficed to bury the dead.

Petrarch.
Petrarch makes mention of a certain Cardinal, that though he was seventy
years old, yet every night would have a fresh whore, and to this end had
certain bauds purueiors and prouiders of his trash: but he died a miserable and
wretched death. And Martin Luther reported, that a bishop being a common
frequenter of the Stues in Hidelberge came to this miserable end: The bords of
the chamber whither he used to enter were loosened, that as soon as he came
in he flipt through and broke his neck.

But above all, that which we find written in the second book of Fincelius is
most strange and wonderful, Job. Fincelius. lib. 2.
of a Priest in Albenthewer, a town near adioining to Gaunt in Flaunders,
that persuaded a young maid to reject and disobey all her parents godly
admonitions and to become his concubine: when she objected how vile a sin it
was, and how contrary to the law of God, he told her that by the authority of
the Pope, he could dispense with any wickedness were it never so great, and
further alleged the discommodities of marriage and the pleasure that would
arise from that kind of life; in fine he conquered her virtuous purpose, and
made her yield unto his filthy lust. But when they had thus pampered their
desires together a while, in came the devil and would needs conclude the play:
for as they were banqueting with many such like companions, he took her away
from the priests side, and notwithstanding her pitiful crying and all their
exorcising and coniuring, carried her quite away, telling the Priest that very
shortly he would fetch him also, for he was his own darling.

CAAP. XXVIII. More examples of the same argument.
I Cannot pass over in silence a history truly tragical, touching the death of
many men who by reason of an Adultery slew one another in most strange and
cruel manner, and indeed so strangely, that (as far as I ever red or knew)
there was never the like particular deed heard of, wherein God more evidently
poured forth the stream of his displeasure, turning the courage and valor of
each part into rage and fury, to the end that by their own means he might be
revenged on them. In the Dukedom of Spoleto which is the way from Ancona to
Rome (of the ancient Latins called Vmbria) there were three brethren who kept
in their possession three cities of the said dukedom, namely Faligno, Nocera,
and Treuio, the eldest of whom whose surname was Nicholas, as he passed from
one town to the other, being at Nocera, lodged diverse times in the castle in
the keepers and captains house, whom he had there substituted to defend the
place with an ordinary band of soldiers: now as he made his abode there a few
days, he grew to cast a more lascivious eye upon the captains wife than was
meet, and from looking fell to lusting after her, in such sort that in short
space he got very privy and familiar acquaintance with her, and oftentimes
secret, and suspicious meetings: which being perceived by her husband, he after
watched so narrowly their haunts, that once he spied the^ together without
being seen of the^: Nevertheless disgesting and swallowing up this sorrow with
silence, and without giving forth any tokens thereof, he co^sulted in himself to
revenge the injury by the death and rasing out, not only of the Adulterer, but
also of the whole race and fraternity. Now when he had hammered this
enterprise and laid forth the plot thereof in his head, he dispatched presently
a messenger to the three gentlemen brethren, to inuit the^ against the next
day to the hunting of the fairest wild bore that was this many a day seen in
the forests of Nocera. Signior Nicholas failed not to come at the time
appointed accompanied with Duke Camerino, who desired to be one of this jolly
crew: they supped in the town but lodged in the castle, where being at rest
about midnight, the captain rushed into his chamber with the greatest part of
his guard, and there handled Signor Nicholas on this manner, he first cut off
his privy members as being principal in the offense, the^ thrust him through on
both sides with a spear, next plucked out his heart, and lastly tore the rest of
his body into a thousand pieces. As for the duke Camerino he shut him up in a
deep and dark dungeon with all the strangers of his retinue. At day break
another of the brethren called Caesar, that lay that night in the town was sent
for to come and speak with his brother, and as soon as he was entered into the
court of the castle, seven or eight of the guard bound him and his followers,
and carried him into the chamber where his dead brother lay chopped as small as
flesh to the pot, and there murdered him also. Conrade the third brother being
by reason of a marriage absent from this feast, when he received the report of
these pitiful news, gathered together a band of men from all quarters, and
with them (assisted with the friends and allies of the duke Camerino then
prisoner) laid siege to the castle, they battered the walls, made a breach,
and gave the assault of entrance, and were manfully resisted five hours long,
till the defendants being but thirty or forty men at the most, not able to
stand any longer in defense, were forced to retire and lay open way of entrance
to the enemy, then began a most horrible butchery of men: for Conrade having
won the fort, first hewed them in pieces that stood in resistance, then
finding the captains father, slew him, and cast him piecemeale to the dogs,
some he tied to the tails of wild horses, to be drawn over hedges, ditches,
thorns and briers; others he pinched with hot yrons, and so burnt them to
death, which when the captain from the top of the dungeon, where he had saved
himself, beheld, he took his wife whom he held there prisoner, and binding
her hand and foot, threw her headlong from the top of the tower upon the
paueme^t; which the soldiers perciuing, put fire to the tower, so that he was
constrained through heat and smoke (himself, his brother, and his little child)
to sally down the same way, which he had taught his wife a little before to
go: and so all three broke their necks: their carcasses were cast out to be
meat for wolves, as unworthy of humane sepulture. And this was the catastrophe
of that woeful tragedy, where by the occasion of one adultery (so heavy is
the curse of God upon that sin) a number of men came to their ends.

Luth. prand. lib. 5. cap. 15.
In the time of Pope Steven the eight, there was a varlet priest that was
captain in the house of a Marquis of Italy, who although he was very misshapen
and evil favored, yet was entertained of the lady Marquis his mistres to her
bed, and made her paramour; upon a night as he was going to lie with her
according to his wont (his Lord being from home) behold a dog barked so
fiercely, leaping and biting at him, that all the servants of the house being
awaked ran thitherward, and finding this gallant in the snare took him, and
for all his bald crown stripped him naked, and cut off clean his privy and
adulterous parts, and thus was this lecherous Priest served.

Luth. prand. lib. 6. cap. 6.
Pope John the thirteenth a man as of wicked conversation in all things, so
especially abominable in whoredoms and adultery, which good conditions
whilst he pursued, he was one day taken tardy in the plain fields, whether
he went to disport himself; for he was found in the act of adultery, and
slain forthwith: and these are the godly fruits of those single life lovers,
to whom the use of marriage is counted unlawful, and therefore forbidden, but
adultery not once prohibited nor disallowed.

CHAP. XXIX. Of such as are divorced without cause.
BY these and such like judgments, it pleases God to make known unto men how
much he desires to have the estate of marriage maintained and preserved in the
integrity, and how much every one ought to take heed how to deprave or corrupt
the same: now then to proceed; if it be a sin to take away, ravish, or entise
to folly another man's wife, shall we not think it an equal sin for a
husband to forsake his wife, and cast her off to take another, she having not
disanulled and cancelled the band of marriage by adultery? Yes verily: for as
concerning the permission of divorce to the Israelits under the law, Mat. 19.
our savior himself expounds the meaning and intent thereof in the gospel,
to be nothing else but a tolleration for the hardness and stubbornness of
their hearts, and not a constitution from the beginning; upon which occasion
speaking of marriage, and declaring the right and strength of the same, he
says, That whosoever puts away his wife, except it be for adultery, and
marries another commits adultery: and he that marries her that is put
away, commits adultery also. Al which notwithstanding the great men of this
world let loose themselves to this sin too licentiously, as it appears by
many examples: As of Antiochus Theos son of Antiochus Soter king of Siria,
who to the end to go with Ptolomie Philadelphus king of Egypt, and marry his
daughter Bernice, cast off his wife Laodicea that had borne him children, and
took Bernice to be his wife: but ere long he rejected her also, and betrayed
her to her enemies (namely his son Callinicus) who slew her with one of her
sons, and all that belonged unto her; and then he took again his old wife,
for which cause Ptolomie Euergetes (son to Philadelphus) renewed war upon him.

Herod the Tetrarch was so bewitched with the love of Herodius his brother
Philips wife, Joseph. of the Jewish antiquity. lib. 18. cap. 7.9.
that to the end he might enjoy her, he disclaimed his lawful wife, and sent
her home to her father king Aretas, who being touched and netled with this
indignity and disgrace, sought to revenge himself by arms: and indeed made so
hot war upon him, and charged his army so furiously, that it was discomfited
by him: after which shameful loss, he was by the Emperor Caligulas
commandment, banished to Lions, there to end the residue of his days.

Amongst the Remans Marcus Antonius was noted for the most dissolute and
impudent in this case of divorce, Plutarch.
for albeit that in the beginning of his triumphirship he forsook his first
wife to mary Octauius his sister, yet he proceeded further, not content
herewith but must needs forsake her to, to be with Cleopatra the queen of
Egypt, from whence sprung out many great evils, which at length fell upon his
own head to his final ruin and destruction: for when he saw himself in such
streights, that no means could be found to resist Octauius, he sheathed with
his own hands his sword into his bowels, when all his servants being requested,
refused to perform the same; and being thus wounded, he fell upon a little
bed entreating those that were present to make an end of his days, but they
all fled and left him in the chamber crying and torme^ting himself until such
time that he was co^ueied to the monument wherein Cleopatra was enclosed, that
he might die there. Cleopatra seeing this pitiful spectacle, all amassed let
down chains and cords from the high window, and with the help of her two maids
drew him up into the monument, uniting their forces, and doing what they could
to get his poor carcass, though by a shameful and vndece^t manner, for the
gate was locked and might not be opened; and it was a lamentable sight to see
his poor body al besmeared with blood, and breathing now his last blast (for he
died as soon as he came to the top) to be drawn upon that cruel fashion. As
for Cleopatra who by her flattering allurements ravished the heart of this
miserable man, and was cause of his second divorce, she played her true part
also in this woeful tragedy, and as she partaked of the sin so she did of the
punishment: for after she saw her self past hope of help, and her sweet heart
dead, she beat her own breasts, and tormented her self so much with sorrow that
her bosom was bruised and half murdered with her blows, and her body in many
places exulcerate with inflammations: she pulled off her hear, rent her face with
her nails, and altogether in phrensied with grief, melancholy, and distress,
was found fresh dead, with her two maids lying at her feet: and this was the
miserable end of those two, who for enjoying of a few foolish and cursed
pleasures together, received in exchange infinite torments and vexations, and
at length unhappy deaths together in one and the same place, verifieng the old
proverb: For one pleasure a thousand dolours.

Charles the eight king of France, Philip. de Cont.
after he had been long time married to the daughter of the king of the Romans,
sister to the Archduke of Austria, was so evil advised as to turn her home
again upon no other occasion, but to mary the duchess of Britain, the sole
heir to her fathers dukedom: wherein he doubly injured his father in law the
Roman king; for he did not only reject his daughter, but also deprived him of
his wife the duchess of Britain, whom by his substitute (according to the
manner of great Princes) he had first espoused. Bembus Bembus.
in his Venetian history handling this story, somewhat mollifieth the fault,
when he says that the Roman kings daughter was never touched by king Charles
in the way of marriage all the while she was there, by reason of her unripe and
oueryong years. After a while, after this new married king had given a hot
alarm to all Italy, and conquered the realm of Naples; as the Venetians were
deliberating to take the matter in hand of themselves, and to resist him,
Maximilian the Roman king solicited them in the same, and thrust them forward,
as well that he might confederate himself with the duke of Millan, as that he
might revenge the injury touching his repelled daughter: so that by this means
the French king was sore troubled at his return, having to withstand him all the
Venetian forces, with the most part of the Potentates of Italy; notwithstanding
he broke through the^ al after he had put the Venetians to the worst: Philip.
de Com.
but being returned after this victorious and triumphant voyage, it happened
that one day as he led the queen to the castle of Amboise to see some sport at
tenise, he stroke his forehead against the upper door post of the gallory as he
went in, that he fell presently to the ground speechles, Surseuil.
and died incontinently in the place, from whence (though the filthiest and
sluttishest place about the castle) they removed not his body, but laid it on a
bed of straw to the veiw of the world from two of the clock in the afternoon
till eleven at midnight, and this good success followed at last his so much
desired divorce.

CHAP. XXX. Of those that either cause or authorize unlawful diuorcements.
Mat. 19.
ALthough the commandment of our Savior Christ be very plain and manifest,
That man should not separate those whom God has joined together, yet there
are some so void of understanding and judgment, that they make no conscience
to dissolve those that by the bond of marriage are united: Judge. 15.
of which number was Sampsons father in law, who took his daughter (first given
in marriage to Sampson) and gave her to another, without any other reason save
that he suspected that Sampson loved her not: but what got he by it? Marry
this: the Philistims provoked against him, consumed him and his daughter with
fire; because that by the means of his injury Sampson had burned their corn,
their vineyards, and their olive trees.

1. Sam. 25.
After the same sort dealt king Saul with David when he gave him his daughter
Michol to wife, and afterward in despite and hatred of him took her away
again, and bestowed her upon another, wherein as in many other things he
showed himself a wicked and profane man, and was worthily punished therefore
as has been before declared.

Froysard. vol. 1.
Hugh Spencer one of king Edward of Englands chiefest fauourits, insomuch that
his ear and heart was at his pleasure, was he that first persuaded the king to
forsake and repudiate the Queen his wife (daughter to Philip the Fair, king
of France) upon no other occasion, but only to satisfy his own appetite, and
the better to follow his delights: And thus by this means she was chased out
of England, and driven to retire to king Charles her brother; where hoping to
find rest and refuge, she was deceived: for what by the crafts and practices
of the English, and what by the Popes authority (who thrust himself into this
action, as his custom is) she was constrained to dislodge her self, and to
change her country very speedily: wherefore from thence she went to crave
succor of the County of Henault, who furnished her with certain forces, and
sent her toward England: where being arrived, and finding the people generally
at her command, and ready to do her service, she set upon her enemy Hugh
Spencer, took him prisoner, and put him to a shameful death, as he well
deserved. For he was also the causer of the deaths of many of the Nobles of
the Realm, therefore he was drawn through the streets of Herford upon a
hurdle, and after his privy members, his heart, and head were cut off, his
four quarters were exalted in four several places to the view of the world.

Now if these be found guilty, that either directly make or indirectly procure
diuorcements, shall we excuse them that allow and authorize the same, without
lawful and just occasion? No verily, Guicciard. li. 4.
no though they be popes that take it upon them: as we read pope Alexander the
sixth did; who for the advancement of his hautie desires, to gratify and
flatter Lewis the twelft king of France, sent him by his son a dispensation to
put away his wife (daughter to king Lewis the eleventh) because she was barren
and counterfeit; and to recontract Anne of Bretaigne, the widow of Charles the
eight lately deceased. But herein though barrenness of the former was
pretended, yet the duchy of the latter was aimed at, which before this time,
he could never attain unto. But of what force and virtue this dispensation by
right was, or at least ought to be, it is easy to perceive, seeing that it is
not only contrary to the words of the Gospel, Mat. 19, but also to their own
decrees, secund. part. quaest. 7. Hi qui matrimoniu^: wherein is imported, that
marriage ought not to be infringed for any default or imperfection, no not of
nature; but Popes may maime and clip both the word of God and all other
writings, and do whatsoever themselves likes, be it good or bad.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Incestuous persons.
ALthough incest be a wicked and abominable sin, and forbidden both by the
law of God and man, in so much that the very heathen held it indetestation, yet
are there some so inordinately vicious and so dissolute, that they blush not
once to pollute themselves with this filthiness. Genes. 35.
Reuben the Patriarch was one of this vile crew, that shamed not to defile
himself with Bilba his fathers concubine, but he was cursed for his labor:
for whereas by right of eldership and birth, Genes. 49.
he ought to have had a certain prerogative and authority over his brethren,
his excellency shed it self like water, and he was surpassed by his brethren
both in increase of progeny and renown. Ammon, one of king David's sons, 2.
Sam. 13.
was so strongly enchaunted with the love of his sister Thamar, that to the end
to fulfill his lust, he traitorously forced her to his will: Rape, lib. 2.
cap. 21.
but Absalom her natural brother, (hunting for opportunity of revenge for this
indignity toward his sister) invited him two years after to a banquet with
his other brethren, and after the same, caused his men to murder him for a
farewell.

The same Absalom that slew Ammon for incest with his sister, 2. Sam. 16.
committed himself incest with his fathers concubins, moved thereto by the
wicked counsel of Achitophel, that advised him to that infamous deed of
defiling his fathers bed: but it was the forerunner of his overthrow, as we
have already heard.

Diverse of the Roman Emperors were so villainous and wretched, Suet. Lamprid
as to make no bones of this sin with their own sisters, as Caligula,
Antoninus, and Commodus: and some with their mothers, as Nero, so much was he
given over and transported to all licentiousness. Oros. lib. 7. c. 4.


Plutarch tells us of one Cyanippus, that being overcome with wine, defloured
his own daughter Cyane, but he was slain of her for his labor. Neither do
I think it so unnatural a part for her to kill her father, as in him to
commit incest with his own daughter: for the oracle lessened, or rather
approved her fault, when it abhorred and chastened his crime: for when
Siracusa was grievously infected with the pestilence, it was pronounced by the
oracle that the plague should continue, till the wicked person was sacrificed:
which dark speech when no man knew, Cyane haled her father by the head to the
altar, telling them that he was that wicked person pointed at by the Oracle,
and there sacrificed him with her own hands, killing her self also with the
same knife, that her innocence might be witnessed even by her blood. Thus it
pleased God even among the idolatrous heathen to execute justice and judgment
upon the earth, though by the means of the devil himself, who is the author
of all such villainy.

Valeria Thusculana was in love with her own father, Plutarch.
and under color of another maid got to lie with him: which as soon as he
understood, he slew himself in detestation of his own ignorant abomination
and wickedness: nay so monstrous and horrible is this sin even in the sight
of man, Valerius.
that Nausimenes (a woman of Athens) taking her own son and daughter
together, was so amazed and grieved therewith, that she never spoke word after
that time, but remained dumb all the rest of her life time: as for the
incestours themselves, they lived not, but became murderers of their own lives.

Papyrius a Roman, got with child his own sister Canusia, which when their
father understood, he sent each of them a sword wherewith they slew themselves.

But above all, the vengeance of God is most apparent in the punishment of
Heraclius the Emperor, Zonar. lib. 3.
who to his notorious wickednesses, heresy, persecution, and paganism he
added this villainy, Paul. Diac. lib. 18.
to defile carnally his own sister; so to his notorious punishments (the
Saracens sword, dropsy, and the ruin of the Empire) the Lord added this
infamous and cruel judgment, that he could not give passage to his urine, but
it would fly into his face, had not a pentise been applied to his belly to
beat it downward. And this last plague was proper to his last sin, wherein
the very member which he had abused, sought revenge of him that abused it; for
that he had confounded nature, and most wickedly sinned against his own flesh.

Agathias, Agathias.
writing of the manners of the Persians, reports, that certain Philosophers
coming out of Egypt into Greece, where they had seen all manner of
unnatural mixtures, found the carcass of a man without a sepulcher, which
when in charity they buried the next day it was found unburied again; and as
they went about to bury it the second time, a spirit appeared unto them, and
forbad them to do it, saying, That it was unworthy that honor, seeing when it
lived he had committed incest with his own mother. A notable story, showing
that the very earth abhors this monstrous confusion of nature: the truth
whereof let it lie upon the authors credit.

Most abominable was the incest of Artaxerxes king of Persia, Herod. lib. 9.
for first he took to himself Aspasia, his brother Cyrus concubine, having
overcome him in war; and afterward gave the same Aspasia to his own son
Darius to wife; from whom, after carnal knowledge, he took her again,
committing incest upon incest, and that most unnaturally: but mark how the
Lord punished all this: first Darius his eldest son was put to death for
treason, then Ochus (succeeding in the inheritance) slew Arsame another of his
brethren; and albeit Artaxerxes himself died without note of judgment, yet
his seed after him was punished for his offense, for so miserable a calamity
pursued them all, that in the second generation not one was left, to sit upon
his throne.

Now to teach us how execrable and monstrous this kind of sin is, and how
much to be abhorred of all men, the example of a poor bruit beast may stand in
stead of a lesson for us, it being so worthy of remembrance, that I thought
meet to make rehearsal of it in this place. It is reported by Varro, Varro.
a learned and grave writer (whom S. Augustine often commends in this book
de ciuitate Dei) of a certain horse which by no means could be brought to
cover a mare that was his damme, until by hiding her head, Lib. 2. de re
rustica, cap. 7.
they beguiled his senses: but after when he perceived their guile, and knew
his damme being uncovered, he ran so furiously upon the keeper with his teeth,
that incontinently he tore him in pieces. Truly a miraculous thing, and no
doubt divinely caused to reprove the enormous and too unruly lusts of men.

CHAP. XXXII. Of effeminate persons, Sodomites, and other such like monsters.
SArdanapalus king of Assyria, Frog. lib. 1.
was so lascivious and effeminate, that to the end to set forth his beauty, he
shamed not to paint his face with ointments, and to attire his body with the
habites and ornaments of women, Cic. lib. 5. Tuscul. quest.
and on that manner to sit and lie continually amongst whores, and with them to
commit all manner of filthiness and villainy: wherefore being thought unworthy
to bear rule over men, first Arbaces his lieutenant rebelled, then the Medes
and Babylonians revolted, and jointly made war upon him, till they vanquished
and put him to flight: and in his flight he returned to a tower in his palace,
which (moved with grief and despair) he set on fire, and was consumed
therein.

Such like was the impudent lasciuiousnes of two unworthy Emperors, Lamprid.
Commodus and Heliogabalus, who laying aside all Imperial gravity, showed
themselves oftentimes publicly in woman's attire; an act as in nature
monstrous, so very dishonest and ignominious: but like as these cursed monsters
ran too much out of frame in their unbridled lusts and affections, so there
wanted not many that hastened and emboldened themselves to conspire their
destruction, as unworthy in their judgments to enjoy the benefit of this
light: wherefore to one of them poison was ministered, and when that would take
no effect, strangling came in the room thereof, and brought him to his end:
the other was slain in a iakes where he hid himself, and his body (drawn
like carrion through the streets) found no better sepulcher but the dunghill.

Touching those abominable wretches of Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 19.
which gave themselves over with all violence, and without all shame and
measure, to their infamous lusts, polluting their bodies with unnatural
sins, God sent upon them an unnatural rain, not of water, but of fire and
brimstone, to burn and consume them, that were so hot and fervent in their
cursed vices: So that they were quite rooted and raked out of the earth, and
their cities and habitations destroyed, yea and the very soil that bore them,
made desolate and fruitless, and all this by fire, whose smoke ascended like
the smoke of a furnace: yea and in sign of a further curse for to be a
witness and a mark of this terrible judgment, the earth and face of that
country continues still parched and withered, and (as Josephus says) whereas
before it was a most plentiful and fertile soil, and as it were, an earthly
paradise, bedecked with five gallant cities; now it lies desert, inhabitable,
and barren, yielding fruit in show, but such as being touched, turns to
cinders. In a word, the wrath of God is so notoriously and fearfully
manifested therein, that when the Holy Ghost would strike a terror into the
most wicked, he threatens them with this like punishment, saying, The Lord
will rain upon each wicked one Psalm. 11.6.

Fire, snares, and brimstone, for his portion.


Howbeit this makes not but that still there are too many such monsters in the
world, so mightily is it corrupted and depraved: neither is it any marvel,
seeing that diverse bishops of Rome, that take upon them to be Christ's vicars,
and Peter's successors, are infected with this filthy contagion: As namely,
Pope Julius the third, whose custom was to promote none to Ecclesiastical
livings, save only his buggerers: amongst whom was one Innocent, whom this
holy father (contrary to the Suffrages of the whole college) would needs make
Cardinal: nay, the insatiable and monstrous lust of this beastly and stinking
goat was so extraordinary, that he could not abstain from many Cardinals
themselves. John de la Casa, a Florentine by birth, and by office Archbishop of
Beneuento, and Deane of his Apostaticall chamber, was his Legate and
Intelligencer in all the Venetian signiories: a man equal or rather worse than
himself, and such a one, as whose memory ought to be accursed of all
posterity, for that detestable book which he composed in commendation and
praise of Sodomie, and was so shameless, nay rather possessed with some
deuilish and unclean spirit, as to divulgate it to the view of the world. Here
you may see (poor souls) the holiness of those whom you so much reverence,
and upon whom you build your belief and religion: you see their brave and
excellent virtues, and of what esteem their laws and ordinances ought to be
amongst you: Now touching the end that this holy father made, it is declared in
the former book among the rank of Atheists, where we placed him. And albeit
that he and such like villains, please their own humors with their
abominations, and approve and clear themselves therein, yet are they rewarded
by death, not only by the law of God, Leuit. 20.
but also by the law Iulia.

When Charlemaigne reigned in France, there happened a most notable judgment
of God upon the monks of Saint Martine in Tours, for their disordinate lusts:
they were men whose food was too much and dainty, whose ease was too easy, and
whose pleasures were too immoderate, being altogether addicted to pastimes and
meriments: In their apparel they went clad in silk like great lords; Nic.
Gil. vol. 1.
and (as Nichol. Gill. in his first volume of French Chronicles says) their
shoes were gilt over with gold, so great was the superfluity of their riches
and pride: in sum, their whole life was luxurious and infamous: for which
cause there came forth a destroying angel from the Lord (by the report of
Eudes the Abbot of Clugny) and slew them all in one night, as the first borne
of Egypt were slain, save one only person that was preferued, as Lot in
Sodom was preserved: this strange accident moved Charlemaigne to appoint a
brotherhood of Canons to be in their room (though little better, and as little
profitable to the common wealth as the former.)

It is not for nothing that the law of God forbids to lie with a beast,
Leuit. 18.
and denounces death against them that commit this foul sin: for there have
been such monsters in the world at sometimes, Exodus 22. Leuit. 20. Deuteronomy. 27.
as we read in Caelius and Volaterranus, of one Crathes a shepherd, that
accompanied carnally with a she goat, but the Buck finding him sleeping,
offended and provoked with this strange action, ran at him so furiously with
his horns, that he left him dead upon the ground. God that opened an asses
mouth to reprove the madness of the false Prophet Balaam, and sent lions to
kill the strange inhabitants of Samaria, employed also this bucke about his
service in executing just vengeance upon a wicked varlet.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the wonderful evil that arises from this greediness of
lust.
IT is to very good reason, that the scripture forbids us to abstain from
the lust of the flesh and the eyes, 1. Ioh. 2.
which is of the world and the corruprion of man's own nature; for so much as
by it we are drawn and enticed to evil, it being as it were, a corrupt root
which sends forth most bitter, sour, and rotten fruit: Iam. 1.
and this happens not only when the goods and riches of the world are in
quest, but also when a man hunteth after dishonest and unchaste delights: this
concupiscense is it that brings forth whoredoms, adulteries, and many other
such sins, whereout spring forth oftentimes floods of mischiefs, and that
diverse times by the self will and inordinate desire of private and particular
persons: Genesis 39.
what did the lawless lust of Putiphars wife bring upon Joseph? was not his
life endangered, and his body kept in close prison, where he cooled his feet
two years or more.

We have a most notable example of the miserable end of a certain woman, with
the sacking and destruction of a whole city, and all caused by her intemperance
and unbridled lust.

About the time that the Emperor Phocas was slain by Priscus, Sabell.
one Gysulphus (governor and chieftaine of a cuntry in Lumbardie) going out in
defense of his cuntry against the Bauarians (which were certain relics of
the Hunnes) gave them battle, and lost the field and his life withal: Now
the conquerours (pursuing their victory) laid siege to the chief city of his
province, where Romilda his wise made her abode: who viewing one day from the
walls the young and fair king with yellow curled locks gallopping about the
city, fell presently so extremely in love with him, that her mind ran of
nothing but satisfying her greedy and new conceived lust: wherefore (burying in
oblivion the love of her late husband, with her young infants yet living, and
her country, and preferring her own lust before them all) she sent secretly
unto him this message, That if he would promise to marry her, she would
deliver up the city into his hands: he well pleased with this gentle offer,
(through a desire of obtaining the city, whioh without great bloodshed and
loss of men, he could not otherwise compass) accepted of it, and was received
upon this condition within the walls: and least he should seem too perfidious,
he performed his promise of marriage, and made her his wife for that one
night, but soon after (in scorn and disdain) he gave her up to twelve of
his strongest leachers to glut her unquenchable fire: and finally nailed her on
a gibbet, for a final reward of her treacherous and boundless lust. Mark
well the misery whereinto this wretched woman threw her self; and not only
her self, but a whole city also by her boiling concupiscense, which so d^zled
her understanding, that she could not consider how indecent it was, dishonest,
and inconvenient, for a woman to offer her self, nay to solicit a man that
was an enemy, a stranger, and one that she had never seen before, to her bed,
and that to the utter undoing of her self, and all hers. But even thus many
more (whose hearts are passionate with love) are blindfolded after the same
sort, (like as poetical Cupid is fained to be) that not knowing what they take
in hand, they fall headlong into destruction ere they be aware. Let us then be
here advertised to pray unto God that he would purify our drossie hearts, and
divert our wandering eyes from beholding vanity to be seduced thereby.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of unlawful gestures, Idleness, Gluttony, Drunkenness,
Daunsing, and other such like dissolutenes.
LIke as if we would carry our selves chastely and uprightly before God, it
behooves us to avoid all filthiness and adultery, so we must abstain from
uncivil and dishonest gestures, which are (as it were) badges of
concupiscense, and coals to set lust on fire, and instruments to injury others
withal: Sabel.
from hence it was that Pompey caused one of his soldiers eyes to be put out
in Spain, for thrusting his hand under a woman's garment that was a Spaniard:
and for the same or like offense, did Sertorius command a footman of his band
to be cut in pieces. Oh that we had in these days such minded captains, that
would sharply repress the wrongs and rauishments, which are so common and
usual amongst men of war at this day, and so uncontrolled! they would not
then (doubtless) be so rife and common as in these days they are.

Kissing is no less to be eschewed than the former, if it be not betwixt those
that are tied together by some bond of kindred or affinity, as it was by
ancient custom of the Medes and Persians, and Romans also, according to the
report of Plutarch and Seneca: and that which is more, Sueton.
Tiberius Caesar forbad the often and daily practice thereof in that kind, as a
thing not to be frequented, but rather utterly abhorred, though it be amongst
kinsfolks themselves. It was esteemed an indignity among the Grecians, to
kiss any maid that was not in blood or affinity allied unto them; as it
manifestly appears by the earnest sure and request of the wife of Pisistratus
the tyrant of Athens, to put to death a young man for kissing her daughter in
the streets, as he met her, Valor. lib. 1. c. 5.
although it was nothing but love that moved him thereto. Saint Augustine also
affirms, De ciuitat. Dei. lib. 21. cap. 11.
that he which wantonly kisseth a woman that is not his wife, deserves the
whip. It is true, Genesis 27.45.
that the holy scripture often mentions kissing, but either betwixt father
and child, or brethren, or kinsfolks, or at least in manner of salutation
betwixt one another of acquaintance, 2. Sam. 20.9.
according to the custom of the people of God: and sometimes also it is
mentioned as a token of honor and reverence which the subject perfourmeth to
his superior in this action. 1. Sam. 10.
In the former ages, Christians used to kiss also, but so, that it was ever
betwixt parties of acquaintance, and in such sort, Just. Apolog. 2. Tectull.
that by this manner of greeting, they testified to each other their true and
sincere charity, peace, and union of heart and soul in the Lord. Such
chearings and loving embracings were pure and holy, not lascivious and wanton,
like the kisses of profane and leacherous wretches and strumpets, Prou. 7.13.
whereof Solomon makes mention. Furthermore every man ought to shun all means
and occasions which may enduce or entise them to uncleanness: and among the
rest especially Idleness, which can not choose but be, as it were, a wide
door and passage for many vices to enter by, as by experience we see in those
that occupy themselves about no good nor profitable exercises, but mispend
their time in trifling and doing nothing, and their wits either upon vain and
foolish conceits to the hurt of others, or upon lascivious and unchaste
thoughts, to their own overthrow; whereas on the contrary, to them that are
well employed either in body or mind, no such thing betideth: wherefore we
ought to be here advertised every one of us to apply our selves to some honest
and seemly trade, answerable to our diverse and several estates and
conditions, and not to suffer our selves to be ouergrowne with Idleness, least
thereby we fall into mischief: for whom the adversary (that malicious and
wicked one) finds in that case, he knows well how to fit them to his
purpose, and to set them about filthy and pernicious services.

Next to Idleness, the too much pampering the body with dainty and much food,
is to be eschued; for like as a fat and well fed horse wincheth and kicketh
against his rider, so the pampered flesh, rebelleth against God, and a man's
own self: this fulness of bread and abundance of fleshly delights, was the
cause of the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha, Ezech. 16.^9.
and therefore our Savior to good purpose warns us, to take heed to our
selves, Luke 21.34.
that we be not oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness; and the Apostle, To
take no thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, but to walk
honestly, Romans 13.13.
not being given to gluttony and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness: and
in another place, Not to be drunk with wine wherein is excess: Ephesians. 5.
for besides the loss of time and mispence of goods, the grievous diseases and
pangs of the body, and dulling and besotting of the wit, which spring from
intemperance, many other great evils depend and wait thereon; as whoredoms,
adulteries, uncleannesses, quarrels, debates, murders, with many other such
like disorders and mischiefs.

Noah, that holy Patriarch, by drinking too much wine, Genesis 9.
not only discovered his own shame, but also was the occas^on of that cruel
curse which the Lord sent upon the posterity of Cham, which even to this day
lies heavy upon them.

Lot, though he hated the sin of Sodom, Genesis 19.
and escaped the punishment of Sodom, yet being overcome with the wine of the
mountains, he committed incest with his own daughter, and made a new Sodom of
his own family.

Balthazar, rioting and reuelling amongst his pots, had the end both of life
and kingdom denounced against him, Dan. 5.
by a bodiles handwriting upon the wall, the Lords decree. Judith. 13.
Whilst Holofernes besotted his senses with excess of wine and good cheer,
Judith found means to cut off his head.

The Emperors Septimus Seuerus, and Iouinianus, died with eating and drinking
too much.

Likewise a certain African called Donitius, Eusebius.
ouetcharged his stomach with so much food at supper, that he died therewith.

Gregory of Tours reports of Childericke a Saxon, that glutted himself so
full of meat and drink over night, that in the morning he was found choked in
his bed.

In our memory, there was a priest in Rouergne near Millaine, that (dining
with a rich farmer for his years dinner) cheered himself so well, and filled
his belly so full, that it burst in two, and he died suddenly.

Plutarch.
Alexander the Great, having invited many of his favorites and captains to
supper, propounded a crown in reward to him that should drink most: now the
greatest drinker swallowed up four steaens of wine, and won the price, being
in value worth six hundred crowns, but lost his life (a jewel of greater
worth) for he suruiued not three days after this vile excess: besides, the
rest that strove with him in this goodly conflict of carousing, one and forty
of them died to bear him company.

The same Alexander was himself subject to wine, and so distempered diverse
times therewith, that he often slew his friends at the table in his
drunkenness, whom in sobriety he loved dearest.

Incest, lib. 2. cap. 31.
Plutarch tells us of Armitus and Ciranippus, two Siracusians, that being
drunk with wine, committed incest with their own daughters.

Cle^mines, king of Lacedemonia, being disposed to carouse after the manner of
the Scithians, drank so much, that he became and continued ever after
senseless.

Anacreon the Poet, a grand consumer of wine, and a notable drunkard, was
choked with the husk of a grape.

The monstrous and riotous excesses of diverse Roman Emperors (as Tiberius by
name, who was a companion of all drunkards) is strange to be heard, and almost
incredible to be believed: he loved wine so well, that instead of Tiberius,
they called him Biberius; and in stead of Claudius, Caldus; and in stead of
Nero, Mer^: noting by those nicknames, how great a drunkard he was.

The Earl of Aspremont, (after he had by infinite excess exhausted all his
substance) being upon a day at S. Michell, drank so excessiuely, that he died
therewith.

Cyrillus, a citizen of Hippon, had an ungracious son, Aug. tom. 10. ver. 33.
who leading a riotous and luxurious life, in the midst of his drunkenness
killed his own mother great with child, Paricid. lib. 2. cap. 11.
and his father, that sought to restrain his fury; and would have ravished his
sister, had she not escaped from him with many wounds.

Bonosus the Emperor, Flauius Vopisc.
is reported to have been such a notorious drunkard, that he was said to be
borne not to live, but to drink: if any ambassadors came unto him, he would
make them drunk, to the end to reveal their secrets: he ended his life with
misery, even by hanging, with this epitaph, That a tun, not a man, was hanged
in that place.

Philostrates, being in the bathes at Sinvess^, Mart^d. lib. 11.
devoured so much wine, that he fell down the stairs, and almost broke his
neck with the fall.

Zeno, the Emperor of the East, Platina.
was so notoriously given to excess of meats and drinks, that his senses being
benumbed, he would often lie as one that was dead: wherefore being become odious
to all men by his beastly qualities, his wife Ariad^e fell also indetestation
of him, and one day as he lay sensles she transported him into a tomb, and
throwing a great stone upon it, pined him to death, not suffering any to remove
the stone, or to yield him any succor; and this was a just reward of his
drunkenness.

Pope Paulus the second, beside the exceeding pomp of apparel which he used,
he was also very careful for his throat, for (as Platina writes of him) he
delighted in all kind of exquisite dishes and delicate wine, and that in
superfluity; by which immoderate and continual surfeiting, he fell into a
grievous apoplexy, which quickly made an end of his life. It is reported of
him, that he ate the day before he died, two great melons, and that in a very
good appetite; when as the next night the Lord stroke him with his heavy
judgment.

Alexander, the son of Basilius, Phil. Melancth* lib. 4.
and brother of Leo the Emperor, did so wallow and drown himself in the
gulf of pleasure and intemperance, that one day (after he had stuffed himself
too full of meat) as he got upon his horse, he burst a vain within his body,
whereat upwards and downwards issued such abundance of blood, that his life and
soul issued forth withal.

Concerning Daunsing (the usual dependants of feasts and good cheer) there is
none of sound judgment that know not, that they are baits end allurements to
uncleanness, and as it were, instruments of bawdry: by reason whereof, they
were always condemned among men of honor and reputation, whether Romans or
Greeks, and left for vile and base minded men to use. And this may appear, by
the reproach that Demosthenes the orator gave to Philip of Macedonie and his
courtiers, in an oration to the Athenians, wherein he termed them common
dauncers, and such as shamed not as soon as they had glutted their bellies with
meat, and their heads with wine, to fall scurrilously a daunsing: As for the
honorable dames of Rome, truly we shall never read that any of them
accustomed themselves to dance, according to the report of Salust touching
Sempronia, whom he judged to be too fine a dauncer and singer to be
honorable withal: as if these two could no more agree than fire and water.
Cicero in his apology of Muraena, Muraena.
rehearses an objection of Cato against his client, wherein he challenged him
for dancing in Asia; which he makes a matter of so great reproach, that not
daring to maintain or excuse the fact he flatly denies it, saying, That no
sober and discreet man ever would commit that fault, unless his sense and
reason was bereft him. Plutarch also setting forth the virtues of women puts
in this among the rest, that she ought to be no dancer: and speaking in a not
her place to all others as well as women, bids them to repulse even their
friends if they should lead and entise them to that exercise.

Besides, all the ancient Doctors of the Church have utterly condemned them as
unlawful: Thou learnest to sing profane and idle songs (says Basil) and
forgettest the godly Psalms and Hymns which were once taught thee: thou
caperest and leapest with thy feet in daunses (unwise as thou art) when as thou
should rather bend thy knees in prayer to the almighty: but what gain is got
hereby? Marry this, that virgins return robbed of their Virginities, and
married wives of their troth to their husbands; both, and all, less chaste than
they went, and more dishonest then they should, if not in act, which
peradventure may be, yet stained in thought which cannot be eschewed. Hear
(says Chrysostom) you maids and wives which are not ashamed to daunse and
trip it at others marriages, and to pollute your sexes; wheresoever a
lascivious dance is daunced, there the devil bears the other part and is
the author of it. It is better (says Ambrose) to dig and delue upon holy days
than to dance. And in another place writing to his sister, he says, that he
need not care for dissolute behauiours and songs which are used at marriages to
make him merry with all, for when banquets are concluded with daunces, then is
chastity in an evil case and in great danger to suffer shipwreck by those
suspicious allurements. Besides this, Orig. lib. 1. contra Cells. Can. 5. and 52.
dancing has been absolutely forbidden by consent of the whole church of
Christ before time, under pain of excommunication; as it may appear by the
Constantinoplitane counsel under Justinian the Emperor: what answer can they
make then to this that are Christians and allow of these forbidden sports? Is
it the denying of a man's self? The spiritual regeneration? The putting off
the old man touching our conversation in this life? And if al adultery and
uncleanness, Ephesians. 5.4.
all filthiness and foolish talking, jesting and such like, ought not once to
be named amongst us, because they are things not comely, If I say it be not
lawful to jest or speak the least lascivious word that is, how shall it be
lawful to do an action with the motion and consent of the whole body, which
represents nothing else but folly, vanity, and lasciuiousnes? And this is for
the^ that demand where dancing is forbidden in the scripture, which I touch as
it were by the way, and do but point at, not minding to frame any long
discourse thereof, seeing there is a particular treatise touching the same
matter, which he may read that desires to know any more touching it. Now let
us see what goodly fruits and commodities have risen therfrom. The daughters of
the children of Israel being dancing in Silo upon a feastiual day, after the
manner of the uncircumcised Idolaters, were ravished by the Beniamites for to be
their wives, Judge. 11.
and that mixtly without regard of one or other were they of never so high or
base condition.

At the feast which Herod the Tetrarch made to the princes and captains and
nobles of Galilee, the daughter of Herodias pleased him and his company so well
with her dancing, Mark. 6.
that to gratify this filthy strumpet the incestuous tyrant caused John
Babtist to be beheaded.

Lodowicke Archbishop of Magdeburge celebrating a solemn feast at a Town
called Caluen, invited many of the worthy citizens to make merry with him; the
place for their ioyaltie was the great hall, wherein judicial causes were
appointed to be discussed: here after the banquet ended they fell a dancing
men and women mixtly together, such a ridiculous round clay and such a
multitude, that what with the weight of their bodies, or rather the indignation
of God against the^ for this scurrilous and immodest behauior, the beams of the
house began to crack and threaten a certain ruin, whereat the Archbishop
affrighted caught hold by a fair dame and began first to go down the stairs,
but the steps before losened, as soon as he trod upon the^ tumbled down and he
and his comfort headlong withal, and were crushed in pieces: and thus he that
was principal of the feast and sport, was made an example to all the rest of
the Lords vengeance, because he dishonored his calling and profession by such
lewd and light behauior: and this was one goodly effect of dancing.

Chron. Magdenburge.
Another we read of in the Chronicles of the same city to this effect, in a
village called Ossemer adioining to Stendel, as the Popish priest played the
minstrell to his parishoners that danced the morris before him, and reioiced in
their merry may games: a tempest arose and a thunderbolt stroke off his right
hand together with the harp which he played on, and consumed a four and twenty
men and women of the company: a just punishment of so profane a priest, who in
stead of dehorting them (as his duty bound him) from that lascivious custom,
played the chief part in their madness, and was an inciter of them unto it.

Moreover, in many places by dances, grievous and spiteful quarrels have been
stirred up, and many murders executed, the examples whereof are so evident and
notorious, that it is not needful now to stand upon them: to conclude
therefore this point with the saying of Lud. Viues; Lodouicus Viues.
There is not a greater vanity in the world than dancing, for (says he) I
heard of certain men of Asia, that coming into Spain when they first saw the
Spaniards dance, were so sore affrighted that they ran away for fear, supposing
the^ to have been either possessed with some spirit, or out of their wits at
least: and truly I think if a man had never seen a woman dance before, he could
hardly be of another judgment, there being nothing that resembles frenzy and
lunacy more the^ the strange shakings and motions of the body at the noise of a
beaten sheepskin: verily it is a pastime to mark the grave behauior, the
measurable march, the pomp and ostentatio^ of wome^dancers, and the great care
they have to perform wisely so foolish an action: it is very likely that all
their wit at that time is distilled from their head into their feet, for there
it is more requisite and needful the^ in the brain: thus much says L. Viues.
Now touching Mummeries and Maskes, I place the^ in the same rank with the
other, for so much as they are derived from the same fountain, and communicate
the same nature, and produce the same effects, and oftentimes are so
pernicious, that diverse honorable women have been ravished and co^ueied away by
their means: Nay and some Masquers have been well chastised in their own vices:
as it happened in the reign of Charles the sixth, to six that masked it to a
marriage at the hostell of S. Paul's in Paris, being attired like wild horses,
covered with loose flax dangling down like hair: albedaubed with greafe for
the fitter hanging thereof, and fast bound one to another, and in this guise
entered the hall, dancing with torches before the^: but behold suddenly their
play turned to a tragedy, for a spark of one of their torches fell into the
greasy flax of his neighbor, and set it immediately on fire, so that in the
turning of an hand they were all on flame, then gave they out a most horrible
outcrie: one of them threw himself headlong into a tub of water provided to
rense their drinking cups and gobblites, and upon that occasion standing not
far off; two were burnt to death without stirring once from the place: the
bastard Foix and the Earl of Iouy escaped indeed present death, but being
conveyed to their lodgings they suruiued not two days: the king himself being
one of the six, was saved by the duchess of Berry, that covering him with her
loose and wide garments quenched the fire before it could seize upon his flesh.
Vol. 4. cap. 52.
Froyssard the reporter of this tragedy says, that the next morrow every man
could say that this was a wonderful sign and advertisement sent by God to the
king to warn him to renounce all such fond and foolish devises which he
delighted too much in, and more than it became a king of France to do: and this
was the event of that gallant masque.

It rests now that we speak somewhat of Plays and Comedies, and such like
toies and may games which have no other use in the world but to deprave and
corrupt good manners, and to open a door to all uncleanness: the ears of young
folk are there polluted with many filthy and dishonest speeches, their eyes
are there infected with lascivious and unchaste gestures and countenances, and
their wits are there stained and imbrued with so pernicious liquor, that
(except Gods good grace) they will ever savor of it: the holy and sacred
scripture ordained to a holy and sacred use, is oftentimes by these filthy
swine profaned to please and to delight their audience. In few words there is
nothing else to be found amongst them but nourishment to our senses of foolish
and vain delights: Tertul. Oros.
for this cause many of the sager Romans as Nasica and diverse other Censors,
hindered the building of the Theaters in Rome, for an opinion they had that
their sports and pastimes which were exercised therein, served to no other
purpose but to make the people idle, effemina^e, and voluptuous: and besides
the masters guiders and actors of plays were always debarred as men
infamous, from bearing any public office or dignity in the Commonwealth.

Tiberius Caesar himself though of most corrupt and rotten manners and
conversation, Tacit. lib. 4.
yet in open Senate complained and found fault with the immodesty of stage
plaiers, and banished them at that same time out of Italy: when Domitian was
Censor he put out of the Senate a citizen of Rome, Fulgos. De curiositate.
because he was too much addicted to the imitation of the fashions of plaiers
and dancers: and Plutarch says, that we ought to shun all such spectacles.

If then such pastimes were by the judgment of the Romans noted with infamy,
shall we have their equals in follies in better account? Basil calls such
sports and pastimes, The workehouse, forge, and common shop of all wickedness:
Homil. 4.
and therefore Chrisossome prays and admonishes the faithful of his time to
abstain from frequenting such places. S. Augustine also forbids to bestow
our money upon tumblers, Homil 6. in. 1. cap. Genesis Can. 51.
iugglers, and plaiers, and such like? Beside by the Constantinoplitane
council under Justinian, it was inhibited to be once present at such sports,
under the pain of excomunication: and that the ancient Christians did by
common consent not only condemn but also utterly abstain from such pastimes,
it may appear by the testimony of Tertullian, writing to the Gentiles to this
effect: Apolog.
We renounce and send back (says he) sports and plays unto you as to the
head and fountain from whence they were first derived: we make no reckoning of
those things which we know were drawn from superstition: we love not to
behold the folly of turning with chariots, nor the unchastity of the Theater,
nor the cruelty of sword playing, nor the vanity of leaping, wrestling, and
dancing: but take pleasure in exercises of better report, and less hurt.

Moreover how odious and irksome in the sight of the Lord such spectacles are,
and what power and sway the devil bears therein, the judgment of God upon a
Christian woman (reported by Tertullian Tertul. de spect.
) may sufficiently instruct us: There was a woman (says he) that went to the
Theater to see a play, and returned home possessed with an unclean spirit: who
being rebuked in a coniuration for daring to assault one of the faith, that
professed Christ; answered that he had done well because he found her upon his
own ground.

The same author reports another example as strange, of a woman also that
went to see a tragedy acted, to whom the night following appeared in a dream
the picture of a sheet (a presage of death) casting in her teeth that which she
had done; and five days after, death himself seized upon her.

As touching wanton songs and unchaste and ribald books (that I may be brief)
I will content my self only with that which is alleged by Ludiuicus Viues
concerning that matter. The Magistrate (says he) ought to banish out of his
dominion all dishonest songs and Poemes, Lib. of instruction of a Christian
woman.
and not to suffer novelties to be published day by day in rimes and Ballades,
as they are: as if a man should hear in a city nothing but foolish and
sturrilous dirties, such as would make even the younger sort that are well
brought up to blush, and stir up the indignation of men of honor and gravity:
this ought Magistrate to prevent, and to discharge the people from reading
Amadis, Tristram, Lancelot, du lake, Melusine, Poggius scurrilities, and
Boccace novelties, with a thousand more such like toies: and thus much out of
Viues.

CAAP. XXXV. Of Theenes and Robbers.
IT follows that we speak in the next place of such as by their greedy
covetousness and unquenchable desire of lucre, transgress the fourth
commandment of the second table, to wit, Thou shall not steal: wherein not
only simple theft but also sacrilege is condemned, and first of Sacrilege.

Into this sin fell wretched Achan in the time of Joshua, Joshua. 7.
when in the sack of Ierecho, he seeing a Babilonish garment with certain
gold and silver, covered it and stole it away, and hid it in his tent, contrary
to the commandment of the Lord: for which cause the Lord was offended with his
whole people, as if they all had been necessary to the crime; and infer bled
them so before their enemies, that they were be at ^^ndowne at Hay, and
shamefully put to flight, neither was his anger appeased until that the
offendant being divinely and miraculously descried, was stoned to death and
burnt with his children, and all his substance:

But to come unto profane stories, let us begin with Heliodorus measurer of
Seleuchus king of Asia: who by the Kings commandment and suggestion of one
Simon, governor of the Temple, came to take away the gold and silver which was
kept in the treasury of the Temple, and to transport it unto the kings
treasury, whereat the whole city of Jerusalem put on sackcloth, and poured out
prayers unto the Lord: so that when Heliodorus was present in the Temple with
his soldiers ready to seize upon the treasure, the Lord of all spirits and
power, showed so great a vision that he fell suddenly into extreme fear
and trembling: for there appeared unto him an horse with a terrible man sitting
upon him most richly barbed, which came fiercely and smote at him with his
foreseer; moreover there appeared two young men, notable in strength, excellent
in beauty, and comely in aparrell, which stood by him on either side and
scourged him with many striples, so that Heliodorus that came in with so great
a company of soldiers and attendants, was stricken dumb and carried out in a
litter upon thens shoulders: for his strength was so abated that he could not
help himself, but lay destitute of all hope of recovery, so heavy was the
hand of God upon him, until by the prayers of Onias the high priest he was
restored; then lo, he confessed that he which dwelt in heaven had his eye on
that place, and defended it from all those that came to hurt and spoil it.

Another of this true, was in Crassus the Roman, who entering Jerusalem robbed
the Temple of two thousand talents of silver and gold; Josephus, Zonar.
beside the rich ornaments, which amounted in worth to eight thousand talents,
and a beam of beaten gold co^taining three hundred pound in weight: Campoful.
lib. 1.
for which sacraledge, the vengeance of God so pursued him, that within a while
after he was overcome by the Parthians and together with his son slain, his
evil gotten goods being dispersed, and the scull of his head being made a ladle
to melt gold in, that it might be glutted with that being dead, which alive it
could never be satisfied with.

Josephus. lib. 17.
Herod following the steps of Hircanus his predecessor that took out of the
sepulcher of king David three thousand talents of money, Zonar. Annal. 1
thinking to find the like treasure, broke up the sepulcher in the night, and
found no money but rich ornaments of gold which he took away with him:
howbeit to his cost, for two of his servants perished in the vaut, by a divine
fire as it is reported, and he himself had small success in his worldly
affairs ever after.

Julian the Apostatae robbed the church of the revenues thereof, and took away
all beneuolences and contributions to schools of learning, to the end the
children might not be instructed in the liberal arts, nor in any other good
literature. He exaggered also his sacrilege with scornful ieasts, saying
that he did further then salvation by making them poor: seeing it was written
in their own bibles; Blessed are the poor, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven: but how this sacreligious thief was punished, Lib. 2. cap. 20.
is already declared in the former book.

Zonaras.
Leo Croponymus took out of the Temple of Constantinople an excellent crown
of gold beset with precious stones, which Mauritius had dedicated to the Lord,
but as soon as he had set it on his head, a cruel fever seized upon him that
he died very shortly.

Fulg of. lib. 1. chap. 2.
The punishment of the sacrilege of Queen Vrratha in Spain, was most
wonderful and speedy: for when in her war against her son Alphonsus she wanted
money, she robbed the church dedicated to S. Isidore, and took with her own
hands the treasures up, which her soldiers refused to do: but ere she
departed out of the church, vengeance ouertook her and stroke her dead in the
place.

Moreover the Lord so hates this ireligious sin, that he permits the
devil to exercise his cruelty upon the spoilers of profane and idolatrous
temples, as he did upon Dionisius the tyrant of Siracusa; Aelianus.
who after many robberies of holy things, and spoiling the churches, died
suddenly with extreme joy as authors report, he spoiled the temple of
Proserpina at Locris, and shaued off the golden beard of Aesculapius at
Epidamnum, saying it was an unseemly thing for Apollo to be beardlesse and his
son bearded: he deprived Jupiter Olimpus of his golden raiment, and gave him
a woollen coat in steed thereof; saying it was too heavy for him in the
summer, and too cold in winter, and that this was more convenient for both
seasons: the pretext of al his sacrilege was this, that seeing the Gods were
good, why should not he be pertaker of their goodness.

Such another was Cambises king of Persia, Sabel. lib. 4. c. 3. Herod. lib. 1.
who sent fifty thousand men to rob and destroy the temple of Jupiter Ammon,
but in their journey so mighty a tempest arose, that they were overwhelmed with
the sand, not one of them remaining to carry news of their success.

Brennus was constrained to slay himself for enterprising to rob the Temple of
Apollo at Delphos: Philomelus, Fulgo. lib. 1. c. 2.
Onomarchus, and Phayllus, went about the same practice, and indeed robbed the
Temple of all the treasures therein; but one of them was burned, another
drowned, and the third broke his neck: to conclude, the Athenians put to death
a young child for taking but a golden plate out of Dianaes Temple, but first
they offered him otheriewels and trinckets, which when he despised in respect
of the plate, they rigorously punished him as guilty of sacrilege.

Cardinal Wolsey being determined to erect two new colleges, Stow. chron.
one at Oxford, and the other at Ipswich, obtained license and authority of
Pope Clement the seventh to suppress about the number of forty Monasteries to
furnish and set forward the building of his said college; which irreligious
sacrilege (I call it sacrilege, because not done of conscience but to patch
up pride) was furthered by five persons who were the chief instruments of the
dissolution of Daintrey Monastery, because the Prior and Covent would not
grant them certain lands in farm at their own price: But what punishment
ensued upon them at Gods hand the world was witness of: for of those five
persons, two fell at discord amongst themselves, and the one slew the other,
for the which the suruiuour was hanged; the third drowned himself in a well;
the fourth being then worth two hundred pounds, within three years became so
poor that he begged until his dying day; and the fifth called (Doctor Allane)
was cruelly maimed in Ireland, the Cardinal himself falling into the Kings
displeasure was deposed from his Bishopric and died miserably, the Colleges
which he meant to have made so glorious a building, came never to any good
effect; the one at Ipswich being clean defaced, the other at Oxford unfinished.

And thus much of Sacrilege, now let us come and see the punishment of simple
theft; the principal cause whereof is covetousness, which is so unruly an
evil, and so deep rooted in the heart of man, that ever yet it has used to
encroch upon the goods of others, and to keep possession of that which was
none of it own; breaking all the bands of humanity, equity, and right,
without being contained in any measure or mean: whereof we have a most notable
example in the old world before the flood, which (by Moses report) ouerflowed
with iniquity and extortion; the mighty ones oppressed the weak, the greater
trod under foot the less, and the rich devoured the poor: when the Lord saw
the general deluge of sin and disorder thus universally spread (which indeed
was a sign of great defection and contempt of him) he like a just judge that
could not endure these monstrous iniquities, sent a deluge of waters amongst
them by opening the windows of heaven, and breaking up the fountains of the
great deepes, and giving passage to the waters both by heaven and by earth, so
that it rained forty days and forty nights without ceasing, and the waters
prevailed upon the earth, and ouercouered the high mountains by fifteen
cubits, the earth being reduced into the same estate which it had in the
beginning before the waters were took away from the face thereof: verily it
was a most hideous and sad spectacle to see first the valleys, then the hills,
and last the highest mountains so overflowed with water, that no show or
appearance of the^ might be perceived, it was a dreadful sight to behold whole
houses tossed to and fro up and down in the waves, and at last to be shiuered
in pieces, there was not a city nor village that perished not in the deep,
not a tree nor tower so high that could ouerpeere the waters: as they increased
more and more in abundance, so fear, horror, and despair of safety increased
in the heart of every living soul. And on this fashion did God punish those
wicked rebels, not at one blow, but by little and little increasing their
pain, that as they had a long time abused his patience, and made no reckoning
of amendment, so the punishment of their sin might be long and tedious. Now
in this extremity one could not help another, nor one envy another, but all
were concluded under the same destruction, all surprised, assieged, and
environed alike, as well he that roued in the fields as he that stayed in the
houses, he that climed up unto the mountains, as he that abode in the valleys,
the merciles water spared none: it was to no purpose that some ascended their
high houses, some climed upon trees, and some scaled the rocks, neither one
nor other found any refuge or safety in any place, the rich were not saved by
their riches, nor the strong by the pith of their strength, but all perished
and were drowned together, except Noah and his family: which punishment was
correspondent unto the worlds iniquity, for as the earth was corrupted and
polluted with abundance of sin: so God sent abundance of water to purge and
cleanse away the filthiness thereof, as at the latter day he will send fire to
purify and refine heaven and earth from their dregs, and restore them to their
first and purest estate. And thus God revenged the extortion and cruelty of
that age.

But yet for all this those sins were not then so defaced and rooted up, but
that they be burnished again and grown in time to as big a Bulk: for even at
this day the greatest part of the world is given to practice fraud and deceit,
and by unlawful means to encroch upon others goods; which subtleties, though
they desire never so to disguise and cloak, yet will they ever be condemned
and reputed kinds of theft before God: now as some are of greater power and
authority than others in the world, so answerable to their selves is the
quality of their sins, and by consequence the punishment: the greater of
power, the greater thieves and the greater judgment: for if a poor man through
poverty and necessity cutteth a purse, of steals any other trifle, be
culpable; how much more culpable shall he that is rich be, that usurps the
goods of his neighbor?

Draco the lawgiuer of Athens appointed death to be the punishment of theft:
Solon mitigated that rigor, and punished it with double restitution: The
Locrians put out his eyes that had stolen ought from his neighbor: The
Hetrurians stoned them to death: The Scythians abhorred the^ more than all
creatures, because they had a community of all things except their cups. The
Vacceians used such severity toward this kind of men, that if one had taken
but a handful of corn, he was sure to die for it.

Marcus Fabius being Censor, condemned his own son Bute^ to death being
apprehended for theft. Tiberius the Emperor punished a souldior after the same
manner for stealing a Peacock: in sum, there was no Commonwealth wherein this
sin was not highly detested, and sharply punished, except the Lacedemonian,
where it was permitted and tolerated for their exercise of warlike discipline.

It was a rash and severe, Theat. histor.
yet as it proved a just ded of Tamburlaine that mighty tyrant and conqueror
of Asia, when a poor woman complained to him of one of his soldiers that had
taken from her a little milk and a piece of cheese without payment, he caused
the soldiers belly to be ripped to see whither she had falsely accused him or
no, and finding the milk in his stomach adjudged him worthy of that
punishment for stealing from so poor a woman.

When Theophilus reigned Emperor in the East, there was a certain soldier
possessed of a very gallant and brave horse, which his captain by all means
possible sought to get from him, Zonar. Annal. 3.
but he would not in any case part with him; wherefore he put him forth of pay
and took his horse from him by force, and sent him for a present to the
Emperor Theophilus: now it chanced that this poor soldier was slain in the
battle for want of his horse, and his wife and children left destitute of
succor, insomuch that through necessity she was constrained to fly to
Constantionple and to complain to the Emperor of the injury done unto her
husband: with this resolution entering the city, she met the Emperor riding
upon her husbands horse, and catching the horse bridle, challenged him not only
for stealing the horse, but also being the cause of her husbands death. The
Emperor wondering at the woman's boldness, examined her more narrowly and
found out the whole practice of that wicked captain, whom he banished
presently his Empire, and bestowed his possession in recompense upon the
distressed widow.

Ibicus the Poet being set upon by thieves, when he saw that they would not
only spoil him of his money but of his life also, he cried for help and
revenge to the cranes that flew over his head, a while after as these murdering
thieves sat together in the market place, the same cranes appearing unto them
in the air, they whispered one another in the ear, and said, yonder fly
Ibicus reuengers, which though secretly spoken, yet was ouerheard: so that they
being examined and found guilty, were put to death for their pains. The like
story Martin Luther Luther.
reports touching a trauailer; only differing in this, that as cranes
detected the former, so crows laid open the latter.

Albert. Krantz. lib. 10. cap. 7.
In the year 1384 when as al Saxony was so infested with thieves, that no man
could travail safely in the country, the Princes calling a council, set
down this order, That not only the thieves themselves should be severely
punished, but all that did protect or harbor any of them; which decree when as
Theodorick county of Weringrode impugned, the body of the council sent for
him and adjudged him to a most cruel and shameful death.

Cranth. lib. 10. cap. 30.
In the year 1410 Henry duke of Luneburge, a most just and severe prince, went
about to purge his country from all thefts and robberies, insomuch as the least
offense committed in that kind he suffered not to go unpunished: now it
happened as the Duke went toward Luneburge, he sent before him one of his
chiefest officers to provide necessaries against his coming; who riding
^^thout a cloak, the weather being cold, entreated a ploughman to lend him his
cloak till his return; which when the clown refused to do, he took it without
leave, but it cost him his life for it, for the ploughman awaited the dukes
coming and directed his complaint unto him on this manner: What avails it (O
noble prince) to seek to suppress the outrage of thieves and spoilers, when as
the chiefest officers dare commit such things uncontrolled, as the lieutenant
of Tzela has but now taken from memy cloak? the duke hearing this complaint,
and considering the cause, dissembled his council till his return back from
Luneburge unto the same place, where calling for his leiutenant, and rating him
for his injury, he commanded him to be hanged upon a tree: a wonderful
severity in justice and worthy to be commended; for what hope is it to root
out small and petty thieves, if we suffer grand thieves to go uncorrected.

There is another kind of theft practiced of them that be in authority, who
under the title of confiscation assume unto themselves stolen goods, and so
much the readilier, by how much the value of the things amounts to more
worth: an action altogether unjust and contrary to both divine and humane law,
which ordain to restore unto every man his own: and truly he that in steed of
restitution with holds the good of his neighbor in this manner, differs no
more from a thief, than that the one steals boldly without fear, the other
timorously and with great danger: and what greater corruption of Justice can
there be then this? For who would follow the law upon a thief when he knows
he shall rather run into further charge, than recover any of his old loss?
Beside this, it happens that poor small thieves are often drawn to the
whip, or driven to banishment, or sent to the gallows, when rich grand thieves
lie at their ease and escape uncontrolled, albeit the quality of their crime
be far unequal, according to the Poet: The simple dove by law is censured, Dat
veniam coruis vexat censura columbas.

When ravenous crows escape unpunished.


The world was ever yet full of such ravenous ravens, so nimble in pilling
others goods, and so greedy of their own gain; that the poor people in steed
of being maintained and preserved in the peaceable enjoying of their portions,
are gnawne to the very bones amongst them: for which cause Homer in the person
of Agamemnon calls them deuourers of men: likewise also the Prophet David in
the sixteenth Psalm calls them eaters of his people: and yet want they not
flatterers and trencher-friends (Canckerwoms of a Commonwealth) that urge the^
forwards, and devise daily new kind of exactions, like horseleaches to suck
out the very blood of men's purses, showing so much the more wit and deceit
therein, by how much the more they hope to gain a great part thereof unto their
selves: being like hungerstarued Harpeis, that will never be satisfied, but
still snatch and catch all that comes near their clouches: and these are they
that do good to no man, but hurt to all; of whom the Merchant finds himself
agreeued, the Artificer trodden under foot, the poor laborer oppressed, and
generally all men endamaged.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the excessive burdenings of the Comminaltie.
AS it is a just and approved thing before God to do honor and reverence to
kings and Princes, and to be subject under them in all obedience: so it is a
reasonable and allowable duty to pay such tributes and subsidies, (whereby
their great charges and honorable estate may be maintained) as by right of
equity are due unto the^: and this is also commanded by our Savior Christ in
express words when he says, Mat. 22.21.
Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's. And by the Apostle Paul more
expressly, Romans 31.7.
pay tributes, render unto all men their due: tribute to whom tribute
belongs, and custom to whom custom: Mark how he says, Give unto all men
their due: and therein observe that kings and princes ought of their good and
just disposition be content with their due; and not seek to load and
ouercharge their subjects with unnecessary exactions, but to desire to see them
rather rich and wealthy than poor and needy, for thereby comes no profit
unto themselves; further it is most unlawful for them to exact that above
measure, upon their commons, which being in mediocrity is not condemned: I say
it is unlawful both by the law of God and man, [the law of God and man is
termed all that which both God and man allow and agree upon, and which a man
with a safe conscience may put in practice:] for the former we can have no
other schoolmaster nor instruction, save the holy scripture, wherein God has
manifested his will unto us, concerning this very matter, as in Deuteronom. 18,
speaking of the office and duty of a king, he forbids them to be horders up
of gold and silver, and espousers of many wives, and lovers of pride;
signifying thereby, that they ought to contain themselves within the bounds of
modesty and temperance, and not give the raines to their own affections, nor
heap up great treasures to their peoples detriment, nor to delight in war,
nor to be too much subject to their own pleasures; all which things are means
of unmeasurable expense: so that if it be not allowable to muster together
multitudes of goods, for the danger and mischief that ensues thereof, as it
appears out of this place; then surely is it much less lawful to leuy
excessive taxes of the people; for the one of these can not be without the
other: and thus for the law of God it is clear, that by it authority is not
committed unto them, to surcharge, and as it were, trample down their poor
subjects, by unmeasurable and unsupportable imposition.

As for that which the Prophet Samuel in the name of God, gives notice to the
Israelites of, touching the right of a king; wherein he seems to allow him
the disposition of the goods and persons of his subjects: I answer first, that
God being an immooueable truth, cannot contradict himself by commanding and
forbidding the same thing; and secondly, that the word of the text in the
original, signifies nothing else, but a custom, or fashion, as it appears
in the 1. Sam. 11.13: besides, the speech that the Prophet uses, imports not
a commandment, but an advertisement of the subjection, whereunto the people
were about to thrust themselves, by desiring a king after the manner of other
nations, whose customs amongst them, was to exercise authority and dominion as
well over their goods as their persons: for which cause, God would have them
forewarned, that they might know how vile a yoke they put their own neches
under, and what grievous and troublesome servitude they undertook, from the
which they could no ways be delivered, no though they desired it with tears.

Furthermore, that a king in Israel had no power (in right and equity) to take
away the possessions of any of his subjects, and appropriate it to himself, it
appears by Nabaoths refusal to king Achab, 1. King. 12.
to give him his vineyard, though he requested it (as in may seem) upon very
reasonable conditions, 1 King. 12.
either for his money, or for exchange; so that a man would think he ought
not to have denied him: howbeit his desire being thus crossed, he could not
mend himself by his authority, but fell to vex and grieve himself, and to
champe upon his own bit, until by the wicked and detestable complot of
Iezabel, poor Nabaoth was falsely accused, unjustly condemned, and cruelly
murdered; and then he put in possession of his vineyard: which murder
(doubtless) she would never have attempted, nor yet Nabaoth ever have refused
to yield his vineyard, if by any pretense of law they would have laid claim
unto it: but Nabaoth knowing that it was contrary to Gods ordinance, Number 36.9.
for him to part with his patrimony (which he ought most carefully to
preserve) would not consent to sell over his vineyard neither for love nor
money, nor other recompense: and herein he did but his duty, approved by the
holy scripture. Now how odious a thing before God, the oppression of poor
people is, it is manifest by his own words in the prophecy of Ezechiel, where
he says, Chap. 15.9.
Let it suffice, O princes of Israel, leave off cruelty and oppression, and
execute judgment and justice: take away your exactions from my people, and
cease to thrust them from their goods and heritages. Now concerning the law of
man, which all men agree unto, because it is grounded upon reason and equity,
we find no permission given to kings to use the goods of other men at their
pleasures; for that was far from equity: neither was there any such liberty
bestowed upon them, by those that first in the beginning exalted them to that
degree of dignity: but rather (as diverse worthy authors avouch) their own
virtues vnd good behavior which won them credit amongst the better sort,
installed them first unto that honor. Cic. lib. 3. de legibus. Aug. de ciuitat
Dei. lib. 4. c. 6.
And truly, there is nothing more rightful and just in man's society, than
that every one should possess and enjoy that which is his own, in peace and
quietness, without disturbance or violence; in which respect also, rules of
justice are established, called laws, which no good kings will ever seek to
stand against. They are indeed lords of the earth, as some say, and truly; but
so, that their lordships stretch no further than right, and pass not the rule
of equity; and notwithstanding the propriety of goods and possession,
remains untouched. Lib. 7. c. ^. and 5. de benefictis.
To kings (says Seneca) pertains the sovereignty over all things, but to
private men the propriety.

Tiberius Caesar, being solicited by the governors of the provinces, to lay
heavier tributes, and leuy larger subsidies from his people, made (though a
Painym) this notable answer: That a good shepherd ought to sheare his sheep,
not to flea them. Saint Jews, that good king, amongst all his otherwise and
virtuous exhortations which he gave unto his son before his death, this was
none of the least nor last; Nic. Gil.
That he should never crave any tax or subsidy of his subjects, but upon
urgent necessity and very just cause, and that if he did otherwise, he should
not be reputed for a king, but for a tyrant.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of those that have used too much cruelty toward their subjects
in Taxes and Exactions.
IT is clear then by these foresaid assumptions, that a king may not impose
upon his subjects unmeasurable taxes, and subsidies, least he make himself
guilty of extortion; the root and fountain many times of many great
mischiefs and inconveniences, and in very deed from whence oftener changes,
seditions, and ruins of commonwealths have proceeded, than from any other
cause beside.

What happened to Roboam, king of Israel, for showing himself too rigorous on
this behalf to his subjects, but the defection of the greater part of his
kingdom from him; for being come to the crown after the death of his father
Solomon, when the people came and made a supplication to him to be eased from
his fathers burdens, he (despising the counsel of his sage and ancient
counselors, 1. King. 12.
and following the giddy advise of his young companions) gave them a most
sharp and sour reply, saying, That if his father had laid a heavy yoke upon
them, he would increase it; and if he had chastised them with rods, he would
correct them with scourges: which when they of Israel heard, they revolted from
him, (all save the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin) and stoned to death his
collectours, and chose them another king to rule over them: thus Roboam was
deprived of ten parts of his kingdom thorough his own unadvised tyranny, and
fled all amazed unto Jerusalem, where he lived all his days without recovery
of the same.

Achaeus, king of Lydia, was hanged up against a hill, and his head thrown
into a river running by, because of the great subsidies which he exacted of his
people.

Plutarch. apo^h. Reg.
Dionysius, the first of that name, a notorious and renowned tyrant, not only
in regard of his exceeding cruelty, but also of his unjust rackings and
exactions, was so violent in that practice of doing wrong, that albeit he well
knew the griefs and vexations of the people, that ceased not to complain and
lament their case continually, yet he diminished not their burdens, but
multiplied them more and more, and sucked and gnew out all that ever he could,
until he left them naked, empty, and dispoiled: to conclude, this grand
thief, that durst not trust his wife nor own daughters, Frog. lib. 21.
after he had been discomfited by the Carthaginians, was slain by his servants.

Of the Roman Emperors that most vexed the comminalty with tributes and
taxes, these three were chief, Caligula, Nero, and Caracalla, of whom, this
latter did most pill and pull the people, and would often say, Dion. and Xiph.
That the gold and silver of the kingdom pertained in right to none but him:
being reproved of his mother at a time for his immoderate and excessive
expenses, saying, That there was almost not so much more treasure left as he
had already spent; he made her this answer, That she should take no care for
that, for as long as his hand was able to wield his sword (which he held naked
before her) he would not want money. This is the sword which many now adays
(after the example of Caracalla) have taken up, to cut out (by force and
violence) a way to their own wills, and to cut the throat of equity and
justice, and to compel the poor people to forgo their goods, and surrender
them into their hands: Now how odious and hateful these three were made unto
the people by their own wicked demeanours, their miserable ends do
sufficiently testify; which we have already before mentioned, and mean
afterward more at large to speak of.

The Emperor Constance, son to Constantine, whose father was Heraclius,
coming at a time out of Greece to Rome, Fulgos. lib. 9. cap. 4.
abode there but five days, but in that short space committed so much outrage
in ransacking the temples and other public places, and carrying away so many
rich ornaments and pictures (whereof those places then abounded) that in man's
remembrance, noforraine barbarous enemy, having taken the city by force of
war, ever went away with the like spoil: besides, he did so oppress the
allies and tributaries of the Empire, (and chiefly the Siciliens) with taxes
and imposts, that many of them were constrained to sell their children for
money, to satisfy his extortion: and by this means, he scraped together an
infinite mass of rapins and evil gotten goods, but enjoyed the sweet of them
not very long; for very soon after, he was murdered by his own men of war,
in his return out of Sicilie: and all that spoil which he had unjustly
surprised, was suddenly taken and transported into Africa, by the Saracens that
then inhabited the city Panorme.

Lewis the eleventh, king of France, after he had ouercharged his subjects
with too grievous burdens of paiments and taxes, fell into such a timorous
conceit and fear of death, as never any man did the like: he attempted all
means of avoiding or delaying the same, as first during his sickness, he gave
his physician monthly ten thousand crowns, by that means to creep into his
favor; wherein he being in all other things a very niggard and pinchpenny,
showed himself on the other side more then prodigal: next he sent into
Calabria for a Hermit reported to be a holy and devout man, to whom at his
arrival, he performed so much duty and reverence, as was wonderful and
unseemly: for he threw himself on his knees, and besought him to prolong his
decaying life, as if he had been a God and not a man: but all that he could
do was to no purpose, no nor the relics which Pope Sixtus sent him to busy
himself withal, nor the holy vial of Rheims which was brought him, could
prorogue this life of his, nor privilege him from dying a discontent and
unwilling death: he suspected the most part of his nearest attendants, and
would not suffer them to approach unto him in his sickness: after he had thus
prolonged the time in hope, and yet still languished in extreme distress of
his disease, it was at length told him in all speed, that he should not set
his mind any longer upon those vain hopes, nor upon that holy man, for his
time was come, and he must needs die. And thus he that during his reign
showed himself rough and cruel to his subjects, by too many and heavy
impositions, was himself in his lattet end thus roughly and hardly dealt
withal.

Christiern, the eleventh king of Denmark, Norway, and Suecia, after the death
of king John his father, reigned the year of our Lord 1514, and was too
intolerable in imposing burdens and taxes upon his subjects; for which cause
the Swecians revolted from his government: whom though after many battles
and sieges he conquered, and placed amongst them his garrisons to keep them
in awe, yet ceased they not to rebel against him, and that by the instigation
of a mean gentleman, who very quickly got footing into the kingdom, and
possessed himself of the crown and government. Now Christiern having lost
this province, and being also in disdain and hatred of his own country, and
fearing least this inward heat of spite should grow to some flame of danger to
his life, seeing that the inhabitants of Lubeck conspiring with his uncle
Frederick, began to take arms against him, he fled away, with his wife
(sister to the Emperor Charles the fifth) and his young children to Zeland, a
province of the Emperors, after he had reigned nine years: after which, the
Estates of the realm (aided by them of Lubeck) assembling together, exalted
his uncle Frederick, prince of Holsatia, (though old and ancient) to the
crown; and publishing certain writings, addressed them to the Emperor and
the princes of his Empire, to render a reason of their con-proceeding, and to
make known unto them upon how good siderations, they had deposed and banished
Christierne, for the tyranny which he exercised among them: ten years after
this, he got together a new army by sea, in hope to recover his losses, but
contrary to his hope he was taken prisoner, and in captivity ended miserably
his days.

Henry, king of Suecia, was chased from his scepter for enterprising to burden
his commons with new contributions. Those that were deuisers of new taxes and
tributes, Nic. Gil. v^l. 1.
for the most part ever lost their lives in their labors: for proof whereof,
let the example of Parchenus or Porchetes serve; who for giving counsel to
king Theodebert, touching the raising of new subsidies, was stoned to death by
the multitude, in the city Trieues.

Likewise was George Presquon cruelly put to death by the people for persuading
and setting forward Henry of Suecia, to the vexation and exaction of his
subjects.

CHAP. XXXVIII. More Examples of the same subject.
Platiniae in vita Zacharin.
AIstulphus the nineteenth king of Lumbardy, was not only a most cruel
tyrant, but also a grievous oppressor of his subjects with taxes and
exactions; Phil. Melanct. lib. 3.
for he imposed this upon every one of them, to pay yearly a noble for their
heads: against this man, Pope Steven provoked king Pepin of France, who coming
with an army, drove the tyrant into Ticinum, and constrained him to yield to
partial conditions of peace; howbeir Pepin was no sooner gone, but he returned
to his old byas; wherefore the second time he came and drove him to as great
extremity: in so much, as another peace was concluded: after the
accomplishment whereof, perverse Aistulph, still vexing his subjects, was
plagued by God with an apoplexy, and so died.

Zonar. lib. 3.
Justinian the Emperor, as be was profuse and excessive in spending, so was
he immoderate and insatiable in gathering together riches, for he exercised
his wit in devising new tributes and paiments, and rejoiced his heart in
nothing more: for which causes there arose a grievous sedition at
Constantinople against him; wherein not only the excellent and famous
monuments of the Empire were burned, but also forty thousand men slain: and
this was no small punishment for his oppression.

At Paris there is to be seen in the corn market, a certain monument hard at
the mouth of the common sink, which conuaieth away all the filth out of the
city; Eras. in lingua.
the occasion whereof is reported to be this: A certain courtier seeing the
king sad and melancholy for want of treasure, counseled him to exact of every
countriman that brought ware into the city but one penny, and that but for two
years together: which when the king put in practice, and found the exceeding
commodity thereof, he not only continued that tax, but also invented diverse
others, to the great damage of the Commonwealth and enriching of his own
treasury. Wherefore he that put it first into his head, when he saw that he
had not so much authority in dissuading as he had in persuading it, to take
punishment of himself for that inconsiderate deed, and to warn others from
attempting the like, he commanded by his testament that his body should be
buried in that common sincke, to be an example of exaction and the filthiness
thereof.

Barnabe Vicount of Millane by the report of Paulus Ionius, Tom. 2. Viuoru^
illustrum.
was an unconscionable oppressor of his subjects and tenants, for he did not
only extort of them continual imposts and payments, but enioned them to keep
every one a dog; which if they came to any mishap, or were either too fat or
too lean, the keeper was sure to be beaten, or at least some fine to be set
on his head: this tyrant was taken by John Galeacius, and after seven months
imprisonment poisoned to death.

Archigallo brother to Gorbonianus in nature, Lanquet.
though unlike in conditions (for he was a good Prince, whereas this was a
Tyrant) was crowned King of Britain in the year of the world 3671, we may
well place him in this rank of oppressors, for he deposed the Noblemen, and
exalted the ignoble: he extorted from men their goods to enrich his treasure:
for which cause the estates of the realm deprived him of his royal dignity,
and placed his younger brother Elydurus in his room, after he had reigned five
years.

Hardiknitus king of Denmark, The same.
after the death of Harold, was ordained king of England in the year of the
Lord 1041, this king as he was somewhat cruel (for he caused the body of
Harold to be taken up out of the sepulcher, and smiting off his head to be cast
out into the river Thames, because he had injured his mother Emma when he was
alive:) so he was burdensome to his subjects in tributes and exaction: for
which cause growing into hatred with God and his subjects, he was stricken
with sudden death, not without suspicion of poisoning, after he had reigned
three years.

The same.
William Rufus second son of William the conqueror succeeded his father as
in the kingdom of England, so in disposition of nature, for they were both
cruel, unconstant and covetous, and burdened their people with unreasonable
taxes: insomuch that what with the morreine of men by pestilence, and the
oppressions of them by exactions, the tillage of the earth was put off for one
year, being the year 1096, whereby ensued great scarsitie the year following
throughout all the land: but for the oppression William was justly punished by
sudden death, when being at his disport of hunting he was wounded with an
arrow glaunsing from the bow of Tyrill a French knight: and so his tyranny and
life ended together.

The same.
Neither does the Lord thus punish oppressors themselves, but also they that
either countenance, or having authority do not punish the same; as it
appears by this example following: In the year of our Lord 475, there lived
one Corrannus a king of Scots: who though he governed the people in peace and
quietness a long space, and was indeed a good Prince, yet because his
Chancelour Tomset used extortion and exaction amongst his subjects, and he
being advertised thereof did not punish him, he was slain traitorously by his
own subjects.

It is not unworthy to be noted, how Edward the third king of England,
prospered a long while in the wars against France, and got many worthy and
wonderful victories: but when Prince Edward, son unto the foresaid Edward,
after conditions of peace concluded, began to set taxes and impositions upon
the country of Aquitaine, then did king Edwards part begin to decline, and the
success of war which the space of forty years never forsook him, now frowned
upon him, so that he quickly lost all those lands which by composition of peace
were granted unto him.

CAAP. XXXIX. Of such as by force of arms have either taken away, or would
have taken away, the goods and lands of other men.
NOw if they that oppress their subjects and devour them in this manner, In
this whole chapter note the nature of ambition, and the fruits thereof.
be found guilty, then must they needs be much more, that are carried with
the wings of their own hungry ambitious desire to invade their lands and
signiories, attended on with an infinite retinue of pillages, sackings, ruins
of cities and people; which are always necessary companions of furious
unmerciful war. There are no floods so broad, nor mountains so steep, nor
rocks so rough and dangerous, nor sea so long and furious, that can restrain
the rash and headstrong desire of such greedy minded Sacres: so that if their
body might be proportioned to the square and greatness of their minds, with
the one hand they would reach the East, and with the other hand the West (as it
is said of Alexander:) howbeit hereof they boast and glory no less than they
that took delight to be surnamed citie-spoilers: others burners of cities,
some conquerors, and many Eagles and Faulcons, seeking as it were fame by
infamy; and by vice eternity. But to these men it often comes to pass, that
even then when they think to advance their dominion, and to stretch their
bounds and frontiers furthest, they are driven to recoile for fear of being
dispossessed themselves of their own lands and inheritances: and even as they
dealt with others rigorously and by strength of weapons, so shall they be
themselves rehandled and dealt withal after the same measure, according to the
word of the Prophet denounced against such as they, Cursed be thou that
spoilest and dealest unfaithfully; when thou have made an end of spoiling
others, thou thy self shall be spoiled: and when thou have done dealing
traitorously, then treason shall begin to be practiced against thee: and this
curse most commonly never fails to sease upon these great Thieves and
Robbers, or at least upon their children and successors; as by particular
examples we shall see, after we have first spoken of Adonias, who not content
with his own estate of being a kings son, 1. King. 12.
which God had allotted him, went about to get the crown and kingdom from his
brother Solomon, Treason. lib. 2. cap. 3.
to whom by right it appertained (for God had manifested the same by the mouth
of his father David) but both he and his assistants for their ouerbold and
rash enterprise, were justly by Solomon punished with death.

^arod.
Crassus king of Lidia was the first that made war against Ephesus, and that
subdued the Greeks of Asia, to wit the Phrigians, Mysians, Chalybeans,
Paphlagonians, Thracians, Bythinians, Ionians, Dorians, Aeolians, and
Pamphilians, and made them all tributaries unto him: by means whereof he
being grown exceeding rich and puissant, by the detriment and undoing of so
many people; vaunted and gloried in his greatness and power, and even then
thought himself the happiest man in the world, when most misery and adversity,
grief and distress of his estate and whole house, approached nearest: for
first and foremost one of his sons that was dear unto him, was by oversight
slain at the chase of a wild bore, next himself having commenced war with
Cirus, was overcome in battle: and besieged in Sardis the chief city of his
kingdom, and at last taken and carried captive to Cyrus, despoiled of all his
late glory and dominion. And thus Crassus (as says Plutarch after Herodotus)
bore the punishment of the offense of his great grandfather Giges, who being
but one of king Candanles attendants slew his master, and usurped the crown at
the prouokement of the Queen his mistress, whom he also took to be his wife:
And thus this kingdom decayed by the same means by which it first increased.

Policrates the Tyrant, Herod.
was one that by violence and tyrannous means, grew from a base condition to
an high estate: for being but one of the vulgar sort in the city Samos, he
with the assistance of sifteene armed men, seized upon the whole city, and
made himself Lord of it: which dividing into three parts, he bestowed two of
them upon his two brethren, but not for perpetuity; for ere long the third
part of his usurpation cost the elder of them the best part of his life, and
the younger his liberty, for he chased him away that he might be sole
possessor of the whole Island: after this he invaded many other Islands,
besides many cities in the same land: he raised the Lacedaemonians from the
siege of Samos which they had begirt. And when he saw that all things fell out
so well to his own wish, that nothing could be more, fearing so great
prosperity could not but carry in the tail some terrible sting of adversity
and mischance; attempted by voluntary loss of something of value to prevent
the mischief which he feared to ensue, and this by the advice of his dear
friend and ally (the king of Egypt) therefore he threw a ring which he had
in great price, into the sea; to the end to delude fortune (as he thought)
thereby: but the ring was after found in a fishes belly, and offered as a
present unto him: and this was an evident presage of some inevitable misfortune
that waited for him: neither did it prove vain and frivolous, for he was
hanged upon a gibbet of Sardis, by the commandment of Orates the governor of
the city; who under pretense of friendship, and coulor of rendering his
treasure into his hands, and bestowing upon him a great part thereof, promising
also to pass the rest of his days under his wing, for fear of the rage of
Cambises, drew him to come privately to speak with him, and so easily wrought
his will upon him.

Aristodemus got into his hands the government of Cuma, Dion^s. Halicar. lib. 7.
after he had made away the principal of the city: and to keep it the
better being obtained, he first won the vulgars hearts by presents, then
banished out of the City their children whom he had put to death, and
entertained the rest of the youth with such variety of pleasures and delights,
that by those devises he kept himself in his tyrannous estate many years:
but as soon as the children of those slain Citizens, were grown to ripe
years of strength and discretion, being desirous to revenge their fathers
deaths, they set upon him in the night, so at unawares, that they put him and
all his family to the slaughter.

Plutarch.
Tymophanes usurped a principality, power, and rule, in Corinth a free city,
and became so odious thereby to the whole people, yea and to his own brother
Tymoleon also, that laying aside all respect of nature, he slew him with his
own hands: preferring the liberty of his country, before any unity or bond
of blood. When the cities of Greece (says Orosius) would needs through too
greedy a desire and Ambition of reign, Lib. 3. cap. 12.
get every one the maisterie and sovereignty of the rest, they altogether made
shipracke of their own liberties by encroching upon others: as for instance,
The Lacedaemonians, how hurtful and vncommodious the desire of bringing their
neighbor adioining cities under their dominion was unto them, the sundry
discomfitures and distresses within the time of that war undertaken upon that
only cause befell them, Oros. l^b. 3. ca. 2.
bear sufficient record.

Seruius Tullus the son to a bondsman, addicted himself so much to the
exploits of war, that by Prowess he got so great credit and reputation
among the Romans; that he was thought worthy to be made the son in law of
king Tarquinius by marrying one of his daughters: Titus Liuius.
after whose death he also usurped the crown, under color of the
Protectorship of the kings two young sons. Who when they came to age and
bigness, married the daughters of their brother in law Tullius: by whose
exhortation and continual prouokement, the elder of them which was called
Tarquinius, conspired against his father in law, and practiced to make himself
king, and to recover his rightful inheritance, and that by this means: he
watched his opportunity when the greatest part of the people were out of the
city about gathering their fruit in the fields, and then placing his
companions in readiness to serve his turn if need should be, he marched to
the palace in the royal robes, guarded with a company of his confederats: and
having called a Senate, as he began to complain him of the treachery and
impudency of Tullius, behold Tullius himself came in and would have run
violently upon him, but Tarquinius catching him about the middle threw him
headlong down the stairs, and presently sent certain of his guard to make an
end of the murder which he had begun. But herein the cruelty of Tullia was
most monstrous; that not only first moved her husband to this bloody practice,
but also made her coach to be driven over the body of her father which lay
bleeding in the midst of the street scarce dead.

Manlius after he had maintained the fortress of Rome against the Gauls,
glorying in that action, Parricide. lib ^ cap. 11.
and envying the good hap and prosperity of Camillus, went about to make
himself king, under pretense of restoring the people to their ancient entire
liberty: but his practice being discovered, he was accused, found guilty, and
by the consent of the multitude adjudged to be thrown headlong down from the
top of the same fortress; to the end that the same place which gave him great
glory might be a witness and memorial of his shame and last confusion: for
all his valiant deeds before done were not of so much force with the people,
to excuse his fault or save his life, as this one crime was of weight to bring
him to his death.

In former times there lived in Carthage one Hanno, Oros. lib. 4. c. 6.
who because he had more riches than all the Commonwealth beside, began to
aspire to the domination of the city: which the better to accomplish, he
devised to make show of marrying his only daughter, to the end that at the
marriage feast he might poison the chiefest men of credit and power of the
city, whom he knew could or would any ways withstand or countermand his
purpose: but when this devise took no effect, by reason of the discovery
thereof by certain of his servants, he sought another means to effect his
will: He got together a huge number of bondslaues and servants, which should at
a sudden put him in possession of the city; but being prevented herein also
by the citizens, he seized upon a castle with a thousand men of base regard,
even servants for the most part, whither thinking to draw the Affricanes, and
king of the Moors to his succor, he was taken and first whipped, next had his
eyes thrust out, and then his arms and legs broken in pieces, and so was
executed to death before all the people: his carcas being thus mangled with
blows was hanged upon a gallows, and all his kindred and children put to
death, that there might not one remain of his strain, either to enterprise
the like deed or to revenge his death.

That great and fearful warrior Julius Caesar, one of the most hardy and
valiants pieces of flesh that ever was, after he had performed so many notable
exploits, overcome all his enemies, and brought all high and haughty purposes
to their desired effect: being pricked forward with the spur of ambition and a
high mind, through the means and assistance of the mighty forces of the
Commonwealth, which (contrary to the constitution of the Senate) were left in
his hands, he set footing into the state, and making himself master and Lord
of the whole Roman Empire, usurped a sovereignty over the^. But as he
attained to his dignity by force and violence, so he inioied it not long,
Plutarch. Sueton. ^^^rop.
neither gained any great benefit by it, except the loss of his life may be
counted a benefit, which shortly after in the open Senate was bereft him: for
the conspirers thereof as soon as he was set down in his seat, co^passing him
about, so vehemently ouercharged him on all sides, that notwithstanding all the
resistance he could make for his defense, tossing amongst them, and shifting
himself up and down, he was overthrown on the earth, and abode for dead,
through the number of blows that were given him, even three and twenty
wounds. The monarchy of Assyria was at one instant extinguished in
Sardanapalus: and of Babylon in Balthazar, Arbaces being the worker of the
first, and Darius king of Persia of the latter; both of them receiving the
wages not of their wickedness, but also of their predecessors and great
grandfathers cruelty and oppressions, by whom many people and nations had
been destroyed. Moreover, as the Babylonian Empire was overthrown by Darius of
Persia, so was his Persian kingdom (in Darius the last king of that country
his time, this man's successor) ouerturned by Alexander. Again, the great
dominion of Alexander (who suruiued not long after) was not continued to any of
his by inheritance, but divided like a prey amongst his greatest captains, and
from them the most part of it in short time descended to the Romans; who
spreading their wings and stretching their greedy talents far and near, for a
while rauened and preyed over all the world, and enriched and bedecked
themselves with the spoils of many nations; and therefore it was necessary
that they also should be made a prey, and that the far fetched Goths and
Vandales should come upon them, as upon the body of a great Whale that suffers
shipwreck upon the sea shore: since which time the Roman Empire went to
decay, and grew every day weaker than other: yea and many princes setting
themselves against and above it, have robbed it of the realms and provinces
which it robbed others of before: and thus we may see, how all things run,
as it were, in a circle, and how great the uncertainty of this world is, seeing
that the mightiest are subject to so many and great changes: For if there be
any thing under the sun that may carry any show of stabilitie or continuance,
surely it is a monarchy or common wealth, grounded upon the unity and consent
of all people, maintained by the authority of the greatest and most mighty,
and underpropped with the shores of much strength and wealth, as that Roman
Empire was: and yet for all that, there was never any, though never so well
reared and furnished, and deep rooted, which at the length has not been
demolished, ransacked, and pulled up by some notable and strange calamity. And
this is that which the spirit of God would give us to know, by the vision of
that great image, represented to Nabuchadnezzar in a dream, according to
Daniels interpretation thereof; to wit, that the four great and puissant
monarchies of the world, should at last be ruinated and dispersed, like the
chafe before the wind, till they were consumed and brought to nothing, albeit
they were glorious and excellent as gold and silver, or strong and mighty as
brass and iron.

How much more foolish and evil advised are they then, that for a certain
apparent splendor and show of worldly honor (which is as frail as any rose,
as variable as the wind, as light and vain as a shadow or smoke, as unassured
as a rotten planke) have the eyes of their minds so dazzled, and their wits so
bewitched, and all their affections so transported, as to mingle heaven and
earth together, to dash the East against the West, to stir up discord and
dissension betwixt man and man, and to shed so many thousand men's blood, and
all for a paltry desire of reign, though to their own final ruin and
destruction?

Sabellicus.
And thus came it to pass in the time of the Emperor Otho, to a duke of Venice,
called Peter Caudian, who (not content with his dukedom) went about to usurp
a tyrannical rule over the whole segniory, and that by pride and threats;
desiring rather to make himself terrible to the people by those bad means,
than amiable and beloved by any means whatsoever; and thus daily he grew as in
age so in insolency: he placed a garrison of men about his palace, and so
fortifying himself, presently he showed himself in his colors, namely a
cruel tyrant: which when the multitude perceived, and remembered withal, their
liberty, which they were like to lose, they took up arms forthwith, in
purpose to beat down his hautie mind; therefore they first set on fire his
house, and caused him to forsake his fortress, and to betake himself to his
shifts: but when by reason of the stopping of the passages he could not escape,
they took him and his young son also which was with him, and put them to a
most cruel and sudden death, and cast their carcasses to be devoured of dogs.

In the Empire of Maximilian, Jews Sforce, Bemh^^. lib. 2. of the Ven^^ ^
history.
a prince of an inconstant and turbulent spirit, ambitious, and one that made
no account of his promises nor faith, took upon him the government of
Millaine, after the death of his brother Galeaz duke of Millaine, who was
traitorously slain: in which action, the first wrong which he did, was to his
brothers widow, whom he deposed; the second to his young nephew, his brother
Galeaz son, whom he so brought up, as if he never meant he should come to
honor or goodness, for he suffered him not to be trained up either in learning
or arms, but let him run into all possible occasions that might corrupt and
spoil his tender age: thus he enjoyed the principality thirteen years, all
the while under his nephews rain; to whom when, Alphonsus king of Naples had
given in marriage one of his daughters, and perceived what small reckoning his
uncle made of restoring him his dukedom, after he had often and instantly
entreated him without prevailing, at length he fell to threaten him with war:
he fearing to have the worse and to loose so great a dignity, wrought so by
his own shifts and devices, together with the helping hand of Pope Alexander,
that he put it in the head of Charles the eight of France to go and conquer
Naples, for the hatred which his heart possessed against Alphonsus, supposing
by this means the better to accomplish his affairs to his own desire. The
king of France was no sooner entered Italy, but Jews Sforce ministered an
Italian posset to his young nephew John Galeaz, that he immediatle died upon
it, Guicciard. lib. 1.
and then he proclaimed himself prince of the Duchy, by the aid of the
principal of the counsel, whom he had won to defer that honor unto him, by
deposing the young son of John Galeaz, being then but five years old: but he
declared presently his inconstant and perfidious nature, in breaking promise
with the king of France, whom he had induced with so many fair speeches, to
undertake that voyage; and entering a new league with the Venetians both against
him and the Pope, although ere long he served them with the same measure: but
Lewis the twelfth, succeeding in the crown of France, could not brook this
injury done to his predecessor, but pretending a title to the Duchy of
Millaine, he dispatched an army thitherward, that bestirred it self so well,
that in short space they brought under their subjection, all the cities and
towns near adjoining: which the citizens perceiving, begun to rebel against
their duke, and killed his treasurer; whereupon he (being not able to make his
part good with the French abroad, nor daring to put any confidence in his own
at home) left his castle to the charge and custody of a captain, and fled
himself with his children to Almaine, toward the Emperor Maximilians court,
hoping to find succor at his hand, as indeed he did; for he returned to
Millaine with five hundred Burgundians, and eight thousand Zwitzers, and was
received again into the city: being thus refortified with these and other more
troops that came unto him, he encamped before Navarre, and by composition, got
the city into his hands from the Frenchmen. The French king in the mean while
sent a new supply of men into the Duchy, amongst whom were many Zwitzers, who
so dealt with their countrymen that were on the dukes side, that they brought
them also to favor the king of France, and to forsake the duke: which when he
understood, he presently departed the city, and posting to the camp, hardened
his soldiers, desiring them to play the men, and not to shrink, for he meant
to give battle without delay: but the captains made answer, That they might
not fight against their own nation without especial leave from their lords.
Now in the mean while, whilst these things were in doing, they took order
that the Frenchmen should approach to Nouare and intercept all the passages,
that the duke might not escape, he therefore laid aside his horse and marched
on foot in the squadron of Switzers, now joined to the French, in attire and
armor like a Switzer, thinking by this trick to save his life: but all his
counterfaiting could not save him from being taken, and from lying ten years
prisoner in the Tower of Loches, where he also died: Gulcciard. li. 4.
and so all his high and ambitious thoughts (which scarsely Italy could
contain) were pend up in a straight and narrow room.

With the like turbulent and furious spirit of ambition have many Roman bishops
been inspired, who what by their iuggling tricks, cousenages, and subtle
devises, and what by force, have prospered so well, that of simple bishops
(which they were wont to be) they are grown temporal lords, and as it were
monarchs; having in their possessions, lands, cities, castles, fortresses,
havens, garrisons, and guards, after the manner of kings, nay they have exalted
themselves above kings, (so intolerable is their impudency) and made them
subject to their wills: Mark. 10. Luke. 22.
and yet they call themselves the Apostles petigree, whom Christ forbad all
such domination. But what of that? it pertains not to them to succeed in
virtue, but in authority the Apostles; for if that charge had concerned them,
then Pope Lucius the second, Bal.
would never have been so shameless, as to request in right of his popeship,
the sovereignty over Rome as he did; neither when it was denied him, to have
gone about to usurp it by force, and to bring his mind about to have laid
siege to the Senate house with armed men, to the end that either by banishing
or murdering the Senators then assembled together, he might inuest himself
with the kingly dignity: But what got he by it? mary this: The people being
in an uproar in the city upon the sight of this holy fathers proud attempt,
took themselves to arms, and ran with such violence upon master Pope, that
they forthwith stoned his holiness to death, but not like Steven the martyr
for the profession of Christ Jesus, but like a vile and seditious thief for
seeking the commonwealths overthrow.

Pope Adrian the fourteenth, a monks son, succeeding Lucius both in the
Papacy, Saboll. Bal.
and also in ambition, took in hand his omitted enterprises; for he
excommunicated the Romans until they had banished Arnold a Bishop, that gave
them counsel to retain the power of electing their magistrate, and governing
their city in their hands (a thing repugnant to his intent) and after he had
degraded the consuls; to make his part the stronger, he caused the Emperor
Frederick to come with an army to the city; whom notwithstanding he handled
but basely for his pains, for he did not only check him openly for standing
on his feet and holding the stirrup of his horse with his left hand, but also
denied him the crown of the Empire, except he would restore to him Pouille,
which (he said) pertained unto him: howbeit he got the crown
notwithstanding, and before his return from Rome into Germany, more then a
thousand citizens that would not yield nor subscribe unto the Popes will, were
slain: after Frederickes departure, the Pope seeing himself destitute of his
further aid, first excommunicated the king of Sicilie, that in right of
inheritance possessed the foresaid Pouille; but when this served him to small
purpose, he practiced with Emmanuel the Emperor of Greece to set upon him,
which thing turned to his final confusion: after this (through his
intolerable pride) he fell out with Frederick the Emperor, and to revenge
himself upon him, discharged his subjects from their fealty to him, and him
from his authority over them: Now mark his end; As he walked one day toward
Auiane, a fly got in at his mouth and down his throat so far, that it
stopped the conduit of his breath, so that for all that his physicians could
do, he was choked therewith. And thus he that sought by all the means he
could, to make himself greater than he ought to be, and to get the mastery of
every thing at his own will and pleasure, and to take away other men's rights
by force, was cut short and rebated by a small and base creature, and
constrained to leave this life, which he was most unworthy of.

Hither may be referred, that which befell the Emperor Albert, duke of
Austria, and one of his lieutenants in Swizzerland, for going about to usurp
and appropriate certain lands and dominions to him, which belonged not unto
him. This Emperor had many children whom he desired to leave rich and
mighty, and therefore by all means possible he endeavored to augment his
living, even by getting from other men whatsoever he could: and amongst all
the rest, this was one especial practice wherein he labored tooth and nail,
to alienate from the Empire the land of the Swizzers, and to leave it for an
everlasting inheritance to his heirs: which although the Swizzers would in no
case condescend nor agree unto, but contrariwise sued earnestly unto his
majesty, for the maintenance of their ancient liberties and privileges which
were confirmed unto them by the former Emperors, and that they might not be
distracted from the Empire; yet notwithstanding were constrained to undergo
for a season the yoke of most grievous tyranny and seruirude imposed by force
upon them: and thus the poor comminalty endured many mischiefs, and many
grievous and cruel extortions and indignities at the hands of the Emperors
officers, whilst they lived in this wretched and miserable estate.

Amongst the rest there was one called Grislier that began to erect a strong
fort of defense upon a little hill near unto Altorfe, to keep the country in
greater awe and subjection; and desiring to discrie his friends from his foes,
he invented this devise: He put a hat upon the end of a long pole, and placed
it in the field before Altorfe, where great multitudes of people, with this
commandment, That every one that came by should do obeisance, and veil bonnet
to the hat, and in every respect show themselves as dutiful unto it, as to his
own person, imagining that his greatest enemies could not endure nor find in
their hearts to do it, and therefore upon this ocasion he might apprehend
them, and discover all their close practices and conspiracies, which they might
brew against him: now there was one, a stout hearted man, that passing every
day up and down that ways, could in no wise be brought to reverence the
dignity of the worthy hat, (so unreasonable a thing it seemed in his eyes)
whereupon being taken, the tyrant commanded him (for punishment of his open
contempt) to shoot at an apple laid upon the crown of the head of his dearest
child, and if he mist the apple, to be put to death: the poor man after many
excuses, and allegations, and entreaties that he might not hazard his child's
life in that sort, was notwithstanding enforced to shoot, and shooting, God so
directed his shaft, that the apple was hit and the child untouched; and yet for
all this, he adjudged him to perperuall prison: out of which he miraculously
escaping, watched the tyrants approach in so fit a place, that with the shaft
that should have been the death of his son, he stroke him to the heart: whose
unlucky end, was a luckie beginning of the Switzers deliverance from the
bondage of tyrants, Nic. Gil. vol. 1.
and of the recovery of their ancient freedom, which ever after they wisely
and constantly maintained.

The Emperor Albert, purposing to be revenged upon them for his injury, as
also for slaying many more of his men, and breaking down his castles of defense
which he had caused to be builded in their country, determined to make war
upon them; but he was slain ere he could bring that determination to effect by
one of his own nephews, from whom (being his ouerseer and guardant for his
bringing up) he withheld his patrimony against all equity; neither by prayers
or entreatie could be persuaded to restore it. These things (according to
Nicholas Gils report in his 1 volume of the Chronicles of France) happened
about the reign of Saint Jews.

CHAP. XL. Of Vserers and their thest.
IF open larcinies and violent robberies and extortions are forbidden by the
law of God, as we have seen they are, then it is no doubt but that all deceit
and unjust dealings and bargains used to the damage of others are also
condemned by the same law; and namely Usury, when a man exacteth such
unmeasurable gain for either his money or other thing which he lends, that
the poor borrower is so greatly indammaged, that in steed of benefitting and
providing for his affairs, which he aimed at, he hitteth his further loss
and final overthrow. This sin is expressly prohibited in Leuiticus 25,
Leuit. 25.36.
Deutronomie 23, Deuteronomy. 23.19.
and Psalm 15, Psalm. 15.5.
where the committants thereof are held guilty before Gods judgment seat of
iniquity and injustice: and against the^ it is that the Prophet Ezechiell Eze.
18.12.13.
denounces this threatening: That he which oppresses or vexes the poor and
afflicted, he which robs or gives to usury, and receives the increase
into his bags, shall die the death, and his blood shall be upon his pate.

Neither truly does the justice of God sleep in this respect, but takes
vengeance upon all such, and punishes them after one sort or other, either in
body or goods, as it pleases him: I my self knew a grand usurer in the country
of Vallay that having scraped together great masses of gold and silver by these
unlawful means, was in one night robbed of fifteen hundred crowns by thieves,
that broke into his house. I remember also another Usurer dwelling in a Town
called Argentall, nigh unto Anouay under the jurisdiction of Tholosse in high
Viuaria, who being in hay time in a meadow, was stong in the foot by a serpent
or some other venomous beast, that he died thereof: an answerable punishment
for his often stinging and biting many poor people with his cruel and
unmerciful usury.

Nay it is so contrary to equity and reason, that all nations led by the
instinct of nature have always abhorred and condemned it, insomuch that the
condition of thieves has been more easy and tolerable then usurers; for theft
was wont to be punished but with double restitution, but usury with quadruple:
and to speak truly, these rich and gallant usurers, do more rob the common
people and purloine from them, then all the public thieves that are made
public examples of justice in the world. It is to be wished that some would
examine usurers books, De off^cio princip. lib. 4. ca. 14.
and make a bondfire of their obligations, as that Laced emonian did when
Agesilaus reported that he never saw a clearer fire: or that some Lucullus
would deliver Europe from that contagion, as that Roman did Asia in his time.
Alex. ab Alex. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Licurgus banished this Canckerworme out of his Sparta: Amasis punished it
severely in his Egypt. Cato exiled it out of Sicile, and Solon condemned it in
Athens: how much more should it be held in detestation among Christians? S.
Chrysostom Chrisost. in Mat. cap. 5.
compares it fitly to the biting of an aspe, as he that is stung with an aspe
falls asleep as it were with delectation, but dies ere he awaketh, so
money taken in usury delights and contenteth at the first, but it infecteth
all his possessions, and sucketh out the marrow of them ere it be long. Seeing
the^ it is so abominable both by the law of God and nature, let us shun it as
a toad, and fly from it as a cockatrice, but when these persuasions will not
serve, let them turn their eyes to these examples following, wherein they shall
see the manifest indignations of God upon it.

In the Bishopric of Coline a notable famous Usurer lying upon his death bed
ready to die, moved up and down his chops and his lips as if he had been
eating something in his mouth, D s^ipul. de tempor^.
and being demanded what he ear, he answered his money, and that the Devil
thrust it into his mouth perforce, so that he could neither will nor choose
but devour it: in which miserable temptation he died without any show of
repentance.

The same Author tells of another Usurer, that a little before his death
called for his bags of gold and silver, and offered them al to his soul, upon
condition it would not forsake him: but if he would have given all the world
it could not ransom him from death, wherefore when he saw there was no
remedy but he must needs die, he commended his soul to the devil to be
carried into everlasting torments, which words when he had uttered he gave
up the ghost.

Another Usurer being ready to die, made this his last Will and testament: My
soul (quoth he) I bequeath to the Devil who is owner of it; my wife likewise
to the Devil who induced me to this ungodly trade of life; Johannes. Auglus.
and my Deacon to the Devil for soothing me up and not reproving me for my
faults: and in this desperate persuasion he died incontinently.

Usury consists not only in lending and borrowing, but in buying and
selling also, and all unjust and crafty bargaining, yea and it is a kind of
Usury to detain through too much covetousness those commodities from the
people which concern the public good, and to hoord them up for their private
gain, till some scarsitie or want arise, and this also has evermore ben most
sharply punished, as by these examples may appear. About the year 1543 at
what time a great famine and dearth of bread afflicted the world, there was in
Saxony a country peasant, that having carried his corn to the market, and
sold it cheaper than he looked for, as he returned homewards he fell into
most heavy dumpes and dolours of mind with grief that the price of grain was
abated, and when his servants sang merrily for joy of that blessed cheapenesse,
he rebuked them most sharply and cruelly, yea and was so much the more
tormented and troubled in mind by how much the more he saw any poor soul
thankful unto God for it: but mark how God gave him over to a Reprobate and
desperate sense: Whilst his servants rode before he hung himself at the cart
tail, being past recovery of life ere any man looked back or perceived him. A
notable example for our English cormorants, who join barn to barn, and heap
to heap, and will not sell nor give a handful of their superfluity to the
poor when it bears a low price, but preserve it til scarsity and want come,
and then they sell it at their own rate; let them fear by this, least the
Lord deal so or worse with them.

Another covetous wretch, when he could not sell his corn so dear as he
desired, said the mise should eat it rather then he would lessen one jot of the
price thereof: which words were no sooner spoken, but vengeance took them; for
all the mise in the country flocked to his barnes and fields, so that they
left him neither standing nor lying corn, but devoured all: this story was
written to Martin Luther, Luther.
upon occasion whereof he inueighing mightily against this cruel usury of
husbandmen, told of three misers that in one year hung themselves, because
grain bore a lower price than they looked for, adding moreover that all such
cruel and muddie extortioners deserved no better a doom, for their
unmerciful oppression.

D. Pomeranus.
Another rich farmer, whose barnes were full of grain and his stackes
untouched, was so covetous withal, that in hope of some dearth and dearness
of corn, he would not deminish one heap, but hoorded up daily more and more,
and wished for a scarsitie upon the earth, to the end he might enrich his
coffers by other men's necessities, this cruel churl reioiced so much in his
abundance, that every day he would go into his barnes and feed his eyes with
his superfluity: now it fell out as the Lord would, that having supped and
drunk very largely, upon a night as he went according to his custom, to view
his riches with a candle in his hand, behold the wine, or rather the justice of
God overcame his senses, so that he fell down suddenly into the mow, and by
his fall set on fire the corn, being dry and easy to be incensed, in such
sort that in a moment all that which he had scraped together and preserved so
charily, and delighted in so unreasonably, was consumed and brought to ashes,
and scarce he himself escaped with his life.

Another in Mifina in the year 1559 having great store of corn hoorded up
refused to succor the necessity of his poor and half famished neighbors,
Job. Flucel. li. 2.
for which cause the Lord punished him with a strange and unusual judgment,
for the corn which he so much cherished assumed life, and became feathered
souls, flying out of his barns in such abundance, that the world was
astonished thereat, and his barnes left empty of all provision in most
wonderful and miraculous manner.

No less strange was that which happened in a Town of France called
Stenchansen to the governor of the Town, The same author.
who being requested by one of his poor subjects to sell him some corn for
his money, when there was none to be gotten else where; answered he could spare
none, by reason he had scarce enough for his own hogs: which hoggish
disposition the Lord requited in it own kind, for his wise at the next litter
brought forth seven pigs at one birth to increase the number of his hogs, that
as he had preferred filthy and ougly creatures before his poor brethren, in
whom the image of God in some sort shined forth, so he might have of his own
getting more of that kind to make much of, since he loved the^ so well.

Equal to all the former both in cruelty touching the person, and miracle
touching the judgment, The same.
was that which is reported by the same author, to have happened to a rich
covetous woman in Marchia, who in an extreme dearth of vittailes, denied not
only to relieve a poor man whose children were ready to starve with famine,
but also to sell him but one bushel of corn when ^e wanted but a penny of her
price: for the poor wretch making great shift to borrow that penny, returned to
her again, and desired her he might have the corn: but as he paid her the
money, the penny fell upon the ground by the providence of God, which as she
stretched out her hand to reach, it miraculously turned into a serpent, and bit
her so fast, that by no means it could be loosened from her arm, until it
had brought her to a woeful and miserable end.

Fulgos. lib. 2. cap 2.
Sergius Galba, before he came to be Emperor, (being President of Africa
under Claudius, when as through penury of vitailes, corn and other food was
very sparingly shared out and divided among the army) punished a certain
soldier that sold a bushel of wheat to one of his fellows for a hundred
pence, in hope to obtain a new share himself, in this manner, he commanded the
Quaestor or treasurer to give him no more sustinance, since he preferred lucre
before the necessity of his own body and his friends welfare; neither
suffered he any man else to sell him any: so that he perished with famine, and
became a miserable example to all the army of the fruits of that foul dropsy
covetousness.

And thus we see how the Lord reigned down vengeance upon all covetous Usurers
and oppressors, plaguing some on this fashion, and some on that, and never
passing any, but either in this life some notable judgment ouertakes them
either in themselves or their ofsprings, (for it is notoriously known that
Usurers children, though left rich, yet the first or second generation became
always beggars) or in the life to come they are thrown into the pit of
perdition, from whence there is no redemption nor deliverance.

CHAP. XLI. Of dicers and card plaiers, and their theft.
IF any recreation be allowed us as no doubt there is, yet surely it is not
such as whereby we should work the damage and hurt of one another, as when
by gaming we draw away another man's money with his great loss, and this is one
kind of theft, to usurp any man's goods by unlawful means: wherefore no such
sports ought to find any place amongst Christians, especially those wherein any
kind of lot or hazard is used, by the which the good blessings of God are
contrary to their true and natural use exposed to chance and fortune as they
term it, for which cause Saint Augustine is of this opinion concerning them:
Epist. 54. a Maced.
That the gain which arises to any party in play, should be bestowed upon the
poor, to the end that both the gamesters, as well the winner as the looser
might be equally punished, the one by not carrying the stake being won, the
other by being frustrated of all his hope of winning. Plaiers at dice both by
the Elibertine and Constantinoplitane council under Justinian were punished
with excommunication: Can. 79. Can. 50.
and by a new constitution of the said Emperor, it was enacted that no man
should use dice play, either in private or public, no nor approve the same by
their presence under pain of punishment; and bishops were there appointed to
be overseers in this behalf, to epsy if any default was made. Cod. li. 3.
tit. 43.


Horace an Heathen Poet avouched the unlawfulness of this thing even in his
time, Od. 24. lib. 3. Lndere doction scu graeco iubeas trocho seu malis vetita
legibus alea.
when he says that dice playing was forbidden by their law. Lewis the eight
king of France renowned for his good conditions and rare virtues, amongst all
the excellent laws which he made, this was one, That all sports should be
banished the Commonwealth (except shooting whether with long bow or crossebow)
and that no cards nor dice should either be made or sold by any, to the end
that all occasion of gaming might be taken away. Surely it would be very
profitable and expedient, for the weal public, that this ordinance might
stand in effect at this day, and that all Merchants and Mercers whatsoever,
especially those that follow the reformation of Religion, might forbear the
sale of all such paltrie wares: for the fault in selling such trash is no less
than the abuse of them in playing at them, for so much as they upon greediness
of so small again, put as it were a sword into a mad man's hand by ministering
them the instruments, not only of their sports, but also of those mischiefs
that ensue the same: there a man may hear curses as rife as words, bannings,
swearings, and blasphmies banded up and down; there men fret themselves to
death, and consume whole nights in dark and deuillish pastimes, some lose
their horses, others their cloakes, a third sort all that ever they are worth,
to the undoing of their houses, wives and children; and some again from
braulings fall to buffitings, from buffets to bloodsheding, from bloudsheading
to hanging: and these are the fruits of those gallant sports.

Discipu. de temp^r. ser. 12.
But this you shall see more plainly by a few particular examples. In a Town of
Campania a certain Jew playing at dice with a Christian lost a great sum of
money unto him, with which great loss being enraged, and almost beside
himself, as commonly men in that case are affected, he belched out most bitter
curses against Christ Jesus, and his mother the blessed virgin, in the midst
whereof the Lord deprived him of his life and sense and stroke him dead in the
place; as for his companion the Christian, indeed he escaped sudden death
howbeit he was robbed of his wit and understanding, Blasphemy. li. ^ cap. 31.
and suruiued not very long after: to teach us not only what a grievous sin
it is to blaspheame God and to accompany such wretches, and not to shun or at
least reprove their outrage; but also what monstrous effects proceed from such
kind of ungodly sports, and how grievously the Lord punishes them, first by
giving them over to blasphemy, secondly to death, and thirdly and lastly to
eternal and irreuocable damnation: let our English gamesters consider this
example, and if it will not terrify them from their sports, then let them look
to this that follows, which, if their hearts be not as hard as adamants, will
mollify and persuade them.

In the year 1553, near to Belissan a city in Heluetia, Ioh. Fincel. Andreas
Muscabus in diabol. blasphemiae.
there were three profane wretches that played at dice upon the Lords day
without the walls of the city, one of which called Vlrich Schraeterus having
lost much money, and offended God with many cursed speeches, at last presaging
to him self good luck, he burst forth into these terms, Mandat. 4. Breach of
Saboth, lib. 1. cap. 35. Mandat 3. Blasphemy, lib. 1. cap. 31.
If fortune deceive me now, I will thrust my dagger into the very body of God
as far as I can; now fortune failed him as before, wherefore forthwith he
drew his dagger, and taking it by the point, threw it against heaven with all
his strength: behold, the dagger vanished away, and five drops of blood
distilled upon the table before them, and without all delay the devil came in
place, and carried away that blasphemous wretch with such force and noise, that
the whole city was amazed and astonished thereat: the other two (half beside
themselves with fear) strove to wipe away the drops of blood out of the table,
but the more they wiped it, the more clearly it appeared: the rumor of this
accident flew into the city, and caused the people to flock thick and
threefold unto the place, where they found the other two gamsters washing the
board; whom (by the decree of the Senate) they bound with chains, and carried
toward the prison, but as they passed with them through a gate of the city,
one of them was stricken suddenly dead in the midst of them, with such a number
of lice and worms creeping out of him, that it was both wonderful and
loathsome to behold: the third they themselves (without any further inquisition
or trial) to auert the indignation which seemed to hang over their heads, put
incontinently to death: the table they took and preserved it for a monument,
to witness unto posterity, both how an accursed a pastime dicing is, and also
what great inconveniences and mischiefs grow thereby.

But that we may see yet more the vanity and mischievous working of this
sport, I will report one story more out of the same author, though not equal
to the former in strangeness and height of sin, yet as tragical and no
less pitiful.

Job. ^incel. lib. 2.
In the year 1550, their lived in Alsatia one Ada^ Steckman, one that got his
living by trimming, pruning, and dressing vines: this man having received his
wages, fell to dice, and lost all that he had gotten, insomuch that he had not
wherewith to norish his family, so that he fell into such a grief of mind, and
withal into such pains of the head, that he grew almost desperate withal:
one day his wife being busy abroad, left the care of her children unto him,
but he took such great care of them, that he cut all their throats, even three
of them, whereof one lay in the cradle; and lastly would have hanged himself,
had not his wife come in, in the mean while, who beholding this pitiful
tragedy, gave a great outcry, and fell down dead: whereupon the neighbors
running in, were eye witnesses of this woeful spectacle: as for him, by law he
was judged to a most severe and cruel punishment; and all these pitiful events
arose from that cursed root of dice-play.

We ought therefore to learn by all these things that have been already
spoken, to abstain not only from this cursed pastime, but also from extortion,
robberies, deceit, guile, and other such naughty practices that tend to the
hurt and detriment of one another; and in place thereof, to procure the good
and welfare of each one in all kindness and equity, following the Apostles
counsel, where he says, Let them that stole steal no more, Ephesians. 4.28.
but rather travail by laboring with his hands in that which is good, that
he may have wherewith to succor the necessity of others: for it is not
enough not to do evil to our neighbor, but we are tied to do him good, or at
least to endeavor to do it.

CHAP. XLII. Of such as have been notorious in all kind of sin.
We have seen by these foreplaced examples, These examples of this chapter
may be referred to all the commandments for the most part.
how heavy the judgments of God have been upon those, that through the
vntamednesse of their own lusts and affections, would not submit themselves
under the holy and mighty will of God, but have countremanded his
commandments, and withstood his precepts, some after one sort and some after
another: now because there have been some so wicked and wretched, that being
wholly corrupted and depraved, they have ouerflowed with all manner of sin and
iniquity; and as it were, maugred God with the multitude and heinousness of
their offenses: we must therefore spend some time also in setting forth their
lives and ends, as of the most vile and monstrous kind of people that ever
were. In this rank, we may place the ancient inhabitants of the land of
Canaan, an irreligious people, void of all fear and dread of God, and
consequently given over to all abominable wickedness, as to couiurings,
witchcrafts, and vnnameable adulteries: for which causes the Lord abhorring and
hating them, did also bring them to a most strange destruction; for first and
foremost Jericho (the frontier city of their country) being assaulted by the
Israelites for bindering their progress into the country, were all
discomfited, not so much by Iosuah his sword, as by the huge stones which
dropped from heaven upon their heads: and least the night ouerraking them
should break off the small and full destruction of this cursed people, the day
was miraculously prolonged, and the sun made to rest himself in the midst of
heaven the space of a whole day: and so these five kings hiding themselves in a
cave, were brought but, and their necks made a footstool to the captains of
Israel, and were hanged on five trees.

Semiramis, queen of Assyria, was a woman of an ambitious spirit, Sabell.
who through her thirst of reigning, counterfaited her sex, and attired her
self like a man, to get more authority and reverence to her self; she was
the destruction of many thousand people, by the unjust war which the stirred
up: besides that, she was a notorious strumpet, and withal, a murderer of
those that satisfied her lust, for still as they came from her bed, some lay
privily in watch to kill them, least they should bewray her villainy: yea and it
is reported, that she was so vile and past shame, that she solicited her
own soon to commit incest with her; who, in detestation of her filthiness,
raised a power against her, and conquering her in one great battle, caused
her to be put to death.

The tyrant Periander usurped the government over Corinth, Sabell.
after he had slain the principal of the city: he put to death his own wife
to the end to content and please his concubine; nay and was so execrable, as to
lie with his own mother: he banished his natural son, and caused many
children of his subjects to be gelded: finally fearing some miserable and
monstrous end and want of sepulcher, in conscience of his misdeeds, he gave in
charge to two strong and hardy soldiers, that they should guard a certain
appointed place, and not fail to kill the first that came in their way, and to
bury his body being slain: now the first that met them was himself, who
offered himself unto them without speaking any word, and was soon dispatched
and buried according to his commandment; but these two were encountered with
four other, whom he also had appointed to do the same to them which they
had done to him.

In this rank deseruably we may place the second Dionysius his son, Sabell.
that for his cruelties and extortions, was slain by his own subjects: who
though at the first made show of a better and milder nature than his father was
of, yet after he was installed in his kingdom, and grown strong, his wicked
nature showed forth it self; for first he rid out of the way his own
brethren, then his nearest kindred, and lastly all other that but any way
displeased him, using his sword not to the cutting down of vice, as it ought,
but to the cutting the throats of his innocent and guiltless subjects: with
which tyranny the people being incensed began to mutiny, and from mutinies
fell to open rebellion persecuting him so, that he was compelled to fly and to
take harbor in Greece: where notwithstanding he ceased not his accustomed
manners, but continued still freshly committing robberies, and doing all manner
of injuries and outrages, in wronging men and forcing both women and maids, to
his filthy lust: until he was brought unto so low and so base an eb of
estate, that of a king, being become a beggar and vagabond, he was glad to
teach children at Corinth, to get his poor living, and so died in misery.

Clearchus another tyrant after he had put to death the most part of the
Nobles and chief men of account in the city Heraclea, usurped a tyrannous
authority over the rest: Sabel.
amongst many of whose monstrous enormities, this was one, that he constrained
the widows of those whom he had slain, against their wills to marry those
of his followers whom he allotted them to; in so much that many of them with
grief and anger slew themselves: now there were two men of stouter courage
than the rest, who pitying the miserable condition of the whole city,
undertook to deliver the same out of his cruel hands: coming therefore
accompanied with fifty other of the same mind and resolution, as though they
would debate a private quarrel before his presence as soon as conuenience served,
they diuerted their swords from themselves into the tyrants bosom, and hewed
him in pieces in the very midst of his guard.

Agathocles, king or rather Tyrant of Sicile, Sabel.
from a potters son growing to be a man of war, took upon him the
government of the country and usurped the crown, contrary to the consent of
his people: he was one given to all manner of filthy and unclean pollutions,
in whom treachery, cruelty, and generally all kind of vice reigned, and
therefore was worthily plagued by God, first by a murder of his youngest son
committed by his eldest sons son, that aspired unto the crown, and thought
that he might be an obstacle in his way for obtaining his purpose: and lastly
having sent his wife and children into Egypt for safety, by his own miserable
and languishing death which shortly after ensued.

Romulus the first king of Rome was (as Florus Florus.
testifies) transported by a devil out of this earth into some habitation of
his own, for the monstrous superstitions, coniurings, thefts, rauishments, and
murders, which during his pomp, he committed: and moreover (he says) that
Plutarch Plutarch.
the most credible and learned writer among Historiographers, both Greek and
Latin that ever writ, avouches the same for true: that he was carried away
one day by a spirit in a mighty tempest of thunder and lightning before the
view of the whole multitude to their great astonishment, insomuch that they
fled at the sight thereof. What shall we say of Silla, that monster in
cruelty, that most odious and execrable Tyrant that ever was, by whom all
civil order and humane policy was utterly defaced, and all vice and confusion
in steed thereof set up? Did he not procure the death of six thousand men at
one clap, Plutarch.
at the discomfiture of Marius? and having promised to save the lives of three
thousand that appealed unto his mercy, did he not cause them to be assembled
within a park, and there to have their throats cut, whilst he made an
oration to the Senate? It was he that filled the channels of the streets of
Rome and other cities in Italy with blood and slaughters innumerable: and that
spared neither altar, temple, or other privileged place or house whatsoever,
from the pollution and destainement of innocent blood: husbands were slain in
their wives arms: infants in their mothers bosoms: and infinite multitudes of
men murdered for their riches: for if any were either rich, or owners of fair
houses or pleasant gardens, they were sure to die: besides if there were any
private quarrel or grudge betwixt any citizen and some of his crew, he
suffered his side to revenge themselves after their own lusts, so that for
private mislike and enmity, many hundreds lost their lives: he that saved an
outlaw or proscribed person in his house (of which there were too many of the
best sort in his time) or gave him entertainment under his roof, whether he
were his brother, son, or parent whatsoever, was himself for recompense of
his courtesy and humanity, proscribed and sold, and condemned to death: and
he that killed one of them that was proscribed, had for reward two tale^ts
(the wages of his murder) amounting in value to twelve hundred crowns, whether
it was a bondslaue that slew his master, or a son that murdered his father:
coming to Prenest, he began to proceed in a kind of iusticiall form amongst
the citizens, and as it were by law and equity to practice wrong and injury;
but ere long either being weary of such slow proceedings, or not at leisure to
prosecute the same any further, he caused to meet together in one assembly two
thousand of the^, whom he committed al to the massacre without any manner of
compassion: as he was sitting one day in the midst of his palace in Rome, a
souldior to whom he had granted the proscription of his dead brother, as if he
had been alive (whom he himself before the civil war had slain) presented him
in lieu of thanks for that great good turn the head of one Marcus Marius of the
adverse faction before the whole city, with his hands al embrued in blood,
which he also washed in the holy waterstack of Apolloes temple, being near unto
that place; and all this being commended and countenanced by Sill^: he decreed
a general disanulment and abrogation of all titles and rights that were passed
before his time, to the end to have more liberty both to put to death who^ he
pleased, and to co^fiscat men's goods and also to unpeople and to repeople
cities, and to sack, pull down, and build, and to depose and make kings at his
pleasure: the goods which he had thus seized, he shamed not to sell with his
own handssitting in his tribunal seat, giving oftentimes a fair woman a whole
country or the revenues of a city for her beauty, and to plaiers, iesters,
iuglers, minstrels, and other wicked effranchised slaves, great and unnecessary
rewards: yea and to diverse married women also, whom (pleasing his eye) he
deprived their husbands of perforce, and espoused them to himself, maugre
their wills: being desirous to ally himself with Pompey, he commanded him to
cast off his lawful wife, and taking from Magnus Glabrio, his wife Aemilia,
made him marry her, though already great with child by her former husband: but
she died in travail in his house. In feasts and banquettings he was too
immoderate, for it was his continual and daily practice; the wine that he
drank usually was forty year old, and the company that he delighted to keep
was compact of minstrels, tumblers, players, singers, and such like rascals,
and with these he would spend whole days in drinking, carousing, dancing, and
all dissoluteness. Now this disordinate life of his, did so augment a disease
which was grown in his body, to wit an impostume, that in time it corrupted
his flesh, and turned it into lice: in such sort that though he had those that
continually followed him, to sweep them off and to louse him night and day,
yet the increase was still so plentiful that al would not serve to clear him
for a moment: in so much that not his apparel though never so new and
changeable, nor his linen though never so fresh, nor his bath nor his lauer,
no nor his meat and drink could be kept unpolluted from the flux of this
filthy vermin, it issued in such abundance: oftentimes in a day he would wash
himself in a bath, but to no great purpose; for his shame increased the more:
the day before he died he sent for one Granius, who attending his death
delaied to pay that which he ought to the Commonwealth, and being come in his
presence he commanded him to be strangled to death before his face: but with
straining himself in crying after his execution, his impostume burst and
vomitted out such streams of blood, that his strength failed him withal, and
passing that night in great distress, the next day made up his wicked and
miserable end.

Dion.
After that Caligula began to addict himself to impiety and contempt of God,
presently being not curbed with any fear nor shame, he became most dissolute
in all kind of wickedness; for at one time he caused to be slain a great
number of people, for calling him young Augustus, as if it had been an injury
to his person to be so entitled: and to say briefly of all his murders, there
were so many of his kindred, friends, senators, and citizens made away by his
means, that it would be too long and tedious here to recite: wherefore seeing
that he was generally hated of the people for his misdeeds, he wished that
they all had but one head, to the end (as it might seem) that at one blow he
might dispatch them all. In sumptuousnes and costlinesse of dishes and banquets
he neither found nor left his equal, Sueton.
for he would sup up most precious stones melted by art, and swallow down
treasures into his belly: his banquets were often served with golden loaves and
golden meats: in giving rewards he was sometime too too prodigal, for he
would cast great sums of money amongst the people certain days together,
until his bags were drawn dry: and then new strange shifts must be
practiced to fill them up again: his subjects he ouercharged with many new
found and unjust taxes, exacting of them a tribute even for their meat: if
there were any money controversies to be decided, the fourth part of the same
was his share, which way soever the matter inclined: the eight penny of every
porters gain throughout the city (which with travel they earned) he took
into his purse: yea and that which is more filthy and dishonest, the very
whores and common strumpets paid him a yearly revenue for their bauderies;
which act though most villainous and slanderous, yet is made a sampler to some
of our holy popes to imitate, and indeed has of many been put in practice:
but to our porpose; whereas before his prodigality was so great as to scatter
money like seed amidst the people, now his niggardliness grew on the other side
so miserable, that he would have the people upon the first day of the year,
every one to give him a newyeres gift, he himself standing at the door of his
house like a beggar, receiving the peoples alms: moreover, of all that ever
gave their lusts the bridle to abuse other men's wives he was most impudent and
notorious; for diverse times he used to feast many fair ladies and their
husbands, and after his good cheer ended, to ouerview them severally apart, as
Merchants do their wares, and to take her that pleased his fancy best, into
some secret place to abuse at his pleasure: neither after the deed done to be
ashamed to glory and vaunt himself in his filthy and wicked act: He committed
Incest with his own sisters, forcing them to his lust, and by one of them had
a daughter borne, whom (says Eutropius) his abominable concupiscence abused
also in most filthy and preposterous manner: at length many conspired his
destruction, but especially one of the Tribunes (which office we may after the
custom of our French nation rightly term the Marshalship and the officer
(one of our four Marshals, as Budeus says) who showed himself more eagerly
affected in the cause than the rest, pursued his enterprise in more speedy and
desperate manner; for as the Tyrant returned from the Theater by a by-way, to
his palace (the third day of the feast which he celebrated in honor of
Julius Caesar) the Tribune presented himself as if in regard of his office, to
impart some matter of importance unto him: and having received a currish word
or two at his hands (as his custom was) he gave him so sudden a stroke
between the head and the shoulders, that what with it and the blows of his
accomplices, that going for the same intent rushed upon him, he was slain amongst
them, no man stirring a foot to deliver him out of their hands, though many
looked on and might have aided him if they would; he was no sooner slain but
his wise incontinently was sent after, and his daughter also, that was crushed
to death against a wall: and thus came his wretched self with his filthy
progeny, to a wretched and miserable end.

Sueton.
Nero showed himself not only an enemy to God in persecuting his church, but
also a peruerter and disturber of humane nature in embruing his hands in the
blood of his own mother, and grandmother whom he caused to be put to death,
and in killing his own wife and sister, and infinite numbers of all kind of
people: beside in Adulteries he was so monstrous, that it is better to
conceal them from modest ears, than to stir up the puddle of so stinking and
noisome a dunghill, for which his villainies the Senate condemned him to a
shameful and most ignominious death, and his armies and forces forsook him:
which when he understood he betoke him to flight and hid himself in an outway
amongst thorns and bushes, which with great pain having past through being
weary of his life, he threw himself down into a pit four foot deep, and when
he could get none of his men to lay their hands upon him, he desperately and
miserably slew himself.

Vitellius for the murders and other outrageous misdeedes which he committed,
Sueton.
was taken in his shirt and drawn through the streets with a halter about his
neck, and his hands bound behind him, and the point of a dagger under his
chin: the people casting dirt and dung upon him in detestation, and calling him
makebate and seditious villain, with other opprobrious reproaches, and at last
being massacred with many blows, was drawn with a hook into Tiber like a
carrion.

Domitian was a cruel enemy of the Christians, Sueton.
he rejected his own wife to take a new, and being covertly reproved by
Heluidius for the same, in a play of the divorce of Paris and Enon, which he
presented unto him; he put him to death for his labor: many worthy Senators
and chief men, and such as had borne the office of the Consul, without just
cause given of reprehension, were murdered by him; he spared not his own blood
and nearest allies, no nor his own brother Titus, but what with poison and
sword destroyed them all to confusion. But in the end when he saw that the
world hated him for his outrageous cruelties, he consulted with the
Astrologians and coniurers what death did wait for him: one of the which
amongst the rest told him that he should be slain and that very shortly:
wherewithal being sore troubled, he first caused him that had prognosticated
this evil unto him to be slain, then he compassed himself with a strong
guard, and to the end to see them that should come near, he made his gallerie
walls where he walked of such a kind of glistering and shining stone, that he
might see in them all about him, both behind and before: when the day and hour
which was forecalculated for his death was come, one of the conspiratours came
in with his left arm in a scarf, as if he had been sore hurt, feigning that
he would bewray the whole treason which he so much feared; and being entered his
chamber, presented him with a long discourse in writing, touching the matter
and manner of the conspiracy: and when in reading the same he saw him most
astonished, then he took occasion to strike him suddenly into the belly with
his dagger, his own servants making up the murder, when they saw him go about
to resist: and thus by all his wisdom and providence, he could not rid
himself from being surprised, nor hinder the execution of Gods just
fore-appointed judgment. And these were the ends of those wicked Emperors,
who in regard of their vile lives, were rather monsters then men, and not only
they whom we have named, but many more also, as Antonius Caracalla,
Heliogabalus, and other like, may be worthily placed in this rank.

Tigellinus, one of the captains of Neros guard, and a chief procurer and
setter forward of his tyranny, was the cause of the death of many great
personages in Rome; and being enriched by their spoil and other such like
robberies, after the death of Nero (whom in his extremity he forsook) plunged
himself and wallowed in all manner of licencious and disordinate delights: now
though he was worthy of a thousand deaths for his cruelties toward many good
citizens, yet by the means of one Iunius, the Emperor Galba his chief
minion, whose favor he had by great sums of money bought and obtained (for he
gave unto his daughter at one time five and twenty thousand crowns, and to
himself at another a carknet worth fifteen thousand crowns for a present)
he was spared and kept in safety: but as soon as Otho was installed in the
Empire, his downfall and destruction began presently to follow: for Otho to the
end to gratify the Romans, sent to apprehend him, who was then in his houses
of pleasure in the field, banketting and sporting with his harlots, and using
all manner of riot, albeit by reason of a deadly disease which was upon him, he
was even at deaths door. When he saw himself thus taken, and that no means of
escape was left, (no not by the vessels which he had prepared at the sea shore
for purpose if need were to conueigh him away) and that he which had
commission to take him, would give him no advantage of escaping, though he
offered him great rewards for the same; he entreated only leisure to shave his
beard before he went, which being granted, he took a rasour, and in stead of
shauing, cut his own throat.

CHAP. XLIII. More Examples of the same argument.
HIeronymus, a true tyrant of Cicile, Tit. Livius.
inured and fashioned to all pride, and of most corrupt and rotten manners,
began right after the death of his father Hiero, (that left him a peaceable and
quiet kingdom) to show forth his arrogancy; for he quickly made himself
fearful to his subjects, both by his stately and proud manner of speech, as
also by the hardness of access unto him, together with a kind of disdainful
contempt of all men: but most of all did the inward pride of his heart appear,
when he had gotten a guard about his body, for then he ceased not to bait,
bite, and devour, and to exercise all kind of cruelty against every man, and
all kind of riot and excess of filthiness against himself: so that he
became so odious and contemptible to his subjects, that they conspired against
him to deprive him both of his life and kingdom: which conspiracy though it
came to light, yet for all that wanted not his due effect: for after he had
(through listening to false reports) put to death unjustly his truest and
dearest friends, and those that would indeed have helped him in his necessity,
both with good advise, and other succor; he was surprised as he walked in a
narrow and straight way, and there cruelly murdered: Now there was one
Andronodorus his brother in law, that aspiring to the crown, had corrupted his
manners, and thrust him forward to all these misdemeanors; to the end by those
practices he might make him odious to his people, that by that means he might
obtain his own purpose, as indeed he did: for after his death he seized upon
the scepter, though with no long enioyance, for through the troubles and
commotions which were raised in the country by his means, both he, his wife,
and whole race, together with the whole progeny of Hieronymus, whether
innocent or guilty, were all utterly rooted out and defaced.

Andronicus was one of the most wickedst men that lived on the earth in his
time, for he excelled in all kind of evil, in ambition, boldness in doing
mischief, cruelty, whoredom, adultery, and incest; also to make up the whole
number, besides he was so treacherous and disloiall, that he traitorously slew
the son and heir of the Emperor Emanuel, shutting him in a sack, and so
throwing him into the sea: after which, by violence he took possession of the
Empire of Constantinople, and like a strong thief seized upon that which was
none of his own: but as soon as he had gotten his desire, then began his
lusts to rage and rave, then he fell to whoring and forcing women and maids to
his lust; whom after he had once robbed of their chastities, he gave over to
his bauds and ruffians to abuse: and that which is more than all this, he
ravished one of his own sisters, and committed incest with her: moreover, to
maintain and uphold his tyranous estate, he slew most of the nobility, and
all else that bore any show of honesty or credit with them, and lived
altogether by wrongs and extortions: Wherefore his subjects (provoked with
these multitudes of evils which reigned in him, and not able to endure any
longer his vile outrages and indignities) rebelled against him and besieged
him, got him into their merciless hands, and handled him on this fashion
following: first they degraded him and spoiled him of his imperial ornaments,
then they pulled out one of his eyes, and set him upon an ass backward, with
the tail in his hand in steed of a scepter, and a rope about his neck instead
of a crown: and in this order and attire they led him through all
Constantinople, the people shouting and reuiling him on all sides, some
throwing dirt, others spittle, diverse dung, and the women their pispots at his
head: after all which banketting dishes, he was transported to the gallows,
and there hanged to make an end of all.

Charles king of Navarre, Froyss. vol. 3. chap. 100.
whose mother Ieane was daughter to Jews Lutton king of France, was another
that oppressed his subjects with cruelty and rough dealing, for he imposed
upon them grievous taxes and tributes, and when many of the chiefest of his
common wealth came to make known unto him the poverty of his people, and that
they were not able to endure any more such heavy burdens, he caused them all to
be put to death for their boldness: he was the kindler of many great
mischiefs in France, and of the fire wherewith diverse places of strength and
castles of defense were burned to ashes: he counseled the County of Foix his
son to poison his father, and not only so, but gave him also the poison with
his own hands, wherewith to do the deed: Nich. Gilles.
Moreover above all this, leacherie and adultery swaied his powers, even in his
old age, for at threescore years of age he had a whore in a corner, whose
company he daily haunted, and so much, that she at length gave him his deaths
wound; for returning from her company one day (as his use was) and entering into
his chamber, he went to bed all quaking and half frosen with cold, neither
could he by any means recover his heat, until by art they sought to supply
nature, and blew upon him with brazen bellows aquauitae and hot blasts of
air, but withal, the fire unregarded flew betwixt the sheets, and inflamed
the dry linne^ together with the aquauitae, so suddenly, that ere any help
could be made, his late quiuering bones were now half burned to death. It is
true, that he lived fifteen days after this, but in so great grief and
torment, without sense of any help or asswagement by physic or surgerie,
that at the end thereof he died miserably: and so as during his life his
affection ever burnt in lust, and his mind was always hot upon mischief and
covetousness; so his days were finished with heat and cruel burning.

Lugtake, king of Scots, succeeding his father Galdus in the kingdom, was so
odious and mischievous a tyrant, that eueryman hated him no less for his
vices, Lanques.
than they loved his father for his virtues: he slew many rich and noble men
for no other cause, but to enrich his treasury with their goods: he committed
the government of the realm to most unjust and covetous persons, and with
their company was most delighted: he shamed not to defloure his own aunts
sisters and daughters, and to scorn his wise and grave counselors, calling
them old doting fools: all which monstrous villainies (with a thousand more) so
incensed his nobles against him, that they slew him after he had reigned three
years: but as the Proverb goes, seldom comes a better, another or worse
tyrant succeeded in his kingdom, namely Mogallus, cosen germane to Lugtake, a
man notoriously infected with all manner of vices: for albeit in the beginning
of his reign he gave himself to follow the wisdom and manners of his uncle
Galdus, yet in his age his corrupt nature burst forth abundantly, but chiefly
in avarice, lechery, and cruelty: this was he that licensed thieves and
robbers to take the goods of their neighbors without punishment; and that
first ordained the goods of condemned persons to be confiscate to the kings
use, without respect either of wives, children, or creditours: for which crimes
he was also slain by his nobles.

Besides these, there was another king of the Scots, called Atherco, in the
year of our Lord 240, who showed himself also in like manner a most vile and
abominable wretch; The same.
for he so wallowed in all manner of unclean and effeminate lusts, that he
was not ashamed to go in the sight of the people playing upon a flute,
rejoicing more to be accounted a good fidlar than a good prince; from which
vices he fell at last to the deflouring and rauishing of maids and women, in
so much as the daughters of his nobles could not be safe from his insatiable
and intolerable lust. Wherefore being pursued by them, when he saw no means
to escape, he desperately slew himself.

The great outrages which the Spaniards have committed in the West Indies, are
apparent testimonies of their impiety, injustice, cruelty, insatiable
covetousness and luxury, and the judgments wherewith God has hunted them up
and down both by sea and land (as late and fresh histories do testify) are
manifest witnesses of his heavy anger and displeasure against them: amongst all
which, I will here insert none but that which is most notorious and worthy
memory, as the wretched accident of Pamphilus Nauares and his company: This
man with six hundred Spaniards making for the coast of Florida to seek the
gold of the river of Palm trees, Benzoni Mil.
were so turmoiled with vehement winds and tempests, that they could not keep
their vessels from dashing against the shore, so that their ships did all split
in sunder, and they for the most part were drowned, save a few that escaped to
land, yet escaped not danger; for they ran rouing up and down this savage
country so long, till they fell into such extreme poverty and famine, that
for want of vittails, twelve of them devoured one another: and of the whole
six hundred that went forth, there never yet returned above ten, all the rest
being either drowned or pined to death.

Francis Pizare, a man of base parentage, for in his youth he was but a
hogheard, and of worse qualities and education, Benzoni.
for he knew not so much as the first elements of learning, giving himself to
the West Indian wars, grew to some credit in bearing office: but withal
showed himself very disloiall, treacherous, and bloudy-minded in committing
many odious and monstrous cruelties, entering Peru with an army of soldiers,
to the end to conquer new lands and dominions, and to glut his insatiable
covetousness with a new surfeit of riches, (after the true Spanish custom) he
committed many bloody and traitorous acts, and exercised more than barbarous
cruelty: for first under pretense of friendship, faining to parle with
Artabaliba King of Cusco, the poor king coming with five and twenty thousand
of unarmed men, in ostentation of his greatness, not in purpose to resist: he
welcomed him and his men so nimbly with swords and courtelaxes, that they had
all soon their throats cut by a most horrible slaughter, and the king himself
was taken and put in chains; yea and the city after this massacre of men
abroad, felt soon the insolences of these brave warriors within: in fine
though Pizarre promised Artabaliba to save his life, in regard of a ransom
amounting to more than two Millians of gold, yet after the receipt thereof he
traitorously caused him to be hanged: contrary to both his oath and all equity
and reason, but this cruel perfidie of his went not long without punishment,
for both he and all the rest that were any ways accessory, or consenting to
the death of this king came to a wretched end, but especially his four
brethren, Ferdinand, Gonzall, John Martin of Alcantara, and Diego of Almagro;
who as they were principal in the action, so were they in the punishment: the
first that was punished was John Pizarre, who with many other Spaniards was
surprised in the city Cusco and slain by the men of war of Mangofrem and
Artabaliba: next after that there arose such a division and heartburning
betwixt the Pyzarres and Almagro and their partakers, that after they had
robbed and wasted and shared out the great and rich country of Peru they slew
one another by mutual strokes: and albeit that there was by common consent an
agreement accorded betwixt them, for the preserving of their unity, and
friendship, yet Francis Pizarre envying that Almagro should be governor of
Cusco and he not, interrupted all their agre^ments by starting from his
promises, and rekindled the half quenched fire of war by his own ambition: for
he presently defied Almagro, and sent his brother Ferdinand before to bid him
battle, who so well behaved himself that he took Almagro prisoner, and
delivered him bound to his brother Francis, who caused him to be strangled in
prison secretly, and after to be beheaded in public: now Ferdinand being sent
by his brother toward Spain with a great mass of gold to clear himself of
the death of Almagro could not so well justify the fact as that all his
treasure could save him from the prison, and what became of him afterward
known it is to God, but not to the world. A while after the fellows and
friends of Almagro, whose goods the Pizarrists had seized upon, took counsel
with Don Diego Almagro his son to revenge the death of his father, therefore
being in number but twelve, with unsheathed swords, they desperately burst into
Francis Pizarres house, (then Marquis and governor of Peru) and at the first
brunt slew a captain that guarded the entrance of the hall, and next him
Martin of Alcantara, with other more that kept the entrance of the chamber, so
that he fell dead even at his brother the Marquesses feet: who albeit his men
were all slain before his eyes, and himself left alone amidst his enemies,
yet gave not over to defend himself stoutly and manfully, until all of them
setting upon him at once, he was stabd into the throat and so sell dead upon the
ground, and thus finished he and his co^plices their wretched days, answerable
to their cruel deserts: but their murderers (though they deserved to be thus
dealt withal) yet for dealing in this sort without authority, were not
faultlesse, but received the due wages of their furious madness; for Don Diego
himself after he had been a while governor of Peru had his army overcome and
disco^fited by the Emperors force, and was betrayed into their hands by his own
lieutenant of Cusco, where he thought to have saved himself: and right soon
lost his head with the greatest captains and fauourits that he had, who were
also quartered. Now of the five brethren we have heard four of their
destruction, only one remains (namely Gonzalle Pyzare) to be spoken of, who
being sent for by the conquerors to be their chiefetaine and Protector against
the Viceroy, that went about to make them observe the Emperors laws and
decrees, touching the liberty of the Indian Nation, was betrayed and forsaken
by the same men that sent for him, and so fell into his enemies hands that cut
off his head: the General of his army, a covetous and cruel man, that in
short space made away above three hundred Spaniards, and all as it were with
his own hand, was drawn up and down at a horse tail, the space of half a
quarter of an hour, and then hanged upon the gallows, and quartered in four
parts. The Munke of Vauuard called Vincent, who with his cross and porteise
had encouraged Pizarre and his army against Artabaliba, and was for that cause
treated bishop of Peru, when Diego came to the government fled into the Island
Puna to escape his wrath, but in seeking to avoid him he fell into as great a
snare, for the Islanders assaulted him one night, and knocked him to death with
staves and clubs, together with forty Spaniards of his fellowship, that
accompanied him in his flight and started not from him in his death. And thus
the good and holy Monk for meddling with and setting forward the murder of so
many poor people, was for his pains and good deeds justly rewarded by the
Indians of that Island.

Moreover, after and beside al these troubles, seditions, and civil wars of
Peru, all they that returned from Spain suffered shipwreck for the most part,
for their fleet had scarce attained the midst of their course, when there arose
so terrible a tempest, that of 18 ships, 13 so perished that they were never
heard of after: and of the five which remained, two were tu^bled back to the
coast of S. Dominick, al berent and shiuered in pieces: other three were driven
to Spain; whereof one hitting against the bay of Portugal lost many of her me^,
the admiral her self of this fleet, perished near unto S. Lucar de barra
meda, with two hundred persons that were within her: and but one only of them
all got safe into the haven of Calix without damage. Here we may see how
mightily the hand of God was stretched forth to the revenge of those wicked
deeds and villainies which were committed by the Spaniards in those quarters.

Peter Loys bastard son to Pope Paul the third, Sleidan lib. 19. Bal.
was one that practiced many horrible villainies, robberies, murders,
adulteries, incest, and Sodomitries, thinking that because his father was Pope
therefore no wickedness was unlawful for him to commit. He was by the report
of all men, one of the most notorious, vildest, and filthiest villains that
ever the world saw: he forced the Bishop of Faence to his unnatural lust; so
that the poor Bishop with mere anger and grief that he should be so abused
died immediately: being made Duke of Plaisence and Parme he exercised most
cruel tyrany toward many of his subjects; insomuch that diverse gentlemen
that could not brook nor endure his injuries, conceived an inward hate against
him and conspired his death: and for to put in practice the same they hired
certain ruffians and roisters to watch the opportunity of slaying him, yea and
they themselves oftentimes, went apart with these roisters, keeping themselves
upon their guards, as if some private and particular quarrels had been in
hand, one day as the Duke went in his horselitter out of his castle: with a
great retinue to see certain fortifications which he had prepared, being
advertised by his father the Pope (by the help of Magic which he practiced)
to look diligently to himself the tenth day of September, in which
notwithstanding he was slain: for as he returned into his castle the
conspirators to the number of six and thirty, marched before him as it were
to do him honor, but indeed to do him villainy: for as soon as he was entered
the castle, they drew up the drawbridge for fear of his retinue that were
without, and coming to him with their naked swords, cast in his teeth his
tyranny, and so slew him in his litter, together with a Priest, the master of
his horse, and five Almaignes that were of his guard: his dead body they hung
by a chain over the walls, and shaking it to and fro to the view of the people,
threw it down headlong at last into the ditch; where the multitude to show
their hates, wounded it with daggers, and trampled it under their feet, and so
whom they durst not touch in his life, him being dead, they thus abused: and
this befell upon the tenth day of September in the year of our Lord 1547.

Some of the Bishops of Rome for their rare and notable virtues, and the glory
of their brave deeds, may be honored with this dignity, to be placed in this
worthy rank, for their good conditions and behauiours were such, that no
tyrant, butcher, thief, robber, ruffian, nor any other, ever excelled them in
cruelty, robbery, adultery, and such like wickedness, or deserved more the
credit and reputation of his place than they: And hereof we have a manifest
example in John the thirteenth, who pulling out the eyes of some of his
Cardinals, cutting out the tongues of others, hewing off the hands, noses, and
privy members of others, showed himself a pattern of such cruelty, as the
world never saw the like: He was accused before the Emperor Otho in a synod,
first of incest with two of his own sisters, secondly for calling the devil
to help him at dice, thirdly for promoting young infants to bishoprics,
bribed thereto by the gift of certain pieces of gold, fourthly for rauishing
maids and wives, and lying with his fathers concubine, yea and lastly, for
lying with his own mother, and many other such monstrous villainies; for which
cause he was deposed from the papacy, though reinstalled again by the suit
and cunning practice of his whores, by whom as he recovered his triple
crown, so he lost shortly after his vicious life, by the means of a married
whore that betrayed him.

Benno. Bal.
Pope Hildebrand surnamed Gregory the seventh, was adorned with all these good
qualities; namely to be bloody minded, a poisoner, a murderer, a coniurer, also
a consulter with spirits; and in a word, nothing but a lump and mass of
wickedness: he was the stirrer up of many battles against the Emperor Henry
the fourth; and a prouoker of his own son to depose and poison his father as
he did, but this wicked (I would say holy) Pope was at last banished his
Cathedral city to Salernum, where he ended his days in misery.

Pope Clement the sixth of name contrary to his nature, for his inclemencie,
cruelty and pride toward the Emperor Lewis of Bauarie, was intolerable; he
procured many horrible wars against the Empire, and caused the destruction of
twenty thousand Frenchmen by the king of England, yea and poisoned the good
Emperor also so well he wished to him: Howbeit ere long himself was stifled
to death, and that suddenly, not by any practice of man as it was thought, but
by the special hand of God, in recompense of all his notable acts.

John the four and twentieth was deposed by the council of Constance for these
crimes following; heresy, Simonie, Benno. Bal.
manslaughter, poysonings, cousenings, adultry, and Sodomitry, and was cast
into prison, where remaining three years he falsely made show of amendment of
his wicked life, and therefore was graced with a Cardinals hat, but it was not
that which he expected, for which cause with despite and grief he died.

It would be too long to run over the discourse of every particular Pope of
like conditions, and therefore we will content our selves in brief with the
legend of Pope Alexander the sixth, reported by two authors of credit and
renown, and unsuspected, to wit, Guicciardine a Florentine gentleman,
Guicciardine. lib. 2. Bembus.
and Bembus a Venetian cardinal: this man (says Guicciardine) attained to the
Papacy, not by worthiness of virtues, but by heaviness of bribes and
multitude of fair promises made to the cardinals for his election, promising
large recompense to them that stood on his side, whereupon many that knew his
course of life were filled with astonishment, amongst whom was the king of
Naples, who hearing of this election, complained to his queen with tears, that
there was such a pope created, that would be a plague to Italy and al
Christendom: beside, the great vices which swaied in him, of which the same
author speaking, makes this catalogue and pettigree in his own language which
follows. Gui^^tardine. lib. 2.
Costum (d it il) oscensimi non sincerita, non verita, non feed, non religione;
auaritia, insatiabile, ambitione, immoderata crudelta pinque barbara, eo
ardentissima cupidita di escaltare in qualunque modo, i figli voli: i quali
erano molti, (that is to say) He was endued with most filthy conditions, and
that neither sincerity, truth, faith, nor religion was in him: but in steed of
them covetousness unquenchable, ambition unmeasurable, more then barbarous
cruelty, and a burning desire of promoting his own children (for he had many)
by what means soever. He persuaded king Charles the eight of France to
undertake war against Naples; and after he had brought him to it, presently he
forsook him and entered a new league with the Venetians, Venetian histor. lib.
6.
and the other princes of Italy to drive him home again. This was he (says
Cardinal Bembus) that set benefices and promotions to sale, that he which
would give most, might have most; and that poisoned John Michell the Cardinal
of Venice at Rome, for his gold and treasure which he abounded with: whose
insatiable covetousness provoked him to the committall of all mischief, to
the end he might maintain the forces of his son, who went about to bring the
whole lands and dominions of all Italy into his possession: in adulteries he
was most filthy and abominable, in tyrany most cruel, and in Magic most
cunning, and therefore most execrable: supping one night with Cardinal Adrian
his very familiar friend, in his garden, having foreappointed his destruction
that night by poison; through the negligence and oversight of his butler to
whom he had given the exploit in charge, that was deceived by mistaking the
bottles, he drank himself the medicine which he had prepared for his good
friend the Cardinal: and so he died (says Bembus) not without an evident
mark of Gods heavy wrath, in that he which had slain so many Princes and rich
men to enjoy their treasures, and went now about to murder his host which
entertained him with friendship and good cheer into his house, was caught in
the same snare which he had laid, and destroyed by the same means himself,
which he had destinated for another; being thus dead, the whole city of Rome
(says Guicciardine) ran out with greedines and joy to behold his carcass, not
being able to satisfy their eyes with beholding the dead serpent, whose venime
of ambition, treachery, cruelty, adultry, and avarice, had impoisoned the whole
world. Some say that as he purposed to poison certain Cardinals, he poisoned
his own father, that being in their company chanced to get a share of his
dregs: and that he was so abominable to abuse his own sister Lucrece in the
way of filthiness. When Gemen the brother of Bajazet the Emperor of the Turks
came and surrendered himself into his hands, and was admitted into his
protection, he being hired with two hundred duccats by Bajazet, gave poison to
his new client, even to him to whom he had before sworn and vowed his
friendship: besides, that he might maintain his tyranny he demanded and
obtained aid of the Turk against the king of France, which was a most
unchristian and antichristian part; he caused the tongue and two hands of
Antony Manciuellus (a very learned and wise man) to be cut off, for an
excellent oration which he made in reproof of his wicked demeanours and
dishonest life. It is written moreover by some that he was so affectionated to
the service of his good Lord and master the devil, that he never attempted any
thing without his counsel and advise, who also presented himself unto him at
his death in the habit of a post, according to the agreement which was betwixt
them: and although this wretched Antichrist straue against him for life, saying
that his term was not yet finished; yet he was enforced to diflodge and depart
into his proper place, where with horrible cries and hideous fearful groans
he died.

Thus we see how miserable such wretched and infamous miscreants and such
pernicious and cruel Tyrants, have ended their wicked lives, their force and
power being execrable and odious, In his book of the clemency of a prince.
and therefore (as says Seneca) not able to continue any long time, for that
government cannot be firm and stable, where there is no shame nor fear to
do evil, nor where equity, justice, says, and piety with other virtues are
contemned and trodden under foot; for when cruelty once beginnerh to
predominate, it is so insatiable that it never cease but grows every day
from worse to worse, by striving to maintain and defend old faults by new,
until the fear and terror of the poor afflicted and oppressed people with a
continual source and enterchange of evils which surcharge them, conuerteth it
self from forced patience, to willing fury, and breaks forth to do
vengeance upon the tyrants heads with all violence: whence arises that saying
of the Satyricall Poet to the same sense, Where he says; Ad generum cereris
sine cede and sanguine pauci: Descendunt reges and sicca morte tyranni.
Few tyrants die the death that nature sends,
But most are brought by slaughter to their ends.


CHAP. XLIIII. Of calumniation and false witness bearing.
We have seen heretofore what punishments the Lord has laid upon those that
either vex their neighbors in their persons, as in the breakers of the fifth,
sixth, and seventh commandments; or damage the^ in their goods, as in the
eight: now let us look unto those that seek to spoil them of their good
names and rob them of their credit by slanderous reproaches and false and
forged calumniations, and by that means go against the ninth commandment,
which says, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor: in
which words is condemned generally all slanders, all false reports, all
defamations, and all evil speech else whatsoever, whereby the good name and
credit of a man is blemished, stained, or impouerished; and this sin is not
only inhibited by the divine law of the almighty, but also by the laws of
nature and nations, for there is no country and people so barbarous with whom
these pernicious kind of creatures are not held in detestation: of tame beasts
(says Diogenes) a flatterer is worst, and of wild beasts a backbiter or a
slaunderer, and not without great reason; for as there is no disease so
dangerous as that which is secret, so there is no enemy so pernicious as he
which under the color of friendship biteth and slandereth us behind our
backs; but let us see what judgments the Lord has shown upon them, to the
end the odiousness of this vice may more clearly appear.

And first to begin with Doeg the Edomir, 1. Sam. 22.9.
who falsely accused Achimelech the high priest unto Saul, for giving succor
unto David in his necessity and flight; for though he told nothing but that
which was true, yet of that truth, some he maliciously perverted, and some he
kept back: and falsehood consists not only in plain lying, but also in
concealing or misusing the truth; for Achimelech indeed asked counsel of the
Lord for David, and ministered unto him the show bread and the sword of Goliath,
but not with any intent of malice against king Saul, for he supposed and David
also made him believe that he went about the kings business, and that he was
in great favor with the king: which last clause the wicked accuser left out,
and by that means not only provoked the wrath of Saul against the high priest,
but also when al other refused, became himself executioner of his wrath and
murdered Achimelech with all the nation of the priests, and smote Nob the city
of the priests with the edge of the sword, both man and woman, child and
suckling, ox and ass, not leaving any alive (so beastly was his cruelty) save
Abiathar only one of the sons of Achimelech, that fled to David and brought him
tidings of this bloody massacre. But did this cruel accuser escape scotfree?
No, the spirit of God in the 52 Psalm proclaims his judgment: Psalm. 52.1.2.5.
Why beastest thou in thy wickedness thou tyrant, thy tongue imagines
mischeife, and is like a sharp rasor that cutteth deceitfully, etc. but God
shall destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee and pluck thee out of thy
tabernacle, and root thee out of the land of the living.

Next to this man, 1. Kin. 21.
we may justly place Achab the king of Israel, and Iesabel his wife, who to the
end to get the possession of Naboths vineyard (which being his inheritance he
would not part from) suborned by his wives pernicious council false accusers,
wicked men, to witness against Naboth, that he had blasphemed God and the
king, and by that means caused him to bestoned to death: but mark the judgment
of God denou^ced against them both, by the mouth of Elias for this wicked fact,
Have thou killed (says he) and taken possession? Thus says the Lord, In the
place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs even lick thy blood
also: and as for Iezabel, dogs shall eat her by the wall of Israel, thy house
shall be like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, I will cut off from Ahab
him that pisseth against the wall, etc. Neither was this only denounced but
executed also, as we may read, 1. Kin. 22.38. and 2. Kin. 9.36.37. etc. and 2.
Kin. 10.7, etc.

Amos. 7.17.
Amaziah the priest of Bethel under Jeroboam the wicked king of Israel,
perceiving how the Prophet Amos prophesied against the idolatry of that place,
and of the king he falsely accused him to Jeroboam to have co^spired against
him, also he exhorted him to fly from Bethel, because it was the kings
chapel, and fly into Judah, and prophecy there: but what said the Lord unto
him by the prophet? Thy wife shall be an harlot in the city, thy sons and thy
daughters shall fall by the sword, and thy land shall be divided by live, and
thou shall die in a polluted land: lo there was the punishment of his false
accusation.

Ester. 7.10.
How notable was the judgment that the Lord manifested upon Haman the Syrian
for his false accusing of the Jews, to be disturbers of the Commonwealth and
breakers of the laws of king Ahasuerash? did not the Lord turn his mischief
upon his own head? The same day which was appointed for their destruction, the
Lord turned it to the destruction of their enemies, and the same gallows which
he prepared for Mordecai was he himself hanged upon.

Daniel. 6.
The me^ that falsely accused Daniel to king Darius for breaking the kings edict,
which was, that none should make any request unto any for 30 days space, save
only to the king himself fared no better: for when as he found Daniell praying
unto God, they presently accused him unto the king, urging him with the
stability which ought to be in the decrees of the kings of Medea and Persia,
that ought not to be altered, in such sort that king Darius (though against
his will) commanded Daniell to be thrown amongst the lions to be devoured of
them, but when he saw how miraculously the Lord preserved him from the teeth of
the lions, and thereby perceived his innocence, he caused his envious accusers
to be thrown into the lions den with their wives and children, who were
devoured of the lions ere they could fall to the ground.

Notorious is the example of the two judges that accused Susanna, both how she
was delivered and they punished: the credit of which history, because it is
doubtful I here omit to speak further of.

But let us come to profane histories, Apelles that famous painter of Ephesus,
felt the sting and bitterness of this venomous viper, for he was falsely
accused by Antiphillus another painter, an enuier of his art and excellent
workmanship, to have conspired with Theodota against king Ptolomie, and to have been the cause of the defection of Pelusium from him, which accusation he laid
against him, to the end that seeing he could not attain to that excellency
of art which he had, Theat. histor.
he might by this false pretense work his disgrace and overthrow, as indeed he
had effected had not great persuasions been used, and manifest proofs alleged
of Apelles innocence and integrity, wherefore Ptolomie having made trial of the
cause, and found out the false and wrongful practice, he most justly rewarded
Apelles with an hundred talents, and Antiphillus the accuser with perpetual
servitude: upon which occasion Apelles in remembrance of that danger painted
out calumniation on this manner; a woman gaily attired, and dressed with an
angry and furious countenance, holding in her left hand a torch, and with her
right a young man by the hair of the head, before whom marched an evil
favored sluttish usher quick sighed and palefaced, called Envy, at her right
hand sat a fellow with long ears like king Midas, to receive tales, and behind
her two waiting maids, Ignorance, and Suspicion: and thus the witty painter to
delude his own evil hap expressed the lively image and nature of that
detracting sin. Vide li. 1. ca. 12. example of Nero. Eusebius. li. 9. ca. 5.


This trick used Maximinus the tyrant to deface the doctrine and religion of
Christ in his time, for when he saw that violence and torments prevailed not,
Nicep. li. 7. c. 27.
but that like the palm, the more it was trodden and oppressed the more it
grew, he used this subtlety and craft to undermine it: he published diverse
books full of blasphemy of a conference betwixt Christ and Pilate, and caused
them to be taught to children in steed of their first elements that they might
no sooner speak than hate and blaspheme Christ: moreover, he constrained
certain wicked and lend women to avouch that they were Christians, and that
vile filthiness was daily committed by them in their assemblies, which also he
published far and near in writing: howbeit for all this the Lords truth
quailed not, but swum as it were against the stream, and increased in despite
of envy; as for these false accusers they were punished one after another with
notable judgments: for one that was a chief doer therein became his own
murderer, and Maximinus himself was consumed with worms and rottenness, as
has been showed in the former book.

It was a law among the Romans, that if any man had informed an accusation
against another, Euse. li. 5. ca. 21.
either wrongfully, unlawfully, or without probability, both his legs should be
broken in recompense of his malice: Nice. li. 4. c. 26.
which custom as it was laudable and necessary, so was it put in execution at
diverse times, as namely under the Emperor Commodus, when a profane wretch
accused Apollonius (a godly and professed Christian, and afterward a constant
martyr of Christ Jesus) before the judges, of certain grievous crimes, which
when he could by no color or likelihood of truth convince and prove, they
adjudged him to that ignominious punishment to have his legs broken, because he
had accused and defamed a man without cause.

Eustathius bishop of Antioch, a man famous for eloquence in speech and
uprightness of life, Nicep. li. 8. c. 46.
when as he impugned the heresy of the Arians, was circumuented by them and
deposed from his bishopric by this means: they suborned a naughty strumpet
to come in with a child in her arms, and in an open synod of two hundred and
fifty bishops to accuse him of Adultery, and to swear that he had got that
child of her body, which though he denied constantly, and no just proof could
be brought against him, yet the impudent strumpets oath took such place, that
by the Emperors censure he was banished from his bishopric; howbeit ere
long his innocence was known, for the said strumpet being deservedly touched
with the finger of Gods justice in extreme sickness, confessed the whole
practice how she was suborned by certain Bishops to slander this holy man,
and that yet she was not altogether a lier, for one Eustathius a handy-crafts
man got the child as she had sworn, and not Eustathius the bishop.

The like slander the same heretics devised against Athanasius in a synod
conuocated by Constantine the Emperor at Tyrus, Phil. Melanct. chro. lib. 3.
Nicep. li. 9. c. 23.
for they suborned a certain lewd woman to exclaim upon the holy man in the
open assembly for rauishing of her that last night against her will: which
slander he shifted of by this devise, he sent Timotheus the presbiter of
Alexandria into the synod in his place, who coming to the woman asked her
before them all, whether she durst say that he had ravished her; to whom she
replied, yea I swear and vow that thou have done it (for she supposed it to
have been Athanasius, whom she never saw) whereat the whole synod perceived
the cavil of the lying Arrians, and quitted the innocence of that good man.
Howbeit these malicious heretics seeing this practice not to succeed invented
another worse than the former, for they accused him to have slain one Arsenius
whom they themselves kept secret, and that he carried one of his hands about
him, wherewith he wrought miracles by encha^tment: but Arsenius touched by the
spirit of God stole away from the^ and came to Athanasius, to the end he should
receive no damage by his absence, whom he brought into the judges, and showed
them both his hands, confounded his accusers with shame of their malice,
insomuch as they ran away for fear, and satisfied the judges both of his
integrity and their envious calumniation: the chief broker of all this
mischief was Stephanus bishop of Antioch, but he was degraded from his
bishopric, and Leontius elected in his room.

Histor. tripart.
Hitherto we may add the example of one William Feming, who accused an honest
man called John Cooper, of speaking traitorous words against Queen Mary, and
all because he would not fell him two goodly bullockes which he much desired,
for which cause the poor man being arraigned at Berry in Suffolk was
condemned to death by reason of two false witnesses which the said Feming had
suborned for that purpose, whose names were White and Greenewood; so this poor
man was hanged drawn and quartered and his goods taken from his poor wife and
nine children, which are left destitute of all help: but as for his false
accusers one of them died most miserably, for in harvest time being well and
lusty, of a sudden his bowels fell out of his body, and so he perished; the
other two what ends they came unto it is not reported, but sure the Lord has
reserved a sufficient punishment for all such as they are.

Acts and mon. page 2100.
Many more be the examples of this sin and judgments upon it as the pilleries
at Westminster and daily experience bears witness, but these that we have
alleged shall suffice for this purpose: because this sin is cosen Germane
unto perjury, of which you may read more at large in the former book. It
should now follow by course of order if we would not pretermit any thing of
the law, of God to speak of such as have offended against the tenth
commandment, and what punishment has ensued the same, but for so much as all
such offenses, for the most part are encluded under the former, of which we
have already spoken, and that there is no adultery nor fornication, nor theft,
nor vniust-warre, but it is annexed to and proceeds from the affection, and
the resolution of an evil and disordinate concupiscense, as the effect from
the cause: therefore it is not necessary, to make any particular recital of
them, more than may well be collected out of the former examples added
hereunto, that in simple concupiscense and affection of doing evil which
comes not to act, (though it be in the sight of God condemned to everlasting
torments) yet it does not so much incur and provoke his indignation, that a
man should for that only cause be brought to apparent destruction, and be made
an example to others, to whom the sin is altogether dark and unknown,
therefore we will proceed in our purpose without intermedling in special with
this last commandment.

CHAP. XLV. That kings and princes ought to look to the execution of Justice,
for the punishment of naughty and corrupt manners.
NO man ought to be ignorant of this, that it is the duty of a prince, not
only to hinder the course of sin, from bursting into action, but also to
punish the doers of the same, making both civil justice to be administered
uprightly, and the law of God to be regarded and observed inuiolably: for to
this end are they ordained of God, that by their means every one might live a
quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty: to the which end, the
maintenance and administration of justice being most necessary, they ought not
so to discharge themselves of it, as to translate it upon their officers and
judges, but also to look to the execution thereof themselves, as it is most
needful: for if law (which is the foundation of justice) be (as Plato says) a
speechless and dumb magistrate, who shall give voice and vigor unto it, if
not he that is in supreme and sovereign authority? for which cause the king
is commanded in Deuteronomie, Deu. 17.18, 19
To have before him always the book of the law, to the end to do justice and
judgment to every one in the fear of God. And before the creation of kings in
Israel, the chief captains and sovereigns amongst them, were renowned with
no other title nor quality, than of Judges. In the time of Deborah the
Prophetess, though she was a woman the weaker vessel, yet because she had
the conducting and governing of the people, they came unto her to seek
judgment. It is said of Samuel, that he judged Israel so long, till being
tired with age and not able to bear that burden any longer, he appointed his
sons for judges in his stead: who when through covetousness they perverted
justice, Judge. 4. 1. Sam. 7.8.
and did not execute judgment like their father Samuel, they gave occasion to
the people to demand a king, that they might be judged and governed after the
manner of other nations: which things sufficiently declared, that in old time
the principal charge of kings, was personally to administer justice and
judgment; and not as now to transfer the ear thereof to others.

The same we read of king David, of whom it is said, That during his reign,
1. Chron. 18.
he executed justice and judgment among his people: and in another place, that
men came unto him for judgment, 2. Sam. 15.
and therefore he disdained not to hear the complaint of the woman of Tekoah,
showing himself herein a good prince, and as the angel of God to hear good
and evil: 2. Sam. 14.
for this cause Solomon desired not riches nor long life of the Lord, but a
wise and discreet heart to judge his people, 1. King. 3.
and to discern betwixt good and evil: which request was so agreeable and
acceptable to God, that he granted it unto him, so that he obtained such an
excellent measure of incomparable wisdom, that he was commended and reputed
more for it, than for all his great riches and precious treasures beside: there
is mention mad^ in the book of the kings of his judicial throne wherein he
used to sit and hear the causes of the people, and execute justice among them;
and albeit he was the most puissant and glorious king of the earth, yet
notwithstanding he scorned not to hear two harlots plead before him about the
controversy of a dead infant.

Ioram, king of Israel, son of Achab, 2. King 6.
though a man that walked not uprightly before God, but gave himself to work
abomination in his sight, yet he despised not the complaint of the poor
affamished woman of Samaria, when she demanded justice at his hands, although
it was in the time of war when laws use to be silent, and in the besieging
and famishment of the city: neither did he reject the Sunamites request, for
the recovery of her house and lands, 2. King 8.
but caused them to be restored unto her. So that then it is manifest, that
those kings which in old time reigned over the people of God, albeit they had
in every city Judges, yea and in Jerusalem also, as it appears in the 19
chapter of the second book of Chronicles, yet they ceased not for all that to
give ear to suites and complaints that were made unto them, and to decide
controversies that came to their knowledge: and for this cause it is that
Wisdom says, That by her, kings reign, Prou 8.15.
and princes decree justice: whereunto also belongs that which is said in
another place, That a king sitting in the throne of judgment, chaseth away all
evil with his eyes. Prou. 20.8.


Moreover, that this was the greatest part of the office and duty of kings in
ancient times, to see the administration of justice, Homer the Poet may be a
sufficient witness, when he says of Agamemnon, That the scepter and law was
committed to him by God, to do right to every man; answerable to the which,
Virgil (describing the Queen of Carthage) says, She sat in judgment in the
midst of her people: as if there was nothing more beseeming such a person than
such an action. And therefore the Poets not without cause faigne Jupiter
always to have Themis (that is to say, Justice) at his elbow: signifying
thereby, not that whatsoever kings or princes did, was just and lawful, be it
never so vile in it own nature (as that wanton flatterer Anaxarthus said to
Alexander) but that equity and justice should always accompany the^, and never
depart from their sides. And hereupon it was, that Acacus, Minos, and
Radamanthus the first king of Grecia, were so renowned of old antiquity,
because of their true and upright execution of justice, and therefore were not
honored with any greater title, than the name of Judges.

Plutarch.
It is said of king Alexander, that although he was continually busied in the
affairs of war, and of giving battles, yet he would sit personally in
judgment to hear criminal causes and matters of importance pleaded: and that
whilst the accuser laid open his accusation he would stop one ear with his
hand, to the end that the other might be kept pure and without prejudice, for
the defense and answer of the accused. The Roman Emperors also were very
careful and diligent in this behalf; Sueton.
as first Julius Caesar, who is recorded to have taken great pains in giving
audience to parties, and in dealing justice betwixt them. In like manner
Augustus Caesar is commended for his care and travail in this behalf, for he
would ordinarily sit in judgment upon causes and controversies of his
subjects, and that with such great delight and pleasure, that often times night
was feign to interrupt his course, before his will was to relinquish it; yea
though he found himself evil at ease, yet would he not omit to apply
himself to the division of judgment, or else calling the parties before him
to his bed.

The Emperor Claudius, though a man otherwise of a dull and gross spirit, yet
in this respect he discharged the duty of a good prince, for that he would
intermeddle with hearing his subjects causes, and do right unto them: He
chanced once to make a very pretty and witty end of a suit betwixt a son and
his mother, who denying and disclaiming him to be her son, was by the
Emperor commanded to marry him; and so least she should agree to that
mischief, was constrained to acknowledge and auow him for her son: and to be
short, it was very ordinary and usual among the Emperors, to take knowledge
of matters controuerted; but especially of criminal and capital causes, by
means whereof the Apostle Paul desirous to show the judgment and lyings in
weight of his enemies the Jews, appealed from them to Caesar, which he would
never have done, if Caesar had not in some sort used to meddle with such
affairs: and for further proof hereof, hither may be added the saying which
is reported of Nero in the beginning of his reign, That when he should sign
with his hand a sentence of death against a condemned person, he wished that
he could neither wright nor read, to the end to avoid that necessary action.

The bold answer of an old woman to the Emperor Adrian is very worthy to be
remembered; Fulgos. lib. 6. cap. 2.
who appealing and complaining to the Emperor of some wrong, when he answered
that he was not at leisure then to hear her suit, she told him boldly and
plainly, That then he ought not to be at leisure to be her Emperor: which
speech went so near the quick unto him, that ever after he showed more
facility and courtesy toward all men that had any thing to do with him. The
kings of France used also this custom of hearing and deciding their subjects
matters, as we read of Charlemaigne the king and Emperor, who commanded that
he should be made acquainted with all matters of importance, and their issues,
throughout his realm. King Jews the first treading the steps of his father
Charlemaigne, accustomed himself three days in a week, to hear publicly in
his palace the complaints and grieuances of his people, and to right their
wrongs and injuries. King Jews surnamed the Holy, Aimo.
a little before his death, gave in charge to his son that should succeed him
in the crown, amongst other, this precept, To be careful to bear a stroke in
seeing the distribution of justice, and that it should not be perverted not
depraved.

CHAP. XLVI. Of such princes as have made no reckening of punishing vice, nor
regarded the estate of their people.
IT cannot choose but be a great confusion in a commonwealth, when justice
sleeps, and when the shameless boldness of evil doers is not curbed in
with any bridle, but runs it own swinge: and therefore a Consul of Rome
could say, That it was an evil thing to have a prince, under whom license and
liberty is given to every man to do what him lists: for so much then as
this evil proceeds from the carelesnes and slothfulness of those that hold
the stern of government in their hands, it can not be but some evil must
needs fall upon them for the same: The truth of this may appear in the person
of Philip of Macedonie, (whom Demosthenes the orator notes for a treacherous
and false dealing prince:) after that he had subdued almost all Greece, not so
much by open war, as by subtilty, craft, and surprise, and that being in the
top of his glory, he celebrated at one time the marriage of his son
Alexander, whom he had lately made king of Epire, and of one of his daughters
with great pomp and magnificense: as he was marching with all his train
betwixt the two bridegroomes, (his own son and his son in law) to see the
sports and pastimes which were prepared for the solemnity of the marriage,
behold suddenly a young Macedonian gentleman called Pausanias, ran at him, and
slew him in the midst of the prease, for not regarding to do him justice when
he complained of an injury done unto him by one of the peers of his realm.

Plutarch.
Tatius, the fellow king of Rome with Romulus, for not doing justice in
punishing certain of his friends and kinsfolks that had robbed and murdered
certain Ambassadors which came to Rome, and for making their impunitie an
example for other malefactors by deferring and protracting, and disappointing
their punishment, was so watched by the kindred of the slain, that they slew
him even as he was sacrificing to his gods, because they could not obtain
justice at his hands.

What happened to the Romans for refusing to deliver an Ambassador, Tit.
Liuius. Plutarch.
who (contrary to the law of nations coming unto them) played the part of an
enemy to his own country, even well nigh the total overthrow of them and
their city; for having by this means brought upon themselves the calamity of
war, they were at the first discomfited by the Gauls, who pursuing their
victory, entered Rome, and slew all that came in their way, whether men or women,
infants or aged persons; and after many days spent in the pillage and spoiling
of the houses, at last set fire on all, and utterly destroyed the whole city.

Childericke king of France, Paul. Aemil.
is notified for an extreme dullard and blockhead, and such a one as had no
care or regard unto his realm, but that lived idly and slothfully without
intermedling with the affairs of the common wealth, for he laid all the charge
and burden of them upon Pepin his lieutenant general, and therefore was by him
justly deposed from his royal dignity and mewed up in a cloister of religion
to become a monk, because he was unfit for any good purpose: and albeit that
this sudden change and mutation was very strange, yet there ensued no trouble
nor commotion in the realm thereupon; so odious was he become to the whole
land for his drowsy and idle disposition. Paul. Aemil.
For the same cause did the princes Electours depose Venceslaus the Emperor
from the Empire, and established another in his room.

King Richard of England, amongst other foul faults which he was guilty of,
incurred greatest blame for this, because he suffered many thieves and robbers
to roue up and down the land unpunished: for which cause the citizens of London
co^menced a high suit against him, and compelled him having reigned 22 years,
to lay aside the crown, and resign it to another, in the presence of all the
states, and died prisoner in the Tower.

Moreover, this is no small defect of justice, when men of authority do not
only pardon capital and detestable crimes, but also grace and favor the doers
of them: and this neither ought nor can be done by a sovereign prince, without
ouerpassing the bounds of his limited power, which can in no wise dispense with
the law of God, Exodus 21.
whereunto even kings themselves are subject: for as touching the willing and
considerate murderer, D^ut. 19.
Thou shall pluck him from my altar (says the Lord) that he may die, thy eye
shall not spare him, to the end it may go well with thee: which was put in
practice in the death of Ioab, 1 King. 2.
who was slain in the Tabernacle of God, holding his hands upon the horns of
the Altar: for he is no less abominable before God that justifies the
wicked, Prou 17.
than he that condemns the just: and hereupon that holy king S. Jews when
he had granted pardon to a malefactor, Nich. Gilles.
revoked it again after better consideration of the matter, saying, That he
would give no pardon, except the case deserved pardon by the law, for it was a
work of charity and pity to punish an offender; and not to punish crimes
was as much as to commit them.

In the year of our Lord 978, Egebrede the son of Edgare end Alphred, king
of England, was a man of goodly outward shape and visage, but wholly given to
idleness and abhorring all princely exercises: besides, he was a lover of riot
and drunkenness, and used extreme cruelty toward his subjects, having his
ears open to all unjust complaints; in feats of arms of all men most
ignorant: so that his cruelty made him odious to his subjects, and his
cowardice encouraged strange enemies to invade his kingdom: by means whereof,
England was sore afflicted with war, famine, and pestilence. In his time (as
a just plague for his negligence in government) decayed the noble kingdom of
England, and became tributary to the Danes: for ever when the Danes oppressed
him with war, he would hire them away with sommes of money, without making any
resistance against them: in so much that from ten thousand pounds by the year,
the tribute arose in short space to fifty thousand, wherefore he devised a
new trick, and sought by treachery to destroy them, sending secret commissioners
to the Magistrates throughout the land, that upon a certain day and hour
assigned, the Danes should suddenly and jointly be murdered: which massacre
being performed, turned to be the cause of greater misery, for Swain king of
Denmark hearing of the murder of his countrymen, landed with a strange army
in diverse parts of this Realm, and so cruelly without mercy and pity spoiled
the country, and slew the people, that the Emglishmen were brought to most
extreme and unspeakable misery: and Egelrede the king driven to fly with
his wife and children to Richard duke of Normandy, leaving the whole kingdom
to be possessed of Swain.

Edward the second of that name, Stow. chron. Phil Com.
may well be placed in this rank, for though he was fair and well
proportioned of body, yet he was crooked and evil favored in conditions, for
he was so disposed to lightness and vanity, that he refused the company of
his Lords and men of honor, and haunted among villains and vile persons; he
delighted in drinking and riot, and loved nothing less than to keep secret
his own counsels though never so important, so that he let the affairs of
his kingdom run at six and at seuens: to these vices he added the familiarity
of certain evil disposed fellows, as Pierce de Gaueston, and Hugh the
Spencers; whose wanton counsel he following, neglected to order his
Commonwealth by sadness, discretion and justice, which thing caused first
great variance betwixt him and his nobles, so that shortly he became to them
most odious, and in the end was deprived of his kingdom: for the Scots that
were so curbed in his fathers days, now played reakes through his negligence,
and made many irruptions into his land, killing and discomfiting his men at
three sundry battles: besides Charles of France did him much scath upon his
lands in Gascoin and Guyan, and at last Isabell his own wife with the help of
Sir John of Henault and his Henowaies (to who^ the nobles and commons gave
their assistance) took him and deprived him of his crown, installed his young
son Edward in his place, keeping him in prison at Barteley, where not long
after he was murdered by Sir Roger Mortimer.

CHAP. LXVII. How rare and geason good Princes have been at all times.
IT appears by all these former histories, what a multitude there has been of
dissolute, proud, cruel, and vicious princes, and of tyrants and oppressors,
so that the number of good and virtuous ones seems to have been but small in
comparison of them: which is also intimated by the tenor of the histories of
the kings of Judah and Israel, of whom (being in number forty) but ten only
were found that pleased God in their reigns, and they of Judah; and yet of them
ten, one was corrupted in his old age, and fell away to vile iniquities: but of
Israel, there was not one that demeaned not himself evil in his estate, and
dealt not unjustly and wickedly before the Lord: as for the first Emperors what
manner of me^ they were for the most part, we have already sufficiently
declared. Wherefore it was not unfitly spoken of him that jesting wise told the
Emperor Claudius, that all the good Caesar's might be engraue^ in one little ring
they were so few: so that the^ a king or prince endued with virtue, bounty, and
cleme^cy, and that loves his subjects, ends strifes and kindles concord, is
an especial note of Gods favor, and a gift inestimable; and that people that
have such a prince for their support and stay, are infinitely blessed; they lie
as it were upon a sunny bank, and ride in a most safe and quiet haven, whilst
other are exposed and laid open to the cruelty of time, and are tossed and
turmoiled with the waves of calamity and oppression; therefore this may be their
song of mirth and reioicing, whilst other nations sing nothing but welladaies.

A sad afflicted soul all pale with grief and wrong,
Being easd from sense of dole, does straightway change his song
From moan to mirth; for why, his thick and cloudie night
Is turned to purity of T^tans glorious light.
The raging storm is past, and fear of shipwreck gone,
Their weary ships at last a calmy shore have won.
The pilot safely lies reposed under lee,
Not fearing frown of skies or other misery.
The strong and mighty blast of furious winds are still,
They do no more down cast huge firr trees at their will:
A pleasant gale succeeds of fruitful Zephirus,
Which recreates the seeds of spring voluptuous.
Pack hence you wicked ones with all your equipage
Of murdering champions enuenomed with rage:
Your horse are tired with toil and all your strengths plucked down,
Your swords have caught a foil by lovely peaces crown.
O blessed glorious peace (that beautifiest each land,
And make all dangers cease whereof in fear we stand)
Distill thy favors pure (which are immortal things)
On us that lie secure in shadow of thy wings.
Even those thy holy train which still attendance yield,
Let them wax young again and flourish in our field:
Justice and verity which balance right from wrong,
Let them attend on thee with equity among.
Then shall the Swains rejoice under a figtree lien,
And sing with cheerful voice until the suns decline:
And all the world shall ring with echoes of our praise,
Which to the Lord our king we warble out always.
The simple harmless lamb no greedy wolf shall fear,
Nor kid new weaned from dam shall stand in awe of bear:
But sheep and wolf shall make like friends one flock and fold,
A fearelesse child shall take the rule of tygres old.
You flocks of Sion hill which through so many fears
Of war and crosses, still have sown your field with tears,
Take comfort to your hope, straight comes the ioifull hour,
To reap a fruitful crop for all your torments sour.
But alas it comes to pass through the sins and wickedness of men, that
realms are oftentimes scarred with the alarmes and assaults of foes, and
strangely afflicted with many evils, Esaias. 3.
when as the state of government is troubled and changed by the iniquities of
the people.

CHAP. XLVIII. That the greatest and mightiest cities are not exempt from
punishment of their iniquities.
WHereas great and populous cities are as it were the eyes of the earth (as
Athens and Sparta were said to be of Greece) there is no question but that they
are so much the more blameable for glutting and ouercharging themselves with
sins, by how much the more they abound with temporable goods and commodities,
and that at length they tumble into utter ruin and desolation; for in steed of
being a pattern and direction unto others of wisdom and good government, as
they ought, they are for the most part examples of folly and vanity: for where
is there more evils and dissoluteness reigning, than in them? the principal
cause whereof is that greedy worm Avarice, which begets in all estates much
fraud, coosening, and other naughty practices, with many such like children:
for through it every man looks to provide for his own affairs, and to get
any commodity or ease whatsoever to himself, even with all his power, not
caring who be damnified so he be enriched: the plenty of riches which there
abounds, instilleth pride and haughtiness of mind into some, makes others
dissolute and effeminate, and besotteth others with carnal and dishonest
pleasures; from which head, spring rivers of evils, as enuies, quarrels,
dissension, debates, and murders, all which things happen to the^ that being
transported and distracted with the furious contrariety of their disordinate
affection, can find no contentment nor agreement with themselves, but must
needs burst out into some outward mischiefs: hence is that wonderful pomp
and bravery, as well of aparrell as other things: hence all gourmandise and
drunkenness are so common, yea and adulteries so much frequented: wherefore
the anger of the almighty must needs be kindled, to consume the^ in their sins.

One of the notablest cities of the world for greatness and antiquity was
Niniue, the capital and chief city of the Assyrian Empire, howbeit her
greatness and power could not so protect her, but that after she had once been
spared by the means of the Prophet Jonas, who foretold her of her destruction,
being returned to her former vomit again, to wit, of robberies, extortions,
wrongful dealings and adulteries, she was wholly and utterly subverted, God
having delivered her for a prey into the hands of many of her enemies, that
spoiled and pilled her to the quick; and lastly into the hands of the Medes,
who brought her to a final and unrecoverable desolation, as it was prophesied
by the prophet Nahum.

Babylon was wont to be the seat of that puissant monarchy under
Nabuchadnezzar, where flourished the famous Astrologers and notable wise men of
the world, where the spoils and riches of many nations and countries were set
up as trophies and kept as the remembrance of their victories, where also vices
reigned, and al manner of excess and villainy ouerflowed: Lib. 5. of the acts
of Alexander.
for by the report of Q. Curtius the city did so exceed in whoredom and
adulteries, that fathers and mothers were not ashamed to be bauds unto their
daughters, no nor husbands to their wives, a thing most strange and odious;
Oros. lib. 2.
wherefore it could not choose but in the end to be sacked and quite destroyed
with an extreme ruin and destruction, Paul. Jou. com. 2. lib 33.
the signs and and appearance whereof yet are seen in the ruin of old walls
and ancient buildings that there remain.

Amongst sea-bordring cities, and for renown of merchandise, Tire in former
ages was most famous, for thither resorted the merchants of al countries for
traffic of Palestina, Siria, Egypt, Persia, and Assyria; they of Tarshis
brought thither iron, lead, brass, and silver; the Sirians sold their
Carbuncles, purple, brodered work, fine linen, corrall, and pearl; the Jews
honey oil, triacle, Cassia, and Calamus; the Arabians trafficked with lambs
muttons, and goats; the Sabeans brought merchandise of all exquisit spices and
apothecary stuff, with gold and precious stones; by means where^^ it being
grown exceeding wealthy, enriched by fraud and deceit, and being lifted up to
the height of pride and plunged in the depth of pleasures, it was at length by
the just judgment of God so sacked and ruinated, Sabel.
that the very memory thereof at this day scarce remains.

The like judgment fell upon Sidon, and upon that rich and renowned city of
Corinth, which through the co^modiousnes of the haven was the most frequented
place of the world for the intercourse of merchants out of Asia and Europe;
Thuciaides.
for by reason of her pride and corruption of manners (but especially for her
despising and abuse of thy heavenly graces of Gods spirit) which were sowed and
planted in her, Contempt of the word. lib. 1. cap. 34. Eutrop. Oros. lib. 9.
she under went this punishment, to be first finally destroyed, and brought
into cinders by the Romans; and then after her reedification, to be debased
into so low and vile an estate, that that which remains is no wise comparable
to her former glory.

Again Athens the most flourishing and famous city of Greece for her fair
buildings, large precincts and multitude of inhabitants, but especially for her
philosophy, by means whereof recourse was made from all parts to her as the
fountain and welspring of arts, and the school and university of the whole
world: whose policy and manner of government was so much esteemed by the
Romans, that they drew from thence their laws, but now she lies dead and buried
in forgetfulness, not carrying any of her former proportion or appearance.

Carthage that noble city, mistress of Africa, and Paragon to Rome, may not
brag of any better issue than her fellows: for though she resisted and made
her part good with Rome for many years, yet at length by means of her own
inward and civil iars, she was utterly destroyed by the^; for the inahbitants
not able to stand any longer in defense, Oros. Eutrop.
were constrained to yield themselves to the mercy of their enemies: the women
to the number of 25 thousand marching first forth, and after the^ the me^ in
number 30 thousand following, al which poor captives were sold for bondslaues,
a few only of the principal excepted, and then fire was put to the city, Eutrop.
which burnt 17 days without ceasing, eue^ till it was clean consumed. It is
true that it was reedified after this, but which lasted not long, for it was
again brought to destruction, that at this day there remains nothing but old
and rotten ruins, and thus fared many other cities, Nunc seges est vbi Troia
fuit.
of which may be verified that which was spoken of Troy, that fields and corn
are where cities were.

Numantium in Spain being besieged by the Romans after it had borne the brunt
of war and sacking, a long while made many desperate sallies upon their
enemies, and lastly seeing themselves consumed with famine, rather tha^ they
would bow their necks to the yoke of servitude, barring their gates, set fire
on all; and so burning themselves with their whole city, left the enemy
nothing but ashes for his prey and triumph: Titus Liuiu^.
as the Saguntines not long before served Anniball.

It is a marvelous and strange thing to consider, how that proud city has
lifted up her head above all others, and usurped a tyranny over nations; and
which Lactantius, Hierom, Rome he means.
and Augustine, three learned fathers entitled Babylon, how I say she has
been humbled for all her pride, and empouerished for all her riches and made a
prey unto many nations. It was sacked and ransacked twice by the Visigothes,
taken once by the Herulians, surprised by the Ostrogothes, destroyed and rooted
up by the Vandales, annoied by the Lumbards, pilled and spoiled by the
Grecians, and whipped and chastised by many others; and now like Sodom and
Gomorra it is to expect no more punishment, but the last blow of the most
mightiest his indignation to throw it headlong into everlasting and horrible
desolation.

CHAP. XLIX. Of such punishments which are common to all men in regard of their
iniquities.
THese and such like effects of Gods wrath ought to admonish and instruct every
man to look unto himself for doing evil, and to abhor and detest sin, since
it brings forth such sour and bitter fruits; for albeit the ways of the
wicked seem in their own eyes fair and good, Prou. 22.
yet it is certain that they are full of snares and thorns to entrap and
prick them to the quick: for after that being fed with the licourous and
deceitful sweetness of their own lusts, they have sported themselves their
fills in their pleasures and wicked affections; then instead of delights and
pastimes, they shall find nothing but punishment and sadness: their laughter,
joy, pomp, magnificence and glory shall be turned into torments and dolors,
weepings, opprobries, ignominies, confusion and misery everlasting: for if God
spared not great cities, Empiers, monarchies, and kings in their obstinate
misdeeds, shall we think he will spare little cities, hamlets, and villages,
and men of base estate, when by their sins, they provoke him to anger? No it
cannot be, for God is always of one and the same nature, always like unto
himself: A God executing justice and judgment upon the earth; Ierem. 9. Psalm.
5.
A God that loves not iniquity, with whom the wicked cannot dwell, nor the
fools stand before his presence. It is he that hates the workers of
unrighteousness, and that destroieth the liers, and abhors all deceitful,
disloiall, periurous and murdering persons, as with him there is no acception
of persons, so none of what estate or condition soever, be they rich or poor,
noble or ignoble, gentle or carterlike, can exempt themselves from his wrath
and indignation when it is kindled but a little, Romans 2.9.
if they delight and continue in their sins; for as S. Paul says,
Tribulation and anguish is upon the soul of every man that does evil.

Now according to the variety and diversity of men's offenses, the Lord in his
most just and admirable judgment, uses diversity of punishments: sometimes
correcting them one by one in particular, other whiles altogether in a heap;
sometimes by storms and tempests both by sea and land, other times by
lightning, hail, and deluge of waters; often by ouerflowing and breaking out
of rivers, and of the sea also; and not seldom by remediless and sudden
fires, heaven and earth and all the elements being armed with an invincible
force, to take vengeance upon such as are traitors and rebels against God:
sundry times he scourges the world (as it well deserves) with his usual and
accustomed plagues, namely of war, and famine, and pestilence, which are
evident signs of his anger, according to the threats denounced in the law
touching the same: and therefore if at any time he defer the punishment of the
wicked, it is for no other end, but to expect the fullness of their sin, and
to make them more inexcusable, when contrary to his bountifulness and long
suffering (which inuiteth and calls them to repentance) they harden
themselves and grow more obstinate in their vices and rebellion, drawing upon
their heads the whole heap of wrath the more grievously to assail them. And
thus the vengeance of God marches but a soft pace (as says Valerius Maximus)
to the end to double and aggrauate the punishment for the slacknesse thereof.

CHAP. L. That the greatest punishments are reserved and laid up for the wicked
in the world to come.
NOtwithstanding all which has been spoken, and howsoever sinners are punished
in this life, yet is certain, that the greatest and terriblest punishments are
kept in store for them in another world: and albeit that during this transitory
pilgrimage, they seem to themselves often times to live at their ease, and
enjoy their pleasures and pastimes to their hearts contentment: yet doubtless
it is so, that they are indeed in a continual prison, and in a dungeon of
darkness, bound and chained with fetters of their own sin, and very often
turmoiled and butchered with their own guilty conscience, ouercharged with
the multitude of offenses, and forefeeling the approach of hell: and in this
case many languish away with care, fear, and terror, being toiled and tired
with incessant and vnsupporrable disquietnesse, and tossed and distracted with
despair, until by death they be brought unto their last irreuocable
punishment: which punishment is not to endure for a time and then to end, but
is eternal and everlastingly inherent both in body and soul: I say in the
body, after the resurrection of the dead; and in soul, after the departure
out of this life till all eternity: for it is just and equal that they which
have offended and dishonored God in their bodies in this life, should be
punished also in their bodies in the world to come with endless torments: of
which torments, when mention is made in the holy scripture, they are for our
weak capacity sake called gehenna, or a place of torment, utter darkness and
hell fire, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth, etc: again, eternal
fire, a poole and pit of fire and brimstone, which is prepared for the devil
and his darlings: and how miserable their estate is that fall therein, our
Savior Christ gives us to know in the person of the rich glutton, Luke 16.
who having bathed himself in the pleasures and delights of this world,
without once regarding or pitying the poor, was after death cast into the
torments of hell, and there burns in quenchlesse flames without any ceasing
or allaying of his griefs: therefore whatsoever punishments the wicked suffer
before they die, they are not quitted by them from this other, but must descend
into the appointed place to receive the surplus of their paiments which is due
unto them: for what were it for a notorious and cruel tyrant that had
committed many foul and wicked deeds, or had most villanously murdered many
good men, to have no other punishment but to be slain, and to endure in the
hour of death some extraordinary pain; could such a punishment balance with
his so many and great offenses? whereas therefore many such wretches suffer
punishment in this world, we must think that it is but a taste and a scantling
of those torments and punishments which are prepared and made ready for them
in the world to come. And therefore it often comes to pass, that they pass
out of this life most quietly without the disturbance of any cross or
punishment; but it is, that they might be more strangely tormented in another
world. Some not considering this point, nor stretching the view of their
understanding beyond the aspect of their carnal eyes, have fallen into this
foolish opinion, to think that there is neither justice nor judgment in
heaven, nor respect of equity with the highest: when they see the wicked to
flourish in prosperity, and the good and innocent to be overwhelmed with
adversity, yea and many holy men also have fallen into this temptation, as Job
and David did, Job. 12. and 21. Psalm. 73.
who when they considered the condition of the wicked and unjust, how they
lived in this world at their hearts ease, compassed about with pleasures and
delights, and waxing old in the same, were carried to their sepulchers in
peace, they were somewhat troubled and perplexed within themselves, until
being instructed and resolved by the word of God, they marked their fina^^end
and issue, and the everlasting perdition which was pr^^^^ for them, and by no
means could be escaped. And thus it comes to pass (says S. Augustine) that
many sins are punished in this world, Epist. 5^.
that the providence of God might be more apparent; and many, yea most reserved
to be punished in the world to come, that we might know that there is yet
judgment behind.

CHAP. LI. How the afflictions of the godly, and punishments of the wicked
differ.
WHich seeing it is so, it is necessary that the wicked and perverse ones
should feel the rigor of Gods wrath for the presumption and rebellion
wherewith they daily provoke him against them: and although with those that
fear God, and strive to keep themselves from evil, and take pains to live
peaceably and quietly, it often times goes worse here below than with others,
being laid open to millions of injuries, reproaches, and cruelties, and are as
it were sheep appointed to the slaughter; whereof some are massacred, some
hanged, some hedded, some drowned, some burned, or put to some other cruel
death: yet notwithstanding their estate and condition is far happier than
that of the wicked, for so much as all their sufferings and adversities are
blessed and sanctified unto them of God, who turns them to their advantage,
according to the saying of S. Luke, Romans 8.28.
That all things work for the good to them that fear God: for whatsoever
tribulation befalls them, they cannot be separated from the love of God,
which he bears unto them in his well beloved son Christ Jesus: be it then
that God visits them for their faults (for there is none that is clear of
sin) it is a fatherly chastisement, to bring them to amendment: be it that he
exercises them by many afflictions, as he did Job, it is to prove their faith
and patience, to the end they may be better purified like gold in the furnace,
and serve for examples to others. If it be for the truth of the Gospel that
they suffer, then they are blessed, because they are conformed to the image of
the son of God, that they might also be partakers of his glory, for they that
suffer with him, are assured to reign with him: hence it is, that in the midst
of their torments and oppressions, in the midst of fires and fagots flaming
about them, being comforted with the consolations of Gods spirit through a
sure hope of their happy repose and incorruptible crown which is prepared for
them in the heavens, they rejoice and are so cheerful: contrariwise the
wicked, seeing themselves ensnared in the evils which their own sins brought
upon them, gnash their teeth, fret themselves, murmr against God, and
hlaspheme him, like wretches, to their endless perdition. There is therefore
great difference betwixt the punishments of each of these, for the one tends
to honor and life, the other to shame and confusion: and even as it is not the
greatness of torments that makes the martyr, but the goodness of the cause; so
the infliction of punishment unjustly, neither makes the party afflicted
guilty, nor any whit diminishes his reputation: whereas the wicked that are
justly tormented for their sins, are so marked with infamy and dishonor,
that the stain thereof can never be wiped out.

Let every one therefore learn to keep himself from evil, and to contain
himself in a kind of modesty and integrity of life, seeing that by the
plagues and scourges wherewith the world is ordinarily afflicted, Gods fierce
wrath is clearly revealed from heaven upon all impiety and injustice of men,
to consume all those that rebel against him. Think upon this you inhabitants
of the earth, small and great, of what quality or condition soever you be.

If you be mighty, puissant, and fearful, know that the Lord is greater tha^
you; for he is almighty, all-terrible, and al-feareful; in what place soever
you are, he is always above you, ready to hurl you down and ouerturne you,
to break, quash, and crush you in pieces as pots of earth; he is armed with
thunder, fire, and a bloody sword to destroy, consume, and cut you in pieces:
heaven threatens from above, and the earth which you trample on from below,
shaking under your feet, and being ready to spue you out from her face, or
swallow you up in her bowels: in brief, all the elements and creatures of God
look a skew at you in disdain, and set themselves against you in hatred, if
you fear not your Creator your Lord and Master, Esai. 40.
of whom you have received your scepters and crowns, and who is able (when he
please) to bring princes to nothing, and make the rulers of the earth a thing
of naught: Forsake therefore if you tender the good, honor, and repose of your
selves and yours; the evil and corrupt fashions of the world, and submit your
selves in obedience under the scepter of Gods law and gospel, fearing the just
retribution of vengeance upon all them that do the contrary; Heb. 10.31.
for it is a horrible thing to fall into the hands of the Lord. And you which
honor and reverence God already, be now more quickened and stirred up to his
love and obedience, and to a more diligent practicing of his will and following
his commandments, to the end to glorify him by your lives, looking for the
happy end of your hope reserved in the heavens for you by Christ Jesus our
Lord, to whom be glory everlastingly, Amen.

A Table of all the principal points contained in the first and second Book.
AS touching the corruption and peruersitie of this World, how great it is.
Page 1 What the cause is of the great overflow of Vice in this age. Page 3 That
great men which will not abide to be admonished of their faults can not escape
punishment at Gods hand. Page 5 How all men both by the law of God and Nature,
are inexcusable in their sins. Page 9 How the greatest monarchs that are in the
world ought to be subject to the law of God, and consequently the laws of man
and of nature. Page 12 Of those that persecuted Christ and his Church, and
their issues. Page 18 Of those that in our age have persecuted the Gospel in
the person of the faithful. Page 45 Of Apostataes and Backsliders, that
thorough infirmity have fallen away. Page 59 Of those which have willingly
fallen away. Page 66 Of Apostataes through Malice. Page 70 Of Heretics. Page
95 Of Hypocrites. Page 106 Of Coniurers and Enchanters. Page 113 Of those that
through pride and vainglory, strove to usurp the honor due unto God. Page
125 Of Epicures and Atheists. Page 139 Touching transgressors by Idolatry. Page
1^9 Of many evils that have come upon Christendom for Idolatry. Page 153 Of
those that corrupted and mingled Gods religion with humane inventions, or went
about to disquiet the discipline of the Church. Page 157 Of Periurers. Page 160
Of Blasphemers. Page 174 Of those that by cursing and denying God, give
themselves wholly to the devil. Page 179 Punishments for the contempt of the
word and Sacraments: and the abuse of holy things. Page 189 Of those that
profane the Sabbath day. Page 193
The second Book.
OF rebellious and stubborn children toward their parents. Page 199 Of those
that rebel against their Superiors. Page 211 Of such as have murdered their
rulers or princes. Page 225 Of such as have rebelled against their Superiors,
because of subsidies and taxes imposed upon them. Page 230 Of Murderers. Page
236 Their seuarall punishments. Page 262 Of Paricides or parent murderers. Page
271 Of Subject murderers. Page 27^ Of those that are both cruel and disloiall.
Page 288 Of Queens that were murderers. Page 292 Of such as without necessity
or confe^^^e, upon every light cause, move (...) Page 294 (...) please
themselves overmuch (...) cruelties. Page 298 (...) ^xercise too much rigor and
^^^^tie. Page 302 (...) ^^^erers. Page 305 Of Rapes. Page 307 ^^^aples of Gods
Judgments upon Adulterers. Page 316 That Stews ought not to be suffered
amongst Christians. Page 318 Of whoredoms committed under the color of
Marriage. Page 321 Of unlawful marriages, and their issues. Page 323 Touching
incestuous marriages. Page 327 Of Adultery. Page 330 Of such as are divorced
without cause. Page 350 Of those that either cause or authorize unlawful
diuorcements. Page 354 Of Incestuous persons. Page 356 Of effeminate persons,
Sodomites, and other such like monsters. Page 359 Of the wonderful evils
arising from this greediness of lust. Page 363 Of unlawful gestures,
Idleness, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Daunsing, and other such like
dissoluteness. Page 365 Of Thieves and Robbers. Page 376 Of the excessive
burdenings of the Comminaltie. Page 386 Of those that have used too much
cruelty toward their subjects in Taxes and Exactions. Page 389 Of such as by
force of arms have taken away, or would have taken away, the goods and lands
of other men. Page 397 Of Usurers, and their theft. Page 411 Of such as have
been notorious in all kind of sin. Page 421 Of calumniation and false
witness bearing. Page 444 That kings and princes ought to look to the
execution of Justice, for the punishment of naughty and corrupt manners. Page
451 Of such princes as have made no reckening of punishing vice, nor regarded
the estate of their people. Page 456 How rare and geason good princes have
been at all times. Page 460 That the greatest and mightiest princes are not
exempt from punishment for their iniquities. Page 462 Of such punishments which
are common to all men in regard of their iniquities. Page 466 That the greatest
punishments are laid up for the wicked in the world to come. Page 467 How the
afflictions of the godly, and the punishments of the wicked differ. Page 470
Finis.

