THE MYSTERY OF MANKIND, Made into a Manual, OR THE PROTESTANTS Portuize,
reduced into Explication Application, Invocation, tending to Illumination,
Sanctification, Devotion, being the sum of seven Sermons, Preached at S.
Michaels in Cornehill, London. By William Lo, Doctor of Divinity, Chaplain to
his sacred Majesty, and Pastor Elect, and allowed by autho^ity of Superiors of
the English Church at Hamborough in Saxony.

1 Cor. 3. 23. All are yours, and ye Christ's, and Christ God. LONDON, Printed
by Bernard Alsop for George Fayerbeard, and are to be sold at his shop at the
North side of the Exchange. 1619.

TO THE MOST CATHOLIC and most Christian Monarch, JAMES, by Gods especial
appointment of great B^ittaine, France and Ireland* King, Defendor of the faith.
DRead Sovereign. The blessed company of holy ones, that household of faith,
that Spouse of Christ, and Church of the living God (which is the pillar and
ground of all truth) is so grievously gastered, and so continually infested
with hellish Athisme, misled Papisme, and misperswaded Separa^isme, especially
in these last and worst ages of the world, that had not God of his exuberant
mercies, set up your Highness among us, for a blessing, as another Joshua to
succeed Moses, and as another Solomon, to sit upon the throne of David, to the
supportatio^ of the Church of England. It is verily believed of many wise, and
iuditious, that the doctrinall principles of Christian Religion, had not only
been sore-shaken within your Majesty's Realms (as they are to the
hearts-griefe of many thousands among your bordering neighbors) but also a
most woeful and lamentable distraction, Witness the Remonstrants monstrous
opinions in West-Freezeland*
and open division, would before this time have broken forth to to the utter
ruin, and razing of the very foundations of the blessed peace, and
established discipline of the church, within these your Majesty's Territories.

But magnified for ever be our God, who has remembered us in mercy, and has
directed your Majesty's royal and enlarged heart, not only to take care of
things, Quae sunt ante pedes: but also, amidst other your Highness many and
manifold cares of your most Christian government, long prospicere, as to have
an eye what manner of growth your Seminaries of Merchants have beyond the Seas,
at Hamborough, Middleborough, and other places; for as much as they are the men
in all likelyhoode, who are to be of your Majesty's great Chamber, the City
of London, and to sit near about the Stern in future ages.

Therefore (most dread Sou^raigne) It being almost a whole year sithence I was
by the worthy and ancient Company of Merchant-Aduenturers elected and by the
most reverend Archbishop of Canterbury allowed to be Pastor of the English
Church at Hamborough. I thought it my bounden duty before I departed, and in
some part of recompense for my long stay to leave behind me a token of that
service, o^seruance, duty, love, and alleagia^ce, which I owe unto your
Majesty, and unto the Church of England, wheresoever the Lord di^pose^h of me.

The doctrine and discipline of which Church, I shall endeavor to maintain (
pro modulo meo) even to my last breath, and think my self an happy m^n, to be
the son of so famous and Christian a Catholic Church. Some of the compilers
of whose devout Letu^gie have shed their blood for the testimony of the Lord
Jesus, which blood I have always thought to be the best blood in the world.
Bonus sanguis non mentitur.
A measure of which model of mine, I here humbly prostrate at your Highness
feet, heartily beseeching Almighiy God to preserve your Highness, and your
most royal seed, to be glorious instruments of his Church, and to crown your
Majesty, and your Princely Progeny with his saving mercies in Christ Jesus.

Your Majesty's most humble s^ruant. and Subject, WILL: LO.

1 TIMOTHY 3. 16.
Without controversy, Great is the mystery of Godliness, God manifested in
the flesh, Justified in the Spirit, S^ene of Angels, Preached unto the
Gentiles, Believed on in the world, and received up in glory.

A PREFACE OF Pacification to all Christian Tearmers and Travelers, from the
reverend Judge Itinerant, Justice of Oier, and Determiner, unto the poorest
Clyent that iournyeth within the four seas of Great Britain, Mercy be
multiplied in Christ Jesus:
BLessed, and beloved in the Lord, (for I cannot give you a more honorable
title if I should study to give you ten thousand be of what rank or condition
your will.) Hearken. Upon the Lords day, being the third day after our
Saviors sufferings, two disciples traveling from Jerusalem to a village
called Emaus as they walked on their way, they talked of Jesus. And as they
thus communed, Jesus himself drew near, and went with them, Luc. 24. 13.
and afterward questioning with them, opened unto them the Scriptures tarries
with them, sits witb them, blesses their meat, eats with them, gives them a
super substantial blessing, for he opens their eyes, and they, know him. A
perf^t president for you, beloved in the Lord, and a blessed direction as you
tra^aile, for we aree all Viatores, look as big as we will; not
comprehensores; if we have company to conf^rre and talk of the Lord Jesus,
for you see if you be but two in company he will make the third, if you
commune concerning him in fear and reverence, yea your conference shall not
be fruitless. For what is the sequel? Eu^n knowledge of the holy Scriptures,
they shall be opened upon such conference, Christ his comfortable company by
the holy Ghost will be affoorded, for albeit according to his Es^e Natural, he
is in heaven; yet secundum esse personale he is every where, by his breath and
favor in his chosen. Moreover, he will sit with you upon the throne of
Justice, to direct your hearts aright, you shall partake of his blessings with
healtb and salvation: he will bless you in your store, he will enlighten
your minds, incline your wills rec^ify your desires, and you shall know him whom
to know is eternal l^fe.

For this cause I have often bowed the knees of my heart unto the God of heaven
for you all, and have presumed to reduce the sum of all into this little
Manual, as the Protestants portuize to carry in his hand, in his bosom, and
to accompany him in your travels, as Paul had his parchments with him, which
casually he left at Troas, and whereof it seemed he had an especial care. Let
not the prudent Judge disdain or despise that I become his remembrancer, for
the time is come that we must look to our Christian principles, seeing many
are gone so far to question long received truths in the spirit of subtlety
and error, as if the Metempsycosis of the Pythagorists were revived, and the
soul of John Duns Scotus were entered into the bodies of suruiuing scholars,
to trouble the world with nicities, and to lose themselves in miserable
extrauagant wanderings. It was a good rule therefore that Irenaeus gave, That we
should diligently heed never to be transported beyond the limits of
Doctrinall Principles, which indeed is a gloss of that of the Apostle, Sapere
ad sobrietatem. The jolly Counceller that learnedly argues titles of land,
pleas of debt, damages of clyent, and cause, may hereby be counseled to call
to mind what claim, or challenge he has to heaven, what plea he ought to
make for his own debt, which he owes to his Creator, and if the damnage or
wrong of his Clyent were his own, what plea, what care, what diligence would
^e use to redres himself. The disturbed, yea often times the poor miserable
distracted Clyent, that is delayed, crossed, encumbred, snibbed, and many times
ouerborne, may herewithall endeavor to qualify and settle his wearyed and
perplexed heart and look up unto the master of requests in heaven, and to
refer his cause unto the Judge of the world Christ Jesus who judges
righteously. And if his cause go well with him, yet hereby h^e may be caused
to remember in what pass his case is with God, and to know who it is that lets
a man see his desire upon his enemies.

All what soever they be, if they will be pleased to be advised, may herein see
(as in a view) what Creation is, that tends to salvation. And so to abandon
from their holy intentions all needelesse controversies, and fruitless
contentions, according to the reference of the prefixed context.

For the lamentable Controversies about Religious Godliness, An abridgement of
controversies. raised from the word of the Context, (...), rendered without
controversy.
are so many in number, and so intr^cate in nature, that the studious labors
of any one man (were he never so well qualified) cannot sufficiently (no not
all the time of his life) so much as enter into all the ambiguous laborinths
thereof, much less be ever able to compose, or conclude them. For it falls
out in this kind, as it does in the quirks and quiddities of law cases, and
that's a thousand pitties, for the more lawyers retained often times the more
suites, pleas, counter pleas, demurrers in Law, and many other such like quaint
devises so the morewriting of controversies, the more subtil^ies, euasions,
distinctions, personal aspersions, mistakings with all maleuolent stirrings,
and striuings to make good either part. Such also has been the rotten
condition of mankind, that when one has once hatched, and brought forth
never so absured an opinion, yet he finds wits in the world ready to devise
tricks and shifts by nice distinctions, and doubt full differences to
mainetaine withal possible glosses the absurdities, and shadows thereof.
Besides, if we consider the impossibility of composing, and reconciling the
controversies of the setimes, by reason of the auerse, and settled resistance of
the opponents, both foraine and domestic, together with the irreconciliable
natures of the things controuerted, and questioned, and the little hope of any
means to be expected either from them that strive, or from others their
wellwishing neighbors, or from both to reconcile, and pacify the furiousrage
of either party, we may even despair of expecting any certain and settled
end of these miseries, until the Lord Jesus come himself from heaven in his
second and most glorious aduent, and Consume with the spirit of his mouth all
the gaynesayers and impostors of his sacred truth, and abolish with brightness
of his coming all the mistie fogges of misperswasion and mis-beleefe.

Doubtless therefore in the mean while, the best, and most assured way for us
(that love, and look, and long for Christ's coming) to find rest to our
distressed souls amidst such perplexed distractions and laborinths, is, to
have recourse to the pillar and foundation of all Christian faith, the director
to heaven, which is the written word of God, the one and only way to the word
begotten, wherein, many places we shall find couched in in few words the
sum and substance of all our hope, and happiness in Christ, both in nature
grace, and glory, and that sum of Christianity in so compendious an
abridgment often times reported, that the shortest memory may recount it, and so
plainly set down that the weakest capacity may conceive it. Such is this
Scripture prefixed, in which as in a running stream in some place the Elephant
may swim for deepenes, and in other the Lamb may wade for shall ownesse.

Leaving therefore behind us the hellish afronting of all Godliness to the
damned Athiest, that says in his heart, There is no God, which some Achrists of
Spain (I would they were not in England) most Lucian-like, and Iulian-like
have terms to the grief of many good hearts their Peccadillos, or little
sin, and appropriating the circular Divinity of Temporizers-who go in a Maze
to painted Hypocrites, Who are ever learning, and never come to the
acknowledgement of the Truth, because they feel not the power thereof, nor
endeavor to practice it together with all, neutralizing staggerers, and
Cassandrian Courtiers, who neither cleave to God, nor to Baal, but are like
Ephraim, a cake on the harth not turned, which needs must be dough on the one
side, and burnt on the other, hot in their singed zeal, and lue warm in their
fringed hypocrisy, and lastly, abandoning from us all novel sectaries, who
either with the ^nostiques and Donatists challenge to themselus an
impropriation of all reformed doctrine and discipline, or with the Cathari
boast of a Monopoly of perfect sincerity, or with the rare illuminates of the
world, the Jesuits, Iesuini, Scofiotti, Presbyteri, Sanctae Luciae, Reformati,
Sacerdotes, or by what other titular denominations soever they be termed, who
undertake to have the only direction for all Christendom, in ordine ad Deum,
or with the Capucini, who aspire the only mortification (forsooth) in a
patched Capouch, and with them utterly forsaking all other rabbles, and swarms
of monastical, and secular nominals, who neglect the truth, and the light
thereof, Let us fly homeward with the distressed dove into the Arc, which is
the holy Scriptures to save our selves from the general deluge and cataclisme
of ambiguities, questions and ouerflowings of ungodliness, which assault us
here in this life, the Ocean and sea of sorrow, and hide from us the
brightness of Jesus Christ, with the mists of impiety, and fogs of vanity.

And let us call to mind that all understanding in Godliness is either Opnion
Faith, or perfect Knowledge.

Opinion being like the Twilight, neither certain* nor evident. Faith, as the
dawning, certain but not evident and perfect.

Knowledge as the Sunneshine both certain and evident.

Opinion being the Conduite pipe of all controversies, the mother of heresies,
the seed of schism, and the head of a Fox, and perfect knowledge, only
proper to our triumphant and glorious estate in Heaven: we must here in this
Life walk by faith. This faith must have a foundation to build upon, What Is
that? must it be built on the Church? that's to general: so the Sarazens, or
Hagarens rather (as Zozomene observed a thousand years ago, have their
Masters. Upon the Fathers? that's too rusticall, so the Jews have their
Rabbis. Upon the Pope, that's too Phythagorical? so the Gentiles had their
Philosophers of their several sects, Upon sudden and fancifull revelations,
that's merely Anabaptisticall, God in an engine. Upon what then? Euangelical
Esaias the Lords Prophet tells us, That our faith must be founded upon Gods
Oracle the Scriptures, and Christ the son of God biddes us Search the
Scriptures, and Saint Peter a chief pillar of the Church, says, We shall
do well to heed that certain end of Prophecy, as unto a light that shines
in a darkplace until the day dawne, and the day star arise in our hearts.

But stay, who then shall be judge of the scripture? that our faith may be
settled with judgment: for as much as most Heretics avouch scripture.

Shall Christians judge between Christians in cases of controversy? no they
are too partial, because they are parties. Shall Pagans? no, they are not
capable of holy mysteries, shall Jews? no they are enemies of Christ. What
then? Shall we knock at heaven gates, that Christ Jesus may come down and
decide these doubts, What need that? We have him in the Gospel, says
Cyprian, wherein if we exercise our selves diligently by conferring scripture
with scripture, and expounding according to the Analogy, and rule of our
faith, being guided by the judgment of holy reformed Church, which
acknowledges no other guide, but only the Evangelical and Apostolical
writings, nor any other rock to build upon but Jesus Christ, nor any other
City of refuge, to fly unto then the word of God, which as David says, is a
Lamp unto our paths for our lives and a light, as S. Peter says, in
darkness for our knowledge, a balance for our decision, to weigh the light
from the ponderous, says S. Augustine, a touch stone for our trial, as says
S. Chrysostom, to discern the curre^t from the counterfeite, and in a word as
Constantine in the Nicene counsel, said of all sufficiency for our full
satisfaction, and the only deuoyment of all controversies for our resolution
we shall do well. This being added, that we pray earnestly with David, That
God would open our eyes that we may see the wonders of his Law, Otherwise, they
that are conceyted in their own singularity, and private spirit, either for
doctrine of faith, or direction for manners. Satan stands at their right hand,
and the things that should have been for their good, are occasion of their
falling.

These things being so, what means the cursed malignants of our Church of
England to trouble men's minds with niceties, the breeders of controversies,
whence many monsters of opinion, and thousand of fancies do daily arise, which
entangle the simple in many woeful Laborinthes, as to demand of unsettled
souls, where was your Church hid until of late, some hundred years since?
What Emperor reigned when it came forth? or on what day was it hatched? What
age did the Religion you profess, arise in? What is become of our Forefathers?
These and the like interrogatories are as introductions and preambles to
ensnare and entangle the simple with needless questions, and quiddities. As if
Petrus Valdus Lugdunensis, John Wicleefe, Husse, Luther, and others such
reformers, did at any time endeavor to beget, or set up a new Church,
whereas the truth is, they only diligently labored by the word of God, and by
the power thereof, to reform that Church, which by men's traditions and
deuizes, was most miserably deformed and defaced, and to reduce it to its
former splendour, and integrity. Always saluting that church, though much
deformed by the loving Sister. And doubtless we know many pious and chaste
Matrones, who justly may be ashamed of their own sisters enormious courses,
and exorbitant conditions. Neither did they use any other means in seeking
reformation, but by yielding only, and lamenting said, Oh how is that
faithful City become an harlot? It was full of judgment, and justice lodged
therein, but now they are murderers. Thy silver, O sister, is become dross,
thy wine is mixed with water: For these and the like important consideratio^s
of the great defect, miserable revolt, and dangerous obliquities of those times
they had learned Apostolical counsel, To have no fellowship with such doings,
but to reprove them rather. Were these and their followers then to be
accounted enemies, and to be scornefully branded with the names of Waldenses,
Wicklefia^s, Hussites, Lutherans, and other the like disgraceful terms, as
if they had been Nouelists, because they told the truth, God forbid? George
Cassander the choice divine of his time said well and iuditiously, when he gave
his sentence of the dissentions of the Church, both to Ferdinand and Maximilian
the Emperors, acknowledging that in the beginning many were justly stirred up
by a godly zeal, earnestly to reprove, and reform some apparent abuses in the
church, and that the principal cause of the Churches calamity, and
distraction, was not to be imputed to those who sought reformation, but rather
to such as ruled the stern, who being puffed up with disdain, and scorned to
be rebuked, proudly, and peremptorily despised, and disdayned those that
modestly, meekely, and justly did but admonish and advertise them.

And he thought that there could be no firm, nor constant concord in the
Church, unless they beeganne to reform, who first gave the occasion of
distraction, to wit, that those of the Churches Government must abate their
rough rigor and sternnes, and yield somewhat for the peace of the church, and
by listening to the petitions, and counsels of many godly and well disposed
men, should reform the apparent errors and abuses crept into the church, and
conform them according to the rule of Gods word and the primitive integrity
from which they were in many things declined.

If the case were come to this, who would not embrace that sacred peace of the
church wherewith the angels of heaven congratulated mankind in the
incarnation which Christ left as his legacy to his peculiar people when he
was to forsake the world, and the Apostles as their principal doctrine
enjoined to the Christian Church.

Every one (you say) is ready for peace, but what if we cannot have it? Then
must we make peace as Saint James speaks) by our diligence, by our sufferance.
What if we make peace once, and it depart? Then must we follow peace (as
Paul commands.) What if it abandon us ( Peter wishes us) to seek it, and
ensue it. What if it will not come? (as Abraham's servant said of Rebecca)
after we have sought it and ensued it? Surely then must we study to be
quiet.

For what good Christian is not of worthy Constantines mind, who desired of
God to pass his days free from trouble and vexation. And of Iouians who said
this by chance, touching a queroulous libel of the Macedonians, I hate
contentions and strife, and those that are given to peace and concord, I
dearly love and reverence.

Oh what hellish fury has enraged the malignant Church to stir up strife,
and controversy against us, not only all the day long, but even for time, and
times, even many ages. The Arrians and Circumcellians never more raged against
the Orthodoxe, then Rome has against us.

For behold and see, if there were any damnable heresy of old wherewith they
have not endeavored by all the wit and strength of skill they could to brand us
withal, which is all the issue (for ought I can see) of all these
controversies.

They tearming us Simonians, for once mentioning of grace, and salvation,
Eunomians, and Pepusians, for attributing (as they say) too much unto faith,
and to woman^for that a woman was our dread Sovereign. Originists, and
Proclians for teaching that the Image of God by sin is extinctin man, and that
the fume of concupiscence is not utterly extinct.

Sabellians, Eutichians, Swinkefeldians, yet let the indifferent reader judge
whether we partake in one iota with these heretics? They terms us Donatists;
for admitting the just only into the elect Church of God, Mani^chees, for
abandoning all free will in our selves to work well of our selves.

Arrians, for neglecting humane traditions. Nouatians for refusing Popish
penance. Aetians, for omitting oblations, and feasts for the dead. Iouianists,
for casheering a slippery and perplexed faith. Vigilantians for not admitting
the adoration of relics. Nestorians for not keeping the consecrated hosts.
Xenaits, for abolishing Images. Lampetians for putting from us the bondage of
vows and indeed what not? to to make up a bead-rowle of rablement against. us.

Thus they do fat and please themselves with these, and the like as persions of
slander, and reproach, as if they had vowed never to sacrifice unto their Idol
Jupiter Latialis, Papa Turcissimus, but as the Lindians did to Hercules with
curfning, and raylings. Thus the tongues of our adversaries who hate peace,
has bin a furnace to refine us in.

Besides many cart loades of Pamphlets frought with these and the like
obliques, what rivers of blood: what burnings, both of the living and of the
dead, has the Christian Catholic world in these dissentions of that bloody
and Antichristian Synagogue, bot^ by woeful experience known, and by barbarous
cruelty endured. And have they (think you) who have been neuteralizing
sequestrators taking part on no side, but standing by, and looking on,
endeavoring only a Cassandrian pacification, have they (I say) escaped their
virulencie? Let Cassander himself, Fricius, the Adiaphorists, Interimists, and
the nameles Apologists of France, who have sought peace and an end of
controversies, tell if it has not happened unto them amidst these garboyls, as
it did unto the foolish shepherd, that interposed himself between two rams
furiously raging, and running with all might and violence the one at the other.
Neither suffiseth it to compose these controversies that we admit as absolute
Catholics, the whole sacred book of God, the three Catholic Symboles or
Creedes, to wit, that of the Apostles, that of Athanasius and that of Nice,
eue^ in the very leturgy of our Church together with all the holy divinity
co^prized in the four first general cousels, unless we also receive from
the^ Transsubstantiatio^, Purgatory, and the Popes transcendent supremacy,
with all other novelties hatched from the Conuenticle of Trent, in this dotage
of the world, which strange proiects were then devised, that the holy Fathers
of Italy might no way be inferior to the Apostles, nor the Pope of Rome, to
Christ Jesus himself.

The fire of God says Basil affoordeth light without burning, but hell fire
burns without light. Hell fire therefore is the portion for those that
despise the glorious light of Gods truth, and desire like the Salamander to
noozell themselves in the flames of furious contentions, and continual
contro^er^ies.

But without controversy says the Context, Great is the Mystery of
Godliness. And confessed it is on al hands that unless we believe the Catholic
faith we cannot be saved: a sum whereof is this model of Scripture prefixed.

Let us therefore be wise now at the last to lay aside all distracting
controversies both transmarine and domesticke and let us study to be quiet,
For we see by many woeful experiences what is the miserable issue of calling
in question long received tr^thes.

And how at the first this hellish fire of Contention may be more easily put
out, before it break forth into such scorching flames, as now in fest the
Church of God in West Frizeland.

Oh England be thou wise by the lamentable and woeful example of thy b^rdering
neighbors, and remember that God co^ma^ds love and peace on al hands in
Prince, Peers, Priests and people. It is the new and eleventh commandment
given from mount* Sion as a supplement to the tennefrom mount Sinai: Leuit. 9.
16
nay as their complement: Luc. 6. 31..
for true Evangelical concord and love, Romans 13, 9.
is the fulfilling of the Law. Ioh. 13. 34
See the Patriarch^ love, Abraham yields to Lot. It is indeed no great marvel,
Genesis 13.
says a father, if the servant become any thing for the love of the brethren,
seeing the Lord of life became a curse for the servant. Origin. lib. 7 ad
Shall we not love that which is good and pleasant, Romans 9.
where God promises his blessing, Psalm. 133. 1.
and life for evermore as the Psalmist speaks.

Shall not we detest that which hinders true and clear interpretation of
the Scriptures, that rayseth sects, that gives offense to weak ones, and does
utterly dash and ^uinate all church policy and government? Shall not we hate
that which impeacheth and hinders our valor that we fight not courageously
the Lords battle against Antichrist? Does not the Apostle read us a lecture
in our own bodies of the me^^bers of consent. 1. Cor. 12. 12.
Let us assure our selves that we can never be owners of Christ his seamlesse
coat, if we rend and divide the church of God by needles and fruitles
factions. The harmony of other reformed churches urge us to conformity in our
own if we have grace. And the spirits of all well disposed will ever wish
with Paul, Vtinam abscindantur qui nos inquietant. Gal. 5. 12.
The ignorance also of many thousand who understand not the things
controuerted, no not their names much less their natures does admonish us to
be wise, at the last lest they of Gath and Askalon laugh at our singular
folly. And the degrees of scandal which follow these outrages as unadvised
anger, Mat. 4. 22.
subiecting us to the danger of judgment, 1 Ioh. 3. 15
because we are mansl^yers: mutual hatred making us liable to the censor of a
council, and showing us to be carnal: and mutual detraction cast^g us into
the fire of Gehenna. should deter every honest heart from kindling or
stirring and the least spark either publicly or privately that should
disturb the Churches sacred peace.

Besides the wounding of our own consciences in such garboyles by hindering of
Sit procul a Christi discordia saeua ministris, Namque Deus poterit non nisi
pace coli. Nullalues ouibus tantum, non vlla venena, Quantum pastorum dissidia
ipsa nocent. Phil. Melanct* in Epigram.
our prayers and Preachings in the work of Christ's ministry bids us beware
(if ever we will be warned) of such scandalous courses. For how can we preach
peace, or persuade mutual reconciliation between others, when we our selves
are the firebrands of contention to stir up the coals of factions and sidings
among the poor ignorants. And whiles one says he is Paul's, another says he is
Apollos, are ye not carnal? Let us therefore never listen to, Non ego
Caluimum magnnm nec curo Lutherum, Venus vterque placet, falsus vterque iacet.
This I say, this thou say: but lot us all hear what the Lord says, and
let that (...) be our religious Ephod to put upon us. Let them speak that
have lived in contentious striuings, if in all that time they were not between
the hammer and the Anuelle in eminent peril of being dashed into pieces, and
have been at last constrained for relief to creep into houses, and there
led captive seely women laden with sins, and carried with diverse lusts,
which are ever learning, and never could attain the knowledge of the truth.

Consider therefore Brethren what has been said and God give unto us
understanding in all things that concern our salvation, and Gods peace.

Comm^ne with your own heart, whether the motives that stir you up to
contentions and strifes, weigh more then these directions of Gods Spirit. But
look that you p^ize them by the measures of the Sanctuary, Light of God,
Sight of Faith, Charity, Construction, not by Faction, Singularity, Prejudice:
for doubtless, Mat. 15. 13.
whatsoever our heau^ly Father has not planted, shall be r^oted up.

Thus only seeking hereby to procure the peace of men's Consciences, that they
may with clear sight, behold this mystery of Godliness, and endeavoring the
quiet of the Church, that every holy one may possess his soul in patience. I
shall ever pray to God where ever I am, that the peace of God, may be ever
upon the Israel of God.

Yours much obliged in the Lord Jesus, William Lo.

Errata sic corrigantur.
Page 21. lin. 26. for Tearchers, read Teachers. Page 48 in the mar* ^eade
(...). ibidem. (...). ibid. (...). Pa. 50. 1. 25. for iuslice read justice.
page 59. ma. read (...). page 82. lin. 11. into which I had fallen. page 86.
lin. 1. for Manifested, read was justified. page 114. in the mar. r. Ex. se.
page 126. in the mar. read (...), ibidem for spera^e read spirare. p. 152
line 21. for assist, r. assist us. page 178. l. 25 for would read could. page
184. li. 10. for hae, read he. page 116, for expecting read expect page 206.
l. 26 for Chrst ienioyned read^ Christ enjoined.

Great is the Mystery of Godliness. 1 Timothy 13. 16.
EXPLICATION.
GReat is the misery of mankind, The Lords day Romans 5.
both by original attainder, Psalm. 51.
m^ being conceived, Iac: 1.
bred, Apoc. 21.
and borne in sin; and also by actual transgressions of thought, word, and
deed, whereby man becomes more and more every day the miserable bondslaue of
Sath^^. A figure of this woeful estate was represented unto us in the twofold
bondage of Gods Children, Exodus ^.
the people of Israel, 2* Reg. 23.
the one in the slavery of Egypt, the other, in the captivity of Babylon. Into
the first; the Israelites were plunged in the pers^ of their Ancestors, in
whose loins they descended into Egypt, and were thereby subjected to the
cruelty of Pharaohs tyranny, and needed a delivery to rid them thence. Into
the second, their own actual fresh bleeding sins cast them, for thereby they
provoked God to wrath, who in his just judgment delivered them to the rage and
force of their enemies, who led them away Captive; and in that wretched estate
had they remained, if they had not also from them been graciously delivered.

Semblable was the woeful estate of Mankind, had not Jesus Christ the eternal
Son of God delivered us both from the one and the other. This deliverance of
Mankind, from out this woeful and lamentable condition, whereunto we were
plunged in the loins of Adam originally, and by our own sins actually, is
the greatest mystery that ever the world knew, and is therefore called the
Great mystery of Godliness. For we being now delivered by the life and death
of Christ Jesus, from this original attainder of high treason, and by holy
grace purchased by the power of his Passion, Resurrection, and ascension,
being restored to our blood, and freed from the rule, reign, and rage of
sin, this great misery of mankind, is turned into a great mystery of
Godliness; and we once wretches, and miserable miscreants, are now become good,
godly, and a choice company of holy ones.

This mystery therefore is called the mystery of Gods will; for it is Gods
will we should be good. 2 These. 4, 3:
This is the will of God, Col. 1:
even your Sanctification. Act. 15,
Sometimes it is called the mystery of faith, as the means of becoming good;
for our hearts are purified by faith; otherwise it is a mistie, and misled
faith, that brings not forth goodness. And here it is called the Great
Mystery, as the end of our godly profession, which is the greatest blessing
that ever could come to man, which is our Union with God in Christ, and thereby
life euerl^sting. And assuredly, this Union with Christ, can never be obtained
but by godliness, without the which, no man shall see God.

Great then is this mystery, Heb. 12.
for the Revelation of this opens unto us all other mysteries, and therefore
it is Great.

It shows unto us the mystery of the great Whore Apoc. 17.
the mystery of iniquity, (even the history of the Papacy as noble and*
memorable Philip Morney styles it) which misguideth so many thousand souls,
and plungeth them into the misery of error and ungodliness, even into the
deep darkness of Satan, Apoc. 2.
lewdness of life, and final despair in death. It shows also unto us the
mystery of the last day, which is that, We shall not all dye, but we shall
be all changed, 1 Cor. 15.
and that in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, by Gods last trumpet.

Godliness then is a mystery? yea surely, for it is an hidden and unknown
secret to the wise and prudent, that is, to those that think themselves wise
and are not, and it is a revealed and known mystery to babes, and sucklings:
that is, Mat, 18.
to those that as little children subject and submit themselves to the wise and
learned in God. For he that will be somewhat with God, must be nothing in him
self; Gal. 6,
for, He that thinks himself somewhat, when he is nothing, he deceives
himself.

Godliness is a mystery, because it has been hid with God from the worlds
foundation, who they are that in time should be godly, and should come to the
true knowledge of this mystery. And it is a mystery, because it was not made
known to some ages of the world in full revelation, but was reserved for the
glory and greatness thereof unto the last times, even until the revelation of
Jesus, that the Son of God, whose precious bloudshedding has made so many
holy ones, Sancti ceu sanguine tincti.
in the sight of God the Father. And lastly, it is a mystery, for that it is
even yet hid in Gods just judgment, to them that are lost, 2. Cor. 4.
in whom the god of this world has blinded the minds of them that believe not,
l^st the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God,
should shine unto them.

This sacred mystery is also called Great, both in respect of the matter
thereof, which is marvelous, and in respect of the manner which is miraculous.
The matter marvelous, that we for lorne wretches, and dust creeping worms,
blinded in our own understandings, hardened in our hearts, and infected in our
affections, should ever become coheires with Christ the Son of God, taken out
as a remnant from among all other creatures; which God seemed to pass over,
and to neglect, in respect of us, for God has not communicated this mystery
in such neernesse, no not to the blessed Angels: for, To which of the Angels
said God at any time, Sit on my right hand, Heb* 1.
until I make thine enemies ^hy footestoole.

The manner miraculous, that flesh^ and blood should become such holy servants,
enlightened in their understandings, mollified in their hearts, reformed in all
their desires, yea sanctified throughout, both in spirit, and soul, and body,
and should become such resolute soldiers in Gods battles, upon such hard
terms of intertainement as were proclaimed by Christ to his followers, being
conditions so offensive, and contrariant to the nice nature of men and women:
which were, That if they followed Christ, and would live godly in this present
world, 2 Timothy 3.
they should suffer persecution: they should be hated of all men, Mat. 10.
they should be whipped and murdered, Luc* 6.
yea they should fare as Lambs among Wolves. In a word, their swords of
Revenge, must be ever words of Grace and Edification; their fightings,
patience; their wealth, ofttimes grievous want; their feasting, fasting; their
whole life very miserable in respect of others, they being abridged of many
outward things, and their end, (in the sight of men) ofttimes most lamentable.

Great, therefore doubtless is this mystery of godliness, which (for all
these hard conditions, or whatsoever heresy, schism, apostasy, the world,
the flesh, or the devil, could do to cross it) discerns truth from
falsehood by Evangelical revelation, the effect of Preaching, and by doctrine
the effect of knowledge, which Saint Angustine calls Christian Doctrine, and
by the patient sufferings of Gods Saints in the bloody butcheries and
persecution of the Christian Church.

Great is the mystery of godliness, Ioh* 1.
yea so Great, that God became man, and man became God, that this God-man was
manifested in the flesh, so great was it, that it was justified by the spirit,
both of power and purity, so bright that the Angels desire to behold it, so
great that the Isles a far off hear it preached, the hearts of men are
subdued, there with to believe it, and the nature of man in the person of the
Son of God is received up in glory.

Great is this holy mystery that m^n thereby should have a new birth by
Regeneration, Tit. 3.
a new heart by Sanctification, Ioh. 3.
new desires by holy Resolution, and become good, godly and piou^ men, from out
all obliquities, Psalm. 51*
defects, and evils of their sinful nature, which is wholly corrupted, as of
infidels to become believers, of unclean persons to become chaste, of
drunkards sober men, of liars truth loueuers, and (in a word) of sinful and
sensual miscreants, to become fast and faithful Christians. Yea it is so
Great, that it is miraculous, for in despite of Satan, and all the powers of
darkness, it works miraculous effects in our weak and feeble natures.

It enlightneth our understandings with the sight of God, Act. 15.
by faith in the mirror of Jesus Christ, Mat. 5.
for being pu^ified in heart, Mendacii multiplex diuortium. Aug.
we shall see God. It abandoneth all multiplicitie of gods in Paganism for in
untruths there is no end of lying. It detecteth all Turkish impostures, and
all Mahumetan dreams of their Miscelanian mongrill, Alcaron. It cleereth the
ora^cles of Gods will, the sacred Scriptures from all the Talmudicall muddie
glosses of the Jewish Rabinicall Sanhe^drim.

And in a word it refuteth all Popish innouations and misguiding traditions,
Dan. 7.
and whatsoever else depends thereon. For the Antiquity of this godliness
is the Ancient of days, and we may easily answer all our opposits brags of
Antiquity with this, It was not so from the beginning. The counsels of this
Godliness are Apostolical, and Orthadoxe, Mat. 19.
not Trentall, or Lateran, for the voice from heaven was, Hear him. Mat. 17.
The fathers hereof Saint Paul, and Saint Peter, and others the fathers of the
fathers. This is a mystery indeed, and a great mystery, and more then that,
the mystery of Godliness, not the curious querees of man's vain greatness, to
wit, the secret mysteries of nature, either of the firmamentarie orelementarie
world, for abstruse knowledge we leave to Aristotle, Lemnius, Cardanus,
Cornelius Agrippa, Albert us, Auerhoes, Trismegistus and such like, the
searchers and inquisitors of natures niceties, the end whereof (for the most
part) is vain Philosophy, and they that spend their days in such triflings,
either fail of this happy end to be Godly, like those that seek with the
expense of wit, and wealth the Elixar of the Philosophers stone (the Worlds
woodcocke) or fall away from God in Astrologicall calculations, with the
curious, Chaldeans, and Egyptians.

But this Godliness is the Great Riches; for albeit it has nothing of the
World; 2. Tim. 6.
yet it possesses all the things of God. That's a mystery indeed. It
dignifieth us with the grace of Sanctification above our wretched nature, and
diefieth us with the happiness of Glorification above the visible Heavens.
That is a great mystery.

It is the salt of the earth seasoning us, and all the acts we do, that we,
and they may be rational sacrifices, acceptable to God in Christ: yea, and it
is the favor of Heaven, breathing into us the breath of eternal life, whereby
we are made partakers of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.
in believing on God in this World, and in loving him shall live for ever in
the other world.

This Godliness must needs be great, when the great God by his holy Spirit is
the worker thereof; for who can repair the ruins of our rotten and corrupt
nature, but the God of nature? He it is who only can take away the stony
heart, and give us a fleshie, pliable, and penitent heart, that only can rid
us out of satan's snares and 2 Timothy 2.
restore us to a sound mind.

Great is this Godliness, seeing nothing could move God to do this for us, but
his own great love to mankind, John 3.
and the death and Resurrection of that great Prophet Christ Jesus the Son of
God. Great in respect of the means, Act. 7,
whereby God conuayed this Godliness unto us, for the faith of this Godliness
conuerteth us by the doctrine of the Law to know our selves, and our sins, by
the preaching of the Gospel, to know our selves in Christ Jesus to be saved,
and often times by afflictions, we are weaned from the World, and are made to
take liking of God and godliness.

So we see that in the first act of our becoming good, we are merely
passive; for what can a dead man do to quicken himself, and we were all dead
in sins, and trespasses; Ephesians. 2*
but after we are thus quickened by Gods act, we know that we are alive, and
rejoice in our godly well doings. At the first, to work this great (...), 1
Cor. 15.
the grace of God is in us, but when we once feel this sacred power we are
willingly led on to goodness, for the grace of God is with us; yet in all this
we have here no absolute perfection, but expect the consummation thereof in
glory. Tell me then (Beloved in the Lord) is not this a mystery, a great
mystery, and the Great Mystery of Godliness, the end whereof tends to the
glory of God, who hereby regenerateth his children, prescribes them Laws,
they obey them, and promises them Heaven, and they are sure of it. Is not this
Mystery Great, and excellent that assures them that know it, that they are
elected, is a declaration to our selves and others, that we do believe, and
is a performance of our duty in part: And lastly, is not that Great, the end
whereof tends to the Conversion of unbelievers, Luc. 22.
who seeing our good works in this profession of Godliness, Romans 14.
glorify our heavenly Father, and is the confirmation, and settling of our
brethren that do believe. Oh sacred mystery of celestial happiness!

Thrice happy are they therefore, Application
who understand this Mystery of Godliness. For Without controversy (for that
is the preamble of this Scripture) Great is the Mystery of Godliness, and
such as are of the generation of those that seek the Lord, will with all
diligence, modesty, sobriety, meekness and peace, search to know this
Mystery, laying aside all contentions, quarrels, strifes, and enuyings, which
distract, and disturb men's hearts, and hinder men from being good. Let
Godliness be our Helena, and the truth will assuredly appear unto us, as the
learned Earl of Mirand wrote to Hermolaus Barbarus in this case. For it
seuereth from it all the He^trogenean, and mongrill boastings of curious
speculations, the specious glitterings of man's abstruse wisdom, as humane
traditions, fanatical Enthusiasmes, and gross commixtures of Moses rites with
Christianisme.

And they that know this Mystery of Godliness, lay aside all spleanie
Controversies, and seek only to know God, and whom he has sent, Christ
Jesus, whereby they shall find themselves by the power thereof changed from the
fashions of the World, the old man, the first Adam, 1 Cor. 15.
into the blessings of the new man, Ephesians. 4.
Christ Jesus the second Adam, that is clothed with righteousness and grace.

They shall find that Godliness is the richest treasure, yea to be more
excellent, and more magnificent then all Majesty enriching them with those
blessings, that many Kings and Monarchs of the earth could never attain unto.
Because Godliness shall secure them from all vexations and incursions of the
Devil whatsoever: for God will tender them, Psalm. 91. 11, Zach. 2,
As the apple of his own eye, and command his Angels to pitch their tents
round about them. There is the safety of this Godliness, even a wall of fire
to keep out their enemies. Godliness shall beautify them, for they shall be
decked with Grace, whereby God shall accept them. For his people, his sons,
and daughters for his Spouse, Psalm. 34.
and fer his exceeding great delight: Cant. 3.
There is the grace of this Godliness, even the rays of Sion.

Sat^an, and all the powers of darkness shall be subject Luc. 19.
unto them that are godly, their memorials shall be written in Gods Register?
And all things shall work together for their good; Romans 28.
yea, even their sins (as Saint Augustine notes) There is the victory of
this Godliness, even a glorious conquest which many Kings and Monarchs never
achieved. Godliness shall enlighten their darkness, (as Saint Augustine
says) For it is the Mirror of the purified s^ule: And David testifies,
psalm. 119.
That God is his light, psalm. 27.
and sure salvation. There is the light of this Godliness in Gods light, even
a very view of Heaven. If we be ignorant, We shall all be taught of God,
^oh. 6.
yea our knowledge in the very seeking of this Mystery shall surpass, psalm.
119.
our Tearchers shall surpass, our Ancients. There is the true wisdom of this
Godliness. Godliness, Psalm. 31. 19.
shall comfort us in despair. O how great is the goodness he has laid up for
the that trust in him even before the sons of men. There is the favor of this
Godliness.

The voice of joy and gladness is in the dwellings of the righteous. Psalm. 118.
15
There is the sound solace of this Godliness.

No marvel then if Peter said, Mat. ^7.
It is good being here master. Indeed there is no good being any where else.
For holiness becomes his house for ever. For what evil can come unto us,
Ca^t. 2.
when Gods left hand is under our head, and his right hand does embrace us.
There is the protection of this Godliness.

This Mystery of godliness quieteth the distresses of conscience. Prou. 14.
The godly man is as confident as a Lion, Pro. 30.
for the name of the Lord is his strong tower, he runs unto it and is safe.
There is the security of this godliness. Not carnal security, such as the
custom of the world, and the use of sin does oftimes besot, and infatuate
the hearts of Worldlings withal. For unless I were Clean either indeed, or
in desire or endeavor, I should suspect the fear of God had never once come
into my heart, how soever the subtlety of Satan and sin had secured me,
Psalm. 19.
for the fear of the Lord is clean.

But when a Christian feels in himself first Aversion from evil, whereby he
hates sin, and of that hatred a double sorrow to proceed: One of the world
working death, when we are plunged in devouring fears and sorrows, 2. Cor. 7.
through the sight of our sin, Ephesians. 4.
and an apprehension of Gods just judgments for the same, by the rigor of the
Law, the other a godly sorrow, working repentance by the spirit of adoption,
Romans 8.
and delivering us from the spirit of bondage to fear any more, we are not
idle, or luld in security, but straightway we fall to cry Father, and labor
after a most godly sort, to rest in this so holy a resolution. By carfulness
to look more warily to our ways, ^. Cor. 7. 11
by clearing of our selves to keep a good conscience in all things, by
indignation to disdain ever to be brought again unto the former slavery of
Satan, by Fear to dash out all relapses, and backslidings, lest our ends be
worse the^ our beginnings, by vehement desire to set our affections above, by
zeal to draw others out of the fire, and by revenge to ab^idge our selves of
many things. we impotently, and foolishly, seek, and search after in this
world.

And having thus approved our selves, that we are turned from the evil in a
true detestation thereof, we go on in our conversion to the good which is the
other part of our Godliness, even the quickening of our spirits by Gods grace, by
illumination of our minds in the sight of those things which lead us on to
heaven, by renouation of our minds, in the obedience of our once sullen and
froward hearts, but now pliable and penitential hearts to Gods counsel, by
reformation of all our disordered affections, in settling them to the mind, and
think of nothing but whatsoever things are True, Phil. 4.
honest, just, pure, lovely, of good report, of virtue, or of praise which we
have learned, received, and seen in Gods children, these things they think
on, and do, that are the Lords.

Indeed hypocrites, and the reprobate are said in Scripture Heb. 6. 4. 10. 29.
to be sanctified in respect of their outward calling, and in their partaking
of the external preaching of the word and Sacraments received, but the godly
only who are inwardly renewed by the power of the Spirit have this s^nctifying
grace to expel all full consent from their hearts to offend God, and to labor
and strive after righteousness.

Yet whiles the godliest live in this world they cannot attain to a full
expulsion of the evil, and introduction of the good* but these two remain
like to opposite parties in a pittched field combating, Gal. 5.
and skirmishing the one with the other, that the most holy cannot do what they
would.

And as in the twilight, or dawning of the day, the light that we see is not
utterly voided of darkness neither is the darkness altogether without light,
and as in warm water the heat is mixed with cold; so the reluctations of the
flesh and spirit that the godly have in this world, have no fellowship the one
with the other, no more then those different qualities, yet they may remain in
one subject, either acting his own part, not severally, albeit distinctlie.
Sarah the wife of Abraham is a president in this kind, who believed the
promise of God made unto her concerning her issue, being moved thereunto by the
holy Ghost, yet being impatient of delay, enforced thereunto by the flesh, she
gives her maid unto her husband, so that one and the same work even in the
dearest of Gods children, may in respect of the spirit be praise worthy, and in
respect of the flesh be blameable. Sanctification in it self is most perfect,
but when it is considered in the man that is sanctified, it is imperfect, and
varies by degrees, and increases by reason of the daily slips, and slidings of
the best, whereby their goodness is ofttimes greatly hindered, and never in
this life perfected, which is the reason that the Scripture calls this our
Godliness, sometimes a pledge of the spirit, to assure us Gods favor, and
sometimes an earnest, which is to be made up, never to be taken away. So that
we see this God^ines in Gods children, albeit it be ofttimes very weak, and
feeble in respect of their many infirmities, yet it is rea^ll, because it is
rooted in the inward parts, and God requires truth from thence, Psalm. 51.
whereas the unregenerate have forms and fruits also of holiness, but their
fruits are like those Apples that grow about the banks of the dead Sea, or
Asphaltique Lake, look on the inside and you shall see nothing but
earthlynesse, sensuality, and diuellishnesse.

But those that have this name of Godliness written in their hearts by the
finger of God, are justified by their faith, and this Godliness is a fragrant
flower, and holy fruit of that their holy faith.

Thy ever looking after the sequel of this Holiness, which is Happiness,
reserved for them in the heavens, for God brings his children by this way of
Holiness to the life of Happiness, there being great difference betwixt the
Way that leads unto the kingdom of heaven, and the cause of our attaining
both the way, and eternal life, which is the gift of God through Jesus Christ
our Lord. What now can disturb or distract the peace of Gods holy ones, seeing
they have such pledges, assurances, and earnests of Gods favor; that they
shall never utterly fail, or fall away from God. Oh this blessed security,
and happy peace of conscience Is more to be desired then gold, Psalm. 19.
yea then much fine gold, sweeter also then the honey, and the honey Comb,
called of the most wise, the Continual Feast. There is their absolute
contentment of this Godliness. Thus Godliness benefiteth us in this life, and
blesses also in our death, yea after death. Psalm. 11.
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. Luke 16.
They are carried of Angels into the everlasting habitations. Blessed are the
dead which dye in the Lord, Apoc. 14.
for they rest from their labors. Most blessed therefore are the people that
are in such a case, Psalm 144*
that know this Mystery, and practice this Godli^^sse, for in themselves,
albeit not of themselves, they are the vessels of honor by Illumination, 1 Thessalonians 4.
their life the rule of Christianisme by sanctification, their pedigree i^ in
descent from the royal Priesthood by devout inuo^ation; 1, Pet. 2. 9.
their practice is to Purge themselves for the hope of heaven by Mortification,
1. Ioh. 3. 3.
their reputation is not to run to the same excess of riot with others, in
hope of Glorification, but their whole life is Euangelilicall, yea Angelical
(as the Apostle speaks) Phil. 3.
For their Conversation is in Heaven: Yet for all this, we see wise men seek
Greatness, few Godliness: For, if we bestowed but half the diligence to be
godly, as we do to be great; we should have more piety, and less wicked
policy. And that's the reason why Mammon has so many Scholars, and Christ so
few Followers; For most men desire to know the mystery how to be great; but
few desire to know how to be good. Machiauels Prince, Lipsius Politeques,
Bodins Commentaries, and Books of such subjects, are matters preciously
accounted of by some, whereby they imagine to become great in practizing these
principles, whiles the book of God, and other means to reduce them to be
good, are neglected. Many men bind themselves for term of time to learn a
mystery how to thrive, and rise in the World, and ofttimes with much hardness
and intolerable bondage endure the attainement thereof: But we see how few
t^ere are, that can endure, (I will not say, seven years Apprentiship, no
scarce seven hou^es service to understand and know this Mystery of Godliness in
Christ, to whose service all Christian men are bound by the law of God, and
their vow of Baptism to be as obliged Votaries all their life long.

A thousand woes then must needs attend them, that are not acquainted with
this Mystery of Godliness, who are either plunged into the Deepe^esse of the
Devil, Apoc. 7.
being so chained and fettered by him in their ungodly courses, that they
cannot raise themselves out of this bottomless pit, or else are misled by
the mystery of iniquity, which busily works even amidst the Church, 2. These.
2
Both by lying, wonders, and wonderful lies, being strong delusions to believe
lies, as was long before prophesied, or else are besotted with the vanity of
the world, 1. Ioh. 5.
which is Alt^g^ther set upon wickedness: For there be many Antichrists in
the World, and in a Country, where all, or the most part be Negroes, It is no
blemish there to be black. And that's the cause of our dullness in thi^ point,
that we live so secure and wicked without any desire to know and understand
how to be godly. Such are they that have Jacobs voice in prating of
Godliness, but Es^us hands in practicing unhappiness. Such are they that
profess a Linzie wools^y Religion, being hateful to God, because they are
not real, hateful to the World, because they are religious, albeit they be
but in show, and hurtful to themselves, because they are hypocrites, and
deceive themselves with seeming Godliness: These are such as are misled with
the mystery of iniquity; such a one was Pope Paul the third, who at his end,
said. Now shall I know three things, whereof I doubted all my life; to wit,
whether there be a God; or Hell, or whether the soul be immortal, (O damned
Infidel!) Such another was Leo the tenth, who accounted the Gospel of Christ
a Fable, and showing his Fauouri^es, (said) See what heaps of treasure I have
gathered by that fable of Christ (O wretched misc^eant.) The doctrines that
pleases those that are thus misled with the mystreie of iniquity, are
traditions, amphibolous equivocations, mental reseruations, and the like
devises. Their Religion is policy, their faith either implicit, or wavering;
like that of Lucius consisting of words or wonders, with Moses Egyptius, as
Ruffinus records, would not admit of, nor endure, that Lucius should lay his
hands upon him, but told him, that he would rather believe his eyes then his
ears; that is, he would rather embrace the Religion which is seen, then that
which is only heard. And for them that without blushing say, Psalm. 14.
There is no God, and blot out all Religion with one dash, or with Zenaherib,
Holofernes, and Ph^raoh, scoff at Godliness, or with Rufus entertain the
Religion of the place where they live, what ever it be, or turn Religious
godliness into worldly policy, by practicing (as I said) Machiauels Prince,
Bodins Commentaries, Lipsius Politiques, and such like Discourses: That of
Saint Paul is verified of them: 2 Cor. ^. 4.
For if o^r Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of
this world has blinded the eyes of them that believe not, lest the light of
the glorious Gospel of Chrict, who is the Image of God should shine unto them:
For to these it is even yet a hidden mystery; And in such fearful case are
all light headed Zebuls, scoffing Iebusites, scorning Cains, vile Iulianists,
impious Lucianists, and contemners of all piety, religion, and godliness: But
Believers consider, That the ungodly shall be turned into hell, Psalm. 9.
and all the Nations that know not god, Romans 9.
and the whole creation on groneth to be delivered from such burdens as these
miscrea^ts are, Heb. 10.
Who tread under foot the son of God, and account the blood of the new
testament as an unholy thing, whereby they are sanctified, and do despite the
spirit of grace. And Believers see even by the very glimpse of right reason,
that nothing but man makes account of greatness, God does not, for with him is
no respect of persons; Act. 10.
Nature does not, for the children of Princes are borne naked, Mors aequo pede
pulsat* pauperum taberna: Regumque turres Horat.
as well as the Cottagers, and death assayleth the Court as well as the cart.
Goodness only is that wherein God delights, and good men tender it as their
breath: Godliness being the gracious mother, and goodness the holy daughter.

Lastly, they that believe, know that godliness has the promise of this Life,
to be gracious in Christ, and of that to come, to be glorious in Christ, and
therefore it is the only thing they desire to know, It is the one thing
necessa^ie, Luke 10.
they practice, it is the Manna of their souls, the joy of their hearts, the
touchstone of their actions, the Gynosura of their affections, the David's harp
for their ^ares, the Word for their mouths, the Mirror for their lives, the
path for their feet, the station for their watch, the salve for their griefs,
the Key of Heaven, and the Heaven on Earth: To thee therefore O Lord, do I
lift up my heart in the mercies of thy Son Christ Jesus.

Doubtless, Invocation.
O holy and heavenly father, man disquiet^th him self in vain; for thou did
make him righteous, but he after the vanity of his own heart which is fallen
from thee, have sought many inventions. Thou O God can not please us with thy
patience, nor humble us with thy present and future judgments, nor allure us
with thy gracious promises. Such is the peruersitie of our infirm natures, such
is the p^euishnes of our corrupt condition, such is the evil of guilt and
action that we have in us, Thy lessous are al of peace, and w^e run counter
into controversies, every day devising to our selus an opinion, a fancy, a
faction, and to make good these, what stone do we not mou^? what corner do we
not ra^s^ck^? what earnestnes and acrimonie do we not apparently reveal? or
else like some stupid or dull beast we have no sense or feeling at al of thee,
or of thy greatness, but live only to live, and to del^ght our selus with our
selus in our gross mistakings. If we pretend religion Satan tempts us with
faction, if purity, with hypocrisy, if zeal, with uncharitable ioalo^sie. O
Lord some years have I liu^ed, wretched man, that I am among other of thy
servants, and knew not whether there were a Jesus, a Christ, an holy Ghost or
no? So besotted have I bin with the love of the world, so befooled with mine
own fancy, so plunged into the dark deepeues of the devil, and so transported
with the fashions of others, who know as little, and understand as little, or
less then my self. But now O Lord God, lo^king back into the misery of my
self, I shudder and tremble, seeing a far of a mystery whereof as yet I could
never attain the knowledge, albeit I have observed many of my brethren with
great diligence, and zeal to abound in all Godlinos, forwardnes, and
sa^cti^ony, gladly hearing, frequenting, conferring, following after the light,
that shined unto them in the darkn^s of this Life, yea aduenturing their lives,
their liuelyhoodes, their credit and esteem among the sons of men, and
accompting all things else as dung in respect of the knowledge and service of
their heavenly Master. To me O Lord, among other the rest of thy servants,
this is a great mystery, that have felt in my self no mind, no meaning
thereunto. What shall I do, O Lord, in this my miss led, and misperswaded
est^te? I now perceive, O Lord, by that glimpse of right reason, which makes
every man inexcusable, and by that spark of light, which enlightneth every one
that comes into the world, that my sins, my sins, my great and gri^uous
sins, like to some huge mountain, have vpreard themselves between me and
this most glorious light, dimming up mine eyes that I cannot see, and damming
up that heavenly splendour which should enlighten me, and have set such a
controversy between thee and me, that my soul is like utterly to be
diu^rced from thy love, unless thine eye of pity consider me. O look upon
me dear and tender hearted Father in the face and favor of Jesus Christ my
Savior, and for his sufferings sake, dispell the mystie clouds of my wreatched
nature, with the light of thy countenance, and show me this Mystery of
Godliness. Illuminate mine understandings with the glorio^^ rays of Sion.
Bless mine imagination that I may think of no evil, but of goodness
continually. Incline my will that it may bow it self to the obedience of thy
commandments. Put this Mystery of Godliness into my heart, by the invisible
singer of thy sacred Trinity, that it may make me good by shining upon me,
and piercing into me, that I may be sanctified thereby, both in body, soul,
and spirit. O Lord, let not the Mystery of iniquity misleade me, nor the
deepenesse of Satan deceive me, nor the deceitfulnes of sin by flesh and
blood carry me away to forsake or neglect thy goodness, but let this light of
thine O Lord be ever more precious unto me then the balm of Gilead, more
magnificent then the royalty of Solomon, and more dear then the apple of mine
eye. That thereby I may be acceptable unto thee, in thy Christ, in whom thou
art well pleased. That my service in this sacred Mystery of Godlilinesse, may
be as Physic for to cure mi^e ungodliness, as my Counselor to direct me in
the affairs of my life, and as my casuist to resolve the cases of my
distressed conscience: So shall I ever magnify thy name, O Lord, that have
showed me such loving kindness in a strange city, in revealing to me, to me
I say the vnworthyest of many thousands, the Mysteries and light of the
kingdom of heaven, in the darkness and shadow of death, So shall I be ever
telling of thy truth, and mercy to the as sembly of thy Saints, and to the
generations which a^e yet for to come. Grant these favors unto me O King of
heaven, God of all peace, Father of mercies, Fountain of wisdom and
goodness for the unspeakable merits and sufferings of Jesus Christ our only
Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.

GOD MANIFEsted in the Flesh.
Explication.
GOD is the height of this Mystery, 2 The first day of the week.
God in the flesh, is the depth of this Mystery, God manifested in the flesh,
is the length and breadth of this Mystery. Of God it is revealed that he is
one in nature, and three in persons, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, that is a
Trinity in Unity, and an Unity in Trinity. Even as in the number of three
are one number, and yet three unities, in a triangle are three angles, yet one
figure, in the Sun are body, brightness, and heat, yet one Sun, in the
fire, light, flame, and heat, yet the fire cannot be divided, in the soul
our memory, understanding and will, and yet one soul; all these showing, that
three may be one, and one three. So likewise in God, are three persons,
Father, Son, and holy Ghost; and yet one God, who is blessed for evermore:
For unless I understand (when I hear the name of God) that it is meant of the
holy and undivided Trinity, whereby I am sau^d, mine understanding shall content
me nothing.

The supereminency of which Mystical Being of God passes man's utterance,
August. l. 7. cap. 4. de Trin.
and therefore we can better think, then speak of God. Let us not then be
over curious to search out this mystery: For God is ex^ellent, Job. 6. 26.
and we know him not, (says Elihu in Job) Our thoughts comprehend him not,
Ier 32. 19.
says Jeremy, And his ways are past finding out (says Saint Paul) These
secrets belong unto the Lord our God, To. 11. 33.
and the revealed things thereof belong unto us, Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
and to our children for ever. Let us then here content our selves with a touch
rather then with a taste of this secret of the essence and will of God: For God
the Father in himself is the Fountain of the Dei^ie, which no curiosity can
find out: Dyonys. Areopag. (...)Epiph. (...)Origin, Just Mart (...)
Perfection of himself, which no man can comprehend: God of himself, whom all
adore, and Life of himself, in whom we all live. God the Son in himself is
the very engraven form of his Father, in whom the whole Godhead dwells
bodily. And God the holy Ghost, is in himself the fullness of them both by
procession. God (I say) whose power is all puissance, whose sense is all
knowledge, whose essence is the principal good; whose work is every good,
whose scites beneath al things without substractio^, above all things without
elation, within all things yet not included. without all things yet not
excluded: above al things as president, beneath all things as sustinent,
within all things as co^plement, without all things as comprehe^dent. The first
mouer yet notmoued in local site, yet not circu^scribed, ordering al times,
yet not changed, in Essence infinite, inco^prehensible in Majesty, in goodness
sovereign, in wisdom wonderful, in counsels terrible, in judgment righteous
in cogitations secret, in works holy, in mercy rich, in promise true, always
the same, eternal, immortal, unchangeable, not to be expressed by speech, not
conceived by thought, of whom all the Angels of Heaven do stand in fear, whom
all dominations and thrones do adore, at whose presence all powers do shake.

God, I say, being thus of himself, is also revealed toward us to be of
power incomprehensible, creating all things by his own power, ordering all
things by his own will, directing all things to his own ends of his own good
pleasure: of wisdom unsearchable, by which he spread the heavens, Psalm. 103.
divided the waters, and settled the earth; for in wisdom has he made them
all: of mercy unspeakable, by creating us of nothing, and by redeeming us when
we were worse then nothing: And of iuslice uncontrollable, leaving no good
vnrecompensed, no evil unpunished.

This then indeed is a surpassing incomprehensible mystery, that thus God
should be manifested in our weak flesh, that God and Man should be in one
person. And that of the same God, the holy Scripture should say, in respect of
this his manifestation in the flesh: Luk 2.
The child increased in wisdom and knowledge, and in favor with God and man:
And Emanuel, God with us, should say of himself, The Father is greater then I:
And of the same God in respect of his Dietie, Ioh. 14.
he h^mself says; Ioh. 8.
Before Abraham was borne, I am, and that he was the first begotten of every
Creature. And further in respect of the union of both natures in the person of
the Son of God (the sacred word says) That God redeemed his Church with his
blood, Act. 2.
That the Jews crucified the Lord of glory* 1. Cor. 2.
and that he gave his life for us: 1. Ioh. 3.
So that the Catholic conclusion of all, is this, That Christ Jesus Emanuel
consisting of two distinct Natures in the person of the Son of God, without
confusion was incarnate, and became our Mediator, according to both Natures,
that the same hand that wrought the institution of the world, should also work
the restitution of the same: For it was impossible that the World should be
saved without the Incarnation of the Son of God: For God in Christ reconciled
the world unto himself: And by taking unto himself our flesh by Incarnation,
made it his own flesh, that so of his own (albeit from us) he might have what
to offer to God for us.

And without this our flesh he could not suffer, for the manhood is the proper
subject of passion, compassion and feeling pity, which causes the regiment of
Christ's Kingdom to be most amiable, exercising dominion over all men, with a
true, natural and sensible touch of mercy*

The second person therefore of the glorious Trinity; was sent to perform
this great work: not the Father, who being of none, could not be sent: Not the
holy Ghost, who albeit he proceed, yet he is not the first that proceeds: And
forasmuch as a double Mission was requisite, the first person that proceeds,
was fittest for the first Mission, and the second for the second, who also more
fit, to make us the sons of God by grace, then he that was the son of
God by nature: And who more fit to repair the images decayed in us, then he
that was the engraue^ form of his Fathers person. And this was done that man
with more assurance, and without danger of ever erring, might come near unto
the presence of sacred truth it self, and settle therein by this manifestation
of the Son of God. And God became man, that he whom man was to follow, might
show himself unto man, and be seen of him. Besides it was done, that the
humane nature might be advanced to such an high dignity and excellency, that
no man should any more so much forget himself, as to defile the same with
sinful impurities. Lastly, it was done that man might be delivered from the
slavery and bondage of sin, whereinto he was plunged; For man was punished
as Justice urged: That was p^rformed which God had threatened, as Truth required
The offender was pitied as Mercy entreated, and God and Man reconciled, as
Peace desired. Thus Mercy and Truth met together, Righteousness and Peace
kissed each other.

The manner of this is the astonishment of Heaven, and Earth; but our holy
faith makes it more true then plain unto us; yet some resemblances may in some
part express this union unto us.

The union of soul and body makes one man a flaming and fiery sword, makes
one sword one man may have two accidental forms, Physic and Law, and a
branch engraffed, and a tree is one tree: so Christ is one, and yet has two
different Natures, and in them performs the distinct actions pe^tayning to
either of them. Condemned then be all heretical cauils of Arr^us Macedonius,
Apollonarius, Panlus Samofatemus, Sabellius, Photinus, Aetius, together with
the whole swarm of Dimiarr^ans, and the like damned heretics, who either
impeach the truth of Christ's Incarnation, and Nativity, or the union of his
natures in one person, or his line of David, Romans 1.
according to the flesh, that is, according to the weak flesh, Ioh. 1. 14.
but not corrupted flesh: For the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us.
There is the whole Nature of man. And Christ in the days of his flesh offered
up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears unto him, Heb. 5. 7:
that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared. There
is the true affection of our nature: So then, 1 John 4. 2.
He that confesses that Jesus is come in the flesh is of God, and he that
confesses it not is of the Devil. There is the trial of our faith. For this
manifestation of God in the flesh is to unbelievers as the cloud that stood
betwixt the Israelites and the Egyptians at the red sea, which to the
Israelites was a bright shining cloud, but to the Egyptians a dark, dangerous,
and portentous Commet.

And is not this then a Great Mystery? That God, who is without beginning and
end, should have a beginning with us by birth, and an end by death. That God
who neither changes nor alters, should increase in stature: That God who is
without commixture or defect, should eat and be an hungry. That God who could
be no more then he was, should take upon him the shape of a servant, and be
that he was not, that could have no more then he had, should be less then he
was, and could know no more the^ he knew, and yet would feel our infirmities,
and taste our miseries. What tongue, what pen can express this mystery? that
God should be united unto man, not only in love and grace, but in one person:
for we must observe that the humane nature of Christ is not a distinct person
by it self, as Peter, John, and such like, but to our unspeakable comfort is
so united to the divine nature that did assume it, as they both make but one
person: so that all that is in it, is truly said to be Gods, and all that was
don by it, to be done by God, as Christ's blood was Gods blood, Christ's death
was Gods death, as has been said. And the God of glory may as well be said to
suffer death, as to raise the dead from their graves, and the son of man as
well to have made, as to have redeemed the world.

Who would ever have thought that so great a wou^d as man's sinful defect from
God, should ever have been thus healed? or that God, and a wretched sinner
should be thus reconciled, or that heaven and earth should be thus
incorporated, or that the verity of God, Ita celeberima illa concilia Nicenum
contra Arrianum, (...) Constant. cont. Apol. (...).
and the complete substance of man should be united in one Christ, Ephel.
cont Nestor. (...).
who is truly God, Calcedon. contra Eutichen. (...).
perfectly man, God and man indiuisibly, and both in that one distinctly.

But yet behold this Great Mystery of Godliness, as it is not to be ascended
unto in the exaltation thereof* for it is God; and as it is unutterable in the
humiliation; for it is God in the flesh: so it is undoubted and infalible in
the demonstratiue manifestation thereof; for nothing is more evident to the
faith of christian beleeue^s. It being not only prophesied, shadowed and
portrayed out unto us in the old Testament under diverse types, and sundry
forms, but also substantially, and really performed, fi^ished, and consummated
in the new testament. Mark but the divine paralels of this manifestation in
some few particulars, Hoc mysterium in veteri Testamento fuit velatum. in nouo
Reuelatum.
and note whether they do not touch each other, and point out to every
believing soul, the whole frame and for me thereof from the circumference to
the Center: Pharaoh kileth the Hebrewe children, Exodus 1. Mat. 2.
Herod the true Pharaoh kills the children of Bethelem. Both stirred up by
Satan to murder the Messiah (if they could) and to falsify the promise of
this manifestation, purposed before of God from everlasting. 1 Reg. 3.
Solomon at twelve years decideth the question between the 2. women for the
living child: Christ the true Solomon at 12. Luc. 2.
years is found admidst the Doctors, posing and questioning them, doubtless
of the Jewish Synagogue then dead and of the true Christian Church, the living
child. Moses fasted forty days at the giving of the Law; Christ fasted forty
days at the commencement of the Gospel* Twelve Patriarchs the fathers of the
Law; Twelve Apostles the Patriarchs of the Gospel. Ten commandments given on
mount Sinay. Exo. 20.
Ten petitio^s on mount Horeb. Mat. 4.
Judah the Patriarch sells Joseph, Judas the Apostle and traitor sells for
thirty pieces the true Joseph, Jesus Christ. Christ is taken in a garden by
the Brook Cedron: Man sin^ed in the Garden of Eden. Joseph the innocent is
imprisoned: Pilate im^^^^ prisoneth the innocent Lord Jesus. At noone Christ
suffered, at noone man sinned. The first Adam by transgression shuts up heaven,
the second Adam by his passion opens heaven to all believers. Joseph the
Patriarch burieth Iacoh: Joseph of Arimathea burieth the true Israel. Daniel is
sealed up in the Lions den* the true Daniell Christ is laid in his
sepulcher, and the Magistrates seal the stone: yea the very circumstances of
this manifestation are most exactly set down.

The time limited, to wit, When the scepter shall depart from Judah; Genesis 49.
the place designed, At Bethlem in Iudaea. The miraculous manner published. A
virgin shall conceive a son. Mich. 5. 2.
His presentation in the Temple verified, Esa. 7. 14.
The Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come into his Zac. 11. 13.
Temple. His price valued. A goodly price was I prized at of them, says the
Lord. The treason against him foretold. That his own familiar friend in who^
he trusted, Psalm. 41. 9.
and did eat his bread should list up his heel against him. In a word, all
things (even to the very vinegar and gal in his last sufferings) were at sundry
times, and in manifold manner long before certainly prophesied of, as they were
manifestly in their determinate times of Godperformed. So that this
manifestation was the accomplishment of vision and prophecy, the body of type,
and shadow, the end of Law, and Priesthood, the perfection of Sacrifice and
Sacrament, and the union of mankind with God in Christ and thereby life
everlasting.

Is God then thus abased in^ our flesh? Application.
Oh the great bounty of Gods favor unto us. Oh then let us submit our selves
unto God. For the Lord will have an eye to none but to such as are of a broken,
and contrite heart, and trembles at his word. But if we be meek and lowly
in heart, We shall find rest unto our souls. Mat. 11.
Yea our chife service consists in this, To humble our selves to walk with our
God. Mic 6.
Remembering the excellent dignity of our sanctified nature, being now united
to our God, and pertaking of his holy nature, by filiation according to the
Evangelical precept, Mat. 5.
Be merciful as your heavenly father is merciful. See God is become our
father by sanctification. For if we being wretches can give good gifts unto
our children, how much more shall our heavenly father give graces and blessings
to them that all upon him. By adoption, For to as many as receive him, he has
given power to become the sons of God. Ioh. 1.
Let not the unbelieving Jews dema^d how this union should be? or how God
could be manifested in our flesh? But let them tell how the dead rod of Aron
could bear blossoms? how a virgin should conceive and bear a son? how a bush
could burn and not consume? how Gedeons fleece could be wet at one time in the
floor, and all the floor about it dry, and another time dry and all the
ground about it wet, and in answer of these, this union will be eue^ unto the^
manifest: ^or all these things they v^doubtedly believe. Let not the damnable
Atheist discuss this mystery asking reasons how, and which way? but let him
tell me, this one thing, how the Sun beams pierce through the glass, and yet
the glass remains whole? And if he cannot tell this, let him adore and
reverence in sacred silence, and not explore in curiositi^ this secret Mystery.

And let all Infidels and miscreants know, that both heaven, and earth, and
hell, do all witness against them, and do manifest this mystery which is God
in the flesh In In earth.
earth, besides the trembling thereof at Christ's passion, the rage of the Sea
qualified by a word of his mouth, the cross that had the ordinances, and hand
writing that was against us fastened unto it, and the life and the death of the
Lord Jesus so famoused throughout the Christian world, which was as wonders in
heaven and earth, filling both with the sweet odours thereof, the very heathen
Emperor Augustus the then Monarch of the world, when this manifestation was in
the fullness of time accomplished' made a decree in the Senate of Rome, not to
be saluted by the name of Lord, as if he had been taught by some divine
inspiration (for the holy ghost ofttimes has spoken by the mouth of his
enemies, as in Balaam, Caiphas, and others) that now there was manifested in
the earth one, that was indeed the Lord of Lords.

In heaven also appears at the time of this manifestation, In heaven.
as Albertus Magnus cites out of A^bumaser the great Astrologer, in the first
aspect of the sign of Virgo, a fair and chaste virgin, having two ears of
corn in her hand, and a child in her arms, which child some nations do call
Jesus, not as if he that made the stars were any way subject to the motion of
the stars, but that he which stretches out the heavens as a scrole of
parchment, where he wrote the book of nature, Apollo Collophonius quaerenti
(Quis aut quid deu^) respondit.
might not want witness out of the book of nature of that which was contained
before in the book of Eternity, (...). L^ctan. de de falls. vill. cap. 7.
which was his secret decree: That a virgin should bring forth a child, and so
he should be described to us to be a natural man, albeit not borne after a
natural manner. Thus heaven and earth witness apparently this mystery. Yea
the very devils of hell believe this and tremble; confessing in the Gospel,
Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye? at what time some counterfeyt
exorcists took upon them to call over the possessed the name of the Lord Jesus.

And the Oracle of Delphos being the devils mouth did at the time of this
manifestation take their last farewell in these words, Me^puer Hebraeus diuos
Deus ipse gubernans cedere sede iubet, tristemque ridere suborcum, Aris regno
dehin^ tacitus aboedito nostris. And in steed of the darkness of this
kingdom, Satan which had almost over spread the whole world, this glorious
Sunshine of Gods manifestation with us, appeared, which was so effectual,
that even as in the spring time when the Sun returns all things begins,
to wax green, the earth brings forth, the trees are clothed with leaves,
and the whole surface of the earth is renewed: so at the manifestation of Christ
the Son of righteousness, the whole frame, and fabrique of the world was
spiritually altered.

For then arose out of the former Hellish darkness, quires of holy ones, men,
women, virgins, martyrs, confessors, Preachers, holy people, whole nations,
countries, and tongs declare the wonderful mercies of the Can. 2.
Lord in the revelation of Jesus Christ: Who is the Rose of the field, and the
Lilly of the valleys. Moses of old posed the whole world with this question.
Enquire of the days of old which were before thee and from the day that God
created man upon the earth, yea even from the height above to the depth
beneath, Deuteronomy. 4.
if ever the like thing were known. That a people should hear the voice of
the Lord speaking out of the midst of the fire. But now we may pose Moses,
and say, O Moses, then God spoke by an Angel out of the midst of the fire,
but now (O man of God) was ever the like as this heard, That God himself in the
nature of man should sit amidst his disciples and teach the. This is that the
spirit of God so magnifieth. That at sundry times, and in diverse manner God
spoke heretofore in his Prophets, Heb, 1.
but in these last days by his only Son, And if the word delivered by an
Angel was steadfast, Heb. 4.
what shall become of them that refuse and neglect the Son of God now
speaking unto them?

O most ungrateful, and brutish are the sons of men, who seek not to
understand this mystery so anciently prophesied of, so fully performed, and so
manifestly declared. Me thinks I hear all other creatures of heaven and earth
say. Oh that God had vouchsafed us such a blessing, such a tie, such a favor,
for then had we had been most happy. The quires of Angels say, Oh that God
had ordained to us so unspeakable a favor, as to have been united to our
nature. But Christ took not upon him the nature of Angels, but took upon him
the nature of children, that being tempted himself, and suffering, Heb. ^.
he might succor them that suffer, and are tempted. Who would not then in
consideration hereof give himself a whole burnt offering unto his God, and
consecrate his whole life (if the term thereof were even from the first Adam,
unto the end of the world) as a votiue service unto the glory of this God. Oh
uncircumcised hearts and ears of those who neither care to hear, nor to
understand this* blessed mystery. For if they would diligently seek, they
should find that God would manifest himself unto them even in their
individual flesh, by the sanctifying power of his holy Spirit, Apoc. 3.
and by pertaking of his divine nature, Io^. 14. 2.
Pet. 1.
whereby they should see with open face (as in a mirror) the glory of the
Lord, and be changed into the same image from glory to glory, 2. Cor. 3.
even as the spirit of the Lord. In no wise should they be as those wretches in
whose flesh Satan, and not God is manifested, who are indeed incarnate devils
(as the proverb is) whom Satan has so sifted to the bran, and winnowed to the
chafe, that no remainder of any godliness, or goodness is leaft in them, in
whom Satan is Totus in toto, and totus in qualibet part (as Aquinas says) of
the soul.

Their imagination evil, their mind ill, their meaning ill, their will
obstinate, their understanding darkened, their ears itching after vanities,
their eyes adulterous, which cannot choose but sin, their mouth blasphemous,
their an open grave of fulsome slanders, their hands rough, and cruel, their
feet swift to shed blood, their whole body a cage of unclean birds, their
life and conversation a stye of stinking swines flesh, an Acheldema of
oppression, a Caluarie of dead spoils, and their end a puddle of loathsome
impieties.

But those that secke God, do understand this mystery, and show forth this
manifestation in themselves, having lift up their heads as gates, and their
minds as doors, and the king of glory is come in unto them, Psalm. 24.
and is manifested in them by their faith in Christ by their good works among
men, Mat. 5.
by all the fruits of his gra^ious spirit, and by their joyful departure
hence being assured of a far better rest, and happiness in their masters
kingdom.

The custom of the Ethiopian Church, which live under Prester John, is to
observe the feast of the Epiphany as their chief and principal festiuitie, at
which time God showed himself both to Jew and Gentile in this manifestation by
a star. Thereby acknowledging, and that most truly, that this blessing, is
the beginning and fountain of all other blessing in Christianity whatsoever,
and ought most sollemnly to be observed, and most diligently to be considered,
especially of us that were Gentiles.

Go forth therefore ye daughters of Sion (even all religious and denoute
souls) and behold King Solomon (your Christ) with the crown wherewith his
mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, Cant. 3.
and in the day of the gladness of his heart.

Go forth (I say) from out the fashions and fancies of this world, both with
readiness and resolution, as men do to meet their new king. If you be
malefactors, he will pardon you upon repentant reconciliatio^ through Christ
Jesus, and will receive you to favor. If you be already his servants and
citizens of the city of God, go forth to meet him with your presents of
good works and holiness, as your homages of fealty. If you be friends and
alliance, as are all devout Souls, do that often which he has bid you
do, in remembrance of him, that is, offer the sacrifice of thankfulness,
receive the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord, that so you
may show the Lords death all your life long, until his coming again. So
shall your eyes b^ opened, that you shall not only understand this Great
mystery of Gods manifestation in the flesh, but also see it Justified in the
Spirit.

Oh blessed Emanuell increase our faith.

O Eternal and most mighty Jehovah Elohim, Invocation.
whose seat is in heaven, whose footestoole is in earth, whose chariots are
the clouds, whose might is in the great waters, whose power is every where,
whose displayed glory is in heaven, where angels are they attendants, and where
all the blessed dominations and thrones do thee daily homage, where the
innumerable company of elected Saints, do incessantly praise thee, where thine
habitation is light, that none can approach unto, thy clothing Majesty, and
honor, thy wisdom incomprehensible, thy mercy unspeakable, and thy judgments
past finding out, Look down look down most merciful Father in Christ from
thine holy place, the seat of mercy, upon me a most miserable and distressed
wretch. O hearken thou to my prayers which I sinful soul power out from an
unfeigned heart. Open unto my soul this great mystery of thy manifestation in
our flesh, that I may know, and comprehend with all Saints, the height, length,
breadte, and depth of the unsearchable riches of thy grace in Christ Jesus our
Lord. For thou did so love the world that thou gave thine only begotten
Son, that who so believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life.

This divine love of thine is incomprehensible, this gift inestimable, this
deliverance unutterable, and this felicity incomparable. My heart burns with
in me, and the sparks of devotion arise from the center of my soul, in musing
on this so holy^, and so happy a mystery which I do adore in the retiredness
of my spirit continually, and the fire of thy zeal, O Lord, increases in my
heart^, and the flames thereof bursts forth, and I cry to thee O King of
heaven, and of earth, that thy goodness would vouchsafe me a blessing among
thine holy ones, in whose flesh thou art manifested by the power of thy spirit
of sanctification, and other graces of thy goodness. For, O my God, I have
perceived sin and Satan a long time to have ruled and reigned in my flesh,
In my heart, by auersenes from thee, in my understanding, by misled judgments,
in my wit by wayward purposes, and froward desires, in my fancy by foolish
imaginations and designs, and my thoghts by rebellious affections, in mine
eyes by adulterous wanderings, in mine ears by itching after vanities, in my
forhead, as in the whores brow, by impudent outfacings, in my mouth by
blasphemous swearings and curses, and in my whole mass of nature by lewd and
loose conditions.

Now therefore I come unto thee, O Savior of mankind, the Physician of soul
and body, and lie groueling in mine own dust before thy footestoole, humbly
praying thy goodness for thy Christ his sake, that thou would vouchsafe to
manifest thy self by thine almighty power in my flesh, in my wretched flesh,
in my rebellious, and rotten flesh, in mine haughty naughty and hellish flesh.

That it may by thy thy power become a vessel of holiness, of purity, of
grace, and of glory.

To this blessed end mortify in me, O Lord, the deeds of the flesh,
adultery, fornication, uncleanness lasciviousness, Idolatry, witchcraft,
hatred, variance emulation, wrath, strife, sedition, heresies, enuyings,
murders, drunkenness, reuellings and suc^h like, and in stead thereof manifest
in me, O God, thy self by bestowing upon me a principal portion of thy
Spirit, in love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meckenesse, temperance, and what else thy holy wisdom knows fit for me in my
vocation and rank.

Restrain sin that it may not reign in my mortal body, and Satan that he
may not rage over me,

Set up thy self, O God, above the heavens, and thy glory above all the earth.

That thy beloved in whom thou art manifested by thy gra^ious spirit of
sanctification, may ever praise and magnify thy Great name amiddest the
Congregatigations. And I the vnworthyest of all thy creatures, shall ever be
telling of thy goodness toward me, for redeeming me with thy blood, for
sanctifying me by thy grace, for uniting thy self mystically unto me thine
humbled Votarie, and for saving me from those many, and manifold evils of the
flesh, whereinto thousands are feign also, had not thy gracious assistance, O
Lord, vpheld my weak and feeble flesh.

^N Lord, there has no sin been committed since Adams fall unto this day,
by any the sons and daughters of men, but I had done the like, if thy sweet
favor in Jesus Christ had not prevented me, O Lord, then let me live in
thee, let me wholly resign my self unto thee that neither sin, nor Satan,
nor shame, nor confusion may come near my dwelling: but that thou may dwell
in me here by thine own spirit of holiness, that hereafter I may obtain the
happiness of thy glorious kingdom through Jesus Christ mine only Lord and
Savior, Amen.

GOD IVSTIFIed in the Spirit.
Explication.
GOD manifested in the Spirit, 3. The second day of the week.
not as man justified, whose sins are remitted for Christ his sake, whose
unrighteousness is covered with Christ his merits, whose wretchedness is not
imputed for Christ his obedience, as Saint Augustine divinely discanteth upon
the 32 Psalm but justified in the spirit by divine justice, such as is
properly to God only. In which sense his judgments are said to be justified,
that is, they are true and righteous al together, albeit to us they are secret
and unsearchable,

His wisdom is said to be justified of her children, that is, it is known
to be true and infallible wisdom.

In this phrase spoke David to God saying, Psalm. 51.
That thou might be justified when thou speak, and clear when thou
iudgest, That is, that no living creature could tax, implead, or touch the
resolutions, and performances of Gods decrees with any the least prejudice or
impeachment of iniquity, for they were ever most just, and sacred; albeit they
are unknown to us, Is there any unrighteousness with God, says Paul.

In this phrase also Saint Peter urges the Jews, that they had denied The
holy one, and inst, Act: 2.
and desired a murderer to be given them.

The manner of this Justification was in the spirit, that is to say; He was
justified in that, which was in his sacred person divine, and above the humane
nature. So S. Paul teaches the Church of Rome, affirming, that albeit he was
the son of David according to the flesh, yet was he declared to be the
Son of God, with power according to the Spirit of sanctification, Romans 1. 2.
by the resurrection from the dead, which seems unto me to intend two
arguments to this purpose. The first is, that never any in our flesh lived
spotless, and void of sin, but Christ only. There is the justifying
Spirit of Sanctification.

The second is, that never any of himself, but Christ Jesus loosed the bands
of death, and arose from the fetters of the grave. There is the Justifying
Spirit of power in the Resurrection; and even in this very phrase Athanasins
speaks, to wit, That Christ was justified, Non humano more sed diuina
puritate.
not after the manner of men, but by divine purity,

To this end, that he should be honored and worshipped, not as a mere man,
albeit he was truly man, but as the eternal God in our flesh. This therefore
is the Catholic Faith which, whosoever does not believe, cannot be saved.
That Jesus Christ is known by his power in the spirit, to be the very son of
God against the Ma^cionites, Gods son by nature, not by grace against the
Arrians, that he was begotten of the Father against the Bonosians, and that
from everlasting, against the Natiuitarians; that he was God of himself,
against the Donatists, and that he was coequall with the Father, and
consubstantiall against the Macedoans. This Justification of the Son of God
was declared in the spirit of power, and in the spirit of purity, as I have
said out of Saint Paul to the Romans.

In the power of the Spirit it was declared against all the powers of
darkness, which flesh and blood could not abandon. For besides the general
cessation of Oracles at his coming, the particular Idols were every where
defaced and confounded. Astorah of the Sydonians, Melchom of the Ammonites,
Chemosh of the Moabites, Beelzebub of Ekron, Remphan of the Sirians, Dagon of
the Philistines, Moloch of the Egyptians, and many others, were in all places
of the world put to utter confusion: Because the God of this world, which is
the devil was cast out, and the stronger man surprised the strong man,
dispossessed him, dispoiled him, and utterly vanquished him. Insomuch that the
very devils cry, Torment us not before our time: and ask leave to go even
into sordid swine. Thus was he justified in the power of the Spirit, in
^anquishing the powers of darkness.

His Justification was also declared by the spirit of power against his
enemies, as appeared by the four Herod's, As^alonita, Archelaus, Antipas, and
Agrippa, who being Tyrants, and persecutors of Christ in his infancy, and of
some of his followers, there appeared upon them the strong hand of God, that
brought them to pitiful and lamentable confusions. But most notably and most
notoriously the Justification of the same God, Christ Jesus our Lord in the
Spirit of power appears most evidently, even at this day to the view of the
whole christian world, in his continued judgments upon the whole nation of the
Jews, who were subverted, and utterly overthrown by the Romans, at the very
time of the year wherein they crucified Christ, which was about Easter: For at
that very time of their great festiuity, the Roman^s came, and besieged
Jerusalem.

And as from Mount Oliuet they apprehended Christ; so from that Mount was their
City entered, and surprised: And as they hurried the Lord Jesus from Pilate to
Herod; so they were hurried up and down during the siege, from John to Simeon,
and from Simeon to John, two notable villains that did mutinize within the
City to their unspeakable torment, vexation, and utter subversion. And as they
whipped the Lord of Life, and attired him in despicable manner, in contempt and
scorn; Even so they were whipped up and down the holy City in great villainy
and reproach by the Roman soldiers.

And as the Lord Jesus was sold for thirty pieces of silver by Judas a Jew;
even so thirty of the Jews in the sacking of the City were sold for one piece
of silver by the Soldiers. And even yet the hand of Gods power to justify his
sons innocence, is not shortened, but stretched out against them still.

The holy blood of Christ crying against them, and against their children (as
they themselves desired) for vengeance. They living as a forlorn and scattered
people upon the surface of the earth without Priest or Prophet, King or
Scepter, comfort or compassion.

In a word tell me, who did ever strive against the Messiah and did prosper, or
band himself against Christ, or Christian, and was not confounded? Christ was
also justified by the spirit of sanctifying purity; being pure, and spotless
in himself, both in body and soul, for there was not any guile in him, and
also pure in his redeemed people effectually. In himself pure, his conception
pure by the holy Ghost, his birth pure of a Virgin, his life pure, both in word
and deed, in life and death pure, for he offended not, no not so much as in
his tongue, and he is perfect that so offends not.

In his redeemed people pure, by the effects of the same justifying spirit:
For whereas all the whole world else is set upon wickedness, hunting either
with profit, as with a bloud-hound, or else being befooled or besotted with
pleasures, as their Helena (these two being, as it were, the two Poles whereon
the whole world else is turned) the spirit of Christ has wrought in those
that are his, ^uch a measure of sanctification, that they mind and breath
nothing but Heaven, and heavenly things. If it thu^der that (say they) is the
voice of our heavenly Father; If they cast their eyes to those visible heavens,
there (say they) is the curtain, or base court of our inheritance among the
Sa^nts.

If they hear music, Oh (say they) what harmony do the Angels make in
Heaven? If they behold the earth and the glory thereof, they say,

If God have provided such a place of pleasure for us on earth in this our
prison; What glory is that he has laid up for us in heaven.

In all occurrences of their life, they savor nothing but of God and
goodness. In a Word, they live not, but Christ lives in them. Gal. 2. 20.
For this is indeed the true being of Christians, wholly to give over
themselves to be guided by Gods holy justifying Spirit.

Their life is to live in the Spirit, their passages are to walk in the
spirit, If they resolve, their station is in the spirit. If they be devout,
They pray in the Spirit.

Al their whole service of God, John 6.
is to Worship him in spirit and truth. Otherwise, those that have not this
spirit, that is, are not guided thereby, are none of his: Romans 8.
For as in the creation of the World, Genesis 1.
The spirit of God moved upon the waters; So certainly now in the
Regeneration, and new birth of the Christian World: the Spirit of God moves
upon the affections of our hearts, to turn the rivers in the south, that is, to
turn the stream of our actions and courses of our life to the Ocean, the
living God, For he has made us for him self, and therefore our hearts are
never quiet, Aug. lib. 1. Confess.
until we return unto the Lord our God again.

When Christ therefore speaks, Application
he speaks by the spirit to the Churches for the Scripture says, Apoc. 3
Let him that has an ear to hear, hear what the spirit says to the
Churches.

The Comforter also of Gods Church is the spirit, which is Gods gift unto his,
and does Witness with the spirit, Romans 8.
That we are the sonnnes of God.

There is the certainty of the subject of our Faith, The spirit does make
intercession for us, with sighs unutterable.

There is the breath of our prayers, and does help our infirmities, There is
the stay and pillar of all our happiness, Cor. 15.
The first Adam being a living soul, but the second Adam a quickening spirit:
For they are quickened, in whom this blessed spirit dwells, both toward God
in the spirit of faith, and holy union, and in the spirit of zeal being
ravished for the hope of Heaven, as appeared in the blessed Martyrs, and also
quickened toward others in the spirit of charity, keeping the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace, in the spirit of meekness, and placabilitie
being easy to be entreated for Christ's sake. Quickened in themselves in the
Spirit of sanctification, 1 Ioh. 3.
purging themselves for their assured hope of Heaven, and in the spirit of
sincerity, Mich. 6.
Doing justly in all their actions with all men.

To this purpose, the earnest of the Spirit is given the Elect, even in this
life, never to be taken away, but to be made up (for that is the (...) of an
earnest) and the pledge of the spirit, as an hostage to secure them; the seal
of the promise to sanctify them, and the spirit it self being the Doctor of
truth, to lead them into all truth, that their sensual part may be guided
by right reason, their reason ordered by faith, and their faith illuminated,
sanctified, and led on by the Spirit of God. Indeed to them that seek, not
after God, this direction of his most holy spirit is hateful, and the reason
is very plain. Even because this sacred spirit of the eternal God, John 16,
Rebukes the world of sin, of righteousness and of judgment.

It rebukes the world of sin, because the wicked world believes not, which
is the Sin of Sins, as I may so say, but is fraught with furious spirits of
blind ignorance, and desperatefolly, which cast thousands into fires, and
waters of misperswasion, and misbeleefe, and these worldlings are caught away
with vnpure spirits of sensual security; which possess them both with
dumbnes and deafness, that they can neither speak of God, but in their
blasphemous cursinges and swearings, nor hear of God, without great
wearisomnesse and discontent,

This sacred spirit also rebukes the world of righteousness, because, says
Christ, I go the right way unto the Father; but the world is led by wit
worshippes, will worships, and other such devises of singularity and conceited
righteousness of man's many inventions.

Some with Anabaptisme, Eccles. 7.
which is the devil in an Angel of light, and some with Iesuitisme, which is
a subtle and sly Antichrist in the Church And this holy spirit rebukes the
world of Judgment, because the Prince of this world is judged already, and the
unbelievers his vassalls, and slaves, are judged with him, and are reserved for
the further judgment, and utter darkness of these vnpure spirits, that are
already in chains to be brought forth in the great audite of Christ, and end
of the world. For what devout soul trembles not? yea shuddereth not with
horror, to know that Satan is the God of this world, 2 Cor. 4. 4.
and to conceive that seven spirits of evil, yea Legions of unclean spirits.
may obsesse, possess, and hellifie the soul, and body of one man, or of one
woman.

I wonder that the whole frame and fabrique of nature, shakes and quaketh not
to bear, and hear those hellish and devilish miscreants, that when the
servants of GOD preach solemnly, soberly, and seriously, in the power, zeal
and abundance of their spirit, say to them, as Festus said to Paul, This man is
beside himself, much learning makes him mad; and say to others, as the Jews
to the Apostles, when they had received the gift of the holy spirit.

These men are drunk with wine; or else take upon them in the devilish and
damnable pride of their own hearts, to direct the whole world, in the
misperswasion of their own singular and private spirit, not in order to God,
as they pretend, but in confusion to the devil, as the end shows.

So did John of Leidon, Nipper Doling, Chreiton, and others of that crew of
wretched miscreants, who at Munster in their enraged and rebellious route cried
out (being led by a cursed spirit of their own) nothing but Depose, kill,
murder, meaning those sober and moderate Christians, that withstoode their
brainesicke fury, and Anabaptisticall fanaticall folly, and in all that outrage
pretended nothing; but that they were guided thereunto by the spirit. So do
those that are engaged into the spirit of Antichrist, and enraged with the
poisoned cup of the stru^pet of Romish Babylon, her spiritual fornication, who
speak, write, and practice prepensed wickedness, as did Cardinal Como to
Parrie the traitor, This Record remains in the acts of Parrie his arraignme^t.
what time he intended; nay received their consecrated host with the said
Cardinal to kill our late Queen Elizabeth of precious memory, signifying by
letter unto him, that the then Pope Gregory the thirteenth, as by the
Credentiall note included in the letter, he might see, doubted not but that the
same spirit, which moved him to so good a work, as to kill the Queen, would
certainly assist him to the performance thereof.

Oh barbarous spirit of brutish Popery, So do those that scoff at the gifts
of the Spirit in their brethren, saying to those whom they see reuearing, and
yielding obedience to the power of Gods grace, and counselling others to be
guided and governed thereby. Oh Sir, you are so full of the spirit that it
runs out of your nose. Oh sir, the spirit moves you.

This and the like hellish language, I say, is an amazement unto good men, to
think there should be any fo damnably profane, and so desperately wicked,
especially among Christians, who profess in their holy Creed, to believe in
the holy spirit, and acknowledge that in the power of that spirit, They live,
move, Act 16.
and have their being, yea and they feel themselves often times quickened from
the dullness of sin by the same spirit, unto the motion, and life of grace,
Romans 2.
whereby they are made inexcusable.

And profess further, that they believe that they shall be raised up out of
their dust, and from the bands and fetters of the grave, by the operation of
this powerful and blessed spirit unto eternal glory, by that mighty working
whereby it is able to subdue all Phil. 3.
things unto it self.

This (I say) is a great consternation and amazement unto a Christian heart,
and causes often times many good souls to quake and shudder to see, and behold
such desperate scornings, and reprochful contumelies among such, as profess
they believe in God.

The serious consideration whereof (I am persuaded) would eftsoons trouble the
minds of many other, with grievous distractions and disturbances, had not the
holy book of God in two most pregnant places of the new Testament, set forth
to the life, both of the Apostacy of faith, and irregularity of good manners,
which the spirit of God prophesyeth should happen in these last and worst ages
of the world. For Saint Paul teaches the Bishop of Ephesus, That the spirit
speaks evidently, 1. Tim. 4. 1.
That in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, and shall give
heed to spirits of error, and doctrines of Devils.

The spirits of error are such, in whom there is no sound truth of GOD, but
mingled and mangled with humane traditions, no conscience of good, but
iustifyings of their own inventions.

The doctrines of devils are prohibitions of marriage, and superstitious
abstaining from meats, as the Text speaks, And I take those spirits of
errors, and doctrines of devils, are no where to be found in the Christian
Church more pregnant, for we must not look for them among Turks and Pagans,
because this Prophecy reuealeth what shall happen in the Church, and amongst
professors of Christ, but in the Papacy only, which in the later times, that
is, some six hundred years ago, or thereaboutes, utterly fell away from the
verity of the faith of Christ, and gave heed to the spirits of errors, and
doctrines of devils, intending nothing else thereby but the subversion of the
Primitive purity of Religion, and conversion of the internal beauty of the
Church of Christ, into an external, and pompous luster of humane policy.

And again Saint Paul shows by the evidence of the same spirit, 2. Tim. 3.
That in the last days, which are these worst days of ours, should come
perilous times, wherein men should be lovers of themselves, covetous
boasters, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy,
without natural affections, truce breakers, false accusers, intemperate,
fierce, no lovers at all of them that are good, traitors, beady, high minded,
lovers of pleasure more then of God, having a show of Godliness, but have
denied the power thereof, from which Saint Paul counsels to turn away.

These (Men and Brethren) These, I say, are the faithless and fruitless
spirits of vanity, the dissolute children of disobedience, and clouds without
water, who despite the spirit of grace, Quench the light of the Gospel, Act.
19.
and know not whether there be an holy Ghost or no.

But (Men and Brethren) Hearken, whosoever offends of infirmity, offends
against God the Father, who is power and strength, and whosoever offends of
ignorance, sins against God the Son, who is wisdom, and these finnes are
pardonable, but who so sins against the Holy Ghost, the spirit of truth and
charity, his sins are irremisible.

Let him therefore that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches: For the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. Be
men never so profoundly learned, or so well conceyted of themselves.

Christ Jesus who was our Reconciliation on earth, by his Incarnation, Life,
and Passion, is now our Aduocation in heaven, at the right hand of God the
Father, by his continual Mediation, and is our daily Comforter, (as Saint
Bernard speaks) by moving, In occulto, ait Bernard.
stirring, and inclining our hearts to believe, and our wills, and consciences to
the obedience of faith, and to the endeavor, care and study of all sacred
duties. Are not they then in a most desperate and woeful estate and condition,
think you, who despise and despite this Reconciliation, Aduocation, Mediation,
and Consolation of Gods spirit, who continue in that sin, for which there is
neither sacrifice, no^ oblation to be offered, that can do them, or theirs
any good who resist the Spirit of Christ, albeit it stand at the door of their
hearts and consciences, and crave for entrance, who grieve the spirit of God
by their vile and beastly living, and quench out the light thereof by their
ouer-flowings of malitiousnesse, which otherwise would shine and glitter, like
the sparkles of a diamond in the midst of our naughty Natures; and in a
word, who have in them no gift, grace, condition, quality, spark or
resemblance of Gods spirit whatsoever they may brag, and boast thereof, out of
their own deceivable seemings, but only this, that their goodness, so
Anabaptistically are they besotted, cannot be seen as the holy Ghost is
invisible.

And no less lamentable are the cauils of those which object, That the
Jesuits (whom we so vilify) boast also that they are led by the spirit, as
if most damnable heretics did not make the same plea; but the practice of the
Nobles of Baroa is a satisfactory answer for that, and all other cauils of
that fry: for they searched the Scriptures: Act. 17.
To see whether or no the things were so that they heard the Apostles preach;
but the spirit of Iesuitisme dare not abide that trial, nor any other like
spirit of error.

Another says, there be so many that vaunte of the spirit, that I know not
which I should adhere unto, but Saint Paul gives a rule for that.
Nevertheless (says he) whereunto we have already attained, Let us march by
the same rule, Phil. 3. 16.
(which is the sacred Scriptures) that we may mind the same thing.

This plainly shows us, that we must adhere to none, for our direction to
God, but such as adhere to Gods Oracle, the Sacred scriptures, and are guided
thereby.

Yea, but another urges further (and says) we see that those that profess
themselves to be guided by the Scriptures, and by the spirit thereof, do
differ. What then? All men have not Faith, albeit in number and profession they
be of the Church, (as S. Austine speaks:) and hence it is that they cannot
accord: For what communion has light with darknes^: or Faith with infidelity?
Yea, even amongst them that have Faith, some have a greater, and some a lesser
portion thereof, according to their knowledge, by Gods dispensation: and hence
it is often times that they cannot accord in all things, at all times, for there
is a procession from faith to faith, yet all may hold the Fundamental
grounds, and principles, in blessed divinity: albeit they differ in some
particulars, because some have already attained to that measure of grace, which
another^ may attain unto in some time after.

This therefore is an infall^ble rule of S. John: 1. Ioh* 4.
We are of God, he that knows God, hears us: He that is not of God,
hears not us: Hereby know we the^ spirit of Error, and the spirit of
Truth. That is as S. Augustine expounds it, If any man take upon him to
expound the scriptures, A se.
albeit it be even by himself, with invocation of GOD, who assists by his
holy spirit, and the spiritual man discerns all things, 1. Cor: 2.
the internal unction, directing him in all things, and leading him into all
truth: To this man we are bound to hearken, and his doctrine to embrace,
albeit thousands gain say it, as the Council of Nice hearkened to Paphnutius
being but one man against the whole route, and rabble of Pseudo Catholics.

But if any man undertake to do it of himself, of his own private, and
singular spirit without warrant, and direction of Gods spirit which
counsels and guides by the word only: It is the Spiders web, the
Cockatrice egg, the foam of the sea, the fume of the bottomless pit, and
we may undoubtedly disauow it, and defy it.

I conclude then, that this foundation stands firm and sound, and may
satisfy the soul of any believer, to wit, that God is manifested in the
flesh, by being baptized as man: Justified in the Spirit, by forgiving sins
as God: Manifested in the flesh, by being tempted as man, Justified in the
spirit, as God by ouercomming for us the world, the flesh and the Devil.

Manifested in the flesh, by being hungry as man, Justified in the spirit, as
God, by feeding thousands abounda^tly with a very small pittance: Manifested in
the flesh, by enduring thirst as man: Justified in the spirit, as God, by
calling those that are thirsty unto the waters of Life, that they might never
thirst any more. Manifested in the flesh, by praying as man, Justified in the
spirit, by hearing the prayers of others as God. Manifested in the flesh, by
weeping as man: Justified in the spirit, by wiping all tears from our eyes as
our God. Manifested in the flesh, by being sold for thirty pieces of silver, as
a man, Justified in the Spirit as God by redeeming the world with his blood, a
price pricelesse, peerless. M^nifested in the flesh, being led as a sheep
to the slaughter, as man, Justified in the spirit, by triumphing over death
and hell, and by leading captivity captive, as God^ Manifested in the flesh, by
dying as man, Justified in the spirit, as God, by rising again from the dead,
by ascending into heaven, by sitting at the right hand of the Father, whence we
expecting him to come again in the end of the world with Majesty and great
glory, to judge both the quick and the dead.

Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly. O holy spirit of purity and power, assist my
weak and feeble spirit, to be lift up unto thee in prayer.

Oh righteous God, Invocation.
and most merciful Father in Jesus Christ, to whom the spirits of the just
are always, and every where lift up, remember me in thy great goodness. For I
acknowledge and confess unto thee my many and manifold infirmities,
wretchednesses, and wickednesses, both in the sins of my body, and also in
the sins of my soul.

Now a long time O Lord I have bin grievously te^ptead with the spirits, not of
infirmity only which dwell in my flesh, but with foul and filthy spirits, of
pride, ambition, envy, worldly policy, and other vile and vain deceitfulnes
of mine own heart, and often times with lothsom and ugly spirits of lust,
adultry, gluttony, dru^kenes, wantonness, and many other such like evils,
which haunt me daily either in thought, word, or deed, and seek to har^our, in
my polluted flesh, giving me no rest, nor respite, but are still seeking, and
daily assayling to ruinate and run over me: and are daily fighting and
troubling me. I have sinned O Lord, I have sinned, I have done evil in thy
fight, and these evils are punishments unto me for the same.

It is I Oh Lord, it is I, and it seems to me that it is none but I that ever
sinned so hainously against thee, I seem to my self of all others to be the
most miserable, most distressed, and most wretched creature on the earth.

What shall I do, O Creator of heaven and of earth? Thou preserver of
mankind, whether shall I fly from these ugly Monsters, that thus pursue my
soul, and daily seek to prevail against me? I know not where to be safe
from them, but only to fly unto thee, Oh Lord, who only can still the
raging and the roaring of the great waters when they arise and swell: who only
can chain the Devil when he is ^rampant, and ready to devour; and who
only can cast out the unclean spirit with a word, that they never enter
any more.

Now therefore come I to thee, O King of Saints, showing to thee my malady, my
misery, my mo^rning, how I lie here among the graves of the dead, and torment
my self, being possessed with the rage, and hell of my misdeedes, and cry
after thee, O son of David, have mercy upon me, and deliver me by the power
of thy might, by thy stretched out arm, and by one touch of thy sacred
goodness, that it may dispossess Satan, the strong man of his hold, that it
may heal me, and cast out the unclean spirits, and may utterly abandon
sin, shame and Satan far from me, and from my dwellings.

Take from me for Christ his sake mine own wretched spirit of infidelity,
pride, malice, and inconstancy, and grant unto me O Lord, in steed thereof
thy blessed spirit of truth, humility, charity, and perseuering constancy. Oh
take from me, O Lord, mine own spirit of uncleanness, covetousness,
flouthfulnesse, and bestow upon me in steed thereof, thine holy spirit of
pureness, liberality, and of all careful, and Christian circumspection.

Take from me, dear Father, mine own spirit of crookedness wherewith I have
been vexed, and bowed together for many years, and grant me thy Spirit of
power to raise me up, and thy strength that I may resist sin in these days
of my combating, that I may so resolutely devout my self to the^, and to thy
sacred service, that I may never more hearken to subtle and enticing spirits
of pleasure, of errors, of impiety. O sacred spirit that did move upon the
waters in the creation of the world, now move the streams and fountains of my
life, in my regeneration, and new birth.

Shake the very foundations of my soul, that the image of Christ Jesus may be
repaired in me, which I vile wretch by my sins have miserably deformed and
defaced O blessed spirit help mine infirmities, heal my imperfections,
compassionate my miseries, and make intercession for me, with sighs
unutterable, which will have no nay. That I may feel my self comforted by
thee, the spirit of consolation in all the ways of godliness, that I may
perceive my self to be led on into all truth and verity and may at the last
assure mine own spirit by thy blessed testimony, that I am a child of thy
gracious adoption.

O blessed Jesus that wast declared mightily to be the son of God, by the
powerful spirit of sanctification, and by rising from the dead, that did
vanquish and utterly abandon all the powers, all the hours of darkness, and
spirits of error and misbeleefe, remove far from me all heathenish, Pagan,
and Popish idolatry, all confidence in any creature, all flattering of mine
ownselfe, that the pure light of thy revealed truth may shine into my heart,
that I may ever worship thee in spirit and truth, as thou have commanded. And,
O God, make my life holy, innocent, modest, and honest in thy sight, that I may
see my heart repaired, and renewed by thy spirit of grace, to walk before thee
in godly and sincere integrity of conversation, all the remainder of my
wretched days. So am I assured Satan shall never circumuent me, nor the world
deceive me, or mine own flesh entice me, or enforce me from thy holy and
sacred directions, but if I fall, I shall rise again, if I turn away at any
time, I shall return again. So shall I ever magnify thy name, and multiply
praises unto thy majesty, and ascribe unto thee honor, and praise all my life
long.

Grant these mercies unto me O father of comfort, and power, for thy covenants
sake made unto mankind in the justification of thy Son Christ Jesus, both
for the sanctity of his life, for the suffering of his death, and for the
continual intercession, and mediation of his eternal priesthood, he now
sitting at thy right hand for us in Mai^stie and great glory, and remaining a
Priest for ever after the order of M^lchisedech.

Behold us wretches, O holy Ghost, whose souls cleave unto the ground, quicken
us with thy might, and lift us up from the grossness of our corruption, to
our spiritual being in Jesus Christ, that we may live in the spirit, love in
the spirit, pray in the spirit, and be led thereby continually into all good
actions, being thereby purged and purified, both in our spirits, souls, and
bodies, from all dead and damnable works of the flesh, the world and the
devil. That so at the last we may through thy favor, O God, be perfectly
united unto thee in the spirit of sanctification, in this life, and in the
everlasting spirit of thy power be brought to our glorification in the other
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

GOD SEEN of Angels.
Explication.
THis Manifestation of God in the flesh, and justification in the Spirit, The
third day of the week.
was so apparent, and the glory thereof so great that it filled heaven and
earth with the brightness of it, for it was as well seen of Angels as of men.
Seen of Angels, that is, known of good Angels, and acknowledged of evil
Angels, who felt the power thereof. Of Angels those heavenly soldiers, whose
creation, both for the time and place, whose apparition, whether it be real,
or imaginary only, whose motion, whether it be in time, or at an instant,
whose local sight, whether it be definitive, or may be in many places at
once, Haec crypta magis Platonicorum, (...) quam Christianorum. (...),
theologiam sperare iudicamus.
whose tongue, whether it be a proper and peculiar Idiome among themselves
only, or communicable to others, whosetuition, whether it be (according to the
Egyptian and Platonicall devises severally limited over particular Countries,
Provinces, and cities, whose number whether it be divided into three
Hierarchies, and into nine orders and other such like curious Queeres: if any
desire to know, I refer the in quisitors thereof to Abbas Tritemius, Agrippa,
Dionysius, and others.

My purpose in this discourse, being not to make knots, but to endeavor to
untie them rather, and not so much to satisfy the brain with curious
contemplacions, as to desire to sanctify the heart with divine meditations,
shall endeauo^r and tend to open more profitable lessons, and therefore first I
show unto you, that Angels are spiritual essences created of nothing, formed
most near to the ^mage of God, ordained of God to minister to himself, to
take care of his elect people, and to enjoy eternal happiness with him, being
endued with most royal robes of excellent wisdom, righteousness, and
sanctity.

The Scripture both Canonical and Apocripha notify their natures by certain
proper names attributed unto the^

The sacred Canonical Scripture, note^h two of most eminent employment,
Gabriel signifying the power of God employed in the message of this
manifestation, and Michael, signifying, Who is as God, employed in the
debellation of gods, and our enemies

The Apocrypha Scripture has these four, Raphael, which is power of healing,
Vriel named so of the light, Ieremiel called so of the mercy of God, and
Shealtiel designing the praise of God.

The Canonical Epistles of Saint Paul to the Churches of Ephesus, Ephesians. 3. 10.
and Colossi, Col. 1. 16.
declare their nature by five terms of puissance, calling them Thrones, as
attendants on Gods tribunal to do, and execute his decrees, dominations, as
being authentical, and having powerful warrant for what they do,
principalities, as guiding and guarding their several limited, and especially
appointed princedoms, powers, as having effectual working over inferiors,
Mights as being Gods great guard, who is the Lord of hosts, and angels
generally in the whole body of the Scripture, which notes their general
employment, being Gods nuntioes, emissaries, and messengers, Dan. 7. 10.
A thousand thousand of which stand before him, and 10000. minister unto him.
Such are their names, such are their natures, and such are their general
imployme^ts.

And as for their conceited hierarchies of angels, assisting Seraphins,
Cherubins, and thrones Angels commanding dominations, principalities, powers,
angels executing, Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, are rather fancies the^ verities,
rather imaginations then conclusions of divinity.

As for their number, we are sure it is numberless. For Daniel says, Iunius
in Iocum. Dan* 7.
A thousand thousand stand before him, and ten thousand minister unto him:
where a difinite number is put for an indefinite. Christ himself also testifies
it saying.

I can even now pray unto my Father, and he will give me more then twelve
legions of Angels; Mat. 26.
and the spirt of God witnesses, That we are come to innumerable company of
Angels. Heb. 12. 22.
Oh this is a singular comfort unto us, for hence we know that more are with
us, then against us, as Elisha said to Gihazi.

This Mystery of Godliness, is said here to be seen of these glorious
spirits the Angels, so that we see Godliness is Angelical.

Seen, that is, perfectly known, for what we see we auerre confidently
against all gainesayers to be true, for we avouch with asseueration, Vident
animo eloquere (mi fili) vt te videam Senec.
that we saw it with our eyes.

Seen intellectually, as the Lattins speak, they see in their minds: Speak
on my son that I may see thee.

In which sense also the Angels who are childrens Gardians, are fayde always
to behold the face of their Father in heaven. Mat. 18.


Unto natural sight three things are required. First the power of seeing, then
the light, as the means of seeing, and a visible form for the object.

To this intellectual, Angelical knowledge or fight are three things also
requisite.

First, their intellectual power of knowledge given the^ by their Creator in
their creation; then the reflection of Gods light, as the means of their
knowledge, and the sacred body of Christ Jesus as the visible object to delight
them.

The knowledge then of Angels is twofold, the one natural whereby they see,
and know God in the undivided Trinity (to wit) the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost) one in essence, and three in existence, and all the creatures of God in
this blessed vision.

The other knowledge of things is two fold: First, by a matutine knowledge, as
Saint Angustiue calls it, knowing, and seeing all things in the Word, by whom
all things were made, and afterward by a view of the creatures in themselves.
For the Angels see the creatures in God, and men see God in the creatures.

Plainly thus, Euclides, Archimides, or some such like skillful Mathematitian,
first sees, and knows the length, and breadth, and all the demensions of the
lines, and every turning, tryangle, and particular parcel of his draught and
circle in his mind and cogitation, and afterward sees and knows the same
lines, angles, and Circles, in the table, dust or earth, wherein he draws
those proportions; semblably the Angels see, and know all things revealed unto
them: First in God, and then in the Creatures; in God, as in their minds, in
the Creatures, as in the revealed objects, For Angels have a natural
knowledge, wherein they were created, even as many as continued their stations
in the truth and service of their Creator, and they have also revealed
knowledge from God in several particulars, as to the Angel Gabriel was made
known in particular the Incarnation of the Messia^. And they have also an
experimental knowledge of Gods wisdom in the mystery of his sons
Inca^nation, even by the revelation of preaching in Gods church, as Paul
witnesses, Unto me (says he) who am less, then the least of al Saints, Ephesians.
3. 10.
is this grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable
riches of Christ, and to make all men see what is the fellowship of the
mystery which from the beginning of the world has been hid in God, who
created all things by Jesus Christ, to the e^tent that now to the
principalities and powers in heavenly places might be known (by the Church)
the manifold wisdom of God.

And this is most apparent in the sight, and certain knowledge, that the
Angels of Heaven had of the particulars touching this blessed mystery; for
before Christ's incarnation, the time of the sixty two weeks, which was the
time, from that prophecy to his passion was seen* and known to an Angel, Dan.
9. 24.
that revealed it by Gods appointment to Daniel.

Christ's name was foretold by an Angel before he was conceived in the womb;
Mat. 1.
his conception revealed by an Angel, Luke 1.
and both to the blessed Virgin; Luke 2.
his birth was proclaimed to the shepherds by a troop of Angels; Mat. 2.
his flight into Egypt from Herod's butcherie; his returning out of Egygt, and
turning aside into the confines of Galilee, all directed and ordered by an
Angel, that God especially employed in that message.

In his temptation in the wilderness, Mat. 4.
Angels minister unto him, Luke 22.
in his agony, an Angel from heaven comfort him, Mat. 26*
in his apprehension he testifies to his enemies teeth, that he could have a
guarde of more then twelve Legions of Angels, if he should desire them of his
heavenly Father.

While he was in the grave an Angel descends, Mat. 28.
and rouled away the stone from the door of the monument.

After his Resurrection, two Angels sat one at the head, and the other at the
feet, Ioh. 20. 20.
where Jesus body had layne, and declared that he was rise^ from the dead,
they being employed by God to bring that message to the then mournful and
sorrowful Disciples, for the late death of their heavenly master.

In his Ascension two Angels spoke unto the people, that gazed up into Heaven,
Act, 1. 11
after him, and certified them of his coming again to judgment in the end of
the world.

Yea the very evil Angels saw and knew the power of the son of God in this
manifestation to their great terror and torment.

Insomuch that they cry in the possessed; Mat. 8.
Oh Jesus, what have we to do with thee? Art thou come to torment us before
our time? And when they were forced to depart out of the possessed, they roar
and yell, yea they fell down, and confess saying, Luke 8.
Thou art the Son of God: and at the last being driven by extremit^es, they
desperately attempt to conjure Jesus Christ by God himself, not to torment
them.

Moreover, after Christ departure into Heaven, Mar. 5.
his very Name was, and yet is most dreadful unto them, and most powerful
against them: For S. Paul by the power of Christ's name cast out an evil Angel
out of a Damsel that had a spirit of divination. Act. 16.


And the Disciples of Christ came unto him reioising, that evil Angels were
made Luke 10. 17.
subject unto them through his Name.

Whereby it appears to our unspeakable comfort that the God whom we serve,
was known and acknowledged of the blessed Angels, yea, and that evil Angels
also felt his power, and know him to their faster and deeper despair, and are
now, and always made subject to Gods elect.

What unspeakable comfort is the knowledge of this unto us? Application.
What excellent direction does this Angelical knowledge afford us in our
Euangelical service, and what divine incitement is this to stir up in us
Angelical zeal? Comfort it is unspeakable.

For all these blessed Spirits are the attendants of our Lord Christ, and are
his Emissaries and Nuntioes, sent out by him for the good of them that shall be
saved. Heb. 1.


Not that every particular person has a peculiar Angel designed unto him to
be his Guardian (as the Popelings would have it) but hence we know, Psalm. 91.
that not one Angel, but many are ordained by God to succor and safeguard us
in all necessities and distresses what soever.

And without controversy, this is more comfort a thousand times, then to know
that one Angel only is appointed to be our assistant, In our life, in our
death, and in the day of judgment, they are appointed of God to be our
assistants. In our life, yea in all our life: In childehoode, Christ says,
Mat. 18.
Take heed ye despise not one of these little ones, for I say unto you, that
in Heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in
heaven.

In affliction Hagar is comforted by an Angel. Genesis 16.
In the wars Angels fight for Israel against the Assirians. Es. 38.


In prison Peter is loosed out of prison, Act. 12.
and out of the fetters by an Angel, albeit he slept between two soldiers
that took upon them to be his keepers.

In all our ways the Angels have charge to be our Conuoy toward Heaven.
Mat. 4.
Psalm. 91.


At sea in shipwreck, an Angel comfort Paul, Act. 27.
and shows unto him what would be the issue of that voyage.

On land, Jacob in his journey to Mesopotamia, Genesis 28.
is guided by an Angel.

In death they transport us into Abraham's bosom, Luc. 16.
and keep watch over our interred bodies until the Resurrection. And in that
great harvest at the end of the world, they are the Reapers in that great
solemnity, and exceeding Majesty, They are the Harbengers, Heraldes and
Trumpeters, 1 Cor. 15.
and in the sentence of that judgment they shall be the deuiders that shall
separate the good from the bad. Mat. 1 3


Oh that our service of God then were practiced by Mat. 25.
us according to our prayers: For we pray, Thy will be done O Lord, even on
earth, as it is in Heaven, that is by us Christians on earth, as by holy angels
in heaven. The Angels seeing and beholding this great and wonderful sacred
mystery, Praise God continually, crying Holy, Es. 6*
Holy, Holy Lord God of Saboth; should not we also both by prayers and praises
magnify our God incessantly.

The Angels most readily exceute Gods will, should not we with King David say,
Our hearts are prepared, we are ready to do thy will, O Lord.

The Angels love God above all things: why do we esteem any thing in the World
but for him, and for his sake, as helpers to lead us toward him.

The Angels long after our salvation, and much joy therein: Why do we thrust
one another into Hell; and heaviness by our lewdness, misperswasion, and
evil example?

The Angels desire yet further to see the perfection, and final consummation
of this glorious mystery of Christ's Kingdom, why do we wretches neglect the
blessed means thereof, which are offered unto us every day?

Thus the blessed Angels do, because they are a part of the Church
universally considered, whereof our Lord Christ is the head, and they much joy
for our association with them, whereby the ruin of those Angels that fell, is
repaired, and for the Incarnation of the Son of God, whereby they are in grace
most assuredly confirmed for evermore.

Why should not we, having so clear a reuclation and so displayed a sight,
both' in Gods works, in Gods word, and in the face of Jesus Christ; Why should
not we, (I say Men and Brethren) endeavor that we may do Gods will, in some
measure on earth, as the blessed Angels do in Heaven, seeing God has placed us
in the midst, creating us neither Angels nor beasts, but affording us the
means by the preaching of the Gospel, that by Regeneration: we might become
as glorious as the angels of Heaven, and not by degeneration become worse then
brute beasts: For God has given us the sparks of right reason to
surpassebeasts, and holy grace to surpass our selves.

Is it not then a thousand sorrows to every good believing heart to conceive,
that albeit God in his abundant mercies has thus revealed himself unto us in
the manifestation of our flesh, among us by the power of this Almighty spirit
above us, and by the testimony of Angels about us, yet there should be of them
that profess Christianity, such as are worse then the Sect of the Saduces, for
the Sadduces yet acknowledge that Angels were the good motions stirred up in
us, but these neither acknowledge God, good motions, nor devils, but are
copartners with the Devil against Michael, and his Angels, and are become
Combatants Apoc. 12
against Christ, and his Christians.

Has not Satan (think you) sifted such to the bran, and winnowed such to the
chafe by his damned motions, that he has made them good for nothing, and left
in them nothing but the dregs, and remnants of himself, as namely, the
eagerness, and greedy desire of having, and the cursed sins of despite and
malice: for they have taken the Devil at his word, when he showed them the
World, and the glory thereof, and said unto them. Mat. 4.
All this will I give you, they immediately fall down and worship him. Or else
show themselves to be of the devils pedigree by the grosnes of lying, John 4.
by the fulness of impurity, by the subtilty of sorcery, or as was said by the
mischief of helsish malice.

All which dregs of the devil. hide the son of God from those children of
disobedience, and nothing remains for the^ (except they repent) but the
fearful sentence of Depart from me ye Mat. 25
cursed into hell fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

Whereas if the sons of me^ would consider but what losses they sustain
hereby, me thinks it should recall every good mind, but of an ordinary
understanding to a far better disposition: For we Christians lose by such
wickedness the honor of being such evil Angels Judges; 1 Cor. 6.
Why do not ye know that we shall judge the Angels? that is, do ye not know
that we shall be assessors with Christ in the day of judgment, and condemn the
devil and his angels?

We lose the sight of Christ's mystical body in the glory of his Saints, 2.
Pet. 1.
Which the Angels of heaven desired to behold.

We loose the victorious triumph of Gods Saints, for shortly Satan shall be
beat 1 Thessalonians 4.
down under our feet.

Let us then raise up our selves to his glorious assotiation of the Angels,
in our service of God, knowing, that there are more with us, then against us,
and that our Lord (Christ Jesus shall appear in the end of the world with this
holy Angels in Majesty, Mat. 25.
and great glory to judge all mankind.

And I adjure you before Jesus Christ, and his Elect Angels, Tim. 21.
that ye diligently and duly consider these things, Heb. 12.
For ye are not come unto the mount which might not be touched, and that
burned with fire, nor unto blacknes and darkness, and tempest, and the sound
of a trumpet, and the voice of words which voice they that heard entreated that
the Word should not be spoken unto them any more.

But ye are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the
heavenly Jerusalem, and to aninnumerable company of Angels, and to the general
assembly, and Church of the first borne, which are written in heaven, and to
God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to
Jesus the Mediator of the New Test^ment, and to the blood of sprinck lings,
which speaks better things then that of Abell.

Oh blessed Lord, let me see thy face, for thy face Lord will I seek.

Incomparably blessed are those sacred Spirtes ( O holy and Inuocation^
heavenly Father) who ever attend thy glorious Majesty, and stand before thee
^ight and day to behold and see thee in thy displaied glory. They are in the
fullness of joy, and at thy right hand, where are blessings for evermore They
are ever delighted with the sight of thin^ unsearchable wisdom, of thine
unutterable glory, and unspeakable mercy. They are free from the assaults of
sin or Satan, for no evil comes near thy dwelling.

O miserable, wretches that we are on earth, subject to Satan's sl^ights, the
fleshes frailety, and the worlds wickedness. Debarred are we from thy glorious
light (O King of Heaven) and shut up h^^e in the darkness of our own ignorance,
and lie in the very shadow of death. Restrained are we from the joyful
fruition of the company of those stiall attendants the Angels and Saints that
ever do thee service without ceasing.

O blessed Lord, how happy were we the miserable inhabitants of thy
footstool, if thou would vouchsafe us that favor for Christ his sake, as
to deliver us out of the prison of this body, out of the fetters of sin, and
out of the snares of the Devil, that we might serve thee without fear in thy
Court of Heaven continually.

Consider good Father our misery, and forasmuch as in Christ Jesus thou have
given us a light of thy self, in the mirror of thy mercy, and mystery of
Christian godliness. Leave us not comfortless, but grant us for his passion
sake a glympse of thee, even in this Life, while we are here, that our souls
may be ravished with holy desires, and never be satisfied until we come unto
thee our God to enjoy thy self in glorious majesty.

To this blessed end, Oh tender hearted Father, arm us with help from heaven
in all the occasions of our life. For thou know: O Lord, that we war not
against flesh and blood only which are intestine and homebred enemies, but
against principalities, powers and spirits of errors, and darkness in high
places.

Thou know O Lord, that they are many, mighty and malicious: Thou know
our frailety, our feebleness, and our folly.

Help us then, dear Father, out of all the temptations and snares of the
devil. Let thy guard of good Angels, and holy ones stand with us to assist,
stand over us, to protect us, and give the^ a charge, O Lord, to keep us in
all our ways. Let them stand at our right hand to guide us for the best: Let
them go before us daily with thy preventing mercy, as they did before the
host of thy Israel. Let them comfort us in the good, as they did thy Iosuah.
Let them supply our wants, if need require, as they did thy Eliah.

Let them deliver us out of prison as they did thy Peter: save us in shipwreck
as they did thy Paul.

Let them always be ayding unto us in our sickness, and in all the weakness
and temptations thereof, yea in the last breath of our life, and after death:
Let them tra^sport us into Abraham's bo^ome, as they did thy Lazer^^.

And grant unto us O Father, for Christ's sake this grace that while we live
here, we may endeavor to do thy blessed will, as the angels do in heaven,
That we may ever ^praise thee for thy goodness, sing unto thee for thy
mercies, magnify thee for thy graces, and multiply our daily thankefulnes,
for thine unspeakable favors, both toward our bodies, and toward our
souls, sowards our selves and children in this lise, and in that to come.

Cause us, O Lord, to tremble at thy fearful judgments, that did not spare
the Angels that sinned, but have reserved them in chains of darkness unto the
judgment of the great day, O Lord if thou did not spare them for one sin,
what shall become of us that have sinned daily against thee, and do multiply
our iniquities as the hairs of our head, and as the sands of the sea shores
which is innumerable.

O Father have pity upon us, forgive us sweet Father, forgive us for Christ's
sake, and give us thy grace, that we may con^ert and turn unto thee, with all
our hearts, that those blessed spirits the Angels may have joy in our
conversion, and repentance, and we may ioy^e with them in the celebration and
honor of thy great and glorious name for evermore. O let us be partakers of
that grace, with thy blessed Angels, which wins infallibly, holds
inseparably, and leads indeclinably into the ways of eternal blessedness.

Grant unto us these mercies, O God of mercies, for Christ's sake, our only
Mediator.

So shall we that are thy people of thy pasture, sheep of thy flock, and
Church of thy Redeemed, as thy holy ones of heaven, be ever telling of thy
praise, and magnifying thy goodness in Christ Jesus world without end, Amen.

GOD PREACHED unto the Gentiles.
Explication.
THis Mystery of Godliness, you see, has been Manifestedin the flesh, The
fourth day of the week.
Justified in the Spirit, Seen of Angels, that is, It has bin manifested unto
us in the person of Christ in the power of Christ, and in the knowledge
service, and ministration of the blessed Angels of Christ. What can we then say
for our selves? Have not we heard of this great mystery of godliness? Has it
bin hid in a corner from us? or whispered in the ear, or been known to a
few, or published to a handful of people in some angle or corner of the world.

Have the Jews only had this made known unto the^? Assuredly God has been
Preached. There is the promulgation or proclamation of this mystery. God has
been Preached to the Gentiles. There is the large extent of this promulgation
God preached unto the Gentiles. 1. Cor. 1.
For it has pleased God by that which the world calls the foolishness of
Preaching to make known unto the world his unsearchable wisdom, and the
riches of his glorious grace in Christ.

Preaching being the gift of the holy Ghost, the spirit of prophecy, the glad
tidings of peace, of good things, and of salvation, caused Esayas an
E^angelicall Prophet of the Lord, to say, That the very feet of them that
brought this news unto the world were beautiful.

Preaching being the embassage of our reconciliationwith God in Christ, the
holy ordinance of God, 2. Cor. 5.
for the ordinary means of our sanctification by grace in this world, and the
cleeare publication of our assured glorification in the other world, caused
Paul to say, Woe is me if I preach not the Gospel: so necessary it was for him
and all believers.

Preaching to youth is, Ezec. 16.
as Ezechiel his clean water to assuage the heat of their concupiscence, and
to purge the old leaven of malitiousnesse.

It is as Solomon his wine to strengthen and glad the hearts Cant: 1.
of the ancient.

It is as Saint Peter his milk for children, to nourish and feed them up to
godliness.

It is as a sovereign bath to heal all believers, with what disease of sin
soever they be ill affected, and it is an antido^e, or counterpoyson against
all the venom of our rottennes.

For Preaching is the cele^^all chariot, wherein the gra^es, and gifts of the
holy ghost ^^^e continually conveyed unto us.

So Christ testifies when ^^e prays thus.

Sanctify them O, Father ^^rough thy truth, Ioh. 17.
thy Word is ^^uth. And that we may not ^oubt what this Word is, Saint Peter
preaches it. That we are ^orne again, not of corruptible ^eede, 1. Pet. 1.
but of incorruptible, by the Word of God, which lives and ^bideth for ever.

For all flesh is grass, and all the glory of man is as the flower of the
field, the grass withers, and the flower thereof falls away, but the word
of the Lord endures for ever, and this is the word which by the Gospel is
preached unto you.

Moreover, this Mystery of Godliness ( God preached unto the Gentiles) Saint
Peter had showed unto him in his practice of preaching. For it is said, While
Peter yet preached these words, Act. 10.
the holy Ghost fell on all them that hard the Word. Observe this saying:

The gift of the holy Ghost fell on the auditors, as Peter was a preaching.

Out of doubt preaching is the heavenly talent left unto the ministers of the
Gospel by their Master Christ, Mat. 26.
where withal they must negotiate, and wherein they must employ themselves
until he come again unto his great audite in the end of the world. And the
preaching of this mystery is the power of our God, the glory of our Preachers,
to the salvation both of Preachers and people. Preaching has the power of
edification through God in Christ, and works, ^ightily in those that God ^ath
set apart and designed Romans 1.
^o that business, for the buil^ing up again of those ruins which has been
battered down by sin and Sa^han.

For the bruised reed it must not break, nor the smoking flax it must not
quench if God in Christ direct it, but whereas knowledge puffs up, 1. Cot. 13.
this builds up unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Preaching is the voice of God, whereby he preaches, and publishes his holy
will, and last testament by men, vnthe sons of men.

In a word, Preaching is the Manna from heaven to feed our souls, the dew of
Hermon to water our barrenness, the lamp and light of God in the darkness
of this world for our direction, the sword of truth to cut asunder the Gordian
knots of heresy, schism, and controversy for our satisfaction, the wall of
fire by Gods promise to encompas us from enraged beasts, for our protection,
the revelation of the rock of our faith to build upon, for thetestification of
our full assurance in Christ, the touchstone of our co^uersatio^, for our
trials in all cases of conscience, the key that opens heaven to the
^eleeuers, and shuts heaven to impenitents, by Gods dispensation.

It is the David's harp, the music thereof so delights the soul, that it
does not faint, neither is altogether wearyed with the tediousnes of our
banishment in this world: It is the pricelesse antidote; more precious then
Nepente, or Mol^^, so much famoused by the ancient, for (...) expels by the
power of ^^e spirit which accom^nyeth it, all evils and (...) devils.

It follows next to whom his Mystery was preached, Preached unto the Gentiles.
^uen to the very heathen Gen^les, Preached unto the Gen^iles.

Now it comes to be consi^ered, that the time was, when ^he dew of heaven fell
only Iud. 6,
^on the fleece of Gideon, and ^he earth round about it was ^rye: that is, The
^ime was when the world consisted of Jews, Romans 3.
that only had Gods blessed favors, Ephesians. 3.
and the Gentiles which were without God.

The Jews were Gods peculiar to whom he committed his sacred oracles of trust,
Romans 2.
they were Israelites as preuayling with God more then any other nation. To
whom only were granted the privileges of Priesthood, and the arc of the
covenant. Of whom came the Patriarchs, the Prophets, and Jesus Christ our Lord
according to the flesh. Romans 9.


Concerning the privileges of those people, Moses challenges the whole earth
besides, and says, What nation is so great? who has the Lord so nigh unto
them, as the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon him for?

And David concludes it saying: God shows his word unto Jacob, and his
judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any nation, neither has the
heathen, that is the Gentiles, knowledge of his judgments. That the Son of
God should be preached unto the Jews thus privileged, and esteemed with God
is no great mystery, or marvel, but that he should be preached unto the
Gentiles, and that Gide^ns ^^eece should be dry, and all (...) ground round
about it The Jews rejected.
^et, that indeed is the Great ^ysterie of Godliness, and the ^nspeakeable
riches of Gods ^ercie, and the exuberance of ^is goodness, and the glory ^f
the treasure, of his grace ^owards us Gentiles. For the Gentiles were Atheists,
A^^hrists, strangers from the ^ommon wealth of Israel, a^^ants from the
promise of God, and without hope in the world. They were Idolaters ^n the woeful
alienation from God. For they made the^ Gods of the hosts of heaven of sinful
man, like unto themselves of men's qualities, as Justice, and Prudence and the
like, of men's perturbations as of Fear, and Love, of men's defects (for they
had their Muta de^.
dumb Goddess, their Bacchus for their Drunkards, their Venus for their
gallants. yea even for their very limi^ of their grounds, they ha^^ their
Terminus, and that which is unseemly to be spoken their very Iaxe house mu^^
have a patroness Cloacina.

The word of God tellet^ us sufficiently of Astora^ Melchom, Chemosh, Beelze
bub, and other such like Idolatrous rabble among the gentiles, and how that
every nati^^ made them gods of their own.

The men of Babylon, made Succoth Benoth, and the men of Cuth, made Nergall,
and the men of Hameth made Ashim^ and the Anites made Nibhaz* and Tirt^cke, and
Adrammelech, and Anammalech were the gods of Sepharuaim.

These indeed were those dogs the Scripture mentions, and therefore holy
things were forbidden to be given to such dogs.

These were those hogs, before whom the pearls of ^eaching must not be
cast, ^ea these were those Cymme^^an wretches against whom (...) mandate was
enjoined (...) the Apostles. That they should not so much as go into the ^^ay
of the Gentiles, nor once en^er into the city of the Samari^^ns who were
Gentiles.

^a^ it be imagined by the wit ^f the wisest man, that these should ever have a
redeemer: that they should have a God Mat. 10.
^o be good unto them. For neither Jupiter Optimus Max^mus, Jupiter Hammon,
Jupiter Capitolinus, nor Apollo the O^acle of wise dome (for his ^mouth was
stopped) nor great Pan (for a voice was heard, Pan is dead) nor the Hecatombes
of Caesar, no nor Pluto himself, albeit he might harrow hell, as some speak,
could help or do these Cymmerian wretches any good But with our Lord Jesus
Christ there is plenteous redemption.

He Prophesies this blessings unto them, he performs it. He prophesies it
long before by Esayas his Evangelical Prophet: Es. 2. 2.
But in the last days, it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house
of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it shall be
exalted above the hills, and the people shall stowe unto it, and many nations
shall come and say. Come let us go up unto the mountain of the Lord, and to
the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will
walk in his paths. For the Law of God shall go forth of Sion, and the word
of the Lord from Jerusalem.

And again, I am sought of them that asked not for me, Es, 5. 5.
and I am sound of them that sought me not. I said, Behold me, Esa. 65.
Behold me unto a nation that was not called by name.

And yet again, God says unto his Son, Ask of me and I will give thee the
^eathen for thine inheritance, Psalm. 2.
and the utmost parts of the earth for thy possession. Did God promise this,
and did he not perform? Performed this was in Melchisedecke king of Salem; in
Abimilech, in Ruth the Moabitish, in Rhahab the Cananite, in the Queen of
Sheba, in Hiram King of Tire, in Naaman the Assirian, in Job the Easterling,
and in the King of Niniute the Sprians chief City, as in the first fruits
of the Messiah purchased by his blood unto God the Father.

This redemption of the Gentiles was also Prophesied in the New Testament, to
wit,

That they should come from the East and West, and sit down with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, and that the Gospel should be
preached to all the world.

This was performed, Mat 2:
as in the first fruits thereof in the wise men that came to adore; Mat. 9.
in the Centurion, in the designement of Saint Paul to Act. 9.
be the minister, and doctor of the Gentiles; and in Peter's vision wherein he
was taught Act. 10.
to call nothing common, or unclean that God had cleansed, at what time he
was sent to preach this mystery unto Cornelius, and to his friends being
Gentiles.

Yet men and brethren behold and see with amazement, Application
how vile Preaching and Preachers are esteemed with many miscreants.

For to a Jewish spirit preaching is a scandal, to a Greek Philosopher it is
folly, to an Atheist babbling, to a Papist praching, to an Infidel intol^erable
tediousness, to the desperately damned a scarre-Crow, and to the worldling,
and hypocrite a cloak of dishonestie.

And as the Preaching of the Gospel is thus vilified, so Preachers also are
contemned.

But vouchsafe (Blessed in the Lord) to cast down your eyes upon the
Preachers, and consider well, that albeit their high Commission is from the
Lord, yet observe their contemptible, despicable, and mean condition among the
sons of men.

By office, Preachers are the Angels of God, and the Angels of the Church
appointed Mal. 2.
interpreters of God to his people, Apoc. 2.
and of the people to God.

Of God to the people in the explication, and application of his revealed will,
wherein the Preacher is the mouth of God unto the people. He is also the
peoples remembrancer to their God, when he confesses for them, and when he
prays for them, and herein he is the mouth of the people to their God.

The end of his Embassage is to deliver himself, and his hearers from hell.

God indeed has said, to the Artizan, Build man an house: To the Physician,
heal this man: To the Soldier, ^ight for man: To the King, Govern thy
subjects: To the Master, Defend and ^rouide for thy family.

But to which of the sons of men has God said, Deli^er thy brother from hell?

Surely to none but to the Preacher, and that this is the Preachers high
Commission ^t plainly appears.

For Job says, Job. 33.
If there be a messenger with him, an inpreter one among thousands to show
unto man his uprightness, then he is gracious unto him, and says, Deliver
him from going down to the pit, I have received a ransom.

And Saint Paul shows, that to Preachers God has delegated the Mystery, 2.
Cor. 5.
and Ministry of our reconciliation, with God in Christ, and committed unto
them the word of atonement, to be as his Ambassadors to pray, and beseech men
in Christ steed, that they would be reconciled to God, whereby they might be
saved.

Well for all this, let their Commission be what it will, their Embassage never
so divine, never so Evangelical, never so Angelical; I am sure their
condition of all other men's is often times most miserable, most lamentable.
Pitiful experience shows it to view of the whole Christian world, that none
interessed in that business be qualified how they will, can please.

For Esaias is too long, Obediah is too short, Daniel too hard, Amos too plain,
Micheah too mild, Hoshea too sharp, and Jeremy too querulous. This was the
condition of the Prophets.

Peter is reputed a drunkard, Paul a Sectary and a mad man, all the residue of
the Apostles esteemed the riffe raffe of the world, and the ofscowring of all
things unto this day.

This was the condition of the Apostles.

Hence the holy ones of God became complaynants. Jeremy says, The word of the
Lord was made a reproach and derision unto him daily, and therefore through the
anguish of his soul, though unadvisedly, he cursed the day of his birth, Ier.
20.
and the party that brought his father the tidings where he was borne, and
bewayleth, that his mother bare him a man of strife, and contention to the
whole world. For having neither lent nor borrowed upon usury: yet every one
did curse him.

Paul also laments the case, that God had set forth the Apostles last, as it
were appointed to death: For we are made, says he, a spectacle to the world,
and to Angels, and to men. We are fools for Christ's sake; but ye are wise:
we are weak, but ye are strong, ye are honorable but we are despised, being
reviled, we bless, 1, Cor. 4.
being persecuted, we suffer it, being defamed, we entreat, we are made as
the filth of the world, and are the off cowring of all things unto this day.

In all this think not much of it (blessed Brethren) for it is the very case
and condition of them that now live, who are the sincere preachers of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, and live conformable to the Church wherein they were
bred.

For what between the common adversary the Papist, the devils mouth the
Atheist, and the intestine firebrand the Separist, the poor Conformitant does
ofttimes more suffer then ever did any fugitive Seminary in Wisbich Castle.

But Christ was crucified between malefactors, and orthodoxe Christians have
ever been tortured between the spirits of extremes.

The Jews obtruded to the Lord of life, (when they had nothing else to say)
his mean parentage. Is not this the carpenters son? Are not such and such his
sisters?

The obiecting then either of baseness of birth, or poverty of estate unto
the preachers of the Gospel, is the spirit of Iudaisme, and let men be ware in
this case, lest the Jewish plagues befall them.

And the challenging of singularity, is the spirit of Iesuitisme, and let men
take heed of the spirits of errors and darkness of devils, for the devil can
transport himself into an Angel of light, and such men might prove light
Angels.

But the sons of true wisdom know, that the most abject, and meanest things
of the world, if God take them into his hands may work rare and wonderful
effects.

Salt being taken into the hand of God makes the bitter waters of Jericho to
become sweet. In humane reason the salt should make the waters more brackish,
but behold, 2. Reg. 2.
coming through Gods hand, as being Gods ordinance, it causes sweetness.

The washing in the ordinary river of Jordan at Gods command cures the Syrian
Captain of Leprosy, which the famoused waters of Abanah and Pharphar would
not do.

What is more vain then a dream? yet Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezar, and Gideon, had
great strength, and potent directions by dreams presented unto them by God?
What is more mean, and and more unlikely then clay? especially to clear ones
eyes, Ioh. 9.
yet this being taken into the hand of Christ makes blind eyes see plainly?

What more unlikely to heal then touching? yet the believing woman touched but
the hemme of Christ's garment, and was cured?

What more unlikely to work miracles then a voice? yet the unclean spirits
were cast out by the voice of Christ and his Apostles, yea with a voice the
very dead were Ioh. 11.
raised to life.

What more vanishing then a shadow? yet the shadow of Peter had effectual
power of doing wonders. Act. 5.


Let Preachers then be but Salt, yet they are the Salt of the earth, but
ordinary water, yet as Apostles they may water your dry hearts, Mat. 10.
and make them fruitful to God, but a Dream, yet they may awake you from the
slumber of sin, and present unto you truth, and puri^ie, but dust, and clay,
to be trodde under your feet, so that they make you see they care not, but a
voice in the wilderness of this world, yet they are the forerunners of the
great judgment, but shadows, yet will they haunt your ghosts until they have
prevailed with you, if you belong unto God.

And this is not of their own worth, and strength, but (as I said) because God
vouchsafes to take them into his hands, whereby he works out this great
work of our salvation, as appears in the vision to Saint John, where it is
said, Apoc. 1,
That God held seven stars in his right hand; and in the last verse of that
Chapter these seven stars are expounded to be seven Ministers of the Churches
of Asia. Therefore Preachers God holds in his hand, and so their labors
become powerful.

But cursed Cauillers, like Iannes and Iambres, who withstood Moses, stand up,
and object.

We confess (say they) this is most true, if God take this business into his
hand: But alas, we see this practice of preaching is in the hand, and handling
of many a sinful man, such as are often times more enormious, and exorbitant
in their conuersations, then those that are no Preachers.

Well, what then? The word preached either by a good or bad man remains the
Word of God still. For if the words of the scripture read, or Preached be
but a mere and dead letter, why is it called the Spirit of God?

And when we preach, if it be but the sound of a man's voice only, why does
God vpbraid the world That Prou. 6.
he has called (when men have but preached) and yet ye have refused, and why
do the Prophets when they preached, in^ulcate so often in all their writings.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, when notwithstanding the Prophets only in the
voices of men, spoke, and preached unto the people.

Yea, but says a second: If it were Gods work, it would not be fruitless,
and ineffectual in the issue thereof. As if that were not as good seed which
fell among thorns as that which fell on good ground? and as if Paul did not
testify, That to some Preaching is the oder of Life, unto life, and unto some
the savor of death unto death?

And Evangelical Esaias tells you, That as the rain comes down, and the snow
from Heaven, and returns not thither, Es. 55.
but waters the earth, and makes it to bring forth and budde, that it may
give seed to the sower, and bread to him that eats. So shall my Word be,
that goes out of my mouth, it shall not return unto me void, but it shall
accomplish that which I will, and it shall prosper in the thing, whereto* I
sent it, says the Lord God almighty. Neither is this all, for a third puts in
his objection, and says: If indeed Paul and Peter did preach, there were no
doubt to be made of the happy issue thereof. I answer,

Yet we know that some say d^ to Paul, and Peter his Master, even Christ Jesus,
when he preached unto the^ thus, John. 8.
Thou have a Devil, At what time hae rebuked them of sin, but these were
crucifiers. And Peter they said was drunke^ when he spoke out of the plenty of
Gods spirit, Act. 2.
which he had lately received; but they that said so, were Infidels; Act. 26.
and Paul was accounted mad when he preached of righteousness, of temperance,
and of judgment to come, but he that so esteemed him was but a Pagan.

Therefore we may see, that all such cauils as these, are but the suggestions
of flesh, and blood; and the delusions of the Devil of hell.

^agans shall condemn such ^espisers in the judgment. For the people of
Lystra and ^erbe, Cities of Lycaonia re^eyued Paul and Barnabas, as ^f they had
been Gods from Heaven, calling the one Jupiter, and the other Mercurius. But
believing souls entertain these Messengers of salvation, as Angels sent from
God. So did the believing Galathians receive Saint Paul, albeit he preached
among them in great infirmity (as he himself confesses) yet had not the Law
of God, and nature for bad them, they would have pulled out their own eyes to
have pleasured Paul. Oh what is become of the kind acceptance of the former ages
that left all the endowments now visibly to be seen in the Christian world,
for the continuance and propagation of Religious preaching for the service, and
ordinance of God, for the proclamation of this mystery, and for the
dissemination of the blessed seed of godliness into all the world.

Surely, the entertainment of our forefathers of the wodden Priests of Babylon
(who were indeed but Balaytes) will rise up and condemn the sons, of their
irreligious profane, and base contempt of the clear and earnest preachers* of
this sacred Mystery.

But we will cease to urge our own case, and appeal from our condition among
the sons of men, to our Master which is in Heaven, to whom we either stand or
fall. Blessed be his goodness for ever, and his inheritance shall never
fail, that we are assured of.

Oh the unspeakable riches and bounty of Gods fa^our, that did thus reveal it
^t self unto us miserable wret^hes that were Pagans.

And now that we may ^ot err^, or be ignorant, we must understand that we (we
I say) of the English Nation among others were these Gentiles.

To us (to us I say) that inhabit the utmost western Isles of the World is
the door of holy faith opened, and Christ the expectation of the Gentiles
revealed, our hearts being purified by faith, we are now become the sheep of
Christ's pasture, and he is become the chief Bishop and Shephearde of our
Souls.

Our English Nation being at the first delivered from the blackness and
darkness of Gentilisme by their preaching of this mystery of Godliness, either
by Joseph of Arimathia, or by Philip the Evangelist, or as some record by
Priscilla and Aquila, or by all of these.

A remainder of that wretchedness, wherein we were then plunged is continued,
yet amidst our Nation: for the days of the week, (which our children name)
retain yet the brandes of infidelity, wherewith our whole nation was then
marked.

The Heathen Saxons (and such were we once) had gods for every day of the
week. The Sun for the Prime day of the week, and thereof called it Sunday.
The second of the Moon, Moonday. The third of Tuisch, for so they called Mars,
Tuisch day. Of Wooden, their Idol, Woodensday. Of Thor, their Jupiter, or
Thur, another Panim god, Thursday. Of Freer, Of Wooden that Heathen Idol
remains at this day in some shires of England, a ^rench called VVansditch
which was their Venus, Freersday, now Friday. And the last day of the Week,
they named of the slowest Planette, Satursnday, or after some Se^ersday,
another Saxon Idol.

From out of this Heathenish infidelity, and bottomless misery of blindness
and impiety.

Lo the mercy of God has delivered us by this preaching of this mystery of
Godliness, the Gospel of Christ, and has made us Citizens of the Saints, the
family of Faith, and light in the Lord, from out of the bondage of sin and
satan, from out the confusion of Idolatry, and darkness of of extreme
ignorance.

That the promise of GOD made to Abraham, as Tertullian reasons might be
performed, which was, That in him all the Nations of the earth should be
blessed; and the prophecy of Reb^^caes twins might come to pass, of whom it
was said: The elder should serve the younger; which was indeed fulfilled,
(whereof Esau his service to Jacob was a figure) when the Jews were rejected,
and served the Gentiles, their younger brethren.

The use of this Saint Paul does largely exemplify in the ninth to the
Romans. The Jews were the true vine, we the Gentiles were the wild branches
of a wild Olive. Are they eiected, that we might be received, are they broken
off; that we might be engraffed.

Then let us fear, for if God spared not his own true vine, questionless, he
will not be indulgent to us that are wild ^liues. And let us know' (...) when
the fullness of the ^entiles is accomplished, God (...) again receive his own
^^ople, and remove the can^^sticke, that both Jew and ^^^entile that believe
may be ^ued by the Lord Jesus christ, every one in his ac^^^ptable time.

Now is our time, now is (...) time of the Gentiles salua^^on, now is the time
that by his preaching of this Gospel and mystery of godliness, God will be
revealed unto ^s, that we may believe and ^e saved.

God therefore persuade Ia^heth to dwell in the tents of ^em, Amen.

O Lord God, Invocation.
and most gr^tious Father in Jesus Christ, how wonderful are thy works in all
the world: For out of the mouths of Preachers, sometimes very babes and suck^
lings thou have ordained strength that thereby thou might make thy power the
more to be known in suppressing the rage and fury of Satan, the enemy of all
mankind, by such weak and feeble instruments.

And this thou have done O Lord of thine unspeakable mercy in Christ,
considering that we are but dust, and cannot endure the presence of an Angel to
speak unto us, much less are we able to behold thee in thy glorious
brightness.

Nay O Lord, no man can see thee and live: Eternally therefore blessed be thy
goodness, O God, for ordaining so sacred and so ^afe a means, for our
^nowledge, and acknowledge^ent of thee, and of him whom ^hou have sent, Christ
Jesus our Lord: For it has pleased thee (...) put thy word into the mouths
(...) men, to publish it unto us.

Thou have clothed their hearts ^ith thy righteousness, to fur^^sh them with
grace. Thou ^ast added the power thereof, (...) thy sacred spirit to guide us
to all truth, thou have shew^^ the effects thereof in the san^^itie of our
lives and good works (...) thy great glory.

Thou have given us the joy ^ereof in the songs of holy ones, (...) our
sola^e, and the end there^^, in the salvation of our sinful ^ules and bodies
to our eternal ^^licitie in heaven,

O Lord, who can sufficiently ^^^toll thy Majesty for this thy ^^rpassing
favor toward us? ^et us entreat thy goodness for Christ his sake to stir
up, and ^uicken ^our dull hearts to a thankful acceptance of this thy
blessing. Make us to love the preaching of thy word, that sacred Embassage from
heaven, that we may be thoroughly reconciled unto thee. Make it the savor of
life unto us, and let i^ in no wise be the savor of death unto us, or any of
v^.

Make us to think reverently of these whom thou have separated, and sent to be
the lighte^ and guide of this world, cause us to esteem of them preciously to
love them heartily, to pray for them effectually, and to hear them with all
possible respects fulness, as people knowing that (...) that hearet^ them,
hears thee, he that receives them, receives thee, he that regards them
regards thee, and he that does for them, does for thee, as people knowing it
is thy Word they preach, thy holy will they teach, thy heavenly worship and
divine service they entreat ^s to embrace, as people know^^g that the glory
thereof is ^^ine, the good thereof is ours, ^^en to the saving of our selves,
^^d children in both worlds.

O King of Heaven, give us ^^ermore of this Manna, the ^ngels food, of this
water of (...), of this celestial treasure, of ^is fruit of life, of those
songs (...) Sion, of this speech of Cana^^^, of this salt of the earth, of ^^is
light of life, of this dew of ^ermon, of this name of Jesus, (...) this
eternal Gospel by the ^eaching of thy holy will. As ^e hear it O Lord, let
it di^ill into our souls as thy holy ^^^ction, Let it stir our hearts (...)
thy power: Let it bow our ^ils to thy obedience, as thy ^^unsell: Let it
sanctify our (...) as thy ordinance, let it ^^epare us throughout for thee
(...) Lord, and for the glory of thy ^ace for ever.

Humble our hearts with the remembrance what wretches we were without this
revelation of thy Son. Say unto us, you were dogs and might not ea^^ the
childrens bread, you were hogs, and might not have these precious pearls
cast unto (...) you were as uncircumcised P^listines, as cursed Can^anit^^ as
devilish Samaritans, as He^ theni^h Pagans, as Turkish I^^^^dels: But I have
washed, purg^^ purified and sanctified you wi^^ my grace, I have called you my
name, and I will bless yo^ for ever.

O Lord God, Grant th^^ we may eat but the crum^^ under thy table, that we
(...) touch but the hemme of thy v^ sture, that thou will but spea^ the Word
only, and we wretches shall live, shall be heale^ shall be happy to thy
praise (...) ever.

Say Lord unto our souls, am your salvation* So shall (...) (...) and be
glad all our (...), so shall we study to set (...) thy honor, and will vow
(...) sacrifices of thankfulness (...) of soul and body, in our (...) and
children for ever.

O hear us King of Hea^^^, and grant these blessings (...) thine to be
continued unto us, (...) to our seed to al our generati^^ for the merits of
thy dear ^^ne Christ Jesus our most ^^^^acious Redeemer, Amen.

GOD BELIEVED. on in the World.
Explication.
THat the World should believe in God, The fifth day of the week.
is the mystery of mysteries. First, that the World should believe in GOD, in
the unity of his essence, and Trinity of existence, Then to believe God in the
verity of his written word: And lastly, to rely upon God in the assurance of
his love for his promise sake: this (I say) to know is eternal life, and for
the World to know it, is a world of wonders.

For how should the World come by this saving know^edge? (...) Take the World
as in ^oly writ it sometimes signi^ies the reporbate, of whom Christ says, I
pray not for the ^orld, John 17:
that is, for the reprobate of the world, these believe not. Take it
Cosmographically for the frame of heaven, and of earth, containing the
firmamentary, and elementary regions, these parts are not ^apable of such
mysteries: ^ut understand it of the E^ect people of God, inhabi^ing within the
limits of the known Christian world, and ^else where dispersed and scattered
upon the surface of the whole earth (as it is taken in this place) and then
this mystery will be revealed unto us.

For otherwise as the world (...) more generally taken for the people of the
world. It is altogether set upon wickedness. 1 John. 5.


The World receyues not the Spirit of truth, I oh. 14.
The World knownes not God, The world is at defiance with God, as may plainly
appear by the contrariety betwixt God and the wo^ld.

The spirit of God being love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, Gal. 5.
faith, meekness, and temperance. The Spirit of the World being adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, lasciuious^es, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
variance, emulation, wrath strife, seditions, hypocrisies, enuyings, murders,
drunkenness, and reuellings.

How could it ever be thought that these things so contrariantly opposite,
should ever accord? Yet behold this great mystery, for this malignant,
contrariant, exorbitant, refractory World is conquered by holy says in the
blood of Christ, and multitudes of millions in the World, (albeit not of the
World) Live, love, and be^eeue in God amidst the furious, cruel, and deadly
rage, ^atred and bloody cruelty of many miscreants, and infidel worldlings.

So that now God has purchased by faith a world of people to himself, called
out of the universal mass, and multitude of people in the World, to know, and
acknowledge him to be their God and Savior.

This is the sense of these words. And the sacred scriptures call those the
World, whom God has thus called out of the world, because for their sakes
only this world was made, 2. Pet. 3.
and this world is as yet preserved, and all things continue as from the
beginning.

But when God has his full number of these his chosen people out of the world,
then this world shall have an end, and there shall be a new Heaven, and a new
earth, wherein shall dwell righteousness.

To these his redeemed people in the world, God made his promises, both of the
promulgation, extension, and augmentation of this Kingdom of Jesus Christ his
Son.

First, that the extention thereof should be as large, as is the expansion of
the Heavens, and so great, that it should encircle, and surround the earth.

Secondly, that the dominion thereof should be from sea to sea. And from the
rivers unto the end of the world. Psalm. 72.
The kings of Tharsis, and of the ^sles should bring presents, yea all Kings
should fall down before him, at nations should serve him.

Thirdly, Apoc. 7.
that Christ should ^edeeme us to God by his blood, ^ut of every kindred and
tongue and people, and Nation.

Fourthly, that there should ^ee so great a multitude of believers of all
Nations, Kindreds people and tongues which stand Apoc. 7.
before the throne, and before the ^ambe that no man should be ^ble to number
them.

The performance of which ^rophesies, and promises God showed most power^^lly
in the very commencement of this conquest of faith: ^or Peter conuerred in one
^ermon three thousand, Act. 2.
and (...) another Sermon, five thou^and souls that believed, and ^^^^rned to
God from their in^quities. Act. 4.


So mightily, yea so ^uddenly grew the word of God, and prevailed, yea, (...)
is ttuely observed both by Suetonius in the life of Nero. and by Tacitus in the
first book of his History, being enemies to Christ and Christians, and also
by Tertullian a friend to Christians, in his Apologeticall exhortation to the
Gentiles, that the multitude of believers was so great in the Prim^tiue Church,
even amidst those furious, bloody butcheries, and woeful persecutions, that
their strength and puissan^e, (if they should have, waged war) was often times
a fear and terror, even to the ve^ry persecuting Emperors themselves.

This was exceeding strange, that a World of people so dissonan^, so dissolute,
so aliant, so repug^nant to God, and to goodness, should become so pliable, so
flexible, and so obedient (...) submit, and subject them^^lues to the yoke of
Gods ce^^estiall direction.

And albeit this very act ^f believing, may seem very ^aruellous unto us in
it self, ^et the strange means where^y this victorious conquest was wrought by
Christ in ^educing the world to the act ^f faith, was indeed incompa^ably
wonderful, and above man's capacity to conceive.

For Christ Jesus the Son of God, when he made this conquest of the World by
faith, did not proclaym to the world (as king Cyrus did when he intented his
conquests) great pay, worldly promotions, magnificent titles, and honorable
entertainements for his voluntaries and Followers, neither did Christ proffer
as the devil did, All this will I (...) thee (showing all the king^omes of the
world) if thou will fall down and worshi^ me: nor as the licentious Turk does,
grants liberty of wiueving, to what number of women men will, and of thriuing
by what callusions, and devises men can (so they do no violence) to all that
embrace his Mahumetanisme, Turcissimus Papa, ait* Luth.
nor yet as the most Turkish Pope uses, who grants pardons, and indulgences
from all kind of punishments, to all his Peccadilloes whatsoever.

For then Christ doubtless might have had followers on a sudden more then
enough. But behold, and consider the injunctions, motions, and persuasions that
Christ used to move the world to believe and then tell me (Beloved in our Lord)
if this be not a secret and hidden Mystery. The very first mandate that Christ
ienioyned to those that meant to follow him was, Re^^nt ye: that is, Be of
another ^inde, and lead another life (...) you have done hereto^^re: Mat. 3.
Become new creatures; ^^at is, leave off to do evil, (...) learn to do good.

This was no lesson for the ^^lfe lovers of the world to ^^arne, and of these
there is an ^^finite number.

By this doctrine Christ ^^ight lose all the nice of the world, and all that
were wed^ed to their own self li^ings.

Another iniunction was, ^n the world (if you will be mine) you shall have
augariation Ioh. 14.
and your hearts shall be pierced through with many sorrows. This was no
coppie to be taken out by the effeminate, delitious, and delicate persons of
the world.

A third was, You shall be hated of all men for my names sake (says Christ.)
This was no condition to obligue faint and false hearted cowards of the world.

A fourth was, He that loves his life shall lose it. This was not the way to
win a worldling: notwithstanding all these, and other such like more
conditions and entertainments, even to exquisite torments, ye^ I say, what ever
could be said or done to the contrary by the infidel party, in all the blood
and but chery of Gods Saints, behold ye the power of God in this wonderful
conquest of the world by faith.

For a Centurion beleeue^ even to life, albeit Christ is absent from doing any
act, and speaks this in the words of a believer. Say the word only O Lord,
Mat 8.
and my servant lives.

A Canaanitish woman believes to health, if she might eat but the crumbs th^^
fall ^^om the table, or touch but ^he hemme of Christ his ve^ure.

The good thief believes (...) salvation in Christ Jesus, Luc. 23.
whom he beheld fastened to ^^rosse laden with disgrace^^^l reproaches, and
scoffings, forlorn and forsaken of the ^hole world, struggling in his (...)
dolours, gasping, gaping (...) weltring in his own ^oud. Oh wonderful power
(...) faith! Oh marvelous work ^f God! Is there any reason (...) be yielded
hereof? Are ^^ere any causes of this so rare (...) marvelous a change in the
^eart, and resolution of man. Ier. 14.^
^o surely, Man's reason in this ^ynt is but as a beast, (as Iere^ie says.) But
Almighty ^od has his reasons for it, ^ost preg^ant, and most pow^^full.

For this believing in christ being an act of the understanding, assenting to
Gods divine truth, at the commandment of the will, so moved by the grace and
spirit of God, shows that it is the power only, and spirit of God that
inclines our hearts to believe, 1 Spirit^s SS. causa fid^^procatarctica.
as the first moving cause thereof.

This was the reason why Lydia the Thyatirian, hearkened to Paul's preaching,
which many other did not, that heard the word notwithstanding, Sp. est qui
sensum dat, and assensum mouet. Bern. Act. 16.
as well as she. For the Text says, God opened the heart of Lydia, that she
attended the the words of Paul, that is to say, She attended not, until God
opens her heart.

The invisible finger of God being as you see a golden key to unlock our
steely hearts, that may see, perceive, and be moved to seek after God for our
salvation.

And this is the reason why ^he Scripture calls this cause The spirit of
faith, 1. Cor. 4.
or the spirit ^f believing.

Gods second cause of our ^eleeuing is his blessed, 2. Verbum praedicatum est
causa demivrgica, and via ad verbum genitum.
and ^oly word read and preached (...) the ordinary means of our ^ith, which
works upon ^wo forcible, and perswasiue ^enses the eye, and the ear, ^he one
for the reader of the word, the other for the hearer of the word preached, or
read.

For the ear, God has ordained a voice to call upon ^s by the pains of
preaching.

For the eye, his sacred word is written, or printed, that it may be read, and
understood of us and our children, and this is the cause of our believing which
is called, 1. Tim. 4.
The word of Faith.

Ask a Christian then why he believes the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in
Trinity: his answer is, because the Scripture records it, there is the word of
faith, but reply upon him, and ask him why he believes the scriptures, his
reason is, without reason in himself, for he says The finger of God is there.
If you urge and say. Why do thou believe, and I do not, I hear the word as
well as thee? Saint Paul will answer with an out cry, O depth! That is a
matter of amazement, not of argument, says S. Ambrose. But what might be the
cause that stays and vpholds the hearts of the sons of men along the misery
of this life in this word of believing? Surely eternal life the salvation of
our souls, the last article of our Christian faith, 3 Vita aeterna causa fidei
teleiot i^a.
is the final cause, 1. Pet. 1.
and anchorholde of out believing in Christ Jesus.

For the hope whereof, the holy ones of God purge themselves, 1. Ioh. 3.
both in soul and body, that they may be accepta^le unto God through Jesus
Christ our Lord. And therefor S. Peter calls eternal ^ife the end of our
believing ^uen the assured glorification ^f soul and body, which by ^aith we
expect in the other world. In respect whereof also it is that this faith goes
not alone, like some bankrupt, but is royally attended with a troop of good
works, semblable to the causes thereof. For the spirit of faith is not barren,
but is in continual motion in stirring and quickening up the hearts of gods
children every day to goodness.

Neither is the word of faith verbal only, Heb. 4.
But lively and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged sword, and
enters through, even to the dividing of the soul, and the spirit, and of the
joints, and the ma^row, and is a discerner of the thought, and the intents of
the heart.

The people of God therefore whose hearts are thus powerfully moved by the
spirit of faith to believe, and thus effectually counseled by the word of
faith, to live well, Act. 15.
endeavor nothing else but that their living may be answerable to their
believing, that so their souls might be saved. For this sacred faith of
Christ, first of all purifieth the heart; now if the fountain be clear and
clean, the whole stream that issues thence will be clean also.

Secondly, this faith of Christ works by love, and brings forth good
works. I should ever therefore distrust that I never was a true believer,
unless I felt my heart sanctified by grace, and my and working the deeds of
haritie. This doubtless was ^he faith of the primitive ^orld, while the blood
of Christ was yet warm in the ^earts of those believers.

Witness all those Churches ^olledges, Hospitalls, En^owments, Rents, Reuenews
^ands, Livings, Pensions, and ^^l other such donations, and ^onsecrations
appropriated, and given to the maintenance of religion and learning, to ^he
succor of the poor, and ^o the perpetuating of Gods worship here on earth,
until ^he second coming of Christ.

For the people then lived, and believed, as men knowing that the faith of
Christ is not fruitless, and that by the fruits thereof, they are assured of
their election past; and of their perfection by Christ to come: that their good
deeds should follow them where nothing else ^ould, Apoc. 14.
and that according to the proportion of their works, wrought in earth by
grace in Christ, they should through the mercy of God, and not of merit be
allotted a portion of happiness hereafter in the heavens. Act. 2.
And therefore understanding their weldoing here, to be necessary to their
well being for ever, they studied nothing else but to go on in that race of
goodness, that they might attain at the last the blessed end thereof, even
the reward of mercy promised unto them by the word of faith written unto them
in the blood of our faith, sealed, and assured unto the^ by the death of our
faith, stirred up and moved hereunto by the spirit of faith Christ's vicegerent
on earth, whose they were, encouraged thereunto by the blood of so ^any
faithful believers that ^yed for the faith of Christ, and continue therein
unto their lives end, by the exube^ant, and abundant riches of Gods mercy in
Christ Jesus their Ruler, and Redeemer.

O Blessed Paul, Application
faithful and believing was the world, when as yet the blood of Christ was
warm in men's hearts, and when the faithful believers inflamed with the love
of God, and ouerioyed with the glad tidings of the Gospel, thus bespake. Gods
servants that preached the faith unto them. Blessed in the Lord, Act. 4.
will our goods pleas^^^ you? Gal. 3.
Behold we lay them dow^ at your feet, will our eyes (...) you good? Take
ought of ou^^ that is near, and dear unto (...) even our right eyes. Apoc. 12.
Will our lives steed you? We esteem the^ not for the testimony of the
fait^ of Jesus Christ, as for all manner of tribulations that can happen for
Jesus Christ sake, We account them not worthy (...) the glory that shall be
received.

A blessed and beautiful ^ace of time it was (O Paul) when* the prime
believing Christians had no other fault ^ound in them, no not by their very
enemies (as Plinius ^ecundus an heathen testifies (...) Traian the Emperor)
but his was all he could certify against them to the state, that ^hey often
times assembled ^emselues together before ^ay in the caves, and holes of the
earth to sing Psalms, and praises to the Lord of ^ife, Christ Jesus, which
service for fear of persecution they durst not perform publicly.

O then was the time (ho^y Paul) that faith wrought ^y Gods love, and not by
self love, by good works, and not by goodly words, what time the believing
Christians were known not ^o be of the tribe of Naphta^^, giving goodly
words, Genesis 49.
but of the tribe of Joseph being fruitful boughs, even fruitful boughs by
a Well, whose branches run over the wall.

When Placilla the wife of Theodosius a believing Empress, would resort unto
the Alms houses, and Hospital^s of the poor to see them succored and
relieved, and when her nice Gentlewomen that waited o^ her, would dehort and
dissuade her not to debase her self to come into such mean places, and near
such nastie people, she with tears in her eyes would re^ply, and say:

O I wou^d not do thi^* and this only, but so, and s^ yea much more for the
love ^ bear to my Savior Christ, an^ to his blessed members (...) mean
soever they be, for I (...) him my self and all I have, (...) thousand ways.

(O sacred Paul) that was ^etime when men believed, and loved God so sweetly,
^^at they would not be allu^ed by the enticements of the ^orld to fall from
the faith ^f Christ, as did covetous (...) ^mas, they believed, and lo^ed him
so wisely that they ^ould not be deceived with ^he vanity of wretchedness
(...) fail in their sacred seruic^ (...) did proud hearted Diotre^^^^es that
loved the prehemi^ence, they believed and lo^ed God so resolutely that ^^ey
could never be utterly ^an quished either by sin, ^eath, or Satan as many
mil^^ons of unbelieving, and ^isbeleeuing Christians are.

But O blessed God of hea^e^, and earth, how is the case in ^ese ourdaies
altered. For the ^iuell having heretofore ray^d up diverse heresies, and ^hismes
in all ages to hinder, peach, and utterly to overthrow this sacred act of
believing and true service of God, as first against the faith of Gods creating
the world, he raised up the Marcionites, Carpocrations, and Nicolaita^^,
against the word of grace and redemption of man by Christ, he stirred up the
Ebionites, Gnostiques, Ar^ rian, and Sabellians, and against the assurance of
glory for his Saints, he enraged the ancient Cathari, Pepusians, and
Anabaptists, and many other such like damnable miscreants, against all the
articles of our Christian faith, but now in this dotage of the world, he like
cursed Caligula (that monster of men) wishes this holy people that believe in
Christ had but one head, that he might strike it off at once, even with this
one blow, and hellish blast, ^here is no God, Psalm. 14.
to the utter ^olishing of all the ground ^orke of our Christ^an faith. Oh that
the devil could but ^ish this only, as he desired ^nce to sift and winnow
^eter.

But it is a thousand pitties ^o see and behold how much ^e has prevailed with
mil^ions of thousands, even in the Christian world. Else how ^urst so many
damned mis^reants insult, even over God ^imselfe. Let him make speed and
hasten his works that we may see it. Yea that dare breath defiance, and out
face Gods ^udgments by denying them, and saying:

There is no plague, this pro^hesying is but words, this preaching is but
wind, and in the end fall away from all that ^s called God, as did Pharaoh,
saying:

Who is God that I should serve him? and what is Jehovah that I should yield
unto him? These are such against whom there is no law in England, which is to
be feared will be the provoking of Gods judgments upon this our Land, and
state in particular, wherein there is so much care taken; and so many good laws
made and that most worthily, for the preservation of the kings crown and
dignity, that whosoever speaks against it is held a cursed Tray^or, and that
most justly, and is worthy to die an ignominious and cruel death, and that
most deservedly, yea particular and private men's cases, their lands, livings,
titles, pleas, and wrongs are by good, and wholesome laws redressed, yet there
is no extant and positive Law, Statute or Ordinance against these impea^hers of
this holy faith, and against the open cursed, and damnable Blasphem^rs,
de^ier^, and defiers of the eternal God.

Oh England, this is a work worth the best intendments, consultations, and
determinations both of thy Princes, Peers, and people that such hellish
roaring Boys, and such damned crues may not once be named within the
territories where thy renowned king is styled the defendor of the faith.

For we see that of such as make profession of faith, the Oracle of faith
tells us, 1. These. 4.
All have not faith.

God sent Noah in the worlds infancy to preach this faith of the Messiah,
Abraham in the worlds childhood had the sign of the covenant of this faith for
the same purpose, David in the worlds youth believed, and defended the same.
The Prophets in the worlds middle age guided the believers unto it, Gods own
Son in his first coming preached it to the worlds old age, his Apostles and
Preachers, to this our age, the worlds dotage, and all these found unbelievers,
and missebeleeuers in all their times. And last of all, when Christ shall come
again to judge the living and the dead: Shall he find faith on the earth?

In his first aduent he had not (as he himself affirms) where to lay his
head, but when he comes again to judgment, he will not have where to set
his foot, if the world continue as it has ^one along time, eloyning from
Christ's Church, and ^poyling it of the means of ^he Gospells preaching, those
^acred donations and endowments which the faith of the ^ormer and better ages
con^ecrated, as the lands and re^enewes of Jesus Christ the Son of God here
on earth, ^or the perpetuating of his ministry and service. No ^eloued these
are the days of ^inne, and wherein sin a^oundeth, because the love of God in
the world waxes Mat. 24.
^old.

These are the days where ^n such a faith is professed by ^any, that is, no
where to be ^eene by good works but ^ard only in some certain ^oodly
words, such a faith ^s I told you before was the ^ith of Lucius learned Par^ot
like, and tunable to the ear, having no semblance, or quality of Gods spirit
in it, but only this, that not working by love it is invisible.

Africa was accounted in ancient time the mother of monstrous shapes, but
Europe, Christian Europe is become the grandmother of many strange wonderments.
For, as Saint Augustine says, He that believes not now, seeing the world
believes, is aprodigious, and portentous amazement to himself.

And many there are who albeit they live in the profession of this holy
belief, yet they profit not in it, because they abuse the holy means
thereof, neither do they practice the religious manner, and method of
attaining unto it.

For first^, they abuse the means, by coming ^reuerently and irreligiously
^ot as believers to hear the Word of this faith prea^hed.

Elias Gods Prophet when ^ee comes where he hears 1 King. 19.
God, he covers his face, with his mantle in reverence of Gods Majesty: For
believers, the nearer they come to God, the more modest they are.

Ezechiel hearing GOD speak unto him, wanting a veil, falls with his face to
Ezech. 1.
the earth, making the earth his mantle, to show his reverence, and fea^e to
Gods majesty.

Peter seeing Christ coming toward him, cries out, Depart from me for I am
a sinful man, as acknowledging he was not worthy to breath in the place
where Christ was.

Abraham, when he talks with God about Sodom, says thus, Let not my Lord
be angry, if I dust, and ashes speak unto him. Genesis 8.


And the Syrophenician coming to receive comfort from Christ, stands behind
him daring not to speak, but entendeth only to touch, not his body, nor his
garment, but even the very hemme of his vesture, and she received a
comfortable compellation from Christ, for he owned her, and said, Daughter,
be of good cheer, thy belief has saved thee.

For the more vereeundious and modest we are in this our hearing of God, and
in our coming unto him, the more bright and beautiful we are in his sacred
sight. If we would thus serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice be fore him with
trembling, we should not go so often to Church, and so often return again
never the better, ofttimes the worser, we should not so often hear in vain,
nor so often see, and not discern.

But the manner is now with many to come, as satan did (for company or custom,
or worse) came also when the sons of God were assembled before him to the
devils Chapel, according to our English Proverb, Where God has his Church,
the Devil has his Chapel

For even in the great assemblies while some are there hearing the word
attentively, others sleep profoundly, while some read, others prate, while
some lift up their eyes to heaven, others point out the finger to note some
vanity in the next pue, while some pray, othe^s scoff, while some sing others
curse, while some sigh for their sins, others laugh at sin, and while
others sit hearkening to the Sermon unto the end, others make have to be gone,
and think every hour two, until they hear the Peace of God, which they will
scarce vouchsafe to take with them, nor the Grace of GOD neither.

Cease therefore to marvel at our fruitless hearing the Word, if this be our
demeanor: when we present our selves before our God; were we persuaded of God,
as we ought, (and surely, he that will come to God, must believe that God is)
and of his son Christ Jesus, of whom the voice from Heaven (and not from men)
was this, Hear him; we could not thus abuse our time, Mat. 17.
when we assemble our selves to hear this Word of faith preached unto us.

But those that thus de^mean themselves, the Prophe^ie of Esaias is fulfilled,
which God in his just iudg^ment ^ringeth upon them for their neglect of him in
making their hearts fat, Their ears heavy, and their eyes dim, that they
may not see with their eyes, Esaias. 6.
nor hear with their ears, nor understand with their hearts, and should be
converted, and God should heal them, These are such that come into the house
of God without fear, and offer the sacrifice of fools, for albeit they live
wickedly, yet they imagine that they have made GOD beholding unto them for
sitting an hour or two in his service.

It was otherwise in Saint John the Divine, Apoc 1.
who in heavenly meditations and service of God, was ravished in the Spirit,
on the Lords day, and in that holy ecstasy, heaven was opened unto him, and
he saw God, the Angels, the Elders, and the souls of the Saints clothed in
white robes; whereas these devilish hearers are ready to faint for water; yet
sit (as Hagar Abraham's bondmaide did) by the fountains of waters, and do not
see them, and are ready to perish for food, and yet do not see the heavenly
Manna that is reached out unto them.

And as they thus abuse the holy means of their believing* so also they use
not the heavenly and orderly proceeding in the practice of their belief. For a
true Believer at his very first awaking in bed, is present with God in his
thoughts, words and meditations, as David speaks: and after he is up, he
takes unto him blessed words as ^head directs either publike^y or
privately, Hosh. 14.
and offers ^God his morning sacrifice in ^prayer, and then addresseth and
addicteth himself to his calling, and therein abides, performing his earthly
vocation with an heavenly mind.

And if a true believer happen into any company, he sits often times still, and
retired to himself, watching and waiting opportunity when he may speak words,
that may minister grace unto the hearers.

And if a true Believer have any leisure (not that he will be at any time
idle) he says to himself, Now will I retire myself into my closet, and there
will I power out my heart unto my God.

If a true believer prosper in the work of his hands, he is thankful, and
not proud. If he suffer adversity, he makes his patience known unto all
men, without murmuring or repining, assuring himself that it proceeds not of
Gods hatred, but of his singular love t^ward him that he is afflicted, for God
delights not in the misery of his Creatures, for if he did, he would never
have made man a Paradise to live in, even in his innocence, but God knows in
his wisdom, that by afflictions his dearest children are weaned from the love
of the World, and take liking of the other world.

And thus having past the day, recalling to mind Gods great mercies, recounting
his own many and manifold infirmities and imperfections, magnifieth Gods
favors in all, craves pardon for his great unthankfulness, and so reposing
himself in bed in his Sepulcher, having now made, as it were, his last will
to God, acknowledging himself a stranger, and Pilgrim here, as all his
Fathers were, and believing that the time will come, that as he is awaked, and
rises from bed in the morning: so shall he be raised from his grave, and
sleep of death, to live with GOD in Christeternally.

But the unbelievers and fruitles professors in their carriage, are quite
contrary. For their awaking is to evil, and that is ever present with them.
Their morning Mattens is cursing and swearing, and that shall distill one day
into their bowels as water, and like oil into their bones.

Their vocation is to be busy bodies in other men's matters. Their society is
to seek out the riotous to run with them to excess, their retiredness is
to study out mischief, to complot against their brethren, and to circumuent by
politic stratagems their harmless associates*

If these prosper, no man is able to endure their pride, their disdain, their
curiosity, their stateliness. If they be afflicted, the whole Country shall
ring of their impatience, murmuring, rauing and blasphemy.

And thus having lost the day, they couch themselves in their beds of
beastliness at night; as if they had made a covenant with death, and the
devil never to be good; This is the fruit of infidelity, and thus godless
professors demean themselves, as if Barrahas had suffered, and Christ had
been let go, as if Christ were yet in his grave and that Caiphas should be
judge of quick and dead.

But true believers, know that without faith it is impossible to please God
(let us prate what we will) and whatsoever is not of faith is sin, (let us
do what we will) and this faith must work by love, or else all is in vain,
let us live how we will, let us then beg this blessed boon of God, that we
may believe, and that he would help our believing, that we may have both the
Saluific^ fidei tribuuntur hi quatnor Tituli. 1 (...) 2 (...) 3 (...) 4 (...).
groundworke of faith to build upon, the trust of faith to resolve upon, the
boldness of faith, to approach near unto God, and the full persuasion of faith
to die in, that so we may go on from faith, to faith, until we have our
perfect bliss in Christ for ever. Albeit our condition be, that we live in
these last and worst times, as Lot in Sodom, and as Abraham in Vr, of the
Chaldes, yet having the rock of our faith in Heaven, 1. Ioh. 5.
the Father determining, the word directing, the holy Ghost moving, and these
3. are one, having the records of our faith on earth, the Spirit witnessing to
our Spirit, that we are the sons of God, the water of Baptism, the seal
of our Redemption in Christ, the blood of the holy Martyrs, as the signs of
the power of faith in weakness, and these three a^gree in one, we may bid
defiance to the Devil, and quiet our conscience in Christ for evermore.

Concluding, that we can be justified no other way in the sight of God, but
only by this holy faith in the blood of Jesus; but being there by
onceiustified, we are in direct order toward God, we are through the gate,
and in the happy way that leads to Abraham's bosom, even eternal life.

For God can direct us in the best way unto himself, that leads to
everlasting felicity, in turning us from ^ur evil ways, and retur^ing us to
himself by re^entance, and so on to good works, the assurance to our ^elues,
of our election in CHRIST, from good works to Gods mercy, and from thence to
glory, where^nto this faith teaches us, that CHRIST is already ^ntered, and
whether he ^ill undoubtedly bring all that love him, that look and long for
his coming, ^ consummate and perfect ^is our holy service in the Heavens,
where is the fulness ^f joy, and happiness in the presence of God for evermore.

O Lord, I believe, help my unbelief, and increase my Christian faith.

Wonderful art thou, Invocation.
O Lord God in thy manifold works, marvelous in thy Almighty power, and
unsearchable in thy divine secrets. The goodly frame of heaven and of earth
show shy power, the disposition of all things therein tell of thy great
wisdom, and the passages of so many millions of particulars, point out this
gracious providence in all, and yet the works of thy mercies surpasses all
this: For which, O heavenly Father, we magnify and praise thy name, and
multiply our thankfulness unto the in Jesus Christ from day to day: For it
has pleased thee, good Father, to elect unto thy self, and to call ^ut of
this World, out of this world, ( I say) being ^ sincke of sinnefulnesse, a
deep ^den of despair, an Asphatites of ^ll filthiness, a dead sea of
sensu^lity, the vale of the children of Hinnon, a Babylon of beast. linesse, a
Sodom of sorrow, a Gomorrah of ungodliness, a Seboim of security, an Adamah
of Adultery, and a world of wickedness: to chose (I say) one of this route a
remnant of people to be thy beloved Spouse, and wife of the Lamb, to be a
royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people, the love of Christ, all
fair undefiled, and without spotte, the only Dove, to be like an Orchard
enclosed, a well sealed up, a fountain of living water, a Paradise of all
precious, delectable, and desirable fruits, and to be the mystical body of
Christ, which he does quicken with his own spirit.

And these heavenly Father, thou have sealed with thine own fignet, dignified
with thine own favors, and as it were di^sied by thine effectual and saving
grace, in giving them the holy faith of thy Christ, and our Jesus thine only
son, and our Savior, to purify their hearts, to purge their consciences from
dead works, to serve thee the Father of light, and life, and so to be blessed
by thee with light and life everlasting. O Lord now behold me poor silly
wretch, that lies here beneath in this miserable world, creeping in the dust,
and crawling in mine own infirmities, My soul cleaves unto the ground, my
belly unto the earth: I have nothing in me but sin, sensuality and shame.
Blind I am in mine own understanding: for I know thee not, obstinat in my
will, for I little ^ regard thy Counsels, corrupted in mine affections: for I
have no mind unto thee. My parents were of this world, I am borne in the
world, and the world is all, my silly self looks after, I cannot attain to
so much, at to know my self, how then should I know, and discern things above
my self? much less understand the things that appertain unto thee (O Father)
and to the glory of thy Kingdom. Every good and perfect gift comes feom
thee, who art the Father of lights. O bow down thy goodness then unto me,
most merciful Father, and extend thy bounty unto me poor wretch, that most
humbly desires thy grace and favor, that thou would be pleased to give me
a portion and measure of thy blessings in the faith, and favor of thy son.

Grant unto me faith, O Lord, without the which, I cannot please thee, without
the which I cannot hope for any good, nor have any evidence of these things
which are not yet evident, without the which I cannot come to Christ, nor do
any good works, nor be raised from sin, nor know thee O God, nor resist the
Devil, nor overcome the world, nor be justified, nor be saved.

O blessed Father, grant this mercy unto me, without the which I desire not to
be, without which I cannot be, but a Cimmerian wretch, a stranger unto thee,
an Atheist, a profane person, an Infidel, a cast away, and a Firebrand of Hell.

What praise can be to thee, O Lord in the deep, in the land of oblivion, in
the place of the damned? Shall the dead praise thee?, shall the bottomless
pit celebrate thee? shall the damned sing unto thee? no, no, The believing,
the repenting, the sorrowful soul for sin, whom thou shall shine upon with
the light of thy countenance, in the faith of Christ, that soul (O God) that
soul shall ever be magnifying thy mercies, extolling thy goodness, and
celebrating thy greatness fro age to age

What ever I do, what ever I think, what ever I say, without it he seasoned
with this grace of faith, it is sin. O blessed plant of Paradise, O heavenly
Jewel of incomparable valuation.

Dear Father, bestow this blessing upon me, shut not up my life with
unbelievers, which shall never see thy face, but rectify me in all parts, to
the right use of the sacred means of obtaining this favor of faith. It
comes by hearing of thy Word,

O sanctify me throughout, that I may attentively hearken what the Lord will
say: For he will speak peace unto my soul, and love to his Saints, that
they return not to folly.

O holy Lord, Look back upon mine humbled Suite, and sign my petition for
thy tender mercies sake in Christ. So shall my Sacrifices be always
acceptable unto thee, as Abels, my conversation holy as Enochs, my preaching
powerful as Noah's, my offeringes delectable, as Abraham's, so shall I contemn
the World in respect of this, as did Moses the powers of darkness, and the
gates of hell, as the walls of Jericho shall fall down before me, as those
did before thy Ioshuah. I shall subdue all mine enemies, be they never s^many,
never so mighty, never so malicious, as did David, and his Worthies, and shall
sanctify all my corrupted actions, and affections, healing that which halted,
and binding up the broken parts, as did thine Holy Prophets. So shall I triumph
over hell, vanquish ^death, and live with thee for ever. O Lord, thou art not
wont to quench smoking flax, nor to break a bruised reed, nor to let a
repenting soul go pensive from thy presence. O look upon me with one glimpse
of thy countenance, and inflame mine heart with zeal, that feels it self
touched with the fire of thine Alter.

Oh save me for thy pity sake, and take me ou^ of the multitude of
unbelievers, that I may seek, and serve thee for ever.

Distill thy heavenly dew into my bowels, Let it run like oil into my bones.

Let it be as a fruitful, and effectual plantation in mine heart, that I may
not be one of the number of those, that say they have faith, and profess it
also, but without fruit, but of those who with never altering resolutions,
tread the trace of that sacred faith that works by love, overcomes the
world, holds always the sacred truth, and leads into the ways of eternal
joy, and happi^nesse, by thy effectual and saving grace.

Grant this O Father of Heaven, for Christ Jesus sake thy blessed Son, and
mine eternal Savior, Amen.

GOD RECEIVED up in Glory.
Explication,
THis Mystery of Mankind (you see) has now led us from Gods humiliation in the
flesh, The sixth day of the week.
to GOD justified in the Spirit, from vision of Angels, to revelation unto men,
from thence to believing, and now are we come to the exaltation thereof, for
God was received up in Glory. That is, Christ Jesus, God and man, in our nature
is ascended up into heaven, to take possession in our nature of that glory,
which he had in himself from all eternity, but has purchased it for us his
redeemed Church, with his most precious blood For it was necessary that Christ
should suffer, and so enter into ^lory. Not that this was of ^bsolute necessity
that he must needs suffer. For in respect of himself this glory was his from
everlasting, but was necessary, he should enter into ^ by suffering, only in
re^pect of us; that the humilia^ion of the Son of God becoming Man might be
the ^ause of the exaltation of the nature of Man. For when he ^ersonally
assumed the nature of Man, and became Man, Man became God ^lmightie, having all
power, and a name above all ^ames, that the abasing of ^e divine Majesty and
person of the Son of God ^ight be the high aduan^^ng, and exaltation of the
^^rme of a servant.

For when God began to be Man, and Man began to be God, God began to be a Man
in subjection and humility, and man to be God in the height of perfection.

For if God were humbled as much as he might be in that he became Man, was not
Man exalted as much as he might be, in that he became God? Herein undoubtedly
appeared the wisdom, and power of our God that his Son in obedience to the
Father being abazed to the lowest degree of humiliation for us, should by his
own power (and not as Enoch and Elias were by another power) be exalted to
the supreme height of exaltation in the sight of all the world both of men and
Angels.

Therefore we believe that he which Ascended is the same that Descended first
into ^o the lowest parts of the ^arth. Descended, when his ^ody was laid in
the grave; Descended, when his soul separated from the body went ^o the place
where the souls departed were; Descended when his Deity exhibited ^t self
into the lowest pit to ^he terror of the devils, and ^urther despair of the
dam^ed: Descended, when the power of his passion did ex^end it self even to
those ex^reme parts: Descended when ^e suffered those extreme anguishes and
torments which for our sakes by his Fathers will he was willing to endure.
Descended when he delivered those that deceased before his resurrection, and
brought them by the power of his sufferings into the place where they now are.
And he that thus Descended, is the same that Ascended far above all heavens
to fulfill all things. Even he our Lord Christ, that in our nature was
accounted but a most despicable man, yea a worm, and no man, that undertook
our sins the cause of his sufferings, that endured a cursed death, the
punishment due for our transgressions, even he that in the entrance of this
bottomless sorrow had his soul heavy unto the death, and made strong cries,
and tears to be delivered, and in the progress thereof, had clods of blood
breaking from him, and when he was deepest in, uttered that dreadful clamor
expressing a most horrible passion, My God my God why have thou forsaken me?
Even he (I say) now t^^umphes over all the powers of hell, and the heavens
stoop down, and receive him up in glory.

And this the power and mighty hand of our God has wrought for us to the glory
of his great name, which be praised and blessed for ever.

By God we understand ^he hypostaticall union of the divine, and humane
natures ^n the person of Christ Jesus. By Received up, we conceive not a
momentany but by degrees of time a local motion ascending from an inferior
place to an higher, and by Glory, is meant that he was exalted above these
visible heavens, and received through the spheres, the cataracts of heaven
opening unto him, even that he might sit at the right hand of God in great
Majesty and highest glory for evermore in the heavens of the blessed. The
circu^sta^ces of this article of our Christian faith, is most evidently in all
the particulars set down in holy w^it.

The place where he was received up, was mount Oliuet near to Jerusalem, the
city where he was so abased, even there (there I say) was he taken up into
the glory of the father in the sight of his cursed enemies.

The manner of his ascent was, Act. 1.
a cloud received him up. The heavens stoop down to do homage unto the heir
of heaven and earth. For by the same power whereby he made all things in the
beginning, he also lift up himsele above all things that are created.

His passage natural without either change or diffusion of his natures. His
Session also actual. For according to his true natural being, he sits at the
right hand of God, and according to his personal being he is every where.

The time of his ascent was ^ortie days after his resurre^tion from the grave.
For so ^ong was he conuersing with ^is people after his passion, that they
might be the more ^scertayned of the truth of his ^rising from the dead, and
^ight be informed, and confirmed the more in his doctrines, both of grace, and
glory.

Sixescore witnesses were present at the place in whose ^ight he was received
up.

Two Angels from heaven spoke unto them that were present, and preached his
return to judgment. The words were specified which ^e, and the Angels uttered
at ^is departure. The sequel ^hereof related at large, to wit, whither, the
multitude went which saw him ascend, and and what they did, and many ^ther
things which followed ^re as a cloud of witnesses to the confirmation hereof
For as the truth of his ascension is irrefragable, so the effects thereof are
unutterable.

For first, by his ascension he has opened heaven unto us, that was shut
against us, Ephesians, 1.
and has Made us sit together with him in heavenly places.

Secondly, he has taken possession of heaven for us in our nature, Ioh. 14.
and in our names as he told his disciples before* Saying, I go to prepare a
place for you, and I will come again, and take you unto me.

Thirdly, he hereby accomplisheth our Christian comfort in triumphing over
Hell, all the powers of darke^^nesse having led Captivity captive, and given
gifts unto men, by sending down his holy spirit the informer and ^omforter of
his cho^^.

And lastly, his Receiving ^ has filled all things (as the ^postle speaks)
the earth ^ith his mercy, hell with his ^stice, heaven with the ma^festation
of his glory even the blessed Angels.

And now there he is ^^r advocate with the Fa^^er, our intercessor in all ^^r
necessities, our master of ^quests in all our suits, there ^^e turns away the
eyes of ^^d the Father from our ^nes, to look upon his ^^edience, and
meritori^s righteousness, and day^^ prepares a way for us ^ to the throne of
grace.

For these causes he is ^scended into the height (...) that Majesty where ^^d
vouchsafes to display his glory to the view of men, and Angels in the face of
Jesus Christ.

The perfect knowledge of the superexcellency of which place of happiness we ca^
in no ways attain unto in this life, but in possessing it in the other world
we shall fully enjoy it. In the mean while our holy faith is confirmed hereby,
which for the corporal presence of Christ, embraces the spiritual, that we
may not be troubled with doubtings, and say in our hearts, Who shall ascend for
us into heaven? Romans 10.
Our hope is ascertained of obtaining heaven, and of the perfection of our joy
therein, and our love is enflamed that our conversation tending toward heaven
where our treasure is our heart may be there also.

MAnifold is the use of this his glorious exaltation. Application
Let therefore the ^ealous soul come hither, and ^earne to forsake the world,
and to be received up on high ^or where the head is of nece^sitie there must
the members ^e also. Let us ascend the degrees of this great mystery, from the
manifestation thereof in the flesh, let us go on to ^e justification in the
spirit. from justification spiritual, ^o vision Angelical. From An^elicall
revelation to Prophe^call promulgation. From the ^reaching thereof to praying ^
faith, and so to the exalta^ion in glory. For thus it was ^^eete, that Christ
by these ^eanes of suffering might ^ring his chosen to rest. For (...) he had
gone any other way ^ee might have entered himself, but could not have brought
us in with him.

Let us then stand as it were upon the point of the promontorie of Nebo, and
look into the holy land, and revew the lowest step in this Jacobs ladder which
is Christ's exinanition in the flesh: and see how the power of God has made it
known unto A^gels, by celestial vision, and unto men by degrees of holy
Christian faith, until it has brought us up unto the supereminent glory.

Go (I say) from his humanity in the flesh to his divinity, a glimpse
whereof was seen in his transfiguration on the mount, from his passion on the
cross in his humiliation, to his power in his resurrection, from his minority
in respect of his Father, to their quality in the height of glory. Not that
the deity in his ascent could be exalted, but that our nature in the person
of the Son of God was first raised up from the dead, and then received up in
to everlasting glory.

When therefore we read that Christ was received up by a cloud, we
understand the clouds of obsequiousness, not any help it afforded him (as
the fiery chariot did Elias) we conceive the clouds service, not any aid it
yielded, the clouds ministry not any assistance that it occasioned.

For the matter or subject that ascended, is ^properly the humane nature of
Christ, for the deity is neither contained in place, nor subject to motion.

So the ancient Fathers spoke, The Son of God had of ours whereby he hanged
on the cross, and of his own, whereby he ascended into heaven. For the humane
nature ascended, and the ascent was wrought through the power of the divine
nature.

And this is the cause that Tertullian calls Jesus the sequestrator of God
and man, for of either party he had, that was committed unto him, and he
keeps the pledge of the flesh in himself the earnest of all mankind. For as
he has left unto us the earnest of the spirit, so he has taken from us the
earnest of the flesh, and carried it into heaven as a pledge of the whole
family which hereafter shall be brought thither also.

Thus is Christ our treasure in heaven, and assuredly where our treasure is,
there will our hearts be also.

If Christ be our treasur^ let us follow him in heart, where he is in body,
let us follow him with paces of love, because his return in the judgment day
will be terrible.

The hand writing that was against us is now cancelled, Genesis 1.
the curse was, Earth thou art, and to earth thou shall return.

But the blessing is purchased, Luc. 23.
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

Christ therefore in this life by his grace does ascend unto our hearts, when
the fear of the Lord of hoasts receives therein plantation, he descends
into our hearts when we take his counsels to heart, he issues from our
hearts when we run afrer him in our affections in the sweet perfume of his
precious oyntements feeling our own defects, and again, he ascends above
our hearts, when by the eyes of holy faith we see as with an Eagles eye the
prey a far of (as Stephen Act 7.
did) even Jesus standing at the right hand of God.

Let the sanctified soul come hither, and see it self in heaven three manner
of ways whiles it is on earth. First, in conversation, for, Our conversation
is in heaven, says the Apostle. Phil. 3.


Secondly, in our affe^ctions. 1. Ioh. 4.
For they that abide in charity, abide in God.

Thirdly, by right of possession. For Christ is ascended to prepare us a place.
Ioh. 14.


Let the oppressed, and distressed soul come hither, and look up, Seeing we
have an high Priest which is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God,
let us hold fast our profession.

For we have not an high Priest that cannot be touched with our infirmities,
but was in all parts tempted like as we are, without sin.

And albeit* we read that Moses, and Samuel, Noah, Daniel, and Job those holy
men were not powerful to prevail with God in some cases for others, yet no
where can it be found that our Lord Jesus Christ had ever the repulse for his
chosen.

For he is the Son, in whom the Father is well ^leased.

Let the curious questioner come hither, and if he ask, Mat. 28.
How is Christ with us unto the end of the world, as he promised, if he be
received up in glory.

I answer, that he who Was before Abraham, Ioh. 8.
is with us by his grace, and power of his holy spirit, that live in the faith
of Abraham.

His departure hence into heaven being for our exceeding great Comfort, and
benefit.

For where should an advocate be, but before the Judge pleading his Clyents
cause? where should a Captain be, but fighting with the enemies without the
City.

And the father of a great family does not always reside at home, but
trauelleth into a far country about his affairs, to provide for his household.

So Christ himself testifies, Ioh. 14.
That unless he depart the Comforter should not come.

Not unlike the glorious sun of the firmament, which when it is furthest from
us in local distance, it is nearest unto us in power, and effect, as appears
in the Summer season. For then the beams of the Sun are more p^ercing,
albeit it be further of, because then they are direct, and perpendicular,
which in the Winter though the body of the Sun be nearer, yet the rays
thereof are oblique and aside: Semblably the bodyly presence of Christ on earth
wrought not so effectually in his Apostles, and other the faithful, as his
holy spirit did after his departure, which he powered out on them in great
measure, as he promised, for then were their hearts thoroughly resolved, their
wills fully purposed, and their zeales fervently onflamed.

Yea let the most Seraphicall and most Cherubicall souls that live, come
hither, and see what the Angels of heaven admire at, who beholding Christ Jesus
ascending with this glorious conquest of his redeemed church say but by way of
admiration.

Who is she that looks forth as the Morning, Cant. 6.
bright as the Sun, pure as the Moon, terrible as an Army with ensigns.

Nay blessed souls to which of the Angels said God at any time, as he does
to our Lord Christ Emanuell: thou art my son: And again, I will be thy
Father and thou shall be my Son: yea, the Angels are commanded to adore him,
and the son is bid to sit down at the right hand of the Father in the glory of
heaven.

Lastly, let the simple and honest soul come hither, and learn not to seek
Christ on earth in a Wafer Cake (as the Popelings do) but as the Apostle
counsels in heaven, saying:

If you be risen with Christ seek those things that are above where Christ
sits at the right hand of God, Col. 3.
and where he must be until the times of the restitution of all things which
God has spoken by the mouth of his holy Prophets since the world began. Set
therefore your minds on heaven, and heavenly things, and not on earth, and
earthly things.

Heaven is now opened, enter thou into the holy of holiest: for thou art, O my
soul, past the utter and inner Court. Thy Mediator is in heaven, pray thou
here in earth, that he may hear in heaven, and speak for thee.

Our ^ flesh is in heaven in the person of Christ, whereby we see that the
glory we have won by Christ, is greater then the disgrace and curse, that the
malice of the devil, brought upon us by Adam.

The devils malice^, and our sin cast us out of Paradise, but Christ's love
and sufferings for sin, makes us sit in heavenly places with him.

In a word, our triumph is in heaven, who would not fight the battle manfully
against the flesh, the world, and the devil, being assured by the captain of
the victory.

We may also hence perceive how God tenderly, 1. Cor. 5.
and lovingly deals with us, even as Moses says he dealt with his own
people the Israelites.

And how was that? even as the Eagle, says he does with her young. The Eagle
covers her young with her wings, so God does with the wings of his safe
protection. She sometimes perceiving her young ones dull, and drooping, gently
peckes them with her beck, to stir them up, so God by afflictions does
quicken his children, yea sometimes the Eagle takes away her young ones meat
and flies up into the air, to entice and provoke them to practice, and
endeavor to soar on high-euen so God the Father has received up Christ Jesus
our heavenly Manna into glory, that we should learn to aspyre and soar
upwards, that where, he is, there we might be also.

And to this end the two Angels told us at his receiving up into this
glory, that he should in the same manner descend to judgment in the end of
the world, which we exp^ct with patience, nay long, and look for, and cry in
our hearts, Com^ Lord Jesus, Apoc. 22.
Come quickly, and we do nothing more seriously, while we are on earth. but
call to mind in holy meditations the Lords death, and show it to the eyes of
our faith until his coming again, in partaking of his blessed body and blood
in the Sacrament; that by the power thereof we may be established, that we
turn not this great grace into wantonness, nor neglect our Lord Jesus, who is
thus exalted into the highest glory. not for himself, (for he had that glory
before the world was) but for us his redeemed people: so that now here is the
exaltation and supereminent height of faith, even everlasting life.

The Being whereof is called Glory, and our Estate there Glorification. To
this do all the goldly aspire, that they may be where Christ Jesus is, to
behold his Majesty, and his glory in the Kingdom of GOD the father.

The Metropolis of which Kingdom is the Heaven of the blessed, the Confines
are Eternity, the chair of Estate is the thrones, the houses of the Courtiers
are the visions of Angels and Saints, God is there as the King, Christ as the
Prince, the Church as the Queen, the Virgins as the Handmaides, the Nobles
are the Patriarchs and Prophets, the Notaries are Evangelists, the Prelates
are the Doctors of the Church, the Soldiers are Martyrs, and the Subjects are
all the blessed.

In which Kingdom are all things to be desired.

Desire you riches? Glory and riches are in his house. Desire you gold? The
City it self is of pure gold? Desire you honor? O God, Apoc. 21.
such honor as this glory have all thy saints: Desire you pleasures? At Gods
right hand are pleasures for evermore. Desire you knowledge? In Christ are all the treasures of wisdom, and knowledge. Desire you Liberty? Jerusalem which
is above is free. Love you peace? My people (says GOD) shall sit in the beauty
of peace, and in the Tabernacles of my protection. Desire you dainties? You
shall be satisfied when his glory shall appear. Desire you wine? You shall be
filled, with the plenty of this house: and shall drink of the rivers of
gladness. Does Music delight you? Here Cherubin and Seraphin continually do
cry, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Saboth.

In a word, what delectable thing soever can come into man's imagination. It is
here in full abundance to be found: For God has spoke it, Come, and I will
show thee all good. O wretched sons of men, whose teeth are set on edge,
with the crudities of this world, that they cannot taste of the delicacies of
that other world.

For the Fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on
edge, as Ezechiel speaks. Ezech. 16.
We must therefore abstain from the raw and unwholesome things of this
Life, if we mean to confirm our teeth, and conform our taste to savor
Heaven, and these glorious things of God.

The best of Gods people that ever were in the world, could express the glory
of this place, but by Negatiues, albeit they had an extraordinary inspection
into it. Ask the Prophet Esaias, and Saint Peter the Apostle, they will tell
you, That the things which eye has not seen, neither has ear heard, neither
came it into man's heart, are which God has prepared for them that love him.

And Saint Augustine says, That the things which God has prepared for them
that love him. Our faith cannot conceive, our hope cannot comprehend, our
charity cannot apprehend: for it surpasses our thoughts, our understanding
our desires.

Let this be our comfort, that this glory may be obtained: expressed, or
conceived, it cannot be.

Augustine says, that he can tell sooner, what is not there, then what is
there.

When the Queen of Sheba came to Solomon's Court and heard his wisdom, saw
the house which he had built, observed his diet, viewed the dwellings of his
servants, noted what servants robes, and the manner of their service, and
recounted the whole burnt offerings which were offered in the house of the Lord
every day. The text says, that she stood amazed, and there was no Spirit in
her, and when she came to her self, she uttered these words.

It is true that I heard in mine own land of thee, O King, howbeit I believed
not the report until now I see it, but the one half was not told me, for thou
have more wisdom and prosperity then I heard by report.

Right so, O my soul, shall thou say, when thou come into this heavenly
Court, and beholdest and know God, as he is known and see the new
Jerusalem, the Feast of the Lamb, the Mansions provided, the milk white
roabes of the Saints, their attendants upon God, and the continual Alleluiah
sung by the quire of Heaven, thou will say: O it was not the least particle of
this glory, that we heard of beneath, when we were in the earth, for this
glory far surp^sseth all that ever we heard or could imagine, neither
indeed could we believe the same, but now O King of Heaven assuredly they are
fully blessed that always stand before thee and behold this thy Majesty, and
surpassing glory.

Hence was it, that Holy men of God often sighed, and earnestly desired when they
meditated of this glory to be with Christ. I desire to be dissolved, and to
be with Christ, says Paul. Aye me that I am constrained to dwell with
Mesech, Psalm. 120.
says David. And in another place.

When shall I come and appear before the presence of the Lord, Psalm. 42.
If I have found grace in thy sight, O Lord, show me thy face, says Moses.

And to this purpose God sends his dearest children bitter pills of
affliction ofttimes in this life, to weane them from the pleasures of this
world.

The world troubles me, says S. Augustine, and yet I love it, what would I
do, if it did not afflict me? Surely it would befoole us, as it does too many,
who rather then they would forsake any part or parcel of the World, they will
desperately and diuelishly forsake their God, and the glory of heaven, and in
their hearts wish God to keep it for him self, and let them enjoy their
pleasures and pastimes in this present life.

O blind and barbarous folly of the sons of Adam, who has bewitched you?
Would you see the invisible things of God? They are seen says Paul, by the
visible God, being considered in his works. Christ is received up in glory,
Romans 1
ascend thou by these degrees unto Christ, O my soul, that he has revealed
unto thee.

Say unto thy self, when thou viewest the world, and the glory thereof both in
the frame of Heaven, and in the fabrique of the earth.

If O Lord, thou grantest unto us such goodly things in this our prison: what
have thou prepared for us in thy palace of Heaven. If here thou affoordest so
liberally thy blessings, both to friends and foes, what have thou provided in
heaven for friends only?

When thou beholdest the surpassing beauty of the heavens, say, O my souls,
How delectable are thy dwellings, O Lord of Hosts, my Spirit faints for
desire to dwell in the Courts of thy house for evermore. For all Nations are
before thee, as nothing, and they are accounted less then nothing and vanity.

When we consider again that there are three principal places in this
universe, to wit, Hell, the World, and Heaven.

The first under the earth, the second above the earth, the third above the
visible heavens. The first a place of darkness, the second a place mixed both
with light and darkness, the third is altogether. light. The 1. a dungeon of
despair, the second a vale of tears, the third a Paradise of incomparable
delights, and delicacies, whose heart desires not after those waterbrookes?
whose soul seeks not after those joys of Heaven, where is the fullness of
joy? and happiness for evermore.

For there is health without sickness, youth without age, fullness without
famine, plenty without penury, g^ory without infamy, peace without war, and
in a word all good without evil.

Now therefore O ye sons of men, Mark Says Saint Augustine, Heaven is to
be sold, and God requires no other price for thee to buy it, but thy self,
it is worth so much as thou art, give God thy self, and thou shall have it.

But observe, thou must not present thy self to God in this exchange a
worldling, a sinner, a castaway, but thou must become just, good, holy, and
worthy of the same, not of thy self, but being justified, sanctified, and
bettered by the holy faith, and Spirit of thy God in Christ Jesus, in whom we
all are accounted worthy, so shall thou by his merits obtain a Kingdom, where
the fire does not burn, nor the air infect, nor the water drown, no^ the
earth tremble under thee, where there is no commet to presage thee evil, no
thunder to terrify thee, no lightning to daunt thee, no thunderbolt to consume
thee no tempest to affright thee, no cold ^o molest thee, no heat to offend,
no plague to kill thee, no calamity to afflict thee.

O Christian souls endeavor to ascend to your Christ Jesus, unto, and into
this glory, and be not discouraged either with the long distance from you, or
with the marvelous height above you.

For with as much faci^itie as the Devils, were de^ected from Heaven in Gods
^ispleasure you shall be lifted ^p to Heaven by the favor of Christ.

The hand of the Lord of Hosts that cast them out unto the bottomless pit,
shall be stretched forth to ^eceyue you up into glory, and that in a moment,
1 Cor. 15.
in the winckling of an eye.

Oh how amiable are our goings toward the Lord of Hosts Sanctuary? in the
progress of divine virtues.

Humility does lift us up above the earth. Poverty in Spirit above the water.
Contrition above the air. Good works above the fire: Faith, Hope, Love,
Discretion, Constancy, Temperance, Righteousness aduanceth us above the seven
Planets, our conversation above the Imperial Heavens, Purity of heart, does
bring us up to the sight of God, and unto the glory of the blessed,

For three places God has appointed h^^ Children to live in, the Womb, this
Earth, the Heavens. In the womb, in a narrow place, for a short time, some
nine months.

In the earth a place of greater extent, and a longer season, some seauentie
years.

And lastly, in Heaven a place of extent, without limit, and for term without
time, even for ever and ever.

And as the second place far exceeds the first, both in largeness of
Extent, and in continuance of time, so the third place of our most happy
being, incomparably surpasses the second in both; for it is without limmit of
local site, and without all determination of time for length of days.

O Christ come unto us, and into us with these thy graces, that we may come to
thee, and into that glory where thou ru^est, and raignest with God the Father,
and the Holy spirit for evermore.

O Lord lift up mine heart unto the^,

O Eternal God, and most merciful Father in Christ Jesus, Inuocaon.
who dwell in the thrones of immortality, and bliss, vouchsafe to look
upon us thy humbled Creatures, that lie here beneath, and groan to be
delivered from the bondage of our corruption into the freedom of thy goodness.

Thou have taken up from us our Lord Jesus, and have set him at thy right hand
in Maie^ty and great glory.

O when shall we come, and behold the beauty of thine ^ouse, and the
blessedness of thy Saints.

L^sten Lord unto our sup^lications, and for our Advocates ^ake that pleades
our cause before thee in heaven,

Let us be dissolved, that we ^ay be with thee, and with our ^eloued Jesus,
Who for us men ^^me down from Heaven, and ^as humbled to death, that we might
live with thee for ever. Behold, O Lord God, how we run after him in the
sweet savor of his divine perfumes. When he lived here with us on earth, he
disdayned not Mat^e^ a publican, he abandoned not Peter a denyer of him, nor
cast away Paul a per^ecutor, nor despised Marie Magdalen a courtezan, nor
refused to hear a Cananaatish woman, the blind, the lame, the dumb, the
deaf, yea the possessed with devils he had compassion upon.

Therefore now we wretches here beneath, albeit our con^^tion is far worse
then any of those, yet we conceive comfort that now in his glorified estate he
will also grant us his pity, and compassion, and by the power of his grace,
whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself, will conquer our
stubborn, and disobedient hearts, and mak^ them pliable and conformable^ to his
sacred Laws.

That we may not reason in our understanding, nor encline^ our affections
downwards, but as he is received up in glory, so we may set our selves and
souls to seek and search after him in all heavenly things.

O Lord the dead praise thee not, they that go down into the pit do not
remember thee, what benefit is there in our blood, what glory is there to thee
in the land of oblivion, where thou art not once thought upon? O God let the
devouring and despayring gulf be the portion for the devils and the damned
that never seek thee in thy beloved. Let that vale be for the children of
Hinnon that bottomless pit for the Locusts, that lake of brimstone for thy
Christ's enemies, that second death for the desperate, that weeping and wayling
for the heathen that has not known thee, that hell for the d^spisers of thy
Sonn^, that everlasting fire for the Abaddon, and his servants, but as for
those that sue for favor unto thee and lie at thy mercy gate for grace, and
beg but the crumbs, let them be delivered because of thy beloved, let them
rejoice on thy salvation, let them see the sight of thy saints, and be glad
with the light of thy countenance for ever. O speak comfortably unto their
souls, and let their hearts evermore rejoice before thee.

Oh tender hearted Father give them a taste in this life of the happiness of
the other, and a glimpse of that glory when into Christ Jesus is received. That
so our hearts may be enflamed, our wills inclined, our affections settled, and
our whole selves knit unto thee, that neither sin nor Satan, life nor death,
things present, nor things to come may separate us from the love and exceeding
thirst and desire of being where Christ our treasure is. Let not the devil
with any of his subtle and sly delusions carry us downward in tempting us
with our unworthiness, our evil, our wretchedness, in putting into our
minds, that we are predestinate, and ordained of old to destruction, and that
whatsoever we do, ^r say, or pray, it auailes not, for ^t cannot alter thy
decree, and so ^y this means cast us into des^erate carelessenesse. But O Lord
^each our souls to reason, and ^ommune with our own hearts (...) going
upwards where Christ jesus is received up in glory, that ^e believing, and
loving thee our God, living in thy grace and calling upon thee daily, may work
out ^ur salvation with fear, and ^embling.

And do thou O God ascertain ^ur conscience that these things ^re the actions
and affections of ^ose that are ordained to bliss, ^^d life everlasting in the
merits of thy dear Son Christ Jesus our Lord.

To this blessed purpose assist us O God in all the occurrences of our life at
home, and abroad, in business, and in leisure, in prosperity and adversity,
in sickness and in health, that we may still have our minds lift, up unto
thee through the power of our Prince of peace Christ Jesus, and ever use these
things of this life to further our salvation in him, that at the last when we
shall come (...) our fatal, and final dissolution i^ this world, the way of
all flesh, we may be received up by thy goodness, and ministry of thy
blessed Angels into those everlasting habitations, and taberncles of thy
triumphant Church where Christ our head is. To whom with thee and the sacred
spirit be all glory, and houour, might and majesty ascribed of Angels in
heaven, and men on ^arth throughout all generations in thy Church for (...)
more, Amen.

FINIS.

