A Margarite of America

By T. Lodge

Printed for John Busbie, and are to be sold in S. Dunstons churchyard in
Fleet Street, at the little shop next Cliffords Inn. 1596

To the noble, learned and virtuous Lady, the Lady Russell, T. L. wishes
affluence on earth, and felicity in heaven.
MAdam your deep and considerate judgment your admired honor and happy
readings have drawn me to present this labor of mine to your grac^ous hands,
and favorable patronage: wherein, though you shall find nothing to admire; yet
doubt I not but you may meet many things that deserve cherishing. Touching the
subject, though of it self it seem historical, yet if it please you like our
English Sapho, to look into that which I have slenderly written, I doubt not
but that your memory shall acquaint you with my diligence, and my diligence may
deserve your applause. Touching the place where I wrote this* it was in those
straits christened by Magelan; in which place to the southward many wondrous
Isles, many strange fishes, many monstrous Patagones withdrew my senses;
briefly, many bitter and extreme frosts at midsummer continually clothe and
clad the discomfortable mountains, so that as there was great wonder in the
place wherein I writ this so likewise might it be marvelled, that in such
scantie fare, such causes of fear, so mighty discouragements, and many
crosses, I should deserve or eternize any thing. Yet what I have done (good
Madame) judge and hope this felicity from my pen, that whilst the memory
ther^of shall live in any age, your charity, learning, nobility and virtues
shall be eternized. Oppian writing to Theodosius was as famous by the person to
whom he consecrated his study, as fortunate in his labors, which as yet are
not mastered by oblivion; so hope I (Madame) on the wing of your sacred name to
be borne to the temple of Eternity, where though envy bark at me, the Muses
shall cherish, love, and happie^^^. Thus hoping your Ladyship will supply my
boldness with your bounty and affability, I humbly kiss your most delicate
hands, shutting up my English duty under an Italian copy of humanity and
courtesy. From my house this 4. of May 1596.

Your Honors in all zeal, T. LODGE.

To the Gentlemen Readers.
GEntlemen, I am prevented in mine own hopes; in seconding thrifts forward
desires. Some four years since being at sea with M. Candish (whose memory if I
repent not, I lament not) it was my chance in the library of the Jesuits in
Sanctum to find this history in the Spanish tongue, which as I read delighted
me, and delighting me, won me, and winning me, made me write it. The place
where I began my work, was a ship, where many soldiers of good reckning
finding disturbed stomachs; it can not but stand with your discretions to
pardon an indiscreet and unstaid pen, for hands may vary where stomachs
miscary. The time I wrote in, was when I had rather will to get my dinner, then
to win my fame. The order I wrote in, was past order, where I rather observed
men's hands lest they should strike me, then curious reason of men to condemn
me. In a word, I wrote under hope rather the fish should eat both me
writing, and my paper written, then fame should know me, hope should acquaint
her with me, or any but misery should hear mine ending. For those faults
(gentlemen) escaped by the Printer, in not being acquainted with my hand, and
the book printed in my absence, I must crave you with favor to judge of, and
with your wonted courtesies to correct; and according to Ecclesiastical law,
give us on our confession absolution: if you will not, remember this, that a
country less for Ladies, may tell them they curle too much; and for
Gentlemen, that they are unfashioned by their fashions. To be short, who lives
in this world, let him wincke in the world; for either men prove too blind in
seeing too little, or too presumptuous in condemning that they should not.

Yours T. Lodge.

A Margarite of America for Ladies delight, and Ladies honor.
THe blushing morning began no sooner appear from the desired bed of her old
paramor, and remembering her of her Cephalus, watered the bosom of sweet
flowers with the crystal of her tears: but both the armies (awaked by the
harmony of the birds, that recorded their melody in every bush, began to arm
them in their tents, and speedily visit their trenches: Among the rest the two
emperors (the one, Protomachus of Mosco, the other, Artosogon of Cusco)
considering with themselves, the care Princes ought to have that command
multitudes; the prefixed hour of their fight already arrived, suddenly armed
themselves, commanding their corronels by sound of trumpet to draw out their
companies into the plain: Then marched forth each squadron, deaffing the air
with their cries, dimming the sun with the reflection of their costly curets,
their high looks promised happy forwardnes, and their haughty hearts were
portraied in their dreadlesse demean. At the last embattailed in due order,
the pikemen in a Macedonian phalanx, the horsemen in their out-wings, the shot
as gards to the pikes, al as protectors of their colors, the fatal charge was
sounded, and both the armies marched forward to encounter; (when suddenly an
old man, whose sober looks betokened his severe thoughts, whose morneful
garments, shadowed, his melancholy mind,) bearing the Image of the Gods,
(whom he most honored) between his arms, and the homage a true subject ought
to have in his heart, thrust himself between both the armies, when sending
many sighs from his breast to famous pity, and tears from his eyes to move
compassion, he fixed both his hands on their knees (who were nearly
encountered to enter combat) and began in their terms to persuade both the
monarchs (whilst both the armies withdrew their weapons, to give diligent
attention to his words:) Stay your unbridled furies, O you Princes, and let not
the world say, that you who were borne to be the defenders of the monarchies,
are (through your il-gouerned furies) become the destroyers of mankind.
Whereto tends this your unjust arms? if for your private grudges; oh how
fond are you, that to revenge your mislikes, are the murderers of many
innocents? If to enlarge your signiories; oh how vain are you, that seek to
attain that with blood, which you must keep with care; that labor to sell
that with stripes, which you have bought with peace; that travel to loose your
own estates and signiories, for alitle name of souerainty? Hear me O you
Princes (nay rather be advised by me:) you have spent huge treasures, made many
widows, lost three years, and for what I pray you? for the right of one
city, the whole confines and revenues whereof is not sufficient to acquit for
one month of your charges: O unhappy Mantinea, the cause of such hartburning:
O lawles name of seigniory, the occasion of such sorrows. Hear what Plutarch
says, Ye potentates, there is no war that takes head amongst men, but of
vice: for either the love of pleasure, either covetousness, ambition or desire
of rule, provoke the same. If this be true, as it is most certain, why blush
you not (Princes) to behold your own follies? why reconcile you not to amend
your misdeedes? If you say there are more pleasures in Mantinea, then in your
several countries, you detract from whole provinces, to make proud one poor
city: and if it were, what a vain thing is it, that such as are in authority
should purchase a private delight by public danger? Plato being demanded why
he praised the Lydians so much, and dispraised the Lacedaemonians so highly,
answered thus: If I commend the Lydians, it is for that they were never
occupied but in tilling the field: and if I do reprove the Lacedaemonians, it is
because they knew nothing else but to conquer Realms: so virtuous a thing has
it bin held by the learned to maintain peace, and to shun occasions of
contention. If you will be held virtuous and monarchies (as I wish you should
be) desire nothing to the damage of your commonweals, lest in satisfying your
own humors ye subvert your subjects happiness. If for covetousness ye hunt after
conquests, how vain are you, laboring like mad men to lay more straw on your
houses to burn them, and cast more water on the sea to drown it? Covetousness
is an affection that has no end, an extreme that has no mean, a profit full
of prejudice. Well said Aristotle in his Politikes, there is no extreme poverty
but that of covetousness. If for ambition, well may ye weep with Alexander, to be
laughed at, practice with Zenos, to repent with him: for in desiring beyond
your reach, you fall besides your hopes. But if all these evils be grown to
one head, if your incontinencie in desire, your excessive thirst after
pleasure, your covetous longing after riches, your ambitious hunting after
seignioritie, have occasioned this war; subdue these errors in your selves
for your subjects sakes: and since Protomachus has one daughter, and no more to
inherit Mosco, and Artosogon one son and heir to suceede in the Empire of
Cusco; let both these be joined together in happy matrimony: so shall the
cause of this different be quickly decided, your self may root out your
ingrafted errors, your subjects enjoy their desired peace, and finally, your
Children shall have greater cause to praise their fathers foresight, then to
repent hereafter their unjust fury. Hereunto I conjure you, O you Princes, by
these holy gods, whom you honor, by these hoarie hairs which you should
reueren^e, lest your subjects hereafter ruinated through your rashness, have
rather occasion to curse you then commend you. In Octauius Caesar's time, each
one thought himself fortunate to be borne under his emperie, and him happy
that maintained his province in peace: so let it be said of you (good Princes)
and leave you such memory to your succession: than shall I think my self
happy in my persuasions, and you shall be famous to all posterity.

No sooner had he ended his oration, but both the emperors resolved, by his
reasons, and pacified by the persuasions of their nobility (who after long
debate and consultation, and cheer behoouefull) drew to an accord: wherein it
was concluded, that Arsadachus the youthful heir of Cusco should be sent to
the emperor of Mosco, where, (considering the worthiness of his court) he should
find fit companions, and apply himself to fancy, being continually in the
presence of his fair Margarita: finally (after the decease of both the
Princes) it was enacted that both Mantinea and the whole empire, should remain
to Arsadachus, and Margarita and their heirs for ever. These articles thus
concluded upon, both the camps brake up; the brave knights who to-fore time
delighted in tossing of lances, now have no other pleasure but in talking with
fair Ladies, the soldiers sword, was changed to a husbandmans sith; his gay
Curets, to a gray frocke; the gates which beforetime were shut against foes,
were now opened to all sorts as unsuspected friends: Such liberty follows
peace, exempted from the tyranny of war. Artosogon withdrew his folowers to
his own frontires, and returning to his court, made honorable provision for
his son Arsadachus to send him to Moscouia. Protomachus (after he had
rewarded each soldier according to his desert) withdrew himself to the castle
of that aged father, who had so faithfully councelled him, (yielding him for
reward the dukedom of Volgradia, the chiefest place of honor through all
Moscouy) whither, as to the open theater of al delights, the nobility and
ladies resorted, among the which the chiefest, fairest, and chastest Margarita,
presented her self, rejoicing at the happy reconcilement: where being
resolved by her father of ye contract that was concluded upon, with blushes at
first showed her modesty, and with obedience at last condescended to his
mind. In this rare fortress of Arsinous (situate by a gracious and silver
floting river, environed with curious planted trees to minister shade, and
sweet smelling ^loures, to recreate the senses; besides the curious knots, the
dain^ie gardin plots, the rich tapestrie, the royal attendance) Protomachus
found as evident signs of high spirit, as of huge expense: at the entrance, of
his chamber (which had a prospect into a delicious garden in which al sorts of
birds enclosed in a Cage of crystal recorded their harmonies, whilst the
gentle fall of a bubling fountain seemed to yield a sweet and murmuring
consent to their music) was placed that sentence of Drusius Germanicus which
he carried always ingraued in his ring.

Illis est grauis fortuna quibus est repentina.

About the walls of the chamber in curious imagerie were the seven sages of
Greece, set forth with their several virtues, eloquently discovered in Arabicke
verses: The bed appointed for the prince to rest himself, was of black Ebonie
enchased which Rubies, Diamons and Carbun^ls, made inform of an arch, on which
by degrees man's state from infancy to his old age was plainly depictured, and
on the testerne of the bed the whole contents of the same most sagelie
desciphered in these verses. Humanae Miseriae discursus.
O whereof boasts man, or by what reason
Is filthy clay so much ambitious?
Whose thoughts are vain, and alter every season*
Whose deeds are damned, base, and vicious,
Who in his cradle by his childish crying
Presageth his mishaps and sorrows nying.
An infant first from nurces teat he sucketh
With nutriment corruption of his nature:
And from the root of endless error plucketh
That taste of sin that waits on every creature,
And as his sinews firm his sin increases,
And but till death his sorrow never cease.
In riper years when youthly courage raineth,
A winters blast of fortunes lowering changes,
A flattering hope wherein no trust remains,
A fleeting love his forward joy estranges:
Atchiue he wealth, with wastefull woe he bought it,
Let substance fail, he grieves, and yet he sought it.
In stayed years when as he seeks the gleaning^
Of those his times in studious Arts bestowed,
In sum, he often misconstrueth wise-mens meanings,
Soiling the spring from whence his science flowed,
In all he gains by perfect judgment gained,
A hate of life that has so long remained.
From height of throne to abject wretchedness,
From woonderous skill to servile ignorance:
From court to cart, from rich to rechlesnesse,
The joys of life have no continuance:
The king, the caitife wretch, the lay, the learned.
Their crowns, woes, wants, and wits with grief have erned.
The Judgment seat has brawles, honor is hated,
The soldiers life is daily thrall to danger,
The merchants bag by tempests is abated,
His stock still serves for prey to every stranger,
The scholar with his knowledge learnes repent,
Thus each estate in life has discontent.
And in these trades and choice estates of living,
Youth steals on manly state, and it on age,
And age with weakened limbs, and mind misgiuing,
With trembling tongue repents youthly rage,
And ere he full has learnd his life to govern,
He dies, and dying does to dust return.
His greatest good is, to report the trouble
Which he in prime of youth has ouerpassed.
How for his grains of good he reapt but stubble,
How lost by love, by follies hew disgraced,
Which whilst he counts, his son perhaps attends,
And yet his days in self like follies ends.
Thus mortal life on sudden vanishes.
All like a dream, or as the shadow fleeteth,
When sun his beam from substance banisheth,
Or like the snow at once that dries and sleeteth.
Or as the rainebow which by her condition
Lives by the Suns reflect and opposition.
Thus life in name is but a death in being,
A burden to the soul by earth entangled:
Then put thou off that veil that lets thy seeing,
O wretched man with many torments mangled,
Since neither child, nor youth, nor staid, nor aged,
The storms of wretched life may be assuaged.
And with the Egyptian midst thy delicates
Present the shape of death in every member,
To make thee know the name of all estates:
And midst thy pomp thy nying grave remember,
Which if thou do, thy pride shall be repressed*
Since none before he dies is perfect blessed.
Thus sumptuous was the lodging of Protomachus, but far more glorious the
chamber of Margarita which seemed from the first day to be fashioned to her
affections, for over the entrance of the doors was drawn and carved out of
curious white marble, the fair goddess of chastity blushing at the sudden
interception of Acteon, and her naked nymphs, who with the one hand, covering
their own secret pleasures with blushes, with the other cast a beautiful
veil over their mistress dainty nakedness: the two pillars of the door were
beautified with the two Cupids of Auacreon, which well shaped modesty often
seemed to whip lest they should grow over wanton: no sooner was the inward
beauties of the chamber discovered, but the work wrought his wonder, and the
wonder it self was equalled by the work, for all the chast^ Ladies of the
world, inchased out of silver, looking through fair mirrours of chrisolites,
carbuncles, saphires and green Emeraults, fixed their eyes on the picture of
eternity, which fixed on the tops of a testerne, seemed with a golden
trumpet to applaud to them al: in the tapistrie (beutified with gold, and
pearl) were the nine Muses curiously wrought, who from a thicket beheld
amorous Orpheus making the trees leap through his laments, and as he warbled
his songs the floods of Hebrus stayed their sources; and the birds that beheld
their comfort, began likewise to carrol. It was strange to think, and more
strange to behold, in what order Art matched with nature, and how the lymning
painter had almost exceeded nature in life, saving that the beauteous faces
wanted breath, to make them alive, not cunning to prove them lively. Thus was
both the emperor and his daughter lodged, wanting neither delights of hunting,
nor other princely plesures, to entertain them: so curious was the good old
man, in pleasing his emperor and master. But among al other courtly delights
Margarita met not the least, who in this castle found a companion to accompany
her in life, and a chaste maid to attend her in love, who (beside her
education, which was excellent, her virtues such as equalled excellence, her
beauty so rare as exceeded both) was beloved by a noble lord of Moscouy, who
for his singularities in poetry, and science in feats of arms, was rather the
seignior, then second of all the empire. The enterchange of which affections was
so conformable to the fancies of the princess, that she, who was ordained to
be the miracle of love, learnd by them and their manners the true method of the
same: for when Minecius courted his Philenia, Margarita conceited her
Arsadachus; and by perceiving the true heart of the one, supposed the perfect
habit of the other. If at any time cause of discourtesie grew betwixt Philenia
and her friend, Margarita salued it, hoping by that means to sacrifice to Love,
to gratify him in her fortunes, which were to succeed. How often would she
make Minecius deserts excellent by her praise, and he his Philenia famous by
his poetry? It was a world to see in them, that when love waxed warm, those
lovers waxed witty, the one to command, the other to consent: if at any time
Minecius wrote an amorous sonnet, Margarita should see it: and if at any time
Margarita read a sonet she would commend it to satisfy Philenia, and in that
Arsinous (the father through the good opinion of Protomachus the Emperor,
thought not amiss of the marri^ge between his daughter and the Moscouite,) he
rather furthered then frouned on their p^stimes: and Minecius having a^^iued
her father and entangled the daughter in fancy, sough^ all means possible to
satisfy her delights; sometimes therefore under a pastoral habit he would
hide him in the gr^^es and woods where the Ladies were accustomed to walk,
where recording a ruthful lay as they passed by; he through his harmony,
caused them believe that the tree tattled love, and such was his method in his
melancholy fancies, that his coat was accordant to his conceit, and his
conceit the miracle of conceits: among the rest these of no small regard, I
have thought good in this place to register, which though but few in number are
worthy the noting. First being on a time melancholy by reason of some mislikes
of his mistress he wrote these sonets, in imitation of Dolce the Italian, and
presented them in presence of the Princes Margarita, who highly commended them,
over the top whereof he wrote this in great Roman letters.

PIETATI.
If so those flames I vent when as I sigh*
Amidst these lowly valleys where I lie*
Might find some means by swift address to fly
Unto those Alpine toplesse mountains high:
Thou should behold their Icie burdens thawe,
And crimson flowers adorn their naked backs,
Sweet ro^es should enrich their winter wracks,
Against the course of kind and natures law.
Bu^ you fair Lady see the furious flame,
That through your will destroys me beyond measure,
Yet in my pains me thinks you take great pleasure,
Loath to redeem or else redress the same:
Nor has your heart compassion of mine illes,
More cold then snow, more hard then Alpine hills.
The other was this which seemed to be written with more vehementle of spirit*
and (...) great (...) melancholy, which i^ a shepherds habit, sitting under
a ^ie^le tree he had mornfully recorded in the presence of his mistress.
PIETATI.
O deserts be you peopled by my plaints,
And let your plants by my pure tears be watered,
And let the birds whom my sad moan acquaint,
To hear my hymns have harmony in hatred.
Let all your savage citizens reframe,
To haunt those bowers where I my woes bewray,
Let none but deep despair with me remain,
To haste my death when hope does will me stay.
Let rocks remove for fear they melt to hear me,
Let Echo whist for dread she die to answer:
So living thus where no delights come near me,
My many mones more moving may appear:
And in the depth of all when I am climing,
Let love come by, see, sigh, and fall a crying.
This mourning passion pleased the ladies very highly, especially Philenia, who
thought her self no little blessed to be thus beloved: among the rest they
gave this that follows his deserved commendation; for being written in the
desolate season of the year, and the desperate success of his earnings, being
so applied to his affects, and accordant with the years effects, (in my mind)
deserves in small good liking.

With Ganimede now ioines the shining sun,
And through the world displaise his chiller flame,
Cold, frost, and snow, the meddowes, and the mountains
Do wholly blend, the waters waxen Ice:
The mead^s want flowers, the trees have parched leaves,
Such is the dolie season of the year.
And I in coldest season of the year,
Like to a naked man before the Sun,
Whilst drought thus dwells in herbs and dried leaves,
Consume my self, and in affections flame
To cinders fall: ne helps me frost or ice
That falls from off these Snow-clad cloudie mountains.
But when as shades new clothe again the mountains,
And days wax long, and warmer is the year;
Then in my soul fierce love congeales an Ice,
Which nor the force of fierce enflamed sun
May thaw nor may be moult with mighty flames,
Which frost does make me quake like Aspen leaves.
Such time the winds are whist, and trembling leaves*
And beast grow mute reposing on the mountains,
Then when aslaked been the heavenly flames,
Both in the waine and prime tide of the year:
I watch, I ward, until the new sprung sun,
And hope, and fear, and feel both cold and Ice.
But when again her morrow-gathered Ice
The morn displaies, and fro^tieth drouping leaves,
And day renewes with rising of the sun,
Then wailful ^orth I wend through vales and mountains:
Ne other thought have I day, month, and year,
But of my first the fatal inward flames.
Thus love consumes me in his lively flames,
Thus love does freeze me with his chillie Ice,
So that no time remains me through the year
To make me blith^ne are there any leaves:
Through all the trees that are upon the mountains,
That may conceal me from my sweetest (...).
First shall the sun be seen without his flame,
The wintred mountains without frost or ice,
Leaves on the stones ere I content one year.
This written in an amorous and more p^ausible vain (as that which most
pleased the Ladies) and was not of least worth, I have set down last.

O curious Gem how I envy each while,
To see thee play upon my Ladies paps,
And hear those Orbs where Cupid lays his traps
From whence a gracious April still does smile.
And now thou plaist thee in that Garden gentill,
Twixt golden fruit and near her heart receiuest
Thy rest, and all her secret thoughts conceiuest
Under a veil fair, white, divine, and subtle.
Ye gentle pearls where ere did nature make you?
Or whether in Indian shoares you found your mould*
Or in those lands where spices serve for fuel:
Oh if I might from ou^ your essence take you,
And turn my self to shape what ere I would,
How gladly would I be my Ladies Jewel?
Many such like were devised by Minecius, and allowed by Philenia, through
which, Love, that had new vurgend his wings, began to fly, and being shut in
close embers, brake out to open fire: so that like the Alcatras that scenteth
far, Philenia consented to yield him fa^^ou^ who sought it, knowing that his
wit like the rose being more sweet in the bud then in the flower would best
fi^^er^ and (as the h^arb Ephemerus that has in his spring a sweet and purple
flower, but being of ten days growth conceiueth nothing of beauty, but is
replenished with barrenness, so course of time would change him* she made
choice of him, since in that estate of life wherein he then lived, was
fashioned to all pleasures and disfurnished of no perfection, she knew him most
meetest to enjoy his beauty, and most accordant to possess her marriage bed.

But leave we Philenia delighted in her Mineciu, Margarita applauding them
both, Protomachus conuersing with Arsinous, and the whole courtely train of
Mosco living in them co^ent; and let us have an eye to Cusco and the emperor
thereof, who no sooner arrived in this court, but like the good gardner,
knowing his time to plant; like the fortunate husband well trained to yoke and
pl^ugh, learned of Trisolium, who lifts up her leaves against tempest; and
the emo^, who by her provision and travel foretells a shower and trouble that
follows, thought good (having been taught by experience to take the
opportunity, knowing that princes and monarchs minds are most subject to
alterations, according to the humors of their counsels) to send his son
Arsadachus to Mosco: whereupon furnishing him with princely attendance and
great treasures, he see him forward on his way, and at his last farewell, ^ooke
his lea^e of him in this fatherly and kingly manner: My son, as thou art
young in years, so have thou young thoughts, which if thou govern not with
discretion, it will be the cause of thy destruction. Thou art leaving thy
country for an other court, thy familiars, for new friends, where the least
mite of folly in thee, will show a mountain, the least blemish, a great blot.
Since therefore thine inclination is corrupt; and the faults which I smother,
in that I am thy father, others will smite at, being thy foes? I will counsel
thee to foresee before thou fall; and to have regard before thy ruin. Thou
art borne a Prince, which being a benefit sent from heaven, is likewise an
estate, subject to all unhappiness, for, whereas much dirt is, thither come
many carrions; where high fortunes, many flatterers; where the hugeredat
grows, the thistle springs; where the foorde in deepest, the fish are
plentiest; and whereas sovereignty is, there are many seducers. Be thou
therefore wary like the Unicorne, which, for fear she should taste poison,
touches with her horn, before she lap it with her lip so seem thou, in
(...) credit to choose, who mean to fawn on thee in thy (...) them in their
s^ight^, (...) ^oth the Locust, and prevent them in their (...) the fish Nibias
does the sea dragon. In choosing thy friends, learn of Augustus the Roman
Emperor, who was strange and scrupulous in accepting friends, but changelesse
and resolute in keeping them. Choose not such companions, I pray thee, as will
be drunk with thee for good fellowshippe, and double with thee in thine
affairs, but use such as the chriftier sort do by their threede-bare coats,
which being without wool, they cast off, as things unfit for their wearing.
And especially remember these short lessons, which the shortness of time
makes me utter by a word, where indeed they require a whole days work;
beware of ouer-trust, lest you commit the sweetest of your life to the credit
of an uncertain tongue. Use all such courtiers as visit you, in like manner as
Goldsmiths do their metal, who try it by the touchstone if it be forthall,
and melt it in the fire, before they vouchsafe it the fashion; so do thou, and
if they be counterfeit, they will soon leave thee; if faithful, they will the
more love thee. Trust not too much to the ear, for it beguileth many; nor to
the tongue, for it bewitcheth more. Strive not with time in thy affairs, but
take leisure; for a thing hastily enterprised, is more hastily repented. In
your counsels, beware of too much affection: and in your actions be not too
proud, for the one will pro^^e your little regard of conscience; the other the
corruption of your nature. And since thou art going into a foreign court, and
must follow the direction of a second father, whose favor if thou keep, thou
may hap to be most famous, look to thy self, for as Plato says; to be a
king, and to reign, to serve, and be in favor; to fight, and overcome, are
three impossible things, and are only distributed by fortune, and disturbes by
her frowardness in following. Therefore ( Protomachus) seek in all things to
follow his humor; for opinion is the chief step to preferment: and to be
thought well of by the Prince, is no small profit; and if so be thou will
please him, do him many services, and give him few words. In thy speech be
deliberate, without hashfulnesse: in thy behavior courtly, without pride; in
thy apparel priueely without (...); in thy reuenges hold, but not too (...)
love be (...) (...) his corrupt manners. From this so sour a stock that fruit
may be expected but crabbes? from so lewd beginnings, how lamentable issues? At
last, arriving in Mosco, he was informed of the emperors being in the castle
of Arsinous: whereupon addressing himself thither according to the mightiness
of his estate, he was by Protomachus entertained royally, who receiving the
prelents of Ar^osogon* returned them back, who brought them with high rewards,
choosing among all the princely gentlemen of his court, those for to accompany
Arsadachus who were virtuously disposed and well indewed. Among the rest
Minecius was appointed chief, whom Margarita highly trusted by reason of the
trial Philenia had made of him. But among all other subtle demeanours in
Court, this one was most to be admired, that Arsadachus should make signs of
great devotion toward Margarita and deluded her with most hateful doubleness;
it was wonderful to see him counterfeit sighs, to feign love, dissemble
tears, to work treasons, vow much, perform little; in brief* vow (...)
faith, and perform nothing but falshoode. Margarita (poor princess) thinking
all that gold which glistered; the (...) precious, by reason of his fair
foil; the water shallowe* (...) reason of his mild silence, trusted so long,
until (...) perished in her trust, wholly ignorant that love is like the
sea-starre, which whatsoever it touches it burns: for knowing the resolution
of her father, the conclusion of the nobility, she began to strain her
thoughts to the highest reach, f^ncying every motion, wincke, ^ecke, and action
of the Cuscan Prince, in such sort as that (assisted by the virtuous, constant,
and vnspot^^d simplicity of her nature) she seemed not to suspect whateuer she
saw, nor to count it wrong, howsoever she endured. Among all other the
counselors of this young and untoward heir (about that time the flame of his
folly long time smothered, began to smoke, besides his own countriemen*
which were Brasidas, Capan^us, and other) there lived a great Prince in the
court of Protomachu^* who delighted rather to flatter then counsel, to feed
corruptions then purge them, who had Macheui^^ (...) in his (...) to give
instan^^, and mother Nana the Italia* (...) in his pocket to show his
artificall villainies. This Thebion being in high account with the Emperor for
his ripe wit, was quickly entertained by this ungracious Prince for his
cunning wickedness; who where Arsadachus was prone by nature to do ill, never
ceased to minister him an occasion of doing ill. For, perceiving one day how
with ouer-lustful eyes ye young prince beheld Philenia, egged him onward which
had too sharp an edge, using old proverbs to confirm his odious discourses and
purposes: to be brief, Arsadachus perceiving Philenia and Margarita always
conversant, resorted often to them, giving the Emperors daughter the hand for
a fashion, whilst Arsinous darling had the heart for a favor. And the better
to cloak this corruption, be used Minecius with more then accustomed
familiarity, seeming to be very importunate in his behalf with Philenia, where
indeed he only sought opportunity to discover his own love. Whereupon
being one day desired by Minecius to work a reconcilement between him and
his mistress, by reason he knew him to be both eloquent and learned, be
taking the occasion at a certain fest^^all, whilst Minecius courted
Margarita, to withdraw Philenia do a bay window in the castle, which ouerlooked
the fair fields on every side; where taking her by the hand he began thus:

Beautiful Philenia, if I knew you as secret as you are sage, I would discover
that to you in words, which I cover in my heart with sighs. If it be love,
great prince, (said Philenia little suspecting his treachery) you may commend
it to my ear, in that it is settled in this heart; as for silence, it is lovers
science, who are as curious to conceal, as cunning to conceive: and as Hunters
carry the feather of an Egle against thunder, so lovers bear the herb
Therbis in their mouths, which has the virtue to stay the tongue from
discourse whilst it detaineth the heart with incredible pleasure. If it be so
said Arsadachus* blushing very vehemently (for natures sparks of h^pe were
not as yet altogether rui^^ted) I will hold Ladies weakness for worth, and
disclose that secret which I thought to keep close. And what is that quoth
Philenia? Love said Arsadachus, it is love, and there he paused* Love, my
Lord (quoth the Lady) why it is a passion full of pleasure, a god full of
goodness, and trust me, Margarita has of late days stolen him from his mother
at Paphos, to make him her play-fellow in Mosco, she prom^th his wings every
day, and curleth his locks every hour; if he cry, she stilles him under
your name, if he be wanton, she charms him, with thinking on you: since then
she has the sickness in her hand, that loves you in her heart; complain not
of love since you command it. Here Arsadachus unable to endure the heat of
affection, or conceal the humor that restrained him, brake off her discourse
in this sort: Ah Philenia, if I did not hope, that as the hard oak nourishes
the soft silkeworme; the sharp beech brings forth the sauourie ches-nut, the
black Bdellium sweet gum; so beautiful looks concealed pitiful hearts, I
would furf^et in my sorrows to the death, rather then satisfy thee in my
discourse. But hoping of thy silence ( Philenia) I will disclose my mind: I
love Philenia; fair Philenia, I love thee; as for Margarita, though she
cherish beauty in her bosom, thou inclosest him in thy beutie; she may have
his feathers, but thou his fancies, she may please him well, but thou only
appease him. You do speak Greek Arsadachus (said Philenia) I understand you
not. I will paraphrase on it then (quoth the Prince) to make it plainer (for
now occasion had emboldned him.) I come not to plead a reconcilement for
Minecius, as you suppose, but remorce for my self (sweet madam) on set
purpose, for upon you (faite madam) depends my life, in your hands
consists my liberty; your looks may deifie my delights; your loures dare me
with discontents. I pray thee therefore, dear Philenia, by those chaste eyes
(the earnest of my happiness) by this fair hair (the minister of all favors)
take compassion of Arsadachus, who being a prince, may prefer thee, and an
emperor, will love thee: as for Margarita, let Minecius and her accord them,
for only I will make thee empress, and she may make Minecius Emperor.
Philenia unable to endure his devilish and damned assaults, s^ang from him with
this bitter and sharp answer: Did not my promise lock up these lips
(thou injurious Prince) thy doublenes should be as well known in this Court
as thy name; but since my promises have made thee presumptuous, I will
hereafter hear before I answer, and try before I trust* Is this the faith
thou bear to Margarita? thy friendship thou vowest to Minecius, to falsify
thy faith to one, and delude the trust of the other* Hence, poisoned, because I
abhor thee; and if hereafter thou haunt me with these lewd and lecherous
salutes, trust me, the Emperor shall know thy treasons, and others shall be
revenged on thee for thy treacheries. This said, she thrust into the company
of other Ladies, leaving him altogether confused: yet being made confident, by
reason of her promise, he withdrew himself to his chamber, where tossing his
licencious limbs on his soft bed, he fed on his desperate determina^^on, till
Thebion and Brasidas (the one a Cuscan, and the other a Moscouian, both of his
dissolute counsel) entered his chamber: when after they had sounded the cause of
his sorrows, and the manner of the disease, quickly ministered the method of
curing it; for the day of Minecius marriage being at hand, and the nuptial
feast ordained the Monday following: they seeing the grounded affection of the
Prince, concluded this; by the death of Minecius to minister Arsadachus his
remedy, the complot whereof they laid in this sort: that (where in Mosco it
was accustomed, that such nobles as married young heirs in their fathers house,
should after the joining of hands conduct them to their own castles, there to
accomplish the festiualles;) Arsadachus and they his counselors with the
assistance of their followers should lie in wait in the woods of Mesphos, by
which Minecius and his bride should needly pass, where they might surprise
Philenia, and murder Minecius

Arsadachus too toward in all tyranny, no sooner conceived the manner, then
consented to the murder: and having a subtle and preventing wit (and being
very careful how to acquit himself of the matter) he asked Thebion how he
should answer Protomachus. Tut said he, fear not that, for in the enterprise
you shall be disguised, and Brasidas here your true counselor shall only take
the matter on him, and flee into Cusco, where your credit can countenance him
against all justice: for your self, fashion your mind for these few days to
please Margarita, to appease Philenia, to further Minecius; seem likewise
discontented with your former motions, so shall you rid suspect in them, and be
more ready in your self to effect; seem now to be more devout to the gods
then ever, for this opinion of devotion is a great step to perform any weighty
action: for where we offer much to the gods who are most pure, our actions are
least suspected; and revenge is better performed in the Temple where we pray,
then in the field where we fight: for the offender in that place trusts
sufficiently to his forces, wherein the defender presumes too much on his
devotion. Tut the king that nipt AEsculapius by the beard, gave instance to
those that follow to gripe the enemy by the heart. But (mighty prince) I must
end with etc. Arsadachus knowing the cloth by the list, the bill by the Irem,
the steel by the mark, and the work by the words, with a smile commended that
which was concluded; and thereupon hasted to Court, where finding Margarita,
Philenia, and Minecius in the privy garden, he counterfeiting marvelous
melancholy, having his coat suitable to his conceit, presented both the Ladies
with this melancholy, which Minecius ouerreading most highly commended.

CAZON.
My words, my thoughts, my vows,
Have soild, have forced, have stainde,
My tongue, my heart, my brows.
My tongue, my heart, my brows,
Shall speak, shall think, shall smile,
Against words, against thoughts, against vows*
For words, for thoughts, for vows,
Have soiled, wrongde, and stained,
My tongue, my heart, my brows.
Whereon henceforth I swear.
My words, my thoughts, my vows,
So vain, so vile, so bace,
Which brought, my tongue, heart, brows,
To shame, repulse, disgrace*
Shall evermore forbear,
To tempt that brow, that heart, that tongue, so holy,
With vows, with thoughts, with words, of too great folly.
Margarita ouerreading this sonet, supposed it to be some melancholy report of
his pretty wanton discourses with her, whereupon she spoke thus: Arsadachus
were I the priest to confess you, you should have but small penance; since in
love (as Philostratus says) Cupid dispenses with an oath, and words are good
weapons to win women, but if either of these have defaulted in you, blush
not, they shall be borne withal, for as the Mole has four feet and no eyes;
so a lover may be borne withal, for one maistaking among a many virtues: to be
brief as the Logicians say passion is no more but the effect of action, the
one whereof I have gathered in these lines, the other thou must show in thy
life: this said she ceased, and Philenia blushed. Minecius to cut off these
mute melancholies of his mistress gave the dagger a new haft, turning over the
leaf to a second discourse, ministering Arsadachus by that means occasion to
court Margarita, and himself opportunity to pacify Philenia, who by the
carriage of her eye, showed the discontent of her mind. In short words
Arsadachus so behaved himself with his Mistress, that neither Tiberius for
his eye, neither Octauius for his affability, neither Alexander for his
scarre, nor Cicero for his mole, were so much commended, and noted, as the young
Cuscan was for his behauior. Lord how demurely would he loooke, when he thought
most deuillishly? how could he fashion himself to haunt there, where he did
most hate? to smooth ^holer under color of friendship? so that Margarita,
laughed for joy, to see his gravity, Minecius admired to behold his demeanor;
but Philenia mistrusted his double and sinister subtilties. In a word, as the
day succeeds the night, and the shutting up of the evening, is followed by
the serenitie of the morning, so time passed, so long, til the present day
aproched, wherein the marriage was to be solemnised: whereon the emperor (the
^ore to dignifie the nuptials) countenanced the marriage with his presence.
Thither likewise resembled the flower of the nobility and Ladies; among whom
Margarita was not least sumptuous, for on that day her apparel was so
admirable, her carriage and behauior so execelent, that had the wisest Cato
beheld her, he would have in some part dismissed his stoical severity: her
golden hairs curled in rich knots, and enterlaced with rich bands of diamonds
and rubies, seemed to s^aine Apollos golden bush; enuirond with her wreath of
chrisolites, her eyes like pure carbuncles, seemed to smile on the roses of her
cheeks, which consorted with the beauty of the lilly, made her beutie more
excelent, her eyes, briars like the net of Vulcan, polished out of refined
threeds of sine ebonie, her alablaster neck was encompassed with a collar of
orient perle, which seemed to smile on her teeth when she opened her mouth,
claiming of them some consanguinitie; her body was apparrelled in a fair
loose garment of green damask, cut upon cloth of tissue, and in every cut,
was inchased a most curious Jewel, wherein all the escapes of Jupiter, the
wanton delights of Venus, and the amorous deceits of Cupid were cunningly
wrought. Thus attired, she attended the bride, being her self waited on by a
troop of beautiful dainsels that day. Arsadachus, though with little devotion
accompanied the Emperor, being that day clothed in red cloth of gold,
betokening revenge. It were a vain matter to reckon up the order of the
bridegroom, the majesty of his favorers, the manner of the lords and ladies,
the sumptuousnes of the feasts and triumphs, the harmony and music in the
temples; suffices it, that by the consent of Arcinous, Philenia was betrothed
to Minecius, who seeing the day welnigh spent, and the time convenient to
depart to his castle, (after he had with humble reverence invited the emperor,
his daughter, with the other Princes the next day to his festiual, which he had
prepared in his own house) made all things in a readiness, and departed, having
received by the emperor and Arcinous, many rich rewards. Arsadachus seeing the
long desired hour of his delights at hand, stole out of the court in great
secret to his lodging, where arming himself according as Thebion had given him
instructions; and attended by Brasidas and other Cusca^s, his trusty
followers, he presently posted unto a grove, through which the new married
couple should needly pass, where he privily hid himself and his ambush. By
that time the bright and glorious light of heaven, abasing himself by degrees,
reposed his sweatie steedes in the soft bosom of clear looking Eurotas; and
evening the fore-messenger of the night had haled some stars to illuminate
the hemisphere, when as Minecius (in the top of al his felicities) accompanied
with his fair Philenia and other folowers, without either suspect of treason
or other trouble entered the wood, and through the secretnesse thereof, hied
them toward their determined abode. But all the way Philenia took no comfort,
dreadfully suspecting the subtle dealings of Arsinous; and often she sighed, and
often she dropped down lillies on the roses of her face, or rather, such sweet
tears wherewith the blushing morn enchaseth the soft Hyacinth. Minecius
seeing her in these passions, persuaded her unto patience: but even as
(according to the opinion of Aristotle) lions, bears, eagles, griffins, and al
other birds and beasts whatsoever, are then more egre and cruel when they have
young ones: so Philenia having now a second care annexed to her own safety,
(which was for her dear husband) could not cease to perplexe her self, and to
fear for him. Long had they not traveled, but they discovered the ambush, and
the ambush assaulted them: among which Arsadachus greatly disguised, as he that
envied the fortunes of Minecius, took hold on the reins of Phileniaes
palfrey, whilst Thebion, and Brasidas, with others, with their naked swords
began to assault Minecius and his followers. He that has seen the faul^on
seizing his keen talents in the flesh of a silly dove, and playing his sharp
bill on her soft feathers, might have thought on Arsadachus, who no sooner
took hold on her, but pulling the mask from her face, enforced many violent
kisses on her soft lips, whilst she exclaiming on the name of Minecius, and
crying, help, repulsed the injuries with her white hands, which were
injuriously offered to her delicate face. Minecius suspecting no more then was
true, and unable to endure further violence, deemed it greater honor to die in
defense of his mistress, then behold the impeach of her credit, left his
companions who fled, and with naked sword smote Arsadachus a mighty blow on
the helm, through which he staggered, and lost his hold-fast; then renewing
his mistress which was almost dead for fear, he boldly spoke thus to
Arsadachus; Traitor, and coward, that in time of peace go thus armed, and
with unjust arms assaultest naked knights, if any spark of honor reign in
thee, give me arms and weapons; if thou seek my life, take it from me with
courage like a knight, not by treason like a coward; if my Love, I pray thee
take these eyes from their sight, these hands from their sense, and this
tongue from his speech: for whilst the one may see, the other fight, and the
third threaten: thou shall have no part of that wherein my felicity is reposed;
thus saying, he remounted Philenia: whilst he was thus occupied, Arsadachus
swelling with impatience after he had bin animated by his followers, replied
thus: Soft (amorous sir) this is no meat for your mowing, you best were rather
to fall to your prayers, then to use prating, to beseech for life, then to
seech love: for assure thy self, there is no way with thee but death, nor no
love for Philenia but mine. This said, he gave Minecius a mighty stroke on
the head, so that the blood ouerflowed his costly attire, and he fell to the
ground. Philenia half mad with melancholy, leapt from her palfrey to
comfort her paramour: and seeing the whole troop of assailants ready to charge
her husband, and assured that Arsadachus was the chief of them, with such a
piteous look as Venus cast on bleeding Adonis she beheld Minecius, and
wiping his wounds with one hand, and touching the knees of Arsadachus with the
other, she spoke thus: Ah Cuscan prince though thy face is shadowed, I know
thee by these follies, though thy raiments are changed, I judge thee by thy
rashness, what seek thou? if my favor, it is already bequeathed: if
revenge, how base is it against a woman? if Minecius life, how injurious art
thou to wrong him that loves thee as his life? Ah cruel as thou art (yet would
thou were not cruel) thou know Chrises tears could move Achilles, the one
proceeding from a seely maid, the other pitied by a princely man: thou know
that Alexander to Campaspe, Pompey to his prisouer, and other great conquerours
have rather showed compassion then victory; and will thou who art equal to
all in power, be inferier to al in virtue? Ah woe is me poor Philenia that have
planted my affections there where they are watered with warm blood, and heap
my compassion there where working tears have no boot. I pray thee gracious
prince, I pray thee be gracious: divide not those by murder, whom the gods
have united by marriage: seperat not those souls by death whom the destinies
have appointed to live. In speaking these words she beheld Minecius, who
through the grieuousnesse of his wounds, fell in a swowne: whereupon she
casting off all care of life, and hope of comfort, closed her soft lips to
his, breathing the balm of her sighs into his breathless body, clapping his
pale cheeks with her pretty hands, moisting his closed eyes, with her crystal
tears, so that they who were the very authors of her sorrow, began sigh to see
her ceremonies. Will thou hence (said she) Minecius? Oh stay for Philenia, let
our souls post together to Elysium that on earth here may not enjoy their
happiness; for nothing shall separate me from thee (my love:) if thou do
banish sight from thine eye, I will drive out blood from my heart: if thy
beauty grow pale as ^ying death, my cheeks shall pine as seeking death: if
thou faint through feebleness of body, I will default through waightinesse of
discontent: and since we may not live together, we will die together. With this
Minecius rowsed himself: and Arsadachus inflamed, replied; Philenia, there is
no ransom of thy husbands life, but thy love, nor no means to pacify me,
but my pleasure of thee: speak therefore, and sound the sentence of my
delight, or Minecius destruction: which said, he approached to kiss her: whom
Minecius though half dead began to rescue: and Philenia half bedlam
enforced her self in these terms: Traitor disloyal and damned leacher, since
neither tears, nor terms will satisfy thee, use thy tyranny (for better
were it for me to be buried with honor, then bedded with infamy) do therefore
thy worst, thou hated of the gods, and despised among men, for no sooner shall
thou assail my husband, but thou shall slaie me: each drop of his blood shall
be doubled by mine: and ^s in life he should have been the shelter of mine
honor, so even in death will I be the shield to defend him from the assaults of
his enemies: come therefore ye murderers, in growing cruel to me, you will
prove pitiful: first take my life, that Minecius beholding my constancy, may
die with more comfort. Thus cried she out with many tears; and Minecius
dissuaded her. But the time passing away, and Arsadachus fearing delays,
seeing all hope lost, grew to desperate fury, so that animating his followers,
they set on Minecius, who valiantly defended himself. It was a world to see,
how during the conflict Philenia bestirred her, letting no blow slip without
the ward of her body, lying between the sword of the enemy for her husbands
safety, crying out on the heavens til she was wellnie hoarse with crying. At
last Minecius lacking blood, Philenia breath, both of them entangled arm in
arm, fell down dead, leaving the memory of their virtues to be eternized in
all ages. Arsadachus seeing the tragedies performed (not without some sighs
which compassion extorted from him, as strokes do fire out of hard flint: he
presently sent Brasidas away, as it was concluded (attended by those Cuscans
that followed him in the enterprise) and he with Thebio^ speedily posted to
their lodging, both undiscovered and unsuspected.

By this, such as attended Minecius to his castle had with speedy flight entered
the court of Arsinous; who certified of his daughters danger, advised the
emperor, and presently with certain armed soldiers, posted on to the
rescouse: mean while Protomachus made search through all the court for such as
were absent; and they that were appointed to the action entering Arsadachus
chamber, found him in his fox sleep: where-through the emperor being
advertised, began little suspect him: in like sor^ found they Thebion, only
Brasidas was missing. In the mean while Arsinous having attained the place of
the conflict, found both the murdered bodies sweltered in their bloods:
whereupon falling from his horse in great fury, he thus exclaimed on fortune.
Oh fortune, well art thou called, the enemy of virtue, since thou neither
fauourest such as deserve well, nor destroyest those that perform ill* for
had thou not been partial, my daughters chastity had prevented her death,
and her murderers cruelty had been their own confusion: woe is me that have
lost my flower in the bud, my hope in the ear, and my harvest in the blossom.
Ah my dear Philenia, dear were thou to me, that bought thee with much care,
and have lost thee with more: dear were thou unto me, who have cost me many
broken sleeps to bring thee up, many careful thoughts to bestow thee, more
fatherly tears to prevent thy overthrow, and now having reared the fortress
of my delights, the tempest of injurious fortune has destroyed it: woe is me
that am careful to publish my pains, and negligent to seek remedy; fond am I
to defy fortune from whom I cannot fly: ah Arsinous weep not her that may
not be recalled with tears, but seek to revenge her; show thy self rather
fatherly in act, then effeminate in tears? Which said, he governed himself,
causing the dead bodies honorably to be covered and conveyed with him to his
castle, where within a temple erected to chastity, he reared a fair tomb of
white marble, wherein with the general tears of the emperor and his whole
court, these two faithful lovers were entombed, and over their graves thus
written: Virtue is dead, and here she is enshrined,
Within two lifelesse bodies late deceased:
Beauty is dead, and here is faith assigned
To weep her wrack, who when these did first ceased.
Pity was dead when tyranny first slew them,
And heaven inioies their souls, tho earth does rue them.
Since beauty then and virtue are departed,
And faith grows faint to weep in these their fading,
And virtuous pity kind and tender hearted,
Died to behold fierce furies fell inuading.
Vouch safe ye heuens that fame may have in keeping
Their happy and thrice blessed names, for whom
Both virtue, beauty, pity died with weeping,
And faith is closed in this marble tomb,


This register of his love did Arsinous with many tears write upon the toobme
of his deceased son in law and daughter, who had no sooner furnished the
funeralles, but Phidias a page of Philenias, who during the mortal debate, and
bloody massacre, had hid himself in a thicket, and ouerheard the whole
discourse of Arsadachus, repaired to the court, who calling Arsinous aside,
with pitious tears discoursed unto him the whole tragedy in such ruthful
manner, as that it was hard to say, whether the lad in bewraying it, or the
father in hearing it, were more compassionate. The old man certified the truth,
though scarce able, yet smothered his griefs, till opportunity offered,
suffering the emperor (like a wise man) to follow his own course, who the
next morning assembling his nobility, forgot not Arsadachus, who making
semblance to have but new inteligence of the murder of Minecius and his love,
repaired to the Court in mourning apparel and being present when the matter
was debated, seemed to weep bitterly, crying out on the emperor for Justice,
exclaiming on the iniquity of time, the cruelty of men, and tyrany of love.
Protomachus was not a little pleased herewith, neither was Margarita aggreeued
to hear it, but Arsinous boiled in choler to see it: at last it was found out,
by a scarf which Brasidas had let fall (and was after taken up by one of those
who fled) that he was at the murder, whereupon his absence was sufficient to
conuic^ him, and Arsadachus called forth to answer for him in that he was his
attendant, spoke thus: Noble emperor, the gods that have placed thee in thy
kingdom, shall bear me witness, how I grieve this accident, and willingly would
revenge it, and since my follower to my defame, has (as it is supposed) bin a
principal, vouchsafe me noble emperor license for a time to depart to Cusco,
where I will both discharge my choler, purge my grief, and be so revenged of
Brasidas (who as I hear is fled, and by the token is guilty) as all the world
shall ring of the justice, and rid me of suspicion. The emperor not hearing
one that dared say his letters should suffice, endeavoring himself to seek
the confederates; and because by his looks he perceived some discontents in
Arsadachus, he sought all the means he could to please him, and remembering
himself (that those good deeds which are done to our self beloved, are
esteemed as to our self) he highly promoted Thebion, thinking thereby to win
the heart of Arsadachus, so that he pretermitted no consultations, where
Thebion was not chief, neither bestowed benefits, wherein he had no part. The
young prince measuring all this according to the corrption of his nature,
supposed these favors were but to sound him, and that Thebion being won by
benefits, would easily consent to bewray him, whereupon he conceived a deadly
hate against him, and perseuered it so long till he effected it in this manner
to his death: For knowing that Margarita dearly loved him, aiming all her
fashions to his fancies, her behauiours, to his humors, he began anew to cloak
with her, showing her ^o undoubted signs of assured affection, that she seemed
in a paradise of pleasure, to see his pliantnes, and having with sweet words,
trained her to his lewer, he attended such an occasion, as that he found her
alone walking in the privy garden in her meditations, (for those that love
much, meditate often) where nying her with a courtly salute; he thus found her
affection: Fair Princess, if either my unfeigned love have any force, or your
virtuous nature true compassion, I hope both my sorrows shall be pitied, and
my discontents succored. Why what aggreeueth my dear Lord said Margarita? (and
heartily she sighed in saying so) is either our court unpleasant, our
entertainment unworthy, our ladies unapt to work your delights* believe me
good prince, if Mosco cannot suffice to please you, Europe and the world shall
be sought to satisfy you. Kind words good madam, said Arsadachus, act and
silence must content me, which if you will under the faith of a noble and
famous princess promise me, I shall be heads man, to pray for your
happiness, and rest yours unfeigned in all service and loyalty. Margarita
having gotten such an opportunity to please him both vowed and reuowed all
secrecy, swearing although it were with the hasard of her life to do
whatsoever him best liked, and conceal whatso it please him to discover, so
great is the simplicity of women, who are soon led where they most like.
Arsadachus finding the iron hot, thought good to strike; the fruit ripe, began
to gather, the flower springing, ceased not to water: and thus began to work
her. True it is madam, that where love has supremacy, all other affections
attend on it, so that neither the eye beholds, neither the sent smells, nor
the ear hears, neither the tongue speaks any thing, but is to the honor
of the best beloved: this find I true in my self, who since I surrendered you
the sort of my fancy, find my delights metamorphosed into yours, ye so much
am I tied unto you, as that danger which either attempteth or touches you, or
any of yours, wholly attainteth me. The proof whereof you may perceive in this,
that having heard through my entire acquaintance with Thebion, a certain
resolved determination in him, to make your father away, by reason of his
familiar access to his majesty every morning, I could not choose but
discover his drift unto you sweet Princess, whose dangers must needely second
your fathers subversion. Thebion said Margarita, alas my lord what reason
should move him hereunto, since no one is more favored by my father then he^
can favor possibly be requited with such falsehood? Doubt you it said
Arsadachus* why madam where is greater treason, then there where is least
mistrust? under the clear Christ all lurketh the mortal worm, under the
green leaf the greedy serpent, and in fairest bosoms are falcest hearts.
Think not that liberallitie has any power in depraved minds, for whereas the
thoughts hant after emperie, hem^ are each supposes, faith dies, truth is
exiled nulla fides regni, if you have read histories, you shall find that they
soonest have supplanted their Princes, who have bin least suspected, as may
appear by Giges, and other: cast therefore hence (my dear lady) all thought
of excuse, and bethink you of prevention; for it is greater wisdom, to see
and prevent, then to hear and neglect. Thebion has conspired and does
conspire, resolving with himself to vsurp the empire, murder Protomachus,
banish you; all which I have learned of him, dissembling my affections toward
you, and soothing him in his corruptions; yea so far have I brought him, and
so near have I wrought it, that I can assure you to morrow morning is the last
of your fathers life, unless you prevent it. Alas my lord (said Margarita
weeping) how may this be? Thus my sweet love and thus it is concluded (quoth
Arsadachus) you know he has every morning of late private access unto your
fathers chamber, where being alone with him and the unsuspected emperor in his
bed, he has resolved with his dagger to stabbe him to the heart; which secret,
since the gods have opened unto me, I think good to discover unto thee (my
dear heart) the means to prevent (which shall the more easily be performed if
thus you work it) no sooner let the day appear, but in the morning betimes
enter you your fathers chamber, where after you have saluted him, you may seem
to utter this; that in a dream this night you were mightily troubled about his
Majesty, and so troubled, that you thought Thebion entering his chamber with a
hidden poiniard stabbed him to the heart. But what needs these circumlocutions
or delays quoth Margarita if the treason be so manifest? My lord, if it please
you I will discover it presently and plainly. The gods forbid (said
Arsadachus) that my desires should be so hindered, for (my noble princess) the
delay I seek, and the order I prescribe you, is rather to ground your fathers
affection toward me, and get the credit of this service then otherwise; yea
the love I bear thee sweet Lady; (with that he sighed and sealed it with a
kiss) for having by this means won favor, both our fortunes shall be
bettered, our marriage hasted, and our fames magnified.

Margarita (poor princess) supposing all that gold that glistered, yielded
easy consent; whereupon after many amorous promises, the young prince took his
leave, willing her to be careful in the morning, and to leave the rest of the
affairs to his faithfulness, and thus they parted.

But mark the nature of malice (which as the poet describes is sleepelesse,
restless and in satiate) for Arsadachus being departed from Margarita, and
earnestly bent on his revenge, sought out Thasilides the page of Thebion, whom
he so cunningly wrought with oaths, gifts, and gold, that he made him both
promise and practice the means to put a certain scedule into the pocket of
his masters gown which he usually ware, the which he himself had wrote, and
wherein he behaved him self with such art, as that he had not only
counterfeted Thebions hand, but also the names of al such as either he thought
his favorites, or else likely to thwart his proceedings in court (among which
he forgote not Ctesides a grave counselor of the emperors, who the day before
was very earnest with Protomacus to marry his daughter, showing him evident
reasons of Arsadachus counterfeiting. All these things falling out according to
his own devise and fantasy, he sought out Thebion that night, whom he used
with the greatest familiarity that might be: and to insinuate the more into
his favor, he bestowed on him a poiniard, whose pummel was a bright
carbuncle, the haft unicorns horn, a jewel which Thebion had long time
greatly desired, praying him of all loves to wear it for his sake; and since
he was in such estimation to continue him in the good grace of the Emperor.
Thebion made proud to be entreated and presented by so high a prince, promised
both to wear his gift, and to win him favor. Whereupon since the night was
far spent Arsadachus repaired to his lodging, Thebion to his rest. But vain
is the hope that depends on the next day, and those worldly honors that do
wait on this life; for the one is prevented oftentimes by injurious fortune,
the other altered by our ouerweening mistrusting words, actions, and desires,
and shall manifestly appear in the sequel of this history. For no sooner began
bright day to chase away black darkness, and the stooping stares do homage
to the rising sun, but Margarita arose, apparelling herself freshly like
May, in a gown of green sendall, embrodered with all kind of flowers in
their native colors, and remembering her self of the affair she had in hand;
she under the conduct of love (who is both a cunning dissembler and nice
flatterer) hasted to her fathers chamber, and humbly admitted to the presence
of the emperor by the grooms that attended him, (with a trembling hand, and a
bashful c^untenaunce: spreading the mute oratorie of her tears, upon her
blushing cheeks) she awoke him. Protomachus amassed to see his daughters
sudden access, and sad countenance, began thus: How now my dear Margarita,
what, has love awaked you this morning, threatening you with some apparent
sorrow to make your after-good in deed more sauourie? why hangs your
countenance? why tremble your limbs? what moves this your amasednes? sweet
maiden tell thy father. Ah my Lord (said Margarita) it is love indeed that
disturbes me, but not that love that is painted with feathers, wanton looks,
that love that whispereth affections in ladies ears, and whetteth women's
wits, making the eye traitor to the heart, and the heart betrothed to the
eye; but that love which was engendered by nature, ordained by the heavens,
attired by reverence and duty, and tired with nothing but death, that love
(and so speaking she wept) has awaked me, to forewarne you. Protomachus
somewhat urged by these tears, rowzed himself on his pillow, and began more
intentiuely to listen, asking her what had hapnes? Ah dear father, said she,
this night that is past I was greatly troubled with a grievous dream; me
thought I saw Thebion, a man in high authority in your court, attended by many
insolent rebels, who violently brake open your majesty's privy chamber,
murdered you in your bed, and dispossessed me of my heritage, me thought even
then you cried unto me; ah Margarita help me! and I with outcries calling for
rescouse, Arsadachus came in hastily, who with his sword berest Thebion of
life, and me of fear: And so you waked and found all false (quoth the
emperor) Tut, doat not on dreams, they are but fancies: and since I see
(swe^te daughter) that you are so troubled by night, I will shortly find out a
young prince to watch you, who shall drive away these night-sprights by his
prowess. Thus spoke Protomachus smiling, yet smothered he suspect in his
heart: for such as have much, suspect much.

No sooner were these discourses finished, but Arsadachus knowing how to take
his time, hastily approached the Emperors chamber, where intimating some
occasion of high import, he required to speak with Protomachus, and was
presently let in. The Emperor conceiving new suspicions upon this second
assault, began to misdeeme: and seeing Arsadachus with ghastly looks entering
the chamber, was ready to speak unto him when as the young Cuscan prevented
him, saying: The gods be blessed (noble Emperor) that have by their foresight
rid me of fear, and rest you of danger; for sore have I feared lest your
majesty should have perished before you had been advertised: Alas, why in
such dangers are you vnattended upon, when the foe is at the door? why is not
the guard in a readiness? Ah royal Moscouite rowze thee and arise, and honor
the sequel of the greatest treason that ever was contrived. Why what tidings
brings Arsadachus said Protomachus? Thus mighty prince (said he) yesternight
very late when I entered Thebions chamber unawares, I found his page (his master
being absent) laying certain waste papers out of his pocket upon his table,
perusing which, (as I was accustomed) by reason of the near familiarity
between us, I found one among the rest where (alas that subjects should be so
seditious) there was a conspiracy signed by Thebion, Ctesides, and others
(whose names I remember not) to make your mightiness away, and Thebion to
enjoy the crown: the manner to execute their stratageme, was when you least
suspected, this morning; at which time Thebion by reason of his near
familiarity and access to you, should enter your chamber and murder you.
This paper when I had ouer-read, I laid aside, making semblance of no
suspicion, resolving this morning early to signify the whole unto your
majesty, whose life is my liberty, whose happiness is my honor, whose death
were my utter ruin and detriment. Thebion a traitor quoth Protomachus; are my
favors then so smally regarded? is my courtesy rewarded with such cursednesse?
Well Arsadachus (said he) happy art thou in bewraying it, and unfortunate he
and his confederates in attempting it, for they all shall die.

This said, he presently attired himself, laying certain of his trustiest
gentlemen in guard behind the tapistrie of his privy closet, expecting the
hour of a most cruel revenge: when as suddenly Thebion knocked at the door,
and was presently admitted, who had scarcely said, God save the emperor, but
even in the bending of his knees, he was thrust through by Arsadachus, and the
other of the guard hearing the broile, came and mangled him in pieces, casting
the residue to the Emperors lions according as he had appointed. Protomachus
grudging at the sudden death of Thebion, began to chide Arsadachus for his
haste, saying, that it was inconvenient for a subject to be punished before he
were convicted. Convicted (said Arsadachus? why does your grace suspect his
guiltiness? Behold said he (drawing out the poinyard which Thebion had at
his back) the instrument that should have slain you, see (said he) taking
the schedule out of his pocket the confederacy to betray you; and should such
a wretch live then to justify? No (mighty Emperor) my soul abhorres it; the
care I have of you will not suffer it; the love I bear Margarita will not
endure it. The Emperor ouer-reading the writing, and seeing the poinyard, gave
credible belief, and with tears of joy embracing Arsadachus he said thus: Ah
my son, the gods have blessed us in sending us such a friend, who has saved
me from imminent danger, and will make me fortunate by marriage, hold take
thee (said he) my Margarita, and with her, enjoy my empire; and more, take thou
my love, which is so rooted in me toward thee, that death may not untwine it.
Arsadachus thanked the Emperor for this favor, and recomforted Margarita with
sweet words, being almost dead to see the stratageme passed. Mean while the
Emperor gave present direction to hang all the other conspirators, and put
them to other tortures, who presently without knowing why, or license to
answer, were tyrannously executed; so great is the tyranny of princes which
are subject to light belief, and led by subtle suggestions.

The rumor of this accident spread through the Court, moved sundry
imaginations in men's minds, some praised Arsadachus, some suspected the
practice, all feared; for whereas justice sleeps being ouerborne with
tyranny, the most secure have cause to fear; among the rest Arsinous wept
bitterly, knowing in himself the virtue of Ctesides, and remembering him of the
murder of his dear Philenia, he could not cease but welme bedlam to cry out
on the heavens, whose tragedy we must now prosecute, and leave Arsadachus and
his Margarita to their merry conceits and discourses.

Protomachus after that this late treason had been discovered, began to be
more wary, to keep greater guard, and to use Arsinous and the rest of the
nobility with less familiarity, who good old man, having before time been
shrewdly hurt, took this unkindness to the heart (for where greatest love
is, there unkindness is most grievous) for that cause almost desperate he
sought out the emperor, and finding opportunity, he humbling him on his knees
began thus: As Traiane (dread Monarch) was commended in Rome for bearing
poor men's complaints, so art thou condemned in Mosco for shutting thy gates
against all kind of suitors, so as (nowadayes) thou hear by others ears,
workest by others hands, and speak by others mouths, where-through justice
is made a nose of wax warmed, and wrought according to all men's pleasures, and
the poor are left to complain: the which the gods (if thou repent not) will
shortly punish in thee. Believe me (good Emperor) such as shut their gates
against their subjects, cause them not to open their hearts willingly to obey
them; and they that norish fear in their bosoms without cause, make themselves
guilty of some crime by their suspect. Wh^refore sliest thou the sight of those
that love thee? shutting thy ears lest thou hear those complaints that have
already deaffed the heavens for equity. O prince, look abroad, it behooves
thee; do justice, for it becomes thee, and hear old Arsinous a hapless
father; father do I say, being thus robbed of my children? nay a desolate
caitife, and do me right. That justice becomes thee, mark these reasons:
Homer desirous to exalt it, could not say more, but to call kings the children
of the God* Jupiter, and not for the naturalitie they have, but for the office
of justice which they minister. Plato says, that the chiefest gift that the
gods have bestowed on man is justice; that therefore thou may seem ^ightly
descended of the gods, vouchsafe me audience, and to the end thou may boast thy
self to enjoy the least gift of the gods, su^cour me. Thou know my Philenia
is ^laine, but by whose hands thou know not; thou hear Minecius is
murdered, but by whom thou inquire not, thou have rubbed the gall, but not
recured the wound; thou have tempered the medicine, but have not ministered it:
yea thou have refreshed the memory of my gri^fes very often, but remedied them
never. Three months are past, since thou have made inquiry of my daughters
death, and she that I nourished up twenty years and better, is forgotten of
all, but her old father, lamented of none, but Arsinous: and can be revenged
by none but Protomachus. O Emperor I hear their discontented grief crying
out in mine ears, and appealing to thee by my tongue for justice, me thinks
bloudlesse Minecius stands by thy throne vpbraiding thee of his services, and
conuicting thee of ingratitude. Philenia cries justice Protomachus, justice,
not against Brasidas, who was but agent, but against Arsadachus the principal,
that wretched Arsadachus, who in her life time assaied to move her to lust, and
wrought her death, in that she would not consent to his lust, against
Arsadachus the viper nourished in your bosom, to poison your own progeny,
the locust* dallied in Margaritaes lap, to deprive her of life. Ah, banish such
a bewitched race of the Cuscans, I mean not out of your kingdom, but out of
life; for he deserves not to behold the heavens, that conspireth against the
gods, root out that bloodthirsty yongman, root out that murderer, root out
that monster, from the face of nature, that the poor deceased ghostes may be
appeased, and their poor father pacified. Show thy self a prince now
Protomachus; the surgeon is known, not in curing a green wound, but in
healing a grievous fistula; the warrior is known, not by conquering alittle
village, but a great monarchy, and a prince is perceived in preventing a
capital pestilence, not a private prejudice. That I accuse not Arsadachus
wrongfully, behold my witnesses: which said, he brought out Phileniaes page,
who confidently and constantly auowed all he had told his master in the
presence of the emperor: wherefore (noble monarch) have compassion of me, and
by punishing this tragic tyranny make way to thine own eternity.

Protomachus hearing this accusation was sorely moved, now thinking all truth
which Arsinous had said by reason of that virtue he had approved in him in
times past, now deeming it false, in that Arsadachus (as he supposed) had
lately and so luckily preserved him from death. For which cause, calling the
young prince unto him, he urged him with the murder before the old man, and the
young ladde his accuser, who shook off al their objections with such
constancy, that it was to be wondered: what says he Protomachus, am I, who
have lately manifested my zeal in saving your life made subject to the
detraction of an old doting imagination with his prattling minister, I hope your
Majesty (says he) measures not my credit so barely, nor will ouerslip this
injury so slightly, since you know, that when the murder was done I was in my
bed, when the tragedy was published, I was the first that prosecuted the
revenge; and more, the friendship twixt Minecius and me should acquit me of
this suspicion. But it may be, that this is some set match of Thebions
confederates that seek my death, which if it shall be here countenaunced, I
will return to Cusco, where I dare assure my self against al such subtilties.
This said, Arsadachus angerly departed: for which cause, Protomachus fearing
his speedy flight, sent Margarita to pacify him; and causing the tongue of the
guiltless lad to be cut out, and his eyes to be pricked out with needles, both
which were guilty (as he said) the one of pretended seeing, the other of lewd
uttering. He banished the old Duke of Uolgradia, who for all his faithful
services, had this lamentable recompense, and removed himself, his court, and
daughter to Mosco, where we will leave him a while.

Arsinous thus banished from the Court, after he had furnished himself of
necessaries convenient for his journey, traveled many a weary walk toward
the deserts of Ruscia, crying out and exclaiming on the heavens for justice;
his hoarie locks and bushy beard he carelessly suffered to grow (like to those
Moscoes who are in disgrace with their emperors) seeming rather^ savage man
than a civil magistrate (as in time past he had been.) Long had he not
traveled among many barren rocks and desolate mountains, but at last he
arrived in a sollitarie Grove encompassed with huge hills, from the tops
whereof, through the continual frosts that fell, a huge river descended, which
circling about a rock of white marble, made it (as it were) an Island, but
that to the northward there was a pretty passage of twelve foot broad, decked
with ranks of trees, which gave a solitary access to the melancholy mansion;
mansion I call it, for in the huge rock was there cut out a square and curious
chamber, with fine loopes to yield light, hewn thereout (as might be supposed)
by some discontented wood-god wedded to wretchedness. Here Arsinous seated
himself, resolving to spend the residue of his days in studies, praying to
the gods continually for revenge, and to the end (if happily any should pass
that way) that his deep sorrow might be discovered, he with a punchion of
steel in a table of white Alablaster engraued this over the entrance of his
cave.

Domus doloris.
Who seeks the cave where horride care does dwell,
That feeds on sighs, and drinks of bitter tears:
Who seeks in life to find a living hell,
Where he that lives, all living joy forbeares:
Who seeks that grief, that grief it self scarce knows it,
Here let him rest, this cave shall soon disclose it.
As is the mite unto the sandy seas,
As is the drop unto the Ocean streams,
As to the orb of heaven a silly pease.
As is the lamp to burning Ticius beams:
Even such is thought that vainly does indeuer,
To think the car^ lives here, or count it ever.
Here sorrow, plague, despair, and fierce suspect,
Here rage, here jealousy, here cursed spite,
Here murder, famine, treason and neglect,
Have left their stings to plag^^ a w^f^ll wight:
That lives within this tomb of discontent.
Yet loathes that life that nature has him lent.
In this solitary and uncouth receptacle, Arsinous lived, turning of his
steed, to shift for food amid the forest, and assending every day to the
height of the rock, he shed many salt tears before the Image of Minecius
and Philenia, whose pictures he had brought with him from his castle, and
erected there: and after his devotions to the gods for revenge, and to the
ghosts to manifest his grief, he accustomed himself to walk in that desolate
coppesse of wood, where sighing, he recounted the unkindness of his prince, the
wretchedness of his thoughts and life, melting away in such melancholy, as the
trees were amassed to behold it, and the rocks wept their springs to hear it,
as the Poet says, on a desolate and leauelesse oak he wrote this: Thine age
and wastfull tempests thee,
Mine age and wretched sorrows me defaced,
Thy sap by course of time is blent,
My sense by care and age is spent and chased.
Thy leaves are fallen away to dust,
My years are thralld by time unjust.
Thy boughs the winds have borne away,
My babes fierce murder did decay.
Thy roots are firmed in the ground,
My roots are rent, my comforts drowned, showers cherish.
Thy barren bosom in the field, I perish.
Since nothing may me comfort yield.
Storms, showers, age, wear, waste, daunt, and make thee dry
Tears, cares, age, ice, waste, wring, and yet live I.


In these melancholies leave we the desolate duke of Uolgradia, till occasion
be ministered to remember him, and return we to Margarita and her lover.
Arsadachus resi^t now in Mosco* whom Protomachus by reason of the forepassed
tragedies, thought to refresh with some pleasant triumphs: for which cause he
proclaimed a iusts throughout all the empire, assembling all the Dukes, Lords,
and governors of his provinces, to dignifie the open court he meant to keep.
Thither also repaired all the fair ladies of Moscouia; among the rest
Margarita as one of most reckoning, made not the least expense, for whatsoever,
either to dignifie her person, or to set out her beauty, or to present her
beloved, could either be bought from India, trafficked in Europe or marchanded
in Asia, was sought out, and especially against the day of the tilt, and turny,
at which time, like a second Diana, having her goldilocks tied up with loose
chains of gold, and Diamondes, her body apparreled in cloth of silver, (over
which she had cast a veil of black and golden tinsell, through which her
beauty appeared as does the bright Phoebus in a summers morning: leaving our
Hemisphere our fair Hecate, chasing away balefull darkness with her bright
beams) she was mounted on a high arch of triumph covered with cloth of gold:
near unto her sat her old father in his sovereign majesty; about her a
hundredth damselles in white cloth of tissue, ouer-cast with a veil of purple
and green silk loosly woue^, carrying gold and silver censors in their hands,
from whence issued most pleasant odours, such as in the pride of the year
breath along the coast of Arabia Foelix or drops from the balmie trees of the
East.

Thus seated, the Challengers with their several devises entered the tilt-yard,
each striving to exceed other in expense and excellence; whose trumpets
cleared the air with their melody. After these the Defendants entered; among
whom Arsadachus was chief, whose pump in that, exceeded al others I have
seen, and the other are ordinarily matched in our Courts of christendom, I
will set down unto you. First, before the triumph entered the tilt-yard, there
was a whole volie of a hundred cannons shot off; the noise whereof somewhat
appeased ^ hundred knights having their horse, arms, crests, feathers, and each
part of them covered with green cloth of gold, with lances of silver, tr^tted
about the yard, making their steedes keep footing, according to the melodious
sound of an orb, which by cunning of man, and wonderful art was brought into
the presence of the prince, which whilst it continually turned, presented all
the shapes of the twelve signs, dancing as it were to the harmony, which the
enclosed music presented them. After these marched a hundred pages apparelled
in white cloth of silver with crownets of silver on their heads, leading each
of them in their right hands, a brave courser trapped in a caparison purple and
gold; in their left, a scutchion with the image of the princess in the same.
After these Arsadachus in his triumphant chariot drawn by four white
unicornes entered the tilt-yard, under his seat the image of fortune, which he
seemed to spurn, with this posie, Quid haec? on his right hand envy, whom he
frowned on by her this posie, Nec haec; on his left hand the portraiture of
Cupid, by whom was written this posie, Si hic; over his head the picture of
Margarita with this mot, Sola haec. These arms were of beaten gold far more
curious then those that Thetis gave her Achilles before Troy or Meriones
bestowed on Ulysses when he assaulted Rhesus, being full of flames and half
moons of saphires, chrisolites, and diamonds. In his helm he bare his
mistress favor, which was a sleeue of salamanders skin richly perfumed, and
set with rubies. In this sort he presented him before the Emperor and his
daughter, who was not alittle tickled with delight to behold the excellency of
his triumph. The trumpets were sounded, and the Judges seated, Arsadachus
mounted himself on a second Eucephalus, and taking a strong lance ouerbore
Stilconos the earl of Garania, breaking his arm in the fall; in the second
encounter he overthrew Asaphus of Tamir^e horse and man, neither ceased he
till (...). of the brauest men at arms were unhorsed by his hardiness. All
this while with blushes and sweet smiles Margarita fa^ored every incountery,
seeming with the egernesse of eye to break every push of the lance that
leuelled (...) Arsadachus. His races being at end, Plicotus of Mac^ra^ entered
the (...), who (...) himself like a brave prince, conquering as much with the
sword, as the other with the lance: in this sort, this day, the next, and that
which followed were ouerpast, wherein Arsadach, made evident proofs of great
hope: so that Protomachus at the last cried out to his other princes; See ye
Moscouites the hope of the empire, whose endings if they prove answerable to
his beginnings, Europe may perhaps wonder, but never equal.

The third day being ended, and the honors bestowed on them that best deserved
them: the emperor in the chiefest of the festival caused the tables to be
removed, and the music to be called for; thinking by his means to give love
more fuel, in hope it should burn more brighter: whereupon the princes
betook them to dance; and Arsadachus as chief, led Margarita the measures.
And after the first pawse began thus with her; Princess said he, by what means
might love be discovered if speech were not: By the eyes (my lord said she)
which are the keys of desire, which both open the way for love to enter, and
lock him up when he is let in. How (...) then (said he) that Cupid among the
poets is fained blind? In that (my lord quoth she) he was maskt to poets
memory; and you know that falcons against they fly, are hooded, to make them
more fierce and clearer sighted, and so perhaps was love, which was blindfold
at first (in the opinion of Poets) who never could see him rightly until they
felt his eye in their hearts. Why sticks he his eye in their hearts? I had
thought (madam) it had been his arrow said Arsadachus. Why his eyes are his
arrows, quoth the princess, (or I mistake his shooting;) for the last time he
leuelled at me he hi^ me with a look. I beshrew him (said the Prince) and
then sounded the next measure, when Arsadachus continued his discourse in this
manner: Madam, if love wound by the eye, how heals he? By the eye (my lord
said she) having the mapertie of Achill^s sword to quell and recure. Then
gracious lady quoth the prince, since love has wounded me by your looks, let
them recover me, otherwise shall I blame both loves cruelty, and your
judgment. Margarita replied thus: Great prince, if mine eyes have procured
your offense, I will pluck them out for their folly; and if love have shot
them for his shafts I besh^ew him, for the (...) time they look^ on you, they
left my heart in you. In (...) Arsadachus? Yea in you my lord quoth Margarita.
Can you then live heartlesse (said the prince?) Yea since hopeless replied
she. This said, the music cut off their merry talk, and the sudden
disease of the Emperor brake up the pastimes. Whereupon every prince and peer,
lord and knight, taking leave of their mistresses, betook them to their rest.
Only Margarita, in whose bosom love sat enthroned, in whose heart affections
kept their watch being laid in her bed, fared like Orlando sleeping in that
bed his Angelica had lien with Medor, each feather was a fur bush; now turned
she, now tossed she, now groueling on her face, now bolt upright, hammering ten
thousand fancies in her head; at last, breaking out into a bitter sigh she
began thus: Alas unkind love, that seasonest thy delights with delays. Why
give thou not poor ladies as great patience to endure, as penance in their
durance? why are not thy affections like the figs of India, which are both
grafted and green of themselves, and no sooner sprung to a blossom, but
spread in the bud? Why give thou Time swift wings to begin thee, and so
long and slow ere he seize thee? I bes^ech thee love, (...) how she sighed
when she besought him pl^ine thou the wings of Time, lest he punish me, for
thy delay is so great that my disease is insufferable: alas poor wretch that I
am why prate I to love? or pray I for relief, being assured that the beginning
of loves knowledge is the ending of humane reason, love is a passion that may
not be expressed, conceived beyond conceit, and extinguished beside custom;
stay thy mind therefore foolish Margarita, for it began first in thee beyond
expectation, and must end in thee beyond hope: for, as there are no reasons but
nature to prove why the swanne hates the sparrow, the eagle the Trochilus,
the ass the be, and the serpent the hog; so likewise in love there can no
cause but nature be alleged either of his sudden flourish or vehement fall,
his speedy waxing and slow waining: Temper thy self therefore, though love
tempt thee, and ways thine opportunity: for the wanton if you fawn on him,
will fly you; and setting light by him, will leap upon you. Fond that I am,
why talk I thus idly, seeming with the prating soldier to discourse of the
for^resse I have never conquered, and of the fancies I shall never compass?
Why does not Arsadachus smile on me? as who knows not that the aspis
tickleth when she pricketh; and poisons that are delightful in the swallow,
are deadly in the stomach: why has be not courted me these five months: fond
that I am, the more near am I to my fall; for as the philosopher faith, men
are like to the poison of scorpions, for as the sting of the one kills in
three days, so the pride and cruelty of the other quelleth a kind heart in
less then a moment. Woe is me, I had rather need Philoxenus to cure me of
love by his lays, then Anippus to continue love in me: better were it for me
to hear Tripander play then Arsadachus preach.

(In these thoughts and this speech love sealed up her eyes till on the morrow;
but what she dreamed I leave that to you Ladies to decide, who having dallied
with love, have likewise been acquainted with his dreams.) On the morrow, the
day being far spent, and the court replenished with attendants, Margarita
arose, and scarcely was she attired, but that a messenger came unto her in the
behalf of the earl Asaphus. beseeching her presence to grace his feast that
day, for that he had entertained and invited Arsadachus and the best princes
and ladies in Court, by the Emperors consent, to make a merry festival;
whereunto Margarita quickly condescended, and thought every hour two till
noonetide; at which time cordially attended, she repaired to Asaphus house,
where were assembled, of princes, Arsadachus, Plicotus, and S^^lconos; of
ladies, beside her self, Calandra, Ephania, and Gerenia: all these Asaphus
entertained heartily, placing them according to their degrees, and feasted them
with as great pomp and pleasure as he could imagine.

But when he perceived their appetites quelled with delights, their ears
cloyed with music, and their eyes filled with beholding, he being a Prince of
high spirit, began thus: Princes and Ladies, I have invited you to my house,
not to entertain you with the pomp of Persia, or the feast of Heliogabalus,
but to dine you according to the the direction of the physicians, which is to
let you rise with an appetite, which both whetteth your memories and helps
your stomachs; and for that the after banker may as well please your humors,
as the former appeased your hunger, I must beseeke you to rise from this place,
and repair unto another, where because the weather is hot, and the time unfit
for exercise, we will spend the time in pleasant discourse, feeding our
fancies with pleasant talk, as we have feasted our fast with curious cates. To
this motion all the assembly easily consented, in that for the most part, they
had bin buzzing in their ears, and baiting their hearts, whereupon be brought
them into a fair arbor, covered with Roses, and honisuckles, paued with
Camamile, pinkes, and violets, guarded with two pretty crystal fountains in
every side, which made the place more cool, and the soil more fruitful.
They all being entered this arbor, A saphus being both learned and pleasant
witted, began thus. My ghests said he (for name of Princes I have sent them
lately unto palaces) now let each of you be think him of mirth not of
majesty, I will have no stoicall humor in this arbor, but all shall be either
lovers, or loves wel-willers, and for that, each of us may be more apt to talk
of Venus; we will taste of her friend Bacchus; for a draught of good wine, (if
Lamprias in Plutarch, may be believed) whettes the conceits, and be when he had
drunk most, debated best: Aschilus therefore ere he had dipped his pen in
the inks to write tragedies, diued into the bottom of a wine put to find
terms; for as, where the wolf has bitten most soundest, the flesh is most
sweetest, so whereas wine has warmed most hotely, the tongue is armed most
eloquently, I therefore carowse to you my familiars, and as I give you licour
to warm, so will I crown you with joy and roses to alay: then have at love
who list, for me thinks I am already prepared for him: This said be drunk
unto them, and all the rest gave him the pledge, and being crowned after the
manner of the philosophical banquets, they sat down. And Arsadachus spoke
thus: Asaphus I have heard that the motion is vain, unless the action follow,
and delights that are talked of before such as like them, except they grow in
force, breed more discontent in their want, then pleasure in their report: as
therefore you have hanged out the Iuie bush, so bring forth the wine, as you
have prefixed the garland, so begin the race, as you intimated delight, so bring
it to entrance, Asaphus smiling replied thus: Do then all these Ladies and
brave lovers give me the honor and direction to govern these sports: They do,
said Margarita: Then sit aside quoth he and give place to your commander;
whereupon all the assembly laughed, and Asaphus smilingly sat down in the
highest room, placing the Ladies opposite against theie lovers, and himself
seated in his soueraintie, began thus: Since in bankets the place is not to be
given for the majesty, but the mirth, be not displeased though I prefer my
self (my subjects,) since I know this, that I have crothets in my head, when I
have tasted the cup, and no man is more apt to talk then I when I have
trafficked with good wine, and were it not so, you had no cause to wax wroth
with my presumption, for as the mason prefers not the attique stones in his
building for nobility, neither the painter his precious colors in limning,
for their liuelines, neither the shipwright his Cretan cedar in framing for the
sweetness: so in festiualles the ghests are not to be placed, according to
the degrees, but their dispositions, for their liuelynesse, not their
liuelyhoods, for where pleasures are sought for, the person is smally regarded,
which considered, I am justified. But to our purpose, since love is the
affection that leads us, at him we will leuill our fancies, canuassing this
question amongst us, whether be so best works, by the eye, the touch, or the
ear, for of the five senses I think these three are most forcible. Now
therefore we will and command you, our masculine subjects, said Asaphus, to
begin to our feminine Philosophers, and since you Arsadachus are of greatest
hope, incipe. After they had all laughed heartily at the maiesticall utterance
of Asaphus, and his imperious manner, the young Cuscan said thus: The Thebians
in time past, who confined upon Pontus, begat such children, who when they
beheld their parents killed them by their looks, as it faved with them, so
falls it out with me, who bethinking my self of those thoughts, which I
have conceived in respect of love, am confounded in thinking of them, such
power has fancy, where it has hold-fast. I must therefore as they quelled
the one, kill the other, or I shall die by thoughts as they did by looks: but
since to die for love is no death but delight, I will adventure to think,
talk, and discourse of him, and rather perish my self, then suffer these
pastimes to be unperformed. Our question is of love fair ladies, whereat you
blush when I speak, and I bow when I think, for he gives me words to
discourse, and courage to decide; for as Plato says, love is audacious in all
things, and forward in attempting any thing: he yields speech to the silent,
and courage to the bashful, he gives industry to the negligent, and
forwardnes to the sluggard, making a courtier of a clown; and lighting on a
currish Minippus, he softeneth him as iron in the ^^te, and makes him a
courtly Aristippus under his safeconduct; therefore I will talk of him, and
with your patience I will satisfy you, that love has soonest entrance by the
eye, and greatest sustenance by the sight; for sight whereas it is stirred up
by many motions, with that spirit which it darteth out from it self, does
likewise disperse a certain miraculous fiery force, by which mean we both
do and suffer many things: and as among all the senses, the eye extends his
power furthest, so is his working most forcible; for as the clay petrot draws
fire, so the looks do gather affection. And that the forcible working of the
eye may be proved to exceed all other the senses, what reason can be greater,
since according to every affection of the heart or distemperature of the mind,
the radiations of the eye are correspondent; if the heart be envious, the
looks dart ou^ beams of fierce envy, as may be considered by that of
Entelidas in Plutarch^ Quondam pulcher erat crinibus Entelidus.
Sed sese ipse videns placidis in fluminis vndie*
Liuore infamis perdidit inuidiae,
Facinus attraxit morbum, formamque perdidit.


For it is reported that this Entelidas taking a delight in his own lively
beauty, and beholding the same in a spring, grew in envy against the same; and
by that means fell into a sickness, whereby he lost both health and beauty.
Narcissus, neither by taste, nor the ministry of speech, nor the office of
scent affected his own form, but his sight bereft him of his senses, and the
eye drew fancy to the heart; for this cause the poets call Ladies eyes Cupids
coach, the beams his arrows; placing all his triumph and power in them as the
^hiefest instrument of his seigniorie, and that the eye only beside the
ministry of other senses, procures love, you may perceive by these examples
following. Xerxes, who despising the sea, and scorning the land found out new
means to nauigate, and armies to choke the earth, yet fell in love with a
tree; for having seen a plantane in Lydia of huge greatness, he stayed under
it a hot day, making him a shelter of his shadow, a lover of his loves; and
afterward departing from the same, he adorned it with collars of gold and
iewelles, as if that that tree had been his enamoured, over which he appointed
a guardian to assist it, fearing lest any should do violence unto the branches
thereof. And what I pray you) moved this affection in Xerxes but the eye? A
noble young man of Athens loved so much the stature of good fortune erected
near unto the Prytaneum, that he embraced it, and kissed it, and offered a
great sum of money to the Senate to redeem the same, and not attaining his
suite, he slew himself; and what wrought this in this noble young man but the
eye? for this marble image had neither sent to delight the sent, speech to
affect the ear, nor other means to move affection; it was then the sole force
of the eye which conducteth to the heart each impression, and fixes each
fancy in the same: what rests there then but to give the honor to the eye?
which as it is the best part in a woman, so has it the most force in love.
Soft (said Plicotus) claim not the triumph before you hear the trial; for
if virtue and the whole praise thereof (as the philosophers say) consists in
act, let the touch have the first place, and the eye the second; for looks do
but kindle the flame, where the touch both makes it burn, and when it
lists, quenches the fury. Such as behold Anter are healed of the falling
sick^nesse (says Arsadachus) and they that sleep under Sinilan at such time
as the plant swells and bears his flower, are slain. Quoth Plicotus,
saffron flowers procure sleep; the Amethist staieth drunkenness, by which
reasons you ought to ascribe as much power to the scent as to the sight. But
hear me, you detracters from the touch; the herb Alissus taken in the hand,
drives sighs from the heart. Yea but (said Arsadachus) the mad elephant
beholding the rain grows wild. Yea but the wild bull tied to the fig
tree, and tasting thereof, is no more wrathful (said Plicotus) ascribe
therefore to the touch far more then the sight; heap all the argument that
can be for the eyes, it breeds the sickness: but we rather commend the
herb that purges the disease, then the humor that feeds it, the salve
that heals the wound, than the corrosiue that grieueth it, the flower that
comfort the brain, and not that which cloyeth the same: the touch therefore
in love should have the prerogative which both reareth it, and restrains it;
and that the touch has greater power then the sight, what greater reason may
be alleged then this, that we only see to desire, especially to touch? the
furniture of all delight is the taste, and the purgatory in love, is to touch,
and want power to execute the affection, as may appear by this example. In the
days of Apollonius Tianeus, who by every man was held for the fountain of
wisdom, there was an eunuch found out in Babylon who had unlawfully conuersed
with a paramour of the Kings; for which cause the king demanded of Apollonius
what punishment the eunuch ought to have for that his rash and bold enterprise:
no other answered Apollonius save that he live to behold and touch without
further attempt. With which answer the king being amazed, demanded why he
gave this answer. To whom Apollonius replied; Doub^ not you, O king, but that
love shall make him feel exceeding pains and martirdomes; and like a simple
fly, he shall play so long with the flame until he fall to cinders. And for
further proof the Egyptians (as Ororius reports) when as they would
represent love do make a net: and the Phenitians describe him in a hand laid
in fire, approving them by the touch which of all senses suffers most, and
has greatest power in the body. Asaphus that was still all this while,
suddenly brake off the discourse, saying thus: What sense (I pray you) was
that (ye philosophers) that persuaded Ariston of Ephesus to lie with an ass,
and to beget a daughter, which was afterward called Onoselino? what sense had
Tullius Stellus to be in love with a mare, of whom he begat a fair daughter
which was called Sponano? what made Cratis the Iloritane shepherd to love a
goat? Pasiphae to fancy a bull^ Stilconos hearing that question, replied
thus: Truly a senseless desire, which having no power of love but instinct of
life, ought neither to be mentioned by modest tongues, nor uttered in chaste
hearing: that love which is gathered by the eye, and grounded in the heart,
which springs on the uniformity of affection, having in it self all the
principles of music (as Theophrastus says) as grief, pleasure, and divine
instruct that love which the Graecians call Ghiciprion, which is as much to say
as bitter sweet; of that we talk, and no other, which sacred affection I have
both tasted with the eye, and tried by the touch, and have found so many
effects in both, that as the sea ebbes and flows by the motion of the moon:
the Tropi of Egypt wax and waine according to the floods, and fall of Nilus,
so have I by smiles, and lovers pleasures, and repulses, found such a taste in
love, that did not the ear claim some greater pre-eminence, I should subscribe
to you both: but as love begins by the sight, and has pleasure in the
touch, so gathers he his eternity from hearing, by hearing Cupid a boy, is
made Cupid a god, by hearing Cupid scarce fligd gathers store of feathers;
for even as breath extinguisheth fire in the beginning, but when it is
increased, both nourishes and strengthens it, so love that is covered
members by the air, and scarce enabled and fashioned by the touch, is angry
with those that discover him; but when he flies abroad, and braggeth in his
wrings, he is fed with sweet words and laughes, at pleasant languish if he
faint, kind words do relieve him; if he be sick, persuasions purge him; if
he misdeeme, reasons recover him; in brief, by the ear love sucketh, by the
ear love thriueth, and by the ear all his essence is fashioned: and for that
cause Melpomene and Terpsicore the Muses are governors of our hearing, whereas
not any muse or godhead has any affection to the eye or touch: for delight and
gladness in love proceeds from eloquent persuasion, which received by the
ear, changes, moves, alters and governs all the passions of the heart.
Margarita blushing in that her turn was next, drove Stilconos out of his text
in this sort: My lord (said she) if love were gathered by the ear, old men
for their wise discourses should win more credit then young men for their
worthy comlines; or if by the touch, love had his trial, the divinity of love
would be wronged by too much inhumanitie. It must be the eye then which can
discern the rude colt from the trained steed, the true diamond from the
counterfeit glass, the right color from the rude, and the perfect beauty from
the imperfect behavior: had not the eye the prerogative, love should be a
monster, no miracle: and were the touch only judge, the soft Ermine for
daintiness, the Seal for his softness, the Marterne for his smoothe
sweetness, would exceed both Ladies best perfections, and the finest skin
of the choicest lover. If by the ear love were discerned, the Siren by her
sweet song should win more favor then Sibilla for her science, and the
flatterer should be held for the best favorite: let the eye therefore have the
prerogative, which is both curious to behold, and emperious to conquer. By it
the heart may discover his affections as well as fine phrases, and more sweet
has oftentimes been gathered by a smile then a touch: for by the one, we
gather a hope of succeeding pleasure, by the other, a joy in suspect for fear
we be deceived, which begins in a minute and ends in a moment. All cattes
are gray in the dark (said Calandra) and therefore (good madam) you do well
to prefer the eye. Yea but said Ephania, the eye had need of a candle to
light it, or else (perhaps) the fat were in the fire. Well (said Gerenia) I
will trust mine ear then: for where neither the eye sees, nor the touch
feels, certainly by dark let me hear the words, for they are the
tell-troths, Ah Gerenia (said Stilconos) trust them not, for they that are
false for the most part by day, will (perhaps) fail you in the night. Leave
your talk (quoth Asaphus) and shut me all these three senses in one, and then
tell me the felicity, when the eye shall give earnest of the heart, the heart
take comfort by the ear, the words we have heard, and the sights we have
seen confirmed by touch, this is the love I had rather have in mine arms then
hear it in this place discoursed by argument. Since therefore (my subjects)
you are at my obeisance, and upon my direction are to do homage to love, I
give you free license to discourse, free liberty to look, the sweetes
whereof, after you have gathered, come to me, and after the priest has
hand-fasted you, come touch and spare not, you shall have my pattent to take
your pleasure. It is a dangerous matter (said Arsadachus) to enter those lists
where women will do what they list. Well (said Margarita) devils are not so
black as they be painted (my Lord) nor women so wayward as they seem. A good
earnest penny (quoth Asaphus) if you like the assurance. With that they brake up
the assembly, for it was supper time, and the prince entreated them to sit
down, where they merrily passed the time, laughing heartily at the pleasant
and honest mirth wherein they had passed that afternoon.

The supper ended, each lover took his mistres apart, where they handled the
matter in such sort, that Margarita which was before but easily fired, now at
last grew altogether inflamed, for the night calling them thence, and the
company taking their leave, she with a bitter sigh and earnest blush, took
her leave of Arsadachus thus: My Lord said she, if time lost be hardly
recovered, and favors won are to be followed, have a care of your estate,
who may brag of that fortune that no one in Mosco can equal: which said,
she in all her periode of sighs ending as abruptly as she had begun, and so
departed. Arsadachus that knew the tree by the fruit, the cloth by the list,
the apple by the cast, fained not to see what he most perceived, and taking his
leave of Asaphus departed to his lodging where in a careless vain, as if
cloking and smothering with love, he worte these verses.

Judge not my thoughts, ne measure my desires,
By outward conduct of my searching eyes,
For stars resemble flames, yet are no fires*
If under gold a secret poison lies,
If under softest flowers lie Serpents fell,
If from man's spine bone Vipers do arise,
So may sweet looks conceal a secret hell,
Not love in me, that never may suffice.
The heart that has the rules of reason known,
But love in me which no man can devise.
A love of that I want, and is mine own.
Yet love, and lovers laws do I despise.
How strange is this? judge you that lovers be,
To love, yet have no love conceald in me.
And other he wrote in this manner, which came to the hands of his mistress, who
prettily replied; both which I have underwritten.

I smile to see the toies,
Which I in silent see,
The hopes, the secret joys,
Expected are from me:
The vows, the sighs, the tears, are lost in vain,
By silly love through sorrow wel^ie slain.
The color goes and comes,
The face, now pale, now red,
Now fear the heart benomes,
And hope grows almost dead.
And I look on and laugh, tho sad I seem,
And feign to fawn although my mind misdeeme.
I let the fly disport,
About the burning light,
And feed her with resort,
And bait her with delight.
But When the flames has seasd her wings (adieu)
Away will I, and seek for pleasures new.
Smile not, they are no toys,
Which you in silent see,
Nor hopes, nor secret joys,
Which you behold in me:
But those my vows, sighs, tears, are serious seals,
Whereby my heart his inward grief reueales.
My color goes and comes,
My face is pale and red,
And fear my heart benomes,
And hope is almost dead:
And why? to see thee laugh at my desert
So fair a man, and yet so false a heart.
Well, let the fly disport,
And turn her in the light:
And as thou do report,
Still bait her with dispite:
Yet be thou sure, when thou have slain the furst,
Thou fliest away (perhaps) to find the worst.
Thus passed the affairs in Mosco til such time as the emperor growing more
and more in sickness; by the consent of his nobles, hasted on the marriage. The
rumor whereof being spread abroad, made every one rejoice; but among the rest,
Margarita triumphed, who called into open assembly by the Emperor, was
betrothed to Arsadachus in the presence of the nobility, who by his lowering
looks at that time, showed his discontents; yet will he, nill he, the day was
appointed, the sixteenth of the Calends of March, next ensuing: against which
time there were high preparations in Court, and throughout all the provinces
for pastimes. But since it is a most true axiom among the Philosophers, that
whereas be many errors, there likewise must needs follow many offenses: it must
needly follow, that since Arsadachus was so fraught with corrupt thought, he
should practice and perforne no less ungracious corrupt and ungodly actions,
for no sooner was he departed from the presence of the Emperor, but he
presently began to imagine how to break off his nuptials, forcing in
himself a forgetfulness of Margaritaes virtues, her love and good deserts, so
that it may evidently be perceived and approved that which Ammonius says, that
things concluded in necessity are dissolved by violence, and truly not
without reason was love compared to the sun, for as the sun thrusts forth
his purer and warmer beams through darkness and the thickest cloud, so love
pierces the most indurate hearts, and as the sun is sometime inflamed, so
likewise is unstable love quickly kindled. Moreover, as the constitution of
that body which uses no exercise endures not the sun, so likewise an
illiterate and corrupt mind cannot entertain love, for both of them after the
same manner are disturbed from their estates, and attainted with sickness,
blaming not the force of love, but their own weakness. But this difference
is between love and the sun, for that the sun shows both fair and foul
things to those that look on upon the earth: love only takes care of the
beauty of fair things, and only fixes the eyes upon such things, enforcing
us to let slip all other. By this may be gathered that Arsadachus being vicious
could not justly be attainted with love, but with some slight passion, such as
affect the greatest tyrants in beholding the pitiful massacre of the
innocent, as shall manifestly appear by the sequel: for after long debating in
his restless mind, sometime to fly the court, and by that means to escape
the bondage which he supposed was in wedlock; sometime to make the princes
away by poison, ridding himself thereby of suspect, and Artosogon of hope.
Fortune is as well the patroness of injuries, as the protector of justice, the
scourge of the innocent, as the favorer of the nocent, who is rightly blind in
having no choice, and worthily held for bedlam, in that she respectetth no
deserts, so smiled on him that in depth of his doubts a remedy was ministered
him beyond his imagination, which fell out after this manner. Artosogon his
father being so tired with years, as he must of force yield speedy tribute to
death; so laden with sickness that he seemed welnie past all succors,
bethinking him of his succession, and like a kind father, desirous (before his
death) to behold his son, not without the earnest entreaty of the empress,
and his nobility, sent present messengers to Mosco, beseeching the emperor
Protomachus presently to dispatch Arsadachus unto him, assuring him of the
perilous estate of his life, and the desire he had to stablish his son before
his death: for therefore the emperor of Mosco (though loathly) dismissed his
pretended triumphs, and gave Arsadachus license to depart for Cusco.

The ungodly young prince seeing his purposes fall out so happily, sacrificed to
Nemesis, clearing his brows of those cares wherewith discontent had fraught
them: and having with all expedition furnished himself to depart, he thought
good to cast a fair foil on his false heart, to color his corrupt thoughts
with comfortless throbbes; and coming to Margarita, (who was almost dead to
heart the tidings) with a fained look and false heart he thus attempted her.
Madam were I not assisted with my sighs, and succored by my tears, (...)
disburthen the torments of my heart, I fear me it should even now burst, it
is so fraught with bitterness, Alas I must now leave you, being the bark to
the tree, the blossom to the stalk, the sent to the flower, the life to the
body, the substance to the shadow; I must now leave you being the beautiful
whom I honor, the chaste whom I adore, and the goddess of al my glory; I must
now leave you to live in sorrow without comfort, in despair without solace, in
tears without rescouse, in pains without ceasing; I must now leave you as the
dam her young kid, the (...) her dear lambkin, the nightingale her prettiest
nestling, fea^ing lest the cuckoo hatch those chickens which I have bred, the
Callax bring up those young fish I have got, and foreign eyes feed on those
beuties which only fasten life in me: Ah Margarita, so fair, as none so fair,
more virtuous then virtue her self; if these troubles attaint me, in what
temper shall I leave you, being the mirror of beauty, and even the miracle of
constancy? me thinks I see those injurious, though fair hands, beating those
delicate breasts, these eyes surffeting with tears, these lips with blasting
their roses with sighing ^^ but (ah dear lady) let not such follies be your
familiars* for as the thorn pricking the dead image in wax pierces the
lively substance indeed, so every light ^lip you (...) will fell this body,
every light tear that trickleth from these eyes, will melt me to water, the
least sighs steaming from these lips, will stifle me, have therefore patience
(sweet lady) and govern your passions with discretion; for as the smallest
kernel (in time) makes the tallest tree; so (in time) these shadows of
sorrow shall turn to the substance of delight: yea in short time my return
shall make you more happy then my present depart now makes you heavy. With
these words Arsadachus was ready to take his leave. When Margarita presaging
the mischief that was to follow; casting her arms about his neck, gave him
this sorrowful adue.

Since my misgiuing mind assures me of my succeeding harm: ah suffer me
(sweet prince) to embrace that which I never hereafter shall behold and look
upon; that with my weeping eyes which is the cause of all my wastefull enuies:
Ah my soul, must thou leave me when thou were wholly incorporate in this body?
Ah my heart, must thou forsake me to harbor in this happy bosom? What then
shall remain with me to keep me in life, but my sorrow? being the bequest of
misery shall assist me in my melancholy: ah dear Arsadachus since thou must
leave me, remember thou leauest me without soul, remember thou leauest me
heartlesse: yea I would to the gods thou might leave me lifelesse, for then
disburthened of this body, I might in soul accompany thee, uniting our parts
of fire: since our fleshly persons must be parted, farewell (dear Lord)
farewell, ever dear Lord, but I beseech thee, not for ever (dear Lord)
remember thou have conquered, and art to triumph, thou have gotten the goal,
and art to reap the garland; thou have taken the captive, and may enjoy the
ransom: hie thee therefore, oh hie thee lest heaviness ouerbeare me; return
to her that shall live in terror till thou return. But if some angry fa^es,
some untoward fortune, some sinister planet detain thee, and with thee, my
soul, heart, life and love; now now, oh now ye destinies, end me. This said,
she fell in a swowne, and her Ladies could hardly recover life in her. Mean
while (by the direction of the emperor) who heard her impatience, Arsadachus
was called away, to whom Protomachus presented many gifts, swearing him in
solemn manner before the whole assembly of his nobility, to make a speedy
return to Mosco, to accomplish the marriage. In the mean time Margarita was
revived, who seeing her Arsadachus absent, demeaned her self in the most
pitiful manner that ever poor lamentable Lady did: at last remembering her of
a rich jewel which Arsinous had given her, which was a precious box set with
emeraulds, the which at such time as he gave it her, he charged her to keep
until such time as he she loved best should depart from her; she sent the same
for a present to Arsadachus, beseeching him as he loved her, never to open the
same box until such time as he began in any sort to forget her (for such
counsel Arsinous had given her.) This present was delivered the prince when he
mounted on horse, who promised carefully to keep it; and with his retinue rode
on his way toward Cusco: where we leave him to return to Margarita, who no
sooner heard of the departure of Arsadachus, but laying apart her costly
jewels, her rich raiment, and princely pleasures ^closed herself up in a
melancholy tower, which through the huge height thereof beheld the country
far and near: on the top whereof, each hour she diligently watched for the
return of her beloved Arsadachus. Her lodging was hanged about with a cloth of
black velvet embrodered about with dispaires; before her bed hung the picture
of her beloved: to which she often discoursed her unkindness conceived,
offering drops of her blood daily to the deaf image; such a fondling is love,
when he grows too fiery, no day; no night passed her, wherein she spent not
many hours in tears, and many tears every hour, neither could the
authority of her father, the persuasions of his counsel, nor the intreatings
of her attendants, alter her resolution.

In which melancholy a while I will leave her to discourse the damned treasons
of Arsadachus, who arriving at last in Cusco, after long iourneis was after
many hearty welcomes conducted to his father, who received such sudden joy at
the sight of him, that he recovered strength, and cast off his sickness; so
that calling his nobility unto him, he ordained a time wherein Arsadachus
should be invested in the empire, publishing the same through al his provinces.
In the mean time with much mirth and festival, the young Prince lived in his
fathers court, dearly tendered by the empress Lelia his mother, and duly
attended by the best of the nobility; among whom Argias the duke of Morauia,
being a prince of deep reach, and of great revenues, following the custom of
such who desire to grow in favor with Princes, entertained Arsadachus with
huge feasts and bankets: and among the rest, with one most especial, wherein
as he had employed al whatsoever the country could afford to delight the ^ast,
so spared he no cost to breed pastime and triumph. Among all other, after the
supper was solemnized, he brought in a mask of the goddesses, wherein his
daughter (being the mirror and the Aperse of the whole world for beauty) was
apparelled like Diana, her hair scattered about her shoulders, compassed with
a silver crownet, her neck decked with carkanets of pearl, her dainty body
was covered with a veil of white network wrought with wiers of silver, and
set with pearl, where through the milk white beauties of the sweet Saint
gave so heavenly a reflection, that it was sufficient to make Saturn merry and
mad with love, to fix his eye on them: among all the rest that had both their
parts of perfection and beauty, and great lovers to like the^, Arsadachus
made choice of this Diana (who not only resembled her in that show, but indeed
was called by the name of Diana) on whose face when he had fixed his eyes, he
grew so inflamed as Montgibel yields not so much smoke as he sent out sighs:
to be brief, he grew so suddenly altered, that as such as beheld the head of
Medus were altered from their shapes, so he that saw the heaven of these
beauties, was ravished from his senses: to be brief, after he had danced the
measures, passed the night, and was conducted by Argias and his attendants, he
took no rest, but tossing on his bed, grew so altered, that on the morrow all
the court was amazed to behold his melancholies. It cannot be reported how
strangely he demeaned himself, for his sleeps fled him, his color changed,
his speech uncertain, his apparel careless: which Argias perceiving as being
marvelous pollitique, ministered oil to the lamp, fuel to the fire, flax to
the flame, increasing his daughters beauty with cost, and Arsadachus love by
her company; for he ceased not to inuit him, hoping that at the last the
clouds would break out and rain him some good fortune. Diana was trained by
him to the lewre, and taught her lesson with great cunning, who was as apt to
execute as her father to counsel. Arsadachus one day among the rest finding
the opportunity, and desirous to discover his conceits was stricken so dombe
with her divine beauty, as he could not disclose his mind. Whereupon calling
for pen and ink, he wrote this, thrusting it in Dianaes bosom, walked
melancholy into a fair garden on the back side of Argiaes palace, where he
wept so bitterly, that it was supposed his heart would burst.

I pine away expecting of the hour,
Which through my waiward chance will not arrive,
I wait the word, by whose sweet sacred power,
My lost contents may soon be made alive:
My pensive heart, for fear my grief should perish,
Upon f^llacious hope his fast appeaseth;
And to my self my frustrate thoughts to cherish,
I feign a good that flits before it cease:
And as the ship far scattred from the port,
All welnie spent and wreckt with wretched blast,
From East to West, midst surging seas is tossed,
So I, whose soul by fierce delays effort,
Is overcome in heart and looks defast,
Run here, run there, sigh, die, by sorrow crossed.
Diana took no days to peruse this ditty, but having ouerread it, gave it her
father to judge of, who faining a severity more then ordinary, and glad of
the opportunity, entered the garden where the prince was welnie forespent with
sorrow, and taking occasion to interrupt his meditations, he began thus: Most
royal Prince, I think the heavens lowre on me, that laboring by all endeavors
to procure your delights, I rather find you more melancholy by my motions, then
merry by my entertainment: Alas my Lord, if either my actions do displease, my
entertainment be too bace, or if in any thing I have defaulted, wherein I
may make amends, I beseech you let me know of you, and you shall find such
readiness in me, your humble servant, as no hasard, danger, or discommoditie
whatsoever, shall drive me from the accomplishment of your pleasures and
behests. Arsadachus seeing Argias so plyant began to recover hope, whereupon
fixing his eyes upon him a long while, at last he brake his mute silence thus:
Argias, thy courtesy can not boade my discontents, for thy kindness is such
as binds me unto thee, and breeds me no melancholy; and for I see thee so
careful for my good, I will first therefore show thee of what important,
secrecy is, and declare unto thee, those punishments antiquity bestowed on
those that revealed secrets. Lastly upon thy faithful oath I may ventre
further, but so as thy silence may make thee happiest man in Cosco. To be of
fair words ( Argias) becomes a man of much virtue; and no small treasure
finds that Prince who has a privy and faithful secretary, in whose bosom
he may power his thoughts, on whose wisdom he may repose his secrets.
Plutarch writes that the Athenians having war with king Philip of Macedon,
by chance lighted upon certain letters which he had written to Olimpias his
wife, which they not only sent back sealed and unsearched, but also said,
that since they were bound by their laws to be secret, they would neither see
nor read other men's private motions, Diodorus Siculus, writes that among the
Egyptians it was a criminal act, to open secrets which he proves to be true,
by example of a priest, who had unlawful company with a virgin of the
goddess Isis, both which trusting their secrecy to another priest, and he
having little care to keep their action concealed, suddenly cried out, where
through the offenders were found out and slain, and he banished. And where as
the same priest complained against the unjust sentence, saying: that whatsoever
he had reveled was in favor of religion, he was answered by the Judge, if thou
alone had known it without being privy to them, or had thou had notice
without corrupt consent, thou should have reason to be aggreeued; but
suddenly whereas they trusted their secrecy unto thee which they had in hand,
and thou promisedst them to keep silence, had thou remembered thee of thy
bond and promise, and the law which we have to be secret in all things, thou
had never had the courage to publish it. Plutarch in his book of banishment
says, that an Athenian sought under the cloak of an Egyptian, asked him what
he carried hid, to whom he answered: Thou show thy self smally read and
worse nurtered (O thou Athenian) since thou perceiuest not that I carry this
hid for no other respect, but that I would have no man know what I carry, many
other are the examples of Anaxileus, Dionisius, Plato, and Bia^, which were too
long for me to report, and too tedious for thee to hear, my only desire is to
let thee know the weight of secrecy, and the punishment that knowing the one
and the other (my Argias,) thou might in respect of thy life keep silence
with the tongue.

Argias that knew the bird by the feather, and the eagle by the flight, the
leopard by his spot, and the lion by his claw, cut off his circumlocutions,
with this discourse; Aristarchus the Philosopher (most noble prince) was wont
to say, that by reason of their instabilitie, knew not that which the most men
ought to desire, nor that which they should fly, because that every day
changes, and swift Time flies: Eubeus the Philosopher, was wont many times to
talk this at the table of great Alexander; by nature every one is prompt and
sharp witted, to give counsel and to spea^e his opinion in other men's
affairs, and fond and ^low in his own purposes. Truly this sentence was both
grave and learned, for many there be that are discreet in other men's causes,
and judge rightly, but among ten thousand there is not one that is not deceived
in his own causes. This considered, your grace does most wisely, to seek to
disburden your thoughts in a secret bosom, and to ask counsel of another in
your earnest occasions, for by the one you shall benefit your grief, by the
other conquer it. Histories report that the valiant captain Nicias, was never
mistaken in any thing which atchiued by another man's counsel, neither ever
brought any thing to good effect, which he managed according to his own
opinion. It is therefore virtue in you (good prince) if in immitation of so
great a Chiefetaine, you rather trust other men's wisdom, then your own wit:
and since it pleases you to grace me with the hope of secrecy, your
excellency shall not need to misdoubt, for by all those gods whom I
reverence, by this right hand which I lay on thy honorable Ioines, so may my
pastures be plentiful my barnes filled, my vines burdened, as I vow to be
secret, resolved to seal my faith with such assurance, as death it self shall
never be able to dissolve it. Arsadachus hearing his zealous promises, and
weighing his wise answers, by the one, assured himself of (...) loyalty, by
the other, gathered his great wisdom and learning; whereupon taking Argias by
the hand, and withdrawing himself into a very secret and close arbor in the
garden, he, after he had a while rested himself, and meditate^ on that he
had to say, with a bitter sigh brake out into these speeches. Oh Argias, had
the destinies made us as prone to endure the assaults of love, as they have
made us prompt to delight in them, if they had favored us with as much power
is pacify the fury of them, as they have given us will to persevere in the
folly, I could then be mine own physician, without discovering my grief, and
salve that with discretion, which I now sigh for through despair. But since
they have denied us that grace in their secret wisdom, to have will to relieve
our own weakness, purges to expulse our poisons, and constancy to endure
loves conflicts, I must have recourse unto thee, in whom consists the source
of all my safety, beseeching thee (dear Argias) if thou hear that thou
should not, consider that I suffer that I would not, and so temper my
defects, by the force and effects of thy wisdom, that I may be relieved and
thou nothing grieved. Thou know sweet friend the contract I have past with
Margarita, thou know the resolution of my father wholly bent to accomplish
it, thou know the expedition is required to accomplish the marriage: al which
shall no sooner be accomplished, but I shall perish, and that day I shall
become the bridegroom of Margarita* I wish to be buried in my grave: this is
the first mischief must be anticipated, this the first sore must be salued,
this the first consumption must have a cordial: Mighty prince said Argias,
those conditions that consist on impossibilities may be broken, and marriage
which by an inviolable law of nature was ordained to knit and unite souls and
bodies together, cannot be rightly solemnised between such, whose good likings
have not the same limits, whose affections are not united with self like
faculties, for as to join fire and water, moist and dry, were a matter
impossible, especially in one subject, and more, in that they be contraries; so
to couple love where there is hatred, affinity where there is no fancy, is a
matter against right, repugnant to reason, and such a thing as since nature
does impugn it, the gods if it be broken will easily dispense withal,
whereas therefore you are a prince in your wax^^g years, your father in his
waining, in your pride of wit: your father is impouerished in his
understanding; since the cause concerns you in act, him but in words, since
this damage is but the breach of a silly vow, if the marriage be broke, your
detriment the misery of an age without all manner of content, you may (good
prince) in reason to prevent your own harm in justice, since you cannot
affect, break off those hands: and if Protomachus shall threaten, let him play
the woulfe and bark against the sun, he cannot bite: you have power to resist
him, and friends to assist you, I but my father ( Argias) how shall we pacify
him? either by persuasions (good prince) said Argias, or by inpulsio^, by the
laws of Solon old men that date must be governed by yongmen that have
discretion, if he gainsay you there are means to temper him, better he smart
then you perish, my shirt is near me my Lord, but my skin is nearest, the
cause concerns you and must not be vallied. Arsadachus having found a hawk
fit for his own lure, and a counselor agreeable to his own conceit, with a
smiling regard he greeted Argias again in this kind of manner: dear friend,
thou have rid me of my doubts, and were only reserved me by the gods, to
redress my damage. Thou haste ^^mplotted the means to displace Margarita, to
appease Artosogon now if to pacify that raging affection that subdueth me,
thou find me a remedy, I will make thee the chiefest man in Cusco, of most
authority in court* yea thou shall be my second heart (my Argias) and yet this
which I require of thee though it be the difficultest in me, is the easiest in
thee; for if it be lawful for me as thou prouest, to break my first marriage,
to bridle my father, and work also whatso is mine own will, what lets my
second wedlock with which thy favor shall be solemnised between thy
angelical Diana and me, wherethrough I shall have peace, and thou
pre-eminence? Argias that had already caught the fox in the snare, now laid
hands of him, and with a pleasing countenance began thus. O Prince this last
doubt is your least danger, for where you may command my life, where you are
lord of my wealth, can I be so forgetful of duty, think you to deny you my
daughter, whose worth is of too great weakness, to entertain such dignity?
but since it pleases your excellence to daine it her in virtuous sort, command
me and her to our utmost powers, we are yours. Arsadachus thinking himself in
heaven, thanked Argias for his courtesy, who at last wholly discovered unto
him, how secret he was to his affections, showing him his sonnet: to be brief,
it was so complotted that without further delay, Arsadachus should be
presently wedded to Diana, which was effected so, that both these two married
couples in the height of their pleasures, passed their time in wonderful
delight in Argias castle. But as nothing is hidden from the aid of Time,
neither is any thing so secret which shall not be revealed: the emperor
Artosogon (by reason of Arsadachus continual abode at Argias house) discovered
at last both the cause and the contract: whereupon, storming like the Ocean
incensed with a northeast brise, he presently sent for Argias; and without
either hearing his excuses, or regard of his entreaties, presently caused him
to be torn in pieces at the tails of four wild horses, then casting his
mangled members into a litter, he sent them to Diana in a present, vowing to
serve her in the same sauce her father had tasted, that durst so insolently
adventure to espouse with the sole heir of his empire. The poor lady almost
dead, to see the dead body of her father, but more moved with her own
destruction which was to follow, fell at Arsadachus feet, beseeching him with
brinish tears, which fell in her delicate bosom, to be the patron of her
fortunes. Arsadachus who loved her entirely, comforted her the best he might,
assuring her safety, in spite of his fathers tyranny; whereupon he levied a
guard of his chiefest friends to the number of three thousand men, and shutting
Diana in a strong fortress, left her after many sweet embraces in their
custody: and for that the time of his coronation drew near, be assembled
four thousand such as he knew most assured; he repaired to the court, vowing
in his mind such a revenge on his father, as all the world should wonder to
hear the sequel. Being arrived in court, he cloyed the gates thereof with
armed men, placing in every turning of the city sufficient rowts of guard to
keep the citizens from insurrection: Then ascending the royal chamber where
the Emperor his father with his nobility were resident, he prowdly drew him
from his seat royal, in which action those of the nobility which resisted
him were slain, the rest that tremblingly beheld the tragedy, heard this
which ensues: Arsadachus prowdly setting him in his fathers seat, was ready
to speak unto the assembly, when the old Emperor that had recovered his
fall, awaking his spirits, long dulled with age and weakness, began in
this sort to vpbraide his ungracious heir: Uiper villain and worse, auaunt,
and get thee out of my presence. How dare thou lay hands on thy Lord? or
stain the imperial seat with thine impure and defiled person? Can thou
behold thy father without blushes, whom thou have perjured by thy
perverseness, making my oaths frustrate through thine odious follies? ah
caitife as thou art! more depraved then Caligula, more bloody indeed then
Nero, more licentious then Catuline: would God either thou had been unborn,
or better taught. Thou second Tarquine fostered by me to work tragedies in
Cusco: thou proud yongman, thy beauty thou have employed in riot, thy forces in
tyranny; Oh unkind wretch, I see, I see with mine eyes the subversion of this
Empire, and that which I have kept forty years, thou will loose in less
then thirty months. How can thy subjects be obedient to thee that despisest
thy father? How can these Nobles hope for justice at thy hands, that have
injuriously attempted me, an old man, thy father, that bred thee, thy lord,
that cherished thee, the emperor that must inherit thee. What may strangers
trust in thee, that have broken thy faith with Protomachus, abused the love of
Margarita, and all for a fair faced minion, whom if I catch in my claws I
will so temper as thou shall have little lust to triumph: O what pity is it
thou perverse man, to see how I have bought thee of the gods with sighs; how
thy mother has delivered thee with pain; how we both have nourished thee with
trauelles; how we watched to sustain thee; how we labored to relieve thee;
and after, how thou rebellest, and art so vicious, that we thy miserable
parents must not die for age, but for the grief wherewith thou do torment
us? Ah woe woe is me that beholds thy lewdness, and wretched art thou to
follow it: well did I hope that thy courage in arms, thy comeliness in
person, thy knowledge in letters were virtues enough to yield me hope, and
subdue thy follies: but now I say and say again, I affirm and affirm again,
I swear and swear again, that if men which are adorned with natural gi^ts do
want requisite virtues, such have a knife in their hands wherewith they do
strike and wound themselves, a (...) on their shoulders wherewith they burn
themselves, a rope on their necks to hang themselves, a dagger at their (...)
stab themselves, a stone to stumble at, a hill to tumble down. Oh would to God
that members wanted in thee, in that ^ice did not abound: or would the loss
of thine eyes might recompense the lewdnes of thine errors. But th^^lmighest
to hea^e me lament, which shows thy small hope of amends, thou have ^^ touch
of conscience, no fear of the gods, ^^ aw^ of thy parents, wha^ then should I
hope of thee? would God thy death, for that were an end of detriment: if thy
life, I beseech the gods for mine own sake close mine eyes by death, lest I see
thy unjust dealings.

In this state Arsadachus that was resolved in his villainy without any reply
(as if scorning the old man) caused his tongue by a minister to be cut out, then
commanded his right hand to be struck off, wherewith he had signed the writ
of Argias death: afterward apparelling him in a fools coat, and fetching a
vehement laughter, he spoke thus: Cuscans, wonder not, it is no severity I
show, but justice; for it is as lawful for me to forget I am a son, as for
him to forget he is a father, his tongue has wronged me, and I am revenged on
his tongue his hand has signed to the death of my dear Argias, and it has
paid the penalty: and since the old man doateth, I have apparelled him
according to his property and impatience, wishing all those that love their
lives, not to cross me in my reuenges; nor assist him in his sinister
practices. This said, he made all the nobility to swear loyalty unto him:
and Diana laughing incessantly at the old man, who continual pointed with his
left hand, and lifted his eyes to heaven for revenge, sometimes he embraced the
nobles, inciting them by signs to revenge, but all was in vain, fear subdued
their affections.

In the mean while, the news of these novelties were spread through the city,
so that many took arms to revenge the old emperor, who were presently and
incontinently slain by the soldiers: in brief, as in all conflicts, the weak
a^ last went to the wall, and necessity enforced such as misdeemed of
Arsadachus proceedings, to allow of them in show: the day of coronation drew
on, against which time Lelia the Empress (little suspecting that which had
fallen out) arrived in Cusco, who hearing of the hard measure was offered her
husband by her ungracious son (for Artosogon was shut up all the day till
meal times, when Arfadachus called for him forth to laugh at him) she entered
the palace with such cries, as might have made the hardest heart melt to hear
them, where clasping of her arms about the neck of the old and aged man, who
melted in tears to behold the melancholy of the chaste matron, she cried out
and complained in this manner: O you just gods, can you see these wrongs
without remedy? are you deaf to hear, or pitiless to redress? Ah, look
down, look down from your thrones, and behold my throbbes, witness such
wrongs as the sun has never seen the like; the dog is grateful to his
master for his meat, the elephant to his teacher for his knowledge, the
serpent to the hunts-man for his life; but our untoward son, for releeuing
him, has grieved us, for giving him sweet milk in his youth, does feed us
with bitter aloes in our age; and I for bearing him with many groans, am now
betrayed by him to many griefs: Ah Artosogon, ah my dear Artosogon, it is
enough grief for thee to endure, let me weep (for the old man, to see her,
shed many tears) because thou suffer, that as thou decayest through tyrany,
I may die with tears. This said, sorrow stopped the passage of her speech, and
they both swowned, be to behold his Lelia so forlorn, she to see her
Artosogon so martyred: he that saw Venus lamenting Adonis, Aurora bewailing
Memnon, Mirrha her tosst fortunes, saw but the shadow of cares, not the
substance of complaints; for this sorrow of the princes was only beyond
compare, and past belief; wherein so long they demeaned themselves, till age
and sorrow, after long strife surrendered to death, who pitied the old
princes, being despised of their lewd son, and ended their sorrows in ending
them. The rumor of whose fall was no sooner bruited in the ears of
Arsadachus, but that instead of solemnizing their funeralles, he frequented his
follies, instead of lamenting for them, he laughed at them, causing them for
fashion sake to have the favor of the grave, not for any favor he bare them:
then calling for Diana to his court, he honored her as a goddess, causing his
subjects to erect a shrine, and to sacrifice unto her: and such was his
superstitious and besotted blindness, that he thought it the only paradise of
the world to be in her presence, no one was better rewarded then he that could
best praise her; sometimes would he (attiring him like a second Diana ready to
chase) disguise himself like a shepherd, and sitting apart solitarily, where
he might be in her presence, he would recount such passions as gave certain
signs in him of an excellent wit, but matched with exceeding wickedness: among
which these ten, as the most excellent for variety sake, after his so many
villainies, I thought good to set down in this place.

I see a new sprung sun that shines more clearly,
That warmes the earth more blithly with her brightness
That spreads her beams more fair, and shines more cheerly
Then that clear sun that glads the day with lightness.
For but by outward heat the one offends me,
The other burns my bones, and melts their marrow:
The one when he sets on further blends me,
The other ceasles makes her eye loves arrow.
From that a shower a shadow of a tree,
A foggie mist may safely me protect,
But this through clouds and shades does pass and perce me
In winters frosts the others force does flee*
But this each season shines in each respect,
Each where, each hour, my heart does plague and perce me.
This other for the strange form thereof, though it have the second place
deserves the first, which howsoever you turn it backward or forward, is good
sense, and has the rimes and cadence according, the curiousnes and cunning
whereof the learned may judge: the first stands is the complaint, the second
the counsel; both which he wrote in the entrance of his love with Diana.
Complaint*
132 Tears, cares, wrongs, grief feel I; 1132

221 Woe, frowns, scorns, crafts nill cease, 4241

314 Years, months, days, hours do fly 3314

443 Fro me away flies peace: 2423

1 Oppressed I live (alas) unhappily, 2

2 Rest is exilde, scornde, plagde, thus am I, 1

Answer.
132 Mend her, or change fond thought, 1132

221 Mind her, then end thy mind, 4241

314 End thee will sorrow sought, 3314

443 Kind if thou art: too blind, 2423

1 Such love fly far, lest thou perceive and prove 2

2 Much sorrow, grief, care, sighing, breeds such love. 1

The third though shore for the method, is very sweet, and is written in
imitation of Dolce the Italian, beginning thus: Io veggio, etc. I see with my
hearts bleeding,
Thus hourly through my pain my life desires,
I feel the Hames exceeding,
That burn my heart by undeserved fires.
But whence these fires have breeding,
I cannot find though great are my desires.
O miracle eterne!
That thus I burn in fire, and yet my fire cannot disceern.
The fourth being written upon a more wanton subject, is far more poetical,
and has in it his decoram as well as the rest.

When as my pale to her pure lips united,
(Like new fallne snow upon the morning rose)
Suck out those sweets wherein my soul delited,
Good lord how soon dispersed were my woes!
And from those gates whence comes that balmy breath*
That makes the sun to smile when he arises,
I drew a life subdewing neering death,
I sucked a sweet that every sweet compriseth.
There took my soul his hand-fast to desire,
There chose my heart his paradise on earth,
There is the heaven whereto my hopes retire,
There pleasure bred, and thence was Cupids birth:
Such is their power that by a touch they sever.
The heart from pains that lived in sorrows ever.
An other time, at such time as in the entrance of love he despaired of al
succor, he desperately wrote this and that very prettely.

Even at the brinke of sorrows ceasles streams,
All well me drowned through dalliance and disdain,
Hoping to win the truce in my extremes,
To perce that marble heart where pride remains.
I send salt tears, sad sighs, and ruthful lines,
Firm vows (and with these true men) my desire,
Which in his lasting sufferance scarce repines,
To burn in ceaseless AEtna of her ire.
All which (and yet of all, the least might serve)
If too too weak to waken true regard,
Vouchsafe O heaven that see how I deserve,
Since you are never partial in reward,
That ere I die she may with like success,
Weep, sigh, write, vow and die without redress.
This other in the self like passion, but with more government he wrote, which
for that cause I place here consequently.

Heap frown on frown, disdain upon disdain,
Join care, to care, and leave no wrong unwrought,
Suppose the worst, and smile at every pain,
Think my pale looks of envy not of thought.
In errors mask let reasons eye be masked,
Send out contempts to sommon death to slay me,
To all these tyrant woes tho I be tasked,
My faith shall flourish tho these pains decay me.
And tho repyning love to cinders burn me,
I will be fam'de for sufferance to the last,
Since that in life no tedious pains could turn me,
And care my flesh, but not my faith could wast.
Tho after death for all this life's distress,
My soul your endless honors shall confess,
Another melancholy of his, for the strangeness thereof deserves to be
registered, and the rather, in that it is in immitation of that excellent Poet
of Italy. Lodouico Pascale, in his sonnet beginning; Tutte le stelle hauean
de'l ciel l impero.

Those glorious lamps that heaven illuminate,
And most incline to retrograde aspects,
Upon my birthday shonde the worst effects,
Thralling my life to most sinister fate.
Where-through my self estrangde from truth a while,
Twixt pains, and plagues, midst torments and distress,
Supposde to find for all my ruth redress,
But now belief, nor hope, shall me beguile.
So that (my heart from joys exiled quite)
I Will pine in grief through fierce disdaines accursed,
Scornde by the world, alive to naught but spite:
Hold I my tongue? it is bad; and speak I? wurst,
Both help me noughts; and if perhaps I write,
It Is not in hope, but lest the heart should burst:
Another in immitation of Martelli having the right nature of an Italian
melancholy, I have set down in this place.

O shadie vales, O fair enriched meades,
O sacred woods, sweet fields, and rising mountains,
O painted flowers, green herbs, where Flora treads,
Refresht by wanton winds, and watrie fountains.
O all you winged queristers of wood,
That piercht aloft your former pains report,
And strait again recount with pleasant mood,
Your present joys in sweet and seemly sort.
O all you creatures, whosoever thrive.
On mother earth, in seas, by air or fire:
More blessed are you, then I here under sun,
Love dies in me, when as he does revive
In you; I perish under beauties ire,
Where after storms, winds, frosts, your life is won.
All other of his, having allusion to the name of Diana, and the nature of the
Moon, I leave, in that few men are able to second the sweet conceits of
Philip du Ports, wose Poetical writings being already for the most part
englished, and ordinarily in every man's hands, Arsadachus listed not to
imitate, only these two others which follow, being his own invention, came to
my hand, which I offer to your judgment (Ladies) for that afterward I mean to
prosecute the history.

Twixt reverence and desire, how am I vexed?
Now prone to lay ambitious hands on beauty,
Now having fear to my desires annexed,
Now haled on by hope, now staid by duty.
Emboldned thus, and ouerrulde in striving.
To gain the sovereign good my heart desires:
I live a life, but in effect no living,
Since dread subdues desire that most aspireth.
Tho must I bide the combat of extremes,
Feign to enjoy yet fearing to offend,
Like him that strives against resisting streams,
In hope to gain the harbor in the end:
Which haven her grace, which happy grace enjoyed
Both reverence, and desire, are well employed.
The conclusion of all his poetry, I shut up with this his Hiperbolical
praise, showing the right shape of his dissembling nature.

Not so much borrowed beauty has the stars,
Not so much bright the mighty eye of day,
Not so much clear has Cinthia where she wars,
With deaths near niece in her black array.
Not so true essence have the sacred souls,
That from their natural mansions are divided,
Not so pure red has Bacchus in his boules.
As has that face whereby my soul is guided.
Not so could art or nature if they sought,
In curious works themselves for to exceed,
Or second that which they at first had wrought,
Nor so could time, or all the gods proceed,
As to enlarge, mould, think, or match that frame,
As I do honor under Dians name.
Now leave we him in his dalliance, making all things in a readiness for his
coronation, and return we to the constant Margarita, who living in her
solitary seat, minding nothing but melancholies, triumphing in nothing but
her tears; finding at length, the prefixed time of Arsadachus return almost
expired, and her impatience so great, as she could no longer endure his
absence, in a desperate fury setting light by her life, she resolved privily
to fly from her fathers court to find out Arsadachus in his own country.
For which cause she brake with a faithful follower of hers called Fawnia, by
whose assistance, without the knowledge of any other in the disguise of a
country maid, she gate out of the city, attended only by this trusty
follower, about the shutting in of the evening, at such time as her train
without suspect intended their other affairs, and by reason of her melancholy
little suspected her departure out of doors: and so long she traveled
(desire guiding her steps, and sorrow seating her self in her heart) that she
gat into an unpeopled and huge forest, where meeting with a poor shepherd,
she learned sure tidings of her way to Cusco, keeping in the most untrodden
and unfrequented ways for fear of pursuit, weeping as she walked incessantly,
so that neither Fawniaes words, nor the hope she had to reuisit her beloved
could rid her of ruthfulnesse: three days she so walked, ^eeding her thoughts
on her own wretchedness, till on the fourth about the break of the day when
Phoebus had newly chased the morn, crowned with roses from the desired bed of
her beloved paramor, she sat her down by a fair fountain, washing her
blubbered face in the clear spring, and cooling her thirst in the cristal
waters thereof: here had she not long rested her self, talking with her Fawnia
in what manner she would vpbraide Arsadachus in Cusco, of his unkind absence,
when as suddenly a huge lion which was accustomed to refresh himself at that
spring, brake out of the thicket behind their backs, Fawnia that first spied
him was soon supprised, then she cried, and rent in pieces (in that she had
tasted too much of fleshly love) before she feared. Margarita that saw the
massacre, sat still attending her own tragedy, for nothing was more welcome
to her then death, having lost her friend, nor nothing more expected: but see
the generositie and virtue of the beast insteede of renting her limbs he
sented her garments, in the place of tearing her peecemeale, he laid his head
gently in her la^, licking her milkewhite hand, and she wing al signs of
humility, in steed of inhumanitie. Margarita seeing this recovered her
senses, and pitifully weeping spoke thus: Alas ^e gods, why yee^d you sorrows
to those that despise fancy, and betray you them by death, who desire to flee
detriment? woe is me, how fortunate were Margarita, to have bin dismembered? how
forlorn was Fawnia to be thus mangled, ah tyrant beast had thou spared her,
her virtue had deserved it, had thou spoiled me, why I was reserved for it,
for what ^are have not I part in? or from what joy am not I parted? Love that
is a Lord of pity to some, is pitiless to me, he gives other the rose,
but me the thorn; he bestows wine on others, and me viniger, he crowns the
rest with laurel in respect of their flourishing fortune, but me with Ciprus
the tree dedicated to funeral: out alas that I live or that I have time to
speak, I live, in that I have had time so long, to love with neglect, and to
pine in the delay. Ah courteous beast (said she) why executest thou not that
which my sorrow does prasecute? let thy teeth (I beseech thee rid me of loves
tyranny. This said, she pitifully wept; but the Lion ceased not to play with
her, stroking her with his rough paw, as if willing to appease her, but all was
in vain, till that sleep by reason of her sorrow seized her, and settled her
self in the lions eyes, where we leave them, returning to Mosco, where the day
no sooner appeared, but Protomachus (according to his custom coming to visit
his daughter) found her suddenly ^led, whereat storming incessantly, he
presently put al her attendants to most bitter and strange death, sending out
espialles through all the country to find out Margarita. wh^ by reason of her
solitary walks, was free from their search: at last, looking among her secret
papers, he found a letter, wherein the princess had written to Arsadachus,
that if he presently returned not, she would shortly visit him. By reason
whereof, being a wise prince, he gathered some circumstance of her flight; and
leuying a power of soldiers, with as much expedition as he might, he set
forward toward Cusco, where I leave him, to return to Arsinous, who studying
Magic in his melancholy cell, found by reason of the aspect of the planets,
that the hour of his revenge was at hand: whereupon being resolved of the
place, which was Cusco, and the manner, with all other actors in the tragedy,
he being desirous to behold that with his eyes which he had long time longed
for with his heart, forsook his melancholy home, and set forward toward C^sco.
And as he passed on his way, it was his chance to behold where Margarita lay
sleeping, having the lions head in her lap, whereat being amazed and
affrighted, in that he heartily loved the princess, he with his staff awaked
her: who seeing a man so ouergrowne in hairs and years; yet carrying as much
show in his countenance, of honor, as disconten^, softly stole from the lion,
and left him sleeping there: suddenly seasing Arsinous by the hand, she said
thus: Father, thank fortune that has given thee time to escape death if thou
list, and follow me, who has both need of thy counselles, and of such a
reverend companion as thou art. Which said, they both withdrew the^ out of the
way hasting two long hours without ever looking back, till at last, when
Arsinous saw her and himself in safety, he courted her thus* Country loss
by your coat, but courtly dame by your countenance, whither travel you this
ways, or for what cause are you so woeful? Forlorn man by thy apparel, but
honorable sit by thy behavior, I am traveling to Cusco, where both remains
the cause of my woe, and the means to cure it. May I be so bold said Arsinous
to know of you what you are, and what you aile? It neither pertains to you
that I tell it (quoth Margarita) neither pleases it me to discover it, for the
one will seek my harm, the other yield you little help. Then quoth Arsinous
smiling, I will try mine own cunning, to cross a woman's reso^ution,
whereupon entreating Margarita to set her down under a Palm tree, to avoid
the heat of the sun, which being at his noonetide flamed very fiercely, he
drew a book out of his bosom, and read so long til suddenly there appeared
one in self li^e shape and substance as Arsadachus was wont to be, whom
Margarita no sooner espied, but that she ran fiercely toward him that
hastily fled, she cried out; Oh stay thee (my Arsadachus) stay thee, behold thy
Margarita that has left her fathers court, hazarded her honors, adventured
all dangers for thy love, for thy sake, oh stay. This said, the vision
suddenly vanished, and she striving to embrace him, caught his shadow:
whereupon vehemently weeping, she exclaimed on the gods, over love and his
laws, renting her hairs, and beating her breasts in such sort, as it was
pity to behold it: and had died in that agony, had not Arsinous recomforted
her in this sort: Fie Margarita, does this beseem your wisdom, to demean
sorrow without cause, and seek your death through a delusion? why princess
whateuer you saw was but an apparition, not the substance, devised only by your
servant Arsinous to discover you. She hearing the name of Arsinous presently
started up, and clasping her arms about his aged neck, whom she suddenly had
discovered, she spoke thus: Ah my father, pardon my folly, that sought to keep
that secret, which is discovered by your science. Tut madam, the pardon is to
be granted by your hands, said he, who are most injured; was it ever seen
(quoth he smilingly) a lady to be so besotted on a shadow? Ah pardon me (said
Margarita) I held it for the substance: but father, I pray you tell me whither
you intend your journey? Arsinous desirous in short words to satisfy her,
told her that he pretended his course to Cusco; forsaking his melancholy cell
of purpose, to meet her whose danger he had perceived in private being in his
study: further he told her many things touching the Emperors search after
her, not pretermitting any thing to content her, but concealing that which
tended to her ruin, which with ernefull heart he inwardly perceived,
Margarita somewhat rejoiced with the company of such a guide, sat her down
seeking some herbs in the forest to relieve her hunger, Arsinous that
perceived it said thus: See madam, what love can do, that fashioneth courtly
stomachs, to whomely acates the gods grant you may speed well, for I see you
can feed well, hereon he opened his book and read, and suddenly a pauilion
was picht, the table was reared, the dishes served in, with all kind of
delicates, the music exceeding pleasant, so that Margarita was ravished to
behold this, but being animated by Arsinous she fell to her meat, certifying
him at dinner time of such things as had passed in her fathers court in his
absence; thus in iollitie appeased they their hungry stomachs, and eased
their sorrowful hearts, till occasion called them forth to travel, at which
time the pauilion seruitors, and all things vanished, and only Arsinous and
Margarita were left alone, having two squires attending on them, with two rich
gennets bravely trapped fit for their managing, which they speedely backed,
talking merrily as they rode of such strange things as Arsinous had wrought by
his art, and so long they traveled toward Cusco, that they arrived within two
leagues of the same, understanding by ye great troops that rode that way, that
the coronation was the next day following, Margarita by Arsinous counsel
stayed in the castle of Aged knight, where he wrought so by his art, that
although Margarita had a desire to hear tidings of Arsadachus, yet made she no
question of him all the time of her abode there. And here let us leave them,
and return to Cusco to the accursed and abominable tyrant Arsadachus, who as
soon as the day began to break, the birds to hal^ forth sun, the sun to
haste his course, arose from his bed, apparelling himself in rich and
princely robes: about which hour Diana was not idle, for whatso of excellence
could be bought for money, or had for friendship, she wanted nothing thereof to
set out her beauty: the courtiers to grace their Emperor, spared no cost, the
citizens no triumphs, so as the triumph of Antigonus Epiphanus, in comparison
hereof was but a trifle, the manner whereof, since it was miraculous, I have
thought good to mention in this place. First came five thousand of the yoongest
Cuscanes out of the palace, trotting along the streets unto the temple armed,
according to the Roman fashion: after them as ma^^ Tartars armed after their
manner, who were followed with three thousand Thracians, and Plessians, all of
which carried silver lances and shieldes, having their (...) pieces decked with
ostrige plumes and emeralds: after them marched two hundred and fifty
sword-players, who followed the brave caualiers that marched before; after whom
trotted the horsemen, of which one thousand, together with their horses, were
all pompously garnished with gold and silver, with a garland of gold upon
their heads: after the^ rode another thousand horsemen, decked with gold and
purple, with lances of gold, headed with pointed diamonds: next them rode
those which were called the emperors minions, clothed in cloth of tissue,
their horses trapped in green cloth of gold, their stirrops of silver: after
them came the Emperors guard on horse back, having their caparisons studded
with iron and brass, wearing upon their armors a certain curious stoale,
wherein, with gold and silver, silk, and gossanpine thread of many colors,
were wouen the images of those gods, which the Cuscans most worshipped: after
whom came one thousand five hundredth armed chariots, the most part drawn by
two white genets, but forty of them by four: after them there came a chariot
drawn by elephants, and attended by six and thirty elephants, with eight
hundred young men attending them as their keepers, attired with ornaments of
gold, and having their temples encompassed with wreathes of roses, and silver
bends: after them came eight hundred young lads leading many fat oxen with
gilded horns to be sacrificed to the gods: next unto them eight hundred
ministers bearing platters of gold with precious stones, unicorns horns, and
elephants teeth to be sacrificed for the health of the emperor: next which, an
infinite number of statues were carried, not only of their gods, but also of
those fiends they feared; likewise the images of all their kings deceased,
according as every one deserved for his excellence, apparelled in goodly
garments of gold and silver, and other precious and inestimable iewelles, each
of them having a table at his feet, in which al his noble and worthy actions
were written. There were likewise other semblances of the day, the night, of
heaven, of the morning and midday, with an infinite number of vessels likewise
forged out of gold and silver, and borne by the slaves of the empire: after
these came six hundred pages of the emperor apparelled in gold: after whom
came three hundred virgins in white cloth of tissue, burning with censors in
their hands of silver: and Agate spreading sundry sorts of sweet perfumes
followed by five hundred eoches of silver, wherein Dianaes damsels were
carried: after which came fourscore of beaten gold, wherein all the princely
heirs of the empire were royally seated. After all these the Emperor with his
Diana rode in one coach attended with one hundred attired in beaten cloth of
silver, casting rich cloth before the coach, whereon the horses that drew the
Emperor should tread. ^t were a vain thing for me to set down the riches of
Arsadachus garments, or the attire of his goddess: suffices it that it
exceeded that which is past, and all was beyond belief: In this solemn sort
entered they the temple, where (according to the custom) they were sacred,
anointed and inthroned, receiving homage of the princes. And after in self
like pomp returned they to the palace: where having many rich delicates
prepared for them with sweet and melodious music they sat them down to eat;
where, after they had somewhat refreshed their stomachs, and whetted their
wits with costly wines, Arsadachus remembering him of his Margarita, called
for his box, merrily jesting with Diana, and saying, that the Empress of Mosco
deserved so small a remembrance* which was no sooner brought unto him, and
opened, but (see the judgment of just heaven) a sudden flame issued thereout,
which with a hideous odor so bestraught Arsadachus of his senses, that
thrusting the tables from him, and overthrowing whatsoever incountred him, he
brake out from his seat, cursing the hea^ens, renting his embalmed hair,
tearing his royal vestures: his nobility that saw this, became amazed, and
among the rest, Brasidas, who fled for the murder in Mosco, and was at that
time in great favor with him, came to pacify him; who no sooner espied him,
but taking a huge boule of wine, and crying out, Brasidas, I drink to Philenia
whom thou murtheredst, he tasted the wine, and with the cup took him such a
mighty blow on the head that he pashed out all his brains: all they that
beheld this sat still; some for fear stole secretly out of his presence,
among the rest, woeful Diana rather like the statue of Venus raised in Paphos,
then the lovely Lucina that gave light to all Arsadachus delights, sat still
quaking and trembling, as one ready to depart th^s life; whom when the Emperor
espied where she sat, he hastily ran unto her, crying out; Ah tyrant that
have robbed me of my heart, my hope and life, let me sacrifice to Nemesis; I
will sacrifice: which said, with the caruing knife he slit up the poor
innocent ladies body, spreading her entrails about the palace floor, and
seizing on her heart, he tare it in pieces with his tyrannous teeth, crying,
Sic itur ad astra; by this ti^e the rumor ^as spread throughout the palace,
and from the palace through the city: by which means the triumphs which were
commenced were turned to mournings, for Arsadachus used such cruelties every
way, that the Numantines for all their inhumanitie could never be able to match
him. And in this fit continued he for the space of six hours, at which time
he entered the secrets of his palace, and finding there a young son which his
Diana had bred and he begotten; he took it by the legs, battering out the
brains thereof against the walls, in such sort as the beholders were amazed
to see him; this done he flung it on the ground among the dead members of his
mother, calling on the name of Artosogon and Lelia his father and mother, and
telling them, that in some part he had yielded them revenge. By this time
Arsinous and Margarita were entered the city, who hearing the turmoile through
the city, questioned the cause thereof, and were certified by those that
passed by, in what estate the emperor was at that present. Margarita hearing
the cause, began woefully to exclaim, til she was pacified by Arsinous, who
told her that the nature of the medicine which he gave her, was such, that if
Arsadachus were constant to her, it would increase his affection; if false, it
would procure madness: to which effect, since the matter was brought, it
could not be but the young Emperor had wronged her. With these persuasions
he drew her to the palace, where thrusting through the prease Arsinous
thought himself happy to see such a revenge wrought on his enemy. Margarita
was heartlesse to behold the doleful estate of Arsadachus, so that forgetting
the honor of his name, and the modesty of her sex, she brake through the guard,
and ran to Arsadachus, where he sat embrewed in the blood of innocents, and
with tears spoke thus unto him; Is this the joy of my love (said she) are
these thy welcomes to thy beloved in steed of triumphs to feast her with
tragedies, in lieu of banquets, with blood? why speaks not my dear spouse?
why look thou so ghastly? O if it be thy pleasure to show cruelty on me,
make it short by a death, not lingering by life. Arsadachus all this while sat
mute ghastly staring on Ma^^arita; at last fiercely flinging her from his neck,
his rage revived and he cried out; Diana, ah Diana by thy bright looks, by thy
beautiful lo^kes, let not thy ghost be displeased, thou shall have blood for
blood, here is the sacrifice, here is the instrument; whereupon drawing a
rapier out of the sheath of one of those who ministered fast by him, he ran
Margarita quite through the body: and in this sort with bedlam madness fled
out of the presence to his privy chamber. The poor princess even when death
began ^o arrest her, pursued him: and as she endeavored to utter her moanes,
fell down dead on the floor; whom Arsinous woefully bewept, and in the
presence of the princess of Cusco, discovered what she was. Then began each
of them to imagine a new fear, doubting lest the Emperor of Mosco should
revenge her death at their hands. For which cause they consulted how to shut
up Arsadachus til Protomachus were certified, which they effected suddenly, in
that they found him laid on his bed, and soundly sleeping, enforced thereunto
by the industry and art of Arsinous. Who after he perceived the whole assembly
of princes dismayed, caused the ministers to gather up the mangled members and
cover the^ with a rich cloth of gold, and afterward seeing all the courtiers
attentive, he began in this manner* Thales (ye worthy princes) after he had
traveled long time, and at last returned home, being asked what strange or
rare thing he had seen in his voyage, answered; an old tyrant: for certain
it is, that such as practice open wrong, live not long; for the gods yield them
shortest life that have the wickedest ways: muse not therefore to see your
young Emperor in these passions, whose sins if they be ripped up exceed al
sense, whose tyrannies surpass the belief of any, but such as have tried
them. What, know you not of his disobedience, who spared not his own father
that begat him, his dear mother that bred him? What, know you not of his
perjury? that has falsified his faith to Protomachus, betrayed and murdered
Margarita, and at one time frustrated the hope of both these empires? What,
know you not of his murders, where these in sight are sufficient to convict
him: but those I sigh for are more odious, who through his lewd lus^ ^e reft me
(poor Arsinous) of my daughter, and her of an husband? But the just gods have
suffered me to behold the revenge with mine eyes, which I have long wished for
with my heart. Truly (ye Cuscans) ye are not to marvel at these chances, if
you be wise, neither to wonder at your emperors troubles, if you have
discretion; for as unity (according to Pythagoras) is the father of number, so
is vice the original of many sorows. When the fish Tenthis appears above the
water, there follows a tempest: when evils are grown to head, there must
needely follow punishment; for as the gods in mercy delay, so at last in
justice they punish. Hear me ye men of Cusco, and consider my words, if never
as yet any tyrant lived without his tragedy what should you expect? In faith
no other thing but the confirmation of Platoes reason, who said that it is
unnecessary for him to live, that has not learned how to live well. The
tyrant of Sicely Dionisius, of whom it is said, that he gave as great reward
to those that invented vices, as Rome did to those that conquered realms) died
a private man and in misery. Now what in respect of this man can you hope of
Arsadachus, who hired not men to invent, but did himself in person practice:
believe me, believe me, your sufferance of such a viper in your realm, is a
heinous sin in you, and as Dion says, it is but meet they be partakers to
the pain, who have wincked at the fault. Caligula the emperor of Rome was so
disordered in his life, that if all the Romans had not watched to take life
from him, he would have waited to take life from them; this monster bare a
brooch of gold in his cap, wherein was written this sentence: Vtinam omnis
populus vnam praecise ceruicem haberet, vt vno ictu omnes necarem. And what was
this man in regard of Arsadachus? Truly almost innocent; for the one
pretended kindness to those that gently persuaded him, but the other neither
feared the gods, neither spared his friends, neither regarded justice, and can
such a monster deserve life? The Romans when the tyrant Tiberius was made
away, sacrificed in their open streets, in that the gods had reft them of such
a troublesome wretch; why cease you then (you Cuscans) to sacrifice to your
gods, to the end they may deliver you of this trouble-world. It was a law
among the Romans, that that child which had disobeyed his father, robbed any
temple, injured any widdowe, committed any treason to a stranger should be
banished from Rome, and disinherited of his fathers possessions; and what has
not Arsadachus done of these things? and why is not Arsadachus punished?
Scedasus daughters being violated in Lacedemon, and unrevenged by the
magistrates of the city; the gods inflicted both the guilty and vnguiltie
with plagues, in that they afflicted not punishment on the offenders: and what
can you hope (ye Cuscans) that suffer this sincke of sin to triumph in your
palaces? You will perhaps say, that no man is to be punished before he be
convicted. And (I pray you) for what should ill men plead? since as Chrisippus
says, nothing is profitable unto them. You see testimonies of his murder
before your eyes, tokens of his perjury I ring in your ears, his lust the gods
abhor, and shall he yet live?

This said, there grew a great muttering among the nobility, and the noise
thereof awaked the emperor (whose sleep had stayed the working of the
enchantment) who finding him self wholly imbrewed with blood, his doors fast
locked unto him, began to misdeeme: whereupon calling and exclaiming on his
attendants, some of them at last fearfully opened the doors. The nobility
hearing of his freedom, presently fled, but when as the fatal fruits of his
fury were discovered unto him, and his ruthful eyes beheld what his hands had
executed, Lord what pitiful exclamations used he! how he rent his breast
with fury, how he tare his face: At last, laying him down upon the mangled
members of Diana, and embracing the dead body of Margarita, he washed both of
them in his tears, and demeaned himself so woefully, as it (...) wonder to
behold; at last, with a bitter sigh he brake out into these bitter words,
(whilst his nobles hearing of his recovery, began to reenter the palace)
True it is that Plutarch says (quoth he) that life is a stage play, which even
unto the last act has no decorum: life is replenished with all vices, and
empouerished of all virtue. Sooth spoke Chrisippus when he alleged this, that
the euilles of this life are so many, that the gods can not invent more,
neither a living man endure half; so that rightly I may say with Hercules:
Plenus malorum sum iam, nec superest locus
Alijs nouis recipiandis --


But why philosophy I of life complaining on it where I ought only to convict
my self? It is not the wretchedness, but the wickedness of life that makes
it odious. Then have thou occasion (wretched man) as thou art to learn thee,
who having sinned in the excess, ought rightly to have thy comforts in
defect. Yea I have sinned O ye heavens, first in beguiling this chaste Margarita
with hope* in wronging my dear parents in their age, in slaughtering this
poor infant with his mother. Oh AEtna of miseries that I see! oh ye Cuscan
princes, why suffer you me alive, that have stained your empire with such
infamies? why vnsheath you not your swords? for pity delay not, for pity rid
me of life: alas, why crave I pity, that have been altogether pitiless? ah
ye flocks of flatterers, where are you now that fed me with follies? come
now and punish my follies in me: none hears me, all forsake me, despised of
the gods, hated of men; ah just heavens, I honor you that have left me
occasions in my self, you cursed eyes of mine that have glutted your selves in
vanity, since you reft me of my senses, I will be revenged on your sight:
which said, he drew out his eyes weeping piteously in so erneful manner, that
the whole assistance became compassionate: at last some one of his nobles
laboring to pacify him, alleging reasons of great weight, which in a man of
government were sufficient to quallifie the fury of sorrow, he replied thus:
Friends and princes the force of reason, (as the Stoics say) is not to be
used in those things that are not, it concerns not me (lords) that I live,
persuade me not for that cause to entertain and think of life, for if it be
odious to those that through infirmities of their flesh grow in hate with it,
what should it be to me, who have not only a body aggreeued with sorrows,
but a soul sweltered in sins; lament me not therefore, neither relieve me;
for as the dew causes leprosy in man though it yields life to flowers, so
tears rather torment those that despair then relieve them; and though they
comfort the distressed, yet they are tedious to the desperate: I feel my
forlorn heart (you nobles) cloyed with thoughts and longing to be
disburthened. I see with mine inward eyes the ghosts of these poor slaughtered
souls calling for justice at my hands; stay me not therefore from death, but
assist me to die, for by this means you shall rid your country of a plague,
the world of a monster. Such as are wounded with brazen weapons, are according
to Aristotle's opinion soon healed; so likewise are they that are tainted with
easy sorrow: but whereas the passions exceed reason, they have no issue but
death; the instrument that wounds is deadly. Ah my heart, I find Plutarchs
reason of force; for as the sun is to the heaven, so is the heart to the man;
and as the one eclipseth, the other cloudeth; when the one danceth, the other
dies. I ^eele thee (poor heart) dispossessed of al joy, and shall I continue
possessed of life? no (you ghosts) I will visit you. This said, he grapled about
the floor among the dead bodies, and at last he griped that weapon wherewith
he slew Margarita, wherewith piercing his hated body he breathed his last, to
the general benefit of all the Cuscans who in that they would pacify the
emperor Protomachus, who as they understood had levied a huge army after
they had enterred their slain emperor with his fair love, bestowed
honorable funeral on the princess Margarita, on whose sepulcher, as also on
that of Dian^es, Arsinous wrote these epitaphs*

Margaritaes Epitaph.
A blessed soul from (...)
Ye happy heuens has (...) to you conuaide,
The earthly hold within this tomb enclosed,
White Marble stones within your womb is laid:
The fame of her that soul and body lost,
Suruiues from th'ile to the Bractrian coast.
A precious pearl in name, a pearl in nature,
Too kind in love unto too fierce a foe,
By him she loved, she did, O cursed creature,
To quite true faith with furious murder so!
But vain are tears for those whom death has slain,
And sweet is fame that makes dead live again.
Dianaes Epitaph.
Thy babe and thou by sire and husbands hand*
Beloved in stayed sense was slain in rage,
Both by untimely death in native land
Lost Empire, hope, and died in timelesse age,
And he whose sword your blood with fury spilt.
Bereft himself of life through cursed guilt.
All ye that fix your eyes upon this tomb*
Remember this, that beauty fades fast,
That honors are enthralde to haples dombe,
That life has nothing sure, but soon does wast;
So live you then, that when your years are fled,
Your glories may survive when you are dead.
In this sort were these murdered princes both buried, and honored with
epitaphs, by which time the emperor of Mosco arrived in Cusco, who certified of
that which had insued, with bitter tears lamented his daughter, and upon the
earnest submission of the Cuscans, spoiled not their confines, but possessing
himself of the empire, he placed Arsinous governor of the same, whom upon the
earnest reconcilement and motion of the Princes, he took to favor, being
certified of his wrong and innocence: which done, he returned to Mosco, there
spending the remnant of his days in continual complaints of his Margarita.

FINIS.

