From the library of SIR R. LEICESTER HARMSWORTH, BART.

TO AL THOSE of the Reverend Society of the name of JESUS, perpetual increase
of al virtues, from him that gives them.
HAVING received so singular benefits from you, as needs I must, (more then
to any other earthly creatures) acknowledge my self indebted to you; and
having from you receued both the copy, the counsel, and other commodities, to
translate this worthy Treatise into our English tongue; I could do no less,
as-wel in respect of your former merits, as of the means you gave me, to
attempt and finish this work, but make you the Patrones of my small pains, and
vow the cote and simple attire to them, who gave the mould, and sovereign
subject to me. God grant my skill have answered to my will, then shall I without
al affec have translated that into plain, and not impure English, which was
first written by a worthy Father of your company, in plain and right pure
Italia^. Accept therefore, Reverend Fathers, and Brethren, a bird of your own
brood, plucked out of her natural plume, and garnished with foreign fether.
Accept this my seely travail, as a testimony of a reverent zeal, I bear to
your whole Socieite; and as a (...) of further reward I owe you: which our
good God, having given you his word for me, will furnish you most aboundantlye.
He preserve, increase, and strengthen you for ever; and grant me and al others
grace to follow your good instructions.

At Paris, the. 20. of June. 1579, Your most bounden beadsman, and dutiful
friend for ever. Iamer Sancer.

THE AUTHOR to the devout Reader.
CONSIDERING the necessity of many men, who having a good will, have not for all
that the capacity, or means, to seek out and read such books, as entreat
of the exercises, which every good Christian ought to occupy himself in; I
have for this cause thought good, to gather in this short Tretise the principal
exercises which every Christian is bound to use; that by spending his time
laudably therein, he may have hope to obtein Gods divine grace, and by means
thereof, come afterward to enjoy eternal felicity, which is the end,
whereto we are created. And albeit this Treatise may generally help al, yet
mean I chiefly to speak to those Christians, who (woting the end whereto
they are created, and the rigorous account they must render of al their whole
life, yea, of every idle word) desire in such sort to spend and govern
their temporal life, as that afterward they may come to obtain everlasting
life. They that are thus affected, shall (I hope) make their avail of such
things as I shall here entreat of; and will (I doubt not) with good will and
plain meaning receive that, which is with no less afforded them.

A TABLE OF the Chapters contained in this Book.
WHAT thing he ought first of (...) to do, that purposes to begin a new
life, and to spend his time henceforth sincerely in Gods service. Fol 1.
Certain general aduertisementes necessary for such as mind to serve God
sincerelye. 4. Of the particular order, which we ought every day to observe in
our daily exercises. 8. The exercises wherein a good Christian ought to occupy
him-self on holy days. 12. Of the profit and necessity of prayer. 17 The
manner how to pray mentally, and of the preparation we ought to make before it.
20. Meditations of the blessed Passion of our Savior, for every day in the
week, especially on morninges. 23. Certain particular aduertisementes
touching the Meditations contained in the former Chapter. 38. Meditations to be
made on Eueninges, or a new week. 42. Other meditatio^s, wherein the better
learned may at other times exercise the^-selues; certain also for the simpler
for wherein the mysteries of the Rosarie are intreted of. 57. Certain Remedies
for such, as could not happily find savor or devotion in the former
Meditations. 70. Of Confession, how and when we ought to make it. 76. Of the
utility and profit that is reaped by often receiving the holy Sacrament. 82.
In what manner we ought to prepare our selves before we come to receive the
blessed Sacrament. 87. Of spiritual Receiving. 92. Of the temptations which
ordinarily offer them selves to such as have begone to walk in spiritual way.
96. General Remedies to be used against temptations. 99. A Preamble concerning
the Remedies against particular temptations. 104. Remedies against
Lasciuiousnes. cod. Remedies against the second sin of the flesh, which is
Gluttony. 111. Remedies against the troublesome temptations of sloth and
Idleness. 116. Remedies against the sin and temptation of covetousness. 120.
Remedies against the temptation of the third enemy, to wit, the devil; and
first against Pride, whereto he principally induces us. 125. Remedies against
the temptations and sin of wrath. 132. Remedies against the sin and
temptation of Envy. 139. Certain other aduises and Remedies concerning the
same matter of temptations. 144. What a good Christian ought to do, when he
falls sick, and draws nigh the hour of death. 148. Of the temptations
that are commonly felt in the hour of death, and of the Remedies against the
same. 156. A Conclusion and brief Rehearsal of all that has been said in this
little Treatise, and of the things that every good Christian is bound to
learn, and have by heart. 165. A brief declaratton of the.12. Articles
contained in the Creed. 169. A declaration of the Decalogue or tenn
Commandments. 175. A declaration of the Pater noster. 182. An exposition of
the Aue Mary. 186. A prayer or Meditation, whereby the soul is stirred up to a
reverence and love of the blessed Sacrament, before a man receaueth it. 190.
An-other Prayer or Meditation to be made the day that one has received, to
stir him up through the consideration and knowledge of so great a benefit,
to give God thanks therefore, and to be grateful for his goodness. 197. A
prayer for the Translatour. 204. A Preface to the Reader. 205. A prayer to be
said in the morning before al other business. 206. A prayer to be said to
bedward, applied to the excellent instructions of the. 3. Chapter of this
Treatise. 207. A prayer to be used before Sacramental Confession. 210. A prayer
to be said after Sacramental Confession. 211. A very fit prayer to be said
before Mass, wherein we exercise very fruitfully our faith, and prepare our
selves to hear it with dutiful attention. 213. An-other prayer to be said
likewise before Mass 215. An excellent prayer and adoration to be made in the
presence of the blessed Sacrament. 216. A Protestation to be made in time of
sickness. 111. A prayer to God and to al his holy Saints for all things
necessary for our selves, and our neighbors. cod. A most strange and
excellent monument, proving apparently the reverend antiquity of our Catholic
Religion, found at Rome in July last past, in the year of our Lord. 1578. and
is of al wise men believed to be the blessed Virgin S. Priscilla her
Church-yarde. 222.
FINIS.
A SONNET so the Christian Reader.
AChilles never durst at once
With monsters two to fight,
And yet at once this book shows thee
How three to put to flight.
The Devil, the World, the Flesh; and more,
To conquer Death and sin;
And how to live, and how to dye,
And how the heavens to win.
It is a path to Paradise,
A port to heavenly bliss,
It treats of truce, and bringes the peace,
That ever during is.
Then read, and reap the fruits thereof.
And thank thou for thy gains
The God above, who raisd up those,
That took for thee the pains.
Conuertantur qui oderunt Sion.
MILITI CHRISTIANO TETRASTICHON.
QVO tibi iam de te parias certamine palmam,
Et docet hic paucis, praebet and arma liber.
Sedulus hunc ergo si nocte, dieque reuoluas,
Corpore victus eris, menteque victor eris.
CARMEN in Natiuitatem Christi.
CVR petis humanas puer o (...) me seeds
A superis factus sedibus exul? Amo.
Cur tua panntculos molles quibus implicet artus
Non habet in tali tempore Matter? Amo.
Cur geminas inter pecudes decumbis, and vdas
Lachrimulas madido lumine fundis? Amo.
Cur rigidae (...) paleae mordacibus vrunt
Et tenerum ledunt frigora corpus? Amo.
Cur stabulis sacris (...) robora membris,
Et lapis heu (...) asper? Amo.
Pauca modo patior sed post qua adoleuerit at as,
Verbera, (...), vepres, (...) alt a feram.
Nascitur, and iacet in staebulo qui torquet Olympum:
Pastorum, and Superum cantibus antra sonant.


Behold, O thanklesse wretch, behold,
How, to repair thy fall;
The God, that rules the rouling skies,
Lies borne in brutish Stall.
Hocce tuo nunquam labatur pectore nomen,
Quod decus est Diuum, quodq, salus (...)


Al praise and due renown, O Lord,
Give to thy holy name.
And not to us most wretched wights
Do thou impart the same.
What thing he ought first of al to (...), that purposes to begin a new
life, and to spend his time henceforth sincerely in Gods service.

Cap. 1.
FOR that, as S. Austine says, it is not possible for any man to begin a
new and laudable life, but if he first forsake and utterly detest his former
loose and lewd life: who so therefore minds to amend his former manners, and
to endeavor him self sincerely to serve God: the first thing he ought to do,
is, to cleanse and purge his soul, that so it may please the holy ghost to
dwell and remain therein, 1. Cor. 3. c. 1. Cor. 6. d. 2. Cor. 6. d.
as in his holy temple: who will not (as Sap. 1. a.
holy scripture tells) enter into the soul of the wicked, nor be harbored
in the body thral and captiunte unto sin. It behooves therefore to follow the
prophets counsel, first to Psa. 33. b Psalm. 33. c Isai. 1. d. 1. Pet. 3. b.
sequester thy self from sin, and so shall thou become a fit instrument to
do good. The which sequestration from sin and purging of thy soul, is
procured by true and lowlye confession, wherewith it is very expedient thou
first begin, preparing thy self thereto with great diligence and contrition:
yea, it shall be both profituble for thee, and right commendable too (if already
thou had not made a general confession of thy whole life) now to make the
same, calling to mind very diligently and with inward hearty sorrow, the whole
(...) 38. c.
time thou haste hitherto lived, and al thy years past, so lewdly and
disorderly bestowed.

This general confession shall help greatly, as well to cancel and clear al old
reckonings of thy former life (being fully bent henceforth to live a new, and
to (...) a new book) as also to take away the scruples which are wont to
molest the soul, whereas, through the more plentiful light of Gods good grace,
we see now the imperfections and defectes of our former confessions, which
perhaps were not vailable, either for want of contritio^, or for having left
some notorious and deadly sin, or necessary circumstance untold: whether it
were through shamefastnes, or blame worthy negligence, or some such other
like default, which we were not in the dark time of our former days aware of:
and now through the grace and heavenly light we have since the^ received, do
plainly and manifestly perceive them. Joining therefore due diligence to this
heavenly light, we are now to supply al former wantes, that our soul may be
set at rest, and rid of such remorse which else would continually gnaw and
wouud it.

This general confession shall profit much in this wise to, to move and provoke
God thorough the (...) and shame we suffer in making it, to grant us greater
abundance of his grace, and more strength, with other virtues, necessary for
the better leading of our life hereafter.

Now to make this confession rightly, and as it ought to be, we must, first
crave of God in all humility his grace and favor, Psalm. 31. b Psalm. 37. d.
to have due knowledge of those grievous sins which we have committed against
his divine Majesty throughout all our former life, and that it may plese him
to give us sincere and Psa. 50. d
hearty sorrow for the same. This being done, take a day or (...) yea more if
need be, wherein thou must retire thy self from company, and examine at
leisure thy whole life, beginning at the time thou first began to have use of
reason, and so Isai. 38. d.
running over al thy years according to the change of time and places where
thou haste lived, and the exercises and trades thou haste been practiced in
running over likewise the ten maundementes of God, and those of his Church,
the seven deadly sins, the senses of the body, and powers of the soul. All the which thou may do much better, and with more facility a great deal,
if thou read over some brief and learned Confessionarye (as there be many) or
if so thou can not read thy self, to cause some other to read it to thee.
And when at any time thou shall be put in mind of any crime whatsoever it be,
thou haste committed, force thy self to have a particular grief and sorrowful
repentance, as well of it, as al other, whereof thy conscience may plead thee
guilty.

Having used this diligence, and necessary preparation, seek then the best
learned and most virtuous confessor thou may possibly find out, to who I
wish thee, as well now, as hereafter, to make thy confession to, and by his
counsel, to govern the whole course of thy life, and al thine actions: wherein
no doubt but thou shall find a notable help for the better serving of God, and
more secure walking in his way, as I shall hereafter more at large let thee
understand in the. Xij. Chapter of this little Treatise.) When thou have thus
made choice of such a Confessor, then shall thou with all humility,
shamefastnes, and sincerity, open al thy sins unto him, declaring what is
necessary, and omitting that is superfluous, Psa. 31. b
accusing thy self, and no other body, of the sins thou have committed:
neither excusing thee, as some do very naughtily, attributing Psa. 141.
the cause of their sins to the devil, the frailty of their flesh, or to
some other body, or at least alleging certain excuses to cloak and shadow
their sins withal, that by this means they may either seem none at al, or
the less grievous a great deal. Al which kind of scuses, the humble, true,
and contrite penitent, must in any wise eschew. And therefore is it much
better (as S. John Climacus says) to discover the wounds of thy soul nakedly
and plainly to thy confessor, he being appointed thy physician to cure and
heal the same, saying in this manner: I confess that I have sinned through
mine own fault, and no other bodies, neither has the devil provoked me thereto,
nor any other man, neither my body, not any other creature, but only is it
through mine own fault and wickedness that I have offended. If thou both think
and say thus, thou shall do according to that the prophet David says: Psalm.
31. b
I will confess mine unrighteousness against me. And if by thus doing thou
suffer more confusion and shame, believe verily, that for this temporal shame
thou shall escape eternal and everlasting shame. Thus having in this manner made
thy confession, accept the penance and satisfaction which which shall be laid
upon thee, procuring to fulfill the same so soon as thou may conveniently.
And if it should so fall out that thou were bound to make restitution of goods
or of good name, do it, if it be possible, before confession, or so soon
after as thou can. The like do I also say of other penance and satisfaction
that shall be enjoined thee, that thou perform the same without delay.

CERTAIN general aduertisementes necessary for such as mind to serve God
sincerely.

Cap. 2.
HAVING thus made a general confession, who so had not (as I have already
said) made the same before, the soul being now cleansed from al mortal sin,
it behooves thee to have a most stedf^st purpose never to offend mortally
again, but rather to suffer any affliction or worldly contempt, yea, death it
self, if need required. For if a chaste wife ought to carry this mind, rather
to loose her life, then to betraye the troth she has once plight unto her
husband, how much more ought thou to be of the same mind, rather to lose
a thousand lives (if thou had so many) the^ to play the traitor toward
God, who is thy 2. Cor. 112
husband; thy father, thy Lord and maker. When thou have once thus fully
determined; take then a zealous and fervent desire to live a new hereafter, and
strive to get other new behauiours, and to live far otherwise then thou haste
done tofore reputing thy self to be now a new man, far changed from that
thou erst was, since all the time thou haste hitherto lived has been but
lost, and as it were a death. For the better doing whereof this shall help thee
greatly, in any wise to eschew al occasions of sin, especially the compa nie
of (...)
wicked men, but much more of weme^, such as may provoke thee to naughtines,
and give thee loose and lewd example. For albeit thou art bound to love every
one, and to pray for every one (as charity commands) yet art thou not bound
to company and converse with every one, but only such as may help to do thee
good, and with their good words and virtuous examples, serve to edify thee.

SECONDLY, thou must fly such places where God is (...) offended, as be
dising houses, tauernes, daunsing schools, and such like: not only foreseing
thou do none evil thy self, but also not to be present there where it is done:
for look how much more thou stand aloof from the fire, and so much the
more secure art thou not to be burned therewith.

THIRDLY, thou must take great head to be at no time idle, for that (as the holy
scripture Eccl. 33. d
tells) many me have receued much harm through idleness. See therefore thou
follow S. Ieroms S. Jerome.
cousail, saying: It behooves we be always doing of some good, that when the
fiend shall come to te^pt us, he may find us well and virtuously occupied.

FOURTHLY, thou must take heed of al excess in Luc. 21. (...)
eating, drinking, sleping and clothing, and endeavor thy self to observe a
mediocritie and temperace in each of them: yea, rather to decline to some
rigor and austeritie, then to any superfluity and delicate pampering of thy
flesh: for look by hawe much the more thou tamest and bridelest it, and by so
much the less shall thou be troubled with the tentations and disordinate
desires that proceed of it: yea, so much the more apter shall thou find thy
self to serve God, and to perform al spiritual exercises.

As touching corporal punishments and penance, as fasting, discipline, here
cloth and other chastisements, herein it behooves thee to use good discretion,
taking such as help to repress the assaults and temptations of the flesh, and
leuing others that may be hurtful, not yielding herein to the heats, which some
nouices are wont to have in their beginning, who thorough indiscrete mortifying
and dompting of their flesh, fall into some such infirmity, as afterward
they must needs pamper and cherishe it to much. It shall be good therefore thou
govern thy self in these things by thy ghostly fathers advise, being a man
practiced in spiritual exercises.

Fifthly, it shall greatly profit thee to set before thine eyes the good
examples, works and life that other have led and still continue in, but chiefly
of such as be like to self, 2. Cor. 4.
animating thee by their good examples, and procuring as much as thou may to
imitate them in every thing, yea, forgetting the good thou haste already done,
thou ought to strive every day to become better then other, and always to
(...) forward in the service and fear of God.

Sixthly, make none account of the (...) and temptations which those (...)
feel, that begin first to lead a godly and spiritual life, be not thou, I
say, dismayed therewith at al, but 1. Cor. 9. d.
march on forward, and fight manfully against al such temptations,
comforting and confirming thy self with this undoubted truth which thou must
have firmly fixed in thy mind, to wit, that now thou haste taken in hand
the highest and most happy enterprise that may be thought of in this world, and
how this is an affair of more weight and importance then any other, and
whereby more certain gain, greater abundance of treasure, more honor and
dignity, and finally the most blessed happes of all the happy and good
things that may be found or desired in this world, shall redound unto thee,
yea, there is no good thing that is good in deed, but only this, neither any
other important affair but this alone, this being the one only thing, our Luc.
10. g
Savior him self said, was necessary. And therefore ought no toiles, Romans 8.
f. 2. Cor. 4. d.
temptations or disquietnes, no backbitinges, slanders, and persecutions,
which may and must befall thee in this life, seem any whit grievous for the
gaining of so precious a perle, and rare jewel, as thou look for. Herewith
must thou eftsons animate and encorage thy self, calling often to mind that
Saying of the Apostles, Romans 8. d
How all the afflictions and crosses of this world are not to be compared to the
future glory that shall be given unto us. Persuade thy self likewise, least
thou might happily faint in resisting the toiles and temptatios which may
befall thee in this strainght way that brings to heaven) persuade thy self I
say assuredly, that as herein there be worldly toils and temptations, so be
there heavenly comforts and consolations: and that to overcome these crosses
and ouerthwartes of nature, there are helps and succors of grace given
withal, which in power surpass nature. And with this consideration may thou
remain a vanquisher, and do al things ( Phil. 4. (...)
as did S. Paul) (...) him that shall comfort thee, which (...) Jesus Christ
our Lord and captain.

OF THE particular order we ought every day to observe in our daily exercise.

Cap. 3.
DESCENDING now to more particularitie, for that such things as be well and
orderly disposed, be both more durable and profitable too: I have therefore
thought good to advertise thee, what course and order thou ought every day
to keep. Which let be this: first, to rise in the morning so earlye as thou
may, having before taken convenient rest and sleep, which is had betwixt
six and seven hours, little more or less, according to the diversity of
complexions. So soon as thou art awake, it is a good and godly devotion,
before thou settle thy mind to any other thing, to offer up to God the first
fruits of al thine actions, and powers of thy whole body: as for example, thy
heart, thinking of thy Creator, and sighing after him: thine eyes, casting
them upon some godly picture, or up to heaven: thy legs, kneeling humbly
before his presence: thy hands, lifting them up to adore and thank him: thy
mouth, saying some short prayers, as the Pater noster, Aue Mary, and the Creed:
and then may thou afterward, according as thy devotion shall teach thee,
briefly give him thanks for having preserved thee the night past, desiring him
likewise to defend thee that presont day from al sin; and to give thee grace
to spend it better in his divine service.

After this, if so thou be at leisure, and have no great business, read a little
of some devout Treatise, or make a little me ditation, whereof I shall entreat
hereafter. Doing thus, thou do as our Savior him self advised thee,
saying: Mat. 6. d
Seek first the kingdom of God, and his justice, and al other things shall
be given unto you. It were very good also, after thou have done thus, to go to
the Church, if thou might conveniently, and there to hear Mass, or at
least to see and adore thy Savior in his most holy Sacrament: but if thy
need and poverty can not well afforde thee such leave as to go thither, it
shall then suffice on working days to do the same with heart and good desire.

Having now recommended thy self to God in manner aforesaid, thou may with
his holy blessing attend to thine occupation or temporal business, referring al
things, yea, temporal also, to his divine service, choosing rather to do them
for his love, then for thine own lucre. And therefore ought thou to think
eftsons of him, whiles thou labourest, or art busied in any kind of temporal
affairs, and to recommende thy self to his divine mercy, offering up thine
heart with all thy doings to him.

And in any wise beware of one thing, that neither in thine occupatio^ or other
temporal doings thou use any guile, or exercise any unlawful trade, and
against conscience (for so should thy building laid on such a foundatio be
very faulty: thou must likewise take heed of Iac. 5. c.
swearing, lying, using of 1. Cor. 15. d
idle words and impertinent speeches so much as may be: yea, not to hear any
such, if it were possible for thee.

Thus having spent the day til diner time, see (...) thou go thereto, that
being now at table, either thou or some other sai grace before thou eat, or
at least wise say a Pater noster and Aue Mary. And beware thou feed not too
greedily, nor of too dainty and delicate meat: take heed also of al such
excess and superfluity as might make thee vnlisting, and less apt to read,
pray, or do any other work: take therefore so much as thou may well think
necessary for thee, and no more, remembering, that meat is rather to be
received as a medicine or refection, to sustain the body, and interteine this
temporal life of ours, then to satisfy the sensual delights and desires of
our flesh. And therefore must thou force thy self not to feed with the whole
man, but to eleuate thy mind up to God, and to listen to some holy and
spiritual lessons, if there were any read. And if thou find thy self disposed
to gluttony, thou must seek to repress the same with some good thought: as
for example, remembering that through thy sins thou deseruest not that, which
God of his mere liberality bestows upon thee: and how others that merit
more, lack what thou leauest. Calling also to mind the toiles, torments and
sorrows of our Savior, and how for thy sake he tasted Mat. 27 d Luc 23. e. 40.
9. c. Psalm. 68. d.
gaul and vinager: with these and such like good cogitations may thou, as
with a wholesome sauce delay the to sweet and pleasant savor of thy meat.

After diner see thou rise not from table before thou haste thanked thy maker,
who in such wise has vouchsafed to sustain and refreshe thee with his most
bountiful hand, thou deserving rather through thy sins, to suffer eternal
torments, and say some Pater noster and Aue Mary for the living and the dead:
and so may thou at thy pleasure return again to thy business, demeaning thy
self therein, as is aforesaid in the morning.

At evening it should be very good, (if thou could conucniently) to say some
few devotions before supper, or to read a little, as I shall hereafter instruct
thee, that by this means thy soul might receive some refreshing before thy
body: howbeit, if thy trade and business would not give thee leave to do so then
may thou get thee to supper on Gods name, behauing thy self therein as is
said at diner time.

The residue of time from supper til thou go to bed, thou may bestow in
some honest talk, or other good exercise and recreation, taking heed yet of
occupying thy self in any such thing as may hinder and disturb the quietness
of thy mind.

Afterward having made some small pause and resting while, see thou prepare
thy self to bedward, considering that a good christian ought to dispose him
self in such wise thereto, as if he were that night to depart this life.

The manner how to prepare thy self, is this: first kneeling down devoutly
before some picture of Christ or of our Lady (which thou ought always to
have in thy chamber) say the Creed, Pater noster, and Aue Mary: Four principal
points to be considered.
afterward 1.
give God most humble thanks for having preserved thee that day: 2.
and require the light of his grace to understand and know thy faults, but
chiefly those thou have committed that present day: 3.
examine afterward thy conscience at leisure, and with good deliberation,
discussing how, and in what things thou haste bestowed the same. And where
thou find thee guilty of any offense, 4.
be sorrowful for it, and ask God heartily mercy: purpose also to confess the
same in due time, and to amend thy life hereafter: but finding not thy
conscience guilty of any great offense, yield him humble thanks, who has
preserved thee: and finally beseech him to defend thee the night following, from
all the deceiptes and illusions of the devil, granting thee convenient rest for
the health of thy soul and body. And thus may thou go to bed, making the
sign of the holy cross upon thee as thou laiest thee down: and see thou
dispose thy whole body in honest and decent wise, remembering that God, and his
holy Angel thy Guardian do Mat. 18. b Psalm. 33. a
look upon thee: to whom thou must not fail to recommende thee. It shall be
likewise very good to remember otherwhiles, that even as thou now laiest thy
self down in bed, so shall others one day couche thee down in grave: and
ponder well, that this must needs be the end of all the riches, pompes and
honors, and of all the whole pride and glory of this world. Say therefore,
as thou lie, some short prayer, himne, or Pater noster over thee, craving
Gods good help and assistance for that last hour of so great dread and
importance. And beware in any wise of loving to dainty and soft a bed.
Calling to mind that narow and hard couche of the cross, which for thy sake
our Savior lay upon, and thus may thou fall asleep, either with this or
such other like godly thought: and look that when thou chauncest at any time
to wake, thou have God by and by in thy mind, and let thy mouth be filled with
his praises, saying some verse to thank and bless him, or to recommende thy
self to his divine mercy: and when thou risest again in the morning, behave
thy self as is aforesaid.

THE exercises wherein a good christian ought to occupy him self on holy
days.

Cap. 4.
HAVING declared already what order thou ought to keep to thine exercises
each working day through the week, it rests now to teach thee, how thou
art to behave thy self on holy days, since both God and his holy Church
command us to sanctify and keep the^ holy. It behooves therefore, that we
toil not only, and take no servile pains on those days, but that we
dedicate our selves more diligently to Gods service, and to exercise of
spiritual, good, and godly works, that by these means we may sanctify the
said days, by indeuouring our selves to have more holiness on them. On Sundaies
therefore and other holy days, thou shall dispose thy life and exercises in
this order.

After thou art got up in the morning, offer and commend thy self to thy Lord
and maker, as on other days, and make thy prayers (whereof I shall tell thee more
hereafter) somewhat longer then on other days, or at least wise read of some
godly book a while, preparing thy self to go to Mass, and to receive the
blessed Sacrament, if thou be minded so to do that day.

When thou haste thus done, and left such order for thy temporal matters at
home as shall be meet, get thee then to Church to hear Mass, and the sermon
(if there be any) in such place where thou hopest to receive most profit and
devotion, especially at such time as thou purposest to receive. And take heed
in the way to Church ward thou roll not thine eyes up and down, gasing here
and there, especially at thine entry into the Church: but retire them home in
modest and devout wise, and calling to mind thine own unworthiness and
manifold sins, be sorrowful for them, asking God mercy and forgeuenes. And
the^ may thou sai that sentence of the psalm: Psalm. 5. b.
Putting my trust and confidence in thy mercy, O Lord, I will enter into thy
holy Temple in thy fear. Place thy self afterward in humble and contrite
wise, like to the Luc. 18. b.
publican, in some convenient room, there to hear attentively, both Mass,
and other divine service, desiring to be partaker of all the mysteries which are
celebrate in that holy place, and alwais to remain in the 1. Cor. 1. b
unity of the holy catholic Church, and of all the faithful and lively members
of Christ, that thou deserve afterward to enjoy everlasting happiness, with
them in the triumphant Church above.

Now at such time as they begin to sai their mattins or Mass, lift thou up
thy mind and heart conformably as the Church does, praising God when she
praises him, praying when she prays, and for the same things she prays,
giving thanks when she does, and so in all things imitating her, and
conforming thy self unto her.

When the priest says Mass, harken diligently to such words as he
pronounces, without either reading thy self, or saying any other prayers and
devotions, at least wise whiles the priest reads out: yea, much more
commendable should it be to occupy thee all the while he celebrateth, in some
good thought or meditation, rather then in reading or praying in thy book: yea
thou ought chiefly at such time to remember the passion of Christ our
Savior and redeemer, since the holy Mass is a memorial of the same, and both
the priests attire and all the ornaments of the aultare, with the ceremonies
which be used in the saying of Mass, do al represent and signify such
things unto us, as he either did or spoke during the time of his painful
passion: and therefore is it a very godly thing to have the same in memory,
especially at the time of elevation, calling to mind that inspeakable love of
our Savior, which caused him to be Romans 5. a. Heb. 9. d. g. 1. Pet. 3. d.
crucified and lifted up upon the cross for thee: and therefore art thou bound
to adore and thank him with great reverence for this so inestimable a
benefit, and to crave such things of him with faith and feruencie as thou
stand need (...) since look with what love and (...) he then vouchsafed to
be (...) for thee, with the like is he now ready in this most holy Sacrament,
(...) show mercy to such as dispose the^ (...) receive it.

Afterward when the priest (...) if so thou be not that day sacramentally to
do it, yet may thou in spiritual wise receive with him, according as I shall
hereafter tell Inf. ca. 15
thee, when I entreat of receiving the blessed Sacrament.

If there be a sermon that Sunday or holyday, give ear thereto with great zeal
and attentio^, preparing thy self before it begin, by estraunging thy mind
from foreign thoughts, and making thy prayer to God, that it may please him
to minister such speech and spirit unto the precher, wherewith he may both
profit thee and others, and then may thou say with Samuel: 1. Reg. 3. b.
Speak Lord, for thy sernaunt hoareth.

Of such things as the preacher shall deliver in his sermon, thou ought to
commit some such lessons to memory, as shall most concern thee, and that
chiefly moved thee, supposing our Lord him self had delivered the same unto
thee. In like manner shall thou do at Mass, if thou can understand the
words of the Epistle and Gospel, which thou ought to take as though God had
spoken the^ even at that instant to thee alone, committing them to memory, and
thinking of them, at least all that day.

If so be there be many sermons, go to hear him, whom thou deemest to preach
Gods word with most fervent zeal of his glory, and profit of the audience.

These be the chiefest exercises, wherein thou art to spend the forenoone til
diner time, and then behave thy self as on other days. Having then paused a
little while after diner, it were a very fruitful exercise if thou coldest
conveniently use it, to go and instruct others in the christian faith, or
learn thy self, if thou understand it not well, at such Churches where they
have this exercise, whereby every way does ensue great gain: for if thou teach
others that be ignorant, thou Iac. 5. d.
exercisest one of the seven spiritual works of mercy: and if thou learn thy
self of others, thou winnest that which it behooved thee to know, and that is
more precious then be mountains of worldly wealth.

After this exercise thou may go and hear euensong, compline, and some good
lesson, if there be any, governing thy self in althinges, as is abouesaide in
the morning.

This being done, imploie the spare time til night in doing some deed of
mercy, as in Iac. 1. d.
visiting some hospital or prison, comforting and performing some charitable
office to those weak and comfortles creatures, or otherwise thou may
associate thy self with some virtuous companions to re to report or hear some
spiritual discourses, or read some godly book, or find thee occupied in some
such like honest exercise: And if so be thou think it otherwhile expedient
to walk abroad for recreation, let it be in some secret and solitary place,
where other seculer persons come not to disturb thee, and with their profane
conversation withdraw thy mind from God.

It is also a very good exercise upon such Saints days as be kept holy, to
read or meditate upon their lives, and to animate thy self thereby to imitate
them in some one virtue or spiritual work, such as pertain most to thine own
estate. Finally thou ought ever after diner on these days to occupy thy
self in some such exercise, as thy soul may thereby reap some spiritual
profit, and grow more zealous and fervent in the love of God, with new
purposes and inflamed desires to go continuallye forward, and to wax stronger
in his divine service, with greater charity toward thy neighbor, better
knowledge of thy self, and more humility in all thine actions.

Thus be the holy days sanctified conformably to Gods will, and the intent of
holy Church.

Afterward both in thy meditation before supper (having the means to make
it) and in the examination of thy conscience before thou go to bed; thou shall
both in these and each other thing of night, do as is abouesaid in the former
Chapter; noting this by the way, that on these days al is to be done with so
much more leisure, feruoure, and diligence, as the highness of the day shall more
require it.

And here let every man that has children or family learn, that he is as a
guide and governor to such as be under him, and therefore is he bound so much
as in him lies, to draw them to the service of God, causing them to hear
Mass, and to spend the holidaies in godly exercises; and to frequent the
blessed Sacraments of Con fession and receiving, so often as they may, and shall
perceive it for their profits. And in no wise are they to allow, that any one
in their house 1. Cor. 5. d.
have any public crime, or other notorious imperfection; as to be a swearer,
a blasphemer, a gamster, or an offendour in such like trespasses against our
Lord and Savior.

OF THE profit and necessity of prayer.

Cap. 5.
NOW that I have already entreated of the order that such as desire to live
like good Christians ought to keep both on working and holy days; it rests,
that I entreat of another kind of dailye exercise very necessary for each
one to obtain this their desired end withal; chiefly yet for such as mind
to dedicate them selves more sincerely to divine service. And this is the
exercise of holy prayer, not only vocal, which is common to each one, and more
frequented of al; but also mental, which very few wot of, and so consequently
very few do practice; being nevertheless the more excellent kind a great
deal. And therefore is it to be noted, that albeit vocal prayer, to wit, that
which is made with the mouth and voice, saying of sundry offices, psalms, and
devotions, is a very profitable thing, instituted, approved, and practiced in all religions and cathedral Churches; yet is not this, but that which we call
mental the more worthy and excellent kind a great deal, and whereof the holy
doctors do chiefli mean, when they speak of the excellency of prayer, and the
singular fruits which proceed thereof. The which mental kind of prayer does
so far pass and go beyond the vocal, as does the soul or spirit, in
dignity, pass and excel the body. Wherefore, such as mind to exercise them
selves thoroughly in Gods service, and to batten and grow strong in spirit,
ought not to content them selves only with vocal prayer, but (as S. Paul
says) 1. Cot. 14 c
to pray with mouth and mind together, having received at Gods hands both
the one and the other. Howbeit, let us chiefly pray with spirit: for (as our
Savior said Ioh. 4. c 2. Cor. 3. d
to the Samaritane) God is spirit, and those which adore him, must in spirit
and truth adore him. Whereupon we know right well, that the holy Saints of old
time, and the most spiritual men of our days exercise them selves most
chieflye and commonly in this kind of prayer, as having by experience proved,
how much more profit and spiritual comfort the soul receaueth by this mental
prayer the^ by that of vocal. This thing also alone, declares sufficiently, of
what importance they deemed this exercise, and how necessary for all good
Christians, in that they are not afraid to call the same omnipotent: for so
much as being made as it ought to be, we thereby obtain every thing, like as
Christ our redeemer has promised, saying: Mat. 21. b Mar. 11 c. Ioh. 15 b.
Verily I say unto you, that what soever you shall ask by prayer, believe it
shall be given you.

This prayer, whereof we now speak, is a lifting up of our mind to God, which
is rather done with inflamed desires of the heart, then with variety of outward
words, and so are we less pained therein then in vocal prayer: yea, look how
much the longer we continue in this kind of exercise, and so much do we find
it the more sauourie and fruitful for our soul; for that each time a man
frequenteth this holy exercise, he still sucketh out new sap of graces and
spiritual treasure: yea, such as at some times the soul does, as it were,
palpate and feel it most apparently. For like as Moises had his face lightened
and made glittering, through his often conuersing with God, in such wise, as
the children of Israel (according as holy Exo. 34. d Cor. 3. c
scripture tells) could not abide to look upon him; even so the soul
through perseverance in prayer becomes more lightened and illuminated with the
new graces it receaueth: we know moreover, how Christ our redeemer (as the
holy Evangelist S. Luc. 9. d Mat. 17. a. Mar. 9. a. 2. Pet. 1. c.
Luke reports) being in prayer, was transfigured, and his face visiblye
changed into as beautiful a brightness as the Sun, his garments also became
as white as snow; even so is the soul of man in prayer transfigured and
changed into God, and the darkness thereof turned into light, frailty into
force, fear into hope, sadness into solace, with other innumerable commodities
too many to rehearse, which trial testifies to proceed out of this holy
prayer.

Since therefore this is for all so profitable and necessary an exercise; I
shall stretche my self out a little the further, to tell thee, in what manner thou
art to make it. And first shall I declare what such may do as be more
spiritual, and have better leisure, being minded to make this exercise;
afterward will I set down another method for the simple and more busied
sort, such as want capacity and leisure to exercise them whollye in this
office; that by doing yet what they are able to do, they may become partakers
of this so fruitful and necessary an exercise.

THE manner how to pray mentally, and of the preparation we ought to make
before it.

Cap. 6.
THIS prayer which we call mental, being (as I have already said) an elevation
and lifting up of the mind to God; like as the soul may diverse ways eleuate
it self to the knowledge of God; even so be there diverse meditations or
considerations, which are al of them called by this name of prayer. Neuerthel
see, I shall here entreat of those only that be most devout, easy, and
profitable, and that with such brevity, as I may conveniently.

FIRST notwithstanding am I to advertise thee of certain points which must
needs be thought of before thou enter into this kind of exercise.

Whereof take this for the first; that thou force thy self (being one that have
leisure enough) to have one hour in the morning, and an other in the evening
(little more or less) which thou art to allot and destinate to this so
profitable an exercise, like as the holy Church has her certain hours
appointed for public prayers, and divine service; that the time and hours thus
prefixed, may admonish and provoke thee thereto; and a good custom once got
take away the difficulty.

Who so could not for all that have these hours so certain and precise; ought
not to give over and neglect this exercise; yea, rather were to take such
hours and time for it, as his business might best afforde him.

Now when thou come to these determined hours, (being so thou may have
them in manner aforesaid) it behooves thee to prepare thy self (as the wise man
(...) 18. (...)
says) before prayer; to the end thou may have more attention, devotion and
reverence, with other parts requisite for the better performing of this
exercise.

Thy preparation therefore let it be in this manner; when thou come to the
time and place prefixed, endeavor thy self to lay aside al other cares and
cogitations, which in any wise may impeche thee; weighing well the weight and
seriousnes of this office thou art in hand withal. And to thend thou may
have the more attention and reverence, consider, how when thou art in prayer,
thou spekest not to the wind, nor to the walls, but stand most assuredly
before the face of the living God, and that God is there really present at thy
prayers; listening thy words; vewing thy tears, and taking delight in thy
devotions and holy exercise. For albeit he universally assist al his creatures,
yet assisteth he chiefly such as pray to him, according as the sacred
scripture witnesses, saying: Deuteronomy. 4. a
There is no other nation in the world so great, to whom their Gods be so
nighe, as is our Lord God. who assisteth us in all our prayers. Think now
how great attention and reverence is requisite, to speak and staude before
the presence of so divine a Majesty; before that most sovereign and
omnipotent King? before that infinite 1. Cor. 3. 6. 7
beauty and incomprehensible greatness; if so great respect be had in speaking
but to a temporal lord or king. This consideration shall make theo humble thy
self, and bow down to the very dust of the earth, and stand with fear and
trembling before that sacred soueraintie and dreadful Majesty.

With this thought may thou kneel down in reverent wise, making the sign
of the holy Cross upon thee, and then say the general confession, or the
psalm of (...) or a Pater noster, if thou cannest none other, craving of god
briefly for geuenes of thy sins, those especially, wherein thou have offended
that day, as also grace to perform this office better the^ heretofore, and to
spend that final time to his glory, and the profit of thine own soul,
since we are not able without his grace to do any good thing; with this
affect and mind may thou sometimes say the himne Veni Creator spiritus, or
those words of the patriarche Abraham: Genesis 18. d.
(...) ad dominum meum, cum sim puluis et cints. I will speak to my Lord,
though I be but dust and ashes: or other vocal prayers or sentences, wherein
thou happily have most devotion, which shall al of them serve for a preparatiue,
to make thee have better attention, and to shut out and exclude al foreign
cogitations.

Having now in this or like manner got attention, devotion and reverence; fall
then in hand with thy meditation the best ways thou can; the which ought,
in mine opinion, to be most commonly of the passion of Christ, as being a
thing very acceptable to him, and of great devotion and profit for our
souls, since this our Savior his passion is no other thing the^ an epilogue
and recapitulation of his whole life and doctrine, and an abbreuiate and short
word, wherein it pleased him to teach us the sum of al wisdom, and the
perfection of the Gospel. Wherefore, for thy better and more orderly proceeding
in this matter, thou may divide the points of the passion, by the days of
the week, in manner following.

MEDITATIONS of the blessed Passion of our Savior, for every dai in the week,
especially on mornings.

Cap. 7.
THE meditations which I think most profitable for thee to exercise thy self
most in, especially on morninges, are to be of the passion of Christ, which
thou may dispose in this order.

MONDAY.
ON MONDAY morning at thine appointed hour thou shall think of the last
supper of our Lord and Savior; wherein amongst other things thou shall
meditate conformably to the story of the Gospel; call chiefly to mind these
three points; to wit, that most profound humility, wherewith he washed his
Ioh. 13. a.
disciples feet; Mat. 26. c. Marc. 14. c Luc. 22. b.
the institution of the most holy Sacrament; those most sugared speeches he
lastly preached to them.

ABOUT the first; consider that humility enough to astonishe a man, wherewith
that most high and puissant prince (into whose hands his eternal father had
given the rule of al things) Ioh. 13. a.
bowed him self to wash and cleanse his disciples feet, and amongst the rest
those filthy feet of Judas the Traitor, neither yet did his puissance nor
his wisdom, nor his holiness, nor his greatness (each being incomprehensible) let
him to do this so base a work, that we should follow the example that he left
us therein, not only to humble our selves to our betters, but also our equals
and inferiors.

TOUCHING the second point; consider that most fervent love our sweet Redeemer
bare us Ioh. 13. a.
to the end; whereby (he being now to depart from us) devised this ineffable
means how to (...) still with us; for our consolation, profit and refection in
this most holy Sacrament: and like as he could not leave us any gift more
precious then this, so ought we not to seek or desire any other then this,
disposing our selves eftsons to receive this most sacred food, that being
eftsons united to him, we be made partakers of the inestimable fruits, which
are by means thereof imparted to us.

CONCERNING the third, amongst the other words of that long and most lofty
sermon he made to his disciples; take for thee that his new precept of
charity, so highly commended of him; wherein he said, that his disciples
should be discerned; and withal, note the patience thou must have in the
manifold tribulations and persccutions which thou must needs suffer in this
world; wherewith the soul is purged, and gains great and inspeakable meede.

TVESDAY.
THOU may on Tuesday at thy wonted hour meditate three other points, whereof
let the first be of our Lords prayer which he made three times in the garden
of Mat. 26 (...) Mar. 14. d. Luc. 22. d.
Gethsemani. Behold here the anguishe and anxietie that sacred foul of his
felt; which he him self said Mat. 26. d
was sorrowful and heavy to death: that is to say; that the sorrow he felt was
enough to procure his death. And note the remedy we must flee to, when we hap
to be thus afflicted and made heavy; which is, a zeal and perseverance in
prayer; as he used three times, praying so much the longer, as his affliction
increased and grew more grievous through the most vehement apprehension he had
of his future torments now at hand, Luc. 22. d.
which made him sweat great drops of blood. Take therefore this refuge of
prayer in all thy tribulations, as Saint James Jacob. 5. c
does also admonish thee; and seek not after any other faithless and vain
remedies.

THE SECOND point for this dai, is our Saviors imprisonment, whereunto he
willingly offered him self to loose thereby the gives and fetters of our
folies. Here may thou weighe that insuperable patience wherewith he willingly
Isai. 53. b. 1. Pet. 2.
consented to be bound; injured, and stricken; with diverse blows and buffets,
without any move making or resistance; yea, he found fault with Peter (who did
what he could to defend him) saying: Ioh. 18. b.
The (...) that my father has given me, will thou not that I drink it? the
virtue and meaning whereof thou ought to mark well, and lay up in the tresure
of thy heart, therewith to relieve and defend thy self in all thy griefs and
persecutions: for whence soever they come, whether of the world, or the devil,
al is the cup which thine euerlalting father gives thee for the welfare of thy
soul.

THOU MAY also meditate the third point; how the faithfullest master that
ever was, being Mat. 26 f Mar. 14. 6 Luc. 22. f. Ioh. 18. d
abandoned and forsaken of al his disciples; and accompanied only with those
cruel officers; was ledd to the houses of those sacrilegious bishops Annae and
Caiphas; where they begone a fresh to renew their villainous outrages; their
haukinges and spittings, their blows and buffets; their mocks and mowes; with
other their grievous vexations, wherewith he passed over all that night, abiding
every thing with incomparable patience; 1 Pet. 2. (...)
that thou in like case should endeavor thy self to imitate him.

WEDNESDAY.
ON WEDNESDAY meditate the ignominious progres, and wearisome journey our
Savior made on the morrow, being conducted from one Judge to another; and
pause a while in each of their houses, to weigh the words he spoke, and the
injuries that were done him; but chiefly call to mind those words he answered
Pilate withal, asking him if he were a Ioh. 18. (...)
king; which were these: My kingdom is not of this world; which if thou mashe
and ruminate well, will make thee know the blindness of worldly men, who with so
great carke and care desire to reign; and to enjoy the prosperity, pleasures
and pompes of this world, whereof the true and only king confesses in these
words, that his kingdom consists not; that thou should thereby frame thy
self to contemn the world, which he so little regarded, and learn to live
like a Heb. 11. c. 1. Pet. 2. b.
pilgrim and stranger therein, making no account of the pompes, riches, and
credit thereof, which be so vain and transitory.

CONSIDER likewise the scorns done to him in Herodes house, that unjust Judge;
who to make him be Luc. 23. b
mocked, caused him to put on that white fools cote; and thus having fooled
and doulted him, sent him afterward back again to Pilate; in the which
voyage he suffered such pains and spiteful reproaches, as thou well may
think of Learn here to hold thy peace when thou art despised, mocked, or
otherwise curiouslye questioned; thou may see likewise what pains and
travail thou must prepare thy self to take (when need shall require) for his
sake, and thy neigh bours; since he has thus both for thee, and al their
sakes made so many wearisome iourneys.

THVRSDAY.
ON THVRSDAY at thine accustomed time and place thou shall meditate, first,
the cruel scourging of the son of God in Pilates house (who weening thereby
to appease the rage and fury of the Jews) caused him to be Mat. 27. c Mar. 19
b. Ioh. 19. a
whipped and beaten most bitterlye. Behold then how they pull off his clothes,
and stripp him naked, who adorneth the fields with all their beauty; and how
they bind those hands to the pillar, which created erst the heavens, and
being thus naked and fast tied, how the cruel executioners begin then with
might and maine to lay on that virginal flesh; fleaing the tender skin of
the immaculate Lamb, and causing that most sacred blood to issue and spin out
of all the parts of his body in so great quantity, as it wet and covered the
ground he stood upon; yea, in such sort was that most dainty and beautiful
flesh fleane and wounded, as thereby was rightly fulfilled the prophecy of
Isai. 53. b.
Isay, saying: We reputed him as a leper, and as one smitten of God and
humbled. In the midst of al these grieslye griefs, the most innocent Lamb
stood dombe and quiet; with out Isai. 53. b. Mat. 16. f. Act. 8. f.
moving or making any resistance at al; since he was not so straightly fastened to
the pillar with hempen coardes, as with heavenly charity, and the fervent
love he bare us, which knitt his divine heart with much more stronger bands
then were the other.

FOR THE second point, meditate how the tirannous officers being now tired
with beating him; albeit he not so with suffering for us; they the^ unloosed him
from the pillar; and without giving him any other succor or solace, let him
seek his garments thrown here and there about the palace; which having at
length with much ado found out and put upon him, they straitwaies stripp him a
new to put on that old purple coat, wherewith they openly scorn and make
him their laughing stock; and anon Mat. 27. c Ioh. 19. a Mar. 15. b.
crown him most cruelly with a crown of sharp pricking thorns. If thou
view and consider all this with devout attention, it can not be but it must
provoke thee to love that Savior; who for thy welfare only vouchsafed to
endure so fell torments; and make thee also to fear for thy sins, and
utterly to abhor thy lasciuiousnes, thy plesures, pompes, and superfluous
pamperinges of thy flesh, with the which thou haste so highly offended God;
and for the which he has in this wise so painfully satisfied. For if a kings
Isai. 53. b. 1. Pet. 2. d.
son be afraid, when he sees but a contemptible bodslaue beaten in his
presence; how shall not the most abominable boundslaue fear and quake again,
seeing the son of God so cruelly handled for his offenses? if others sins be
paid thus derely for, what payment shall he have that shall be punished for his
own?

LASTLY, thou may meditate this day, how our Savior standing in this wise
crowned, wounded, and mocked; Pilate commanded him to be brought Ioh. 19. a
forth; for the whole assemble of people to look upon, to try, whether he
might this ways mollify those obstinate and stony hearts; and thereupon
said: Ecce homo, Lo here the man. Fail not thou therefore with the eyes of
thy soul to take an advised view of this most rueful spectacle, beholding the
hew and ouglie shape he carried, who is, the brightness of his eternal fathers
glory; and that to restore what thou had lost through thine offenses. Behold
how he stands in the midst of such an assembly freight full of shame and
sorrow, cladd in that fools coat so euilfauoured an attire; with the crown of
thorns cnuironing his sacred head; Mat. 15. b Mat. 27. d. Ioh. 19. a
the reed in his tied hands in lieu of a scepter; that hard coarde about his
tender neck, his divine visage al put up and swelled with the blows he had
received, and abhominably disfigured with blood and filthy spittle; yea, from
to ppe to too no one spot free from wounds; neither was this enough to soften
those flintie hearts, sufficient though to appease his eternal fathers wrath,
who accepting the same for the satisfaction of our most heinous crimes,

FRIDAY.
ON FRIDAY meditate how our Savior accepting the most wro^gful sentence
pronounced against him, Ioh. 19. c
carried the cross him self on his back, whereon he was presently after to be
crucified; for so had those his cruel enemies appointed, that thereby his
torments and reprochful ignominies might eueri ways grow greter. Now sithe^s
our lord and Savior bears thus upon his shoulders al thine imquities enforce
thy self to yield him thanks for this so finguler a benefit; and to help him
(like another Mat. 27. d Mar. 15. b. Luc. 23. d
Cvreneus) to eary his cross; in imitating his example; and see thou keep
those devout women company that followed him; to whom he said; how they were
rather to weep over them selves and their children: Luc. 23. (...)
for if they do these things in the green wood, what shall be do ne in the dry?
the which words thou ought to apply to thy self in being careful not to be
like a piece of doted wood, barren and fruitless in thy life; but to sorce thy
self every day to bring forth fruit of good works: though it be with labor and
pain: for if thou bear him co^pani in this life in his griefs; thou shall
(according as S. Paul promises) be a co^panio^ with him in the other life, in
his ioies and inspeakable consolations.

MEDIT ATE secondly how those unmerciful tormentors, so soon as they were now
come to the mount of Caluari; stripped forthwith in cruel wise that loving Lamb,
tearing his skin, to his excessive grief, being through the green wounds
festred to his garments: and afterward stretche him out upon that hard bed
of the cross, which the world had prepared for him: and so with out stretched
arms, of his abundant charity offered he him self up to his everlasting
father in a true and lively Sacrifice for the sins of the whole world: And
thus his hands and most holy feet being with sharp nails fastened to the
cross, they hoiste him up on high, hanging most pitifullye thereon. Weigh
here diligently, what griping griefs his most rueful virgin mother suffered,
hearing the strokes of the hammer, wherwithal they erucified him, and seeing him
afterward hoisted so up upon that hard cross with such opprobrious shame,
and infinite pains and torments.

Now then behold a while with the eyes of thy soul this thy Savior thus
hanging nailed upon the cross, and gather upon this wholesome tree the fruit
of life it plentifully affords thee: for here is always forthcomming the
supply for all thy needs, the salve for all thy sores, the satisfaction for all
thy sinnesiand herein may thou, as in a glass, plainly perceue al thy
wantes and imperfections, since this is a much more beautiful and bright glass
then those were that God Exo. 38. (...)
commanded to be set in the temples for the priests to look the^ in, at
such time as they were to minister; for that the godly soul which shall
attentively admire it self in this mirror, may soon espy, and easily find
out al her faults and folies whatsoever. That nakedness and extreme poverty we
see upon the roode, utterly overthrows al our pompes and superfluous
decking: That crown of thorns condemns our pride and ambition. The gaul and
vinager which was given him to drink cries out against our gourmandise and
disordinate drinking; those weeping withered eyes accuse the losenes and lack
of modesty in ours; those out stretched arms ready to embrace both friends
and foes, find fault with our rancour and revenge; that most sacred body
wounded al over from topp to toe, argues, and that seuerelye, the
lasciuiousnes and sensual appetite of ours.

Thus see thou, how all the stains and sinful spots of thy whole life do
manifestly appear in this unstained mirror full of al perfection.

THIRDLY, if thou have any spare time lest, thou may meditate the other
egregious and notable things which happed about our Saviors death; but
chiesly those seven speeches he vttred, being upon the cross; For in the first
[ Luc. 23. e.
Father forgive them, for they know not what they doo] is charity toward
our foes highly commended. In the second [ Luc. 23. f
(...) I say unto thee, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise] mercy to
wards sinners in sovereign wise (...) out. In the third [ Ioh. 19. c.
Behold thy son, behold thy mother] a piety and zeal toward parents. In
the fourth [ Ioh. 19. c.
I thirst] a fervent desire of our neighbors welfare. In the fifth [ Mat. 27. d
Mar. 15. c Psalm. 21. a.
My God, my God, why have thou for saken me] an humble prayer in tribulation.
In the sixth [ Ioh. 19. f.
It is accomplished] a perseuering in obedience til thend; In the seventh [
Luc. 23. f.
Father, I commend my spirit into thy handes] a perfect and entier resignation
into the hands of God; which is the periode and somm of al our perfection.

SATURDAY.
ON SATURDAY meditate the Ioh. 19. f.
percing of our Saviors side with that cruel spear, to the incomparable
grief and hart-break of his most heavy mother. And pause here a while to
behold both this, and other his infinite and most precious wounds; since
these are to be thy refuge, thy phisike, and chief consolation. In the old
law we read, how God commannded certain cities to be assigned in the land
of promise, whereto such as had committed any offense might securely make their
refuge: but Deuteronomy. 19. a.
now in the law of grace there is none so secure a refuge as is the harboring
in those most sweet wounds; whereto sinners may flee a great deal more
securely, to eschew the perils and persecutions of this world, then they could
do in old time to their assigned cities.: And herein shall that wound in our
Saviors side chieflye help thee, figured by the window God commanded Noe to
make in the side of the Arc, by the which all the beasts that should escape
the flood were to enter in; eucn so now al such as find them selves
indaungered in the terrible sourges of this tempestuous world, if so they covet
to escape drowning, let them have recours to those most sacred sores and wide
wounds; let them enter at this open window; and therein shall they be most
secure, and find them selves in true peace and tranquillity.

MEDITATE afterward, with how great devotion the Redeemer of the world was
Mat. 27 d Mar. 17. d Luc. 23. (...) Ioh. 19. f
taken down off the roode; and laid in his mourning mothers lap; who with a
right ruful countenance fastened her eyes upon him; Think here, what streams
of tears his beloved disciple S. John, the blessed Magdalene, with the other
godly women plentifully powered out upon him: Behold and ponder well, with what
zeal and feruencie both they and the two worthy men Joseph and Nicodemus
anointed and wrapped him in his winding sheet, and afterward bore and laid him
in the sepulcher which was in the garden: and endeavor thou to cleanse thy heart
through lie from al corruption of sin, from al filthe of fond desires and
thoughts; that so thou may as in a new sepul chre lay up therein this most
precious treasure. And see thou fail not this day to bear the woeful mother
company in her lonolines and sorrow, wailing with her, and taking compass sion
of her griefs, that thou afterwar des deserve to participate of the joys in
the resurrection.

SUNDAY.
ON SUNDAY meditate the joys of our Saviors joyful resurrection; wherein
consider these three points. First how our Redeemer having now perfected the
work of our redemption, and overcome our sinful death with his most sacred
Romans 5. a. Heb. 9. d. 1. Pet. 3. d.
death; his blessed soul descended into Psalm. 15. b (...) 9. c. Col 2 c
Limbo to visit and enfraunchise those holy fathers; who so many a year had
with longing desire looked for him; with when he staide (to their inestimable
comfort) til the hour of his resurrection, which was on Sundaye morning, at
what time his most happy soul reentring and reuniting it self to his blessed
bo die he became most beautiful, bright, glittering, impassible and immortal;
albeit berore he were disfigured with the blows, wounds, and torments of his
passion: and being thus risen up and by his own power issued out of his closed
sepulchte, the first thing be did afterward (as we may with godly zeal
believe) was that he visited his most Niceph. Cap. 32. h. 1. hist. Eccles.
blessed mother. Think then now what that blessed virgin felt, seeing her
entierly beloved son stand before her alive sound and whole, so glorious and
triumphant as he then was, whose death had so (...) perced her soul with most
vehement sorrows. What inestimable joy felt she in beholding his sweet and
amiable countenance; the beautiful brightness of the wounds he had before
received; those gracious and lovely eyes wherewith he looked upon and in hearing
those sugared and sweet words, wherewith he greeted her) How great was the joy
and comfort of her soul, when she vnbethought her of the exceeding glory his
former injuries and infamies were turned to; what surpassing beauty the
deformity of his wounds was changed to; and finally how great a calm and
happy quietness all the former stormy tempests were now converted to Learn
thou hereby not to faint, or to be discouraged when thou art persecuted,
tempted, and afflicted; but with faith to expect our good Lord his hour, who
after a tempest sends fair wether; after troubles quietness; and uses
according to the proportion Psat. 93. d
of tribulations to visit afterward with roy and consolations.

THE SECOND point thou shall meditate upon this day, is the singular comfort
those devout Mary's received, when they saw their beloved master (whom even
now they sought to anoint as dead) thus glorious and revived again: And
consider especially the tender heart of that most virtuous woman Mary
Magdalene; being wholly mested and dissolved into tears through the zealous
love she bare our Savior; and thereby would not depart, but stood still at the
sepulcher, til such time as she merited to see and find her Lord, and to
receive comfort of him, whom she so greatly longed for. Wherein thou must note
and mark well, how (next to his holy mother) our Lord appeared first Mar. 16. b.
Ioh. 20. d.
to her that loved him most; that perseuered most; and that sought him most;
to the end thou know and learn thereby; that then the same Lord will appear and
comfort thee; when with like tears, love, and diligence, as she did; thou
shall inquire, seek, and sorrow after him.

THOU may in like manner meditate the third point (having spare time) how
this most desired master appeared to his disciples, who after his resurrection
he eftsons visited, comforted and confirmed in their faith; but chiefly ponder
the sweet speeches he vled to those he went in company with to Emaus Mar. 16.
c. Luc. 24. h.
who with great grief were talking of his passion, whom he did afterward
exceedingly comfort and inflame; and showed himself unto the in the breking of
the bread. Whereby thou may gather, that if thy conversation and talk be
such as (...) was (to wit of Christ's passion) thou shall not lack his
presence and company; and shall be illuminated to better know and love him,
and this chiefly in the breaking that is in the sacred Sacrament of the altar.

THOU MAY likewise at some other time meditate on this day his holy and
miraculous ascension, how forty days being now past over (...) his
resurrection (in which time he appeared estsones his disciples, rejoicing,
comforting and teaching the^ what they ought to do; the forty day he lastly ^
Luc. 24. c. Ioh. 20. c
appeared to them being at table, and found fault with their incredulity; and
afterward having sufficiently informed them how they ought to preach; he and
they with his mother went al together to the mount Oliuet, whence that most
worthy and glorious triumpher having now Ioh. 15. d Mar. 16. d. Luc. 24. g.
blessed and bid them al farewell, mounted up in all their sightes to heaven;
carrying with him the rich spoils of holy Saints, who with the troops of
Angels gave lauds and praises to him, singing with inspeakeable joy and
exultation; and thus was he in this so solemn a triumph and rejoicing
received into heaven, where he sits on the right hand of his almighty
father.

Consider here, how it pleased our sweet Lord to ascend into heaven in the
presence of those that truly Ioued him, to the end they should, both with
their eyes and spirit follow him; and desire to ascend with him; knowing
right well in what a solitarines they were after to remain for lack of his
presence; which following and longing after him avails much for the obteining
his divine grace (...) Reg. 2. b
Heliseus desired his master Helias (as holy Scripture tells) to give him his
spirit, after he were departed from him; to whom Helias made this answer: if
thou see me when I shall be taken away from thee, it shall be done that thou
requirest me, otherwise not; eue^ so now they shall have Christ's spirit with
them, that shall see and associate him with their spirit, and such whom the
love they bear to Christ shall make feel his absence; and continually to
desire and sighe in heart for his divine presence.

MEDITATE also the great joy wherewith (as S. Luc. 24. g
Luke the'uangelist tells) they returned back again to Jerusalem; receiving
greater contentation through the joy which he was gone to, whom they so derely
loved; then sorrow through the solitarines wherewith they found them selves
environed; for such is the nature of true love, as it contenteth it self
much better with the weldoing of those it loves, then with her own private
and peculier profit. And thus ought thou to (...) what touches the honor
and service of Christ before thine own particular commodity.

These be the meditations which thou may make on mornings each day in the
week, wherein for the better perfourming of the same, and with more savor in
thy soul, it were good that thou perfectly knew the history, or read it in
the last Chapters of the (...) lists; it shall also behooue thee to (...) in ure
and practice the precepts that follow in the next chapter; and when thou (...)
thus exercised in these meditations one hour or a half, little more or less,
give God thanks with all thine heart in the best manner thou can for all the
things it has pleased him to do and suffer by thee; and crave withal, that
he will vouchsafe to make thee partaker of the fruits of his passion and
redemption; as also to impart his other graces to thee, which thou shall find
thy self to stand most need of; pray likewise for his holy Church, and such
as thou art bound to remember, or that have commended them selves to thy
devotions, for the souls also that are in purgatory, and for all such other
necessities as occasions may most require; and thus may thou herewith finish
this thineexercise.

CERTAIN particular aduertisementes touching the (...) contained in (...)
former Chapter.

Cap. 8.
TO THEND thou may with more fruit and spiritual advancement make the
meditatios mentioned in the former Chapter, it behooves thee to observe therein
these few aduiies following.

FIRST, concerning those points of the passion, whereon thou art to meditate;
thou must understand, that they are in such wise to be meditated, as though
they happed even in that instant before thin eyes, in the self same place
where thou art; or within thy soul; or otherwise imagining thou were in the
very places where such things (...) if happily this ways thou feel better
devotion.

SECONDLY, thou must force thy self to draw some doctrine and spiritual fruit
out of the things thou meditatest; as for example, to note in every over and
above that is already said; these four points; what he is that Four notable
points to be considsred.
suffered; what thing he suffered; in what manner; and for when he suffered.

OVT OF the first thou may gather an immeasurable love thou owe 1 Who it
is that suffered.
to so loving a Lord; who being God almighty, and of infinite Majesty; has
vouchsafed to suffer so great torments and injuries for thee so vile and
abominable a bodslaue; since if another man were he never so abject had
suffered the like or much less for thee thou would love him with all thy
heart; and pain thy self to be grateful toward him.

OVT OF the second point thou may pick forth matter of great 2 What thing
he suffered.
compassion; weighing thy Savior thus freight with excessive griefs; alone;
persecuted; blasphemed on every side; and from top to toe al wholly wounded;
that but if thou saw a brute beast suffer the like; thy heart would melt
again with pity and compassion.

OVT OF the third point thou maieh 3 In what manner he suffered.
gather marvelous examples to imitate him in. Learn first to be humble and
lowly, pondering that bottomless humility, wherewith he humbled him self,
even unto death. Learn to be patient, considering that (...) patience wherewith
he endured such torments and villainous spites; without making any resistance
or lamentation. Learn to love poverty; seeing him so extreme poor; hanging
naked upon the Cross; and buried afterward in another man's sepulcher: as
also al his life time, haning nothing of his own; nor where to rest his Mat.
8. b
head. Learn to love thine enemies; seeing with how great charity he prayed
for those that crucified him. Learn to be constant and perseuerant in such
good works as thou take in hand; and not to give them over for any toiles or
cross encounters; considering the firm constancy of Christ, wherewith (...)
so many toiles, contradictions, and torments, he perseuered until death; and
therewith finished the work of our redemption, Finally, out of this point, if
thou can consider it at leisure, thou may learn innumerable virtues; and
most worthy examples; which shine forth in every passage of his passion.

OVT OF the sourth thou majest (...) For who^ be suffered.
gather a great and general charity toward al men, and to despise none, seem
he never so vile and contemptible; considering that our Lord has spilt his
most precious blood for him, and for all men in the world; neither is there any
so wicked and lewd a wretch, for whom alone (if need, had been) he would not
have suffered all the torments he suffered; Learn thou therefore, seeing this
his infinite charity toward al men; to love al men, and to make account of
al men; Learn besides to detest sin above al things, remembering thee how
that was the only occasion of our Lords most cruel death and passion.

THIRDLY thou must understand, concerning the foresaid meditations, that if at
any time it so happed, that in such points as be set down to upon, thou
happily foundest in the first or second of them good devotion; the in may
thou stay so long as thy devotion shall last; not (...) to pass over to the
other points remaining behind, in that meditation; for if thou chance to
leave some untouched that time, thou may another day supplye this want; In
like manner mean I, if thorough any urgent affairs thou should some-time
omit thine exercise or appointed hour, that then thou force thy self to
supplye that want with a new hour; and if not on the same, yet on some other
day.

FOURTHLY thou must procure (...) to be (...)
by all means possible to cherishe and interteine thy devotion and godly
purposes, with other good gifts whatsoever thou might happily have received in
the time of prayer. And this shall thou do by indeuouring thee to go as
retired and gathered in the day time as thou may; calling eftsons to mind
what thou erst did meditate and receive; especially when thou hear the
clock strike; or other wise as thou may.

Now if on the other side it so chanced A document worthy great observation
thou were disquieted with diverse foreign thoughts (as it eftsons happeth)
and thereby should remain without any devotion or taste in thy prayer; yet
ought thou not for all this to give over thine exercise, until thy time be
fully finished; since many times, yea most commonly it falls so out, that
one finds him self cold, and without taste or tallage in the beginning; and
afterward thorough perseverance in his prayer gathers heat and finds
good devotion Yea, when it so chanced, as thou should not find any taste
or savor at al in the whole time of prayer; neither yet ought this to dismaie
or make the quaise; but rather believe assuredly, that such is our Lord his
good pleasure at that time, thereby to try and exercise thy patience, thy
loialtie, and perseverance; like as he dealt with the woman of Mat. 15. (...)
Cananea, whom albeit he seemed at the first to make none account of, yet did
he afterward most abundantly comfort her, honor her, and grant her her
desire: Well therefore may thou assure thy self, that look how much more
patiently thou bear this drouth and barrennes of thy soul; so much more
fruits has thy sonle accumulated and heaped up. Think moreover, that albeit
thou have not found that devotion and attention thou wishest for; yet has our
Lord showed him self favorable and friendly to thee in suffering (...) to
remain so long time in his presence; and so no doubt but the time spent in
this manner is much more fruitfully employed, then in such other works as may
seem far better to thee; and if thou find no deuotid and at one time; well
may thou hope in Gods mercy that another timo it shall please him to comfort
theo so plentifully, that thy former wantes shall thereby be more then
sufficientlye rewarded. And believe this assuredly, that how much the more thou
shall persevere in this exercise; so much the more profit and pleasure shall
thou find thereby; besides other marvelous gifts which are not know en nor
perceived at the first.

Nevertheless for that by reason of this desire (being common and natural to
each one to covet a taste and devotion in their prayers;) diverse are wont in
seeking by force and violence, to wrest it out, to do therein greatly amiss;
as by that means both oppressing their understanding; and dulling their affect
and will;

FIFTHLY, it is meet to advertise thee herein; that in the passages of the
passion, or any other holy mysteries thou shall meditate upon; thou content
thee with a simple and quiet speculation of such points as thou think of,
and with that affection and taste God shall vouchsafe to bestow upon thee,
without forcing thine understanding Violence in meditation great ly hurtful.
or imagination to speculate and imagine things more plainly; ne yet thy will
to feel and taste the same, by wringing out affections and tears with
violence: for these immoderate excesses both of the one and the other side, are
wont rather to hinder then help devotion, hurting the head with that
inordenate toil; and when this violence of the part affectiue is once past;
the will then does remain more cold and without taste, make thy meditation
therefore with quietness and peace; waiting with patient silence what our Lord
shall work in thee; and holding thy self contented therewith, as is aforesai de.

FIFTHLY, (to advertise thee in euetye thing) know this by the way, that if
thou find pain and disquietnes in kneeling (for so must thou needs dispose
thy self in the beginning) then may thou rise up, and stand, sit, or
walk; as thou think most meet for obteining that quietness and rest thou
desire in thy soul.

MEDITATIONS to be made on eueninges, or a new week.

Cap. 9.
TO THE end that such as be better instructed, and have more opportunity and
leisure to give themselves to prayer, may have more large scope and ample
matter to exercise them selves in, I have thought good to set down other
meditations here, which may be used on euenings; meaning to refresh and feed
thy soul each day morning and evening; as thy body each day does not want
those two repasts: As for others which are busied, and cannot intend to take
this refection and exercise each day so often; these may one week use one part
of these meditations; and another week the other. Nevertheless, such as I
now entreat of be most fit for nouices and young beginners; wherein they
ought certain weeks to exercise the^ selves before they proceed further to
the meditations of the passion of our Lord and Savior: for that true
contrition of our sins; knowledge of our selves; and the fear and reverence
toward God (which are gathered out of these meditations) help greatly for
proceeding afterward with more profit and avail to the meditations of the
passion.

Having therefore certain hours lotted to these present meditations, whether
it be at morning or at evening; and observing the foresaid aduertisementes,
such as shall serve most fitly for this purpose; the^ may thou meditate
according to the method following.

MONDAY. 2.
ON MONDAY let thy meditation The sins of our former life.
be of all the sins thou have committed during thy whole life time; and this
shall thou do in manner following. Standing in the place of meditation with
great lowlines and shame, thine eyes fixed on earth; and head bowed down to
ground-ward; like as a thief should stand before a Judge that had taken him
with the manner: thus shall thou begin to weighe with bitterness of thy soul,
al thy years and time misspent, wherein thou haste committed so many and (...)
crimes, which thou may reduce to memory, by running over the ten
commandments, the deadlye sins; the senses, powers and all the parts of
the body; by every one whereof thou may find thee guilty of innumerable
offenses committed against that God; who^ thou so greatly ought to have
dreaded and reverenced for his majesty and infinite power; and so singulerly
have loved for the great and continual benefits he has bestowed upon thee.

SECONDLY think how greatly this Lord thy God detesteth sin; seeing he has
so rigorously punished it from the beginning of the world; with the Cen 7. b
waters of that universal flood; with Cen. 19. e
fire from heaven, wherewith he punished that horrible vice of those five
Cities, besides other his dreadful scourges wherewith he has eftsons chastised
the world for the sin of man; and lastly for our sins vouchsafed
himself to dye; to die, that by this means they might be punished
sufficiently.

THIRDLY consider, how with every mortal sin, thou haste done as much as in
thee lay to Heb. 6. a.
crucifye him again. Out of these considerations thou may easily gather the
enormitie of thine offenses; how into lerable thy ingratitude has been, and
how great torments thou have deserved, and yet deseruest to suffer. Our first
father Genesis 3. a.
Adam did eat but of one only tree contrary to Gods commandment; and well
do we wot how severely his sin has been punished both in him Romans 5. c.
and us; what punishment then deserves he that has transgressed so many
commandments, and that so many times?

Hereby may thou know the infinite clemency of God toward thee; seeing he
might so many times, so justly have Romans 2. a.
thrown thee down headlong into hell; as he has done others, and yet has not
done so to thee, but forborne thee, and preserved thee from sundry and manifold
dangers; especially from the douils: (whose will thou fulfilledst in sinning)
and both would and could have hailed thee to hell, had not his mighty hand
defended thee: Finally he has given thee many good inspirations, and invited
thee to penance; besides many mo great benefits bestowed on thee; which no
father would have done to a most tenderly beloved son.

Being then stirred up with such like considerations, and moved with
compunction; reputing thy self a most abominable caytiff; prostrate thy
self (filled with shame and confusion) at our Savior his feet, as did that
public sinner the blessed Luc. 7. (...) 12. a Mar. 14. (...) Mat. 26. (...)
Magdalene; and with great sorrow and humblenes pray him to pardon thee those
infinite sins and abominations thou haste committed; purposing fully for the
time past to do penanceand to lead a new life in time to come.

And here note that when thou vnbethinkest thee of thy former sins, it shall
not be needeful ne convenient to stand upon such particularities as might
procure alteration in thy flesh, (which often happeth in carnal sins) but
generally to consider, how often thou have committed these carnalities and
beastlines through thy whole life; being sorrowful for them in general, without
staying to discourse any particular manner or circumsta^ce in such crimes; for
thereby do commonly ensue very dangerous alterations.

TVESDAY. 2
ON TVESDAY meditate thy present faults, and such wicked inclinations Our
daily imprfections.
as thou now find in thee; which daily cause thee to commit diverse
disorders; and weigh withal the manifold miseries this present life is subject
to, that so, what by the former meditation, knowing thy life past fraught full
of filth and sin, and seeing the sundry stains thou art now presently defiled
with; thereby thou may humble thy self, and force thee to amend such faults
as thou find in thee; and withal begin to hate this life so full of
calamities and dangers; wherein for the better and more orderly proceeding,
consider these three points following.

EXAMINE first the sundry imperfections which thou presently fin dest in thee;
how first thou lackest a pure and right intent in most of thine actions;
doing them for the world, or for some worldly interest; where in deed thou
ought to do them purely for God. Thou may find likewise thine
inclinations to be disordred, being wholly bent to the vain and transitory
things of this world; The like disorder shall thou perceive and find in all
thy senses, thoughts, words, and works; since there is no true virtue to be
sound in thee; which, by the examination thereof, thou shall well perceive; as
first, for charity, which thou wa^test; as also humility, patience,
chastity, te^perance, and so through all the rest; about the which thou may
discuss particulerly, how often thou use to offend in each one, falling
into such vices as be opposite and contrary to the said virtues.

SECONDLY consider how smallye thou haste profited since it pleased God to
help thee with his grace, and give thee these good motions, and purposes to
amend thy life; and how many times thou haste left such works undone, as thou
purposest to do; and how often thou haste fallen in relapse of thy former
folyes; which thou determinest in any wise to abstein from. Think withal, how
much better others have behaved themselves in this time; and profited more in
virtue then thou haste done; and here ought thou to purpose firmly to
imitate them; and to seek new remedies and means of ame^dment, humbly
craving grace of God to execute the same.

THIRDLY, weigh what small affection thou ought to bear toward this wicked
world, and present life; fraught full of such (...) and grievous miseries, and
wherein no true satietie or contentation is to be found: yea (that which is
worst of al) wherein are so many rocks to reele against, and so infinite
occasions to offend that sovereign Lord, who so woorthely deserves to be
honored, loved, and most dutifully obeyed.

WEDNESDAY.
ON WEDNESDAY thy meditation shal-be of death; a thing greatly Death.
profitable to eschew sin; And this must thou meditate even as though that
hour were now arrived. Imagining therefore it is so, and how thou art now
come to that latter time of so great grief and frighting fear, discourse upon
these articles following.

FIRST, how in that hour there is a separation and deuorce to be made betwixt
the soul and body; by means whereof the soul shall not only be separate from
the body; but also from al other things it loved in this life; and how thou
must needs leave here behind thee, wife, riches, kinsfolks; and al thy other
dear friends, Job. 1. d 2. Tim. 6. a. Eccle. 5. (...)
with each other thing be it never so well beloved; neither shall thou carye any
thing away with thee, but only the good and evil works thou have wrought in
this world.

CONSIDER secondly what we suffer in this sundring of our souls and bodies;
the agonies, temptations, and sightes; the vision of devils, which in terrible
and dreadful show appear unto us; the perils that pinch the soul on every side;
the anxietie it receaueth, imagining what shall become both of it self, and of
the withered and consumed body.

THIRDLY think, how thy soul thus parting from the body with ineffable
grief; the body shall then be buried, and yield food to worms; neither shall
any one jot of all the riches rest with it, but only that poor piece of
winding-sheete it shal-be wrapped in; and that small circuit of earth wherein it
is interred: Now the soul, it shal-be presented before Christ the dreadful
Judge, to who^ it shall yield a most strict and narrow reckning of al her life;
and shall receue according to her deserts an everlasting doom. Weigh well here,
what the soul shall feel whiles it waits for this doom, not woting on which
side it shal-be sent.

Out of these considerations (...) Documents
these right profitable lessons be picked; to wit, how small trust and
confidence we ought to have in this life, wherein death may every day and
hour assail us; as also to riches, kinsfolks, and friends, who can-not any
ways help us at that time, yea, al abandon and forsake us; on the other fide,
what contentation we should then receue by having lived well, and gained
certain faithful friends, who might in that hour help and greatly succor
us. See therefore thou endeavor thy self now to do that which thou would
in that hour have done; and force thee to please those true friends in deed;
which are, Jesus Christ; his holy virgin mother; the Saints and blessed
Angels; that they may succoure thee in that hour of so apparent peril.

THVRSDAY.
ON THVRSDAY thy meditation shal-be of the last day of judgment, Doomsday.
which we according to our belief do certainly look for; and shall come
without fail; yea, perhaps in thy days; concerning the which thou shall
meditate these three points.

FIRST how terrible and dreadful a day that shal-be; as-wel by reason of the
signs and wonders that shall go before it; in the Sun, the Sea, and other
creatures, with the ruin and overthrow of the whole world; as also through
that most dreadful sound of the terrible trompet, whereby al shall in one moment
be Mat. 13. f Sap. 3. b Dan. 12. a.
raised up again.

SECONDLY consider the brightness and beauty which the elect shall rise in, and
the vgglines and 2. Cor. 5. b. 10. 14. b
grieslye grimnes of the reprobate; besides, the most strait account, which
they shall yceld to Christ of all the words, works and thoughts of their whole
life; and what utter shame and confusion the wicked shall suffer before all the
angels and millions of men.

THIRDLY think how highlye the good shal-be favored and honored, before all that universal Assembly; and what the reprobate shall feel, seeing Christ in
such power and majesty; Mat. 24 c
who with an ireful countenance shall look upon them; and with that final
doom, throw them down to everlasting torments.

Out of these points debated at Docume^ts.
leisure, and in more particularitie, thou may gleane this profit; how, (to
avoid the shame and confusion of that day, when every one their sins shal-be
discovered) there is no better a remedy, then to unfold the^ now to thy
ghostly father, by confession; and to do penance for the same. Weigh withal,
that if men do here travail so much to attain some temporal degree and
riches; and so greatly force themselves to fly the dangers and disgraces of
this life; what ought thou to do to be made partaker of that souerain
dignity and inspeakable riches, which the elect shall enjoy eternally? and what
pains ought thou to refuse for the avoiding that supreme contempt and
incomparable torments wherein the damned shall sorrow everlastingly?

FRIDAY. 2.
ON FRIDAY let thy meditation be The (...) of hell.
of the pains of hell; that by this, as well as by the former meditations; both
the fear of God, and detestatio^ of sin may increase in thy soul: For the
meditating whereof it shal-be convenient thou frame in thine imagination some
horrible and hideous place, as might be an infernal pit, or dongeon without
any bottom, dark and full of fire; whereinto the damned souls shal-be thrown
head long down. And that thou may meditate this the better, consider these
points following.

FIRST, the terrible torments Apoc. 16.
which the wicked shall suffer in that place of horroure amongst all the devils,
which surpass al other pains and torments that in this world may be possibly
imagined; and after the resurrection, shall they both in body and soul, in all
their powers, parts and senses, suffer more excessive pains then the tongue
of man may any ways express; for like as the wicked have offended God with all their parts, powers, and senses; and have employed them al as instruments
to serve sin with; even so shall Gods divine justice ordeine, that in all the
self same parts, powers, and senses they suffer sorrow and torment; that so
may that which is written be fulfilled. How much he glorified himself, and
was in delicacies: g^ue him so much torments and lamentation.

Apoc. 18 b
SECONDLY think how besides these sensible torments they are to suffer; that
which shall most of al afflict them, and cause an excessive sorrow, is, a
despair they shall have, woting well that in all eternity they shall never see
God; and this is called the (...) of damage; and as they shall (...) call to mind
the infinite good they lost through their frantike folly, and know there is no
remedy now to recover it; this shall plunge them into a pit of inspeakable
torments, making them rave and rage, against God, themselves, and cuerye
other creature ever lastingly.

THIRDLY consider the eternity of these pains, which if a man could
profoundly ponder, there is no one thing that appaleth or frighteth more; since
the wicked shall continue in those torments more years then there be drops of
water in the Sea, or seed of sand on earth, or any other number that may be
possiblye imagined; yea, when they have suffered all the millions of years that
may be added thereto; then shall they begin a-newe to suffer, as though nothing
had been past; and finally these their torments shall never, never, have any
one moment of release, or minute of A notable remembrance.
relaxatio^. Hence may thou gather this fruitful note, that if so thou were
now in these torments, which eftsons through thy sins thou have deserved;
what would thou do to come out of them? Think, how any other pain
whatsoever, would seem pleasant to thee; and what penance soever were
enjoined thee, thou would right willingly perform it. Do therefore somewhat
now, of that thou would then do to escape these so great torments and
perpetual calamities.

SATURDAY. 2
ON SATURDAY thy meditation The joys of heaven.
shal-be of the happiness which the elect enjoy in celestial glory; whereupon
consider these (...) points.

FIRST the greatness, beauty, and riches of that renowned regio^, where God does
show him-self in glorious majesty to his angels, and holy Saints; to the
pleasantnes and beauty whereof, not all the beautiful and pleasant things that
we either see or can here imagine, be in any wise to be compared.

SECONDLY ponder what a comfort and sweet delight it shal-be, to be in that
blessed society of so many Angels, Saints, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors,
Virgins, al of them so bright and beautiful; what shall it be to see the sacred
humanity of Christ, and of his blessed mother; how shall one be ravished with
the hearing of the sweet harmony and melodious music that shal-be there; and
to enjoy so sweet a conversation everlastingly.

THIRDLY consider how yet besides these, there shal-be another glory much
more excellent, and surpassing al humane capacity; which shal-be, to see God
face to face, wherein consists our essential beatitude; Glory essen tial and
ac cidental.
for that al other things, whatsoever may be imagined, be but accidental
glory; which being so exceeding great and incomparable, what shall the^ the
essential be? Finally think how there shal-be the full accomplishment and heap
of al goodness, without intermedling of any evil; as in hell shall al evil be
without mixture of any goodness. The prophet Ier 24. a.
Jeremy says how on a time he saw at the (...) ple gates two paniers of
figs, the one of good figs, and singular good; the other so noughtie, that they
could not be eaten, so, noughtie were they. These two paniers do figure these
two rewards so far differing a-sunder, which God shall give to the (...) and
to the reprobate. The reward that is prepared for the elect shal-be so great,
that (as the Apostle says) neither eye has seen, nor 1 Cor. 2. c Isai. 64. a
are has heard, (...) man's heart and under standing can imagine and the
punishment of the reprobate shal-be so excesiue, that no tongue can possibly
express it.

Think now (good brother) how A serious advertisement.
that one of these two lottes must needs light upon thee; for eyter shall thou
possess that everlasting felicity, which does embrace and contain in it al
good things al riches, al satietie, and more then may be either imagined or
desired; or else shall thou become thral to that bottomless pit of al misery,
griefs, and inspeakable torments; and both the one and the other shall endure
euerlastinglye. Consider therefore what thou ought to do and suffer to
gain so incomparable a bliss; or to eschew so extreme a misery; if men use
here to toil so greatly for the getting of some temporal pleasure or
promotion, or for the avoiding of some small sorrow and shame, yea be it for
never so small a time.

SUNDAY. 2.
ON. SUNDAY thy meditation shall The benefits of God
be of the benefits that God has most bountifully bestowed upon thee, to
thend the knowledge thereof give thee occasion to yield him thanks, and to be
more grateful toward him; for the better doing whereof, consider these three
points following.

FIRST the general benefits thou General benefits. The benefit of Creation.
have receued; which are these: The be nefite of creation, how God has created
thee of nothing, and given thee the essence and being thou have, far passing
that of other creatures; Consider the dignity of thy soul framed to his own
likeness and similitude, and the body thou have received, co^pact with such
variety and comlines of members, and senses; whereby is well declared the
greatness, power, and wisdom of the maker. And this benefit may thou well wot
how great it is; by that thou would esteem thy self so much beholden to
one that could but restore or heal one of thine eyes, or any other member
which The benefit of preservation.
thou lackedst. The benefit of preservation; how every moment he preserves
and keeps thee; which if he did not, thou should forthwith return to that
nothing which thou were first made of: and this is as much as though he
created thee anewe; besides, for thy preservation, he has made all the other
creatures that be in the universal world: whereof some be to nourishe thee,
some to clad thee; other to yield honest delight and recreation to al thy
senses; other to cure thy griefs and sickness; and finally all the creatures
thou see under the cope of heaven, yea and heaven it self too, shall thou
find, how God has created for some use and service of thine: weigh now well
if thou would think thy self so greatly bound to one that had bestowed some
ieweh or other gracious gift upon thee; how much more art thou to repute thee
bound and indebted to him that has heaped so many gifts together upon thee,
and that without any mite of thine own meriting Think afterward of the
benefit of redemption, which contains in it all the things thy sweet
Savior did and suffered for thy raun some paying. First, how he descended
from heaven The benefit of redemption.
to earth for thee; and being borne, was for thee laid in a maunger: for thee
began he the eight day after his birth to shed his precious blood; for thee did
he al his life long endure so innumerable annoiances, pains, and persecutions;
in going, sweating, preching, fasting, watching, praying; and finally for thee
did he suffer the most grievous and bitter torments, anguishes, and
ignominious reproaches that may be possibly rehearsed; being obedient even until
the death Phil. 2. a
of the cross. If thou ponder these things more particulerlye and by
peece-meale, they will yield matter enough to inflame thy heart with zeal, be it
never so frosen; and provoke thee to love him, who has so deerly loved thee;
and with so great a price redeemed thee.

SECONDLY call to mind the particular Particular benefits.
benefits thou haste (...) The benefit of vocation.
chieflye that of thy vocation: how God through his great mercy has called
thee to his holy faith and baptism, wherein he bestowed his grace and gifts
upon thee, whereof an infinite number of other nations never tasted; think
how many times thou have lost this grace through thy sins, and yet God has
forborne and stayed for thy penance; yea, provoked thee thereto by many good
inspirations, and after has receued thee again, and forgeuen thee. Consider
also the remedies he has left thee to recover, keep, and increase this grace
and spiritual life withal; which are the holy Sacraments, for the which he
deserves to be highly thanked, as having vouchsafed to leave us so great a
treasure; but chiefly for that The benefit of Sacraments.
Sacrament of Sacraments, wherein he him self is contained; and when thou will, does impart himself unto thee for thy food and sustenaunce; which is
a benefit and grace incomparable.

Think also, how many other particular benefits he has done, and does daily
bestow upon thee, giving thee more temporal riches, more honor, more
ability, more prowes, more prosperity, then to others; recuring thine
infirmities, delivering thee from many perils, releeuing thy necessities; with
other innumerable and hidden benefits, that thou thy self art ignorant of.

THIRDLY consider, that if thou had received the foresaid benefits, or
any one of them of what man soever, how intierly thou would have loved and
thanked him; and how thou would willingly have drudged to do him any kind
of service; and thought no pains great to have showed thee grateful toward
him; how much more reason is it then thou show thy self such toward thy
heavenly Lord and God; to whom for his great goodness thou art more deeply
indebted; and he more worthy to be beloved and ferued: Do then that Psalm. 102.
David says: Psalm. 102.
Let thy soul bless the Lord, and never forget his so manifold benefits. For
if he see thee thankeful, having his benefits always in mind, and yielding
laud and praises to the geuer; thou shalt every day merit to receive more
relief, and new bounties of his most bountiful hand.

These be the meditations which thou may make on eueninges, or in an-other
week; observing always in the beginning and ending of each one, what has
been foretold thee in the former Chapter.

OTHER meditations, wherein the better learned may at other times exercise
themselves: certain also for the simpler sort, wherein the mistortes of the
Rosarie be entreated of.

Cap. 10.
FOR SO MVCH as this exercise of prayer is of so great profit; and that
wherewith the spiritual life is as it were norished and sustained: I have
thought good thus amply to entreat thereof: and will add somewhat more in this
chapter to that which has been said already; desiring to satisfy both the
learned and the ignorant; that is to say, both those that be more capable of
this exercise, and such as have not so great capacity; for the first sort
whereof, the former meditations be most fit and fruitful Nevertheless, to the
end they may have more ample matter to meditate upon; some weeks they may
intermedle The life of Christ divided into 3. parts.
the meditations of the life of Christ, which is divided into three parts or
periods.

1. THE FIRST is of the incarnation of the son of God until his baptism;
wherein are contained, his incarnation, nativity, circumcision, adoration of
the three wise men; presentation in the temple; flight into Egypt; retourning
to Nazareth; and of the finding of our Savior amidst the Doctors in the
temple, when the blessed virgin had lost him. Of all the with mysteries S. Luke
and S. Matthew write in the first Chapters of their Gospels. A man may meditate
likewise, what he did from twelve years upward until his baptism, according
to every one their godly devotion, for that we find nothing written thereof
in the holy Gospel.

2. THE SECOND part of Christ his life begins at his baptism, and
continues until his sacred Passion; wherein are comprehended his baptism,
fasting, temptation in the wilderness; his preachings, and many miracles he
wrought until his last supper; whereof the history of each one may be gathered
out of the holy Gospels.

3. THE THIRD part comprehends his last supper, his passion, resurrection,
and ascension, whereof I have already entreated in the seventh chapter.

These meditations of the life and miracles of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, may be fitly distributed and meditated in one or two weeks, by such
as have leisure and learning to gather the storye out of the holy Gospel;
observing pardie in all their meditatio^s, the aduises and instructions
abouesaid; especially, of picking fruit full notes and doctrine for their souls,
out of these holy mysteries; and of governing themselves in the beginning and
ending of each one, as is aforesaid.

And for so much as the devotion The devotion of the Rosarye a very fruitful
exercise.
of the Rosarie is very laudable and grateful to our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, and to the blessed virgin his mother; as has been sufficientlye
proved by the testimony of many miracles; and that in this kind of devotion
mental prayer may with great good and gain of our souls be put in ure; I have
thought good herewithal to entreat of this exercise, that the simpler sort may
with more commodity, and less labor, find, if not al, yet the greter part of
the foresaid meditations gathered here together: which both they may, and
ought to think upon, in saying of the Rosarie; and thereby reap likewise the
benefit of such indulgences, as be granted to those that in this wise do
say the same.

First therefore it is to be noted, that the whole Rosary and Psalter of our The
Rosarie, whereof it consists.
blessed Lady is divided into three fifties, whereof each one conteyneth fifty
Aue Mary's and five Pater nosters. Now whiles each of these three fifty 3.
kinds of mysteries to be meditated.
Aue Mary's are in saying, there be three several sorts of mysteries to be
meditated on. In the first fifty, ar the five joyful mysteries to be thought
upon; which are so called, for that in them we contemplate five special joys
our Lady had before her son our Saviors resurrection. In the second are
meditated the five doleful mysteries; so named, of five special and notorious
panges of sorrow our Lady had, during the time of her sons most painful
passion. In the third are the five glorious mysteries meditated; so termed of
the five most glorious and pleasant joys our Lady had after her son his most
glorious resurrection.

EFFIGIEM Lucas Mariae qua^ pinxerat (...) Vide Nice phoru^. cap. 43. lib. 2.
hist. Eccl.
Ista refert viuo viua color tibi.


THE five joyful mysteries of the first fifthe are these in manner following. The
five joyful misterses.

WHILES the first ten Aue Mary's and one Pater noster are a saying, meditate
the mystery of the incarnation; 1. The 'incarnation of our (...)
how the blessed virgin being dououtly kneeling at prayers in her poor
lodginge; the Angel Luc. I. (...)
Gabriel came and greeted her with that celestial Embassage. Meditate here the
speeches that passed betwixt her and the Angel; and the inspeakable virtue our
Lady showed, in the receiving of this Embassage. First, that modesty and
silence wherewith she gave ear to the message; without uttering any words
her-self but most necessary; a right commendable virtue, especially in women.
Secondlye, that profound humility which caused her so seemly bashfulnes, in
hearing her own praises spoken of. Thirdly, that entier affection and zeal
she bare to chastity; whereof she first of al others had made (...) her vow;
and that albeit so souerain a dignity were tendered her, as to be the mother
of God: yet would she be right well assured, in no wise to distaine that
virginal purity, which she so singulerlye esteemed. Fourthlye, that perfect
faith, which S. Elizabeth (...)
so highly commended in her; for having believed such things as the Angel
told and promised her on the behalf of our Lord, albeit they surpassed al
man's reach and understanding. And hereby may thou learn to credit the
words and promises of God, seem they never so incredible to humane judgment.
Fifthly, that lowly obedience, wherewith in fine she resigned up her self
wholly into the hands of God, saying: Luc. 1. d
Ecce ancilla Domini. etc. Behold the handmaide of the Lord, be it done to me
according to thy word. Whence thou must learn, to do the same in each thing
it shall please God to work, in, or by thee.

IN THE second ten Aue Mary's 2. The visitation of S. Elizabeth.
and Pater noster meditate the second joyful mystery, which is the visitatio^
of S. Elizabeth; how the most holy virgin knowing by the Luc. 1. d.
Angels words, that her cousin was conceived with child, went in humble wise
to visit her; whom after she had loving ly saluted, Elizabeth was forthwith
replenished with the holy ghost, and inspeakable joys; as well appeared by the
words she spoke unto her. In this work our Lady gives thee example; that
look how much thou feel thy self more enriched with Gods good gifts and
fouorable graces, so much art thou to show thy self more lowly and
charitable toward thy neighbors, for whose sakes, and not thine own only
private benefit, thou have received the^. And that in such like works of
charity, thou do them with feruor and diligence, as the most sacred virgin
did herein toward S. Elizabeth. Consider also what great virtue and Note.
efficacy the voice of this great Lady the virgins salutation was of, seeing
Luc. 1. d.
S. Elizabeth confessed, how presently after she had once heard her speak, she
forthwith felt in her-selfe such strange matters, and wonderful alterations.
Thou ought therefore to be very careful in often serving and saluting her,
that so thou deserve to be comforted and helped by her puissant speech and
prayer. Learn withal, when thou hear thy self praised, or art guilty of
any good part in thee, to attribute al to God; and to give him thanks for all,
as here our blessed Lady did in her devout Canticle (...) Luc. 1. (...)
of Magnificat. etc. My soul does magnify our Lord.

IN THE THIRD ten Aue Mary's 3. The birth of Christ.
meditate the third mystery, which is of the nativity and birth of Christ;
wherein think first, how Caesar Augustus having caused proclamations to be made
for each one to enroule their names in such chief Cities as they belonged
too; the most sacred virgin (the mirror of al humility) being ready to obey
this decree, went from Nazareth to Bethleem in so cold a season, and with so
great pain, as her great poverty must needs co^strain and force her. Note
here, with how rigorous an austeritie the son of God; who^ she bare in her
womb, would before his birth perform Obedience, and have his mother to do
the same, were it never so painful to her; that thou should hereby learn of
them to be humble and obedient in all seasons, and occasions whatsoever.
Secondly contemplate, in what extreme poverty the king of al kings vouchsafed
to be borne; and bound up in poor swadling-clouts, (...) Luc. 2. (...)
and laid in a cribbe and manger of brute beasts. Weigh withal, that love and
lowlye reverence his blessed mother adored him with; as Joseph also, and the
Angels did; who with exceeding gladness, and sweet heavenly harmony, denounced
this his birth to the poor shepherdes. Marvelous examples may thou find
in all this discourse, of humility, poverty, Docume^ts.
austeritie, mortification, patience; and above al, of infinite charity which
caused this heavenly young babe begin to suffer such annoyes in his so tender
age; Endeavor thou likewise to imitate the poor Shepherdes, in their poverty,
simplicity, and watchfulnes; if thou desire to be visited by the Angels, and
made partaker of these divine mysteries, as they were.

IN THE fourth ten Aue Mary's 4. The presentatio^ of our Redeemer.
meditate the fourth joyful mystery; which is of the presentation; how forty
days being now expired, that our Luc. 2. c
blessed Lady the virgin had continued in Bethleem in so great penury and
manifold distresses; she then departed to Jerusalem, there to present her
son in the temple. Weigh here likewise the joy that Simeon adored him with,
and embraced him Luc. 2. d.
in his arms; as also the other things he then foretold and prophesied of
him. Whereout note this lesson, to be diligent in presenting thee eftsons in
the temple, and to behave thy self there with reverence and attention; that by
so doing, thou learn to know and love Christ better by such things as are
there entreated and publicly spoken of him. Consider also that sweet canticle
of Nunc dimittis Lord, thou let now thy servant depart in peace. etc.
which shows plainly the fervent and zealous spirit of that old father S.
Simeon, and the great consolation he then received; and think, how such as be
of his parts, and qualities, to wit; just, and virtuous, and that desire the
sauegarde of their souls, such shall merit to be made partakers of the like
favors and celestial graces.

IN THE fifte ten Aue Mary's, memeditate the fifte joyful mystery; which is,
of the joy our blessed Lady 5. The finding of our Savior in the Temple.
had, when having lost her son she found him again amongst the Luc. 2. g.
doctors in the Temple. Meditate here the sorrow and painful diligence,
wherewith both the most sacred virgin, and her holy husband Iosephe wandered up
and down, seeking him amongst his kindred and acquaintance; and after, seeing
they could by no means find him there, how they travailed back again to
Jerusalem; not resting, til they found him in the Temple amongst the Doctors.
Think now, what ineffable joy that virginal heart was seized with, having
thus found out her treasure; with what entier affection she received him to
her; and how carefullye she kept him from loosing him any more. Forth of all this thou may Notable documents
learn; first, to seek this self same Lord with like pains and diligence,
when thy soul has lost him; and think not to find him amongst Genesis 12. a
kindred and acquaintance; to wit, amongst the folies and fond delights of
flesh and blood; but rather in renouncing and mortifying of the same; and
finally, thou shall find him in the temple, in the midst of doctors; that is
to say, harkening devoutly to Gods word, and frequenting eftsons the blessed
Sacraments of Confession, and of the Aultare. Learn likewise, after thou have
once found him by means of these most holy exercises, to keep him with all
careful custody, that thou loose him not an-other time.

This order must thou likewise keep in saying the Aue Mary's and Pater nosters
of the other two fifties following.

THE dolourous mysteries of the second The. 5. dolerous mysteries.
fifty be these.
THE FIRST is of our Lords prayer in the garden, wherein meditate, 1. Our
Lords prayer in the garden.
how the Redeemer of the world approaching nere his death, and feeling him-self
assaild with grievous afflictions, fell down to his prayers, saying these
words: Mat. 26 d. Luc. (...) d
My father, if it be possible, let this cupp pass from me, howbeit, not my will
but thy will be done. And thus prayed he three feueral times til the Angel came
and comforted him. Whence A document worthy day ly (...)
thou may learn this lesson; how in all thine (...) thou ought to make
thy refuge to fervent prayer for thy remedy, repeting the self same words our
Savior spoke; and perseuering in thy prayer without fainting; for no doubt,
but God at length will hear thee, when he shall deem it most expedient and
necessary 2. Of (...) of our Savior.
for thy welfare.

THE SECOND dolourous mystery is of the Ioh. 19. (...)
scourging of our Lord. Meditate here the barbarous cruelty, wherewith he was
straightly tied to the pillar, and there most cruelly scourged and wounded from
top to toe, he suffering al their vilanous outrages in mild manner like an
innocent Isai. 53. b.
Lamb. Whence, learn thou, not to A worthy lesson.
beat him any more with thy sins; and patiently to abide such chastisementes
and afflictions as God shall lay upon thee.

THE THIRD dolourous mystery 3. The crowning of our Lord. cIoh. 19. a Mat.
27. (...) Mar. 25. b
is of the crowning of Christ; wherein meditate the sharp thorns he was
crowned with, and his sacred head al to torn and perced; the mockes and scoffs
likewise they dissemblinglye adored him with; smiting him afterward with the
reed they had erst given him in his hands. Learn A document against pride
and (...)
hereby to detest thy pride and hawtines, which caused this his cruel crowning;
and with greater, both out ward and inward reverence to adore him; least happily
thou be like to those that thus disse^blingly did scorn him

THE FOVRTH dolorous mystery 4. The carrying of the Cross.
is, how our Savor being now adjudged to dye, carried the cross on his Ioh.
19. c
own back, to the place of execution. Where, note the grievous pain and
shameful reproach wherewith he bore the same, to be crucified thereon; as also
the inspeakable griefs his mother and the other devout women felt, seeing him
thus feloniously martired; and forget not the words he then spoke unto the^.
Luc. 23. e. If they do these things in the grene wood what shall be done in
the dry.
Hence gather out this doctrine; that no remedy, but as Christ himself
said, thou must needs carry thy Mat. 10. d 16. d. Mar. 8. d Luc. 9. c.
cross to follow him; that is to say, thou must patientlye abide the pains and
persecutions that in this life shall befall thee.

THE FIFTE dolourous mystery 5. The crueifying of Christ.
is of the crucifying of Christ, wherein meditate those most bitter torments
he felt, whiles they nailed him on the roode, and afterward heaued him on
high thereon; the pains he likewise suffered in each part of his body, and al
his senses; remember also See the. 31. and. 32. leaves above.
the words he spoke thus hanging on the roode. Gather here this lesson, how
to be Christ's servant, thou must Gal. 5. d.
crucify thine own flesh with all thy vices and concupiscences; and comfort
thy self in all thy woes and griefs; beholding what Christ has on the roode
in this wise suffered for thy sake.

THE third Rosarie or fifty, is of the The. 5. glorious mysteries.
glorious mysteries, whereof-
THE FIRST is of Christ's resurrection: 1. The Resurrection.
wherein meditate the beauty, glory, and majesty he rise up in; and how he
appeared afterward to his blessed mother; Mat. 28. b
to good Mari Magdalen with other the devout women, and his Disciples. Mark
well here in what glory and joy we hope one day to rise again after our death;
whereunto we must by the toiles and troubles of this life atteyne; as Christ
himself did by the pains of his cross and bitter passion.

THE SECOND glorious mystery 2. The Ascension.
is of our Lord and Savior his Asce^sion. Contemplate here, how the forty day
after his Resurrection, he Mar. 16. c
lastly of al appeared to his disciples, being set at table; and commanded
the^ to get them up to the mount Oliuet; where, after he had taken his leave
and loving farewell of his blessed mother and his disciples, Act. 1. b
mounted up with great glory and triumph into heaven, accompanied with legions
of Angels; and such Saints, as he erst had delivered out of Limbo. Take out
here this lesson, that who so Mat. 23. b Luc. 14. c 18. c.
hu^bleth himself most in this life, shall afterward be most exalted in the
other, as we see in this example of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

If any desire more ample discourse and consideration of these two glorious
mysteries; and of the five dolorous aforesaid; let them read the seventh
Chapter above, where they are more largely amplified and set out; and in that
respect be here more briefly spoken of; my meaning being in this place to serve
their turns chiefly, that have less capacity and leisure to use this
exercise of meditation.

THE THIRD glorious mystery is 3. The coming of the holy Ghost.
of the coming down of the holy ghost upon the disciples. Wherein meditate,
how both they and the other holy women that loved Christ being altogether with
his blessed mother in the dining chamber Act. 1. 14. (...)
at prayer, the holy ghost came down in fiery Act. 2. a.
tongues, and wonderfully rejoiced and comforted them al; ministering to them
great strength to go and preach abroad, as well appeared both by the notable
courage and (...) efficacy, wherewith they preached publicly without any
fear; as also by the multitude of people which were thereby forthwith Act. 2.
f.
converted: whence gather this note; that to receive the holy ghost, thou must
be in perfect peace and charity toward al men; and withal attend diligently
to devout and fervent prayer. A notable observation.
Note furthermore; that then shall thou be strong enough to hazard thy self in
any peril for Christ's cause; and thy speeches and spirit shal-be then of
force and strenght to stir up and inflame others their frosen hearts; when
thine own shall first be perfectlye kindled and inflamed with this heavenly
fire, which the Apostles received as this day: 4. The Assumption of our Lady.


THE FOVRTH glorious mystery is of the Assumption of our blessed Lady;
Meditate here, how the Apostles being now departed to preach round about the
world, the blessed virgin our Lady remained still in Jerusalem; giving
her-selfe to contemplation; and visiting deuoutlye and eftsons those holy
places, wherein her sacred son had erst wrought the mysteries of our
redemption. And being thus occupied, well may we believe, she by continual suit
of prayers required to be drawn out of this life; and conducted thither where
she might see her most sweet The blessed virgin Ma rye died in the. 59 year of
her age, and in the 11. after the death of Christ. Nic. lib. 2 cap. 3.
son. Who after certain years condescending to this her suit and humble
petition, came himself down, accompanied with troops of holy Angels, and
took with him this most happy soul, carrying it into heaven with great joy
and inestimable exultation. Mark here what a commendable and very fruitful
exercise it shal-be for thee, eftsons in mind to visit these very places,
where this redemption of ours was wrought; meditating deuoutlye the mysteries
thereof, as we may right well suppose the most holy virgin did. Note moreover,
how in this life (being a vale of toiles and tears) thou ought to pass
the time as in an 1. Pet. 1. c.
exile; sighing, sorowing, and desiring to be conducted up to that heavenly
region, where the true life is, in company of that most happy mother, and of
her derelye beloved son. Hereby may thou likewise understand, how greatly
this Lord and sovereign Monarche is to be loved and obeyed; who both can and
will so highly reward and favor those that serve and love him loially, as here
thou meditatest he has done toward his most loial and loving mother. 5. The
coro nation of our Lady.


THE FIFTE glorious mystery is of the crowning of our blessed Lady; where
meditate, how that after her assumptio^ (according as we right holily do
believe) that most happy soul associated with millions of holy Angels, came
down to join it self to her virginal body; which being raised up, became
most beautiful, bright, immortal, and impassible; and so with incomparable
glory and honor was she crowned of the most sacred Trinity; and placed in a
most precious throne above all the Angels, on the right hand of her intierly
beloved son. Here may thou call to mind, that albeit in this life thy body
be pincht and punished with penance, disciplines, and other mortifications; yet
shall it afterward rise up immortal, impassible, glittering, and 1. Cor. 15. a
beautiful; like as here thou contemplatest the virginal body of our blessed
Lady to have done. Mark here lik ewise, what efficacy the prayers of this
most sovereign Lady are of, being thus highly exalted and beloved of God; and
therefore ought thou to labor al thou can, to be reverent and devout
toward her; that by so doing, it may please her to favor and help thee in
thy needs.

In this wise is the whole Rosary to be said at least once every week; and
both these and other like profitable lessons to be picked out, as God shall
vouchsafe by means of thy devotion to suggest and bring the^ to thy mind.

There may also be an-other exercise framed of the Rosarie; whereout An-ct' er
exercise of the Rosary.
the simpler sort may likewise reap good fruit; as to lay the picture of
Christ before their eyes; and at every part where he suffered any torment or
gricfe, there to say a Pater noster (...)
or Aue Mary; contemplating the whiles of that grief and pain. In like manner
may thou do before the picture of our blessed Lady, calling to mind the
joys or sorrows she suffered, either in seeing hearing, or touching her son;
as-wel in all his life time, as in his passion and painful death. Otherwhiles
likewise thou may offer up an Aue Mary or Peter noster, thinking of the
Angels and holy Saints of both sex; especially such as thou have most
devotion to; recommending thee to their prayers and intercessions; and thus
may thou with great ease gain great graces of our Lord and blessed Savior

CERTAIN remedies for such, as could not happily find savor or devotion in the
former meditations.

Cap. 11.
WOTING well (as I haute already said) what great good this exercise of prayer
does purchase to our fowls; I have in this respect been more willing to
extend my self a little the further in entreating thereof. And for the same
some cause have thought good likewise in this Chapter to annexe certain
remedies to relieve thee with at such times as thou foundest thy self barrein
of devotion, and without any relishe or taste in the foresaid meditations.

FIRST therefore it is requisite thou The first (...) against (...)
have this in mind, how one of the principal means and helps for thee both
in this life to live vertuouslye, and in the other to enjoy God everlastingly, is
this exercise of prayer; and therefore what pains and care soever it behooved
thee to take for the gayning of so great a jewel, ought in no wise to seem
grievous and yrksome to thee; yea, propounding this so rich a recompense before
thine eyes, thou ought with all might and maine to remove such obstacles and
lets, as might any ways impeache the due and orderly perfourming of this
exercise. Thou ought therefore take heed of distracting thy mind in diverse
vain thoughts, of spending the time in profane and unprofitable co^uersations;
of disordinate affections; of excessive passions of thy soul; as anger,
heaviness, too much laughing, and rejoicing in worldly matters; and of too great
a carke and care in thy temporal affairs and business. These and such other
like imperfections, whereby the peace and serenitie of thy soul may be
shadowed and taken away, are in any wife, so much as may be, to be avoided.
Neither behooves it only to have this watch and ward over thy heart and
inward powers; but also to use the like touching thy outward senses, which are
the doors whereby these distractions enter and penetrate into thy heart: as
might be a curious eye, in viewing; a listening after novelties and impertinent
matters; too much speech and talk; and each other thing whatsoever that
experience teaches us to breed distraction. No doubt therefore, but
solitarines would in this case be a sovereign Solitarines a great help to (...)
help to such as might conveniently use it; for by it, are al occasions of
distracting the senses clean cut off; and thereby a man may with more facility,
eleuate his mind up to God, and stand well guarded within him self: whereupon
this saying has been woorthely of long, time used, that a contemplative man
ought to be deaf, blind, and dombe; that by this means wanting occasions to
distract his mind in outward things, he might always be gathered and
attentive inwardly in godly cogitations.

It shall profit likewise to procure devotion, and elevation of mind up to God
to use abstinence, fasting, and Abstinence and discipline.
other afflictions and corporal chastisementes moderately applied. For like as
these proceed of devotion, so do they maintain and increase devotion.

A purity and cleanes of conscience Purity of conscience.
is also very necessary for gayning this devotion; the which ought not only to
be kept vndistained with any mortal sin; but also free from venial, so much
as may be: for these do swage and abate the fervor of charity, which is the
nurse and mother of devotion. It behooves therefore, if thou covet to find a
sweetness and sauoure in thy prayers, to shun al kind of sin, and such
imperfections, as may gaul and fret thy conscience; as also to shake off
scruples, and al superfluous remorse; the which, like privy thorns lie
pricking and paining the soul, and will not suffer it to enjoy any quiet rest
or fruitful savor in devotion.

THE SECOND remedy which The second reme-lie against distraction.
concerning this matter of meditation is by diverse good and virtuous men proved
to be very profitable, is, for one to strain himself continuallye to walk
in the presence and sight of A continis al eye upon God.
Gods divine Majesty; supposing (as most true it is) that we always stand
before his eyes; he beholding every hour and moment what we do, speak, or
think; and keeping with each one a particular account of every thing. Seeing
therefore, God evermore has us in his heavenly eye and (...) 118. 168.
presence, right meet and requisite is it, we always have him in ours. And in
very deed, the taking up of this custom shall help in this respect very
much, to make us afraid of committing any filthy and dishonest act, when we
bethink us, that the eyes of God are every where upon us.

THE THIRD remedy that helps The third remedy against distraction. (...)
greatly to gather attention and devotion, is an often frequentation of
certain prayers every day, which the holy fathers call darting prayers, for
Darting prayers.
that they be in manner of amorous and loving darts thrown up at Gods heart.
The manner of doing this is by saying with a zeal and inflamed desire certain
verses of David, or some other sentences of holy Saints, which thou must ever
have in memory; and at such time, as thy devotion shall serve, to sai those
that be fittest for that present affection thou then feel; as for example,
finding at some time a disposition of repentance and compunction for thy
sins, then to rehearse certain verses of the Psalm. 50.
Miserere psalm, or some other such like brief sayings, serving to signifye
this affect of repentance. At an other time, feeling a desire to be more and
more inflamed in the love of God, say that Psalm. 17.
verse, Diligam te domine fortitudo mea, Another time desiring to be with God,
say; Quemadmodum desideras (...) ad fontem Psalm. 41.
aquarum etc. Otherwhiles, longing to approach and draw nighe to those heavenly
bours; say, Psalm. 83.
Quam dilecta tabernacula tua Domine. etc, Beati qui habitant in domo tua
Domine. An-other time, with an affect to give thanks to God for his divine
benefits, thou may say certain everses of the psalm: Psalm. 102
Benedie anima mea Domino, and omnia quae intra me sunt. etc. or Psalm. 33.
Benedicam Dominum in omni tempore: And so in like manner, according to the
diversity of each other affect thou happily find thy self touched with in
soul; for cche kind, whereof either in the prophets, or in some other of the
Saints and fathers thou may find very fit words and sentences, to
signify thy meaning with But if so be thou want skill and knowledge thy self
to cul and gather them out; then may thou frame words of thine own,
(according as the holy Ghost shall vouchsafe to instruct and teach thee) such
as may serve most fitly for thy purpose, and cause thy zeal to increase to
Godward, and to good desires. And albeit at the first it may seem thou dartest
not those amorous arowes with any great feruoure or fiery heat of soul; yet
fail not to send and breath them forth; for no doubt but they shall afterward
kindle and gather heat, and help thee greatly to warm thy soul withal. But if
happily thou could not light of such words as thou wisshest for; send then
up certain sighs and groans drawn out from the bottom of thy heart, and
these shall supplye and serve in steed of words to God-warde, who well woteth,
what thy spirit does crave and long for. These darting prayers, with the
sentences, sighs, and speeches abouesaide, shall likewise help such greatly, as
lack conueniu^t leisure, to perform this exercise, in such The fourth
remedy is, the reding of some godly (...)
manner as I have heretofore declared.

THE FOVRTH remedy, which may be used at such time, as thy distraction were
greater, then that the former aduises could suffice to call thy mind home, and
to cause attention; then may thou have recourse to reading; whereto shal-be
very expedient thou be provided of some godly book, full of good devotion and
sound doctrine; and thereon to read with leisure, fair and softly; not lightlye
running over many leaves, but pausing at every periode and sentence, to chawe
the same, and to pick thence some profit, and fruitful devotion, staying
therein so long as attention serves thee; which once wanting; proceed then
on forward to an-other sentence, doing likewise in that; and thus might
thou by means of such words as thou read, use those speeches, sighs, and
inflamed desires, whereof I jastly spoke in the third remedy; since no doubt,
but they are very valable, and of great force to retire thy mind home, and to
kindle in it a devotion, and fervent love to God-warde.

The fittest books for this purpose are such, as stir a man up to piety
and devotion, and that withal, give good instructions for life and manners; as
might be the meditations, Soliloquies, and Manuel of S. Austin; certain small
treatises of S. Bernarde, and S. Bonauenture, which are to be found apart and
printed by themselves; especially some such one as entreats of the life of
Christ; but above al other, shall that book benefit and do thoe good, which
is called De contemptu mundi, Or The following of The following of Christ, a
book greatly pro fitable.
Christ, entitled to John Gerson, though in very deed it was of one Thomas
de Kempis making, this being a work of wonderful profit, and most notable
doctrine; The lives of Saints shal-be likewise very good for this purpose, who
erst have showed themselves lively paterns of christian perfection. In these
and such like books may thou exercise thy self; now reading, now
meditating on them, and always committing some spiritual point to memory,
which thy soul may amongst other thy business, nourishe and comfort it self
withal.

How-be-it, because this remedy is only to serve their turns that can read;
others, that lack that skill may use pictures in steed of printed Pictures
ignorant men's books
books, and therein behold that passage they mean to meditate on; and thus
shall the picture serve them instead of books, and help to procure inward
collection of their mind, and to purchase devotion which is wanting; This shall
chieflye help young beginners, and such as be yet rawlye rooted in these
exercises; as also at the beginning and first entrance into prayer, when the
soul does commonly find disquietnes, by reason of vain thoughts and wandering
cogitations.

THE LAST remedy thou art to The fifth remedy against distraction, is
perseuera^ce
take concerning this matter; is, to force thy self to persevere in prayer;
how distract and frosen soever thou shall find thee; for that, who so shall
thus force and strain himself to endure the tedious toil and pain of
prayer, whiles thus he feels himself frosen, and carried away with diverse
foreign thoughts and fancies, well may he believe, that at the end of his
prayer he shall for the most part receive comfort and contentation; and that, as
it happed to our Savior (whom the Luc. 22. a.
Angel came and comforted in the garden, after his long perseverance in
prayer, which he made three several times;) even so likewise shall it in the end
befall to him. And as in other works experience teaches us, that custom
takes away the toil which we feel at the beginning thereof; eue^ so shall
custom and continuance in this exercise; (not slacking or neglecting it at any
time) eut off the toil and travail thereof, and cause a conquest of al such
difficulties, as in the beginning seemed right painful to us.

OF CONFESSION. how and when we ought to make it.

Cap. 12.
TWO things there be, wherewith the soul is chieflye fostred, and wherewith, as
with Two wings, (...) the soul (...) to heaven.
two wings, it soareth up to heaven; that is to say, prayer, and the receiving
of the blessed Sacrament. Having therefore already spoken sufficiently of the
first, it remameth I now say somewhat of the second. And because to receive
rightly this blessed Sacrament, Confission is always presupposed to go before,
I shall first of al entreat thereof, being a very sowithal; ueraine saulue for
our souls, and (...) necessary to sustain our (...) withal; whereof albeit I
have spoken somewhat before in the first Chapter; yet since that speech tended
chieflye, to teach the manner of making a general confession to such, as
purposed presently to begin a ne we life; it behooves I now declare, how,
and when, such as do proceed on forward in the true fear of God, and in
his divine service, ought to confess themselves; wherein this I say first,
that as-wel for the making of a general, as a particular confessio, both in
the one and the other, it shall help thee greatly, to choose out such a Confessor
as I then spoke of; one that is wise, learned, and of godly life; as also well
beat and practiced in spiritual ways; who both in this and each other cause
may guide and teach thee what thou ought to do: And therefore no doubt but
it behooves thee to use great diligence in The care we ought to have in chosing
a skilful Con fessour.
(...) searching for such a one; for if we use with so great care to enquire
after the most learned and sufficient physician to cure our bodily griefs,
how much the rather ought we to do the same, for the sickness and infirmities
of our souls? Why do we not digest and ponder well, what truth himself did
Mat. 15. b.
testify unto us; that If the blind do lead the blind, bothfal down intc
the diche; the truth whereof because diverse have little regarded and rought of;
have therefore proved to their cost, what harm and hinderance they have
sustained in being so blind and recklesse in this behalf; whereby both they,
and each other may well wot, what care and diligence ought to be employed for
the finding out of so sufficient a person, as the weight of this affair
imports. And having once found out such a one, make account to have hitt of
no small treasure, thy soul now having How great a treasure a good ghostly
father is.
one, by whose good means and help al her spiritual infirmities shal-be
healed; al her doubts dissolved; al her fears assuaged and comforted; and by
whom she may in her weakness and indeuotion be inflamed; in her wearines eased
and encouraged; helped in all her temptations; and directed in the sundry
dangers, which in this life do dasel and fright us; and finally by his
conduct be carried the right way to eternal bliss and happiness; like as the
children of Israel were let into the land of promise, for having had so good a
guide, as was their Captain Iosue.

Having therefore in this wise found out such a ghostly father and good guide;
impart to him thy whole life, thine intentes and exercises, as also each other
thing, whereof he shall desire to be informed; and see that by counsel thou
govern the whole course of thy spiritual life.

How-be-it, because a man shall very hardly at al times have such a ghostly
father at hand, as may in every point serve his turn, and satisfy this
office; I shall therefore briefly give thee certain notes, whereby, for this
point, thou may know how to guide and direct thy self, in matters of
Confession.

And first concerning the time thereof, I say unto thee, that every good
Christian ought to prepare him When we ought to confess.
self to confession once every week; according as both S. Austin, and the
other holy doctors exhort us; yea, such, as in temporal affairs be less S.
Austine.
busied, and in spiritual causes better practiced, may do it ofter, especially
being well battened and exercised in that kind of prayer, I have already
entreated of Such though as are more (...) and less able to perform that kind
of prayer, may every fifteen or twenty days confess them; but in no wise
would I, that any man, have he never so much adoo, should fail once every
month to do the same.

Minding therefore to confess thee thus often, let thy preparation thereto be in
manner following.

First, the same day that thou purposest How we aught to confess, and
examine our consciences.
to confess on, see thou gather thy self a little before, and crave of God the
light of his grace, to know thy sins and faults, without the which neither
can they be known nor well confessed; Afterward examine thy conscience,
vnbethinking thee what thou haste done since the time of thy former consession.
And for the better doing hereof, thou may est run over the commandments,
and the deadly sins; especially such, as thou art wont most commonly to fall
into. How be-it, for those that do more often and ordinarilye frequent
confession, it may suffice to discourse upon their thoughts, words, and
omissions or negligences, examining in each one of these points, wherein they
may seem to have offended. And such particular things as thou remembrest to
have transgressed in, since thy former confessions, those shall thou chiefly
note and confess thee of, be they venial, or mortal, sins: for al-be-it we
are not bound to confess our venial sins, yet is it both more secure, and
profitable so to do; those specially, that be most notorious, and of greatest
importance. And for so much as some do very fondly forbear to receive, and
confess themselves, for lack of his help, whom they have erst chosen for
their ghostlye guide and governor; I deem it therefore requisite A notable
advertisement.
to advertise thee herein; that in such wise would I have thee obedient and
affected to this thy Confessor thou haste made choice of (of whom I have
already spoken) that when thou should haplye want opportunity to make thy
confession to him; thou fail not then to confess thee to an-other. And let
not this sensual and indiscreet affection, which some (but chiefelye women) are
wont to carye toward their Confessors, bereue thee of that liberty, which is
expedient for thee in this case to have; (wanting commodity of confessing to
thy accustomed and wonted Father) yea, rather set thy mind of the grace which
is granted by means of this holy Sacrament, being al one, then of the priest
which gives thee this Sacrament, whereof be many. And in doing thus, both thy
soul shal-be better provided for, and thou remain more secure, not to fall
into such inconveniences, as others have incurred, by too indiscretly addicted
themselves to these their chosen Confessors.

This being thus presupposed, thou may discuise thy conscience in manner
following. Concerning thoughts; If thou haste had any dishonest, unclean,
Thoughts.
vain, and unprofitable thoughts, and therein spent the time; or any rash
judgementes or suspicions; or lewd affections and desires. Touching words; of
blasphemous speeches, oaths, lies, murmuringes, detractions; Words.
contentious, proud, ireful, and idle words. For deeds; look if thou Deeds.
haste done any outward work of sin, which is against any of the
commandments. About omissions; here Omissions.
may thou accuse thy self of having left undone some such works, as thou
ought to have done; as, not to have heard Mass, prayed, and received the
holy Sacrament; with such other like good works; or at least to have done
them faintlye, and with small devotion. And if at some time it happen so, that
thou foundest not thy conscience guilty of any particular crime, whereot thou
might (...) accuse thee, then may thou confess thee of certain general
points, wherein most commonly at, (be they never so spiritual) do fail; as
not to have loved God so intierly, as thou ought; of unthankfulness for his
divine benefits; of small charity toward thy neighbors; of to great love
thou bear to worldly things, and to thy self, whereby thou seek thine
own profit more carefullye then need requineth; of an over weening of thy
self, whereby thou reputest thee to be better then others, and desire to be
respected and reverenced of them; of to curious a desire to know many matters
that profit not, nor apperteine unto thee; yea, sometimes do greatly harm and
hinder thee; of not having made due resistance against such tentations as
assault thee; not to have sied and shunned the occasions of offending; nor to
have had such diligent watch and ward over thy outward and inward senses as
behooved; of unprofitable speeches and thoughts; of evil employing the time,
wherein thou might have done great good; of having been negligent in many
such works as thou were bound to do; and in those works thou do, not to
have that purity and right intention thou art bound to have; since thou
do them not purely for Gods sake alone; but for some other vain respects;
and so in every thing to have been most imperfect; not answering nor obeying
to such divine inspirations, as thou feel in thee; nor being constant in
such purposes as thou haste already enterprised. In these and such like other
defectes (examining thy self well) thou shall find thy want and imperfection,
whereof, or at least some part, it is very commendable to confess thee at such
time, as thou haste not fallen into any greater giltes. But in any waves
howsoever, it is meet thou accuse thee of these and such like defaultes at
least once in a month; not belecuing them for all that to be mortal sins, but
rather vemal, and imperfections. This do I add, because there be some of
timorous conscience through the often freque^ting of confession, that are many
times troubled with diverse scruples; which annoye and hinder greatly their
proceeding in spiritual life and exercise; who (the best remedy they A (...)
me ane to (...) superfluous remorse.
can use) in this case, is, not to credit that their timorous conscience shall
tell them; ne ween any thing to be a mortal or deadly sin, which is not
against the commandments of God, or of the Church our holy mother. And to
take away, and rid them quite of the toil and perplexity, which these
scruples are wont to bring the^ in, the soundest counsel for such to follow,
is, to let them selves be governed by their discrete Confessors; and to obey
the^ in all things; al-be-it that which they command them, shall seem flat
contrary to that their own consciences tells them; and this ways, no doubt,
but they shall receive a great deal more help and consolation; and by breaking
and mastering their own (...) this manner, be far sooner healed; then in doing
that, which their own timorous, blind, and erroneous consciences may suggest
the^.

OF THE utility and profit that is reaped, by (...) the holy Sacrament.

Cap. 13.
AS material bread is necessary for our bodily sustinance, without the which
this corporal life of ours cannot long be incertained; As material bread is
necessary for our bodies, so is (...) bread for our souls.
even so is spiritual bread necessary for the preservation of our souls, and
spiritual life, the which bread is given us in the sacred and holy Sacrament
of the altar. And therefore is it called the Ioh. 6. a
bread of life, through the life it causes in the souls of such, as worthily
receive it. The which bread if we should not eat, we should not have Ioh. 6.
f.
life in us, as our Savior Christ affirms in the Gospel. This is the bread
that gives us strength to overcome tentations, to travail more lustily, and
with greater courage to pass the course of this worldly pilgrimage, and is
called Viaticam, that is The bread of pilgrims and (...) for like as pilgrims
have need of bread to last out to the region and country they go to; even so
we do stand need of this bread, to arrive at length happily to the celestial
Region we aspire to. And therefore is this Sacrament figured by the bread
baked under ashes, which the Angel gave unto 3. Re. 19. b
Helias, wherewith he recovered so great strength; as he lasted out, til he came
to the mount of God, Oreb; the effect which this Sacrament does operate in like
manner, Singular effects of the B. Sacrament. being worthily (...)
being worthily receued; making us recover strength, to arrive out to the mount
of eternal happiness; it causes us also to fight manfully, and to vanquishe our
enemies, which in this life do what they can to let us. Finally, in this
sacrament (who so worthily receaueth it) does find al succor, al comfort, al
sweetness, and sugared savor. And therefore is it woorthely figured by that Exo.
16. a
Manna which God sent down from heaven to the people of Israel: for, like as
in that the good found al favor and goodness they could happily desire; even so
in this sacrament, such as do dulye taste it, do find al savor and happiness
they may well require in this world. Since the effects which the holy
Doctors write to proceed out of this sacrament, be almost innumerable; who
grant, that it forgeueth our former sins, and ministers force to withstand
future tentations; it causes them likewise to be both fewer and famter; It
weakneth our passions; increases devotion; establishes virtue; illuminateth
our faith; confirms hope; exciteth charity; makes us partakers of the
merits of Christ; and gives us an earnest-penye of everlasting happiness.

If therefore both these and other most excellent and unspeakable fruits be
by this most holy and sacred food (the blessed sacrament of the Aultare)
afforded and wrought in us; what is he that either can or will be so stark
blind, or so great an enemy to his own welfare, as to be wilfully weined from
them, and willingly to deprive himself of so many benefits? what delight
can thou desire, that is not here afforded thee: what gain can thou long
for, that here is not given thee? yea, and that with much less cost and
labor, then men use to take for other things a great deal less important.
Since therefore this most sacred Sacrament is thus profitable and necessary for
thy soul (yea, and much more then may by speech or pen be specified) it
behooves, I say, we receive it often; that often we be made partakers of the
fruits and innumerable benefits that proceed out of it. Neither are we to
Against those that (...) of often (...)
believe and credit such, as say, it is not convenient or commendable to
receive it very often, since the often receiving should impair the reverence due
to so sovereign a Sacrament. Believe them not, I say, that say thus, for in
very deed it is not so; but rather, as love increases, by the frequentation
thereof; so do both devotion and reverence increase in like manner: For that,
look, by how much the more the soul approaches nighe to this Sacrament, and
by so much the more is it illuminated; according as is figured by the honye
that 1 Reg. 14. (...)
Ionathas tasted of in the wilderness, wherewith his eyes were forthwith opened
and made bright; The soul then being better illuminated by this Sacrament,
then it was before, the worthiness there of must needs be better discerned; as
also the greatness and majesty of our Lord therein contained; and consequently,
the reverence due thereto, be much augmented and increased. They most
reverent that receive oftest.
The truth whereof, experience and trial do plainly teach us; since those that
receive but once by year, or very seldom, we see to be most irreuerent
toward this sovereign Sacrament; and such most reverent, as The (...) of
(...) Church in receiving.
receive it oftest. The same is also mamfestly proved by the zeal, feruencie,
love, and reverence which was used in the primative Church, when each one
received every day, as was Pope Ana cletus.
decreed by pope Anacletus; Since which time, look how much more rarely the
people have used to receue; and so much more is devotion decayed; as also the
reverence to this sacrament, and al other goodness. See therefore, good brother,
thou follow the counsel of Saints and holy Doctors, both old and new
herein; and if thou feel thy self a-colde, draw nigh to the fire of this
most holy sacrament; If thou be in poverty, think how this treasure was
given for the poor; If feeble and weak, remember that such stand need of a
physician; and how for such was this medicine chiefly instituted; If thou
be hungry, and pressed with famine, here shall thou find the true food and
fostring. For albeit this is the bread of holy Angels; yet is it not denied to
penitent sinners. This is a banquet meet for kings and princes; but withal it
is bread fit for poor laborers and pilgrims. It is meat for great ones, and
likewise milk for little ones. Briefly, this miraculous sacrament may greatly
profit every one (being well disposed thereto) like as our Lord and Savior,
(who is therein contained) descended from heaven for every one; was born for
every one, and vouchsafed to dye for every one. If therefore thy cares and
business be many, receive many times the remedy and ready dispatch of al,
which is herein promised thee. Receive (if thou can not ofter) at least once
every week or fortninght, and all the high festiual days that are solemnized
throughout the whole year: Neither do thou regard the sayings of such as be
indeuout, who under the color of reverence, do cloak and shadow their
negligence, And no doubt, but by thus endeavoring thy self to receive as
woorthely as thou can, trial shall within few months teach thee, that the
profit and consolation which thy soul shall thereby gain, is far greater,
then any man may possibly set out and exaggerate with words. For albeit there
have been by so great a number of holy Doctors as have written upon this
matter, many glorious things and marvelous excellencies reported, which this
heavenly mystery does work; yet much more shall such by experience find and
prove, as will dispose themselves to taste often, and woorthely, this divine
food, and grace above al graces.

IN WHAT manner we ought to prepare our selves before we come to receive the
blessed Sacrament.

Cap. 14.
HAVING in some wise touched the importance and great profit which the often
frequenting of this holy Sacrament is of; it remains now, to teach thee the
manner how to prepare and make thy self fit to receive the same; since, as the
Apostle says; It behooves (...) 1. Cor. 11. (...)
that a man prove himself before he eat of this bread; since otherwise, who
so should unworthily eat it, should not receive any benefit thereby, but
judgment and condemnation for his soul. It is therefore to be noted, that so
far is man unable to present himself woorthely, and according to the
dignity of this Sacrament; that the Angels themselves can-not do the same.
Nevertheless, to have that woorthines, which man's frailty will permit, it
shal-be sufficient to prepare and prove thy self so well as thou can; and
this may thou do in manner following.

FIRST, the evening before thou The manner of preparing our selves to receauc.
purposest to receive, endeavor thy self as much as possibly thou may, to
refrain al temporal traficque and busying thy mind in seculer affairs; yea,
from al superfluous and impertinent speeches. Likewise if thou have a wife, it
were very commendable to forbear that night the act of matrimony; as also to
leave thy supper, or at least wise, to make it more moderate the^ at other
times; since that, considering the high feast thou look for the next day,
some small abstinence should do well before it. In like manner shall it be good,
to make a little meditation before thou go to bed; calling to thy mind that
immeasurable love, wherewith our Lord and Savior vouchsated to leave us so
inestimable a grace, as this most gracious sacrament is; and begin then in
heart to taste that sauourie food, which on the morrow thou hopest to receive;
beseeching God to preserve and prepare thee, that thou may do the same to
his glory, and the welfare of thine own soul. On the morrow; being got up
betimes; examine thy conscience quietly; with sorrow for such sins and
faults as thou shall find therein; and get thee afterward to thy ghostly
father to confess them, (if happily thou had not done so Note well, and (...)
eftsons.
over night) And either whiles thou art in confession, or afterward, it
shal-be very good to renew and confirm thy former good purposes to walk
henceforth more warilye in Gods ways, and with greater diligence to amend
thine imperfections, especially, such, as thou use most commonly to fall
into; craving thereto particular aid and grace of God, devising also some new
means how better to perform the same. When thou have in this wise examined,
and unfolded thy conscience, gather thy self, a while to meditate some one or
mo pomtes of the passion of our Lord and Savior (in memory whereof was this
venerable Sacrament instituted; that every time we receive the same, we should
call to mind that infinite love, where with he offered up himself to the cross
for us) as also al other the pains and torments he from the cribbe until the
Cross did willinglye suffer for our salvation. Doing thus, (and devoutly
meditating the roode, and other his most ruful panges) the fire of his fervent
love shall by this means kindle and creep into thy soul; being a thing right
necessary for the worthy receiving of this sacrament. For like as in the old
law Exo. 12. b.
God commanded the pascal Lamb to be eaten roasted; The paseal Lamb figure of
the B. Saerament.
eue^ so the most innocent Lamb (which is contained in this sacrament, and
figured by the former of the old law) must be eaten roasted, to wit, with a
heart inflamed in his love, since he here gives himself to us roasted with
the fire of his most fervent charity. Love (...) with due reverence and
humility.
And to the end that with this love, thou may also have due reverence for
receiving so high a sacrament; consider well the excellency thereof, and what
that is thou mindest to receive; how in this sacrament is contained the sacred
and sovereign humanity of Christ; that is to say, his soul, his body, and
his blood; and not only his humanity, but eke his divinity, since the one can
no ways be separated from the other; so that in this sacrament is contained the
son of the eternal God, and of the blessed virgin Mary. And for so much as,
look where the son of God is, there is the father and the holy ghost; being
al three persons one self same essence; it follows, that all the most ho lie
Trinity is contained in this high and mighty sacrament, in such wise, as the
deuines declare and teach it; which thou art bound most firmelye to believe,
albeit to know the manner thereof surpasses thy capacity and understanding.
See now (all this being well considered) with how great reverence thou ought
to present thy self before so great a Monarche as is contained in this
Sacrament; before whom all the powers of heaven do tremble and quake again;
and thousand thousands of Angels wait and geuo attendance on him in the same,
yielding adoration, and al other most dut full (...) the to Having the ^ being
astonished at so (...) an excellency and dreadful Majesty, thou may say
these words ( My Lord my God, what Note;
art thou, and what am I?) wherein pause and occupy thy self a while before
thou receive; weighing thine own inspeakable vileness, and his incomprehensible
Majesty and highness; as also that ineffable love, and beyond al measure,
wherewith he vouchsafes to come to that Sacrament, thereby to communicate his
graces and gifts unto thee, if thou be thy self disposed to receive them.

Being in this manner by these lowlye considerations provoked to humility; and
thy heart already inflamed in fervent love and charity; thou may then
receive thy maker with great reverence; and see thou in no wise chowe the host
with thy teeth; but let it moisten a while in thy mouth, thereby to swalowe it
down more easilye without any cleaving to thy palate; and humbly beseech that
Lord thou receauest, that it may please him to receive thee, and through his
love and graces to transform thee into him, and to make thee partaker of such
gra ces, as he ordinarily bestows by the means of this most sacred sacrament.
How we ought to behave our selves after having received.
And thus having received, see thou pause a while to yield that Lord most
hearty and humble thanks for having thus lovingly vouchsafed to visit thee,
comforting thy self, and keeping company with him, whiles he yet remains in
thy breast; being otherwise a very indecent thing, that so great a Lord
vouchsafing thus to visit thee, and to enter into thy poor cotage, thou
should bye and bye fling out of doors, and occupy thy self in foreign
thoughts and communications. See therefore thou attend only of this most
worthy gest which thou haste received, and solace thy self with his most
sweet and comfortable conversation; doing so, assure thy self thou shall be
well paid and contented for his lodging; and receive mercy, as Mat. 9. a.
Matthew and Luc 19. b
Zacheus did, at such time, as they harbored him in their houses. Crave also
particulerly his aid, for the vanquishing of that vice that most molesteth
thee; and which thou have chiefly determined to withstand and fight against.
And if thou be so disposed, thou may with this mind say some vocal prayer,
yielding him thanks, and begging necessary graces for thy needs. For this
cause have I annexed at the end of this little Treatise certain prayers or
meditations, whereof thou may read either al, or part, as-wel before as
after the blessed sacrament; foreseing always, that the words proceed rather
from thy heart, then from thy mouth. Having thus occupied thy self some time,
so long as thy devotion shall continue, thou may then get thee home; and
beware that (without very urgent occasion) thou spitt not of some pretty space
after thou have received; and when thou do, let it be in some clean and
decent place; pause likewise a while ear thou eat any meat, least thou mix
corruptible food with that divine and heavenly food, which thou so lately
receauedst. It were very commendable also for him that had the commodity and
means, to inuit some poor body to dinner with him; that he might so receive
that Lord in his members, whom he received even now in the blessed Sacrament:
but who so had not the commodity to perform this in act, may in will and
wish execute the same, which our Lord will repute and take for deed. And note
how on that day thou receuest, thou art bound Note.
to take greater heed then on other days, of distraction in seculer causes;
of profane conversation; of play; of immodest laughter; of superfluous words;
but much more of dishonest words; of murmuringes and detractions; being a very
unfit thing, that forth of that mouth, wherein the word incarnat has so lately
entered; (which thou receauest in this blessed Sacrament) should so dissonant
words proceed, and so offensive to this eternal word of God. Finally, take
heed of eating and drinking to much, and of each other thing that may let thy
devotion; which on this day thou must endeavor to keep as diligently as may
be; by reading of some good book; or making longer prayers, hearing of sermons
or lessons, if there be any; or otherwise occupying thy self in doing some
spiritual or corporal work of mercy.

OF SPIRITVAL receiving.

Cap. 15.
THIS most holy sacrament of the Altar (wherein is contained the very real
body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, and by the same his passion and
dolful death represented unto us) is of such virtue and excellency, that it
not only profits such, as with due preparation do really receive the same;
but extends also the virtue thereof to those, that with faith and inward
zeal desire to receive, albeit sacramentally they do it not. And therefore
besides this sacramental receiving (whereof I have entreated in the former
Chapter) the holy Doctors exhort us to use a spiritual receiving 3. Kinds of
Baptisine.
of the same. For like as there be three kinds of Baptism defined; the first
of blood; which is that, where by a Martyr is baptized in his own 1. Of blood
blood, or rather in the blood of Christ; since by dying for his sake he makes
it his: the second of water, 2. Of (...)
which is the first sacrament that each one receaueth; and are al thereby made
the members of Christ, and become Christians: The third, of the holy 3. Of
the holy ghost.
Ghost; which is that kind of Baptism that such receive, as have a desire,
and yet can-not sacramentally be baptized; to whom the holy ghost 3. Kinds.
of receiving.
imparteth the grace of Baptism, albeit he give them not the sacrament of
Baptism. Even so like-wise be 1.
there three kinds of receiving. The first is that, whereby we are
incorporated and united to Christ by favth S. Austime.
and charity; and hereof is that saying of S. Austins to be understood;
Believe, 2.
and thou haste eaten. The second kind is the sacramental receiving; which
is, when Christians do really receive the consecrated host at the priests
hands; whereby (being well disposed and prepared) they receive those marvelous
graces, whereof I have already spoken. The third is this spiritual manner
which is done through a longing and zealous desire to receive this Sacrament;
whereto is in effect the first kind of receiving presupposed, that a
Christian be linked to Christ by faith and charity; and the second in affect;
to wit, that he hartilye desires to receive this blessed sacrament. The which
spiritual kind of receiving thou may frequent by preparing thy self thereto
in manner following.

WHEN thou go to Mass on The manner of preparing our selves to re ceaue
spiritually.
such days as thou art not sacramentally to receive; vnbethinke thee of the
fruits of this sacrament, and the marvelous See the 13. Chapter above.
effects it works in the souls of such as woorthely receive it; whereof do
thou with all thy heart desire to be made partaker. And thus shall thou with this
desire and purpose come to hear Mass, and at such time as the priest begins
the general confession, or a little before, examine briefly thy conscience,
reducing to mind such sins and faults, at least the principal, wherein thou
haste offended since thy last confession or examination; and being penitent
therefore, beseech God humblye to forgive thee; purposing to confess them to
thy ghostly father, as soon as thou may conveniently, and to amend thy
life hereafter. Thus may thou herein occupy thy self, whiles the priest is
making him ready to say Mass, and recites the general confession; little
time more or less, according as thy need shall require. Afterward hear
Mass, behauing thee therein, as I told thee in the fourth Chapter; and at
such time, as the priest is about to receive, prepare thou thy self in like
manner, as if thou were then really to receive; lifting up thy heart anew to
thy Lord God contained in that sacrament; and inflaming thy soul with fresh
desires to receue him; and having so done, (...) him humbly, rather with suit
of heart, then sound of words) that fithens thou may not then sacramentally
receive him; yet that of his goodness it may please him to impart the virtue and
fruits of this marvelous sacrament unto thee; in granting them spiritually,
as he best can and knows how to do it. Thus having made thy suit and humble
prayer (according as the holy Ghost may vouchsafe to inspire thee) believe
assuredly, how that most bountiful and benign Lord, (who desires nothing
more then to comfort us, and give himself unto our souls) will satisfy thy
longing, and gratiouslye grant thee the gifts and virtues of this sacrament,
albeit thou sacramentally receive it not, doing therein according to his Mat.
5. a
promise, that such as hunger and thirst after righteousness (for such is this
sacrament) shul-be satiated: His holy mother has likewise Luc. 1. (...)
prophesied how he shall fill the hungrye with good things: for so ought thou
in hungry wise to be affected toward this sacrament, which is the true
satietie. And believe assuredly, that if thou have this fervent desire, and want
not faith, thou shall gain great consolation and profit by this spiritual
receiving; which may likewise be used, not only once Spiritual receiving may
be eft sons frequented in one day.
every day (as is the sacramental) but many times, if in one day thou happ to
hear many Masses; yea, thou ough test every time thou see the host
consecrated, to accustom thee forthwith to have an elevation of mind thereto,
longing to eat thereof, and to participate of those precious fruits that
proceed out of it; Since if by the fight of any strange and delicate
fruits or conserues; thou art forthwith provoked with a longing desire to
feed and taste thereon: how great a shame and confusion should it be to thee,
if seeing this fruit of the virginal womb contained in the consecrated host (a
much more precious fruit then that of the tree of life) thou should not
forthwith feel a longing and great desire to enjoye and receive it. By thus
accustoming thy self to covet this heavenly fruit and divine food, with far
greater desire then any corruptible food, thou may with great ease gain
much spiritual treasure, and eftsons reap this divine co^solatio^, by eftsons
receiving spiritually, as is aforesaid. Government after spiritual receiving.
Having now in this wise received, yield thanks to thy Lord for this his
singular benefit, and in all other things behave thy self according to that I
have told thee in the former Chapter; eue^ as though thou had then
received sacramentallye. And thus may thou pass on the time, til thou come
to receive sacramentally in deed, which thou ought not for all this
spiritual exercise to omit; but rather at the ordinarye times with great zeal
to frequent and use it; for thus must thou needs do to make thy spiritual
receiving so fruitful as I tell thee, one of these helping greatly to the other;
and as well the one as the other shall turn to great good, and comfort of thy
soul, and to no small increase of spiritual strength,

OF THE tentations which ordinarilye offer themselves to such as have begone
to walk in spiritual way.

Cap. 16.
HAVING hitherto entreated The (...) most excellent method.
of the most necessary exercises that every Christian man (minding sincerely to
dedicate him-self to divine service, and to live spiritually) ought to use and
spend his time in; it remains that I now speak of the encumbrances and
temptations, which ordinarily offer them selves in this spiritual life; and of
the remedies we are to use to overcome and vanquishe them withal. For this must
needs be presupposed, that our life (as Job says) is a continual warfare
Job. 7. a
upon earth, the which does grow so Our life is a continual warfare
much the greater, as a man draws nearer to Gods service; and means to
abandon this worldly life; especially in the beginning, til such time, The
Devil affiscteth is most in the beginning of our conversion.
as he have somewhat dompted the passions of the flesh; according to that the
wise man does forewarne us, saying: My son, drawing near to the service of
God, stand in ighteousnes, and fear, and dispose thy self to temptation. For
look how much a man grows stronger, Eccle. 2. a
and gains more spiritual treasure, by leaning to God, and leaving the world;
and so much more does our ghostly enemies the devils malicious rage increase,
and with more violence do they force themselves by sundry tentations to
afflict us; yet are not we to trouble our selves thereat, nor to grow faint
hearted, or give over the race we have so haplye begone; yea, rather ought we
to fight valiantly; and to be joyful; considering that all the temptations and
persecutions, Temptutions profitable.
wherewith our adversaries may any ways afflict us, if we force our selves to
fight, and manfullye to withstand them, shall occasionate our greater gain. For
by means of these temptations our soul is Job. 13. c.
proved and purified; and the pride of man repressed from growing 2. Cor, 12. b
insolent through Gods gifts, or his own good works, (wrought through Gods
grace) whiles by these temptations, he sees his own weakness and miserable
frailty. They make us also more wary and diligent to exercise prayer, and
other good deeds, that so it may please God continually to defend and keep
us. Finally they be occasion of diverse and sundry great benefits: And for this
cause is it, that our Lord suffers us to be thus tempted, and yet 1. Cor. 10 c
not above that our strength may well bear. Let us think therefore (as Iac.
1. a Judith. 8. c
S. James says) that then is great matter of reicysing offered unto us, when
diverse tentations do assault us. as-wel for the meede and spiritual fruit we
may reap thereby, as also for the apparent 1 Pet. 5. e
testimony it gives us, that we are not in slavery and bondage to the devil;
who vexes not, ne strives in this wise with those he has already under his
dominion; but with such as be divided from him, and follow the foresteppes of
Jesus Christ our souerain Lord and captain. In consideration whereof, we read
of diverse Saints, that being grievously and long time tempted, would neither
pray the^-selues, nor suffer any other to pray to God for their deliverance,
and the taking away of these temptations; but very willinglye to give them
aid and strength courageously to withstand them.

NOW therefore (good brother) if, A sweets exhortation and encouragement.
having begone to follow this thy Captain his steps, thou feel thy self
afflicted with diverse temptations and cross ouerthwartes; be not dismaide
therewith; but pluck me up a good heart; not believing for all this, but that
thou walk rightly and in our Lords way. Think how in like manner the same
happed to him; he vouchsafing to be tempted for our example and consolation;
whom if thou imitate rightly, in resisting and fighting manfully against them,
thou shall afterward by trial find that true which is written Iac. 1. b. 2.
Tim. 2. a. 4. b. Apoc. 2. b c. g. Job. 3. d.
Happy is the man that susteineth temptation. Who being by this means proved,
shall receive the crown of life, which is not given, but to those that
coragiously do fight the Thus being both counseled and encouraged by this good
consideration, take up such wepons, and brandishe them before hand, wherewith
thou must fight and resist thine enemies, at al times when any need shall
require and urge thee.

And for-so-much as the temptations and assaults, which assail us in this
life, be manifold, and much different, like as our enemies be manifold and
much different; I shall first appoint thee certain wepons and remedies,
generally to withstand and redress al what so-euer; and afterward shall I
set thee down others that are particular, according to the particular kind
and quality of each tentation. Temptations, albeit they be pro fitable, yet
are they in no wise to be sought for.


Howbeit, first will I here, before I go any further, advertise thee of one
thing, that albeit temptations be so profitable to our souls, as is
aforesaid, and that they may yield thee matter of so great profit, when God
permits them to come upon thee; yet art not thou for all that to crave,
seek, or intrude thy self into them; since this should be a far greater
temptation; and then might it well happen unto thee aceording as is Eccle. 3. d
written, that who so loves peril, shall perish in it.

GENERAL remedies to be used against temptations.

Cap. 17.
SINCE it is so weighty a matter, and of so great importance to fight, and
to resist tentations, for fear of being overcome, and falling into sin; it
behooves us to have always a vigilant eye, and to be furnished of such wepons
as be most requisite for this future combat. Such therefore as may serve
generally to defend thee from al kind of sin, be these considerations
following; which thou must exercise, not only in time of In time of truce we
ought to prepare for battle.
fight, but in time of peace too; that when need requires, thou may the^ have
them in more readiness.

FIRST consider the dignity of thy The dignity of ma^s soul.
soul, created to the very Genesis 1. c. Colos. 3. b (...) Ioh. 12. c.
likeness and similitude of God; and how, whiles it persisteth in grace, it is
so beutiful and bright, that the maker himself delights tobdwel in it; and
all the holy Angels and quiers of heaven do reverence and rejoice in it; but
anon, after it has once consented to sin, God straight-waies departs out,
and the devil enters in; polluting and changing it into so vgglye and
abominable a state, as if the sinner could then see himself, he would be
therewith utterly confounded, and have him-self in extreme horror. If therefore
thou would so lothly soil An apt comparison.
any fresh and gay garment thou had lately bought; how much more the^
ought thou to detest that consent to sin, which so filthily polluteth thy
soul; a much more precious thing, without al comparison, then any most
gorgious and glittering attire of body.

SECONDLY consider, how besides One mortal sin cause of in numerable sorrows.
this evil; even one sin does cause thee to incur innumerable other
miseries; since by committing but of one mortal sin, thou loosest the grace of
God; and his amity, annexed to his grace; Chris. ho. 17. in Genesis
Thou loosest the infused virtues, and the gifts of the holy Ghost; which
adorned thee, and made thee beautiful in the sight of God. Thou losest the
repose and Chris. ho. 8. ad pop. Antioch.
serenitie of a good conscience. Thou losest the Ezec. 18. c f. 33. c. d.
meed and merit of al such good deeds as thou have done before; and the
participation of the merits of Christ our head; since thou art not now united
to him by grace and charity; and so remainest an enemy to thy Creator, Mat. 7.
d 23. d Luc. 13. f
deprived of the inheritance, which Christ by his precious blood had purchased
for thee, condemned to everlasting torments; a thral and Ioh. 8. d.
bond-ssaue to the devil; who by all means possiblye seeks thine utter
overthrow. Briefly, thou incurrest so many other dangers, as no man's tongue
can sufficiently declare them. What man is he then, that wil-be so madd, as for
a short and beastlye delight that sin affords him; to incur such huge
heaps of extreme miseries, and incurable calamities?

THIRDLY consider, how by striving to resist tentations they tarry not long,
but vanish and fleet away; and thou by having vanquished the^, shall remain
enriched with greater meede, honor, and consolation. The blessed Mat. 4 b
Angels of heaven shall also come and serve thee, like as they did our Savior,
having overcome his tentations. But if on the other side thou let thy self be
lewdly overcome; the delight of sin shall forth with fleet away; and the
gripes, confusion, and coffeehouse, that remain behind, and gnawe thy
guilty conscience, The gripes of a guilty conscience.
shall afflict thee much more the^ any resistance making might possiblye have
done.

FOURTHLY consider, that if thou easily consent to sin, thou must afterward
painfully redress the evil thou have committed, since thou must needs suffer
much sorrow in bewailing it; shame in confessing it; pain in doing penance for
it; besides a millio^ of many mo difficulties; al which thou may avoid, by
fighting manfully, and not consenting unto sin.

FIFTHLY consider, that look how much more thou use to consent to sin, and
so much more shall thy An evil custom hardly to be cured.
temptations increase, and thy strength decay; and thus at length shall thou
cause a wicked custom, which afterward will almost be impossible for thee to
forsake and leave. For (as Aug. li. 8. confess. ca. 5
S. Austin says) Whiles we resist not a custom, we make it become a necessity:
but contrariwise, if thou force thee to resist in the beginning, thy strength
shall daily increase, and the tentations wax more weak and feeble. Suffer not
therefore thy self through a little negligence at the first, to receive
afterward a desperate and incurable wound. In these and such like
consultations, if thou eftsons exercise thy self, believe verilye to receive
great help thereby, against al kind of temptations. Other general remedies
against sin. Often prai er.


There be yet mo wepons, and general remedies; as is the often freque^tation of
prayer; a remedy that our Savior gave to his disciples the night of his holy
passion, Mat. 26. d Mar. 14. d Luc. 22. e Meditation of the four last things
exhorting them so sundry times to pray, for fear of being overcome by
tentation. It helps greatly in like manner to meditate, the four last
things; to wit, Death, Judgment, Hell, and Heaven; according to that saying
of Eccl. 7. d. The reding of holy scripture.
holy writ: In all thine actions remember the last things, and thou shall not
sin everlastingly. An-other general remedy is the reading of holy scripture,
committing certain sentences and particular authorities thereof to memory,
such as may most fitly help thee against the tentations that shall assault
thee. This remedy did our Lord and Savior Iesus-Christe teach us, when
being tempted by the devil in the Mat. 4 a Mar. 1. b Luc. 4. a Note. The holy
name of JESUS of great virtue.
wilderness, he overthrew and repulsed al his temptations by the textes of holy
scripture. The remembrance of particular examples of holy saints, shall likewise
help thee, setting before thine eyes what they did in such tentations as thou
feel.

It helps also not a little against al tentations to call eftsons upon the holy
name of Hieron. in (...) Ber. Ser. 15 in Cant. The sign of the holy Cross.
JESUS with a zeal and fervor of faith; and withal to form the Athan. in
Anton. Chris. hom. 55. in Mat Cyril Catec. 4. et. 13 Hist. Trip. li. 6. ca. 1.
Ex Theodoreto. li. 3 cap. 3.
sign of the holy Cross upon thee; which the devil does greatly dread;
(especially being made with a lively faith) as wherewith he was once utterly
confounded. And if for all this thou find thy self still infested with these
tentations; it shall help thee very much to behold our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ crucified Christ crucified.
with the eyes of thy soul; remembering those most Ber. Ser. 43. in Can tic.
and Ser. 42. de mo. ben. viu.
grievous torments which he endured for thy sake; and so shall thou well know,
what a small matter it is, to abide patiently for his sake all that trouble and
toil thou presently feel.

An-other remede, and that of great efficacy, is the often frequentation of
The Sacraments souerain remedies against al temptations.
those two most holy Sacraments; of Penance, and Receiving: since these are
the sovereign remedies and medicines, which our Savior (desirous of our
welfare) left unto us; Cip. Ser. de (...) Dom.
as-wel to cure our present wounds, caused through our former sins; as also
(they being already healed) to preserve us henceforth from incurring the like
dangers. And albeit the use of these divine Sacraments is (as I have said
before) at al times very profitable; yet much more does it help us in the
time of our tentation; since the^ does a man stand most need of grace and
strength, when he is most grievously assailed by his adversary: and then, no
doubt, but this grace is most plentiful and certain, when it is sought for by
means of these most holy Sacraments; besides the counsel and comfort each
one may receive of his ghostly father, to whom he shall humbly unfold in
confession al his whole danger and vexation. In like manner, if it should so
fall out, (which God forbid) as being overcome by tentation, thou fell into any
sin; see thou presently apply and use this remedy of Confession, not
permitting thy self, for never so small a while, to remain in mortal sin; (as
S. Gregory says:) The sin which Gre. lib. 25. Moral. cap. 12.
is not washed away with the water of penance, draws us down with the weight
thereof, and makes us fall into an-other. It behooves therefore with like
diligence to procure a present saulue for this spiritual sore, as we would do
for a corporal disease, though less dangerous a great deal.

TEE LAST general and right sovereign Occasion of sin to be eschewed.
remedy, not only to vanquishe tentations, but not to be troubled with them,
is; to shun, and carefully eschew the occasions whence they commonly do
proceed; as be superfluous riches, idleness, profane conuersations, lewd
companies, tumult of people; places and times where and when sins are
committed; and finally al such dangers and occasions, whereby thou remembrest
thee to have erst fallen into sin, or at least into tentation.

A PREAMBLE concerning the Remedies against particular tentations.

Cap. 18.
ALBEIT the particular sins; as also the tentations which induce us thereto,
be very many; yet are they al reduced unto seven, which are commonly called
Capital; as being the heads, roots, 7. Capital or deadlye sins.
and fountains whence the others are derived. With these seven sins be there
three enemies, that assault us; the Flesh, the World and the Devil; according
as is gathered out of that saying of S. John 1. Ioh. 2. c. The Flesh, the
world, and the Devil.
the'uangelist: Every thing that is in the world, is concupiscence of the
flesh, concupiscence of the eyes, and pride of life. The flesh does tempt and
induce us to three sins; Lasciuiousnes, gluttony, and sloth: The world, to
covetousness, and carke of temporal things in it; The devil does suggest and
allure us principally to pride, wrath, and envy.

I shall therefore, according to this order, entreat of the wepons, which we
are to weelde against these three sworn enemies of ours; and of the remedies
we must use to preserve us from such sins as they induce us to.

Of al other temptations, those of The temptations of the flesh most
dangerous.
the flesh be the most difficult and dangerous, as rising of a domestical and
very importunate aduersarye: And therefore does it herein behoue us to use
greatest diligence and circumspection.

REMEDIES against lasciuiousnes.

Cap. 19.
The first remedy against lust
THE first remedy a man is to take against lasciuiousnes, is, with all
diligence to fly occa Occasions to be eschewed.
sions; such as commonly use to inflame our flesh with disordinate
concupiscence; as is the conuersing with such persons, as either are wont, or
at least wise might provoke and kindle such fire; and a fixed view and curious
regard of others comelines; since, (as S. Isidore says) The first darts of
lust S. Isid. li. 2. de summo bono. (...) 39 Job. 31. a. b Eccl. 9. b.
are the eyes, which ( Ier. Three. 3. f
Jeremy said) had given his soul in pray. And to make us understand this
danger the better, S. Gregory says; how it is not lawful for us to fix our
eye on that, which is not lawful for us to desire, seeing that death is wont
commonly to enter into us by the Ier. 9. f
windows of our eyes and other senses. And therefore must thou take heed in
like manner of uttering any dishonest Colos. 3. b. Ephesians. 5. (...)
and ribald words, which corrupt good manners, as the Apostle 1 Cor. 15. d
says; as also of listening to them; or of reading books, wherein such
lascivious and (...) words are written. But much more ought thou to shun
the 1 Cor. 7. a
touching of such persons, as may occasionate a carnal alteration in thee, and
never to be in their company alone; since this fire is wont with solitarines
and opportunity soonest to be kindled. For this cause does S. Ier. epist. 2.
quae est ad Neapotianum de vit. Cleric.
Jerome write these words to Neapotian: If through thy office and function of
priesthood, need urge thee to visit any widow or virgin, see thou enter not
alone into her cha^her, but take such a companion with thee, as by his presince
thy soul may be preserved.

Take heed also of the receiving any letters Ier. vbi (...) Ber. ser. 61. de
modo ben. viu.
or tokens from such parties being absent; as also of sending any to them;
since these things are but sticks to kindle and keep in this wicked fire.
Finally this vice (as S. Austine says) is much better vanquished Flight more
safe then fight.
by flying then by fighting; and therefore behooves it, thou alwais Eccles. 3. d
fly the peril, not to perish in it.

In this respect too beware of being Eze. 10. f Ber. ser. 51. de mod. ben viu.
idle at any time; and of too much pampering up thy flesh, with disordinate
diet in eating and drinking; with to sumptuous and effeminate attiring; with
sleeping in too soft and easy bedding. Brieflye beware of al such like
delicacies; which are al of the^ ince^siues, and prouokers of this brutish
appetite: For otherwise, no doubt but experience shall testify that a most
true saying of holy writ, that Pro. 29. (...)
Who so nourishes his servant too daintslye, shall find him afterward
obstinate and rebellious. It shall therefore be greatly profitable for such as
be young, and of sanguin complexion, to use now and then some kind of
discipline, hear-cloth, fasting, watching, and other like corporal austerities,
wherewith the brodes of our flesh are bridled, and it made obedient and
subject to the spirit. For if S. Paul did in this wise chastise his body, (as
he 1. Cor. 9. d
witnesses himself he did) much more ought he to do the like, who stands
in greter need of this medicine; besides, that each of these chastisements shall
make thy meede increase; since they are al of them the works of penance; which
others do of mere free will, only to occasionate their greater merit; and to
please God their souerain Lord withal.

SECONDLY, thou must be marvelous The. 2. Remedy. Wicked suggestions are to
be expelled at the first.
heedy and circumspect, to expel these wicked thoughts presently after they
begin once to solicit and trouble thy mind, and to tickle thy flesh; forcing
thy self al thou may, not to give them any entrance; but in lieu thereof to
occupy thy mind in some other good and godly cogitations; And thus must we
like-wise behave our selves in each other temptation and suggestion; but
specially in this of the flesh; For look by how much the more thou suffer
such thoughts to enter in, and perseuerest in them; and by so much the more
will they fortify themselves, and with greater difficulty be driven out
again; which would never hap, if at, the very beginning thou did shake
them off, and oppose thy self manfully to bear off their first bruntes.
Whereupon a holy father said right well, that the thought of fornication, if we
resist it in the beginning, when the devil does first put it in our hearts, is
as brittle as a bul-rush, A pretty similitude.
and may right easily be broken; but if we receive it with delight and
pleasure, and linger any time therein, then does it become as hard as iron, and
very hardlye can be broken: whereto may that saying of the psalmist be fitly
applied: Ps. 136. a
Blessed is he that shall breaze his (...) ones; to Wit, the beginning of his
tentations; with the stone, which is, 1 Cor. 10. b
Jesus Christ.

But if in case through thy retchlesnes and small regard these temptations had
made a breach, and were alredie fortified in thy flesh; and thou thereby in
danger to consent and yield unto them, let this be then.

THE THIRD remedy, to cry amain The. 3. (...)
upon God with great zeal and affection (like as they do, which in the maine
Seas are suddenly endangered with some horrible tempest) craving his divine
help with certain short and pithie sentences, like to these; Ps. 69. a
Deus in adiutorium meu^ intend. etc. Esal. 38. c
Domine vim patior, responde pro me. Psalm. 37. d
Domine ne discedas a me. Psa. 73. d
Ne tradaes (...) anima^ confitentem tibi. Mar. 10. g Mat. 15. c
Jesus fili David miserete mei. With these and such like words may thou
call for his divine favor. It shall likewise very much avail thee to recommend
thy self to our blessed Lady; and to the holy Saints of heaven; specially
such as thou bear most devotion too; yea, and to seek some virtuous man,
if haplye in that instant thou could hit of any, who with his godly
exhortations and good prayers might not a little procure thine avail and
benefit.

THE FOVRTH remedy in this case The. 4. Remedy.
shall be, to give some affliction to thy flesh, by fasting, watching,
discipline; Sensible of fliction very necessary in extremities
yea, and in the time of danger to cause some sensible and present grief, that
thereby the stinges thou feel, may be choked up; and thou made forget those
unlawful delights thou art provoked too. This remedy did Saint Gre. PP.
initio vitae D. Benedicts, quae habetur li. 2. Dial. ca. 1. and sequ.
Benet use, feeling some fire in his flesh through the thinking of a woman;
who stripping off his clothes, rolled himself stark naked upon thorns;
and weltered so^ long there, til his body became al of a goare blood, and so
vanquished his tentation. The. 5. Remedy.


THE FIFTE Remedy is, eftsons to think of death, forsomuche as no one thing
(says Saint Gregory) Greg. lib. 16. Moral. cap. 31.
is of so great force to dompt the desires and concupiscences of the flesh, as
to think of the vgglines and filth thereof, being once dead. This remedy did a
holy father use, lib. 1. despir. forni. in 2. part. vit. SS. P. litera. f. and
lib. 7. cont. fornic.
of whom we read in the lives of Saints; that being much disquieted with
wicked suggestions toward a woman, who he had erst known in the world; and
finding no means how to rid the same out of his mind; it happened on a time,
that a friend of his being come to visit him, amongst other An history of
great of ficacie.
things, told, how such a woman was departed: This good father hearing him,
and being well informed where she was interred, got him thither on a night;
where, opening the sepulohre, that the dead corpse did lie in; and finding it
now rotten, and stinking very filthely, foiled a handkerchefe he had for the
nonst brought with him, in this carianly filth; and therewith returned home
again to his lodging: afterward, when either this, or any other woman came
to his mind, he presently took this cloth, and al to be-smothred his face
with all, saying: Glutt thy self, thou (...) wretch, glutt thy self with this
filthy savor of stinking flesh; and by this means was ridd of this
tentation.

THE SIXTH remedy, and that a very The. 6. Remedy.
sovereign one, especially for religious men, Ber. sermon. 38. de mo. ben. viu.
Pallad. v. 29. de Pach. v. 59 de Helen.
to subdue both these and other their temptations with; is, presently to
reveal their thoughts to their superiors and ghostly fathers; this being a
thing that wonderfullye displeases the devil, and that causes him to fly
with utter confusion; like as a man would do, if the woman he solicited to
lewdnes, should forthwith discover his dishonest suits unto Confession
confounds the Devil.
her husband. This counsel did a holy father give to a young man, grieved
with this temptation; who following the same, and feeling on a night this
conflict, ran diverse times to this his ghostlye father; returning evermore as
his temptation returned; and declared to him what he felt and suffered;
seriously recommending himself to his good prayers; and by this means, what
through the good words his ghostlye father gave him, and the godly
consolations he encouraged him with, it pleased God to perfectly deliver him.

These particular remedies, together with the general spoken of in the former
Chapter, may greatly help The 7. Remedy.
to defend thee against this sin. And yet besides those common considerations
there assigned, thou may take for a seventh remedy others that serve more
particulerly against this sin; as might be the aduises following.

FIRST consider, how God Ambr. in cap. 4. Luc. Ber. Sermon. 29. de mo. ben. viu.
General considerations peculierly serving against lasciuiousnes.
does look upon thee, and thy guardian and good Angel beholds al thine
actions; that by this means thou be ashamed to perpetrate so dishonest an act
in their celestial sight and presence; since before any never so simple a man,
thou would not be so impudent and shameless, as to commit the (...)

SECONDLY consider, how thy soul is with this vice most notoriously
polluted; yea, thy flesh it self, and al thy members, (which whiles thou
perseuerest in grace, are the temple of the holy ghost) become now through
this sin the members of an harlot, as 1. Cor. 6 c. d.
S. Paul says; and from a companion and fellow of Angels, (which thou art,
living in chastity) thou make thy self a pheere and fellow to brute beasts,
by living dishonestly.

THIRDLY consider the particular dis-commodities that rise of this detestable
and stinking sin; first it shortneth life, impaireth strength; cha^geth
complexio^ and comely hew of body; consumes a man's Luc. 15. b
substance; and spoileth him of his good name; since there is no sin so infamous
amongst al men, as this is. Briefly, this vice occasioneth an infinite number
of other evils; which daily experience, (...) declare and teach us.

(...) consider, that albeit thou would never so feign wallow still in this
pestiferous puddle of sin, and desire never so greatly to satiate this corrupt
desire of thine, yet shall it be impossible for thee so to do; this being one
of the things that is never satiated. And therefore, look how much more thou
wadest in this vice, Arist. ca. 1. lib. 7. de hist. animal.
and so much more shall the thirst of concupisce^ce be inflamed, eue^ like to
fire; the which, look how much more wood there is heaped on it, and so much
more does it kindle, and the flame grow greater. Al these things, if thou
weigh them well, and often, shall suffice, I hope, to make thee abhor this
brutal sin, and cause thee courageously to resist al such tentations as shall
induce thee to it.

REMEDIES against the second sin of the flesh, which is (...)

Cap. 20.
Gluttonye a great friend of (...)
THE second sin of the flesh is Gluttony, a great friend and fostrer of
lasciuiousnes; since, when the panch is puffed up, and the flesh too delicately
fedd, this fire is quickly kindled; and a man falls easily into the filth of
lechery, according as the scriptures Pro. 20. a Eccl. 23. a. Ephesians. 5. d. Jacob.
5. c 2. Pet. 2. c.
do in sundry places admonish us. It behooves thee therefore to be armed at al
assayes against this vice, which is the door and entrance of many others; and
of the victory and conquest whereof depends the victory and conquest of the
rest. Whereupon those holy ancient fathers that lived erst in the wilderness,
end euoured themselves al they might, to dompt and suppress this vice; woting
well, that but if this were first fullye vanquished, the other could very hardly
be subdued. Yea, experience teaches this for truth; how the devil most
commonly begins to give his first onset with this temptation. Witnesses
hereof are our first Genesis 3. a
Parents Adam and Eve; yea, the very first teptation he propouded to our Lord
Mat. 4. a Luc. 4. a Mar. 1. b
and Savior Jesus Christ, was of this sort. Wherefore, to defend thee from
this so venomous a vice, being one that does hatch and breed so many other,
apply these remedies and aduises following. Five kinds of gluttony.


THEFIRST is, that in thy eating thou seek to observe five things, that
preserve thee from five sundry sorts of gluttony; whereof S Gre. li. 13.
moral. cap. 13. 1. Eating out of due time.
Gregory does in one of his books make mention. The first is concerning the
time, when a man eats before his ordinary hour; which thou must beware of;
Cassian. (...) 5. cap. 20
forbearing and forcing thy self not to take above two repasts a day; to wit,
thy dinner and supper; and that at such convenient and accustomed hours, as
they keep, that govern themselves most orderlye; more the^ at which times
thou ought not to eat, without some notable necessity. If therefore thou
find thy self at any time tempted to infringe this rule, and without
sufficient cause to anticipate thine hour, thou must fight, and make a
forcible resistance; as did that monk which How a belie father beguiled him
self.
is written of in the lives of holy fathers; who on a time being tempted to
eat in the morning before his accustomed hour, beguiled himself in this
manner, saying: Tarry a while until the third hour (which is at nine a clock
in the morning) and then will we eat. And when this hour was come; go too, let
us work a while until the sixth hour (to wit, noone:) afterward, now let
us say a few prayers or psalms; now let us lay our bisquit to steep; and
thus passed on the time, til his ordinarye hour was come, which was at the
ninth hour, to wit, (three a clock at afternoon;) and by this means was he
perfectly delivered from this vice.

THE SECOND kind of gluttony The 2. kind of gluttony
(...) in the quality; I mean, in eating of too dainty and pleasant Dainty
meats.
meats, whereof thou must take great heed, contenting thy self with such
meats, as may suffice to sustain and (...) flesh; and not to delight and
(...) it; according to that S. Bernard Ber. epist 1. ad Rob. nepotem. Job. 6.
a. Pro. 27. a
does exhort thee; and but if they seem course and unsavory, apply that
saulce which he Ber. vbi supra.
(...) to (...) hunger; (...) that shall cause them to seem sauourie enough.
Remember thee also of that singular abstinence of the ancient fathers of
Egypt, who deemed it superfluous to eat any sodden meats, as S. Jerome
tells us. Let therefore this their rigor S. Jerome.
shame and confound thy riot, and make thee refrain eating of delicate and
sweet meats, for fear thou be like to those amongst the people of Israel;
Nu. 11. (...) and g. ps. 77. c. d
that desired flesh in the desert, and thereby provoked the wrath and
indignation of God against them.

THE THIRD kind of gluttonye The 3. kind of glutto nigh. Excess.
concerns the quantity, that is, of eating more then suffices to sustein
nature; whereof follows (as S. Jerome says) that look by how much the more
the bellye S. Jerome.
is filled, and by so much the more is the soul made feeble. Thou must
therefore shun such excess; since meat is (according to S. Aug. cap. 31. (...)
1. Con fess.
Austins counsel) to be taken in manner of a medicine; whereof we use not to
receive any great quantity. Take heed then of ouercharging thy heart with
too much meat and drink; as our Savior does admonish Luc. 21. g. Romans 13. d.
us, that by this means thou may escape his future indignation; and a
million of mischiefs Eccl. 37 d
that proceed out of this vice.

THE FOVRTH kind of gluttonye The 4. kind of gluttony.
respects the manner. When a man eats his meat too greedily, and with too
great a fervor: which appears Greedines.
well by his hasty and disorderly feeding; and when he is too much bent and
affectionate upon his meat. Thisvice does the wise man Eccl. 37 d
in these words reprehend, saying: Long not after every kind of meat, nor
eat not greedilye upon every dishe. Whose counsel see thou endeavor thy self
to follow, minding not so seriouslye thy corporal food and nutriture whiles
thou eatest; but either listen to the lesson, if there be any read; or lift up
thy mind to God with some good thought; or enterlace some prayer or psalm
amongst; that by thus doing both thy soul and body may be fostred and sed
together.

THE FIFTH and last kind of gluttony, The. 5. kind of gluttony.
is an excessive ear and thought to seek out (...) of cates and newfangled
tastes; which thou ought (as A curious desire of straungo tastes.
a very blameworthy thing) greatly to eschew and beware of, for fear of
being like to those the Apostle Phi. 3. d. Romans 16. (...)
speaks of, that make their belies their God, seeking with as great care to
serve and satisfy it; as were requisite for discharge of their duties to
Godward.

For remedy both of these and al other kinds of gluttony, these
considerations following shall greatly help which thou may take for a second
remedy.

FIRST consider, how much the ouercharging The 1. (...)
and heuines that remains in thy stomach after having surfeted, does more
hurt and trouble thee; the^ the diversity of delicate and sweet meats can
delight and do thee good; the taste and pleasure whereof lasts no longer, Taste,
how smally it tarieth.
the^ whiles the meat is passing from the mouth unto the throat; neither af ter
it is once thus gone, is there any me morial or sign of this delight remai
may thou much better understand, if thou examine what now rests of all that
ever thou have swalowed and swilled al thy whole life time: What Note well.
have thou now left of all the repasts, of all the sweet tastes, of all the
dainty morcels that thou ever deuouredst? What have thou now extant and forth
coming of all this? Thou see how al is quite vanished away, as though there
had never been any such Make account therefore, when thou feel thy self
tempted with this vice; that the pleasure is already gone, which so speedily
does pass away. And care not for condescending to thy flesh, in that it thus
disordinately may covet and desire.

SECONDLY consider the inconveniences The. 2. Remedy.
that rise of this sin; Amb lib. de Helia et ieiunio. ca. 12. and. 16
First the cost and trouble thou must be at, to satiate this thy gluttony.
Eccl. 17. d
Secondlye, the number of bodily infirmities that grow by means of surfeting.
Oseae. 7. (...).
Thirdly, it dulleth and does obfuscate the mind, and makes a man afterward
unfit for spiritual exercise. Luc. 6. d.
Fourthly, call to mind that everlasting hunger and thirst that shal-be in the
next world, where no one drop of water shal-be granted; as we gather plainly by
that example of the rich Luc. 16. f.
glutton. Remember also what a filthy substance thy tenderly pampered flesh
once being dead, shal-be resolved too.

THE THIRD Remedy is, to think The. 3. Remedy.
of Christ and his Mat. 12. d Mar. 2. d Luc. 6. a
Disciples abstinence; being forced through famine, to pluck of the ears of
corn, and eat them; how our Savior likewise Our Sauiouts abstinence.
Mat. 4. a Mar. 1. b. Luc. 4. a. f Mat. 27. d
fasted forty days in the desert; and the gaul that was given him in his
extreme thirst to drink, being upon the froode; whereof thou ought every
time thou art at meat, to vnbethinke thee.

THE FOVRTH remedy is, eftsons The. 4. Remedy.
to remember that eternal supper of heaven; whereto we are al invited, as our
Savior by one of his Mat. 22. c Luc. 14. d Apoc. 19. b.
parables does signify. Consider how, minding to enjoy this so happy and
royal a supper, it behooves to abstain in the The plentiful supper in heaven
should cause a spare dinner in carth.
dinner of this life; that by so doing thou may then fill and satiate thee
the better; like as we see in the world; he that is invited to a sumptuous sup
per, uses commonly to be moderate and spare at noone; not to lose the
commodity and pleasure of his appetite at night.

THE LAST remedy, and that a very The 5. Remedy.
secure one, is, so much as thou may possibly, to fly al occasions of
gluttony; Occasions to be eschewed.
as be the feasts and iunketings of worldly man, where there is so great
abundance and variety of viandes; so many meats, drinks, and delicate and
pleasant fruits, amidst the which, very hardly may any man keep sobriety;
being so many things to allure him to gluttony. Remember what holy writ
Genes. 3.
says of our mother Eve, how she saw the tree, that it was good to eat, and
fair and pleasant to the eye, she took of the fruit, and did eat, and gave
thereof unto her husband. and thereby was cause of so great a loss both to
her-self, and to the whole Romans 5. c.
race of miserable mankind. In like manner may thou fall into many miseries,
if thou fly not the hazarding thy self in such like dangers.

REMEDIES against the troublesome tentations of sloth and idleness.

Cap. 21.
Idleness engendered of lasciuiousnes and gluttony.
THERE is yet an-other vice of the flesh, engendered of the two former, spoken
of in the former Chapters, and is called Sloth or Idleness, which is a
lothsomnes Ber. ser. 3. et 6. de Ascens. Gre. 3. par. curae pas tor. admoni. 16.
and disliking of spiritual things; and a negligence or fainting to begin
any good thing, or to finishe that which is entered and begone already. Against
which vice (not a little hurtful) it is convenient likewise to be armed; since
thou shall not be without this wearines, and loathsome temptations, whiles thou
art harbored in this fleshly body; which (as the scripture Sap. 9. c
says) does aggrauate and molest the soul, seeing that many times through
attending to our bodily necessities, and the importunities of our flesh, we
become slouthful, distract, and dull to do any good. Wherefore, to the end thou
be not overcome with this domestical enemy, help thy self with these
considerations and remedies that I shall now prescribe thee.

FIRST consider the strict account The. 1. Remedy. S. Bernard.
thou must yield of the time that God does grant thee in this life, to work
well in; for that, as S. Bernarde Ber. de trip (...) manus, linguae and cordis.
says: There is no time given thee in this mortal life, whereof thou must not
render a reckning (...) thou have employed it. For if we be to yield an account
of every idle word, ( Mat. 12. (...)
as truth himself does tell us in the holy Gospel) how much the rather are we
to do the same, of time spent Every moment to be made account of.
idely, and without any fruit or goodness? The which a devout and spiritual man
marking well, every time he heard the clock strike, said thus in his heart. P.
Ignat. in horas singulas col ligebat sese cap. 1. lib. 5 vitae ipsius.
Ah my Lord God, lo now an-other hour of my life spent, whereof I am to yield
thee a reckning. and so forced him-self withal to spend the next hour better
the^ he had done the former.

SECONDLY consider, how if thou once let slip the Gala. 6. c Time past is past
recovery.
time unfruitfully, that is given thee to fructify and do good in; it can
never be possibly recovered again; and so must thou needs afterward lament
the loss of so precious a thing through thy negligence, and yet want means to
win it any more; for albeit thou have a meaning to do well hereafter, yet is
it Mat. 24. d. 25. a Apoc. 3. a.
uncertain whether thou shall have time and leisure granted thee to do so;
and but if thou have, yet is the good thou shall then do, due to that present
time; and so both might and ought thou have done tofore. The toil of
worldlings confounds the sloth of Christians.


THIRDLY consider how long and painful the toils and sweats of worldly men
be, to scrape a few riches together; and to purchase some temporal promotion;
and how they refuse no pains to satisfy others humors, and to gain their
gracious looks and favors; and thus be thou utterly confounded, that they to
get vain and transitory things should be more diligent; then thou to purchase
most precious and everlasting riches. Be ashamed likewise, that they are more
diligent and Luc. 16. b.
careful to please men, (but bond-slaues of the world) then thou to please God,
that celestial and omnipotent Monarche. Thus read we, of a holy Father in the
lives of Saints; who on a time having marked the curious attire and tricking
up of a lewd losel; began to bedew his cheeks, and say: Pardon me, O my
Lord and omnipotent God, who see, that one days trimming up of this strumpet,
surpasses the pains I have al my life long bestowed, to deck and beautify my
soul. Petrus de natalib. cap. 38-lib. 6. de SS. ex Heraclide.
The like is al-most written of the Abbot Pambus; who having seen in
Alexandria a woman of no less curious attire the^ the other, fell of weeping,
and being asked the cause; his answer was, that he wept as-wel for the loss
of that woman; as also for that he employed The 2. Remedy.
less care and study to please God, then she to please men. The hope of gain
in heaven ought to make us take pains in earth.


THE SECOND Remedy to make thee take pains, and to work well in this life,
is, to think estsons of the glorious fruit that these thy good travails and
labors will one day afforde and yield thee; for if the husbandman do dig
and delue; and til his ground in frost, sknow, and all the cold winter winds
that blow; and withal this hardness goes so lustily away in hope of summers
yield, that sometimes does deceive him; how Iac. 5. b.
much more reason is it, that thou should trauail and take pains to serve
God in this life; hoping, as thou do, for so plentiful a harvest in the life
to come; which never did, nor can possibly deceive us, as both our faith, and
all the holy 2. Par. 5 b Prou. 11. c. Eccl. 2. b Mat. 10. d. Luc. 6. c 1. Cor.
3. b
scriptures do assure us? And if the hired servant weigh not the toil of his
whole days travail, for joy of the wages he looks to receive at night;
why do not thou in like manner animate thy self to work in this life?
remembering the abundant and incomparable hire that shal-be paid thee at
night; to wit, after thy death Neither can any man attain to so great a
reward, but by great pains and travail, as S. Gregory testifies. Call to
mind S. Gregory
also the anguishes, griefs, and infinite torments that such suffer, and shall
do everlastingly as in this life through sloth and negligence refused to take
any pains to serve God, and to fulfill his divine commandments; Mat. 3. (...)
7. c. 21. b Luc. 13. b Ioh. 15. (...)
and so be dead like barreine branches without bearing fruit: Which but if
thou seriously do think of, will put life into thee, and make thee bear,
right patiently, any pains whatsoever. So did Achilles the Abbot find
himself quickened thereby; who being asked of a friar, why, being in his sell,
be found himself slouthful; for that (quoth he) thou haste neither seen the
joys we expect, nor the torments we dread: for if thou had once well and
diligently weighed these, albeit thy sell were full of worms, yet would thou
abide therein without any idleness.

THE THIRD Remedy to redress this vice, and to animate us not to The 3.
Remedy against Sloth.
shrink at the toiles which we must take in this life to serve and please God
with; is, that the Apostle prescribes to the Heb. 12. c.
Hebrews; to wit, the often thinking and rethinking of the life and passion of
our Savior Jesus Christ; since if we eftsons did consider how this good
Ber. ser. 43. in Can.
Lord of ours was from his infancy brought up in travail, and how he passed
his whole Our Saviors passion ought to make us painful.
and most holy life, even from the cribbe until his cross in continual
turmoiles and troubles, these afflictions of his would suffice to ease and
lighten ours, seemed they never so intolerable; his drops of sweat, would
assuage our heates, and encourage us to bear him company; woting well, how
Mat. 10. b Luc. 6. f Joan. 13. b and. 15. c.
unseemly a thing it is for the servant to be in better estate then the
master. If he therefore took such pains in this life for love of us, it is
not much that we on the other side take some pains for his love and our own
profit. This consideration caused the holy Saints afore-time with such
feruoure and diligence, to walk in our Lords ways: here-with did they
cheerfully pass over their toiles, troubles, fastinges, watchinges, and al
other the loathsome labors of this temporal life; and so may thou do in
like manner, if thou set the same mirror continuallye before The. 4. Remedy.
thine eyes.

THE LAST remedy that shall in Every day to be accounted our dying day.
this matter help thee greatly, is to make accoumpt, that each day is the
last day of thy life; which with good cause thou may do, and think,
seeing thou art not Luc. 12. c. Mat. 24. d 25. a. Mar. 13. d.
assured whether the next day shal-be given thee, or no. Think therefore; how
thy whole estate for ever depends only of this one days behavior, and so
animate and cheer up thy self, saying; my dolours shall endure but for this day:
it is not much, that I behave my self diligently therein, especially knowing
the profit that is to ensue thereof.

REMEDIES against the sin and temptation of Covetousness.

Cap. 22.
THE second enemy that we The tentations of the second ene mie.
have in this life, is the world, which is meant and understood by the
concupiscence of our Ioh. 2. c Ber. Ser. 59 adsorore.
eyes; conformably to the authority of S. John aforesaid, since the great
variety of things that are in this world; as riches, and other temporal
commodities, do engender in us a certain curious desire to see them; of
seeing, grows a seeking and longing to have them, weening they should be both
profitable and pleasant to us; and then having once obtained and gotten them,
follows a covetousness, which is a disordinate Couetise defined.
desire wherewith we love, possess, and enjoy them; as also an insatiable
appetite to have always more the^ that we have already. The which vice, for
that it is a very dangerous one; yea, as the Apostle 1 Timothy 6. b
says, The root of al wickedness is Covetousness; It behooves therefore, we be
provided of good wepons and sufficient remedies to resist the same, for fear
of being overcome withal. Wherefore the best and most convenient for this
purpose are these aduises following. Remedies for the poor man covetous.


FIRST, if thou be poor, and have a disordinate love to riches (which love
makes thee more covetous, the^ if thou had riches, and did not love
them) refrain this hurtful desire, and content thy self with thine estate;
considering that by thus doing, thou shall have more security, more rest, and
more speedy means a great deal to gain virtue withal, then if in deed thou
were rich. Lact. ini tio cap. 1. li 1. divine. Inst. Hier. lib. 3. in. 19. cap.
Math.
This did the The old Philosophers despi sed worldly wealth.
Philosophers of old time by natural discourse only understand right well; and
for that cause forsook such riches as they had, knowing the^ to be a let and
hinderance to the obteyning of wisdom, and al other virtues. Now if these men
guided only by the light of nature made choice of poverty, having means to be
rich; why should not thou, being illuminated with a higher light, and more
glittering brightness of heavenly grace, well wot To make of Necessity a virtue.
the same truth, and make a virtue of necessity, contenting thee with that
poverty that God of his great good providence has given thee, as a very
substancial and secure mean for thy Examples of others harms happed through
Couetise
salvation? Why do not the examples of others their falls convince thy folly,
and their great and grievous harms make thee more heedeful? Remember how 4.
Re. 5. f
Giezi, the prophet Elizeus servant being not contented with his calling, but
desirous to be rich, deserved with his riches, to have a perpetual leprie
laid upon him. We read likewise, how Act. 5. 4.
Annanias Ananias and Zaphiras.
and Zaphiras, through a covetousness they had to retain some part of the
goods, which they had erst begone to renounce, were deprived of their corporal
lives. Thou can not Judas.
be ignorant, into what a miserable blindness this covetousness brought that
accursed Mat. 26. (...) Luc. 22. a Mar. 14. b.
Judas, as the Scripture yields testimony both of these and many mo such
like examples. Which if thou consider well, thou shall thereby discern, how
much more secure the poor man's estate is, being contented with his poverty;
then that of the rich man, being never satiated with all his plenty. Thou
ought not therefore thus greedilye to long for wealth and worldly
substance which might cause thee to fall into so many dangers, and perilous
tentations.

SECONDLY, consider the perils Covetous men fall into the Devils snares.
and difficulties, as well of the bodies, as souls, of the rich men, and such
as with so great anxietie do seek after worldly wealth; Since by this their
longing desire after riches, they fall into the devils snares (as S. 1 Timothy 6. b
Paul does testify) Thou see besides, with how great care and Bern. sub
(...) 11. lib. de (...) Cler.
pain they be gotten; with how great fear they be kept; and with how great
fear they be kept; and with how great grife and sorrow they be lost. And when
al is done, these men can have but meat and cloth; and this shall not thou
want, with half that care, if thou will Mat. 6. d. Luc. 12. d. 1. Pe. 5. c
Phil. 4. b
principally seek for the kingdom of God, and the heavenly riches of thy
soul; like as Christ him self has promised thee.

THIRDLY consider, how by loving of poverty, and willingly embracing it; thou
art by that means The contented poor man more rich then the richest.
more rich and noble, then all the rich gentlemen of this world be; for thus
art thou an Imitatour of Christ, and like to him, who so highlye set by Ber.
ser. 1. de vigil. Not. ser. 4 Natiu. Amb. ca. 13 de instit. virg.
poverty, and with so great rigor, from his infancy to the hour of his
death, observed and practiced it; as by discoursing over al his life, thou
may right evidently see. What greater honor or degree desire thou, then
to be of the same estate and condition, that so high a Lord was of? yea, thou
art withal most rich; for thus is the kingdom of heaven. and the King and
Lord thereof, thine; and so by possessing of him, thou possessest al riches,
and much more precious treasures, then may in this life be either atteined,
imagined, or desired.

FOURTHLY, an-other very good Covetous men's company to be avoided.
remedy not to fall into the tentatio^ of avarice, is; to shun (as much as
may be) the haunting of rich men's company, pany, especially if they be
covetous, least by their conversation, thou be smitted with their infection.
Take heed in like manner, not to see or deal with much money, riches, or any
beautiful and precious things of this world; the sight whereof does commonly
kindle our hearts to desire and long for them, where otherwise by not seeing
them, thou (...) want this greedy desire of having them. This was the holy
Abbot S. Antony tempted to avarice.
S. Anthonies opinion, of whom we read, that the devil having laid in the way
he was to pass by, a great cupp of silver, and an other time a massy wedge of
gold; yet would this holy man never take up any thing, but fled forthwith fro
them; least by looking thereon, his fancy might have been drawn to regard the
wealth and riches he had already given over; and by that means his heart have
been defiled with love of temporal things, which he had erst purposed never
to esteem and set by. Fly therefore, as much as thou may, to touch, or deal
with money, which is like to pitche, that according to holy writ) Eccl. 13. a
defiles such as touch it. It shall also Money defiles like pitche.
help thee not a little in this matter, to go som-times and visit hospitals,
and to converse with poor folks; weighing also, how others that be poorer
then thou art, bear patiently al their wantes and penury.

Al these remedies may in like manner serve to help the rich, albeit, in very
deed, there be others, (as might be the considerations following) more fit for
their purpose, to make them Ramedies for the rich covetous.
with draw their minds from so greatly fancying of worldly wealth.

FIRST consider, if thou be rich, how uncertain and Bernard epist. 103.
deceitful are al riches, renown, and temporal treasure; since we see by daily
experience many, that were erst Job. 1. 2. (...) seq.
welthy and very rich, Iyenowe plonged in the pit of extreme penury: yea, the
greatest wealth in the world, both may be, and eftsons is, al lost in one day.
And albeit it be not thus lost, yet must it, (maulger our heads) in the end be
by death forsaken; Death.
at what time that doubtful distribution is to be made; the body be given in
pray to worms; the goods to thanklesse heirs, yea, many times to foes; the
soul perhaps to the infernal furies for them to torment in everlasting
pains.

SECONDLY consider, how riches The rich man like to him that has a dropsy.
do never satiate; yea, look how much thy wealth and substance multiplieth,
and so much does the hunger and greedy desire, to have more, increase; even
like to a man that has Isod. li. 2. de summo bono. ca. 41 Amb. li. de Nabutha.
cap. 2
a dropsy; who, look how much more he drinks, and so much more he
swells, and is less satisfied then before. Moreover, by thus seeking
satietie of that which will never satiate, thou losest the true satietie and
consolation that God would both in this life, and in the other give thee, if
thou soughtest for it, and therewith only held thy self contented.

THE THIRD and last Remedy, The. 3. Remedy against Covetousness.
which (being a rich man) will help thee much, not to be overwhelmed with
avarice, is, to force thee (seem it never so paineful and grievous) always to
be giving good alms to the Alms giving.
poor; assuring thy self, as most certain it is, that thou have not any so
assured riches, as that which in this wise thou distributest to the needy;
since this can neither be Mat. 6. b. Luc. 12 d 1. Tim. 6. d
robbed by thief, nor corrupted by time, as the other which is left behind;
yea, that which is more, this only will accompany thee, when death does rob
thee of the rest. See therefore thou take this secure way, to store up tresure
in heaven; and encorage thy self to do thus every day, with more cheerful and
frank heart then other; considering, that what thou bestowest upon the poor
and needy, Christ himself receaueth it, as he Mat. 10 d 25. d. e. Mar. 9. f.
affirms; who with this (...) ho. 6. et 7. varior. arg. et cap 4. lih. de
Nabuth. D Thom. 22. q. 32. art. 5.
condition has given thee what thou have, that thou should hberally
dispense the same to the poor; and taking for thy self what is meet and
requisite, to dispose the surplusage amongst thy needy and distressed brethren.

REMEDIES against the tentations of the third Enemy, to wit, the Devil, and
first against PRIDE, whereto he principally induces us.

Cap. 23.
THE third and last enemy, against who^ we have to fight in this world, is the
Devil; who in the authority Joan. 2. c.
of S. John above alleged, is understood by the pride of life, since this was
that, that made him at the very first to be hurled headlong Isai. 14. (...)
out of heaven, into the bottomless pit of hell; and therefore, albeit he induce
us to al other sins, and tempts us with each one; yet is this inducement to
pride (the most heinous sin of al) principally attributed to him; as also the
suggestions to wrath and envy, which issue and proceed therout. Wherefore,
like as I have given thee wepons and remedies to resist the rest withal, so
shall I now (God willing) prescribe thee some preservatives against these;
beginning first with pride, which is a Pride. what it is.
disordinate desire and appettite of a man his own excellency; whereby he
seeks to be singular above al others.

THE FIRST Remedy therefore, The first re medie against Pride.
which thou art to use against this diabolical sin, shall be, to consider how
greatly Eccl. 10. (...)
God detesteth pride, and how grievously from the beginning of the world he
has punished it, as-wel in Angels, as also in men; in Angels, we see by Isa.
14. c Apo. 12. a. b
Lucifer, and the rest of his adherentes; in men, by Dan. 4. e
Nabugonosor, 1. Mac. 1. e 2. Mac. 9. c
Antiochus, with many mo (as holy writ does witness) that came to ruin
through this vice; and were most severely chastised. The same does like-wise
eftsons testify, Mat. 18 a 20. d. e. 23. b. Luc. 14. c. 18. c.
how singulerly he has always loved and exalted the humble; whereof both Mat.
12. d 21. a. Phil. 2. a Heb. 2. b.
our Savior, and the blessed Lady Luc. 1. e.
his holy mother do bear sufficient testimony.

THE SECOND remedy is the consideration of thine own self, since (as S. Ber.
ser. 1. in die S. Andreae, et sermon. 6. in Psalm. 90. Qui habitat.
Bernard says, thine estate being well examined, shall teach thee what thou
want; and prayer shall obtain thee, that thou want it not. For God loves
the soul that diligently discusseth The 2. Remedy against pride.
it self; and that after due discussion, does without flattery and partiality
judge it self. Confider therefore what thou art, both in body and soul; and
so shall thou find more causes of confusion and shame, then of hawtines and
arrogancy. Touching The misery of ma^s estate.
thy body, vnbethinke thee, what a filthy substance it was engendered of; and
how now it is a sack full of dirt and donge; and shall ere long be made the
pray of worms; and as for thy soul, it is fraught with heaps of folies,
errors, ignorance, fears, fancies, anxieties (and that which is worst of al)
of so many monstrous crimes it has committed against that divine and dreadful
Majesty. Finally, look how much better thou shall know thy self, and so
much more plainly shall thou perceive thee to be such as Job describes,
saying: a Man borne of a woman, living but Job. 14. a.
small time, is full of many miseries, who springs up like a flower, and
withers quickly, and vanishesh as a shadow, and never continues long in one
estate: for presently thou shall see him merry, and by and by sad; now whole,
then sick; now rich, now poor; now quiet, now troubled; in fine, not in
the main seas be there so many waves and diverse The (...) of man's nature.
mutations to be seen; as man by daily proof finds contrary changes and
alterations in him-self. Who so therefore considers these things, and
thoroughly weighs the^ as they be, shall find much more cause to be
confounded, and to accuse himself, then to be a boasting bragger, or any
ways proud and insolent; and when When one thinks worst of himself, then
is he best at quiet.
he thinks thus basely of himself, then is he best at ease, and most of al
contented. Wher-vpo^ we read in the lives of holy fathers, how an Abbot being
asked on a time, whether it were better dwelling alone and solitarye, then
abroad in the world and in company with others; his auswere was; that, but if
a man knew himself well, he might securely enough dwell The proud man never
quiet.
wheresoever him listed; but if he were vainglorious and proud, he should
never find any quietness, whersoeuer he lived. Whence thou may gather this
note, that the disciphering of thy self, is a means to make thee lowlye Note.
and humble, and to live in rest and great tranquillity.

THIRDLY, if thou find thy self The. 3. Remedy against Pride.
puffed up with any wind of vain glory, weening thee to be endued with
certain virtues that thy companion has not; think yet, how he passes thee
far in many good parts thou lackest. For if thou haplye can fast more, and
take greter pains the^ an-other; yet has he more humility, more patience, and
more charity then thou haste; and these be much more precious virtues in the
sight of God, then are thine. Finally, see thou An excellent lesson.
follow this advise, to consider others virtues sooner then their vices; and in
thy self to weigh rather thy vices the^ virtues; being more diligent to note in
others such virtues as thou lackest, rather then any virtues in thy self,
others are deuoyde of. This consideration shall keep thee in humility, and
inflame thy heart with desire to advance from good to better; and by this
means shall thou be preserved from the boistrons blasts of Eccl. 43. b
Northern winds; (to wit) of ambition and vain glory; which eftsons stay the
dewes of divine influence, and blow over the shours of heavenly consolations.
The. 4. Remedy against pride.


FOURTHLY consider, that if thou remembrest thee of any good deeds thou have
done, or perceauest any commendable part in thee, consider, I say, how all this, whatsoever it is, 1. Cor. 4. b Ephesians. 2. a. b.
thou have received it from God; and therefore ought thou not to glory any
We ought not to be proud of that is not our own.
more therein, then in a thing of an other bodies; yea, rather ought thou to
fear, least for thy pride all this be taken from thee, and thou by that means
be contemned of such as erst commended thee.

But if in case thou art not vainglorious and proud of thy good works, but of
thine honor, riches, and other temporal profits which thou possessest.
Remember, how these things are Al good gifts com from God.
also given thee of his heavenly liberality; to the end that by means thereof
thou should be occasioned to love and reverence better the good geuer and
benefactour; which if thou do not, al these things, whereof thou now
braggest, shall, for thine ingratitude, occasionate thy greater punishment and
condemnation. Thou art not therefore to vaunt and be proud of these things;
but rather to be more Luc. 18. b
humble, and to stand in greater fear and awe.

FIFTHLY, to beat down this vain The (...) remedy against pride.
glory and boasting (which men are commonly wont to have through the credit
and worldly wealth they enjoy in this life) it is a very good remedy to weigh
well, how vain, caduke, and transitory al these things are; like as man's life
it self is very short, and most uncertain: And therefore mark well the words
that Saint Austine writes to this purpose. If (...) Austine.
thou vaunt thee of thy riches (says he) and of the nobility of thine
ancestors; (...) good brother.
if thou glory in thy country thy co^lines of body, and the renowm, which the
world respects thee with; consider with thy self, how thou art (...)
earth, and shall be come earth. Behold where those are now that eaist
enjoyed the same titles and styles, which thou art presently puffed up with?
where be they that so ambitiously desired to rule and govern countries? where
be these insuperable and unvanquished Emperors? where be the Generals, and
chief captains of armies? where be those that erst ridd so proudly, mounted on
their stately palfreys? where be they that took pleasure in their pompes and
ceremonies; now is al turned to earth and ashes? now is the memorial of their
lives contained in few lines: Look now into their graves, and see, if thou
can know the master from the man; the poor fellow from the peni-father?
Discern now, if thou can, the bondslaue from the king; the strong man from
the weak; the comely personage from the deformed criple? The same does Chrisost.
hom. 43. ad Pop. Antioch. to. 5.
S. John Chrysostom in a manner say, and adds: Draw nigh to each ones grave,
and behold their naked ashes, their stinking flesh, and offal of worms
food; and remember how this must be the end of al our carcases, be they never
so curiously entreated in this life, and pass they their days in never such
iolitie, delicacie, and exile of al annoies: yea, I would to God (says he) all this matter came in the end but to ashes and worms, since these losses should
be but small, and the condition of our nature might easily excuse the^ But now,
remove thine eyes from their toumbes and ashes, and lift up thy mind to that
dreadful Tribunal of divine judgment; where there shall be weeping and gnasshing
of teeth; where shal-be outward darkness, and the worm that never dies, and
the fire that never que^cheth. Thou can not, if thou ponder these things
thoroughly, be proud and vainglorious of any earthly thing whatsoever.

SIXTHLY, it shall greatly help to The sixth Remedy against pride.
make thee detest al pride, to consider, how highly God hates such as be
infected with it; who (as the Iac. 4. b. 2. Pet. 5. b.
Scripture witnesses) does resist the proud, and gives grace unto the lowly.
This kind of people is likewise abhorred of other Eccl. 10. a
men, who can by no means away with their loathsome and disdainful The proud
man hated both of God and man.
conversation; yea, to themselves are they also very noisome and tedious, in
seeing themselves environed with so many dangers, dreads, and suspicions;
having every one to malice and lie in wait for them, and to gainsay and
cross them in all their enterprises. Whereupon it is reported of a certain holy
king, who having a marvelous rich and precious crown given him to be crowned
withal, held it (musing) a pretty while in his hands, before he would put it
on his head, and at length said openly in this wise: O more noble then happy
crown, which if any man knew well, how full of cares, perils, and manifold
miseries tho^u art fraught, a lbeit he met thee with his feet, yet would he
not vouchsafe to lift thee up. What this king said of his crown, may thou
well apply to each dignity and precious thing which the ambitious proul after
in this life; for look how much higher and more excellent they be, and so much
more are they subject to greter casualties, cares, and more painful griefs See
therefore thou take not so great toil for a thing, that so quickly fleeteth
away, as does the wind of pride and vainglory.

THE LAST Remedy to shake off The. 7. Remedy against Pride.
pride withal, and to purchase that so necessary a virtue of humility, is; to
force and accustom thy self (seem it never so paineful and loathsome to thee)
to exercise diverse actions of humility; as to do the basest offices in the
house; to converse with the meaner sort; to Luc. 14. b
sit in the lowest place; to cladd thy self in homely attire (not Ber. ser. 9
de (...). ben. (...)
so homely though, as to give occasion of being compted singular, since this
should be a pride) not to do or say any thing, whereby to make show of
excellency and preeminence, or to cause admiration in other men's eyes; and
finally, to call eftsons to mind our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ's humility,
as also that of his most holy mother the blessed virgin Marye, and of such
others, as have lived here in humble and lowly wise.

REMEDIES against the tentations and sins of wrath.

Cap. 23.
DIVERSE of the Remedies that have been prescribed thee against pride, may in
like manner help thee against this sin of wrath and anger; seeing, that most
commonly such as be proud The proud man iresul
and hawtie, are wont also to be angry and ireful. Yet nevertheless be there
other peculier remedies to be used against this vice.

THE FIRST is, to ponder, how The first (...) against (...)
far it is out of al good frame and reason, that any man should be angrye,
and desire to hurt an-other; since (...) brute beasts, be they ueuer so fell,
fight not one with an-other, but live The (...) of brute beasts (...) the
malicex of mankind.
(...) peace and unity with those of their own kind; how much more reason
is it, that men should do the (...) who are not borne armed, as brutishe, and
savage beasts be; nor provided of wepons to defend themselves, or to offend
others.

SECONDLY behold the vgglines The 2. Remedy against anger.
and deformity of an angry man, both in his countenance, gesture, words, and
actions; in all the which thou shall at that time see him wonderfully
disordered, and besides himself. An angrye man besides himself.
See thou beware therefore of being angry, if thou will not fall into those
defectes, which in others do so greatly dislike thee.

THIRDLY consider, that whosoever The 3. Remedy against anger.
he be, that has proffered thee any wrong or injury, has done him self much
more harm then thee; and if thou grow angry thereat, and seek revenge, in so
doing thou shall hurt thy self much more then thine adversary; Chris. he. 9.
Quod (...) laditur (...) a (...)
for that (as S. Chrysostom says) No man is hurt, but by him-self, which
should be no less a folly, then for a man to kill himself, to tear his
enemies cote; since thine enemies body is as his coat, which thou meaning to
tear, in seeking to kill him, do Mark well.
first slay and kill thine own soul; for S. Austin.
as S. Austin says: The knife pearceth the heart of the persecutour, before
the body of the persecuted. Strive therefore to master thy self, and to
vanquishe thine ire; and so shall thou gain greater honor and victory, then if
thou had subdued a mighty City; and by this means, in not seeking thy
self, to take revenge, God shall take it for thee, as he himself has Deu.
32. (...) Eccl. 28. a. Romans 12. d. Heb. 9. c.
promised thee.

FOURTHLY, if the devil, to stir thee up to wrath, do aggrauate thine injury
receued, and make it greter; do The. 4. Remedy against anger.
thou contrariwise what thou can to lessen it, and to make it smaller,
thinking thus, how he that in this manner has iniuried thee, is at that time
overcome with some passion or indiscretion; or else call to mind some good
turns he has erst done thee; or how thou have other-whiles done him some
injury, which he then did tolerate at thy hands, and therefore is it meet,
thou bear now likewise with him. And if thou can not this ways find any
sufficient plaster to heal thy pain withal, call then to mind, how Sap. 11.
d.
God has borne many injuries at thy hands; that in like manner thou should
bear patientlye thy neighbors imperfections.

FIFTHLY consider, how both this injury, which is now done unto thee, The fist
remedy against anger.
and al other losses that light upon thee (whereby thou feel thy self
incensed and provoked to anger) are al by Gods divine dispensation sent Gods
providence in all afflicts ons.
unto thee; that by these scurges, thou should in this life be chastised for
thy sins; and by bearing patiently this chastisement, come to obtain his
grace, and celestial benediction. Thus did that holy king David think, who
flying the furye of his son Absalon, met with that wicked man Simei in the
high way, who A singular example of patience in K. David.
reviled him with vilanous and reprocheful speeches, and threw stones at him;
whereby one of his captains being bent to cut off his head, in revenge of so
outrageous an injury and crime committed against his sacred ma iestie; this
patient and most mild king did forbid him, saying; let him curse and rail upon
me, for so has our Lord commanded him; and it may be, our Lord will by this
means look upon mine afflictions, and give me good for the evil, which this
man does wish me. In like manner may thou believe, that by bearing
patientlye the villainies and injuries that shal-be said and done against thee,
God will so dispose, that al shall turn to thy greater benefit, and comfort of
thy soul.

SIXTHLY, if thou feel thy self already The 6. Remedy a against anger.
overcome with anger, take heed in any wise thou neither do nor speak then
any thing, whereby this inward indignation thou feel, may burst forth in
outward show; but force thee al thou may to bridle and repress it; and get
thee out of his company, whom thou art thus offended with; busy thy mind also
about some other affairs until this fire flaming within thee be somewhat
quenched; suspecting each thing which Al our thoughts to be suspected be ing in
anger.
thou then think meet to be done or spoken, yea, seem it never so honest
and reasonable; for afterward, when this angry heat is throughlye cooled,
then may thou a great deal more miturely examine, whether that thou
thoughtest of before, be convenient to be done or spoken. And by thus doing
shall thou within a small while, see this angry blast blown over; and be thy
self greatly contented and comforted by having overcome thy temptation; and
perceive the devil, Iac. 4. b.
who egged thee thereto, to be fled with utter confusion. Thus read we in the
lives of holy Fathers, that Isaac the Abbot did; who being demanded by
an-other father, why the fiendes did fear him so? made this answer; From that
time (quoth he) that I was first made a monk, I determined with my self,
never to let any anger issue out of my mouth, but to mortify and burye it
within me; and for this cause is it, the devils do so greatly dread me. So
may thou well hope they will do to thee, if thou endeavor thy self to do
the same that he did. Beware also the Iac. 4. b.
Sun do never go down upon Ephesians. 4. (...)
thine anger; according, as S, Paul admonishes; that is to say, that thou
expel it quicklye, and suffer it not long to soiourne in thy soul; for so
might it turn into Aug. epist. (...) ad Prosis tur.
hatred, and become more dangerous and harder to be healed. We read, how the
Abbot Agatho was wont to say; Never would I (quoth he) sleep, being offended
with any man; neither have I suffered (as much as lay in me) that any other man
should sleep, that was offended with me; but went about forthwith to make
atonement both in my self and others. Endeavor thou to do the like, as
occasion may give thee leave.

These Remedies may thou at such time principally put in ure, who^ thou
perceauest thy self offended toward others. But if thou contrari-wise see
an-other offended and angry with thee, then frame thy self to do one of these
two things; Amb. ca. 21. li. Ioff. ex Romans 12. d. Genesis 27. g. Jacob fratri
indignanti cessit.
either covertly in the best manner thou can, to wind thy self out of his
company that is angrye, until the wrath he has conceived be worn over; or
Basil. (...) de Ira. (...) arg. 10.
else (wanting opportunity to do thus) force thee to overcome evil with good,
according to the To. 12. c.
Apostles counsel, seeking to appease him with some fair and humble
speeches, since, (as the wise (...) 15. (...) and. 25. b.
man says) A mild answer asswageth anger, and hard speeches kindle furye
and rage. But if thou should want means to do either of these, take such
order at least wise, as to be silent, whiles thou see him in these freatting
fumes; and in thy heart to pray to God for him; for that, as S. Greg. 3. part.
pastcur ad. 17.
Gregory says; It is a great deal more glorious, to shun ne wrath by silence,
then to subdue it by aunswering.

LASTLY note, that if the anger or The last remedy against anger.
impatience which thou feel in thee, proceed not of any injury or wrong
done to thee by any person, but through the adversities and tribulations that
befall thee in this life, then shall it be a very good Remedy, to remember the
Ber. ser. 16. ad sorn. de. mo. be. (...)
examples of such perfect and holy men, as have endured with great patience
far greater tribulations and calamities the^ thine be. Remember that
invincible patience of Job, who with so stout a Examples of patiece.
courage sustained so many losses, so many sores, such infinite number of
griefs, corseys, hart-breakes, as happened to him in one instant. Neither did
he amongst al these millions of miseries once droope, Job. 2. e.
or show by word or deed any sign of blameworthy impatience, as the holy
scripture testifies. Think also of that holy man Tob. 2. b. c
Tobias his rare patience; who in his blindness, poverty, and al his other
annoyes had continually a constant mind, and conformable to the will of God.
Consider also that mildnes and marvelous patience of the holy prophet Exo. 15.
a 16. a. Number. 14. a
Moises, whom not all the continual troubles and murmuringes of that ungrateful
people which he had brought out of Egypt could suffice to disquiet, or move to
anger. The like patience and mildnes may thou note in that holy 2. Re. 16.
a. b.
king David, amongst all the manifold persecutions and afflictions he suffered
through the whole course and perrode of his life. The same consta^cie and
patient mind shall thou in like manner find by discoursing many other of the
holy prophets and perfect men's lives of the old Testament, and much more
exactly in the new; since we read in S. Act. 5. g.
Luke, touching the Apostles, how they being by decree and counsel of the
Pharisees bett and outragiously injured; they abidd and passed over al with
great gladness, as being thought worthy to suffer these contemptes for the name
of JESUS. And not only these, but innumerable other torments did they suffer,
with like constancy and cheerfulnes; shedding their blood, and losing their
lives for love of the same Lord. And after them, did in like manner many
thousand thousands of martirs, whom thou may also vnbethinke thee of. But
above al, call to mind, and pause for the nonst, to poder that marvelous and
incomparable patience of the holy of al holies, our Savior and Redeemer Jesus
Christ, The patience of our Savior.
who suffered much more persecutions, pains, reproaches, villainies, griefs,
torments in all his life time, and with far greater constancy and meeknes
then any other, conformablye to that the prophet Esaias Esa. 53. b Mat. 26. s.
foretold; that he should stand domme, even like a Lamb before the Shearer.
And S. 1. Pe 2. d
Peter says, how being railed upon and reviled by others; he gave no cuil
words at al, and in suffering so grievous torments, did not threaten those
that with such barbarous cruelty tormented him; yea, in recompense prayed to
his Luc. 23 (...)
everlasting father for them. If thou propounde these things, with the other
examples before thine eyes, al thy tribulations, adversities, and persecutions
what-soeuer shall seem but very small and easy to thee, and thou be animated and
encouraged to endure al very patiently.

THOU may also in this case apply A good cosideration against anger.
an-other remedy, by considering the great commodity thou shall reap by
these tentations and tribulations, which thou suffiest. This consideration, as
S. Gregory affirms, S. Gregor.
does mittigate the force of the whip and scourge. Think therefore, that like
as gold 1. Pe. 1. b. Sap. 3. a Prou. 17 a
is with fire fined in the furnace; so shall thy soul be purged with the fire
of tribulations; And that for this cause God does send the^ to thee, as a
father that loves thee dearly; and by chastising Heb. 12. b Apoc. 3 d Prou. 3.
b
thee as a son he does purge and purify thee; whereas if thou lackest this
discipline, and his holy rod of correction, thou should this title and name
of son. Believe Chastisement a (...) of love.
furthermore, that the stones which are to be laid in the celeslial Icrusalem,
must first be hewn here with many blows of tribulations, pains, Stones for
heavenly buildinges must be (...) here in earthlye bowrs.
and persecutions; for above in those heavenly boures, there shal-be no noise
of 3. Re. 6. a Aug in psalm. 121. ca. 8. and him. Vrbs beata (...)
hammers; to wit, no dolours or wailinges, no toiles nor tentations at al, but
an endless joy, and happy quietness. Believe like-wise, that if (as S Rom 8. c.
Paul faith) thou be a companion of Christ in this life, in his passions and
tribulations; thou shall in the next life be a companion of his joys and
consolations. And if thou suffer with him in this world, thou shall
afterward reign with him everlastingly in the other world. And if here thou
be a little afflicted and grecued (since the afflicted of this short life, are
but short and small) thou shall afterward (...) in heaven with a glorious and
(...) joy, as S. 1. Pc 4, c. d.
Peter promises thee.

Al these things, if thou consider them well, as the holy Saints aforetime
have pondered and considered them, thou will not only abide patientlye these
thy present tribulations; but yield most hearty thanks to that Lord, who
with so singular love does send them, for thy benefit, and Iac q. b. c 2.
Tim. 2. a. 4. b. (...) Apor. 2. b. c g. (...) Tob. 3. d.
the enriching of thy crown; knowing, that it is impossible to come by so great
a reward as we look for, without great pains and trauail. And truly, great
reason is it, that Christians like good soldiers should follow their (...)
Christ; tracing his steps, and walking the same way he went before, and
entered into his glory.

REMEDIES against the sin and tentations of Envy.

Cap. 25.
IT NOW remains, to set thee down some remedies against the temptations of
envy or malice, wherewith the fiende is in like manner wont to assault and
tempt us; For as holy writ Sap. 2. d. Genes. 3. a.
does witness: Through the malice of the devil death first entered into the
world. This made the Jews mat. 27. b
to seek our Lord and Savior his death; and by this vice have many murders,
Genesis 4. a. Sap. 14. c Job. 5. a.
and innumerable wicked Iac. 3. d.
acts been committed in the world. This is also that most cruel beast, which
Jacob Genesis 37 g 44. e.
said had devoured his son Joseph. And therefore must thou carefully foresee,
that this venomous vipre begin not at any time to nourishe her-selfe in thy
soul, but forthwith at the very first brunt to kill and cast her out, using for
that purpose these instructions and aduises following.

FIRST consider, how this sin f. Aug. lib. 11. de Genes. ad lit. cap. 14.
of malice, or envy, (which is according to S. Austin) a grief and sorrow at
others felicity.) is more hurtful and unprofitable then any of the other; for
albeit other sins do hurt the soul, The first remedy against Envy.
yet afforde they, I know not what kind of miserable taste and pleasure to
the flesh; but this vrle vice, does both hurt the soul, and afflict the
flesh; since it sealdeth the heart, pineth the body, withers the face,
appaleth the countenauce; and comelye sanguine hew; briefly, it tormenteth and
overthrows the whole man, being like to the worm that consumes the wood,
whereof she comes. And the^ is it, that the envious man finds him-self in
worst case, and most wretched, when the other, who^ he maliceth, is best at
case, and happiest.

SECONDLY consider, how by shaking off this so fretting and fruitless The 2.
Remedy against Envy.
a vice, and by being in the sta'e of Gods good grace; thou art Gregor. past.
(...) p. 3. Ad. 11.
a partaker of al such good things as others do possess; since charity does
make them thine; and therefore ought thou to be joyful that others enjoy
goods, and live so happilye, rather then to be sorrowful, or any whitt grieved
thereat. For by rejoicing with Charity makes each one partaker of others
happiness.
charity, thou art made happy in their happiness; and by malitiouslye repining
thereat, thou losest thy part, and they remain still with their prosperity;
which, albeit they lost yet should not thou recover it.

THIRDLY, what-soeuer helps The 3. Remedy against envy.
against pride, does like-wise help against Envy, as proceeding for the most
part out of the other; fithens the proud man bearing impatientlye; Pride the
mother of Enute.
that any other should be his better, or pheere and fellow with him; he
maliceth those, whom in any respect he deemeth to be his betters, or more happy
then he is. See therefore, thou endeavor thy self to pluck this poisoned
root out of thee, and not to set thy love upon the temporal things of this
world, which are so miserable, spare, and scant, that if thy neighbor have
them, thou must go Temporal things scant, celestial abundant.
without them; and many times must lack that, which an-other might
conveniently leave. But if on other side thou set thy mind of spiritual and
heavenly things, no man can bereave or bar thee of them; yea, look how much
the Gre. li. 5. moral. cap. 34.
number of such is greater that enjoy and possess the same goods thou
do; and so much shall thy happiness increase, and grow the greater: And by
this means shall thou be so far off from malicing of any man, as thou shall
hartilye desire, that each one might gain the goods which thou possessest;
woting well, that so should thy ri ches and bliss be not a little multiplied

FOURTHLY, if the desire of thine The 4. Remedy against (...)
own excellency make thee malice thy neighbor for being thine egall, or more
high in dignity, then thou art; consider, that in doing thus, thou losest that
thou so greatly seek for; since herein thou debasest thy self, and geuest
others occasion to co^te^ne thee, perceuing this thy cankred and vile nature,
which thus dishonestly thou thy self discouerest; But if contrari-wise thou
striuedst to master thy self, and to rejoice at thy neighbors welfare, as at
thine own; then should thine estimation and credit grow much greater, since
every good man would esteem thee better, and highly commend this charity,
and noble mind of thine, whereof, by thus doing, thou geuest the world an
apparent and plain testimony. Thy spiritual profit should herewith be in
like manner greatly increased; for either would God give thee the same goods and
graces thou reioysest at in thy neighbor, or at least wise reward thee
plentifully for the merit of thy charity. And therefore Chris. ho. 51. adpop.
Antioch. Tom. 5.
does S. Chrysostom say, that the virtue of charity is very great and
marvelous, which without spoiling, any man does rob The vertus of charity
robs al.
and take al; since by rejoicing at other men's welfare and goods, we make
them ours, and win possession of all that which others do possess.

FIFTHLY, al such means as help to The 5. Remedy against (...)
excite and stirte up Charity toward al, shall likewise help greatly to subdue
and vanquishe this vice: as for example to think how we are al Genesis 2. d.
brethren; as-touching our flesh, descending from the same parents, Adam and
Eve; and as for the spirit, al created of one Lord; regenerated by Causes to
procure Charity.
one verrue; redeemed by one price, and hy the self same Redeemer. We have al
of us one mother the holy Catholic Church, the same faith, the same
Sacraments, and al of us hope for the same bliss, where each ones good
shal-be common to al; and that of al to each one: Whereas therefore so many and
so great causes of vni tie and charity be, envy ought to bear no grief at
others good; no mirth at others misery; yea rather ought we al of us to
rejoice at others their weldoinges; and lament their harms and evils, as if
they were our own; perfourming thereby what S To. 12. c.
Paul prescribes; to reiovce with such as rejoice, and to weep with them
that weep. But if happily al these causes of union sufficed not, to make thee
reckon thy neighbors goods as thine own, he seeming still but a stranger and
a forener in thine eye; and how he never did thee any good, but rather harm
and injury; Remember, how thou being a greater stranger, and far more
unworthy, Christ has bestowed so many and so great benefits upon thee; whereof
he will have thee to make a recompense, with other benefits not done to
himself (since he stands Ps. 49. b. 15. a. (...) mac. 14. (...)
no need of thy good turns) but bestowed upon thy neighbor, seem he never so
unknown and unworthy to thee; for look what good thou do to such mat.
10. d 15. d. e. Mar. 9. f
a one, and this Lord will accept it as done unto himself.

SIXTHLY consider, how, to vanquishe The, 6. Remedy against (...)
this venomous vice of envy; the law of nature, common to al, ought at least
to move thee, which Tob. 4. c. h. Mat. 7. b. Luc. 6. d.
teaches us to do to others, as we would be done unto our selves. As
therefore thou would not, that others should be grieved at thy good; so
ought not thou to be offended at others welfare; for other-wise should
thou show thy self a senseless creature and without al reason; yea, well may we
say by the malicious man, that he has lost his reason and natural judgment,
since he would not stick, to make choice of his own loss, if by that means he
might piocure harm to those he hates; A pretty example declaring the canken
of a malactous mind
Like as we read of a king, who meaning to make a proof of the cankred
natures of an envious person, and a covetous wretch; caused two such to be
called to him; whom he made this proffer too, to crave of him what-soeuer they
would, for willinglye it should be given them; provided always, that the
second should have the double of that the first did ask; These twain being
now at great contention, which of them should first begin, least the other
might gain the double; the king being constrained to take up the matter,
commanded the malicious man to speak first; who requested this; that one of
his eyes might be put out, that the other might have both his put out; chosing
rather his own harm then good, that the other, whom he hated, might, by
receiving the double, according to their offer, be the more annoyed. The which
story, if it were true, declares plainly, to what blindness this vice brings
him, that lets himself be lewdly ouereome withal.

THE LAST Remedy, which (feeling The. 7. Remedy against (...)
thy self tempted with this vice) I have to prescribe thee, is; to force thy
self continuallye to pray Mat. 5. g Luc. 6. d. 23. e. Act. 7. g.
for him, whom thou malicest, and bear envy to; as also to speak well of
him to others; yea, occasion so serving, to do him some service, albeit thou
seem to do it fainedly, and against thy stomach; since for this force and
violence which thou shall use in mastring thy self, and breaking of thy will,
no doubt, but God will give thee the gift of charity, whereby thou shall be
perfectly healed of this detestable vice, and may aftetwardes love al thine
enemies one and other what-soeuer.

CERTAIN other aduises and Remedies concerning the same matter of tentations.

Cap. 26.
BESIDES these tentations Temptations of Infidelity, Plasphemy and despe
ration.
spoken of in the former Chapters; wherewith the devil does most commonly tempt
us, there be diverse other means, whereby he uses to molest and trouble us; as
by propounding other-whiles temptations of infidelity, doubts against our
belief and faith; or suggestions of blasphemy; yea, sometimes he brings us
into such a mase and perplexity, as whether-soeuer we turn us, or what-soeuer
we say or do, yet seem we still to be caught and entangled; an-other time he
indeuoreth to bring us into desperation; and thus does he with these and diverse
other vexations disquiet, and greeuouslye assault us.

Against all the which his crafts A singular doctrine against the foresaid
temptations
and subtilties, take this for a general rule; never to stay to dispute or
talk with the devil, of set purpose; for if thou do, thou art like to be
ouercom, as Genesis 3. a.
Eve was, for having done the same. It is therefore much more secure, not to
stand reasoning, or listening The Devil is not to be disputed withal.
to that the devil shall tell thee; but forthwith to fly the temptation in the
very beginning, by thinking of some other matter quite contrary to that which
he would have thee. As for example, if he propounde thoughts of infidelity,
saying: how is it possible, that this mystery should be thus and thus? make
none account to answer him, by showing any reason of that truth, which thou
beleeuest; but say: I believe, as our holy mother A Remedy against Infidelity.
the Catholic Church believes, and this suffices me; neither discende to
any other particularities. Thus like-wise must thou do, if in case he molest
thee with temptations of blasphemy, Against Blasphemy.
saying: Thy blasphemy be to thy perdition, for I (...) and love my Lord God.
With this, or some such like short speech may thou set thy mind at rest,
intending to some other business, and different cogitations; neither let these
his suggestions dismay or trouble thee any whit, for all of them shall not make
thee lose any one jot of grace and Gods favor; yea, by doing as I tell thee,
thou shall greatly increase thy meede. If like-wise he go at any time about
to meshe thee in any perplexities, scruples, or other ob scurities, whereby thou
wotest not, on which side well to turn thee, (...) not of them; but convert thy
self wholly to God, saying: I will, my Lord my A refuge in time of perplexity
God, both in this, and (...) other thing what thou will, neither do I will,
or yield consent to any thing that may displease thee. And thus may thou
with this saying be at quiet, and in great security.

In like manner, if he induce thee to desperation, laying before thee the
Against desperatio^
multitude and enormitie of thy sins; behold Christ thy Judge nailed upon
the Roode, in whom thou haste more goodness without al comparison, then in thy
self thou can have evils; and thus putting al thy confidence in him, may
thou despise, and defye all the devils. And not only in this, but in all other
thy Christ crucified ought to be our common refuge.
tentations would I have thee make Jesus Christ crucified a familier defense
and buckler for thee; since that, like as Nu. 21. b.
Moises gave to the children of Israel being stunge in the desert, or bit of
venomous serpents, that Serpent of brass, raised up on a high piece of wood;
whereon who-so looked The brazen serpent figure of Christ crucified.
fixedlye, and with faith, were cured of their griefs: in like manner, and much
better, al such as with faith behold our Lord and Savior Christ crucified, and
heaued up on the wood of the holy cross (whom the serpent of brass did in
figure represent) shal-be healed of al their bitinges and stings of trespasses
and temptations. At such time therefore, as thou feel the serpent assault and
bite thee with the Against Pride.
sin of pride, behold Christ Phil 2. a
humbled on the Cross, and obedient, eue^ til death. If with covetousness,
behold that poverty and nakedness, wherewith Couetise.
he hangs on the roode, in such extreme distress, as he has not where to
rest his Mat. 8. c
head. If thou find thy self assailed with the delites of lust, behold his
bruised and beaten Carnal (...)
flesh, fraught full of extreme anguish; and how for thy sake he hangs on
Gluttony.
the roode, al wounded from topp to toe, and afflicted with most grievous
torments. If thou feel thy self provoked to Gluttony, look upon thy Lord
fastened to the roode; who being extremely pained with drought, had mat. 27 d
gaul and vinegre given him to drink. If thou perceane thy self Anger.
stirred up to anger, behold that inumcible patience of our Savior Jesus
Christ crucified, in abiding al those his most villainous blasphemies, and
incomprehensible torments. If thou be vexed with the venomous vice of Malice.
malice, consider that most fervent charity, wherewith our Savior shedd his
bloudd on the cross for all; and prayed even for those his persecutors that
Luc. 23. e.
crucified him. If sloth or idleness cause thee to wax cold in good works,
fix thine eye upon those feet so cruelly nailed to the cross; which were
never weried with wandering and seeking for thy welfare. Finally; in this thy.
Lord and Savior thus crucified, if thou seek in time to him; thou shall find
sufficient remedies against al kind of temptations, wherewith in this life thou
may be any ways assailed.

It rests now, to admonish thee of one only thing touching this matter; A
necessary advertisement.
that when at any time thou should, either with this, or any other of the
fore-saide remedies repulse thine enemy, and resist his suggestions; yet must
thou not think thy self secure, as though the battle were ended, and the
field fully fought and won; since this is the property of The malice of the
fiende.
the devil, when he is overcome in one temptation, to arm himself
forthwith, and to make preparation for an-other; like as he did to our Savior
Mat. 4. a Mar. 1. b. Luc. 4. a
in the wilderness; whom, when he could not one ways overcome, he assailed and
set upon an-other ways. And therefore, albeit thou ween thy self to be at
some rest, and find the fiende to have taken truce with thee, for a while
after he is vanquished; The fiendes truce is not to be trusted.
yet beware thou trust not too much to him; for when thou suspectest least,
then will he return to make a fresh assault, and to molest thee with new
temptations; and if he the^ happ to find thee unarmed, and unprovided of
means to encounter and withstand him, easily will he subdue and conquer thee,
and the advantage which thou had before won honorably, he will then make
thee lose dishonestlye. Take heed therefore thou never lay thy weapons aside,
but always be provided, and in readiness for the combat; neither be thou tired
with his importunate infestations, whereby he for the most part overcomes
those that wax weary to with-stand him; but like as he is importunate in
tempting thee, Ber. Ser. 67. de mo; ben. viu. De Tent.
be thou importunate and constant in resisting him; and by this means shall thy
crown be so much the more rich and precious, as the temptations, which by
Gods help thou ouercommest, be more irksome and importunate.

WHAT a good Christian ought to do, when he falls sick, and draws nigh
the hour of death.

Cap. 27.
AL SVCH things as I have hitherto entreated of, will help thee, during the
time it pleases God to grant thee health and strength of body. But because
this temporal life of ours is subject to many infirmities, and in the end, no
remedy, but al of us must needs once dye, Heb. 9. g.
according to God his good ordinance and appoyntme^t; I have, for this cause,
thought good in this Chapter, to add certain aduises and instructions, to
teach thee the better, how to govern thy self, both in time of sickness, and
in the hour of death. Neither ought thou with worse will to read these, nor
with less diligence to execute them in their time, then the former.
Nevertheless, these aduises shall principallye Note well.
profit those, that in their health did employ their time in such exercises,
as have been heretofore spoken of in this little Treatise; preparing
themselves continuallye to death, as al good and faithful christian people are
bound to do. For such as prolonge their properation and conversion until the
hour of death, having lived loosly, and without the fear of God all the time
of their health; albeit they be not to despair, but to make the best shift
they can for their poor souls in the small The wicked livers well dying to be
doubted.
time that is left behind; yet are they in great danger, no doubt, and in a
very perilous estate; these being they, whose salvation S. Austin doubts of
Let us therefore (as S. Gala. 6. c
Paul fore-warneth us) do well whiles we have time; continually watching, and
preparing our selves to death, according to our Saviors mat. 24. d.
counsel; since we neither wott the day nor hour thereof. Nevertheless, when
thou suspectest that hour to be already come, then ought thou to be more
curious and careful in thy preperation.

THE FIRST advise therefore, which The first advise in time of sickness.
in this matter thou shall take, let be this; that so soon as ever thou
fallest sick (albeit the sickness seem not greatly dangerous) to be careful
for phisiking thy soul first, before thy body; and therefore take order, that
thy spiritual phisitio^ come to purge The soul to be purged before the body.
thy soul by confession; either before, or as soon as the other, to cure thy
body by potion; and expect not, til the bodily physician do bidd thee to do
thus, as he is bound to do, if The body afflicted for the sins of the soul.
he desire to obey that the sacred Canons do command him. Where this most
true, sentence is also written, that God does many times send sickness Ioh. 5.
b.
of body, for the sins of the soul; And therefore it may be, that the
cause once ceassing, to wit, sins; the effect shall also cease, to wit,
sickness.

NOW, if having used this remedy The. 2. advise in time of sickness.
of confession, thy sickness do still continue, then take this for a second
advise; to accept it with a cheerful and willing mind; as a gift, which thy
Acceptatio^ and Resignation.
heavenly father has for thy souls health, with singular love, sent to thee;
offering up thy self, to suffer for his sake, what-soeuer his divine providence
shall ordeine, and lay upon thee; and see thou purpose fully, in all things to
conform thy self wholly to his most holy will. But because man's frailty is
great; and feeling the gripes of grievous and painful sickness, it shal-be a
very hard matter, to have that patience and conformity to his divine will,
which were meet and requisite for to have.

LET THIS be therefore the third The. 3. advise.
advise, to make thy humble prayers to God for the obteining of such Prayer for
patience.
graces as thou want, and he know eth to be needful for thee. Procure
like-wise, that others pray for thee, following therein S. Iac. 5. c.
(...) the Apostles counsel, who says: If any man amongst you find
himself sick, let him cause the priests to come, that they may pray for him.
And well may thou hope, that their prayers made with faith, shal-be no small
help to mittigate thy pains and grievous sickness.

THE FOVRTH advise is, that as in The 4. ad uise.
thy health either thou did, or at least wise ought to have endeavored
thy self to edifye, and give good example to those thou did converse
Obedience and mildnes in time of sickness.
withal, that now in time of sickness thou be careful to do the same; obeying
those that keep thee, taking willingly the medicines, and what-soeuer for thy
health shal-be geucn thee, be it never so loathsome and painful to thee; In like
manner, to show none anger or impatience in thy speech, especially to such as
attend upon thee; and to give gracious aunsweres to those that visit thee; not
complaining too much of the pain thou feel; but recommending Too much
complaining not commendable.
thy self in humble and lowly wise to their good devotions. And so in all other
things art thou with such good discretion and mildnes to govern thy self,
as al those that see thee, or deal with thee, may be well edified by thee; and
consequently, take greter compassion of thy griefs; and help thee more
willingly, both spiritually and corporally too, if need be.

THE FIFTH advise is, that albeit The. 5. ad. uise in time of sickness.
thou must take for the recovery of thy health, al outward remedies and bodily
physic that may be applied to thee; yet ought thou to put greter Gods
help chieflye to be attended.
confidence in the celestial physician, and in his divine mercy and providence,
then in any artificial and humane medicines; least otherwise it might happ to
thee, as it did to king 2. par. 16 c.
Asa; who being visited with excessive pains in his feet, deserved not to
recover health, yea, mcurred death; for that, as the scripture tells, he
trusted more to his physicians skill and faculty then to Gods divine succor.

THE SIXTH advise is, that if thorough The sixth advise.
Gods good grace thou recover thy health again, and be cured of the infirmity
which lately grieved thee; that presently thou remember to give God, the
author of al good things, most humble thanks, for Gratitude after our
recovery.
this his great benefit; acknowledging and confessing freelye, that it came
principally by him, rather then by any other helps and humane remedies. See
therefore thou show thy self grateful every ways thou may, least
otherwise, thou be like the nine Luc. 17. d
ungrateful lepors that Christ cleansed: yea, rather resemble thou the tenth,
who albeit he was a forreiner, yet did he by and by, after he had received
health, return back to thank his benefactour; whereby he deserved to be
commended of the same our Lord and Savior; and the other nine to be found
fault withal, and condemned for their ingratitude.

THE SEVENTH advise is; that The. 7. advise.
now, having received the health, which thou erst lackedst, thou be Diligent
amendme^t of life, and performance of good purposes.
very careful hereafter, to avoid al sort of sin; and to amend thy life
hereafter; assuring thy self, that for this cause was it, that thy health was
thus restored to thee. Thou ought therefore to be very diligent, in
executing such good thoughts and purposes, as thou had, or should have
had in thy sickness, if God did vouchsafe mercifullye to grant thee health
again, as he now has done; for other-wise by forgetting the benefit
received, and returning back again to thy vomit, and wented beastlines of
offending, thou should by this means deserve to have some worse thing to
light upon thee; like as our Ioh. 5. a.
Savior him-self advertised the man, whom he had cured of his thirty and eight
years palsy.

These aduises may thou use, during the time of such sickness as God will have
thee to escape, and to be recured of. But if thy malady be mortal, and no
remedy, but this temporal life must be determined and ended by it; then over
and above what has been already said, take these aduises following.

THE FIRST is, that perceauing The first advise in time of mortal (...)
thy sickness to increase, and to grow more grievous; thou then awake thy self
with more vigilant care, to dispose, both of thy temporal and spiritual
affairs, as if those words were then spoken to thee, which were delivered by
the prophet Esaye Esa. 38. a
to king Ezechias: Dispose of thy house, for thou (...) dye, and not live.
Dispatch therefore, and make perfect thy will, which every Touching last wills
and Testaments.
good Christian ought to make in the time of health; when he may with better
case, sounder judgment, and more mature advise perform and do the same; and
not to drive it til the last hour, when al these commodities do fail him;
since daily experience does inform us, how through the letts and encombrances
of sickness, the wills that are made in that time, be very rawlye performed; and
many times imperfectly drawn and penned. Having therefore thy will in a redines
by thee, with thy satisfaction therein contained, thou may then, as shall
seem best unto thee, alter, or add thereto any thing by way of codicil: But
if thou have been heretofore negligent in this matter, and had not made it,
or not so exactlye, as to content and satisfy thy mind withal; then may
thou make it anewe, at such time, as thou should find thy self best at
ease, of ripest judgment, and least let with thy sickness; procuring to have
some trusty friend by thee, to prompt thee at that time in necessary and
needful remembraunces.

THE SECOND advise, to help The. 2. advise in time of mor. mal.
thee in this case, is; that when thou haste once finished thy will according to
thy mind, with a true and perfect satisfaction; and disburdened thy conscience,
as-wel for restitution making, and debtes paying (if thou owe any;) as also
touching other discrete and godly legacies: Briefly, having A forgetting of
worldly affairs.
disposed of al thy temporal causes, force thy self forthwith to forget quite
(...) things; which thou (...) here behind thee; and wholly to occupy thy
mind in heavenly matters, which thou shortly hopest to enjoy; that by this
means, the remembrance of such things, as erst thou louedst well, and now
must needs leave, do not disquiet thee, or cause thee to receive death more
unwillingly, then were meet thou should do. And to ridd thee the better of
al these encombrances, and dangerous distractions, let this be-

THE THIRD advise; to commau^d The third advise is, an aduertiseme^t to those
that visit.
al those of thy house, and require al others that come to visit and assist
thee, not to deal, or break with thee in any temporal matters; nor to put
thee in memory of such worldly things as erst thou bare affection to; as
might be riches, wife, children, friends, with other things, wherein thou
delitedst greatly heretofore. And then see, that this be chieflye done, when
death is at the door, and the life draws fast to an end; then, I say, let
this advise be most carefully executed; least the sight or hearing of such
matters, might then allure or Note well, and execute in time.
draw thine affection to them; and so thy mind be distracted and carried away
from dinine and heavenly matters, wherewith thou ought in that time to be
only in love, and only to desire, and think upon.

THE FOVRTH advise, when thou see thy self in these terms, is, to The 4.
advise in time of mor. mal.
cause some devout, spiritual and godly me^ to be called for, who in this so
busy and important a time, may assist, and give thee good counsel and
exhortations; The assistance of spiritual persons.
comforting thee either with their good speeches, or by good lessons, which
they may read out of some such spiritual book, as may serve most fitly for
thy purpose; that by this means, thy soul may more easily eleuate it self
up to the consideration of celestial and heavenly matters; wherein, but
specially in the The memo rye of Christ's Passion.
blessed passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, thou ought principallye to
occupy thy mind. These men may like-wise do thee great good with their
zealous and fervent prayers, calling upon God for his divine mercy toward
thee; and beseeching our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and his blessed
mother, with all the whole court of heaven, to help and favor thee in that
hour of thy departure, being a time so tedious, and so full of imminent peril.
And thus must thou pray thy self too, in the best manner thou can.

THE FIFTH advise is, that when The. 5. advise in time of mor. mal.
thou supposest thy life to draw fast away (yet before such time as thou
losest the use of reason) thou then crave the last Sacrament of Extreme The Sa.
of Extreme unction.
Unction, or anneling with holy oil; and this thou must endeavor thy self to
receive with great faith and devotion; and having once received it, then to
make a protestation of the A protestation of the Catholic faith.
Catholic faith, if thou can it by heart; if not, to let it be read unto
thee; wherein thou protestest to live and dye, beeleeuing and confessing all that
our holy mother the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church confesses and
belecueth. And therefore ought thou not to drive off the receiving of this
last Sacrament, until the very latter end, as some very indiscretly do; to
the end thou may be of sound judgment, and have perfect use of reason, to
receive it devoutly; and to make the foresaid protestation sincerely and
advisedly. The 6. advise against mor. mal.


THE LAST advise, which I have to give in this matter, is; that having already
performed, what has been told and taught thee in this chapter, Preparation
against the last assaults.
thou prepare thy self to attend the last conflict, which is yet behind, in
the hour of thy departure; arming thy self against such temptations, as are
wont then commonly to assail us. And to the end thou may the more manfully
resist and vanquishe them, and by vanquishing, attain the crown of conquest;
it shall not be amiss, to tell thee beforehand, with what temptations the
fiends do ordinarily disquiet the soul at her departure, according as we are
informed by the holy Doctors that have written upon this matter. See therefore
thou mark well, what I shall hereof tell thee in the Chapter next ensuing.

OF THE tentations that are commonly felt in the hour of death, and of the
Remedies against the same.

Cap. 28.
THERE be many anguishes and anieties, which the soul does commonly feel in
the perilous trans and hour of death, this being the most terrible thing that
can happ unto us in this life; since at that time the soul does suffer on every
The extreme anguishes of the soul in time of death.
side, and which way soever it turns, does find great cause of corsey and
extreme annoye. First, it suffers in respect of the body, from which it
parts with no small pain; it suffers like-wise in parting from the temporal
things, which it leaves here behind; and look how much more they were in
life time loved of it, and so much more do they in that hour of death torment
it. It suffers, through the great dread it has of the strait account, which
it knows well, must forthwith be passed to the dreadful Judge, of every
thing it has done in all her life time. It suffers, through the horrible
vision of the devils, which in that hour appear; the sight whereof is an
intolerable torment. And much more does it suffer through the grievous and
bitter assaults, wher-with in that hour they far more fiercelye The fiends
most furious in the hour of death.
set upon it, then ever they did tofore. For like as toward the end of the
world, and time of general judgment, the prince of darkness shall more terribly,
and with greater rage and furye assault mankind, as he knows better how
small a time is then remaining for him to do the same, and to infest it any
longer: In like manner do the devils now behave themselves toward such as
be at the point of death, against when they bend al their might and maine, al
their sleightes and subtilties whatsoever; since they know well, that if the
soul, in that last hour do escape their dreadful clookes, they lose what
they pretended to gain al her life time in this world; for so do the Doctors
commonly say upon the sentence of the Apocalips: Apo. 12. (...)
That the devil descends with great rage, woting well, that he has but a small
time left. So that the anxietie and bitterness of that hour shal-be so great;
as no man by words can sufficientlye exaggerate. And this do we plainlye see
by an example, that S. John Climacus reports S. John Climacus.
to have happed in his time to a religious man, whom he both saw and knew; and
says, how this man An example proving the extreme perils in the hour of death.
having lived somewhat looselve in his monastery, came on a time to the very
point of death, and then was in such sort ravished in spirit, as he saw the
dreadful rigor, and such things as pass in the time of judgment, and doom
of every soul; and afterward, coming to himself again, having through God
his divine and special dispensation obtained a time of penance, this holy man
says, how the said monk prayed al those that were there present with him,
(amongst whom was the same John Climacus) that they would al of the^ depart
out of his sell; wherein he afterward remained al alone. until the hour of
his death, which was for the space of xij. years after, without going out at
any time, speaking word A rare kind of penance.
to any man, or receiving all that time any other food then bread and water;
but continually sitting in this his sell, like a man astonished, and besides
him-selse, and having his eyes fixed still in one place, he perpetually reuolued
in his mind the things which he saw in his ecstasy or rauishment, and with the
memory thereof bedewed his cheeks daily with streams of bitter tears; And in
this manner did he continue til the hour of his death; at what time the said
John Climacus, with all the other religious men that lived there-aboutes in the
wilderness came to visit him; who breaking down the door of his sell, which he
had walled up; and being entered in, they al desired him to give them some good
word of edification before his departure; to when he replied this only; I tell
you truly, fathers, (quoth he) if men wist well, how dreadful this last transe
of death, and how rigorous the sentence of divine indgement were, they durst
never offend God, nor transgress his most holy commandments. Since therefore
it is so, we ought eftsons to forethinke this hour, and to arm and prepare
our selves, at al assaies, for this so perilous a season. Albeit, well may we
hope in that most faithful God our Lord, that he will not permit us (as S. 1.
Cor. 10. c.
Paul says) to be tempted above our strength; and that the Angels shal-be no
less careful, especially, every man's Guardian, to succoure and help in that
hour of such extreme necessity, then the devils busy to assault The dangers
foreseen, are more easily avoided
and overthrow us. It shal-be notwithstanding greatly profitable, (as I say)
for each one to fore-thinke in time the suggestions and temptations that shall
in that hour be propounded them; as also the remedies and wepons to defend
and relieve them with; that so they may more securely escape so great a peril;
and gain the crown prepared for the valiant conqueror. It is therefore to be
noted, how-

THE FIRST and principal temptation, The first temptation in the hour of death.
wher-with the fiends are wont in that hour to infest those that are ready to
give up their ghost, is, of faith, according as S. Ambrose testifies, S.
Ambrose
which is the foundation of al spiritual building; that the principal
Infidelity.
foundation once failing, all the whole frame may fall to ruin. Their drift is
therefore, to entrap a man in some error of belief, especially, touching those
articles, wherewith otherwhiles in life time they assailed, and found him
som-what feeble. To which te^ptatio^ thou can not resist better, then, as I
The (...) to be despised.
told thee heretofore in the. 26. Chapter; to wit, by despising it; scorning
the devil; and not regarding to solute his reasons. But if of force thou must
needs answer som-thing, let it be this: I believe firmly what our holy
mother the Church believes, and that which the holy Apostles, Martirs, and
Confessors have believed and taught. whose faith and doctrine (...) God, (whom
none can deceive) has confirmed with innumerable miracles: and for the
confession whereof has so much blood of Martirs been spilt, of whose holiness no
man can justly doubt. Stick fast to this answer, and care not to satisfy
his other objections and demands, which he may propound to thee about this
matter; and no doubt but by thus behauing thy self, thou shall remain a
Conqueror, and gain the goal thou striuest for. Thus read we of a seely
simple man (albeit The shift of a simple man confounding the Diuil.
in this point wise and considerate enough) who in a much like matter de meaned
him-self in like manner. This good man being in conflict with the fiende, shaped
him this answer touching an importunate adoo he made, to know his belief. I
believe (quoth he) all that our holy mother the Church believes; Why, quoth
the devil, And what is that your holy mother the Church believes; She
believes, quoth the good man, that which I believe. And what beleeuest thou,
reiterated he? the other repeting his former answer; I believe (quoth he) what
our holy mother the Church believes. Neither could the devil, albeit he
questioned never so importunatelye about this point, drive him from this his
first answer; and so gained he the victory, and put his foe to flight and
shameful ignominy. In like manner may thou do, if thou use the same means
of resisting this tentatio^.

THE SECOND suggestio^, wher-with the wicked spirits are wont to molest The
second temptation is of Blasphemy.
us in this hour, is of blasphemic; persuading those that are now at point of
death, to believe or think some indecent and unseemly thing of our bles sed L.
and God, or of his holy SS. With this temptation, Eusebius S. Ieroms Disciple
was greeuouslye infested. Eusebius S. Ieroms Disciple.
Hereto may thou resist, by retorting the blasphemy upon the Devil
himself, that propounds it, in this manner. I am more then assured, that my
A retorting of the fiends suggestion.
Lord God is infinitely good, and worthy of al sovereign praise and lcue: and
that al his holy Saints are most perfect, and replenished with all virtue: and
thou, most wicked fiende, by going about to persuade me these blasphemies,
bewrasest plainly thy perverse spirit, pufe up with all impiety, malice,
falsehood, and deceit, and there by most worthy to be of each one despised,
accursed, and abhorred. And then turning thine eyes to thy most mild and sweet
maker, force thy self, to power out of thy heart right humble blessings and
praises in the best wise thou can unto him; and by how much the more the
detestable deceauer shall infest thee with these his abominable and beastly
blasphemies; by so much the more be thou diligent and attentive, to yield
lauds and praises to his most holy name.

THE THIRD temptation, wherewith The 3. temp tation is despair.
the devils do tempt such as lie a dying, especially, if they have been great
offenders, is despair; For like as in time of health they little rought of
their sins; and through the infinite number of Gods mercies, and hope to do
penance at their latter end, made small account thereof: so in that hour of
death do their sins seem more grievous and gretlye aggrauated to them, by
considering the rigor of divine iustce, whereto yt belongs, not to suffer any
one sin vnsifted and unpunished; and then is it the devils persuade and make
them believe, that their contrition in that present hour is of no Note
dissgently.
force and value, as proceeding of servile and slavish fear. They like-wise in
that hour represent all the enormous crimes a man has committed al his life
time; as also the good he might have done, and by his negligence has omitted;
and how he never confessed many of his sins, or at least wise imperfectlye,
and with less sorrow then he ought to have done. In this wise do they so
girde and gripe many heinous sinners, as no doubt but a great number be by that
means driven to desperation. Despair a most dangerous tcptation.
This is one of the most terrible vexations, wher-with such as have wallowed
securely in their sins, are in this time assailed, and is in very deed so
violent and hard to be withstood, as if the ineffable mercy of God did not give
special assistance and aid in that hour, very few could eschew and overcome
the same. The remedy The Remedy against despair is Christ crucified.
to relieve thee with, is; to humble thy self in the sight of God, and to
invoke his divine clemency, calling to mind the Passion of thy blessed and
benign Redeemer our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; whose most bitter
griefs, torments, and wounds thou must offer up to his eternal father for all
thy sins what-soeuer, saying: I know, my Lord, and most gracious A prayer
against desperatio^.
God, that albeit my sins be great, enormous, and innumerable, yet is the
satisfaction, which thy most obedient son my Savior Jesus Christ has
given thee, both for these of mine, and of all the whole world, far greater,
more precious, and more infinite. I know like-wise, that thine
incomprehensible mercy and piety, does far surpass al my misery and
impiety; and therefore will I not despair, as Cain and Mat. 27. a. Act. 1. c.
Judas did; especially, knowing, how this should be, to add a greater offense
to my former trespasses; since despair is that, which most of al displeases,
dishonors, and offends thee; yea, rather will I hope in the multitude of
thy Ps. 105. g
mercies, which thou haste used toward other, most unworthy sinners; and sure
I am, that thine eternal truth, and infallible word, neither can, ne will, ever
deceive, whereby thou haste promised to pardon and receive such as hope in
thee, calvpon thy mercy, and unfeignedly turn to thee, being contrite and
sorrowful for their sins, as I am now. This is the anchor, wher-vnto thou must
cleave fast, and never to forsake thy hold, albeit the devils do what they
may to drown thee, as is aforesaid.

THE FOVRTH temptation is quite The fourth temptation is too great a security.
opposite and contrary to the former. This being a rash and fond security, and
ouer-weening a man has in his own innocence; for that (as Cassian says)
when the wilye and coonning fiende can-not induce a man to that excessive fear
and pusilanimitie he thought to have done, and so to have driven him down to
desperation, then does he craftilye go about to post him over to the other
extreme; by drawing him to a dangerous security, and blind delight, and
pleasing of himself; counterfeiting falslye with him; how he has fought
manfullye, and well prepared himself to death; and how he is greatly bound
to God for so many his gifts most plentifully bestowed upon him; and so ought
to rejoice for having done so many good deeds in his lifetime, wher-by full
well may he hope, that a great glory shal-be given him in heaven; and that by
this means he may securely without any fear or dread depart this life. With
this temptation is he wont chiefly to assail good religious men, or other
spiritual persons, such as have laudably governed themselves throughout the
whole course and periode of this their worldly The Remedy against vain
sccuritie and pleasing.
pilgrimage. Against the which diabolical deceit and treachery, this shal-be a
very profitable remedy; to have such authorities of holy scripture in
readiness, as serve to beat down this vain pleasing, and disordinate confidence
in our selves, as is that saying of the wise man: Eccl. 9. a.
That no man living knows whether he be worthy of love or hatred, and that
of Esae. 64. b
Esaias; Al our righteousness is a defiled cloth; and that which our Luc. 17. c.
Savior himself said; When you have done all that is commanded you, say
ye; we are unprofitable servants. That also of the psalmist: Ps. 35. a.
Thy judgments are a great and inscrutable depth; and that sentence of the
Romans 11. d
Apostle; How incomprehensible are the judgments of God. By these and many
more authorities shall thou well know, how smally thou ought to please thy
self, or to grow secure, by reason of such good works, as thou supposest to
have done; since they may happily be distained with many imperfections; and by
that means be little grateful or acceptable to God. In The best way to heaven
lies betwixt fear and hope.
doing thus, thou shall remain between fear and hope (the most assured path
to pass to heaven by) fering by reason of thy manifold sins and
imperfections; and hoping through the infinite goodness and mercy of God; so
that, look at what time the devil goes about to make thee proud, and to
presume of thy self; see thou depresse and throw thee down with the memory
of such causes as thou have to make thee fear; and when on the other side he
would drive thee to despair, do thou animate thy self with the remembrance
of such things, as justly may move thee to have confidence in our Lord and
most merciful Savior. The 5. (...) is of impatience


THE FIFTH temptation is of impatience, through the pains and griefs that
sickness brings, especially, if it be of long continuance. This vice must
thou vanquishe, by persuading thy self, that whatsoever it be thou The Remedy.
have done, or do now presently suffer, God does with singular love, for the
welfare of thy soul, send it to thee; that by means of such affliction; and
pains it may be purged here, and escape the other, far more grievous
torments, which it should other-wise endure in the world to come; as also,
that by means of these pains and pinching griefs in this earthly pilgrimage,
thy merit might increase above, and thy future glory grow far greater in
heaven.

Besides these temptations already mentioned; well may we ween, that the
wicked spirits do, with diverse other, molest the soul of man in this hour
of transe, and time of so great distress. It shall nevertheless suffice, I
hope, to have set down the chief, and most dangerous, together with such
remedies, as are most fit to be applied against them; whereby, what with them
thine own good prayers, and those of thine assistantes (who shall do very well
to sprinkle holy Holy Water
water eftsons upon thee) as also by The sugared name of JESUS.
embracing the crucifix, and calling upon that most sugared and sweet name of
( JESUS) with faith and fervor, forcing thee to wrap and wind thy self into
his wounds; well may thou, I say, (using al these means) hope to be helped
by God, and his blessed Saints and Angels; and so most happily to gain a
conquest of these, and al other temptations that may assail thee, and at
length arrive most fortunately to that port of eternal rest and quietness.

A CONCLUSION and brief rehearsal of all that has been said in this little
Treatise, and of the things that every good Christian is bound to learn and
have by heart.

Cap. 29.
IN THIS little Treatise, The sum of the whole books
(Christian Reder) have been hitherto as briefly, as might well be showed thee,
the rules and aduises, whereby thou ought to guide thy self, as-wel on
working, as holy days; and how thou may exercise thy self in prayer, and
frequent very profitablye the Sacraments of Confession and receiving. And
because this our mortal life can-not be passed over without the tentations and
grievous assaults of such our adversaries as here in this world do enuirone
us, there are wepons and remedies given thee to vanquish them with, and to
preserve thee from sin; by means whereof thou may also atchieue such
virtues as be needful for thee. Again, for so much as this our temporal life is
thral to many infirmities, and in fine to dint of death, (the port we must
per-force al of us pass by) for this cause have I in this second impression
annexed two Chapters more then there was before; wherein, is showed thee, in
what sort thou must govern thy self in time of sickness, when it shall please
God therewith to visit thee; as also how thou ought to behave thee in
transe and hour of death, when our Lord through his good providence shall
think meet to bring thee thither. This have I thought and deemed sufficient
for thee, that, if of the geuer of al goodness, thou have received a good will
and desire to amend thy life, and to live like a true Christian, thou may,
by perusing this pamphlet, learn how to attain thine intent, and to have a
firm trust and confidence to obtain eternal life (the only end whereto thou
wast created.)

IT RESTS now, that for conclusion and knitting up of this little work, I
admonish thee, beseech thee, and exhort thee, as much as I can and possibly
may, Luc. 9. (...)
that if thou haste once laid hand to the plough, and begone to exercise thy
self in divine service, taking the rules and aduises, which in this Treatise
are prescribed thee for thy guide and government; that in no wise thou look
back again, nor let not thy self by any troubles and toiles, which may
cross thee in this life, be overcome and vanquished. And if at any time it so
chaunsed, as well it may do estsons, that by reason of letts and hindrances
thou should be for some time forced to intermitt thine ordinarye and wonted
exercises, be not any deal dismaide therewith, but when this time of trouble
is once ouershot, renew again thy course, and follow it, as if thou had
never failed, perseuering til the end, as Mar. 13. b. Mat. 24. d. Luc. 12. e
Apo. 16. c.
is needful, if thou mind to attain the crown, and to win everlasting
happiness; for in doing thus, I dare on the behalf of our Lord and Savior
assure thee, that this perseuera^ce shall ease the pain that pincheth at
first, and look how much the more thou do persevere, and so much more
comfort, help, consolation, and heavenly light shall thou receive of his most
bountiful liberality. See therefore, thou content not thy self with once This
books ought not once, but eftsons to be read.
reading over of this little Treatise, but read it eftsons over, for so is
most expedient; for so much as the things that are here entreated of, since they
be the rules and remembrances which thou ought in spiritual life to leuel
and guide thy work by; it behooves at al times to read them, when thou
purposest to practice the^. For besides, that the bare reading shal-be a
laudable and meritorious exercise for thee, and serve as a part of prayer; the
reiterating and freque^tation of reading, shall help thee to learn by heart,
what in action thou art bound to execute; and so may thou afterward
exercise thee in each point with much more facility, and less adoo a great
deal. And therefore, albeit this little labor may profit, each one that with
good and godly intent will vouchsafe to read it; yet was it principally
intended for the simple and more ignorant sort; and for that cause have I
thought good to annexe here in the end such things as many of them wot not,
and yet are bound to know: Seeing that if every Artisan think it meet to
know such things as belong unto his Art; how much more is a true Christian
bound to know what appertains to his profession, (an Art above al Arts)
and to be prepared (as the Apostle S. 1. Pe. 3. c
Peter says) to yield account of that he believes and hops; and what it
behooves him to do, to live according to Gods will and pleasure, and to
obtain everlasting life withal. Wherefore, for such as be in this behalf
blame-woorthye negligent, I have here set down such things, as without
danger of their own well-doing, they neither ought, nor can be ignorant of;
that by reading these notes and short remembrances, they may both understand
what they want, and learn it here commodiously, without further seeking of
other books. And as for the textes, I have here set them forth, both in the
latin and vulgar tongue, for every one to learn them, as best shall like the^,
not respecting so much the words, as the substance and sapp contained in the
same.

SIMBOLVM APOSTOLORVM which in vulgar tongue is called, the Creed.
1. CREDO in Deu^ Patrem Omnipotentem, Creatorem coeli and terrae.

2. Et in Iesum Christum filium eius vnicum Dominum nostrum.

3. Qui conceptus est de Spiritu Sancto, natus ex Maria virgin.

4. Passus sub Pontio Pilato, crucifixus, mortuus, and sepultus.

5. Descendit ad inferos, tertia die resurrexit a mortuis.

6. Ascendit ad coelos, sedit ad dextram Dei Patris Omnipotentis.

7. Inde venturus est iudicare viuos and mortuos.

8. Credo in Spiritum Sanctum.

9. Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam, Sanctorum Communionem.

10. Remissionem peccatorum.

11. Carnis Resurrectionem.

12. Vitam aeternam.

Amen.
1. I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth.

2. And in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord.

3. Which was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the virgin Marye.

4. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried.

5. Descended into hell, the third day he rose again from the dead.

6. Ascended into heaven, sits on the right hand of God the Father Almighty.

7. From thence he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead.

8. I believe in the holy Ghost.

9. The holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints.

10. The forgeuenes of sins.

11. The Resurrection of the body.

12. And the life everlasting.

Amen.
A BRIEF declaration of the. 12. Articles contained in the Creed.

Cap. 30.
FOR thy better remembering of these. xij. Articles contained in the Creed
aforesaid, wherein the whole sum of our holy Catholic faith is comprehended;
I have thought good in this second impression, to adioyne a brief declaration,
as-wel thereof, as also of such other things, as be needful for thee to have
by heart: Whereby thou may easily learn, not only to rehearse the bare
words, but to suck out the sense and sapp also of that which thou beleeuest,
con fessest, and witnessest, or at least wise ought to do, in all thy life
and actions, It is therefore for declaration of this Creed or Simbole to be
noted, how God being one in substance and three in person, all the three
persons of the most sacred and souerain Trinity, are in this Creed
especified, and unto each one of them their peculier and proper Articles
assigned.

THE FIRST Article shows unto us the first person of the Trinity; to wit,
the Father; unto whom is attributed the Genes 1. Ioh. 1. a. Heb. 11. a.
creation of heaven, earth, and of al things visible and invisible; all the
which, as he for us has by his Omnipotency created of nothing; so does he
forovs, through his wisdom and goodness still maintain and govern them;
whereby we are done to wit, what great love we are bound to bear toward this
our so good a father, who has for us created and kept so many things. What
trust we may also repose in him; and how greatly we ought to dread the
offending of so omnipotent a Father.

THE SECOND Article declares unto us the second person of the sacred Trinity,
which is the Son; who, touching his divinity, is from al eternity engendered
of his Father, of the self-same substance with his father, and coequal to him.
This Esaias. 53. 10. 1. c. 16. d Coloss. 1. a. Heb. 1. a
one only and eternal son of God, as he took humane nature, and flesh upon
him, is called Luc. 1. (...)
Jesus Christ, that is to say, Savior anointed; JESUS, which signifies,
Saurour; for that he came to save and redeem his people from their sins; and
CHRIST, which is as much to say, as anointed; for that he was anointed by
the holy Ghost, full of grace and truth. He is also called Ioh. 1. f.
MESSIAH, whom God had erst promised to send into the world; a KING, Heb. 4.
(...)
BISHOP, and LORD, for that he bought us with his most precious blood; and
thereby is given us to understand, how much we are bound to honor, love, and
reverence him.

THE THIRD Article teaches us the incarnation and temporal natiuitre of this
our Lord; for that being (as God) eternally Phil. 2. a
engendered of his father without mother; he for our love descended from heaven,
and took humane flesh upon him, and was, as man, conceived, without father,
or operation of man; in that most sacred vessel the virginal womb of the
evermore virgin Mary; and was afterward borne in Mat. 2. a Luc. 2. a.
Bethlcem of this his blessed mother, she remaining evermore a virgin. By this
incarnation of the (...) of God, we are al of us Romans 6. a Galat. 3. d. Col. 2.
b.
regenerated; and of carnal, that we were, made spiritual, and the children of
God in Jesus Christ.

THE FOVRTH Article does inform us of the Passion, death, and burial of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; who having preched, and done many miracles for
the space of three years, the Jews of mere spite and malice accused him to
Pontius Pilate their Judge; who albeit he wist well his innocence and cleernes
from any crime, yet did he Mat. 27. c. Mar. 15. b.
adiudge him to suffer death upon the Roode; and so was he by that means
crucified, dead, and buried; whose holy wounds, passion, Cross, and death,
were causes of our life; and yield great consolation to al such as sincerely
do love and serve him.

THE FIFTH Article opens to us, how Christ our Redeemer being thus dead on
the roode, his most sacred soul united to his divinity, 1. Pe. 3. d. Zach. 9.
c. Aug. epist. 99 and 57. de fide ad Pet. Cap. 2.
descended down to hell, to fetch thence those holy Fathers, that so many
years had looked for him. And afterward triumphing over death, (as he had
already done over the devil and hell) did rise up the third day by his own
Osee. 5. a. Mat 28. a. 1. Cor. 15. a. 6. c. Colos. 2. c.
power and virtue; and so issued out of his Sepulcher, immortal, and most
glorious. This his example gives Ioh. 11. c. Act. 17. d. 23. b.
hope to each one believing sinceerly in him, that they shall in the end rise
like-wise up immortal and right glorious.

THE SIXTH Article instructs us, how our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ the
forty day after his Resurrection, did with exceeding triumph Act. 1. b mar.
16. 20 Luc. 24 g.
ascend up to heaven, and sits there on the right hand of his Almighty
Father; that is to say, in the self-same glory, power, and Majesty with the
Father; enjoying all the bliss his Father does, and governing al things with
him. This glorious Ascension of Christ our head yields confidence to his
true members, that if they obey their head and heavenly captain, they shall
one day ascend also, and reign in heaven with him.

THE SEVENTH Article tells us of the second coming of Christ our Lord,
which shal-be at the last day; when he shall in humane flesh come with great
power and Majesty, accompanied with all his holy angels Mat. 24 6 Act. 1. b.
to judge the universal world; as-wel those that be at that time living in
earth, as also, al those that have been dead since the world was first
created; and the^ shall he yield reward to each one, according to the 2. Cor. 5 b
Romans 14. b.
deeds and works they shall have wrought. This article admonishes us to live
with so much more vigilant care and watchfulnes, as we know more certainlye,
that al our words, works, and thoughts are to be examined and discussed of
this most dreadful Judge, before whose tribunal seat we must needs al of us
appear.

THE EIGHT Article shows us the third person of the most sacred Trinity,
Genesis 1. a. Ioh. 1. (...) b. 16. a. Mat. 28. d. Romans 8. b
which is the holy Ghost, who proceeds from the Father and the son, and is
with them the self same God, eternal, and omnipotent; And therefore are we
bound with the self same honor, faith, and dutiful obeisance, to reverence
and adore him. This is the comforter and spirit of truth, that illuminateth,
teaches, and sanctifies us; and according to his divine pleasure departs
his gifts to every one.

IN THE ninth Article we confess, that there is a holy Catholic Church; Ioh.
11. g. Romans 6. b. 10. (...) 4. a. 5. d.
to wit, an universal congregation of the faithful, which have the very
self-same faith, doctrine, and Sacraments. And this Church is HOLY, because it
is sanctified by Christ, the head thereof, and governed by the holy Ghost; and
is CATHOLIC, that is to say, universal, for that it embraces all the faithful,
that in every place and time, have held, and do hold one self same faith
of Christ. We confess like-wise in this Article, that in this holy and
universal Church or congregation, there is a communion of Saints; that is to
say, Ioh. 17. (...) Romans 12. c 1. Cor. 1. (...) 10. d. 12. e Ephesians. 4. b. 5. c.
Galat. 3. b.
that al those that dwell in this Church, do, as in the house of God, al of
them, communicate one with an-other such gifts as they receive; and do one of
them help an-other, both spiritually and corporally, like members al of one
body.

THE TENTH Article propounds to us the remission and forgeuenes of our
sins, which is obtained in this holy Catholic Church above said, by the
virtue of Christ's passion, operating by means of such holy Mat. 16. c. Ioh.
20. f. Cip. (...) 1. Epist. 1. Chris. lib. 5. de Sacerd. Amb. lib. 1. de penit.
cap. 2.
Sacraments, as he left in this same Church. Hence are sinners to gather a
singular comfort, since if they be truly penitent for their trespasses, and
have a full purpose, never after to offend their maker, they have then a ready
means to recover Gods grace again, which by their ungraciousness they had so
lewdly lost.

THE ELEVENTH Article testifies the universal resurrection of al men, who,
each one of them, just or unjust, shall rise again in the last day of judgment
with their own bodies; and shall stand before the tribunal of 1. Cor. 15 a 2.
Cor. 5. b Romans 14. b.
Christ's judgment, there to receive doom in their bodies, according to the
good or evil they shall have wrought in this life; So that the elect that have
done good, shall arise with bright and beautiful bodies to the resurrection of
life, and perpetual bliss and happiness: And the damned that have done evil
with most horrible and vggly bodies, to the resurrection of damnation, and
everlasting torments, both in their souls and bodies.

THE TWELFTH Article promises us an everlasting life, which shall succeed
after this transitorye life, wherein the good, rising up in bodies and souls,
shall reign eternally, and enjoy the inestimable treasures of blessed
happiness, exempted from al miseries and toils that in this temporal life do
eftsons trouble us; And the wicked, being also in body and soul resuscitate,
shall dwell in perpetual pains, and abide more terrible torments, then any man's
tongue can tell. This article gives good Christians comfort to abide al
adversity with patience, considering that eternal life we look and hope for;
where being exempt from al evil, we shall enjoy al good things, and reign in
everlasting happiness.

This word Amen, annexed to the end, shows the most certain and infallible
truth of the christian faith and confession contained in this Creed.

THE DECALOGVE, or ten Commandments of the law of God
(...) Exo. 20 a
1. NON ae habebis Deos alienos coram me.

2. Non assumes nomen Domini Dei in vanum.

3. Memento vt diem Sabathi sanctifices.

4. Honora patrem tuum and matrem tuam.

5. Non occides.

6. Non moechaberis.

7. Non furtum facies.

8. Non loqueris contra proximum falsum testimonium.

9. Non concupisces domum proximi tui.

10. Non desiderabis vxorem eius,

1. Thou shall have none other Gods but me.

2. Thou shall not take the name of thy Lord God in vain.

3. Remember that thou keep holy the Saboth day.

4. Honor thy father and thy mother.

5. Thou shall not kill.

6. Thou shall not committ aduoultry.

7. Thou shall not steal.

8. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

9. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house.

10. Thou shall not desire thy neighbors wife.

A DECLARATION of the Decalogue or tenn Commandments.

Cap. 31.
LIKE as we have already seen in the Creed what we are bound to believe;
even so in these tenn commandments are we taught by our Lord God, what his
will is that we do, to gain everlasting life withal. Wherefore, the sum of
his first precept is this; to believe in one true and only God, The first
(...)
which is the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, as is aforesaid in the
declaration of the Articles; and that to him alone we give adoration, honor,
and reverence, loving this our God above al things with all our Deu. 6. (...)
Mat. 22. d. Luc. 10. c.
heart, with all our soul, and with all our might and power; Insomuch, as no
other thing ought to be honored, loved, and reverenced like to him. Whence thou
may learn, that al Idolatry, al superstitious observations, al
inchauntments, witchcraftes, and use of magical art, with each other kind of
dealing, whereby, either an express, or included covenant and paction is made
with the devil, and any honor done unto him; all this, I say, as also al kind
of south-sayinges, diuinations, and giving credit to those we fondly call wise
men, or women, is utterly forbidden and condemned by this commandment.

IN THE second precept we are prescribed, The. 2. Commandment.
how to use our tongues in divine service, being by the former instructed, how
to guide our hearts toward our Lord and God. The content and mening of this
commandment is; that we use the name of God in good and reverent wise; and
that we take heed of naming it Deu. 5. b Zach. 5. a
vainly or irreuerently. Then do we use the name of God well and duly, when we
praise, thank, confess, invoke, annou^ce, and with reverence handle his
most sacred word; and when in any important necessities we swear by it in
truth and due reverence. And contrariwise, the^ is his holy name uttered in
vain, and this precept transgressed, when we swear without these
circumstances; much more when we forswear; but most of al, when we blaspheme
God, or his most holy Saints. Such also, as blaspheme or curse his other
creatures; and that having power to perform their Leu 27. b Number. 6. a. Mat.
14. (...) 1. Tim. 5. b.
vows they have erst made, do not accomplish them; al these offend against
this commandment.

IN the third precept we are informed The 3. com maundement.
of our duties, how we ought to serve God in our words and actions; and
therefore does he here command us to keep holy, and sanctify the Saboth
days; that is, the Sundays, and other festiual days, ordained by our holy
Mother the Church, ceassing on those days from servile work, and such other
temporal trades and business as might occasionate destraction in our souls,
intending only to such works as God is best honored with; and our souls more
inflamed in love and feruoure toward him. Such works are; hearing of an
entier and whole Mass, the sermons, Lessons, with other divine service, what
the time and place thou live in, may afforde thee. In like manner, to laud and
praise God for such benefits as thou have received of his most liberal hand;
to be sorrowful for thy trespasses committed against his Majesty; to reverence
his Sacraments; and with dutiful obeisance to receue the^; to be diligent in
doing works of mer cie: With these, and such like deeds, are the holy days,
according to the meaning of this precept, sanctified. Wherein note, that who so
works Note well.
on holy days, (unless it be some small thing, or work of charity, or else
being compelled by some urgent and great necessity) offends against this
precept. We break this commandment in like manner, when having convenient
means, we hear not a whole and entier Mass on these days; and finally, when
in steed of these holy works and exercises aboue-named (wherein the holy days
ought to be employed) we spend them in contrary works, wher-with God is
displeased; then is it (I say) that this commandment is infringed.

These Exo. 20 c Mat. 22. d. 1. Tim. 1. c. Joseph. (...) 3. antiq. ca. 6 Orig.
ho. 8. in Exodus
three precepts above declared, be the commandments the first table; which
apperteine to the honor of God; and teach us, how in word, work, and
thought we are bound to behave our selves toward him. The other seven that
follow, are called the commandments of the second table; and instruct us,
how Romans 13. c Iac. 2 b. Galat. 5. c. Aug. ibad.
toward our neighbors we are bo^d to behave our selves.

IN THE first whereof, and fourth in order, is commanded us to honor our
parents that did begett us; unto whom, next to God, we are bound to yield al
love, reverence, honor, and obedience; since that of them, next to God, we have
received the essence and being that we have: And therefore ought we of duty,
in all honest things they command us, Ephesians. 6. a. Col. 3. d. Deuteronomy. 5. c Eccl.
3. b Mat. 5. a Mar. 7. b
to obey and execute their good will and pleasures. And if it chanced them to
fall into poverty, whereby they should stand need of our service and succor,
then requires our duty, liberallye Deu. 15. a 1. Tim. 5. b. Aug. cont Adim.
ca. 6 supra Exo 12.
to provide for them, diligently to serve them, and patiently to abide the
troubles and pains they put us to; like as they did patientlye bring us up, and
bear the infirmities of our infancy. By this precept are we likewise
commanded to carye the like love, obedience, and reverence to our spiritual
fathers, and to al our Superiors; as be Bisshops, priests, religious men, and
prelates of the Church; kings, princes, and seculer powers. Thus ought
Scholars to behave the^-selues toward their teachers; servant toward
their masters; and wives toward their husbands. Hereby are also al parents
and superiors warned, what love and special care they are bound to carry
toward their children, and to al such as be their subjects.

IN THE fifth precept is forbidden, The 5. Commandment.
to kill, strike, or other-wise to hurt our neighbors body or life, of our
own authority; To. 13. a 1. Pet. 2. c
albeit a man may well, by authority of law or magistrate, be an executioner
of justice, doing his duty therein orderlye, and without al malice. By this
precept is also forbidden, al injury Leu. 19. d Exodus 13. a. Mat. 5. e.
or reuiling of our neighbors, al hatred, rancour, covet of Pro. 20. e Deuteronomy.
32. f Romans 12. d.
revenge, and each other inward afseandio^, whereby either murder, or some
outward action to endomage our neighbor, is wont commonly to proceed. The
observing therefore of this precept requires great mildnes and patience in all
our doings; and that we bear with our neighbors imperfec tions, and forget
their miuries; pardoning with such love their offenses, as we would wish,
that God should pardon ours. Mothers also do greatly transgress this
commandment, who procure untimely birth, and destroy the fruit conceived in
their wombes; as also al those that give the^ instruction, or any kind of help
thereto. Note.
In like manner, who so slay them selves, maime, or cut off any of their limbs,
or otherwise in rage do injury themselves, or through impatience do
wittingly, by disordinate (...) or other unfit means seek to shorten their
days; al these do violate The. 6. Commandment.
this commandment.

IN THE sixth precept is adulterye, fornication, and each other carnal act
forbidden, except that of matrimony, being orderly observed. In like manner are
al occasions prohibited, whence such unlawful acts do proceed; as be carnal
Job. 32. a. Ge. 6. a. 8. d
thoughts, dishonest Ephesians. 5. a. Eccl 9. a. b
words, profane songs Pro. 5. a Cipr. de Syn. Cleric.
and ballets, the reading of amorous and fond discourses, wanton 2 Pet. 2. c
Job. 31 a. Ihren. 3. f
looks, lascivious gestures, much familiarity and conversation with
dangerous persons; excess in eating and drinking, too much fostring of the
flesh, whereby it is kindled, and made more subject to alterations; briefly, al
such occasions are forbidden, as endaunger the cleannes and chastity that God
requires in us; which we ought with great carefulnes to keep, both in our
souls and bodies, in our hearing, seeing, touching, and in all Tob. 4. e. 2.
Cor. 6. b. Galat. 5. d. 1. Tit 2. b. 3. a. 4. d. 5. ab
our other senses and powers, to satisfy this commandment. The 7.
Commandment.


IN THE seventh precept is forbidden, the stealing of other men's goods,
either privily or pertly, against the owners will; as also each other unlawful
Exo. 20 22. Zach. 1. Amos. 6. Mich. 3.
seasing or withholding of others substance; be it by stealth, violence, or
any fraud and legerdemain; or else by usury, or some kind of other unlawful
bargain, whereby our neighbor is defrauded, and suffers some loss and
hinderance. It follows therefore, that who so in their trades and traffiques
use not equity and upright dealing, offend against this precept. Such also, as
discharge not their Creditours, having means to pay them; or that find any
lost thing, and restore it not, either to the true owner; or to the poor, the
owner being not extant (if happily such things were not reputed as given over,
and voluntarily abe^doned of the owner) Finally, al fraud, deceit, and
tretcherie, whereby our neighbors goods is damnified, to whom our Savior
and Lord will have us to bear great love and charity; and not to do
other-wise to them, then willingly we would that they should do to us; yea,
that we do them the good which they may conuenientlye require, and we
likewise perform toward them. Who so fails in any of these things
aforesaid, does break and violate this commandment.

IN THE Exo. 20 b Prou. 19. a Dan. 13. g.
eight precept is al such harm forbidden, as through our speech and words
may be procured The 8. Commandment.
to our neighbors; as might be principally in bearing false witness against
them in place of judgment; or in speaking such words out of judgment, as
might either blemishe, or quite overthrow our neighbors credit and good
name. In like manner, to reveal such imperfections and faults, as we know by
others, to them that know them not. not; whereby they are either defamed, or
else made less account of; especially, when such things are revealed with
wicked intent, and to those that can by no means redress them. By this
precept is like-wise forbidden, al detractions, murmuringes, speaking evil, and
slaundering of others; al scoffing, taunting, and telling of lies; albeit
without harm or any prejudice to our neighbors. Finally, we must beware of
speaking or saying any thing, whereby any harm might any ways ensue.

THE NINTH Deu. 5. Romans (...) 5. (...) 13.
precept is as a declaration of the seventh, thereby to notify unto us the
better, what charity God will have us to use toward The. 9. (...)
our neighbors, and how far we ought to be from doing them any evil, being
not only forbidden to take their goods by outward means from them, but also
not to desire inwardly in our hearts any unlawful usurpation of them. And like
as the desire and coveting of these things is prohibited us, even so are we
to wit, that each other deliberate will and desire of any thing what-soeuer
that may be prejudicial to our neighbor, is utterly forbidden us. The. 10.
Commandment.


THE TENTH precept is as a declaration of the sixth; to do us the better to
understand, what purity of heart our Lord requires of us; whereby we ought not
only to beware of committing aduoultrie, fornication, or any other carnal act,
as was abouesaid in the sixth; but also, not to have any Mat. 5. d Iecob. 1. c.
concupiscence or desire with determinate consent, which suffiseth, without
committing any outward act, to soil our souls, and to procure the loss of
Gods divine grace and favor toward us. This brief declaration of these ten
commandments shall give thee some light, as well to know the better how to
keep them, as also to understand how to make thy confession better, when
happily thou might have trespassed against any of these precepts. Note
moreover, that al these ten commandments are, according to our Sauiors
doctrine, reduced unto Mat. 22. d. Mat. 12. c
two of charity; toward God; and toward our neighbor: since, who so
loves God sincerely, performs duly the three precepts of the first table,
perteyning to Gods honor: and, who so loves his neighbor with that sincerity
he does himself, will not fail in the seven precepts of the second table;
which instruct each one, how to govern the^-selues toward their neighbors.

OUR LORDS praver, which Mat. 6. (...) Luc. 11. a
Christ himself made; instructing thereby, both his disciples, and al us,
how we ought to pray, and ask for all necessary things, as-wel for our souls
as bodies; and this in seucn Aug. in Euch. ca 115. and li (...) de sermon. Dom.
ca. 19
petitions contained in thy. prayer.
PATER noster qui es in coelis.

1. Sanctificetur nomen tuum.

2. Adueniat Regnum tuum.

3. Fiat voluntas tua, sicut in coelo and in terra.

4. Panem nostrum quotidianum da nobis hodie.

5. Et dimitte nobis debita nostra, sicut and nos dimittimus debitoribus
nostris.

6. Et ne nos inducas in temptationem.

7. Sed libera nos a malo.

Amen.
OUR Father which art in heaven.

1. Hallowed be thy name.

2. Thy kingdom come.

3. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

4. Give us this day our daily bread.

5. And forgive us our trespasses, as we (...) them that trespass against us.

6. And lead us not into temptation.

7. But deliver us from evil

Amen.
A DECLARATION of the Pater noster.

Cap. 32.
THIS prayer is of al other the most holy and most excellent, as-wel in respect
of the maker Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior; as also, for that under so
small a compass is taught us, how we are to ask all that is needful for our
souls and bodies, and is divided into a preface or proeme, and seven petitions.

THE preface Mala. 1. b Romans 8. c Galat. 4. a
is; Our Father, which art in heaven, fit words, to stir up such Cipr. in
ser. de (...) Dom.
attention and devotion, as is meet to say this prayer withal; for hereby are
we put in mind, how we speak to the most high and Omnipotent God; whom we
call father, for two causes; first, by creation, having created us, as he did
al other creatures: next, by adoption, since through Jesus Christ his only
natural son he has received al those that believe in his holy name; for his
children adoptiue; and this word, Our Father, does us to wit, what honor,
obedience, and love we are bound to bear toward such a father; as also, what
charity we ought to have amongst our selves, being al brethren, and children
of one self-same Father. These words, Which art in heaven, warn us to lift up
our hearts and desires to heaven, where our father is; and how we must live
here, not like terrestral, but celestial Citizens; since our Father is resident
(...)
above in heaven. Who is said to be there, for that he appears there glorious
to his elect, albeit he be in each other place in the self same substance,
power, and presence.

THE FIRST petition is; Mat. 5 b 1. Cor. 10. g. Rom 15. b Eccl. 36. a.
Hallowed be thy name and is a petition worthy the children of such a father;
since good children, the principal care they have, is to seek and desire
whatsoever concerns the reverence and honor of their Father: Even so do we
in this first petition covet and desire, that God our father be hallowed and
sanctified in us; that is, that he be known, honored, and reverenced of us;
we by his grace performing such works, Mat. 5. b Luc. 1. g. Phal 2. b 1. Pet.
3. c
whereby al those that see us, may praise and glorify this our heavenly father.

THE SECOND petition is; Mat. 6. d Romans 14. c Psalm. 22. a. 79. a. Lu. 1. c. 17.
e 1. Cor. 3. c. 4. d. Ephesians. 1. d.
Thy kingdom come; wherein we show the boiling desire we have, or should have,
to abandon this Phil. 1. d. Heb. 11. c. 1. Pet. 2. b. Ioh. 7. a
exile; and to come to that heavenly and eternal inheritance, which God has
prepared for those that love him; thither is it we crave by these words
happily to be conducted. And whiles this our flitting is deferred (for so is it
meet it should be) we pray in this petition, that his kingdom of grace do
come unto us; that is, that God by grace reign in us, and no sin soiorne in
our souls, to let us from serving this celestial king, with whom we hope one
day to live and reign eternallye.

THE THIRD petition is; Ps. 102. (...) Romans 1. b. Act. 9. a 21 c. Deuteronomy. 12 a.
Heb. 13. d Iacoh. 4. d. 1. Pet. 4. a.
Thy will be (...) in earth as it is in heaven; wherein we crave grace to obey
Gods behests with like obeisance and redines here in earth, as the Angels,
and whole number of elect do fulfill them in heaven, and are continually
conformable to his most holy will. We ought therefore to take great heed,
that in our works we be not contrary to our words; and that we al enforce
our selves to obey God perfectly, and continually to conform our selves to his
divine will, as-wel in adversity as in prosperity, saying always in each
thing he shall send unto us; Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

THE FOVRTH petition is; Iac. 1. a. (...) Ps 39 d. Deuteronomy. 10. d. Genes 28 d 1.
Tim 6. b. Preu. 30. a Psalm. 144 c
Give us this day our daily bread; wherein we beg of our holy father, like
poor and needy creatures, sustenaunce of body and soul, such as may be
necessary for us in this our temporal life. For our bodies, we beg, under the
name of bred, al other necessary things for the intertainment of this our
transitory life; and therewith, according as they shal-be given us, ought we
moderately to hold our selves contented. For our souls, we crave spiritual
bread; to wit, his divine word, a Mat. 4. a (...) 8. c. Eccl 15. a. Prou. 9. b
sauourie sustenance for our souls; and withal, that most blessed Sacrament
of the mat. 25 c Ioh. 6 d. Hier. in. 6. ca Math. Cipr in ser. de Oratione Dom.
Amb. li. 5. de Sacr. (...) 4.
Altar, with the other Sacraments of the Church, which do wonderfully
feed, foster, and recure our souls infirmities.

THE FIFTH petition is; Three. 4. b 1. Cor. 10. b Leuit 26. c. Number. 5. a. c Exodus
32 f Luc. 7. g.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
In this petition we crave the most grievous and difficult debts of this life to
be forgeuen us; to wit, our trespasses and crimes committed, whereby we
remain obliged and thral to most grievous calamities and nishmentes. By
annexing these words; as we forgive the^ that trespass against us; we are
warned, that if we will have God to acquit and forgive our debts, we must
acquitt others, and forgive them that have any ways offended us. Mat. 6. b
18. d. c Eccle. 28. a Aug in Euch c. 74.
Otherwise, our petition shall in no wise be allowed.

THE SIXTH petition is; Mat. 4 a b. 26. d. Heb 2 d. 2 These 3 a. 1. Ioh. 2. c.
And lead us not into ten (...) whereby we crave Gods divine succor (knowing,
how we have many foes to fight withal in this life) that with their
temptations and tretcheries we be not overcome; but resisting manfullye against
the world, the flesh, and the devil, we may so merit at length to be crowned
like worthy Conquerours.

THE SEVENTH and last petition is; 3. Re 8 d. Prou. 10 d Eccl. 23. a. Hier. 2.
c. Tob. 1. d. (...) Psalm. 33. a. b. d
But deliver us from evil: wherein we crave of this most bountiful and loving
father, that he vouchsafe to preserve us from the perils, troubles, and
calamities of this life, and from each other evil that may withdraw or hinder
us from divine service, and the obteining of that which we have in this prayer
required.

That last word, Amen, which is as 2. Cor. 1. d Ambros. in Psalm 40. Hier. in
ca. 6. Math.
much, as, So be it, is a confirmation of that we have craved; wherewith we
show the desire and hope we have to obtain our former petitions.

THE Luc. 1. c Chri. Basil. and Jacob. (...) Liturg. Aug ser. 2. de
Annuntiatione. Amb. in ca. 1. Lucae.
Salutation Angelical, which is that, where with our blessed Lady was greeted
by the Angel Gabriel.
AVE Maria gratia plena, Dominus tecum: benedicta tu in mulieribus, and
benedictus fructus ventris tui Jesus. Sancta Maria matter Dei ora pro nobis
peccatoribus, nunc, and in hora mortis nostrae.

Amen.
HAIL Mary full of grace, our Lord is with thee: blessed art thou amongst
women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb JESUS. Holy Mary mother of God,
pray for us sinners, both now, and in the hour of our death.

Amen.
AN Exposition of this Salutation.

Cap. 33.
FIRST we must understand, how this salutation is the most holy and divine
prayer that can be possibly said next to the former of the Pater noster; seeing
this salutatio^ was formed of the holy ghost, by means of the Angel Luc. 1. c.
(...)
Gabriel, S. Elizabeth (S. John Baptists mother,) and the holy Church our most
sacred mother. We ought not therefore to make any light account of this our
instruction and teaching, in what manner we are to invoke the blessed virgin
her favor and help, and how we are to salute her; since her intercession is
right valable to us ward, and right effectual to Godward. And therefore have
the holy fathers, illuminated with the holy ghost, alwais observed this manner
of saluting and calling upon her; which al true Chri stians have always with
common consent used, and do use in these our days.

THE FIRST part of this salutatio^, Hail Mary full of grace, onr Lord is with
thee, blessed art thou amongst women; the Angel spoke, when he came to announce
the celestial mystery of the son of God his incarnation in the blessed virgin
her most sacred womb; whereof, each time we say this salutation, we ought to
be mindful, yielding God most humble thanks for this divine mystery, the
first beginning of our salvation. By this word, Aue, which counteruaileth,
Rejoice, or God save thee, is declared the zeal which the Angel had; as also,
that we ought to have toward this most holy virgin, inuiting her eftsons with
this word to be joyful and glad for this divine mystery; and expressing
thereby the contentation we feel through the manifold graces that were
bestowed upon her. This word MARY being the holy name of our Souerain Lady, the
Angel did not utter, in saluting her, but is added by the holy Church; both,
to signify the better unto us, who it is we salute, as also for a devotion
sake toward this holy name of Mary, which is interpreted Lady, and,
illuminated, or Illuminatrix; and sea star; each one whereof, as every man
perceueth, may be right fitly applied unto her. This word, full of grace, is
the first speech, wherewith the Angel praised her, and that right woorthely,
for so much as the grace of God is the greatest good and treasure that may be
possibly desired, and with it do al other gifts come ioyntlye and heaped
togetherwards. With this divine grace was the blessed virgin replenished Amb.
in 1. cap. Luc. Vide Bern. Ser. 9. ex paruis.
more then ever was any pure creature; as being elected to a higher dignity
and prerogative; that is, to be the mother of God. Our Lord is also wont to
grant continually such graces, as be necessary for the state, whereto he
electeth each one. It follows; Our Lord is with thee; that is to say, he that
properlye and absolutely is Lord, (which God alone is) is with thee. For
albeit other men here in earth are called lords, as having a certain
superiority given them, and rule over some men: yet are they but servants,
and the creatures of this one only Lord; who has of himself al soueraintie,
and absolute authority over al menn. This Lord was therefore with our blessed
Lady; since he deliteth to dwell in the soul full of grace, as hers was. And
therefore, who so desire to have this Lord harbor with them, let them first
procure to have his grace, without the which he will never enter or soiourne in
their souls. It follows; Blessed art thou amongst women, or, above al other
women. By which speech the Angel showed, how much our Lady passed (...) Esai.
7. (...) Ezec. 44. a
al other women in the gifts and privileges that were bestowed upon her.
Blessed amongst women, or, amongst al women; for that she was both a virgin,
and a mother together; which prerogative, neither ever has been, nor shal-be
granted to any other woman. Blessed also amongst women; since she was exempted
from the common curse and malediction laid upon al women, to bring forth their
children with dolor and pain; where the blessed virgin, contrari-wise, as she
conceived Mat. 1. d.
her child without corruption, or any detriment at al to her most pure
virginity, so did she bring forth her child without any pain or grief at
al; yea, with inspeakable joy, seeing her self the mother of such a son; and
withal, before birth, in birth, and after birth, a most pure and immaculate
virgin. Luc. 1. (...)
Blessed again is she amongst al women, because of al women and men she has
been hitherto in all ages continuallye blessed, and shal-be of al generations
exalted euerlastinglye.

THE SECOND part of this salutation is; Luc. 11. d.
Blessed is the fruit of thy womb. which words S. Elizabeth greeted our Lady
with, at such time, as being conceived with the son of God, she came to
visit her. The which speech right woorthely apperteineth to our blessed Lady,
for that of such a tree, expedient was it, that such fruit should proceed.
Blessed is the mother, but much more the son, who was cause of his mothers
blessedness. Blessed is the tree that brought us forth the fruit of life; but
much more blessed is the fruit of life, whereby at such time as we eat it
woorthelye, we are made blessed, and receive the true and perfect life. And to
make us understand the better, what this blessed fruit of the virgins womb
is, the Church adds this word, Jesus, our Saviors most Act. 4. b. 1. Pet.
2. a. Phil. 2. b. Isa. 45. d Romans 14. b.
holy name, which is a most sweet honycombe in the mouth of him that pro
nounceth it; a most melodious music in the ears of him that hears it; a
sovereign joy, and inestimable consolation in his heart, that deuoutlye does
contemplate it.

The Vide (...) Breu. Rom and nouum ex edicte Conc. Trid. editum.
holy Church adds a third part to this salutation: Holy Mary, mother of
God, pray for us sinners, now, and in the hour of our death. These words are
a short prayer and petition, whereby we recommend our selves to this most
sacred Lady her protection; agnising and confessing the efficacy and
puissaunce of her prayers to God-warde; and how we being wicked wretches, stand
great need of her prayers, being innocent and pure from al spott of sin;
whom, if in our distresses we invoke with faith and fervent devotion, well may
we hope (how greatly soever we have offended) to find relief and succor at
this mother of mercies hands, as al sinners have evermore by trial proved
true, that in their necessities made their recourse unto her.

The last word, Amen, may be understood, as is afore-saide in the end of the
Creed or Pater noster.

These things thus explaned, as thou see, be the points, which, at least,
every good Christian is bound to have by heart; to the end he know what he
ought to believe, and do; and in what manner to make his prayers, to gain Gods
favor and divine grace; thereby afterward to obtain everlasting glory, and
celestial bliss.

HERE follows a prayer, or Meditation, whereby the soul is stirred up to (...)
reverence and love of the blessed Sacrament, before a man receaueth it.
MOST high and dreadful, most sweet and bountiful Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, who art really contained in this most miraculous Sacrament, which I
both desire, and purpose to receive; behold, how I come freight with fear
and hope unto thee, to be visited, fed, and comforted of thee. I fear,
considering the incomprehensible highness of thy most infinite Majesty; and the
inspeakable baseness of my most wretched misery. I think, Lord, what thou
art, and what I am. Thee, I acknowledge to be my maker, and maker of al things;
omnipotent, eternal, infinite, full of al wisdom, virtue, and incomprehensible
holiness. Thou art he, before whose face all the Job. 40. (...)
pillars and celestial potentates do quake again; and whom all the Phil. 2. b.
Heb. 1. b Psalm. 96. b. Psalm. 103. a Ps. 88. a. b
Angelical quires yield adoration and due reverence to. I contrari-wise, know
my self to be a most vile and filthy creature, a contemptible caterpiller, a
wretched worm, a vessel of corruption, one full of al miseries, Ps. 50. a. Job.
14. a.
conceued and borne in sin, unable to do any good, inclined to al wickedness.
How may then so abject and abominable a caitiff, present himself before so
great a king? What has mire and filth to do with celestial purity? darkness
with light? the sinner of al sinners, with of al holies the holiest? If that
holy man S. Luc. 3. a. Math. 2. c.
John Baptist (one sanctified in his mothers womb, durst not touch thy most
sacred head when thon came to be baptized of him how shall I presume, not
only to touch, but to receive thee in this holy Sacrament, freight with
filth, and wallowing in all wickedness, even from my very infancy?

The faith which that devout Mat. 8. a Luc. 7. a
Co^turion had in thee, made him repute himself unworthy, for thee to enter
into his house; how then shall I with much more feeble faith and devotion,
receive thee into my unclean and unworthy habitation?

If so great purity and holiness were required for the eating of the shewbreades
of the old law, which were but a shadow of this most souerame Sacrament; how
shall I eat the bread of Angels, being so impure, and estraunged from al
holiness? how may so heinous an offendour as I am, presume to approach, hearing
the prince and chief of all the Apostles cry out; Luc. (...) b
Go further from me Lord, for I am a sinful creature.

I languishe, Lord, and tremble, when I consider thy highness, thy dignity, and
what thy holy Saints have said and done unto thee; but much more am I
confounded, calling to mind my malice and ingratitude, al my years consumed in
sin, blindness, injuries, and crimes committed against thy divine Majesty;
without any fear of thy threats and punishments, any regard or thankfulness
for thine infinite benefits; yea, rather renewing, in most impudent wise, not
once, but eftsons, thy cruel torments, and most painful passion; crucifying
that Lord a-freshe with so many grievous abominations, who with so great
charity vouchsafed erst to be crucified for my redemption.

Wherefore, most righteous Lord, Psa. 30 a
if thou look upon mine iniquities, how may I present my self before thee?
what can I hope for at thy hands, but the torments due unto my trespasses?
What shall it be other to receive thee, then with mine impudency more hemously
to offend thee? what other to 1. Cor. 11 g
eat thee, then to eat a judgment and condemnation for my soul.

Nevertheless Lord, albeit my sins astonish me, although the greatness of thy
majesty appal me, yet does thine incomparable mercy, Psalm. (...)
(which surpasses al thy works) cause me to have confidence; thine ineffable
bounty makes me to hope and trust in thee; thy most benign clemency
emboldeneth me to appear and present my self before thee; for look how much my
misery and vnwoorthines is greter, and so much thy mercy shall shine forth
brighter, vouchsafing to admit him to the food of angels feast, who
acknowledges him-self of al men, to be the most vile and wretchedst.

I remember me, O my Comforter, of those most sugared words, which thou
spakest, wandering up and down in this worldly pilgrimage, and comforting the
poor and feeble, the wretched and sinne-ful, such as I my self am; the which
words, O Lord, do in like manner greatly comfort me, and give me courage to
creep and come unto thee; since this is my fixed faith, that what thou did
the^ say, thou like-wise say now; and what then thou did, thou art
ready now to do. Thou sayedst: Mat. 11. d
Come to me al ye that travail and are laden, and I will refresh you; Behold
me toiled and troubled with my trespasses, who stand great need, and require
thy refresshing. Thou saiedst, that the soun de have no need of the physician,
but the sick and feeble; and, Mat. 9. b Luc. 5. f. Mar. 2. b. (...) Tim. 1. c
how thou came not to call righteous men, but sinners; and therefore was it
publicly spoken of thee, how thou receauedst sinners and did eat and
drink with them. All this makes well for me, and gives me cause of great trust
and consolation; since I know my self to be sick, sinful, and more miserable
then any man. Behold me therefore (o heavenly phisi tion) I offer and exhibit
my self here unto thee. to be eured and healed of thee. Behold how I come
slarued to thy table, desiring to eat of this strong and delicate food, which
may give me true and everlasting life: for hitherto have I not through soly fed
of other, then of leekes and garlike, and such like gross meats of Egypt,
which were my bane, and caused my death and overthrow.

Remember, my God, remember thy mercies of old time, and impart some part
thereof unto me; for so requires my great misery, and most lamentable
infirmity.

The whole multitude (as the Mar. 3. (...)
Gospel tells) desired to touch thee, for that such a marvelous virtue as
healed al men, issued out of thee. The Mat. 9. d
blind came, and thou gave them sight; the Mat. 8. (...) Mar. 1. d Luc. 5. c.
lepers, and thou clensedst them from their leprie; the Mat. 9. d 12. b. Luc.
11. b.
possessed with devils, and thou deliueredst them; and finally all that were
feeble and annoied, thou did cure, remedy, and comfort with this marvelous
virtue that issued out of thee. Wherefore, seeing thy bountiful clemency is no
deal lessened from that it ever was; nor the virtue proceeding from thy flesh
( Ioh. 16. c. f
which is given us in this holy Sacrament) of less efficacy the^ aforetime;
no less cure and comfort am I now to hope for, then they did erst receive.
Thou lackest nothing, my Lord, requisite for my redress and welfare; neither
art thou scanted of might, since thou art almighty; nor of pity and clemency,
being pitiful without stint and measure; nor of love, since thy charity is
infinite: Through love thou vouchsafedst to be borne for us; through love thou
suffredst most cruel torments for us; through love thou diedst on the roode for
us; and through love thou haste in this most sweet and sauourie Sacrament,
vouchsafed to give thy Mat. 26. (...) Mar. 14. c. Luc. 22. b 1. Cor. 11. e
self for food unto us. Well may I therefore hope in thee, seeing I find thee
such, as I could possiblye wish thee; well may I expect for cure and comfort
of thee, seeing thou art he, who can so easily afford it, and redress my
grievous misery.

Wherefore my God, my sole delight, my tresure, and whole welfare of my soul,
abandon me not, I beseech thee; but vouchsafe with like charity and clemency
to receive me now, as thou receauedst erst, those annoyed and feeble folks
that came for redress unto thee. Be not angrye, Lord, that I so vile and
wicked a wretch dare presume to come to thee, to touch thee, and to receive
thee in this most worthy Sacrament, no more, then that the poor woman Mat. 9.
(...) Mar. 5. 6. Luc. 8. f.
that suffered the flux should touch thee; whom thou comfortedst, made
joyful, and gratiouslye gave her the health which she desired. The flux
which I suffer through my sins is no deal less, yea, much (...) dangerous
then hers was; and therefore have I more need to touch thee thou being he
alone, who can afford me my desired health and welfare.

If my manisold and grecuous sins make me unworthy to appear before thee, and
thine everlasting fathers face, I cry alowde, and crave on thee with thy holy
prophet, saying: Look not upon me, but upon the face of thine anointed
Christ (O most merciful father) and so will thou receive me, and be favorable
unto me. If my detestable pride and hawtines displease thee, and that right
woorthely, look upon Christ's most reverend head, perced round about with
pricking thorns for me. If my dishonestie and lasciuiousnes have offended
thee, behold that virginal and most holy flesh of Christ al too torn with
most cruel scourges for me. If my wicked works, and disordered step; deserve
correction, look upon thy Christ his hands, and most holy feet, fastened with
most spiteful nails to the roode for me. If the hardness of my heart provoke
thee to wrath, let Christ's most tender and loving heart, perced with that cruel
lance, move thee to take compassion of me.

Behold then, everlasting father, behold thy Christ, behold that glittering
and bright face, whereon the Angels covet to fix their eyes, appaled and
bespitted on the roode for me: regard that vndistained mirror, distained with
strokes and filthy fleame for me: behold those eyes, fart passing the sunnie
beams in beauty and brightness, ecclipsed and darkened with the shadow of death
for me.

Wherefore, O Father of mercies, and God of al comfort, if heretofore the horror
of my monstrous crimes have provoked thee to punishment, let this most worthy
spectacle of thy Christ move thee to compassion; let the love thou bear him,
be of greater force to pardon and forgive me, then the hatred thou bear
toward my sins, to correct and punish me. We read of king David
(accomplished with virtues according to thy hearts desire) how he disdained
not to call a deformed criple to his board, 2. Re. 9. c
for that he was his dear friend Ionathas son; meaning thereby to honor the
son, not for his own sake, but for the merit and woorthines of his father.
Disdain not thou then, O most merciful Father, to admit me a more unworthy,
and deformed sinner unto this thy divine board, not for mine own sake, but for
the merit and honor of thy dear friend, and most sweet son Jesus Christ
our Savior and our Father; who with such griefs and torments did on the
roode regenerate us; whose passion and most precious death is represented each
time that this most grateful Sacrifice is offered up unto thee. And thee
again, my most loving Lord and king Jesus Christ, which art in this holy
banquet, both the food it self, and he that does inuit us to it; I humbly
beg of thee, albeit most unworthy, that it may plese thee to ad mit me, to
satiate me, and to make me partaker of the graces and innumerable gifts, which
thou art wont to bestow upon such thy servants as do woorthely receive thee.
Suffer me not to depart fasting from thee, least I faint in the way; like as
thou sufferedst not the great multitude of people that followed thee with so
great zeal to hear thy sugared words in the desert; whom thou (moved with
pity) vouchsafedst, not only spiritually, but Ioh. 6. a. Mat. 14. c. Mar. 6.
e. Luc. 9. b
corporally also, to satiate, least happily they might have fainted and miscarried
in their journey.

Wherefore, seeing this most sacred Sacrament is the food of this our
pilgrimage, much more am I to desire, and to teceaue it; to the end I feign not
in the way, but like an-other Elias, 3. Re. 19 a
may by force of this food, pass out, and arrive at length to the mount of
everlasting happiness. Let me in therefore, O Lord, seeing I knock at the gate
of thy mercy, as a famished, poor, and feeble creature; that being filled by
thee, enriched by thee, and cured by thee, I may rejoice in thee, give thanks
to thee, and yield perpetual peales of praises to thee, with the Angels that
here attend about thee; with whom I laud and bless thine eternal fathers
infinite charity, who has vouchsafed to grant us this pledge of future and
everlasting glory.

Amen.
ANOTHER prayer or meditation to be made the day that one has received, to
stirte him up, through the consideration and knowledge of so great a benefit,
to give God thanks therefore, and to be grateful for his goodness.
BLESS thy Lord, O my soul, and al my entrals laud his most holy name.
Forgett not, O my soul, the infinite mercies, and continual benefits received
of his most liberal hand; amongst the which, well may thou reckon that which
has been this day given thee; that so infinite a Majesty should vouchsafe
to visit thee, to enter into thy homely habitation; and with surpassing
clemency, whollye to give himself to thee in this most marvelous Sacrament.

O thou incomprehensible God, no less pitiful then puissant, what shall I say,
seeing the depth of thy bottomless less mercies has vouchsafed to impart it
self to the deapth of my inspeakable miseries? What thanks can I yield thee
for so great kindness and love, who wott right well, that if all the members and
muscles of my body were turned into tounges, yet could I not condignely thank
thee for the least of al thy benefits; how much less able shall I then be,
with one tongue to laud and thank thee for this present gift, being of so
great and inestimable a value?

If the Luc. 1. d
mother of thy for-runner S. John Baptist, being visited of thy most sacred
virgin mother, when she perceived thy presence, (illuminated with the holy
Ghost) was so astonished thereat, as she cried out aloud, and said: Whence have
I this, that the mother of my Lord does come unto me? how much more justly am I
to be astonished, and to cry out: Whence have I this, that, not the mother of
my Lord, but my Lord himself, and Lord of all the Angels, of heaven and
earth, and of all the creatures of the world, has visited me, entered into me,
honored me, fostred me; and filled me in this most worthy Sacrament? Whence
have I this, that a Lord so high, so puissant, so woorthye of al woorshipp,
has vouchsafed to come to me a most wretched worm, to me the most heinous
sinner of al sinners? to me that have so many times offended him? to me that
with my lewdnes and abominations have so often banished and expelled him out of
me?

Woorthelye did the holy prophets Job. 7. d. Psalm. 8. a
Job and David wonder at thy divine clemency, at what time they said, Job. 7.
d. Psalm. 8. a
What is man, that thou so greatly magnifiest him': what is the son of man,
that thou thus visitest him? but much greater reason have we most wretched
caitiffs to say the same in these our dais; What is man that thou have thus
extolled him, as for man, to make thy self man, and to give thy self in food
to man, wherewith he may every day be visited and refreshed? And albeit al men
may meruail at this thy divine clemency used toward man, much more yet may
I marvel, which of al men am the basest and vnwoorthiest.

If David, when king Saul would have chosen him for his son in law, reputed
himself unworthy, and said: What am I, or what is my life, or my fathers
(...) 1. Re. 18 d
lignage, that I should be a son in law to a king? how much more cause have
I now to say the same, seeing the king of al kings has admitted me to so high
a dignity? what am I? or what is my fathers offspring? what other am I, then a
vessel of corruption; a sack of donge and filth, engendered of a most vile and
stinking matter, touching my flesh; which, ere long, shall yield food to
woorms; and am, concerning my soul, al soiled with sin, fraught with
ignorance and forgetfulness, with many mo defectes and wicked inclinations; what
other is my life the^ a vanity, a pufle of wind, a smoke and shadow that
quicklye vanishes; a confusion and disorder; a continual exercise of sin,
and transgressions of thy commandments? Such has my life, mine exercises,
and mine inclinations been; Romans 5. c.
such also is my father Adams offspring, and al his ancient family; since all that descend of him, are generally born thus blemished, thus bent, and al like
children of a traitor, as he was, adjudged to suffer death. Wherefore, O most
puissant prince, and dreadful King above al kings, thou knowing me and my life
to have been such, and much worse, the^ I either know, or can imagine, haste
vouchsafed to receive me, not for a in law, but for thine own son; yea, and
as a younger one right tenderlye beloved; for such are fathers accustomed most
of al to cherishe, as now thou have cherished and fed me with this Angels
bread, wherein is found al savor, and al divine delight. S. Luke reports,
how one of those gestes that were at table with thee in a prince of the
Pharisees house, should say: Luc. 14. d
Blessed are those, that shall eat the bread of life in the kingdom of
heaven; but much more happy am I, if I can know it, and gather fruit out of
it, which in this life eat the bread, wherein is the selfsame God
contained; and ther-with receue a pledge to eat him afterward in an-other
manner, in his everlasting kingdom. Happy eke are al those that shall dispose
themselves to repair to this most gracious banquet, wherein is found al
sweet tastes and savors, al riches and renown, and all the things that happily
be to be desired: yea, what is it that man may long for, that is not here
afforded him? If he desire delights and pleasures, here be the sincerest, the
chastest, and the sweetest. If he wish for wealth, behold here the treasure
that enricheth both heaven and earth. If state and soueraintie be sought for,
behold here the highest dignities that can be possiblye achieved; since by
means of this most venerable Sacrament the soul is united to God, and rests
associated and reuere^ced with quires of Angels that assist about it.

Wherefore, Oye blind beguiled children of Adam, what other pleasure and
profit do you proule for? why do you (as Esaias says) spend your money, and
not upon bread? (...) 8. (...)
why employ you your trauail, and not in things that may satiat and content
you? why loose you such satietie, such sweetness, and such treasure as is here
contained in this gift? Do not thou so (O my soul) do not thou so; be not
thou henceforth any more blind; see thou seek not any carnal contentations,
having means to be a partaker of this mere spiritual and celestial delight:
Take no more taste and pleasure in the food of death, (whereof thou erst did
feed) having this bread of life given and granted to thee: Regard not the
pompes and most vain vanities of this world, seeing thou may enjoy in
this Sacrament the true happiness and good things, which in the world can-not
possibly be attained: Embrace and keep this treasure, which suffices to make
thee truly happy; possess this good, which exceeds al good: Content and
quiet thy self in this repose, which may abundantlye satiate thy desire; And
be not ungrateful to this thy benefactour, but yield him hearty thanks, as-wel
for this, as al his other benefits heretofore from the beginning bestowed upon
thee.

Howbeit, my gracious and merciful Lord, how can I yield thee worthy thanks,
the debt I owe thee being so great, and my ability to discharge the same so
small? with all my heart, and with all my might and power, I thank thine infinite
liberality for having created me to thine own likeness and similitude; and for
having, for my conservation, created like-wise so great variety of other
creatures; and much more do I laud and bless thee, for that with thy precious
blood thou haste redeemed me; but above al, do I with all my bowels and powers
of body and soul thank thee, bless thee, and adore thee, for having left us
this miraculous, and most woorthye Sacrament; and for giving me miserable
wretch the grace eftsons to receive it, that eftsons I may thereby be made
partaker of the fruit of thy redemption.

And because these my thanks and praises be slender, weak, and unworthy of
such gifts as I have received, I beseech all the Angels and holy Saints to
supply my want; thy Angels vouchsafe to sound perpetual peals of praises for
me; the Archangels vouchsafe everlastingly to adore thee for me; the celestial
potentates do reverence thee for me; and all the whole court of heaven offer
thee continual sacrifice of thanks-geuing for me. And yet, for that all this is
finite, and is not correspondent to the value of the benefit I have this day
received, being infinite; those most holy and grateful thanks which thou Lord
gave to thy father, minding to grant us this so mestimable a gift, even
those same which are infinite, do I offer both to him and thee together; for
verily believe I, that for this cause did thou yield them, that so
incomparable a gift should not be destitute of condign graces and
thanks-geuing. And now do I humbly beseech thee of thy most bountiful
clemency, that seeing it has pleased thee to satiate and honor me with thy
most worthy presence in this venerable and redoubted Sacrament; thou will also
vouchsafe to grant me thy graces to be always grateful, and to answer
woorthely to this most happy visitation.

This has always been thy wont, my Savior and Redeemer, that where through
thy goodness thou have vouchsafed to enter, there have thou departed of thy
blessings most aboundauntlye, heaping grace upon grace, and mercy upon
mercy Mat. 9. a
Thou entredst into Mathewe the Publicane his house, and from a publican thou
made him thy Disciple, and an Apostle. Luc. 19. (...)
Thou entredst into Zacheus house, when by and by he was changed from his old
custom, and health was given to al his household. Mat. 8. b Luc. 4. f
Thou entredst into Simon Peter's house, and drove away the ague from his wives
mother in law, leaving her whole and comforted. Luc. 7. f. Mat. 26. a. Mar 4.
a Ioh. 12. a.
Eftsons did thou enter into Martha and good Mary Magdalens house, and what
tongue can tell the spiritual riches thou gave to that house, and the ineffable
graces thou endowedst those two sisters with? Zach 9 1. Pet. 3 d.
Thou entredst after thy holy and doleful death into Limbo, and immediatlye
with thy visitation did illuminate and bless those holy Fathers. 2. Re.
6. b.
Finally, the figure of this Sacrament, to wit, the Arc of the old
Testament, because it entered into Obededon his house, was cause that thy bles
singes were powered upon him, and al his, paying plentifully for the harbor
that in that house was afforded thee.

Wherefore, O most sweet and welcome gest, seeing through thy goodness thou have
vouchsafed this day to enter into my poor cotage, send down withal thy holy
blessings thereon, by means whereof I may woorthely answer to this thine
incomparable mercy. Cleanse and fine this house, Lord, from all the filth thou
see in it; Repair and do some cost on it, least it decay and fall to ruin,
drive out the darkness in it, with the glittering beams of thy light; adorn
and deck it up with the virtues and graces of the holy Ghost; that being thus
cleansed, repaired, adorned, and illuminated, it may please thee to dwell
therein, and never to depart. Tarry still with me, O Lord, my comforter; the
night draws nigh, and without thee I shall remain in darkness, and so be sore
endaungered. Thou have affirmed (O eternal truth) how thy Pro. 8. d
whole delight is to dwell with the son of man; and how thou stand Apoc.
3. d
knocking at the door, ready to enter and, suppe with such as shall open, and
let thee in. Behold how I have given thee free entrance into me; and thou of
thy goodness have admitted me to the sweet supper of thy most sacred body.
Aba^don me not therefore (my sovereign Lord) ne depart thou from me; draw me
after thee, knitt and tie me to thee; yea, draw me quite out of my self; since
I am much better in thee then in me: in thee I live, in me I dye; in thee I
remain firm and constant, in me I decay, and come to naught.

Renew me therefore, O my Sanctifier, and through love transform me into thee;
and grant me, so to live in thee, as that I only live to thee; I only love
thee, I only delight in thee; that thou be my only joy, my only comfort, my
only food, wherewith my soul may in such sort be refreshed, as that al other
meats seem loathsome and unsavory to it. This only have I chosen; this only
shall suffice me; with this alone will I live contented, satisfied, and happy,
until that most desired day come, when I shall feed of thee in another form,
and enjoy thee continually in the company of all the elect and blessed Saints
of thy celestial court; where with the Father and the holy Ghost, thou live
and reignest everlastingly.

Amen.
PRAYERS.
THE Translatour of this Treatise (...) earnestly (good Christian Reader) to be
remembered in thy prayers; and that other-whiles of thy charitable devotion
(which shall not be unrewarded) thou will offer for him to God these few lines
in manner following.
O LORD of infinite majesty and mercy, who desire not the death, but the
deliverance of a sinner; take pity upon thy servant N. and pardon his most
grievous trespasses. Grant him grace to know thee, and to know himself.
Give him the virtues of humility, patience. temperance, chastity, and perfect
resignation. Deliver him from mortal siun, during life; and in the hour of
death strengthen him in faith, and firm hope of finding mercy: So that,
scaping the dangers of his enemies, both in his life time, and in that last
most dreadful hour of death, he may, through thy gracious goodness, attain to
everlasting happiness, there to praise thee, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, one God eternallye.

Grant this, O Lord, for our Mediator and only Redeemer Jesus Christ his
sake.

Amen.
Non nobis, Domine, non nobis, sed Nomini tuo da gloriam.



Thy sugared name, O Lord,
Engraue within my breast.
Since therein does consist
My weal and only rest.
TO THE READER.
I HAVE thought good (gentle Reader) following herein the advice of certain
vertucus and learned men, to annexe in the end of the former most excellent
Treatise these few prayers that follow; moved thereto, chiefly with this reason,
that such as have not ben erst exercised in the manner of praying prescribed by
the Author, might here see some practice of his precepts touching government
on morninges and euenings, (the two especial times whereon depend the whole
course of a wel-ordered life) as also touching the disposition requisite both
before and after confession; with some such other prayers, as I demed most
necessary here to present unto thee. I hope, if thou be a Nouice, and
delighted with the former work; this my small pain shall not seem
unprofitable unto thee: which I beseech thee to use to thine avail, whiles
thou want better means. And this must I say for the better credit of that
which follows; how it is not I that am the author thereof, but other famous
men of the same livery that the former is; God requite al our benefactors;
spiritual especially, and give thee, Reder, such good by this whole work, as
the Authors thereof do wish thee, and my poor heart affords thee.

A PRAYER (...) be said in the morning before al other business.
MY LORD God, and most benign Savior Jesus Christ, who, when I was not,
did create and make me capable of thee the sovereign and only good; and
being made a thral and bondslaue through my forefathers trespass, did
redeem me with thy most precious blood, and loss of thy sacred life; abiding
the torments due to my trespasses, to acquit and ridd me from the same: For
these, O Lord, and al other thine inestimable benefits; namely, for having
preserved me this night past, I yield thee most humble, zealous, and obedient
thanks; offering my self whollye to thee, as I am wholly thine; beseeching
thee also of thine infinite cleme^cie, to preserve me this day from any ways
offending thee; and to direct al my thoughts, words, and works, to thine
everlasting glory.

Mine estate and calling is, as thou know, O Lord, environed with many
difficulties, [ here is each one to weigh their vocation, and the dangers it is
subject too.] and through mine evil customs and wicked inclinations, hardlye
can I, without thy special assistance pass this day without offending in
these sins; [ Here must each one call to mind the vices he is most prone too]
Refreshe therefore, O Lord, my concupiscence with the dewes of thy divine
grace, and give me strength to fight more manfully, and to subdue al wicked
suggestions. Truly, Lord, here in humility and sincerity of heart, I
protest, never willingly, by thy gracious favor, to offend thy laws and
commandments any more. I detest al sin, and what may any ways displease
thee. I desire to love thee, fear thee, and serve thee this day and evermore,
and to direct al mine actions to thine honor and glory. Assist me, Lord,
with thy grace, and enriche my poverty with the plenty of thy merits.
Wherefore, in the union of that charity, wherewith thou descendest from heaven
into the blessed virgins womb; and afterward offredst up thy self on the
roode in sacrifice for our sins; in the union of this thine incomprehensible
charity, I offer unto thee what-soeuer I shall do, think, or speak this day;
[ Here may we briefly discourse, wherein we are like to pass over the day.]
beseeching thee, through thy merciful goodness, to accept, govern, and enriche
al in such sort, as thy glory may be thereby procured, my neighbors welfare
occasioned, and mine own soul better fortified and provided. To thee my
sweet and only Jesus Christ, with the father and the holy Ghost be al glory
and praise everlastingly. Amen.

Pater noster. Aue Maria. Credo. etc.

A PRAYER to be said to bed ward, applied to the excellent instructions of
the third Chapter above.
1. SOVEREIGN, dreadful, and most loving Lord my God, who never ceassest to
show thy mercy toward sinners, yea, when they offend and trespass against
thee, such is thine infinite clemency and love, as then thou forbearest not to
heap thy benefits upon them; I most sinful and wicked wretch yield thee
humble thanks for thine ineffable goodness showed toward me, in creating me
to thine own likeness, and making me capable of thine everlasting glory; for
the creation of so many other creatures for my behoufe and sustenance; and for
that inestimable work of my redemption, whereby thou deliueredst me from the
slavery of Satan, and purchasedst me free entrance into thy celestial Region;
[ These points may be fruitfully particularised, according to each one their
skill and devotion.] for having singled me amongst so many millions that know
thee not, and lie drow ned in ignorance and miserable errors, to be thy
servant, and a true Catholic Christian; for all thy blessed Sacraments,
especially, for that sacrament above al sacraments, wherein thou art thy self
most really contained; for having preserved me so many times from hell, wherein I
had been long since plunged, had not thou of thine inspeakable goodness
sustained and delivered me from my foes: For these, and al other thy benefits,
namely for those thou have this day most bountifully bestowed upon me. [ Here
are they particulerly to be though of.] O my sovereign Lord, I yield thee such
sincere and dutiful thanks, as my poor heart can possibly afforde thee;
beseeching the blessed virgin, and all the Saints of heaven: to yield thee
thanks and praises in supply of my want.

2. AND NOW mine only Redeemer and Savior, I humbly crave the light of thy
grace, to know wherein I have this day any ways offended thee, and that by
mature and sound discussion of my conscience, I may see mine own sins with
sorrow, and thine ineffable mercy, with a zealous and firm purpose of amendment.

3. [HERE MVST we examine our selves, how we have employed the day, in word,
thought, and deed; toward God and our neighbors.]

4. THOU SEE, O Lord, my lewdnes, and wotest my misery much better then I
my self do. Sorry I am with all my heart, that I should still offend so loving a
Lord, and wish to God my sorrows were greatly multiplied. I purposed erst to
do better by thy grace, which wanted not; and yet have I tra^sgresled in my
former trespasses. Neither yet may I despair, O Lord, but will continually
trust to thy mercies in all euentes; and purpose firmly, as I now do, every
day to amend my life. Deliver me, my gracious God, from al mortal sin for
ever, and give me grace to persecute my venial vices with sorrow, during life;
And for the satisfaction of these and al my former sins, together with all
those of the world, as also for all thine ineffable benefits bestowed upon me
and al mankind, I offer unto thee the merits of thy bitter passion; those
most precious drops of blood thou sheddest for me, and that inflamed
charity, wherewith thou wholly resignest thy self to al thy torments for my
(...) and in the union of this thine oblation on the roode, I offer up my self,
soul, body, and al I have of thine, within or without me to thine honor, and
everlasting glory. I retain nothing to my self, but give al to thee, whose it
is, and make that thine by my will, which is thine of justice. Give me thy
grace, O my God, to live better her eafter, and to confess my sins in due time
to my ghostly Father. Give me true humility and repentance, grace to know
thee, and grace to know me; purity of heart in all my doings, patience,
chastity, and perfect charity. Give me a good life, and a good death, and in
the dangerous hour of my departure, the assistance of thy blessed Saints and
Angels, with whom I may, through thy mercy in an-other world, praise and
glorify thee euerlastinglye. Amen.

Say then the Pater noster, Aue Maria, and the Creed, with some short prayer
or hymn; as thou lie thee down, to crave protection for the night, and
convenient rest of body and soul: And fail not to commend thee to thy
Guardian Angel.

A PRAYER to be (...) before Sacramental Confession.
MOST Sovereign, mighty, and merciful Lord, who of thine infinite love and
mercy toward mankind, have ordemed in thy Church the Sacrament of Penance,
as a sovereign saulue to heal our spiritual wounds, and to purge us from the
filth, wher-with we may after Baptism any ways have defiled our souls; I.
N. thy most vile and ungrateful creature, having offended thee many ways, and
most greeuouslye since my last Confession, purpose through thy grace, to fly
hither for my remedy, and according to thy divine ordinance to confess my
sins unto thy servant; hoping thereby, according to thy promise, to receive a
full and perfect absolution.

Give me grace therefore, O Lord, that like as of thy goodness thou have
inspired into my heart a desire to apply this remedy to my ghostly griefs, so I
may in due reverence, contrition, and sincerity, use the same, to the glory of
thy name, and the full forgeuenes of my sins. Open the secrets of my soul
unto me, O Lord, and make me know al my sins and iniquities what-soeuer. Give
me also due sorrow and contrition for the same, and grace to unfold them to
thy vicar my ghostly physician, purely, plainly, sorowfully, and sincerely,
with firm and constant purpose, through thy grace, to amend my life hereafter.

Ah Lord, my gracious God, and only comfort of my soul, since thou
desire, that in all things I should sincerelye serve thee; and I through thy
grace desire nothing more then to do the same; why is it, Lord, that I still
offend thee? why fall I so often in relapse of my former folies? Thy grace is
not wanting, but mine ungraciousness and inconstancy is the cause thereof,
whereof I most heartily accuse me. Even now I mind to fight manfullye, and by
and by I faint and fail in my former purposes. Rightly therefore am I, in
respect hereof, to humble my self, and to deem me to be thy most vile and
abject creature. Increase in me daily thy grace, and sovereign virtue of
humility; and grant me, that once I may know thee, and know my self; Thee,
in thy Majesty and mercy; me, in mine abominations and misery; and that at
length I may fight more manfully, and gain the victory over mine (...) through
thy gracious help and favor, my only Redeemer and Savior Jesus Christ, who
with the Father and the holy Ghost reignest one God everlastingly.

Amen.
A PRAYER to be said after Sacramental Confession.
O GOD of mercy and pity, having now through thy gracious goodness
disburdened my conscience of the gilt, wherewith it was oppressed, and in the
low lie wise I might, unfolded all the sins I could possibly think of, unto
thy minister my ghostly father, I most humbly beseech thee to accept this my
Confession, and to forgive me my trespasses, as well remembered, as forgotten.

Grant me grace, O Lord, to live more carefully and diligently hereafter,
and to refrain from my former folies, which I utterly detest, and through thy
grace do firmly purpose, never any more to offend in: Especially, O my
gracious and benign Savior, give me grace to withstand these temptations,
wher-with I am most grievously infested [ Here are the temptations wherewith one
is most troubled, to be rehearsed.] as also grace to eschew al occasions of
offending, so much as possibly I may.

The just man, as Scripture tells, falls seven times a day, much more then
shall I fall, O Lord, having thorough mine own most vile abominations
increased greatly the weakness and blindness I received from my fore-father
Adam; yet Lord, as I hope and purpose firmly, by thy merciful favor, to
refrain from consenting to any mortal sin (which I most humbly beg of thee
to preserve me from, whilst I live) so Lord will I, by thy goodness, detest and
persecute my venial sins and imperfections, during life. Grant me grace so to
do, O merciful Lord, and that, as heretofore I have without any remors of
conscience most heinously transgressed thy commandments in every sort, so
now I may feel just remorse and sorrow, for every sin and imperfection what
soever. And that I may the better perform this, grant me grace, my sweet
Savior Jesus Christ, that I may persevere in discussing my conscience every
night more diligently the^ other, according to the good instructions it has
plesed thee, by thy servants, to impart unto me; and that each morning I may
so happily begin the day, by offering thee the first fruits of al mine
actions, as that the rest thereof may evermore be passed to thy glory.

As for my Penance that is enjoined me, and not performed already, favorably
I beseech thee to assist me, both, in the perfect remembering thereof, and in
the diligent executing in good time. And grant, that by thus endeavoring my
self daily, thorough thy grace, to amend my life, I may both live and dye a
true Penitent; and obtain, through the merits of thy blessed passion, a full
forgeuenes of my sins in this world, and in the other, the life eternal,
whereto thou have created me. To thee, mine only Savior Jesus Christ, with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, one God, be al honor, praise and glory
euerlastinglye.

Amen.
A VERY fit prayer to be said before Mass, wherein we exercise very
fruitfully our faith, and prepare our selves to hear it with dutiful attention.
O MOST puissant and loving Lord, who haste of thine infinite mercy
vouchsafed, that thine only son our Savior Jesus Christ should before his
doleful death, ordeine his body and bloudd to be consecrated in thy Church by
virtue of thy word in a most miraculous and dreadful mystery; grant me
grace, I beseech thee, O Lord, that as of thy singular love toward us, thou
have ordained this divine Sacrament, to make us always mindful of the merits
purchased unto us, by the death of thy dear son our Savior, so I may with
due reverence, and diligent remembrance of those his most bitter torments,
assist here whiles thy servant celebrateth this mystery, and offer up my
prayers in most obedient wise unto thee.

The souerain desire thou had of our welfare, O Lord, was that which
moved thee to leave us this most divine sacrifice of the Mass, that like as
thy triumphant Church has her sacrifice above, so thy militant Church might
have her sacrifice below. For like as in heaven thy son daily offers
himself unto thee for bethouse, appering before thy face in a visible and
glorious manner, so have thou vouch safed, that in earth he should daily be
offered to thee, by the function of priests, for our sins, in a manner
invisible, and proportionable to our frailty. Yet is it al one only, and the
self same Jesus Christ thy son, and al our profit and avail is wholly
derived from the Tree of the holy Roode. This mystery, most mighty Lord, is
far surpassing al humane capacity, and yet right easy for those to believe,
that have in time sucked the sweet sapp of thy most sauorie and wholesome
doctrine.

For mine own part, Lord, I believe (through thy gracious goodness) simply,
whatsoever thy holy, Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church teaches me,
either touching this, or any other of thy most divine mysteries and doctrines;
and confess undoubtedly, that as thou have said, that body and blood is
contained in this most sacred Sacrament, and the same body to be like-wise on
the right hand of thy Father in heaven; so believe I them both most assuredly,
and the one as firmelye as the other; seeing one is as-wel the will and work of
the Word, God and man, as is the other; and to be in earth, in heaven, and in
many places at once, is in thy power to do it most easily, as thou do, and
is in my power (through thy grace) to believe it most constantlye, as I do.
Herein I utterly renounce my sense, and al man's understanding, and cleue only
to thy divine and inexplicable Omnipotency; who, as thou made al things of
nothing, so can thou alter and dispose of al things at thy will and pleasure.

Now therefore, I beseech thee, most omnipotent and mighty God, to drive
away al distractions and wicked thoughts out of my mind, that I may attend the
celebration of this heavenly mystery with fear and reverent humility.
Sanctify also, I beseech thee, his spirit, who is here to present himself
before thee, to celebrate this divine Sacrifice; to the end, that he may
woorthely do it to thine honor and glory, his own avail, and the benefit
of al others. Give me grace, that by the reverent ceremonies, which are here to
be used, I may be put in mind of thy most painful torments, which they do
represent; and that I may adore thee in thy imperial Sacrament, with souerain
dread and lowlines. This, by thy grace, I purpose; this, by thy grace, I hope
to perform. Accept therefore. O Lord, to thine honor, our welfare, and the
unity of thy Church, the body and blood of our Savior, thy son Jesus
Christ, offered thee in this Sacrifice. Incline thine ears, O Lord, to the
prayers of thine afflicted flock, and mercifully restore thy true religion
where it is lacking. Open the eyes of the blind, and make them know their
errors; Relieve the distressed, the captives, and the sick, in the virtue of
this sacrament. Give grace to the living, and perpetual place of rest and
quietness to those which are departed in thy faith; for the merits of our only
Savior thy son Jesus Christ, to whom, with thee, and the holy Ghost, one
God, be al renown, praise, and soueraintie for evermore.

Amen.
ANOTHER short prayer to be said likewise before Mass.
O MY sovereign Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; O Lamp of light and truth, I
most miserable wretch humbly beseech thee to stanche my wandering mind, in
such sort, as, I may with due (...) and attention assist and wait here in thy
imperial presence, whiles thou procurest this so important an affair with thy
eternal father, for my well fare, and of al mankind.

Illuminate my soul, and stir up my lumpish heart (O son of true Sapience
and Justice) with the bright nes of thy countenance, that I may here with a
grateful and devout memory call to mind that sacrifice of obedience, patience,
and mosle inflamed charity, which thou, being wrapped in extreme woes and
ignominious reproaches, did offer upon the roode; with thy life, and every
dropp of thy most sacred blood, to thy celestial Father for our sins.

Ame^.
AN EXCELLENT prayer and adoration to be made in the presence of the blessed
Sacrament.
I MOST wicked wretch and unworthy Christian, bow down before my Lord who
has made and redeemed me, who fostreth and susteineth me, and evermore
remains life and verity.

O Jesus Christ, very God and me^, I adore thee here present, and call upon
thee; not doubting any whitt at al of the very real presence of thy flesh and
blood viuificant; nor of the presence of thy precious body, and most sacred
soul. Ah Lord, that I could in such sort know, behold, love, and laud
thee, as so many millions of Angels do with sovereign joy and gladness behold
thee; knowing, loving, and lauding thee perfectly, without being ever weried in
doing (...) and due obeisance unto thee.

I salute thee, O sauegarde of my soul, eternal word of the father, true
sacrifice, flesh viuificant, entier divinity, eternal life. O most precious
Treasure, replenished with all delight, the harbor and resting place of pure
and clean hearts. O (...) viande, O celestial and most excellent bread, O
eternal word of the father, which art for us made flesh, and yet remainest God
in the very self same person; I confess thee most undoubtedly to be true
God, and true man, consecrated after a miraculous manner on the Altar. Thou art
the assured hope, and the true salvation of sinners. Thou art the (...)
Restoratiue of those that languishe. Thou art the (...) Treasure of poor
distressed pilgrims.

Hallowed be thy name therefore, most sweet Savior Jesus Christ; Al thy
creatures sound forth praises and thanks-geuinges to thee, for the (...)
wher-with thou tenderedst our welfare, by descending down from (...) and
offering up thy noble, (...) and innocent body on the (...) of the roode for
our redemption; and that after thy Resurrection and Ascension thou did
vouchsafe for our welfare and consolation, to leave us with ineffable love,
the selfsame thy lively and immortal body (contained in this most venerable
Sacrament) as a memorial of thy departure, and paune of the peerlesse love thou
bear us.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us,
and grant us thy peace. Refreshe also our souls with spiritual food and
comfort; especially; at the latter end of our days; that neither in life nor
death we depart from thee, nor be deprived at any time of thy celestial
benedictions, thou which live and reignest with God the Father, and the holy
ghost, in all eternity.

Amen.
A PROTESTATION to be made in time of sickness, according to the instructions of
the. 27. Chapter above.
Say first the Creed, and then in manner following.

I PROTEST here before Almighty God my maker and Redeemer, before the blessed
virgin Marye, and all the whole Court of heaven, namely, before my Guardian
Angel, and al you that are here assistant about me, that, by Gods grace, I
mind to live and dye in this faith I have here protessted, according as the
holy Catholic and Roman Church understands it, and that I will evermore, by
Gods grace, remain in the union of the body of this Church, under the head
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and his Vicar here in earth. And if any
word that sounded contrary hereto, should by dotage escape out of my mouth, I
protest here, that it is not mine, but only that which I have above protested.

A PRAYER to God, and to al his blessed Saints, for all things necessary for
our selves, and our neighbors.
MOST bountiful, pitiful, and most merciful Father, have mercy and pity upon
me, who for all mine offenses, and those of the whole world, offer the life,
passion, and paineful death of thine only son unto thee. I present unto thee
all that he has most patiently abidden for my sake; I offer unto thee his most
holy heart converted into honey, through the greatness of the love he bare me.
I offer thee the merits of his most sacred mother, and of al thy holy Saints,
that it may please thee, for their sakes to pardon me my sins, to take pity
upon me, and that al glory and renown may thereby redounde to thee
everlastingly. Amen.

MOST SWEET Jesus, my Sovereign Lord and Savior, take pity and compassion
upon me, for the infinite multitude of thy mercies; I thank thee most humbly
for the innumerable benefits which I have received, and daily do receive of
thy most bountiful liberality. I thank thee for thy most sacred incarnation,
thy most pure nativity, thy most cruel passion, for all the effusions of thy
most sacred blood, and for thy most ignominious and doleful death. I beseech
thee, most loving and merciful Lord, that it may please thee, to make me
partaker of al thy merits, that being incorporate, and made one self same
thing with thee through love, and imitation of thy most holy life, I may
merit to depend and be nourished of thee, as a branch of the vine; seeing
thou art the true vine, and the life of al faithful persons, whereby al glory
and honor is due to thee for evermore. Amen.

O HOLY Ghost my Comforter, help and succor me, I most humbly beseech
thee. I commend unto thee my soul, body, and whatsoever I have within or
without me, and resign and yield up into thy hands all the whole course and
last end of my life. Grant me, Lord, that I may persevere thy faithful
servant, even til the last breath, doing true and sincere penance for my
trespasses, and that I sorrow and lament them most heartily before my soul
depart this miserable habitation. I know right well, Lord, that whiles I live in
this world, I am blind, feeble, and fall with great facility into the snares
of mine affections. I straye very easily, and am easily seduced and beguiled
of mine enemies. I present therefore, and offer al up into thy hands, shrouding
my self under thy most sovereign protection. Defend Lord, defend this thy
poor servant from al evil. Illuminate mine understanding, govern my soul,
direct and guide my body, fortify my courage against the disordinate dulnes
of my heart, and against the innumerable scruples, which cross, and cruelly
encounter it. And grant me grace to love thee, with all delight and sweetness,
and that wholly I may be inflamed in thy love, fulfilling at al times, and in all places, thy most sovereign behestes. And thou be always blessed and
thanked for evermore. Amen.

I ADORE, reverence, and glorify thee, O most sacred Trinity, God Almighty,
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. I prostrate and humble my self
whollye before thy dreadful and divine majesty, and abandon my self for ever
unto thy most holy will. Expel Lord, and banish quite out of me, and of al
faithful persons what-soeuer offends thee, and give us that which is grateful
and acceptable to thy most sovereign eyes. Bring to pass, O Lord, that we
may be even such as thou would have us. I commend unto thy sacred
protection all this whole family, and all the cause and affairs of every one,
be they spiritual or temporal. I commend unto thee al my parents, brethren,
kinsfolks, benefactours, friends and acquaintance, as also al those, whom I am
bound to pray for, and that either have done, or presentlye do commend them
selves to my poor devotions. Procure, Lord, that al obey thee, serve thee,
and that al, in perfect unity, do love thee. Reduce the wandrers to the right
way, extinguish al heresies and schisms; convert to thy faith al those that
yet are ignorant of thy holy name. Grant us peace, and maintain us therein,
as thou shall think it best, and most expedient for our welfare. Comfort the
comfortless, and ease al those that live in pain, tentation, disgrace, and
spiritual or corporal affliction. Finallye, I commend al thy creatures to thy
most favorable protection, that it may please thee to give grace to the
living, and perpetual rest and quietness to the dead.

I SALVTE thee, O most beautiful and glittering lilly of the gracious and
pleasant springtime, most sacred virgin Mary. I salute thee, O odoriferous
flower of divine suauitie. I salute thee, O lovely Rose of celestial delights,
whereon our Savior Jesus Christ, the brightness of his fathers glory, and
figure of his substance vouchsafed to be borne and nourished; Obtain me,
gracious Lady, of thy loving son, what thou see most needful for my soul.
Help most pitiful mother, help the weakness and debilitie of my spirit in all
my tentations and necessities; and vouchsafe to succor me in the hour of
death, that through thy gracious favor and help, I may be assured in so
perilous and extreme a danger.

O most happy Angelical spirits, who with one voice do with pleasant and
wel-tuned melody glorify our common Lord, and enjoy perpetually the taste
of his delights, take pity upon me poor miserable wretch, namely, thou, O
holy Angel, the guardian of my soul, to whom I am especially committed, have
thou continually a diligent and careful eye upon me. And ye, O Saints of al
sorts, which are after the navigations of these rough and stormy seas, happily
delivered of this exile, and arrived to the harbor of celestial abode, be, I
humblye beseech you al, mine Advocates and Intercessours, praying to our Lord
for me, that I may in favor of your merits and prayers, be not only favored
of him at this instant, but even to the very last day and end of this my
temporal life.

Amen.
A MOST strange and excellent monument, proving apparently the Reverend
antiquity of our Catholic Religion; found at Rome, in July last past, in the
year of our Lord. 1578. and is of al wise men believed to be the blessed
virgin S. Priscilla her Church-yarde.
VITHOVT the gate called (Salaria,) about two miles distant from the City of
Rome, it happed, that in digging in the vineyard of a certain Spaniard, for a
black sand to build withal, which they there call, Puteolana, there was, as
God would have it, discovered by digging somewhat deep, a holowe way under
earth, to the great admiration of al men; wherein, diverse monumentes and signs
of Christian Religion being espied, Cardinals, Prelates, religious persons, and
al of al sorts, as well Antiquaries, as other. began to repair thither; al
affirmig with one voice, that it was the blessed virgin S. Priscilla her
Churche-yarde, which had thus remained unknown, even from the time of the
invasions of the Goths; and wherein this most holy woman (as Lady and owner
of that ground) with other godly men, had, (before the Christian faith was
publicly received in those parts) buried the bodies of Saints, Martirs
especially, and other faithful Christians; and wherein such Christians, as were
most of al suspected, and hated of the Ethnikes, were wont to lie hidden, and
secret from their enemies.

In this Churchyard there is one principal and chief way, of breadth and
height sufficient, in the walls whereof are on either side sepulchers cut out,
one above an-other, like to cophins and little chestes, in the fronts whereof
were stones that had inscriptions graven in them, both in the Latin and greek
tongues. How-beit the most part of these stones are either taken away, hewed
out, or broken, as of the bones there are likewise very many missing. Yet, for all that, are there some forth-comming and extant, and of toumbes there are
already found above two thousand.

Out of this maine way there are so many lower and straighter ways, so many
windinges derived, that it seems an vnder-earth City of dead men, and is by
reason of the turninges, and crooked ways very intricate, even like a
Laberinth, the circuit whereof is supposed to be a mile; So that none dare
rashly hazard the^ selves to search out the place, without many clewes of
cord, torches, and means to strike fire with, if the lights they carye in
with them might happily be put out.

There is in an inner roumth a Chapel, with a little Altar found, where the
picture of the Crucifix is to to be seen painted, with the Images of two
Saints on the one side, and of a Matrone on the other side, the which is supposed
to be the Image of S. Priscilla. There is also a Sheppard carrying a sheep on
his shoulders, to be seen painted in diverse places of this Church-yarde, and
many times withal S. Ignatius amidst two Lions, the Sacrifice of Abraham in
like manner, and a woman holding a sponge in her hand, which is demed to be the
picture of S. Praxedes, whose body, as also that of her sister Potentiana were
there interred, as sacred Stories testify. There are also the signs of other
Images to be seen, which cannot be known what they represent, through their
great oldnes. And the place is, by reason of the Antiquity, reverence, and
Sanctity, so dreadful, and of so great a Majesty, as all that enter therein,
and weigh the matter advisedly, are appalled with a fear, and forced to let
fall tears. By this most worthy monument we may easily gather, how great the
persecutions and miseries, as also the piety of those godly persons, were in
the primitive Church.

Here may every man see, to the singular confirmation of our undoubted and
Catholic Religion, and of the Catholic rites and obseruances, the religion,
care, and diligence which those good friends of God used in the burying of the
dead. Here may we witness apparently with our eyes, how, when those holy and
devout friends of God could not in the Ethnikes and Idolatours days paint and
reverence pictures in open place and public show, yet did they paint and
reverence them in caves and secret corners. But now (O intolerable blind nes
of our days) there want not amongst Christians themselves, which dare with
rash attempt, presume to deface, and throw them out of holy Temples Howbeit,
touching this Church-yarde; it is now closed up with gates, neither may each
one at their (...) enter therein: The Lords also of the vine-yarde, and
others, are commanded upon certain penalties, to deliver the bones and stones
that are taken thence, to the most Reverend Vicar of the City. In the mean
time, there is consideration had, whether a Church is to be erected there or no.

FINIS.

Sit decus immortale Patri, Natoq perennis Gloria; Spiritus, non periturus
honor.

AMEN.
THE faults escaped in printing are to be thus corrected.
THE first figures signify the leaf: the next letter, the side or page
thereof: the figures following, the line.

Fol. 12. page b. lin. 23. Read, keep in thine exercises.] 26. a. 25. for
these words, mesh and ruminate, read ponder and weigh] 29. a. 21. wrath
accepting] 33. b. 5. lonelines.] 37. b. 1. exercised thy self in] 39. a. 1.
maiest] 48. a. 1. fightes] 60. a. 23. purity.] 61. b. 19. (...) roule] 97. b.
17. footesteps.] 101. b. (...) considerations.] 135. a. 16. do the] 149. a. 9.
preparation] 163. b. 3. is as a defiled cloth] 208. b. 4. read, the blessed
virgin Mary.]

Pardon al faults, good Reader, and bear with the Printers of a vulgar
tongue in a foreign country.


