A Looking Glass for LONDON AND England.

Made by Thomas Lodge Gentleman, and Robert Green.

In Artibus Magister.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, and are to be sold by William Barley, at his
shop in Gracious street. 1594.

A LOOKING GLASS FOR London and England.
Enters Rasin King of Niniuie, with three Kings of Cicilia, Creete, and
Paphlagonia, from the overthrow of Jeroboam, King of Jerusalem. SO pace ye on
tryumphant warriors,
Make Venus Lemmon armd in all his pomp,
Bash at the brightness of your hardy looks,
For you the Viceroyes and the Caualires,
That wait on Rasins royal mightiness:
Boast petty kings, and glory in your fates,
That stars have made your fortunes clime so high,
To give attend on Rasins excellence.
Am I not he that rules great Niniuie,
Rounded with Lycas silver flowing streams,
Whose City large Diametri contains,
Even three days iournies length from wall to wall,
Two hundredth gates carved out of burnisht brass,
As glorious as the portoyle of the Sun,
And for to deck heavens battlements with pride,
Six hundredth Towers that toplesse touch the clouds:
This City is the footestoole of your King,
A hundredth Lords do honor at my feet,
My scepter straineth both the poralels,
And now to t'enlarge the highness of my power,
I have made Iudeas Monarch flee the field,
And beat proud Jeroboam from his holds,
Winning from Cades to Samaria,
Great Iewries God that foilde stout Benhadab,
Could not rebate the strength that Rasni brought,
For be he God in heaven, yet Uiceroyes know,
Rasni is God on earth and none but he.
Cicilia. If lovely shape, feature by natures skill,
Passing in beauty fair Endymions,
That Luna wrapped within her snowy breasts,
Or that sweet boy that wrought bright Venus bane,
Transformde unto a purple Hiacynth,
If beauty Nunpareile in excellence,
May make a King match with the Gods in gree,
Rasni is God on earth, and none but he.

Creet. If martial looks wrapped in a cloud of wars
More fierce then Mars, lightneth fro his eyes
Sparkling revenge and dyre disparagement:
If doughtie deeds more haughty then any done,
Sealed with the smile of fortune and of fate,
Matchless to manage Lance and Curtelex.
If such high actions graced with victories,
May make a King match with the Gods in gree,
Rasni is God on earth, and none but he.

Paphlag. If Pallas wealth.


Rasni. Uiceroyes enough, peace Paphlagon no more,
See where is my sister fair Remilia,
Fairer then was the virgin Dania,
That waits on Venus with a golden show,
She that has stolen the wealth of Rasnes looks,
And tide his thoughts within her lovely locks,
She that is loved, and love unto your King,
See where she comes to gratulate my fame.

Enters Radagon with Remilia, sister to Rasni, Aluia wife to Paphlagon, and
other Ladies, bring a Globe seated in a ship. Remilia. Uictorious Monarch,
second unto Jove,
Mars upon earth, and Neptune on the Seas,
Whose frown stroyes all the Ocean with a calm,
Whose smile, draws Flora to display her pride,
Whose eye holds wanton Venus at a gaze,
Rasni the Regent of great Niniuie,
For thou have foyld proud Ieroboams force,
And like the mustering breath of Aeolus,
That ouerturnes the pines of Libanon,
Have scattered Jury and her vpstart grooms,
Winning from Cades to Samaria,
Remilia greets thee with a kind salute,
And for a present to thy mightiness,
Gives thee a Globe folded within a ship,
As King on earth and Lord of all the Seas,
With such a welcome unto Nyniuie
As may thy sisters humble love afford.

Rasni. Sister. The title fits not thy degree,
A higher state of honor shall be thine,
The lovely Trull that Mercury intrapt,
Within the curious pleasure of his tongue,
And she that basht the sun-god with her eyes,
Fair Semele the choice of Venus maids,
Were not so beauteous as Remelia.
Then sweeting, sister shall not serve the turn,
But Rasnes wife, his Lemmon and his love.
Thou shall like Juno wed thy self to Jove,
And fold me in the riches of thy fair,
Remilia shall be Rasnes Paramour.
For why if I be Mars for warlike deeds?
And thou bright Venus for thy clear aspect,
Why should not from our loins issue a son,
That might be Lord of royal soueraintie?
Of twenty worlds, if twenty worlds might be,
What say Remilia, art thou Rasnes wife?

Remilia. My heart does swell with favor of thy thoughts,
The love of Rasni makes me as proud
As Juno when she wore heavens Diadem.
Thy sister borne was for thy wife by love,
Had I the riches nature locketh up,
To deck her darling, beauty when she smiles,
Rasin should prancke him in the pride of all.

Rasin. Remelias love is far more either prisde,
Then Ieroboams or the worlds subdue,
Lordings i will have my weddings sumptuous,
Made glorious with the treasures of the world,
I Will fetch from Albia shelues of Margarites,
And strip the Indies of their Diamonds,
And Tire shall yield me tribute of her gold,
To make Remelias wedding glorious,
I Will send for all the Damsel Queens that live
Within the reach of Rasins government,
To wait as hand-maides on Remelia,
That her attendant train may pass the troop
That gloried Venus at her wedding day.

Creete. Oh my Lord, not sister to thy love,
It Is incest and too foul a fact for Kings,
Nature allows no limits to such lust.

Rada. Presumptuous Uiceroy dare thou check thy Lord,
Or twit him with the laws that nature lowes,
Is not great Rasin above natures reach,
God upon earth, and all his will is law.

Creet. Oh flatter not, for hateful is his choice,
And sisters love will blemish all his worth.

Radag. Does not the brightness of his majesty,
Shadow his deeds from being counted faults.

Rasin. Well have thou answered within Radon,
I like thee for thy learned Sophistri,
But thou of Creet that countercheckst thy King,
Pack hence in exile, Radagon the Crown,
Be thee Uicegerent of his royalty,
And fail me not in what my thoughts may please,
For from a beggar have I brought thee up,
And gracst thee with the honor of a Crown,
Ye quandam king, what feed ye on delays?

Creete. Better no king then Uiceroy under him
That has no virtue to maintain his Crown.

Rasni. Remilias, what fair dames be those that wait
Attendant on thy matchless royalty?

Remilia. It Is Aluia, the fair wife to the king of Paphlagonia


Rasni. Trust me she is fair thast Paphlagon a Jewel,
To fold thee in so bright a sweetings arms.

Rad. Like you her my Lord?


Rasni. What if I do Radagon?


Rada. Why the^ she is yours my Lord, for marriage
Makes no exception, where Rasni does command.

Paphla. Ill do thou counsel him to fancy wives.


Rada. Wife or not wife, what so he likes is his.


Rasni. Well answered Radagon thou art for me,
Feed thou mine humor, and be still a king.
Lords go in triumph of my happy loves,
And for to feast us after all our broils,
Frolic and revel it in Niniuie.
Whatsoever befitteth your conceited thoughts,
Or good or ill, love or not love my boys,
In love or what may satisfy your lust,
Act it my Lords, for no man dare say no.

Smith. Denesum imperium Cum Jove nunc teneo.


Exeunt. Enters brought in by an Angel Oseas the Prophet, and set down over
the Stage in a Throne. Angel. Amaze not man of God, if in the spirit
Thou Art brought from Iewry unto Niniuie,
So was Elias wrapped within a storm,
And set upon mount Carnell by the Lord,
For thou have preached long to the stubborn Jews,
Whose flintie hearts have felt no sweet remorse,
But lightly valuing all the threats of God,
Have still perseuerd in their wickedness.
Lo I have brought thee unto Niniuie,
The rich and royal City of the world,
Pampred in wealth, and ouergrowne with pride,
As Sodom and Gomorrha full of sin,
The Lord looks down, and cannot see one good,
Not one that couets to obey his will,
But wicked all, from Cradle to the Cruch.
Note then Oseas all their grievous sins,
And see the wrath of God that paies revenge.
And when the ripeness of their sin is full,
And thou have written all their wicked through,
I Will carry thee to Iewry back again,
And seat thee in the great Jerusalem,
There shall thou publish in her open streets,
That God sends down his hateful wrath for sin,
On such as never heard his Prophets speak,
Much more will he inflict a world of plagues,
On such as hear the sweetness of his voice,
And yet obey not what his Prophets speak,
Sit thee Oseas pondring in the spirit,
The mightiness of these fond peoples sins,

Oseas. The will of the Lord be done.


Exit Angel. Enters the Clown and his crew of Ruffians, to go to drink.
Ruffian. Come on Smyth, thou shall be one of the Crew, because thou know
where the best Ale in the Town is.


Smith. Come on, in faith my colts I have left my M. striking of a heat, and
stole away because I would keep you company.


Clown. Why what shall we have this paltrie Smith with us?


Smith. Paltry Smith, why you in (...) you that you speak petty (...) trade?


Clown. Why slave I am a gentleman (...)


Smith. A Gentleman good sir, I remember (...) your progenitors, your father
bare office in our (...) man he was, and in great discredit in the parish,
(...) two squiers livings on him, the one was on (...) and then he kept the
town stage, and on (...) him the Sextens man, for he whipped dogs out of the
(...) sir, your father, why sir mee-thinks I see the (...) proper youth, he was
faith aged some four and ten, his (...) color, half black half white, his
nose was in the (...) gree of noses, it was nose Autem glorificam, so set (...)
that after his death it should have bin nailed up in Copp(...) (...) hall for a
monument: well sir, I was beholding to your (...), for he was the first man
that ever instructed me in (...) sterie of a pot of Ale.


2. Well said Smith, that crossed him over the thumbs.


Clown. Uillaine were it not that we go to be merry, (...) pier should
presently quit thy opproprious terms. (...) O Peter, Peter, put up thy sword I
prithie heartily into thy (...) bard, hold in your rapier, for though I have
not a long reach (...) have a short hitter. Nay then gentlemen stay me, for my
(...) begins to rise against him, for mark the words a paltry (...) Oh
horrible sentence, thou have in these words I will stand (...) libelled against
all the sound horses, whole horses, sore (...) Coursers, Curtalls, Iades, Cuts,
Hackneies, and Mare (...) upon my friend, in their defense, I give thee this
curse, shall (...) be worth a horse of thine own this seven year.


1. Clown. I prithie Smith is your occupation so excellen(...) (...) A paltry
Smith, why i will stand to it, a Smith is Lord of the four elements, for our iron
is made of the earth, our bellows blow out air, our flore holds fire, and
our forge water. Nay sir, we read in the Chronicles, that there was a God of
our occupation.

(...) a Cuckold.

(...) he called your father cousin, paltry smith, (...) thou have defaced their
worshipful (...)

(...) how?

(...) stand to it, that a Smith in his kind is a (...) and a Barber. For let
a Horse take a cold, or (...) the hots, and we straight give him a potion or
(...) physical manner that he mends straight, if (...) diseases, as the spuing,
splent, ring-bone, (...) fashion, or sir a galled back, we let him blood and
clap (...) to him with a pestilence, that mends him with a (...), now if his
mane grow out of order, and he have (...) hairs, we straight to our sheeres
and trim him (...) cut it please us, pick his ears and make him neat, (...)
indeed sir, we are slouings for one thing, we never use (...) musk-balls to
wash him with, and the reason is sir, because (...) woe without kissing.


Clown. Well sirrah, leave off these praises of a Smyth, (...) us to the best
Ale in the Town.

(...) sir I have a feate above all the Smythes in Niniuie, for sir (...) am a
Philosopher that can dispute of the nature of Ale, for (...) you sir, a pot of
Ale consists of four parts, Imprimis the (...), the Toast, the Ginger, and the
Nutmeg.


Clown. Excellent.

(...) Ale is a restoratiue, bread is a binder, mark you sir two excellent
points in physic, the Ginger, oh ware of that, the philosophers have written
of the nature of ginger, it is expullsitiue in two degrees, you shall here the
sentence of Galen, it will make a man belch, cough, and fart, and is a great
comfort to the heart, a proper poesy I promise you, but now to the noble virtue
of the Nutmeg, it is says one Ballad I think an English Roman was the author,
an vnderlayer to the brains, for when the Ale gives a buffet to the head, oh
the Nutmeg that keeps him for while in temper.

Thus you see the description of the virtue of a pot of Ale, now sir to put my
phisical precepts in practice (...) any further.


Clown. What Is the matter now?

Why seeing I have provided the Ale, who is (...) wenches, for masters take
this of me, a cup (...) wench, why alas it is like an egg without salt, (...)
without mustard.

Lead us to the Ale, we will have wenches enough I (...)


Oseas. Iniquity seeks out companions still,
And mortal men are armed to do ill:
London look on, this matter nips thee near,
Leave off thy riot, pride and sumptuous cheer.
Spend less at board, and spare not at the door,
But aid the infant, and relieve the poor:
Else seeking mercy being merciless,
Thou be adjudged to endless heaviness.

Enters the Usurer, a young Gentleman, and a poor man. Usurer. Come on, I am
every day troubled with these needy companions, what news with you, what wind
brings you hither.


Gent. Sir I hope how far soever you make it off, you remember too well for me,
that this is the day wherein I should pay you money that I took up of you alate
in a commodity.


Poor man. And sir, sirreuerence of your manhood and genterie, I have brought
home such money as you lent me.


Usurer. You young Gentleman is my money ready.


Gentle. Truly sir this time was so short, the commodity so bad, and the
promise of friends so broken, that I could not provide it against the day,
wherefore I am come to entreat you to stand my friend and to favor me with a
longer time, and I will make you sufficient consideration.


Usurer. Is the wind in that door, if thou have my money so it is, I will not
defer a day, an hour, a minute, but take the forfeyt (...) sir consider that
my loss was great by the (...) up, you know sir I borrowed of you forty
(...) I had ten pounds in money, and thirty pounds (...), which when I came to
sell again, I could get (...) for them, so had I sir but fifteen pounds for
(...) In consideration of this ill bargain, I pray you sir (...) month longer.


(...). I answered thee before not a minute, what have I to do how thy bargain
proved, I have thy hand set to my book that thou receiuedst forty pounds of
me in money.


Gent. I sir it was your devise that, to color the Statute, but your
conscience knows what I had.


Poor. Friend thou speak Hebrew to him when thou talkest to him of
conscience, for he has as much conscience about the forfeyt of an Obligation,
as my blind Mare God bless her, has over a manger of Oats.


Gent. Then there is no favor sir?


Usurer. Come to morrow to me, and see how I will use thee.


Gent. No covetous Caterpillar, know, that I have made extreme shift rather
then I would fall into the hands of such a ravening panthar, and therefore here
is thy money and deliver me the recognisance of my lands.


Usurer. What a spite is this, has sped of his Crowns, if he had mist but
one half hour, what a goodly Farm had I gotten for forty pounds, well it is
my cursed fortune, Oh have I no shift to make him forfeit his recognisance.


Gent. Come sir will you dispatch and tell your money.


Strikes 4. a clock. Usurer. Stay, what is this a clock four, let me see, to
be paid between the hours of three and four in the afternoon, this goes
right for me, you sir, hear you not the clock, and have you not a
counterpaine of your Obligation, the hour is past, it was to be paid between
three and four, and now the clock has strooken four, I will receive none,
I Will stand to the forfeyt of the recognisance.


Gent. Why sir, I hope you do but jest, why it is but four, and will you for a
minute take forfeyt of my bond, if it were so sir, I was here before four.


Usurer. Why did thou not tender thy money then? if I offer thee injury take
the law of me, complain to the Judge, I will receive no money.


Poor. Well sir, I hope you will stand my good master for my Cow, I borrowed
thirty shillings on her, and for that I have paid you 18. pence a week, and
for her meat you have had her milk, and I tell you sir, she gives a goodly
soape: now sir here is your money.


Usurer. Hang beggarly knave, come to me for a Cow, did I not bind her
bought and sold for a penny, and was not thy day to have paid yesterday, thou
getst no Cow at my hand.


Poor. No Cow sir, alas that word no Cow, goes as cold to my heart as a
draught of small drink in a frostie morning. No Cow sir, why alas, alas,
M. Usurer, what shall become of me my wife, and my poor child?


Usurer. Thou getst no Cow of me knave, I cannot stand prating with you, I must
be gone.


Poor. Nay but hear you M. Usurer, no Cow, why sir here is your thirty
shillings, I have paid you 18. pence a week, and therefore there is reason I
should have my Cow.


Usurer. What pratest thou, have I not answered thee thy day is broken?


Poor. Why sir alas, my Cow is a Commonwealth to me, for first sir, she
allows me, my wife and son, for to banquet our selves withal, Butter, Cheese,
Whay, Curds, Cream, sod milk, raw-milke, sower-milke, sweete-milk, and
butter-milke, besides sir, she saved me every year a penny in Almanackes, for
she was as good to me as a Prognostication, if she had but set up her tail and
have gallapt about the meade, my little boy was able to say, oh father there
will be a storm, her very tail was a Calendar to me, and now to loose my
cow, alas M. Usurer take pity upon me.


Usurer. I have other matters to talk on, farewell fellows.


Gent. Why but thou covetous churl, will thou not receive thy money and deliver
me my recognisance?


Usurer. I Will deliver thee none, if I have wronged thee, seek thy mends at the
law.


Gent. And so I will insatiable pesant.


Poor. And sir, rather then I will put up this word no Cow, I will lay my
wives best gown to pawn, I tell you sir, when the slave uttered this word no
Cow, it struck to my heart, for my wife shall never have one so fit for her
turn again, for indeed sir, she is a woman that has her twidling strings
broke.


Gent. What meanest thou by that fellow?


Poor. Marry sir, sirreuerence of your manhood, she breaks wind behind, and
indeed sir, when she sat milking of her Cow and let a fart, my other Cowes
would start at the noise, and kick down the milk and away, but this Cow sir
the gentlest Cow, my wife might blow whilst she burst, and having such good
conditions, shall the Usurer come upon me with no Cow: Nay sir, before I pocket
up this word no Cow, my wives gown goes to the Lawier, why alas sir it is as
ill a word to me, as no Crown to a King.


Gent. Well fellow, go with me, and i will help thee to a Lawyer.


Poor. Marry and I will sir: No Cow, well the world goes hard. Exeunt.


Oseas. Oseas. Where hateful usury
Is counted husbandry,
Where merciless men rob the poor,
And the needy are thrust out of door.
Where gain is held for conscience,
And men's pleasures is all on pence,
Where young Gentlemen forfeit their lands,
Through riot, into the Usurers hands:
Where poverty is despisde and pity banished
And mercy indeed utterly vanished.
Where men esteem more of money then of God,
Let that land look to feel his wrathful rod.
For there is no sin more odious in his sight,
Then where usury defraudes the poor of his right.
London take heed, these sins abound in thee:
The poor complain, the widows wronged be.
The Gentlemen by subtlety are spoilde,
The plough-men loose the crop for which they toild*
Sin reigns in thee o London every hour,
Repent and tempt not thus the heavenly power.

Enters Remilia, with a train of Ladies in all royalty. Remilia. Fair
Queens, yet handmaids unto Rasnes love,
Tell me, is not my state as glorious
As Iunoes pomp, when tired with heavens despoile,
Clad in her vestments, spotted all with stars,
She crossed the silver path unto her Jove,
Is not Remilias far more beauteous,
Richt with the pride of natures excellence?
Then Venus in the brightest of her shine.
My hairs, surpass they not Apollos locks,
Are not my Tresses curled with such art,
As love delights to hide him in their fair?
Does not mine eyne shine like the morning lamp
That tells Anrera when her love will come?
Have I not stolen the beauty of the heavens,
And plac'st it on the feature of my face?
Can any Goddess make compare with me?
Or match her with the fair Remilia?

Aluida. The beauties yt proud Paris saw fro Troy
Mustring in Ida for the golden ball,
Were not so gorgious as Remilia.

Remilia. I have trickt my tramels up with richest balm,
And made my perfumes of the purest Myrre:
The precious drugs that Aegypts wealth affoords,
The costly paintings fetched fro curious Tire,
Have mended in my face what nature mist.
Am I not the earths wonder in my looks?

Alui. The wonder of the earth and pride of heaven.


Remilia. Look Aluida a hair stands not amiss,
For women's locks are tramels of conceit,
Which do entangle love for all his wiles.

Aluid. Madam, unless you coy it trick and trim,
And play the civil wanton ere you yield,
Smiting disdain of pleasures with your tongue,
Patting your princely Rasni on the cheek,
When he presumes to kiss without consent:
You mar the market, beauty naught auailes.
You must be proud, for pleasures hardly got,
And sweet, if once attainde.

Remilia. Fair Aluida,
Thy counsel makes Remilia passing wise.
Suppose that thou weart Rasnes mightiness,
And I Remilia Prince of excellence.

Aluida. I would be master then of love and thee.


Remil. Of love and me. Proud and disdainful king,
Dare thou presume to touch a Deity,
Before she grace thee with a yielding smile?

Aluida. Tut my Remilia, be not thou so coy,
Say nay, and take it.

Remilia. Careless and unkind,
Talks Rasni to Remilia in such sort
As if I did enjoy a humane form?
Look on thy Love, behold mine eyes divine,
And dare thou twit me with a woman's fault?
Ah Rasni thou art rash to judge of me,
I tell thee Flora often has wood my lips,
To lend a Rose to beautify her spring,
The sea-Nymphs fetch their lillies from my cheeks.
Then thou unkind, and hereon would I weep.

Alui. And here would Aluida resign her charge,
For were I but in thought Th'assirian King,
I needs must quite thy tears, with kisses sweet,
And crave a pardon with a friendly touch,
You know it Madam though I teach it not,
The touch I mean, you smile when as you think il.

Remi. How am I pleased to hear thy pretty prate,
According to the humor of my mind?
Ah Nymphs, who fairer then Remilia?
The gentle winds have wood me with their sighs,
The frowning air has cleerde when I did smile,
And when I tract upon the tender grass,
Love that makes warm the center of the earth,
Lift up his crest to kiss Remelias foot,
Juno still entertaines her amorous Jove,
With new delights, for fear he look on me,
The Phoenix feathers are become my Fan,
For I am beauties Phoenix in this world.
Shut close these Curtains straight and shadow me,
For fear Apollo spy me in his walks,
And scorn all eyes, to see Remilias eyes.
Nymphs, Knancks, sing, for Mauors draws nigh,
Hide me in Closure, let him long to look,
For were a Goddess fairer then am I,
I Will scale the heavens to pull her from the place.

They draw the Curtains and Music plays. Aluida. Believe me, tho she say
that she is fairest,
I think my penny silver by her leave.

Enter Rasni with his Lords in pomp, who make a ward about him, with him the
Magi in great pomp. Rasni. Magi for love of Rasni by your Art,
By Magic frame an Arbor out of hand,
For fair Remilia to desport her in.
Meane-while, I will bethink me on further pomp.

Exit. The Magi with their rods beat the ground, and from under the same
rises a brave Arbor, the King returns in an other suit while the Trumpettes
sound. Rasni. Blessed be ye man of Art that grace me thus,
And blessed be this day where Himen hies,
To join in union pride of heaven and earth.
Lightning and thunder vvherevvith Remilia is strooken. What wondrous
threatening noise is this I hear?
What flashing lightnings trouble our delights?
When I draw near Remelias royal Tent,
I waking, dream of sorrow and mishap.

Rada. Dread not O King, at ordinary chance,
These are but common exalations,
Drawn from the earth, in substance hot and dry,
Or moist and thick, or Meteors combust,
Matters and causes incident to time,
Inkindled in the fiery region first.
Tut be not now a Roman Angurer,
Approach the Tent, look on Remelia.

Rasni. Thou have confirmd my doubts kind Radagon.
Now open ye foldes where Queen of favor sits,
Carrying a Net within her curled locks,
Wherein the Graces are entangled often:
Open like the imperial gates where Phoebus sits,
When as he means to woo his Clitia.
Necternall Cares, ye blemishers of bliss,
Cloud not mine eyes whilst I behold her face.
Remilia my delight, she answers not.
He draws the Curtains and finds her stricken with Thunder, black. How
pale? as if bereaved in fatal meedes,
The balmy breath has left her bosom quite,
My Hesperus by cloudie death is blent,
Uillaines away, fetch Sircopes of the Inde,
Fetch Balsomo the kind preserve of life,
Fetch wine of Greece, fetch oiles, fetch herbs, fetch all
To fetch her life, or I will faint and die.
They bring in all these and offer, naught preuailes. Herbs, Oils of Inde,
alas there naught preuailes.
Shut are the day-bright eyes, that made me see,
Locked are the Iems of joy in dens of death,
Yet triumph I on fate, and he on her.
Malicious mistress of inconstancy,
Damd be thy name, that have obscured my joy,
Kings, Uiceroyes, Princes, rear a royal tomb
For my Remilia, bear her from my sight,
Whilst I in tears, weep for Remilia.

They bear her out. Rada. What makes Rasni moodie? Loss of one?
As if no more were left so fair as she?
Behold a dainty minion for the nonce,
Fair Aluida the Paphlagonian Queen,
Woo her, and leave this weeping for the dead.

Ras. What woo my subjects wife that honoreth me?


Rada. Tut Kings this meum tuum should not know.
Is she not fair? Is not her husband hence?
Hold, take her at the hands of Radagon.
A prittie peate to drive your mourn away.

Rasni. She smiles on me, I see she is mine own.
Will thou be Rasnes royal Paramour?

Rad. She blushing yields concent, make no dispute:
The King is sad, and must be gladded straight.
Let Paphlagonian King go mourn meane-while.

He thrust the King out, and so they Exeant. Oseas. Pride has his judgment,
London look about,
It Is not enough in shovv to be devout,
A Fury now from heaven to lands unknown,
Has made the Prophet speak, not to his own,
The wantons fly, this pride and vain attire,
The seals to set your tender hearts on fire.
Be faithful in the promise you have past,
Else Cod will plague and punish at the last.
When lust is hid in shroude of wretched life,
When craft does dwell in bed of married wife.
Mark but the Prophets, we that shortly shows,
After death exspect for many woes.

Enters the poor man and the Gentleman, with their Lawier. Gent. I need not
sir discourse unto you the duty of Lawiers in tendering the right cause of
their Clients, nor the conscience you are tied unto by higher command.
Therefore suffice the Usurer has done me wrong, you know the Case, and good
sir, I have strained my self to give you your fees.


Lawier. Sir if I should any way neglect so manifest a truth, I were to be
accused of open perjury, for the case is evident.


Poor. And truly sir, for my case, if you help me not for my matter, why sir,
I and my wife are quite undone, I want my mease of milk when I go to my
work, and my boy his bread and butter when he goes to school, M. Lawier pity
me, for surely sir, I was feign to lay my wives best gown to pawn for your
fees, when I looked upon it sir, and saw how hansomly it was tawbed with statute
lace, and what a fair mockado Cape it had, and then thought how hansomely it
became my wife, truly sir my heart is made of butter, it melts at the least
persecution, I fell on weeping, but when I thought on the words the Usurer gave
me, no Cow: then sir, I would have stripped her into her smock, but I would make
him deliver my Cow ere I had done, therefore good M. Lawier stand my friend.


Lawier. Trust me father, I will do for thee as much as for my self.


Poor. Are you married sir?


Lawier. I marry am I father.


Poor. Then goods Benison light on you and your good wife, and send her that
she be never troubled with my wives disease.


Lawier. Why what is thy wives disease?


Poor. Truly sir, she has two open faults, and one privy fault, sir the
first is, she is too eloque^t for a poor man, and has her words of Art, for
she will call me Rascal, Rogue, Runnagate, Uarlet, Uagabond, Slave, Knave. Why
alas sir, and these be but holi-day terms, but if you heard her working-day
words, in faith sir they be ratlers like thunder sir, for after the dew
follows a storm, for then am I sure either to be well buffetted, my face
scratcht, or my head broken, and therefore good M. Lawyer on my knees I ask
it, let me not go home again to my wife, with this word, No Cow: for then she
will exercise her two faults upon me with all extremity.


Lawier. Fear not man, but what is thy wives privy fault?


Poor. Truly sir, that's a thing of nothing, alas she indeed strreuerence of
your mastership, does use to break wind in her sleep. Oh sir, here comes the
Judge, and the old Caitife the Usurer.


Enters the Judge, the Usurer, and his attendants. Usurer. Sir here is forty
angels for you, and if at any time you want a hundredth pound or two, it is ready
at your command, or the feeding of three or four fat bullocks: whereas these
needy slaves can reward with nothing but a cap and aknee, and therefore I pray
you sir favor my case.


Judge. Fear not sir, I Will do what I can for you.


Usurer. What master Lawier what make you here, mine adversary for these
Clients?


Lawier. So it chances now sir.


Usurer. I know you know the old Proverb, He is not wise, that is not wise for
himself. I would not be disgracst in this action, therefore here is twenty
angels say nothing in the matter, and what you say, say to no purpose, for the
Judge is my friend.


Lawier. Let me alone, I Will fit your purpose.


Judge. Come, where are these fellows that are the plaintifes, what can they
say against this honest Citizen our neighbor, a man of good report amongst all
men?


Poor. Truly M. Judge, he is a man much spoken off, marry every man's cries are
against him, and especially we, and therefore I think we have brought our
Lawier to touch him with as much law as will fetch his lands and my Cow, with
a pestilence.


Gent. Sir, I am the other plaintiff and this is my Counselor, I beseech your
honor be favorable to me in equity.


Judge. Oh Signor Mizaldo, what can you say in this Gentleman's behalf?


Lavvier. Faith sir as yet little good, sir tell you your own case to the
Judge, for I have so many matters in my head, that I have almost forgotten it.


Gent. Is the wind in that door, why then my Lord thus, I took upon this
cursed Usurer, for so I may well term him, a commodity of forty pounds,
whereof I received ten pound in money, and thirty pound in Lute-strings,
whereof I could by great friendship make but five pounds: for the assurance of
this badde commodity, I bound him my land in recognisance, I came at my day
and tendered him his money and he would not take it, for the redress of my open
wrong, I crave but justice.


Judge. What say you to this sir?


Usurer. That first he had no Lute-strings of me, for look you sir, I have his
own hand to my book for ye receipt of forty pound.


Gent. That was sir, but a devise of him to color the Statute.


Judge. Well he has thine own hand, and we can crave no more in law, but now
sir, he says his money was tendered at the day and hour.


Usurer. This is manifest contrary sir, and on that I will depose, for here is
the obligation, to be paid between three and four in the afternoon, and
the Clock struck four before he offered it, and the words be between three
and four, therefore to be tendered before four.


Gent. Sir, I was there before four, and he held me with brabling till the
Clock struck, and then for the breach of a minute he refused my money, and
keep the recognisance of my land for so small a triflle: Good Signor Mizaldo
speak what is law, you have your fee, you have heard what the case is, and
therefore do me justice and right, I am a young Gentleman and speak for my
patrimony.


Lawier. Faith sir, the Case is altered, you told me it before in an other
manner, the law goes quite against you, and therefore you must plead to the
Judge for favor.


Gent. O execrable bribery.


Poor. Faith sir Judge, I pray you let me be the Gentleman's Counselor, for I
can say thus much in his defense, that the Usurers Clock is the swiftest Clock
in all the Town, it is sir like a woman's tongue, it goes ever half an hour
before the time, for when we were gone from him, other Clocks in the Town
struck four.


Judge. Hold thy prating fellow, and you young Gentleman, this is my ward,
look better another time both to your bargains and to the paiments, for I must
give flat sentence against you, that for default of tendering the money between
the hours, you have forfeited your recognisance, and he to have the land.


Gent. O inspeakeable injustice.


Poor. O monstrous, miserable, moth-eaten Judge.


Judge. Now you fellow, what have you to say for your matter?


Poor. Master Lawier, I laid my wives gown to pawn for your fees, I pray
you to this geere.


Lawier. Alas poor man, thy matter is out of my head, and therefore I pray
thee tell it thy self.


Poor. I hold my Cap to a noble, that the Usurer has given him some gold, and
he chawing it in his mouth, has got ye toothache that he cannot speak.


Judge. Well sirrah, I must be short, and therefore say on.


Poor. M. master Judge, I borrowed of this man thirty shillings, for which I
left him in pawn my good Cow, the bargain was, he should have eighteen pence
a week and the Cows milk for usury: Now sir, as soon as I had gotten the
money, I brought it him, and broke but a day, and for that he refused his money
and keeps my Cow sir.


Judge. Why thou have given sentence against thy self, for in breaking thy day
thou have lost thy Cow.


Poor. Master Lawier now for my ten shillings.


Lawier. Faith poor man, thy Case is so bad I shall but speak against thee.


Poor. Twere good the^ I should have my ten shillings again.


Lawier. It Is my fee fellow for coming, would thou have me come for nothing?


Poor. Why then am I like to go home, not only with no Cow, but no gown,
this geere goes hard.


Judge. Well you have heard what favor I can show you, I must do justice, come
M. Mizaldo and you sir, go home with me to dinner.


Poor. Why but M. Judge no Cow, and M. Lawier no gown, Then must I clean run
out of the Town.

How cheer you gentleman, you cry no lands too, the Judge has made you a
knight for a gentleman, has dubd you sir John lackland.


Gent. O miserable time wherein gold is above God.


Poor. Fear not man, I have yet a fetch to get thy lands and my Cow again,
for I have a son in the Court that is either a king or a kings fellow, and to
him will I go and complain on the Judge and the Usurer both.


Gent. And I will go with thee and entreat him for my Case.


Poor. But how shall I go home to my wife, when I shall have nothing to say
unto her, but no Cow. Alas sir my wives faults will fall upon me.


Gent. Fear not, lets go, I Will quiet her shall see.


Exeunt. Oseas. Fly Judges fly, corruption in your Court,
The Judge of truth, has made your judgment short.
Look so to judge that at the latter day,
Ye be not judged with those that wend astray.
Who passerh judgment for his private gain,
He well may judge, he is adiudg'd to pain.

Enters the Clown and all his crew drunk. Clown. Farewell gentle Tapster,
masters as good Ale as ever was tapt, look to your feet, for the Ale is
strong, well farewell gentle Tapster.


1. Ruffian. Why sirrah slave, by heavens maker, think thou the wench love
thee best because she laughed on thee, give me but such an other word, and I
will throw the pot at thy head.


Clown. Spill no drink, spill no drink, the Ale is good, I Will tell you what,
Ale is Ale, and so I Will commend me to you with hearty commendations, farewell
gentle Tapster.


2. Why wherefore peasant scornst thou that the wench should love me, look but
on her, and i will thrust my daggar in thy bosom.


1. Ruffian. Well sirrah well, thart as thart, and so i will take thee


2. Why what am I?


1. Why what thou will, a slave.


2. Then take that villain, and learn how thou use me another time.


1. Oh I am slain.


2. That's all one to me, I care not, now will I in to my wench and call for a
fresh pot.


Clown. Nay but hear ye, take me with ye, for the Ale is Ale, cut a fresh
toast Tapster, fill me a pot here is money, I am no beggar, I Will follow thee as
long as the Ale lasts: a pestilence on the blocks for me, for I might have had
a fall, well if we shall have no Ale i will sit me down, and so farewell gentle
Tapster.


Here he falls over the dead man. Enters the King, Aluida, the King of Cilicia,
and of Paphlagonia, with other attendant. Rasni. What slaughtred wretch lies
bleeding here his last?
So near the royal pallaice of the King,
Search out if any one be biding nie,
That can discourse the manner of his death,
Seat thee fair Aluida, the fair of faires,
Let not the (...) once offend thine eyes,

L. Here Is one sits here a sleep my Lord,

Rasni. Wake him and make enquiry of this thing.


Lord. Sirrah you, hear thou fellow?


Clown. If you will fill a fresh pot here is a penny, or else farewell gentle
Tapster.


Lord. He is drunk my Lord.


Rasni. We Will sport with him that Aluida may laugh.


L. Sirrah thou fellow, thou must come to the King.


Clown. I will not do a stroke of work to day, for the Ale is good Ale, and
you can ask but a penny for a pot, no more by the statute.


L. Uillaine here is the King, thou must come to him.


Clown. The King come to an Alehouse, Tapster, fill me three pots, where is the
King, is this he? give me your hand sir, as good Ale as ever was tapt, you
shall drink while your skin crack.


Rasni. But hear thou fellow, who killed this man?


Clown. I Will tell you sir, if you did taste of the Ale, all Niniuie has not
such a cup of Ale, it flowers in the cup sir, by my troth I spent eleven pence
beside three rases of ginger.


Rasni. Answer me knave to my question, how came this man slain?


Clown. Slain, why Ale is strong Ale, it is hufcap, I warrant you twill make a
man well, Tapster ho, for the King a cup of ale and a fresh toast, here is two
rases more.


Aluida. Why good fellow the King talks not of drink, he would have thee tell
him how this man came dead.


Clown. Dead nay, I think I am alive yet, and will drink a full pot ere night,
but here ye, if ye be the wench that filled us drink, why so do your office, and
give us a fresh pot, or if you be the Tapsters wife, why so, wash the glass
clean.


Aluida. He is so drunk my Lord, there is no talking with him.


Clown. Drunk, nay then wench I am not drunk, thart a shitten queen to call
me drunk, I tell thee I am not drunk, I am a Smith I.


Enters the Smith, the Clownes master. Lord. Sir here comes one perhaps that
can tell.


Smith. God save you master.


Rasni. Smith can thou tell me how this man came dead?


Smith. May it please your highness, my man here and a true of them went to
the Alehouse, and came out so drunk that one of them killed another, and now
sir, I am feign to leave my shop and come to fetch him home.


Rasni. Some of you carry away the dead body, drunken men must have their
fits, and sirrah Smith hence with thy man.


Smith. Sirrah you, rise come go with me.


Clown. If we shall have a pot of Ale lets have it, here is money, hold Tapster
take my purse.


Smith. Come then with me, the pot stands full in the house.


Clown. I am for you, lets go, thart an honest Tapster, we will drink six pots
ere we part.


Exeunt. Rasni. Beauteous, more bright then beauty in mine eyes,
Tell me fair sweeting, wants thou any thing?
Conteind within the threefold circle of the world,
That may make Aluida live full content.

Aluida. Nothing my Lord, for all my thoughts are pleased,
When as mine eye surfets with Rasnes sight.

Enters the King of Paphlagonia, malcontent. Rasni. Look how thy husband
haunts our royal Courts,
How still his sight breeds melancholy storms,
Oh Aluida I am passion passionate,
And vexed with wrath and anger to the death,
Mars when he held fair Venus on his knee,
And saw the limping Smith come from his forge,
Had not more deeper furrows in his brow,
Then Rasni has to see this Paphlagon.

Alui. Content thee sweet, i will salve thy sorrow straight,
Rest but the ease of all thy thoughts on me,
And if I make not Rasni blyth again,
Then say that women's fancies have no shifts.

Paphla. Shamst thou not Rasni though thou be a King,
To shroude adultry in thy royal seat,
Art thou arch-ruler of great Niniuie,
Who should excel in virtue as in state,
And wrongst thy friend by keeping back his wife,
Have I not battail'd in thy troops full often,
Against Egypt, Jury, and proud Babylon,
Spending my blood to purchase thy renown,
And is the guerdon of my chivalry,
Ended in this abusing of my wife,
Restore her me, or I will from thy Courts,
And make discourse of thy adulterous deeds.

Ras. Why take her Paphlagon, exclaim not man,
For I do prise mine honor more then love.
Fair Aluida go with thy husband home.

Alui. How dare I go, shamed with so deep misdeed,
Revenge will broile within my husbands breast,
And when he has me in the Court at home,
Then Aluida shall feel revenge for all.

Rasni. What say thou king of Paphlagon to this?
Thou hear the doubt thy wife does stand upon,
If she has done amiss it is my fault,
I prithie pardon and forget all.

Paphla. If that I meant not Rasni to forgive,
And quite forget the follies that are past,
I would not vouch her presence in my Courts,
But she shall be my Queen, my love, my life,
And Aluida unto her Paphlagon
And loved, and more beloved then before.

Rasni. What say thou Aluida to this?


Alui That will he swear it to my Lord the king,
And in a full carouse of Greekish wine,
Drink down the malice of his deep revenge,
I will go home and love him new again.

Rasni. What answers Paphlagon?


Paphla. That what she has requested I will do.


Alui. Go damsel fetch me that sweet wine
That stands within thy Closet on the shelfe,
Power it into a standing bowl of gold,
But on shy life taste not before the king,
Make have, why is great Rasni melancholy thus?
If promise be not kept, hate all for me.
Here is the wine my Lord, first make him swear.

Paphla. By Niniuies great gods, and Niniuies great king*
My thoughts shall never be to wrong my wife,
And thereon here is a full carowse to her.

Alui And there^^ Rasni here is a kiss for thee.
Now may thou freely fold thine Aluida.

Paphla. Oh I am dead, obstructions of my breath
The poison is of wondrous sharp effect,
Cursed be all adultrous queens say I,
And cursing so poor Paphlagon does die.

Alui. Now have I not salued the sorrows of my Lord?
Have I not rid ariuall of thy loves,
What say thou Rasni to thy Paramour?

Rasni. That for this deed i will deck my Aluida,
In Sendall and in costly Sussapine,
Bordred with Pearl and India Diamond,
I Will cause great Eol perfume all his winds,
UUith richest myrre and curious Ambergreece,
Come lovely minion, paragon for fair,
Come follow me sweet goddess of mine eye,
And taste the pleasures Rasni will provide. Exeunt.

Oseas. Where whordome raines, there murder follows fast,
As falling leaves before the winter blast.
A wicked life trainde up in endless crime,
Has no regard unto the latter time.
When Letchers shall be punished for their lust,
When Princes plagued because they are unjust.
Foresee in time the warning bell does towle,
Subdue the flesh, by prayer to save the soul.
London behold the cause of others wrack,
And see the sword of justice at thy back.
Defer not off to morrow is too late,
By night he comes perhaps to judge thy state.

Enter Jonas Solus. Jonas. From forth the depth of my imprisoned soul,
Steal you my sighs, testify my pain,
Convey on wings of mine immortal tone,
My zealous prayers, unto the starrie throne:
Ah merciful and just thou dreadful God,
Where is thine arm to lay reuengefull strokes
Upon the heads of our rebellious race?
Lo Israel once that flourisht like the vine,
Is barraine laid, the beautiful increase
Is wholly blent, and irreligious zeal
Incampeth there where virtue was inthroan'd
Ah-lasse the while, the widow wants relief,
The fatherless is wronged by naked need,
Devotion sleeps in sinders of Contempt,
Hypocrisy infects the holy Priest,
Aye me for this, woe me for these misdeeds,
Alone I walk to think upon the world,
And sigh to see thy Prophets so contem'd:
Ah-lasse contem'd by cursed Israel.
Yet Jonas rest content, it is Isreal's sin
That causes this, then muse no more thereon,
But pray amends, and mend thy own amiss.

An Angel appears to Jonas. Angel. Amithai, son, I charge thee muse no
more,
(I am) has power to pardon and correct,
To thee pertains to do the Lords command.
Go girt thy loins, and have thee quickly hence,
To Niniuie, that mighty City wend,
And say this message from the Lord of hoasts,
Preach unto them thse tidings from thy God.
Behold thy wickedness has tempted me,
And pierced through the ninefold orbs of heaven,
Repent, or else thy judgment is at hand.

This said, the Angel vanishes. Jonas Prostrate I lie before the Lord of
hosts,
With humble ears intending his behest,
Ah honored be Iehouahs great command,
Then Jonas must to Niniuie repair,
Commanded as the Prophet of the Lord,
Great dangers on this iourny do awaight,
But dangers none where heavens direct the course,
What should I deem, I see, yea sighing see,
How Israel sin, yet knows the way of truth,
And thereby grows the byword of the world,
How then should God in judgment be so strict?
Against those who never heard or knew his power,
To threaten utter ruin of them all:
Should I report this judgment of my God,
I should incite them more to follow sin,
And publish to the world my countries blame,
It may not be, my conscience tells me no.
Ah Jonas will thou prove rebellious then?
Consider ere thou fall what error is,
My mind misgiues, to Ioppa will I flee,
And for a while to Tharsus shape my course,
Until the Lord vnfret his angry brows.

Enter certain Merchants of Tharsus, a Master and some Sailers. M. Come one
brave merchants now the wind does serve,
And sweetly blows a gale at West Southwest.
Our yardes a cross, our anchors on the pike,
What shall we hence and take this merry gale?

Mer. Sailers convey our budgets strait aboard,
And we will recompense your pains at last,
If once in safety we may Tharsus see,
M. we will feast these merry mates and thee.

M. Meanwhile content your selves with silly cates,
Our beds are boordes, our feasts are full of mirth,
We use no pomp, we are the Lords of see,
When Princes swet in care, we swincke of glee.
Orious shoulders and the pointers serve,
To be our load-stars in the lingering night,
The beauties of Arcturus we behold,
And though the Sailer is no booke-man held,
He knows more Art then ever booke-men read.

Sailer. By heavens well said, in honor of our trade,
Lets see the proudest scholar stir his course
Or shift his tides as silly sailers do,
Then will we yield them praise, else never none.

Mer. Well spoken fellow in thine own behalf,
But let us hence, wind tarries none you wot,
And tide and time let slip is hardly got.

M. March to the haven merchants, I follow you.


Jonas. Now does occasion further my desires,
I find companions fit to aid my flight,
Stay sir I pray, and hear a word or two.

M. Say on good friend, but briefly if you please,
My passengers by this time are aboard.

Jonas. Whether pretend you to imbarke your selves*


M. To Tharsus sir, and here in Ioppa haven
Our ship is pressed and ready to depart.

Jonas. May I have passage for my money then?


M. What not for money? pay ten siluerlings,
You are a welcome guest if so you please.

Jonas. Hold take thy hire, I follow thee my friend.


M. Where is your budget let me bear it sir.


Jonas. To one in peace, who sail as I do now,
Put trust in him who succoureth every want.

Exeunt. Ose. When Prophets new inspirde, presume to force
And tie the power of heaven to their conceits,
When fear, promotion, pride, or simony,
Ambition, subtle craft, their thoughts disguise,
Woe to the flock whereas the shepherds foul,
For lo the Lord at unawares shall plague
The careless guide, because his flocks do stray:
The axe already to the tree is set,
Beware to tempt the Lord ye men of art.

Enter Alcon, Thrasibulus, Samia, Clesiphon a lad. Clesi. Mother, some meat or
else I die for want.


Samia. Ah little boy how glad thy mother would
Supply thy wants but naked need denies:
Thy fathers slender portion in this world,
By usury and false deceit is lost,
No charity within this City bides:
All for themselves, and none to help the poor.

Clesi. Father shall Clesiphon have no relief?


Alcon Faith my boy I must be flat with thee, we must feed upon proverbs now.
As necessity has no law, a churles feast is better then none at all, for
other remedies have we none, except thy brother Radagon help us.


Samia. Is this thy slender care to help our child?
Has nature armde thee to no more remorse?
Ah cruel man, unkind, and pitiless,
Come Clesiphon my boy, i will beg for thee.

Clesi. Oh how my mothers mourning moves me?


Alcon. Nay you shall pay me interest for getting the boy (wife) before you
carry him hence. Ah-lasse woman what can Alcon do more? I Will pluck the belly
out of my heart for thee fweete Samia, be not so waspish.


Samia. Ah silly man I know thy want is great,
And foolish I to crave where nothing is.
Haste Alcon haste, make haste unto our son,
Who since he is in favor of the King,
May help this hapless Gentleman and us.
For to regaine our goods from tyrants hands.

Thra. Have patience Samia, weight your weal from heaven,
Tho Gods have raisde your son I hope for this,
To succor innocents in their distress.
Enters Radagon, Solus Lo where he comes from the imperial Court,
Go let us prostrate us before his feet.

Alcon. Nay by my troth, i will never ask my son blessing, che trow, cha taught
him his lesson to know his father, what son Radagon, in faith boy how do
thee?


Rada. Uillaine disturb me not, I cannot stay.


Alcon. Tut'sonne i will help you of that disease quickly, for I can hold thee,
ask thy mother knave what cunning I have to ease a woman when a qualme of
kindness come too near her stomach? Let me but claspe mine arms about her
body and say my prayers in her bosom, and she shall be healed presently.


Rada. Traitor unto my Princely Majesty,
How dare thou lay thy hands upon a King?

Samia. No Traitor Radagon, but true is he,
What has promotion bleared thus thine eye,
To scorn thy father when he visits thee?
Ah-lasse my son behold with ruthful eyes,
Thy parents robbed of all their worldly weal,
By subtle means of Usurie and guile,
The Judges ears are deaffe and shut up close,
All mercy sleeps, then be thou in these plundges
A patron to thy mother in her pains,
Behold thy brother almost dead for food,
Oh succor us, that first did succor thee.

Rada. What succor me, false callet hence auant?
Old dotard pack, move not my patience,
I know you not, Kings never look so low.

Samia. You know us not. Oh Radagon you know,
That knowing us, you know your parents then,
Thou know this womb first brought thee forth to light,
I know these paps did foster thee my son.

Alcon. And I know he has had many a piece of bread and cheese at my hands, as
proud as he is, that know I.


Thracib. I weight no hope of succors in this place,
Where children hold their fathers in disgrace.

Rada. Dare you enforce the furrows of revenge,
Within the brows of royal Radagon?
Uillaine auant, hence beggars with your brats,
Marshall why whip you not these rogues away?
That thus disturb our royal Majesty.

Clesiphon. Mother I see it is a wondrous thing,
From base estate for to become a King:
For why meethinke my brother in these fits,
Has got a kingdom, and has lost his wits.

Rada. Yet more contempt before my royalty?
Slaves fetch out tortures worse then Titius plagues,
And tear their toongs from their blasphemous heads.

Thrasi. I Will get me gone, tho woe begone with grief,
No hope remains, come Alcon let us wend.

Ra. Twere best you did, for fear you catch your bane,


Samia. Nay Traitor, I will haunt thee to the death,
Ungratious son, untoward and perverse,
I Will fill the heavens with echoes of thy pride,
And ring in every ear thy small regard,
That do despise thy parents in their wants,
And breathing forth my soul before thy feet,
My curses still shall haunt thy hateful head,
And being dead, my ghost shall thee pursue.

Enter Rasni King of Assiria, attended on by his soothsayers and Kings. Rasni.
How now, what mean these outcries in our Court?
Where naught should sound but harmonies of heaven,
What makes Radagon so passionate?

Samia. Justice O King, justice against my son.


Rasni. Thy son: what son?


Samia. This cursed Radagon.


Rada. Dread Monarch, this is but a lunacie,
Which grief and want has brought the woman to,
What does this passion hold you every Moon?

Samia. Oh polliticke in sin and wickedness,
Too impudent for to delude thy Prince.
Oh Rasni this same womb first brought him forth.
This is his father, worn with care and age,
This is his brother, poor vnhaphie lad,
And I his mother, though contemned by him,
With tedious toil we got our little good,
And brought him up to school with mickle charge:
Lord how we joyed to see his towardness,
And to our selves we often in silence said,
This youth when we are old may succor us.
But now preferred and lifted up by thee,
UUe quite destroyed by cursed usury,
He scorneth me, his father, and this child.

Clesi. He plays the Serpent right, described in Aesopes tale,
That sought the Fosters death that lately gave him life.

Alcon. Nay and please your Maiesti-ship, for proof he was my child, search
the parish book, the Clarke will swear it, his godfathers and godmothers can
witness it, it cost me forty pence in ale and cakes on the wives at his
christning. Hence proud King, thou shall never more have my blessing.


He takes him apart. Rasni. Say sooth in secret Radagon,
Is this thy father?

Rada. Mighty King he is,
I blushing, tell it to your Majesty.

Ras. Thy do thou then contemn him and his friends?


Rada. Because he is a base and abject swain,
My mother and her brat both beggarly,
Unmeete to be allied unto a King.
Should I that look on Rasnes countenance,
And march amidst his royal equipage,
Embase my self to speak to such as they?
Twere impious so to impair the love
That mighty Rasni bears to Radagon.
I would your grace would quit them from your sight
That dare presume to look on Jove's compare.

Rasni. I like thy pride, I praise thy policy,
Such should they be that wait upon my Court.
Let me alone to answer ( Radagon.)
Uillaines, seditious traitors as you be,
That scandalize the honor of a King,
Depart my Court you stales of impudence,
Unless you would be parted from your limbs,
So base for to entitle father-hood,
To Rasnes friend, to Rasnes favorite?

Rada. Hence begging scold, hence caitiue clogd with years,
On pain of death reuisit not the Court.
UUas I conceived by such a scuruie trull,
Or brought to light by such a lump of dirt:
Go Lossell trot it to the cart and spade,
Thou art unmeet to look upon a King,
Much less to be the father of a King.

Alcon. You may see wife what a goodly piece of work you have made, have I
tought you Arsmetry, as additiori multiplicarum, the rule of three, and all for
the begetting of a boy, and to be banished for my labor. O pitiful hearing.
Come Clesiphon follow me.


Clesi. Brother beware, I often have heard it told,
That sons who do their fathers scorn, shall beg when they be old.

Exet Alcon, Clesiphon. Radagon. Hence bastard boy for fear you taste the whip.


Samia. Oh all you heavens, and you eternal powers,
That sway the sword of justice in your hands,
(If mothers curses for her sons contempt,
May fill the balance of your fury full)
Power down the tempest of your direful plagues,
Upon the head of cursed Radagon.
Upon this prayer she departs, and a flame of fire appears from beneath,
and Radagon is swallowed. So you are just, now triumph Samia. Exet Samia.

Rasni. What exorcising charm, or hateful hag.
Has ravished the pride of my delight?
What tortuous planets, or maleuolent
Conspiring power, repining destenie
Has made the concaue of the earth unclose,
And shut in ruptures lovely Radagon?
If I be Lord-commander of the clouds,
King of the earth, and Sovereign of the seas,
What daring Saturn from his fiery den,
Does dart these furious flames amidst my Court?
I am not chief, there is more great then I,
What greater then Th'assirian Satrapos?
It may not be, and yet I fear there is,
That has bereft me of my Radagon.

Soothsaier. Monarch and Potentate of all our Provinces,
Muse not so much upon this accident,
Which is indeed nothing miraculous,
The hill of Scicely, dread Sovereign,
Sometime on sudden does euacuate,
Whole flakes of fire, and spues out from below
The smoakie brands that Vulueus bellows drive,
Whether by winds enclosed in the earth,
Or fracture of the earth by rivers force,
Such chances as was this, are often seen,
Whole Cities suncke, whole Countries drowned quite,
Then muse not at the loss of Radagon.
But frolic with the dalliance of your love.
Let clothes of purple set with studdes of gold,
Embellished with all the pride of earth,
Be spread for Aluida to sit upon.
Then thou like Mars courting the queen of love,
May drive away this melancholy fit.

Rasni. The proof is good and philosophical,
And more, thy counsel plausible and sweet.
Come Lords, though Rasni wants his Radagon,
Earth will repaie him many Radagons,
And Aluida with pleasant looks revive,
The heart that droupes for want of Radagon.

Exeunt. Oseas. When disobedience reigns in the child,
And Princes ears by flattery be beguilde.
When laws do pass by favor, not by truth,
When falsehood swarmeth both in old and youth.
When gold is made a god to wrong the poor,
And charity exilde from rich men's door.
When men by wit do labor to disprove,
The plagues for sin, sent down by God above.
Where great men's ears are stop to good advice,
And apt to hear those tales that feed their vice.
Woe to the land, for from the East shall rise,
A lamb of peace, the scourge of vanities.
The judge of truth, the patron of the just,
Who soon will lay presumption in the dust.
And give the humble poor their hearts desire,
And doom the worldlings to eternal fire.
Repent all you that hear, for fear of plagues,
O London, this and more does swarm in thee,
Repent, repent, for why the Lord does see.
With trembling pray, and mend what is amiss,
The sword of justice drawn already is.

Enter the Clown and the Smiths wife. Clown. UUhy but hear you mistress,
you know a woman's eyes are like a pair of pattens fit to save shooleather in
summer, and to keep away the cold in winter, so you may like your husband with
the one eye, because you are married, and me with the other, because I am your
man. Alas, alas, think mistress what a thing love is, why it is like to an
ostry faggot, that once set on fire, is as hardly quenched, as the bird
Crocodill driven out of her neast.


Wife. Thy Adam cannot a woman wink but she must sleep, and can she not love
but she must cry it out at the Cross, know Adam, I love thee as my self, now
that we are together in secret.


Clown. Mis. these words of yours are like to a Fox tail placed in a gentle
woman's Fan, which as it is light, so it gives life. Oh these words are as
sweet as a lilly, whereupon offering a borachio of kisses to your unseemly
personage, I entertain you upon further acquaintance.


Wife. Alas my husband comes.


Clown. Strike up the drum, and say no words but mum.


Smith. Sirrah you, and you huswife, well taken together, I have long suspected
you, and now I am glad I have found you together.


Clown. Truly sir, and I am glad that I may do you any way pleasure, either in
helping you or my mistress.


Smith. Boy here, and knave you shall know it straight, I will have you both
before the Magistrate, and there have you surely punished.


Clown. Why then master you are jealous?


Smith. Ielous knave, how can I be but jealous, to see you ever so familiar
together? Thou art not only content to drink away my goods, but to abuse my
wife.


Clown. Two good quallities, drunkenness and leachery, but master are you
jealous?


Smith. I knave and thou shall know it ere I pass, for I will beswindge thee
while this roape will hold.


Wife. My good husband abuse him not, for he never proffered you any wrong,


Smith. Nay whore, thy part shall not be behind.


Clown. Why suppose master I have offended you, is it lawful for the master
to beat the servant for all offenses?


Smith. I marry is it knave.


Clown. Then master will I prove by logic, that seeing all sins are to
receive correction, the master is to be corrected of the man, and sir I pray
you, what greater sin is, then jealousy? it is like a mad dog that for anger
bites himself. Therefore that I may do my duty to you good master, and to
make a white son of you, I will so beswinge jealousy out of you, as you
shall love me the better while you live.


Smith. What beat thy master knave?


Clown. What beat thy man knave? and I master, and double beat you, because
you are a man of credit, and therefore have at you the fairest for forty pence.


Smith. Alas wife, help, help, my man kills me.


Wife. Nay, even as you have baked so brue, jealousy must be driven out by
extremities.


Clown. And that will I do, mistress.


Smith. Hold thy hand Adam, and not only I forgive and forget all* but I will
give thee a good Farm to live on.


Clown. Begone Peasant, out of the compass of my further wrath, for I am a
corrector of vice, and at night I will bring home my mistress.


Smith. Even when you please good Adam.


Clown. When I please, mark the words, it is a lease paroll, to have and to
hold, thou shall be mine for ever, and so lets go to the Alehouse.


Exeunt. Oseas. Where servants against masters do rebel,
The Commonweal may be accounted hell.
For if the feet the head shall hold in scorn,
The Cities state will fall and be forlorn.
This error London, waits on thy state,
Servants amend, and masters leave to hate.
Let love abound, and virtue reign in all,
So God will hold his hand that threatens thrall.

Enter the Merchants of Tharsus, the M. of the ship, some Sailers, wet from
sea, with them the Governor of Ioppa. Gouer. Iop. What strange encounters met
you on the sea?
That thus your Bark is battered by the floods,
And you return thus sea-wrackt as I see.

Mer. Most mighty governor the chance is strange,
The tidings full of wonder and amaze,
Which better then we, our M. can report.

Gouer. M. discourse us all the accident.


M. The fair Triones with their glimmering light
Smiled at the foot of clear Roots a rain,
And in the wrath distinguishing the hours,
The Load-starre of our course dispearst his clear,
When to the seas with blithfull western blasts,
We saild amain, and let the bowling fly:
Scarce had we gone ten leagues from sight of land,
But lo an host of black and sable clouds,
Began to eclips Lucinas silver face,
And with a hurling noise from forth the South,
A gust of wind did rear the billows up,
Then scantled we our sails with speedy hands,
And took our drablers from our bonnets straight,
And severed our bonnets from the courses,
Our topsailes up, we trusse our spritsailes in,
But vainly strive they that resist the heavens.
For lo the waves incence them more and more,
Mounting with hideous roarings from the depth,
Our Bark is battered by incountring storms,
And welny stemd by breaking of the floods,
The steers-man pale, and careful holds his helm,
Wherein the trust of life and safety lay,
Till all at once (a mortal tale to tell)
Our sails were split by Bisas bitter blast,
Our rudder broke and we bereft of hope,
There might you see with pale and ghastly looks,
The dead in thought, and doleful merchants lifts,
Their eyes and hands unto their Countries Gods,
The goods we cast in bowels of the sea,
A sacrifice to swage proud Neptunes ire,
Only alone a man of Israel,
A passenger, did under hatches lie,
And slept secure, when we for succor praide:
Him I awooke, and said why slumberest thou?
Arise and pray, and call upon thy God,
He will perhaps in pity look on us.
Then cast we lots to know by whose amiss
Our mischief come, according to the guise,
And lo the lot did unto Jonas fall,
The Israelite of whom I told you last,
Then question we his Country and his name,
Who answered us, I am an Hebrew borne,
Who fear the Lord of heaven, who made the sea,
And fled from him for which we all are plagued,
So to assuage the fury of my God,
Take me and cast my carcass in the sea,
Then shall this stormy wind and billow cease.
The heavens they know, the Hebrews God can tell,
How loath we were to execute his will:
But when no Oars nor labor might suffice,
We heaued the hapless Jonas ouer-boord.
So ceast the storm, and calmed all the sea,
And we by strength of oars recovered shore.

Gouer. A wondrous chance of mighty consequence.


Mer. Ah honored be the God that wrought the same,
For we have vowed, that saw his wondrous works,
To cast away profaned Paganism,
And count the Hebrews God the only God.
To him this offering of the purest gold,
This mirrhe and Cascia freely I do yield.

M. And on his altars perfume these Turkey clothes,
This gassampine and gold i will sacrifice.

Sailer. To him my heart and thoughts I will addict,
Then suffer us most mighty Governor,
Within your Temples to do sacrifice.

Gouer. You men of Tharsus follow me,
Who sacrifice unto the God of heaven,
And welcome friends to Ioppais Governor. Exeunt a sacrifice.

Oseas. If warned once, the Ethnicks thus repent,
And at the first their error do lament:
What senseless beasts devoured in their sin,
Are they whom long perswations cannot win.
Beware ye western Cities where the word
Is daily preached both at church and board:
Where majesty the Gospel does maintain,
Where Preachers for your good, themselves do pain.
To dally long, and still protract the time,
The Lord is just, and you but dust and slime:
Presume not far, delaie not to amend,
Who suffers long, will punish in the end.
Cast thy account o London in this case,
Then judge what cause thou have, to call for grace.

Jonas the Prophet cast out of the Whales belly upon the Stage. Jonas. Lord of
the light, thou maker of the world,
Behold thy hands of mercy reares me up,
Lo from the hidious bowels of this fish,
Thou have returned me to the wished air,
Lo here apparent witness of thy power,
The proud Leuiathan that scoures the seas,
And from his nosthrils showers out stormy floods,
Whose back resists the tempest of the wind,
Whose presence makes the scaly troops to shake,
With humble stresse of his broad opened chappes,
Has lent me harbor in the raging floods.
Thus though my sin has drawn me down to death,
Thy mercy has restored me to life.
Bow ye my knees, and you my bashful eyes,
Weep so for grief, as you to water would:
In trouble Lord I called unto thee,
Out of the belly of the deepest hell,
I cride, and thou did hear my voice O God:
It Is thou had cast me down into the deep,
The seas and floods did compass me about,
I thought I had been cast from out thy sight,
The weeds were wrapped about my wretched head,
I went unto the bottom of the hills,
But thou O Lord my God have brought me up.
On thee I thought when as my soul did faint,
My prayers did prease before thy mercy seat.
Then will I pay my vows unto the Lord,
For why salvation comes from his throane.

The Angel appears. Angel. Jonas arise, get thee to Niniuie,
And preach to them the preachings that I bad:
Haste thee to see the will of heaven performed.

Depart Angel. Jonas. Jehovah I am Priest to do thy will.
What coast is this, and where am I arrived?
Behold sweet Licas streaming in his bounds,
Bearing the walls of haughty Niniuie,
Whereas three hundred towns do tempt the heaven.
Fair are thy walls pride of Assiria,
But lo thy sins have pierced through the clouds.
Here will I enter boldly, since I know
My God commands, whose power no power resists.

Exet. Oseas. You Prophets learn by Jonas how to live,
Repent your sins, whilst he does warning give.
Who knows his masters will and does it not,
Shall suffer many stripes full well I wot.

Enter Aluida in rich attire, with the King of Cilicia, her Ladies. Aluida.
Ladies go sit you down amidst this bower,
And let the Eunickes play you all a sleep:
Put garlands made of Roses on your heads,
And play the wantons whilst I talk a while.

Lady. Thou beautiful of all the world, we will.


Enter the bowers. Aluid. King of Cilicia, kind and curtious,
Like to thy self, because a lovely King,
Come lay thee down upon thy mistress knee,
And I will sing and talk of love to thee.

King Cili. Most gracious Paragon of excellence,
It fits not such an abject Prince as I,
To talk with Rasnes Paramour and love.

Al. To talk sweet friend? who would not talk with thee?
Oh be not coy, art thou not only fair?
Come twine thine arms about this snow white neck,
A loue-nest for the great Assirian King,
Blushing I tell thee fair, Cilician Prince,
None but thy self can merit such a grace.

K. Ci. Madam I hope you mean not for to mock me:

Al. No king, fair king, my meaning is to yoke thee.
Hear me but sing of love, then by my sighs,
My tears, my glauncing looks, my changed cheer,
Thou shall perceive how I do hold thee dear.

K. Ci. Sing Madam if you please, but love in jest,

Aluid. Nay, I will love, and sigh at every rest.
Song.
Beauty alas where wast thou borne?
Thus to hold thy self in scorn:
When as Beauty kissed to woo thee,
Thou by Beauty do undo me.
Heigho, despise me not.
I and thou in sooth are one,
Fairer thou, I fairer none:
Wanton thou, and will thou wanton
Yield a cruel heart to plant on?
Do me right, and do me reason,
Cruelty is cursed treason.
Heigho I love, heigho I love,
Heigho, and yet he eyes me not.

King. Madam your song is passing passionate.


Alui. And will thou not then pity my estate?


King. Ask love of them who pity may impart.


Alui. I ask of thee sweet, thou have stole my heart.


King. Your love is fixed on a greater King.


Alui. Tut women's love, it is a fickle thing.
I love my Rasni for my dignity.
I love Cilician King for his sweet eye.
I love my Rasni since he rules the world.
But more I love this kingly little world. Embrace him.
How sweet he looks? Oh were I Cinthias Pheere,
And thou Endimion, I should hold thee dear:
Thus should mine arms be spread about thy neck.
Embrace his neck. Thus would I kiss my love at every beck.
Kiss. Thus would I sigh to see thee sweetly sleep:
And if thou wakest not soon, thus would I weep.
And thus, and thus, and thus: thus much I love thee.

Kiss him. King. For all these vows, beshrow me if I prove you:
My faith unto my King shall not be falc'd.

Alui. Good Lord how men are coy when they are craved?


King. Madam behold our King approaches nie.


Alui. Thou art Endimion, then no more, heigho for him I die.
Faints. Point at the king of Cilicia. Enter Rasni, with his Kings and Lords.
What ailes the Center of my happiness,
Whereon depends the heaven of my delight?
Thine eyes the motors to command my world,
Thy hands the axier to maintain my world.
Thy smiles, the prime and springtide of my world.
Thy frowns, the winter to afflict the world.
Thou Queen of me, I King of all the world.

Alui. Ah feeble eyes lift up and look on him, She rises as out of a trance.
Is Rasni here? then droupe no more poor heart,
Oh how I fainted when I wanted thee?
Embrace him. How feign am I, now I may look on thee?
How glorious is my Rasni? how divine?
Eunukes play himmes, to praise his deity:
He is my Jove, and I his Juno am.

Rasni. Sun-bright, as is the eye of summers day,
When as he suits Spenori all in gold,
To woo his Leda in a swanlike shape.
Seemly as Galbocia for thy white:
Rose-coloured, lilly, lovely, wanton, kind,
Be thou the laborinth to tangle love,
Whilst I command the crown from Venus crest:
And pull Onoris girdle from his loins,
Enchast with Carbunckles and Diamonds,
To beautify fair Aluida my love.
Play Eunukes, sing in honor of her name,
Yet look not slaves upon her woing eyne,
For she is fair Lucina to your king,
But fierce Medusa to your baser eye.

Alui. What if I slept, where should my pillow be?


Rasni. Within my bosom Nymph, not on my knee.
Sleep like the smiling purity of heaven,
When mildest wind is loath to blend the peace,
Meane-while thy balm shall from thy breath arise,
And while these closures of thy lamps be shut,
My soul may have his peace from fancies war.
This is my Morane, and I her Cephalus.
Wake not too soon sweet Nymph, my love is won:
Catnies why stay your strains, why tempt you me?

Enter the Priest of the sun, with the miters on their heads, carrying fire
in their hands. Priest. All hail unto Th'assirian deity.


Ras. Priests why presume you to disturb my peace?


Priest. Rasni, the destinies disturb thy peace.
Behold amidst the addittes of our Gods,
Our mighty Gods the patrons of our war.
The ghost of dead men howling walk about,
Crying Ve, Ve, woe to this City woe.
The statutes of our Gods are thrown down,
And streams of blood our altars do distaine.

Aluida. Ah-lasse my Lord what tidings do I hear?
Shall I be slain?

She starteth. Rasni. Who tempts Aluida?
Go break me up the brazen doors of dreams,
And bind me cursed Morpheus in a chain,
And fetter all the fancies of the night,
Because they do disturb my Aluida.

A hand from out a cloud, threatens a burning sword. K. Cili. Behold dread
Prince, a burning sword from heaven,
Which by a threatening armeis brandished.

Rasni. What am I threatened then amidst my throane?
Sages? you Magi? speak: what means this?

Sages. These are but clammy exhalations,
Or retro grade, conjunctions of the stars,
Or oppositions of the greater lights.
Or radiatrous finding matter fit,
That in the starrie Sphere kindled be,
Matters betokening dangers to thy foes,
But peace and honor to my Lord the King.

Rasni. Then frolic Uiceroies, Kings and potentates,
Drive all vain fancies from your feeble minds.
Priests go and pray, whilst I prepare my feast,
Where Aluida and I, in pearl and gold,
Will quaffe unto our Nobles, richest wine,
In spite of fortune, fate, or destiny.

Exeunt. Oseas. Woe to the trains of women's foolish lust,
In wedlock rights that yield but little trust.
That vow to one, yet common be to all,
Take warning wantons, pride will have a fall.
Woe to the land where warnings profit naught,
Who say that nature, Gods decrees has wrought.
Who build one fate, and leave the corner stone,
The God of Gods, sweet Christ the only one.
If such escapes o London reign in thee:
Repent, for why each sin shall punished be.
Repent, amend, repent, the hour is nie,
Defer not time, who knows when he shall die?
Enters one clad in devils attire alone. Longer lives a merry man then a sad,
and because I mean to make my self pleasant this night, I have put my self
into this attire, to make a Clown afraid that passes this way: for of late
there have appeared many strange apparitions, to the great fear and terror of
the Citizens. Oh here my young master comes.


Enters Adam and his mistress. Adam. Fear not mistress, i will bring you safe
home, if my master frown, then will I stamp and stare, and if all be not
well then, why then to morrow morn put out mine eyes clean with forty pound.


Wife. Oh but Adam, I am afraid to walk so late because of the spirits that
appear in the City.


Adam. What are you afraid of spirits, armde as I am, with Ale, and Nutmegs,
turn me loose to all the devils in hell.


Wife. Alas Adam, Adam, the devil, the devil.


Adam. The devil mistress, fly you for your safeguard, let me alone, the
devil and I will deal well enough, if he have any honesty at all in him, I Will
either win him with a smooth tale, or else with a toste and a cup of Ale.


The Devil sings here. Devil. Oh, oh, oh, oh, feign would I be,
If that my kingdom fulfilled I might see.
Oh, oh, oh, oh.

Clown. Surely this is a merry devil, and I believe he is one of Lucifers
Minstrels, has a sweet voice, now surely, surely, he may sing to a pair of
Tongs and a Bag-pipe.


Devil. Oh thou art he that I seek for.


Clown. Spritus santus, away from me satan, I have nothing to do with thee.


Devil. Oh villain thou art mine.


Clown. Nominus patrus, I bless me from thee, and I conjure thee to tell me
who thou art?


Devil. I am the spirit of the dead man that was slain in thy company when we
were drunk together at the Ale.


Clown. By my troth sir, I cry you mercy, your face is so changed, that I had
quite forgotten you, well master devil we have tossed over many a pot of Ale
together.


Devil. And therefore must thou go with me to hell.


Clown. I have a policy to shift him, for I know he comes out of a hot
place, and I know my self, the Smith and the devil has a dry tooth in his
head, therefore will I leave him a sleep and run my way.


Devil. Come art thou ready.


Clown. Faith sir my old friend, and now goodman devil, you know, you and I
have been tossing many a good cup of Ale, your nose is grown very rich, what
say you, will you take a pot of Ale now at my hands, hell is like a Smiths
forge full of water, and yet ever a thrust.


Devil. No Ale villain, spirits cannot drink, come get up on my back, that
I may carry thee.


Clown. You know I am a Smith sir, let me look whether you be well shod or
no, for if you want a shoe, a remove, or the clinching of a nail, I am at your
command.


Devil. Thou have never a shoe fit for me.


Clown. Why sir, we shoe horned beasts as well as you, Oh good Lord let me
sit down and laugh, has never a cloven foot, a devil quoth he, i will use
spritus santus nor nominus patrus no more to him, I warrant you I Will do more
good upon him with my cudgel, now will I sit me down and become Justice of
peace to the devil.


Devil. Come art thou ready?


Clown. I am ready. And with this cudgel I will conjure thee.


Devil. Oh hold thy hand, thou kilst me, thou kilst me.


Clown. Then may I count my self I think a tall man, that am able to kill a
devil. Now who dare deal with me in the parish, or what wench in Niniuie will
not love me, when they say, there goes he that beat the devil.


Enters Thrasibulus. Thrasi. Loathed is the life that now enforced I lead,
But since necessity will have it so,
(Necessity it does command the^ Gods)
Through every coast and corner now I pry,
To pilfer what I can to buy me meat.
Here have I got a cloak not over old,
Which will afford some little sustenance,
Now will I to the broaking Usurer,
To make exchange of ware for ready coin.

Alcon. Wife bid the Trumpets sound a prize, a prize, mark the posie, I cut
this from a new married wife, by the help of a horn thombe and a knife, six
shillings four pence.


Samia. The better luck ours, but what have we here, cast apparel. Come away
man, the Usurer is near, this is dead ware, let it not bide on our hands.


Thrasi. Here are my partners in my poverty,
Enforced to seek their fortunes as I do.
Ah-lasse that few men should possess the wealth,
And many souls be forced to beg or steal.
Alcon well met.

Alcon. Fellow beggar whither now?


Thrasi. To the Usurer to get gold on commodity.


Alcon. And I to the same place to get a vent for my villainy, see where the
old crust comes, let us salute him, God speed sir may a man abuse your
patience upon a pawn.


Usurer. Friend let me see it.


Alcon. Ecce signum, a fair doublet and hose, new bought out of the pilferers
shop, a hansome cloak.


Usurer. How were they gotten?


Thrasi. How catch the fishermen fish?


M. take them as you think them worth, we leave all to your conscience.


Usurer. Honest men, toward men, good men, my friends, like to prove good
members, use me, command me, I will maintain your credits, there is money, now
spend not your time in idleness, bring me commodity I have crowns for you,
there is two shillings for thee, and six shillings for thee.


Alcon. A bargain, now Samia have at it for a new smock, come let us to the
spring of the best liquor, whilst this lastes, tril-lill.


Usurer. Good fellows, propper fellows, my companions, farewell, I have a pot
for you.


Samia. If he could spare it.
Enters to them Jonas. Repent ye men of Niniuie, repent,
The day of horror and of torment comes,
When greedy hearts shall glutted be with fire,
When as corruptions vailde, shall be unmasked,
When briberies shall be repaide with bane.
When whoredoms shall be recompensed in hell.
When riot shall with rigor be rewarded.
When as neglect of truth, contempt of God,
Disdain of poor men, fatherless and sick,
Shall be rewarded with a bitter plague.
Repent ye men of Niniuie, repent.
The Lord has spoke, and I do cry it out.
There are as yet but forty days remaining,
And then shall Niniuie be overthrown.
Repent ye men of Niniuie, repent.
There are as yet but forty days remaining,
And then shall Niniuie be overthrown. Exet.

Vsur. Confused in thought, oh whither shall I wend? Exet.


Thrasi. My conscience cries that I have done amiss. Exet.


Alcon. Oh God of heaven, against thee have I offended. Exet.


Samia. Ashamed of my misdeeds, where shall I hide me? Exet.


Clesi. Father methinks this word repent is good,
He that punish disobedience,
Does hold a scourge for every privy fault. Exet.

Oseas. Look London, look, with inward eyes behold,
What lessons the events do here unfold.
Sin grown to pride, to misery is thrall,
The warning bell is rung, beware to fall.
Ye worldly men whom wealth does lift on hie,
Beware and fear, for worldly men must die.
The time shall come, where least suspect remains,
The sword shall light upon the wisest brains.
The head that deemes to ouer-top the sky,
Shall perish in his human policy.
Lo I have said, when I have said the truth,
When will is law, when folly guides youth.
When show of zeal is prankt in robes of zeal,
When Ministers powle the pride of commonweal?
When law is made a laborinth of strife,
When honor yields him friend to wicked life.
When Princes hear by others ears their folly,
When usury is most accounted holy.
If these shall hap, as would to God they might not,
The plague is near, I speak although I write not.

Enters the Angel. Angel. Oseas.


Oseas. Lord.


An. Now has thine eyes perused these heinous sins,
Hateful unto the mighty Lord of hosts,
The time is come, their sins are waxen ripe,
And though the Lord forewarnes, yet they repent not:
Custom of firm has hardened all their hearts,
Now comes revenge armed with mighty plagues,
To punish all that live in Niniuie,
For God is just as he is merciful,
And doubtless plagues all such as scorn repent,
Thou shall not see the desolation
That falls unto these cursed Ninevites,
But shall return to great Jerusalem,
And preach unto the people of thy God,
What mighty plagues are incident to sin,
Unless repentance mittigate his ire:
Wrapped in the spirit as thou were hither brought,
I Will seat thee in Iudeas provinces,
Fear not Oseas then to preach the word.

Oseas. The will of the Lord be done.


Oseas taken away. Enters Rasni with his Viceroyes, Aluida and her Ladies, to a
banquet. Rasni. So Uiceroyes you have pleased me passing well,
These curious cates are gracious in mine eye.
But these Borachious of the richest wine,
Make me to think how blythsome we will be.
Seat thee fair Juno in the royal throne,
And I will serve thee to see thy face,
That feeding on the beauty of thy looks,
My stomach and mine eyes may both be filled.
Come Lordings seat you, fellow mates at feast,
And frolic wags, this is a day of glee,
This banquet is for brightsome Aluida.
I Will have them skinck my standing bowls with wine,
And no man drink, but quaffe a whole carouse,
Unto the health of beauteous Aluida.
For who so rises from this feast not drunk,
As I am Rasni Niniuies great King,
Shall die the death as traitor to my self,
For that he scorns the health of Aluida.

K. Cili. That will I never do my L.
Therefore with favor, fortune to your grace,
Carowse unto the health of Aluida.

Rasni. Gramercy Lording, here I take thy pledge.
And Creete to thee a bowl of Greekish wine,
Here to the health of Aluida.

Creete. Let come my Lord, Jack scincker fill it full,
A pledge unto the health of heavenly Aluida.

Rasni. Uassals attendant on our royal feasts,
Drink you I say unto my lovers health,
Let none that is in Rasnes royal Court,
Go this night safe and sober to his bed.

Enters the Clown. Clown. This way he is, and here will I speak with him.


Lord. Fellow, whither pressest thou?


Clown. I press no body sir, I am going to speak with a friend of mine.


Lord. Why slave, here is none but the King and his Uiceroyes.


Clown. The King, marry sir he is the man I would speak withal.


Lord. Why calst him a friend of thine?


Clown. I marry do I sir, for if he be not my friend, i will make him my friend
ere he and I pass.


Lord. Away vassaile be gone, thou speak unto the King.


Clown. I marry will I sir, and if he were a king of velvet, I will talk to
him.


Rasni. What Is the matter there, what noyce is that?


Clown. A boon my Liege, a boon my Liege.


Rasni. What is it that great Rasni will not grant
This day, unto the meanest of his land?
In honor of his beauteous Aluida?
Come hither swain, what is it that thou crauest?

Clown. Faith sir nothing, but to speak a few sentences to your worship.


Rasni. Say, what is it?


Clown. I am sure sir you have heard of the spirits that walk in the City
here.


Rasni. I, what of that?


Clown. Truly sir, I have an oration to tell you of one of them, and this it is.


Alui. Why go not forward with thy tale?


Clown. Faith mistress, I feel an imperfection in my voice, a disease that
often troubles me, but alas easily mended, a cup of Ale, or a cup of wine,
will serve the turn.


Alui. Fill him a bowl, and let him want no drink.


Clown. Oh what a precious word was that, and let him want no drink. Well sir,
now i will tell you forth my tale: Sir as I was coming along the port ryuale of
Niniuie, there appeared to me a great devil, and as hard favored a devil as
ever I saw: nay sir, he was a cuckoldly devil, for he had horns on his head.
This devil, mark you now, presses upon me, and sir indeed, I charged him
with my pike staff, but when yt would not serve, I came upon him with sprytus
santus, why it had been able to have put Lucifer out of his wits, when I saw my
charm would not serve, I was in such a perplexity, that six peny-worth of
Juniper would not have made the place sweet again.


Alui. Why fellow weart thou so afraid?


Clown. Oh mistress had you been there and seen, his very sight had made
you shift a clean smock, I promise you though I were a man and counted a tall
fellow, yet my Landresse calde me slouenly knave the next day.


Rasni. A pleasant slave, forward sirrah, on with thy tale.


Clown. Faith sir, but I remember a word that my mistress your bedfellow
spoake.


Rasni. What was that fellow?


Clown. Oh sir, a word of comfort, a precious word: and let him want no drink.


Rasni. Her word is law: and thou shall want no drink.


Clown. Then sir, this devil came upon me and would not be persuaded but he
would needs carry me to hell, I proffered him a cup of Ale, thinking because he
came out of so hot a place that he was thirsty, but the devil was not dry,
and therefore the more sorry was I, well, there was no remedy but I must with
him to hell, and at last I cast mine eye aside, if you knew what I spied you
would laugh, sir I looked from top to toe, and he had no cloven feet. Then I
ruffled up my hair, and set my cap on the one side, and sir grew to be a
Justice of peace to the devil. At last in a great fume, as I am very
cholloricke, and sometime so hot in my fastin fumes that no man can abide
within twenty yards of me, I start up, and so bombasted the devil, that sir
he cried out, and ran away.


Alui. This pleasant knave has made me laugh my fill.
Rasni, now Aluida begins her quaffe,
And drinks a full carouse unto her King.

Rasni. A pledge my love, as hardy as great Jove,
Drunk, when his Juno heau'd a bowl to him.
Frolic my Lord, let all the standerds walk.
Ply it till every man has taken his load.
How now sirrah, how cheer, we have no words of you?

Clown. Truly sir, I was in a broune study about my mistress.


Alui. About me for what?


Clown. Truly mistress, to think what a golden sentence you did speak: all
the philosophers in the world could not have said more: what come let him want
no drink. Oh wise speech.


Alui. Uillaines why skinck you not unto this fellow?
He makes me blyth and merry in my thoughts.
Heard you not that the King has given command,
That all be drunk this day within his Court,
In quaffing to the health of Aluida?

Enters Jonas. Jonas Repent, repent, ye men of Niniuie repent.
The Lord has spoken, and I do cry it out,
There are as yet but forty days remaining,
And then shall Niniuie be overthrown.
Repent ye men of Niniuie, repent.

Rasni. What fellow is this, that thus disturbes our feasts,
With outcries and alarams to repent.

Clown. Oh sir, it is one goodman Jonas that is come from Jericho, and surely I
think he has seen some spirit by the way, and is fallen out of his wits, for
he never leaves crying night nor day, my master heard him, and he shut up his
shop, gave me my Indenture, and he and his wife do nothing but fast and pray.


Jonas. Repent ye men of Niniuie, repent.


Rasni. Come hither fellow, what art, and from whence come thou?


Jonas. Rasni, I am a Prophet of the Lord,
Sent hither by the mighty God of hosts,
To cry destruction to the Ninevites,
O Niniuie thou harlot of the world,
I raise thy neighbors round about thy bounds,
To come and see thy filthiness and sin.
Thus says the Lord, the mighty God of host,
Your King loves chambering and wantonness,
Whoredom and murder do distaine his Court,
He favors covetous and drunken men.
Behold therefore all like a strumpet foul,
Thou shall be judged and punished for thy crime:
The foe shall pierce the gates with iron rampes,
The fire shall quite consume thee from above.
The houses shall be burnt, the Infants slain.
And women shall behold their husbands die.
Thine eldest sister is Lamana.
And Sodom on thy right hand seated is.
Repent ye men of Niniuie, repent.
The Lord has spoke, and I do cry it out.
There are as yet but forty days remaining,
And then shall Niniuie be overthrown.

Exet offered. Rasni. Stay Prophet, stay.


Jonas. Disturb not him that sent me,
Let me perform the message of the Lord. Exet.

Rasni. My soul is buried in the hell of thoughts.
Ah Aluida, I look on thee with shame.
My Lords on sodeine fix their eyes on ground,
As if dismayed to look upon the heavens.
Hence Magi, who have flattered me in sin.
Exet. His Sages. Horror of mind, disturbance of my soul,
Makes me aghast, for Niniuies mishap.
Lords see proclaimed, yea see it straight proclaimed,
That man and beast, the woman and her child,
For forty days in sack and ashes fast,
Perhaps the Lord will yield and pity us.
Bear hence these wretched blandishments of sin,
And bring me sackcloth to attire your King.
Away with pomp, my soul is full of woe:
In pity look on Niniuie, O God.

Exet. A man. Alui. Assaild with shame, with horror ouerborne,
To sorrows sold, all guilty of our sin.
Come Ladies come, let us prepare to pray.
Ah-lasse, how dare we look on heavenly light,
That have dispisde the maker of the same?
How may we hope for mercy from above,
That still despise the warnings from above?
Woes me, my conscience is a heavy foe.
O patron of the poor oppressed with sin,
Look, look on me, that now for pity crave,
Assaild with shame, with horror ouerborne,
To sorrow sold, all guilty of our sin.
Come Ladies come, let us prepare to pray.

Exeunt. Enter the Usurer solus, with a halter in one hand, a dagger in the
other. Usurer. Groaning in conscience, burdened with my crimes,
The hell of sorrow hauntes me up and down.
Tread where I list, mee-thinkes the bleeding ghostes
Of those whom my corruption brought to noughts,
Do serve for stumbling blocks before my steps.
The fatherless and widow wronged by me.
The poor oppressed by my usury,
Mee-thinkes I see their hands reard up to heaven,
To cry for vengeance of my covetousness.
Where so I walk, I Will sigh and shun my way.
Thus am I made a monster of the world,
Hell gapes for me, heaven will not hold my soul.
You mountains shroude me from the God of truth.
Mee-thinkes I see him sit to judge the earth.
See how he blots me out of the book of life.
Oh burden more then Atna that I bear.
Cover me hills, and shroude me from the Lord.
Swallow me Licas, shield me from the Lord.
In life no peace: each murmuring that I hear,
Mee-thinkes the sentence of damnation soundes,
Die reprobate, and hie thee hence to hell.
The evil angel tempts him, offering the knife and rope. What fiend is this
that temptes me to the death?
What is my death the harbor of my rest?
Then let me die: what second charge is this?
Mee-things I hear a voice amidst mine ears,
That bids me stay: and tells me that the Lord
Is merciful to those that do repent.
May I repent? oh thou my doubtful soul?
Thou may repent, the Judge is merciful.
Hence tools of wrath, stales of temptation,
For I will pray and sigh unto the Lord.
In sackcloth will I sigh, and fasting pray:
O Lord in rigor look not on my sins.

He sits him down in sack-cloathes, his hands and eyes reared to heaven.
Enters Aluida with her Ladies, with dispiearsed looks. Alui. Come mournful
dames lay off your brodred locks,
And on your shoulders spread dispiearsed hairs,
Let voice of music cease, where sorrow dwells.
Clothed in sackcloaths, sigh your sins with me.
Bemone your pride, bewail your lawless lusts,
With fasting mortify your pampered loins:
Oh think upon the horror of your sins.
Think, think, with me, the burden of your blames,
Woe to thy pomp, fall, e beauty, fading flower,
Blasted by age, by sickness, and by death.
Woe to our painted cheeks, our curious oils,
Our rich array, that fostered us in sin.
Woe to our idle thoughts that wound our souls.
Oh would to God all nations might receive,
A good example by our grievous fall.

Ladies. You that are planted there where pleasure dwells,
And thinks your pomp as great as Niniuies,
May fall for sin as Niniuie does now.

Alui. Mourn, mourn, let moan be all your melody,
And pray with me, and I will pray for all.

Lord. O Lord of heaven forgive us our misdeeds.


Ladies. O Lord of heaven forgive us our misdeeds.


Usurer. O Lord of light forgive me my misdeeds.


Enters Rasni, the Kings of Assiria, with his nobles in sackcloath. K. Cilicia.
Be not so overcome with grief O King,
Least you endanger life by sorrowing so.

Rasni. King of Cilicia, should I cease my grief,
Where as my swarming sins afflict my soul?
Uaine man know, this my burden greater is,
Then every private subject in my land:
My life has been a loadstarre unto them,
To guide them in the laborinth of blame,
Thus I have taught them for to do amiss:
Then must I weep my friend for their amiss,
The fall of Niniuie is wrought by me:
I have maintaind this City in her shame.
I have contemned the warnings from above.
I have vpholden incest, rape, and spoil.
It Is I that wrought the sin, must weep the sin.
Oh had I tears like to the silver streams,
That from the Alpine Mountains sweetly stream,
Or had I sighs the treasures of remorse,
As plentiful as Aeolus has blasts,
I then would tempt the heavens with my laments,
And pierce the throane of mercy by my sighs.

K. Cil. Heavens are prepitious unto faithful prayers.


Rasni. But after our repent, we must lament:
Least that a worser mischief does befall.
Oh pray, perhaps the Lord will pity us.
Oh God of truth both merciful and just,
Behold repentant men with pitious eyes,
We wail the life that we have led before.
O pardon Lord, O pity Niniuie.

Omnes. O pardon Lord, O pity Niniuie.


Rasni. Let not the Infants dallying on the tent,
For fathers sins in judgment be oppressed.

K. Cil. Let not the painful mothers big with child,
The innocents be punished for our sin.

Rasni. O pardon Lord, O pity Niniuie.


Omnes. O pardon Lord, O pity Niniuie.


Rasni. O Lord of heaven, the virgins weep to thee.
The covetous man forie sorry for his sin.
The Prince and poor, all pray before thy throane.
And will thou then be wroth with Niniuie?

K. Cili. Give truce to prayer O king, and rest a space.


Rasni. Give truce to prayers, when times require no truce*
No Princes no. Let all our subjects hie
Unto our temples, where on humbled knees,
I will exspect some mercy from above. Enter the temple Omnes.

Enters Jonas, solus. Jonas. This is the day wherein the Lord has said
That Niniuie shall quite be overthrown.
This is the day of horror and mishap,
Fatal unto the cursed Ninevites.
These stately Towers shall in thy watery bounds,
Swift flowing Licas find their burials,
These palaces the pride of Assurs kings,
Shall be the bowers of desolation,
Where as the sollitary bird shall sing,
And Tigers train their young ones to their nest.
O all ye nations bounded by the West,
Ye happy Isles where Prophets do abound,
Ye Cities famous in the western world,
Make Niniuie a president for you.
Leave leaud desires, leave covetous delights.
Fly usury, let whoredom be exilde,
Least you with Niniuie be overthrown.
Lo how the suns inflamed torch preuailes,
Scorching the parched furrows of the earth.
Here will I sit me down and fix mine eye
Upon the ruins of you wretched town,
And lo a pleasant shade, a spreading vine,
To shelter Jonas in this sunny heat,
What means my God, the day is done and spent.
Lord shall my Prophecy be brought to naught?
When falls the fire? when will the judge be wroth?
I pray thee Lord remember what I said,
When I was yet within my country land,
Jehovah is too merciful I fear.
O let me fly before a Prophet fault,
For thou art merciful the Lord my God,
Full of compassion and of sufferance,
And do repent in taking punishment.
Why stays thy hand? O Lord first take my life,
Before my Prophecy be brought to noughts.
Ah he is wroth, behold the gladsome vine
That did defend me from the sunny heat,
Is withered quite, and swallowed by a Serpent.
A Serpent deuoureth the vine. Now furious Phlegon triumphs on my brows,
And heat preuailes, and I am faint in heart.

Enters the Angel. Angel. Art thou so angry Jonas? tell me why?


Jonas. Jehovah I with burning heat am plungde,
And shadowed only by a silly vine,
Behold a Serpent has devoured it?
And lo the sun incenst by Eastern wind,
Afflicts me with Cariculer aspect,
Would God that I might die, for well I wot,
Twere better I were dead, then rest alive.

Angel. Jonas art thou so angry for the vine?


Jonas. Yea I am angry to the death my God.


Angel. Thou have compassion Jonas on a vine,
On which thou never labor did bestow,
Thou never gave it life or power to grow,
But sodeinly it sprung, and sodeinly did.
And should not I have great compassion
On Niniuie the City of the world,
Wherein there are a hundred thousand souls,
And twenty thousand infants that ne wot
The right hand from the left, beside much cattle.
Oh Jonas, look into their Temples now,
And see the true contrition of their King:
The subjects tears, the sinners true remorse.
Then from the Lord proclaim a mercy day,
For he is pitiful as he is just.

Exet Angelus. Jonas. I go my God to finish thy command,
Oh who can tell the wonders of my God,
Or talk his praises with a fervent tongue.
He brings down to hell, and lifts to heaven.
He draws the yoke of bondage from the just,
And looks upon the Heathen with pitious eyes:
To him all praise and honor be ascribed.
Oh who can tell the wonders of my God,
He makes the infant to proclaim his truth,
The Ass to speak, so save the Prophets life.
The earth and sea to yield increase for man.
Who can describe the compass of his power?
Or testify in terms his endless might?
My ravished spright, oh whither do thou wend?
Go and proclaim the mercy of my God.
Relieve the careful hearted Ninevites.
And as thou weart the messenger of death,
Go bring glad tidings of recovered grace.
Enters Adam solus, with a bottle of beer in one slop, and a great piece of
beef in an other. Well good man Jonas, I would you had never come from Jury to
this Country, you have made me look like a lean rib of roast beef, or like
the picture of lent, painted upon a read-herings cob. Alas masters, we are
commanded by the proclamation to fast and pray, by my troth I could prettely
so, so, away with praying, but for fasting, why it is so contrary to my nature,
that I had rather suffer a short hanging, then a long fasting. Mark me, the
words be these. Thou shall take no manner of food for so many days. I had as
leeue he should have said, thou shall hang thy self for so many days. And yet
in faith I need not find fault with the proclamation, for I have a buttry, and
a pantry, and a kitchen, about me, for proof, Ecce signum, this right slop is
my pantry, behold a manchet, this place is my kitchen, for lo a piece of
beef. Oh let me repeat that sweet word again: For lo a piece of beef. This
is my buttry, for see, see, my friends, to my great joy, a bottle of beer.
Thus alas I make shift to wear out this fasting, I drive away the time, but
there go Searchers about to seek if any man breaks the Kings command. Oh here
they be, in with your victuals Adam.


Enters two Searchers. 1. Searcher. How duly the men of Niniuie keep the
proclamation, how are they armde to repentance? we have searched through the
whole City and have not as yet found one that breaks the fast.


2. Sear. The sign of the more grace, but stay, here sits one mee-thinkes at
his prayers, let us see who it is.


1. Sear. It Is Adam, the Smithes man, how now Adam?


Adam. Trouble me not, thou shall take no manner of food, but fast and pray.


1. Sear. How devoutly he sits at his orysons, but stay, meethinkes I feel a
smell of some meat or bread about him.


2. Sear. So thinks me too, you sirrah, what victuals have you about you?


Adam. Uictuals! Oh horrible blasphemy! Hinder me not of my prayer, nor drive
me not into a chollor, victailes! why hardst thou not the sentence, thou shall
take no food but fast and pray?


2. Sear. Truth so it should be, but me-thinkes I smell meat about thee.


Adam. About me my friends, these words are actions in the Case, about me, No;
no: hang those gluttons that cannot fast and pray.


1. Sear. Well, for all your words, we must search you.


Adam. Search me, take heed what you do, my hose are my castles, it is burglary
if you break open a slop, no officer must lift up an iron hatch, take heed my
slops are iron.


2. Sear. Oh villain, see how he has gotten victailes, bread, beef, and
beer, where the King commanded upon pain of death none should eat for so
many days, no not the sucking infant.


Adam. Alas sir, this is nothing but a modicum non necet vt medicus daret,
why sir, a bit to comfort my stomach.


1. Sear. Uillaine thou shall be hanged for it.


Adam. These are your words, I shall be hanged for it, but first answer me to
this question, how many days have we to fast still?


2. Sear. Five days.


Adam. Five days, a long time, then I must be hanged?


1. Sear. I marry must thou.


Adam. I am your man, I am for you sir, for I had rather be hanged the^ abide so
long a fast, what five days? come i will untruss, is your halter and the
gallows, the ladder, and all such furniture in readiness?


1. Sear. I warrant thee, shall want none of these.


Adam. But hear you, must I be hanged?


1. Sear. I marry.


Adam. And for eating of meat, then friends, know ye by these presents, I will
eat up all my meat, and drink up all my drink, for it shall never be said, I
was hanged with an empty stomach.


1. Sear. Come away knave, will thou stand feeding now?


Adam. If you be so hasty, hang your self an hour while I come to you, for
surely I will eat up my meat.


2. Sear. Come lets draw him away perforce.


Adam. You say there is five days yet to fast, these are your words.


2. Sear. I sir.


Adam. I am for you, come lets away, and yet let me be put in the Chronicles.


Enter Jonas, Rasni, Aluida, kings of Cilicia, others royally attended Jonas.
Come careful King, cast off thy mournful weeds,
Exchange thy cloudie looks to smothed smiles,
Thy tears have pierced the pitious throane of grace,
Thy sighs like Imence pleasing to the Lord:
Have been peace offerings for thy former pride.
Rejoice and praise his name that gave thee peace.
And you fair Nymphs, ye lovely Ninevites,
Since you have wept and fasted for the Lord,
He graciously have tempered his revenge,
Beware henceforth to tempt him any more,
Let not the niceness of your beauteous looks,
Ingraft in you a high presuming mind,
For those that climb, he casts to the ground,
And they that humble be, he lifts aloft.

Rasni. Lowly I bend with awful bent of eye,
Before the dread Jehovah, God of host,
Despising all profane device of man,
Those lustful lures that whilome led awry,
My wanton eyes shall wound my heart no more:
And she whose youth in dalliance I abused,
Shall now at last become my wedlock mate.
Fair Aluida look not so woe begone:
If for thy sin thy sorrow do exceed,
Blessed be thou, come with a holy band,
Lets knit a knot to salve our former shame.

Alui. With blushing looks betokening my remorse,
I lowly yield my King to thy behest,
So as this man of God shall think it good.

Jonas. Woman, amends may never come too late.
A will to practice goodness, virtuous.
The God of heaven when sinners do repent,
Does more rejoice then in ten thousand just.

Rasni. Then witness holy Prophet our accord.


Alui. Plight in the presence of the Lord thy God.


Jonas. Blessed may you be, like to the flouring sheaues,
That play with gentle winds in summer tide,
Like Olive branches let your children spread:
And as the Pines in lofty Libanon,
Or as the Kids that feed on Lepher plains,
So be the seed and offspring of your loins.

Enters the Usurer, Gentleman, and Alcon. Usurer. Come forth my friends whom
wittingly I wronged,
Before this man of God receive your due,
Before our King I mean to make my peace.
Jonas behold in sign of my remorse,
I hear restore into these poor men's hands,
Their goods which I unjustly have detaind,
And may the heavens so pardon my misdeeds,
As I am penitent for my offense.

Thrasi And what through want from others I purloynd,
Behold O King, I proffer fore thy throane:
To be restord to such as owe the same.

Jonas. A virtuous deed pleasing to God and man,
Would God all Cities drowned in like shame,
Would take example of these Ninevites.

Rasni. Such be the fruits of Niniuies repent,
And such for ever may our dealings be,
That he that called us home in height of sin,
May smile to see our hearty penitence.
Uiceroyes proclaim a fast unto the Lord,
Let Isreal's God be honored in our land.
Let all occasion of corruption die.
For who shall fault therein, shall suffer death.
Bear witness God, of my unfeigned zeal.
Come holy man, as thou shall counsel me,
My Court and City shall reformed be.

Exeunt. Jonas. Wend on in peace, and prosecute this course,
You Ilanders on whom the milder air
Does sweetly breath the balm of kind increase:
Whose lands are fatned with the deaw of heaven,
And made more fruitful then Actean plains.
You whom delitious pleasures dandle soft:
Whose eyes are blinded with security,
Unmaske your selves, cast error clean aside.
O London, maiden of the mistress I Will,
Wrapped in the foldes and swathing cloutes of shame:
In thee more sins then Niniuie contains,
Contempt of God, dispight of reverend age.
Neglect of law, desire to wrong the poor:
Corruption, whordome, drunkenness, and pride.
Swollen are thy brows with impudence and shame.
O proud adulterous glory of the West,
Thy neighbors burns, yet do thou fear no fire.
Thy Preachers cry, yet do thou stop thine ears.
The larum rings, yet sleep thou secure.
London awake, for fear the Lord do frown,
I set a looking Glass before thine eyes.
O turn, O turn, with weeping to the Lord,
And think the prayers and virtues of thy Queen,
Defers the plague which otherwise would fall.
Repent O London, least for thine offense,
Thy shepherd fail, whom mighty God preserve,
That she may hide the pillar of his Church,
Against the storms of Romish Antichrist:
The hand of mercy ouershead her head,
And let all faithful subjects say, Amen.

FINIS.

