Scillaes Metamorphosis: Enterlaced with the unfortunate love of Glaucus.
Whereunto is annexed the delectable discourse of the discontented Satyr: with
sundry other most absolute Poems and Sonnets. Containing the detestable
tyranny of Disdain, and Comicall triumph of Constancy: Very fit for young
Courtiers to peruse, and coy Dames to remember.

By Thomas Lodge of Lincolnes Inn, Gentleman.

O vita! misero longa, foelici breuis.

Imprinted at London by Richard Ihones, and are to be sold at his shop near
Holburne bridge, at the sign of the Rose and Crown. 1589.

TO HIS ESPECIAL good friend Master Raph Crane, and the rest of his most
entire wellwillers, the Gentlemen of the Innes of Court and Chauncerie. Thomas
Lodge of Lincolnes Inn Gent. Wishes increase of worship and continuance in
virtue.
SVVeete Master Crane, I had not thought at this instant to have partaked my
passions with the print, whose discontented thoughts so long inured to
obscurity, were divorced many years since, from vain glories inordinate
folly: but the base necessities of an extrauagant melancholy mate, that had
no other vnde of quod ad victum attinet, but the forestalling of other men's
inventions, made my imperfect Poems (in spite of waste paper) to hazard an
apprenteship in Poules: so that, that which in the first peeping forth was
wholly predestinate to your friendship, by an underhand mart, is made the
mercinarie recreation of every ridiculous mate. Our wits now a days are waxt
very fruitful, and our Pamphleters more than prodigal; So that the posts
which stood naked a tedious non terminus, do vaunt their double apparel as
soon as ever the Exchequer opens; and every corner is took up with some or
other penilesse companion that will imitate any estate for a two penny alms.
I could afford you whole services of absurdities, that would disquiet the
disgestion of Art vsque ad nausaeam, were it not that I pity to
particularize simple fellows imperfections, and am altogether loath to
adventure my pains in so ungrateful a Province. For transformed Scilla how
ever she happened now to be disioyned from disdainful Charybdis; think not,
but if they have good shipping they will meet ere long both in one shop: and
landed they had at this instant, in one and the self same bay, if Scilla (the
vnfortunater of the two) had not met with a needy pirate by the way. Arrived
she is, though in a contrary coast, but so wrackt, and weather beaten, through
the unskillfulness of rough writers, that made their poast haste passage by
night, as Glaucus would scarce know her, if he met her: yet my hope is
Gentlemen, that you will not so much imagine what she is, as what she was;
insomuch as from the shop of the Painter, she is fallen into the hands of the
stainer. Thus referring the supporta^ce of my credit, and the inability of my
verse to your ingenious opinions, I bid you farewell til the next Term; at
which time I hope to entertain your several delights, with far better
discourses, and be suppliant to my good friend Master Crane, in some or other
more acceptable Poem. In the mean time let my appliable voluisse, entitle me
to your courtesy: whose I am during Iife in all enterchangeable duty.

Your friend assured Thomas Lodge.

The most pithie and pleasant History of Glaucus and Silla.
WAlking alone (all only full of grief)
Within a thicket nere to Isis flood,
Weeping my wants, and wailing scant relief,
Wringing mine arms (as one with sorrow wood);
The piteous streams relenting at my moan
Withdrew their tides, and staid to hear me groan.
From forth the channel, with a sorrowing cry
The Sea-god Glaucus (with his hallowed hears
Wet in the tears of his sad mothers dye)
With piteous looks before my face appears;
For whom the Nymphs a mossie coat did frame.
Embroadered with his Sillas heavenly name.
And as I sat under a Willow tree,
The lovely honor of fair Thetis bower;
Reposd his head upon my faintfull knee:
And when my tears had ceast their stormy shower
He dried my cheeks, and then bespake him so,
As when he waild I straight forgot my woe.
Unfortunate, why wandreth thy content
From forth his scope as wearied of it self;
Thy books have schoold thee from this fond repent,
And thou can talk by proof of wavering pelf:
Unto the world such is inconstancy,
As sapp to tree, as apple to the eye.
Mark how the morn in roseat color shines,
And straight with clouds the Sunnie tract is clad;
Then see how pomp through wax and waine declines,
From high to low, from better to the bad:
Take moist from Sea, take color from his kind,
Before the world deuoid of change thou find.
With secret eye look on the earth a while,
Regard the changes Nature forces there;
Behold the heavens, whose course all sense beguile;
Respect thy self, and thou shall find it clear,
That infantlike thou art become a youth,
And youth forespent a wretched age ensu'th.
In searching then the schoolemens cunning noates,
Of heaven, of earth, of flowers, of springing trees,
Of herbs, of metal, and of Thetis floates,
Of laws and nurture kept among the Bees:
Conclude and know times change by course of fate,
Then mourn no more, but moan my haples state.
Here began he pause and shake his heavy head,
And fould his arms, and then unfold them straight;
Feign would he speak, but tongue was charmed by dread,
Whilst I that saw what woes did him awaight,
Comparing his mishaps and moan with mine,
Began smile for joy and dry his drooping eyne.
But (lo) a wonder; from the channels glide
A sweet melodious noise of music rose,
That made the stream to dance a pleasant tide,
The weeds and sallowes near the bancke that groes
Began sing, as when the calmest winds accord
To greet with balmie breath the fleeting forde.
Upon the silver bosom of the stream
First began fair Themis shake her amber locks,
Whom all the Nimphs that weight on Neptunes realm
Attended from the hollow of the rocks.
In brief, while these rare parragons assemble,
The watrie world to touch their teates do tremble.
Footing it featlie on the grassie ground,
These Damsels circling with their brightsome faires
The loue-sicke God and I, about us wound
Like stars that Ariadnes crown repaires:
Who once has seen or pride of morn, or day,
Would deem all pomp within their cheeks did play.
Nais fair Nymph with Bacchus iuorie touch,
Began tune a passion with such sweet reports,
And every word, noate, sigh, and pause was such,
And every Cadence fed with such consorts,
As were the Delian Harper bent to hear,
Her stately strains might tempt his curious ear.
Of love (God wot) the lovely Nymph complained:
But so of love as forced love to love her;
And even in love such furious love remained,
As searching out his powrefull shaft to prove her,
He found his quiver emptied of the best,
And felt the arrowe sticking in his breast.
Under a Popler Themis did repose her,
And from a brier a sweetfull branch did pluck:
When midst the brier ere she could scarce suppose her
A Nightingale began sing: but woe the luck;
The branch so near her breast, while she did quick her
To turn her head, on sudden began to prick her.
Whilst smiling Clore midst her envious blushes,
Began blame her fear and prettily said thus;
Worse pricks than these are found among these bushes,
And yet such pricks are scarcely feared of us.
Nay soft (said Chelis) pricks do make birds sing,
But pricks in Ladies bosoms often sting.
Thus jest they on the Nightingales report,
And on the prickle of the Eglantine
On Nais song, and all the whole consort
In public this sweet sentence did assign;
That while some smile, some sigh through change of time;
Some smart, some sport amidst their youthlie prime.
Such wreathes as bound the Thebans iuorie brow;
Such gay trickt garlands pleit these iollie Dames;
The flowers themselves when as the Nymphs began bow,
Began veil their crestes in honor of their names:
And smilde their sweet and woed with so much glee,
As if they said, sweet Nymph come gather me.
But penciue Glaucus passionate with painings,
Amidst their revel thus began his ruth;
Nymphs, fly these Groves late blasted with my plainings,
For cruel Silla nill regard my truth:
And leave us two consorted in our gronings,
To register with tears our bitter monings.
The floods do fail their course to see our cross,
The fields forsake their green to hear our grief,
The rocks will weep whole springs to mark our loss,
The hills relent to store our scant relief,
The air repines, the penciue birds are heavy,
The trees to see us paind no more are leauie.
Ay me, the Shepherds let their flocks want feeding,
And flocks to see their palie face are sorry,
The Nymphs to spy the flocks and shepherds needing
Prepare their tears to hear our tragic story:
Whilst we surprisde with grief cannot disclose them,
With sighing wish the world for to suppose them.
He that has seen the sweet Arcadian boy
Wiping the purple from his forced wound,
His pretty tears betokening his annoy,
His sighs, his cries, his falling on the ground,
The Echoes ringing from the rocks his fall,
The trees with tears reporting of his thrall:
And Venus starting at her loue-mates cry,
Forcing her birds to have her chariot on;
And full of grief at last with piteous eye
Seen where all pale with death he lay alone,
Whose beauty quaild, as wont the Lillies droop
When wastfull winter winds do make them stoop:
Her dainty hand addressed to dawe her dear,
Her rose all lip alied to his pale cheek,
Her sighs, and then her looks and heavy cheer,
Her bitter threats, and then her passions meek;
How on his senseles corpse she lay a crying,
As if the boy were then but new a dying.
He that has vewd Angelica the fair
Bestraught with fancy nere the Caspian springs:
Renting the tresses of her golden hair,
How on her harp with pitious notes she sings
Of Rolands ruth, of Medors false depart,
Sighing each rest from center of her heart.
How now she writes upon a beechen bow
Her Medors name, and bedlam like again
Calls all the heaven to witness of his vow,
And straight again begins a mournful strain,
And how in thought of her true faith forsooken
He fled her bowres, and how his league was broken.
Aye me who marks her harp hang up again
Upon the willowes watered with her tears,
And how she rues to read her Rolands pain,
When but the shadow of his name appears;
Would make more plainings from his eyes to flee
Than tears distill from amber weeping tree.
He that has known the passionate mishappes
That nere Olimpus fair Lucina felt
When as her Latium love her fancy trappes,
How with suspect her inward soul does melt:
Or marked the Morn her Cephalus complaining,
May then recount the course of all our paining.
But tender Nymphs to you belongs no teene;
Then favor me in flying from this bower
Whereas but care and thought of crosses been,
Leave me that loose my self through fancies power,
Through fancies power which had I leave to loose it,
No fancy then should fee me for to choose it.
When you are fled the Heaven shall lowre for sorrow,
The day orecast shall be bedtime with sable,
The air from Sea such streaming showers shall borrow
As earth to bear the brunt shall not be able,
And ships shall safely sail whereas beforne
The ploughman watched the reaping of his corn.
Go you in peace to Neptunes watrie sound,
No more may Glaucus play him with so pretty;
But shun resort where solace nill be found,
And plain my Scillaes pride and want of pity:
Alas sweet Nimphs my Godhead's all in vain,
For why this breast includes immortal pain.
Scilla has eyes, but too sweet eyes has Scilla;
Scilla has hands, fair hands but coy in touching;
Scilla in wit surpasses grave Sibilla,
Scilla has words, but words well storde with grutching;
Scilla a Saint in look, no Saint in scorning:
Look Saint-like Scilla, least I die with mourning.
Alas why talk I? Sea-god cease to mourn her,
For in her nay my joys are ever ceasing:
Cease life or love, then shall I never blame her;
But neither love nor life may find decreasing.
A mortal wound is my immortal being,
Which passes thought, or eyes advised seeing.
Herewith his faltring tongue by sighs oppressed
Forsook his office, and his blood resorted
To feed the heart that wholly was distressed,
Whilst pale (like Pallas flower) my knee supported
His feeble head and arm, so full of anguish,
That they which saw his sorrows began to languish.
Themis the coyest of this beauteous train
On hilly tops the wondrous Moly found,
Which dipped in balmie deaw she began to strain,
And brought her present to recure his wound:
Clore she gathered Amaranthus flower,
And Nais Ajax blossom in that stowre.
Some chafe his temples with their lovely hands,
Some sprinkle water on his pale wan cheeks,
Some weep, some wake, some curse affections bands;
To see so young, so fair, become so weak:
But not their pitious herbs, or springs have working,
To ease that heart where wanton love is lurking.
Naithles though loath to show his holy kindness
On every one he spent a look for favor,
And prayed their pardon vouching Cupids blindness,
(Oh fancies fond that naught but sorrows savor);
To see a lovely God leave Sea Nymphs so:
Who cannot doom upon his deadly woe?
Themis that knew, that waters long restrained
Break forth with greater billows than the brooks
That swetely float through meades with flowers distained,
With cheerful lays did raise his heavy looks;
And bad him speak and tell what him agreeu'd:
For griefs disclosed (said she) are soon releeu'd.
And as she wished so all the rest did woe him;
By whose incessant suites at last invited,
He thus discovered that which did undo him,
And orderly his hideous harms recited,
When first which fingers wagge he began to still them,
And thus with drierie terms of love did fill them.
Ah Nymphs (quoth he) had I by reason learnt
That secret art which birds have gaind by sense,
By due foresight misfortune to prevent;
Or could my wit control mine eyes offense:
You then should smile and I should tell such stories,
As woods, and waves should triumph in our glories.
But Nereus daughters, Sea-borne Saints attend,
Lake breeding Geese when from the Eastern clime
They list unto the western waters wend
To choose their place of rest by course of time,
Approaching Taurus haughty topped hill
They charm their cackle by this wondrous skill.
The climing mountain neighboring air welnie,
Has harbored in his rocks and desert haunts
Whole airies of Eagles pressed to fly
That gazing on the Son their birth right vaunts,
Which birds of Jove with deadly fewde pursue
The wandering Geese, when so they press in vewe.
These fearful flitting troops by nature tought,
Passing these dangerous places of pursuit:
When all the desert vales they through have sought,
With pibbles stop their beakes to make them mute,
And by this means their dangerous deaths prevent
And gain their wished waters of frequent.
But I fond God (I God complain thy folly)
Let birds by sense exceed my reason far:
Whilom than I who was more strong and iollie
Who more contemnd affections wanton war?
Who less than I loved lustful Cupids arrows?
Who now with curse and plagues poor Glaucus harrowes.
How have I leapt to hear the Tritons play
A harsh retreat unto the swelling floods?
How have I kept the Dolphins at a bay,
When as I meant to charm their wanton moods?
How have the angry winds grown calm for love,
When as these fingers did my harp strings move?
Was any Nymph, you Nymphs was ever any
That tangled not her fingers in my tresse?
Some well I wot and of that some full many
Wished or my fair, or their desire were less
Even Ariadne gazing from the sky
Became enamorde of poor Glaucus eye.
Amidst this pride of youth and beauties treasure
It was my chance, you floods can tell my chancing,
Fleeting along Sicillian bounds for pleasure,
To spy a Nymph of such a radiant glancing,
As when I looked, a beam of subtle firing
From eye to heart incenst a deep desiring.
Ah had the veil of reason clad mine eye,
This foe of freedom had not burnt my heart:
But birds are blessed, and most accursed am I
Who must report her glories to my smart,
The Nymph I saw and lou'de her, all to cruel
Scilla, fair Scilla, my fond fancies iuell.
Her hair not trust, but scatterd on her brow,
Surpassing Hiblas honnie for the view,
Or softened golden wires; I know not how
Love with a radiant beauty did pursue
My too judicial eyes, in darting fire
That kindled straight in me my fond desire.
Within these snares first was my heart intrapped,
Till through those golden shrowdes mine eyes did see
An yuorie shadowed front, wherein was wrapped
Those pretty bowres where Graces couched be:
Next which her cheeks appeerd like crimson silk,
Or ruddie rose vespred on whitest milk.
Twixt which the nose in lovely tenor bends,
(Too traitrous pretty for a Lovers view:)
Next which her lips like violets commends
By true proportion that which does ensue;
Which when they smile, present unto the eyes
The Oceans pride and yuorie paradise.
Her pollisht neck of milk white snowes does shine,
As when the Moon in Winter night beholdes them:
Her breast of alablaster clear and fine,
Whereon two rising apples fair unfolds them
Like Cinthias face when in her full she shines,
And blushing to her Loue-mates bower declineth
From whence in length her arms do sweetly spread
Like two rare branchie saples in the Spring,
Yielding five lovely sprigs from every head,
Proportioned alike in every thing;
Which featly sprout in length like springborne friends,
Whose pretty tops with five sweet roses ends.
But why alas should I that Marble hide
That does adorn the one and other flank,
From whence a mount of quickened snow does glide;
Or else the vale that bounds this milkwhite bank,
Where Venus and her sisters hide the fount,
Whose lovely Nectar does all sweetes surmount.
Confounded with descriptions, I must leave them;
Lovers must think, and Poets must report them:
For silly wits may never well conceive them,
Unless a special grace from heaven consort them.
Aies me, these faires attending Scilla won me:
But now (sweet Nymphs) atte^d what has undone me.
The lovely breast where all this beauty rested,
Shrouded within a world of deep disdain:
For where I thought my fancy should be feasted
With kind affect, alas (unto my pain)
When first I wood the wanton straight was flying,
And gave repulse before we talked of trying.
How often have I (too often have I done so)
In silent night when every eye was sleeping,
Drawn near her cave, in hope her love were won so,
Forcing the neighboring waters through my weeping
To wake the winds, who did afflict her dwelling
Whilst I with tears my passion was a telling.
When midst the Caspian seas the wanton played,
I drew whole wreaths of corrall from the rocks:
And in her lap my heavenly presents laid:
But she unkind rewarded me with mockes,
Such are the fruits that spring from Ladies coying,
Who smile at tears, and are intrapt with toying.
Tongue might grow weary to report my wooings,
And heart might burst to think of her denial:
May none be blamde but heaven for all these doings,
That yield no helps in midst of all my trial.
Heart, tongue, thought, pen nil serve me to repent me,
Disdain her self should strive for to lament me.
Wretched Love let me die, end my love by my death;
Dead alas still I live, fly my life, fade my love.
Out alas love abides, still I joy vital breath:
Death in love, love is death, woe is me that do prove.
Pain and woe, care and grief every day about me houers:
The^ but death what can quel al ye plages of haples lovers?
Aies me my moanings are like water drops
That need an age to pearce her marble heart,
I sowed true zeal, yet fruiteles were my crops:
I plighted faith, yet falsehoode wrought my smart:
I praisd her looks, her looks despised Glaucus,
Was ever amorous Sea-god scorned thus?
A hundereth swelling tides my mother spent
Upon these locks, and all her Nymphs were pressed,
To pleit them fair when to her bower I went:
He that has seen the wandering Phoebus crest,
Touched with the Crystal of Eurotas spring,
The pride of these my bushie locks might sing.
But short discourse beseemes my bad success,
Each office of a lover I performed:
So fervently my passions did her press,
So sweet my lays, my speech so well reformed,
That (cruel) when she saw naught would begile me
With angry looks the Nymph did thus exile me.
Pack hence thou fondling to the western Seas,
Within some calmy river shroud thy head:
For never shall my fair thy love appease,
Since fancy from this bosom late is fled:
And if thou love me show it in departing:
For why thy presence does procure my smarting.
This said with angry looks, away she hasted
As fast as fly the floods before the winds:
When I poor soul with wretched sorrows wasted,
Exclaimde on love, which wit and reason blinds:
And banished from her bower with woeful poasting
I bent my self to seek a foreign coasting.
At last in wandering through the greater Seas
It was my chance to pass the noted streights:
And wearied sore in seeking after ease,
Amidst the creekes, and watrie cool receipts,
I spied from far by help of sonnie beams
A fruitful I Will begirt with Ocean streams.
Westward I fleeted, and with heedfull eye
Beheld the chalkie cliffes that tempt the air,
Till at the last it was my chance to spy
A pleasant entrance to the floods repair;
Through which I pressed, and wondering there beheld
On either side a sweet and fruitful field.
Isis (the Lady of that lovely stream)
Made holiday in view of my resort;
And all the Nymphs of that her watrie realm
Began trip for joy, to make me mickle sport:
But I poor soul with no such joys contented,
Forsook their bowers, and secretly lamented.
All solitary rome I here about,
Now on the shore, now in the stream I weep,
Fire burns within, and ghastly fear without,
No rest, no ease, no hope of any sleep:
Poor banished God, here have I still remained,
Since time my Scilla has my suits disdained.
And here consort I now with hapless men,
Yielding them comfort, (though my wound be curelesse)
Songs of remorse I warble now and then,
Wherein I curse fond Love and Fortune durelesse,
Wan hope my weal, my trust but bad adventure,
Circumference is care, my heart the center.
Whilst thus he spoke, fierce Ate charmde his tongue,
His senses faild, his arms were folded straight,
And now he sighs, and then his heart is stung;
Again he speaks against fancies fond deceit,
And tears his tresses with his fingers fair,
And rents his roabs, half mad with deep despair.
The piteous Nymphs that viewd his heavy plight,
And heard the sequel of his bad success,
Did loose the springs of their remorsefull sight,
And wept so sore to see his scant redress:
That of their tears there grew a pretty brook,
Whose Crystal cleares the clouds of penciue look.
Alas woes me, how often have I bewept
So fair, so young, so lovely, and so kind,
And whilst the God upon my bosom slept,
Beheld the scarres of his afflicted mind,
Imprinted in his yuorie brow by care,
That fruitless fancy left unto his share.
My wandering lines, bewitch not so my senses:
But gentle Muse direct their course aright,
Delays in tragic tales procure offenses:
Yield me such feeling words, that whilst I wright
My working lines may fill mine eyes with languish,
And they to note my mones may melt with anguish.
The woeful Glaucus thus with woes attainted,
The penciue Nymphs agreeud to see his plight,
The floods and fields with his laments acquainted,
My self amazd to see this heavy sight;
On sudden Thetis with her train approached,
And gravely thus her amorous son reproched.
My son (said she) immortal have I made thee,
Amidst my watrie realms who may compare
Or match thy might? Why then should care invade thee,
That art so young, so lovely, fresh and fair.
Alas fond God, it merits great reproving
In States of worth, to doat on foolish loving.
Come wend with me, and midst thy Fathers bower
Let us disport and frolic for a while
In spite of Love: although he powte and lowre,
Good exercise will idle lusts beguile:
Let wanton Scilla coy her where she will,
Live thou my son by reasons level still.
Thus said the Goddess: and although her words
Gave signs of counsel, pomp and majesty:
Yet nathelesse her piteous eye affoords
Some pretty witness to the standers by,
That in her thoughts (for all her outward show)
She mournd to see her Son amated so.
But (welladay) her words have little force,
The haples lover worn with working woe,
Upon the ground lay pale as any corse,
And were not tears which from his eyes did flow,
And sighs that witness he enjoyed his breath,
They might have thought him Citizen of death.
Which spectacle of care made Thetis bow,
And call on Glaucus, and command her Son
To yield her right: and her advice allow,
But (woe) the man whom fancy had undone
Nill mark her rules: nor words, nor weeping tears
Can fasten counsel in the lovers ears.
The Queen of Sea, with all her Nymphs assured
That no persuasion might relieve his care:
Kneeling adowne, their faltring tongues enured
To tempt fair Venus by their vowed prayer:
The course whereof as I could bear in mind
With sorrowing sobbes they uttered in this kind.
Borne of the Sea, thou Paphian Queen of love,
Mistress of sweet conspiring harmony:
Lady of Cipris, for whose sweet behoue
The Seepeheards praise the youth of Thessallie:
Daughter of Jove and Sister to the Son,
Assist poor Glaucus late by love undone.
So may thou baine thee in The Arcadian brooks,
And play with Vulcans rival when thou list,
And calm his jealous anger by thy looks,
And knit thy temples with a roseat twist
If thou thy self and thine almighty Son,
Assist poor Glaucus late by love undone.
May earth still praise thee for her kind increase:
And beasts adore thee for their fruitful wombes,
And fowls with noates thy praises never cease,
And Bees admire thee for their honnie combs:
So thou thy self and thine almighty Son,
Assist poor Glaucus late by love undone.
No sooner from her reverent lips were past
Those latter lines, but mounting in the East,
Fair Venus in her iuorie coatch did have,
And toward those penciue dames, her course addressed;
Her doves so plied their wauing wings with flight,
That straight the sacred Goddess came in sight.
Upon her head she bare that gorgeous Crown,
Wherein the poor Amyntas is a star;
Her lovely locks, her bosom hang adowne
(Those netts that first ensnared the God of war:)
Delicious lovely shine her pretty eyes,
And one her cheeks carnatio^n clouds arise,
The stately roab she ware upon her back
Was lilly white, wherein with cullored silk;
Her Nymphs had blazed the young Adonis wrack,
And Laedas rape by Swan as white as milk,
And on her lap her lovely Son was plaste,
Whose beauty all his mothers pomp defaste.
A wreath of roses hemmed his Temples in,
His tresse was curlde and clear as beaten gold;
Haught were his looks, and lovely was his skin,
Each part as pure as Heavens eternal mold,
And on his eyes a milk white wreath was spread,
Which longst his back, with pretty pleits did shed.
Two dainty wings of party coulored plumes
Adorn his shoulders dallying with the wind;
His left hand weelds a Toreh, that ever fumes:
And in his right, his bow that fancies bind,
And on his back his Quiver hangs well stored
With sundry shaftes, that sundry hearts have gored.
The Deities ariu'd in place desired;
Fair Venus her to Thetis first bespake,
Princess of Sea (quoth she) as you required
From Ceston which my Son, my course I take:
Frollick fair Goddess, Nimphs forsake your plaining,
My Son has power and favor yet remaining.
With that the reverend powers each other kissed,
And Cupid smiled upon the Nymphs for pleasure:
So naught but Glaucus solace there was missed,
Which to effect the Nymphs withouten measure
Entreat the God, who at the last drew nie
The place, where Glaucus full of care did lie,
And from his bow a furious dart he sent
Into that wound which he had made before:
That like Achilles sword became the teint
To cure the wound that it had carved before:
And sodeinly the Sea-god started up:
Reuiude, relieud, and free from Fancies cup.
No more of love, no more of hate he spoke,
No more he forced the sighs from out his breast:
His sudden joy his pleasing smiles provoke,
And all aloft he shakes his bushie creast,
Greeting the Gods and Goddesses beside,
And every Nymph upon that happy tide.
Cupid and he together hand in hand
Approach the place of this renowned train:
Ladies (said he) releast from amorous band,
Receive my prisoner to your grace again.
Glaucus gave thanks, when Thetis glad with bliss
Embrast his neck, and his kind cheeks did kiss.
To see the Nymphs in flocks about him play,
How Nais kempt his head, and washed his brows:
How Thetis checked him with his welladay,
How Clore told him of his amorous vows,
How Venus praisd him for his faithful love,
Within my heart a sodein joy did move.
Whilst in this glee this holy troop delight,
Along the stream a far fair Scilla floated,
And coilie vaunst her creast in open sight:
Whose beauties all the tides with wonder noated,
Fore whom Palemon and the Tritons danced
Whilst she her limbs upon the cide advanced.
Whose swift approach made all the Godheads wonder:
Glaucus began smile to see his lovely foe,
Rage almost rent poor Thetis heart asonder:
Was never happy troop confused so
As were these deities and dainty dames,
When they beheld the cause of Glaucus blames.
Venus commends the carriage of her eye,
Nais vpbraides the dimple in her chinne,
Cupid desires to touch the wantons thie,
Clore she swears that every eye does sin
That likes a Nymph that so contemns love,
As no attempts her lawles heart may move.
Thetis impatient of her wrong sustained,
With envious tears her roseat cheeks afflicted;
And thus of Scillas former pride complained;
Cupid (said she) see her that has inflicted
The deadly wound that harmde my lovely son,
From whom the offspring of my care begone.
Oh if there dwell within thy breast my boy
Or grace, or pity, or remorse (said she)
Now bend thy bow, abate you wantons joy,
And let these Nymphs thy rightful justice see.
The God soon won, began shoot, and cleft her heart
With such a shaft as causd her endless smart.
The tender Nymph attainted unawares,
Fares like the Libian Lioness that flies
The Hunters Lance that wounds her in his snares;
Now gins she love, and straight on Glaucus cries;
Whilst on the shore the goddesses rejoice,
And all the Nymphs afflict the air with noise.
To shore she flitts, and swift as Afric wind
Her footing glides upon the yielding grass,
And wounded by affect recure to find
She suddenly with sighs approcht the place
Where Glaucus sat, and weary with her harms
Began claspe the Sea-god in her amorous arms.
Glaucus my love (quoth she) look on thy lover,
Smile gentle Glaucus on the Nymph that likes thee;
But stark as stone sat he, and list not prove her:
(Ah silly Nymph the selfsame God that strikes thee
With fancies darte, and has thy freedom slain)
Wounds Glaucus with the arrowe of disdain.
Oh kiss no more kind Nymph he likes no kindness,
Love sleeps in him, to flame within thy breast,
Cleared are his eyes, where thine are clad with blindness;
Freed be his thoughts, where thine must taste vurest:
Yet nill she leave, for never love will leave her,
But fruiteles hopes and fatal happes deceive her.
Lord how her lips do dwell upon his cheeks;
And how she looks for babies in his eyes:
And how she sighs, and swears she loves and leekes,
And how she vows, and he her vows enuies:
Trust me the envious Nimphs in looking on,
Were forced with tears for to assist her moan.
How often with blushes would she plead for grace,
How often with whisperings would she tempt his ears:
How often with Crystal did she wet his face:
How often she wipte them with her Amber hears:
So often me thought, I often in heart desired
To see the end whereto disdain aspired.
Palemon with the Tritons roar for grief,
To see the Mistress of their joys amated:
But Glaucus scorns the Nymph, that waits relief:
And more she loves the more the Sea-god hated,
Such change, such chance, such suits, such storms believe me
Poor silly wretch did heartily agreeue me.
As when the fatal bird of Augurie
Seeing a stormy dismal cloud arise
Within the South, foretells with piteous cry
The weeping tempest, that on sudden hies:
So she poor soul, in view of his disdain
Began to descant on her future pain.
And fixing eye upon the fatal ground,
Whole hoau^s of floods drew deaw from out her eyes;
And when through inward grief the less did sound,
The softened grass like billows did arise
To woe her breasts, and wed her limbs so dainty.
Whom wretched love had made so weak and faintie,
(Ayes me), me thinks I see her Thetis fingers
Renting her locks as she were woe begone her;
And now her lips upon his lipping lingers:
Oh lingering pain where love nill list to moan her?
Rue me that writes, for why her ruth deserves it:
Hope needs must fail, where sorrow scarce preserues it.
To make long tale were tedious to the woeful,
Woeful that read what woeful she approved:
In brief her heart with deep despair was so full,
As since she might not win her sweet beloved.
With hideous cries like wind borne back she fled
Unto the Sea, and toward Sicillia sped.
Sweet Zephirus upon that fatal bower
In haples tide midst watrie world was walking;
Whose milder sighs, alas, had little power
To whisper peace amongst the Godheads talking:
Who all in one conclude for to pursue,
The haples Nymph, to see what would ensue.
Venus her self and her fair Son began hie
Within their iuorie Coath drawn forth by doves
After this haples Nymph, their power to try:
The Nymphs in hope to see their vowed loves,
Began cut the watrie boasom of the tide,
As in Cayster Phoebus birds do glide.
Thetis in pomp upon a Tritons back
Did poast her straight attended by her train;
But Glaucus free from love by lovers wrack,
Seeing me penciue where I did remain,
Upon a Dolphin horst me (as he was)
Thus on the Ocean hand in hand we pass.
Our talk midway was naught but still of wonder,
Of change, of chance, of sorrow, and her ending;
I wept for want: he said, time bringes men under,
And secret want can find but small befrending.
And as he said, in that before I tried it,
I blamde my wit forewarnd, yet never spied it.
What need I talk the order of my way,
Discourse was steeresman while my bark did sail,
My ship conceit, and fancy was my bay:
If these fail me, then faint my Muse and fail,
Have brought us where the haples Nymph soiourned,
Beating the weeping waves that for her mourned.
He that has seen the Northren blastes dispoile
The pomp of Prime, and with a whistling breath
Blast and dispearse the beauties of the soil;
May think upon her pains more worse than death.
Alas poor Less the Echoes in the rocks
Of Sicilie, her piteous plaining mockes.
Echo her self when Scilla cried out O love!
With piteous voice from out her hollow den
Returned these words, these words of sorrow, ( no love)
No love (quoth she) then fie on traitorous men,
Then fie on hope: then fie on hope (quoth Echo)
To every word the Nymph did answer so.
For every sigh, the Rocks returns a sigh;
For every tear, their fountains yields a drop;
Till we at last the place approached nigh,
And heard the Nymph that fed on sorrows sop
Make woods, and waves, and rocks, and hills admire
The wondrous force of her untamed desire.
Glaucus (quoth she) is fair: whilst Echo sings
Glaucus is fair: but yet he hates Scilla
The wretch reports: and then her arms she wrings
Whilst Echo tells her this, he hates Scilla,
No hope (quoth she): no hope (quoth Echo) then.
Then fie on men: when she said, fie on men.
Fury and Rage, Wan-hope, Despair, and Woe
From Ditis den by Ate sent, drew nie:
Fury was red, with rage his eyes did gloe,
Whole flakes of fire from forth his mouth did fly,
His hands and arms ibath'd in blood of those
Whom fortune, sin, or fate made Countries foes.
Rage, wan and pale upon a Tiger sat,
Knawing upon the bones of mangled men;
Naught can he view, but he repinde thereat:
His locks were Snakes bred forth in Stigian den,
Next whom, Despair that deep disdained elf
Delightlesse liude, still stabbing of her self.
Woe all in black, within her hands did bear
The fatal torches of a Funeral,
Her Cheeks were wet, dispearsed was her hear,
Her voice was shrill (yet loathsome therewith all):
Wan-hope (poor soul) on broken Ancker sitts,
Wringing his arms as robbed of his wits.
These five at once the sorrowing Nymph assail,
And captive lead her bound into the rocks,
Where howling still she strives for to prevail,
With no avail yet strives she: for her locks
Are changed with wonder into hideous sands,
And hard as flint become her snow-white hands.
The waters howl with fatal tunes about her,
The air does scoule when as she turns within them,
The winds and waves with puffes and billows skout her;
Waves storm, air scoules, both wind and waves begin them
To make the place this mournful Nymph does weep in,
A haples haunt whereas no Nymph may keep in.
The Seaman wandering by that famous Isle,
Shuns all with fear dispairing Scillaes bower;
Nymphs, Sea-gods, Sirens when they list to smile
Forsake the haunt of Scilla in that stowre:
Ah Nymphs thought I, if every coy one felt
The like misshappes, their slintie hearts would melt.
Thetis reioyst to see her foe deprest,
Glaucus was glad, since Scilla was enthrald;
The Nimphs began smile, to boast their Glaucus rest:
Venus and Cupid in their throanes enstald,
At Thetis beck to Neptunes bower repair,
Whereas they feast amidst his palace fair.
Of pure immortal Nectar is their drink,
And sweet Ambrosia dainties do repast them,
The Tritons sing, Palemon smiles to think
Upon the chance, and all the Nimphs do have them
To trick up mossie garlands where they won,
For lovely Venus and her conquering Son.
From forth the fountains of his mothers store,
Glaucus let fly a dainty Crystal baine
That washed the Nimphs with labor tired before:
Cupid he trips among this lovely train,
Alonely I apart did write this story
With many a sigh and heart full sad and sorry.
Glaucus when all the Goddesses took rest,
Mounted upon a Dolphin full of glee:
Conueide me friendly from this honored feast,
And by the way, such Sonnets song to me,
That all the Dolphins neighboring of his glide
Daunst with delight, his reverend course beside.
At last he left me, where at first he found me,
Willing me let the world and ladies know
Of Scillas pride, and then by oath he bound me
To write no more, of that whence shame does grow:
Or tie my pen to Pennie-knaues delight,
But live with fame, and so for fame to wright.
Lenuoy.
LAdies he left me, trust me I missay not,
But so he left me as he wild me tell you:
That Nimphs must yield, when faithful lovers straie not.
Least through contempt, almighty love compel you
With Scilla in the rocks to make your biding
A cursed plague, for women's proud backsliding.
FINIS.
Glaucus complaint written by the said Gent.
THe Billows that by winds assisting breath
Does beat upon the rocks at last do pierce them:
Ah then (thou gentle offspring of my death)
Why fail my plaints when penciue I rehearse them
To wound thine ears? when as my words exceed them,
And that my sighs in stead of winds do lead them.
Along the floods I wander all forlorn,
Nor may the Sea-nimphes smiles enforce me play:
But if I think, I think upon thy scorn,
And if I wish, I wish my dismal day,
Oh fruits of love, oh powrefull course of pain*
That one should like the thing that has him slain.
Look in my mothers Crystal face, fair maid,
There read the story of my bitter state;
My tears her silver floatings have alaid,
Her troubled looks foreshowe my wretched fate:
If not for me, yet mourn her bitter weeping,
And pity him whose heart is in thy keeping.
Take pity Scilla, pity thou thy lover;
For thou art fair, and beauty should have pity,
Ahlas she flies, persuasions cannot move her,
She is too wanton, or too foolish witty:
Along the floates the scaly troops increase,
Yet nill she love to maintain natures peace.
Oh stepdame Nature have thou shut these faires
Within the rampeir of so deep disdain,
To kill a God with sorrows and dispaires:
Would God thy power (to lessen all my pain)
Were dead in her; or fancies quenchles fire
Might from my breast with ceaseles course retire.
But all in vain (so vain is loves pursuit)
Try I her ears, and tempt her hardened heart:
Cease wretched tongue, twere better still be mute,
Than tell a tale of grief and endless smart
To her that grounds her glories on disdain,
And takes a pride to view my bitter pain.
(Fond that I am) all these are faint supposes:
Imperious Love (to show his endless power)
My tender and immortal heart encloses
Within the center of her lovely lowre:
That all may see, Loves prison is her eye,
And Gods must stoop unto his deity.
Yet (Love) allot prescriptions unto woe;
Else will the sour exceed the sweet by far:
Or level pity from thy lawles bow,
That sorrow in excess, may cause a war
That may consume, if not confound my life;
And I may seem to die amidst the strife.
The deaf nill hear: both she and Love together
Have made a match to aggreuate my grief:
I see my hell, there rests no hope in either:
From proud contempt there springs no relief,
What rests there then but since I may not gain her,
In piteous terms and tears for to complain her.
FINIS.
The Discontented Satyr written by Thomas Lodge Gent.
SUch time as from her Mothers tender lap
The night arose, guarded with gentle winds:
And with her precious dew refresht the sap
Of bloome and bark (whilst that her mantle blinds
The veil of heaven) and every bird was still
Save Philomele, that did bemoane her ill.
When in the West Orion lift aloft
His starrie crest, and smiled upon the Twins;
And Cynthia seemly bright (whose eye full often
Had watched her love) with radient light begins
To pierce the veil of silence with her beams,
Sporting with wanton clear on Ocean streams.
When little winds in beating of their wings,
Did woo the eyes to leave their wonted wake,
And all was hushed save Zephyrus, that sings
With lovely breathings for the Sea-nimphs sake:
My watchful griefs perplexed my mind so sore,
That forth I walked my sorrows to deplore.
The doaly season that resembled well
My drooping heart, gave life to my lament:
Each twinkling lamp that in the heavens did dwell
Began rest his course to hearken mine intent:
Forth went I still devising on my fear
Distinguishing each footestep with a tear.
My working thought deluding of my pace,
At last did bring me to a desert dale,
(By envious mountains robbed of Phoebus face)
Where grows no herb to taste of deaws avail,
In midst thereof, upon a bed of moss
A Satyr did his restles body toss.
Stearne were his looks, afflicting all the feelds
That were in view; his bushie locks undressed
With terror hang, his hauiour horror yields,
And with the sight my sorrows were suppressed;
So, near I drew, when suddenly he roase,
And thus in terms his purpose did disclose.
Blush days eternal lamp to see thy lot,
Since that thy clear with cloudy darkes is scard;
Lowre on fair Cinthia for I like thee not;
For borrowed beauties, merit no regard:
Boast Discontent, naught may depresse thy power,
Since in thy self all grief thou do devour.
Thou art the God whom I alone adore
Whose power includes discords all in one,
Confusions are thy food and fatal store,
Thy name is feared where thou art most unknown;
Thy grace is great, for fortunes laugh and lowre
Assailes them not, that glory in thy power.
The mind through thee divines on endless things,
And forms a Heaven through others fond mislikes;
Time loathes thy haunt, yet lends thee many wings:
Refined wits against thy bulwark strikes;
And when their curious thoughts are ouerpast,
They scorn their books, and like thy bent at last.
For who but thou can yield them any gain?
Deprive the world of perfect Discontent;
All glories end, true honor straight is slain,
And life it self in errors course is spent,
All toil does sort but to a sorry end,
For through mislikes, each learnes for to commend.
What made fierce Phillips son to manage arms,
To veil the pride of Persia by his sword,
But thou my God, that he by others harms
Might raise his seat: and thereby still afford
A cause of discontent to them that lost,
And hate in him that by their power was crossed.
Let envy cease, what Prince can make it known
How dear he loves his best esteemed friends:
For were not some of purpose overthrown,
Who may discern whereto true favor tends:
Thus Princes discontent does honor some,
And others through their hates to credit come.
Without thy help the Soldier shunnes the feeld:
You studeous Arts how fatal haps had you,
If discontents did not some succors yield?
Oh fleeting Fame who could thy grace pursue:
Did not my God send emulations out
To whet the wits and pens of Pallas rout,
How could the Heavens have retrograde aspects
Without thy help? How might the Plannets find
Their oppositions, and their strange effects,
Unless thy power assisted every kind?
The air by thee at first invented voice,
Which once reuerberate, straight yields a noice.
The pencile man that with a careless hand
Has shaddowed Venus, hates his slack regard;
And all amazed does discontented stand,
And mends the same that he before had mard:
Who sees not then that it was Discontent,
That sight to eye, and perfect judgment lent?
The schooleman that with heedlesse flourish writes,
Refines his fault, if thou direct his eye:
And then again with wonder he endites
Such sweet sententious li^es, as never die:
Lost in my self in praising of thy might,
My speech yields up his office to delight.
This said he smiled, and on his restles bed
Reposde and tossed his indisposed lims:
A world of thoughts still hammerd in his head,
Now would he sleep, and straight his couch he trims:
And then he walks, and therewith sits him down:
And faines to sing, yet ends with a frown.
I stood amazed and wondered at his words,
And sought to suck the soul from out his lips,
His rare discourse such wondrous joy affords:
But unawares, like lightfoote Fawn he trips
Along the lawnes: and I with watch forespent,
Drew home and vowde to honor Discontent.
Thomas Lodge.

FINIS.
Sundry sweet Sonnets written by the said Gent.
In praise of the Country life.
MOst happy blessed the man that midst his country bowers
Without suspect of hate, or dread of envious tongue
May dwell among his own: not dreading fortunes lowres,
Far from those public plagues that mighty men has stoong:
Whose liberty and peace is never sold for gain,
Whose words do never sooth a wanton princes vain.
Incertaine hopes, and vows, do never harm his thought,
And vain desires do shun the place of his repose;
He weeps no years misspent, nor want of that he sought,
Nor reapes his gain by words, nor builds upon suppose:
The storms of troubled Sea do never force his fears,
Nor Trumpets sound does chang his sleeps, or charm his ears,
Ambitions never build within his constant mind,
A cunning coy deceit his soul does not disguise,
His firm and constant faith corruptions never blind,
He never waits his weal from princes wondering eyes:
But living well content with every kind of thing,
He is his proper court, his favor, and his King.
His will (restraind by wit) is never forced awrie,
Vain hopes, and fatal fears (the courtiers common foes)
(Afraid by his foresight) do shun his piercing eye:
And naught but true delight acquaints him where he goes,
No high attempts to win; but humble thoughts and deeds,
The very fruits and flowers that spring from virtues seeds.
(O deities divine) your Godheads I adore
That haunt the hills, the feelds, the forests and the springs,
That make my quiet thoughts contented with my store,
And fix my hopes on heaven, and not on earthly things;
That drive me from desires, (in view of courtly strife,)
And draw me to commend the fields and country life.
My thoughts are now enclosde within my proper land,
And if my body sleep my mind does take his rest,
My simple zeal and love my dangers do withstand,
The mornings pleasant air inuites me from my nest,
If wether wax too warm I seek the silent shade,
If frosts afflict, I strive for warmth by hunters trade.
Although my biding home be not imbost with gold,
And that with cunning skill my chambers are not dressed,
(Whereas the curious eye my sundry sights behold)
Yet feeds my quiet looks on thousand flowers at least,
The treasures of the plain, the beauties of the spring,
Made rich with Roses sweet and every pleasant thing.
Amidst the palace brave puffed up with wanton shows
Ambicions dwell, and there false favors find disguise,
There lodge consuming cares that hatch our common woes:
Amidst our painted feelds the pleasant Fayrie lies,
And all those powers divine that with untrussed tresses,
Contentment, happy love, and perfect sport professes.
So living, naught remains my solace to betray;
I hear the pleasant birds record their sacred strains,
When at the mornings rise they bless the springing day:
The murmuring fountains noise from out the marble veins,
Are pleasing to mine ears: whilst with a gentill fall
They fleet from hie, and serve to wet the meads withal.
What sport may equal this, to see two pretty doves
When neb to neb they join, in fluttering of their wings,
And in their roundelaies with kisses seal their loves?
Then wondering at the gifts which happy nature brings;
What sport is it to sleep and slumber by a well,
Whose fleeting falls maks show, some lovely tale to tell?
Oh what content to see amidst the darkesome night
(When as the setting son has left the moon in place)
The Nymphs amidst the vales and groves to take delight,
To dance, to leap, to skip, with sweet and pleasant grace,
To give green gowns in sport, and in their tripping make
By force of footing all the springing grass to quake.
Their daunces brought to end, I lift my looks one hie
To see the horned moon, and deskant on her hew
Clear silver shining bright, and eftsoons then think I
Upon that hapie chance the Latmian shepherd knew:
Then do I wish myself as fair a friend as she,
But watching I desire she might disport with me.
Thus midst the silent night my self I do content:
Then when as Phoebus beams our Hemisphere enflames,
A thousand change of sports for pleasure I invent,
And feast my quiet thoughts with sundry pleasant games,
Now angle I awhile, then seek I for the chase,
And straight my limerods catch the Sparrows on the place.
I like, and make some love: but yet in such a sort
That naught but true delight my certain suit pursues;
My liberty remains, and yet I reap the sport,
Nor can the snares of love my heedefull thoughts abuse:
But when I would forgo, I have the power to fly,
And stand aloof and laugh, while others starve and die.
My sweet and tender flocks (my faithful feeld compeers)
You forests, hoults, and groves, you meads and mountains hie,
Be you the witnesses of my contented years:
And you O sacred powers vouchsafe my humble cry,
And during all my days, do not these joys estrange;
But let them still remain, and grant no other change.
Finis.
In commendation of a solitary life.
NOt yet forsaken (gentle Muse) draw near,
And help to weary out these worldly thoughts;
Go fit thy method to my moodie cheer,
For why fond pleasure now prevails noughts:
Since where content and wealthy state declines,
The heart does droope, and doleful be the lines.
For thy (fond man) why rest I not at last?
My wings of hope are clipte by foul disgrace:
The silver down of age now flocketh fast,
Like moss on oak to dwell upon my face:
And what with thought and time, through want and ruth:
I challenge care for joy, and age for youth.
What fruits of former labors do I find?
My studious pen does traffic for a scorn:
My due deserts are but repaid with wind;
And what I earne, is naught but bitter mourn:
In which account I reap but this advise,
To cease to clime, and live contented wise.
But gentle Muse, where boadeth this content?
The Princes Court is fraught with endless woes,
Corruptions flock where honors do frequent,
The Cities swarm with plagues, with suits, with foes:
High climing wits do catch a sodein fall,
With none of these Content list dwell withal.
Ah beauty of the double topped hill,
Thou saddest sister of the sacred nine,
What fruitful pleasance follows now my quill?
What wondrous beauties bless my drooping eine?
Even such as erst the shepherd in the shade
Beheld, when he a Poet once was made.
Me thinks I see the deserts fresh arraid,
New mantled in their liueries of green,
Whose frolic pride makes smiling heaven apaid*
Wherein the Nymphs do weary out their teene,
Washing their iuorie in those murmuring springs,
At whose kind fall, the birds with pleasure sings.
See where the babes of memory are laid
Under the shadow of Apollos tree,
That pleit their garlands fresh, and well apaid,
And breath forth lines of dainty poecie:
Ah world farewell, the sight hereof does tell,
That true content does in the desert dwell.
See where a Cave presents it self to eye,
By Natures hand enforst in marble veins;
Where climing Cedars with their shades deny,
The eye of day to see what there remains:
A couch of moss, a brook of silver clear,
And more, for food a flock of savage dear.
Then here (kind Muse) vouchsafe to dwell with me,
My velvet robe shall be a weed of gray
And least my heart by tongue betrayed be,
For idle talk I will go fast and pray:
No sooner said and thought, but that my heart
His true supposde content began thus impart.
Sweet solitary life thou true repose,
Wherein the wise contemplate heaven aright,
In thee no dread of war or worldly foes,
In thee no pomp seduceth mortal sight,
In thee no wanton ears to win with words,
Nor lurking toys, which City life affoords.
At peep of day when in her crimson pride,
The Morn bespreds with roses all the way
Where Phoebus coach with radiant course must glide,
The Hermit bends his humble knees to pray:
Blessing that God, whose bounty did bestow
Such beauties on the earthly things below.
Whether with solace tripping on the trees
He sees the citizens of Forest sport,
Or midst the withered oak beholds the Bees
Intend their labor with a kind consort:
Down drop his tears, to think how they agree,
Where men alone with hate inflamed be.
Taste he the fruits that spring from Tellus woomb;
Or drink he of the crystal springs that flows:
He thanks his God, and sighs their cursed doomb
That fondly wealth in surfeiting bestows:
And with Saint Hierom says, The Desert is
A paradise of solace, joy, and blis.
Father of light, thou maker of the heaven,
From whom my being well, and being springs:
Bring to effect this my desired steauen,
That I may leave the thought of worldly things:
Then in my troubles will I bless the time,
My Muse vouchsafde me such a luckie rhyme.
T. L.

Finis.
Beauties Lullabie.
Hos ego versiculos feci, tulit alter honores.
GEntlemen, I had thought to have suppressed this Lullabie in silence, amongst
my other papers that lie buried in oblivion: but the impudent arrogancy of
some more then insolent Poets have altered my purpose in that respect, and made
me set my name to my own work, least some other vain glorious Batillus
should prejudice my pains, by subscribing his name to that which is none of
his own.

Non mesuree.

Lullabie Beauty, sweet Beauty lullabie;
To such kind of Infants sing lulla would I.
SWeet, sweet desire that made my pleasant wondering eyes
To gaze on such a blazing star, as dims the state of skies:
Whose feature while my Muse does now devise upon;
Sweet Beauty rest thee still awhile, I shall have done anon.
First lulla to those locks derived from Phoebus rays,
Which fasten light in dimmest looks by virtue of their sprayes:
From whence her golden wiers Diana borrowed then,
When with Arachne at the loombe she strove amidst the fen.
Next lulla to the front where only shrowdes the die,
Which ruddie Morrow borrowed then when Thetis she did spy
To hunt forbidden bed, whereas vermillion hue
Is staind in sight, and every sense approues my censure true.
Next lulla to those stately couerts of her eyes,
In which in Alablaster white dame Nature did devise
A subtle frame of settled wiers, in such confused art:
As those that look but on that work amazed do depart.
Next lulla to those lamps, those twinkling stemmes of state:
Whereof but one, does dim the Sun (both) Sun and Moon do mate,
On which while Jove does pry, the ielous Juno chides.
Thus Gods and men admire at her in whom such beauty bides.
But he that does but mark those rocks of marble white;
From whence do spring those sweet perfumes the senses that delight,
And sees with how great state the ruddie lips they shade,
Will think the workma^ more divine that such a work has made.
Now see those crimson cheeks, the mounts wherein do dwell
The golden fruit Aeneas fet from midst the mouth of hell,
Bedect with driven snow, and pounst with Rubie red;
To which compare the ruddie rose, and it will seem but dead.
Next praise those cherrie lips where rose and lilly meet,
Enclosures of th'Egiptian gems, from whence does Zephir sweet
Breath forth a blast, and yield an noise like to Orpheus lute,
Which moved the craggie rocks to ruth, and stird what so was mute.
Yet in that dimpled chinne bedect with every grace,
Where curious eye may easlie see the beauty of the face.
Admit but this, that Ganimede the cup for Jove did choose:
And if a man might drink with Gods, would I the same might use.
Then blessed be those mounts where Venus sits and sings,
With wanton Cupid in her lap, and from those stately springs
Draws Nectar forth to feed her son: which taste him so beguild,
That only for to suck those teates, be still would be a child.
But look a low (my Muse) and fix thy stately view:
Behold a path like Dedalls maze, wherein with azure clew
A Theseus may the secret cells of beauty there behold,
More stately than the Egiptian tombs, though reared all of gold.
Next which of Alablaster white a mountain there does rise,
A mountain fair of driven snow, wherein incarued lies
A stately tipe of Venus vale: some calls it Cupids couch;
Whereas the God devising lies which part were best to touch.
There spies he earths Elysium, where Nature sits and paints
Th'impressions of the sweetest forms her fancy her acquaints:
In which one lulla I would rock to Beautis grace,
And be a prentise during life to serve her in that place.
Next lulla to those forts whereout does fancy pry,
As one amazed to see the star is fixed before her eye.
A Crinite Comet crisped fair which on those arches stands
Of Marble white enameled, and closde with azure bands.
But he that sees those knees, whose feature is so fair,
As when they bend, all knees do bend below and midst the air;
Whose cords by compass knit, and nerves by Nature set,
Binds Art apprentise for some years the pattern for to get.
Here rests not wonders yet: for why behold a low
Two rising silver colored clouds, which like to those do show,
As compast in fair Phoebus then, when in his midday prime
He sported with Cassandra fair, amidst the summer time.
Now Nature stands amazd her self to look on Beauties feet,
To see those joints combinde in one, and framed of Amber sweet,
So small a pile so great a weight, like Atlas to uphold
The body, as the mighty man to bear the heavens is bold.
But to behold those Gemini, those silver colored arms,
Who^ native blood with blushing streams in azure co^duits warmes,
Inuit the sense like violets, bepurfurated fair
With Floras lillies* lilly white these lovely branches are.
But whilst I gaze a low, and see those palms of peace,
Wherein the map of fortune rests and times discents increase:
From whence the branching fingers spread betipt with iuorie,
The least impression whereof a marble mind might mollify.
Makes me confess pen may not write, heart think, nor tung unfold
The least effect in Beauty, where both iuorie, pearl, and gold,
Where purphure, Ebonie, white, and red, al colors stained be:
And if thou seek for all these sweetes, then seek my sweet to see.
Finis.
Sundry sweet Sonnets written by the same Gent.
1
A Very Phoenix, in her radiant eyes
I leave mine age, and get my life again;
True Hesperus, I watch her fall and rise:
And with my tears extinguish all my pain,
My lips for shadows shield her springing roses,
Mine eyes for watchmen guard her while she sleeps,
My reasons serve to quite her faint supposes:
Her fancy, mine; my faith her fancy keeps;
She flower, I branch; her sweetes my sowres supporteth,
O happy Love, where such delights consorteth.
Finis.
2
I Vow but with some grief henceforth to shun the place,
Where beauty casts her scortching looks to feed me with disgrace.
And since I was so fond to build on such a molde,
As every wave of vain conceit the substance may unfold;
I will repent with tears the errors of my mind,
And leave to tie my thoghts to like of wanton womankind.
Whose wayward wiles I spy how full of sleights they be,
The heart delights in others choice, the hand yet faunes on me,
And feign she would forsake, yet follows if I shun,
And with her tung repents the time that ere the fact was done.
And yet she will be thought as constant as the best;
Yet scorns the man that bears faith and courage in his crest.
Whom if she list to know, his color sable is;
A mournful color meet for those whose eyes have gazed amiss:
His color pale for woe, his courage all forlorn;
His heart confirmed to shun the sex that holds his faith in scorn.
Willing all men to learn, least they be forced to prove,
That women alter with the wind, and have no hold in love.
Finis.
3
THe heavens inclinde to change, are passing clear,
Their showers restraind make billows of mine eyes,
Their winds made calm within my breast appear,
Which dims the air with sighs and heavy cries.
My frozen love has laid the frost adowne,
These snowes restraind serve to congeale my heart,
This pleasant spring my stormy sorrows frown:
Go lying books, cease fools to boast your art,
And mark the cause: my Mistres smiles and lowres
Makes clear the heavens, and clouds my heart with showers.
Finis.
4
I Will become a Hermit now,
and do my penance straight
For all the errors of mine eyes
with foolish rashness filled;
My hermitage shall placed be,
where mellancholies weight,
And none but love alone shall know
the bower I mean to build.
My daily diet shall be care,
made calm by no delight:
My doleful drink my drierie tears,
amidst the darkesome place
The fire that burns my heedles heart
shall stand in stead of light,
And shall consume my weary life
mine errors to deface.
My gown shall be of spreding gray
to clad my limbs withal:
My late repent upon my browe
shall plainly written be.
My tedious grief and great remorse
that does my soul enthrall,
Shall serve to plead my weary pains
and pensive misery.
Of faintfull hope shall be my staff,
and daily when I pray,
My mistress picture placed by love
shall witness what I say.
Finis.
5
IF that I seek the shade, I sodeinlie do see
The God of Love forsake his bow, and sit me by:
If that I think to write, his Muses pliant be:
If that I plain my grief, the wanton boy will cry.
If I lament my cares, he does increase my pain:
If tears my cheeks attaint, his cheeks be moist with moan:
If I disclose the wounds the which my heart has slain,
He takes his Fascia off, and wipes them dry anon.
If that I walk the woods, the woods are his delight:
If I my self torment, he bathes him in my blood:
He will my Soldier be if once I wend to fight:
If seas delight, he steeres my bark amid the flood:
In brief, the cruel God does never from me go,
But makes my lasting love eternal by my woe.
Finis.
6
Weary am I to weary Gods and men,
Weary am I to weep so many tears without some succor:
Weary am I my wretched state to ken,
Weary am I to see my woeful years consume with dolor.
These mounts, these fields, these rocks, these waves, these woods
Resign their echoes to my woeful cries, too much disdained:
These lambs, these kidds, these bullockes, leave their foods,
These flowers, this grass, with mourning parched lies to see me pained.
Naught under Sun that has not tasted change,
My bitter grief alone abides still without departure.
Accursed be Love, that wrought this wonder strange,
Boading my sorrows by my wanton will that causde my smarting.
O quiet life fore past, why have thou left
The woeful shepherd weary of his pain to feed on sorrow?
Oh weeping eyes of wonted joys bereft,
Why leave you him whom lucklesse Love has slain to view the morrow?
My faintfull flock does languish and lament,
To see their master mourning his mischance this jolly season:
My bagpip's broke, my roundelaies are blent,
My rebecke now my solace to advance accounts it geason:
Yet not alone sheep, lambs, kidds weep my woe:
But rocks for ruth, and birds for sorrow plain my woeful wending:
Then cruel Love vouchsafe me to forgo
My wretched life, the cause of mickle pain, and make mine ending.
The rocks their brooks with murmuring noise shall weep,
The birds their songs with warbling notes shall sing: and full of pleasure
My flocks shall feed, although their master sleep,
And to my grave their falling fleeces bring, their native treasure.
Solace each where shall reign when I am dead,
No care, no woe, no sorrow shall prevail: but well contented
Poor I shall sleep, when cursed Love is fled,
That first with fury did the fields assail where I frequented.
Finis.
7
THe earth late choakt with showers
Is now araid in green:
Her bosom springs with flowers,
The air dissolues her teene,
The heavens laugh at her glory:
Yet bide I sad and sorry.
The woods are decked with leaves,
And trees are clothed gaie,
And Flora crowned with sheues
With oaken boughs does play:
Where I am clad in black,
The token of my wrack.
The birds upon the trees
Do sing with pleasant voices,
And chaunt in their degrees
Their loves and luckie choices:
When I, whilst they are singing.
With sighs mine arms am wringing.
The Thrushes seek the shade,
And I my fatal grave:
Their flight to heaven is made,
My walk on earth I have:
They free, I thrall: they jolly,
I sad and penciue wholly.
8
WHen with advice I weigh my years forepast,
And count the course that in my youth I kept:
How my fond eyes on garish beauty plast,
Dimde by desires in vain opinion slept:
For every look and thought with tears I cry,
I loath the faults and follies of mine eye.
By which my heart was burnt with scorching flame,
Growing to head by stealth of idle time,
Whom often my looks with blushing red did blame;
But folly fixed before, it grew to prime:
So for my wanton looks with tears I cry,
I loath the faults and follies of mine eye.
Oh wanton looks, ye foes of sad forecast,
That wept the tears of will, and not repent:
Now see the end how fickle fair is past,
And crimson cheeks with crooked years are spent:
And blame your selves, and help my careful cry,
Who loath the faults and follies of mine eye.
Finis.
9
HAnd, heart, and eye; touched, thought, and did behold
A lock, a joy, a look of great delight,
Looks sweet, joys rare, but locks of beaten gold,
Hearts joy, eyes looks, hands touch so pleased my sight;
That what I would, by eye, hand, heart I try,
And what I am, is but hand, heart, and eye.
Finis.
10
IF hollow eyes, if wan and wearish face,
If scalding sighs my secret suites bewray:
Lo (love) those looks that want their former grace,
And dying thoughts which secret joys betray.
And grant me this that either death may ease,
Or humble suite my mistress wrath appease.
Whose dire disdain more pines my fainting heart,
Than Aetnaes flame that fumes both night and day:
Whose wisdom when it measures by desert,
Dissolues my doubts and drives my woes away:
Whose looks if once they yield me beams of grace,
Discharge the furrows that befret my face.
Twixt hope and hap my ship does bear a sail,
The Seas are sighs, the Ancker slipper joy;
Would Sea and Ancker both, and tacke might fail,
So land of love were gained to foil annoye.
I say no more, the tear that last did fall
On latter line, can show and open all.
Finis.
11
A Satyr sitting by a river side,
Foreworne with care that hardly finds recure:
A straying Nymph in passion did deride
His tears, his care, her smiles her scorns assure:
He wept, she wished, and all their thoughts among,
Fancy beheld and sung this careful song.
Perhaps the furrows in thy wrinckled face
Grown by thy grief, abate thy wonted form:
Perhaps her eye was formde to yield disgrace,
And blemished that which wit may not reform.
Perhaps she will if so thou list to prove,
Perhaps she likes, and yet she dares not love.
But if (perhaps) thy fortune be so fair,
Laugh Satyr then it proves a pretty prize:
And if thou will, so live to shun despair
As looking long thou keep thy proper eyes.
This said she ceast: the Nymph she fled away,
And good persuasion causde the Satyr play.
12
Fair Phoebus flower upon a summer morn,
Began proud with love to show her painted pride,
And gay with glory with a curious scorn,
Disdainde those buds that blossomed her beside.
When Rose and Lillies, Violets and Balm,
(Scarce warmed to work their beauties to a flower)
With envious wrath near to a water calm,
Beheld my Phillis in a happy hour.
Not wak't nor won too much with solemn sleep,
But sweetly slombring they beheld my Saint,
The Rose and Lillies both together creep;
The one her lip, the next her cheek did taint.
And both they spread: the Violet consumed
To gentle air her amber breath fulfilled:
Apollo feeling all the air perfumde,
With gentle beams into her eyes distilled.
His flower amazed, gave Rose and Lillies place,
The Sun his shine within her eyes contains,
The Rose her lips, the Lillies deck her face,
The Violet within her breath remains.
Lenuoy.
THen cease (fond men) henceforth to boast your flowers,
Since Roses, Lillies, Violets are ours:
And Phoebus flower does homage to their powers,
And Phillis eye his glorious beams deuours.
FINIS.

