PHILLIS: Honored with Pastoral Sonnets, Elegies, and amorous delights.
VVhere-vnto is annexed, the tragical complaynt of Elstred.

Iam Phoebus disiungit equos, iam Cinthia iungit. At London, Printed for John
Busbie, and are to be sold at his shop, at the West-doore of Paul's. 1593.

TO THE RIGHT worthy and noble Lady, the Countess of Shrewesbury
I Have adventured (most noble Lady with the wrastlers of Olympia, tho not to
win, yet to work for the Garland; the judgment of my industry relyeth on your
Ladishippe, who have both authority to convict, and knowledge to commend. I
have chosen you Madam among many, to be the Sovereign and she Mecaenas of my
toil, because I am assured, that the great report of your learning and virtue,
(wherewith as yet it has not pleased you to dignifie the world) must even now
be exemplified in me, who dare promise as much in affection, as any other can
perform in perfection. May it please you to look and like of homlie Phillis
in her Country caroling, and to countenance her poor and affectionate
Shepherd, who promises under the only encouragement of so noble a Lady, to
employ all his best deseignes, life, and studies, to your good lyking.

Your Ladyships most humble to command Tho: Lodge.

Induction.
I That obscured have fled the Scene of Fame,
Intitling my conceits to naught but care,
I that have lived a Phoenix in loves flame,
And felt that death I never would declare,
Now mount the Theater of this our age,
To plead my faith and Cupids cursed rage.
Oh you high sp'rited Paragons of wit,
That fly to fame beyond our earthly pitch,
Whose sense is sound, whose words are feat and fit,
Able to make the coyest ear to itch:
Shroud with your mighty wings that mount so well,
These little loves, new crept from out the shell.
And thou the true Octauia of our time,
Under whose worth, beauty was never matched,
The Genius of my Muse and ragged rhyme,
Smile on these little loves but lately hatched,
Who from the wrestling waves have made retreat,
To plead for life before thy judgment seat.
And tho the fore-bred brothers they have had,
(Who in their Swan-like songs Amint^s wept)
For all their sweet-thought sighs had fortune bad,
And twice obscured in Cinthias circle slept:
Yet these ( I hope) under your kind aspect,
(Most worthy Lady) shall escape neglect.
And if these Infants of mine artlesse brain,
(Not by their worth, but by thy worthiness)
A mean good liking of the learned gain,
My Muse enfranchised from forgetfulness:
Shall hatch such breed in honor of thy name,
As modern Poets shall admire the same.
As modern Poets shall admire the same,
I mean not you (you never matched men)
Who brought the Chaos of our tongue in frame,
Through these Herculean labors of your pen:
I mean the mean, I mean no men divine,
But such whose feathers are but waxt like mine.
Go weeping Truce-men in your sighing weeds,
Under a great Mecaenas I have past you:
If so you come where learned Colin feeds
His lovely flock, pack thence and quickly haste you;
You are but mistes before so bright a sun,
Who has the Palm for deep invention wunne.
Kiss Delias hand for her sweet Prophets sake,
Whose not affected but well couched tears:
Have power, have worth, a Marble mind to shake;
Whose fame, no Iron-age or time out wears.
Then lay you down in Phillis lap and sleep,
Until she weeping read, and reading weep.
I that obscurd have fled the scheane of fame,
Intitling my conceits to naught but care:
I that have lived a Phoenix in loves flame,
And felt that death I never would declare:
Now mount the Theater of this our age,
To plead my faith and Cupids cursed rage.
Oh you high spirited paragons of wit,
That fly to fame beyond our earthly pitch:
Whose sense is sound, whose words are feate and fit,
Able to make the coyest ear to itch:
Shroud with your mighty wings that mount so well,
These little loves new crept from out the shell.
And thou the' Ascrean Poet of our time,
Under whose style conceit was never matched:
The Genius of my muse and ragged rhyme,
Smile on these little loves but latlie hatched:
Who from the wrestling waves have made retreat,
To plead for life before thy Judgment seat.
And tho the fore-bred brothers they have had,
(Who in their Swan-like songs Amyntas wept)
For all their sweet-thought sighs had fortune bad,
And twice obscurd in Cinthias circle slept:
Yet these I hope under your kind aspect,
(Thou flower of knighthood) shall escape neglect.
And if these infants of mine artlesse brain,
(Not by their worth but by thy worthynes:)
A mean good liking of the learned gain,
My muse enfranchisd from forgetfulness:
Shall hatch such breed in honor of thy name,
As modern Poets shall admire the same.
As modern Poets shall admire the same,
I mean not you (you never matched men,)
Who brought the Chaos of our tongue in frame,
Through these herculean labors of your pen:
I mean the mean, I mean no men divine,
But such whose feathers are but waxt like mine.
Go weeping truce-men in your sighing weeds,
Under a great Mecenas I have past you:
If so you come where learned Colin feeds,
His lowely flock, pack thence and quickly have you,
You are but mistes before so bright a sun,
Who has the palm for deep invention wunne.
Kiss Delias hand for her sweet Prophets sake,
Whose not affected but well couched tears:
Have power, have worth a marble mind to shake,
Whose fame no yron-age or time out wears:
Then lay you down in Phillis lap and sleep,
Until she weeping read and reading weep.
Phillis. Sonnet I.
Oh pleasing thoughts, apprentises of love,
Forerunners of desire, sweet Methridates
The poison of my sorrows to remove,
With whom my hopes and fearful often debates.
Inritch your selves and me by your self riches,
(Which are the thoughts you spend on heaven bred beauty,)
Rowse you my muse beyond our Poets pitches,
And working wonders yet say all is duty.
Use you no Eglets eyes, nor Phoenix feathers,
To tower the heaven from whence heavens wonder fallies:
For why your son singes sweetly to her wethers:
Making a spring of winter in the valleys.
Show to the world tho poor and scant my skill is,
How sweet thoughts be, that are but thought on Phillis.
Sonnet II.
You sacred Sea-nimphes pleasantly disporting,
Amidst this watrie world, where now I sail:
IF euerloue, or lovers sad reporting,
Had power sweet tears from your fair eyes to hayle:
And you more gentle-hearted then the rest,
Under the Northern Noon-stede sweetly streaming:
Lend those moist riches of your crystal crest,
To quench the flames from my hearts Aetna steaming.
And thou kind Ariton in thy trompet relish,
The ruthful accents of my discontent:
That midst this treauell desolate and hellish,
Some gentle wind e that listens my lament.
May prattle in the north in Phillis ears,
Where Phillis wants Damon consumes in tears.
Sonnet III.
In fancies world an Atlas have I been,
Where yet the Chaos of my ceaseless care:
Is by her eyes unpitied and unseen,
In whom all gifts but pity planted are.
For mercy tho still cries my moane-clad muse,
And every paper that she sendes to beauty:
In tract of sable tears bringes woeful news,
Of my true heartkinde thoughts and loyal duty.
But ah the stringes of her hard heart are strained,
Beyond the harmony of my desires:
And tho the happy heavens themselves have pained,
To tame her heart whose will so far aspires,
Yet she who claims the title of worlds wonder,
Thinks all desartes to bace to bring her under.
Sonnet IIII.
Long has my sufferance labored to enforce,
One pearl of pity from her pretty eyes,
Whilst I with restless rivers of remorse,
Have bathde the banks where my fair Phillis lies.
The moning lines which weeping I have written,
And writing red unto my ruthful sheep,
And reading sent with tears that never fitten,
To my loves Queen, that has my heart in keep:
Have made my Lambkins, lay them down and sigh:
But Phillis sittes, and reads, and calls them trifles:
Oh heavens why clime not happy lines so high,
To rent that ruthlesse heart, that all hearts rifles?
None wrightes with truer faith, or greater love,
Yet out alas I have no power to move.
Sonnet V.
Ah pale and dying infant of the spring,
How rightly now do I resemble thee:
That self same hand that thee from stalk did wringe,
Has rent my breast and robbed my heart from me.
Yet shall thou live, for why thy native vigor,
Shall thrive by woeful dew-droppes of my dollour:
And from the wounds I bear through fancies rigor,
My streaming blood shall yield thee crimson color.
The ravished sighs (that ceaseless take their issue,
From out the furnesse of my heart inflamed:)
To yield you lasting springs shall never miss you,
So by my plaints, and pains, you shall be famed
Let my hearts heat, and cold, thy crimson norish,
And by my sorrows let thy beauty flourish.
Sonnet VI.
It is not death which wretched men call dying,
But that is very death which I endure:
When my coy looking Nymph (her grace envying,)
By fatal frowns my damage does procure.
It is not life which we for life approve,
But that is life when on her woul-soft pappes,
I seal sweet kisses, which do batten love:
And doubling them do treble my good happes.
It Is neither love the son, nor love the mother,
Which lovers praise and pray to; but that love is:
Which she in eye and I in heart do smother,
Then muse not tho I glory in my miss.
Since she who holds my heart, and me in durance,
Has life, death, love and all in her procureance.
Sonnet VII.
How languisheth the Primrose of loves garden?
How trill her tears th'Elixar of my senses:
Ambitious sickness, what does thee so harden,
Oh spare and plague thou me for her offenses.
Ah Roses, loves fair Roses do not languish,
Blush through the milk-white veil that holds you covered:
If heat or cold may mitigate your anguish,
He burn, He frize, but you shall be recovered.
Good God would beauty mark now she is crased,
How but one shower of sickness makes her tender:
Her Judgments then to mark my woes amazed,
To mercy should opinions fort surrender:
And I (oh would, I might, or would she meant it,)
Should herrie love, who now in heart lament it.
Sonnet VIII
No stars her eyes to clear the wandering night,
But shining suns of true diuinitye:
That make the soul conceive her perfect light:
No wanton beauties of humanity
Her pretty brows, but beams that clear the sight
Of him that seeks the true Philosophy:
No Corrall is her lip, no rose her fair,
But even that crimson that adornes the Sun
No Nymph is she, but mistress of the air,
By whom my glories are but new begun,
But when I touch and taste as others do,
I then shall wright and you shall wonder to.
Sonnet IX.
The dewie-Roseate morn had with her hairs,
In sundry sorts the Indian Clime adornd:
And now her eyes apparrailed in tears,
The loss of lovely Memnon long had moornd.
When as she spide the Nymph whom I admire.
Kembinge her locks, of which the yelow gold,
Made blush the beauties of her curled wire,
Which heaven it self with wonder might behold.
Then redd with shame, her reverend locks she rent,
And weeping hid the beauty of her face,
The flower of fancy wrought such discontent:
The sighs which midst the air she breathd a space,
A three days stormy tempest did maintain,
Her shame a fire, her eyes a swelling rain.
Sonnet X.
The rumor runs that here in I sis swim,
Such stately Swannes so confident in dying;
That when they feel them selves near Lethes brimme,
They sing their fatal dirge when death is nighing.
And I like these that, feel my wounds are mortal,
Contented dye for her whom I adore:
And in my joyful himnes do still exhort all,
To die for such a Saint or love no more.
Not that my torments, or her tiranie.
Enforce me to enjoin so hard a task,
But for I know, and yield no reason why,
But will them try that have desire to ask.
As love has wreathes his pretty eyes to feel,
So lovers must keep secret what they feel
Sonnet XI.
My frail and earthly bark, by reasons guide,
(Which holds the helm, whilst will does weilde the sail:)
By my desires (the winds of bad betide,)
Has saild these wordly Seaes with small avail.
Vain obiectes serve, for dreadful Rocks to quail,
My brittle boat from haven of life that flies
To haunt the Sea of mundane miseries:
My soul that draws Impressions from above,
And viewes my course, and sees the winds aspire,
Bids reason watch to escape the shoales of love:
But lawles will enflamd with endless ire
Does steerem poope whilst reason does retire.
The streams increase loves waves my barcke do fill,
Thus are they wrackt that guide their course by will.
Sonnet XII.
Ah trees why fall your leaves so fast?
Ah Rocks where are your robes of moss?
Ah flocks, why stand you all aghast?
Trees, rocks, and flocks, what are you pensive for my loss?
The birds me thinks, tune naught but moan,
The winds breath naught but bitter plaint,
The beasts forsake their dens to groan,
Birds, winds, and beasts, what does my loss your powers attaint?
Floodes weep their springes above their bounds,
And Echo wailes to see my woe,
The roabe of ruth does cloth the grounds:
Floodes, Echo, gro^udes, why do you al these tears bestow?
The trees, the rocks, and flocks reply,
The birds, the winds, the beasts report,
Floodes, Echo, grounds, for sorrow cry,
We grieve suice Phillis nill kind Damons love consort.
Sonnet XIII.
Love guides the roses of thy lips,
And flies about them like a be:
If I approach he forward skippes,
And if I kiss he stingeth me.
Love in thine eyes does build his bower,
And sleeps within their pretty shine:
And if I look the boy will lower,
And from their orbs shootes shaftes divine.
Love works thy heart within his fire,
And in my tears does firm the same:
And if I tempt it will retire,
And of my plaintes does make a game.
Love let me cull her choycest flowers,
And pity me, and calm her eye,
Make soft her heart, dissolve her lowers,
Then will I praise thy dietie.
But if thou do not love, I Will truly serve her,
In spite of thee, and by firm faith deserve her.
Sonnet XIIII.
I wroat in Mirrhaes barcke, and as I wroate,
Poor Mirrha wept because I wroat forsaken:
It Was of thy pride I soong in weeping noate,
When as her leaves great moan for pity maken.
The falling fountains from the mountains falling,
Cride out ah-las, so fair and be so cruel?
And Babbling Echo never ceased calling,
Phillis disdain is fit for none but truthlesse.
The rising pines wherein I had engraued,
Thy memory consulting with the wind:
Are trucemen to thy heart, and thoughts depraved,
And say thy kind should not be so unkind.
But (out ah-las) so fell is Phillis pheerlesse,
That she has made her Damon welnie tearlesse.
Sonnet XV.
My Phillis has the morning sun,
At fust to look upon her.
And Phillis has morne-waking birds,
Her risinges for to honor.
My Phillis has prime-feathered flowers,
That smile when she treades on them,
And Phillis has a gallant flock,
That leapes since she does own them.
But Phillis has so hard a heart,
Ah-las that she should have it.
As yeeldes no mercy to desert,
Nor grace to those that crave it:
Sweet sun when thou look on,
Pray her regard my moan.
Sweet birds when you sing to her,
To yield some pity woo her.
Sweet flowers when as she treades on,
Tell her. her beauty deades one:
And if in life her love, she will agree me,
Pray her before I die, she will come see me.
Sonnet XVI.
I part but how? from joy, from hope, from life,
I leave but whom? loves pride, wits pomp, hearts bliss,
I pine for what? for grief, for thought, for strife:
I faint and why? because I see my miss,
Oh ceaseless pains that never may be toulde,
You make me weep as I to water would.
Ah weary hopes in deep obliuious streams,
Go seek your graves, since yon have lost your grounds,
Ah pensive heart seek out her radiant gleames,
For why thy bliss is shut within those bounds?
Ah traitorous eyes to feeble in for sight,
Grow dim with woe, that now must want your light.
I part from bliss to dwell with ceaseless moan,
I part from life, since I from beauty part,
I part from peace, to pine in care alone,
I part from ease to dye with dreadful smart.
I part (oh death;) for why this world contains,
More care, and woe then with despair remains,
Oh loath depart wherein such sorrows dwell,
As all conceits are s^ant the same to tell.
Sonnet XVII.
Ah fleeting weal, ah sly deluding sleep,
That in one moment give me joy and pain:
How do my hopes dissolve to tears in vain?
As wount the Snowes, fore angry sun to weep?,
Ah noisome life that has no weal in keep
My forward grief has form and working might
My pleasures like the shadows take their flight:
My pathe to bliss is tedious long and steep.
Twice happy thou Endemion that embracest,
The liue-long night thy love within thine arms:
Where thou fond dream my longed weal defacest
Whitest fleeting and uncertain shaddes thou placest
Before my eyes with false deluding charms.
Ah instant sweetes which do my heart revive,
How should I joy if you were true alive;
Sonnet XVIII.
As where two raging venomes are united,
(Which of them selves disseuered life would sever;)
The sickly wretch of sickness is acquitted,
Which else should die, or pine in torments ever.
So fire, and frost, that hold my heart in seasure,
Restore those ruins which themselves have wrought,
Where if a part they both had had their pleasure,
The earth long since, her fatal claim had cought.
Thus two united deaths, keep me from dying,
I burn in Ice, and quake amidst the fire:
No hope midest these exteames or favor spyinge,
Thus love makes me a Martyr in his ire.
So that both cold and heat do rather feed,
My ceaseless pains, then any comfort breed.
Sonnet XIX.
Thou tiranizing Monarcke that do tire,
My loue-sicke heart through those assaulting eyes,
That are the lamps which lighten my desire,
If naught but death fury may suffice:
Not for my peace, but for thy pleasure be it,
That Phillis, wrathful Phillis that repines me,
All grace but death, may daine to come and see it,
And seeing grieve, at that that which she assigns me.
This only boon for all my mortal bane,
I crave and cry for, at thy mercy seat;
That when her wrath a faithful heart has slain,
And soul is fled, and body rest of heat:
She might perceive how much she might command,
That had my life, and death, within her hand.
Sonnet XX.
Some praise the looks, and others praise the locks,
Of their fair Queens, in love with curious words:
Some laud the breast where love his treasure locks,
All like the eye that life and love affordes.
But none of these frail beauties and unstable
Shall make my pen riot in pompous style:
More greater gifts shall my grave muse enable,
Whereat seuerer brows shall never smile.
I praise her honny-sweeter eloquence,
Which from the fountain of true wisdom flows:
Her modest mean that matcheth exelence,
Her matchless faith which from her ver tue grows:
And could my style her happy virtues equale,
Time had no power her glories to enthrale.
Egloga Prima Demades Damon.
Demades. NOw sourge of winters wrack is welnie spent,
And sun ginnes look more longer on our clime,
And earth no more to sorrow does consent,
Why been thy looks forlorn that view the prime?
Uneath thy flocks may feed to see thee faint,
Thou lost, they lean, and both with woe attaint.
For shame cast off these discontented looks,
For grief does weight one life, tho never sought,
( So Thenot wrote admired for Pipe and books:)
Then to the spring attemper thou thy thought,
And let advice rear up thy drooping mind:
And leave to weep thy woes unto the wind.

Damon. Ah Demades no wounder tho I wail,
For even the spring is winter unto me,
Look as the sun the earth does then avail,
When by his beams, his bowels warmed be:
Even so a Saint more sun bright in her shining.
First wrought my weal, now hasts my winters pining.
Which lovely lamp withdrawn from my poor eyes,
Both parts of earth, and fire drowned up in woe:
In winter dwell: my joy my courage dies,
My lambs with me that do my winter know?
For pity scorn the spring that nyeth near,
And pine to see, their Masters pining cheer.
The root which yields sap unto the tree,
Draws from the earth the means that makes it spring:
And by the sap the siens foster ed be,
All from the sun have comfort and increasing:
And that fair eye that lights this earthly ball,
Killes by depart, and neeting cheereth all.
As root to tree such is my tender heart,
Whose sap is thought, whose branches are content:
And from my soul they draw their sweet or smarte,
And from her eye, my souls best life is lent.
Which heavenly eye that lights both earth and air,
Quels by depart and quickens by repair.

Demades. Give periode to the process of thy plaint,
Unhappy Damon witty in selfe-greeuing:
Tend thou thy flocks, let tyrant love attaint,
Those tender hearts that make their love their living.
And as kind time keeps Phillis from thy sight,
So let prevention banish fancy quite.
Cast hence this Idle fuel of desire,
That feede^ that flame wherein thy heart consumes:
Let reason school thy will which does aspire,
And counsel cool impatience that presumes:
Drive hence vain thoughts which are fond loves abetters;
For he that seeks his thraldoome merits fetters.
The vain Idea of this dietie
nust at the teate of thine Imagination:
Was bred brought, up by thine own vanity,
Whose being thou may curse from the creation:
And so thou list, thou may as soon forget love,
As thou at first did fashion and beget love.

Damon Peace Demades peace sheep-heard do not tempt me,
The sage-taught wise may speak thus, but not practice:
Rather from life, then from my love exempt me,
My happy love wherein my weal and wrack lies:
Where chillie age first left love, and first lost her,
There youth found love, likt love, and love did foster.
Not as Ambitious of their own decay,
But curious to equal your fore deeds:
So tread we now within your woonted way,
We find your fruits of judgments and their seeds.
We know you loved, and loving learn that lore,
You scorn kind love, because you can no more:
Tho from this pure refiner of the thought,
The gleanings of your lerninges have you gathred
Your lives had been abortiue bace and naught,
Except by happy love they had been fathered,
Then still the swain, for I will still avowe it:
They have no wit nor worth that dis-alow it.
Then to renew the ruins of my tears,
Be thou no hinderer Demades I pray thee.
If my love sighs, grow tedious in thine cares,
Fly me, that fly from joy, I list not stay thee,
Morn sheep, morn lambs, and Damon will weep by you.
And when I sigh come home sweet Phillis cry you.
Come home sweet Phillis, sor thine absence causes
A flowerlesse prime-tide in these drooping meadows,
To push his beauties forth each primrose pauseth,
Our Lillies and our Roses like coy widows
Shut in their buddes their beauties, and bemoane them,
Because my Phillis does not smile upon them.
The trees by my redoubled sighs long blasted,
Call for thy balme-sweete breath and sunnie eyes,
To whom all natures comforts are hand-fasted,
Breath, look on them, and they to life arise:
They have new liueries with each smile thou lendest,
And droope with me, when thy fair brow thou bendest.
I woo thee Phillis with more earnest weeping,
Then Niobe for her dead issue spent,
I pray thee Nymph who have our spring in keeping:
Thou mistress of our flowers and my content,
Come home and glad our Meades of winter weary,
And make thy woeful Damon blithe and merry,
Else will I captive all my hopes again,
And shut them up in prisons of despair:
And weep such tears as shall destroy this plain.
And sigh such sighs as shall Eclipse the air.
And cry such cries as love that hears my crying,
Shall faint and weep for grief, and fall a dying.
My little world has vowed no sun shall glad it,
Except thy little world her light discover,
Of which heavens would grow proud if so they had it,
Oh how I fear least absent Jove should love her,
I fear it Phillis, for he never saw one,
That had more heauen-sweet looks to lure and awe one.
I swear to thee all-seeing sovereign,
Rolling heavens circles round about our center:
Except my Phillis safe return again,
No joy to heart, no meat to mouth shall enter.
All hope (but future hope to be renouned,
For weeping Phillis) shall in tears be drowned.

Demades. How large a scope lendes Damon to his moan,
VVasting those treasures of his happy-witte:
In regestring his woeful woe-begone?
Ah bend thy Muse to matters far more fit:
For time shall come when Phillis is interd,
That Damon shall confess that he has erd.
When natures riches shall (by time dissolved)
Call thee to see with more judicial eye:
How Phillis beauties are to dust resolved,
Thou then shall ask thy self the reason why
Thou were so fond, since Phillis was so frail,
To praise her gifts that should so quickly fail?
Have mercy on thy self cease being idle,
Let reason claim and gain of will his homage:
Rain in these brain-sicke thoughts with judgments bridle,
A short prevention helps a mighty damage.
If Phillis love, love her, yet love her so:
That if she fly, thou may loves fire forgo.
Play with the fire, yet die not in the flame,
Show passions in thy words, but not in heart:
Least when thou think to bring thy thoughts in frame:
Thou prove thy self a prisoner by thine Art.
Play with these babes of love, as Apes with Glasses,
And put no trust in feathers, wind, or la^^es.

Da. Did not thine age yield warrantise (old man)
Impatience would enforce me to offend thee,
Me list not now thy froward skill to scanne,
Yet will I pray that love may mend or end thee.
Spring flowers, sea-tides, earth grass, sky stars shall banish,
Before the thoughts of love or Phillis vanish.
So get the gone and fold thy tender sheep,
For lo the great Autumedon of day:
In Isis stream his golden locks does steep,
Sad Even her duskie mantle does display?
Light-flying fowls the posts of night disport them,
And cheerful looking Vesper does consort them.
Come you my careful flock fore go your master,
I Will fold you up and after fall a sighing,
Words have no worth my secret wounds to plaster,
Naught may refresh my joys but Phillis nighing.
Farewell old Demades, DE. Damon farewell.
How against advise does headlong youth rebel.

An Elegy.
Ah cruel winds why call you hence away:
Why make you breach betwixt my soul and me?
Ye traiterous floodes why (...) your floates delaie,
Until my latest moanes discoursed be?
For tho ye salt sea-Gods with hold the reign:
Of all your floates. And gentle winds befall;
While I have wept such tears, as might restrain
The rage of tides and winds against then will.
Ah shall I lose your sight bright shining eyes?
And must my soul his life and glory leave?
Must I forsake the bower where solace lives,
To trust to tickle fates that still deceive?
" Ah-las so wills the wanton Queen of change,
" That each man tract this laborinth of life,
" With slippery steps, now wronged by fortune strange,
" Now drawn by counsel from the maze of strife?
" Ah joy no joy because so so soon thou fleetest,
Hours, days, and times inconstant in your being.
Oh life, no life since with such chance thou meetest,
Oh eyes, no cies since you must loose your seeing:
Soul be thou sad, dissolve thy living powers.
To crystal tears, and by their pores express,
The grief, that my destressed soul deuoures:
Cloth thou my body all in heaviness,
My sons appeard fair smiling full of pleasure.
But now the vale of absence over clouds them:
They fed my heart with joys exceeding measure
Which now shall die, since absence needs must shroud them
Yea die, oh death, sweet death, vouchsafe that blessing,
That I may die the death whilst she regards,
For sweet were death, and sweet, were deaths oppressing,
If she look on who all my life awardeth.
Oh thou that art the portion of my joy,
Yet not the portion, for thou art the prime:
Suppose my griefs, conceive the deep anoy,
That wounds my soul upon this sorrye time:
Pale is my face, and in my pale confesses,
The pain I suffer, since I needs must leave thee,
Read are mine eyes through tears that them oppresses,
Dul'd are my sprits since fates do now bereue thee.
And now, ah now, my plaintes are quite prevented,
The winds are fair the sails are hoysed hie,
The Anckers waid, and now quite discontented,
Grief so subdewes my heart as it should dye.
A faint farewell, with trembling hand I tender,
And with my tears my papers are distained,
Which closed up, my heart in them I render,
To tell thee how at parting I complained.
Vouchsafe his message that does bring farewell,
And for my sake let him with beauty dwell.
Thirsis Aegloga Secunda.
Muses help me, sorrow swarmeth,
Eyes are fraught with seas of languish:
Heavy hope my sollace harmeth,
Minds repast is bitter anguish.
Eye of day regarded never,
Certain trust, in world untrusty,
Flattering hope beguileth ever:
Weary old, and wanton lusty.
Dawne of day beholdes inthroned,
Fortunes darling, proud and dreadlesse:
Darkesome night does hear him moaned,
Who before was rich and needless.
Robb the sphre of lines united,
Make a sudden void in nature:
Force the day to be benighted,
Reaue the cause of time and creature.
Ere the world will cease to vary,
This I weep for this I sorrow.
Muses if you please to tarry,
Further helps I mean to borrow.
Courted once by fortunes favor,
Compast now with enures curies:
All my thoughts of sorrow sauer,
Hopes run fleeting like the sourses.
(Ay me) wanton scorn has maimed,
All the joy my heart enjoyed:
Thoughts their thinking have disclaimed,
Hate my hopes has quite anoyed.
Scant regard my weal has scanted,
Looking coy has forced my lowering:
Nothing likt where nothing wanted,
VVeddes mine eyes to ceaselesse showering.
Former love was once admired,
Present favor is estranged,
Loath the pleasure long desired,
Thus both men and thoughts are changed.
Lovely swain with luckie guiding,
Once (ebut now no more so friended)
Thou my flocks have had in mindinge,
From the morn till day was ended
Drink and fodder food and foulding,
Had my lambs and ewes together
I with them was still beholding,
Both in warmth and winter weather.
Now they languish since refused,
Ewes and lambs are paind with pining
I with ewes and lambs confused.
All unto our deaths declyning.
Silence leave thy cave obscured,
Daine a dolfull swain to tender,
Though disdaines I have endured.
Ye I am no deep offender.
Phillips son can with his finger,
Hide his scarre it is so little:
Little sin a day to linger,
Wise men wander in a Tittle.
Thriftles yet my swain have turned,
Though my sun he never shows:
Though I weep I am not mourned,
Though I want no pity grows.
Yet for pity love my muses,
Gentle silence be their cover:
They must leave their wonted uses,
Since I leave to be a lover.
They shall live with thee enclosed,
I will loath my pen and paper:
Art shall never be supposed,
Sloth shall quench the watching taper.
Kiss them silence, kiss them kindly
Though I leave them, yet I love them:
Though my wit have led them blindly,
Yet my swain did once approve them.
I will travel soyles removed,
Night and morrow never merry:
Thou shall harbor that I loved,
I will love that makes me werye.
If perchance the sheep strayeth,
In thy walks and shades unhaunted:
Tell the teene my heart betrayeth,
How neglect my joys has daunted.
Sonnet XXI.
Ye heraultes of my heart, mine ardent groans,
O tears which gladly would burst out to brooks,
Oh spent on fruitless sand my surging moanes,
Oh thoughts enthrald unto care-boading looks.
Ah just laments of my unjust distress,
Ah fond desires whom reason could not guide,
Oh hopes of love that intimate redress,
Yet prove the load-stars unto bad betide.
When will you cease? or shall pain never ceasing,
Seize on my heart? oh molifie your rage,
Least your assaults with over switf increasing,
Procure my death, or call on timelesse age.
What if they do? they shall but feed the fire,
Which I have kindled by my fond desire.
Sonnet XXII.
Fair art thou Phillis, I so fair (sweet maid)
As nor the sun, nor I have seen more fair,
For in thy cheeks sweet roses are embayde,
And gold more pure then gold does guilde thy hair.
Sweet Bees have hiu'd their honey on thy tongue,
And Hebe spic't her Necter with thy breath:
About thy neck do all the graces thronge,
And lay such baits as might entangle death.
In such a breast what heart would not be thrall?
From such sweet arms who would not wish embraces?
At thy fair hands who wonders not at all,
Wounder it self through ignorance embases?
Yet naithelesse tho wondrous gifts you call these,
My faith is far more wonderful then all these.
Sonnet XXIII.
Burst burst poor heart thou have no longer hope,
Captive mine eyes unto eternal sleep,
Let all my senses have no further scope,
Let death be lord of me and all my sheep.
For Phillis has betrothed fierce disdain:
That makes his mortal mantion in her heart,
And though my tongue have long time taken pain,
To sue deuorse and wed her to desert.
She will not yield, my words can have no power,
She scorns my faith, she laughes at my sad lays,
She filles my soul with never ceasing sower,
Who filt the world with volumes of her praise:
In such extremes what wretch can cease to crave
His peace from death, who can no mercy have.
Sonnet XXIIII
No glory makes me glorious or glad,
Nor pleasure may to pleasure me dispose,
Ne comfort can revive my senses sad,
Nor hope enfranchise me with one repose.
Nor in her absence taste I one delight,
Nor in her presence am I well content,
Was never time gave term to my dispight,
Nor joy that dried the tears of my lament:
Nor hold I hope of weal in memory,
Nor have I thought to change my restless grief,
Nor does my conquest yield me souerainetie,
Nor hope repose, nor confidence, relief.
For why she sorts her frowns and favors so,
As when I gain or loose I cannot know:
Sonnet XXV.
I wage the combat with two mighty foes,
Which are more strong then I ten thousand fold,
The one is when thy pleasure I do lose,
The other, when thy person I behold:
In seeing thee a swarm of loves confound me,
And cause my death in spite of my resist,
And if I see thee not thy want does wound me,
For in thy sight my comfort does consist.
The one in me continual care creates,
The other does occasion my desire,:
The one the edge of all my joy rebateth,
The other makes me a Phoenix in loves fire
So that I grieve when I enjoy your presence,
And dye for grief by reason of your absence.
Sonnet XXVI.
I Will teach thee lovely Phillis, what love is,
It is a vision seeming such as thou
That flies as fast as it assaults mine eyes:
It is affection that does reason miss;
It is a shape of pleasure like to you,
Which meets the eye, and seen on sudden dies,
It is a doubled grief a spark of pleasure,
Begot by vain desire, and this is love,
Whom in our youth we count our chiefest treasure
In age for want of power we do reprove:
Yea such a power is love, whose loss is pain,
And having got him we repent our gain.
Sonnet XXVII.
Fair eyes whilst fearful I your fair admire,
By unexpressed sweetness that I gain,
My memory of sorrow does expire,
And faulcon like I tower joys heavens amain
But when your sons in Oceans of their glory,
Shut up their day-bright shine, I dye for thought:
So pass my joys as does a new played story,
And one poor sigh breaths all delight to naught.
So to my self I live not, but for you,
For you I live, and you I love, but none else:
Oh then fair eyes whose light I live to view,
Or poor forlorn despised to live alone else,
Look sweet since from the pith of contemplation,
Love gathers life, and living, breeds passion.
Sonnet XXVIII.
Not causlesse were you christened (gentle flowers)
The one of faith, the other fancies pride,
For she who guides both faith and fancies power,
In your fair colors wrapes her Iuory side:
As one of you has whitenes without stain,
So spotless is my love and never tainted:
And as the other shadoweth faith again,
Such is my less, with no fond change acquainted:
And as nor tirant son nor winter weather,
May eeuer change sweet Amaranthus hew:
So she tho love and fortune join together,
Will never leave to be both fair and true:
And should I leave thee then thou pretty else?
Nay first let Damon quite forget himself.
Sonnet XXIX.
I feel my self endaungered beyond reason,
My death already twixt the cup and lip,
Because my proud desire through cursed treason,
Would make my hopes mount heaven, which cannot skip:
My fancy still requires at my hands,
Such things as are not, cannot, may not be
And my desire although my power with stands,
Will give me wings, who never yet could flee:
What then remains except my maimed soul,
Extort compassion from loue-flying age,
Or if naught else their furye may controwle,
To call on death that quels affections rage.
Which death shall dwell with me and never fly,
Since vain desire seeks that hope does deny.
Sonnet XXX.
I do compare unto thy youthly clear,
(Which always bydes within thy flowring prime,)
The month of April, that bedewes our clime
With pleasant flowers, when as his showers appear,
Before thy face, shall fly false cruelty,
Before his face, the doaly season fleetes,
Mild been his looks, thine eyes are full of sweetes:
Firm is his course, firm is thy loialtie.
He paints the fields through liquid crystal showers,
Thou paint'st my verse with Pallas learned flowers:
With Zephirus sweet breath he fills the plains,
And thou my heart with weeping sighs do wring,
His brows are dewd with mornings crystal spring,
Thou make my eyes with tears bemoane my pains.
Sonnet XXXI.
Deuoide of reason, thrale to foolish ire,
I walk and chase a savage fairie still,
Now near the flood, straight on the mounting hill,
Now midst the woods of youth, and vain desire:
For leash I bear a cord of careful grief,
For brach I lead an over forward mind,
My hounds are thoughts, and rage dispairing blind,
Pain, cruelty, and care without relief:
But they perceiving that my swift pursuit,
My flying fairie cannot overtake,
With open mouths their pray on me do make,
Like hungry hounds that lately lost their suite.
And full of fury on their master feed,
To hasten on my hapless death with speed.
Sonnet XXXII.
A thousand times to think and think the same,
To two fair eyes to show a naked heart,
Great thirst with bitter licor to restrain,
To take repast of care and crooked smart:
To sigh full often without relent of ire,
To dye for grief and yet conceal the tale,
To others will to fashion my desire,
To pine in looks disguisd through penciue-pale;
A short dispight, a faith unfeigned true,
To love my foe, and set my life at naught,
With heedlesse eyes mine endless harms to view,
A will to speak, a fear to tell the thought,
To hope for all, yet for despair to die,
Is of my life the certain destenie.
Sonnet XXXIII.
When first sweet Phillis (whom I must adore)
Began with her beauties bless our wondering sky,
The son of Rhea, from their fatal store
Made all the Gods to grace her Majesty.
Apollo first his golden rays among,
Did form the beauty of her bounteous eyes:
He graced her with his sweet melodious song,
And made her subject of his poesies.
The warrior Mars, bequeathed her fierce disdain,
Venus her smile, and Phoebe all her fair,
Python his voice, and Ceres all her grain,
The morn her locks and fingers did repair.
Young Love, his bow, and Thetis gave her feet:
Clio her praise, Pallas her science sweet.
Sonnet XXXIIII.
I would in rich and golden colored rain,
With tempting showers in pleasant sort descend,
Into fair Phillis lap (my lovely friend)
When sleep her sense with slomber does restrain.
I would be changed to a milk-white Bull,
When midst the gladsome fields she should appear,
By pleasant finenes to surprise my dear,
Whilst from their stalks, she pleasant flowers did pull:
I were content to weary out my pain,
To be Narsissus so she were a spring
To drown in her those woes my heart do wring:
And more I wish transformed to remain:
That whilst I thus in pleasures lap did lie,
I might refresh desire, which else would die.
Sonnet XXXV.
I hope and fear, I pray and hold my peace,
Now freeze my thoughts and straight they fry again,
I now admire and straight my wounders cease,
I loose my bonds and yet my self restrain:
This likes me most that leaves me discontent,
My courage serves and yet my heart does fail,
My will does clime whereas my hopes are spent,
I laugh at love, yet when he comes I quail.
The more I strive, the duller bide I still,
I would be thrald, and yet I freedom love,
I would redress, yet hourly feed mine ill,
I would repine, and dare not once reprove,
And for my love I am bereft of power,
And strengthlesse strive my weakness to devour.
Sonnet xxxvj.
If so I seek the shades, I presently do see
The God of Love forsakes his bow and sit me by:
If that I think to write, his Muses plyant be,
If so I plain my grief, the wanton boy will cry.
If I lament his pride, he does increase my pain,
If tears my cheeks attaint, his cheeks are moist with moan,
If I disclose the wounds the which my heart has slain,
He takes his Fascia off, and wipes them dry anon.
If so I walk the woods, the woods are his delight,
If I my self torment, he bathes him in my blood:
He will my soldier be if once I wend to fight,
If seas delight, he stears my Bark amidst the flood:
In brief, the cruel God does never from me go,
But makes my lasting love eternal with my woe.
Sonnet xxxvij.
These fierce incessant waves that stream along my face,
Which show the certain proof of my nere-ceasing pains,
Fair Phillis are no tears that trickle from my brains:
For why such streams of ruth, within me find no place.
These floods that wet my cheeks, are gathered from thy grace
And thy perfections, and from hundredth thousand flowers
Which from thy beauties spring: whereto I medly showers
Of Rose and Lillyes to, the colors of thy face.
My love does serve for fire, my heart the furnace is,
The aperries of my sighs augment the burning flame,
The Limbique is mine eye that does distill the same:
And by how much my fire is violent and fly,
By so much does it cause the waters mount on hie,
That shower from out mine eyes, for to assuage my miss.
Sonnet xxxviij.
Who lives inthrald to Cupid and his flame,
From day to day is changed in sundry sort:
The proof whereof my self may well report,
Who often transformd by him may teach the same.
I first was turned into a wounded Heart,
That bare the bloody arrow in my side:
Then to a Swanne that midst the waters glide,
With pittious voice presagd my deadly smart.
Eft-soones I waxt a faint and fading flower,
Then was I made a fountain sudden dry,
Distilling all my tears from troubled eye:
Now am I Salamander by his power,
Living in flames, but hope ere long to be
A voice, to talk my Mistress majesty.
Sonnet xxxix.
My matchless Mistress, whose delicious eyes
Have power to perfect natures privy wants,
Even when the Sun in greatest pomp did rise,
With pretty tread, did press the tender plants.
Each stalk whilst forth she stalks, to kiss her feet
Is proud with pomp, and prodigal of sweet.
Her fingers fair in favoring every flower
That wooed their Iuory for a wished touch:
By chance (sweet chance) upon a blessed hour,
Did pluck the flower where Love himself did couch.
Where Love did couch, by summer toil suppressed,
And sought his sleeps within so sweet a nest.
The Virgins hand that held the wanton thrall,
Imprisoned him within the Rose-ate leaves:
And twixt her teates, with favor did enstall
The lovely Rose, where Love his rest receaues.
The lad that felt the soft and svveet so nigh,
Drowned in delights, disdaines his liberty.
And said, let Venus seek another son,
For hear my only matchless Mother is:
From whose fair orient Orbs the drink does run,
That deifies my state with greater blis:
This said, he sucked, my Mistress blushing smyld,
Since Love was both her prisoner and her child.
Sonnet xl.
Resembling none, and none so poor as I,
Poor to the world, and poor in each esteem,
Whose first borne loves, at first obscurd did die,
And bred no fame but flame of bace misdeeme.
Under the Ensign of whose tired pen,
Loves legions forth have maskt, by others masked:
Think how I live wronged by ill tonged men,
Not Master of my self, to all wrongs tasked.
Oh thou that can, and she that may do all things,
Support these languishing conceits that perrish,
Look on their growth: perhaps these silly small things
May win this worldly palm, so you do cherrish.
Homer has vowed, and I with him do vow this,
He will and shall revive, if you allow this.
An Ode.
Now I find thy looks were fained,
Quickly lost, and quickly gained:
Soft thy skin, like wool of Weathers,
Heart unstable, light as feathers.
Tongue untrusty, subtle sighted,
Wanton will, with change delighted:
Siren pleasant, foe to reason,
Cupid plague thee for this treason.
Of thine eyes, I made my mirror,
From thy beauty came mine error,
All thy words I counted witty,
All thy smiles I deemed pretty.
Thy false tears that me agrieued,
First of all my trust deceived,
Siren pleasant, foe to reason,
Cupid plague thee for this treason.
Faind acceptance when I asked,
Lovely words with cunning masked,
Holy vows but heart vnholly,
Wretched man my trust was folly:
Lilly white and pretty winking,
Sollemne vows, but sorry thinking.
Siren pleasant, foe to reason,
Cupid plague thee for this treason.
Now I see O seemly cruel,
Others warm them at my fuel,
Wit shall guide me in this durance,
Since in love is no assurance.
Change thy pasture, take thy pleasure,
Beauty is a fading treasure.
Siren pleasant, foe to reason,
Cupid plague thee for this treason.
Prime youth lusts not age still follow,
And make white these tresses yellow,
Wrinckled face for locks delightful,
Shall acquaint the Dame despightfull:
And when time shall cate thy glory,
Then too late thou will be sorry.
Siren pleasant, foe to reason,
Cupid plague thee for thy treason.
The complaint of Elstred.
THE silent shadows with their mothers veil,
The brighter lamp of Heaven from Thetis hid:
Apolloes sister in her starrie rail,
Along her lower sphere in triumph rid,
When I by Seuerus beauteous banckes alone,
Encountered with this woeful vision.
A doleful Queen in semblance and array,
Attended by a princely looking less:
Amidst the waltring wave enforced her way,
And landed there where I lamenting was:
Both seemd of royal birth, and well begotten,
Although their weeds through eld and wette were rotten.
The leaves in Autumn fall not down so fast,
As liquid crystal dropped from their eyes:
But when their stormy tears were ouer-past,
(The silent spoks-men of their miseries)
They sat them down where I amazed remained,
And thus their falls successively complained.
Amidst the troops of those whom tyrant Fate
Has led in tr^umph to their time-lesse grave:
Let vvof^ll Elstred weep her wretched state,
Whose story merrits some regard to have.
Who once enthroned, and now to fortune thrall,
May teach successions to avoid my fall.
Within that Region where proud-byllowed Rhine,
Does animate the babes of fruitful earth:
And baines the bosom of the swelling Vine:
From thence my offspring came, and thence my birth
In svvathing clowtes, for happy Princess heried,
In shrowding sheet, a hapless Princess buried.
What said I, buried? I in silver vvaue.
What said I, shrouded? I in liquid sheet.
The water both my winding sheet and grave,
Which stifling me, for pity seemd to greet:
But where the life so wretched did become,
What talk I of the death, the shroud, the Tomb?
When first I sucked the svveetes of subtle air,
Like to a Comet gathered in the North,
(Which in the vernall season makes repair)
With me all natures riches issued forth.
They that beheld, admird, and did presage
By infancy, the honors of mine age.
The fame that should present my facts to view,
As I from cradle crept, so gathered wing:
As grew my beauties, so his feathers grew,
As waxt my worth, so was he pressed to spring,
As years increast, from earth to trees he sprung,
From trees to towers, from whence my fame he sung.
Thus through continual motion growing great,
His many feathers hatched as many eyes,
His eyes, as many tongues for to entreat,
His tongues, as many ears to harken cries.
Which feathers, eyes, tongues, ears, he ever frames
To paint our praise, and bruit our endless blames.
This monstrous babe (that rents his mothers breast,
To fill the world with tragic history)
To register my beauties never ceast,
Where-through, each ear that heard the nouelty,
Summons each sense with wonder to behold,
If beauties were so great as they were told.
The German Lords, my Fathers neighbor friends,
(For why my Father was a German Peer)
Willing to see the face which Fame commends,
Do haunt his Court, and like and love me dear.
All woo, none win, for Fortune would it so,
To set me hie, at last to cast me low.
At length, far bruited through his famous fight,
Renowned Humber terror of his time,
(More feared then loved of every German Knight)
Came to our Court, and saw me in my prime:
All like a mayden-rose, as yet untainted,
Wherewith each touch desires to be acquainted.
His power, his person far beyond report,
His promise to enstall me in a throne:
His working words which mercy might extort,
Had power to fashion love where first was none:
So that two Damsels with my self agreed,
To weight from him our fortunes and good speed.
Thus we with armed eyes, whence love did forage
The richest treasures of his tender heart,
Inspyred Humber by our looks with courage,
With him from German soil we did depart:
For him, our friends, for him, our land we left,
With him, of friends, lands, life we were bereft.
His mighty mind which hunted after fame,
(Fore-staling each occasion of delay:)
His warlike troops to tedious martch did frame,
Till all arrived where as his ships did stay,
We were embarckt, and by propitious wind,
Within the Albanian Coast did harbor find.
He that has seen the daughters of the sky,
The miracles of nature in the field,
Who after their imperial chieftaine fly,
And cull such comforts as the spring does yield,
How each his task, how all themselves revive
At his command, for to enrich their Hiue:
Or as the royal Monarcke of the Ants,
Arranging of his little-labouring train,
(In Summer time foreseeing Winters wants)
By their endeavors stores his nest with grain,
Where each industrious else for common good,
Does gather, seek, regather happy food.
So strive these Scithian warriors, to express
Their duties to their Prince by industry:
Some pitch their Tents, and some their Arms address,
Some scoute, some forage all the Country nie.
The Plow-mans hope, the thrifty Husbands tillage,
Is now become the wast-full soldiers pillage.
Stout Albanact as then the Scottish King,
Hearing of Humbers proud invasion:
To stop ambition least it further spring,
Attended by the flower of all his Nation,
Encountered him, and that his barbarous band,
Endeavoring force, by force for to withstand.
Then pressed forth from depth of horrid hell,
The babes of wreakfull war with threatening brows:
Reuengefull Wrath, and sleeplesse Envy fell,
Prodigious Fear her trembling lymmes did rowse:
And flesh-lesse Death, led blood-affecting Murder,
The tragic change of fortune for to further.
The Husbands scithe was changed to a sword,
The Coblers-aule into a sturdie lance:
Peace was obscurd, of war was every word,
All prayed to Fortune for succes-full chance,
That sits inthrond on her inconstant seat,
And helps them most who least her help entreat.
As when to purge excessive moist, descending
From Saturns sphere, or else superfluous heat
Styrd up by Mars, Jove (common good intending)
Sends lyghtning-flash to lay their angry threate.
So vviser heads that knew the scourge of war,
Sought sooth-fast means to mittigate the jar.
But as a troop of fierce incensed Bulls,
The Heards-mans strokes or threats do set at naught:
So they whose rankorous rage their judgment dulles,
Had little mind to peace or peace-full thought.
" Who fight for Crowns, set life, set all to light,
" Who aim so hie, will die or hit the white.
The battles joined, heaven mournd to see them join,
The burnisht Arms, heavens brightest beauty basht:
On warlike-steades with many a fatal foine,
The moodie men at Arms together dashed.
The Heavens to see, the Earth to bear did groan,
What God consents to set these iarres at one?
As when a troop of harvest thriftie swains,
With cutting scithes earth ripned riches movve:
Whole sheaues of Corn lie strewed upon the plains,
So fall the Scots before the conquering foe.
My Humber gaind both kingdom and renown,
And Albanact lost life, his state, his Crown.
When Albanact lost life, his state, his crown,
Then we our lives, our states, our crowns attained:
We came to conquer and to put him down,
And what we sought, by warlike sword we gained.
Caesar no more then Humber could intend,
Who came, who saw, who conquered in the end.
But (vvoe is me) promotion is a puff,
These vvorldly honors are but shades of sweet:
Who seek too much, before they get enough,
Before they meet the mean, with death do meet.
With death they meet, the Haven of all desire,
Where will must waine, and pride cannot aspire.
For when Locrinus with his warlike brother,
His warlike brother Cambre, understood
How partial Fortune which deserts does smother,
Had brought to naught the nestling of their brood:
They levied men, marched forth without in comber,
And fought, and gaind, and tryumpht over Humber.
Then fled my love, who thought the world should fly him,
And what he fled, he met with ere he sought it,
For why the floods that passage did deny him,
Deni'de him not the death, before he thought it:
And in that stood which terminats the bound, Whereon the waters are called
Humber waters to this day.

Twixt England and twixt Scotland, death he found.
There death he found, with many a warlike Knight.
There found we thraldom, far more worse then death,
Cords were our Crowns, our dainties were despite,
My two consorts (aie's me) there lost their breath.
There lost I friends, there lost I helps, there hope,
But lo my fortune aims at higher scope.
For where I lost my love, my friends, my hope,
There found I hope, there faithful friends, there love:
And whilst I went fast fettered in a rope,
Weeping such tears as might compassion move,
I was presented by unhallowed hand,
To stout Locrinus King of Logiers land.
Who like that thunder-threatning Potentate,
The Arbiter of changes and increase,
Sat lightning forth such looks as might amate
Warre-breeding Mars, the countercheck of peace:
Him when I saw, I shook, and shaking wept,
And weeping, to his throne for mercy crept.
And whilst I rent my carelesse-scattered locks,
Those tricked trammels where true love was tangled,
At Locrins breast for mercy fancy knocks,
Shadowed in seemly looks wherewith love angled:
And when I cried, O pity me my King,
His eyes cried pity me, by woe looking.
Each motion of mine eyes, enforced commotion
Betwixt his will and reason what to answer:
(But will where love will rule, must have promotion.)
My suit first past for life, with listening ear
He heard, and granted what I did require,
Ennobling of my life by his desire.
My bonds new broke, and I from fetters los'd,
As mount the brother twins from waterie vast,
Within fair Thetis liquid lap fore-clos'd,
So from their humbled closures lightened fast
My lovely lamps, which erst made intercession,
And by one look, of all hearts took possession.
All wonder, and with dazeled eyes withdraw them,
Only the right-borne Egle by these lights
Approved his birthright, and no sooner saw them
Apparailed in hope, and choice delights,
But up he looks, by sudden sight confounded,
And I by selfe-like sight, was likely wounded.
" For where there grows a simpathie of hearts,
" Each passion in the one, the other paineth,
" And by each carriage of the outward parts,
(Wherein the actual work of love remains)
The inward griefs, mislikes, and joys are tought:
And every sign bewraies a secret thought.
Short tale to tell, Locrinus had the palm
And interest in all my best desseignes:
Each kiss I lent him, breathed Indian balm
To cure his wounds, to break affections cheines
He had Loves Moly growing on my pappes,
To charm a hell of sorrow and mishappes.
Lo here my second step to high estate,
Now mark my second fall and overthrow:
Behold in me the tragedy of fate,
The true Idea of this worldly woe:
The Eris and Erynnis that proceeds
From wretched life, that trusts to Fortunes weeds.
Locrinus freed from hostile detriment,
Possessed of love by me, and me by love:
(Whose looks unto his love gave nutriment)
Whether by fatal motion from above,
Or through the hot suggestions of his Lords,
Unto a second love at last accords.
To Guendolen, to Guendolen (woe's me)
To Corincus daughter, by consult
My dear Locrinus must espoused be,
Even here began Fortune proudly to insult.
What said I, to insult, nay rather reign,
For hence his tyranny he did maintain.
The English King God knows against his will,
(Or else his will, far differed from his vows)
His Nobles intimations to fulfill,
The Cornish Guendolena did espouse.
She got the Crown, tho I was promised fair,
And he by her begot a royal heir.
Then to my pride, rebated by her rising,
No day, no night, could pass me without plaint:
My thoughts were pensive, full of sad surmising,
My dreams, some dreadful damage did depaint.
Aloud my conscience told, and I confessed it,
My life was loose, and bad me to detest it.
I feared Locrinus through his new contract,
Should grow in hatred of his ancient choice:
I saw my credit was already cracked,
My life condemnd for lewd by common voice.
And what is worse? I knew the Queen intended
That but with death her wrath should not be ended.
Amidst these thriuing thoughts, whilst I assaied
With vaine-affected hopes, to ouer-top
The true-inflicted pains my heart betrayed,
Locrinus came: and by sweet words did stop
The breach, which guilty conscience and unrest
Had made, within the rampayres of my breast.
The ruins which incessant fear prouokt,
By his well tempered reasons were renewed:
My halfe-dead joys whom danger long had chokt,
Were cheered with kisses which sweet words insewed.
His words attended by truth-meaning tears,
Ravished my heart, through mine attentive ears.
Tho Guendolen (says he) does tyrannise,
Yet Elstred is the sovereign of my soul:
Th'inforced sollace, like to vapor flies
That has no power repining hearts to towle.
And wrested wedlocks breed but hated heat,
Where no love seems so sweet, as stolen and secret.
Ah, temporise my love a little season;
And reap the ripning harvest of all pleasure:
Gleane all my loves, and do me but this reason,
To serve occasion till she gyues thee seasure.
Rent out thy fears to minds more bace and abject,
And trust thy life to me, thy beauties subject.
Disparage not my hope by thy misdeeming,
The nest is thine, although the Cuckoo hatch there:
Love lives not there where looks make louely-seeming,
Bear witness heavens, I never meant to match there.
But I inforst to fly a further mischief,
In color her, in heart do hold thee chief.
All these and more, sweet chains of honny speech,
Delivered by a trick Herculean tongue,
Able to tice all ears, and all griefs teach,
So rooted up my sorrows as they sprung,
That hope suruiu'd, and joy exhaled grief:
"For perfect love is quickest of belief.
And to effect his honny promise plighted,
No pleasures were unsought to yield me sollace:
The darksome care which my hearts hope benighted,
The sunshine of his princly love did chase.
Delight in showers of gold, in harmony,
In curious gemmes, was sent to please mine eye.
And to assure my life and his content,
A second Cretan wonder he began,
Wherein nor wanted art nor ornament,
Nor curious work of high conceited man:
By hundredth ways, and twice as mickle winding,
Crossed, and recrost, beyond all searchers finding.
Not that Colossus reared up in Rhodes,
Nor hanging Gardens houering in the sky:
Nor all the wondrous mansions and aboades
In Egypt, Lemnos, or in Italy,
Either for riches, cunning, or expense,
Might match this Laborinth for excellence.
Within this Maze and curious Cave I kept,
And those the Saphires of my shyning eyes
Long wakned by my fears, in quiet slept.
Here when Locrinus list to wanton nise,
I paid him trybute for those gifts he sent me,
With all the sweets that God and nature lent me.
So long in lystes of pleasure did we strive,
Till both affections mutually agreed,
The happy heavens a Trophie did revive,
A Trophie of our triumph and good speed:
A pretty babe for me to stay withal,
A lovely child for him to play withal.
Then lo the fire regathered moodie might,
Long smothered in the embers of suspect:
In me alone Locrinus took delight,
And so my newborn Sabrine did affect,
That nor his wife, her son, or ought could move him
To leave my love, who did so dearly love him.
" Mislikes are silly lets where Kings resolve them,
" Where counsaile-chasing will has empery,
" Deeds are too pressed for reason to dissolve them.
" In mighty minds a grounded vanity
" Like Iuie springs, that ceaseless never stops,
" Until her neighbour-Oake she ouer-toppeth.
Locrinus hearing of the hapless date
Of Corineus, Guendolenues Father:
Now began to tempest forth his smothered hate
He durst not threaten forth, or publish rather:
And both his wife, and his unhappy child,
From Crown, from Court, from favor quite exild.
Then was I drawn like that sea-fostered Queen,
From those obscurer prysons of my glory,
And brought abroad in tryumphe to be seen:
None durst vpbraid, though many hearts were sorry.
All likt my looks, tho each one cursed my life,
To see a harlot so supplant a wife.
But as the Sun in March, is held unwholesome
For stirring vmors, and not laying them:
Filling the earth and air with moistnes fulsome,
Yet not resolving or decaying them,
So was Locrinus blamed for this action:
Who brought to head heere-through a mighty faction.
For Guendolen, with that heroic sprite
Wherewith her Father was enobled erst,
To wreake on me her Miriades of despite,
The sentence of her wrongs by power reuerst,
Her harms, by arms, she vowed to satis-fie,
And heereon levied a mighty Army.
And thus attended in tryumphant order,
And guarded by her warlike Cornish crew,
She pitched her field, near to those banks which border
This azure-mantled stream, where now we rewe.
The King that sets a woman's threats at naught,
Pressed men, and met his foe, and with her fought.
But so would Fortune, (fie on Fortune fickle)
That by a shaft Locrinus was confounded:
His scattered troops like sheaues before the sickle,
Fell down, or fled, or died deadly wounded.
Ah guilt less souls, they perrisht for my sins,
And from their fall, my tragedy begins.
Ah Fortune, nurse of fools, poison of hope,
Fuel of vain desires, deserts destruction,
Impugner of preuentions, errors scope,
Supposed sovereign through our vain construction,
Princess of Paganism, root of impiety,
Devil on earth masked in deity;
Scorn of the learned, Follies eldest sister,
Bastard of time, begot by vain opinion
Against thy power, O peevish proud resister,
Mother of lies, and Mistress of illusion,
Vampe of vain glory, double faced shroe,
Whose smyles at first succesfull, end in woe.
It was not thou, (tho worldly wits accuse thee)
That set Mount Gibel of my plagues a burning:
It was not thou, my conscience does excuse thee,
It was my sin that wrought mine ouer-turning.
It was but justice, from the heavens inflicted
On lustful life, defamed and convicted.
As when the poule that vnder-props the Vine,
Is rest away, the crimson clusters fall,
And as the buildings suddenly decline,
That want the means to stay them up withal:
So when the King, and all his trusty friends
Were fled or slain, then lo mine honor ends.
My little daughter left alone with me,
Both traversing the fatal blood-dewd plain:
More fit to fear, then fleet away to flee,
At last arrived where as my love lay slain:
Oh slaying sight, vvounds wounding, death, death breeding,
Pale looks (ye seals of sorrovv) palenes feeding.
Sweet Image of his living excellence,
Whilst thus it lay (ah-las that thus it lay)
Impatient grief would leave me no defense,
I called on death, but tears wept death away.
His worst was past, I sighed, but sighs nor slender
Tears work no truce, but where the heart is tender.
And as the straw unto the Iette fast cleaves,
So clunge I both mine arms about his neck:
Pouring my plaints in ears that naught conceaueth.
Ah love (quoth I) unkind, why do thou check,
Why do thou mate the minds that most admire thee,
And in our needs, in constant thus retire thee?
Breathe life in him again, or leave me breathless,
Or from thine envious tryumphant throne,
Send forth Despair with locks unkempt and wreathlesse,
To join by death two souls in life but one.
And since at once our hearts thou did inspire,
Let both of us (O Love) at once expire.
Oh spent on barraine ground, my flood-like weeping
Love would not hear: tho began I trembling try
If kisses could revive his ceaseless sleeping,
But death repines these baits of fond desire.
I sucked his wounds, and wrapped them round about,
But (ah) the life before was issued out.
I faynting fell, enfeebled through my sufferaunce,
My child that saw me fall, for grief fell by me:
I wept, she cryde, both gave grief sustenaunce,
I fainted, and she fainting laid her nie me.
Even what I kyst, she kissed, and what I said
She said, and what I feared, made her afraid.
For every sigh, a sigh, for every tear,
A tear, she was no niggard of her moan;
Ah beauties blossom blasted in the ear,
Thou daughter of the hapless woeful one,
The croppes of cares together must thou gather,
And loose at once, both Mother, life, and Father.
Whilst thus we breathed our Elegies of sorrow,
Not recking who beheld, or who surprised us,
The free-booters that raunge the Champion through,
(Who by our robes, of some high race surmis'd us)
Laid hands on us, and brought us to the Queen,
Who sat tryumphant royally beseene.
Look how fair locked Juno was affected,
When she the monster-queller did behold,
With selfe-like proud-full enmity infected
The Queen sat, hatching murders manifold;
And as the wrathful tempest, that does follow
In high-topt trees, long murmureth ere it blow,
So began she to euacuate by her tongue,
The Hydraes of revenge she had intended:
With tyring taunts at first my heart she stoonge,
And fierce vpbraydes with bitter buffets ended.
Suborner of lasciviousness, (she cride)
Have thou no vale of shame, thy looks to hide?
Misgouern'd Minion, in whose wanton brows
The registers of wretched life are written:
Suborner of contempt, lascivious blowse,
By whom my joys were blasted and frost-bitten.
Mistress of murders, looseness, and what not?
Now are you compast in your proud complot.
The Caedar tree is fallen, that did protect you
From every stormy threat and hate I meant thee:
But now fierce rage by footsteps shall direct you
To timelesse death; for-thy vain wretch repent thee,
Thou art but dead: for death my hate must bound,
Thy child, thy self, together shall be drowned.
This said, she wild the Ministers to bind
Our tender arms: and now pale fear addressed
Our wayning roses, quite beyond their kind,
To fly our cheeks, and help our hearts oppressed.
Fear sommond tears, tears came, and strove to stint
A ceaseless hate, within a heart of flint.
But weladay our Doomesday was ordaind,
For when the oceans of our moan assaild her:
A ruthles rock, deaf-eared, she disdaind,
We faild not to submit, but pity faild her.
Then lowlie-creeping prostrate at her feet,
In these laments for mercy I entreat.
Pitiful Queen (said I) vouchsafe t'assommon,
The partiallest opinions of thy mind:
And yet remembering thee thou art a woman,
Hear thou with reason, not affection blind:
Then lo my proofs to such effect shall sort,
As they from thee some pity shall extort.
If under covert of ambitious rising,
Or fond intention to suggest the King,
Or by complots of mine own lewd devising,
I had surmisd or practisd any thing,
Where-through Locrinus should affect me so,
Just were my death, and just mine overthrow.
But happy heavens have registered the truth,
They know my cause, and they can thee assure
It was not I, it was thy husbands youth
That made him love, and traind him to the lure.
What should poor Captives do? or what should I?
Twere better love and live, than loath and die.
My sex was weak, my senses far more weaker,
Afflictions taught me to accept occasion:
I am a poor unwilling wedlock breaker,
I was unable to withstand invasion:
For where the Conqueror craved, I knew full well
He could command, if so I should rebel.
What is the Wren, to wrestle with the Gripe?
Or mine unarmed will to resolution?
Although my beauty made affections ripe,
His was the palm, and his the execution.
My sufferaunce was my fault, he did exact all,
He sought, he taught me first for to enact all.
Then mighty Sovereign mittigate thine ire,
For why I sinned unwilling and enforced:
And tho an exile, let me hence retire.
But if compassion be from thee divorced,
O let me die, and true compassion take
Upon my daughter, for her fathers sake.
Look how in royal characters inchased,
She bears the records of his haughty heart.
Stoop princely maid, be not so losty paced,
Not what thou were think thou, but what thou art.
Will thou not stoop? ah wretch, perhaps thou deemest
The Queen will pardon, since so sweet thou seem.
Fayre-looking soul, how often did I seal
Kisses upon her cheeks, whilst thus I pleaded?
But all in vain for pity I appeal,
Sentence of death already was arreaded;
Fast bound, to Seuerns bancke I was conducted,
Ready to die, yet not to death instructed.
Meane-while, my sweet Sabrina weeping hasted
To Guendolen, and with her little palm
Struck on her marble-breast, by no grief wasted,
Striving by smiles her moody wrath to calm.
She kissed her hand, and straight embrast her neck,
As if enforcing mercy by a beck.
Pardon she cried, oh Madam, save my Mother.
Yea Mother so I cried, said Sabrine tho.
Oh let me now no longer sorrow smother,
But by my self capitulate my woe:
Since none are fit, or meetest to reveal it,
Then those who like my self, do likewise feel it.
I saw the death prepared for my life,
I saw the tears my Mother wept for me:
I saw the woeful lover and the wife,
The One past pity, the other pitying me.
I pitied both, the one, wanting remorse,
The Other, since her plaints had little force.
And both of these with self like pity wounded,
Beheld me, whilst I dallyed for my death:
I dallied with that lip which me confounded,
The lip that gave eiection to my breath.
The lip which through the office of the tongue,
Made age-pursuing death to sease on young.
How much for thee sweet mother did I flatter,
Pledging transparant Crystal for some pity?
I know, God knows, God knows, I know the matter,
Will would not hear the words of wanton pretty:
Both, both must dye, I mother, thou must dye,
Thou must be drowned, sweet mother, so must I.
As climes the ancient shadow of the field,
The Father-oake, whose roots so deeply enter,
As where the spreading boughs midst heavens do build,
The rest lies closd in the Tartarian center:
Whom fierce Vulturnus (wonder-working blast)
Nor Southern healthles wind can ouercast.
So sat the Queen undaunted and untainted,
Like to her self, an envious minded woman:
With no kind pleas, her ears would be acquainted,
Away with them she cries. Ah-las that no man
Weeps now with me; for then what creature cursed not
The cruel Queen, tho reprehend they durst not.
Sabrine. Then you and I sweet Mother were led forth,

Elstred. We were led forth sweet daughter to our last;

Sabrine. Our words, our beauties had but little worth,

Elstred. So will the heavens: that purest, soonest wast.

Sabrine. I cride, help mother, help, when I was drowne^

Elstred. Ah helples both, yet wanting help renowme^
Thus cast at once into the woeful wave,
That laughed for to embowell natures treasures:
I forced my self, my Sabrine for to save,
But death no time, no age, no reason measures.
Help mother when thou crydst, I came unto thee,
And then I died, when drowning did undo thee,
Both dyed at once: the Annals of mishap,
Wherein woe-tempted men may read their fortune:
Since all are subject to the self like trap,
And self like death may sweetest souls importune.

Sabrine. I thus we dyed, yet not with self like same,
For floting Seuerne loves Sabrinaes name.
So may he prattle still unto his vvaue,
Sabrinaes name, whilst brine salt tears sea weepeth:
And if the Gods or men compassion have,
Compassion that with tender hearts nere sleeps,
We both shall live. This said, both sought their Tomb^
Within the waves, and suncke unto the bottom.
The Water-Nimphes with their vnkembed tresses,
The byrds that saw the Water-Nimphes assembled
The fishes that were fed by their distresses,
The stoods with all of these, together trembled:
And I got home and weepingly thus pend it,
Careless of those that scorn and cannot mend it.

FINIS.

